DEpart the Court.
Such was the Dukes command.
You'ar Secretary to the State and him,
Great in his counsels, wise, &amp; (I think) honest,
Have you, in turning over old Records,
Read but one name descended of the house
Of Le•…, in his loyalty remiss?
Never, my Lord.
Why then should I now, now, when glorious peace
Triumphs in change of pleasures, be wiped off,
Like to a useless moth, from Courtly ease:
And whither must I go?
You have the open world before you.
Why then tic like I'm banished.
Not so;
My warrant is only to command you from the Court,
Within five hours to depart after notice taken,
And not to live within thirty miles of it,
Until it be thought meet by his Excellence
To call you back: now I have warned you, my Lord,
At your peril be it if you disobey; I shall
Inform the Duke of your discontent.—
Doe, Politician, doe:
I scent the plot of this disgrace; it is Fiormonda, she,
That glorious Widow, whose commanding check
Ruins my Love; like foolish beasts, thus they
Find danger, that prey too near the Lions den.
My Noble Lord Roseilli!
Sir, the joy
I should have welcomed you with, is wrapped up
In Clouds of my disgrace; yet, honoured Sir,
Howsoever frowns of great ones cast me down,
My service shall pay tribute in my lowness,
To your uprising virtues.
Sir, I know
You are so well acquainted with your own,
You need not flatter mine; trust me, my Lord,
He be a suitor for you.
And I'll second
My Nephews suit with importunity.
You are, my Lord Fernando, late returned
From travels; pray instruct me, since the voice
Of most supreme Authority commands
My absence: I determine to bestow
Some time in learning Languages abroad;
Perhaps the change of ayre may change in me
Remembrance of my wrongs at home: Good Sir
Inform me; say I meant to live in Spain,
What benefit of knowledge might I treasure?
Troth, Sir, I'll freely speak as I have found:
In Spain you lose experience; it is a Climate
To hot to nourish Arts; the Nation proud,
And in their pride unsociable; the Court
More pliable to glorify it self
Then doe a stranger grace; if you intend
To traffic like a Merchant, it were a place
Might better much your Trade; but as for me,
I soon took surfeit on it.
What for France?
France I more praise and love; you are (my Lord)
Your self for horsemanship much famed; and there
You shall have many proofs to show your skill,
The French are passing Courtly, ripe of wit,
Kind, but extreme dissemblers; you shall have
A French-man ducking lower than your knee,
At the instant mocking even your very shoo-tyes:
To give the Country due, it is on earth
A Paradise; and if you can neglect
Your own appropriaments, but praising that
In others, wherein you excel yourself,
You shall be much beloved there.
Yet, me thought,
I heard you and the Duchess, two nights since,
Discoursing of an Island thereabouts
Called—let me think—it was—
England.
That, pray Sir,
You have been there, me thought I heard you praise it.
I'll tell you what I found there; men as neat,
As Courtly as the French, but in Condition
Quite opposite: Put case that you (my Lord)
Could be more rare on horse-backe than you are,
If there (as there are many) one excelled
You in your Art, as much as you doe others,
Yet will the English think, their own is nothing
Compared with you a stranger; in their habits
They are not more fantastic than uncertain:
In short, their fare abundance; manhood, beauty,
No Nation can disparage but it self.
My Lord, •…ou have much cased me, I resolve.
And whither are you bent?
My Lord for travel,
To speed for England.
No, my Lord, you must not;
I have yet some private Conference
To impart unto you for your good: at night
I'll meet you at my Lord Petruchio's house,
Till then be secret.
Dares my Cozen trust me?
Dare I, my Lord! yes, 'lesse your fact were greater
Than a bold women's spleen.
The Duke's at hand,
And I must hence, my service to your Lordships.
Now Nephew, as I told you, since the Duke
Hath held the reins of state in his own hand,
Much altered from the man he was before,
(As if he were transformed in his mind)
To sooth him in his pleasures, amongst whom
Is fond Ferentes; one whose pride takes pride
In nothing more then to delight his lust;
And he (with grief I speak it) hath, I fear,
Too much besotted my unhappy daughter,
My poor Colona; whom, for kinreds sake,
As you are noble, as you honour virtue,
Persuade to love her self: a word from you
May win her more then my entreaties or frowns.
Uncle, I'll doe my best; mean time pray tell me
Whose mediation wrought the Marriage
Betwixt the Duke and Duchess? who was agent?
His roving eye, and her enchanting face,
The only dower Nature had ordained
T'aduance her to her Bride-bed: She was daughter
Unto a Gentleman of Millaine, no better;
Preferred to serve in the Duke of Millaine's Court:
Where, for her beauty, she was greatly famed:
And passing late from thence to Monacho,
To visit there her Uncle, Paul Bagloone,
The Abbot; Fortune (Queen to such blind matches)
Presents her to the Dukes eye, on the way
As he pursues the Dear: in short, my Lord,
He saw her, loved her, wooed her, won her, matched her,
No counsel could divert him.
She is fair.
She is; and to speak truth, I think right Noble
In her Conditions.
If when I should choose,
Beauty and Virtue were the Fee proposed,
I should not pass for parentage.
The Duke doth come.
Let's break off talk: if ever, now
Good Angel of my soul protect my truth.
Come my Biancha, revel in mine arms,
Whiles I, wrapped in my admiration, view
Lilies and Roses growing in thy cheeks.
Fernando! oh thou half my self! no joy
Could make my pleasures full without thy presence!
I am a Monarch of felicity,
Proud in a pair of Jewels, rich and beautiful;
A perfect Friend, a Wife aboue compare.
Sir, if a man so low in rank, may hope
By loyal duty, and devoted zeal,
To hold a Correspondence in friendship
With one so mighty as the Duke of Pavy,
My uttermost ambition is to climb
To those deserts may give the stile of servant.
Of partner in my Dukedom, in my heart,
As freely as the privilege of blood
Hath made them mine, Phillippo and Fernando
Shall be without distinction: Look, Biancha,
On this good man; in all respects to him
Be as to me: only the name of husband,
And reverent observance of our bed
Shall differ vs in persons, else in soul
We are all one.
I shall, in best of Love,
Regard the bosome-partner of my Lord.
Ferentes.
Madam.
You are one loves Courtship,
He had some change of words; it were no lost labour
To stuste your Table-bookes, the man speaks wisely.
I'm glad your Highness is so pleasant.
Sister.
My Lord and brother.
You are too silent;
Quicken your sad remembrance: though the loss
Of your dead husband be of more account
Then slight neglect, yet it is a sin against
The state of Princes to exceed a mean
In mourning for the dead.
Should form, my Lord,
Prevail aboue affection? no, it cannot.
You have your self here a right noble Duchess,
(Virtuous at least) and should your grace now pay
(Which heaven forbid) the debt you owe to Nature,
I dare presume, she would not so soon forget
A Prince that thus advanced her.—Madam, could you?
Bitter and shrewd.
Sister, I should too much bewray my weakness,
To give a resolution on a passion
I never felt nor feared.
A modest answer.
If credit may be given to a face,
My Lord, I'll undertake on her behalf;
Her words are trusty Heralds to her mind.
Exceeding good; the man will undertake:
Observe it, Da'uolos.
I doe, Lady; it is a smooth praise.
Friend, in thy judgment I approve thy love,
And love thee better for thy judging mine:
Though my gray-headed Senate in the laws
Of strict opinion and severe dispute,
Would tie the limits of our free effects,
(Like superstitious Jaws, to match with none
But in a tribe of Princes like our selves)
Gross nurtured slaves, who force their wretched souls
To crouch to profit; nay, for trash and wealth,
Dote on some crooked or misshapen form,
Hugging wise Natures lame deformity,
Begetting creatures ugly as themselves:
But why should Princes doe so, that command
The store-house of the earths hid minerals?
No, my Bianchae, thou art to me as dear
As if thy portion had bin Europes riches,
Since in thine eyes lies more than these are worth:
Set on; they shall be strangers to my heart
That envy thee thy Fortunes:
Come, Fernando, my but divided self, what we have done
We are only debtor to heaven for.—On.
Now take thy time, or never, Da'uolos;
Prevail, and I will raise thee high in grace.—
Madam, I will omit no Art,
My honoured Lord Fernando.
To me, Sir?
Let me beseech your Lordship
To excuse me, in the nobleness of your wisdom,
If I exceed good manners: I am one, my Lord,
Who in the admiration of your perfect virtues,
Doe so truly honour and reverence your deserts,
That there is not a creature bears life
Shall more faithfully study to doe you service
In all offices of duty, and vows of due respect.
Good Sir, you bind me to you: is this all?
I beseech your care a little, good my Lord; what I
Have to speak, concerns your reputation and best fortune.
How's that? my Reputation? lay aside
Superfluous Ceremony; speak, what is it?
I doe repute my self
The blessed'st man alive, that I shall be the first
Gives your Lordship news of your perpetual comfort.
As how?
If singular beauty, unimitable virtues, honour, youth,
And absolute goodness be a fortune, all those are at once
Offered to your particular choice.
Without delays, which way?
The great and gracious Lady Fiormonda love you,
Infinitely loves you.—But, my Lord, as ever you tendered
A servant to your pleasures, let me not be reueal'd, that
I gave you notice on it.
Sure you are strangely out of tune, Sir.
Please but to speak to her, be but Courtly ceremonius
With her, use once but the language of affection, if I
Mis-report ought besides my knowledge, let me never
Have place in your good opinion: oh, these women, my Lord
Are as brittle mettle as your glasses, as smooth, as slippery:
Their very first substance was quicke-sands; let 'em look
Never so demurely, one phillip chokes them: my Lord,
She loves you I know it.—But I beseech your Lordship
Not to discover me; I would not for the world she
Should know that you know it by me.
I understand you, and to thank your care
Will study to requite it; and I vow
She never shall have notice of your news
By me, or by my means. And, worthy Sir,
Let me alike enjoin you not to spaake
A word of that I understand her love;
And as for me, my word shall be your surety
I'll not as much as give her cause to think
I ever heard it.
Nay, my Lord,
Whatsoever I infer, you may break with her in it
If you please, for rather than silence should hinder
You one step to such a fortune, I will expose my self
To any rebuke for your sake, my good Lord.
You shall not, indeed Sir, I am still your friend,
And will prove so; for the present I am forced
To attend the Duke, good hours befall ye, I must leave you.
Gon already; S'foot I ha marred all, this is worse and worse, he's as cold as Hemlock; if her Highness knows how I have gone to work, she'll thank me scurvily: a pox of all dull brains; I took the clean contrary course: there is a mystery in this slight carelessness of his, I must si•…t it, and I will find it. vd's me, fool my self out of my wit: well, I'll choose some fitter opportunity to inveigle him, and till then, smooth her up, that hee is a man overjoyed with the report.———
Madam, by this light I vow my self your servant; only yours, inespecially yours: time, like a turne-coat, may order and disorder the outward fashions of our bodies, but shall never enforce a change on the constancy of my mind, sweet Colona, fair Colona, young and sprightful Lady, doe not let me in the best of my youth, languish in my earnest affections.
Why should you seek, my Lord, to purchase glory
By the disgrace of a silly maid?
That I confess too;
I am every way so unworthy of the first fruits of thy em∣braces, so farbeneath the riches of thy merit, that it can be no honour to thy fame, to rank me in the number of thy servants, yet prove me how true, how firm I will stand to thy plea∣sures, to thy command; and as time shall serve be ever thine Now prethe dear Colona.
Well, well, my Lord, I have no heart of flint;
Or if I had, you know by cunning words
How to out-weare it.—But.
But what? doe not pity thy own gentleness,
Lovely Colona; shall I speak? shall I? say
But I, and our wishes are made up.
How shall I say I, when my fears say no?
You will not fail to meet two hours hence, sweet.
No; yes, yes, I would have said, how my tongue trips.
I take that promise, &amp; that double yes as an assurance
Of thy faith, in the grove (good sweet remember)
In any case alone (do ye mark love) not as much as your
Duchess little dog, (you'll not forget) two hours hence,
(Think on it, and miss not,) till then—
Oh, if you should prove false, and love another?
Defy me then; I'll be all thine, and a servant
Only to thee, only to thee.——
Very passing good, three honest women in our Courts
Here of Italy, are enough to discredit a whole Nation
Of that sex: he that is not a Cuckold, or a Bastard,
Is a strangely happy man; for a chaste wife, or a mother
That never stepped awry, are wonders, wonders in Italy.
S'life I have got the feat on it, and am every day
More active in my trade; it is a sweet sin, this slip
Of mortality, and I have tasted enough for one
Passion of my senses: Here comes more work for me:
And how does my own Iulia, mew upon this sadness?
What's the matter you are melancholy?
Whither away, wench?
It is well, the time has bin when your smooth tongue
Would not have mocked my griefs, and had I bin more
Chary of mine honour, you had still bin lowly as you were.
Lowly? why I am sure I cannot be much more lowly
Then I am to thee, thou bring me on my bare knees
Wench, twice in every four and twenty hours, besides
Half turns instead of Beavers; what must we next
Doe, sweet-heart?
Break vows on your side, I expect no other,
But every day look when some newer choice
May violate your honour and my trust.
Indeed forsooth, how •…hey by that la, I hope I neglect
No opportunity to your Nunquam satis, to be called
In question for; go, thou art as fretting as an old
Grogrum, by this hand I love thee for it, it becomes thee
So prettily to be angry: well, if thou should dye,
Farewell all love with me for ever: go, I'll meet
Thee soon in thy Ladies back lobby, I will, wench,
Look for me.
But shall I be resolved you will be mine?
All thine; I will reserve my best ability,
My heart, my honour, only to thee, only to thee:
Pity of my blood away, I hear company
Coming on: remember soon I am all thine,
I will live perpetually only to thee, away.—
S'foot I wonder about what time of the year
I was begot; sure it was when the Moon was
In conjunction, and all the other Planets
Drunk at a Morrice-dance: I am haunted
Aboue patience, my mind is not as infinite to doe,
As my occasions are proffered of doing: Chastity! I am
An Eunuch, if I think•… there be any such thing; or
If there be, it is amongst vs men, for I never found it
In a woman, thoroughly tempted, yet: I have a shrewd hard
Task coming on, but let it pass: who comes now?
My Lord, the Dukes friend! I will strive to be inward with
Him, my Noble Lord Fernando.
My Lord Ferentes, I should change some words
Of consequence wi•… you; but since I am,
For this time, busied in more serious thoughts,
I'll pick some fitter opportunity.
I will wait your pleasure, my Lord,—Good day to
Your Lordship.———
Traitor to friendship, whither shall I run,
That lost to reason cannot sway the float
Of the unruly faction in my blood?
The Duchess, oh the Duchess! in her smiles
Are all my joys abstracted; death to my thoughts,
My other plague comes to me.
My Lord Fernando, what, so hard at study?
You are a kind companion to your self,
That love to be alone so.
Madam, no;
I rather chose this leisure to admire
The glories of this little world, the Court,
Where like so many stars on several thrones,
Beauty and greatness shine in proper Orbs,
Sweet matter for my meditation.
So, so, Sir, (leave vs Iulia) your own proof
By travel and prompt observation,
Instruct you how to place the use of speech;
But since you are at leisure, pray let's sit;
We'll pass the time a little in discourse:
What have you seen abroad?
No wonders, Lady,
Like these I see at home.
At home! as how?
Your pardon, if my tongue (the voice of truth)
Report but what is warranted by sight.
What sight?
Look in your glass, and you shall see
A miracle.
What miracle?
Your Beauty,
So far aboue all beauties else abroad,
As you are in your own, superlative.
Fie, fie, your wit hath too much edge.
Would that,
Or any thing, that I could challenge mine,
Were but of value to express how much
I serve in love the sister of my Prince.
It is for your Princes sake then, not for mine.
For you in him, and much for him in you.
I must acknowledge, Madam, I observe
In your affects a thing to me most strange,
Which makes me so much honour you the more.
Pray tell it.
Gladly, Lady:
I see how opposite to youth and custom
You s•…t before you in your Tableture
Of your remembrance, the becoming griefs
Of a most loyal Lady; for the loss
Of so renowned a Prince as was your Lord.
Now good my Lord, no more of him.
Of him!
I know it is a needless task in me
To set him forth in his deserved praise,
You better can record it; For you find
How much more hee exceeded other men
In most Heroic virtues of account,
So much more was your loss in losing him.
Of him! his praise should be a field too large,
Too spacious, for so mean an Orator
As I, to range in.
Sir, enough; it is true,
He well deserved your labour; on his death-bed
This Ring hee gave me, bade me never part
With this, but to the man I loved as dearly
As I loved him; yet since you know which way
To blaze his worth so rightly, in return
To your deserts, wear this for him and me.
Madam.
It is yours.
Me thought you said, he charged you
Not to imparrit but to him you loved
As dearly as you loved him.
True, I said so.
O then far be it, my unhallowed hand
With any rude intrusion should vnuaile
A Testament enacted by the dead.
Why man, that Testament is disanuled,
And •…ncell'd quite by vs that live: look here,
My blood is not yet friezed; for better instance
Be judge your self, experience is no danger:
•…old are my sighs; but feel, my lips are warm.
What means the virtuous Marquess?
To new kiss
The oath to thee, which whiles he lived was his:
Hast thou yet power to love?
To love?
To meet
Sweetness of language in discourse as sweet.
Madam, it were dullness, past the ignorance
Of common block heads, not to understand
Whereto this favour tends; and it is a fortune
So much aboue my Fate, that I could wish
No greater happiness on earth; but know,
Long since, I vowed to live a single life.
What was it you said?
I said I made a vow.
Blessed deliverance!
Prevented? mischief on this interruption.
My Lord Fernando you encounter fitly,
I have a suit t'ee.
It is my duty, Madam,
To be commanded.
Since my Lord the Duke
Is now disposed to mirth, the time serves well
For mediation, that he would be pleased
To take the Lord Roseilli to his grace,
He is a Noble Gentleman: I dare
Engage my credit, loyal to the state:
And, Sister, one that ever strove (me thought)
By special service, and obsequious care,
To win respect from you; it were a part
Of gracious favour, if you pleased to join
With vs, in being suitors to the Duke
For his return to Court.
To Court! indeed
You have some cause to speak; he undertook
Most Champion-like to win the prize at tilt,
In honour of your picture.—Marry did he:
There's not a Groom of the Equerry, could have matched
The jolly riding man; pray get him back,
I doe not need his service, Madam, I.
Not need it, sister? why? I hope you think
It is no necessity in me to move it,
More then respect of honour.
Honour? puh,
Honour is talked of more than known by some.
Sister, these words I understand not.
Swell not unruly thoughts:
Madam, the motion you propose, proceeds
From the true touch of goodness; it is a plea
Wherein my tongue and knee shall jointly strive
To beg his Highness for Roseillie's cause:
Your judgment rightly speaks him; there is not
In any Court of Christendom, a man
For quality or trust more absolute.
How? is it even so?
I shall for ever bless
Your Highness for your gracious kind esteems
Of my dishartned kinsman; and to add
Encouragement to what you undertake,
I dare affirm, it is no important fault
Hath cause the Dukes distaste.
I hope so too.
Let your Highness, and you al, my Lords, take adieu•…e
How you motion his Excellence on Roseillie's behalf:
There is more danger in that man than is fit to be
Publicly reported; I could wish things were other wise
For his own sake; but I'll assure ye, you will exceedingly
Alter his Excellencies disposition (he now is in) if you but
Mention the name of Roseilli to his ear; I am so much
Acquainted in the process of his actions.
If it be so, I am the sorrier, Sir:
I'm loath to move my Lord unto offence,
Yet I'll adventure chiding.
Oh had I India's gold, I'd give it all
To exchange one private word, one minutes breath
With this hart-wounding beauty.
Prethe no more, Ferentes, by the faith
I owe to honour, thou hast made me laugh
Beside my spleen; Fernando, had thou heard
The pleasant humour of Maurucio's dotage
Discoursed, how in the winter of his age
He is become a Lover, thou would swear
A Morris-dance were but a Tragedy
Compared to that: well, we will see the youth:
What Council hold you now, sirs?
We, my Lord, were talking of the horsemanship in France
Which, as your friend reports, he thinks exceeds
All other Nations.
How? why, have not we
As gallant Riders here?
None that I know.
Pish, your affection leads you; I dare
Wage a thousand Ducats not a man in France
Out-rides Roseilli.
I shall quit this wrong.
I said as much, my Lord.
I have not seen
His practice, since my coming back.
Where is he?
How is it we see him not?
What's this? what's this?
I hear he was commanded from the Court.
Oh confusion on this villainous occasion.
True; but we meant a day or two at most,
Should be his furthest term; not yet returned?
Whore's D'auolos?
My Lord.
You know our minds,
How comes it thus to pass, we miss Roseilli.
My Lord, in a sudden discontent I hear he departed towards Beneuento, determining (as I am given to under∣stand) to pass to Si•…l, minding to visit his Cozen Don Pedro de Toledo, in the Spanish Court.
The Spanish Court! now by the blessed bones
Of good S. Francis, let there posts be sent
To call him back, or I will post thy head
Beneath my foot; ha! you, you know my mind,
Look that you get him back; the Spanish Court,
And without our Commission,—say!
Here's fine juggling.
Good Sir be not so moved.
Fie, fie, Biancha;
It is such a gross indignity, I'd rather
Have lost seven years revenue.—The Spanish Court!
How now, what ails our sister?
On the sudden
I fall a bleeding, it is an ominous sign;
Pray heaven it turn to good.—Your highness leave.—
Look to her; come Fernando, come Biancha,
Let's strive to overpass this choleric heat:
Sir, see that you trifle not. How we,
Who sway the manage of authority,
May be abused by smooth officious agents?
But look well to our sister.——
Nephew, please you
To see your friend to night?
Yes, Uncle, yes:
Thus bodies walk vnsold; mine eyes but follows
My heart entombed in yonder goodly shrine:
Life without her, is but death's subtle snares,
And I am but a Coffin to my cares.
BEard be confined to neatness, that no hair
May stouer up to prick my mistress lip,
More rude than bristles of a Porcupine.
Giacopo.
My Lord.
Am I all sweet behind?
I have no Powlterers nose, but your apparel sits
About you most debonarely.
But Giacopo, with what grace doe my words pro∣ceed out of my mouth? have I a moving countenance? is there harmony in my voice? can thou perceive, as it were, a hansomenesse of shape in my very breath, as it is formed into syllable, Giacopo?
Yes indeed, Sir, I doe feel a savour as pleasant as—a Glister-pipe,——Calamus or Civet.
Observe him and be silent.
Hold thou the glass, Giacopo, and mark me with what exceeding comeliness I could court the Lady Marquess if it come to the push.
Sister, you are his aim.
A subject fit
To be the stall of laughter.
That's your music.
Thus I reverse my pace, and thus stalkingly in Courtly gate I advance, one, two, and three.—Good, I kiss my hand, make my Congee, settle my countenance, and thus begin.—Hold up the glass higher, Giacopo.
Thus high, Sir?
It is well, now mark me:
Most excellent Marquess, most fair La-dy,
Let not old age, or hairs that are silver
Disparage my desire; for it may be
I am then other greene youth nimbler:
Since I am your graces servant so true,
Great Lady then love me for my virtue.
Oh Giacopo! Petrach was a dunce, Dantes a Iig-maker,
S'anazar a goose, and Are•…osto a puck-fist to me:
I tell thee, Giacopo, I am wrapped with fury,
And have been for these six nights together
Drunk with the pure liquor of Helycon.
I think no less, Sir;
For you look as wild, and talk as idly
As if you had not slept these nine years.
What think you of this language, sister?
Sir, I think, in princes Courts, no age nor greatness
But must admit the fool; in me it were folly
To scorn what greater states than I have bin.
O, but you are too general.
A fool;
I thank your Highness; many a women's wit
Have thought themselves much better, was much worse.
You still mistake me.
Silence, note the rest.
God-a-mercy brains; Giocopo, I have it.
What? my Lord?
A conceit, Giacopo, and a fine one; down on thy knees, Giocopo, and worship my wit; give me both thy ears: thus it is, I will have my picture drawn most composituously in a squire table of some too foot long, from the crown of the head to the waste downward, no further.
Then you'll look like a dwarf, Sir, being cut off by the middle.
Speak not thou, but wonder at the conceit that follows; In my bosom on my left side. I will have a lease of blood-red crimson velvet (as it were part of my doublet) open; Which being opened, Giacopo, (now mark) I will
have a clear and most transparent Crystal in the form of a heart.—(Singular admirable.) When I have framed this, I will, as some rare outlandish piece of workmanship, bestow it on the most fair and illustrious Lady Fiormonda.
But now, Sir, for the conceit.
Simplicity and Ignorance, prate no more: blockhead, dost not understand yet? why this being to her instead of a Looking-glasse, she shall no oftner powder her hair, surfell her cheeks, cleanse her teeth, or conform the hairs of her eye-browes, but having occasion to use this glass (which for the rareness and richness of it, she will hourly doe) but she shall as often gaze on my picture, remember me, and behold the excellence of her excellencies beauty, in the prospective and mirror, as it were, in my heart.
I marry, Sir, this is something.
All aboue. Ha, ha, ha.——
My sister's gone in anger.
Who's that laughs? search with thine eyes, Giacopo.
O my Lord, my Lord, you have gotten an everlasting fame; the Dukes grace, and the Duchess grace, and my Lord Fernando's grace, with all the rabble of Courtiers, have heard every word, look where they stand: now you shall be made a Count for your wit, and I Lord for my Counsel.
Be shrew the chance, we are discovered.
Pity,—oh my wisdom! I must speak to them.
O Duke most great, and most renowed Duchess!
Excuse my apprehension, which not much-is:
It is love, my Lord, that's all the hurt you see,
Angelica her self plead for me.
We pardon you, most wise and learned Lord,
And that we may all glorify your wit,
Entreat your wisdoms company to day,
To grace our talk with your grave discourse:
What says your mighty eloquence?
Giacopo, help me; his Grace has put me out my own Bias, and I know not what to answer in form.
Vd's me, tell him you'll come.
Yes, I will come, my Lord the Duke, I will.
We take your word, and wish your honour health.
Away then; come Biancha, we have found
A salve for melancholy. Mirth &amp; ease.—
I'll see the jolly lover and his glass
Take leave of one another.
Are they gone?
O my Lord, I doe now smell news.
What news, Giacopo?
The Duke has a smackering towards you, and you shall clap up with his sister, the widow, suddenly.
She is mine, Giacopo, she is mine; advance the glass, Giacapo, that I may practise as I pass, to walk a portly grace like a Marquess; to which degree I am now a climbing.
Thus doe we march to honours haven of bliss,
To ride in triumph through Persepolis.
Now, as I live,
Here's laughter worthy our presence;
I will not lose him so.——
Madam.
To me, my Lord!
Please but to hear
The story of a Cast-away in love;
And ô let not the passage of a jest
Make slight a sadder subject, who hath placed
All happiness in your diviner eyes.
My Lord, the time——
The time! yet hear me speak,
For I must speak or burst: I have a soul
So anchored down with cares in seas of woe,
That passion, and the vows I owe to you,
Have changed me to a lean Anatomy,
Sweet Princess of my life—
Forbear, or I shall—
Yet as you honour virtue, doe not freeze
My hopes to more discomfort, then as yet
My fears suggest; no beauty so adorns
The composition of a well-built mind,
As pity: hear me out.
No more; I spare
To tell you what you are; and must confess,
Doe almost hate my judgement, that it once
Thought goodness dwelt in you: remember now
It is the third time since your treacherous tongue
Hath pleaded treason to my care and fame;
Yet for the friendship twixt my Lord and you,
I have not voye'd your follies; if you dare
To speak a fourth time, you shall rue your lust:
Tic all no better; learn, and love your self.
Gon! oh my sorrows! how am I undone?
Not speak again? no, no, in her chaste breast
Virtue and resolution have discharged
All female weakness: I have sued and sued,
Kneeled, wept, and begged; but tears, and vows, and words,
Move her no more then summer-winds a rock:
I must resolve to check this rage of blood,
And will; she is all icy to my fires,
Yet even that ye inflames in me desires.
Is it possible the Duke should be so moved?
It is true; you have no enemy at Court
But her, for whom you pine so much in love:
Then master your affections; I am sorry you hug your ruin so.
What say you to the project I proposed?
I entertain it, with a greater joy
Then shame can check.
You are come as I could wish, my Cozen is resolved.
Without delay
Prapare your self, and meet at Courtanon,
Some half hour hence; and Cupped bless your joy,
Is ever man was bounden to a friend—
No more; away: loves rage is yet unknown,
In his (aye me) too well, I feel my own:
So, now I am alone, now let me think;
She is the Duchess; say she be: A Creature
Sowed up in painted cloth, might so be styled,
That's but a name; shoe's married too, she is,
And therefore better might distinguish love:
She's young, and fair; why, Madam, that's the bait
Invites me more to hope; she's the Dukes wife;
Who knows not this? she's bosomed to my friend:
There, there, I am quite lost: will not be won;
Still worse and worse; abhors to hear me speak:
Eternal mischief, I must urge no more:
For were I not beleapred in my soul,
Here were enough to quench the flames of hell.
What then? pish, I must not speak, I'll write.
Come then, sad Secretary to my plaints,
Plead thou my faith, for words are turned to sighs.
What says this paper?—he reads to himself.
Now is the time; alone; reading a letter; good; how now? striking his breast? what, in the name of policy, should this mean? tearing his hair? passion, by all the hopes of my life, plain passion: now I perceive it; if this bee not a fit of some violent affection, I am an ass in vnderstan∣ding; why it is plain, plainer and plainer: Love in the ex∣treamest: oh for the party, who now? the greatness of his spirits is to high cherished to be caught with some ordinary stuff, and if it bee my Lady Fiormonda, I am strangely mi∣stooke: well, that I have fit occasion soon to understand: I have here two pictures, newly drawn, to bee sent for a present to the Abbot of Monacho, the Duchess Uncle, her own and my Ladies: I'll observe which of these may, per∣haps, bewray him:—a turns about, my noble Lord.
You're welcome, Sir, I thank you
Me, my Lord? for what, my Lord?
Who's there? I cry you merey, D'auolos,
I took you for another, pray excuse me;
What is it you bear there?
No secret, my Lord, but may be imparted to you:
A couple of Pictures, my good Lord, please you see them.
I care not much for pictures: but whose are they?
Th'one is for my Lords sister, the other is the Duchess.
Ha, D'auolos, the Duchesses?
Yes, my Lord:—sure the word startled him—
—Observe that.
You told me, master Secretary, once,
You owed me love.
Service, my honoured Lord, howsoever you please to term it.
It were rudeness to be suitor for a sight,
Yet trust me, Sir, I'll be all secret.
I beseech your Lordship;
They are, as I am, constant to your pleasure:
This (my Lord) is the widow Marquesses, as it now newly came from the Picture-drawers, the oil yet greene a sweet Picture; and in my judgment, Art hath not bin a niggard in striving to equal the life. Michael Angelo himself needed not blush to own the workmanship.
A very pretty Picture;
But, kind Signior, to whose use is it?
For the Dukes, my Lord, who determines to send it with all speed as a present to Paul Baglione, Uncle to the Duchess; that he may see the riches of two such lustres as shine in the Court of Pay.
Pray Sir, the other?
This (my Lord) is for the Duchess Biancha, a wondrous sweet Picture, if you well observe with what sin∣gularity the Arts-man hath strove to set forth each limb in exquisitest proportion, not missing a hair.
A hair?
She cannot more formally,
Or (if it may be lawful to use the word) more really, behold her own Symmetry in her glass, then in taking a sensible view of this counterfeit: when I first saw it, I verily almost was of a mind that this was her very lip.
Lip!
How constantly he dwells upon this portraiture? Nay, I'll assure your Lordship there is no defect of cunning. His eye is fixed as if it were incorporated there.—Were not the party her self alive to witness that there is a Creature composed of flesh and blood, as naturally enriched with such harmony of admiral beauty, as is here artificially counter∣feited, a very curious eye might repute it as an imaginary rapture of some transported conceit, to aim at an impose∣bility; whose very first gaze is of force almost to persuade a substantial love in a settled heart.
Love! heart.
My honoured Lord.
Oh heavens!
I am confirmed.—Whst ails your Lordship?
You need not praise it, Sir, it self is praise.
How near had I forgot my self?—I thank you.
It is such a picture as might well become
The shrine of some feigned Venus; I am dazeld
With looking on it:—pray Sir convey it hencc.
I am all your servant:—blessed, blessed discovery!
Please you to command me?
No, gentle Sir: I'm lost beyond my senses.
Do ye hear Sir, good where dwells the picture maker?
By the Castles farther draw-bridge, near Galzazzo's statue; his name is Alphonso Trinultio—happy aboue all fate.
You say enough, my thanks t'ee.
Were that picture
But rated at my Lordship, it were too cheap.
I fear I spoke or did I know not what,
All sense of providence was in mine eye.
Youth in threescore years and ten; trust me (my Lord
Maurucio) you are now younger in the judgment of those that compare your former age with your latter, by seven and twenty years, then you were three years ago: by all my fideli•…y, it is a miracle: the Ladies wonder at you.
Let them wonder; I am wise, as I am Courtly.
The Ladies, my Lord, call him the Greene broom of the Court, he sweeps all before him, and swear he has a stab∣binge wit: it is a very glister to laughter
Nay, I know I can tickle 'em at my pleasure:
I am stiff and strong, Ferentes.
A Rhedish root is a spear of steel in comparison of
I know what.—
The Marquess doth love you.
She doth love me.
And begins to doe you infinite grace. Maurucio, infinite grace.
I'll take this time:
Good hour, my Lords, to both.
Right Princely Fernando, the best of the Fernando's: by the pith of generation, the man I look for. His Highness hath sent to find you out; hee is determined to weather his own proper individual person, for two days space, in my Lord Narbassa's forest, to hunt the Dear, the Buck, the Roe, and eke the Barren Doe.
Is his Highness preparing to hunt?
Yes, my Lord, and resolved tolye forth for the breuiating the prolixity of some superfluous transmigration of the Suns double Cadence to the western Horizon, my most perspicuous good Lord.
Oh, Sir, let me beseech you to speak in your own mother tongue—two days absence—well—my Lord Maurucio, I have a suit t'ee.
My Lord Fernando, I have a suit to you.
That you will accept from me a very choice token of my love, will you grant it?
Will you grant mine?
What is it?
Only to know what the suit is, you please to P•…∣far to me.
Why it is, my Lord, a Fool.
A Fool?
As very a Fool
As your Lordship is—hopeful to see in any time of your life.
Now good my Lord part not with the Fool on any terms.
I beseech you, my Lord, has the fool qualities?
Very rare ones:
You shall not hear him speak one wise word in a months converse; passing temperate of diet, for keep him from meat four and twenty hours, and he will fast a whole day and a night together: unless you urge him to swear, there sell∣dome comes an oath from his mouth: and of a Fool, my Lord, to tell ye the plain truth, had'a but half as much wit as you, my Lord, he would be in short time three quar∣ters as arrant wise as your Lordship.
Giacopo, these are very rare elements in a creature of little understanding: oh, that I long to see him.
A very harmless Idiot,
And as you could wish, look where he comes.
Nephew, here is the thing you sent for:
Come hither Fool, come it is a good fool.
Here, my Lord,
I freely give you the Fool, pray use him well for my sake.
I take the Fool most thankfully at your hands, my Lord: Hast any qualities, my pretty fool? wilt dwell with me?
A, a, a, a, I.
I never beheld a more natural Creature in my life.
Uncle, the Duke I hear prepares to hunt:
Let's in and wait. Farewell Maurucio.—
Beast that I am, not to ask the fools name:
It is no matter, Fool is a sufficient title to call
The greatest Lord in the Court by, if he be no wiser then he.
Oh my Lord, what an arrant excellent pretty creature it is? come honey, honey, honey, come.
You are beholding to my Lord Fernando for this gift.
True; oh that he could but speak methodically!
Can speak, Fool?
Can speak; De e e e e—
It is a present for an Emperor: What an excellent instrument were this to purchase a suit, or a monopoly from the Dukes ear?
I have it, I am wise and fortunate; Giacopo, I will leave all conceits, and instead of my picture, offer the Lady Marquess this mortal man of weak brain.
My Lord you have most rarely bethought you;
For so shall she no oftner see the Fool,
But she shall remember you better,
Then by a thousand Looking-glasses.
She will most graciously entertain it.
I may tell you, Ferentes, there's not a great woman amongst forty, but knows how to make sport with a Fool. Dost know how old thou art, sirrah?
Dud—a clap cheek for noun sake gaffer. h ee e e e e.
Alas, you must ask him no questions; but clap him on the cheek: I understand his language; your Fool is tho tender hearted'st creature that is.
No more, thou hast, in this discovery,
Exceeded all my favours, D'auolos.
Is it mistress Madam Duchess? brave revenge.
But had your Grace seen the infinite appetite of lust in the piercing adultery of his eye, you would—
Or change him, or confound him, prompt dissembler!
Is here the bond of his Religious vow?
And that, now when the Duke is rid abroad,
My Gentleman will stay behind, is sick—or so.
Not altogether in health, it was the excuse he made.
Most fit opportunity:
Her grace comes just in the nick; let me study.
Lose no time, my Lord.
To her, Sir.
Vouchsafe to stay thy foot, most Cynthian hue.
And from a Creature, ever vowed thy servant,
Accept this gift; most rare, most fi•…, most new,
The earnest penhy of a love so servant.
What means the jolly youth?
Nothing, sweet Princess,
But only to present your grace with this sweet faced Fool: please you to accept him to make you merry; I'll assure your Grace, he is a very whole some Fool.
A fool? you might as well ha given your self:
Whence is he?
Now, just very now, given me out of special favour, by the Lord Fernando, Madam.
By him? well, I accept him; thank you for it:
And in requital, take that Tooth picker.
It is yours.
A Tooth-picker; I kiss your bounty: no quibble now?
And Madam,
If I grow sick, to make my spirits quicker,
I will revive them with this sweet Tooth-picker.
Make use on it as you list; here D'auolos,
Take in the Fool.
Come, sweet heart, wilt along with me?
V v vmh—v v vmh—won not, won not—v v vmh
Wilt go with me, chic?
Will go, te e e—go will go—
Come D'auolos, observe to night; it is late:
Or I will win my choice, or curse my fate.
This was wisely done now: S'foot you purchase A favour from a Creature, my Lord, the greatest King of the earth wud be proud of.
Giacope!
My Lord.
Come behind me, Giacopo; I am big with conceit and must be delivered of poetry, in the eternal commenda∣tion of this gracious Tooth-picker: but first, I hold it a most healthy policy to make a flight supper.
For meat's the food that must preserve our lives,
And now's the time, when mortals whet their knives on thresholds, shoo-soles, Cart-wheeles, &amp;c. Away Giacopo.
It is yet but early night, too soon to sleep:
Sister, shall's have a mate at Chess?
A mate!
No, Madam; you are grown too hard for me:
My Lord Fernando is a fitter match.
He's a well practised gamester:
Well, I care not, how cunning so ever he be,
To pass an hour; I'll try your skill, my Lord;
Reach here the Chesse-board.
Are you so apt to try his skill, Madam Duchess?
Very good.
I shall bewray too much my ignorance
In striving with your Highness; it is a game
I lose at still, by oversight.
Well, well, I fear you not, let's too't.
You need not, Madam.
Marry needs she not; how gladly will she too't? it is a Rooke to a Queen, she heaves a pawn to a Knights place; by'rlady, if all be truly noted, to a Dukes place; and that's be∣side the play, I can tell ye.
Madam, I must •…ntreat excuse; I feel
The temper of my body not in case
To judge the strife.
Lights for our sister, sirs:
Good rest t'ee; I'll but end my game and follow.
Let 'em have time enough, and as thou can,
Be near to hear their Courtship, D'auolos.
Madam, I shall observe 'em with all cunning secrecy.
Colona, attend our sister to her chamber.
I shall Madam.—
Play.
I must not lose th'aduantage of the game:
Madam, your Queen is lost.
My Clergy help me;
My Queen! and nothing for it but a pawn?
Why then the game's lost too; but play.
What Madam?
You must needs play well,
You are so studious.—
Fie upon it, you study past patience:—
What do ye dream on? here's demurring
Would weary out a statue.—Good now play.
Forgive me, let my knees for ever stick
Nailed to the ground, as earthy as my fears;
Ever I arise, to part away so cursed
In my unbounded anguish, as the rage
Of flame's, beyond all Utterance of words,
Devour me; lightened by your sacred eyes.
What means the man?
To lay before your feet
In lowest vassalage, the bleeding heart
That sighs the tender of a suit disdained.
Great Lady pity me, my youth, my wounds,
And doe not think, that I have culled this time
From motions swiftest measure, to vnclaspe
The book of lust; if purity of love
Have residenee in virtues quest; lo here,
Bent lower in my heart than on my knee,
I beg compassion to a love, as chaste
As softness of desire can intimate.
At it already? admirable hast.
Am I again betrayed?—bad man.
Keep in
Bright Angel, that severer breath, to cool
That heat of cruelty, which sways the Temple
Of your too stony breast; you cannot urge
One reason to rebuke my trembling plea,
Which I have not, with many nights expense,
Examined; but, O Madam, still I find
No Physic strong to cure a tottur'd mind,
But freedom from the torture it sustains.
Not kissing yet? still on four knees? O for a plump Bed and clean sheets, to comfort the eking of his shins! We shall have 'em clip anon, and lisp kisses; here's ceremo∣ny with a vengeance.
Rise up, we charge you, rise; look on our face.
What see you there that may persuade a hope
Of lawless love? Know, most unworthy man,
So much we ha•…e the baseness of thy lust,
As were none living of thy sex but thee,
We had much rather prostitute our blood
To some inuenom'd Serpent, then admit
Thy bestial dalliance: could thou dare to speak
Again, when we forbad? no, wretched thing,
Take this for answer; If thou henceforth op
Thy leprous mouth to tempt our ear again,
We shall not only certify our Lord
Of thy disease in friendship, but revenge
Thy boldness with the forfeit of thy life.
Think on it.
Now, now, now the game is a foot, your gray Jennet with the white face is curried, forsooth; please your Lord∣ship leap up into the saddle, forsooth;—poor Duke, how does thy head ache now?
Stay, go not hence in choler, blessed woman!
You've schooled me, lend me hearing; though the float
Of infinite desires swell to a tide
Too high so soon to ebb, yet by this hand,
This glorious gracious hand of yours—
I marry, the match is made, clap hands and too't ho.
I swear,
Henceforth I never will as much in word,
In letter, or in syllable, presume
To make a repetition of my grief•…
Good night t'ee: if when I am dead you rip
This Coffin of my heart, there shall you read
With constant eyes, what now my tongue defines,
Biancha's name carved out in bloody lines.
For ever, Lady, now good night.
Good night:
Rest in your goodness; lights there; Sir good night.
So, via—to be cuckold (mercy and providence) is as natural to a married man, as to eat sleep or wear a night∣cap. Friends! I will rather trust mine arm in the throat of a Lion, my purse with a Courtesan, my neck with the chance on a Dye, or my Religion in a Synagogue of Jaws, then my wife with a friend; wherein doe Princes exceed the poorest peasant that ever was yoked to a sixpenny strumpet, but that the horns of the one are mounted some two inches higher by a Choppine then the other? oh Action! the goodliest headed beast of the Forest, amongst wild cattle, is a Stag; and the goodliest beast amongst tame fools in a Corporation is a Cuckold.
Speak D'auolos, how thrives intelligence?
Aboue the prevention of Fate, Madam: I saw him kneel make pitiful faces, kiss hands and forefingers, rise and by this time he is up, up Madam: dobtlesse the youth aims to be Duke, for hee is gotten into the Dukes seat an hour ago.
Is it true?
Oracle, oracle; siege was laid, parley admitted, com∣sition
offered, and the Fort entered; there's no interruption, the Duke will be at home to morrow (gentle Animal) what do ye resolve?
To stir up Tragedies as black as brave;
And sending the Lecher panting to his gran.—
Resolve, and doe; it is done, What, are those eyes
Which lately were so ouerdrown'd in tears,
So easy to take rest? Oh happy man!
How sweetly sleep hath sealed up sorrows here?
But I will call him: What? My Lord, my Lord,
My Lord Fernando.
Who calls me?
My Lord,
Sleeping or waking?
Ha! who is it?
It is I:
Have you forgot my voice? or is your ear
But useful to your eye?
Madam, the Duchess?
She, it is she; sit up,
Sit up and wonder, whiles my sorrows swell:
The nights are short, and I have much to say.
Is it possible, it is you?
It is possible;
Why doe you think I come?
Why! to crown joys,
And make me master of my best desires.
It is true, you guess aright; sit up and listen.
With shame and passion now I must confess,
Since first mine eyes beheld you, in my heart
You have been only King; if there can be
A violence in love, then I have felt
That tyranny; be record to my soul,
The Justice which I for this folly fear:
Fernando, in short words, how ever my tongue
Did often chide thy love, each word thou spak•…st
Was music to my ear; was never poor
Poor wretched woman lived, that loved like me;
So truly, so unfeignedly.
Oh Madam—
To witness that I speak is truth,—look here,
Thus singly I adventure to thy bed,
And doe confess my weakness; if thou tempt'st
My bosom to thy pleasures, I will yield.
Perpetual happiness!
Now hear me out:
When first Caraffa, Pauy's Duke, my Lord,
Saw me, he loved me; and without respect
Of dower, took me to his bed and bosom,
Advanced me to the title•… possess;
Not moved by Counsel, or removed by greatness,
Which to requite, betwixt my soul and heaven,
I vowed a vow to live a constant wife;
I have done so: nor was there in the world
A man created, could have broke that truth
For all the glories of the earth, but thou;
But thou, Fernando: Doe I love thee now?
Beyond imagination.
True, I doe,
Beyond imagination: if no pledge
Of love can instance what I speak is true,
But loss of my best joys, here, here, Fernando,
Be satisfied, and ruin me.
What do ye mean?
To give my body up to thy embraces,
A pleasure that I never wished to thrive in,
Before this fatal minute: mark me now;
If thou dost spoil me of this robe of •…am,
By my best comforts, here I vow again,
To thee, to heaven, to the world, to time,
Ever yet the morning shall new christen day,
I'll kill my self.
How madam, how?
I will:
Doe what thou wilt, it is in thy choice; what say ye?
Pish, doe you come to try me? tell me, first,
Will you but grant a kiss?
Yes, take it; that,
Or what thy heart can wish: I am all thine.
Oh me—Come, come, how many women pray
Were ever heard or read of, granted love,
And did as you protest you will?
Fernando;
Jest not at my calamity: I kneel:—
By these disheauel'd hairs, these wretched tears,
By all that's good, if what I speak, my heart
Vows not eternally, then think, my Lord,
Was never man sued to me I denied,
Think me a common and most cunning whore,
And let my sins be written on my grave,
My name rest in reproof.—Doe as you list
I must believe ye, yet I hope anon,
When you are parted from me, you will say
I was a good cold easie-spirited man:
Nay, laugh at my simplicity; say, will ye?
No by the faith I owe my Bridal vows:
But ever hold thee much much dearer far
Then all my joys on earth, by this chaste kiss.
You have prevailed, and heaven forbid that 〈◊〉
Should by a want on appetite profane
This sacred Temple; it is enough for me
You'll please to call me servant.
Nay, be thine:
Command my power, my bosom; and I'll write
This love within the tables of my heart.
Enough; I'll master passion, and triumph
In being conquered; adding to it this,
In you my love, as it begun, shall end.
The latter I new vow—but day comes on,
What now we leave unfinished of content,
Each hour shall perfect up: Sweet, let's part.
This kiss,—best life good rest.
All mine to thee.
Remember this, and think I speak thy words:
When I am dead, rip up my heart and read
With constant eyes, what now my tongue defines,
Fernando's name carved out in bloody lines.
Once more good rest, Sweet.
Your most faithful servant.
GEt from me, strumpet, in famous whore, leprosy of my blood, make thy moan to Ballad singers, and Rimers, they'll Jig out thy wretchedness and abominate∣once to new tunes; as for me, I renounce thee, you are no daugh∣la of mine, I disclayne the legitimation of thy birth, and Curse the hour of thy Nativity.
Pray Sir vouchsafe me hearing.
With child I shame to my grave!
Oh whore, wretched beyond utterance or reformation!
What would say?
Sir, by the honour of my mothers hearse,
He has protested marriage, pledged his faith:
If vows have any force, I am his wife.
His faith?
Why thou fool, thou wickedly credulous fool,
Can thou imagine Luxury is observant of Religion? No, no, it is with a frequent Lecher as usual to for swear as to swear, their piety is in making idolatry a worship, their
harts and their tongues are as different as thou (thou whorel) and a Virgin.
You are too violent, his truth will prove
His constancy, and so excuse my fault.
Shameless woman! this belief will damn thee: how will thy Lady Marquess justly reprove me, for prefer∣ring to her service a monster of so lewd and impudent a life? Look too't; if thy smooth devil leave thee to thy infamy, I will never pity thy mortal pangs, never lodge thee under my roof, never own thee for my child; mercy bee my witness.—
Hide not thy folly by unwise excuse.
Thou art undone, Colona; no entreaties,
No warning, no persuasion, could put off
The habit of thy dotage on that man
Of much deceit, Ferentes: would thine eyes
Had seen me in my grave, ever I had known
The stain of this thine honour.
Good my Lord,
Reclaim your incredulity; my fault
Proceeds from lawful composition
Of Wedlock; he hath sealed his oath to mine,
To be my husband.
Husband? hey da! is it even so? nay then we have partners in affliction: if my jolly gallants long Clapper have struck on both sides, all is well: Petruchio, thou art not wise enough to be a Parator; come hither man, come hither, speak softly, is thy daughter with child?
With child, Nibrassa?
Foe, doe not trick me off, I overheard your gabling; Hark in thine ear, so is mine too.
Alas, my Lord, by whom?
Innocent by whom: what an idle question is that? One Cock hath trod both our Hens, Ferentes, Ferentes: who else? How dost take it? me thy•…kes thou att wondrous pa∣tient: Why, I am mad, stark mad.
How like you this, Colona, it is too true?
Did not this man protest to be your husband?
Ay me, to me he did.
What else, what else, Petruchio? and Madam, my quondam daughter, I hope h'aue past some huge words of matrimony to you too.
Alas, to me he did.
And how many more, the great Iucubus of hell knows best: Petruchio, give me your hand, mine own daughter in this arm, and yours, Colona, in this; there, there, sit ye down together; never rise, as you hope to inherit our blessings, till you have plotted some brave revenge: think upon it to purpose, and you shall want no seconds to further it, be secret one to another: Come, Petruchio, let 'em alone, the wenches will demur on it, and for the process, we'll give 'em courage.
You counsel wisely, I approve your plot:
Think on your shames, and who it was that wrought 'em.
I, I, I, leave them alone: to work, wenches, to work.—
We are quite ruined.
True, Colona,
Betrayed to infamy, deceived and mocked
By an inconstant Villain; what shall's doe?
I am with child.
Hey-ho, and so am I:
But what shall's doe now?
This; with cunning words
First prove his love; he knows I am with child.
And so he knows I am: I told him on it
Last meeting in the lobby, and in troth
The false deceiver laughed.
Now by the stars he did the like to me,
And said, it was well I was so hap'ly sped.
Those very words
He used to me; it fretted me to'th heart:
I'll be revenged.
Peace, here's a noise me thinks:
Let's rise, we'll take a time to talk of this?
Will ye? hold: death of my delights, have ye lost all sense of shame? you're best roar about the Court, that I have been your womans-barber, and trimmed ye, kind Morona.
Defiance to thy kindness, you have robbed me of my good name, did promise to love none but me, me, only me; swore, like an unconscionable villain, to marry me the twelfth day of the month, two months since; did make my bed thine own, mine house thine own, mine, all and every thing thine own, I will exclaim to the world on thee, and beg Justice of the Duke himself: Villain, I will.
Yet again; nay, and if you be in that mood, shut up your fore-shop, I'll be your Iourny-man no longer: why wise Madam Dryfist, could your mouldy brain bee so addle, to imagine I would marry a stale widow at six and forty? Marry gip, are there not varieries enough of thirteen? come, stop your Clap-dish, or I'll purchase a Carting for you: By this light, I have toiled more with this tough Carrion hen, then with ten Quails, scarce grown into their first Feathers.
O Treason to all honesty or Religion, speak thou periur'd-damnable-vngracious-defiler of women, who shall father my child which thou hast begotten?
Why thee, Country woman; you have a larger purse to pay for the nursing: nay, if you'll needs have the world know how you, reputed a graue-Matron-like Motherly-Madam, kicked up your heals like a Jennet, whose mark is new come into her mouth, ee'ne doe, doe; the worst can be said of me is, that I was ill advised to dig for gold in a Cole-pit: Are you answered?
Answered?
Let's fall amongst'em,—Love—how is it chick? ha.
My dear Ferentes, my betrothed Lord.
Excellent: oh for three Barberry stone horses to top three Flanders Mares? why how now Wenehes, what means this?
Out upon me, here's more of his truls.
Love, you must go with me.
Good Love, let's walk.
I must rid my hands of'em, or they'll ride on my shoulders; by your leave, Ladies: here's none but is of Com∣mon Counsel one with another: in short, there are three of ye with child, you tell me by me: all of you I cannot satisfy, (nor indeed handsomely any of ye) you all hope I should mar∣rye you, which for that it is impossible to be done, I am con∣tent to have neither of ye; for your looking big on the mat∣la, keep your own Counsels, I'll not bewray ye; but for marriage, heaven bless ye, &amp; me frō ye; this is my resolution.
How, not me!
Not me!
Not me!
Nor you, nor you, nor you.
And to give you some satisfaction, I'll yield you reasons: you, Colona, had a pretty art in your dalliance, but your fault was, you were too suddenly won; you, Madam Morona, could have pleased well enough some three or four &amp; thirty years ago, but you are too old; you, Iulia, were young enough, but your fault is, you have a scurvy face; now every one knowing her proper defect, thank me, that I ever vouchsafed you the honour of my bed once in your lives: if you want clouts, al I'll promise, is to rip up an old shirt or two; so wishing a speedy deliuerāce to al your burdēs, I cōmond you to your patience
Excellent.
Notable.
Unmatched Villain.
Madam, though strangers, yet we vuderstand
Your wrongs doe equal ours; which to revenge,
Please but to join with vs, and we'll redeem
Our loss of honour, by a brave exploit.
I embrace your motion, Ladies, with gladness, and will strive by any action to rank with you in any danger.
Come Gentlewomen, let's together then,
Thrice happy maids that never trusted men.—
Roseilli will not come then? will not? well,
His pride shall ruin him.—Our letters speak
The Duchess Uncle will be here to morrow.
To morrow, D'auolos.
To morrow night, my Lord, but not to make more then one days abode here: for his Holiness has commanded him to be at Rome the tenth of this month, the Conclave of Cardinals not being resolved to sit till his coming.
Your Uncle (Sweet-hart) at his next return,
Must be saluted Cardinal: Ferentes,
Be it your charge to think on some device
To entertain the present with delight.
My Lord, in honour to the Court of Pay,
I'll join with you: Ferentes, not long since,
I saw in Bruxils, at my being there,
The Duke of Brabant welcome the Arch-bishop
Of Mints with rare conceit, even on a sudden
Performed by Knights and Ladies of his Court,
In nature of an Antique; which, me thought,
(For that I ne'er before saw women Antics)
Was for the newness strange, and much commended.
Now good my Lord Fernando further this
In any wise, it cannot but content.
If she entreat, it is ten to one the man
Is won before hand.
Friend, thou honour'st me:
But can it be so speedily performed?
I'll undertake it, if the Ladies please
To exercise in person only that;
And we must have a Fool, or such an one
As can with Art well act him.
I shall fit ye,
I have a natural.
Best of all, Madam; then nothing wants:
You must make one, Ferentes.
With my best 〈◊〉 and dexterity, my Lord.
This false out happily, Nibrassa.
We could not wish it better:
Heaven is an vnbrib'd Justice.
We'll meet our Uncle in a solemn grace
Of zealous presence, as becomes the Church:
See all the Quire be ready, D'auolos.
I have already made your Highness pleasure known to them.
Your lip, my Lord!
Madam.
Perhaps your teeth have bled, wiped with my hand∣kercher; give me, I'll do it my self.—Speak, shall I steal a kiss? believe me, my Lord, I long.
Not for the world.
Apparent impudence.
Beshrew my heart, but that's not so good.
Ha, what's that thou mislik'st D'auolos?
Nothing, my Lord,—but I was hammering a conceit of mine own, which cannot (I find) in so short a time thrive, as a days practise.
Well put off, Secretary.
We are too sad, me thinks the life of mirth
Should still be fed where we are;
Whore's Maurucio?
And't please your Highness, hoe's of late grown so affectionately inward with my Lady Marquesses Fool, that I presume he is confident, there are few wise men worcester∣thy of his society, who are not as innocently harmless as that creature; it is almost impossible to separate them, and it is a question which of the two is the wiser man.
Would a were here, I have a kind of dullness
Hangs on me since my hunting, that I feel
As it were a disposition to be sick, my head is ever eking.
A shrewd ominous token; I like not that neither.
Again! what is it you like not?
I beseech your Highness excuse me; I am so busy
with his frivolous project, and can bring it to no shape, that it almost confounds my capacity.
My Lord, you were best to try a set at Maw;
I and your friend, to pass away the time,
Will undertake your Highness and your sist•…er
The game's too tedious.
It is a peevish play,
Your Knave will heave the Queen out, or your King;
Besides, it is all on fortune.
Bless thee, most excellent Duke; I here present thee as worthy and learned a Gentleman, as ever I (and yet I have lived threescore years) conversed with; take it from me, I have tried him, and is worthy to be priuy-Counsayler to the greatest Turk in Christendom: of a most apparent and deep understanding, slow of speech, but speaks to the purpose; Come forward, Sir, and appear before his Highness in your own proper Elements.
Will—tie—to da new toate sure la now.
A very senseless Gentleman, and please your High∣ness, one that has a great deal of little wit, as they say.
Oh Sir, had you heard him as I did, deliver whole histories in the Tangay tongue, you would swear there were not such a linguist breathed again; and did I but perfectly understand his language, I would be confident, in less then two hours, to distinguish the meaning of Bird, Beast, or Fish, naturally, as I my self speak Italian, my Lord.—Well, he has rare qualities.
Now prethe question him, Maurucio.
I will, my Lord.
Tell me, rare scholar, which in thy opinion,
Doth cause the strongest breath,—garlic or onion?
Answer him, brother fool; doe, doe, speak thy mind •…husk, doe.
Have bid seen all da fine knack, and do ye
Nightie tat-tle of da kna•…ue, dad la have so.
We understand him not.
Admirable, I protest, Duke; mark oh Duke, mark!
What did I ask him, Giacopo?
Which caused the strongest breath, garlic or any∣once, I take it, Sir.
Right, right by Hellicon; and his answer is, that a known has a stronger breath then any of 'em; wisdom (or I am an Ass) in the highest, a direct Figure; put it down, Giacopo
How happy is that Idiot, whose ambition
Is but to eat, and sleep, and shun the rod:
Men that have more of wit, and use it ill,
Are fools in proof.
True, my Lord, there's many
Who think themselves most wise, that are most fools.
Bitter girds if all were known,—but—
But what? speak out; plague on your muttering
Grumbling, I hear you, Sir, what is it?
Nothing, I protest, to your Highness pertinent, to any moment.
Well, Sir, remember.—Friend, you promised study.
I am not well in temper; come Biancha,
Attend our friend Ferentes.
Ferentes, take Maurucio in with you
He must be one in action,
Come, my Lord, I shall entreat your help.
I'll stay the Fool:
And follow instantly.
Yes, pray, my Lord.
How thrive your hopes now, Cousin?
Are we safe?
Then let me cast my self beneath thy foot,
True ver•…uous Lord: Know then, Sir, her proud heart
Is only flx'd on you in such extremes
Of violence and passion, that I fear,
Or she'll enjoy you, or she'll ruin you.
M•…, Cousin; by all the joys I wish to taste,
She is as far beneath thy thought, as I
In soul aboue her malice.
I observed
Even now, a kind of dangerous pretence
In an anointed phrase from D'auolos:
I know not his intent, but this I know,
He has a working brain, is minister
To all my Ladies counsels; and (my Lord)
Pray heaven there have not any thing befallen
Within the knowledge of his subtle Art,
To doe you mischief.
Pish; should he or hell
Affront me in the passage of my 〈◊〉,
I'd•… crush them into Atoms.
I, doe; admit you could, mean time, my Lord,
Be nearest to your self, what I can learn
You shall be soon informed of: here is all
We fools can catch the wise in; to vnknot
By privilege of coxcombs, what they plot.—
Thou art a Traitor: doe not think the gloss
Of smooth evasion, by your cunning •…sts,
And coinage of your politicians brain,
Shall jig me off: I'll know it, I vow I will.
Did not I note your dark abrupted ends
Of words half spoke? your weal's, if all were known?
Your short, I like not that? your girds, and Buts?
Yes (Sir) I did: such broken language argues
More matter then your subtlety shall hide:
Tell me, what is it? by Honours self I'll know.
What would you know, my Lord? I confess I owe my life and service to you, as to my Prince; the one you have, the other you may take from me at your pleasure: should I devise matter to feed your distrust, or suggest likelihoods without appearance? what would you have me say? I know nothing.
Thou lie, dissembler; on thy brow I read
D•…stracted horrors figured in thy •…ookes.
On thy allegiance, D'auolos, as ever
Thou hop'st to live in grace with vs, unfold
What by thy party halting of thy speech
Thy knowledge can discover: By the faith
We bear to sacred Justice, we protest,
Be it or good, or eui•…l, thy reward
Shall be our special thanks, and love vn-term'd:
Speak, on thy duty, we thy Prince command.
Oh my disaster! my Lord, I am so charmed by those powerful repetitions of love and duty, that I cannot con∣ceale what I know of your dishonour.
Dishonour! then my soul is cleft with fear:
I half presage my misery, say on;
Speak it at once, for I am great with grief.
I trust your Highness will pardon me, yet I will not deliver a syllable which shall be less innocent then truth it self.
By all our wish of joys, we pardon thee.
Get from me cowardly servility, my service is no∣ble, and my loyalty an Armour of brass: in short, my Lord, and plain discovery, you are a Cuckold.
Keep in the word,—a Cuckold:
Fernande is your Rival, has stolen your Duchess heart, murdered friendship, horns your head, and laughs at your horns.
My heart is split.
Take courage, be a Prince in resolution; I knew it would nettle you in the fire of your composition, and was loath to have g•…uen the first report of this more then ridicu∣lous blemish to all patience or moderation. But, oh my Lord, what would not a subject doe to approve his loyalty to his Sovereign? yet, good Sir, take it as quietly as you can: I must needs say, it is a soul fault, but what man is hee vnd•… the Sun, that is free from the Career of his destiny? may be she will in time reclaim the errors of her youth: or it were a great happiness in you, if you could not believe it; that's the surest way, my Lord, in my poor counsel.
The icy current of my frozen blood
Is kindled up in Agonies as hot
As slames of burning sulphur: oh my sate!
A Cuckold? had my Duke domes whole inheritance
Been rent, mine honours leveled in the dust,
So she, that wicked woman, might have slept
Chaste in my bosom, 〈◊〉 had been all a sport.
And he, that Villain, viper to my heart,
That he should be the man!
That he should be the man; death aboue utterance!
Take heed you prove this true.
My Lord.
If not,
I'll tear thee joint by joint.—Pew, me thinks
I•… should not be; Biancha! why, I took her
From lower then a bondage; hell of hells?
See that you make it good.
As for that, would it were as good as I would make it, I can (if you will temper your distractions) but bring you where you shall see it; no more.
See it?
I, see it, if that be proof sufficient: I for my part, will slack no service that may testify my simplicity.
Enough:—what news Fernando?
Sir, the Abbot is now upon arri•…all, all your servants
Attend your presence.
We will give him welcome
As shall befit our love and his respect:
Come mine own best Fernando, my dear friend.—
Excellent! now for a horned Moon.
But I hear the preparation for the entertainment of this great Abbot, let him come and go, that matters nothing to this; whiles hee rides abroad in hope to purchase a purple hat, our Duke shall as earnestly heat the pericranion of his noddle, with a yellow hood at home: I hear 'em coming.
On to your vittailes; some of ye, I know, seed up∣on wormwood.
The Duke's on rising; are you ready ho?
Within. All ready.
Then, Petruchio, arm thy self with courage and resolution, and doe not shrink from being stayed on thy own virtue.
I am resolved.—fresh lights, I hear 'em coming.
Right Reverend Uncle, tho our minds be scanted
In giving welcome as our hearts would wish,
Yet we will strive to show how much we joy
Your presence, with a Courtly show of mirth.
Please you to sit.
Great Duke, your worthy honours to me,
Shall still have place in my best thanks:
Since you in me so much respect the Church,
Thus much I'll promise; at my next return,
His Holiness shall grant an Indulgence
Both large and general.
Our humble duty
Seat you, my Lords: now let the Masquers enter.
Uncase me; I am slain in jest, a pox upon your outline•…sh feminine Antiks: pull off my Visor; I shall bleed to death, ere I have time to feel where I am hurt: Duke, I am slain, off with my visor, for heavens sake off with my visor.
Slai•…e? take this visor off; we are betrayed:
Cease on them, two are yonder, hold, Ferentes;
Follow the rest, apparent treachery.
〈◊〉 St. Bennet, what a sight is this?
B•… not amazed, great Princes, but vouchsafe
Your audience; we are they have done this deed:
Look here, the pledges of this false mans lust,
Betrayed in our simplicities: He swore,
And pawned his truth to marry each of vs;
Abused vs all, unable to revenge
Our public shames, but by his public fall,
Which thus we have country•…'d; nor doe we blush
To call the glory of this murder ours:
We did it, and we'll justify the deed.
For when in sad complaints we claimed his vows,
His answer was reproach; villain, is it true?
I was too quickly won, you slave.
I was too old, you dog.
I (and I never shall forget the wrong)
I was not fair enough, not fair enough
For thee, thou monster; let me cut his gall,
Not fair enough! oh scorn! not fair enough?
O, o, oh.—
Forbear, you monstrous women, doe not add
Mu•…there to lust: your lives shall pay this forfeit.
Pox upon all Codpeece extravagancy.
I am peppered—oh, oh, oh—Duke forgive me.
Had I rid any tame beasts, but Barberry wild Colts,
I had not bin thus jerked out of the saddle.
My forfeit was in my blood, and my life hath answered it.
Vengeance on all wild whores, I say,—oh it is true;
Farewell generation of Hackneys.—ooh.
He is dead, to prison with those monstrous strum∣pets.
Stay, I'll answer for my daughter.
And I for mine:—oh well done, girls.
I for yon Gentlewoman, Sir.
Good my Lord, I am an innocent in the business.
To prison with him; bear the body hence.
Her•…'s fatal sad presages, but it is just,
He dyes by murder, that hath lived in lust.
ARt thou Caraffa? is there in thy veins
One drop of blood that issued from the loins
Of Pauy's ancient Dukes? or dost thou sit
On great Lorenzo's seat, our glorious father,
And can not blush to be so far beneath
The spirit of Heroic ancestors?
Can thou engross a slavish shame? which men,
Far far below the Region of thy state,
Not more abhor, then study to revenge.
Thou an I•…alien? I could burst with rage,
To think I have a brother so befooled,
In 〈◊〉 patience to a harlots lust.
One, my Lord, that doth so palpably, so apparently
make her Adulteries a Trophy, whiles the poting-sticke to her unsatiate and more then goatish abomination, jeers at, and flouts your sleepish, and more then sleepish security.
What is she, but the sallow-coloured brat
Of some vnlanded banckrupt? taught to catch
The casie fancies of young prodigal bloods,
In springes of her stewe-instructed Art? Here's your most
Virtuous Duchess, your rare piece.
More base in the infiniteness of her sensuality,
Then corruption can infect: to clip and inveigle
Your friend too, oh unsufferable! A friend? how of
All men are you most unfortunate? to pour out
Your soul into the bosom of such a creature,
As holds it Religion to make your own trust a key,
To open the passage to your own wines womb,
To be drunk in the privacies of your bed:
Think upon that, Sir.
Be gentle in your tortutes, ee'ne for pity;
For pity's cause I beg it.
Be a Prince?
Th'hadst better, Duke, thou had bin borne a peasant.
Now boys will sing thy scandal in the streets,
Tune Ballads to thy infamy, get money
By making Pageants of thee, and invent
Some strangely-shap'd man-beast, that may for horns
Resemble thee, and call it Pauy's Duke.
Endless immortal plague.
There's the mischief, Sir:
In the mean time you shall bee sure to have a Bastard, (of whom you did not so much as beget a little toe, a left ear, or half the further side of an upper lip) inherit both your Throne and Name; this would kill the soul of very pati∣ence it self.
Forbear; the ashy paleness of my cheek
Is scarleted in ruddy flakes of wrath:
And like some bearded met•… shall suck up,
With swiftest terror, all those dusky mists
That ouercloud Compassion in our breast.
You have roused a sleeping Lion, whom no Art,
No swooning smoothness shall reclaim, but blood.
And Sister thou, thou Roderico, thou,
From whom I take the surfeit of my bane,
Henceforth no more so eagerly pursue,
To whet my dullness; you shall see Caraffa
Equal his birth, and matchless in revenge.
Why now I hear you speak in majesty.
And it becomes my Lord most Princely.
Does it? come hither, Sister; thou art near
In nature, and as near to me in love.
I love thee; yes, by yon bright firmament,
I love thee dearly: but observe me well:
If any private grudge, or female spleen,
Malice, or envy, or such women's frailty,
Have spurred thee on to set my soul on fire,
Without apparent certainty; I vow
And vow again, by all Princely blood,
Had thou a double soul, or were the lives
Of fathers, mothers, children, or the hearts
Of all our Tribes in thine, I would unrip
That womb of bloody mischief with these nails,
Where such a cursed plot as this was hatched.
But D'auolos, for thee—no more; to work
A yet more strong impression in my brain,
You must produce an instance to mine eye,
Both present and apparent.—nay, you shall—Or—
Or what? you will be mad? be rather wise:
Think on Ferentes first, and think by whom
The harmless youth was slaughtered: had he lived,
He would have told you tales: Fernando feared it;
And to prevent him, under show, forsooth,
Of rare device, most trimly cut him off.
Have you yet eyes, Duke?
Shrewdly urged,—it is piercing
For looking on a sight shall split your soul•…
You shall not care, 〈◊〉 undertake my self
To do it some two days hence, for need to night,
But that you are in Court.
Right; wud you desire, my Lord, to see them ex∣change 〈◊〉, sucking one another lips, nay, begetting an heir to the Dukedom, or practising more then the very act of adultery it self? Give but a little way by a fained absence, and you shall find 'em—I blush to speak doing what: I am mad to think on it, you are most shamefully, most sin∣fully, most scornfully cornuted.
Do ye play upon me? as I am your Prince,
There's some shall roar for this: why what was I,
Both to be thought or made so wild a thing?
Stay—Madam Marquess,—ho Roderico, you Sir,
Bear witness, that if ever I neglect
One day, one hour, one minute, to wear out
With toil of plot, or practice of conceit,
My busy skull, till I have found a death
More horrid then the Bull of Phalaris,
Or all the fabling Poets; dreaming whips:
If ever I take rest, or force a smile
Which is not borrowed from a Royal vengeance,
Before I know which way to satisfy
Fury and wrong: (nay kneel down) let me dye
More wretched then despair, reproach, contempt,
Langhter and poverty it self can make me:
Let's rise on all sides, friends; now ell's agreed;
If the Moon serve, some that are safe shall bleed.
My Lord the Duke.
Biancha! ha, how is it?
How is it, Biancha? what Fernando? come,
Shal's shake hands, sirs? faith this is kindly done:
Here's three as one; welcome dear Wise, sweet Fri•…nd.
I doe not like this now, it shows scurvily to me,
My Lord we have a 〈◊〉 our friend and I.
She puts my friend before most kindly still.
Must join.
What must?
My Lord!
Must join, you say.
That you will please to set Maurucio
At liberty: this Gentle woman here,
Hath by agreement made betwixt them two,
Obtained him for her husband; good my Lord
Let me entreat, I dare engage mine honour
He's •…nnocent in any wilful fault.
Your honour, Madam! now beshrew you for it,
T'ingage your honour on so slight a ground:
Honour's a precious Jewel, I can tell you;
Nay, it is Biancha.—Go too, D'auolos,
Bring vs Maurucio hither.
I shall, my Lord.——
I humbly thank your grace.
And, Royal Sir, since Iulia and Colona;
Chief Actors in Ferentes tragic end,
Were, through their Ladies mediation,
Freed by your gracious pardon; I, in pity.
Tendered this widows friendless misery;
For whose reprieve I shall in humblest duty
Be ever thankful.
Come you my learned Counsel, doe not roar;
If I must hang, why then lament therefore:
You may rejoice, and both, no doubt, be great
To serve your Prince, when I am turned worms meat.
I fear my lands, and all I have, is begged,
Else, woe is me, why should I be so ragged?
Come on, Sir, the Duke stays for you.
O how my stomach doth begin to puke!
When I doe hear that only word, the Duke.
You Sir, look on that woman; are you pleased,
If we remit your body from the jail,
To take her for your wife.
On that condition, Prince, with all my heart.
Yes, I warrant your grace, he is content.
Why, foolish man, hast thou so soon forgot
The public sh•…me of her abused womb?
Her being mother to a Bastards birth?
Or caust thou but imagine she will be
True to thy bed, who to her self was false?
Phew, Sir, doe not stand upon that, that's a matter of nothing, you know.
Nay, and shall please your good grace, and it come to that, I care not; as good men as I have lain in foul sheets I am sure; the linen has not been much the worse for the wearing a little: I will have her with all my-heart.
And shalt: Fernando, thou shalt have the grace
To join their hands, put 'em together, friend.
Yes, doe my Lord, bring you the Bridegroom hither,
I'll give the Bride my self.
Here's argument to jealousy, as good as drink to the dropsy, she will share any disgrace with him: I could not wish it better.
Even so: well, doe it.
Here, Maurucio, long live a happy couple.
It is enough,—now know our pleasure henceforth.
It is our will, if ever thou, Maurucio, or thy wife,
Be seen within a dozen miles at Court,
We will recall our mercy: no entreat
Shall warrant thee a minute of thy life:
We'll have no servile slavery of lust
Shall breath near vs; dispatch and get ye hence,
Biancha, come with me.—oh my cle•…t soul!
How's that? must I come no more near the Court?
O pitiful, not near the Court, Sir.
Not by a dozen miles, indeed Sir: your only course I can advise you, is to pass to Naples, and set up a house of
Carnality, there are very fair and frequent suburbs, and you need not fear the contagion of any pestilent disease, for the worst is very proper to the place.
It is a strange sentence.
It is, and sudden too,
And not without some mystery.
Will you go, Sir.
Not near the Court?
What matter is it, Sweet-heart, fear nothing, Love, you shall have new change of apparel, good 〈◊〉, wholesome attendance, and wee will li•…e like pigeons, my Lord.
Wilt thou forsake me, Giacopo?
I forsake ye? no, not as long as I have a whole ear on my head, come what will come.
Maurucio, you did once proffer true love
To me, but since you are more thriftier sped,
For old affections sake here take this gold,
Spend it for my sake.
Madam, you doe nobly;
And that's for me, Maurucio.
Will ye go, Sir?
Yes, I will go; and I humbly thank your Lordship and Ladyship: Pay, sweet Pay farewell: come wife, come Gia-
Now is the time that we away must lag, (copo.
And march in pomp with baggage and with bag:
O poor Maurucio! what hast thou mis-doue?
To end thy life when life was new begun.
A •…ew to all; for Lords and Ladies see
My woeful plight; and Squires of low degree:
Away, away, sirs.—
My Lord Fernando.
Madam.
Doe you note my brothers odd distractions?
You were wont to bosom in his Counsels;
I am sure you know the ground on it.
Not I, in troth.
Is it possible? what would you say, my Lord,
If he, out of some melancholy spleen,
Edged on by some thank picking Parasite,
Should now prove jealous? I mistrust it shrewdly.
What Madam? jealous?
Yes; for but observe,
A Prince, whose eye is chooser to his heart,
Is seldom steady in the lists of love,
Unless the party he affects doe match
His rank in equal portion, or in friends:
I never yet, out of report, or else
By warranted description, have observed
The nature of fantastic Jealousy,
If not in him; yet on my conscience now,
He has no cause.
Ca•…se, Madam! by this light
I'll pledge my soul against a vse-lesse rush.
I never thought her less, yet trust me, Sir,
No merit can be greater than your praise,
Whereat I strangely wonder; how a man
Vowed, as you told me, to a single life,
Should so much Deify the Saints, from whom
You have disclaimed devotion.
Madam, it is true;
From them I have, but from their virtues never.
You are too wise, Fernando: to be plain.
You are in love; nay shrink not, man, you are:
Biancha is your aim; why doe you blush?
She is, I know she is.
My aim?
Yes, yours;
I hope I talk no news: Fernando, know
Thou runst to thy confusion, if in time
Thou dost not wisely shun that Circe's charm.
Unkindest man! I have too long concealed
My hidden flames, when still in silent signs
I Courted thee for love; without respect
To youth or state, and yet thou art unkind.
Fernando, leave that Sorceress, if not
For love of me, for pity of thy self.
Injurious woman, I defy thy lust:
It is not your subtle sifting shall creep
Into the secrets of a heart vnsoyl'd:
You are my Princes sister, else your malice
Had railed it self to death; but as for me,
Be record all my fate, I doe detest
Your fury or affection.—Judge the rest.
What gone! well, go thy ways; I see the more•…
I humble my firm love, the more he shuns
Both it and me: so plain! then it is too late
To hope; change peevish passion to contempt:
What ever rages in my blood I feel,
Fool he shall know I was not borne to kneel,
Iulia mine own—speak softly.
What? hast thou learned out any thing of this pale widgeon?
Speak soft, what does she say?
Foe, more then all; there's not an hour shall pass,
But I shall have intelligence, she swears.
Whole nights; you know my mind, I hope you'll give
The gown you promised me.
Honest Iulia, peace: you are a woman worth a king∣dome: let me never be believed now, but I think it will bee my destiny to be thy husband at last: what tho thou have a child, or perhaps two?
Never but one, I swear.
Well, one; is that such a matter? I like thee the better for it: it shows thou hast a good tenant-able and fer∣tile womb, worth twenty of your barren, dry, bloodless devourers of youth; but come, I will talk with thee more privately; the Duke has a journey in hand, and will not be long absent: see, he is come already.—let's pass away easily.
Troubled! yes, I have cause: O Blanch!
Here wa•… my fa•…e engraven in thy brow,
This smoo•…h 〈◊〉 pol•…shed table; in thy cheeks
Nature sum•…'d up thy dower: it was not wealth,
The Miser•… god, n•…r Royalty of blood,
Adieu•…c'd thee to my bed; b•…t love, and hope
Of Virtue, that might equal those sweet looks:
If then thou should betray my trust, thy faith,
To the pollution of a base desire,
Thou were a wretched woman.
Speaks your love,
Or •…ear, my Lord?
Both, both; Biancha, know,
Th•… •…ightly languish of my d•…ll unrest
Hath stamped a strong opinion; for me tho•…light
(Mark what I say) as I in glorious pomp
Was sitting on my Throne, whiles I had hemmed
My best b•…loved Biancha in mine arms,
She reached my cap of State, and cast it down
Beneath her foot, and spurned it in the dust;
Whiles I (oh it was a dream too full of fate)
Was stooping down to reach it; on my head,
Fernando, like a Tray to•… to his vows,
Clapped, in disgrace, a Coronet of horues:
But by the honour of anointed kings,
Were both of you hid in a rock of fire,
Guarded by ministers of flaming hell,
I have a sword ('•…is here) should make my way
Through fire, through darkness, death, and all
To hew your lust engendered flesh to shreds,
Pound you to mortar, cut your throats, and mince
Your •…lesh to mites; I will,—〈◊〉 not,—I will.
Mercy protect me, will ye murder me?
Yes.—Oh! I cry thee mercy.—how the rage
Of my vndreamt of wrongs, made me forget
All sense of suff•…rance! blame me not, Biancha;
One such another dream would quite d•…strict
Reason and self humanity; yet tell me,
Was it not an ominous vision?
It was, my Lord;
Yet but a vision; for did such a guilt
Hang on mine honour, it were no blame in you
If you did stab me to the heart.
The heart?
Nay, strumpet, to the soul; and tear it off
From life, to damn it in immortal death
Alas, what doe you mean, Sir?
I am mad.—
Forgive me, good Biancha; still me thinks
I dream, and dream anew: now prethe chide me.
Sickness, and these divisions, so distract
My senses, that I take things possible
As if they were: which to remove, I mean
To speed me straight to Luca; where, perhaps,
Absence and bathing in those healthful springs
May soon recover me: mean time, dear sweet,
Pity my troubled heart; griefs are extreme;
Yet, Sweet, when I am gone, think on my dream.
Who waits without, ho? is provision ready,
To pass to Luca?
It attends your Highness.
Friend, hold; take here from me this Jewel, this:
Be she your care till my return from Luca:
Honest Fernando, wife respect my friend,
Let's go: but hear ye wife, think on my dream.
Cousin, one word with you: doth not this Cloud
Acquaint you with strange novelties? The Duke
Is lately much distempered; what he means
By journeying now to Luca, is to me
A r•…ddle; can you clear my doubt?
O Sir!
My fears exceed my knowledge, yet I note
No less then you infer: all is not well,
Would it were: whosoever thrive, I shall be sure
Never to rise to my vn-hop'd desires:
But Cousin, I shall tell you more anon;
Mean time pray send my Lord Fernando to me,
I covet much to speak with him.
And see,
He comes himself; I'll leave you both together.
The Duke is horsed for Luca: how now Cousin,
How prosper you in love?
As still I hoped:
My Lord you are undone.
Undone I in what?
Lost; and I fear your life is bought and sold;
I'll tell you how: late in my Ladies chamber,
As I by ehance lay slumbering on the mats,
In comes the Lady Marquess, and with her,
Iulia and D'auolos; where sitting down,
Not doubting me, Madam (quoth D'auolas)
We have discovered now the nest of shame:
In short, my Lord, (for you already know
As much as they reported) there was told
The circumstance of all your private love
And meetings with the Duchess; when at last
False D'auolos concluded with an oath,
We'll make (quoth he) his hart-strings crack for this.
Speaking of me?
Of you: I (quoth the Marquess)
Were not the Duke a baby, he would seek
Swift vengeance; for he knew it long ago.
Let him know it; yet I vow
She is as loyal in her plighted faith,
As is the Sun in heaven: but put case
She were not; and the Duke did know she were not,
This Sword lift up, and guided by this Arm,
Shall guard her from an armed troupe of Fiends,
And all the earth beside.
You are too safe
In your destruction.
Dambe him,—hee shall feel—
But peace, who comes?
My Lord, the Duchess craves a word with you:
Where is she?
In her chamber.
Here have a plum for Ie'ee—
Come fool, I'll give thee plums enough, come fool.
Let slaves in mind be servile to their fears,
Our heart is high in-starr'd in brighter Spheres.
I see him lost already,
If all prevail not, we shall know too late,
No toil can shun the violence of Fate.
NOW fly revenge, and wound the lower earth,
That I, en-sphear'd aboue, may cross the race
Of Love despised, and triumph o'er their graves,
Who scorn the low-bent thraldom of my heart.
Why should thou not be mine? why should the laws
The Iron laws of Ceremony, bar
Mutual embraces? what's a vow? a vow?
Can there be sin in unity? Could I
As well dispense with Conscience, as renounce
The out-side of my titles, the poor stile
Of Duchess; I had rather change my life
With any waiting-woman in the land,
To purchase one nights rest with thee Fernondo,
Then be Caraffa's Spouse a thousand years.
Treason to wedlock, this would make you sweat.
Lady of all, what I am, as before,
To survive you, or I will see you first,
Or widowed or buried: if the last,
By all the comfort I can wish to taste
By your fair eyes, that sepulchre that holds
Your Coffin, shall encoffin me alive:
I sign it with this seal.———
Ignoble strumpet.
You shall not swear, take off that oath again,
Or thus I will enforce it.———
Use that force,
And make me perjured; for whiles your lips
Are made the book, it is a sport to swear,
And glory to forswear.
Here's fast and loo•…e;
Which for a Ducat, now the game's on foot.
Help, help, Madam, you are betrayed, Ma∣dam, help, help.
Is there confidence in credit now, Sir? belief in your own eyes? doe you see? doe you see, Sir? Can you be∣hold it without lightning?
Help, Madam, help.
What noise is that, I heard one cry.
Ha! did you? know you who I am?
Yes; You are Pauy's Duke,
Dressed like a hangman: see, I am unarmed,
Yet doe not fear thee; tho the Coward doubt
Of what I could have done, hath made thee steal
Th'aduantage of this time, yet Duke I dare
Thy worst, for murder sits upon thy cheeks:
Too't man.
I am too angry in my rage,
To scourge thee unprovided; take him hence:
Away wi•…h him.——
Vn-hand me.
You must go, Sir:
Duke, doe not shame thy manhood to lay hands
On that most innocent Lady.
Yet again:
Confine him to his Chamber.
Leave vs all;
None stay, not one, shut up the doors.
Now show thy 〈◊〉 my brother, brave Caraffa.
Woman, stand forth before me,—wretched whore.
What can thou hope for?
Death; I wish no less:
You told me you had dreamt; and, gentle Duke,
Unless you be mistook, you are now awaked.
Strumpet I am, and in my hand hold up
The edge that must uncut thy twist of life.
Dost thou not shake?
For what? to see a weak
Faint tremble•…ng arm advance a leaden blade?
Alas good man, put up, put up; thine eyes
Are likelier much to weep, then arms to strike:
What wud you doe now, pray?
What! shameless harlot;
Rip up the Cradle of thy cursed womb,
In which the mixture of that Traitors lust
Impostumes for a birth of Bastardy:
Yet come, and if thou think thou can deserve
One mite of mercy, ever the boundless spleen
Of just-consuming wrath ore-swell my reason,
Tell me, bad woman, tell me what could move
Thy heart to cra•…e variety of youth?
I tell ye, if you needs would be resolved,
I held Fernando much the properer man.
Shameless intolerable whore.
What ails you?
Can you imagine, Sir, the name of Duke
Could make a crooked leg, a scambling foot.
A tolerable face, a wearish hand,
A bloodless lip, or such an untrimmed beard
As yours, fit for a Ladies pleasure, no:
I wonder you could think it were possible,
When I had once but looked on your Fernando,
I ever could love you again? Fie, fie,
Now by my life, I thought that long ago
〈◊〉 had known it; and been glad you had a friend:
Your wife did think so well of.
O my stars!
Here's impudence aboue all history:
Why thou detested Reprobate in virtue;
Durst thou, without a blush, before mine eyes,
Speak such immodest language?
Dare? yes faith,
You see I dare: I know what you would say now;
You would fine tell me how exceeding much
I am beholding to you, that vouchsafed
Me, from a simple Gentlewoman's place,
The honour of your bed: it is true, you did;
But why? it was but because you thought I had
A spark of beauty more then you had seen.
To answer this, my reason is the like,
The self same appetite which led you on
To marry me, led me to love your friend:
O hoe's a gallant man! if ever yet
Mine eyes beheld a miracle, composed
Of flesh and blood, Fernando has my voice.
I must confess, my Lord, that for a Prince,
Handsome enough you are, and no more:
But to compare your self with him, trust me
You are too much in fault: shall I advise you?
Hark in your ear; thank heaven he was so slow
As not to wrong your sheets; for as I live,
The fault was his, not mine.
Take this, take all.
Excellent, excellent! the pangs of death are music
Forgive me, my good Genius, I had thought (to this.
I matched a woman, but I find she is
A devil, worser then the worst in hell.
Nay, nay, since we are in, ee'ne come, say on,
I mark you to a syllable: you say,
The fault was his, not yours: why, virtuous Mistress,
Can you imagine you have so much art
Which may persuade me, you and your close marke-man
Did not a little traffic in my right?
Look what I said, it is true. For know it now,
I must confess I mist no means, no time,
To win him to my bosom; but so much,
So holily, with such Religion,
He kept the laws of friendship, that my suit
Was held but, in comparison, a jest;
Nor did I ofter urge the violence
Of my aflection, but as oft he urged
The sacred vows of faith twixt friend and friend:
Yet be assured, my Lord, if ever language
Of cunning servile flatteries, entreaties,
Or what in me is, could procure his love,
I would not blush to speak it.
Such another
As thou art, (miserable Creature) would
Sink the whole sex of women: yet confess
What witch-craft used the wretch to charm the are•…
Of the once spotless temple of thy mind?
For without witch-craft it could ne'er be done.
Phew—and you be in these tunes, Sir, I'll leave:
You know the best, and worst, and all.
Nay then
Thou tempt'st me •…o thy ruin; come black angel,
Fair devil, in thy prayers reckon up
The sum, in gross, of all thy veined follies:
There, amongst other, weep in tears of blood,
For one aboue the rest; Adultery,
Adultery, Biancha; such a guilt,
As were the sluices of thine eyes let up,
Tears cannot wash it off: it is not the tide
Of trivial wontonnesse from youth to youth,
But thy abusing of thy lawful bed,
Thy husbands bed; his, in whose breast thou sleep:
His, that did prize thee more then all the trash
Which hoarding worldlings make an Idol of:
When thou shalt find the Catalogue enroled
Of thy mis-d•…eds, there shall be writ, in Text,
Thy bastarding, the issues of a Prince.
Now turn thine eyes into thy hovering soul,
And doe not hope for life: would Angels sing
A r•…quiem at my hearse? but to dispense
With my Revenge on thee, it were all in vain:
Prepare to dye.
I, doe; and to the point
Of thy sharpe sword, with open breast I'll run
Half way thus naked: doe not shrink, Caraffa,
This dants not me: but in the latter act.
Of thy R•…avenge, it is all the suit I ask
At my last gasp, to spare thy noble friend;
For life to me, without him, were a death.
Not this; I'll none of this: it is not so fit:
Why should I kill her? she may live and change,
Or—
Dost thou halt? faint Coward, dost thou wish.
To blemish all thy glorious Ancestors?
Is this thy Courage?
Ha I say you so too?
Give me thy hand, Biancha.
Here.
Farewell.
Thus go in everlasting sleep to dwell:
Here's blood for lust, &amp; sacrifice for wrong
It is bravely done; thou hast struck home at once:
Live to repent too late: Commend my love
To thy true friend, my love to him that owes it,
Ny Tragedy to thee, my hart to—to—Fernand. oo oh.
Sister she's dead.
Then, whiles thy rage is warm,
Pursue the ca•…er of her trespasses.
Good:
I•…le slake no time whiles I am hot in blood.
Here's royal vengeance: this becomes the state
Of his disgrace, and my unbounded fate.—
May we give credit to your words, my Lord?
Speak on your honour.
Let me dye accursed,
If ever, through the progress of my life.
I did as much as reap the benefit
Of any favour from her, save a kiss:
A better woman never blessed the earth.
Be shrew my heart, young Lord, but I believe thee:
Alas, kind Lady, it is a Lordship to a dozen of points,
But the j•…alous mad man will in his fury,
Offer her some violence.
If it be thus, it were fit you rather kept
A guard about you for your own defence,
Then to be guarded for security
Of his Revenge; he's extremely moved.
Passion of my body, my Lord, if'a come in his odd fits to you, in the case you are,he might cut your throat ever you could provide a weapon of defence: nay, rather then it shall be so, hold take my sword in your hand, it is none of the sprucest, but it is a tough fox, will not fail his master: Come what will come, take it, I'll answer'•… I: in the mean time, Pe∣truchio and I will back to the Duchess lodging.—
Well thought on; and in despite of all his rage,
Rescue the virtuous Lady.
Look to your self, my Lord, the Duke comes.
Stand, and behold thy executioner,
Thou glorious Traeytor: I will keep no form
Of Ceremonius law, to try thy guilt:
Look here, it is written on my poniards point,
The bloody evidence of thy untruth,
Wherein thy Conscience, and the wrathful rod
Of heavens scourge for lust, at once give up
The verdict of thy crying villainies.
I see you are armed; prepare, I crave no odds,
Greater then is the justice of my cause.
Fight, or I'll kill thee.
Duke I fear thee not:
But first I charge thee, as thou art a Prince,
Tell me, how hast thou used thy Duchess?
How?
To add affliction to thy trembling ghost,
Look on my daggers crimson dye, and i•…dge.
Not dead?
Not dead? yes, by my Honor's truth: why fool,
Dost think I'll hug my injuries? no, Traitor;
I'll mix your souls together in your deaths,
As you did both your bodies in her life:
Have at thee.
Stay, I yield my weapon up:—
Here, here's my bosom; as thou are•… a Duke,
Dost honour goodness, if the ch•…st Biancha
Be murdered, murder me.
Faint hearted Coward,
Art thou so poor in spirit? 〈◊〉 and •…ight,
Or, by the glories of my now•… and •…me,
In•…e kill thee basely.
Doe but hear me first,
Unfortunate Caraffa; thou hast butchered
An Innocent, a wife as free from lust
As any terms of Art can Deify.
Pish, this is stale dissimulation,
I'll hear no more.
If ever I vnshrin'd
The Altar of her purity, or tasted
More of her love, then what without control
Or blame, a brother from a sister might,
Rack me to Atoms: I must confess
I have too much abused thee; did exceed
In lawless Courtship (it is too true) I did:
But by the honour which I owe to goodness,
For any actual folly I am free.
It is false: as much in death for thee she spake.
By yonder starry roof it is true. O Duke!
Could thou rear up another world like this,
Another like to that, and more, or more,
Herein thou art most wretched; all the wealth
Of all those worlds could not redeem the loss
Of such a spotless wife: glorious Biancha,
Reign in the triumph of thy martyrdom,
Earth was unworthy of thee.
Now on our lives we both believe him.
Fernando, dare thou swear upon my sword
To justify thy words?
I dare: look here,——
It is not the fear of death doth prompt my tongue,
For I would wish to dye; and thou shalt know,
Poor miserable•… Duke, since she is dead,
I'll hold all life a hell.
Biancha chaste!
As virtues self is good,
Chaste, chaste, and kilt by me; to her
I offer up this remnant of my—
Hold,
Be gentler to thy self.
Alas my Lord, this is a wise mans carriage.
Whither now,
Shall I run from the day, where never man
Nor eye, nor eye of heaven, may see a dog
So hateful as I am? Biancha chaste,
Had not the fury of some h•…llish rage
Blinded all reasons sight, I might have se•…no
Her clearness in her confidence to dye.
—your leave—
Tic done, come friend, now for her love,
Her love that praisd thee in the pangs of death,
Isle hold thee dear: Lords, do not care for me,
I am too wise to dye yet—oh Biancha.
The Lord Abbot of Monacho, sir, is in his return from Rome, lodged last night late in the City, very privately; and hearing the report of your journey, only intends to visit your Duchess to morrow.
Slave, torture me no more, note him my Lords,
If you would choose a devil in the shape
Of man, an Arch-arch-diuell, there stands one.
Weal meet our Uncle—order straight Petruchio
Our Duchess may be coffined, it is our will
She forth with be interred with all the speed
And privacy you may, '•…the College Church
Amongst Caraffa's ancient monuments.
Some three days hence we'll keep her funeral.
Damned villain, bloody villain—oh Biancha,
No counsel from our cruel wills can win vs,
"But else once done we bear our guilt within vs.
God boy. Arch-arch-diuell: why I am paid,
Here's bounty for good service; beshrew my heart it is a right princely rewa•…d: now must I say my prayers, that I have lived to so ripe an age to have my head stri•…ken off; I cannot tell, 'tmay be my Lady Fiormonda will stand on my behalf to the Duke: that's but a single hope; a disgraced
Courtier oftner finds enemies to sink him when hee is fall∣ling, then friends to relieve him: I must resolve to stand to the hazard of all brunts now. Come what may, I will not dye like a Cow, and the world shall know it.—
Wonder not, Madam, here behold the man
Whom your disdain hath metamorphosed:
Thus long have I bin clouded in this shape,
Led on by Love; and in that love, despair:
If not the sight of our distracted Court,
Nor pity of my bondage, can reclay me
The greatness of your scorn, yet let me know
My latest doom from you.
Strange miracle!
Roseilli I must honour thee: thy truth,
Like a transparent mirror, represents
My reason with my errors. Noble Lord,
That better dost deserve a better fate,
Forgive me; if my heart can entertain
Another thought of love, it shall be thine.
Blessed for ever, blessed be the words:
In death you have revived me.
Whom have we here? Roseilli the supposed fool?
It is he; nay then help me a brazen face;
My honourable Lord.
Bear off, blood-thirsty man, come not near me.
Madam, I trust the service—
Fellow, learn to new live the way to thrift
For thee in grace, is a repentant shrift.
Ill has thy life been, worse will be thy end;
Men fleshed in blood, know seldom to amend.
His Highness commends his love to you, and ex∣pects your presence: he is ready to pass to the Church, only staying for my Lord Abbot to associate him. Withal, his pleasure is, that you D'auolos forbear. to rank in this so∣lemnity
in the place of Secretary, else to be there as a private man; pleases you to go.—
As a private man! what remedy? This way they must come, and here I will stand to fall amongst •…em in the rear.
Peace and sweet rest sleep here; let not the touch
Of this my impious hand, profane the shrine
Of fairest purity, which hovers yet
About those blessed bones enhearsed within:
If in the bosom of this sacred Tomb,
Biancha thy disturbed ghost doth range;
Behold, I offer up the sacrifice
Of bleeding tears, shed from a faithful spring;
Roaring oblations of a mourning heart.
To thee, offended spirit, I confess
I am Caraffa, hee, that wretched man,
That Butcher, who in my enraged spleen
Slaughtered the life of Innocence and Beauty:
Now come I to pay tribute to those wounds
Which I dug up, and reconcile the wrongs
My fury wrought; and my Contrition mourns.
So chaste, so dear a wife was never man,
But I, enjoyed: yet in the bloom and pride
Of all her years, untimely took her life.
Enough; set op the Tomb, that I may take
My last farewell, and bury griefs with her.
Forbear; what art thou that dost rudely press
Into the confines of forsaken-graues?
Has death no privilege? Come thou, Caraffa,
To practise yet a rape upon the dead? Inhumane Tyrant,
Whats'euer thou intend, know this place
Is pointed out for my inheritance:
Here lies the monument of all my hopes.
Had eager Lust intrunk'd my conquered soul,
I had not buried living joys in death:
Go, Revel in thy palace, and be proud
To boast thy famous murders: let thy smooth
Low-fawning parasites renown thy Act:
Thou come not here.
Fernando, man of darkness,
Never till now (before these dreadful fights)
Did I abhor thy friendship; thou hast robed
My resolution of a glorious name.
Come out, or by the thunder of my rage,
Thou dy'st a death more fearful then the scourge
Of death can whip thee with.
Of death? poor Duke:
Why that's the aim I shoot at: it is not threats,
(Ma•…ger thy power, of the spite of hell)
Shall rent that honour: let life-hugging slaves,
Whose hands imbrued in Butcheries like thine,
Shake terror to their souls, be loath to dye:
See, I am clothed in robes that fit the grave:
I pity thy defiance.
Guard lay hands,
And drag him out.
Yes, let 'em, here's my shield
Here's health to Victory.—
Now doe thy worst.
Farewell Duke, once I have out-stript thy plots:
Not all the cunning Antidotes of Art
Can warrant me twelve minutes of my life:
It works, it works already, bravely, bravely.—
Now, now I feel it tear each several joint:
O royal poison? trusty friend? split, split
Both heart and gall asunder; excellen•… bane!
Roseilli love my memory; well searched out
Swift nimble venom, torture every vein.
I, come Biancha,—cruel torment feast,
Feast on, doe; Duke farewell. Thus I—hot flames
Conclude my Love—and seal it in my bosom, oh—
Most desperate end!
None stir:
Who steps a foot, steps to his utter ruin.
And art thou gone? Fernando, art thou gone?
Thou were a friend vnma•…ch'd, rest in thy fame.
Sister, when I have finished my last days,
Lodge me, my wife, and this vnequali•…d friend,
All in one monument. Now to my vows:
Never henceforth let any passionate tongue
Mention Biancha's and Caraffa's name,
But let each letter in that tragic sound
Beget a sigh, and every sigh a tear:
Children unborn, and widows whose lean cheeks
Are furrowed up by age, shall weep whole nights,
•…petting but the story of our fates;
Whiles in the period, closing up their tale,
They must conclude, how for Biancha's love,
Caraffa in revenge of wrongs to her,
Thus on h•…r Altar sacrificed his life.——
Oh hold the Dukes hand.
Save my brother, save him.
Doe, doe, I was too willing to strike home
To be prevented: Fools, why could you dream
I would out-liue my out-rage sprightful flood
Run out in Rivers? oh that these thick streams
Could gather head, and make a standing poole,
That jealous husbands here might bathe in blood.
So; I grow sweetly empty; all the pipes
Of •…fe vn-ve•…sell life; now heavens wipe out
The writing of my sin: Biancha, •…us
I creep to thee—to thee—to thee Bi—an—cha.
He's dead already, Madam.
Aboue hope, here's labour saved, I could bless the Destinies
Would I had never seen it.
Since it is thus,
My Lord Roseilli, in the true requite•…l
Of your continued love, I here possess
You of the Dukedom; and with it, of me,
In presence of this holy Abbot.
Lady, then
From my hand take your husband; long enjoy
Each to each others comfort and content.
Long live Roseilli.
First thank to heaven, next Lady to your love;
Lastly, my Lords, to all: and that the entrance
Into this principality may give
Fair hopes of being worthy of our place,
Our first work shall be justice.—D'auolo•…
Stand forth.
My gracious Lord:
No, graceless villain,
I am no Lord of thine: Guard take him hence,
Convey him to the prisons top; in chains
Hang him alive; whosoever lends a bit
Of bread to feed him, dyes: speak not against it,
I will be deaf to mercy.—Bear him hence.
Mercy, new Duke: here's my comfort, I make but one in the number of the Tragedy of Princes.
Madam, a second charge is to perform
Your brother's Testament; we'll rear a Tomb
To those unhappy Lovers, which shall tell
Their fatal Loves to all posterity.
Thus then for you, henceforth I here dismiss
The mutual comforts of our marriage-bed:
Learn to new live, my vows v•…moved shall stand:
And since your life hath been so much vn-euen,
Bethink, in time, to make your peace with heaven.
Oh me! is this your love?
It is your desert:
Which no persuasion shall remove.
It is fit:
Purge frailty with repentance.
I embrace it:
Happy too late, since lust hath made me foul,
Henceforth I'll dress my Bride-bed in my soul.
Please yo•… to walk, Lord Abbot.
Yes, set on:
No age hath heard, nor Chronicle can say,
That ever here befell a sadder day.—

DIspute no more in this, for know (young man)
These are no Schoole-points; nice Philosophy
May tolerate unlikely arguments,
But Heaven admits no jest; wits that presumed
On wit too much, by striving how to prove
There was no God; with foolish grounds of Art,
Discovered first the nearest way to Hell;
And filled the world with devilish Atheism:
Such questions youth are fond; For better it is,
To bless the Sun, then reason why it shines;
Yet hee thou talk of, is aboue the Sun,
No more; I may not hear it.
Gentle Father,
To you I have vnclasp't my burdened soul,
Emptied the store-house of my thoughts and heart,
Made my self poor of secrets; have not left
Another word untold, which hath not spoke
All what I ever durst, or think, or know;
And yet is here the comfort I shall have,
Must I not doe, what all men else may, love?
Yes. you may love fair son.
Must I not praise
That beauty, which if framed a new, the gods
Would make a god of, if they had it there;
And kneel to it, as I doo kneel to them?
Why foolish mad-man?
Shall a peevish sound,
A customary form, from man to man,
Of brother and of sister, be a bar
Twixt my perpetual happiness and me?
Say that we had one father, say one womb,
(Curse to my joys) gave both vs life, and birth;
Are wee not therefore each to other bound
So much the more by Nature; by the the links
Of blood, of reason; Nay if you will have,
Even of Religion, to be ever one,
One soul, one flesh, one love, one heart, one All?
Have done unhappy youth, for thou art lost.
Shall then, (for that I am her brother borne)
My joys be ever banished from her bed?
No Father; in your eyes I see the change.
Of pity and compassion: from your age
As from a sacred Oracle. distills
The life of Counsel: tell me holy man,
What Cure shall give me ease in these extremes.
Repentance (son) and sorrow for this sin:
For thou hast moved a Majesty aboue
With thy vn-rannged (almost) Blasphemy.
O doe not speak of that (dear Confessor)
Art thou (my son) that miracle of Wit,
Who once within these three Moneth's were esteemed
A wonder of thine age, throughout Bononia?
How did the University applaud
Thy Government, Behaviour, Learning, Speech,
Sweetness, and all that could make up a man?
I was proud of my Tutelage, and chose
Rather to leave my Books, then part with thee,
I did so: but the fruits of all my hopes
Are lost in thee, as thou art in thy self.
O Giouanni: hast thou left the Schools
Of Knowledge, to converse with Lust and Death?
(For Death waits on thy Lust) look through the World,
And thou shalt see a thousand faces shine
More glorious, then this Idol thou ador'st:
Leave her, and take thy choice, it is much less sin,
Though in such gamos as those, they lose that win.
It were more ease to stop the Ocean
From floats and ebbs, then to dissuade my vower.
Then I have done, and in thy wilful flame:
Already see thy ruin; Heaven is just,
Yet hear my counsel.
As a voice of life.
Hye to thy Fathers house, there locke thee fast
Alone within thy Chamber, then fall down
On both thy knees, and grovel on the ground:
Cry to thy heart, wash every word thou vtter'st
In tears, (and if it bee possible) of blood:
Beg Heaven to cleanse the leprosy of Lust
That rots thy Soul, acknowledge what thou art,
A wretch, a worm, a nothing: weep, sigh, pray
Three times a day, and three times every night:
For seven days space doe this, then if thou find
No change in thy desires, return to me:
I'll think on remedy, pray for thy self
At home, whilst I pray for thee here—away,
My blessing with thee, wee have need to pray.
All this I'll doe, to free me from the rod
Of vengeance, else I'll swear, my Fate's my God,
Come sir, stand to your tackling, if you prove Craven,
I'll make you run quickly.
Thou art no equal match for me.
Indeed I never went to the wars to bring home news,
nor cannot play the Mountebank for a meals meat, and swear
I got my wounds in the field: see you these gray hairs, they'll
not flinch for a bloody nose, wilt thou to this gear?
Why slave, think thou I'll balance my reputation
With a Cast-suite; Call thy Moister, he shall know that I dare—
Scold like a Cot-queane (that's your Profession) thou poor
shadow of a Soldier, I will make thee know, my Moister keeps
Servants, thy betters in quality and performance: Come thou to
fight or prate?
Neither with thee,
I am a Roman. and a Gentleman, one that have got
Mine honour with expense of blood,
You are a lying Coward, and a fool, fight, or by these Hilts
I'll kill thee—brave my Lord,—you'll fight.
Prouoake me not, for if thou dost—
Have you.
What meaned these sudden broils so near my doors?
Have you not other places, but my house
To vent the spleen os your disordered bloods?
Must I be haunted still with such unrest,
As not to eat, or sleep in peace at home?
Is this your love Grimaldi? Fie, it is nought.
And Vasques. I may tell thee it is not well
To broach these quarrels, you are ever forward
In seconding contentions.
What's the ground?
That with your patience Signiore, I'll resolve
This Gentleman, whom same reports a soldier,
(For else I know not) rivals me in love
To Signior Florio's Daughter; to whose ears
He still preferrs his suite to my disgrace,
Thinking the way to recommend himself,
Is to disparage me in his report:
But know Grimaldi, though (may be) thou art
My equal in thy blood, yet this betrays
A lowness in thy mind; which were it thou Noble
Thou would it as much disdain, as I doe thee
For this unworthiness; and on this ground
I willed my Servant to dorrest this tongue,
Holding a man, so base, no match for me.
And had your sudda no coming prevented vs, I had let
my Gentleman blood under the gills; I should have wormed
you Sir, for running mad.
Isle be revenged Soranzo.
On a dish of warme-broth to stay your stomach, doe
honest Innocence, doe; spone-meat is a wholesomer diet then
a spanish blade.
remember this.
I fear thee not Grimaldi.
My Lord Soranzo, this is strange to me,
Why you should storm, having my word engaged:
Owing her heart, what no•• you doubt her •are?
Losers may talk by law of any game.
Yet the villain of words, signior Florio may be such,
As would make any vnspleen'd Dove, Choleric,
Blame not my Lord in this.
Be you more silent,
I would not for my wealth, my daughters love
Should cause the spilling of one drop of blood.
Vasques put up, let's end this fray in wine.
How like you this child? here's threatening challenge∣ing,
quarrelling, and fighting, on every side, and all is for your
sake; you had need look to your self (Chardge) you'll be
stolen away sleeping else shortly.
But (Tutoress) such a life, gives no content
To me, my thoughts are fixed on other ends;
Would you would leave me.
Leave you? no marvel else; leave me, no leaving (Chardge)
This is love outright, Indeed I blame you not, you have
Choice fit for the best Lady in Italy.
Pray doe not talk so much.
Take the worst with the best, there's Grimaldi the
soldier a very well-timbred fellow: they say he is a Roman,
Nephew to the Duke Mount Ferratto, they say he did good ser∣vice
in the wars against the Millanoys, but faith (Chardge) I doe
not like him, and be for nothing, but for being a soldier; one a∣amongst
twenty of your skirmishing Captains, but have some
privy may me or other, that mars their standing upright, I like
him the worse, hee crinckles so much in the hams; though hee
might serve, if their were no more men, yet hoe's not the man I
would choose.
Fie how thou prat'st.
As I am a very woman, I like Seignior Soranzo, well;
hee is wise, and what is more, rich; and what is more then that,
kind, and what is more then all this, a Noble-man; such a one were
I the fair Annabella, my self, I would wish and pray for: then
hee is bountiful; beside hee is handsome, and, by my troth, I
think wholesome: (and that's news in a gallant of three and
twenty.) liberal that I know: loving, that you know; and a man
sure, else hee could never have purchased such a good name, with
Hippolita the lusty Widow in her husbands life time: And
it were but for that report (sweet heart) would'a were thine:
Commend a man for his qualities, but take a husband as he is a
plaine-sufficient, naked man: such a one is for your bed, and such
a one is Signior Soranzo my life for it.
Sure the woman took her mornings Draught to soon.
But look (sweet heart,) look what thing comes now:
Here's another of your ciphers to fill up the number:
Oh brave old Ape in a silken Coat, observe.
Did thou think Poggi•, that I would spoil my
New clothes, and leave my dinner to fight.
No Sir, I did not take you for so arrant a baby.
I am wiser then so: for I hope Poggio. thou
Never heard of an elder brother, that was a Coxcomb,
Did Poggio?
Never indeed Sir, as long as they had either land or
money left them to inhe rit.
Is it possible Poggio? oh monstrous! why Isle under∣take,
with a handful of silver, to buy a heedful of wit at any
time, but sirrah, I have another purchase in hand, I shall have
the wench mine uncle says, I will but wash my face, and
shift socks, and then have at her in faith—
Mark my pace Poggio.
Sir I have seen an. Ass, and a Mule trot the Spanish
•auin with a better grace, I know not how often.
This Idiot haunts me too.
I, I, he needs no description, the rich Magnifico, that is
below with your Father (Chardge) Signior Donado his Uncle;
for that he means to make this his Cozen a golden calfe, thinks
that you will be a right Isralite, and fall down to him presently:
but I hope I have tutored you better: they say a fools babble is a
Ladies play fellow: yet you having wealth enough, you need not
cast upon the dearth of flesh at any rate: hang him Innocent.
But see Putana, see: what blessed shape
Of some celestial Creature now appears?
What man is hee, that with such sad aspect
Walks carelests os him self?
Where
Look below.
Oh, it is your brother sweet—
Ha!
It is your brother.
Sure it is not hee, this is some woeful thing
Wrapped up in grief, some shadow of a man.
Alas hee beats his breast, and wipes his eyes
Drowned all in tears: me thinks I hear him sigh.
Lets down• Putana? and partake the cause,
I know my Brother in the Love he bears me,
Will not deny me portage in his sadness,
My soul is full of heaviness and fear.
Lost, I am lost: my fates have doomed my death:
The more I strive, I love, the more I love,
The less I hope: I see my ruin, certain.
What Judgment, or endeavours could apply
To my incurable and restless wounds,
I thoroughly have examined, but in vain:
O that it were not in Religion sin,
To make our love a God, and worship it.
I have even wearied heaven with prayers, dried up
The spring of my continual tears, even starved
My veins with daily fasts: what wit or Art
Could Counsel, I have practised; but alas
I find all these but dreams, and old men's tales
To ••ight unsteady youth; I'm still the same,
Or I must speak, or burst; tic not I know,
My lust; but tic my fare that leads me on.
Keep fear and low faint hearted shame with slaves,
Isle tell her, that I love her, though my heart
Were rated at the price of that attempt.
Oh me! she comes.
Brother.
If such a thing
As Courage dwell in men, (ye heavenly powers)
Now double all that virtue in my tongue.
Why Brother, will you not speak to me?
Yes; how do ye Sister?
Howsoever I am, me thinks you are not well.
Bless vs why are you so sad Sir.
Let me entreat you leave vs a while, Putana,
Sister, I would be private with you.
With-drawe Putana.
I will,
If this were any other Company for her, I should think my ab∣sense
an office of some credit; but I will leave them together.
Come Sister lend your hand, let's walk together.
I hope you need not blush to walk with me,
Here's none but you and I.
How's this?
Faith I mean no harm.
Harm?
No good faith; how first with'ee?
I trust hee be not frantic
I am very well brother.
Trust me but I am sick, I fear so sick,
Twill cost my life.
Mercy forbid it: it is not so I hope.
I think you love me Sister.
Yes you know, I doe.
I know it indeed—you're very fair.
Nay then I see you have a merry sickness,
That's as it proves: they Poets feign (I read)
That Iuno for her forehead did exceed
All other goddesses: but I durst swear,
Your forehead exceeds hers, as hers did theirs.
Troth this is pretty.
Such a pair of stars.
As are thine eyes, would (like Promethean fire.)
(If gently glaun'st) give life to senseless stones.
Fie vpon'ee,
The Lily and the Rose most sweetly strange
Upon your dimpled Cheeks doe strive for change.
Such lips would tempt a Saint; such hands as those
Would make an Anchorite Lascivious.
Do ye mock mee', or flatter me,
If you would see a beauty more exact
Then Art can counter fit, or nature frame,
Look in your glass, and there behold yourowne.
O you are a trime youth.
Here.
What to doe.
And here's my breast, strict home.
Rip up my bosom, there thou shalt behold
A heart, in which is writ the truth I speak.
Why stand'ee?
Are you earnest?
Yes most earnest.
You cannot love?
Whom.
Me, my tortured soul
Hath felt affliction in the heate of Death.
O Annabella I am quite undone,
The love of thee (my sister) and the view
Of thy immortal beauty hath untuned
All harmony both of my rest and life,
Why do ye not strike?
Forbid it my just fears,
If this be true, it were fitter I were dead.
True Annabella; it is no time to jest,
I have too long suppressed the hidden flames
That almost have consumed me; I have spent
Many a silent night in sighs and groans,
Ran over all my thoughts, despised my Fate,
Reasoned against the reasons of my love,
Done all that smooth'd-cheeke Virtue could advise,
But found all bootless; it is my destiny,
That you must either love, or I must dye.
Comes this in sadness from you?
Let some mischief
Befall me soon, if I dissemble ought.
You are my brother Giouanni.
You,
My Sister Annabella; I know this:
And could afford you instance why to love
So much the more for this; to which intent
Wise Nature first in your Creation meant
To make you mine: else't had been sin and foul,
To share one beauty to a double soul.
Nearness in birth or blood, doth but persuade
A nearer nearness in affection.
I have asked Counsel of the holy Church,
Who tells me I may love you, and it is just,
That since I may, I should; and will, yes will:
Must I now live, or dye?
Live, thou hast won
The field, and never fought; what thou hast urged,
My captive heart had long ago resolved.
I blush to tell thee, (but I'll tell thee now)
For every sigh that thou hast spent for me,
I have sighed ten; for every tear shed twenty:
And not so much for that I loved, as that
I durst not say I loved; for scarcely think it.
Let not this Music be a dream (ye gods)
For pittie's-sake I begge'ee.
On my knees,
Brother, even by our Mothers dust, I charge you,
Doe not betray me to your mirth or hate,
Love me, or kill me Brother.
On my knees,
Sister, even by my Mothers dust I charge you,
Doe not betray me to your mirth or hate,
Love me, or kill me Sister.
You mean good sooth then?
In good troth I doe,
And so doe you I hope: say, I'm in earnest:
I'll swear it and I.
And I, and by this kiss,
(Once more, yet once more, now let's rise, by this)
I would not change this minute for Elyzium,
What must we now doe?
What you will.
Come then,
After so many tears as wee have wept,
Let's learn to court in smiles, to kiss and sleep.
Signior Donado, you have said enough,
I understand you, but would have you know,
I will not force my Daughter against her will.
You see I have but two, a Son and Her;
And hee is so devoted to his Book,
As I must tell you true, I doubt his health:
Should he miscarry, all my hopes rely
Upon my Girl; as for worldly Fortune,
I am I thank my Stars, blessed with enough:
My Care is how to match her to her liking,
I would not have her marry Wealth, but Love,
And if she like your Nephew, let him have her,
Here's all that I can say.
Sir you say well,
Like a true father, and for my part, I
If the young folks can like, (twixt you and me')
Will promise to assure my Nephew presently,
Three thousand Florins yearly during life,
And after I am dead, my whole estate.
It is a fair proffer si•, mean time your Nephew
Shall have free passage to commence his suite;
If hee can thrive, hee shall have my consent,
So for this time I'll leave you Signior.
Well,
Here's hope yet, if my Nephew would have wit,
But hee is such another Dunce, I fear
He will never win the Wench; when I was young
I could have done it y faith, and so shall hee
If hee will learn of me; and in good time
Hee comes himself.
How now Bergetto, whether away so fast?
Oh Uncle, I have heard the strangest news that ever
came out of the Mynr, have I not Poggio.
Yes indeed Sir.
What news Bergetto?
Why look ye Uncle? my Barber told me just now
that there is a fellow come to Town, who undertakes to make
a Mill go without the mortal help of any water or wind,
only with Sand-bags: and this fellow hath a strange Horse, a
most excellent beast, I'll assure you Uncle, (my Barber says)
whose head to the wonder of all Christian people, stands just be∣hind
where his tail is, is it nor true Poggio?
So the Barber swore for sooth.
And you are running hither?
I forsooth Vakle.
Wilt thou be a Fool still? come sir, you shall not go,
you have more mind of a Puppet-play, then on the business I
told y'ee: why thou great Baby, wu't never have wit, wu't
make thy self a May-game to all the world?
Answer for your self Moister.
Why Uncle, shu'd I sit at home still, and not go abroad
to see fashions like other gallants?
To see hobby-horses: what wise talk I pray had you
with Annabella, when you were at Signior Florio's house?
Oh the wench: vds sa'me, Uncle; I tickled her with a
rare speech, that I made her almost burst her belly with laugh∣ing.
Nay I think so, and what speech was it?
What did I say Poggio?
Foot sooth my Moister said, that hee loved her almost a•∣well
as hee loved Parmasent, and swore (I'll be sworn for him).
that she wanted but such a Nose as his was, to be as pretty a
young woman, as any was in Parma.
Oh gross!
Nay Uncle, then sh•e asked me, whether my Father had
any more children then my self: and I said no, it were better
hee should have had his brains knocked out first.
This is intolerable.
Then said she, will Signior Donado your Uncle leave
you all his wealth?
Ha! that was good, did she harp upon that string?
Did she harp upon that string, I that she did: I ensue∣red,
leave me all his wealth? why woman, hee hath no other
wit, if hee had, he should hear on it to his ever lasting glory and
confusion: I know (quoth I) I am his white boy, and will not
be gulled: and with that she fell into a great smile, and went away.
Nay I did fit her.
Ah sitrah, then I see there is no changing of nature,
Well B•rgetto, I fear thou wilt be a very Ass still.
I should be sorry for that Uncle.
Come, come you home with me, since you are no better
a speaker, I'll have you wr•te to her after some courtly manner,
and •close some rich I ewell in the Letter.
I marry, that will be excellent.
Peace •nnocent,
Once in my time I'll set my wits to school,
If all fail, it is but the fortune of a fool.
Poggio, twill doe Poggio.
Come Annabella, no more Sister now,
But Love; a name more Gracious, doe not blush,
(Beauties sweet wonder) but be proud, to know
That yielding thou hast conquered, and inflamed
A heart whose tribute is thy brothers life.
And mine is his, oh how these stolen contents
Would print a modest Crimson on my cheeks,
Had any but my hearts delight prevailed.
I marvel why the chaster of your sex
Should think this pretty toy called Maiden-head,
So strange a loss, when being lost, it is nothing,
And you are still the same.
It is well for you,
Now you can talk.
Music as well consists
In th'eare, as in the playing.
Oh you're wanton,
Tell on it, you're best, doe.
Thou wilt chide me then,
Kiss me, so; thus hung Jove on Laeda's neck,
And sucked divine Ambrosia from her lips:
I envy not the mightiest man alive,
But hold my self in being King of thee,
More great, then were I King of all the world:
But I shall lose you Sweet-heart.
But you shall not.
You must be married Mistress.
Yes, to whom?
Some one must have you.
You must.
Nay some other.
Now prithee do not speak so, without jesting
You'll make me weep in earnest.
What you will not.
But tell me sweet, can thou be dared to swear
That thou wilt live to me, and to no other?
By both our loves I dare, for did thou know
My Gionanni, how all suitors seem
To my eyes hateful, thou would trust me then.
Enough, I take thy word; Sweet we must part,
Remember what thou vow'st, keep well my heart.
Will you begone?
I must.
When to return?
Soon.
Look you doe.
Farewell.
Go where thou wilt, in mind I'll keep thee here,
And where thou art, I know I shall be there
Guardian.
Child, how is it child? well, thank Heaven, hal
O Guardian, what a Paradise of joy
Have I past over!
Nay what a Paradise of joy have you past under?
why now I commend thee (Chardge) fear nothing, (sweet∣heart)
what though hee be your Brother; your Brother's a
man I hope, and I say still, if a young Wench feel the fit upon
her, let her take any body, Father or Brother, all is one.
I would not have it known for all the world.
Nor I indeed, for the speech of the people; else it were nothing.
Daughter Annabella.
O me! my Father,—here Sir,—reach my work.
What are you doing?
So, let him come now,
So hard at work, that's well; you lose no time, look,
I have brought you company, here's one, a learned Doctor, late∣lie
come from Padua, much skilled in Physic, and for that I see
you have of late been sickly, I entreated this reverent man
to visit you some time.
You're very welcome Sir.
I thank you Mistress,
Loud Fame in large report hath spoke your praise,
As well for Virtue as perfection:
For which I have been bold to bring with me
A Kins-woeman of mine, a maid, for song,
And music, one perhaps will give content,
Please you to know her.
They are parts I love,
And she for them most welcome.
Thank you Lady.
Sirnow you know my house, pray make not strange,
And if you find my Daughter need your Art,
I'll be your pay-master.
Sir, what I am she shall command•
You shall bind me to you,
Daughter, I must have conference with you,
Aboutsome matters that concerns vs both.
Good Moister Doctor, please you but walk in,
We'll crave a little of your Cozens cunning:
I think my Girl hath not quite forgot
To touch an Instrument, she could have don't,
We'll hear them both.
I'll waite upon you sir.
Loves measure is extreme, the comfort, pain:
The life unrest, and the reward disdain
What's here? look o'er again, it is so, so writes
This smooth licentious Poet in his rymes.
But Sanazar thou lie, for had thy bosom
Felt such oppression as is laid on mine,
Thou would have kissed the rod that made the smart.
To work then happy Muse, and contradict
What Sanazer hath in his envy writ.
Loves measure is the mean, sweet his annoys,
His pleasures life, and his reward all joys.
Had Annabella lived when Sanazar
Did in his brief Euconium celebrate
Venice that Queen of Cities, he had left
That Verse which gained him such a sum of Gold,
And for one only look from Annabell
Had writ of her, and her diviner cheeks,
O how my thoughts are—
Pray forbear, in rules of Civility, lot me give
notice on it: I shall be taxed of my neglect of duty and service.
What rude intrusion interrupts my peace,
Can I be no where private?
Troth you wrong your modesty.
What's the matter Vasques, who is it?
It is I:
Doe you know me now? look periurd man on her
Whom thou and thy distracted lust have wronged,
Thy sensual rage of blood hath made my youth
Ascorne to men and Angels, and shall I
Be now a foil to thy vnsated change?
Thou know (false wanton) when my modest fame
Stood free from stain, or scandal, all the charms
Of Hell or sorcery could not prevail
Against the honour of my chaster bosom:
Thine eyes did plead in tears, thy tongue in oaths
Such and so many, that a heart of steel
Would have been wrought to pity, as was mine:
And shall the Conquest of my lawful bed,
My husbands death urged on by his disgrace,
My loss of woeman-hood be ill rewarded
With hatred and contempt? No, know Soranzo,
I have a spirit doth as much distaste
The slavery of fearing thee, as thou
Dost loath the memory of what hath past.
Nay dear Hippolita.
Call me not dear,
Nor think with supple words to smooth the grosenesse
Of my abuses; it is not your new Mistress,
Your goodly Madam Merchant shall triumph
On my deiection; tell her thus from me,
My birth was Nobler, and by much more Free.
You are too violent.
You are too double
In your dissimulation, see thou this,
This habit, these black mourning weeds of Care,
It is thou art cause of this, and hast diuore't
My husband from his life and me from him,
And made me Widow in my widowhood.
Will you yet hear?
More of the perjuries?
Thy soul is drowned too deeply in those sins,
Thou need not add to •th number.
Then I'll leave you,
You are past all rules of sense.
And thou of grace.
Fie Mistress, you, are not near the limits of reason, if
my Lord had a resolution as noble as Virtue it self, you take the
course to vnedge it all. Sir I beseech you doe not perplex her,
griefs (alas) will have a vent, I dare undertake Madam Hippo∣lita
will now freely hear you.
Talk to a woman frantic, are these the fruits of your love?
They are the fruits of thy untruth, false man,
Did thou not swear, whilst no happiness on earth
More then to call me wife? did thou not vow
When hee should dye to marry me? for which
The Devil in my blood, and thy protests
Cause me to Counsel him to undertake
A voyage to Ligorne, for that we heard,
His Brother there was dead, and left a Daughter
Young and vnfriended, who with much ado
I wished him to bring hi•her; hee did so,
And went; and as thou know dyed on the way.
Unhappy man to buy his death so dear
With my advice; yet thou for whom I did it,
Forget thy vows, and leave me to my shame.
Who could help this?
Who? perjured man thou could,
If thou had faith or love.
You are deceived,
The vows I made, (if you remember well)
Were wicked and unlawful,it were more sin
To keep them, then to break them; as for me
I cannot mask my penitence, think thou
How much thou hast digressed from honest shame,
In bringing of a gentleman to death
Who was thy husband, such a one as hee,
So noble in his quality, condition,
Learning, behaviour, entertainment, love,
As Parma could not show a braver man.
You doe not well, this was not your promise.
I care not, let her know her monstrous life,
Ere I'll be servile to so black a sin,
I'll be a Curse; woman, come here no more,
Lear•e to repent and dye; for by my honour
I hate thee and thy lust; you have been too foul.
This part has been scurvily played.
How foolishly this beast contemns his Fate,
And shuns the use of that, which I more scorn
Then I once loved his love; but let him go,
My vengeance shall give comfort to his woe.
Mistress, Mistress Madam Hippolita,
Pray a word or two.
With me Sir?
With you if you please.
What is it?
I know you are infinitely moved now, and you think
you have cause, some I confess you have, but sure not so much
as you imagine.
Indeed.
O yo• were miserably bitter, which you followed
even to the last ••llable: Faith you were somewhat too shrewd,
by my life you could not have took my Lord in a worse time,
since I first knew him: tomorrow you shall find him a new
man.
Well, I shall waite his leisure.
Fie, this is not a hearty patience, it comes sourly from
you, troth let me persuade you for once.
I have it a•d it shall be so; thanks opportunity
—persuade me to what—
Visit him in some milder temper, O if you could but
master a little your female spleen, how might you win him!
Hee will never love me: Vasques, thou hast bin a too trusty
servant to such a master, &amp; I believe thy reward in the end will fall
out like mine.
So perhaps too.
Resolve thy self it will; had I one so true, so truly ho∣nest,
so secret to my Counsels, as thou hast been to him and
his, I should think it a flight acquittance, not only to make
him Moister of all I have, but even of my self.
O you are a noble Gentlewoman.
Wu't thou feed always upon hopes? well, I know
thou art wise, and see the reward of an old servant dally what
it is
Beggary and neglect.
True, but Vasques, were it thou mine, and would bee
private to me and my designs; I here protest my self, and all
what I can else call mine, should be at thy dispose.
Work you that way old mole? then I have the wind
of you—I were not worthy of it, by any desert that could
lye—within my compass; if I could—
What then?
I should then hope to live in these my old years with
rest and security.
Give me thy hand, now promise but thy silence,
And help to bring to pass a plot I have;
And here in sight of Heaven, (that being done)
I make thee Lord of me and mine estate.
Come you are merry,
This is such a happiness that I can
Neither think or believe.
Promise thy secrecy, and it is confirmed.
Then here I call our good Genij foe-witnesses, whatso∣ever
your designs are, or against whomsoever, I will not one∣lie
be a special actor therein, but never disclose it till it be effected.
I take thy word, and with that, thee for mine:
Come then, let's more confer of this anon.
On this delicious bane my thoughts shall banquet,
Revenge shall sweeten what my griefs have tasted.
Thou see (my lovely Ness) these strange mishaps,
How all my fortunes turn to my disgrace,
Wherein I am but as a looker on,
Whiles others act my shame, and I am silent.
But Uncle, wherein can this borrowed shape
Give you content?
I'll tell thee gentle Niece,
Thy wanton Aunt in her lasc••ious riots
Lives now secure, thinks I am surely dead
In my late Journey to Ligorne for you;
(As I have cause it to be rumord out)
Now would I see with what an impudence
She gives scope to her loose adultery,
And how the Common voice allows hereof:
Thus far I have prevailed.
Alas, I fear
You mean some strange revenge.
O be not troubled,
Your ignorance shall plead for you in all,
But to our business, what, you learnt for certain
How Signior Florio means to give his Daughter
In marriage to Soranzo?
Yes for certain.
But how find you young Annabella's love,
Inclined to him?
For ought I could perceine,
She neither fancies him or any else.
There's Mystery in that which time must show,
She used you kindly.
Yes.
And craved your company?
Often.
It is well, it goes as I could wish,
I am the Doctor now, and as for you,
None knows you; if all fail not we shall thrine.
But who comes here?
I know him, it is Grimaldi,
A Roman and a soldier, near allied
Unto the Duke of Montferrato, one
Attending on the Nuntio of the Pope
That now resides in Parma, by which means
He hopes to get the love of Annabella,
Save you Sir.
And you Sir.
I have heard
Of your approved skill, which through the City
Is freely talked of, and would crave your aid.
For what Sir?
Marry sir for this—
But I would speak in Private.
Leave vs Cozen.
I love fair Annabella, and would know
Whether in Arts there may not be receipts
To move affection.
Sir perhaps there may,
But these will nothing profit you.
Not me?
Unless I be mistook, you are a man
Greatly in favour with the Cardinal.
What of that?
In duty to his Grace,
I will be bold to tell you, if you seek
To marry Florio's daughter, you must first
Remove a bar twixt you and her.
Whose that?
Soranzo is the man that hath her heart,
And while hee lives, be sure you cannot speed.
Soranzo, what mine Enemy, is it hee?
Is hee your Enemy?
The man I hate,
Worse then Confusion:
I'll tell him straight.
Nay, then take mine advice,
(Even for his Graces sake the Cardinal)
I'll find a time when hee and she doe meet,
Of which I'll give you notice, and to be sure
Hee shall not scope you, I'll provide a poison
To dip your Rapiers point in, if hee had
As many heads as (Hidra had, he dyes.
But shall I trust thee Doctor?
As your self,
Doubt not in ought; thus shall the Fates d•erce,
By me Soranzo falls, that mined me.
Well Sir, I must bee content to be both your Secretary
and your Messenger my self; I cannot tell what this Letter may
work, but as sure as I am alive, if thou come or•e to talk with
her, I fear thou wu't mar whatsoever I make.
You make Uncle? why am not I big enough to car∣rye
mine own Letter I pray?
I, I carry a fools head o'thy own; why thou Dunce,
would thou write a letter, and carry it thy self
Yes that I wudd, and read it to her with my own
mouth, for you must think, if she will not belecue me my self
when she hears me speak; she will not believe another hand∣writing.
O you think I am ablocke-head Uncle, no sir, Pog∣gio
knows I have indicted a letter my self, so I have.
Yes truly sir, I have it in my pocket.
A sweat one no doubt, pray let's see it.
I cannot read my own hand very well Poggio,
Read it Poggio.
Begin.
MOst dainty and honey-sweete Mistress,
I could call
you fair, 〈◊〉 lie as fast as any that loves you, but
my Uncle being the older man, I leave it to him, as more fit for
his age, and the colour of his beard: I am wise enough to tell you
〈◊〉 board where I see occasion, or if you like my Uncles wit bet∣la
then mine, you shall marry me; if you like mine better then
his • I will marry you in spite of your teeth; So commonding my
best parts to you, I rest.
Yours upwards and downwards, or you may chose, Bergetto.
Ah ha, here's stuff Uncle.
Here's stuff indeed to shame vs all,
Pray whose advice did you take in this learned Letter?
None upon my word, but mine own.
And mine Uncle, believe it, no bodies else; it was mine
own brain, I thank a good wit for it.
Get you home sir, and look yon keep within doors
till I return.
How? that were a jest indeed; I scorn it in faith.
What you doe not?
Judge me, but I doe now.
Indeed sir it is very unhealthy.
Well sir, if I hear any of your apish running to motions,
and fopperies till I come back, you were as good no; look
too't.
Poggio, shall's steal to see this Horse with the head in's tail?
I but you must take heeds of whipping.
Dost take me for a Child Poggio,
Come honest Poggio,
Peace, thou hast told a tale, whose every word
Threatens eternal flaughter to the soul:
I'm sorry I have heard it; would mine ears
Had been one minute deaf, before the hour
That thou came to me: o young man cast-away,
By the religious number of mine order,
I day and might have waked my aged eyes,
Aboue thy strength, to weep on thy behalf:
But Heaven is angry, and be thou resolved,
Thou art a man remark't to taste a mischief,
Look for it; though it come late, it will come sure.
Father, in this you are uncharitable;
What I have done, I'll prove both fit and good.
It is a principal (which you have taught
When I was yet your Scholar) that the Fame
And Composition of the Mind doth follow
The Frame and Composition of Body:
So where the Bodies furniture is Beauty,
The Minds must needs be Virtue: which allowed.
Virtue it self is Reason but refined,
And Love the Quintessence of that, this proves
My Sisters Beauty being rarely Fair,
Is rarely Virtuous; chiefly in her love,
And chiefly in that Love, her love to me.
If hers to me, then so is mine to her;
Since in like Causes are effects alike.
O ignorance in knowledge, long ago,
How often have I warned thee this before?
Indeed if we were sure there were no Deity,
Nor Heaven nor Hell, then to be lead alone,
By Natures light (as were Philosophers
Of elder times) might instance some defence.
But it is not so; then Madman, thou wilt find,
That Nature is in Heavens positions blind.
Your age o'er rules you, had you youth like mine,
You'd make her love your heaven, and her divine.
Nay then I see you are too far sold to hell,
It lies not in the Compass of my prayers
To call thee back; yet let me Counsel thee:
Persuade thy sister to some marriage.
Marriage? why that's to dambe her; that's to prone
Her greedy of variety of lust.
O fearful! if thou wilt not, give me leave
To shrive her; lest she should dye vn-absolu'd.
At your best leisure Father, then she'll tell you,
How dearly she doth prize my Matchless love,
Then you will know what pity it were we two
Should have been sundried from each others arms.
View well her face, and in that little round,
You may observe a world of variety;
For Colour, lips, for sweet perfumes, her breath;
For Jewels, eyes; for threads of purest gold,
Hair; for delicious choice of Flowers, cheeks;
Wonder in every portion of that Throne:
Hear her but speak, and you will swear the Spheres
Make Music to the Citizens in Heaven:
But Father, what is else for pleasure framed,
Least I offend your ears shall go vn-nam'd.
The more I hear, I pity thee the more,
That one so excellent should give those parts:
All to a second Death; what I can doe
Is but to pray; and yet I could advise thee,
Would thou be ruled.
In what?
Why leave her yet,
The Throne of Mercy is aboue your trespass,
Yet time is left you both—
To embrace each other,
Else let all time be struck quite out of number;
She is like me, and I like her resolved.
No more, I'll visit her; this grieves me most,
Things being thus, a pair of souls are lost.
Whore's Giouanni?
Newly walked abroad,
And (as I heard him say) gon to the Friar
His reverent Tutor.
That's a blessed man,
A man made up of holiness, I hope
He will teach him how to gain another world.
Fair Gentlewoman, here's a letter sent:
To you from my young Cozen, I dare swear
He loves you in his soul, would you could hear
Sometimes, what I see daily, sighs and tears,
As if his breast were prison to his heart.
Receive it Annabella.
Alas good man.
What's that she said?
And please you sir, she said, alas good man, truly I doe
Commend him to her every night before her first sleep, because
I would have her dream of him, and she harkens to that most
religiously.
Say so, godamercy Putana there's something for thee,
and prithee doe what thou can on his behalf; sha'not
be lost labour, take my word for it.
Thank you most heartily sir, now I have a Feeling of
your mind, let me alone to work.
Guardian!
Did you call?
Keep this letter,
Signior Florio, in any case bid her read it instantly.
Keep it for what? pray read it me here right.
I shall sir,
How do ye find her inclined Signior
Troth sir I know not how; not all so well
As I could wish.
Sir I am bound to rest your Cozens debtor,
The Jewel I'll return, for if he love,
I'll count that love a Jewel.
Mark you that?
Nay keep them both sweet Maid.
You must excuse me,
Indeed I will not keep it.
Whore's the Ring,
That which your Mother in her will bequeathed,
And charged you on her blessing not to giue't
To any but your Husband? send back that.
I have it not,
Ha I have it not, where is it?
My brother in the morning took it frō me,
Said he would were it to Day.
Well, what doe you say
To young Bergetto's love? are you content
To match with him? speak.
There's the point indeed.
What shall I doe, I must say something now.
What say, why do ye not speak?
Sir with your leave
Please you to give me freedom.
Yes you have.
Signior Donado, if your Nephew mean
To raise his better Fortunes in his match,
The hope of me will hinder such a hope;
Sir if you love him, as I know you doe;
Find one more worthy of his choice then me,
In short, I'm sure, I sha'not be his wife.
Why here's plain dealing, I commend thee for it,
And all the worst I wish thee, is heaven bless thee,
Your Father yet and I will still be friends,
Shall we not Signior Florio?
Yes, why not?
Look here your Cozen comes.
Oh Coxcomb, what doth he make here?
Whore's my Uncle firs.
What's the news now?
Save you Uncle save you, you must not think I come
for nothing Masters, and how and how is it? what you have
read my letter, ah, there I—tickled you in faith.
But it were better you had tickled her in another place.
Sirrah Sweet-hea•t, I'll tell thee a good jest, and riddle
what it is.
You say you'd tell me.
As I was walking just now in the Street, I met a
swaggering fellow would needs take the wall of me, and be∣cause
hee did thrust me, I very valiantly called him Rogue, hee
hereupon bad me draw, I told him I had more wit then so, but
when hee saw that I would not, hee did so maule me with the
hilts of his Rapier, that my head sung whilst my fear capered
in the kennel.
Was ever the like ass seen?
And what did you all this while?
Laugh at him for a gull, till I see the blood run about
mine ears, and then I could not choose but find in my
heart to cry; till a fellow with a broad beard; (they say hee
is a new-come Doctor) called me into this house, and gave me a
plaster, look you here it is; and sir there was a young wench
washed my face and hands most excellently, in faith I shall love
her as long as I live for it, did she not Poggio?
Yes and kissed him too.
Why la now, you think I tell a lye Uncle I warrant.
Would hee that beat thy blood out of thy head, had
beaten some wit into it; For I fear thou never wilt have any.
Oh Uncle, but there was a wench, would have done a
mans heart good to have looked on her, by this light she had a
face mee-thinks worth twenty of you Mistress Annabella.
Was ever such a fool borne?
I am glad she liked you sir.
Are you so, by my troth I thank you forsooth.
Sure it was the Doctors niece, that was last day with
vs here:
It was she, it was she.
How doe you know that simplicity?
Why doe's not hee say so? if I should hau• said no, I
should hau• given him the lye Uncle, and so have deserved a dry
beating again; I'll none of that.
A very modest welbehau'd young Maid as I have seen.
Is she indeed?
Indeed
She is, if I have any Judgment.
Well sir, now you are free, you need not care for send∣ing
letters, now you are dismissed, your Mistress here will
none of you.
No; why what care I for that, I can have Wenches e∣nough
in Parma for half a Crown a piece, cannot I Poggio?
I'll warrant you sir.
Signior Florio, I thank you for your free recourse you
gave for my admittance; and to you fair Maid that Jewel I
will give you against your marriage, come will you go sir?
I marry will I Mistress, farewell Mistress, I'll come a∣gain
to morrow—farewell Mistress.
Son, where have you been? what alone, alone, still,
still? I would not have it so, you must forsake this over book∣each
humour. Well, your Sister hath shook the Fool off.
It was no match for her.
It was not indeed I meant it nothing less,
Soranzo is the man I only like;
Look on him Annabella, come, it is supper-time,
And it grows late.
Whose •ewell's that?
Some Sweet-hearts.
So I think.
A lusty youth, Signior Donado gave it me
To wear against my Marriage.
But you shall not wear it, send it him back again.
What, you are jealous?
That you shall know anon, at better leisure:
Welcome sweet night, the Evening crowns the Day.
Does my Uncle think to make me a Baby still? no,
Poggio, he shall know, I have a skonce now.
I let him not bob you off like an Ape with an apple.
Sfoot, I will have the wench, if he were ten Uncles,
in despite of his nose Poggio.
Hold him to the Grynd-stone, and give not a jot of ground,
She hath in a manner promised you already.
True Poggio, and her Uncle the Doctor
Swore I should marry her.
He swore I remember.
And I will have her that's more; did see the codpeice∣point
she gave me, and the box of Marmalade?
Very well, and kissed you, that my chopps watered at the
sight on it; there's no way but to clap up a marriage in hugger
mugger.
I will do it for I tell thee Poggio, I begin to grow valiant
methinkes, and my courage begins to rise.
Should you be afraid of your Uncle?
Hang him old doting Rascal, no, I say I will have her.
Lose no time then.
I will beget a race of Wise men and Constables, that
shall cart whoores at their own charges, and break the Dukes
peace ere I have done my self.—come away.
My Lord Soranzo, though I must confess,
The proffers that are made me, have been great
In marriage of my daughter; yet the hope
Of your still rising honours, have prevailed
Aboue all other Ioynctures; here she is,
She knows my mind, speak for your self to her,
And hear you daughter, see you use him nobly,
For any private speech, I'll give you time:
Come son and you, the rest let them alone,
Agree as they may.
I thank you sir.
Sister be not all woman, think on me.
Vasques?
My Lord.
Attend me without—
Sir what's your will with me?
Doe you not know what I should tell you?
Yes, you'll say you love me.
And I'll swear it too; will you believe it?
It is not point of faith.
Have you not will to love?
Not you.
Whom then?
That's as the Fates infer.
Of those I'm regient now.
What mean you sweet?
To live and dye a Maid.
Oh that's unfit.
Here's one can say that's but a women's noate.
Did you but see my heart, then would you swear—
That you were dead.
That's true, or somewhat near it.
See you these true loves tears?
No.
Now she winks.
They plead to you for grace.
Yet nothing speak.
Oh grant my suite.
What is it
To let me live.
Take it—.
Still yours.—
That is not mine to give.
One such another word would kill his hopes.
Mistress, to leave those fruitless strifes of wit,
I know I have loved you long, and loved you truly;
Not hope of what you have, but what you are
Have drawn me on, then let me not in vain
Still feel the rigour of your chaste disdain.
I'm sick, and sick to th'heart.
Help, Aquavitae
What mean you?
Why I thought you had been sick.
Doe you mock my love?
There sir she was too nimble.
It is plain; she laughs at me, these scornful taunts
neither become your modesty, or years.
You are no looking-glasse, or if you were, I'd dress
my language by you.
I'm confirmed—
To put you out of doubt, my Lord, mee-thinks your
Common sense should make you understand, that if I loved you,
or desired your love, some way I should have given you better
taste: but since you are a Noble man, and one I wouldnot wish
should spend his youth in hopes, let me advise you here, to for∣bear
your suite, and think I wish you well, I tell you this.
Is it you speak this?
Yes, I my self; yet know
Thus far I give you comfort, if mine eyes
Could have picked out a man (amongst all those
That sue'd to me) to make a husband of,
You should have been that man; let this suffice,
Be noble in your secrecy and wise.
Why now I see she loves me.
One word more:
As ever Virtue lived within your mind,
As ever noble courses were your guide.
As ever you would have me know you loved me,
Let not my Father know hereof by you:
If I hereafter find that I must marry,
It shall be you or none.
I take that promise.
Oh, oh my head.
What's the matter, not well?
Oh I begin to sicken.
Heaven forbid.
Help, help, within there ho.
Look to your daughter Signior Florio.
Hold her up, she sounes.
Sister how do ye?
Sick, brother, are you there?
Convey her to her bed instantly, whilst I send for a Phi∣sitian,
quickly I say.
Alas poor Child.
My Lord.
Oh Vasques, now I doubly am undone.
Both in my present and my future hopes:
She plainly told me, that she could not love,
And thereupon soon sickened, and I fear
Her life's in danger.
Bier lady Sir, and so is yours, if you knew all.—•las sir,
I am sorry for that, may bee it is but the Maids sickness, an o∣uer-fluxe
of youth• and then sir, there is no such presentremedy,
as present Marriage. But hath she given you an absolute
denial?
She hath, and she hath not; I'm full of grief,
But what she said, •'le tell thee as we go.
Oh sir, wee are all undone, quite undone, utterly undone,
And shamed forever; your sister, oh your sister.
What of her? for Heavens sake speak, how does she?
Oh that ever I was borne to see this day.
She is not dead, ha, is she?
Dead? no, she is quick, it is worse, she is with child,
You know what you have done; Heaven forgiue'ce,
It is too late to repent, now Heaven help vs.
With child? how dost thou know it?
How doe I know it? am I at these years ignorant, what
the meaning's of Quames, and Waterpangs be? of changing of
Colours, Quezinesse of stomachs, Pukings, and another thing
that I could name; doe not (for her and your Credits sake) spend
the time in asking how, and which way, it is so; she is quick
upon my word, if you let a Physician see her water you're
undone.
But in what case is she?
Prettily amended, it was but a fit which I soon espied,
and she must look for often hence-forward.
Commend me to her, bid her take no care,
Let not the Doctor visit her I charge you,
Make some excuse, till I return; oh me,
I have a world of business in my head,
Doe not discomfort her; how doe this news perplex me!
If my Father come to her, tell him shoe's recovered well,
Say it was but some ill diet; do ye hear Woman,
Look you to it.
I will sir.
And how do ye find her sir.
Indifferent well,
I see no danger, scarce perceive shoe's sick,
But that she told me, she had lately eaten
Mellowness, and as she thought, those disagreed
With her young stomach.
Did you give her ought?
An easy surfeit water, nothing else,
You need not doubt her health; I rather think
Her sickness is a fullness of her blood,
You understand me?
I doe; you counsel well,
And once within these few days, will so order't
She shall be married, ere she know the time.
Yet let not hast (sir) make unworthy choice,
That were dishonour.
Moister Doctor no,
I will not doe so neither, in plain words
My Lord Soranzo is the man I mean.
A noble and a virtuous Gentleman.
As any is in Parma; not far hence,
Dwells Father Bonauenture, a grave Friar,
Once Tutor to my Son; now at his Cell
I'll haue'em married.
You have plotted wisely.
I'll send one straight
To speak with him to night.
Soranzo's wise, he will delay no time.
It shall be so•
Good peace be here and love.
Welcome religious Friar, you are one,
That still bring blessing to the place you come to.
Sir, with what speed I could, I did my best,
To draw this holy man from forth his Cell,
To visit my sick sist•r, that with words
Of ghostly comfort in this time of need,
Hee might absolve her, whether she live or dye.
It was well done •Giouanni, thou herein
Hast showed a Christians care, a Brothers love
Come Father, I'll conduct you to her chamber,
And one thing would entreat you.
Say on sir.
I have a Fathers dear impression,
And wish before I fall into my grave,
That I might see her married, as it is fit;
A word from you Grave man, will win her more,
Then all our best persuasions.
Gentle Sir,
All this I'll say, that Heaven may prosper her.
Now if the Doctor keep his word, Soranzo,
Twenty to one you miss your Bride; I know
It is an unnoble act, and not becomes
A Soldiers valour; but in terms of love,
Where Merit cannot sway, Policy must.
I am resolved, if this Physician
Play not on both hands, then Soranzo falls.
You are come as I could wish, this very night So∣ranzo,
it is ordained must bee affied to Annabella; and for ought
I know, married.
Yet your patience,
The place, it is Friars Bonauentures Cell.
Now I would wish you to bestow this night,
In watching thereabouts, it is but a night,
If you miss now, to morrow I'll know all.
Have you the poison?
Here it is in this Box,
Doubt nothing, this will-doe't; in any case
As you respect your life, be quick and sure.
I'll speed him.
Doe; away, for it is not safe
You should be seen much here—ever my love.
And mine to you.
So, if this •it, I'll laugh and hug revenge;
And they that now dream of a wedding•feast,
May chance to morn the lusty Bridegrooms ruin.
But to my other business; Niece Philotis.
Uncle.
My lovely Niece, you have bethought'ee.
Yes, and as you counselled,
Fashioned my heart to love him, but hee swears
Hee will to night be married; for he fears
His Uncle else, if hee should know the drift,
W•ll hinder all, and call his Couze to shrift.
To night? why best of all; but let me see,
I—ha—yes,—so it shall be; in disguise
We'll early to the Friars, I have thought on it.
Uncle, hee comes.
Welcome my worthy Couze.
I ass pretty Lass, come bus Lassae, a ha Poggio.
There's hope of this yet.
You shall have time enough, withdraw a little,
Wee must confer at large.
Have you notsweete-meates, or dainty devices for me?
You shall enough Sweet-heart.
Sweet-heart, mark that Poggio; by my troth I cannot
choose but kiss thee once more for that word Sweet-heart; Pog∣gio,
I have a monstrous swelling about my stomach, whatsoever
the matter be.
You shall have Physic for it sir.
Time runs apace.
Time's a blockhead.
Be ruled, when wee have done what's fit to doe,
Then you may kiss your fill, and bed her too.
I am glad to see this penance; for believe me,
You have unripped a soul, so foul and guilty.
As I must tell you true, I marvel how
The earth hath borne you up, but weep, weep on,
These tears may doe you good; weep faster yet,
Whiles I doe read a Lecture.
Wretched creature.
I, you are wretched, miserably wretched.
Almost condemned alive; there is a place
(List daughter) in a black and hollow Vault,
Where day is never seen; there shines no Sun,
But flaming horror of consuming Fires;
A lightless Suphure, choked with smoky fogs
Of an infected darkness; in this place
Dwell many thousand, thousand sundry sorts
Of never dying deaths; there damned fowls
Roar without pity, there are Gluttons fed
With Toads and Adders; there is burning Oil
Powered down the Drunkards throat, the Usurer
Is for•'t to supp whole draughts of molten Gold;
There is the Murderer for-euer stabbed,
Yet can he never dye; there lies the wanton
On Racks of burning steel, whiles in his soul
Hee feels the torment of his raging lust.
Mercy, oh mercy.
There stands these wretched things.
Who have dream't out whole years in lawless sheets
And secret incests, cursing one another;
Then you will wish, each kiss your brother gave,
Had been a Daggers point; then you shall hear
How hee will cry, oh would my wicked sister
Had first been damned, when she did yield to lust.
But soft, methinkes I see repentance work
New motions in your heart, say? how is it with you?
Is there no way left to redeem my miseries?
There is, despair not; Heaven is merciful,
And offers grace even now; it is thus agreed,
First, for your Honours safety that you marry
The Lord Soranzo, next, to save your soul,
Leave off this life, and henceforth live to him.
Ay me.
Sigh not, I know the baits of sin
Are hard to leave, oh it is a death to do it.
Remember what must come, are you content?
I am.
I like it well, we'll take the time,
Who's near vs there?
Did you call Father?
Is Lord Soranzo come?
Heestayes below.
Have you acquainted him at full?
I have and hee is overjoyed.
And so are wee: bid him come near.
My Sister weeping, ha? I fear this Friars falsehood,
I will call him.
Daughter, are you resolved?
Father, I am.
My Lord Soranzo, here
Give me your hand, for that I give you this.
Lady, say you so too?
I doe, and vow, to live with you and yours.
Timely resolved:
My blessing rest on both, more to be done,
You may perform it on the Morning-sun.
It is early night as yet, and yet too soon
To finish such a work; here I will lye
To listen who comes next.
Wee are almost at the place, I hope Sweet-heart.
I hear them near, and heard one say Sweet-heart,
It is hee; now guide my hand some angry Justice
Home to his bosom, now have at you sir.
Oh help, help, here's a stich fallen in my guts,
Oh for a Flesh-taylor quickly—Poggio.
What ails my love?
I am sure I cannot peace forward and backward and yet
I am wet before and behind, lights, lights, ho lights.
Alas, some Villain here has slain my love.
Oh Heaven forbid it; raise up the next neighbours
Instantly Poggio, and bring lights,
How is it Bergetto? slain?
It cannot be; are you sure you're hurt?
O my belly seeths like a Porridge-pot, some cold water
I shall boyle over else; my whole body is in a sweat, that you
may wring my shirt; feel here—why Poggio.
Here; alas, how doe you?
Give me a light, what's here? all blood! O sirs,
Signior Donado's Nephew now is slain,
Follow the murderer with all the haste
Up to the City, hee cannot be far hence,
Follow I beseech you.
Follow, follow, follow.
Tear off thy linen Cos, to stop his wounds,
Be of good comfort man.
Is all this mine own blood? •ay then good-night with
me, Poggio. commend me to my V•kle, dost hear? bid him for
my sake make much of this wench, oh—I am going the wrong
way sure, my be•y aches so—oh farewell, Poggio—oh—oh—
O hee is dead.
How! dead!
Hoe's dead indeed,
It is now to late to weep, let's have him home,
And with what speed we may, find out the Murderer.
Oh my Moister, my Moister, my Moister.
Betrothed?
I saw it.
And when's the marriage-day?
Some two days hence.
Two days? Why man I would but wish two hours
To send him to his last, and lasting sleep.
And Vasques thou shalt see, I'll doe it bravely.
I doe not doubt your wisdom, nor (I trust) you my secre•ie,
I am infinitely yours.
I will be thine inspight of my disgrace,
So soon? o wicked man, I durst be sworn,
He would laugh to see me weep.
And that's a Villainous fault in him.
No, let him laugh, I'm armed in my resolve••
Be thou still true.
I should get little by treachery against so hopeful a pre∣ferment,
as I am like to climb to.
Even to my bosom Vasques, let My youth
Revel in these new pleasures, if wee thrive,
Hee now hath but a pair of days to live.
It is bootless now to show your self a child
Signior Donado, what is done, is done;
Spend not the time in tears, but seek for Justice.
I must confess, somewhat I was in fault,
That had not first acquainted you what love
Past twixt him and my Niece, but as I live,
His Fortune grieves me as it were mine own.
Ala• poor Creature, he meant no man harm,
That I am sure of.
I believe that too;
But stay my Masters, are you sure you saw
The Murderer pass here?
And it please you sir, wee are sure wee saw a Ruffian
with a naked weapon in his hand all bloody, get into my Lord
Cardinals Graces gate, that wee are sure of; but for fear of his
Grace (bless vs) we durst go no further.
Know you what manner of man hee was?
Yes sure I know the man, they say a is a soldier, hee
that loved your daughter Sir an't please y'ee, it was hee for cer∣taine.
Grimaldi on my life.
I, I, the same.
The Cardinal is Noble, he no doubt
Will give true Justice.
Knock some one at the gate,
I'll knock sir.
Servant within. What would'ee?
Wee require speech with the Lord Cardinal
About some present business, pray inform
His Grace, that we are here.
Why how now friends? what saucy mates are you
That know nor duty nor Civility?
Are we a person fit to be your host?
Or is our house become your common Inn
To beat our doors at pleasure? what such haste
Is yours as that it cannot waite fit times?
Are you the Masters of this Common-wealth•
And know no more discretion? oh your news
Is here before you, you have lost a Nephew
Donado, last night by Grimaldi slain:
Is that your business? well sir, we have knowledge 〈◊〉
Le that suffice.
In presence of your Grace,
In thought I never meant Bergetto harm,
But Florio you can tell, with how much scorn
Soranzo backed with his Confederates,
Hath often wronged me; I to be revenged,
(For that I could not win him else to fight)
Had thought by way of Ambush to have kilt him,
But was unluckily, therein mistook;
Else hee had felt what late Bergetto did:
And though my fault to him were merely chance,
Yet humbly I submit me to your Grace,
To doe with me as you please.
Rise up Grimaldi,
You Citizens of Parma, if you seek
For Justice; Know as Nuntio from the Pope,
For this offence I here receive Grimaldi
Into his holiness protection.
Hee is no Common man, but nobly borne;
Of Princes blood, though you Sir Florio,
Thought him to mean a husband for your daughter
If more you seek for, you must go to Rome,
For hee shall thither; learn more wit for shame.
Bury your dead—away Grimaldi—leaue'em.
Is this a Church-mans voice? dwells Justice here?
Floe. Justice is fled to Heaven and comes no nearer
Soranzo, was it for him? O Impudence!
Had he the face to speak it, and not blush?
Come, come Donado, there's no help in this,
When Cardinals think murder's not amiss,
Great men may doe there wills, we must obey,
But Heaven will judge them for it another day.
THese holy rights performed, now take your times,
To spend the remnant of the day in Feast;
Such fit repasts are pleasing to the Saint•
Who are your guests, though not with mortal eyes
To be beheld; long prosper in this day
You happy Couple, to each others joy:
Father, your prayer is heard, the hand of goodness
Hath been a shield for me against my death;
And more to bless me, hath enriched my life
With this most precious Jewel; such a prize
As Earth hath not another like to this.
Cheer up my Love, and Centlemen, my Friends,
Rejoice with me in mirth, this day we'll crown
With lusty Cups to Annabella's health.
Oh Torture, were the marriage yet undone,
Ere I'd endure this sight, to see my Love
Clipped by another, I would dare Confusion,
And stand the horror of ten thousand deaths.
Are you not well Sir?
Prithee fellow wait,
I need not thy officious diligence.
Signior Donado, come you must forget
Your late mishaps, and drown• your cares in wine.
So an. Vasques?
My Lord.
Reach me that weighty bowl,
Here brother Giouanni, here's to you,
Your turn comes next, though now a Bachelor,
Here's to your sisters happiness and mine.
I cannot drink.
What?
Twill indeed offend me
Pray, doe not urge him if hee be not willing.
How now, what noise is this?
O sir, I had forgot to tell you; certain young Maidens
of Parma in honour to Madam Annabella's marriage, have sent
their loves to her in a Masque, for which they humbly crave
your patience and silence.
Wee are much bound to them, so much the more as
it comes unexpected; guide them in.
Thanks lovely Virgins, now might wee but know
To whom wee have been beholding for this love,
Wee shall acknowledge it.
Yes, you shall know,
What think you now?
Omnes Hippolita?
It is she,
Bee not amazed; nor blush young lovely Bride,
I come not to defraud you of your man,
It is now no time to reckon up the talk
What Parma long hath rumoured of vs both,
Let rash report run on; the breath that vents it
Will (like a bubble) break it self at last.
But now to you Sweet Creature, lend's your hand,
Perhaps it hath been said, that I would claim
Some interest in Soranzo, now your Lord,
What I have right to doe, his soul knows best:
But in my duty to your Noble worth,
Sweet Annabella, and my care of you,
Here take Soranzo, take this hand from me,
I'll once more join, what by the holy Church
Is finished and allowed; have I done well?
You have too much engaged vs.
One thing more
That you may know my single charity,
Freely I here remit all interest
I ere could claim; and guy you back your vows,
And to confirm't, reach me a Cup of wine
My Lord Soranzo, in this draught I drink,
Long res t'ee—
Fear nothing—
Hippolita, I thank you, and will pledge
This happy Union as another life,
Wine there.
You shall have none, neither shall you pledge her.
How!
Know now Mistress she devil, your own mischievous treachery
Hath kilt you, I must not marry you.
Villain.
What's the matter?
Foolish woman, thou art now like a Fire-brand, that
hath kindled others and burnt thy self; Troppo sperar nigann•,
thy vain hope hath deceived thee, thou art but dead, if thou
hast any grace, pray.
Monster.
Dye in charity for shame,
This thing of malice, this woman had privately corrupted me
with promise of malice, under this politic reconciliation to
to poison my Lord, whiles she might laugh at his Confusion
oh his marriage-day; I promised her fair, but I knew what my
reward should have been, and would willingly have spared her
life, but that I was acquainted with the danger of her deposit∣on,
and now have fitted her a just payment in her own coin,
there she is, she hath yet—and end thy days in
peace wild woman, as for life there's no hope, think noton't.
Wonderful Justice!
Heaven thou art righteous.
O it is true,
I feel my minute coming, had that slave
Kept promise, (o my torment) thou this hour
Had dyed Soranzo—heate aboue hell fire—
Yet ere I pass away—Cruel, cruel flames—
Take here my curse amongst you; may thy bed
Of marriage be a rack unto thy heart,
Burn blood and boyle in Vengeance—o my heart,
My Flame's intolerable—moist thou live
To father Bastards, may her womb bring forth
Monsters, and dye together in your sins
Hated, scorned and unpitied—oh—oh—
Was ever so wild a Creature?
Here's the end
Of lust and pride.
Vasques, I know thee now a trusty servant,
And never will forget thee—come My Love,
We'll home, and thank the Heavens for this escape,
Father and Friends, wee must break up this mirth,
It is too sad a Feast.
Bear hence the body.
Here's an ominous change,
Mark this my Giouani, and take heed,
I fear the event; that marriage seldome's good,
Where the bride-banquet so begins in blood.
My wretched wife more wretched in her shame
Then in her wrongs to me, hath paid too soon
The forfeit of her modesty and life.
And I am sure (my Niece) though vengeance hover,
Keeping aloof yet from Soranzo's fall,
Yet hee will fall, and sink with his own weight.
I need not (now my heart persuades me so)
To further his confusion; there is one
Aboue begins to work, for as I hear,
Debate's already twixt his wife and him,
Thicken and run to head; she (as it is said)
Sleightens his love, and he abandons hers
Much talk I hear, since things go thus (my Niece)
In tender love and pity of your youth,
My counsel is, that you should free your years
From hazard of these woes; by flying hence
To fair Cremona, there to vow your soul
In holiness a holy Votaress,
Leave me to see the end of these extremes
All humane worldly courses are uneven,
No life is blessed but the way to Heaven.
Uncle, shall I resolve to be a Nun?
I gentle Niece; and in your hourly prayers
Remember me your poor unhappy Uncle;
Hie to Cremona now, as Fortune leads,
Your home, your cloister, your best Friends, your beads,
Your chaste and single life shall crown your Birth,
Who dyes a Virgin, live a Saint on earth.
Then farewell world, and worldly thoughts adieu,
Welcome chaste vows, my self I yield to you.
Come strumpet, famous whore, were every drop
Of blood that runs in thy adulterous veins
A life, this Sword, (dost see it) should in one blow
Confound them all, Harlot, rare, notable Harlot,
That with thy brazen face maintainst thy sin
Was there no man in Parma to be bawd
To your loose cunning whorodome else but I?
Must your hot ytch and pleurisy of lust,
The hey day of your luxury be fed
Up to a surfeit, and could none but I
Be picked out to be cloak to your close tricks,
Your belly-sports? Now I must be the Dad
To all that gallymaufrey that's stuffed
In thy Corrupted bastard-bearing womb,
Shy, must I?
Beastly man, why it is thy fate:
I sued not to thee, for, but that I thought•
Your Cuer-louing Lordship would have run
Mad on denial, had ye lent me time,
I would have told 'ee in what case I was,
But you would needs be doing.
Whore of whores!
Dare thou tel' me this?
O yes, why not?
You were deceived in me; it was not for love
I chose you, but for honour; yet know this,
Would you be patient yet, and hide your shame,
I'd see whether I could love you.
Excellent Queen!
Why art thou not with Child?
What needs all this,
When it is superfluous? I confess I am.
Tell me by whom.
Soft sir, it was not in my bargain.
Yet somewhat sir to stay your lo•ging stomach
I'm content t'acquaint you with; The man,
The more then Man that got this sprightly Boy,
(For it is a Boy that for glory sir,
Your heir shall be a Son,)
Damnable Monster.
Nay and you will not hear, I'll speak no more.
Yes speak, and speak thy last.
A match, a match;
This Noble Creature was in every part
So angel-like, so glorious, that a woman,
Who had not been but human as was I,
Would have kneeled to him, and have begged for love.
You, why you are not worthy once to name
His name without true worship, or indeed,
Unless you kneeled, to hear another name him.
What was hee called?
Wee are not come to that,
Let it suffice, that you shall have the glory,
To Father what so Brave a Father got.
In brief, had not this chance, fallen out is it doth,
I never had been troubled with a thought
That you had been a Creature; but for marriage,
I scarce dream yet of that.
Tell me his name.
Alas, alas, there's all
Will you believe?
What?
You shall never know.
How!
Never,
If you doe, let me be cursed.
Not know it, Strumpet, I'll rip up thy heart,
And find it there.
Doe, doe.
And with my teeth,
Tear the prodigious lecher joint by joint.
Ha, ha, ha, the man's merry.
Dost thou laugh?
Come Wh•re, tell me your lover, or by Truth
I'll how thy flesh to shreds; who is it
Che morte pluis dolce che morire per amore.
Thus will I pull thy hair, and thus I'll drag
Thy lust be-leapred body through the dust.
Yet tell his name.
Morendoin gratia Lei morirere senzadolore.
Dost thou Triumph? the Treasure of the Earth
Shall not redeem thee, were there kneeling Kings,
Did beg thy life, or Angels did come down
To plead in tears, yet should not all prevail
Against my rage; dost thou not tremble yet?
At what? to dye; No, be a Gallant hang-man
I dare thee to the worst, strike, and strike home,
• leave revenge behind, and thou shalt feel it.
Yet tell me cre thou die, and tell me truly,
Knows thy old Father this?
No by my life.
Wilt thou confess, and I will spare thy life?
My life? I will not buy my life so dear.
I will not slack my Ve•geance.
What do ye mean Sir?
Forbear Vasques, such a damned Whore
Deserves no pity.
Now the gods forefend!
And wud you be her executioner, and kill her in your rage too?
O it were most unmanlike; she is your wife, what faults hath
been done by her before she married you, were not against you;
alas Poor Lady, what hath she committed, which any Lady
in Italy in the like case would not? Sir, you must be rue•ed by
your reason, and not by your fury, that were vnhumane and
beastly.
She shall not live.
Come she must; you would have her confess the Au∣thors
of her present misfortune•es I warrant'ee, it is an vnconscio∣noble
demand, and she should loose the estimation that I (for
my part) hold of her worth, if she had done it; why sir you
ought not of all men living to know it: good sir bee reconciled,
alas good gentlewoman.
Pish, doe not beg for me, I prize my life
As nothing; if The man will needs bee mad.
Why let him take it.
Vasques, hear thou this?
Yes, and commend her for it; in this she shows the no∣blenesse
of a gallant spirit, and beshrew my heart, but it becomes
her rarely—Sir, in any case smother your revenge; leave
the scenting out your wrongs to me, bee ruled• as you respect
your honour, or you mar all—Sir, if ever my service were of
any Credit with you, be not so violent in your distractions: you
are married now; what a triumph might the report of this give
to other neglected Suitors, it is as manlike to bear extremities,
as godlike to forgive.
O Vasques, Vasques, in this piece of flesh,
This faithless face of hers, had I laid up
The treasure of my heart; had thou been virtuous
(Fair wicked woman) not the matchless joys
Of Life it self had made me wish to live
With any Saint but thee; Deceitful Creature,
How hast thou mock't my hopes, and in the shame
Of thy lewd womb, even buried me alive?
I did too dearly love thee.
This is well;
Follow this temper with some passion,
Bee brief and moving, it is for the purpose.
Be witness to my words thy soul and thoughts,
And tell me did not think that in my heart,
I did too superstitiously adore thee.
I must confess, I know you loved me well.
And would thou use me thus? O Annabella,
Bee thus assured, whatsor're the Villain was,
That thus hath tempted thee to This disgrace,
Well hee might lust, but never loved like me:
Hee doted on the picture that hung out
Upon thy cheeks, to please his humorous eye;
Not on the part I loved, which was thy heart,
And as I thought, thy Virtues.
O my Lord!
These words wound deeper then your Sword could do.
Let me not ever take comfort, but I begin to weep my
self, so much I pity him; why Madam I knew when his rage
was ouer-past, what it would come to.
Forgive me Annabella, though thy youth
Hath tempted thee aboue thy strength to folly,
Yet will not I forget what I should bee,
And what I am, a husband; in that name
Is hid Divinity; if I doe find
That thou wilt yet be true, here I remit
all former faults, and take thee to my bosom.
By my troth, and that's a point of noble charity.
Sir on my knees—
Rise up, you shall not kneel,
Get you to your chamber, see you make no show
Of alteration, I•le be with you straight;
My reason tells me now, that It is as common
To err in frailty as to bee a woman,
Go to your chamber.
So, this was somewhat to the matter; what doe you
think of your heaven of happiness now sir?
I carry hell about me, all my blood
Is fired in swift revenge.
That may bee, but know you how, or on whom? alas,
to marry a great woman, being made great in the stock to your
hand, is a usual sport in these days; but to know what Secret
it was that haunted your Cunny-berry, there's the cunning.
I'll make her tell her self, or—
Or what? you must not doeso, let me yet persuade your
sufferance a little while, go to her, use her mildly, win her if
it be possible to a Voluntary, to a weeping tune; for the rest, if
all hit, I will not miss my mark; pray sir go in, the next news
I tell you shall be wonders.
Delay in vengeance gives a heavier blow.
Ah sirrah, here's work for the nonce; I had a suspici∣on
of a bad matter in my head a pretty whiles ago; but after My
Madams scurvy looks here at home, her waspish perverseness,
and loud fault-finding, then I remembered the Proverb, that
Where Hens crow, and Cocks hold their peace, there are sorry
houses; sfoot, if the lower parts of a Shee-taylors Cunning, can
cover such a swelling in the stomach, I'll never blame a false
stich in a shoe whiles I li•e again; up and up so quick? and so
quickly too? it were a fine policy to lear•e by whom this must
be known: and I have thought on it—here's the way or
none—what crying old Mistress! alas, alas, I cannot blame
'ee, wee have a Lord, Heaven help vs, is so mad as the devil
himself, the more shame for him.
O Vasques, that ever I was borne to see this day,
Doth hee use thee so too, sometimes Vasques?
Me? why hee makes a dog of me; but if some were
of my mind, I know what wee would doe; as sure as I am an
honest man, hee will go near to kill my Lady with unkindness;
say she be with-child, is that such a matter for a young woman
of her years, to be blamed for?
Alas good heart, it is against her will full sore.
I durst be sworn, all his madness is, for that she will
not confess whose it is, which hee will know, and when he doth
know it, I am so well acquainted with his humour, that hee
will forget all straight; well I could wish, she would in plain
terms tell all, for that's the way indeed.
Doe you think so?
Foe, I know it; provided that hee did not win her to it
by force, hee was once in a mind, that you could tell, and meant
to have w•ung it out of you, but I somewhat pacified him for
that• yet sure you know a great, deal.
Heaven forgive vs all, I know a little Vasques.
Why should you not? who else should? upon my Con∣science
she loves you dearly, and you would not betray her to
any affliction for the world.
Not for all the world by my Faith and troth Vasques.
It were pity of your life if you should, but In this you
should both relieve her present discomforts, pacify my Lord, and
gain your self ever lasting love and preferment.
Dost think so Vasques?
Nay I know it; sure it was some near and entire friend.
'T was a dear friend indeed; but—
But what? fear not to name him: my life between you
and danger; faith I think it was no base Fellow.
Thou wilt stand between me and harm•?
V'ds pity, what else; you shall be rewarded too; trust me.
It was even no worse then her own brother.
Her brother Giouanni I warrant'ee?
Even hee Vasques; as brave a Gentleman as ever kissed
fair Lady; O they love most perpetually.
A brave Gentleman indeed, why therein I Commend
her choice—better and better—you are sure it was hee?
Sure; and you shall'see hee will not be long from her
too.
He were to blame if he would: but may I believe thee?
Believe me! why dost think I am a Turk or a Jew?
no Vasques, I have known their dealings too long to belie them
now.
Where are you? there within sirs?
How now, what are these?
You shall know presently,
Come sirs, take me This old Damnable hag,
Gag her instant•y, and put out her eyes, quickly, quickly.
Vasques, Vasques.
Gag her I say sf•ot do ye suffer her to prate? what do ye
fumble about? let me come to her, I'll help your old gums,
you Toad-bellied bi•ch; sirs, carry her closely into the Coal∣house,
and put out her eyes instantly, if she roars, slit her
nose; do ye hear, bee speedy and sure. Why this is excellent and
aboue expectation. 
Her own brother? O horrible! to what a height of liberty in
damnation hath the Devil trayn'dour age, her Brother, well;
there's yet but a beginning, I must to my Lord, and tutor him
better in his points of vengeance; now I see how a smooth tale
goes beyond a smooth tail, but soft,—
what thing comes next?
Giouanni! as I would wish; my belief is strengthened,
It is as firm as Winter and Summer.
Whore's my Sister?
Troubled with a new sickness my Lord she's somewhat ill.
T••th too much of the flesh I believe.
T••th sir and you I think hauee'ne hit it,
But My virtuous Lady.
Whore's she?
In her chamber; please you visit her; she is alone, your li∣berality
hath doubly made me your servant, and ever shall ever—
Sir, I am made a man, I have plied my Cue with cunning
and success, I beseech you let's be private.
My Ladies brother's come, now he will know all.
Let him know it, I have made some of them fast enough,
How have you dealt with my Lady?
Gently, as thou hast counselled; O my soul
Runs circular in sorrow for revenge,
But Vasques, thou shalt know—
Nay, I will know no more; for now comes your turn
to know; I would not talk so openly with you: Let my young
Moister take time enough, and go at pleasure; hee is sold to
death, and the Devil shall not ransom him, Sir I beseech you,
your privacy.
No Conquest can gain glory of my fear.
Pleasures farewell, and all ye thriftless minutes,
Wherein False joys have spun a weary life,
To these my Fortunes now I take my leave.
Thou Precious Time, that swiftly rid'st in post
Over the world, to finish up the race
Of my last fate; here stay thy restless course,
And bear to Ages that are yet unborn,
A wretched woeful woman's Tragedy,
My Conscience now stands up against my lust
With dispositions charectred in guilt,
And tells me I am lost: Now I confess,
Beauty that clothes the out-side of the face,
Is cursed if it be not eloath'd with grace:
Here like a Turtle (mewed up in a Cage)
Vn-mated, I converse with Ayre and walls,
And descant on my wild unhappiness.
O Giouanni, that hast had the spoil
Of thine own virtues and my modest fame,
Would thou had been less subject to those Stars
That luckelesse reigned at my Nativity:
O would the scourge due to my black offence
Might pass from thee, that I alone might feel•
The torment of an uncontrolled flame.
What's this I hear?
That man, that Blessed Friar,
Who joined in Ceremonial knot my hand
To him whose wife I now am; told me oft,
I trod the path to death, and showed me how.
But they who sleep in Lethargies of Lust
Hug• their confusion, making Heaven v••juice•,
And so did I.
Here's Music to the soul.
Forgive me my Good Genius, and this once
Be helpful to my ends; Let some good man
Pass this way, to whose trust I may commit
This paper double lined with tears and blood:
Which being granted; here I sadly vow
Repentance, and a leaving of that life
I long have dyed in.
Lady, Heaven hath heard you,
And hath by providence ordained, that I
should be his Minister for your behoof.
Ha, what are you?
Your brothers friend the Friar;
Glad in my soul that I have lived to hear
This free confession twixt your peace and you,
What would you or to whom? fear not to speak.
Is Heaven so bountiful? then I have found
More favour then I hoped; here Holy man—Throws a letter,
Commend me to my Brother give him that,
That Letter; bid him read it and repent,
Tell him that I (imprisoned in my chamber,
Bard of all company, even of My Guardian,
Who gives me cause of much suspect) have time
To blush at what hath past: bid him be wise,
And not believe the Friendship of my Lord,
I fear much more then I can speak: Good father,
The place is dangerous, and spies are busy,
I must break off—you'll do it?
Be sure I will;
And fly with speed—my blessing ever rest
With thee my daughter, live to dye more blessed.
Thanks to the heavens, who have prolonged my breath
To this good use: Now I can welcome Death.
Am I to be believed now?
First, marry a strumpet that cast her self away upon you but to
laugh at your horns? to feast on your disgrace, riott in your vex∣ations,
cuckold you in your bride-bed, waste your estate upon
Panders and Bawds?
No more, I say no more.
A Cuckold is a goodly tame beast my Lord.
I am resolved; urge not another word,
My thoughts are great, and all as resolute
As thunder; in mean time I'll cause our Lady
To deck her self in all her bridal Robes,
Kiss her, and fold her gently in my arms.
Begone; yet hear you, are the Bandits ready
To waite in Ambush?
Good Sir, trouble not your self about other business, then
your own resolution; remember that time lost cannot be recal'd.
With all the cunning words thou can, inuit
The States of Parma to my Birth-dayes feast,
Haste to my Brother rival and his Father,
Entreat them gently, bid them not to fail,
Bee speedy and return.
Let not your pity betray you, till my coming back,
Think upon Incest and Cuckoldry.
Revenge is all the Ambition I aspire,
To that I'll clime or fall; my blood's on fire.
Busy opinion is an idle Fool,
That as a Schoole-rod keeps a child in awe,
Frights the vnexperienc't temper of the mind:
So did it me; who ere My precious Sister
Was married, thought all taste of love would dye
In such a Contract; but I find no change
Of pleasure in this formal law of sports.
She is still one to me, and every kiss
As sweet, and as delicious as the first
I reap't; when yet the privilege of youth
Entitled her a Virgin. O the glory
Of two united hearts like hers and mine!
Let Poaring bookmen dream of other worlds,
My world, and all of happiness is here,
And I'd not change it for the best to come,
A life of pleasure is Elyzeum.
Father, you enter on the Jubilee
Of my retired delights; Now I can tell you,
The hell you oft have prompted, is nought else
But slavish and fond superstitious fear;
And I could prove it too—
Thy blindness slays thee,
Look there, it is wrote to thee.
From whom?.
Unrip the seals and see:
The blood's yet seething hot, that will anon
Be frozen harder then congealed Corrall.
Why do ye change colour son?
Fore Heaven you make
Some petty Devil factor twixt my love
And your relligion-masked sorceries.
Where had you this?
Thy Conscience youth is seared,
Else thou would stoop to warning.
It is her hand,
I know it; and it is all written in her blood.
She writes I know not what; Death? I'll not fear
An armed thunder-bolt aimed at my heart.
She writes wee are discovered, 〈◊〉 o• dreams
Of lowe faint-hearted Cowardice: discovered?
The Devil wee are; which way is it possible?
Are wee grown Traytoms to our own delights?
Confusion take such d•••ge, it is but forged,
This is your peevish chattering weak old man,
Now sir, what news bring you?
My Lord, according to his yearly custom keeping this
day a Feast in honour of his Birth-day, by me invites you thy∣there;
your worthy Father with the Popes reverend Nuntio, and
other Magni•ico's of Parma, have promised their presence, will•
please you to be of the number?
Yes, tell them I dare come.
Dare come?
So I said; and tell him more I will come.
These words are strange to me.
Say I will come.
You will not miss?
Yet more, I'll come; sir, are you answered?
So I'll say—my service to you•
You will 〈◊〉 go I trust.
Not go? for what?
O doe not go, this feast (I'll gage my life)
Is but a plot to train you to your ruin,
Be ruled, you sha'not go.
Not go? stood Death
Threatening his armies of confounding plagues,
With •o•sts of dangers hot as blazing Stars,
I would be there; not go? yes and resolve
To strike as deep in slaughter as they all.
For I will go.
Go where thou wilt, I see
The wildness of thy Fare draws to an end,
To a bad fearful end; I must not stay
To know thy fall, back to Bononia I
With speed will haste, and shun this coming blow.
Parma farewell, would I had never known thee,
Or ought of thine; well Young man, since no prayer
Can make thee safe, I leave thee to despair.
Despair or tortures of a thousand hells
Ell's one to me; I have set up my rest.
Now, n•w, work serious thoughts on baneful plots
Be all a man my soul; let not the Curse
Of old prescription rent from me the gall
Of Courage, which enrols a glorious death.
If I must totter like a well-growne Oak,
Some under shrubs shall in my weighty fall
Be crushed to splits: with me they all shall perish.
You will not •aisle, or shrink in the attempt?
I will undertake for their parts; be sure my Masters to
be bloody enough, and as unmerciful, as if you were praying
upon a rich booty on the very Mountains of Liguria; for your
pardons trust to my Lord; but for reward you shall trust none
but your own pockets.
We'll make a murder.
Here's gold, here's more; want nothing, what you do
is noble, and an act of brave revenge.
I'll make ye rich Bandits and all Free.
Liberty, liberty.
Hold, take every man a Vizard; when ye are with
drawn, keep as much silence as you can possibly: you know
the watch-word, till which be spoken move not, but when you
hear that, rush in like a stormy-flood; I need not instruct ye
in your own profession.
No, no, no.
In then, your ends are profit and preferment—away.
The guests will all come Vasques?
Yes sir,
and now let me a little edge your resolution;
you see nothing is unready to this Great work, but a great mind
in you: Call to your remembrance your disgraces, your loss of
Honour, Hippolita's blood; and arm your courage in your own
wrongs, so shall you best right those wrongs in vengeance
which you may truly call Your own.
It is well; the less I speak, the more I burn,
and blood shall quench that flame.
Now you begin to turn Italian, this beside, when my
young Incest-monger comes, hee will be sharpe set on his old bit:
give him time enough, let him have your Chamber and bed at li∣bertie;
let my Hot Hare have law ere he be hunted to his death,
that if it be possible, hee may post to Hell in the very Act of his
damnation.
It shall be so; and see as wee would wish,
Hee comes himself first; welcome my Much-lou'd brother,
Now I perceive you honour me; you're welcome,
But whore's my father?
With the other States,
Attending on the Nuntio of the Pope
To waite upon him hither; how's my sister?
Like a good huswife scarcely ready yet,
You're best walk to her chamber.
If you will.
I must expect my honourable Friends,
Good brother get her fort•.
You are busy Sir.
Even as the great Devil himself would have it, let him
go and glut himself in his own destruction; hark, the Nuncio
is at hand; good sir be ready to receive him.
Most reverend Lord, this grace hath made me proud,
That you vouchsafe my house; I ever rest
Your humble servant for this Noble Favour.
You are our Friend my Lord, •is holiness
Shall understand, how zealously you honour•
Saint Peters Vicar in his substitute
Our special love to you.
Signiors to you
My welcome, and my ever best of thanks
For this so memorable court•sie,
Pleases your Grace to walk near?
My Lord, wee come
To celebrate your Feast with Civil mirth,
•s ancient custom teaches: wee will go.
Attend his grace there, Signiors keep your way.
What changed so soon? hath your new sprightly Lord•
Found out a trick in night-games more then wee
Could know in our simplicity? ha! is it so?
Or does the fit come on you, to prove treacherous
To your past vows and oaths?
Why should you jest
At my Calamity, without all sense
Of the approaching dangers you are in?
What danger's half so great as thy revolt?
Thou art a faithless sister, else thou know,
Malice, or any treachery beside
Would stoop to my bent-browes; why I hold Fa•e
Clasp't in my fist, and could Command the Course
Of times eternal motion; had thou been,
One thought more steady then an ebbing Sea.
And what? you'll now be honest, that's resolved?
Brother, dear brother, know what I have been;
And know that now there's but a dying time
Twixt vs and our Confusion: let's not waste
These precious hours in vain and useless speech.
Alas, these gay attires were not put on
But to some end; this sudden solemn Feast
Was not ordained to riott in expense:
•hat have now been chambred here alone,
B•rd of my Guardian, or of any else,
Am not for nothing at an instant freed
To fresh access; be not deceived My Brother,
This Banquet is an harbinger of Death
To you and me, resolve your self it is,
And be prepared to welcome it.
Well then,
The Schoolmen teach that all this Globe of earth
Shall be consumed to ashes in a minute.
So I have read too.
But it were somewhat strange
To see the Waters burn, could I believe
This might be true, I could believe as well
There might be hell or Heaven.
That's most certain.
A dream, a dream; else in this other world
Wee should know one another.
So wee shall.
Have you heard so?
For certain.
But do ye think,
That I shall see you there,
You look on me,
May wee kiss one another,
Prate or laugh,
Or doe as wee doe here?
I know not that,
But good for the present, what do ye mean
To free your self from danger? some way, think
How to escape; I'm sure the guests are come.
Look up, look here; what see you in my face?
Distraction and a troubled Countenance.
Death and a swift ripening wrath—yet look,
What see you in mine eyes?
Methinkes you weep.
I doe indeed; these are the funeral tears
Shed on your grave, these furrowed up my cheeks
When first I loved and knew not how to woe.
Fair Annabella, should I here repeat
The Story of my life, wee might loose time.
Be record all the spirits of the Ayre,
And all things else that are; that Day and Night,
Early and late, the tribute which my heart
Hath paid to Annabella's sacred love,
Hath been these tears, which are her mourners now:
Never till now did Nature doe her best,
To show a matchless beauty to the world,
Which in an instant, ere it scarce was seen,
The jealous Destinies require again.
Pray Annabella, pray; since wee must part,
Go thou white in thy soul, to fill a Throne
Of Innocence and Sanctity in Heaven.
Pray, pray my Sister.
Then I see your drift,
Ye blessed Angels, guard me.
So say I,
Kiss me; if ever after times should hear
Of our fast-knit affections, though perhaps
The Laws of Conscience and of Ci•ill use
May justly blame vs, yet when they but know
Our loves, That love will wipe away that rigour,
Which would in other Incests bee abhorred.
Give me your hand; how sweetly Life doth run
In these well col•ured veins! how constantly
These Palms doe promise health! but I could chide
With Nature for this Cunning flattery,
Kiss me again—forgive me.
With my heart.
Farewell.
Will you begone?
Be dark bright Sun,
And make this mid-day night, that thy guilt rays
May not behold a deed, will turn their splendour
More sooty, then the Poets feign their Styx.
One other kiss my Sister.
What means this?
To save thy fame and kill thee in a kiss.
Thus dye, and dye by me, and by my hand,
•••enge is mine; Honour doth love Command.
Oh brother by your hand?
When thou art dead:
I'll give my reasons for it; for to dispute
With thy (even in thy death) most lovely beauty,
Would make me stagger to perform this act
Which I most glory in.
Forgive him Heaven—and me my sins, farewell.
Brother unkind, unkind—mercy great Heaven—oh—oh.
Shoe's dead, alas good soul; The haplesse Fruit
That in her womb received its life from me,
Hath had from me a Cradle and a Grave.
I must not dally, this sad Marriage-bed
In all her best, bore her alive and dead.
Soranzo thou hast mist thy aim in this,
I have prevented now thy reaching plots,
And killed a Love, for whose each drop of blood
I would have pawned my heart; Fair Annabella,
How ouer-glorious art thou in thy wounds,
Triumphing over infamy and hate!
Shrink not Courageous hand, stand up my heart,
And boldly act my last, and greater part.
Remember Sir what you have to do, be wise and resolve•e.
Enough—my heart is fixed, pleases Your Grace
To taste these Course Confections; though the use
Of such set enterteyments more consists
In Custom, then in Cause; yet Reverend Sir,
I am still made your servant by your presence.
And wee your Friend.
But whore's my Brother Giouanni?
Here, here Soranzo; trimmed in ree•ing blood,
That triumphs over death; proud in the spoil
Of Love and Vengeance, Fate or all the Powers
That guide the motions of immortal Souls
Could not prevent me.
What means this?
Son Giouanni?
Shall I be forestalled?
Be not amazed: If your misgiving hearts
Shrink at an idle sight; what bloodless Fear
Of Coward passion would have ceased your senses,
Had you beheld the Rape of Life and Beauty
Which I have acted? my sister, oh my sister,
Ha! What of her?
The Glory of my Deed
Darkened the mid-day Sun, made Noon as Night.
You came to feast My Lords with dainty fare,
I came to feast too, but I dug for food
In a much richer Mine then Gold or Stone
Of any value balanced; it is a Heart,
A Heart my Lords, in which is mine entombed,
Look well upon it; do ye know it?
What strange riddle's this?
It is Annabella's Heart, it is; why do ye startle?
I vow it is hers, this Daggers point ploughed up
Her fruitful womb, and left to me the fame
Of a most glorious executioner.
Why mad-man, art thy self?
Yes Father, and that times to come may know,
How as my Fate I honoured my revenge:
Li•t Father, to your ears I will yield up
How much I have deserved to bee your son.
What is it thou say?
Nine Moons have had their changes,
Since I first thoroughly viewed and truly loved
Your Daughter and my Sister.
How! alas my Lords, hoe's a frantic mad-man!
Father no;
For nine Months f•ace, in secret I enjoyed
Sweet Annabella's sheets; Nine Months I lived
A happy Monarch of her heart and her,
Soranzo, thou know this; thy paler cheek
Bears the Confounding print of thy disgrace,
For her too fruitful womb too soon bewrayed•
The happy passage of our stolen delights,
And made her Mother to a Child unborn.
Incestuous Villain.
Oh his rage belyes him.
It does not, it is the Oracle of truth,
I vow it is so.
I shall burst with fury,
Bring the strumpet forth.
I shall Sir.
Doe sir, have you all no faith
To credit yet my Triumphs? here I swear
By all that you call sacred, by the love
I bore my Annabella whilst she lived,
These hands have from her bosom ripped this heart.
Is it true or no sir?
It is most strangely true.
Cursed man—have I lived to—
Hold up Florio,
Monster of Children, see what thou hast done,
Broke thy old Fathers heart; is none of you
Dares venture on him?
Let 'em; oh my Father,
How well his death becomes him in his griefs!
Why this was done with Courage; now survines
None of our house but I, guilt in the blood
Of a Fair sister and a Haplesse Father.
Inhamane scorn of men, hast thou a thought
T'out live thy murders?
Yes, I tell thee yes;
For in my fists I bear the twists of life,
Soranzo, see this heart which was thy wives,
Thus I exchange it royally for thine,
And thus and thus, now brave revenge is mine.
I cannot hold any longer; you sir, are you grown inso∣lent
in your butcheries? have at you.
Come, I am armed to meet thee.
No, will it not be yet? if this will not, another shall,
Not yet; I shall fit you anon—
Welcome, come more of you what ever you be,
I dare your worst—
Oh I can stand no longer, Feeble arms
Have you so soon lost strength.
Now, you are welcome Sir,
Away my Masters, all is done,
Shift for your selves, your reward is your own,
Shift for your selves.
Away, away.
How do ye my Lord, see you this? how is it?
Dead; but in death well pleased, that I have lived
To see my wrongs revenged on that Black Devil.
O Vasques, to thy bosom let me give
My last of breath, let not that Lecher live—oh
The Reward of peace and rest be with him,
My ever dearest Lord and Moister.
Whose hand gave me this wound?
Mine Sir, I was your first man, have you enough?
I thank thee, thou hast done for me but what I would
have else done on my self, ar't sure thy Lord is dead?
Oh Impudent slave, as sure as I am sure to see the dye,
Think on thy life and end, and call for mercy.
Mercy? why I have found it in this Justice.
Strive yet to cry to Heaven.
Oh I bleed fast,
Death, thou art a guest long looked for, I embrace
Thee and thy wouuds; oh my last minute comes.
Where ever I go, let me enjoy this grace,
Freely to view My Annabella's face.
Strange Miracle of Justice!
Raise up the City, wee shall be murderedall.
You need not fear, you shall not; this strange task be∣ing
ended, I have paid the Duty to the Son, which I have vow∣ed
to the Father.
Speak wretched Villain, what incarnate Fiend
Hath led thee on to this?
Honesty, and pity of my Masters wrongs; for know
My Lord. I am by birth a Spaniard, brought forth my Coun∣trey
in my youth by Lord Soranzo's Father; whom whilst he li∣ued,
I served faithfully; since whose death I have been to this
man, as I was to him; what I have done was duty, and I repent
nothing, but that the loss of my life had not ransomed his.
Say Fellow, know thou any yet unnamed
Of Counsel in this Incest?
Yes, an old woman, sometimes Guardian to this mur∣thered Lady.
And what's become of her?
Within this Room she is, whose eyes after her con∣fession
I cause to be put out, but kept alive, to confirm what
from Giouanni's own mouth you have heard: now My Lord,
what I have done, you may Judge of, and let your own wise∣dome
bee a judge in your own reason.
Peace; First this woman chief in these effects,
My sentence is, that forthwith she be tan
Out of the City, for examples sake,
There to be burnt to ashes.
It is most just.
Be it your charge Donado, see it done.
I shall.
What for me? if death, it is welcome, I have been ho∣nest
to the Son, as I was to the Father.
Fellow, for thee; since what thou did, was dove
Not for thy self, being no Italian,
Wee banish thee for ever, to depart
Within three days, in this wee doe dispense
With grounds of reason not of thine offence.
It is well; this Conquest is mine, and I rejoice that a
Spaniard out-went an Italian in revenge.
Take up these slaughtered bodies, see them buried,
And all the Gold and Jewels, or whatsoever,
Confiscate by the Canons of the Church,
Wee cease upon to the Popes proper use.
Your Graces pardon, thus long I lived disguised
To see the effect of Pride and Lust at once
Brought both to shameful ends.
What Richardetto whom wee thoughr for dead?
Sir was it you—
Your friend.
Wee shall have time
To talk at large of all, but never yet
Incest and Murder have so strangely met.
Of one so young, so rich in Natures store,
Who could not say, It is pity shoe's a Whore?

GEntle spectators, that with graceful eye
Come to behold the Muses Colony,
New planted in this soil; forsook of late
By the Inhabitants, since made fortunate
By more propitious stars; though on each hand
To over-top us, two great Laurels stand;
The one, when she shall please to spread her train,
The vastness of the Globe cannot contain;
The other so high, the Phoenix does aspire
To build in, and takes new life from the fire
Bright Poesy creates; yet we partake
The Influence they boast of, which does make
Our Baize to flourish, and the leaves to spring,
That on our branches now new Poets sing;
And when with joy hee shall see this resort,
Phoebus shall not disdain to stile't his Court.
WHat Snarl, my dear Democritus, how is it?
You are a Courtier grown, I hear.
No Sir:
Thats too deep a mystery for me to profess.
I spend my own revenues, only I have
An itching humour to see fashions.
And what have you observed, since you came hither?
Why they doe hold here the same Maxim still;
That to dissemble, is the way to live:
But promotion hangs all upon one chain,
And thats of gold; he that intends to climb,
Must get up by the links; and those are tied
Together, with the thread of my Lords favour.
So Sir.
And all desire to live long, and healthy;
But ambition and luxury will not permit it.
I hope you doe not share in their desires.
There is other preposterous dealing too;
Fornature cannot find her self amongst them,
There's such effeminacy in both sexes,
They cannot be distinguished asunder;
And for your times and seasons of all ages;
Your best Astrologer cannot discern them,
Not Spring from Autumn; you shall have a Lady,
Whose cheek is like a scrue, and every rinkle
Would look like a furrow, yet with a garnish
Is so filled up and plai•tred, that it looks
As fresh as a new painted tavern only
Hold there, you'll run your self out of breath else:
And now resolve me of the Lord Philautus:
Is all that true that is reported of him?
Who, he? the most besotted on his beauty;
He studies nothing but to court himself;
No Music but the harmony of his limbs;
No work of art but his own symmetry,
Allures his sense to admiration.
And then he comes forth so bathed in perfumes,
Had you no sense to guide you, but your nose,
You'd think him a Muske-cat, he smells as rank,
As th'extreame unction of two funerals.
My sense will note be able to endure him.
Such men as smell so, I suspect their favour.
Is none his friend to tell him of his faults?
There want not some, that seek to flatter him;
For great men's vices are esteemed as virtues.
O they are still in fashion: in them
A wry neck is a comely president:
Disorder, disagreement in their lives
And manners is thought regular, their actions
Are still authentic, if it be received;
To be illiterate, is a point of state.
But the worst thing which I dislike in him,
Which he does more by words then action:
He gives out that the Ladies dote upon him,
And that he can command them at his pleasure,
And swears, there's scarce an honest woman.
How.
It is not well to say so, but by this light,
I am of his mind too.
You are deceived,
There are a thousand chaste.
There was an age
When Iuno was a maid, and Jove• had no beard,
When miserable Atlas was not oppressed
With such a sort of Deities, and each
Dined by himself: before Ushers and Pages
Swarmed so, and Banquets, and your Masques came up
Riding in Coaches, visiting, and Titles,
So many Plays, and Puritan preachings,
That women might be chaste; now it is impossible:
Now should I find such a prodigious faith,
I'd honour't with a sacrifice.
Tic ill
To be incredulous, when charity
Exacts your belief: but let that pass:
What will you say, if I find out a means
To cure him of his folly?
Then I pronounce
The destruction of Bedlam, and all mad folks
Shall be thy patients.
Nay, I'll doe it:
I'll make him in love, and doe it.
That's a cure
Worse then any disease. I can as soon
Believe a fire may be extinct with oil,
Or a Fever cooled with drinking of Sack.
Suspend your judgement, till I confirm you.
No more, stand by, here comes the Parasite.
That is Narcissus, and this is his Echo.
What is he?
One that feeds all men's humours that feed him,
Can apprehend their jests, before they speak them,
And with a forced laughter play the Midwife.
To bring them forth, and carries still in store
A Plaudit, when they break wind, or urine.
He fits his Master right, although he ne'er
Took measure of him, and though he has not been
Far from home, yet will lye like a Traveller.
He will rather vex you with officiousness
Then you shall pass unsaluted: his business
Is only to be busy, and his tongue's still walking,
Though himself be one of the worst movables:
A confused lump leavened with knavery.
Stand by a little, and let's hear his discourse.
IEffry come hither.
Sir, I wait upon you.
Ieffry, you know that I have ever been
Indulgent to your knaveries.
I thank your worship, you have ever been my friend.
Winked at your faults.
True.
And the reason is.
Because I still am welcome to thy wife.
Your worship may be welcome there at all times.
Honest Ieffry, thou shalt lose nothing by it.
You know my authority in the house: my Lord
Puts all the care into my hands, has left me
The managing of his estate, because
I know the way to humour him.
That is an evident token of your worships wisdom.
And none of them have any place or being,
Without my suffrance.
Sir, you are of power to disperse us like atoms.
Therefore I expect the reverence is due unto my place.
And reason good.
Well, for thy honest care,
I mean to substitute thee under me
In all inferior matters, for I mean
To take my ease, and pamper up my Genius,
As well as he, only for entertainments,
Or any thing belongs unto the Kitchen;
Let me alone,
Yes Sir, your providence
Has showed it self sufficiently that way.
I'll take the ayre in his Coach, eat of the best,
And for my private drinking, I will have
My choice of Wines, filled out of vessels, whose age
Has worn their Countries name out, and their own,
Like some unthankful Hospital, or College,
That has forgot their Founder.
To what purpose,
I wonder, should Nature create this fellow?
He is good for nothing else, but to maintain
The mutiny of the Paunch, against the members.
Keep him from his Whore, and his Sack, and you
Detain him from his center.
By the way,
I will acquaint thee with a secret Ieffry.
What's that, Sir?
I doe love a pretty Wench well.
Tic the only gentile humour that is extant.
I will not leave my recreation that way
For a whole Empire, it is my summum bonum,
My sole felicity, tickles my conceit,
But not a word.
Not I by any means, Sir?
And for this cause, I mean t'apply my self
Wholly to my Venery. I feel this heat
Renews my blood, and makes me younger for it.
And thou shalt keep one for me at thy house.
Where, at my house?
I, there, a heavy burden
Of fleshly desires, daily grows upon me;
And ease works on my nature, once a week,
When I am ballasted with wine, and lust,
I'll sail to my Canaries.
And unlade there.
Wilt keep her form, &amp; let none come near her.
I have had such favour at your worships hands,
That should good fortune come in humane shape
To tempt your Mistress, I'd not let her in.
I'll procure thee the Lease of thy house free,
And when I have done, I'll see it shall not stand empty:
Hast thou any good rooms for Stowage there?
Spare rooms enough, Sir, why doe you ask?
Because I will convey away some Household stuff.
That's not amiss.
No Sir.
Tic quite against my nature to see any vacuum.
Besides, it is not an age to be honest in.
That's the high way to poverty.
I mean to make the benefit of my place therefore.
And when I have done, I'd fine see all your Artists,
Your Politicians with their Instruments
And Plummets of wit, sound the depth of me.
It lies not in the reach of man to fathom it.
Were I set in a place of Justice now,
They would admire me, how I should become it;
Cough on the Bench of State, sit in my night-cap,
Stroke out an Apophthegme out of my beard,
Frame a grave City face, jeer at offenders,
Cry out upon the vices of the times,
O Temporise, O morums.
How the rank Rascal
Is overgrown with flesh and villainy?
This getting of money is a mystery,
Is to be learnt before a mans Alphabet,
No matter how, tic supposed, he that has it
Is wise and virtuous, though he be obscure,
A fugitive, and perjured, any thing,
He, and his cause, shall neither want for friends.
He is the chic of the white Hen, old Fortune:
What ere he treads upon, shall be a Rose.
He shall be invited to his Capon, and Custard,
Ride to the Sheriffs a feasting on his Foot cloth,
Possess the highest room, have the first carving,
With please you eat of this, or that, my Noble,
My Right Worshipful brother? your rich men
Shall strive to put their sons to be his Pages,
And their wives to be his Concubines.
Shall marry young ones a purpose for him.
Very likely.
No more, be gone, I hear my Lord a coming,
I'll send thee my Wench, mark me, keep her close:
Believe it, not a breath of ayre comes near her,
But what steals in at the window.
It is well said.
But stay, Sir, will she not be too great a charge
To keep her to your self, what if you hired her
By the month, as your Factors doe beyond Sea,
And when she is grown old and leaky, Sir,
Mend her in the dock, and fraught her ore for Holland.
I, ore the water, it was well thought upon.
I think, and she were trimd up, she would serve
At last for such a voyage well enough.
What wilt thou say, when I have done with her,
If I doe make thee Master of my bottom?
Who me? the devil shall be the Pilot first,
Ere I come near their quick-sands, their base roads.
They have a dangerous Key to come into.
What ere the Key be, still the dore's kept fast.
As strict as an Aldermans at dinner time:
I, and the way to hell is grown so narrow,
A man's in danger to pass ore, for if
We reel beside the bridge, straight we shall fall
Into a Lake that will foully dight us,
Darker and deeper, then Styx or Cocitus.
Well rim'd Ieffry, this knave will come in time,
By being often in my Company,
And gleaning but the refuse of my speech,
T'arrive at some proportion of wit,
But to avoid suspicion, be gone.
Now would I see the man that should affront me.
My Lord will straight be here, I'll entertain him,
And talk as superciliously, and walk
As stately, as the Warden of a college,
Until I have made a right Pupil of him.
HOw now Ardelio, what? so melancholy?
Faith all this day I have bin so employed
With setting things in order, and provisions,
I can compare my pains to nothing less,
Then a Lord Generals.
Why what's the matter?
Things must be ordered, and there's nothing
Done, unless I oversee it; my industry
Must marshall the Dishes, put the Stools in rank,
See the Wood set upon the carriages,
Sharpen the Knives; all these witness mycare
The very shining of the Candlesticks
Acknowledge my directions.
Tic much,
The strange activity that some men have
To dispatch business.
Why Sir, did you never
Hear how Apelles pictured Homer spewing,
And all the Poets gaping to receive it?
Yes, and what then?
In the same manner doe I,
Upon the Hushers, the Clerks, and the Butlers,
The Cooks, and other Officers, amongst whom
I find to be a drought of understanding,
Shower down the dregs of my counsel.
They are like to be well edified.
Here comes my Lord, make room for my Lords grace.
GOd save your honour, may your flourishing youth
Enjoy an everlasting spring of beauty,
And know no Autumn.
Thanks good Ardelio:
Your wishes have effect, this is the tree,
Under whose shadow Flora builds her Bower,
And on whose branches, hangs such tempting fruit,
Would draw fair Atalanta from her course;
An Altar, on which Queens should sacrifice
Their scorned loves: Nature will scarce believe
It is her own invention, and ripens
She has no way to be incestuous.
Mr. Trimalchio, I am sick to hear him.
I can't abide these repetitions,
And tedious Encomiums of himself:
Let you and I walk a turn in the Garden.
You are the only Garden of •y delight,
And I your dear Atones, honoured Lady.
Ardelio, tell me how this suit becomes me?
Exactly well, Sir without controversy,
And you wear it as neatly.
Nay I have
A reasonable good Taylor, I hope he has not
Surveyed me so long, but he knows my dimensions.
I think, I may venture in the presence with it.
In the presence, I, and love w•re in the presence,
You'd thrust Ganimede out of his office.
What think you Gentlemen?
We all do wish,
Your beauty, or your vanity were less.
For by this means, that which would else commend you,
Proves your disgrace, you take the edge of praise off,
Is due to you, by too much whetting it.
I should prove too injurious to my self,
Should I pass over, with a slight regard,
This building, Nature has solemnised
With such Magnificence, to which I owe
The loves of Ladies, and their daily presents,
Their hourly solicitations with letters,
Their entertainments when I come, their plots
They lay to view me, which should I recount,
It would puzzell my Arithmetic, and to answer
Their unjust desires, would ask the labours
Of some ten Stallions.
And make all jades of them.
You are the Center of all women's love then.
It is true, I have a strange attractive power
Over your females, did you never hear of
Three Goddesses, that strove on Ida hill,
Naked before a shepherd, for a Ball,
With an inscription; Let the fairest have it.
And what of those?
Bring them all three before me:
If I surprise them not all at first dash,
If they fall not together by the ears for me,
Nay, if they run not mad, and follow me,
As if they were drunk with a love potion,
Ne'er trust a Prognosticator again.
But how if you should chance to meet Diana?
Take heed of her, it is a testy Girl,
A professed Virgin. Phil. It is my ambition
To meet with her, to bath my limbs with her,
In the same Well, shoot in her bow, dance with her,
And get the foremost of her troupe with child,
And turn the rape on Iupiter.
Fine in faith.
It seems that you are of opinion,
There is no text of woman-kinde so holy,
But may be corrupted, though a Deity.
Ardelio, tell me what thou dost think of them.
Who I? hang me should I be questioned
Now for my faith, concerning Articles,
Of women's chastity, I should bee burnt
For a rank Heretike, I believe none of them.
But I think otherwise; and can justify it.
What if I bring you now unto a beauty
As glorious as the Sun, but in desire
Cold, as the middle Region of the ayre,
And free from all reflection of lust?
But shall I speak with her, and tempt her to it?
You shall converse with her, and she shall feed
Your sense with such discoursive influence,
And a voice sweeter than the Lydian tunes
Jove would bow down his ear to, yet her blood
Shall run as cold as Iulips through her veins:
The spring-tide of her youth, shall swell with more
Delights, then there be drops in April, yet she
As chaste as Salmacis, amidst the streams.
Her eye shall sparkle like the Diamond,
And be as pure, her kisses soft and melting,
As the South wind; but undefiled as heaven.
And you shall feel the Elemental fire
Of her unspotted love, and grieve, and swear
She is so celestial, and Divine a creature,
Thats only hot in her effect, not nature.
Why such an one would I converse withal.
The Conquest will• be greater, shall I see her?
I'll bring you to her.
He has a strong belief.
I have no such confidence, she may be Lucresse,
And have a foolish Colatine to brag of her.
But most of them, in playing fast and loose,
Will cheat an Ores••. I have a creature
Before these, •ou••iers 〈◊〉 their lips at her,
I'll trust a want•n bag•a•• 〈◊〉 the w•nd.
This Lady 〈◊〉 sister and 〈◊〉 M•s•ris.
Yet both unknown to him, some few years since,
Her father jealous of my love, because
I was a Gentleman of no great fortune,
Sent her away, and charged her by an oath,
To marry none, till seven years were expired,
Six parts of which are gone, yet she remains
Constant to what she promised, though his death,
Has partly quit her: To live in her sight,
And not enjoy her, is a heavenly torment,
But unsufferable, I must live apart,
Till the praefixed minute be expired.
In the mean time, I'll work by some good means,
To win his love, and draw him from his folly.
But first by him, I'll try her constancy.
I must prepare her for his entertainment,
Because she will admit no Company,
Nor will be known to any, but my self.
Come Sir, let's go, by that which shall ensue,
You shall affirm, what I relate, is true.
Tic a dull age this same, casts not her eyes
On men of worth, Captains and Commanders,
Victorious abroad, are vanquished at home,
With poverty, and disgrace, they look as bad
As Brutus, when he met his evil Genius:
Worse, then they had been frighted from the ruins
Of Ices Temple; and you Sir, for your part,
That have been brought up under me at my elbow,
A daily witness unto all my proiects,
That might have got experience enough
To cozen a whole State, if they had trusted you.
Now to be wanting to your self, worn out,
No name, or title, but on posts, and trenchers,
And doors, scored with a cole, in stead of chalk.
Are my hopes come to this?
What should I doe?
I have no thriving way to lye and flatter,
Nor have I such dexterity of wit
As you have (blessed be heaven) to convert
Black into white.
Nay, if you have no will,
Nor power to fr•e your self, you must resolve
To stick in the dirt still.
Nor can I promise
The death of any by the Stars, I have
No rich mans funeral to folemnize,
That left a guilt ring for my Legacy,
And his old Velvet jerkin to survive him.
I have no secret boils within my breast.
For which I am feared, no s•it in Law to follow,
No accusation against a great man,
No house to let to farm, •o tender wife
To prostitute, or skill to corrupt others,
And sleep amidst their wanton Dialogues.
I cry you mercy, you would fine be styled
An honest politic fool, •ee all men's tu•nes
Served but your own; so leave off to be good.
For what is now accounted to be good?
Take a good Lawyer, or a good Attorney,
A Citizen that's a good Chapman;
In a good sense what are they? I would knows
Why a good Gamester, or a good Courtier?
Is it for their honest dealing? Take a good Poet,
And if he write not bawdy lines and raptures,
I'll not give a pin for him.
Would you have me
Act the plagiary, and seek preferment,
To be the drunken ba•d of some black stews?
And think my destine•e well satisfied,
When my shame feeds me, and at length expect
A Legacy, bequeathed me from some Bawd,
In lieu of my old service, or according
To the proportion of my Hernia.
Well I perceive that I must once more take you
To my protection, which if I doe,
I'll teach you better rules, you shall no more
Commit your misery to loose papers.
Nor court my Lord with Panegyrics, nor make
Strange Anagrams of my Lady: you shall not need
To deal for stale Commodities, nor yet
Send forth your privy Bills without a Seal,
To free you from your lodging, where you have
Lain in, most part of the vacation.
You shall no longer run in score with your hostess
For browne Tosts and Tobacco, but you shall leave
Your open standings at the ends of Lanes,
Or your close coverts in Tobacco-shops,
Where you give strict attendance like a Sergeant,
Until some antedated Country cloak
Pass by, whom you most impudently may
Assault, to borrow twelve pence; but bear up
Stiffly, and with the best.
How shall that be done?
We will not call Tiresias from the dead,
To show us how, as he did once Ʋlysses.
You must resolve to learn virtue from others,
Fortune from me.
For that I'll make no scruple.
I have a bird in the wind, I'll fly thee on him.
He shall be thy adventure, thy first quarry.
What's hee?
A golden one, that drops his feathers,
That has received his patrimony, gives money
For all acquaintance, when he first came up,
His only search was for prime Courtesans.
And those he entertained for Mistresses,
Only sometimes to drink a health to them,
The Ladies too would use him for a cooler,
But they suspect his silence, yet he uses
Their names and titles as familiarly
As he had bought them, thou shalt hook him in,
And crack him like a Nut.
Is he not the Son
To the rich Usurer, that died so lately?
The same, that heaped up money by the Bush•l;
And now this studies how to scatter it.
His father walks to see what becomes of it,
And that's his torment after death.
When shall I see him?
He is to meet me here within this hour,
Then take you an occasion to pass by,
And I will whisper to him privately,
And praise thee, beyond Pirrbus or Hannibal.
You must talk, and look big, twill be the grace on it.
What shall I turn a Roarer?
Any thing.
Broker, or Pander, Cheater, or Lefter,
And steal like a Lacedemonian.
Observe what I doe, and fill up the Scene.
How now? what news?
Sir, there's some five or six without to speak with you.
How, five or six.
Yes, Sir, and they pretend
Great business.
What manner of men are they?
They look like pictures of Antiquity.
And their cloaks seem to have bin the coverings
Of some old Monuments.
They are my Gibeonites,
Are come to traffic with me, some design
Is now on foot, and this is our Exchange time.
These are my old proiectors, and they make me
The superintendent of their business.
But still they shoot two or three bows too short,
For want of money and adventurers.
They have as many demurs as the Chancery,
And hatch more strange imaginations
Than any dreaming Philosopher: one of them
Will undertake the making of Bay-salt,
For a penny a Bushel, to serve the State,
Another dreams of building water-workes,
Drying of Fens and Marshes, like the Dutchman.
Another strives to raise his fortunes, from
Decayed Bridges, and would exact a tribute
From Ale-houses, and signe-posts: some there are,
Would make a thoroughfare for the whole kingdom,
And office, where Nature should give account
For all she took, and sent into the world.
But they were borne in an unlucky hour,
For some unfortunate mischance or other,
Still come a'thwart them; well I must into them,
And feast them with new hopes, twill be good sport,
To hear how they dispure it, Pro, and Con.
In the mean time, Autolicus, prepare
To meet my Courtier.
I have my Q. Sir.
Tic near about the time he promised.
Boy,
Go and dispatch those Letters presently.
Return my service to the Lady Lautus.
And carry back her Watch, and Diamond.
Ask if the Dutch•sse has been there to day.
And if you chance to see the Lord her brother,
Tell him I'll meet him at the Ambassadors.
I sha•l Sir.
What M. Trimalchio.
Yo' are punctual to your hour.
Trim. Sir, for your sake,
I can dispense with my occasions.
You'll not imagine what a heavy stir,
I had to come to day.
Why what's the matter?
No less then seven Coaches to attend me,
To fetch me Valence, No••ns.
Pray from whom?
The Lord Philantus, and some min• Nobles.
Whose names, I am loa•h should clog my memory.
They strove for me, as the seven Grecian Cities
Were said to wrangle about the blind Poet.
How got you rid of them?
I had the grace
To go with none of them, made an excuse.
To avoid their troublesome visitations.
How doe they relish your neglect of them?
I know not, yet I still abuse them all.
How? not abuse them.
I mean laugh at them.
Some passages, some sprinkling of my wit,
No otherwise, for which you little think
How I am feared amongst them, how the Ladies
Are took with my conceits, how they admire
My wit, and judgment, trust me with their secrets,
Beyond their Painter, or Apothecary.
I'll tell you in a word, but twill perplex you,
I am their Lasanophorus.
Their Pisse-pot carrier.
Their winged Mercury, to be employed
On messages, and for my company,
They swear it is the Element they move in.
You are happy, Siguier Trimalchio.
I thank my Fates, they have not altogether
Envied me the fruition of such gifts
Are worth the taking notice of, besides
Some special helps of our own industry.
I lately studied the Economicks.
What's that?
The ordering of my Family.
I have reduced it to a certain method.
As how?
I'll tell you, since, my fatehrs death,
First thing I did, I cashiered his old servants;
And to avoid confusion, and expense,
I left the Country, to revel it here.
In the view of the world, and in the sight of beauties,
And have confined my self unto some certain
Appendices, some necessary implements.
My single Page, my Coach, my Groom, my Foot-boy,
And my two pentionarie Whores.
And these
Are all your inventory.
Stay, who comes there?
O it is Autolicus.
My Noble friend and brother of the Sword;
His stomach, and his Blade are of one temper,
Of equal edge, and will eat flesh alike.
He walks there melancholy; to show that worth
Can pass unregarded, be proud to know him,
He is the shrewdest pated fellow breathing,
The only Engineer in Christendom,
Will blow you up a Carrack like a squib,
And row under water. the Emperor,
And Spinola, by secret intelligence,
Have laid out for him any time this ten years,
And twice he has escaped them by a trick.
He is beyond Doedalus, or Archim•des,
But lives concealed like a Seminary,
For fear the State should take notice of him.
Machavill for policy, was a Dunce to him,
And had he lived in Mahomets days, h' had been
His only Counsellor for the Alcaro•:
He is newly come from Holland.
My body
Is all of an itch, to be acquainted with him,
Pray speak to him for me.
Nay more, he is able
To make you a perfect States-man in a month,
Able to be employed beyond the Line.
You will for ever thrall me to your service.
Hark you, Autolicus, here's a Centleman,
Who though he be the Phoebus of the Court,
So absolute in himself, that the desires
Of all men tend towards him, and has power
Enough, to wander in the Zodiac
Of his own worth, yet craves your acquaintance.
I take, S•guiour Trimalchio.
Doe you know me then?
By an instinct, Sir, men of quality
Cannot lye hid.
Indeed, my fathers name
Was Malchio, for my three additions,
Of Valour, Wit, and Honour, it is enlarged
To Mr. Trimalchio; this is wonderful.
Alas, it is nothing, Sir, if you knew all.
No Ambuscado of the enemy,
No treachery, or plot, but he foresees it.
He was the first brought o•re the mystery
Of building Sconces here in England, a Trade
That many live upon.
A good Commonwealths man.
But this is certain, once in a strait Leaguer,
When they were close besieged, their Ammunition
And victuals, most part spent, he found a means,
To yield the Town on composition.
Stand by a while, I must reward his virtues.
Sir, will you please to enlarge your disposition,
To accept a Courtesy, to bind me to you.
I doe not use to sell my liberty,
But that I see your face promise true bounty.
Have you skill in the face, Sir?
I were not fit else, to be styled traveller.
How doe you find my looks inclined to State?
Sir you have won me to power out my thoughts,
And 〈…〉 tell your plain, they are too loose,
Too scattered, to pretend such an acumen,
Too much displayed, and smooth, you must have quirks,
And strange Meanders in your face to express
A State subtility, I'll make it plain.
Hereafter by demonstration in the Optics.
Who would have lost the opportunity
Of getting such a friend? Came you from Holland?
Yes, very lately.
Pray what news from Holland?
Holland's beleaguered.
What all Holland beleaguered?
And will hold out as long as Bus or B•lloign.
They have their Mote and Draw-bridge, I have given them
Besides, a draft of a fortification,
Will hold them play this twelvemonth, for they keep
Their passage open, and want no supplies,
For whosoever comes, they pay them soundly:
The French have made many onflats upon them,
And still been foiled.
Is there such hot service there?
Crossing the Line's a Bath to it, I had like
Been scorched to death with the intemperature
Of the Climate, it is the only Zona torrid,
In the whole microcosm of man or woman,
If you shall once come near the height of it,
Twill melt you like Lightning.
Shal's build a Sconce there?
If you please.
Agreed, who is the Leader of
These factious troupes?
A woman.
How, a woman?
Now by t is •and, an Amazonian,
A Toma••, a right Pe•this••e.
I'll view this Leaguer by this light, and swim
Like a Lender o'er the Hell•pout,
That shall divide me from these Heroines.
It is well resolved, you are not married Sir?
No pox, I know them all too well for that:
I can use them for recreation, or so.
What think you of a rich Widow?
I'll none of them,
They are like old clothes that have been worn.
I like you, that you care not for such relics;
But yet I think I have a match will fit you,
An Orphan, a young heir, that has some thousands,
Besides her possibilities, if you
Can win her, she is at her own disposing,
There's one that knows her.
By instinct, it may be.
But for the pattern of true modesty,
It is seldom known, riches and virtue meet
In such a mixture.
Will you bring me to her?
I, and perhaps persuade her to it, you know not
Let us secure this business first of all,
And then we'll meet at the Leaguer.
It is good counsel.
And I'll confirm all with a jointure.
Well,
It is done,
I'll tell you more of her, she is one
Whose tender years have not as yet aspired?
The height of wickedness, but may be brought
To commit venery in her own language,
And be content with one man, has not robed
Young boves of their voices, knows not her slights,
And doubles, nor her Labyrinths, through which,
The Minotaure her husband shall ne'er track her,
Cannot indite with are, t•or give a censure,
Upon the lines are senth er, has no agents,
No factors, pensioners, or Champions,
Nor has her tears fixed in th•ir Station,
To flow at her command, and so confirm
Her perjury: no• large in her expense, nor one
That when she is dressed, will call a conventicle
Of young, and old, to pass their judgements on her,
As if her life were gaged upon the matter,
Nor carries an Ephemerids about with her,
To which she ascribes your forked destiny,
Nor is her body crazie, neither takes she
Physic for state, nor will rise up at Midnight
To eat her Oysters, and drink Wine, till lust
Dance in her veins, and till the house turns round,
And she discern not twixt her head and tail.
Nor holds strange intelligence abroad,
To furnish her discourse with, neither takes she
Her journey once a year to'th Bath, nor is
So learned, as to judge betwixt your Poets,
Which of them writes best, and fluenst, nor yet
Is grown an Antiquary, to decide
Matters in Heraldry: she has no fucus,
To catch your lips like Birdlime, nor yet uses
Restoratives, more then the help of nature;
I'll speak the noblest words I can, of you:
So many women on a mere report,
Doe fall in love with men, before they see them.
Nay, when I see her, I am sure of her.
I have a little hast, I am to meet
A Countess at the Exchange within this hour.
Besides, I have a Catalogue of business,
If I could think on it: so I take my leave,
Farewell Gentlemen.
Farewell Sir.
Farewell sweet M. Coxcomb.
This Wench I so commended, is my daughter.
And if my skill not fails me, her I'll make
A Stale, to take this Courtier in a brake.
IS there no means to absolve you of your oath?
The blame on me, let the bright day no longer
•nvy the darkness, that conceals such beauty:
You are no Votary, and yet force your youth
To such a strict and solitary life,
Which others bound by vow, cannot perform.
I wonder at the temper of your blood,
So differing from your Sex, when your old women
Doe burn with lustful thoughts, as with a Fever,
Yet you go on, in the old track of virtue,
Now overgrown with seeds of vice.
Sweet hear me;
It is a penance that I live reserved,
Because my love to you was made abortive,
But when due time shall perfect in her womb,
And bring it forth anew unto the birth:
I will surrender up my self, and it,
To your dispose: Let it suffice the while,
I am no haunter of your public meetings,
No entertainer, nor no visitor.
Nor did I ever trust my wandering eyes,
To view the glittering vanity of the world,
Nor ever yet did sit a guilty witness
To a lascivious, and untuned discourse,
Sounding to their fantastic actions.
But I must begone favour at your hands,
And suffer no repulse.
What is it?
It may offend you.
It shall not.
Then know that I have boasted of your beauty.
Nay more, exposed thy virtues to the trial.
You have not prostituted them on Stalls,
To have the vulgar fingers sweat upon them,
As they doe use upon your Plays and Pamphlets?
I am engaged to bring a Lord to see you.
A Lord.
And you must use all art for his content,
With Music, Songs, and dancing, such as are
The stirrers of hot appetites.
Profane,
And idle wretch, to cast away thy hopes,
Upon a Pandarly profession.
Or did thou think, that I could be corrupted,
To personate a Strumpets dalliance?
I grieve for thee. Be gone, henceforth I'll live
Immured for ever, as an Anchorist,
From him, and thee, since thou hast wronged my love.
Mistake me not, the difference twixt the Poles
Is not so great, as betwixt me, and baseness:
Nor is it a sinister intent to make
Your favours stale, and common as a drug,
Which are so dear to me, that both the Iudies
Are not of equal value to engross,
But for a noble and peculiar end.
This seems to me a Paradox.
It is true.
If it be so, it is granted, speak it free.
Then if you please to grant relief
To my desires, take them in brief;
I would have you first express
All the skill that comeliness
Can invent, to make you seem
Fair, and pleasant, as loves Queen.
When she Anchises came to kiss
On the Banks of Simois.
Call the graces, and suborn
Them thy beauty to adorn,
Thy face, the table where love writes
A thousand stories of delights:
Make it all over, smooth and plain,
But see you shadow it with disdain.
Weave a net out of thy hair,
A subtle net, that may ensnare
Such fond souls as shall aspire
To come near the holy fire
Of thine eyes, which were of late,
By Cupids torch illuminate.
Use all the delusiue art
That may captivate his heart.
What's your intent in this?
I'll have him punished.
He casts aspersions of disloyalty,
On all your sex, and you shall vindicate them
When he is plunged in love irrevocable,
As conquered by thy all subduing look,
Then you shall bind him to conditions,
As I shall first instruct you, shall redeem
Him from his folly, and next clear your honour.
Your wi l's a law, and shall not be withstood,
When my ell's quited with another good.
MArgery, go call your Mistress.
What is she?
My daughters maid, a wench fit for the purpose,
Cunning as a Whore: besides, I have provided
A bed, and hangings, and a casting bottle,
And once a day a Doctor to visit her.
Mill•seent come hither, know this Gencleman.
Captain, herelyes our venture, this is she,
The rich Antomo's daughter, the great heir,
And Niece •o the grand Sophies of the City;
That has been wood and sued to by great Lords,
Aldermans sons, and agents of all sorts.
Thus we have spoke thy praise, wench, has not seen
The man she likes yet, but her fortunes may
Ordain her to some better choice, to the making
Of some deserving man, which must needs be
Trimalchio, and no other; how lik'st thou her?
Hang me, so well, I think you may go on,
In a right line, she is worthy of a better.
Few of your modern faces are so good.
That's our comfort, she may put a good face o•'t.
Let me alone, Sir, to be impudent,
To laugh them out of countenance, look skirvy,
As a Citizens daughter new turned Madam.
I warrant you, Sir, my Mistress, and I,
Have practised our Lirripoope together.
Thou must insinuate strange things into her
Both of her virtue and Nobility,
The largeness of her dowry, besides Jewels,
The expected death of her old grand mother,
That has a blessing for her, if she marry
According to her mind, keep him at distance,
Make him believe, it is hard to have access,
And wait the happy hour, to be let in
At the back door.
I, and the fore-doore too.
Thou hast a noble wit, and spirit, wench,
That never was ordained for any skinkard
T'ingender with, or mechanic Citizen,
Unless it were to Cuckold him, thou shalt
Be stilli'th front of any fashion,
And have thy several Gowns and Tires, take place,
It is thy own, from all the City wires,
And Summer birds in Town, that once a year
Come up to moulter, and then go down to'ch Country
To jeer their neighbours, as they have been sera'd
Nay more, if you can act it handsomely,
You'll put a period to my undertakings,
And save me all my labour of proiecting,
As putting out my money on return,
From aqua pendente, or some unknown place,
That has as much ado to get a room
In the Map, as a new Saint in the Calendar.
Twill dead all my device in making matches,
My plots of Architecture, and erecting
New Amphitheaters, to draw the custom
From Play-houses once a week, and so pull
A curse upon my head from the poor scoundrels.
Twill hinder to the gain of Courtiers,
Put on by me, to beg Monopolies,
To have a sixth share in the business,
Nor need I trample up and down the Country,
To cheat with a Polonian, or false rings,
Nor keep a tap-house of the Bank side, and make
A stench worse then a Brew-house, amongst my neighbours,
Till I am grown so poor, that all my goods
Are shipped away in the bottom of a Sculler,
And then be driven t'inhabit some blind nook
In the Suburbs, and my utmost refuge be
To keep a bawdy house, and be carted.
Ne'er fear it Sir.
It is well, speak for thy self, Girl.
If I doe not, let me be turned to ashes,
And they be buried in an urn so shallow,
That boys may peace into it, let me deal
In nothing else but making Sugar Cakes,
Ointments, and Dentifrices: Let me serve
Seven years Apprenticeship, and learn nothing else,
But to preserve and candy. Let me marry
With a Pedant, and have no other dowry
Than an old cast French-hood. Let me live
The scorn of Chambermaids, and after all.
Turn a dry-nurse.
You shall have trophies, wenches,
Set up for you, in honour of your wits,
More then Herculean pillars, to advance
Your Fame to a non ultra, that who ever
Shall read your history, may not attempt
To go beyond it.
Well, prepare your selves
To entertain him.
Faith you need not doubt them,
To manage the business.
Let us alone.
We leave the charge to your discretion.
MAdam, in troth this grief does not become you,
It is an ill dressing for so good a face,
Yet you pursue it with such eagerness,
As if you were ambitiously sad.
It is some invincible malignity
Makes her untractable, deaf to all comfort.
What might I gh•sse the cause of this disaster?
Her Monkey and her Dog are both in health,
I thank my providence, only her Monkey
Is a little costive, but I'll physic him:
Sure her intelligence arrived too late,
About the last new fashion, or the crime
Lies in the Sempster, or it must needs be
Some other grand solecism in her Taylor.
What if it prove a Capital offence,
Committed by the tire-woman? but I believe
Some skiruy Lady put it in her head,
To practise a State melancholy, that first
Begins in an imperious revolt,
And frowning, and contempt of her own husband,
And what she might recover by the Law
In case of separation, or a nullity,
Which she already has took counsel of:
Come it is so.
Nay tell me now, Quartilla,
Can I behold the current of that love
Should flow to me with a prodigious course,
Run back to his own head, to have a husband
That should grow old in admiration
Of the rare choice he made in me, at last,
As if there were a barrenness and want
Of my perfections, dote upon himself?
I could plot against him? Prithee Quartilla,
How long hast thou been chaste?
This chastity
Is quite out of date, a mere obsolete thing,
Clean out of use, since I was first a Maid,
Why doe I say a Maid? let Iuno plague me,
If I remember it, for I began
Betimes, and so progressed from less to bigger,
From boys to Lads, and as I grew in years,
I writ my Venery in a larger volume.
Whore's my brother?
With his Tutor forsooth
I think that dull Prometheus was asleep
When he did form him, had he but so much
As the least spark of salt that is in me,
He would see me righted.
He is very obtuse,
And so are many of your elder brothers.
I carried all the wit from mine, when I
Was young, I'd have look: a Captain in the face,
Answered him in the Dialogue, and have stood
On tip-toe to have kissed him: But for your brother,
Doe not despair good Madam, what although
His breeding be a little course, he may be
A Lord in's time, now he has means enough?
I sent for him up hither to that purpose:
But yet I am ashamed to have him seen,
Or show him publicly.
You have provided
A Tutor to inst•used him, a rare man,
One that has poisoned me with eloquence,
I fear he will make my belly swell with it.
Go call the Novice hither, and his Tutor.
And now I think on it. Mr. Trimalchio
Shall take him strait to court with him, to learn
And imitate his fashions, suck from him
The Quintessence of education.
He is the only man I know, and for
His face, it is the abstract of all beauty.
Nor does his voice sound mortal, I could dwell
For ever on his lip, his very speech
Would season a tragedy; nay more, there is
A natural grace in all his actions.
what are you come, tic well, advance yet forward
We ever told you what a hateful vice
This bashfulness was counted.
You forget
The Theorems we told you. Lord how often
Shall we enforce these documents upon you?
May not a man buy a brazen face, think you,
Among all this Company?
By no means
Your Trades-men will not part with them, there are
Many in the City have such furniture,
But they doe keep them for their own wearing.
Stand by a while, let me salute these Ladies.
Hail to these twins of honour, and of beauty.
Sir, you transgress in your opinion,
If you consider both, alas my beauty
Is much exhausted.
Lady, you are deceived,
For you are amiable, or else I have
In vain, so often exercised my judgment
In the distinction of faces.
I shall
Be proud to be so seated in your favour.
But tell me, Signeour Miscellanio,
What think you of your pupil?
Troth I found him
As rude as any Chaos, so confused
I knew not which way to distinguish him.
He seemed to me, not to participate
Of any Gentle Nature, never I think,
To fashion out a Mercury with such
A crooked piece of timber, was attempted
By a true traveller: but I hope in time
To rectify him, for Labour vincit omnia.
Does he come on well, is there any hope
He will receive his true dye, his right tincture?
I warrant you, that I'll make him in time,
A perfect Cavalier: he shall wear
His clothes as well, and smell as rank as they,
And court his Mistress, and talk idly: that's
As much as can be required in a true Gallant,
T'approue him one: nay more too, he shall dance
And doe the half Pomado, play at Gleek,
And promise more than ere he will perform,
And ne'er part with a penny to a Trades-man
Till he has beat him for it: shall walk the streets
As gingerly, as if he feared to hurt
The ground he went on, whilst his cast down eye
Holds commerce with his leg: shall utter nothing
What ere he thinks, yet sweare't what ere it be.
Nay more, he shall vow love to all he sees,
And damn himself to make them believe it.
Shall fawn on all men, yet let his friend perish,
For what he spends in one day on his Punk,
For Coach hire: these are special properties,
And must be often practised, to remember,
He shall never rise till it be ten a clock,
And so be ready against dinner time.
Slight and my father had not bin an Ass,
I might have been able to have writ this down.
Pray let me hear how he has profited.
Salute these Ladies as you were instructed.
You must conceive the coldness of his courtship,
As yet points but one way; you may suppose it
To his disdainful Mistress, when he shall come to
The Cape de bone speranza of her love,
He may vary like the compass of his complement.
Lady, the Fates have led me to your service,
To know my self unworthy of your favours.
Yet let me so far win upon your bounty,
That what I utter in humility,
May not cause my contempt, or have my love
Shook off, because tic ripe, but let me hang by
The stalk of your mercy, the remnant of whose life
Lies in your power.
Your oath now to confirm it,
If she should chance to doubt, or press you to it.
That's true indeed. By the structure of your breasts,
And by the si•ken knot that ties your hair
Upon the top of your crown, I protest it.
If he can persevere, tic excellent.
Where be these noble Ladies?
Sir you are come in the most happy hour,
I was wishing for you.
I am in haste,
And only come to see you: there's a banquet
Stands ready on the table, and the Lords
Swear they will not sit down, until I come.
You still are in such hast, when you come hither.
I think I must retire my self, I am
So sued and sought to, where I come, I am grown
Even weary of their loves: Last night at a Masque,
When none could be admitted. I was led in
By the hand, by a great Lord, that shall be nameless,
And now this morning early, in his Chamber,
A Fencer would needs play with me at foils,
I hit him in three places, and disarmed him.
Why now my dream is out, I lay last night
Upon my back, and was adream'd of fighting.
Sir, will you please to know these Gentlemen,
My brother, and his Tutor.
I must crave pardon,
Is this your brother?
Yes.
I must embrace him.
I never saw a man in all my life
I so affected on the sudden, sure
There's some Nobility does lurk within him
That's not perspicuous to every eye:
He promises so fair, I should have known him
To be your brother, had you not told me so.
Your method now of thanks.
Right Noble Sir,
I have so often times been honoured,
And so much modified.
That word I taught him.
With the distilling influence of your bounty.
That I must blame my self, and my hard fortune,
That has envied me the ability
To render satisfaction.
Very well.
Sir you must pardon him, he is but a Novice,
Newly initiated, and it is his fault,
That he is bashful.
Is that all? I'll take him
To Court with me, where he shall be acquainted
With Pages, Laundresses, and waiting women,
Shall teach him impudence enough.
It is my desire.
His Tutor has taught him the Theory.
Only he wants the practike.
I pray Sir,
Without offence, may I demand of you,
What doe you profess?
Why Sir, any thing
Within the compass of humanity.
To speak, or act, no Pythagorean
Could ever think upon so many shapes
As I will put you in; the French, the Spanish,
Or the Italian garb; not any one,
But jointly all, I'll make a perfect ma•
Out of the shreds of them.
Besides the riding
Of the great Mare; nay Sir, his very carvings,
Even to the dissecting of a Capon.
Are Lectures of Anatomy.
I shall
Be proud to know him.
Now I collect my self,
Sure I have scene you Sir in Padua,
Or some face near like yours.
I have indeed,
Received letters of invitation
From one, that's son to a Magnifice,
Who is informed that I am very like him.
There was the mistake then.
Sir, had I power
O'er my occasions, which now are urgent,
I would most willingly employ the time
In survey of your virtues.
Sir, it has been
The scope I ever aimed at in my travels,
To seek out, and converse with such as have
With foreign observations advanced
Their natural endowments, and I thank
My Stars, I have been ever fortunate
To be beloved amongst them, and that you
Are one, I make no question.
Sir, you need not.
My mind was ever larger, than to be
Comprised within the limits of my Country.
And I congratulate my Fate, in that
I come so near the virtue of that planet,
That rui'd at my Nativity; whose nature,
Which ever it be, is ever to be wandering.
Sir I must be abrupt, but for my promise
Unto some Noble friends that doe expect me,
I could not icily be drawn away
From o•e in whom so many several graces•
Are so apparent, therefore I entreat you
Not to impute it to my lack of judgment,
Or neglect of your worth.
By no means, Sir,
Friendship is turned into an injury
When it usurps authority, conceive me,
O'er a friends business, some other time
Shall serve to give a mutual testimony
Of love between us, and how much I honour you.
When will you doe this?
I am practising.
Prithee Quartilla, help me stave them off.
Although they have no mercy on themselves
Yet we must use some conscience.
Gentlemen,
You'll break your wits with stretching them, forbear
I beseech you.
My wit, it never fails me,
I have it at a certainty: I'll set it
To run so many hours, and when it is down,
I can wind it up like a Watch. But I fear
I have deceived the time too long. Ladies,
I'll take my leave of your fair beauties: you have
No service to enjoin?
You'll take my brother
Capritio with you.
If he please, and his Tutor.
My suff•age shall consent to any thing
Her Lady ship approves.
You must remember,
You prove not refractory to your discipline,
Twill be much for your improvement.
I'll bring him
Unto a Captain, shall set both our faces
To look like the very Ianus of a States-man,
And so farewell. Come Sir.
I told you, Seignior,
What a rare man he was.
In all my travels
a ue not met the like; not any one
Was so mellifluous in his discourse.
I think when he was young, some swarm of Bees
Did light upon his lips, as it was feigned
Of Hesiod.
Let's in, for I shall morn,
And be melancholy, till his return.
ARdelio, we are now alone, come tell me
Truly, how does the vulgar voice pass on me.
Why Sir, the shallow currents of their brains
Runs all into one stream, to make a deep,
To bear the weighty burden of your fame.
And it is all true they say.
That you are most fair,
A most exact, accomplished, gentile Lord,
Not to be contradicted, it is a truth
Aboue all truths, for where is any truth,
That is agreed upon by all, but this?
Such is the force of beauty, there is nothing
Can please without it, and who ever has it,
As there be few, is adjudged happy in it.
All this is true.
Then he that has a pure
And sublimed beauty, it is a thing sensible,
And cannot be denied, must be admired,
And free from all detraction.
This is true.
He that excels in valour, wit, or honour,
He that is rich, or virtuous, may be envied,
But love is the reward of beauty; no object
Surprises more the eye, all that delights us,
We ascribe beauty to it.
All this is true.
Look high or low, it is true, why are the stars
Fixed in their Orbs, but to adorn the heavens?
And we adore their beauty more than light.
Look on the Arts, how they tend all to beauty,
It is their only end: he that builds a house,
Strives not so much for use, as ornament,
Nor does your Orator compose a speech
With lesser care, to have it elegant,
Then moving; and your Limner does observe
The trimne, and dress, more then the rules of painting.
All truth, and Oracles.
Look on a fair ship,
And you will say, it is very beautiful.
A General rejoices in the title
Of a fair Army. I'll come nearer to you;
Who were thought worthy to be deified,
But such as were found beautiful? for this cause,
Jove took up Ganimede from Ida hill,
To fill him wine, and go a hunting with him.
It is too much truth to be spoke at one time.
It shall suffice, but yet you know that man
May safely venture to go on his way,
That is so guided, that he can not stray.
How now, hast thou obtained in thy request?
I have with much entreaty gained your admittance
Let me embrace my better Genius.
I doe not use the profession.
It is an Art
Will make thee thrive; will she be coy enough?
To tell you true, I take a more delight
In the perplexity of wooing them,
Then the enjoying.
She is as I told you:
If she be otherwise than I conceive.
A pox on the Augury.
But hark you, Sir,
You need not be known who you are.
For that,
Trust to my care; Come let us go about it.
Some men may term it lust; but if it hi•,
The better part shall be ascribed to wit.
HOw goes our matters forward?
Very well Sir.
For I have made your entrance open; told her
All that I can to grace you, that you are
Exactly qualified, unparalleled,
For your rare parts of mind, and body, full
Of rare bounty, and that she likes best in you,
She holds it a good argument you will
Maintain her well hereafter, marry else
She is natural covetous, but that's
A point of Huswivery, she does not care,
You should spend much upon your self, and can
Dispense with house keeping; so you allow her
To keep her State, her Coach, and the fashion,
These things she means to article beforehand,
I tell you what you must trust to.
Very well Sir.
Now see that you be circumspect, and fail not
In the least circumstance; you may doe somewhat
Extraordinary, at the first meeting.
For when she has conceived of your good nature,
The less will be expected.
Why the Captain
Has put me in a form:
Of words he has.
But you must doe the deeds.
I, so I will.
For look you Sir, I have the several graces
Of four Nations, in imitation
Of the four Elements, that make a man
Concu•re to my perfection.
As how?
I am in my complement, an Italian,
n my heart a Spaniard,
In my disease a Frenchman,
And in mine appetite an Hungarian.
All these are good and commendable things
In a Companion, but your subtle women
Take not a mans desert on trust, they must
See and feel something, what you give her now,
You make her but the keeper, it is your own,
You win her by it: I should be loath to see you
Out done with Courtesies: what if some Gull,
That has more land than you, should interpose it,
And make eclipse between you? it is a fear,
Therefore you must be sudden, and dispatch it,
For she is ticklish as any Haggard,
And quickly lost: she is very humoursome.
I'll fit her then, I am as humoursome
As her self, I have all the four humours.
I am hot, I am cold,
I am dry, and I am moist.
I must be like the Satyr then, and leave you,
If you are hot and cold.
Oh you mistake me.
I am •ot in my ambition,
I am dry in my jests,
I am cold in my charity,
And moist in my luxury.
Sir, for the Gentlewoman that is with her,
Not so much in the nature of a servant,
As her Companion; for it is the fashion
Amongst your great ones, to have those wait on them
As good as themselves: she is the sole daughter
To a great Knight, and has an ample dowry.
Apply your self to her, though it be nothing
Else but to practise Courtship, and to keep you
From sleep and idleness.
I shall be ruled
By you in any thing.
You shall not doe
Amiss then: what? you may get her good will:
And then object it to your friends; you can
Advance your self without their counsel.
Counsel;
I still scorned that.
Captain, a word with you:
Were I not best look like a Statesman, think you?
What to a woman? it were a solecism
In nature, for you know Cupid's a boy,
And would you tyre him like a Senator,
And put a declamation in his mouth?
It were a mere madness in you: here they come;
See what a Majesty she bears, go meet her.
STand by, it is my happiness invites me.
O that I could appear like Iupiter,
Unto his Simile.
Why, would you burn her?
Yes, with my love I would; most Luculent Lady,
After the late collection of my spirits,
Lost in the admiration of your beauty,
Let me crave pardon.
Sir, for what?
My boldness.
I apprehend none.
You must pardon me,
For I am jealous of the least digression:
And you may justly frown.
I should be loath,
To acknowledge so much from you.
Lady, you have those fair additions
Of wealth, and parentage, joined to your virtues,
That I may justly suspect your disdain:
But by my hopes, I doe not court your fortunes,
But you.
Believe me, no deserving man
Shall be the less esteemed for that, where I find
Ability to govern, what I bring him.
Tic that I value: things that are without me,
I count them not my own.
Tic a speech Lady,
Worthy an Empress. I am a made man,
Since you have cleared the heaven of your brow:
Now by that light I swear, a brighter day
N••e broke upon me.
Sir, I hope this Lady
Shall have no cause to repent your admittance.
Sir, for my part, s•nce virtue is my guard,
I doe not only keep my door•s st••l open,
Bu• 〈◊〉 breast •o•, foe• Gentlemen of merit.
Now by this ayre, that does report your voice
With a sound more then mortal: by your fair eyes,
And as I hope to be enroled your servant,
I honour the meanest stitch in your garment.
I would not wish you place your love upon
A thing so mean, so likely to be cast off.
O divine counsel! that so rare a beauty
Should mix with wisdom: these words are not lost.
I am your slave for ever. I'll go hire
Six Poets to sing your praise, and I my self
Will be the seventh to make up the consort.
You see your friend there, Mr Trimalchio
Is like to speed, and fairly on his way
To much happiness. I would not willingly
That any should miscarry in a plot
That I have a hand in: you must be sudden
I told you, it you mean to be a favourite
To fortune, and your Mistress, and be bold.
If I had spoke to her, the brunt were past.
I then the ye were broke; now she makes towards you,
Tic the best time, let no occasion slip,
Lady advance the p•nnacle of your thoughts,
And enlarge the quadrangle of your heart,
To entertain a man of men.
A man
Of means, sweet Lady, that I can assure you.
Hoe's so much the more welcome, I assure you,
You are welcome by this means, doe you mark that?
Some 3000. a year or thereabouts.
Alas I value it not, twill serve to trifle
In pins, and gloves, and toys, and banquets.
It is much.
One of so tender years, should step so soon
Into the world.
Indeed the spring of my courtship
Has been somewhat backward: but I will strive
To redeem it; I have some seeds a growing,
Shall make m'ere long, spread like a Gentleman,
And you shall say so too.
I doe believe it.
Nay where you doe or no, it is no great matter.
Be not Capritious.
My name's Capritio.
There be in Town of the Capritio's,
Came from our house, that shall approve it so.
What will you say, if I show you a way
To get a general credit?
Can you doe it?
I can, and will; I'll have you out of hand,
The master of a good horse, and a good dog,
And be known by them.
Will that doe it?
Will it?
Why when you once have matched your horse, or dog.
The adverse party being a man of note,
Twill raise an inquisition after you.
Whose is the horse, says one, Mr, Capritioes.
What he, says another? a Noble Gentleman.
Twill draw the eyes of a whole Shire upon you,
Besides the Citizens that go down to bett.
Why this is rare indeed.
And then twill furnish you
With fitting discourse for any mans table.
A horse and a dog, no better a subject
To exercise your tongue in, many Ladies
Talk in that dialogue; besides, there being
A kind of near relation in the nature
Of you and those beasts. the good qualities
That are in them, may be thought to be yours.
I'll buy me a dancing horse that can caper,
And have him called Capritio, by my name.
You may doe so.
Lady, by your leave I will.
Sir, what you please.
Her desires go with yours.
Observe but what a wife sh'is like to prove,
That is no more imperious being a Mistress.
Brother come hither.
I am busy here.
How doe you like the fabric of this Watch?
Pray let me see it, a rare piece of work.
It cost me twelve pound, by this light, this morning.
But that it was so dear, I would have begged it.
It is at your service, Lady.
I'll make use of
Your curtsy, with many thanks, Sir.
Nay, but
You must not have it.
Will you go from your word?
I'll give you as good, but this is none of mine,
By this hand I borrowed it.
You said you bought it.
I said so indeed.
You should doe well to buy you
A better memory, as I shall hereafter,
To keep at distance with you.
Is she gone?
Gone in a fume.
How did you anger her?
She would have begged my Watch, and I excused it.
She beg your Watch? she scorns to beg any thing.
She has more than she can tell what to doe with.
Perhaps she longed for yours, and would receive it
As acourtesie, why would you show it her,
Unless you meant to part with it?
I know not:
I think my wit was cramped,
You must ne'er look for,
The like occasion offered you; why this
Was such a time to win her love: a gift
Would put her every hour in mind of you.
What shall I doe?
Best send it after her.
Doe you carry it; tell her withal, I'll send her
A Coach and four horses, to make her amends.
Give me the Watch, if I doe make all good,
Will you perform your promise?
By my life,
I'll send them without fail, immediately.
I'll after her, and see what I can do.
Stand for a watch: here take this Diamond:
Nay, doe not wrong me, I have sworn you shall,
Were it as good as that which was made precious
By B•renices finger, which Agrippa
Gave his incestuous sister, you should have it.
What doe you think I am an Ass? no sir,
Tic he has taught me wit.
And you are happy,
That can •e wise by other men's examples.
What should I loose my Mistress for a toy?
Lead on good brother, I am all of a sweat,
Until some gale of comfort blow upon me.
YOu see that I have brought you to the treasure,
And the rich garden of th'Hesperides:
If you can charm those ever-watchfull eyes
That keep the tree, then you may pull the fruit,
And after glory in the spoil of honour.
Prithee let me alone with her.
I'll leave you.
Lady, my preface is to know your name.
Faustina, Sir.
I may be happy in you.
I have a sister somewhere of that name,
That in her youth did promise such a feature,
And hopes of future excellence: she had
A beauty mixed with majesty, would draw
From the beholders, love, and reverence.
And I doe ill me thinks, with unchaste thoughts
To sin against her memory: this task
Would I were rid of; but I'll venture. Lady,
You are not blind, I conceive.
No sir, I have not
Yet seen a thing so strongly sensible,
To hurt my eye-sight.
Then I hope you can
Take notice of a Gentleman's good parts,
Without a Periphrasis.
What's that?
A figure,
Needless at this time to explain my deserts,
So easy and apparent to be seen.
I dare not envy, nor detract, where worth
Do•s challenge due relation of respect:
Nor is my wit so curious, to make
A gloss or comment on your qualities.
Tic too much labour, it were a task would dull
The edge• of Rhetoric, to describe them rightly;
Nor would I have them dwell upon your tongue,
But fixed in your thoughts, there let them move
Till they meet in coniunct: on with your love;
Nature would boast so sweet a sympathy:
I should be sorry, if my understanding
Moud in so poor a circle, as your praise;
I have not leisure to take notice of it.
Is this all you have to say?
No, I have more;
But love is slow to dictate to my vows:
And yet those sacred and divine impulsions,
Strike truer then my heart, and by his power
That has inflamed me, here I swear I love you.
Your oaths and love, are made of the same ayre.
Both dye in their conception: quickly utterd,
And as easily not believed.
Nay now you wrong
My true intent.
Suppose I grant you love me,
What would you infer?
That you should speak the like,
And with the same affection.
If your love
Be not a Bawd unto some base desire,
I doe return the like.
I know not how
You may interpret it, but sure the law,
And the command of nature, is no baseness,
A thing that love himself has dignified,
And in his rapes confessed the god of love
The greater of the two, whō Kings have stooped to,
We are allowed to enjoy some stolen delights,
So we be secret in it; for it is set down
By such as in this art have skilful been.
W' are not forbid to act, but to be seen.
Upon these terms, I doe deny you love me
It was lust that flattered sin, made love a god,
And to get freedom for his thefts, they gave
Madness the title of a Deity.
For how can that be love, which seeks the ruin
Of his own object, and the thing beloved.
No, true love is a pure affection,
That gives the soul transparent, and not that
That's conversant in beastly appetites.
Tell not me of your Philosophical love.
I am a fool to linger, women's denial
Is but an easy cruelty, and they
Love to be forced sometimes.
Pray know your distance.
Come you dissemble, and you all are willing
To what?
There's none of you but feel the smart
Of a libidinous sting; else wherefore are
Those baits and strong allurements to entice us?
Wherefore are all your sleekings, and your curlings,
Crispings, and paintings, and your skin made soft,
And your face smooth with ointments, then your gate,
Confined to measure, and composed by art,
Besides the wanton petulance of your eyes,
That scatter flames with doubtful motion,
Unless it were to prostitute your beauty?
I'll give account for none Sir, but my self.
And that I'll speak before my Virgin Zone,
Shall be untied by any unchaste hand,
Nature shall suffer dissolution.
But what ere others be, me thinks your worth
Should not pretend to an ignoble action.
Now by this light I think you'll moralise me.
It is my desire you should go better from me
Then you came hither; you have some good parts
But they are all exterior, and these breed
A self conceit, an affectation in you,
And what more odious? Some applaud you in it,
As parasites, but wise men laugh at you.
Will you employ those gifts that may commend you,
And add a grace to goodness, had you any,
In the pursuit of vice, that renders you,
Worthy of nought but pity?
I c•me as to
A Whore, but shall return as from a Saint.
Then leave to prosecute the foggy vapours
Of a gross pleasure, that involves the soul
In clouds of infamy. I wonder one
So complete in the structure of his body,
Should have his mind so disproportioned,
The lineaments of virtue quite defaced.
I am subdued, she has converted me.
I see within the mirror of her goodness,
The foulness of my folly: sweet instruct me.
And I will stile thee my Aegeria.
It is a shame, that man that has the seeds
Of virtue in him, springing unto glory,
Should make his soul degenerous with sin,
And slave to luxury, to drown his spirits
In Lees of sloth, to yield up the weak day,
To wine, to lust, and banquets.
Here's a woman:
The soul of Hercules has got into her.
She has a spirit, is more masculine,
Then the first gender: how her speech has filled me
With love and wonder? sweet •eddie proceed▪
I would have you proceed, and seek for fame
In brave exploits, like those that snatch their honour
Out of the talents of the Roman Eagle.
And pull her golden feathers in the field.
Those are brave men, not you that stay at home,
And dress your self up, like a Pageant,
With thousand antique, and exotic shapes,
That make an idol of a Looking-glasse,
Sprucing your self two hours by it, with such
Gestures and postures, that a waiting wench
Would be ashamed of you, and then come forth
T'adore your Mistress Fan, or tell your dream,
Ravish a ••sse from her white glove, and then
Compare it with her hand, to praise her gown,
Her Tire, and discourse of the fashion;
Make discovery, which Lady paints, which not:
Which Lord plays best at Gleek, which best at Racket.
These• are fine elements.
You have redeemed me,
And with the sunny beams of your good counsel
D•sperst the mist that hung so heavy on me:
And that you may perceive it takes effect,
I'll to the wars immediately.
Why then,
I must confess I shall love you the better.
I will begin it in your happy omen:
But first confess, that you have vanquished me.
And if I shall overcome an enemy,
Yield you the Trophies of the victory.
Please you walk in the while.
I shall attend you.
Henceforth I'll strive to fly the sight of pleasure,
As of an Harpy or a Basilisk,
And when she flatters, seal my ears with Wax,
Took from that boat, that rowed with a deaf oar,
From the sweet tunes of the Sicilian shore.
Are you for the war indeed?
Immediately.
Is there any of you will go along with me,
Besides this Gentleman?
I think no body.
Ardelio, thou art my faithful servant.
Alas sir,
My body is fat, and spungy, penetrable;
And the least cold will kill me.
Yet his face
Is hatched with impudence, threefold thick.
I am not for your Trenches, and cold cramps,
Their discipline will quickly bring me under:
Isle stay at home, and look to your business.
Brother Capritìo, what say you to it?
Who I? odds lid I am not such an Ass,
To go amongst them, like your volunteers,
That frighted worse at home with debt and danger,
Travel abroad in the summer to see service,
And then come home in the winter, to drink Sack.
I am none of those, i'll hardly trust my self
In the Artillery yard, for fear of mischief.
Mr. Trimalehio, you are young and lusty,
Full of ambitious thoughts.
It is true indeed,
That I am grown ambitious of honour.
And mean to purchase it.
But with no danger
Of life and hope.
I mean to hazard a limb for it.
Why, whither are you going?
To the Leaguer,
Upon the same employment, that Hercules
Did once against the Amazons.
And I
Will stay at home, and write their annals for them.
Stay all at home, and hug your ignominies,
And whilst we spoil the enemy, may you
Be piled by pimps. Cheaters entrench upon you.
Let Bawds, and their issues join with you. Marry
With whores, and let proiectors rifle for you.
And so I leave you.
We shall hear of you,
By the next Caranto, I make no doubt of it.
Brother Capritto, are you well provided
With ammunition? armed Capa pea,
To scale the Fort of our Semiramis?
I am appointed, Brother.
Then let vs on,
And beat a parley at the gates. So, ho.
How now what bold adventurers be here?
What desperate rudeness tempts you to your ruin?
Here are no Geese to keep our Capitol.
But men of arms, you slaves, stout imps of Mars:
Giants, sons of the Earth, that shall rise up,
Like Cadmus progeny, to fight it out,
Till you are all consumed. Have you any gold?
Tic that must break our gates op: there are locked
A score of Danes wenches of delight,
Within this Castle, if I list to show you
Where Circa keeps her residence, that shall,
If she but lay her rod upon your necks,
Transform you into Apes, &amp; Swine, you sheeps face.
If thou shall it once but drink of her enchantments,
She'll make a Lyon of thee.
Alas sir,
I had rather look like an Ass, as I am still.
Bee not too boisterous, my son of thunder.
Wee are wel-wishers to thy camp, and thee,
Here is a freshman, I would have acquainted
With the mystery of your iniquity.
I do embrace thy league, and return the hand
Of friendship. To thy better understanding,
I will discover the situation of the place.
Tic of it self an Island, a mere Swans nest:
Which had Vlisses seen, he would prefer
Before his Ithaca, and he whom Fate
Shall bless to vanquish it; Hee may deserve
The name of a new conqueror. It has
The credit, to bee styled the Terra florida,
Of the best beauties in the Town, my friend,
That repair hither upon the least summons,
Besides some that are constant to their trenches.
Ʋenus in his house is predominant.
Tic barren, I confess. Yet wholly given
To the deeds of fructication. But those
Are barred from coming to perfection,
With Rhewmes, and diseases. You Dormice,
What must I read a lecture to you gratis?
No sir, here's money for you.
You may enter,
And return safe, upon your good behaviour.
Well, they may talk of Dunkirk, or of Callis,
Enriched with foreign booties, but if ever
A little Garrison, or sconce, as this,
Were so filled up with spoils, let me be carted.
And carry it so cunningly away,
Beyond the reach of Justice, and of all
The jurisdiction in our own hand,
Like a free state.
Did not I purchase it?
And am not I the Lady of the Manor?
And who shall dare to question me? I hope,
I shall be able to defend my Fort,
From the invasion of the painted staff,
Or the tempestuous paper Engine, safe,
As a Moil in a Trench, and work at hie midnight.
When their wise heads are laid, we'll raise the spirits
Of our dead pleasures, use the benefit
Of youth, and dance our Orgies by the Moonelight.
I hope they need not to condemn vs, wee drive
As open trade as they, and vent as ill
Commodities, as any: all that we utter,
Is in dark shops, or else by candlelight.
We are become the envy of Citizens.
It is reported that we study physic.
Why so?
The reason is, because we know
The several constitutions of men's bodies.
And some term vs the Leaguer▪
We defy
The force of any man, who's that knocks so?
Go bid the watch look out, and if their number
Be not too plural, then let them come in.
But if they chance to bee those ruffian Soldiers,
Let fall the purcullis. All they can do,
Is to discharge a volley of oaths at me.
Isle take no tickets, nor no future stipends.
Tic not false titles, or denominations
Of offices can do it. I must have money.
Tell them so, draw the bridge. Isle make them know,
This is no widows house, but Marcus Manitius,
Is Lord of the Island, Who wast?
The Constable.
What would he have?
You know his business.
Pox on the Marshall, and the Constable.
There cannot be a Mystery in a Trade,
But they must peep into it. Merciless varlets,
That know how many fall by our occupation,
And yet would have their Venery for nothing.
A chambermaid can't have a Ruff to set,
But they must bee poking in it;
Now they have brought vs under contribution,
They vex vs more then the Venetians doe
The whole Corporation of Courtesans:
But we must give good words, show them a room.
There's hot service within, I hear the Muskets
Play from the Rampires. I am valiant,
And will venture upon the very mouths of them.
Mr. Ardelio, you have been a stranger.
You are grown rich of late.
Who, I grown rich?
Yes somewhat pursy for want of exercise.
Well, I was wont to put in for a gamester.
But now I am quite thrust out of all play.
We were wont to be your subjects to work on,
And since you scorn vs, yet you cannot say,
But you have found good dealing at our hands.
We have bin always bent to your worships will
And forward to help you on at all times.
Come, you are good wenches.
Truly sir you know,
I keep as good creatures at livery,
And as cheap too, as any poor sinner
Of my profession.
Hast thou ere a morsel,
That is not tainted, or fly blown?
Indeed I have
So much ado to keep my family sound,
You would wonder at it▪ and such as are so,
They are taken up presently. But I have one,
I dare commend to you, for wind and limb.
Come, let me have her then.
Please you walk in, sir.
Its strange there is no more attendance given,
To usher in a man of my quality.
Are you the Governess of this Cinqueport, Lady?
The fortress, sir, is mine, and none come here,
But pay me custom.
Hast thou ne'er a Pilot,
Or man of war to conduct a man safe
Into thy Harbour? there be rogues abroad.
Piratical varlets that would pillage me.
Very well, sir.
I thought at first, you would have bard my entrance.
I doe not use the fashions of those Countries,
That keep a stranger out four weeks at sea,
To know if hee bee sound. I make no scruple,
But give free traffic to all Nations.
If you have paid your due, you may put in,
There is the way, Isle follow presently.
I think our soldiers are all come, lets in
And set the watch.
Stay punk, make room for vs,
That have advanced our banners to thy walls,
Past all the pikes, the perdues, and the Centuries.
Tic a good Omen, whirs Bellona there,
And the daughters of Mars, those brave Girls?
We are come to pay our homage to their smocks.
Nay, if you are unruly, we shall tame you.
Fear not, wee are tributaries, punk.
Sir, doe you speak with no more reverence
To me? it seems you know me not
I shall
Endeavour to preserve thy dignity,
Art thou that brave Hyppolite, that governs
This troupe of Scythians? Speak, Orsthya,
My Menalippe, my Antiope
Wee are sworn vassals to your petticoats.
Did you attempt but the least injury,
There be in readiness, would vindicate
The wrongs, and credit of my house.
I know
Thy power, punk, and do submit me, punk,
Tam Mart, quam Ʋeneri. Tic thy Motto, punk.
Would I could tell how to get out again.
How came you in? have you performed all duties?
I threw thy Cerberus a sleepy Morsel,
And paid thy Charon for my waftage over.
And I have a golden sprig for my Proserpine.
Then you are wel-come, sir.
Nay I do honour
Thee, and thy house, and all thy vermin in it.
And thou dost well to stand upon thy guard,
Spite of the statutes. Tic a Castle this,
A Fort, a Metropolitan bawdy house.
A Cynosarges, such as Hercules
Built in the honour of his pedigree,
For entertainment of the bast art issue
Of the bold Spartan.
You have said enough, sir.
And for requital, I will show you in,
Where you shall read the titles, and the prices.
But here's a brother of mine is somewhat bashful:
I'd fine deliver him to thy discipline.
What, is he bashful? that's a fault indeed.
Come hither, chops, you must not be so shamefaced?
Lo you there, sir, you shall come forth in print▪
March on, my Calypso, come sir, follow your colours.
You shall have the leading of the first title,
Are your disguises ready?
I have mine.
Mine's in my pocket.
Put it on your face.
Now they are house•, Isle watch their coming forth,
And fright them in the form of a Constable,
If that succeeds well, then Isle change the person,
To a Justice of peace, and you shall act
My clarke Antolicus. They say an officer
Dares not appear about the Gates: Isle try it.
For I have made one drunk, and got his staff.
Which I will use with more authority,
Then Mercury his all-commanding rod,
To charm their steps, that none shall pass this way;
Without examination. There stalks one,
Isle first know what he is; now they drop away,
As if they leapt out from the Trojan horse;
This is the Autumn of the night: who goes there?
A friend.
Friend, or foe, come before the Constable,
Whence come you, friend?
And't please you Sir, I have
Been waiting on my niece, home to her lodging.
Why, is your Niece a Leagerer, asuttler,
Or Laundress to this Fort?
No, and it like you,
She lies without the camp.
You lye like a Pimp.
You are an Apple-squire, a Rat, and a Ferret.
I saw you bolt out from that Conney-berry.
Mr. Constable.
Out of the wind of me what do you think,
You can put out the eyes of a gorcrow?
Fob me off so, the Constable, that have
The parish stock of wit in my hands? I am glad,
That I have got you from your covert. You shall
Bee learcht, you shall along with me sir.
Whither?
No farther then to prison, where you shall pay,
But forty shillings for noctiuagation.
I am undone then. There are forty old scores,
I owe in Town, will follow after me.
What are you? whats your name?
Ardelio,
A Lords servant.
Do Lords servants doe this?
Alas, a venial sin, wee use to learn it,
When wee come first to be pages.
Stand by, ther's one has got a clap too.
The shirt of Hersuses was not so hot.
Ther's one sure has been hurt with a Gronieado.
How now, who's there?
Here's no body.
No body. My senses fail me then, who first?
What man are you?
No man, you are deceived,
I can not find I am a man, that part
Is dead, wherein I once was an Achilles:
Come nearer.
I can not go, I have lost my nerues.
You shall be carried to the Jail then▪
Fitter
For an Hospital. I am condemned already
To fluxes, and dyer drinks.
Murder, Murder, Mr. Constable, Murder.
Who's that Heronimoes sons ghost in the Garden?
O Mr. Constable, wee have been so used,
As never two adventurous Gentlemen
In the hands of their enemies.
Whats the matter?
Let me take breath: I am at the last gasp.
We have eskapt from the den of the Cyclops,
There was one ran a spit against my eyes.
Amongst the rest, there was a blinke-eyed woman
Set a great dog upon me.
They have spoiled vs
Of our cloaks, our hats, our swords, and our money.
Your wits, and credit were both lost before.
No, wee had not our wits about vs then.
Good sir, let's think on some revenge, call up
The Gentlemen prentices, and make a Shrouetuesday.
By no means, I must suppress all violence.
My brother talked of building of a sconce,
And straight they seazd our cloaks for the reckoning.
There I lost my hat and sword in the reskew.
It was weldone.
And whilst some strove to hold my hands,
The other dived in my pockets. I am sure,
There was a fellow with a tand face, whose breath
Was grown sulphurous with oaths and tobacco,
Puffed terror in my face, I shall never bee
Mine own man again.
Stop their throats, somebody.
It were a good deed to have made them swim the mote.
I, to have siript them, and sent them out naked.
Let's sally out, and fetch them in again.
Then call a court on them for false alarms.
Fly from their rage, sir; they are worse then Harpies,
They'll tear vs, as the Thracians did Orpheus,
Whose Music, though it charmed the powers of Hell,
Could not bee heard amongst these. Mr. Ardelio
And Miscellanio, I joy to see you,
Though ill met here.
Seignior Trimalchio,
Sir you must pardon me. I can not stoop.
I have the Grincums in my back, I fear
Will spoil my courtship.
Mr. Ardelio,
Who would expected to have met you here?
Nay, who would not expect it? tic my haunt.
I love it, as a pigeon, loves a salt-pit.
O me! my scholar too how came he hither?
I did not mean t'impart this mystery.
How could hee find it out?
His own Minerua,
And my helped, sir.
Well, you must all together,
Whither must wee go?
Marry, before a Justice,
To answer for your riot.
M. Constable.
I can not dispense with it.
Let vs redeem our peace.
Not before next sessions. Bring them away.
Come, there's no remedy.
Was ever such a treacherous plot intended,
Against our State, and dignity?
Had this
Past with impunity, they might have sworn,
Vengeance had r•nne the country.
But I hope,
They have no cause to boast their victory,
Now by this air, as I am a true sold•er,
Bred under, and devoted to your Ban,
But that your pity did prenent my rage,
They should have known no quarter, for this brow
Brookes no affronts.
Captain, you fought it bravely.
We'll have a stone graven with characters.
To intimate your prowess.
No, my dear Gorgons,
I will not have my same wander without
The precincts of your Castle: tic enough
It can be sheltered here, within these walls.
And to recount with your acknowledgements,
What this Fort owes to my protection.
Captain, wee must confess you are our Guardian.
Then let me sacrifice unto my humour.
All you this night, shall be at my disposing,
To drink and dra•, tic the fault of your fortune
That do profess this trade, t'haue somebody,
To spend your purchase on, tic my decree,
What others riot, you should waste on me.
What, are they come?
Yes, sir.
Then let me see
How I can act it: do I look like a Justice?
As fearful as an Ass in a Lyons skin, sir.
Here I begin my state. Suppose me now
Come down the stairs, out of the dining room,
Into the hall, and thus I begin. Brisco.
Call Brisco my Clarke.
At your elbow, sir.
Reach me my ensign of authority,
My staff I mean. Fie, fie, how dull you are,
And incomposed? Now set me in my chair,
That I may look like a Cathedral Justice,
That knew, what belongs to an Assignanimus,
And Dedimus potestatis. Nay, though we are
O• the peace, wee can give Priscian a knock.
Let me alone now to determine causes,
As free from error as the Pope. Old Minos,
And Rhadmanth, are not so skilldith urn,
As I am in the statutes. I have them ad vngue•
Now if they enter, at their peril bee it.
How dost thou like my action?
Very well, sir.
Let them come in.
Now Mr Constable,
I must commend your diligence. Come hither.
Sir I have brough four men before your Worship,
I found last night, at midnight, in the streets,
Raising a tumult.
Brisco, bee ready to take
Their examination. Good: you found four men,
At midnight. Whose men are they?
Our own men, sir.
So it seems by your Liveries.
Write that down; first they say, they are their own men.
Sir, by your favour, I am not my own man.
I thought they would not all bee in one tale,
I knew I should find them tripping, and I
Once come to sift them. You are not your own man.
It argues you are drunk. Write his confession,
Ex os tuum te iudico: perge Mr. Constable.
I hold it fit, your Worship should examine
What they did there so late,
What did you there
So late?
Good Justice Echo, wee had business.
Record, they say they had business. They shall know.
That I am Judge of Record, and what I do
Record, shall stand, and they shall have no power
To plead not guilty in a Scire facias,
By a Recognifance. I have my terms.
Good your Worship, give vs not such hard words.
Tic almost as hard usage as the Leaguer.
Then you came from the Leaguer?
You may read
Some adventures in our habit, wee have seen,
And tasted the experience of the wars.
They have made me of another religion,
I must turn Jew, I think, and bee circum•iced.
I may be any thing, now I shall lose a Limb.
I may go seek my pension with the soldiers.
But ti• no matter, I'll turn valiant,
And fight with the stump.
You are a fighter then.
T•is doth appear to me, to bee a riot.
What think you, Mr. Constable?
I think no less.
It was adterrorem populum.
I know not
What you mean, but I mean as your Worship means.
I did perceive they had been quarrelling.
Why then it was an affray, a sudden affray,
Directly against the State of Northampton.
The Decimo tertio of Harry the fourth clears the doubt.
How doe you traverse this? what doe you answer?
We make a question, by your Worships favour,
Under correction, whether that which was
Done under foreign powers, in foreign Lands,
Be punishable here or no.
How prove you that?
Tic a province by it self, a privileged place,
A strong corporation, and has factions
In Court and City.
Is inhabited
With furies, that do multiply like Hydra:
An army of diseases can't suppress them,
Besides their many fallings t'other way.
I should be loath t'infringe their liberties,
Isle send you to betryed, from whence you came then.
O good your Worship, hang vs up at home first,
Let vs endure the rack or the strappado,
We do submit vs to your Worships censure.
Have you provided sureties for the peace then?
More need to provide somethings for my belly.
I think they mean to keep me for a race.
I am fallen away quite, I was like a hogshead.
Now I amable to run thorough my hoops.
Whats he that halts before 〈◊〉 doe you mock me?
Tic ill halting before acripple, 〈◊〉
This sore against my will, I can not help it.
Would I could run away with half my teeth.
Can't a man have the venerable gout,
Or the bone-ache, but you must imitate him?
Good Mr. Justice.
Mock your fellow rogues.
I am none of those, that raised my fortunes with
Fiddling and Tobacco. Make his Mittimus.
And't please you sir, here's one has brought a Letter.
From whom?
He says, from one Mistress Millescent,
The contents will inform you.
NOble sir, I am sorry to interest my vnstay•d honour in the patronage of offenders, orto abuse the credit I have with you, in stopping the course of Justice against them, whose youthful licenciousnesse, would pollute the pen of a Lady to excuse it. On the other part, J hold it the be∣traying of a virgins sweet disposition, to with∣draw her favours, where she has once placed them, although there be some want of desert. I must con∣fesse tic an Antipathy to my nature, to see any Gen∣tleman suffer, when I may prevent it. Howsoever I have found a disrespect from him, yet I forget it. For anger abides in the bosoms of women, as snow on the ground: where it is smooth and level, it false quickly off, but remains where it is rough and uneven. That this may appear to bee true, I would entreat you to dismiss those two Gentlemen and their associates, Mr. Trimalchio, and Capri∣tio, whose riotous looseness has made them obe∣noxious to your censure, and my suspicion. Thus
not doubting the success of my letter, I rest in your favour as you may presume on mine, and your true friend,
Millescent.
This Lady, that has writ in your behalf,
Is one I honour.
How ••old she hear of it?
It ••••es, your fault is quickly blown abroad.
〈…〉 rather seal a Nouerint vniuersi,
For a thousand pound stale commodities,
Then thee should know of it.
As for you two,
You may pay your fees and depart, you have
Your manumission, or this Ladies sake.
Master. Constable, you are discharged, and you may
Go along with them and receive their fees.
Though I say nothing, yet I smell something:
A Lady send a letter? She is, in love
With me, Isle pawn my life, and I ne'er knew it.
I'll get my back well, and go visit her.
Now I have got my teeth at liberty,
And they ere tie me to the rack again,
Let me be choked.
Well, I perceive you are
A favourite to this Lady. Whats your name?
Trimalchio.
And yours?
Capritie.
Two ancient names in Camden, Of what country?
Of Norfolk.
The Capritios of Norfolk.
I think we shall bee kin anon. My mother
Was a Capritie, and of that house;
Are you allied unto this Lady?
No sir.
But I have formerly been entertained
As a poor •utor to her graces favour.
I find by that, you are a man of fashion.
And would you then?
Nay good sir, doe not chide.
Yes, I must tell you, that you were to blame,
Having so fair a fortune before you, to wrong
A Lady of her spirit; so rich, and fair,
Of un•ep•ooued chastity, and one
So high in birth, nay it is not possible
To speak her virtues, and present your self
So •umpishly, nay perhaps fill her bed
Full of diseases.
Good sir, say no more.
I am a•raycor, I have kilt a man,
Committed sacrilege. Let her seek revenge
For these, or if less punishment will serve:
To have me beaten, Isle run naked to her.
I will not press a good nature so far:
You two shall stay and dine with me. Isle send
My coach for your Mistress, it shall go hard:
But I will make you friends, before we part.
Now let me bid you welcome from the wars,
Laden with conquest, and the golden fleece
Of honour, which like Iason, you have brought
T'inrich your Country, now indebted to you.
Had it not been a pity such a talent
Of virtue should be lost or ill employed?
Lady, you are a good Physician,
It was your counsel wrought' this miracle,
Beyond the power of Aesculapius:
For when my mind was stupefied, and lost
In the pursuit of pleasures: all my body
Torn, and dissected with close vanities,
You have collected me anew to life:
And now I come to you, with as chaste thoughts,
As they were first adulterous, and yield
A due submission for the wrong I did
Both to your self, and sex.
Sir. for my part,
You have your pardon.
You were borne to quit me.
But when you know the Author of your freedom,
You'll thank her more.
Why, who is it?
Your sister.
Who? not Faustina? she told me so indeed,
Her name was Faustina. Let me look upon her,
As on the picture of all goodness, engraven
By a celestial finger, shall wear out:
A marble character. I knew her not,
I am glad there is ascien of our ftock.
Can bear such fruit as this, so ripe in virtue.
Where have you lived recluse? you were betrothd
To one Fidelio; but crossed by your father.
I have heard good reports of the Gentleman.
I never knew you flatter any man
Unto his face before.
Unto his face?
Where is hee?
My name's Fidelio.
I am transported, ravished: give me leave
Good gods, to entertain with reverence,
So great a comfort. Let me first embrace you.
Great joys, like griefs, are silent. Loose me now,
And let me make you fast. Here join your hands,
Which no age shall untie. Let happiness
Distill from you, as the Arabian gummes,
To bless your issue.
Now I hope, sweet Lady,
The time has put a period to your vow.
Tic ended now, and you may take a comfort,
That I could tie my self to such a law.
For you may hope thereby, I shall observe you
With no less strict obedience.
I believe you.
And for her dowry, I will treble it,
Here Sanrle is come to be a witness to it.
My Lord Philautus, if I may presume
To congratulate your Honours safe return,
I must confess, I doe it with my heart,
And all your friends long to participate
Your happy presence.
Thanks both to them and thee.
Master Fidelio, no less to you.
I see you happy in your Mistress favour:
And thats as much, as I can wish to you.
You have bin always privy to my counsel
Ask me no questions now, I shall resolve you
When we come in.
How fares our Camp at home,
Trimalchio, and the rest?
I have been busy,
In proiecting for them, they must all bee married.
I have seen the interlude of the Leaguer:
And we have played the Justice, and the Constable:
I will not prepossess you with the sport,
But I will show you such as soon of laughter.
Where is Ardelio
Your servant Ardelio.
Tic the notorioust mixture of a villain,
That ever yet was bred under the dunghill
Of servitude. Hee has more whores at command,
Then you have horses. He has stables for them,
His private vawting houses.
Discharge him the house.
Take his accounts and office, and dispose them.
Ever your Lordships true and faithful servant.
When was my Father, and the Captain here?
They are plotting abroad, I hope to see you shortly
Honestly married, and then turn virtuous.
Tic the course of the world now, Margery.
But yet I fear, I have got such a trick,
When I was young, that I shall never leave it.
What help then? the poor Gentleman must suffer,
Good Trimalchio: tic his fate.
I am thinking,
What I shall do with him, when I am married.
What do other women do with their husbands?
Bring him up in obedience, make him besides
An implement to save your reputation.
Let him not press into your company
Without permission, you must pretend,
You are ashamed of him. Let him not eat,
Nor lye with you, unless he pay the hire
Of a new gown, or petticoat: live with him,
As if you were his neighbour, only near him,
In that you hate his friends: and when you please.
To show the power you carry over him,
Send him before on foot, and you come after
With your coach and four horses.
Tic fitting so
Host now what piece of motion have wee here
Would you speak with any body?
My business,
Is to the Lady Millescent.
Whats your will?
Are you that Lady?
Yes, my name is so.
To you then I derect m• apology.
It seems your eye with approbation,
Has glanced upon my person. I protest
I never was so dull in the construction
Of any Ladies favour in my life:
I am ashamed of my error.
In what, sir?
I can not call to mind that ere I saw you.
You have been still too modest to conceal it.
That was not my fault: you did ill to strive
To hide the flames of love, they must have vent:
Tic not the walls of flesh can hold them in.
What riddles have we here? that I should love you?
I would not have you think so well of your self.
Perhaps hee has some petition to deliver,
Or would desire your letter to some Lord.
I know not how, sure I was stupefied,
I have ere now guest at a Ladies mind,
Only by the warbling of her Lutestring,
Kissing her hand, or wagging of her feather,
And suffer you to pine for my embraces,
And not conceive it?
Pray bee pacified.
This fellow will persuade me, I am in love.
Lady, you have took notice of my worth
Let it not repent you. Bee not stubborn
Towards your happiness. You have endured
Too much already for my sake, you shall see,
Pity can melt my heart. I take no delight,
To have a Lady languish for my leo.
I am not made of flint as you suspect me.
I would thou were converted to a pillar,
For a memorial of this impudence.
You shall know what tic to tempt me hereafter,
When I shall let you perish for your folly.
I came to remunerate the courtesy,
I received from your Ladyship.
I know of none.
I must acknowledge my self bound to you
For what?
Your Letter to the Justice, Lady,
It freed me from the pounces of those varlets,
When I was under the gripe of the Law.
I know, the only motive was your love.
I cry you mercy, were you one of them
That drew Trimalchio to those idle courses?
I am ashamed of the benefit, leave me
That I may not see the cause of my sorrow:
But it is no matter, we shall leave you first.
They shall find, I am no man to be slighted,
And that she has misplaced her affection.
When I have wrecked the wrongs on my corival,
Trimalchio, look to thy self, were hee removed,
There might be hopes, my valour shall make known
There is a difference. Isle straight to the tavern:
And when I once am hot with good Canary,
I pronounce him dead that affronts my fury.
Turned out of service the next turn will be
Under the Gallows, and have a Ballad made of me,
The corruption of a cashiered Serving-man,
Is the generation of a thief. I scare,
My fate points me not out to so good fortune.
My bulk will not serve me to take a purse.
The best thing I am fit for, is a tap•la,
Or else get a wench of mine own, and sell
Bottle Ale and Tobacco, that's my refuge
They termed me parasite, it is a mystery
Is like a familiar, that leaves a man
When he is near his execution.
I have no power to flatter my self now,
I might have gone a wooing to some widow,
And had his countenance, but now the tenants
Look like their Bacon, rustily, upon me.
What, Ieffery! thou art the comfort of my woes:
Welcome, good Ieffry.
Thanks to your good Worship;
Where are my hangings, Ieffry?
Very well, sir.
Locked in a Cypress chest, for fear of Moths.
And all the other furniture good Ieffry.
They are kept safe, and well ary'd for your Worship.
Thanks, good Ieffry. I were in a sweet case,
If I had not conveyed somethings away,
To maintain me hereafter.
Why so, sir?
I may go set up bills now for my living,
Cry Vinegar up and down the streets; or fish
At black Fryers stayres; or sit against
A wall, with a library of ballads before me.
You are not out of service.
Turned a grazing,
In the wide Common of the world, Ieffry.
Then are my hopes at best, I have no reason
To care for him any longer; a word with you.
What furniture do you mean?
Those that I sent,
The beds, and hangings.
Did you send any such?
I hope you will not use me so.
Your own words.
I must make the best benefit of my place:
You know, tic not an age to bee honest in.
Tic the only high-way unto poverty.
I know not how, I do not fancy you
Of late.
I chose thee for thy knavish look.
And now thou hast requited me: of all
My evils, thou art the worst.
No faith, sir.
You have a worse commodity at my house.
But you may save the charges of a writ.
Isle send her you without reprieve or bail.
I doe you that favour.
No, you may keep her still.
My thinks you are much dejected with your fall,
I find an alteration in your face.
You look like an Almanac of last years date.
Or like your livery cloak, of two years wearing.
Worse then the smoky wall of a bawdy house.
Villain, dost thou insult on me?
No faith sir,
Al•sse, tic not within the reach of man,
To countermine your plots.
Well, slave, because
Isle rid my hands of thee, Isle give thee a share.
You must have none, without lawful proceeding.
And that I know, you dare not.
But I dare.
Have you been partners all this while in mischief,
And now fall out, who shall bee the most knave?
What doe you mean?
I mean to search your house
For ammunition, no otherwise,
Which I suspect you send unto the Leaguer.
Sir I have nothing there, but one cracked piece
Belongs to this Gentleman, can doe no service.
She is spoiled in the bore.
We'll have her new cast.
Come, bring them away.
Nay good sir, you know,
That I was lately quit before a Justice.
And if I fall in a relapse.
Al's one
To me, but you must satisfy the Law.
Well then, I know the worst of it.
Master Trimalchio, it is an age since I saw you.
I was ne'er out of town.
Not out of town?
We sought you about all the Ordinaries,
Taverns and Bawdyhouses, we could imagine
You ever haunted.
You might have found vs then.
Nay more, we inquired at the Play-houses.
It was once in my mind, to have had you cried.
We gave you lost.
Well, shall I tell you, Captain?
I; doe, what first?
This Gentleman and I
Have past through purgatory, since I saw you.
If I should tell you all the passages
At the Leaguer.
Thither we came to meet you,
And you were gone.
And then at the Justices.
Were you before the Justice?
It is such a story
Would fill a Chronicle.
We met with a party of the enemies,
Took all we had from vs, and then it cost vs
Forty shillings in fees at the Justices.
That was hard dealing.
The old boy and I
Grew to be kin at last.
He made me sure
To my mistress, before we parted.
How?
By what strange accident?
Honest Ardelio,
And Misellanio, wee were all together
In rebellion, and quit by a Letter,
That came from my mistress.
First possible?
And Miscellanio turn traitor?
What.
Would have your mistress from you, thinks the Letter
Was sent for his sake.
That I am sure hee does not.
Threatens, and swears that he will fight for her.
If hee bee weary of his life, hee may.
Why what can hee pretend to her?
I know not,
What has past between them, but I am sure,
He has been practising at the Fencing school,
To get a trick to kill you.
Hee kill me!
I'll kill him first. I fight by Geometry.
How? By Geometry?
Yes sir, here I hold
My Rapier, mark me, in a diameter
To my body; thats the center, conceive me.
Your body is the center, very good.
And my hilt, part of the circumference.
Well sir.
Which hilt is bigger then my body.
Then your whole body?
Yes at such a distance.
And hee shall never hit me, whilst hee lives.
Where did you learn this? At the leaguer?
No.
No by this light: it is my own invention.
I learnt it in my travels.
Very strange:
You are a scholar.
No: I would not bee
•uspected of such a crime for a Million.
But tic no sin to know Geometry;
And by that, I can tel wee shall ne'er fight.
Not fight at all?
I'll show you in Geometry,
Two paralels can never meet: now wee two
Being paralels, for so wee are, that is
Equal in wit and valour, can never meet.
And if wee never meet, wee shall ne'er fight.
To prove your axiom false, see where hee comes▪
I do defy him.
Hang thee blustering son
Of Aeolus, defy me! I'll tie up thy breath
In bags, and sell it for a penny an ounce.
Draw sir.
Draw if hee dares.
Sure, this is the second part of the Leaguer.
It were best for me, to hide me in my cabin.
Will you resign your mistress?
No, I scorn it.
Unless you'll have her tan away by force.
I see, this cannot be ended without blood.
Captain, a word with you.
What say you sir?
I am afraid he comes with the black art.
How you afraid? do not say so for shame.
Hee has lain with an old witch at Sweden.
And is grown stick free.
Fie that you shall say so.
I'll be resolved of that before I fight.
Why, do you think that witches have such power?
I marry do I, I have known one of them,
Do more then that, when her husband has followed
Strange women, she has turned him into a Baser,
And made him bite out his own stones.
Tic strange!
I'll tell you another as strange as that, of one
When a Vintner has sent her but ill wine,
She has converted him into a Frog.
And then conjured him into one of his butts,
Where hee has lived twelve months upon the lees,
And when his old ghosts chance to come to see him,
Hee has croackt to them, out at the bunghole.
This is miraculous.
There was a Lawyer
That spoke against one of them at the bar.
What did she then?
Turned him into a Ram,
And still that Ram retains his profession,
Has many Clients, and pleads causes as well
As some Lawyers in Westminster.
Do you think,
That hee has had recourse to any such?
I know not, but tic good to bee mistrustful.
Hee may have advantage in the encounter.
There she comes, win her, and wear her.
Hold your hands.
I'll have no blood a prologue to my wedding.
Nay then have at you. Hold me not, I say•
I am as fierce as hee.
Bee pacified.
I thought you had been both bound to the peace.
Lady, it seems, that these two Gentlemen
Do stand in competition for your love.
Mr. Trimalchio, I confess, has been
A former suitor, but with his ill carriage,
He has thus long prevented his good fortune.
Then let me make a motion.
What is it?
Will they both stand to it?
I agree.
And I.
Then let the Lady dispose of her self.
She is mine already. I am sure to her,
Before a Justice.
I will have no woman,
Against her will.
No sir, nor you shall not,
Since you are so peremptory, on your words then
That hee shall sing a Palinodium,
And recant his ill courses, I assume
My Love Trimalehio.
Do wee take, or are we taken?
Nay, wee do take.
Who's that, Capritio? where have you been?
Come your ways forth, and lay hands on the spoil.
Go lead away that Lady by the hand.
Now you may take occasion by the foretop,
Advance your own predominant the better,
And march away,
Come, let vs to the Church.
And what must I do now? bee laughed at?
Would you
Hazard your self, for one that cares not for you?
You may be glad you escaped. Recall your self.
Were not you formerly engagd?
No, never.
Not to mistress Quartilla?
Faith we have toyed
In jest sometime.
Let it bee now in earnest.
Make her amends. I know she loves you.
Well.
I will have her, and stand up for my portion,
With the rest of my tribe.
Stay here a little, they are gone to Church,
And will return in couples. First, Trimalchio,
That Giant in conceit, thinks he is ma•cht
To some great heir, but shall embrace a cloud
In stead of Iuno. Then her waiting woman,
Her Iris, reflects upon Capritio,
And for my piece of fragmentary Courtship,
My Miscellany Gentleman, it is his lot
To bee cast upon Quartilla with Agurtes
In his old Iusticeship. All these march together,
Like the seven deadly sins, and behind them,
Comes Antolicus, the clarke of the company.
Look you sir, here they come.
Make room, me thinks
You should not stop the course of Justice so.
My Lord Philantus, you are welcome from
The Wars, and I from the Church. I wonder
Who makes the better return, you have got
Honour, and so have I. But wher's your wealth?
I can embrace five thousand pounds, a year.
That's nothing with you, I have no more wit,
Then to be pi'd by pimps, and marry whoores,
Yet I mean shortly to rank with your honour.
Here is my warrant, I have promised her,
To make her a Countess, but thats nothing with you,
Nay, more then this I can go on, and leave
Some advancement: behind me. Ass signum,
Tic well, I am glad of your happiness,
And much joy to my brother Capritio,
And his fair spouse.
She is according to
My hearts desire, sir.
Well, a word with you,
Master Trimalchio, and the rest.
What say you?
You were as good know it at first, as at last.
You are not the first, that have been deceived.
In what? my wife? I married her for a maid.
And whether she be one, or no, I care not.
Nay, should I hear a man that should abuse her
In that, I would defend her with my sword.
But she and you must call this man your father.
I so she must, hee gave her at the Church.
Nay, her own natural father, flesh and bone,
I hope she'll not deny it.
No indeed, sir.
I would not live to be so ungracious.
I must acknowledge thee my child, or I
Shoe•lt doe thy mother wrong.
I doe not think so,
You'll not make me believe that I took her
For a Lords daughter, and a great heir. Where are
Agurtes and the Captain to justify it?
Is hee your father?
He has ever bred me:
And I have always called him so. I hope
It is no shame: my parentage is honest.
Well, if hee bee, tic no disparagement,
To marry a Justices daughter.
Come, you have
Been carried hood winked through this business.
Nor is the day yet clear before you. Mark me;
I'll open but one leaf in all the book,
And you shall see the whole discovery.
Come sir, vnease.
Who have we here? Agurtes
And the Captain? Was it you that played the Justice?
And you his clarke?
And I the Constable.
Then you are a knot of knaves for your labour.
Now I perceive that I am plainly gulled.
I am glad ther's no man cheated but himself.
Your arrow is one of the same quiver too.
Isle none of her by this light.
Why, you may choose.
And yet I doe not well see, how you can choose.
She is your wife, and you have married her,
And must allow her means to maintain her.
You may declare your self unto the world.
And bee laughed at: but keep your own counsel,
And who needs know of it?
Believe me sir,
The Gentlewoman is not to be despised,
Her wit and virtues are dowry sufficient.
Nay, if you say so, then must I needs love her:
But by this hand, I thought you would have jeered me.
Hold on your course, march on as you came in,
And rest content, since fate has thought it fit,
To make your fortunes equal with your wit.

HOw thrives my boy Asotus? is he capable
Of your grave precepts?
Sir, I never met
A quicker brain, a wit so neat and spruce.
Well,—get thee home old Simo: go and kneel:
Fall on thy aged knees, and thank the gods
Th'hast got a boy of wax, fit to receive
Any impressions.
As I am a Gentleman,
And first of all our family, you wrong me, Dad,
To take me for a dunce.
No, good Asotus;
It is thy fathers care, a provident care,
That wakes him from his sleeps to think of thee:
And when I brooding fit upon my bags,
And every day turn o'er my heaps of gold,
Each piece I finger makes me start, and cry,
This, this, and this, and this is for Asotus.
Take this, and this, and this, and this again:
Can you not be content to give me money,
But you must hit me in the teeth with it?—S'lid.
Nay, good Asotus, such a loving father
That does not bless you with a sweaty palm
Clapped on your head, or some unfruitful prayer;
But lays his blessings out in gold and silver,
Fine white and yellow blessings.
Prithee Ballio,
I could endure his white and yellow blessings,
If he would leave his prating.
Do you hear him?
How sharp and tart his answers are? Old Simo,
Th'hast got a witty witty wag, yet dear one,
When I behold the vastness of my treasure,
How large my coffers, yet how cramb'd with wealth,
That every talent sweats as in a crowd,
And grieves not at the prison, but the narrowness.
If I make not room for um, ne'er trust me.
When I see this, I cannot choose but fear
Thou can not find out ways enough to spend it:
They will out-vie thy pleasures.
Few such fathers!
I cannot choose but stroke your beard, and wonder,
That having so much wealth, you have the wit
To understand for whom you got it.
True:
And I have so much wit to understand
It must be spent, and shall boys.
Pray heaven it may!
I'll live to spend it all; and then—perhaps I'll die,
And will not leave the purchase of a sheet,
Or buy a rotten coffin.
Yes, dear Pupil,
Buy me an urn, while yet we laugh and live;
It shall contain our drink, and when we die
It may preserve our dust: it is fit our ashes
Should take a nap there, where they took their liquor.
Sage counsel this—Observe it boy—observe it.
I live in Thebes, yet I dare swear all Athens
Affords not such a Tutor: thou may read
To all the young heirs—in town or city.
Ah Ballio! I have lived a dunghill wretch,
Grown poor by getting riches, mine own torture,
A rust unto my self, as to my gold:
To pile up idle treasure starved my body
Thus, to a wrinkled skin, and rotten bones,
And spider-like have spun a web of gold
Out of my bowels; only knew the care,
But not the use of gold—Now, gentle Ballio,
I would not have my son so loathed a thing:
No, let him live and spend, and buy his pleasures
At any rate. Read to him, gentle Ballio,
Where are the daintiest meats, the briskest wines,
The costliest garments. Let him dice and wench;
But with the fairest, be she wife or daughter
To our best Burgess: and if Thebes be scarce,
Buy me all Corinth for him:—When I sleep
Within my quiet grave, I shall have dreams,
Fine pleasant dreams, to think with how much pleasure
Asotus spends what I with care have got.
Sure I were a most ungracious child now,
If I should spoil the dreams of a dead Father.
Sleep when thou wilt within thy quiet urn,
And thou shalt dream thou see me drink Sack plenty,
Encircled round with Doxies plump—and dainty.
How thrives my boy?—How forward in his studies?
Troth—with much industry—I have brought him now
That he is grown-past drinking.
How man? past drinking?
I mean, he is grown perfect in that science.
But will he not forget?
No, I warrant you,
I know I shall not forget, because in the morning
I ne'er remember what I did o'er night.
How feeds my boy?
Troth well: I never met
A stomach of more valour, or a tooth
Of such judicious knowledge.
Can he wench? ha?
To say the truth—but roly.
Roly?—I'm sure
I have already made my Dad a Grandfather
To five and twenty—and if I do not
Out of mere charity people all the Hospitals
With my stray babes, then geld me—Wo to the Parish
That bribes me not to spare it.
Then for the Die,
He throws it with such art, so poised a hand,
That had you left him nothing, that one mystery
Were a sufficient portion.
Will you see me?
Set me a bag. These were an Usurers bones.
In this behold what frailty lives in man:
He that rubbed out a life to gather trash,
Is after death turned prodigal.
Throw, Asotus.
Then have at all,—and it were a million. —All!
Fortune was kind, the precious dirt is mine.
And take it boy, and this—and this beside.
And because desert may challenge a reward.
This for your pains, dear Ballio.
My endeavours,
Although to my best power,—alas—come short
Of any merit; Sir you make me blush,
And this reward but chides my insufficiency.
Pray urge it not.
A modest—honest—honest man:
I'll double it—in faith I will—I am
The joyfull'st father!
See how the goodman weeps!
So he will weep his gold away, no matter.
Come hither dear, come, let me kiss my son.
There's a sweet kiss indeed, this it is to want
A Tutor; had you had my education,
You would have taken me by the lily hand,
Then gazed a while upon my flaming eyes,
As wondering at the lustre of their orbs;
Then humbly beg in language strewn with flowers,
To taste the cherries of my ruby lip.
God-a-mercy for this, Tutor.
I am orejoy'd, I am orejoy'd.
well, go thy ways, I may have a thousand fathers,
And never have the like:—Well pockets, well,
Be not so sad, though you are heavy now,
You shall be lighter.
Pupil, I must tell you,
I do repent the loss of those good hours,
And would call back the study I have taken
In moral Alchemy, to extract a Gentleman
Almost out of a dunghill. Still do I see
So much of peasant in you?
Angry, Tutor?
Teem'd my Invention all this while for this?
No better issue of my labouring brain,
After so many and such painful throe's?
Another sin like this, and be transformed
Mere clown again.
The reason, dear Instructor.
Have I not opened to you all the mysteries,
The precise rules, and axioms of Gentility?
And all methodical? Yet you still so dull,
As not to know you print eternal stains
Upon your honour, and corrupt your blood
(That cost me many a minute the refining)
By carrying your own money? See these Breeches,
A pair of worthy, rich, and reverent Breeches,
Lost to the fashion by a lump of dross.
I'll be your bailiff rather.
Out infection.
Who, that beheld those hose, could ever suspect
They would be guilty of mechanic mettle?
What's your vocation? Trade you for your self?
Or else whose Journeyman, or Prentice are you?
Pardon me, Tutor: for I do repent,
And do protest hereafter I will never
Wear any thing that jingles—but my spurs.
This is gentile.
A way mechanic trash:
I'll kick thee son of earth:—Thus will I kick thee,—
For torturing my poor father—Dirt avaunt—
I do abandon thee.
Blessed be thy generous tongue.
But who comes here? This office must be mine:
I'll make you fair account of every drachma.
I'll not endure the trouble of account:
Say all is spent,—and then we must have more.
WHat Fury shot a viper through my soul
To poison all my thoughts? Civil dissension
Wars in my blood: here Love with thousand bows
And twenty thousand arrows lays his siege
To my poor heart; which, manned with nought but fear,
Denies the great god entrance. O Evadne!
Can thou that resist fairer then the morn,
Set blacker then the evening? —Weak jealousy!—
Did ever thy prying and suspicious sight
Find her lip guilty of a wanton smile?
Or one lascivious glance dart from her eye?
The blushes of her cheeks are innocent,
Her carriage sober, her discourse all chaste;
No toyish gesture, no desire to see
The public shows, or haunt the Theatre.
She is no popular Mistress, all her kisses
Do speak her Virgin, such a bashful heat
At several tides ebbes, flows; flows, ebbes again,
As it were afraid to meet our wilder flame.
But if all this be cunning, (as who knows
The sleights of Sirens?) and I credulous fool
Trained by her songs to sink in her embraces;
I were undone for ever—wretched Tyndarus!
Ha, ha, ha, he. This is an arrant Coxcomb,
That's jealous of his wife ere he has got her,
And thinks himself a Cuckold before marriage.
Want of a Tutor makes unbridled youth
Run wildely into passions. You have got
A skilful Pilot (though I say it, Pupil)
One that will steer both you, and your estate
Into safe harbour. —Pray, observe his humour.
Away foul sin. —It is Atheism to suspect
A devil lodged in such divinity.
Call snow unchaste, and say the ice is wanton,
If she be so. No, my Evadne, no,
I know thy soul as beauteous as thy face.
That glorious outside which all eyes adore,
Is but the fair shrine of a fairer saint.
O pardon me thy penitent infidel:
By thy fair eyes (from whom this little world
Borrows that light it has) I henceforth vow,
Never to think sin can be grown so bold
As to assault thy soul.
This fellow, Tutor,
Waxes and wanes a hundred times in a minute:
In my conscience he was got in the change o'th'Moon.
ROt in thy grave, thou dotard, I defy thee.
Cursed be our day of marriage: shall I nurse
And play the mother to another brat?
And she to nose my daughter? —Take Evadne
Your prety-precious-by-blow-fair Evadne,
The minion of the town: go—and provide her
A place in the Spittle.
Gentle wife, have patience.
Let them have patience that can have patience.
For I will have no patience—S'lid. Patience? patience?
You know her daughter to our dearest friend:
And should my son committed to his care
Thus suffer as the poor Evadne does:
The gods were just so to revenge her wrong.
I will not have my house afflicted with her,
She he's more suitors then a pretty wench in an University,
While my daughter he's leisure enough to follow her needle.
Wife, I must tell you you're a peevish woman.
And I must tell you you're an arrant Coxcomb
To tell me so. My daughter nosed by a slut?
There will be a quarrel, Tutor: do you take
The old mans part, I am of the women's side.
Were every vein in poor Evadne filled
With blood derived from those, whose ancestors
Transmitted in that blood a hate to us,
A lineal hate to all our family;
Yet trusted to my care she is my daughter,
And shall share equal blessings with mine own.
Then a perpetual noise shall fill thy house,
I will not let thee sleep, nor eat, nor drink,
But I will torture thee with a peal of chiding.
Thou shalt confess the troubled sea more calm:
That thunder with less violence cleaves the air:
The ravens, schreech-owls, and the mandrakes voice
Shall be thy constant music—I can talk.
Thy friends that come to see thee, shall grow deaf
With my loud clamours. Heaven be praised for tongue,
No woman in all Thebes is better weapon'd:
And 't shall be sharper; or were any member
Not dead besides my tongue, I would employ it
In thy just torment. I am vexed to think,
My best revenge age hath prevented now,
Else every man should read it in thy brow.
I will not wind you up, dear larum: Go,
Run out your line at length, and so be quiet.
HEre is an argument, Tyndarus, to incite
And tempt thy free neck to the yoke of Love.
Are these the joys we reap i'th'nuptiall bed?
First in thy bosom warm the snake, and call
The viper to thy arms—O gentle death,
There is no sleep blessed and secure but thine.
Wives are but fair afflictions: sure this woman
Was wooed with protestations, oaths, and vows
As well as my Evadne; thought as fair,
As wise and virtuous as my soul speaks her:
And may not she or play the hypocrite now?
Or after turn Apostate? —Guilty thoughts
Disturb me not. For were the sex a sin,
Her goodness were sufficient to redeem
And ransom all from slander.
Gentle Sir,
I pity the unripenesse of your age.
That cast your love upon a dangerous rock.
My daughter! —But I blush to own the birth,
And curse the womb so fruitful to my shame.
You may be wise and happy —or repent.
THis woman is a devil, for she hates her own children.
In what an ecstasy stands that grieved wight?
In troth I shall into compunction melt.
Will not a cup of Lesbian liquor rowze
His frozen spirits to agility?
Spoke like a son of Aesculapius!
My fathers angels guard thee. We have gold
To cure thy dumps, although we do not mean
It should profane these breeches. Sure his soul
Is gone upon some errand, and has left
The corps in pawn till it come back again.
Cold jealousy, I shall account thee now
No idle passion, when the womb that bare her
Shall plead her guilt, I must forget her name.
Fly from my memory, I will drink oblivion
To loose the loathed Evadne.
Generous Sir,
A pottle of Elixir at the Pegasus
Bravely caroused is more restorative.
My Tutor shall disburse.
Good impertinent.
Impertinent? Impertinent in thy face.
Danger accrues upon the word Impertinent!
Tutor, draw forth thy fatal steel, and slash
Till he devour the word Impertinent.
The word Impertinent will not bear a quarrel:
The Epithet of Good hath mollified it.
We are appeased. —Be safe—I say—Be safe.
Be not rash, Tyndarus. This malicious woman
May as well hate her daughter, as her husband.
I am too sudden to conclude her false
On such slight witness. Shall I think the Sun
Has lost his crown of light, because a cloud
Or envious night hath cast a robe of darkness
Twixt the worlds eye and mine-?
Can thou, royal boy,
Burn out the remnant of a day with us?
I am resolved upon a safer trial.
Sir, you are Courtly, and no doubt the Ladies
Fall out about you: for those rare perfections
Can do no less then ravish.
I confess—
I cannot walk the streets, but straight the females
Are in a tumult—I must leave thee, Thebes,
Lest I occasion civil wars to rage
Within thy walls—I would be loath to ruin
My native soil.
Sir, what with my instructions,
He has the wooing character.
Could you now
But pull the maiden-blossomes of a rose
Sweet as the spring it buds in, fair Evadne;
Or gain her promise, and that grant confirmed
By some slight jewel, I shall vow my self
Indebted to the service, and live yours.
She cannot stand the fury of my siege.
At first assault he takes the female fort.
And ride, loves conqueror, through the streets of Thebes. I'll tell you, Sir: You would not think how many gentlemen-ushers have, and daily do endanger their little legs, by walking early and late to bring me visits from this Lady, and that Count∣esse. Heaven pardon the sin! Ne'er a man in this city has made so many chambermaids loose their voices, as I have done.
As how, I pray?
By rising in the cold night to let me in to their Madam. If you hear a waiting-woman cough∣ing, follow her: she will infallibly direct you to some that has been a mistress of mine.
I have read loves tactiques to him, and he knows
The military discipline of wooing.
To rank and file his kisses: How to muster
His troops of complements, and—
I do believe you.
Go on—return victorious. O poore-heart,
What sorrows dost thou teem with! Here she comes.
ANd is it possible so divine a goddess
Should fall from heaven to wallow here in sin
With a Babion as this is? —My Evadne,
Why should a sadness dwell upon this cheek
To blast the tender roses? spare those tears
To pity others, thy unspotted soul
Has not a stain in it to be washed away
With penitent waters. Do not grieve, thy sorrows
Have forced mine eyes too to this womanish weakness.
A pretty enemy. I long for an encounter.
Who would not be valiant to fight under such colours?
My lord, it is guilt enough in me to challenge
A sea of tears, that you suspect me guilty.
I would your just sword would so courteous be
As to unripe my heart; there you shall read
In characters sad lovers use to write,
Nothing but innocence and true faith to you.
I have lost all distrust, seal me my pardon
In a chaste turtles kiss. The doves that draw
The rosie chariot of the Queen of love,
Shall not be linked in whiter yokes then we.
Come let us kiss, Evadne. —Out temptation!
There was too much, and that too wanton heat
In thy lascivious lip—Go to the stews,
I may perchance be now and then a customer,
But do abjure thee from my chaster sheets.
THen from the world abjure thy self, Evadne,
And in thy quiet death secure the thoughts
Of troubled Tyndarus.—My womanish courage
Could prompt me on to die, were not that death
Doubled in loosing him. The Elision fields
Can be no paradise while he's not there:
The walks are dull without him.
Such a qualm
Of the sudden.
Fie, turned coward? Resolution
Is the best sword in war.
Then I will on,
And boldly.— Yet—
What? will you lose the day
Ever you begin the battle?
Truly, Tutor,
I have an ague takes me every day,
And now the cold fit's on me.
Go home and blush,
Thou son of fear.
Nay, then I'll venture on
Were she ten thousand strong. Hail heavenly Queen
Of beauty, most illustrious Cupids daughter
Was not so fair.
His mother.
It is no matter.
The silly damsel understands no Poetry.
Deign me thy lip as blue as azure bright.
As red as ruby bright.
What's that to the purpose?
Is not azure blue, as good as ruby red?
It is not charitable mirth to mock
A wretched Ladies griefs. The gods are just,
And may requite you with a scorn as great,
As that you throw on me.
Not kiss a Gentleman?
And my father worth thousands? —Resolution
Spur me to brave achievements.
Such a rudeness
Some Ladies by the valour of their servants
Could have redeemed.—Ungentle god of love,
Write not me down among the happier names,
I only live a martyr in thy flames.
This is such a masculine feminine gender!
She is an Amazon both stout and tall.
Yet I got this by struggling. If I fit you not,
Proud squeamish coyness! Tutor, such an itch
Of kissing runs all o'er me. I'll to Phryne,
And fool away an hour or two in dalliance.
Go, I must stay to wait on fair Techmessa,
Who is as jealous of young Pamphilus,
As Tyndarus of Evadne.
Surely, Tutor,
I must provide me a suit of jealousy:
It will be all the fashion.
Bless me! what uncouth fancies toss my brain?
As in yon' arbour sleep had closed mine eyes,
Me thought within a flowery plain were met
A troup of Ladies, and my self was one.
Amongst them rose a challenge, whose soft foot
Should gentliest press the grass and quickest run.
The prize for which they strove, the heart of Pamphilus.
The victory was doubtful. All performed
Their course with equal speed, and Pamphilus
Was chosen judge to end the controversy.
Me thought he shared his heart, and dealt a piece
To every Lady of the troup, but me:
It was unkindly done.
I have descried
What, Ballio?
A frost in his affections
To you,—but heat above the rage of Dog-dayes
To any other petticoat in Thebes.
I do not think but were the pox a woman,
He would not stick to court it.
O my soul!
Thou hast descried too much. —How sweet it is
To live in ignorance?
I did sound him home.
And with such words profaned your reputation,
Would whet a cowards sword. One that ne'er saw you
Rebuked my slanderous tongue. I feel the crab-tree still,
While he sat still unmoved.
It cannot be.
I'll undertake he shall resign his weapon,
And forswear steel in any thing but knives,
Rather then venture one small scratch to salve
Your wounded honour: or to prove you chaste,
Encounter with a pin.
I am no common mistress, nor have need
To entertain a multitude of champions
To draw in my defence. —Yet had he loved me,
He could not hear me injured with such patience.
Ballio, one trial more: bring me his sword
Rather resigned then drawn in my defence,
And I shall rest confirmed.
Here's a fine business.
What shall I do? go to a cutlers shop,
And buy a sword like that. O twill not do.
Will you do this?
It is resolved. I will
One way or other. Wit, at a dead lift help me.
MAdam, the wretched Pamphilus!
What of him?
Is through your cruelty and suspicion dead.
That news revives me.
Haste, Techmessa then:
What dost thou here when Pamphilus is dead?
Cast off this robe of clay my soul, and fly
To overtake him, bear him company
To the Elision groves: the journey thither
Is dark and melancholy: do not suffer him
To go alone.
Madam, I joy to see
With how much sorrow you receive his death.
I will restore you comfort: Pamphilus lives.
If Pamphilus live, then Ballio's dead again.
Do you put tricks upon me? we shall have you
On a little counterfeit sorrow, and a few drops
Of women's tears, go and persuade your master
I am deeply in love with him.
If you be not,
You ought in justice.
I'll give thee a new feather
And tell me what were those three Ladies names
Your master entertained last night.
Three Ladies!
You make it strange now.
Madam, by all oaths
My master bears a love so firmly constant
To you, and only you; he talks, thinks, dreams
Of nothing but Techmessa. When he hears
The sound of your blessed name, he turns Chamaeleon,
And lives on that sweet air. Here he has sent me
With letters to you; which I should deliver
I know not, nor himself: for first he writes,
And when that letter likes him not, begins
A second stile, and so a third and fourth,
And thus proceeds, then reads um over all,
And knows not which to send: perchance tears all.
The paper was not fair enough to kiss
So white a hand, that letter was too big,
A line uneven, all excuse prevailed,
Language, or phrase, or word, or syllable,
That he thought harsh and rough. I have heard him wish
Above all blessings heaven can bestow
(So strange a fancy has affection taught him)
That he might have a quill from Cupids wing
Dipped in the milk of Venus, to record
Your praises and his love. I have brought you here
Whole packets of affection.
Blessed occasion!
Here is a conquest purchased without blood.
Though strength and valour fail us, yet we see
There may a field be won by policy.
Go, Paegnium, tell your master I could wish
That I was his, but bid him choose another.
Tell him he has no hope ever to enjoy me,
Yet bid him not despair. I do not doubt
His constant love to me. Yet I suspect
His zeal more fervent to some other saint.
Say I receive his letters with all joy,
But will not take the pains to read a syllable.
If I do not think women were got with riddling, whip me: Hoses, poses, here you shall have me, and there you shall have me. A man cannot find out their meaning without the siéve, and sheers. I conceive um now to be engendered of nothing but the wind and the weather-cock. What? my sword gone? Ha! Well. This same pandarly-rogue Ballio has got it; he sows suspicions of my master here, because he cudgels him into man∣ners.
And that old scold Dypsas hires him to it. How could such a devil bring forth such an Angel as my Lady Techmessa? unless it were before her fall. I know all their plots, and yet they can∣not see um. Heaven keep me from love, and preserve my eye∣sight. Go plot Enginners, plot on:
I'll work a countermine, and twill be brave,
An old rogue over-reach'd by a young knave.
REvenge more sweet then muscadine and eggs,
To day I will embrace thee. Healths in blood
Are soldiers mornings draughts. Proud, proud Evadne
Shall know what it is to make a wit her foe,
And such a wit as can give overthrow
To male or female, be they—man or woman.
This can my Tutor do, and I, cr—no man.
And Pamphilus shall learn by this dear knock
His liberal valour late bestowed upon me,
Invention lies at safer ward then wit:
This sword shall teach not to provoke the cruel.
And by this gem shall I confound a jewel.
S'lid, Tutor, I have a wit too, there was a jest ex tempore.
PHysicians say, there's no disease so dangerous
As when the Patient knows not he is sick.
Such, such is mine. I could not be so ill,
Did I but know I were not well. The fear
Of dangers but suspected, is more horrid
Then present misery. I have seen a man
During the storm, shake at the thoughts of death:
Who when his eyes beheld a certain ruin,
Died hugging of the wave. Were Evadne true
I were too blessed; or could I say she's false,
I could no more be wretched.—I am well:
My pulse beats music, and my lively blood
Dances a healthful measure.—Ha! What's this
Gnaws at my heart? what viperous shirt of Nessus
Cleaves to my skin, and eats away my flesh?
It is some infection—
Tutor, let's be gone.
Of my life we are dead men else.
My Asotus?
Keep your infection to your self.
It is love
Is my infection.
Nay, then I care not, Tyndarus:
For that is an epidemical disease,
And is the finest sickness in the world
When it takes two together.
Dear, dear self!
How fares the darling of the age? Say, what success?
Did not I tell you, Sir, that I was born
With a caul upon my face? My mother wrapped me
In her own smock. The females fall before me
Like trembling doves before the towering hawk,
While o'er the spoils in triumph thus I walk.
So he takes virgins with his amorous eye,
As spiders web entraps the tender fly.
True, Tutor, true: for I woo um with cobweb-lawn.
I know the rest of women may be frail,
Brittle as glasses: but my Evadne stands
A rock of Parian marble, firm and pure.
The crystal may be tainted, and rude feet
Profane the milky way: The Phoenix self,
Although but one,—no virgin: Ever I harbour
Dishonourable thoughts of that bright maid!
No Tyndarus, reflect upon thy self,
Turn thine eyes inward, see thine own unworthiness
That does thy thoughts to this suspicion move:
She loves thee not, because thou deserve no love.
I do not know where the enchantment lies,
Whether it be the magic of mine eyes,
Or lip, or cheek, or brow:—but I suppose
The conjuration chiefly in my nose.
Evadne, Sir, is mine, and wooed me first.
Troth it is a pretty lass; and for a woman
She courts in handsome words, and now and then
A polite phrase, and such a feeling appetite,
That having not a heart of flint or steel,
As mine's an easier temper,—I consented
To give her, in the way of alms, a night
Or so:—You guess the meaning.
Too too well.
And must her lust break into open flames,
To lend the world a light to view her shames?
Could not she taste her Page? or secretly
Admit a tuft-back'd Groom into her arms?
Or practise with her Doctor, and take Physic
In a close room? But thus, good heavens, to take
Her stallions up in the streets! While sin is modest
It may be healed; but if it once grow impudent,
The fester spreads above all hopes of cure.
I never could observe so strange a boldness
In my Evadne. I have seen her cheeks
Blush, as if modesty her self had there
Lain in a bed of coral. —But how soon
Is virtue lost in women!
Mistake us not,
Dear Tyndarus, Evadne may be chaste
To all the world—but him. And as for him,
Diana's self, or any stricter goddess
Would loose the Virgin-zone. I have instilled
Magnetique force into him, that attracts
Their iron hearts, and fashions them like steel
Upon the anvil, to what shape he please.
He knows the minute, the precise one minute,
No woman can hold out in. Come to me, Sir,
I'll teach you in one fortnight by Astrology
To make each Burgess in all Thebes—your cuckold.
As silly lambs do fill the wolves black jaw,
And fearful harts the generous lions paw,
As whales eat lesser fries; so may you see
The matrons, maids, and widows stoop to me.
O do not hold me longer in suspense:
The prisoner at the bar may with less fear
Hear the sad sentence of his death pronounced,
Then stand the doubtful trial. Pray confirm me.
Know you this Jewel?
O my sad heart-strings crack!
If your Evadne be a Phoenix, Tyndarus,
Some ten months hence you may have more of the breed.
This did I give her, and she vowed to keep it
By all the oaths religion knew. No Deity
In all the court of heaven but highly suffers
In this one perjury. The diamond
Keeps his chaste lustre still, when she has foiled
A glory of more worth then all those toys
Proud folly gave such price to.
This? a pretty toy;
But of no value to my other trophies
That the frail tribe has sent me. Your best jewels
Are to be found, Sir, in the weaker vessels,
And that's a mystery. I have sweat out such
Variety of trifles, their several kinds
Would pose a learned lapidary: my closet,
By some that knew me not for Cupids favourite,
Has been mistaken for a Jewellers shop.
And then for ribbons, points, for knots and shoe-strings,
Or to slip higher, garters, no Exchange
Affords such choice of wares.
Phoebus whip
Thy lazy team, run headlong to the West,
I long to taste the banquet of the night.
Sir, if you please, when I am surfeited
To take a pretty breakfast of my leavings,—
Where art thou patience? Hence contagious mists
That would infect the air of her pure fame:
My sword shall purge you forth, base dross of men,
From her refined metal.
Bless me, Tutor,
This is not the precise minute.
Why should I
Afflict my self for her? No, let her vanish.
Shall I retain my love, when she has lost
The treasure of her virtue? Stay, perchance
Her innocence may be wronged. Said I, perchance?
That doubt will call a curse upon my head
To plague my unbelief.—But here's a witness
Of too too certain truth stands up against her.
Me thinks the flame that burnt so bright dies in me.
I am no more a captive, I have shook
My fetters off, and broke those gives of steel
That bound me to my thraldom.— My fair prison
Adieu.— How sweetly breaths this open air?
My feet grown wanton with their liberty,
Could dance and caper till I knocked at heaven
With my advanced head. Come dear Asotus,
There are no pleasures but they shall be ours.
We will dispeople all the elements
To please our palates. Midnight shall behold
Our nightly cups, and wear a blacker mask,
As envious of our jollities. The whole sex
Of women shall be ours. Merchants shall proffer
Their tender brides. Mothers shall run and fetch
Their daughters (ever they yet be ripe) to satisfy
Our liquorish lusts. Then Tityrus happy call,
That loosing one fair maid has purchased all.
You have an admirable method, Tutor,
If this fellow has not been in my heart, I'll be hanged,
He speaks my mind so pat. Ha, boon couragio—
You see what more then miracles art can do.
And when we have run o'er the catalogue
Of former pleasures, thou, and I, and Ballio
Will sit and study new ones. I will raise
A sect of new and rare Philosophers,
Shall from my name be called Tyndarides.
And I will raise another sect like these,
That shall from me be called—Asotides.
Tutor, my fellow Pupil here and I
Must quaff a bowl of rare philosophy,
To pledge the health of his Tyndarides.
Come, blessed restorer of my liberty.
If any friend of yours want liberty
In such a kind as this, you may command me.
For if the brave Tyndarides be not free,
The Asotides shall grant them liberty.
We will be frolic, boy; and ever we part,
Remember thee, Thou mighty man of art.
THere is besides revenge a kind of sweetness
In acting mischief. I could hug my head,
And kiss the brain that hatches such dear rogueries,
Such loving loving rogueries. —Silly Pamphilus,
With thine own sword I'll kill thee, and then trample
On the poor foolish carcase. Techmessa here?
Then fortune wait on my designs, and crown um
With a success as high as they deserve.
Me thinks sometimes I view my Pamphilus
Clothed Angel-like in white, and spotless robes,
And straight upon a sudden my changed fancy
Presents him black and horrid, all a stain,
More loathsome then a leper.
And that fancy
Presents him in his likeness. All the sinks
And common shores in Thebes are cleanly to him.
Peace, thou foul tongue.
Nay, if you be so squea∣mesh,
I have no womanish itch to prate.—Farewell.
Nay, do not leave me unresolved, good Ballio.
Why, I did set you out in more vile colours
Then ever cunning pencil used to limb,
Witch, hag, or fury with.
Thou could not do it,
And live.
I am no ghost, flesh and blood still.
I said you had a pretty head of hair,
And such as might do service to the State,
Made into halters: that you had a brow
Hung o'er your eyes like flie-flaps: that your eyes
Were like two powdring-tubs, either running o'er,
Or full of standing brine: your cheeks were sunk
So low and hollow, they might serve the boys
For cherripits.—
Could Pamphilus hear all this,
And not his blood turn choler?
This? and more.
I said your nose was like a hunters horn,
And stood so bending up a man might hang
His hat upon it: that I mistook the year,
And always thought it Winter, when I saw
Two icicles at your nostrils.
Have I lost
All woman, that I can with patience hear
My self thus injured?
I could beat my self
For speaking it, but it was to sound him, Madam.
I said you had no neck: your chin and shoulders
Were so good friends, they would have nothing part um:
I vowed your breasts, for colour and proportion,
Were like a writheld pair of o'er worn footballs:
Your waste was slender, but the ambitious buttock
Climbs up so high about, who sees you naked
Might swear you had been born with a vardingal.
I am even frighted with thy strange description.
I left, ashamed and weary: he goes on,
There be more chops and wrinkles in her lips,
Then on the earth in heat of Dog-dayes: and her teeth
Look like an old park-pale: She has a tongue
Would make the deaf man bless his imperfection
That frees him from the plague of so much noise:
And such a breath (heaven shield us) as out-vies
The shambles and bear-garden for a sent.
Was ever such a fury?
For your shoulders,
He thinks they were ordained to underprop
Some beam of the Temple, and that's all the use
Religion can make of you: Then your feet,
For I am loath to give the full description,
He vows they both are cloven.
Had all malice
Dwelt in one tongue, it could not scandal more.
Is this the man adores me as his saint?
And pays his morning orisons at my window
Duly as at the Temple? Is there such hypocrisy
In loves religion too? Are Venus doves
But white dissemblers? Is this that Pamphilus
That shakes and trembles at a frown of mine,
More then at thunder? I must have more argument
Of his apostasy, or suspect you false.
Whose sword is this?
It is his. And this I tied
About the hilt, and heard him swear to fight
Under those colours, the most faithful soldier
The fields of Mars or tents of Cupped knew.
False men, resign your arms. Let us go forth
Like bands of Amazons: for your valours be
Not upright fortitude, but treachery.
I urged him in a language of that boldness,
As would have fired the chillest veins in Thebes,
To stand in your defence, or else resign
The fruitless steel he wore. He bid me take it.
He had not so much of Knight errant in him,
To vow himself champion to such a doxy.
Then Love, I shoot thy arrows back again,
Return um to thy quiver, guide thy arm
To wound a breast will say the dart is welcome,
And kiss the golden pile. I am possessed
With a just anger, Pamphilus shall know
My scorn as high as his.
Bravely resolved.
Madam, report not me to Pamphilus
Author of this: for valour should not talk,
And fortitude would loose it self in words.
I need no other witness then his sword.
TEchmessa? never did I understand
The sweets of life till now. I will pronounce
This for my birth-day.
And this happy minute
Has cleared my soul too of the same disease.
Then do as Tyndarus did, and go with me,
We'll drink a pottle to Liberty, and another
Pottle to the Asotides, and a pottle to the Tyndarides,
And a fourth to the She-philosophers ycleped—Techmessides.
PAmphilus, welcome: Shake thy sorrows off,
Why in this age of freedom dost thou sit
A captived wretch? I do not feel the weight
Of clay about me. Am I not all air?
Or of some quicker element? I have purged out
All that was earth about me, and walk now
As free a soul as in the separation.
Brother, if any stream of joy can mix
With such a sea of grief as mine, and loose not
His native sweetness, it is a joy for you.
But I am all bitterness.
Now, Asotus,
The Comedy begins.
When will my sufferings
Make my atonement with my angry goddess?
Do you celestial forms retain an anger
Eternal as your substance?
O fine hair!
An amorous brow, a pretty lovely eye,
A most delicious cheek, a handsome nose!
How Nectar-sweet his lips are? and his teeth,
Like two fair ivory pales, enclose a tongue
Made up of harmony. Then he has a chin
So full of ravishing dimples, it were pity
A beard should overgrow it: and his feet
Past all expression comely.
Do not add
Contempt to cruelty. Madam, to insult
Upon a prostrate wretch, is harder tyranny
Then to have made him so.
And then a shoulder
Straight as the pine or cedar.
Courteous death
Take wings, thou art too slow.
I could not hear
Those precious parts defamed, but I durst fight
In the just quarrel.
It is a touchy Tiger.
How happy am I that have escaped the dens
Of these she-wolves!
Now my safety lies
Upon a ticklish point—a women's secrecy.
Madam, my reputation is dear to me.
In what a maze I wander! how my sorrows
Run in a labyrinth!
I'll unriddle it.
St, St. The honour of a man at arms.
Then know, thou perjured Pamphilus, I have learnt
Neglect from thee.
Madam, I am all love:
And if the violence of my flame had met
With any heart but marble, I had taught it
Some spark of my affection.
Now it heats.
No doubt the flame is violent, and must work
Upon a breast so capable as mine.
I think Cupped be turned juggler. Here's nothing but Ho∣cas poses, Praestò be gon, Come again Jack; and such feats of activity.
But I must tell you, you are false and perjured,
Or, what is more, a coward. Tell me, Sir,
For I suppose you of a nobler soul.
If you should hear your mistress by rude tongues
Wronged in the graces both of mind and beauty,
Could you have suffered it?
Madam, were you made
From bones of Hercules, and brawn of Atlas,
And daughter were to Gargantua great,
And wrong my mistress: you should hear my rage
Provoke my blade, and cry, Blade, can thou sleep
In peaceful scabbard? Out thou beast of terror,
And lion-like roar this disdainful wight
To Plutoes shades and ghosts of Erebus.
Yet you, my valiant champion, could resign
This (if you know it) rather then endure
The terror of your own steel, to redeem
My bleeding honours.
How am I betrayed,
And fallen into the toils of treachery!
Give me a man bold as that earth-born race
That bid Jove battle, and besieged the gods;
And if I make him not creep like a worm
Upon his belly, and with reverence
Lick up the dust you scatter from your shoe,
May I for ever loose the light I live in,
The sight of you.
I'll try your spirits, Phronesium,
That blood of goats should soften Adamant!
And poor weak woman with an idle face
Should make the soldier to forget his valour,
And man his sex!
HEre's a champion for you.
Come, Sir, this sword be yours, and if you dare
Maintain-the lists against me, as I fear
Your blood is whey by this time, by your valour
You may redeem your honour, and your sword.
This is another Hercules come from the distaff.
If not, I do proclaim thee here, no Knight,
But mean to post thee up for a vile varlet,
And the disgrace of Chivalry.
O my shame!
A dainty Lady errant.
A fine piece
Of female fortitude.
If this stir thee not,
Thy mistress is the blemish of her sex,
A dirty filthy huswife.
Would it were not
Dishonour now to kill thee!
If your valour
Lie in your back-parts, I will make experience
Whether a kick will raise it. Pray go fetch him
Some aqua vitae: for the thought of steel
Has put him in a swooned: Nothing revive you?
Then will I keep thy sword, and hang it up
Amongst my busk-points, pins, and curling-irons.
Bodkins, and vardingals, a perpetual trophy
How brave a Knight you are.
Where shall I run
And find a desert, that the foot of man
Ne'er wandered in, to hide from the worlds eyes
My shame! S'death, every Page, and sweaty Footman,
And sopie chambermaid will point and laugh at me.
I joy to think that I shall meet Evadne
Turned on the sudden Moor. How black and vile
She will appear!
O Heavens! who will not dare
Henceforth to scorn your powers, and call sacrilege
Merit and piety? I do not see
A hair deformed, no tooth or nail sustain
The brand of her deserved shame. You punish't
The Queen of beauty with a mole; but certainly
Her perjury hath added to her form,
And that the abused gods bribe her with beauty,
As the wracked tenant strives to buy the favour
Of his imperious Landlord.
Gentle Tyndarus,
Load not weak shoulders with too great a burden.
O lust! on what bright altars blaze thy flames,
While chastity lets her cold fires glow out
In deformed temples, and on ruined altars!
Tempt me not strumpet, you that have your hirelings,
And can with jewels, rings, and other toys
Purchase your journeymen-letchers.
My chaste ear
Has been a stranger to such words as these,
I have not sin enough to understand um,
And wonder where my Tyndarus learnt that language.
I am turned eagle now, and have an eye
Dares boldly gaze on that adulterate sun.
I must be short. Who must this ring direct
Into your guilty sheets?
I do not know
How I should lose that pledge of my Lords love:
But it is not in the power of any thief
To steal away the heart I have vowed yours:
And would to all the gods I had kept it there!
Come, blush not bashful bellipiece—I will meet thee.
I ever keep my word with a fair lady.
I will requite that jewel with a richer.
The glorious heavens arrayed in all their stars
Shall not outshine thee. Be not, girl, ashamed.
These are acquainted with it. I would vex'um
To night with the remembrance of those sports
We shall enjoy, then pleasures double rise
When both we feed, and they shall Tantalise.
It is not manly in you, Sir, to ruin
A virgins fame, with hazard of your own.
Tut, lass, no matter, we will be manly anon.
A fine dissembler! ha! what tumults here?
THat's he, I charge you apprehend the villain.
Villain, we reprehend thee.
Slaves, for what?
For an arrant cutpurse: you stole away this little Gen∣tlemans sword; and being done by chance-medly, it is flat felony by statute.
I thank thee Innocence. Though earth disclaim
Thy title, heaven denies thee not protection.
Confess, or I will have thee instantly
Hanged for a sign on thine own post.
Well, villainy
Thou wilt not thrive. Sir, for it was you I wronged:
I do confess the sword by which I raised
So strange a scandal on you, was by me
Stolen from your Page, as he delivered letters
From you to your Techmessa; and the plot
Was fashioned by her mother, though ill fortune
Made me the unlucky instrument. Asot. Cursed Tutor,
Thou hast read nothing to me worth the learning,
But the high-way to the gallows. There shall we
Hang up like vermin. Little did I think
To make the women weep and sob to see
Th'untimely end of two such proper men.
This mouth was never made to stand awry,
And sure my neck was long enough before.
Lady, upon my humbled knees I beg
Pardon for faults committed, I acknowledge
That striving with felonious intent
To steal a kiss or two from your sweet lips,
From your sweet ear I stole a ring away.
For which your sweet neck must endure the halter.
I am again thy servant, mighty love!
O my Evadne, how shall I appear
So bold as but to plead in mine own cause?
It is so foul that none can seal my pardon,
But you that should condemn me.
Sir, you know
The power I have is yours: be your own judge,
And seal your pardon here.
It is double life
Granted by such a seal.
What punishment
Shall we inflict on these?
Gentle Lady,
Even what you please,— but hanging,—that's a death
My enemies will hit me in the teeth with.
Besides, it makes a man look like a Cat
When she cries mew.
I'll bark and bite awhile
Before the dogs death choke me.
Pray dismiss
This pack of hounds: and since we both are guilty,
Let us bestow on one another shoulders
The good and wholesome counsel of a cudgel.
Pray let me intercede.
Thanks, pretty little Gentle∣man.
Officers, you are discharged.
Are the mad dogs gone?
Come Tutor, I must read awhile to you
Under correction.—Not so hard, good Tutor.
Enough.
Nay, one bout I beseech you more
To make up satisfaction.
Well for this
I'll have one engine more, my bad intents
Mend not, but gather strength by punishments.
Your satisfaction now is full and ample.
Nay, we must have the health in the crabtree-cup too:
One to th'Tyndarides, another to the Asotides,
And one, my dear instructor, to the Techmessides.
Nay, now your penance doth exceed your crime.
Say you so? nay, then here's a health to the Pamphili∣des too:
And for his noble sake, to the Evadnides,
And all Philosophy sects what ever they be.
Your justice to your selves is too severe.
Then I ha 'done: farewell, and hearty thanks.
But, Tutor, stay, this little Gentleman
Has been forgot:—Pray, Sir, what may I call you?
My name is Paegnium.—
I were most unthankful
To pass o'er you.— To the Paegniades, Tutor:
You have brought us to a fair pass, Tutor.
Tush,
It was but to exercise your passive valour.
Your passive valour? give me your active valour:
I do not like your black and blue valour,
When bones shall ache with magnanimity.
BRother, I find my soul a troubled sea
Whose billows are not fully quieted,
Although the storm be over. Therefore, Pamphilus,
By the same womb that bred us, and the breasts
Of our dead mother Lalage, I conjure thee,
With all the charms that love can teach thee,
Assault Evadnies faith: if thou report her
Constant, I end my jealousy: if frail,
The torrent of my love shall bend his course
To find some other chanel.
By that love
That made us twins, though born at several births,
That grew along with us in height and strength,
I will be true. Farewell.
Be sudden, Pamphilus.
Me thinks this should confirm you.
That he was not
Guilty of this, acquits him not of all:
To prove a man free from an act of theft,
Assoils him not of murder. No, no, sister,
Tempt him with kisses, and what other dalliance
Craft and indulgent nature hath taught woman
To raise hot youth to appetite; if he yield not,
I will put off distrust. I do not know
Whom I durst trust but you.
Though mine own love
Find me enough of business, yet in hope
That you will second me in my occasions,
I undertake the task.
Take heed Evadne,
Lest while you counterfeit a flame, you kindle
A real fire.— I dare not be too confident.
Hence will I closely pry into their actions,
And overhear their language; for if my sister
See with my eyes, she cannot choose but love him
In the same height with me.
IT grieves me that a Lady of your worth,
Young, soft, and active as the spring, the star
And glory of our nation, should be prodigal
Of your affections, and misplace your love
On a regardless boy.
Sir, the same pity
I must return on you. Were I a man
Whom all the Ladies might grow rivals for
(As less you cannot be) I would not lose
My service to a Mistress of so coy
And proud an humour:— True, she is my sister,
But the same womb produces several natures.
I should have entertained so great a blessing
With greater thankfulness.
That my stars should be
So cross unto my happiness!
And my fate
So cruel to me!
Sweet, it is in us
To turn the wheel of Fortune, she's a goddess
That has no deity where discretion reigns.
But shall I wrong my sister?
Do not I
Give just exchange, and lose a brother for her?
Our sufferings have been equal, and their prides.
They must be equal necks that can draw even
In the same yoke.
I have observed, the chariot
Of the great Cyprian Queen links not together
The dove with sparrows; but the turtle joins
With turtles, and the sparrow has his mate.
See if one softness kiss not in our lips.
One lip not meets the other with more sympathy,
Then yours met mine.
Let's make the second trial.
I Can endure no longer,— Gentle sister.
I cannot blame your jealousy: for I find—
Too much of sweetness in his amorous lips.
There is no tie in nature, faith in blood
Is but a thing that should be. Brothers, sisters,
Fathers, and mothers are but specious names
Of love and duty: you and I have been
But guests in the same womb, that at first meeting
Change kind and friendly language, and next morning
Fall out before they part, or at least ride
Contrary rodes.
Will you then misconstrue
The service I performed at your request?
Henceforth I'll set the Kite to keep my chickens,
And make the Wolf my shepherd.
PAmphilus, how is it?
I know not how to an∣swer thee.
She met me with more courtship then I tendered.
Sir, we are both abused, and the same womb
That gave us life was fruitful to our ruin.
Your traitor wears the mask called Brother: mine
As cunning a disguise, the name of Sister.
These eyes are witness that descried um kissing
Closer then cockles, and in lustful twines
Outbid the ivy, or the circling arms
Of winding vines. Their hot embraces met
So near, and folded in so close a knot,
As if they would incorporate, and grow one.
Then farewell all respect of blood and friendship,
I do pronounce thee stranger. If there can be
Valour in treachery, put thy trust in steel
As I do, not in brothers.— Draw, or die.
Brother.
I hate the name, it is a word
Whets my just anger to a sharper edge.
Hear me.
I will no pleading but the sword.
Were thou protected by Apollo's temple,
Or had the altar for security,
Religion should not bind me from thy death.
Could thou retreat into my mothers womb,
There my revenge should find thee. I am sudden,
And talk is tedious.
Bear me witness heaven,
This action is unwilling.
PUt up for shame those rude unhallowed blades,
And let not rash opinion of a valour
Persuade you to be Parricides. Pray remember
You thirst but your own blood. He that o'recomes
Loses the one half of himself.
Dear Chremylus,
The reverence to your age hath tied my hands:
But were my thread of life measured by his,
I'd cut it off, though we both fell together;
That my incensed soul might follow his,
And to eternity prosecute my revenge.
Brother, at your entreaty I adventured
To court Evadne; and because I found her
Against my mind, too easy to my suit,
Your rage falls heavy on me.
On my knees
I beg, dear father, cloister me in darkness,
Or send me to the desert to converse
With nothing but a wilderness, or expose me
To the cold mercy of the wind and wave,
So you will free me from the company
Of a false sister.
Sir, with much persuasion
She wrought on me to personate a love
To Pamphilus, to find if I could stagger
The faith he vowed to her. This have I done,
And this so much hath moved her.
Here you see
The fruits of rashness. Do you find your error?
But the foul spring from whence these bitter streams
Had their first head, I fear, it from you Dypsas.
I will no more deny it, I have sown
Those seeds of doubt, wishing to see dissension
Ripe for the sickle—For what cause I now
Forbear to speak—but henceforth I will strive
To clear those jealousies, and conclude their loves
In a blessed nuptial.
O how frail is man!
One Sunny day the exhalation reares
Into a cloud: at night it falls in tears.
IF it be not immodesty to demand
So bold a question; I would be resolved
Of one doubt yet.
Speak boldly, by all holiness
My answer shall be true.
When you were young,
And lively appetite revelled in your blood,
Did you not find rebellion in your veins?
Did not the same embraces tedious grow?
And cause a longing in your thoughts to taste
Varieties of men?
I blush, I cannot answer
With a denial; not a proper Gentleman
But forced my goatish eye to follow him:
And when I had surveyed his parts, I would
With any loss of honour, wealth, and friendship,
Have bought him to my bed: and truly, Sir,
It was cheap at any rate.
Steeled impudence!
What fruit can I expect the bough should bear
That grows from such a stock?
I had of late
A months mind Sir to you: You've the right make
To please a Lady.
Sure this old piece of lust
When she is dead will make her grave a brothel,
And tempt the worms to adulterate her carcass.
And that's the reason I have crossed my daughter
To further mine own love. Pity me, Sir,
For though the fewel's spent, there is a spark
Raked up in the embers.—But I now desist.
Please you to go to Ballios house, my daughter
Shall meet you there—I hope that out of duty
She will not grutch her mother a good turn
When she is married—now and then.
Is there no house
To meet at, but this Ballios? Is Evadne
Acquainted there? is that the rendezvous
Of her hot meetings?—yet I still suspect
This women's malice to her child not lost.
I will bestow some time, and go to see
The strange event of this dark mystery.
BAllio.
Madam.
See your house be stored
With the deboisest Rorers in the city
Let every room be filled with noise and quarrelling,
For Tyndarus is to meet Evadne there.
You guess the rest; if not, this purse of gold
Better inform you.
Most celestial Lady,
Though I have practised villainy from my cradle
And from my dug sucked mischief more then milk,
This fury still out-does me.—I am vexed,
Vexed to the heart to see a silly woman
Carry more devils in her then my self.
And yet I love thee—thou she-rogue, I love thee.
Had I but such a wife; what a fine brood
Of toads could I beget!
HEre comes my mole,
The son of earth, that digs his mothers entrails
To turn up treasure for his boy and me.
That with industrious eyes searches to hell
To buy us heaven on earth. Welcome, welcome
Thou age of gold: how do the bags at home?
Are all the chests in health? thrives the purse still?
And says it to the talents, Multiply?
Thanks to my providence like a swarm! Wealth falls
Not in small drops upon me, (as at first)
But like a torrent overthrows the bank
As it would threat a deluge. Were it not pity
My boy should not invent sluices enough
To drain the copious stream.
A thousand pities!
That you should lose the fruits of so much care.
True Ballio, true.
Trust me, what art can do
Shall not be wanting.
I'll not be ungrateful.
It lies in you to turn these silver hairs
To a fresh black again, and by one favour
Cut forue years away from the gray sum.
I had rather cut off all, and be our own carvers:—Aside
Sir, if I had Medea's charms to boil
An aged lamb in some enchanted cauldron
'Till he start up a lamb, I would recall
Your youth, and make you like the aged snake
Cast off this wrinkled skin, and skip up fresh
As at fifteen.
All this you may and more.
If you will place me where I may unseen
Make my eye witness of my sons delight,
I shall enjoy the pleasures by beholding um.
True Sir, you know he's but your second self,
The same you might have been at one and twenty:
The bliss is both's alike.
Most Philosophical!
Place your self there.
I have no words but these
To thank you with.
This is true Rhetoric.
COme forth my Rascals: Let the thriving Lord
Confine his family unto half a man
I cleept a—Page. Our honour be attended
With men of arts and arms. Captain: and Poets
Shall with the Bilbow blade and Gray goose quill
Grace our Retinue—And when we grow surly,
Valour and wit fall prostrate at our frown,
Crouch imps of Mars, and frogs of Helicon.
How they adore him! and the perilous wag
Becomes his state: To see what wealth can do,
To those that have the blessing how to spend it!
Your blessing was the wealth: the art of spending
He had from me.
Once more I give thee thanks.
Who dares offend thee, Lord of fortitude,
And not pay homage to thy potent toe,
Shall be a morsel for the dogs.
Stoutly delivered,
My brave Thrasymachus—Thou for this shalt feed.
I will not suffer valour to grow lean,
And march like famine. I have seen an army
Of such a meagre troop, such thin-chapt starvelings,
Their barking stomachs hardly could refrain
From swallowing up the foe, ere they had slain him.
If thou command our service, we will die
Dull earth with crimson, till the tears of orphans,
Widows and mothers wash it white again:
We'll strew thy walks with legs, and arms, and thighs,
And pay thee tribute thousand heads a day,
Fresh bleeding from the trunk: and panting hearts
Not dead shall leap in thy victorious paw.
Then say thou too to Hunger—Friend adieu!
Ballio condemn a bag, let trash away,
See'um both armed in scarlet cap-a-pea,
Strike top-sail, men of war.
We must divide:
We that serve great men have no other shifts
To thrive our selves but guelding our Lords gifts.
Now I am rich indeed, this is true treasure.
Ha! has Melpomene taken cold of late,
That you are silent, my Parnassian beagles?
Is Clio dumb? or has Apollos Jewes-trump
By sad disaster lost her melodious tongue?
Your praise all tongues desire to speak: but some,
Nay all I fear, for want of art grow dumb:
The harp of Orpheus blushes for to sing,
And sweet Amphions voice hath cracked a string.
A witty solecism reward the error! harp and sing, voice and string.
Give me a breath of thunder, let me speak
Sonorous accents, till their clamours break
Rocks with the noise obstreperous. I will warble
Such bouncing notes shall cleave obdurate marble
Upon mount Caucasus heavens knocking head,
Bores shall blow my trumpet, till I spread
Thy fame, grand Patron of the thrice three sisters,
Till envies ears shall hear it and have blisters.
O rare close, a high sublime conceit!
For this I'll sheath thee in a new serge scabbard
Blade of the fount Pegasean.
What an honour
Will our blood come to!—I have satisfied
For all the Orphans, Widows, and what others
My sacred hunger hath devoured.
Ballio
Bless him with twenty drachmas—yet forbear:
Money may spoil his Poetry. Give's some wine,
Here is a whetstone both for wit and valour.
A health to all my beads-men of the sword.
This will engage the men of arms to fight.
This to the Muses, and their threed-bare tribe.
Thou dost engage the learned troops to write.
Go sons of Mars, with young Apollos brood,
And usher in my Venus: wine hath warmed
My blood, and waked it to an itch of sporting.
Some twenty ages hence twill be a question
Which of the two the world will reverence more:
You for a thriving father, or Asotus
So liberal a son.
Good, Ballio, good:
But which will they prefer?
They cannot, Sir,
But most admire your fist, which grip'd so much
That made his hand so open.
Gracious stars,
How blessed shall I be twenty ages hence!
Some twenty ages hence.
You shall be called
A doting Coxcomb twenty ages hence.
HOw bright and glorious are the beams my star
Darts from her eye! Lead up, my Queen of beauty!
But in a softer march, sound a retreat:
Lead on again, I'll meet her in that state
The god of war puts on, when he salutes
The Cyprian Queen—these that were once the postures
Of horrid battles, are become the muster
Of love and beauty. Say sweet brace of Mercuries,
Is she the—Olympique or the Paphian goddess?
Where are you Sir, where are you?
In Elysium, in Elysium.
This is no goddess of the—Olympique hall
Nor may you her of Neptunes issue call.
For she nor Siren is nor Amphitrite.
Nor wood-nymph that in forest takes delight.
Nor is she Muse.
Nor Grace.
Nor is she of of these
That haunt the springs the beauteous Naiads.
Nor Flora, Lady of the field is she.
Nor bright Pomona the Orchards deity.
No, she is none of these.
Oh then prepare
To hear her blessed name.
It is Phryne fair.
Phryne the fair? Oh peace! if this be she,
Go forth, and sing the world a lullaby.
For thy dear sake in whom is all delight,
I will no more the trembling nations fright
With bellowing drums, and groans of slaughtered men.
My father brings the golden age again.
Pardon me, dreadful deity of war,
It was love of you that forced me from my sphere,
And made me leave my Orb without her influence,
To meet you in the fury of the fight
Sweating with rage, and reeking in the blood
Of wretches sacrificed to the Stygian flood.
Come forth thou horrid instrument of death.
Do you hear him, Sir?
I, to my comfort Ballio.
I will dispeople earth, and drown the world
In crimson floods, and purple deluges.
The old, the young, the weak, the lusty wight,
Soldiers and scholars, fair and foul together,
Men, women, children, infants, all shall die.
I will have none survive that shall have left
Above one eye, three quarters of a face,
And half a nose. I will carve legs and arms
As at a feast. Henceforth to all posterity
Mankind shall walk on crutches.
Cruel Mars!
Let the conjunction of my milder star
Temper the too malignant force of thine.
The drum, the fife, and trumpet shall be turned
To lutes, and citherns. We will drink in helmets,
And cause the soldier turn his blade to knives
To conquer capons, and the stubble goose:
No weapons in the age to come be known,
But sword of Bacon, and the shield of Brawn.
Deign me a kiss, great Warrior.
Hogsheads of Nectar
Are treasured in the warehouse of her worth.
That kiss hath ransomed thousands from the grave.
Let me redeem more thousands with a second.
Rage melts away. I pardon half the world.
O let me kiss away all rigour from thee.
Live mortals, live. Death has no more to do.
And yet me thinks a little rigour's left.
Thus shall it vanish.
Vanish rigour, vanish.
Harness the lions, make my chariot ready:
Venus and I will ride.
How? drawn by lions?
I, thou shalt kiss um till their rigour vanish
(As mine has) into air. I will have these play
With Ounces, Tigers, and the Panthers whelp,
As with a Squirrel. Bears shall wait on thee,
And spotted Leopards shall thy Monkeys be.
Sit down my Queen, and let us quaff a bowl:
See thou, my Phryne, what a fair retinue
I have provided thee? These for thy defence
Against any Lady rivals thee in beauty.
And these on all occasions shall vent forth
Swelling Encomiums, —Say Bomolochus,
How sings my Mistress?
The Grasshopper chants not his Autumn quire
So sweet, nor Cricket by the chimney fire.
They'll make thee any thing. Thou art already
Cricket and Grasshopper. —Chaerilos, how does she dance?
Have you beheld the little fable beast
Clad in an Ebon mantle, hight a flea,
Whose supple joints so nimbly skip and caper
From hem to sleeve, from sleeve to hem again,
Dancing a measure o'er a Ladies smock,
With motion quick, and courtly equipage?
So trips fair Phryne o'er the flowery stage.
Now thou art a flea. —How snorts she as she sleeps!
Zephyrus breaths not with a sweeter gale
Through a grove of sycmore one. The soft spring
Chides not the pebbles that disturb his course
With sweeter murmur. Let Amphions lute
(That built our Theban walls) be henceforth mute.
Orpheus shall break his harp, and silent be,
The reed of Pan, and pipe of Mercury:
Yea, though the spheres be dumb, I care not for it:
No music such as her melodious snort.
Melodious snort! With what decorum spits she!
Like the sweet gummes that from Elector trees
Distill, or honey of the labouring bees:
Like morning dew that in a pleasant shower
Drops pearls into the bosom of a flower;
Cupped with acorn cups close by her fits,
To snatch away the Nectar that she spits.
Ballio, present me with the crowns of laurel.
Thus I drop wine the best of Helicon
On your learned heads, and crown you thus with baize.
Rise Poets laureate both! Favour Apollo!
The Muses and Asotus be propitious!
I will not have you henceforth sneak to Taverns.
And peep like fiddlers into Gentlemen's rooms,
To shark for wine and radishes: nor lie sentinel
At Ordinaries, nor take up at plays
Some novice for a supper: you shall deal
No more in ballads to bewail an execution
In lamentable rhythms: nor beg in Elegies:
Nor counterfeit a sickness to draw in
A contribution: nor work journey-work
Under some play-house post, that deals in
Wit by retail: nor shall you task your brains
To grace a Burgess new post with a Rebus:
Or furnish a young suitor with an Anagram
Upon his mistress name: nor study posies
For rings and bracelets. —Injure not the bough
Of Daphne: know that you are laureate now.
How like you this discourse?
Excellent well.
It is a handsome lass. If I were young
(As I am not decrepit) I would give
A talent for a kiss.
Come beauteous Mars,
I'll kembe thy hair smooth as the ravens feather,
And weave those stubborn locks to amorous bracelets;
Then call a livelier red into thy face,
And soften with a kiss thy rugged lips.
I must not have this beard so rudely grow,
But with my needle I will set each hair
In decent order, as you rank your squadrons.
Here's a full bowl to beauteous Phrynes health.
What durst thou do, Thrasymachus, to the man
That should deny it?
Dissect him into atoms.
I durst do more for beauteous Phrynes sake.
What, more then I? Hyperbolus, thou art mortal.
Yield, or I see a breakfast for the crows.
Death to my lungs, I spit upon thy fame.
Then with my steel I whip thy rash contempt.
Brawling you mastives. —Keep the peace at home
And join your forces against the common foe.
You sha'nt be angry: by this kiss you sha' not.
I will, unless you swear again.
You sha'not.
Ah, Ballio! Age has made me dry as tinder,
And I have taken fire. I burn, I burn.
The spark raked up in ashes is broke forth,
And will consume me, Ballio.
What's the matter?
Love, cruel love. I must enjoy that lady
What ever price it cost me.
Your sons mistress?
Son, or not son. —Let this entreat, and this.
This will persuade. I must remove your son,
His fury else will surely stand twixt us
And our designs. —Old lecher, I will fit you,
And geld your bags for this. You shall be milked,
Emptied, and pumped. Sponge, we will squeeze you sponge,
And send you to suck more.—Invincible Mars.
What says the governor of our younger years?
You have worn this plot of Mars too stale already.
O shift your self into all shapes of love.
Women are taken with variety.
What think you of Oberon the king of Fairies?
I know twill strike her fancy.
Business calls.
Drink on, for our return shall sudden be.
PHryne, here is a boy of wealth, my girl,
The golden bull that got this golden calf
Deeply in love with thee.
Let me alone,
I'll fleece him.—
Melt him, Phryne, melt him:
We must not leave this mine till we have found
The largeness of the vein. —Suck like an horse-leach.
Come, Sir, and boldly enter: I have choak't out
An easy path to tread in; twill direct you
To your wished journeys end, and lodge you safe
In her soft arms.
Thou art my better Angel.
Wilt thou eat gold, drink gold, lie in gold,
I have it for thee. Old men are twice children,
And so was I, but I am grown again
Up to right man. —Thou shalt be my Tutor too.
Is there no stools, or tables?
What to doe?
I would vault over them, to show the strength
And courage of my back.
Strike boldly in, Sir.
Save you, Gentlemen. If you want gold, here's for you.
Give me some wine: Mistress, a health to you:
Pledge me, and spice the cup with these and these.
Thou shalt have better gowns.
A brave old boy.
There's mettle in him.
I will sing thy praise
In lines heroic.
I will tune my lyre,
And chant an ode that shall eternize thee.
Of what a sweet aspect! how lovely looked
Is this fine Gentleman! —I hope you know
It is in Thebes the custom to salute
Fair ladies with a kiss. —
She is enamoured.
Sure I am younger then I thought my self.
Fair Lady, health and wealth attend thee.
Good Sir, another kiss: you have a breath
Composed of odours.
Buy thee toys with this:
I'll send thee more.
How ravishing is his face?
That I should have so ravishing a face,
And never know it! —Miser that I was!
I will go home and buy a looking glass,
To be acquainted with my parts hereafter.
Come, lie thee down by me; here we will sit.
How comely are these silver hairs? This hand
Is even as right to my own mind, as if
I had the making of it. Let me throw
My arms about thee.
How the bur cleaves to him!
This remnant of my age will make amends
For all the time that I have spent in care.
Give me thy hand. How smooth a palm he has!
How with a touch it melts!
The rogue abuses him
With his greasy fists.
Let us score kisses up
On one another lips. Thou shalt not speak,
But I will suck thy words ever they have felt
The open air.—
That I should live so long,
And ignorant of such a wealth as this!
NOw am I Oberon prince of Fairy land,
And Phryne shall be Mob my Empress fair:
My soldiers two I'll instantly transform
To Will-with-a-wisp, and Robin-goodfellow,
And make my brace of Poets transmigrate
Into Pigwiggin and Sir Peppercorn.
It were a pretty whimsy now to counterfeit
That I were jealous of my Phrynes love.
The humour would be excellent, and become me
Better then either Tyndarus or Techmessa.
Thus will I walk as one in deadly dumps.
When shall we marry?
I can hardly stay
Till morning.
O what Fury shot
A viper through my soul! Here Love with twenty bows
And twenty thousand arrows lays his siege
To my poor heart.— O Phryne, Phryne!
I have no cause why to suspect thy love.
But if all this be cunning, as who knows!
Away foul sin. O eyes, what mischief do you see!
O, I could burst with laughter. Here will be
A pretty scene of mirth.
Thou dost not love me.
My boy Asotus, my young sprightly boy
Has stolen thy heart away.
He? a poor mushrum!
Your boy? I should have guessed him for your father.
He has a skin as wrinkled as a Tortoise.
I have mista'ne him often for a hedge-hog
Crept out on's skin. Pray keep the fool at home.
Patience go live with cuckolds. I defy thee.
Villain, rogue, traitor, do not touch my dear
So to unsanctifie her tender skin,
Nor cast a goatish eye upon a hair,
To make that little thread of gold profaned,
Or gaze but on her shoe-string that springs up
A real rose, from virtue of her foot,
To blast the odours: grim-fac'd death shall hurry thee
To Styx, Cocytus, and fell Phlegethon.
Asotus, good Asotus, I am thy father.
I no Asotusam, nor thou my fire,
But angry and incensed Oberon.
All that I have is thine, though I could vie
For every silver hair upon my head
A piece in gold.—
I should send you to the barbours.
All, all is thine: let me but share
A little in thy pleasures: only relish
The sweetness of um.
No, I will not have
Two spenders in a house, Go you and revel,
I will go home and live a drudges life,
As you have done, to scrape up pelf together:
And then forswear all Tutors, Soldiers, Poets,
Women, and wine. I will forget to eat,
And starve my self to the bigness of a polecat.
I will disclaim his faith that can believe
There is a Tavern, or a Religious place
For holy Nuns that vow incontinence,
And have their beads to sin by. — Get you home.
You kiss a Gentlewoman to endanger
Your chattering teeth? — Go, you have done your share
In getting me: to furnish the next age
Must be my province. Go, look you to yours.
Lie with your musty bags, and get more gold.
S'lid, anger me, and I'll turn drudge for certain.
Asotus, good Asotus pardon me.
I wonder you are not ashamed to ask pardon.
It was the dotage of my age, Asotus.
Who bid you live until this age of dotage?
I will abjure all pleasures but in thee.
This something qualifies.
It shall be my sport
To maintain thine. Thou shalt eat for both,
And drink for both.—
Good: this will qualify more.
And here I promise thee to make a jointure
Of half the land I have to this fair Lady.
This qualifies all. You have your pardon, Sir!
But hear you, Sir, it must be paid for too.
To morrow Mob I thee mine Empress crown.
All friends. A merry cup go round, What? Captains
And Poets here, and leave the sack for flies?
THrasimachus, a whole one.
Done: I'll pledge thee
Though it were a deluge. —By my steel you have left
Enough to drown an island, Chaerilus.
And it were the famous fount of Hyppocrene,
I'd quaff it off all, though the great Apollo
And all the Muses died for thirst, Bomolochus.
Come boy, as deep as is Pamassus high.
What nursery of sin is this? what temple
Of lust and riot? Was this place alone
Thought a fit witness for the knitting up
Chaste and religious love? Deeds dark as hell,
Incest and murder might be acted here.
The holy god of Marriage never lighted
His sacred torch at so profane a den.
It is a cage for schreetch-owls, bats, and ravens,
For crows and kites, and such like birds of prey.
But the chaste turtle, the indulgent pelican,
And pious stork, fly hence as from infection.
Evadne meet me here? Is she a parcel
Of the damned family? Are there such white devils
Among their Succuba's? No, thou art wronged, Evadne:
And there be some that scatter snakes amongst us,
Have stung too deep already.
Bless me eyes!
My troubled fancy fools me. I am lost
In a distracted dream. It is not she.
Awake thee Tyndarus: what strange sleeps are these!
Me thinks I am in hell, and yet behold
A glorious Angel there. Or have these devils
Broke into Paradise! for the place is such,
She blesses with her presence.—Mere contradictions,
Chimaeras, of a restless brain.
Diana,
And whatsoever Goddess else protects
Untouched virginity, shield me with your powers.
To what a wilderness have my wandering steps
Betrayed me! sure this cannot be a place
To meet my Tyndarus in.
It is Evadne,
It is the fair-foul Evadne. Now my sword,
That had a good edge to defend this woman,
Go send her soul into another mansion
Black as it self. It is too foul a tenant
For this fair palace. Stay yet, too forward steel,
Take her encircled in her stallions arms,
And kill two sins together. —.Let um be
At hell to bear the punishment of lust
Ever it be fully acted.
What strange fancies
My maiden fears present me! Why, I know not:
But this suspicion seldom bodeth good.
A handsome Bone Robe, and my prize.
I do deny it, she's my monopoly.
Perchance she may one of the Muses be,
And then claim I a share for Poetry.
If ever silly lamb thus strayed before
Into a flock of wolves; or harmless dove
Not only made the prey, but the contention
Of ravenous eagles; such poor soul am I.
Give me a bus, my girl.
If there be here
A Gentleman in whom there lives a spark
Of virtue not yet out; I do beseech him,
By all the ashes of his ancestors,
And by the constant love he bears his mistress,
To rescue innocence and virginity
From these base monsters. I for him will pay
A thousand prayers a morning, all as pure
And free from earthly thought, as ever found passage
Through the strict gate of heaven.
That's a task for me.
A way fowl ravishers, I will teach my sword
Justice to punish you. Such a troup of Harpies
To force a Ladies honour! I will quench
With your own blood the rage of that hot lust
That spurred you on to base and bold attempts.
Fly, Phryne, fly, for dangers do surround.
This is a pleasure that I care not for.
Lady be safe.
Sir, may this favour done
An injured maid call blessings on your head
In plenteous showers!
This curtsy deserves
Some fair requital.
May plumed victory
Wait on your sword: and if you have a mistress,
May she be fair as lilies, and as chaste
As the sweet morning dew that loads the heads
Of drooping flowers: may you have fair children
To propagate your virtues to posterity
And bless succeeding times.—
Heaven be not deaf!
May you and plenty never live asunder.
Peace make your bed,—and—
Prayer is cheap reward.
And nothing now bought at a rate so easy
As that same highway ware.—Heaven bless your worship.
In plain words Lady (I can use no language
But what is blunt) I must do what they would have done.
Call back your words, and lose not that reward
Heaven is engaged to pay you.
Come: no circumstance.
Your answer? quick.
I beg it on my knees,
Have a respect to your own soul, that sinks
In this dishonour, Sir, as deep as mine.
You are discourteous, Lady!
Let these tears
Plead for me: did you rescue me from thieves,
To rob me of the jewel you preserved?
Why do I trifle time away in begging
That may command.—Proud Damsel, I will force thee.
I thank thee blessed occasion:—Now I dare
Defy thee devil: here is that shall keep
My chastity secure, and arm a maid,
To scorn your strength.
Be not too masculine, Lady.
Stand off, or I will search my heart with this,
And force my blood a passage, that in anger
Shall fly into thy face, and tell thee boldly
Thou art a villain.
Incomparable Lady!
By all those powers that the blest-men adore,
And the worst fear, I have no black design
Upon your honour; only as a soldier
I did desire to prove whether my sword
Had a deserving cause: I would be loath
To quarrel for light ware. Now I have found you
Full weight, I'll wear his life upon my point
That injures so much goodness.
You speak honour.
Blessed be this minute, sanctify it, Time,
'Bove all thy calendar. Now I find her gold.
This touchstone gives her perfect. The discovery
Of ne'er found kingdoms, where the plow turns up
Rich oar in every furrow, is to this
A poor success. Now all my doubts are cleared,
And I dare boldly say, Be happy Tyndarus!
GReat Queen of love, sure when the labouring sea
Did bring forth thee, before she was delivered;
Her violent throws had raised a thousand storms.
Yet now, I hope after so many wrecks
That I have suffered in thy troubled waves,
Thou now wilt land me safe.
Pamphilus here?
He comes to meet Evadne. This is their house
Of toleration. She had spied me out
Through my disguise: and with what studied art,
What cunning language, how well acted gesture,
How much of that unbounded store of tears
She wrought on my credulity! The Fox,
Hyena, Crocodile, and all beasts of craft,
Have been distilled to make one woman up.
And has he left me in this dragons den!
A spoil to rapine! what defence, poor maid,
Hast thou against these wilde and salvage beasts?
My stars were cruel: If you be courteous eyes,
Weep me a flood of tears, and drown me in it,
And be Physicians to my sorrows now,
That have too long been Heralds of my grief.
My thread of life has hitherto drawn out
More woes then minutes.
Health to the fair Evadne.
Is any left so courteous to wish health
To the distressed Evadne? Pamphilus?
Is my Techmessa here?
Now all the Gods
Preserve her hence, there is in hell more safety
Among the Furies—Mischief built this house
For all her family. Gentle Pamphilus,
See me delivered from this jail, this dungeon,
This horrid vault of lust.
TAke comfort, Lady.
Your honour stands safe on his guard, while I
Can use a sword.
You have confirmed me, Sir.
How close they wind, like glutinous snakes engendering,
Well sister, I shall study to requite
This courteous treachery.
Pamphilus, in me
All stars conspire to make affliction perfect.
Wait on heavens pleasure, Madam: such a one
The heavens ne'er made for misery, they but give you
These crosses as sharp sauce to whet your appetite
For some choice banquet. Or they mean to lead you
Through a vault dark and obscure as hell,
To make your paradise a sweeter prospect.
—Thus I feed
Others with hopes, while mine own wounds do bleed.
WHy should we toil thus in an endless search
Of what we now behold?—Let us grow wise,
I loath false Pamphilus—yet I could have loved him:
And if he were but faithful, could do still.
Sure were Evadne false, yet Pamphilus
Would not be made the instrument to wrong me.
Or suppose Pamphilus were a treacherous brother;
Me thinks Evadne should be kinder to me.
Techmessa join with me in one search more,
Ballio.
O Ballio, it is in you and dear Asotus
To make two wretches happy.
Then be happy.
'Ile make you two joint heirs of my estate,
And you shall give it out: we two are dead
By our own hands. And bear us both this night
To church in coffins. Whence we will make escape,
And bid farewell to Thebes.
Would you not both
Be buried in one coffin? then the grave
Would have her tenants multiply: —hear you Tutor,
Shall not we be suspected for the murder,
And choke with a hempen squincy?
To secure you,
We will write before what we intend to act:
Our hands shall witness with your innocence.
Well: Come the worst, I'll venture; —and perchance
You shall not die in jest again of the sudden.
What strange Maeanders Cupped leads us through!
When most we forward go, we backward move.
There is no path so intricate as Love!
CArry these letters unto Chremylus house.
Give this to Pamphilus, to Evadne that,
And certify um of this sad event.
It will draw tears from theirs—As from my eyes,
Because they are not real obsequies.
So great my grief, so dolorous my disaster,
I know not in what language to express it,
Unless I should be dumb! —Sob—sob Asotus,
Sob till thy buttons break, and crack thy bandstrings
With lamentation, and distressed condoling,
With blubbered eyes behold this spectacle
Of mans mortality.—O my dearest Tyndarus!
Learn of us Captains to outface grimm death,
And gaze the lean-chapt monster in the face.
I, and I could but come to see his face,
I'd scratch his eyes out.—O the ugly Rogue!
Could none but Tyndarus and fair Techmessa
Serve the vile varlet to lead apes in hell?
I have seen thousands sigh out souls in groans
And yet have laughed:—it has been sport to see,
A mangled carcass broached with so many wounds
That life has been in doubt which to get out at.
Are crawling vermin of so choice a diet?
Would I were then a worm, freely to feed
On such a delicate and Ambrosian dish:
Fit to be served a banquet to my bed!
But O—Techmessa death has swallowed thee,
Too sweet a sop for such a fiend as he.
Chase hence these showers, for since they both were dead,
Tears will not bribe the fates for a new thread.
Inexorable sisters, —Be not sorry:
For Clotho's distaff will be peremptory!
Go then, and dip your pens in gall and vinegar
To rail on Morse, cruel —impartial Morse:
The salvage Tyrant—all-devouring Morse:
The envious, wicked, and malicious Morse:
Morse that respects not valour, Morse that cares not
For wit or learning, Morse that spares not honour:
Morse whom wealth bribes not, Morse whom beauty tempts not.
Thus loudly rail on Morse, that Morse may know it
To be revenged on Morse I keep a Poet.
If Morse were here, the Skeleton should know
I'd cut his charnel bones to dice, for grieving
Our noble General—Courage bon chevalier!
WHy is my boy so sad?—Tell me Asotus:
If dissolved gold will cure thee, melt a Treasure.
O sad mischance!
What grieves my hope—my joy.
My staff, my comfort?
Woeful accident!
Have I not barricaded all my doors,
And stopped each chink and cranny in my house,
To keep out poverty and lean misfortune?
Where crept this sorrow in?
Here, through my heart.
O father, I will tell you such a story
Of such a sad and lamentable nature,
Twill crack your purse-strings.
Ha? what story, boy?
My friend, my dear friend Tyndarus, Sir, is dead.
—And, to augment my sorrow,—killed himself.
And yet to add more to my heap of griefs,
Left me and Ballio—his estate—
Alas!
Is not this counterfeit sorrow well expressed?
But I grieve truly that I grieve in jests
Half his estate to thee, and half to Ballio?
A thousand pities. —Gently rest his bones.
I cannot but weep with thee.
Sir, you see
If you had left him nothing, my instructions
Can draw in patrimonies.
He is rich
In nothing but a Tutor. —Good Asotus,
Though sorrow be a debt due to the hearse
Of a dead friend, and we must wet the turf
Under whose roof he lodges: yet we must not
Be too immoderate.
Bear me witness, heaven!
I used no force of Rhetoric, no persuasions
(What ever the wicked and malicious world
May rashly censure) to instigate these two
To their own deaths. I knew not of the plot,
All of you know that I am ignorant.
Where is my love? shall sorrow rival me,
And hang about thy neck? If grief be got
Into thy cheeks, I'll clap it out. —Dear chicken.
You sha'not be so sad, indeed you sha'not.
Be merry: by this kiss I'll make you merry.
Then wipe my eyes.—Thus when the clouds are gone,
The day again is gilded by the sun.
WHo's within here?
What's the matter with∣out there?
What art thou?
The last of tailors, Sir, that ne'er take measure of you, while you have hope to wear a new suit.
How dost thou live?
As worms do: —by the dead.
A witty rascal. Let's have some discourse with him.
Are any soldiers bones in garrison here?
Faith, Sir, but few: they like poor travellers
Take up their inn by chance: but some there be.
Do not those warlike bones in dead of night
Rise up in arms, and with tumultuous broils
Waken the dormice that dull peace hath lulled
Into a lethargy?—Dost not hear um knock
Against their coffins, till they crack and break
The marble into shivers that entombs um?
Making the temple shake as with an earthquake,
And all the statues of the gods grow pale,
Affrighted with the horror?
No such matter.
Do they not call for arms? and fright thee, mortal,
Out of thy wits? Do they not break the legs,
And crush the skulls that dare approach too near
Their honoured graves? —When I shall come to dwell
In your dark family, if a noisome carcase
Offend my nostrils with too rank a sent,
Know—I shall rage—and quarrel,—till I fright
The poor inhabitants of the charnel house:
That here shall run a toe, a shin-bone there:
Here creeps a hand, there trowles an arm away.
One way a crooked rib shall halting hie,
Another you shall trundling find a skull.
Like the distracted citizens of a town
Beleaguered,—and in danger to be taken.
For heavens sake, Sexton, lay my quiet bones
By some precise religious officer,
One that will keep the peace.—These roaring captains
With blustering words and language full of dread,
Will make me quit my tomb, and run away
Wrapped in my winding sheet,—as if grim Minos,
Stern Oecus, and horrid Rhadamanth
Enjoined the corps a penance.
Never fear it. This was a captains skull, one that carried a storm in his count∣nonce, and a tempest in his tongue. The great bug-beare of the city, that threw drawers down the stairs as familiarly as quart∣pots; and had a pension from the Barbour-chirurgeons for break∣ing
of pates. A fellow that had ruined the noses of more bawds and panders, then the disease belonging to the trade. —And yet I remember when he went to burial, another corse took the wall of him, and the ban-dog ne'er grumbled.
Then skull (although thou be a captains skull)
I say thou art a coward, —and no Gentleman;
Thy mother was a whore,—and thou least in thy throat.
Do not, live hare, pull the dead lions beard.
No, good Hyperbolus, I but make a jest
To show my reading in morality.
Do not the ashes of deceased Poets
Inspired with sacred fury, carroll forth
Enthusiastic raptures? Dost not hear um
Sing mysteries, and talk of things concealed
The rest of mortal judgements? Dost not see
Apollo and the Muses every night
Dance rings about their tombs?
Do not roses,
Lilies, and violets grow upon their graves?
Shoots not the laurel that impaled their brows
Into a tree, to shadow their blessed marble?
Do they not rise out of their shrouds to read
Their Epitaphs? and if they like um not,
Expunge um, and write new ones? Do they not
Roar in caliginous terms, and vapour forth
From reeking entrails fogs Egyptian,
To puzzle even an oculate intellect?
Prate they not cataracts of insensible noise,
That with obstreperous cadence cracks the organs
Acroamatick, till the deaf auditor
Admires the words he hears not?
This was a poetical noddle. O the sweet lines, choice language, eloquent figures, besides the jests, half jests, quarter jests, and quibbles that have come out o'these chaps that yawn so! He has not now so much as a new-coyn'd-complement to pro∣cure him a supper. The best friend he has may walk by him now, and yet have ne'er a jeer put upon him. His mistress had a little dog deceased the other day, and all the wit in this noddle could
not pump out an Elegy to bewail it. He has been my tenant this seven years, and in all that while I never heard him rail against the times, or complain of the neglect of learning. Melpomene and the rest of the Muses have a good time on it that he is dead: for while he lived, he ne'er left calling upon um. He was buried (as most of the tribe) at the charge of the parish, and is happier dead then alive: for he has now as much money as the best in the company,—and yet has left off the poetical way of begging, called Borrowing.
I scorn thy Lyric and Heroic strain,
Thy tart Iambic, and Satiric vein.
Where be thy quirks and tricks? show me again
The strange conundrums of thy frisking brain,
Thou Poets skull, and say, What's time to chimney?
Alas! Sir, you have posed him: he cannot speak to give you an answer, though his mouth be always open. A man may safely converse with him now, and never fear stifling in a crowd of verses. And now a Play of his may be freely censured, without a libel upon the audience. The boys may be bold to cry it down.
I cannot yet contrive it handsomely.
Me thinks the darkness of the night should prompt me
To a plot of that complexion. —Ruminate,
Ruminate Ballio.
Pray, Sir, how does death
Deal with the Ladies? Is he so unmannerly
As not to make distinction of degrees?
I hope the rougher bones of men have had
More education, then to trouble theirs
That are of gentler stuff.
Death is a blunt villain, Madam: he makes no distinct∣on betwixt Jon and my Lady. This was the prime Madam in Thebes, the general mistress, the only adored beauty. Little would you think there were a couple of stars in these two au∣gur-holes: or that this pit had been arched over with a handsome nose, that had been at the charges to maintain half a dozen of se∣viral silver arches to uphold the bridge. It had been a mighty fa∣four once, to have kissed these lips that grin so. This mouth out of all the Madams boxes cannot now be furnished with a set of
teeth. She was the coyest overcurious dame in all the city: her chambermaids misplacing of a hair, was as much as her place came to. —Oh! if that Lady now could but behold this physiognomy of hers in a looking-glasse, what a monster would she imagine her self! Will all her perrukes, tyres and dresses, with her chargeable teeth, with her cerusse and pomatum, and the be∣nefit of her painter and doctor, make this idol up again?
Paint Ladies while you live, and plaster fair,
But when the house is fallen it is past repair.
No matter, my Asotus: Let death do
His pleasure then, we will do our pleasures now.
Each minute that is lost is past recall.
This is the time allotted for our sports,
It were sin to pass it. While our lips are soft,
And our embraces warm, we will twine and kiss.
When we shall be such things as these, let worms
Crawl through our eyes, and eat our noses off,
It is no matter. While we lived, we lived.
And when we die, we die. We will be both embalmed
In precious unguents to delight our sense,
And in our grave we will bus, and hug, and dally
As we do here: for death can nothing be
To him that after death shall lie with thee.
Sexton, receive these coffins to the temple;
But not inter them,—for they both are guilty
Of their own blood,—till we make expiation
T'assoyl the fact. —Tutor reward the Sexton.
I'll come sometimes and talk morality with him.
This, Sir, my Pupil gives you:—but hereafter
I'll more then treble it, if you be no enemy
To your own profit.
Profit's my religion.
Now you that bore my dead friends to the grave,
Usher my living mistress home again.
Thus joy with grief alternate courses shares,
Fortune, I see thy wheel in all affairs.
STaphyla, why Staphyla: I hope she has taken her last sleep. Why when, Staphyla?
What a life have I? I, that can never be quiet. I can no sooner lie down to take my rest, but presently Staphyla, Sty∣phyla. What's the news?
A prize, my rogue, a prize.
Where? or from whom?
Why, thou know I rob no where but on the high∣way to heaven, such as are upon their last journey thither. Thou and I have been land-pyrats this six and thirty years, and have pillaged our share of Charons passengers. Here are a couple of sound sleepers, and perchance their clothes will fit us. Then will I walk like a Lord, and thou shalt be my Madam, Staphyla.
Truly, husband, I have had such fearful dreams to night, that I am persuaded (though I think I shall never turn truly honest again) to rob the dead no more. For, me thought, as you and I were robbing the dead, the dead took heart, and robed us.
Tush, dreams are idle things. There is no felony warrant∣able but ours, for it is grounded on rules of charity. Is it fitting the dead should be clothed, and the living go naked? Besides, what is it to them whether they lie in sheets or no? Did you ever hear of any that caught cold in his coffin? Moreover, there is safety and security in these attempts: What inhabitant of the grave that had his house broke open, accused the thief of Bur∣glarie? Look here: This is a Lawyers skull. There was a tongue in it once, a damnable eloquent tongue, that would almost have persuaded any man to the gallows. This was a turbulent busy fellow, till death gave him his Quietus est. And yet I ven∣tured to rob him of his gown, and the rest of his habiliments, to the very buckrum-bag, not leaving him so much as a poor half-peny to pay for his wafrage: and yet the good man ne'er re∣pined at it. Had he been alive, and were to have pleaded against
me, how would he have thundered it? —Behold (most grave Judges) a fact of that horror and height in sin, so abominable, so detestable in the eyes of heaven and earth, that never any but this days cause presented to the admiration of your ears. I can∣not speak it without trembling, it is so new, so unused, so unheard∣of a villainy! But that I know your Lordships confident of the honesty of your poor Orator, I should not hope by all my reasons, grounds, testimonies, arguments, and persuasions to gain your belief. This man, said I man? this monster rather: but monster is too easy a name: this devil, this incarnate devil, ha∣avenge lost all honesty, and abjured the profession of virtue, Robed, (a sin in the action.) But who? The dead. What need I aggravate the fault? the naming the action is sufficient to con∣damn him. I say, he robed the dead. The dead! Had he robed the living, it had been more pardonable: but to rob the dead of their clothes, the poor impotent dead, that can neither card, nor spin, nor make new ones, O it is most audacious and intolerable! —Now you have well spoke, why do you not after all this Rhetoric, put your hand behind you, to receive some more in∣structions backward? Now a man may clap you of the cox∣comb with his spade, and never stand in fear of an action of battery.
For this one time, husband, I am induced; but in∣sooth I will not make a common practise of it. Knock you up that coffin, and I'll knock up this.—Rich and glorious!
Bright as the sun! Come, we must strip you Gallants, the worms care not for having the dishes served up to their table covered.
Heaven shield me! O, O, O!
HOw poor a thing is man, whom death it self
Cannot protect from injuries! O ye gods!
Is it not enough our wretched lives are tossed
On dangerous seas, but we must stand in fear
Of Pirates in the haven too? Heaven made us
So many buts of clay, at which the gods
In cruel sport shoot miseries. —Yet, I hope,
Their spleen's grown milder, and this blessed occasion
Offers it self an earnest of their mercy.
Their sins have furnished us with fit disguises
To quiet our perplexed souls. Techmessa,
Let me array you in this women's robes.
I'll wear the Sextons garments in exchange.
Our sheets and coffins shall be theirs.
Dear Tyndarus!
In all my life I never found such peace
As in this coffin: it presented me
The sweets that death affords. —Man has no libèrtie
But in this prison.—Being once lodged here,
He's fortified in an impregnable fort,
Through which no doubts, suspicions, jealousies,
No sorrows, cares, or wilde distractions
Can force an entrance to disturb our sleeps.
Yet to those prisons will we now commit
These two offenders.
But what benefit
Shall we enjoy by this disguise?
A great one:
If my Evadne, or thy Pamphilus
Ever loved us living, they will haste to make
Atonement for our souls, stained with the guilt
Of our own blood: if not, they will rejoice
Our deaths have opened them so clear a passage
To their close loves: and with those thoughts possessed,
They will forget the torments hell provides
For those, that leave the warfare of this life
Without a pass from the great General.
I hope they may prove constant!
So pray I.
I will desire you statue, be so courteous
To part wed's beard a while.—So we are now
Beyond discovery.
O, O, O!
O, O, O!
Let's use a charm for these!
Quiet sleep, or I will make
Erinnys whip thee with a snake.
And cruel Rhadamanthus take
Thy body to the boiling lake,
Where fire and brimstone never slake.
Thy heart shall burn, thy head shall ache▪
And every joint about thee quake.
And therefore dare not yet to wake.
Quiet sleep, or thou shalt see
The horrid bags of Tartarie.
Whose tresses ugly serpents be,
And Cerberus shall bank at thee.
And all the Furies that are three,
The worst is called Tisiphone,
Shall lash thee to ever••••.
And therefore sleep thou peacefully.
But who comes hither? Ballio, what's his business?
SExton, I'll open first thine ears with these,
To make um sit to let persuasions in.
These, Sir, will cure my deafness.
Art thou mine!
Sir, you have bought me.
I'll pay double for thee.
Shall I prevail in my request?
Ask these.—
You are apprehensive, to the purpose then;
Have you not in the temple some deep vault
Ordained for burial?
Yes.
Then I proceed:
We have to night performed the last of service
That piety can pay to our dead friends.
It was charitably done.
We brought um hither
To their last home.—Now Sir, they both being guilty
Of their own deaths, I fear the laws of Thebes
Deny um burial. It would grieve me, Sir,
(For friendship cannot be so soon forgot;
Especially, so firm a one as ours)
To have um cast a prey to Wolves and Eagles.
Sir, these religious thoughts have brought me hither
Now at the dead of night; to entreat you,
To cast their coffins into some deep vault,
And to inter um.—O my Tyndarus,
All memory shall fail me, ever my thoughts
Can leave the impression of that love I bear thee.
Thou left'ft me half of all the land thou had;
And should I not provide thee so much earth
As I can measure by thy length, heaven curse me!
Sir, if your curtsy had not bound me yours,
This act of goodness had.
So true a friend
No age records.—Farewell.—This work succeeds!
Posterity, that shall this story get,
May learn from hence an art to counterfeit.
HEre was a strange deliverance! who can be
So confident of fortune, as to say,
I now am safe?
This villain has revealed
All our designs to Pamphilus and Evadne:
And they with bribes and hopes of an inheritance,
If you were dead indeed, have won this rascal
To this black treason.—What foul crimes can Lust
Prompt her base vassals to!—Here let us end
Our busy search, and travel o'er the world,
To see if any cold and Northern climate
Have entertained lost Virtue, long since fled
Our warmer country.
Ha!—It is so!—It is so!
I see it with clear eyes.—O cursed plot!
And are you brooding crocodiles? I may chance
To break the serpents egg, ever you have hatched
The viper to perfection. Come Techmessa,
My anger will no longer be confined
To patient silence: Tedious expectation
Is but a foolish fire by night, that leads
The traveller out on's way—Break forth, my wrath:
Break like a deluge of consuming fire,
And scorch um both to ashes, in a flame
Hot as their lust.—No:—It is too base a blood
For me to spill.—Let um even live t'ingender
A brood of monsters:—May perpetual jealousy
Wait on their beds, and poison their embraces
With just suspicions: may their children be
Deformed, and fright the mother at the birth:
May they live long, and wretched; all men's hate,
And yet have misery enough for pity:
May they be long a dying—of diseases
Painful, and loathsome:—Passion, do not hurry me
To this unmanly womanish revenge.
Wilt thou curse Tyndarus when thou wear a sword?
But ha, hark, observe!—
wait till we call.
Heaven, if thou hast not emptied all thy treasury
Of wrath upon me; here I challenge thee
To lay on more. What torments hast thou left,
In which thou hast not exercised my patience?
Yet cast up all the accounts of all my sorrows,
And the whole sum is trebled in the loss
Of dear Techmessa.
If this grief were real!
Be not too credulous.
I have stood the rest
Of your afflictions, with this one I fell,
Fell like a rock that had repelled the rage
Of thousand violent billows, and withstood
Their fierce assaults, until the working Tide
Had undermined him: then he falls, and draws
Part of the mountain with him.
Pamphilus,
When did you see my sweet-heart? prithee tell me,
Is he not gone a maying?—he will bring me
Some pincks and daisies home to morrow morning.
Pray heaven he meet no thieves.
Alas Evadne!
Thy Tyndarus is dead.
What shall I do?
I cannot live without him.
I am moved:
Yet I will make this trial full and perfect.
What, at this dismal hour, when nothing walks
But souls tormented, calls you from your sheets
To visit our dark cells, inhabited
By death and melancholy?
I am come
To seek my true-love here. Did you not see him?
He's come to dwell with you, pray use him well,
He was a proper Gentleman.
Sir, what cause
Enforced you hither?
I am come to pay
The tribute of my eyes to a dead Love.
Fair Lady, may I ask one question of you?
Did you admit no love into your bosom
But only his?
Alas! you make me weep.
Could any woman love a man, but him!
No Tyndarus, I will not long outlive thee:
We will be married in Elysium,
And arm in arm walk through th'-blessed groves,
And change a thousand kisses,—you sha'nt see us.
I know not whether it be joy or grief
Forces tears from me.
Were you constant, Sir,
To her whose death you now so much lament?
For by those prodigies and apparitions
That have to night shook the foundations
Of the whole temple, your inconstancy
Hath cause your Mistresses untimely end.
The Sun shall change his course, and find new paths
To drive his chariot in: The Load-stone leave
His faith unto the North:—The Vine withdraw
Those strict embraces that enfold the Elm
In her kind arms:—But, if I change my love
From my Techmessa, may I be recorded
To all posterity, Loves great Apostate
In Cupids annals.
If you see my Tyndarus,
Pray tell him I will make all haste to meet him.
I will but weep a while first.
Pretty sorrow!
Sir, you may veil your falsehood in smooth language,
And gild it o'er with fair hypocrisy:
But here has been such groans: Ghosts that have cried
In hollow voices, Pamphilus, O false Pamphilus!
Revenge on Pamphilus! Such complaints as these
The gods ne'er make in vain.
Then there is witch-craft in it. And are the gods
Made parties too against me?—Pardon then
If I grow stubborn.—While they pressed my shoulders
No more then I could bear, they willingly
Submitted to the burden.—Now they wish
To cast it off.—What treachery has bribed you,
Celestial forms, to be my false accusers?
I challenge you (for you can view my thoughts,
And read the secret characters of my heart.)
Give in your verdict, did you ever find
Another image graven in my soul
Besides Techmessa? No! It is hell has forged
These fly impostures! all these plots are coined
Out of the devils mintage!
Certainly
There's no false fire in this.
These cannot be.
Pray, Sir, direct me where I may embalm
My Tyndarus with my tears.
There gentle Lady.
Is this a casket fit to entertain
A jewel of such value?
Where must I
Pay my devotions?
There your dead Saint lies.
Hail Tyndarus, may earth but lightly press thee:
And may thou find those joys thou art gone to taste,
As true as my affection. Now I know
Thou can not choose but love me, and with longing
Expect my quick arrival: for the soul
Freed from the cloud of flesh, clearly discerns
Forms in their perfect nature. If there be
A guilt upon thy blood, thus I'll redeem it,
And lay it all on mine.
What mean you, Lady?
Stay not my pious hand.
Your impious rather.
If you were dead, who then were left to make
Lustration for his crime? shall foolish zeal
Persuade you to a hasty death, and so
Leave Tyndarus to eternity of flames?
Pardon me, Tyndarus, I will only see
That office done, and then I'll follow thee.
Thou gentle soul of my deceased love,
If thou still hoverst here abouts, accept
The vows of Pamphilus. —If I ever think
Of woman with affection, but Techmessa,
Or keep the least spark of a love alive
But in her ashes: let me never see
Those blessed fields where gentle lovers walk
In endless joys. —Why do I idly weep!
I'll write my grief in blood.
What do you mean?
Techmessa, I am yet withheld; but suddenly
I'll make escape to find thee.
O blessed minute!
WHere shall I fly to hide me from my guilt?
It follows me, like those that run away
From their own shadows: that which I would shun
I bear about me. —Whom shall I appease?
The living, or the dead? for I have injured
Both you, and them. —O Tyndarus, here I kneel,
And do confess my self thy cruel murdresse;
And thine, Techmessa. —Gentle daughter, pardon me.
But how shall I make satisfaction,
That have but one poor life, and have lost two?
Oh Pamphilus! my malice ruined thee,
But most Evadne: for at her I aimed,
Because she is no issue of my womb,
But trusted by her father to my care.
Her have I followed with a stepdames hate,
As envious that her beauty should eclipse
My daughters honour. —But the gods in justice
Have taken her hence to punish me. —My sins
March up in troops against me. —But this potion
Shall purge out life and them.
Be not too rash:
I will revive Techmessa.
O sweet daughter!
Thou hast revived two lives at once.
But I
Still live a widowed virgin.
No, Evadne,
Receive me new created, of a clay
Purged from all dregs; my thoughts do all run clear.
Take hence those coffins. I will have them born
Trophies before me, when we come to tie
The nuptial knot: for death has brought us life.
Suspicion made us confident, and weak jealousy
Hath added strength to our resolved love.
Cupped hath run his maze, this was his day:
But the next part Hymen intends to play.
HAil sacred Thebes, I kiss thy blessed soil,
And on my knees salute thy seven gates.
Some twenty winters now have glazed thy floods
Since I beheld thy turrets, battered then
With war, that sought the ruin of those walls
Which music built, when Minos cruel tribute
Robed mothers of their dearest babes, to glut
His ravenous Minotaure, I for safety fled
With my young sons, but called my countries hate
Upon my head, whom misery made malicious.
Each father had a curse in store for me,
Because I shared not in the common loss:
Yet would have willingly changed fortunes with me.
I dare not meet the vulgars violent rage
Eager against me. I will therefore study
Some means to live concealed.
I Have heard my mother,
Who had more proverbs in her mouth then teeth,
(Peace with her soul where ever it be) affirm,
Marry too soon, and you'll repent too late.
A sentence worth my meditation:
For marriage is a serious thing, perchance
Fair Phryne is no maid: for women may
Be beauteous, yet no virgins. Fair and chaste
Are not of necessary consequence.
Or being both fair and chaste, she may be barren;
And then when I am old, I shall not have
A boy—to dote on, as my father does.
Kind fortune fan you with a courteous wing.
A pretty complement. What art thou fellow?
A Register of heaven, a privy Counsellour
To all the planets, one that has been tenant
To the twelve houses, Tutor to the Fates,
That taught um you are of spinning; a live Almanac,
One that by speculation in the stars
Can foretell any thing.
How? foretell any thing?
How many years are past since Thebes was built?
That is not to foretell: you state the question
Of times already past.
And cannot you
As well foretell things past, as things to come!
Say, Register of heaven, and Privy-counsellour
To all the planets, with the rest of your titles,
(For I shall ne'er be able to repeat um all)
Shall I, as I intend, to day be married?
The Almutes, or the Lord of the Ascendeut,
I find with Luna corporally joined
To the Almutes of the seventh house,
Which is the matrimonial family:
And therefore I conclude the nuptials hold.
And yet the Aspect is not in Trine, or Sextile,
But in the Quartile radiation,
Or Tetragon, which shows an inclination
Averse, and yet admitting of reception.
It will, although encountered with impediment,
At last succeed.
Ha? What bold impediment
Is so audacious to encounter me?
Be he Almutes of what house he please;
Let his Aspect be Sextile, Trine, or Quartile;
I do not fear him with his radiations,
His Tetragons, and inclinations:
If he provoke my spleen, I'll have him know
I soldiers feed shall mince him, and my Poets
Shall with a Satire steeped in gall and vinegar,
Rime um to death, as they do rats in Ireland.
Good words.
There's no resistance to the laws of Fate.
This sublunary world must yield obedience
To the celestial virtues.
One thing more
I would desire to know: Whether my spouse
That shall be, be immaculate. I'd be loath
To marry an Advowsion that has had
Other incumbents.
I'll resolve you instantly.
The Dragons-tail stands where the head should be:
A shrewed suspicion, —she has been strongly tempted.
The Dragons-tail puts me in a horrible fear.
I feel a kind of a sting in my head already.
And Mars being landlord of th'eleventh house,
Placed in the Ram and Scorpion, plainly signifies
The maid has been in love; but the Aspect
Being without reception, lays no guilt
Of act upon her.
I shall be jealous presently:
For the Ram is but an ill sign in the head;
And you know what Scorpio aims at in the Almanac.
But when I see the Ascendant and his Lord,
With the good Moon in angles and fixed signs,
I do conclude her virgin pure and spotless.
I thank the Ascendant, and his noble Lord;
He shall be welcome to my house at any time,
And so shall mistress Moon, with all her angles,
And her sixth signs. But how come you to know
All this for certain?
Sir, the learned Cabalists,
And all the Childes do conclude it lawful:
As Oslo, Baruch, and Abobali,
Caucaph, Toz, Arcaphan, and Albuas,
Gafar, with Hali, Hippocras, and Lancao,
With Ben, Benesaphan, and Albubetes.
Are Oslo, Baruch, and Abobali,
With all the rest of the Jury, men of credit?
Their words shall go as far in the Zodiac, Sir,
As another bond. Asot. I am beholding to um.
Another scruple yet,—I would have children too,
Children to dote on, Sir, when I grow old,
Such as will spend when I am dead and gone,
And make me have such fine dreams in my grave.
Sir, you're a happy man. I do not see
In all your horoscope one sign masculine,
For such portend sterility.
How's that man?
Is it possible for any man to have children
Without a sign masculine?
Sir, you mistake me:
You are not yet initiate. The Almutes
Of the Ascendant is not elevated.
Above the Almutes of the filial house.
Venus is free, and Jove not yet combust:
And then the signifier being lodged
In watery signs, the Scorpion, Crab, and Fish,
Foreshow a numerous issue of both sexes.
And Mercury in's exaltations
Placed in their angles, and their points successive,
Beholds the Lords of the Triplicity
Unhindered in their influence. You were born
Under a getting constellation,
A fructifying star. —Sir, I pronounce you
A joyful father.
Happy be the hour
I met with thee. I'll have thee live with me.
Thou shalt be my domestic Astronomer.
I have a brace of Poets as fit as may be,
To furnish thee with verses for each month.
Sir, since the gracious stars do promise me
So numerous a troup of sons and daughters,
It is fit I should have my means in my own hands
To provide for um all: therefore I fain would know
Whether my father be—long-liv'd, or no.
The planet Mars is Oriental now
To Saturn; but in reference to the Sun
He bears a Westerly position.
Which Ylem linking Saturn with the Sun
In opposition, both sinisterly
Fallen from their corners, plainly signifies
He cannot long survive.
Why, who can help it?
There's no resistance to the laws of Fate:
This sublunary world must yield obedience
To the celestial virtues. —Were not providence
To bespeak mourning cloaks against the funeral?
It is good to be in readiness.
If thou be
So cunning a prophet, tell me; Do I mean
To entertain thee for my wizard?
Sir,
I do not see the least Azymenes,
Or planetary hindrance. Alcocoden
Tells me you will.
Tell Alcocoden then
He is in the right. Thrasimachus, Hyperbolus!
We have increased our family, see him enrolled.
He is a man of merit, and can prophecy.
We will drench him in the welcome of the cellar,
And try if he can prophecy who falls first.
How will the world admire me, when they see
My house an Academy, all the arts
Wait at my table, every man of quality
Take sanctuary here! I will be patron
To twenty liberal sciences.
A Fair sun
Shine on the happy bridegroom.
Quondam Tutor,
(For I am past all tuition but my wives)
Thanks for your wishes; have you studied yet
How with one charge (for ceremonious charge
I care not for) I may express my grief
At the sad funerals of my friends deceased,
And yet proclaim with how much joy I wed
The beauteous Phryne?
I have beat my brain
To find out a right garb: wear these two cloaks.
This sable garment, sorrows Livery,
Speaks funeral: this richer robe of joy,
Says it is a nuptial solemnity.
A choice device:—I'll practise.
Rarely well.
GOod morrow boy: how flows thy blood, Asotus,
Upon thy wedding day? is it spring-tide?
Find thou an active courage in thy bones?
Wilt thou at night create me Grandfather? ha?
O, I remember with what sprightly courage
I bedded thy old mother, and that night
Bid fair for thee boy: how I cursed the ceremonies,
And thought the youngsters scrambled for my points
Too slowly: It was a happy night, Asotus.
How sad a day is this! methinks the sun
Affrighted with our sorrows, should run back
Into his Eastern palace, and for ever
Sleep in the lap of Thetis. Can he show
A glorious beam when Tyndarus is dead,
And fair Techmessa? I will weep a flood
Deep as Deucalions; and again the Chaos
Shall musle up the lamentable world
In sable cloaks of grief and black confusion!
What ails my boy? unseasonable grief
Shall not disturb thy nuptials.—Good Asotus,
Be not so passionate.
What incomparable mirth
Would such a dotard and his humorous son
Make in a Comedy, if a learned pen
Had the expression!
Now the tother cloak.
In what a verdant weed the spring arrays
Fresh Tellus in! how Flora decks the fields
With all her tapestry! and the Choristers
Of every grove chant Carols! Mirth is come
To visit mortals. Every thing is blithe,
Jocund, and jovial. All the gods arrive
To grace our nuptials. Let us sing and dance,
That heaven may see our revels, and send down
The planets in a Masque, the more to grace
This days solemnity.
I, this Asotus,
There's music boy in this.
Now this cloak again.
You Gods, you overload mortality,
And press our shoulders with too great a weight
Of dismal miseries. All content is sled
With Tyndarus and Techmessa. Ravens croak
About my house ill-boding schreech-owls sing
Epithalamiums to my spouse and me.
Can I dream pleasures, or expect to taste
The comforts of the married bed, when Tyndarus
And fair Techmessa from the world are gone!
No, pardon me you gentle ghosts; I vow
To cloister up my grief in some dark cell:
And there till grief shall close my blubbered eyes,
Weep forth repentance.
Sure he is distracted!
Asotus, do not grieve so, all thy sorrows
Are doubled in thy father: Pity me,
If not thy self; O pity these gray hairs,
Pity my age, Asotus.
What a silly fellow
My father is, that knows not which cloak speaks?
Father, you do forget this is our nuptial.
Cast off those trophies of your wealthy beggary,
And clad your self in rich and splendent weeds,
Such as become my father: Do not blemish
Our dignity with rags. Appear to day
As glorious as the sun. Set forth your self
In your bright lustre.
So I will, my boy:
Was there ever father so fortunate in a child?
Do not I vary with decorum, Ballio?
I do not think but Proteus, Sir, begot you
On a Chamaeleon.
Nay, I know my mother
Was a Chamaeleon, for my father allowed her
Nothing but air to feed on.
RIses Aurora with a happy light
On my Asotus?
Beauteous Phryne, welcome:
Although the dragons tail may scandal thee,
And Mars corrupt the Scorpion and the Ram;
Yet the good Moon in angles and sixth signs
Gives thee a good report.
What means my dear?
Thy dear, my beauteous Phryne, means the same
With Hali, Baruch and Abobali,
Caucaph, Toz, Archaphan, and Albuas,
Gafar, with Oslo, Hippocras, and Lencuo,
With Ben, Benesaphan, and Albubetez.
I fear you have studied the black art of late.
Ah Girl! The—Almutes of the filial house
Is not depressed, Venus is free, and Jove
Not yet combust: the signs are watery signs,
And Mercury beholds the trine aspect
Unhindered in his influence.
What of all this?
We shall have babies plenty: I am grown
Learned of late. Go Phryne, be in readiness,
I long to tie the knot: at night we will make
A young Asotus.
Health attend you, Sir.
TYndarus living? here take this cloak away, Ballio:
We have no use on it.
The more sorrow's mine.
How does my friend Asotus?
You are welcome
From the dead, Sir: I hope our friends in Elysium
Are in good health.
Ballio, I thank you heartily
You had an honest and religious care
To see us both well buried.
I shall be hanged.
Hymen, thou God of union, with smooth brow
Accept our pious Orgies. Thou that teased
Hearts in a knot, and link'st in sacred chains
The mutual souls of Lovers, may it please
Thy Deity, to admit into the number
Of thy chaste votaries this blessed pair.
Mercy you Gods, the statue turns away.
Why should this be? The reason is apparent:
Evadne has been false, and the chaste deity
Abhors the sacrifice of a sported soul.
Go thou dissembler, mask thy self in modesty,
Wear virtue for a veil, and paint false blushes
On thy adulterate check. Though thou may cozen
The eyes of man, and cheat the purblind world,
Heaven has a piercing sight. Hymen, I thank thee;
Thou stoppedst my foot stepping into the gulf.
How near was I damnation!
Gentle Hymen,
What sin have I unwillingly committed
To call heavens anger on me?
If there be
A secret guilt in these that hath offended
Thy mighty godhood, wilt thou please to prove
This other knot? The Statue turns again!
What prodigies are these!
Celestial powers,
You tyrannise o'er man: and yot it is sin
To ask you why you wrong us.
Cunning Pamphilus,
Though, like a snake, you couch your self in flowers,
The gods can find your lurking, and betray
The spotted skin.
Above this twenty years
Have I attended on thy sacred Temple,
Yet never saw thee so incensed, dread Hymen.
To search the reason, will you please to proffer
These to his godhood?
Will thy godhood daigue
These two the blessings of the genial sheet?
He beckons um.
I, there the faith is plighted.
False Pamphilus, the honour of the temple,
And the respect I bear religion,
Cannot protect thee. I will stain the altars,
And sprinkle every statue in the shrine
With treacherous blood.
Provoke not Joves just thunder.
Well, you may take Evadne, heaven give you joy.
Religion is mere juggling. This is nothing
But the Priests knavery: a kind of holy trick
To gain their superstition credit. Hymen,
Why dost thou turn away thy head? I fear
Thy bashful deitle is ashamed to look
A woman in the face. If so, I pardon thee:
If out of spite thou cross me, know, weak godhood,
I'll teach mankind a custom that shall bring
Thy altars to neglect. Lovers shall couple,
As other creatures,—freely, and ne'er stand
Upon the tedious ceremony—Marriage:
And then thou Priest may starve. Who in your temple
Will light a —Cere-candle, or for incense burn
A grain of frankincense?
Heaven instruct our souls
To find the secret mystery!
I have entertained
One that by Ylem and Aldeboran,
With the Almutes, can tell any thing.
I'll fetch him hither: he shall resolve you.
Man is a ship that sails with adverse winds,
And has no haven till he land at death.
Then when he thinks his hands fast grasp the bank,
Comes a rude billow betwixt him and safety,
And beats him back into the deep again.
HEre's another figure to cast, Sir. These two Gentlemen
A sudden joy o'recomes me.
Are to marry
Old Chremylus daughters. This is Tyndarus,
And he should have Evadne: and this Pamphilus,
That has a moneths-minde to Techmessa; but that Hymen
Looks with a wry-neck at um. If the Ascendant
With all his radiations and aspects
Know any thing,—here's one that can unfold it.
I must go sit my self for mine own wedding.
Fly from the temple you unhallowed troup,
That dare present your sins for sacrifice
Before the gods!
What should this language mean?
Think you that heaven will ever sign a grant
To your incestuous matches?
How incestuous?
This is not Tyndarus, but Demetrius son,
Called Clinias, and fair Evadnes brother.
Evadne trusted in exchange to Chremylus,
For young Timarchus, whom Demetrius took
With him to Athens, when he fled from Thebes
To save the infants from the monsters jaws,
The cruel Minotaur. Marvel not the gods
Forbid the banes, when in each match is incest.
I wonder he should know this.
I am amazed.
I will confirm your faith.
My father?
My father?
No, good Timarchus, ask thy blessing there.
Sir, if I not mistake me, you are Chremylus.
Pray let me see that ring.—Sir, I must challenge it,
And in requital will return you this.
Demetrius! Welcome. Now my joys are full,
When I behold my son and my old friend.
Which is Evadne? Blessings on thy head.
Now Chremylus, let us conclude a marriage
As we at first intended; my Clinias
With your Techmessa, and your son Timarchus
With my Evadne.
Heaven has decreed it so.
Are the young people pleased?
The will of heaven
Must be obeyed.
Now try if Hymen please
To end all troubles in a happy marriage.
Hymen, we thank thee, and will crown thy head
With all the glorious chaplets of the Spring,
The first-born kid, and fattest of our bullocks
Shall bleed upon thy altars (if it be
Lawful to sacrifice in blood to thee,
That art the means to life) because thy provident mercy
Prevented this incestuous match. Deign now
Propitious looks to this more holy knot.
This virgin offers up her untouched zone,
And vows chaste love to Clinias. All joy to you.
The fair Evadne too is come to hang
Her maiden-girdle at thy sacred shrine,
And vows her self constant to the embraces
Of young Timarchus.—Happiness wait on both!
I see our jealous thoughts were not in vain.
Nature abhorring from so foul a sin,
Infused those doubts into us.
IF there be any Knight that dares lay claim
To beauteous Phryne,—(as I hope there's none)
I dare him to the encounter; let him meet me
Here in the lists:—If he be wise he dare not,
But will consider danger in the action.
I'll win her with my sword:—mistake me not,
I challenge no man. He who dares pretend
A title to a hair, —shall sup with Pluto:
It were cooler supping in another place.
No champion yet appear?—I would fain fight.
Sir, if you want a champion, I am for you.
I have no quarrel to thee, Amazon.
I must have a husband too, and I will have a husband; I, and I will have you: I can hold out no longer: I am weary of eat∣ing choke and coals, and begin to dislike the feeding on oat-meal. The thought of so many marriages together has almost lost my maiden-head.
Why, thou shalt have my father: though he be old,
He's rich, and will maintain thee bravely. Dad,
What think you on it?
Thou'lt make me, boy, too hap
She shall have anything.
You will let me make
My own conditions.
What thou wilt, my girl.
I will feed high, go rich, have my six horses,
And my embroidered coach, ride where I list,
Have all the gallants in the town to visit me,
Maintain a pair of little legs to go
On idle messages to all the Madams.
You shall deny no Gentleman entertainment
And when we kiss and toy, be it your cue
To nod and fall asleep.
With all my heart.
Then take him Girl, he will not trouble thee long.
For Mars being oriental unto Saturn,
And occidental to the Sun, proclaims
He is short-lived.
Well Sir, for want of a better,
I am content to take you.
Join um, Priest.
Thus I conjoin you in religious bands.
Now usher Phryne to my amorous arms.
The generous Asotus and fair Phryne
Present their vows unto thee, gracious Hymen.
I forbid the banes.
I forbid the banes.
And can there be no weddings without prodigies?
This is the impediment, the Azymenes
Or Planetary hindrance threatened me.
By the Almutes of the seventh house,
In an aspect of Tetragon radiation,
If Luna now be corporally joined,
I may overcome the averseness of my stars.
Sir, as you cleared our doubts, I will clear yours.
See you these ghosts? Well Sexton, take heed hereafter
How you rob the dead; some of um may cozen you.
Pardon me, Sir; I seriously vow
Henceforth to rob no creature but the living.
Well, you shall both fast to night, and take penance at the lower end of the table in these sheets, and that shall be your pu∣nishment.
Phryne, I take thee for my loving spouse.
And I take you for my obedient husband.
And I conclude the tie.
Ha, you sweet rogue!
WHy how now Tutor, a rope about your neck?
I have heard, that hanging and marrying go by de∣stiny;
But I never thought they had come together before.
I have cast a serious thought upon my guilt,
And find my self an arrant rogue. The gallows
Was all the inheritance I was ever born to.
Even use me as you please.
Pray, Sir, let me beg my Tutors pardon.—
Spare him to day: for when the night comes on,
There's sweeter executions to be done.
You have prevailed. No man be sad to day.
Come, you shall dine with me.
Pardon me, Sir: I will not have it said by the malicious, that I eat at another mans table the first day I set up house-keeping. No, you shall all go home and dine with me.
Come then: our joys are ripened to perfection.
Let us give heaven the praise, and all confess,
There is a difference twixt the jealousy
Of those that woo, and those that wedded be.
This will hatch vipers in the nuptial bed,
But that prevents the eking of the head.
HOw now? Will our endeavours give satisfaction?
I find by the horoscope, and the elevation of the bright Aldeboran, a Sextile opposition; and that the isle∣mutes is inclining to the enemies house.
A way with your Almutes, Horoscopes, Elevations, Aldeborans, Sextiles, and Oppositions. I have an art of mine own to cast this figure by.
THe Lovers now Jealous of nothing be
But your acceptance of their Comedy.
I question not heavens influence: for here
I behold Angels of as high a Sphere.
You are the stars I gaze at, we shall find
Our labours blessed, if your Aspects be kind,

THat Muse whose Song within another Sphere
Hath pleased some, and of the best, whose ear
Is able to distinguish strains that are
Clear, and Phebean, from the popular;
And sinful dregs of the adulterate brain,
By me salutes your Candor once again;
And begs this noble favour, that this place,
And weak performances may not disgrace
His fresh Thalia; alas our Poet knows
Wee have no name, a torrent overflows▪
Our little Island, miserable wee,
Doe every day play our own Tragedy:
But it is more noble to create than kill,
Hee says, and if but with his flame, your will
Would join, wee may obtain some warmth, and prove
Next them that now doe surfeit with your love▪
Encourage our beginning, nothing grew
Famous at first, and Gentlemen, if you
Smile on this barren Mountain, soon it will,
Become both fruitful and the Muses hill.
I Heard your Niece, Sir, was not well, you should encourage her to take the air some times.
Indeed shoe's somewhat melancho∣lie, and keeps
Her chamber:
'T may prove inconvenient for
Her health, does she not languish for a husband?
Take heed of the greene disease▪
I'll find a cure,
If that will do it; your daughters are not yet
Disposed of?
No, but we have clients daily
That visit their affections; and while
We are speaking, here is one.
Ha, which of them? I hope not Master Yongrave▪
Hee would engage his service to my Niece,
I shall not think him worthy, if he have
Two Hares afoot.
He is a stranger to me,
But Master Gerard that holds conference with him,
Maintains some correspondence with my daughters:
Pray let's observe.
Prithee come, venture in.
No farther, you have obligation,
Excuse me, I have affairs, some other time
Isle waite on you.
What needs this ceremony?
The fair ones will not blast you.
It were a sin,
To think their beams could hurt▪
Faith, I could wish
Thy affection not engaged, there's so much beauty
And goodness in this pair of sisters▪
Doe not
Make me suspect your friendship, you would wish
Me miserable, not that I dispute
Their merit, but I must not yield to that
Will bring my faith and honour into question;
I have a Mistress, be you happy Sir in yours.
I like this well, lets interrupt i'm;
Good fortune Master Yongrave.
You are Sir,
Most opportunely met.
Kind Master Gerard.
I had a present resolution,
To visit you at home, and your fair kins-woman.
I shall be bold.
Pray enter.
We'll together: I take my leave.
I am your humble servant,
Come Master Yongrave.
This Gerard is a Gentleman of handsome parts,
And they say fortuned, diligent in's courtship:
But it concerns me to be careful in
Disposing of my children.
Sir Gervace Simple Sir, is newly entered,
His wisdom must be welcome: there's a Knight
With Lordships, but no manors, one that has
But newly cast his country skin, came up
To see the fashions of the Town, has crept
Into a Knight-hood which he paid for heartily
And in his best clothes is suspected for
A Gentleman.
Thumpe, I have not yet the face to speak to her, but
It is no matter, and I can get her fathers and mothers good will.
You have her mothers already.
I, I, shoe's a Matron as they say, I came over her with
My Knight-hood, and begot a consent upon her quickly: I
Perceive it is an advantage for a man to wear spurs,
The rowel of Knight-hood does gingle in the ear of their
Understanding.
I doe wonder Sir, that you speak so well now, and
Want the audacity as they say to talk to your Mistress.
So do I too, but I cannot help it: I was a Gentleman
Thou know but tother day. I have yet but a few
Complements, within a while I shall get more impudence
And then have at her.
The father.
Pray heaven you may besav'd, Sir.
You're charitable.
I am come Sir to doe my business.
How Sir?
You may imagine as they say, and so forth your
Daughter is a very fine Gentlewoman, and may in due time be a Lady,
For I doe love her by this Mullet, there's a touch of my Heraldry.
Have you acquainted her,
How much you mean to honour us, how far
Have you engaged her liking?
Nay, I ne'er spoke to her in my life, nor do not mean in hast.
How Sir?
Not in hast Sir, it were no good manners to speak hastily to a Gentlewoman, to talk post (as they say) to his Mistress; I am resolved to have your consent first, and then.
It argues your discretion;
I think so, some wiser than some, faith how doe y'like my face.
I have seen worse in a beard,
Oh, ho, I took my choice of forty, this morning.
Did you so?
My man knows I broke a Looking▪ glass into for∣tie pieces,
I am sure, and this was the best face I could find among
'Em all, look in my forehead, hast any skill in Palmistry?
Not I, Sir.
But this is nothing to the purpose (as they say,)
Where is my beautiful Mistress, your Daughter?
Which of i'm?
No matter which.
They are both within.
Oh, it is well, I will not speak with her, I told you
Before, but I hope I shall have your good Will.
You mean to marry her.
My Chaplain shall.
You are witty; I hope Sir, you will give me leave (as
They say) to deliberate, for after your example, I would
Doe nothing rashly, I will not give you my consent in
Hast Sir.
It is wisdom, I can tarry, it is fit I should, commend
Me to the Virgin.
What, leaving us already, noble Sir?
Why husband, what doe y'meane? no more respect
To a man honourable? you're not going Sir?
Yes faith, I love to be going, I cannot abide to stand
Still, Thumpe, take off my cloak; does my Rapier become Me?
Excellent well.
This it is to be a complete Gentleman, what a cox∣comb was I before I came to town, the country breeds so many Clowns; dost think my tenants will know me now I am disguised
But what assurance can he give me, wife,
That he is able to get children?
For that's a thing material; I would not
Willingly sacrifice my daughter to
An Eunuch, and such a one may that Knight be,
For ought I know.
What doe you talk of children?
Is he not honourable, a proper Knight?
She does commend me; doe not put on my cloak yet, let her survey my person.
Shall not our daughter be a Lady, and I a
Ladies mother? And the Heralds know
That is some privilege; you have seen many Eunuchs
With a black beard; he is a man I warrant him,
He has the right hair, Husband, for a woman,
I know it by experience: tell not me,
Suppose he were an Eunuch, he I say
Is honourable, and any body can get children,
That's the least thing of a hundred
And the woman be but fruitful.
Now Isle take my leave.
Will it please you Sir, to walk in, and speak to my daughter?
No, I think it not the best way to speak to her, as I said,
In hast, what if I had an inventory of my good parts
First drawn to prepare her.
And his father had not left him more land than brain,
His worship had been but a poor fool.
Well, if she understand signs, have at her.
Come, I will direct you.
My wife is passionate and affects this Knight
For's title, but I hope my daughter will
Submit to my election: how now:
Here is a Gentleman desires access to you.
A Gentleman?
He may be a Lord by his train,
A Page waits on him.
Some fresh Inamorato.
Save you Sir.
And you Sir.
You doe not know me?
Not I Sir.
It is very likely: you have a daughter.
I have two:
Two? the better, there is more choice,
They want husbands.
Twill become my care to provide 'm good ones.
You say well, what doe y' think of me?
I know you not.
You told me that before: may I see'm?
They are not to be let out Sir by lease,
Or yearly rent.
You mistake me; I come not for a lodging.
Nor to lye with them?
I come to take'm Sir, another way:
What portions have they?
You should be a purse-taker, by your enquiry
After their money, they have a round portion, Sir.
What's that?
A cipher.
How?
Nothing. I hope you have no mind to marry.
Ex nihilo nihil fit. I came to offer my self a
Servant in affection to one of your daughters, but
Nothing has converted me.
Doe y'heare Sir, a fine humorist: if they marry with
My consent, I can make figures, which added to
Their ciphers, may make up 2000 pound apiece: what
Is your name?
My name is Caperwit.
You've a dancing Name, I doe not think, but you
Write all the Coranto's.
Wit! wit by Mercury! I shall love thy daughters the
Better for that: doe they affect Poetry?
They read nothing else.
Then they are wise; it is a Seraphic contemplation▪
I'll furnish them with the most excellent Poems—
Of your own composition?
That is intimated, when I say excellent;
Your daughters shall be judge, let 'm vouchsafe
A subject to my muse, and prove the height
Of my imaginations.
They are entering.
Thus breaks Aurora from the Eastern hills,
And chase night away, let me salute
Your rosie cheek—
Good morrow to you Sir, there is but one Aurora,
What doe y' make my Sister pray?
She is the Sun it self.
No Sir, I am the daughter of that Gentleman,
No sun Isle assure you.
Whose golden beams doe gild this lower world,
Transfixing hearts, converting ribs of ice
Into a flame.
What buffonry is this?
Lets hear his speech out, and my Sister be the Sun,
Wee shall have day enough: a pretty Pageant!
Prithee doe not mind him.
Virgins, that equal all the graces, and
Only in this, that you are two, beneath them.
The miracles of beauty! for whose eyes
The Persians might forsake their god, and pay
Religious honour to this flame—whats he?
A Gentleman, that would endear himself.
Has he any fancies in him? Can he ravish
The Ladies?
Ravish Ladies Sir? that's a dangerous matter.
How many raptures does he talk a day?
Is he transported with Poetic rage?
When was he styled Imperial wit? who are
The Prince Electors in his Monarchy?
Can he like Celtic Hercules, with chains
Of his divine tongue, draw the gallant tribe
Through every street, whilst the grave senator
Points at him; as he walks in triumph, and
Doth wish, with half his wealth, he might be young,
To spend it all in Sack, to hear him talk
Eternal Sonnets to his Mistress? ha?
Who loves not verse is damned—
How Sir? This Gentleman dares fight.
Who will fight with him?
You doe not know his disposition.
But I will, Sir; I have a great ambition to be of your acquaintance, I hope you will excuse these fancies of mine, though I were borne a Poet I will study to be your servant in Prose, yet if now and then my brains doe sparkle, I can∣not help it, raptures will out, my Motto is Quicquid cona∣bore▪
the midwife wrapped my head up in a sheet of Sir Philip Sidney that inspired me, and my nurse descended from old Chaser, my conversation has been among the furies, and if I meet you in Apollo, a pottle of the best Ambrosia in the house, shall waite upon you.
They are here Sir, at full view.
What's he?
A Knight Isle assure you.
Does he come
A wooing to the Ladies?
After the Spanish fashion—
A far off.
Daughter, I must counsel you to respect
This honourable man, you doe not know
What it is to be a Lady, and take place,
Such titles come not every day, observe
With what a comely garb he walks, and how
He bends his subtle body, take him a my word,
A man of his complexion loves a woman naturally.
A pretty motion.
Pray come nearer Sir.
You shall pardon me for that, I know
My distance.
Will he not speak to her?
You should doe well to furnish him with an oration, a spoonful of Aganippe's well, and a little of your Salt, would season, if not pickle him.
Should I so wast the bright Minerva's dew, to pickle a Mushrome?
Thumpe, she looks upon me, to say truth, I am but a bashful puppy.
Your worship is more than a puppy.
I, I know I am an old dog at her mother, but and I should be hanged, I have not impudence enough to speak to her: does not that Gentleman laugh at me?
He is very merry with her father.
It is very suspicious, would I had a good jest to get of withal.
You shall command the duty of a daughter,
But I hope mother, you will give me leave
To love before I marry I have yet
No argument of his affection,
But what you please to bring me it becomes not
My modesty to court him, and give up
My heart before I hear him say, he means
To meet and entertain it.
It is a fault, and I must blame him, that he is no for∣warder.
I will accuse him—
Doe so.
Love, forgive me this excuse, my heart is fixed,
I find another written here.
I doe salute you, venery∣ble Sir.
You may salute me at your pleasures, but you are mistaken, I am no more venerable than your self; my name is Sir Gervace Simple.
And I am one of his Gen∣tleman Ushers▪ Sir, that follow him.
Heroic Sir, I doe adore your physiognomy. Now by the dust of my Progenitors—
There's a fine oath!
You look like the Nine Worthies.
I have been taken for 'em a hundred times.
Fairer than Plutos self king of the shades.
That King was a poor kinsman of mine, and indeed Wee had one complexion.
The Devil you had?
Sir, I am sorry, I cannot stay wi'y, but pray if you meet any of the nine Worthies, or my Cousin Pluto, com∣mend me to 'em, I shall be glad to meet you, or them, at a∣ny Tavern, between Cheap and Charingcrosse, and so I re∣maine yours, or not his own, sau's complement.
When will you please Sir Gervace, to visit us again? Nay, it shall be yours.
Now my foot's in.
But that I see it, I should not have believed there were such a fool in nature.
In this variety of servants, I
Acknowledge you greatly honour me, and in the presence
Of both your parents to vouchsafe this favour,
Doubly obliges me.
You are most welcome.
You may believe my sister, she ne'er speaks
But by direction of her heart.
I am confident,
Nor hath she any virtue, which you doe not
Divide with her; your twins in birth and goodness!
You're bountiful in character.
Isle not oppose you Sir, and you can win their open∣neon.
It is enough, I shall be proud to serve you;
But at this present, with your noble licence,
I take my leave, there is a Lord expects
To meet me at a Tavern, that has come
Fourscore and nineteen mile, to hear an elegy of
My composition
He deserves to enjoy you.
Isle attend the Ladies, when my stars will be more propitious, in the interim wearing your beautiful figures in my heart, I kiss your white hand—
I think the stock of his discourse be wasted,
And he returns to take up more on's credit,
Until he break again, the Town is full
Of these vaineglorious flashes.
Chrisolina,
You see what store of servants ye attract,
Plenty of lovers but I hope you will
Be ruled, and take my counsel: which of all
And be plain wi'mee, hold you best opinion of?
You will not Sir, be angry, if I answer you justly.
No no, tell me.
I confess,
I now doe feel the power of love, until
That Gentleman—
Which, which Gentleman?
By his fair merit, won my hearts consent,
I had my freedom.
Master Gerard?
The same, oh Sir, there's no comparison
With him and those that proffer us their service:
Sir Gervace is but title, tother noise,
Empty of all reality and worth,
There is my choice, more precious to my thoughts,
Than all mankind without him, and I hope
You will be kind in your allowance Sir.
You might have used less haste in your election,
Or first acquainted me, you shall doe well
To keep possession of your heart awhile;
But Isle consider; send your sister to me:
What say you daughter to Sir Gervace?
Nothing, as much as he hath said to me.
I affect worth, not show; and in my choice
I hope your judgement Sir will meet.
I like this well, be obedient.
What think you Sir, of Master Gerard?
You doe not love him?
I should then belly
My heart when I deny him my best love,
He needs not boast his worth, like those whom Nature
And Art have left unfurnished, hoe's a man
For birth, for education, for his fortune,
Worthy a nobler wife, than she that now
Commends him to you.
Would you marry him?
I know not that man in the world beside,
I would call husband, in my soul I am
Already his, and if you will not be
Held cruel to your daughter—
How's this?
Both in love with the same man? my care will be
To a great purpose, this is very strange;
Send your sister to me; come hither, come hither,
You are not yet contracted to that Gentleman.
No such thing has past.
But you are content to take him for your bridegroom, I mean Master Gerard.
And call it happiness;
Your mother calls: so, so, doe you hear? Aurelia, doe you love that Gentleman?
Yes.
Very good▪ when your wedding clothes come home, pray give me leave to pay for 'em, and the din∣ner too. I say nothing of a portion, go after your sister: hum, this is very pretty, faith, let me be bold to ask you a question Sir.
My answer shall be just, and free.
Which of my daughters doe you love best?
As you're a Gentleman the truth, if you affect either, it
Is quickly answered.
The truth is, as you ask, I love nei∣there.
How, doe you love none of 'em both, they are ve∣rye well rewarded.
Love neither of them best, they are so equal in beauty, and desert, by both I swear, I cannot prefer any.
You'd not have two wives against the Statute?
When I have the happiness to speak with one alone▪
Theres so much sweetness in her, such a troop
Of graces waiting on her words and actions,
I love her infinitely, and think it blessing
To see her smile, but when the tother comes
In presence, in her eye she brings a charm
To make me dote on her; I am divided,
And like the trembling Needle of a Dial,
My heart's afraid to fix, in such a plenty
I have no star to sail by.
This is stranger.
Than all the rest, but doe you love i'm both?
I dare not call it my misfortune Sir,
And yet I know not.—
What will become o'this?
I'st possible? My daughter will be mad if this humour
Hold, and I am little better while I think on it:
Isle to i'm again.
On whom shall I complain for my hard fate?
Love is not innocent enough to bee
A child, yet Poets give him Deity,
Fond men! prove it in me, thou quiverd Boy,
That love with equal flame two Mistresses,
I will believe thee a god, and kiss thy dart,
Furnish my bosom with another heart.
I Am her Keeper; expect here a while,
And Isle prepare her.
Isle attend; poor Gentlewoman,
Borne with more freedom than thou livest, thy parents
Left thee not rich to be a prisoner,
Nay worse, a prey to this hard man, who hath
Sold thee already, for if I obtain
Thy love— I hear i'm coming.
Gentle Niece,
Misconstrue not my actions, it is my care
Of thee, and to satisfy the duty
I owe to my dead Brother, thy kind parent:
I thus restrain thee, thou art young, and can not.
Being so good thy self, suspect the world
Hath any false men in it; I know there are
Gallants, that study to undo such Virgins
As thou art, that will flatter and betray
Thy fortunes to their riot, this unhappiness
I would prevent, and have new found a man,
Into whose arms I may deliver up
The wealth that I am trusted with.
Hoe's welcome: Pray what's your business?
You may understand, partly by what your Uncle hath delivered.
You come a wooing doe ye not? Heigho!
How's this?
I'll leave you at opportunity.
Troth, if you be a good man, bee not tedious,
I doe not love set speeches nor long praises,
I hope you've made no verses o'my hair,
Acrostics o'my name, I hate them worse
Than witchcraft, or the place I live in: if
You be a suitor, put me out of my pain,
Quickly I beseech you.
I am one would be your servant.
My servant? what can you doe?
I can love you.
I cannot help it, it is none of my fault.
Your beauty makes me,
Which cannot bee without as fair a soul.
I dare believe my eyes, which till this present,
Could never reach more than your face, and that
At too unkind a distance, from your window;
I have enquired your fortune, and lamenting
With loving pity, such a noble creature
Should be confined to narrow limits, come
To bring you freedom, make you mistress of
Your liberty, and my self, if you can think
Me worthy of your love: I doe not court
Your fortune, but your self, and if I urge
With too much haste, what great ones might be proud
To expect, after much suit, and that you cannot
Find in your tongue consent, encourage me,
But for the present with one smile.
I cannot,
Unless I counterfeit, I have not smiled
These ten months; if a sigh will pleasure you,
I can afford enough to break your heart,
And yet I live. Walk into the other room,
You'll find an alteration in the ayre,
And think you come into a mist, which I
Made all with my own sighs, but I would not
Infect you so; you seem an honest Gentleman.
Her sorrows help the growth of my affection;
What will she be in peace, that is so lovely
In her distress; I wish you would impose
Something on me, to settle your sad thoughts,
I would embrace a danger, to assure
The quiet of your mind.
It is in the power
Of one, that would be kind to help me, but—
Make me that friend.
You may love me too much,
To undertake that task.
Too much I cannot.
Oh yes, for though I should esteem him dear,
And call him my true friend, that in this storm
Would lend a cord to save me, yet such is
The misery of the employment, he must not
Love me too well that does it.
Bee more plain
And let me never hope to be called yours,
If I refuse any command, that may
Or profit, or delight you.
I release these hasty
Protestations.
I pray trust me.
I will, athough
Every syllable you speak, makes me suspect,
You will repent this freedom. If you will doe
A grateful Office to me, in your person▪
Give this paper to a Gentleman.
Your name?
In the direction
You'll find it, with all necessary circumstance
To meet with him
This all: you doe not well.
To mock my honest heart with this cheap service.
I was in earnest, when I promised more,
Than carriage of a letter.
If you please
To make it then a perfect act of Nobleness,
You may take notice, that I long have loved him,
And if you find him cold, in the perusal:
Tell him I had the promise of his faith,
When I gave up my heart, in the presence of
A thousand Angels, that will witness it:
If yet hee bee not soft to stir up his
Compassion, tell him how I live, and languish,
You may report you saw me weep, I have not
Much more to say, if you will doe this favour,
Twill be an argument of your respect,
I see your resolution cools already.
Tic a severe employment, but Isle doe
Something, pray honour me to kiss your hand,
I have not yet deserved to reach your lip:
Content dwell in your bosom.
What success?
I hope well, some affairs
Call me away.
Good Master Yongrave: how doe you like this Gentleman.
I shall desire to see him again, my heart
Is light upon sudden, please you Uncle
Isle in, and play a lesson o'my Lute.
Doe what you please, I relish not your ayre,
Thats only sweet to me that profit brings,
There is no music without golden strings.
Was ever Maid so miserable in her affection?
Is not my fate as cruel?
Cannot wee love him still, and yet bee sisters?
I hope we may; the love I bear to him
Shall not destroy my piety to you:
Nature hath framed us two in person, but wee are both one in heart.
Indeed we are; Wee are too much one,
And both love one too much, for either to enjoy him.
Say not so, give me a little time and I will try
How I can give him you; I will persuade
My heart to let him go.
Alas poor sister,
Why should you give him me? it is no argument;
Because I came one minute into life
Before you, therefore you should render first
To me, what is so precious to your self;
Rather let me begin, that was first made
Acquainted to the world, resign to thee,
And make thee happy by enjoying him.
But doe you know the miserable consequence?
For if you love him with that truth, and fervour
You speak of, (as it were a sin in me
Not to believe it,) can you look for less
Than death, to see me mistress of his faith,
And lead in nuptial triumph to the Church?
I cannot tell—
Or if it did not kill you
So soon, I know the sorrow would distract you.
How can I smile to see my sister weep,
Away her eyes, and tell the jarring minutes
With hasty sighs to know her self forsaken?
And can it be, you could doe less, that love him
As well as I, to see him made my husband,
Would it not make you melancholy sister,
And oft retire into the dark to weep,
Could you behold us freely kiss, embrace
And go to bed together, remembering that
You gave this friend to me from your own
Heart, and live?
Why let me dye then,
Rather than you, I shall perhaps obtain
Some charitable Epitaph, to tell
The world, I died to save my sisters life;
Tic no such thing to dye.
This is again
Our misery, it is not in our power
Be resignation, to assure to either
His love, he only must determine it▪
Wee cannot guide his passion.
Nor himself
Direct it, as he now appears divided,
May be, it would be fortunate for both,
Would he be more particular.
That makes
Our flame increase, that he protests he loves
Vs both, so equally.
It is very strange.
Let us then join our argument to persuade him,
To point out one of us to be his Bride,
Tother in time, may hope to gain her freedom;
I know not what I say—we both must plead
Against our selves: see, he is come already.
The scales are even still, that one had less
Perfection, to make the doubtful balance
Give difference in their value; but I wrong
Their virtues to wish either any want,
That equally incline my soul to love 'em.
Justice I now consent, thou should be blind,
My eyes are but the cause I cannot see,
And will not give my judgement leave to make
Distinction of these two Democritus,
I doe allow thy rashness, ad confess
Then thou did rectify thy contemplation
When thou did lose thy sight. Which of these two
Instruct me love, that tother? both? what fate
Hovers about my choice? Were it not sin
I would be blind, as Poets fancy love,
Into whom now I am transformed, that then
My soul not looking through these glasses, might
With inward speculation aim at her,
That is the happiest, if one can be so.
Sir, if wee be not troublesome—
You cannot.
To interrupt your meditations, wee have a suit.
Both? it must needs be granted,
Nor let us suffer in our modesties,
If our request seem strange.
Tic a command,
And I must needs obey; you two divide this Empires
You prepare; we dispute not
The strangeness of your love, but pity it,
And are so ready in our own affection
To answer your opinion of us both,
That if you can collect, what divide
On two, and place it fairly upon one,
Choose whom you will make happy.
We expect not
Your hasty answer, though wee both desire
A swift end to your trouble.
I pray stay.
I would determine now, but cannot—fair ones,
Was ever lover so perplexed? I must resolve.
Why how now Frank? what melancholy?
How came you hither?
Why o'my feet:
I was at your lodging to enquire for you,
And here they told me I should find you.
Yes,
Here I am lost indeed; prithee excuse my dullness.
What's the matter, come I guess
The cause, which of these Gentlewomen is it? I saw 'em▪
Did? and how dost like 'em prithee?
I doe like 'em so well, that I could wish—
Which, which of them?
Faith I cannot tell, the worst of 'em both a-bed wi'me.
Thy wishes are
Not modest: could thou love one of them nobly?
Ha? thou hast a person and fortune to invite thy
Entertainment, come let me counsel you.
To what?
To love, and to a blessing: could thou see
So sweet a pair, and feel no burning shaft?
Hast thou a soul about thee, that is capable
Of knowledge and delight? did ever love?
Yes once, and I think heartily, for the time,
But I ha'drowned her.
How?
In Sack, I think as gallants lose their Mistresses,
By drinking their health too often.
Prithee doe not trifle.
What would have me answer? I can love.
A woman?
What dost make of me?
With honour?
And honesty, if I see cause.
Enough; thou shalt have cause
Within two minutes, shalt but see again
These sisters, and be proud to be a servant,
I prophecy already; oh my friend!
Pray take me wi'you.
Yes, thou shalt go with me
And speak to 'em, and be amazed as I am,
To know there are such creatures.
I ha'seene a multitude of fair ones.
All other women
Are but like pictures in a gallery,
Set off to the eye, and have no excellence
But in their distance; but these two, far off
Shall tempt thee to just wonder, and drawn near
Can satisfy thy narrowest curiosity:
The stock of woman hath not two more left,
To rival them in graces.
You speak for 'em,
I may go farther, and fare worse,—. Isle not
Consider more on it, lets to 'em, stay—
Which of these two's your mistress? let me know▪
Where to direct my service.
That question
Hath puzzled me already.
Say, which is it you best affect▪
I love em both, so equally,
I know not which to name.
How, both? what then
Should I doe with em? art thou mad?
A little,
Contain thy self, and call thy reason to thee,
Although it be the cruelty of my fate,
〈◊〉 can be no bar to thee; I can enjoy
But one, and yet thou shalt have choice
Of both, thou art not thus my rival,
But my friend, relief of my distraction for she
Whom thou refuse, if thou can endear thy self to either,
In my heart shall meet a clear and perfect entertainment.
Hum.
Can thou resolve? win either,
And we both grow happy at once.
You say well, this is fair—
They are here.
With your favour I must chide you Sir, not once speak to My daughter, she expects to be courted with kisses and embraces.
I, I, I could kiss her all over, and embrace her too, but I have an imperfediment, I cannot speak as I would doe; but let me alone a little, Isle try, let me see, and I hanot forgot my verses.
Here they are, Isle not trouble you.
I will leave this Gentleman;
Hee is my best friend Ladies.
You oblige us more to respect him.
I hope you will be just,
At my return, when I declare my self.
Sir, you sh'anot need to urge it.
I am your honourer.
Now Thump, I am resolved to speak to her, whatsoever Come on it; hum, hum.
What another suitor?
I were best locke up my daughters, they'll be smothered with Gentlemen: Sir Gervace you are a welcome man.
You shall see, if I doe not speak to her, now
Now, and to the purpose, in spite of the devil.
Stroke me of the back.
There's something in my head, and it were out.
I hope you doe not mean your brains.
Would somebody loved me, but as well, as I loved Somebody.
Now it is out.
La you there, I think I talked to her.
But in my opinion you were quickly daunted.
Was I so? well mark me now, now, I will wink As hard as I can, and then I'm sure she cannot put me out.
Beauty—
How now? what means this?
Let me but kiss thy hand, and tell
How much I love thee; I know very well
Thou art a Phoenix, beauteous and bright,
And dost burn every man for thy delight
Thy eyes are Sun and Moon, not to be matched.
This was intended for you sister.
Thy hair is fine as gold, thy chin is hatched
With silver, needs must brazen be my face,
That cannot come into thee with a grace.
Before or after meat.
Sweet, hear me out.
But this I know, I am thy faithful Lover,
Oh quench my fire.
Or else the pot run's over.
You're in the right:
Accept me for thy servant, not thy foe,
For I doe love thee better than any man in the whole world can doe.
Come kiss me then, and open thy fair eyne.
With all my heart.
Ha, ha.
Gentlemen, rest you merry; Thump,
By this hand Isle bee drunk presently.
And you had taken my counsel, you had done so
Before you came hither: Wine is armour of proof.
Ladies I am sorry, this rude fellow has
Abused your ear, with harsh, and untuned numbers.
Your verses have a tune belike
I came a purpose, to present a copy
Of verses that should make your genius stand
Of the tip-toe, list to me, and grow immortal.
We shall be troubled now.
If please you Lady
Weel walk a side, I have something of more weight
I would impart.
Isle leave him too.
Master Caperwit, before you read, pray tell me,
Have your verses any adjectives?
Adjectives, would you have a Poem without
Adjectives? they are the flowers, the grace of al our language:
A well chosen Epithet doth give new soul
To fainting Poesy, and makes every verse
A bride, with Adjectives we bait our lines,
When we doe fish for Gentlewoman's loves,
And with their sweetness catch the nibbling ear
Of amorous Ladies, with the music of
These ravishing Nouns, we charm the silken Tribe,
And make the Gallant melt with apprehension
Of the rare word: I will maintain t against
A bundle of Grammarians, in Poetry,
The Substantive it self, cannot subsist
Without an Adjective.
But for all that,
Those words would sound more full, me thinks, that are not▪
So larded, and if I might counsel you,
You should compose a Sonnet clean without i'm:
A row of stately Substantives, would march
Like Switzers, and bear all the field before i'm;
Carry their weight, show fair like Deeds enroled,
Not Writs, that are first made, and after filled.
Thence first came up the title of blank verse,
You know Sir, what blank signifies? when the sense
First framed, is tied with Adjectives like points,
And could not hold together without wedges:
Hanged tic pedantic, vulgar Poetry,
Let children when they versify, stick here,
And there these piddling words for want of matter:
Poets write Masculine numbers.
You have given me a pretty hint, tic new.
And will bee grateful,
My daughter will affect it much the better,
And twill be honour, if she be the first,
To whom so choice a Poem is presented.
I wish you well Sir.
You oblige my service,
I will bestow these verses o'my footman;
They'll serve a Chambermaid, let me see
I want a little quickening, two or three
Infusions of sack will heighten me,
And make my Genius dance, then Lady, Lady—Gone?
Shoe's hard of Soul, but I must supple her,
And there's a conceit new struck upon my brain
Will do it, 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 forces united conquer,
Lady grow soft, if merit cannot prove
Happy, wee must use policy in love.
No more; you doe not well to wrong your friend,
That trusts you with his bosom.
Fair one, hear me.
He gave you welcome hither, and you practise
Unworthily to supplant him.
You are too
Severe, I have no thought so wicked Lady,
Deny me not that liberty, which all
The Creatures have, to wish their own felicity;
Which cannot bee without you, hee will not
Rapine to see me happy in your love.
In seeming to extenuate your error,
You thus enlarge it, and bring into question
The honour of your friend, for whom I must
Though weak, rise up a Champion for his virtue,
And to beat off all argument, on your part
To move for my affection, know, he is next heaven,
The only object of my heart, nor can it know a change.
And yet if you collect your self, you are not
The only Mistress of his heart, your sister hee loves
As well as you; your pardon fairest, tic possible,
Hee may prefer her too, since neither piety nor law allows▪
Hee can bee husband at one time, to both.
Then let discretion guide you first to freedom,
I love you not with half a heart, but all;
Heaven knows with all, at every look you doe
Transfix me, and can only cure the wound
With the same eyes, if they but smile upon it.
I must not hear you plead thus, you appear
Nor friend to him, nor me; so fare you well.
I am caught, by this good day I am, and know not
How now to help my self: a handsome thing!
What a blind buzzard is this Iackanapes Cupped?
Pox of his bird-bolt, Isle not leave her:
Yet I may be too forward; I am punished:
Venus, thy pardon, I beseech thee,
If thou be not hard-hearted, as the Poets feine,
Speak to thy Boy to fetch his Arrow back,
Or strike her with a sharpe one, make her squeak,
And Isle allow thee a Goddess. Ha, it is he.
Before thou speak to me, let me peruse
Thy face, Isle tell my self how thou hast sped:
Well? is it not so? Yet doe not answer me,
That smile does not show clear, there is some cloud
In the corner of thy forehead, that would spread,
And darken all thy face.
Your Physiognomy is quite discredited.
Hast prevailed? With which? why now thou art to tedious.
With the eldest, Chrysolina.
Ha, what sound was that? With Chrysolina?
I prithee what of her, I love her dearly;
Thou hast not filched away her heart, it grew with mine.
How's this?
Hast thou not seen the Woodbine,
That honey-dropping tree, and the loved Brier,
Embrace with their chaste bonghs, twisting themselves,
And weaving a greene net to catch the birds,
Till it doe seem one body, while the flowers
Wantonly run to meet and kiss each other?
So it was betwixt us two.
I mean the youngest.
What my Aurelia?
Thou can not rob me so: the amorous Turtles
Have but their imitation from our love;
The Pelican loves not her young so well,
That digs upon her breast an hundred springs,
When in her blood she bathes the innocent birds,
As I doe my Aurelia.
Godbewi'y',—I know not how to please you, nor to answer.
I prithee stay.
Engage me in a business?
Nay, thrust me of the lime-twigs, to set you
At liberty, when your own wings were glued
Toth'bush, and do ye reward me at his fashion?
And I had known it, you should ha'fluttered.
I forgot my self, I prithee pardon me,
I will excuse thee when thou art in love.
Then doe so now, and you'll be temperate and hear me.
Speak, I am recollected.
And I am in love.
Thou did name both, thou art so unhappy.
Your humours lead me to it, but I shall tell you?
Which, which of them did most encourage thee?
Be not you passionate still, but give me thanks,
And call me fortunate, she has half consented.
I shall be lost in the dark: declare which.
Which? why the eldest; which? Chrysolina,
Now be you advised, and court the other.
Half consenting.
I may say three quarters, and not lye.
Tic false; and such a stain thou throw upon that Virgin,
Thy blood deserves to purge.
You doe not mean to play the fool thus:
Pox upon this madness: I wo not fight with you,
And I will love that Gentlewoman:
I thought I had done you a curtsy.
So thou hast, if it be true.
Have you a mind to be the everlasting madcap?
And you can couple with both, I can resign;
Poor Gentlewoman, shell have the worst on it.
But I prithee tell me,
With what Art did thou so soon win her to thee?
It was some months here I prevailed; and were I not
Confident of thy honesty, I should
Suspect some witchcraft.
There is an Art
In wooing, not revealed to every man,
Which he that knows, shall doe more with a Maid
In some minute, than others in a twelve-moneth.
'T must be a lucky minute.
I, he must take her in the nick; and court her
In the precise minute: yet it may be, she
In pity of my sufferings or mistrusting
She might not be the first in your election,
Inclined the sooner: Now would I have you,
Without more ceremony, neglect the wench
That I have chosed: Do ye mark? neglect her,
And address all your courtship to the youngest,
Your meaning will be clearly understood
A both sides; so you shall with ease, enlarge
Your own heart, fix on one whose arms already
Are open to ye, and make my path direct,
Without any rub to the other. Is this sense?
Obey it then; set on before with your Mistress
A hand gallop, if I overtake you not, let me swing
In the bridle, and set a saddle o'my back, and let all the
Fools in the Town ride me.
Wee must not bee too rash, lets walk, and think on it.
You are a brave Wench.
You are grown bold of late.
I think so, gramercy Sack: Come kiss me, wo't thou be a Lady?
I have no great ambition.
Isle buy thee a Parrot to morrow, and a Monkey:
Here, take this Ring.
Pray keep it, and let me tell you Sir my mind.
And Isle tell thee mine, that's one for another.
Briefly then.
Be as brief as you please, I can be as brief as you, and tedious too: I know thou love me: Sir, did think I was such a fearful coxcomb as I made my self? No, I know when to be Lion, and when to be a Hare. But prithee tell me plainly, when shall we matrimony it, ha? thou dot'st upon my good parts; come, speak to me, pre∣thee be not bashful.
I fear you wo'not understand me.
Speak no language, and I warrant, I know Greek and Latin, I learned my Accidence.
Then know, I doe not love you, Sir.
You do not love me, Sir: then I have lost my labour, Sir▪
I make no doubt it will appear so,
I could be of the humour of some Mistresses,
By some slight favours to encourage you,
Accept your gifts, extol your wit, invent
New ways to melt your gold, beside the Exchange,
And petticoat embroideries.
Thou shall it have smock embroideries; nay, thy ve∣rye skin shall be embroidered.
Have every day some progress for your Coach,
And tire you worse than your foe•e Flanders Ma•es▪
And then laugh at you too: but I am honest,
And will deserve your nobler character:
I tell you what you must expect, in troth
I cannot love you, pray leave off in time,
And let this satisfy you.
This satisfy? why this is even as good nothing.
It is all that I can promise you.
Though you cannot love me,
It shall be for your honour to marry me.
By no means.
What, not marry me neither?
Then be no Lady, that I first pronounce:
Secondly know, I am resolved, your Mother
Shall understand it, by these Hilts.
I would advise you rather to be silent,
And take your leave like a good Christian Lover:
If you betray my honest meaning so,
And move her to impatience, I shall wish you
In the West Indies.
Here she comes.
Sir I hope, you and my Daughter are agreed,
And the conditions please me infinitely;
Mother you never placed your commendation
Upon a Gentleman so Noble, such
Plenty of honour dwells in him, I must
Bee happy in his embraces.
Oh ho! is it come about again?
Nay nay, I told you, you should find him honourable▪
Wee understand each other perfectly,
Hee has so sweet a soul, I may have any thing;
Hee has promised me the finest Parrots.
Oh I, and Madgehowlets that can speak all languages▪
Nay, and he will perform:
Well, for this act of duty, I shall find
Some gold beside thy portion, in the mean time
Isle move thy father to conclude the marriage:
And here hee is already.
Look you Sir,
These turns you put me too; doe not believe
I bear one thought more of good-will for this▪
If you suspect it otherwise; because
I carry it sweet and pleasing to my mother,
Who is so zealous in your cause, I'll swear
Your worship is the most unwelcomm'st ma•
In the world to me.
I'm glad she is not gone yet.
What need you distrust?
He will know precisely when we must be married,
Is jealous of delays, wo'not believe I love him,
Till the Priest hath sealed me his in the Church, hee says.
These are tricks, demurs, your daughter is not sober.
He means serious.
She doth but mock—
Who would think you could dissemble.
Sir have patience, I have not been so hasty,
To become tedious at last, refer that to my care;
Since you have made a marriage in your hearts,
The Church shall soon confirm it.
What doey' think of this?
Faith yet be wise and leave this wooing,
I shall maintain this humour to my mother,
And find a crotchet to come off with honour, you have not
Yet my hate, pray let's bee friends, and never meet again,
This is very fine in faith, if I do not study some mischief.
Conceal for your own shame.
How doe'y like 'em Lady? 'tpleasd your father
To impose somewhat severely on my Muse,
But your Divine acceptance shall declare it
A Crowned Poem, most illustrious Simple,
Simple me no more than I simple thee.
Sir, there is a Lady enquires for Master Caperwit.
A Lady out of complement? tic hee.
She seems of Noble quality, she has Coach and fair
Attendants, and calls her self the Lady Bird.
Good Cupped is it she?
Who gave her direction to find me here?
An honourable Lady, I confess, and hath a fortune
Noble like her birth, tic the rich Aldermans widow,
The great Bird that dyed it's Country house, a Kinsman
To the Ravens of the City; by no means admit her,
She'll betray her foolish Passion.
What is the matter?
Some few days ago
I did by chance, but drop a complement,
How much I was her servant, and she took it
To'th heart, and ever since hath sought occasion
To express her love to me, poor Gentlewoman,
You cannot help it.
Tic one, but of the myriad of Ladies
That have been taken—
With your tropes and figures,
No matter, let her come, it were not civil
Sir to deny your self.
Sheele tire all patience▪
But Lady, be assured my heart is dedicate
To you, and were all women kind in balance
With your divinest person, their light scale
Would kick the Firmament, or coming down,
Bee lost in the middle Region of the ayre,
Or bee converted to a Cloud to weep
Upon the earth, for being so much exceld.
Whore's this Footman?
Trot my Ladies Footman,
Go pray my Uncle Sir Walter Cormorant
To dine with me to morrow— And doe y'heare?
Tic in your way to ask if my Cousin Bulfinch,
The Steward of my Land, bee come to Town,
Hee lies in Fleetstreet between Hawk and Buzzard.
In the afternoon, remember Sirrah, that
You go to Master Kite, that lives in the Poultry,
And say I shall expect the thousand pound,
Was lent him upon mortgage:
Sir, beseech your Nobleness excuse me,
The affairs so nearly doe concern me, with
A Gentleman, (now your guest,) that I presumed
It should not bee offence, if I took hold
Of this occasion, to speak with him.
Madame, you need plead no excuse for that,
Command your freedom here: Daughters, my Lady
Would have some private conference,
By no means
Let me appear so troublesome, your presence
Will be no hurt to my design, you shall
Command a great deal more.
It was cunningly prepared,
Sir, after all, let me obtain your privilege.
Proceed.—
I shall accuse my self of too much boldness,
If you neglect me Sir before all these;
I come not to disturb you, nor to publish
What you have taken from me.
I hope she will lay some felony to his charge.
But Sir, you might have been so kind, to have seen your friend once in three days.
I must be pardoned Widow,
The glass that tells the hour, hath not more sands,
Than there be Ladies waite to catch me up
To spend my time with 'em, they break my dreams,
With importunity, and allow me but
One minute in a week, to say my prayers.
Among them all, there is not one
That more desires your happiness.
Tic more your goodness Lady, than desert,
Or provocation in me.
You're modest,
And thus increase your value.
Your favours are acknowledged, and take up
Much of my studies, how I may be active
In service to reward 'em, still preserving
My liberty, I must not be confined
Or wedged in; all that's good in nature ought
To be communicable, if you have
Promised your self more of me, than as you are
Allowed, an excellent part of the commonwealth,
Tic justice you correct the imagination,
Perhaps you'll say, you love me.
A fine Dialogue:
My blushes speak me guilty, and I fear
Betray my frailty to these Gentlewomen:
You'll sin against your knowledge Sir, to make
A question how much I esteem you, be not
A tyrant, if my opinion of your worth
Prevail against my modesty, to say
I cannot choose but love you, tic my fate,
My breeding never suffered, but in this,
That I should lose my self to court a man,
Ambitious of my favour; tic in vain
To tell you, with what art, my eyes have been
Courted by great ones for their smile, for you
Will turn them all to tears.
Alas poor Lady▪
I pity her, what doth she see in him,
To draw this passion?
May be, I am engaged
To another beauty.
That's my fear indeed;
For who can look with eyes like mine upon you,
And not be tempted to the same desires?
But be not Sir deceived, all forheads are not
True glasses of the mind, and beauty alone
Deserves not such a blessing▪ young men doe
Too hastily betray themselves to misery,
That think no heaven but in their Mistress face,
Look on my fortune, which doth spread more riches,
Than pleasure can instruct thee ways to spend,
Delights shall stream themselves into thy bosom,
Honour and titles of the state shall woe
Thy name to put them on and not be thine
But thou their ornament.
Affection must
Flow uncompeld, you may be pleased to take
Some other time to finish this discourse.
I may suspect I have offended these;
But pray interpret fairly, noble Sir,
I doe beseech you pardon
The errors that you find in us frail women,
Yet I believe you would not use me so
Neglectfully: tic time, I take my leave.
Wee are your humble servants.
Sir, if you will not affect this Lady,
I hope some other may.
And write himself the happiest man alive;
She is Widow for a Lord; but I am fixed,
I would you had her Sir, I say no more;
She has an estate of twenty Exchequers, and▪
Is of so gentle soul.
I leave you to repent
Your cruelty, my Coach—
Please you Madam,
Doe me the grace to let me waite upon you.
Now do I expect she'll dote upon me:
Ladies, you see what fortunes I neglect,
She is a pretty handsome creature too.
In my opinion Sir, you have not been
So kind as she deserves, and for my part
I have so much compassion of her sufferings,
Were all the wit of younger brothers in you,
And could you make me jointure of a Province,
I would rather marry my fathers serving man
And stand at livery my self than be
Wife to a man so ungrateful.
How, sweet Lady?
My sister, Sir, is just, can you expect
An entertainment here after your scorn
Of one that nobly loves you?
I have used a precious policy to supplant my self,
She has a scruple in her conscience,
And will not wrong the Lady Bird, a pox
Upon his Rhetoric.
Your Lady Bird is Coached, and she hath took
Sir Gervace with her.
How?
Their legs doe just••
In the same boot.
Ha, ha, ha.
Why doe you laugh? What humor's this?
Sir Gervace: Ha, ha, he thinks, ha, ha—
You have a merry spleen, I know not what
He thinks, but if he mean to retrive the Lady Bird.
Ha, ha.
Pray let me know, whence springs this sudden mirth; I will laugh wi'yee.
Hold my sides, my buttons!
Tic well your doublet's slashed
Ha, ha, next time I come, Isle discover—I sha'not
Contain my self in the street, ha, ha.
The Poet's mad indeed, farewell Democritus.
By your favour Sir.
Your business?
I understand your name is Thornay.
It was my fathers, and tic, upon record, that I was christened Thomas, does that concern you Sir?
I bring commends from a friend of yours.
I crave you mercy,
I am your servant.
He appears unmoved.
Thank you Sir, Godbe-wi'y'.
Although I am confident
You think it not my office to convey
Letters so much respect I bear the Gentlewoman
That sent it, I would think it Sir no burden
To carry an answer to her.
It requires none.
Shall I return, you'll visit her in person?
I cannot promise.
Why?
I may forget it.
With your pardon Sir, she did impose on me.
To know some resolution.
She did?
Are you acquainted with her?
I doe bear
No great age in her knowledge.
Perhaps she has imparted the contents.
I could conjecture
By circumstance she much desires to see you.
Cannot come; that's all—
I must have more.
How Sir?
Tic a neglect becomes you not.
You are not sent a Champion to defy me.
I have no title from her blood, and yet
Her virtue is so near me, I must tell you,
She hath deserved your best esteem.
She has told you belike some story.
I pray see her, Isle waite upon you.
To what purpose?
To love and cherish her, that claims your heart,
The office of your soul to honour her,
Does not your conscience tremble yet? what reason
Can you allege you should not love her?
Reason? Isle show you a reason, walk a little further.
I shall expect it.
It must be so, and yet me thinks I move
Without a soul, she is the first apostate
From loves religion, in that my honour
Is safe, and it is justice, my Aurelia,
This heart to thee, should now alone be sacred.
Sir, you are welcome, what not speak to me?
This is a strange neglect; I have news for you:
Your friend—
Tic so, he has prevailed with her,
And she will boast her change.
He cannot be
So fixed in meditation; with your favour.
Reserve your news, I doe not thirst to hear it.
Sure he mistakes me all this while, tic I.
But tic not I, I see you are a woman,
I have nothing else to say.
I have not used him so: was there no way to express his purpose, without this scorn? tic not discreetly done, I could be very angry he returns,
With him Aurelia.
I am ignorant
With what words I should meet this noble love.
I was created for this happiness,
To these embraces which doe more than twist
Our bodies, every circle of thy arms
Enchaines my soul, that doth forget all freedom,
And willingly submit to be thy prisoner.
It doe not grieve me that he loves my sister,
I am too little to contain my joy,
It flows above the narrow banks Aurelia:
What shall I say let me bath here eternally,
And study new Arithmetic, to count
Our blessings.
Can you Sir be constant?
I, touch him there Aurelia.
You doe ill
To interrupt our joys upon this lip
That deserves all should open to commend it,
I seal the contract of my heart for ever,
I will be nothing when I am not thine:
Suspect the stars may lose themselves in heaven,
But never I this vow, thy sister has
No part in my affection; she usurped
Some title, but I now have concealed all
The thoughts of her, and offer thee my self,
My self thy perfect honourer.
Wherein have I deserved to be thus slighted?
Is there no conflict in my blood? Can love
I bear a sister, take away all sense
Of this indignity?
Look you Sir, I promised you a reason, why I could
Not love Eugenia; there's my reason, I
Doe love that Gentlewoman.
Tic Master Thornay:
I am resolved, I have no other way
To punish his disdain, than to pretend
I love this Gentleman, that he may see
I have the freedom of my soul, to mock
His triumph, and with as much facility
Meet his neglect. Oh Master Thornay,
You are very welcome, I was wishing for you.
Hum? this entertainment is a little better
Than I expected.
You absent your self too much believe, your visits shall not be more frequent, than your person grateful hither.
doe y' hear, you may return, and tell this story
Unto the Lady in the enchanted Castle:
You see my fate, I cannot come; Godbe-wi'yi'.
You shall acquit your self more Nobly Sir,
And better satisfy her in your person.
I wo'not take the pains to see her, and
She were a dying.
How?
Not to recover her.
Shall you and I Sir, walk a turn in the Garden.
Yes Lady, Heaven vouchsafe I grow not mad
Wi'my good fortune.
With your pardon Mistress,
I must take privilege to tell this man
Hee is not worthy of your favours.
How Sir?
You doe not know my temper:
Nor regard it.
Hold as you bear respect to me.
I am charmed.
I should be guilty of some sin to you
Not to reveal, this Gentleman has made
A forfeit of his honour.
Will you hear him?
Pox o'my dullness, what meant I to bring
Him hither? doe not credit any thing,
Wee are old enemies, and he has studied this
Device to poison your opinion of me,
A mere trick; doe not believe a word sweet Lady.
I am not easy Sir to entertain
Malicious accusation of your fame,
Your virtue in my thoughts, is not so soon
Shaken with one report.
That's comfort yet.
Then you provoke me to be plain, know Lady,
You're in the way to be most miserable,
Abused by this false man, that will betray
Your innocent beauty to so great a shame,
Repentance is not able to restore you:
He has a wife already.
How a wife?
A wife, if holy vows have power to bind you:
Doe you believe this? were you by
When I was married.
No, but heaven and Angels
Are witnesses you did exchange a faith
With one that mourns a Virgin, and a Widow:
Have you no earthquake in you? does thy soul
It self not feel an ague, to remember
How many kisses sealed the amorous contract?
She meant it so, and every day her eyes
Weep in the memory of her self forsaken:
And cause her grief will not at once destroy her,
Despairing of your love, to show how willing
She is to dye, doth every hour distill
Part of her soul in tears.
This cannot bee.
Be: no, no, it is impossible: shall we walk sweet Lady?
Will not this excite your pity, mercy shines bright in women.
I have heard you Sir,
And doubt not, when hee comes to answer
These imputations, hee may quit himself.
Would wee were both on's but to skirmish in
A saw-pit, I must cut his throat.
Admit he promised love,
Obliged himself by oath to her you plead for,
This binds him not to undo himself for ever.
Undo himself.
Yes, marriage is an act,
That doth concern his whole life, and in something
May mar, or profit his eternity:
Perhaps the Gentlewoman, since hee gave
His faith is fallen from virtue.
I have heard so.
May be turned prostitute.
I, who'l swear for her?
I must not hear her named with the suspicion
Of such a stain.
Wee doe not Sir accuse her.
Not absolutely.
Did you but know the Creature, it would call
A blush into your face, for talking thus;
She has purity enough for all her sex,
And this attended with so many virtues,
As but to wish her more, it self were sin.
This Gentleman pleads for her.
Will you please to walk?
Dismiss him first.
Doe y' hear; this Lady
Is weary of your company; you have
Not used me like a Gentleman, indeed
Scurvily, tic no time nor place to expostulate,
But wee shall meet again; in the mean time,
Return, and tell the Virgin you so magnify,
I doe not find my self in any humour
To see her again; pray her neglect no fortune,
For my sake, there be many younger brothers
In the Town, will bee content to marry her:
You may resolve her what's become of me,
There is no wrestling with our fate.
Thou art not worth my answer.
Isle not question Sir, this Gentleman's relation.
You are wise.
But in my confidence, hee hath spoke all truth:
I must desire you visit me no more.
You doe but jest I hope.
Ungrateful man! how are poor women coozen'd?
With what impudence could thou desire my favour?
Go and make a satisfaction to the injured Maid,
Borne the dishonour of a man.
Am I awake? Or doe I dream,
I am made a Coxcomb thus?
I am a Rascal, and deserve no mercy,
For abusing that poor Gentlewoman, that sent
So kindly to me; wo'd the Messenger were here again.
Tic Master Gerard, how hath hee sped?
You are sad Aurelia; what on the sudden
Can beget this change? Are you in health?
Yes Sir.
Your blood methinkes
Is wandering from your cheek, your eyes have lost
Their lightning too, call back your smiles, and bless
Him that is now your creature.
Mine? excuse me if I suspect.
Ha.
I have heard you Sir.
And have considered all that you have said
To make me think you are now wholly mine:
I must confess you have expressed a Lover,
Wanted no Art to flourish your warm passion:
But language is no clew to guide us to
The knowledge of your heart.
Nor is suspicion a cause enough in justice to condemn.
It is not; but where circumstances meet,
They may be thought on.
By your beauty,
By those fair eyes, that never killed till now,
Make me so happy, but to know what cause
Inclines you to suspect, and I will take it
The greatest argument of love, that ever
A Virgin showed to man; then Isle be bold,
And with the whiteness of my soul make such
Assurance of you, that not malice, aided
With all the devils cunning, shall be able
To interpose one scruple more against me.
You loved my Sister.
I did once, my Aurelia.
And you declare you can neglect her now,
Look on her like a stranger.
It is most true.
She loved you well, most nobly, with as much
Fervour as ever I did or can love;
Should I think to be more secure than she?
Promise that firm to me, which in so fresh
A sight and memory you have violated
To her, that placed you in as dear a bosom?
Discretion bids me pause, I may be rash,
Either you loved her not at all, and so
You may play false with both, or loving her
With as much levity, I suppose you may
Forsake me too. Therefore I bid you first farewell.
I am blasted.
We are both undone, I dare not see him.
Was ever man so miserably lost?
Is there a balm can cure me? Oh, I bleed:
The sword wounds gently but love kills indeed.
Has truth forsook mankind? or is it my
Fate only to converse with those that are
So cruel and neglectful of our sex?
Unhappy Maid is he not yet returned?
None yet appears.
Then I despair to see him:
And when I think indeed of the employment,
That it is against himself, I may with justice
Accuse my want of judgement, to expect
He should perform so hard an imposition:
I would I could not think of any man,
They rob me of my peace: I prithee try
Thy voice, to put my heart in better tune;
There is a power in harmony, some say,
To charm the unruly motions of the brain:
Love is itself a melancholy madness:
Why should not Music cure the wound of love?
Melancholy hence, go get
Some piece of earth to be thy seat,
Here the ayre and nimble fire,
Would shoot up to meet desire:
Sullen humour, leave her blood,
Mix not with the purer flood,
But let pleasures swelling there,
Make a Spring-tide all the year.
How does my dear Eugenia?
As well
As this restraint will give me leave, and yet
It does appear a part of my enlargement
To have your company: I hope your sister
Enjoys her health.
And more felicity
Than I can boast mine own, shoe's half a Bride.
Happy in the embraces of her wished servant;
You know our story; he he's chosen her,
And most uncivilly neglected me.
Thus laden with his scorn, I come to practise
A scene of sorrow w'ye; sure thy fate
Hath spun a thread for me, we are so like
In our misfortunes: Have you heard no new▪
Of your ungrateful servant, for I know
No other name, and he indeed deserves
To have no other memory▪ that takes
A pride in his disdain.
Nothing as yet.
But I have met occasion to convey
A Letter to him, yet I cannot promise:
But here's the messenger.
That Gentleman?
I know the man you love then, is it not Thornay?
The same, I did conceal him for his shame.
Why hoe's a zealous suitor for my love.
It makes for me that he continues cruel;
I was not able to command his passion.
But will she not mistrust I have not been
So careful in advancing her desires,
But satisfied my self with any answer,
As knowing what must bring comfort to her,
Must needs be killing to my hopes? In what
A narrow path I tread; her spring must be
My frost, and when her tree carries the pride
And bloom of summer, I retain no sap,
But wither and creep backward into earth,
Like a forsaken plant.
Here Isle obscure.
You are welcome, Sir.
I would I were.
Shall I believe you have been faithful to
My griefs request?
Yes, and bring comfort back.
How's that?
Pronounce those words again.
I bring you comfort.
He did say so: What meant she
To mock me with another sad relation?
Was it a device in her to increase my joy
At meeting, he did talk of comfort; is it
A thing restored in nature? Oh, before
You bless my ear again with that wished sound,
Excuse my modesty, if my heart present
A kiss to thank you.
I drink in my poison.
Now let your comforts flow.
I have returned you
As true a lover as yet ever Mistress
Could boast possession of, one so resolved
To honour you.
Can this be possible?
I have examined every secret thought
Within his foul, concerning you, and dare
Thus boldly justify, he is your own.
Let me but live to see him, and I write
My ambition satisfied
He's here.
Where?
Here,
In me your truest servant is returned.
Does he affect her?
I call all thats good
To witness with me, I discharged with zeal
The unkind office to my self, but could not
Incline him to return to any softness:
In brief, he has unworthily engaged
That heart belonging to you, and would not be
Provoked to see you again.
Eugenia.
Is all this waking? Have I seen her faint?
And did not she that cherishes her enemy,
Haste to her relief, and seem to suffer with her?
While I, as one had grown here, did not move?
I did not well, to exalt her with a hope:
To meet a blessing, and then ruin her.
If death hath whispered her aside, I shall
Be accused, and I will take my preferment
To be sent after her to tell her ghost
I loved her best; when wee are both immortal
She'll understand me better.
Is Eugenia alive again?
There is no danger to be feared; aqualme.
Pray let me ask you Sir one question,
Doe you affect this Virgin really?
I move it not for any harm.
Would she had sent hither,
But with desire to be resolved.
May be she has.
Then tell her I doe love her better
Than I can express, but when she has
Numbered all things are excellent on earth
She is to me above 'em infinitely.
This carries no probability.
Would thou were a man
Then I durst tell thee, I doe love her so
I durst be wicked for her, and kill thee.
With all this, it does not appear you love her so
And be an instrument, nay plead to put another in possession
Of your loved treasure; for if I mistake not
You late did urge a man, whom she esteemed
Better, to return and marry her:
Can any man that loves a woman truly,
Strive to supplant himself and give away
His comfort?
There's the honour of my service,
When I am dead, the story shall remember
I loved a maid so well that I preferred
Whatever she desired above my self,
And cause she loved one better, was content,
To serve her wishes with my banishment:
He does not love a Virgin nobly, whose
Affection walks not just to her desires,
To like e'm'bove his own.
If this can be,
Thou art the noblest lover in the world,
With what affection shall she be blessed
That loves him, when the mistress that esteems
Him not, is thus rewarded?
Indeed I love him still and shall doe ever,
Nor had I now returned to life, but that
I had not took my leave of him
More corrosive.
If you'll oblige a Virgin,
For ever to you once more visit him,
Tell him I lye like one thats desperate sick,
Oppressed with grief of body, and of mind,
But cannot be so fortunate to quit
The world till he vouchsafe to visit me.
Bid him not fear I will detain him long▪
With idle talk, six words and I am dead.
Although he love me not, he may doe this:
If you will add this to your other work,
I will impose no more, indeed I will not:
So farewell noble Sir.
If you will please to join with me, I doubt not
To effect her wishes.
No.
You doe not know what power I have with him.
You have too much
Isle undertake—
You sha'not rob me of the reward.
What reward?
Perhaps another kiss; pray tell her, I
Went cheerfully to finish her command.
I doe admire and love this noble temper,
What flames are these? Suppress 'em, they grow high,
If he affect her so, what hope have I?
Mad? why you still enjoy discourse.
What then? may not a man be mad, and yet talk wisely?
But few in my experience.
Doe not abuse thy knowledge, at the worst▪
Thou can but say, our senses are depraved,
Thrown off o'th'hinge; the tongue is none I hope,
Though some would have the titillation
Joined to make up a sixth in the grave Synod:
Believe then I am mad; Isle prov't by reason.
By reason? that's a new way to prove it;
But Isle hear no reason.
Then thou art mad thy self.
Nay, I think I am madder of the two,
And have as much reason, if there bee reason
Able to make one mad; but let's be wise:
Or if it must be that you've lost your wits,
Let's see and wee can recover i'm by drinking;
For hee that is not sober after drunkenness,
Is no man of this world.
Now thou talk wildly.
I talk wildly, that would justify my self to bee in my wits, and you that talk reason and sense wo'not believe you've any.
If it bee so, that may conclude I have lost 'em,
And doe not understand my self.
So, so, I should believe another in that argument,
But not you, for in knowing that, you prove
You are no mad-man.
Prithee tell me, thou art a piece of a Philosopher,
And know the natural causes.
Hold in that; I must confess, you are little
Beside your self: I a Philosopher?
I studied Titelman sometimes in the College,
As others did, and wanting Epictetus
Lantern, slept always with a watching Candle
In my study window, and might very well
Dream over learning o'my Desk, or so;
What Aristotle might infuse into
My sleeps I know not, but waking I ne'er troubled
My self to understand him; true I loved
His Book De Coelo, for the heavenly Title,
And made my Father buy it, for my study
Of Divinity, told him I would be a Bishop;
That brought me threescore pound a year for sack:
I prithee doe not talk of learning.
Why then acknowledge, I am mad, and I have done.
Well for this once I will allow it, you are mad.
But wherefore doe y'allow it, what's the cause?
Nay, nay, I know not that.
Isle tell thee then.
Tic come about again.
And let thy judgement censure me
If I produce not able reasons—
To prove madness, he makes me mad to hear him;
Now I consider better on it, I confess
You have some cause to be a little mad,
The loss of such a Mistress.
But of one?
Did they not both affect me, and I them
With such equality of honour.
Grant it.
And I to lose 'em both? faith speak but honestly;
Is it not a wonder that I doe not rave
And kill my self? how many have run mad
For one that never loved 'em? and shall I
Bee so unmannerly not to lose my wits
For two and two such creatures? it were a Solecism
In love: I prithee doe not flatter me
With an opinion that I have my reason;
It cannot bee, it is against all sense,
I should have any; such an expectation
Lost, is enough to make the genius
Of all the world run mad, and I will straight.
Whither?
To Bedlam, whether should I go?
I must not live in this community of fools and wisemen.
There be Knaves among us.
Here all are happy, there I sha'not meet
With lovers that are fortunate, but with men
Of my complexion, that look twenty ways
At once, that sigh and curse, and sing mad Carols:
If I can get to bee their Prince, Isle make
A law it shall bee death to smile or kiss
A woman.
Now I fear him.
Nay, we'll have
An excellent well governed Common wealth,
A delicate Eutopia, there shall be
Lectures and public readings shall put down
Gressams foundation for the liberal Arts,
And make the Citizens bring their Shop-bookes hither
To take fine notes, how to bee paid their debts,
And yet trust none but younger brothers: then
Wee will have penal Statutes against eating,
Live all by the ayre of commendations.
No idle man shall live within our State:
Doe y' mark? they are the mouths of the Republike:
And therefore hee that has no other work
To prevent slothfulness, may employ his time
In picking straws, there will be a great plenty.
Here will wee live together, and bee mad
Perpetually, wee wo'not bee recovered;
For if at any time wee incline to bee
Sober, and coming to our wits again,
The lash will whip us into new distempers
And mad fugaries.
Doe y' know all this while
What you have said, you correct me for speaking
Extravagantly, and yet talk wilde your self.
I prithee pardon and instruct me better; I am not well.
Will you walk to your Chamber, Isle bear you com∣pany.
No, I am well again.
Upon condition you will tell Aurelia
She did not use me kindly.
I will.
She did not use me kindly, nothing else, Farewell.
I know not what to think on him,
The unhappiness was so sudden, and unlooked for,
It might disturb his fancy, but I hope
The worst is past, a little rest will settle him.
But which way shall I recompense the injury:
I have done him? and I had not been ungrateful
To Eugenia, wee might have both been happy.
Ha? it is hee: Save you most Noble Sir;
Left please you now, Isle go along with you
To the Gentlewoman.
What Gentlewoman?
Eugenia, that wrote the Letter to me, I mean her.
For what?
I have considered better, &amp; doe mean
To make her satisfaction.
It is too late:
You might have done this earlier, your love
Will appear now unseasonable, I assure you.
Pray give me a reason.
Do ye not blush to ask it?
I told her what you said, and now we are
Resolved; you cannot blame her, she was covetous
To embrace you; but your answer being returned
So peremptorily in her neglect, we both agreed.
You both? Why what was that to you?
That doubt will clear it self when we are married.
Why, did you love her?
And deserve her best
Of all the world: and yet she would give me no
Assurance till she knew your resolution,
Which I was able to inform her, and
It is now a bargain; upon monday next.—
Your wedding day.
Right.
In very good time. You wear a sword.
What then?
Isle only try how you can fence, I must not lose her so.
You lose her? you despised her, wo'd not see her,
Not to recover her from death. Do ye not
Remember such a saying, In the Town
Were many younger brothers, that might be
Content to marry her; let her use her fortune,
For your own part, you were engaged, there was
No wrestling with your fate: Was it not so?
It is all one for that, my mind is altered,
I'm of another humour now, and will
Maintain, I love her better than you dare.
Then I must tell you.
Tell me no tellings:
Either resign her to me again, or—
Resolve me, pray, can you affect her heartily?
Else let me perish on your sword.
I heard
You court another Mistress, that did answer it with enter∣tainment.
She was a very Gypsy.
You were no sooner parted, but she used me
Basely; it is true, I did sufficiently
Deserve it, for my breach of vow to her
I now alone doe honour, and for whom,
(Changed into honesty) I will rather dye
Than live without her.
Heaven do's hear all this.
I make no doubt, and while my heart to her
Is reconciled, cannot despair of mercy.
You shall have her.
Shall I? then Isle love thee too.
And know, she he's no thought but to be yours,
There he's no obligation past betwixt us two:
I came for this: yet I must tell you, Sir,
I love her too, and shall doe ever.
How? not when
She is my wife, I hope.
Yes then.
If you have cut her up, and left her cold meat,
I shall lose my stomach.
With a holy flame,
Her virtue keeps a Vestal fire within me,
But she affects not me, yet I might challenge her:
Nor can you ever, but in right of me,
Glory your self possessed; I have bought her.
I hope she he's not sold her maidenhead.
Her uncle
(Whose aim is only profit) hath concluded
With me a price for her, and therefore gives
Access to none, till I have proved my fortune;
But I find her devoted to you only,
And have conformed my wishes unto hers;
She loves you best, and I prefer you too,
Return, and be her husband, Isle direct you.
You understand my purpose, you shall make
The Dance, let me alone to write the songs.
A Mask will be delightful to the Ladies.
Oh Sir, what Plays are taking without these
Pretty devices? Many Gentlemen
Are not, as in the days of understanding.
Now satisfied without a •egg, which since
They cannot, with their honour, call for, after
The play, they look to be served up in the middle:
Your dance is the best language of some Comedies,
And footing runs away with all; a Scene
Expressed with life of Art, and squared to nature,
Is dull and phlegmatic Poetry.
Enough;
I am bound to honour thee, command my life,
Thou excellent young man.
I wish you happiness and never after her will love a woman.
You know my lodging.
Isle attend you Sir.
I wonder what's become of my hermophrodyte?
Yongrave, how is it man? what art melancholy?
What hath hung plummets on thy nimble soul,
What sleepy rod hath charmed thy mounting spirit?
Prithee enjoy thy self.
By Parnassus
You must not be so head hung, why dost peep—
Under thy cloak as thou did fear a Sergeant?
Who are these? my wish! fortune hath sent thee a cure,
The rarest mirth! you sha'not lose it, ha, ha.
You have strangely won me to obey you Sir,
I refuse nothing you command.
Shalt go,
And hear how I will talk, and baffle 'em:
But what if wee meet Caperwit?
No matter.
No: w'y then let him go hang himself in his own verses, if the lines be strong enough, come my Nightingale, my Bird of Paradise.
If ever thou did love me, lets follow 'em;
Feed not this sullen humour, Isle promise excellent sport.
You shall prevail.
It was not kindly done, believe me sister,
He did perform but our request.
Tic granted;
But his neglect of you afflicted me.
He could not make you happy, and remain
Servant to me.
Nor make me blessed, while you
Seemed discontented.
Doe not think I was,
I did but carry trouble in my face,
When he declared himself withdrew my smiles,
For your sake, to make you appear most lovely,
And worthy of his choice; and could you be
So cruel to reject him, when he came
To be confirmed your own without a rival?
It seems he did not know who loved him best.
Best?
Yes, and I in this, will maked appear,
That now you have exiled him from your love,
Isle sue for his affection.
He is mine.
But you Aurelia are not his; I will
Appeal to his modest reason, that shall guide
His eye to look on both again, I doe not
See what in me should not invite him hither,
With as much ardor, rather more, since he
Hath proved already your too much unkindness;
What if this noble Gentleman should lose
His wits upon 't, will all your beauty call
His straggling senses to their seat again?
Isle seek him out betimes and comfort him.
Tic more than will become you sister.
How?
And it must bring your modesty in question,
To follow one that cares not for you
Thus
I may awake his noble flame, nor is it
Any dishonour when the world shall know
How you have used him, if I make return,
To what I loved so dearly.
Not while I may challenge interest; here are company
Let us withdraw, I have something more to tell you.
Defer it rather now; here comes my hope.
How's this? nay then Isle stay a little longer.
By your leave Gentlewomen, I should mock you
To call you Ladies; perhaps you may wonder at me.
I see no cause.
Have you no eyes?
Such as you see?
Oh eyes no eyes but Mountains fraught with tears!
Hoe's turned Ieronymo.
Go by, Ieronymo, go by, go by.
Doe y' know where you are?
Yes, and to whom I speak I hope.
Noble Sir, I hope you doe not scorn us.
Scorn you, no; but I doe not care a rush for you, you might have had me when I was offered, tic none of my fault, and you doe fall to eating of chalk, and dye of the black jaun∣dise, I cannot help it now for I proclaim, here is the what doe y' call it, of my heart.
Has he won this Lady? I suspect her:
I hope you have not quite forsaken me;
Virgins for custom sake, sometimes deny,
Believe me Sir, when you did plead for love
My heart did not so much as think on it.
Nay tic no matter, I have took my course, yet I
Have a suit to you that you would not break your heart,
Nor you, to see us kiss. Nectar! immortal nectar!
Oh let this Diamond purchase such another,
Tic pity that my lips should ever open,
To let the breath she gave me, out again.
Doe y' pay so much for every kiss? a Diamond?
I never offer less to touch her lip; marry her hand, or her a—or foot or so, I may salute for a ruby, or an emrode or a satire; or so, but I have stones—now doe thou speak a little for their further mortification.
I did not think to have returned so soon
A trouble to you but the importunity
Of this most worthy Gentleman prevailed,
I think there was some Magic in his tongue.
Nay you may swear that, the wisest in the country, thought my mother a Witch.
He did no sooner open his desires,
But he did wound my heart, you see his bounty,
What jewels hee has given me.
All thine own; somebody else might have been wise and had'em.
Somebody else might have been wise, and kept 'em.
I must confess, I loved another lately, but his affection's frozen up—
Bless you bevy of Ladies.
Sir, you are come most seasonably, before
These Gentlewomen, I release your promise,
My thoughts are fixed upon this Noble Knight,
Affect now where you please; here is my husband.
You are not married?
No, but I came to bid you all to my wedding, I have
Bespoke Gloves, and Points, and knacks, and knaveries.
I will dye Hymens Saffron robe in blood,
Put out the Torches with the tears of Virgins,
And make the Temple quake.
Will you so Sir?
Excellent Rascal!
There is no way but to acknowledge it,
It is no shame in love, there's no disgrace,
For else by Law he may recover me.
Doe y' hear Sir, you may take her if you please, but if she be troubled with a timpani, there is a man within a mile of an Ok, I name no-body, that has had,— some earnest of her body.
I hope you doe but jest.
Isle make all sure; what a loving Lady is this?
Then I require you give me back this Diamond,
The token once I gave of my devotion.
Why that's mine, I gave it her but now before all this company.
Be wise and let him have it, it is like his within my Cabi∣net, let's be quit on him, ▪this will secure our marriage.
Let him have it there bee more in Cheapside, but let's not tarry any longer Bird, he will challenge all the rest of thy feathers.
I will obey you Sir.
Farewell beauties and kind Gentleman, if you come to my wedding, I name no time, nor place, we'll be very merry, ex∣cellent cheer Isle promise you, your belly full of Fiddlers.
Ha, Ha.
What did you mean? that Ring was his.
The Boy shall have it again: ha, ha, you do not know the my∣sterie, this Lady is a boy, a very crackrope boy.
Is it possible?
I made him first disguise himself.
Indeed?
Yes faith, to come to you.
Then I must tell you Sir, you have not used us civilly, to make our conversation ridiculous, To talk and complement with a Boy.
Sweet Lady, by Hyppocrene—
Doey' not think your wit found out a precious device to make me love you by a president; is this your great Lady?
Doe but hear me speak.
Not now, I know you have art enough to excuse it,
Yet I am not merciless, let me entreat
Your absence, without ceremony, when
You come again, your talk will bee more musical.
Doe's she not prophecy the conceit, I go
The Mask will do it, more musical? tic so.
Then hoe's gone to her
Hee did promise me.
Let other Virgins when they hear this story
Wonder, but give me leave to love you for it,
Indeed I doe; look not so strange, your virtue
Compels me to reaveale it, tic no shame
To own a passion, kindled by such goodness.
If I doe understand you, give me pardon,
To think you are not perfectly advised;
I am a prisoner still to my Eugenia.
She is satisfied, and you are disengaged.
But she has not yet resignd the heart I gave,
Nor can I think of any other Mistress;
Choose in a plenty of more happy men,
I gave too much away to love again.
I will retire to blush and weep.
Not so.
Alas poor sister, now I fear you not,
I see your purpose was to make me kind:
I wo'd hee were my brother, but let's in
And join our heads, some counsel would doe well,
Tic pity wee two should lead Apes in hell.
MAy I believe my self so fortunate?
Art thou returned, or doe I dream thus happily?
Are these my Thornays arms? are those his lips?
Can hee repent his cruelty and love?
How soon are all my tears dried up? I doe
Forgive my griefs, and think they have been modest,
And gentle sufferings, who can merit such
A joy, that has not felt a world of sorrow?
Let us embrace again, and if thou can
Confirm me yet more, that I am awake,
And taste my true delight.
By this, and this:
Through which, if it were possible, I durst
Convey my soul, I am for ever thine,
Created new to bee made worthy of thee,
I have been dead too long to thee, and virtue,
Committed sin enough, in my neglect
Of thee, to plant a fierce, and deep antipathy
In every women's heart against mankind▪
But you are merciful, and imitate
The eternal nature.
Ha? how is this? a kissing?
We are betrayed.
So now tic done; I would not
Be engaged to kiss you again, for all the estate.
Your father left you.
I hope my breath has not offen∣ded you.
I cannot tell, I have not kissed a woman this twelve-moneth, and had not done this, but that he had my oath to perform it; well you have the lip labour he sent you, Master Yongrave is well, will see you again shortly—Godbe-wi'y'.
Pray stay a little.
You'll send him such another token; employ your waiting woman, I am no common kisse-carrier.
Oh ho, is it not otherwise, hee is a messenger from Master Yongrave, you're welcome Sir.
And I be not, I am going Sir, to the place from whence I came Sir?
How does Master Yongrave?
As foolish as ever, he is still in love—
I pray commend me to him.
You may now commend your self, he is here.
Oh let me fly into his arms and boast
Never had woman such a noble servant,
Blessed was that minute Uncle, in which you
First knew this Gentleman; more blessed I,
That doe enjoy by him, that which my heart
Next heaven affects most; twill be an age
Till holy Church confirms our vows, I cannot▪
Manage the comforts you have given me,
I did not think I should so soon have met
A husband, Uncle.
I am glad to hear it.
Command thy truest servant, nothing wants
But how to get her forth, it were soon dispatched.
Sir, we resolve not to lose any time,
We will marry instantly.
With all my heart.
The licence will be at Church, as soon as we,
Then I shall quickly make you perfect owner,
Of all those lands, that lye so near your Lordship;
You have security, I shall perform
When we are man and wise.
Right, Master Yongrave▪
You are an honest Gentleman, my Niece
May glory in such a choice, I have some business,
Excuse three minutes, Isle dispatch, and go
Along with you my self.
How's that? he go? we must prevent that mischief.
Noble Sir, what service can reward this goodness in you?
If you acknowledge any benefit
From me, in that I am enough rewarded,
I wish you, what I cannot hope for, joy,
But yet we have not finished.
What doe y' think? if▪
Tic gone again, wee must have some trick,
To get off without him.
From Mistress Chrysolina?
What and we should set some on's house afire,
Doe y' think he would stay to quench it? how has he
Lived all this while, and has no more diseases?
No honest Gout to keep him warm at home,
In furs, no charitable Ague, fall
Into his legs to stay him, no Sciatica?
He is no Gentleman he scopes so well.
I love him above my life, but you have only his heart, he says; for which I languish, if you have power to dispose it, I will cherish some hope, he will love me, at least for your sake.
If he should with us, is it not possible
He may have a fall, and break a leg, and it were but his neck, why may not some prentice throw a stone, and put an eye out, that he may go to the Surgeons, or some horse, or cart-wheele squeeze his toe, and stay his journey?
His noble carriage to you, made me first affect him, then sinnce you are happy in another, let me owe to your virtue for his affection, without whom I am the most miserable—
Chrysolina.
Let me entreat you Sir, peruse that paper.
Sir you know Chrysolina?
I doe know her.
Poor Gentlewoman is in love with Yongrave:
Wee have arrived at our desires already,
And want but the Church sealing, she is lost,
Unless he meet her wishes, twill become
Our piety to advance, in what wee may
The common cause of love, then briefly thus—
Can any Virgin affect me so much?
She did prepare this argument before.
As you are charitable, go presently.
And leave you thus?
We will get off▪ well enough:
Pray her to meet us.
I doe pity her,
And I have learned it from my sufferings;
But I must keep my word, Eugenia
Hath still my heart, and only can dispose it.
Then I resign to her, in this alone,
I will deserve these noble offices.
You know the place.
I'm perfect.
Love her, and let us all be happy.
Sir, I must desire
You would excuse me, I would go with you,
But that I have considered, twill be better
That I should not appear, since you intend
To have it private, there will be less notice
If I be absent, and it may be thought
You by some trick stole her away: Do ye mark?
Well thought on.
Then, sir, that opinion
Will save our credit, and excuse the want
Of ceremony, and the fruitless charge,
Which is expected at her marriage:
Is it not best?
You show your providence.
Though I could wish your presence.
You're not wise,
Eugenia, go to the Church, and let me
Salute you quickly happy bride and bridegroom:
Away, I say.
He he's prevented us.
The Land's my own, you wrong your joys to tarry,
I would I had more Nieces thus to marry.
Nay, never blush, but haste and meet the Gentleman.
You have no reason to distrust me, Lady,
After this circumstance.
Can I be so happy?
Have a strong faith, and find it so,
Though once I was guilty of some wrong to thee.
Never to me: or if you had this news
Is recompense enough.
Isle tell thee now:
I was the cause that Gerard did neglect thee,
In hope to gain thee for my self; I told him
Thou had half consented to be mine.
This truth?
Bade him direct his Courtship to Aurelia,
And so be sure of one: poor Gentleman
Believed, and after lost thy sister too:
But if no cure be seasonably applied,
Gerard, I fear, will sink beneath his loss.
Was this the cause?
I must accuse my self.
Isle tell Aurelia this.
Doe so.
She meant to visit him, but this will give her wings.
I will entreat her pardon, but make haste,
I wo'd not willingly be seen.
I feel
Another soul, what raptures are distilled
Upon my heart?
She cannot choose but take it.
You know how to direct her, but be swift
In your return.— Mr. Caperwit?
Your servant▪
Sir, if my sight be not unfaithful, I have seen you.
I owe much to your eyes,
It was my happiness to see you here.
I doe remember.
I observed your courtship
To fair Aurelia.
Pray sir, can you dance?
Dance?
I presume you are a friend to her,
Whose name made sweet your breath so late.
It did not stink before.
Excuse my Poetry.
Cry you mercy.
I know you've heard wherein consists my excellence.
You are a Prince in Poetry, &amp; please your Excellence.
The phrase in Latina's modest, use no reverence,
To tell you true, you are a friend, I am upon a Mask—
That made you ask if I could dance.
It is right, and you should doe me honour
To lend your person to it, but I wo'd
Have it this night, before my Mistress, whose
Mention perfumed your lips so late.
Sweet language!
With your favour, Mr. Caperwit, who are the
Principal Mockers?
Faith I have none yet,
Beside my self, but a foolish Knight, one Sir Gervace,
And's Lady, I want persons.
Let me furnish you.
And tie my everlasting friendship to you.
They shall be of quality, most of your acquaintance▪
What if Aurelia be one? she loves you,
I have discovered that; I know she'll do it,
Her Sister for another, and my self,
Frank Gerard and Jack Yongrave, with his Mistress.
The number I desire.
I know your lodging, say no more, Isle bring 'em,
This afternoon to practise, we may soon
Perfect a dance.
Shall I trust to you?
Here's my hand.
I kiss it.
I may give you a hint perhaps for the device too.
I have no other gratitude but this,
Live but a week, Isle send you an Ode; or dye,
Isle write your Epitaph.
I have no purpose to put your Muse
To such expense. Farewell Phantasm.
Have I not been tedious?
I told my sister all, and she is gone
To Mr. Gerard, if their meeting prosper,
I have directed where to find us.
Excellent, come, let's away,
A thousand joys expect us.
I once believed women were full of pity,
Of soft and gentle constitutions:
But I have found 'em cruel: for Aurelia,
One of the best of all her sex, doth own
A hard and tyrannous nature.
Sir, tic done.
I prithee let it be undone, as I am.
The Song,
I gave to be taught Music? Isle hear't anon:
I prithee go —
Whither?
To Prison.
How Sir?
Yes, and ask when are the Sessions.
They are every month.
I would it were execution day to morrow.
Why, with your pardon, doe you wish it, Sir?
I would entreat the Surgeons to beg
Some Woman for Anatomy, nothing else:
I have heard their Lectures very much commended,
And I'd be present when they read upon
Her heart: for sure there is much difference
Between a Woman and a Man, in that
Same thing we call a heart, they doe not love
As we doe; we are fools, indeed we are,
To dote so much upon 'em, and betray
The glory of our creation, to serve
A female pride; we were borne free, and had
From the great Maker Royal privilege,
Most brave immunities: but since have made
Tame forfeit of our Charter. Let me see it,
It is the same, first read it, reach the chair:
Tic yet no Song, infuse a soul into it.
If Love his Arrows shoot so fast,
Soon his feathered stock will waste:
But I mistake in thinking so,
Love's Arrows in his Quiver grow▪
How can he want Artillery?
That appears too true in me:
Two shafts feed upon my breast,
Oh, make it Quiver for the rest,
Kill me with love, thou angry son
Of Cytherea, or let one,
One sharpe golden Arrow fly,
To wound her heart for whom I dye.
Cupped, if thou be a Child,
Be no god, or be more mild.
I have not, since I served him, known him so
Oppressed with melancholy; hoe's asleep,
I dare not wake him.
Isle expect a while.
This quiet will much benefit him, hee
Began to talk idly.
Heaven preserve the temper of his brain.
He wakes.
Ha, tic not she, doe I dream still;
Come hither, dost thou see nothing?
Yes, a Gentlewoman that came to visit you.
Doe not abuse thy master, it is not possible Aurelia
Will doe me so much honour; in my sleep
Me thought I parled with her, and my fancy
Hath not yet lost her shape; Oh my Aurelia!
I come to ask thy pardon.
Doe not mock me▪
Thou wo't bee cruel when I wake again;
And then I shall repent I dream't so sweetly.
You're now awake, and I am your Aurelia,
That if you can forgive her past neglect,
Will give you proof of her repentance,
But these tears—
Let not the ground be hallowed with
Such water, I have a heart to drink this Balsam:
Enough Aurelia, doe not make thy eyes
Poor, to enrich thy bosom, where the drops
Show like a Carkanet of Pearl upon it,
Thou hast enough restored me.
Oh my Gerard!
Thou art too merciful, and dost forgive
Too soon the injury I did thy love;
But I am come to make thee satisfaction;
And this is but a shadow of those joys,
Wee must divide, if you vouchsafe to follow,
As I direct.
Tic sin not to obey.
You must walk then.
It is to heaven thou goosed.
Convey me swiftly thither.
Nay, tic hast is now required.
What bliss can bee denied,
A man that follows such an Angell-guide?
Where in the name of simplicity, should my Master be all this while? I have been at six Ordinaries, twelve Taverns,
and I think four and twenty Bawdy-houses, places that Gen∣tlemen use to frequent, and yet cannot find him: well, I am re∣solved to ask every man I meet; and if I cannot hear of him the sooner, Isle have him cried.
Pray did you see my Master?
Thy Master? I know him not.
Nay Sir, did you see him? for if you see him, you cannot choose but know him; for hee had a hundred marks brought him warm out of the Country this morning.
Much good doe it him next his heart, I see him not.
No, no; there is no hope, it is but an unmannerly trick of any Master, to leave his man o'this fashion; tic well there is no press abroad, no disguised Constables twelve pence, and the Kings name would put me into a pitiful Fever, and I should curse Sir Gervace in another Country, as often as I heard the re∣port of a Musket, for bringing me up no better, that might have hv'd quietly at home, and gone a feasting with the trained Band without any danger.
Here is another youth, and his commodity, I'll enquire of him, Pray did you see my Master?
Thy Master, what's he.
A Knight Sir, Isle assure you, of the last edition that Was my foolish Master, for want of a better.
His name?
Sir Gervace Simple.
Something of a black complexion, with a weasel face.
The same Sir.
In a doublet of Orange-tawny Satin, richly laced? and blew trunk hose very suitable?
Very right Sir.
A long Italian Cloak came down to his elbows, a Spanish Ruff, and long French stockings.
Just the same, how happy was I to meet with this Gentleman.
Faith honest friend, I saw none such.
Pox of these questions.
But if thou'lt go with me, I may chance help to a sight of this Pageant.
Heaven bless your worship, and the sweet faced modicum in your company.
To prison with your servants Husband; hang
Them all, unless they find our daughters.
And I have sent to Sir Iohn Woodhamores,
They may be with his Niece.
They never used
Thus to absent themselves; Oh me unhappy!
Wee have been too indulgent.
I would have had them more restrained, young wenches
That have so many suitors, grow soon wanton,
And throw off their obedience; had you been
Forward as I, they had been married;
And then wee had not suffered this perplexity.
I did commend an honourable man,
But your deliberation hath mared all,
And they were here again—
Have patience wife,
They are not lost for ever.
No, no, lost?
They'll come again, double I warrant you,
And perhaps treble, with some unthrift husbands,
Of their own choosing.
It does trouble me.
They were not used to walk abroad without
A servant, to waite on 'em.
You must think
They have servants of their own, for such a business,
Young maids have plenty of such waiting men,
And this has been a long conspiracy, Isle lay my life.
What hast found 'em yet?
I can hear no news,
And Sir Iohn Woodhamore is much troubled Sir,
His Niece is gone too.
Hey day!
Sh'as been absent▪
Ever since morning.
Precious, precious thieves!
Eugenias gone, lets have 'em cried together.
They that have found em, will too soon I fear,
Alter the property.
We shall keep no virgins ith town shortly.
Welcome Sir Iohn.
Is not my Niece Eugenia here?
Not here.
Wee have lost our daughters, and that's two for one.
Ours have been absent ever since the morning.
Nor can we study what's become on 'em
Is it possible? is there no plot in this?
Our servants have enquired in every place.
Of our acquaintance.
I will tell you Sir,
You doe remember Master Yongrave.
A servant of your Nieces;
The same Sir
With my consent, he took her forth this morning.
To marry her, I doe believe he has don't,
But it doth wrack my brain, why they should stay thus,
They might have married, forty times by this.
You did perhaps desire it private.
And he too.
I will engage my life they are all together.
Doe you think so?
I am confident, lets in to supper, and expect the best.
What news with him?
Tic something that he says.
I cannot find em.
How?
But I have met a Gentleman, that can
Tel you some news.
That does concern my daughters?
So he reports, he is a cunning man, I think a conjurer,
He talks of art, and spirits.
This is he Sir.
Gentles in your troubled brow,
I read what you desire to know,
Let no fear invade your heart;
I will tell by powerful art,
Your Childrens fate, and where they are:
Know then, they are wandered far,
Led by Cupped God of loves,
They have now arrived those groves,
Where no happy soul can sleep,
Venus doth there revels keep.
Consecrating day and night,
To song, to kisses, and delight:
They in Elysium breath, chsue whether,
They shall move thence, or you go thither.
This is some Poetical business.
Sweet husband let us go to 'em, I have heard Poets talk much of Elysium, I would fine see whither they be ho∣nest of their words or no.
No it will befit them to come to us.
It shall be so: harmonious strains,
That doe bless those happy plains;
Usher them forth, and shame the spheres,
Charm with heavenlier notes our ears,
That when we see the lovers come,
We may believe Elysium
It self come hither, all those bowers,
And the shades of pleasure ours.
Who are all these?
I guess some of them, oh that I were in Elysium
What are they vanished? Another turn of your art Good Sir.
Chime other music.
Now they will discover. Master Yongrave? I rejoice
To see you here, this is the Gentleman I praised so much, hee has Married now my Niece.
But I must ask your blessing, we are married,
Ha, another Sweetheart; I am abused, hee is a very Knave; where is my Niece?
Is hee worse for marrying of my child? nay, then my Blessing on you both, my son and daughter.
Whore's Aurelia?
Here Mother, I have met a Husband too, let us divide your Prayers—soft Master Caper∣wit
wee are married Sir already.
How married? did not you promise me?
Master Gerard? nay and it be no worse I care not 〈◊〉 to my heart.
My duty shall deserve it, tic en so, good Master Caperwit you must dance without her.
Have I made verses and studied speeches for this?
Since there• no remedy, I bless you both, but I did
wish—
Sir: if you will acknowledge your Niece.
You must accept a Nephew too: we are as fast as they.
Death! I am coozend, cheated, there is law.
And there is conscience.
Isle not give you a pen∣ny.
I will not publish Sir your avarice,
Wish em good joy.
Well, tic done.
Yes faith Uncle, wee are coupled, man and wise.
Isle enquire how this came about hereafter;
Look you love her Sir.
As I will doe my soul.
Gentlemen, all is not yet discovered; there are a pair behind, worth taking notice of; doe y know Sir Gervace Simple, I am the man.
Simple as he stands there.
And this is my Lady—what does thy hair come off already.
Your worship is a most egregious coxcomb.
A boy? Gentlemen, have I married a boy, or is she metamorphis'd?
Ha, ha, Master Caperwits Page.
Give you joy Sir.
The Bird is flown indeed law.
Bird? they make a coxcomb of me.
I am glad somebody else is coozend beside my self;
Nay, nay take her, there is a man within a mile of an Oak,
I name no body, has had earnest of her body.
Bawdy quoth a Thumpe, I will sell thee my Knight∣hood for half the money it cost me, and turn Yeoman in the Country again; why there is neither wit nor honesty in this.
Be ruled by me, lets to some Tavern, and
Drink away melancholy.
I, and then we may steal away disguised, a match!
Nay, nay, lets all together, and make a merry night on t, Simon. Why how now Thumpe, are you sneaking away?
Lets all together.
But first we must the licence of these Gentlemen.
Our Poet knows you will be just, but we
Appeal to mercy, he desires that ye
Would not distaste his Muse, because of late
Transplanted, which would grow here, if no fate
Have an unlucky bode opinion
Comes hither but on crutches yet, the Sun
Hath lent no beam to warm us, if this Play
Proceed more fortunate, wee shall bless the day,
And love that brought you hither; tic in you
To make a little sprig of Laurel grow,
And spread into a grove, where you may sit,
And hear soft stories, when by blasting it,
You gain no honour, though our ruins lye
To tell the spoils of your offended eye:
If not for what we are, for alas here
No Roscious moves to charm your eyes, or ear,
Yet as you hope hereafter to see Plays,
Encourage us and give our Poet baize.

And how and how?
The cause depends.
No Mistress.
Yes, but no Wife.
For now she is a Widow.
But I resolve—
What does she say to thee.
She says, I know not what she says, but I must take•
another course, and yet she is—
A creature of much sweetness, if all tongue•s
Be just in her report, and yet tic strange
Having seven years expected, and so much
Remonstrance of her Husbands loss at Sea,
She should continue thus.
What if she should
Renew the bond of her devotion
For seven years more.
You will have time •nough,
To pay in your affection.
Id make,
A voyage to Cassan•re's Temple first,
And marry a deformed Maid, yet I must
Confess she gives me a fair respect.
Has she,
A hope her Husband may be living yet?
I cannot tell; she may have a conceit,
Some Dolphin has preserved him in the storm,
Or that he may be tenant to some Whale;
Within whose belly he may prac•ise 〈◊〉,
And feed on fish, till hee be vomited
Upon some coast, or having escaped the seas,
And bills of Exchange failing, he might purpose
To foot it ore the Alps in his return,
And by mischance is fallen among the mise,
With whom perhaps he battens upon sleep,
Beneath the Snow.
This were• a Vagary.
I know not what to think, or is sh• not
the worse for the coy Lady that lives with her.
Her Kinswoman?
Such a malicious piece,
(I mean to love) tic pity any plac•
But a cold Nunnery should be troubled with her;
If all maids were but her disciples, wee
Should have no generation, and the world
For want of Children in few years undone by it:
Here's one can tell you more, is not that Iarvis
The Widows servant.
Whether in such hast man?
I am commanded Sir to fetch a Gentleman.
To thy Mistress? To give her a heate this morning.
I ha spied him; with your pardon—the servant goes to Lay
Good morrow Moister Venture.
Frank Tryer.
You look iocond and high,
Venus has bin propitious,
I dreamt last night thou were a Bridegroom.
Such a thing may be, the wind blows now
From a more happy coast,
I must leave you, I am sent for,
To thy Mistress•
Without more ceremony, gentlemen my service-far∣well.
Isle tell thee, I have a Mistress.
I believe it
And yet I have her not.
But you have hope.
Or rather certainty.
Why, I hear she is
A very Tyrant over men.
Worse, worse,
The needle of a Dial never had
So many wavetings, but she is touched,
And she Points only this way now, true North;
I am her Pole.
And she your Vrsaminor,
I laugh to think how other of her Rivals
Will look when I enjoy her.
Yare not yet contracted?
No she changed
Some amorous tokens, do you see this Diamond?
A toy she gave me.
Cause she saw you a Spark.
Her flame of love is here, and in exchange
She took a chain of Pearl.
You'll see it hanged.
These to the wise are arguments of love,
And mutual Promises.
Your Lordship's welcome to Town,
I am blessed to see your honour in good health.
Prithee visit my Lodgings.
I shall presume to tender my humble service.
What's he?
A sprig of the Nobility,
That has a spirit equal to his fortunes,
A gentleman that loves clean Napety.
I guess your meaning.
A Lady of pleasure, tic no shame for Men
Of his high birth to love a Wench his honour
May privilege more sins, next to a Woman
He loves a running horse, setting a side these recreations,
He has a Noble Nature, valiant, bountiful.
I was of his humour till I fell in love,
I mean for winching, you may guess a little,
By my legs, but Isle now be very honest,
And when I am married—
Then you are confident
To carry away your Mistress from em all.
From Jove himself though he should practise all
His shapes to court her, tic impossible
She should put any trick upon me, I
Have won her very soul.
Her body must
Needs be your own then.
I have a brace of Rivals
Would they were here that I might Ieere em,
And see how opportunely one is come,
Isle make you a little sport.
I ha bin Melancholy.
You will, express a favour in it.
M. Venture, The first man in my wish
What gentleman is that?
A Friend of mine.
I am his servant, look yet, we are friends▪
An't shall appear, how ever things succeed
That I have loved you, and you 〈◊〉 take
My Council in ill part.
Whats the business?
For my part, I have
Used no enchantment, philter, no devices
That are unlawful, to direct the stream
Of her affection, it flows naturally.
How's this? prithee observe.
I do and shall laugh presently.
For your anger
I wear a sword, though I have no desire
It should be guilty of defacing any
Part of your body, yet upon a just
And noble provocation, wherein
My Mistress love, and honour is engaged,
I dare draw blood.
Ha, ha, ha!
A Mistress love and honour? this is pretty.
I know you cannot
But understand me, yet I say I love you,
And with a generous breast, and in the confidence
You will take it kindly, I return to that
I promised you, good council, come leave off
The prosecution.
Of what I prithee?
There will be less affront then to expect
Till the last minute, and behold the victory
Another, you may guess, why I declare this?
I am studious to preserve an honest friendship•.
For though it be my glory, to be adorned
With trophies of her vanquished love.
Whose love?
This sounds as if he Ieer'd you
Mushroompe!
What dee mean gentlemen? friends and fall out
About good Council.
Isle put up a gain
now I think better on it:
Tic done discreetly,
Cover the nakedness of your tool I pray.
Why look you Sir. If you bestow this Council
Out of your love, I thank you; yet there is
No great necessity, why you should be at
The cost of so much breath, thing's well considered.
A Ladies love is mortal, I know that,
And if a thousand men should love a woman
The dice must carry her, but one of all
Can wear the Garland.
Now you come to him.
For my own part, I loved the Lady well,
But you must pardon me, If I demonstrate
There's no such thing as you pretend, and therefore
In quittance of your loving, honest Council,
I would not have you build an airy Castle,
Her Stars have pointed her another way,
This instrument will take her height.
Ha.
And you may guess what cause you have to triumph,
I would not tell you this, but that I love you,
And hope you will not run your self into
The cure of Bedlam, hee that wears this favour
Hath sense to apprehend.
That Diamond.
Observe it perfectly, there are no trophies
Of vanquished love, I take it, coming toward you,
It will be less affront, then to expect
Till the last minute, and behold the victory
Another.
That Ring I gave her.
Ha, ha, ha!
This was his gift to her, ha, ha, ha!
Have patience spleen, ha, ha!
The scene is changed!
She wonot use me thus, she did receive it
With all the circumstance of love.
I pity him, my eyes run ore, dost hear,
I cannot choose but laugh, and yet I pity thee.
She has a Jeering wit, and I shall love her
More heartily for this. What dost think?
Poor Gentleman how he has foold himself.
Isle to her again.
Nay, be not passionate!
A faith thou were too confident, I knew
It could not hold, dost think Id say so much else?
I can tell thee more, but lose her memory.
Were it more rich
Then that which Cleopatra gave to Anthony,
With scorn I would return it.
She give you this Chain?
She shall be hanged in chains, ere I will keep it.
Stay, stay, let my eye
Examine that—this Chain—
Who would trust woman after this?
The very same
She took of me, when I received this Diamond.
Ha ha! you doe but jest, she wonot fool
You o'this fashion, look a little better, one may be like an∣other.
Tic the same.
Ha, ha, I would it were, that we might laugh
At one another, by this hand I will
Forgive her, prithee tell me—ha, ha, ha!
You will carry her
From Jove himself, though he should practise all
His shapes to court her.
By this Pearl, o Rogue!
How I doe love her fort, be not dejected;
A Ladies love is mortal, one of all
Must wear the Garland, do not fool your self
Beyond the cure of Bedlam.
She has fitted you
With a pair of fools Coat•s, as handsomely
As any Taylor, that had taken measure,
Give me thy hand.
Nay lay your h•ads together
How to revenge it, and so gentlemen I take my leave.
She has abused us.
Let vs take his Council,
Wee can be but what we are.
A pair of credulous fools.
This other fellow Fairefeild has prevailed.
Which if hee have—
What shall we do?
I think we were best let him alone.
Dee hear? Weal to her again, you'll
Be ruled by me, and tell her what wee think on her.
She may come to herself, and be ashamed on it.
If she would affect one of us, for my part
I am indifferent.
So say I too, but to give us both th• canvas
Lets walk, and think how to behave our selves.
What dee mean to do with him?
Thou art
To much a Tyrant, the seven years are past,
That did oblige me to expect my Husband
Engaged to Sea, and though within those limits
Frequent intelligence hath reported him
Lost, both to me, and his own life, I have
Bin careful of my vow; and were there hop•
Yet to embrace him, I would think another
Seven years no penance, but I should thus
Be held a cruel woman, in his certain
Loss, to despise the love of all mankind.
And therefore I resolve, upon so large
A trial of his Constancy, at last
To give him the reward of his rasp•cts.
To me and—
Marry him.
You have apprehended!
No marvel if men rail upon you th•n,
And doubt wh•there a Widow may b• saved,
We Maids are thought the worse on, for your •asines,
How are poor women overseen? We must
Cast a way our selves upon a whining lover
In charity, I hope my Cousins Ghost
Will meet, as you go to Church, or if
You scope it then, upon the Wedding night—
Fie, Fie.
When you are both a bed and candles out.
Nay put not out the candles.
May they burn blew then, at his second kiss
And fright him from—well I could say something
But take your course—he's come already.
Put him off, but another twelve month, so, so,
Oh love into what foolish labyrinths
Dost thou lead us! I would all women were
But of my mind, we would have a new world
Quickly, I will go study Poetry,
A purpose, to write verses in the praise
Of the Amazonian Ladies, in whom only
Appear true valour (for the instruction
Of all posterity) to beat their husbands.
How you endear your servant.
I will not
Be guilty of more stay.
Sweet Lady.
You're come in time Sir, to redeem me.
Why Lady.
You will be as comfortable as strong waters,
There's a Gentleman.
So uncivil to affront you?
I had no patience to hear him long•r;
Take his offence before you question him.
And be most happy if by any service
You teach me to deserve your fair opinion.
It is not civil to ••uesdrop him, but
I'm sure he talks on it now.
Of what?
Of Love, is any thing more ridiculous?
You know I never cherish that condition,
In you tic the most harsh unpleasing discord,
But I hope you will be instructed better
Knowing how much my fancy goes against it,
Talk not of that and welcome.
You retain
I see your unkind temper, will no thought
Soften your heart, disdain agrees but ill
With so much beauty; if you would persuade,
Me not to love you, strive to be less fair;
Undo that face, and so become a Rebel,
To heaven and Nature.
You doe love my face then!
As heavenly prologue to your mind, I doe not
Dote like Pigmalion on the colours!
No you cannot, his was a painted Mistress,
Or if it be the mind you so pretend
To affect, you increase my wonder of your folly,
For I have told you that so often.
What?
My mind so opposite• to all your Courtship,
That I had rather hear the radios tales
Of Hollinghead, then any thing that trenches
On Love, if you come fraught with any,
Cupids devises, keep em for his whirligiggs,
Or land the next edition of his Messenger,
Or post with a mad packet, I shall but
Laugh at them, and pity you.
That pity—
Doe not mistake me, it shall be a v•rye
Miserable pity without love!
Were I a man, and had but half that hansom ness,
(For though I have not love, I hate detraction,)
Ere I would put my invention to the sweat
Of Complement, to court my Mistress hand
And call her smile blessing beyond a Sun• beam,
Entr•at• to wait• upon her, give her Rings
With wanton, or most lamentable Poesies,
I would turn thrasher.
This is a new doctrine,
From women.
'I will concern• your peace, to have• some faith in it.
You would not be neglected.
You neglect
Your selves, the Nobleness of your birth and nature
By servile flattery of this jigging,
And that coy Mistress, keep your privilege
Your Masculine property.
Is there
So great a happiness in nature!
Theres one
just a your mind; can there be such happiness
In nature, fie upont if it were possible,
That ever I should be so mad to love,
To which I thank my Stars I am not inclined,
I should not hold such servants worth my garters,
Though they would put me in security
To hang themselves, and ease me of their visits.
You're a strange gentlewoman! why, look• you Lady?
I am not so enchanted with your virtues
But I do know my self, and at what distance
To look upon such Mistresses,
I can be scurvely conditiond, you are—
As thou dost hope for any good, rail now
But a little.
I could provoke you.
To laugh, but not to lie• down, why! preth•e do!
Go you're a foolish creature, and not worth
My services.
A loud that they may hear•,
The more the merrier, Isle tak't as kindly
As if thou had given me the Exchange, what all this cloud
Without a shower?
You're most ungrateful!
Good, abominable peevish, and a wench
That would be beaten, beaten black and blew.
And then perhaps she may have colour for it,
Come, come, you cannot scold with confidence
Nor with grace, you should look big and swear•
You are no gamester, practise Dice
And Cards a little better, you will get
Many confusions and fine curses by it.
Is not she mad?
To show I have my reason
Isle give you some good Council; and be plain wo'yee
None that have eyes, will follow the direction
Of a blind guide, and what dee thing of Cupped?
Women are either fools, or very wise,
Take that from me, the foolish women are•
Not worth your love, and if a woman know
How to be wise, she wonot care for you.
Do you give all this Council without a Fee?
Come, be less wild! I know you cannot be
So hard of soul.
Prithee let my body alone•!
Why are you thus peremptory? had
Your mother bin so cruel to mankind,
This heresy to love, with you had bin unborn.
My mother was no maid.
How Lady?
She was married long ere I was borne, I take it,
Which I shall never be, that rules infallible,
I would not have you foold it'h expectation,
A favour all my Suitors cannot boost of,
Go home and say your prayers, I wonot look
For thanks till seven year hence.
I know not what
To say, yes I will home and think a Satire,
Wase•er man Ieer'd thus for his good will?
The Licence will be soon dispatcht.
Leave that
To my care Lady, and let him pre•um,
Whom you intend to bless with such a gift,
Seal on your lips the assurance of his heart,
I have more wings then Mercury, expect
Your servant in three minutes.
Take more time!
You'll over heate your self and catch a surfeit.
My nimble Lady I ha business, wee
Will have a Dialogue another time.
You do intend to marry him then.
I have promised
To be his wife, and for his more security
This morning.
How? this morning?
What should one
That has resolved lose time? I do not love
Much ceremony, suits in love, should not
Like suits in Law, be racked from term to term.
You will join issue presently, without your council,
You may be ore thrown; take heed, I have known wives
That have bin ore thrown in their own case, and after
Non suited too, thats twice to be undone,
But take your course, some Widows have bin mortified.
And Maids do now and then meet with their match.
What is in your Condition makes you weary?
You're sick of plenty and command, you have
Too too much liberty, too many servants,
Your Jewels are your own, and you would see
How they will show upon your husbands wag•aisle,
You have a Coach now, and a Christian Livery
To waite on you to Church, and are not Catechise'd
When you come home, you have a waitingwoman,
A Monkey, Squirrel, and a brase of Islands
Which may be thought superfluous in your family
When husbands come to rule. A pretty Wardrobe
A Tailor of your own, a Doctor too
That knows your body, and can make you sick
It'h spring, or fall, or when you have a mind to it
Without control, you have the benefit
Of talking loud and idle at your table
May sing a wanton ditty, and not be chidde,
Dance and go late to bed, say your own prayers,
Or go to Heaven by your Chaplain.
Very fine.
And will you lose all this? For I Sisley, take thee Iohn,
To be my Husband; keep him still to be your servant,
Imitate me, a hundred suitors cannot
Be half the trouble of one husband. I
Dispose my frowns, and favours like a Princess
Deject, advance, undo, create again
It keeps the Subjects in obedience,
And teaches em to look at me with distance.
But you encourage some.
Tic when I ha nothing else to do for sport,
As for example.
But I am not now in tune to hear em, prithee
Lets withdraw.
Nay, nay, Lady we must follow ye.
Music and revelles? they are very merry.
By your favour Sir.
You're welcome.
Pray is this a dancing School.
No dancing School.
And yet some voices sound like women.
Wilt please you
To taste a cup of Wine, tic this day free
As at a Coronation; you seem
A Gentleman.
Prithee who dwells here?
The house this morning was a widows Sir!
But now her husbands, without circumstance
She is married.
Prithee her name.
Her name was Mistress Bono••ned.
How long since her husband dyed.
Tic two years since she had intelligence•
He was cast away, at his departure he
Engaged her to a seven years expectation
Which full expired this morning she became
A Bride.
What's the gentleman she has married.
A man of pretty fortune, that has bin
Her servant many years.
How dee mean wantonly, or does he serve for wages.
Neither, I mean a Suitor.
Cry' mercy, may I be acquainted with his name.
And his person too, if you have a mind too't
Moister Lacy, Isle bring you to him.
Mr. Lacy, may be tic he, would thou could help me to
A sight of this gentleman, I ha business with
One of his name, and cannot meet with him.
Please you walk in.
I would not bee intruder
In such a day, if I might only see him.
Follow me and Isle do you that favour.
Whose that peepes?
Peepes! whose that? faith you shall dance.
Good Sir you must excuse me, I am a stranger.
Your tongue does walk our language, and your fe•te
Shall do as we do, take away his Cloak
And Sword, by this hand you shall dance Monsieur
No pardon moi!
Well said Moist•r Bridegroom, the gentleman
May perhaps want exercise.
He will not take it well.
Th• Bridegrom's merry!
Take me no takes, come choose your •irk•
For dance you shall.
I cannot, you'll not compel me.
I ha sworn.
Tic an affront as I am a Gentleman,
I know not how to foot your Chamber jigges.
No remedy, here is a Lady lunges for one vagari•
Fill a boule of Sack, and then to the Canaries.
You are circled with your friends, and do not well
To use this privilege to a Gentleman's
Dishonour.
You shall shake your heals.
I shall, Ladies tic this gentleman's desire•
That I should make you mirth, I cannot dance
I tell you that before.
He seems to be a Gentleman and a Soldier.
Good Mars be not so sullen, you'll do more
With Venus privately.
Because this Gentleman is engaged Isle try.
Will you excuse me yet.
Play excuse me, yes any thing you'll call for.
This motion every morning will be wholesome
And beneficial to your body Sir.
So, so.
Your pretty lump requires it.
Wheres my sword, sir I have bin your hobby horse.
You danced something like one.
Ieere on my whimsy Lady.
Pray impute it
No trespass studied to affront you Sir,
But to the merry passion of a Bridegroom.
Prithee stay, weal to Hide Park togeth•r!
There you meet with Morrisdancers, for
You Lady I wish you more joy, so farewell.
Comes, ha tother wherle, lustily boys!
You are resolved then.
I have no other care left,
And if I do it not quickly my affection
May be too far spent, and all physic will
Be cast away.
You will show a Manly fortitude.
When saw you Moister Tryer?
Not since yesterday!
Are not his visits frequent?
He does see me sometimes!
Come! I know thou love him! and he will
Deserve it, hoe's a pretty gentleman.
It was your Character, that first commended
Him to my thoughts!
If he be flow to answer it
Hee loses me again, his mind more then
His fortune gained me to his praise, but I
Trifle my precious time.
Farewell! al my good wishes stay with thee.
And mine attend you! Moister Tryer.
I come to kiss your hand.
And take your leave.
Only to kis't again!
You begin to be a stranger! in two mornings
Not one visit, where you profess affection.
I should be surfeited with happiness
If I should dwell here.
Surfeits in the Spring
Are dangerous, and yet I never h•art,
A lover would absent him from his Mistress
Through fear to be more happy, but I allow
That for a Complement, and dispute not with you
A reason of your actions • you're now welcome
And though you should be guilty of neglect,
My love would over-come any suspicion.
You are• all goodness
With me prithee admit him!
Sir, my Lord saw you enter, and desires
To speak with you!
His Lordship shall command, where is he?
Below Sir!
Say, I instantly waite on him?
Shall I presume upon your favour Lady?
In what!
That I may entreat him hither, you will honour me
To bid him welcome, he is a gentleman
To whom I owe all services, and in
himself is worthy of your entertainment.
If he be yours command me!
My Lord! excuse
Nay I prevent your trouble—Lady I am
Your humble servant, pardon my intrusion
I hano business, only I saw you enter.
Your Lordship honours me.
What gentlewoman's this.
Wy—
A Lady of pleasure, I like her •y•, it has
A pretty twirl, wot-will she bid one welcome.
Be confident my Lord, sweet Lady pray
Assure his Lordship he is welcome,
I want words.
Oh sweet Lady your lip in silence
Speaks the best language.
Your Lordship's welcome to this humble roof!
I am confirmed.
If your knew Lady, what
Perfection of honour dwells in him,
You would be studious with all ceremony
To enter taine him! beside, to me
His Lordship's goodness hath so flowed, you cannot
study, what will oblige more then in his welcome!
Come, you Complement.
Though I want both ability and language•,
My wishes shall be zealous to express me
Your humble servant:
Come, that humble was
But complement in you too.
I wood not
Be guilty of dissembling with your Lordship,
I know words have more proportion
With my distance to your birth and fortune,
Then humble servant.
I doe not love these• distance•s.
You would have her be more humble, this will try h•r,
If she resist his siege, she is a brave one,
I know he will put her too't, he that doth love
Wisely, will see the trial of his Mistress,
And what I want in impudence my self,
Another may supply for my advantage•,
Isle frame excuse!
Frank thou art melancholy!
My Lord I now reflected on a business,
Concerns me equal with my fortune, and
It is the more unhappy that I must,
So rudely take my leave.
What? not so soon.
Your honours pardon.
Are you sir in earnest!
Love will instruct you to int•rpret fairly,
They are affairs that cannot be dispensed with,
I leave this noble gentleman.
Hoe's a stranger,
You wonot use me well, and sh•w no care
Of me, nor of my honour, I pray stay!
Thou hast virtue to secure all, I am confide•ned,
Temptations will shake thy innocence,
No more then waves, that clime a Rock, which soon•
Betray their weakness, and discover thee,
More clear and more impregnable
How is this?
Farewell, I will not sin against your honours clem•ncy
To doubt your pardon.
Well and there be no remedy I shall see you
Anon ith Park, the Match holds, I am not willing
To leave you alone Lady.
I have a servant.
You have many, in their number pray write me,
I shall be very dutiful.
Oh my Lord!
And when I have done a fault I shall be instructed,
But with a smile to mend it.
Done what fault?
Faith none at all, if you but think so.
I think your Lordship would not willingly
Offend a woman.
I would never hurt em,
'Thas bin my study still to please those women,
That fell within my conversation.
I am very tender hearted to a Lady,
I can deny em nothing.
The whole sex is bound to you.
If they well considered things,
And what a stickler I am in their cause,
The common cause, but most especially
How zealous I am in a Virgins honour,
As all true Knights should be, no woman could
Deny me hospitality, and let down,
When I desire access, the rude Portcullis,
I have a natural sympathy with fair ones,
As they do, I do! theres no handsome woman
Complains, that she has lost her maindenhead;
But I wish mine had bin lost with it.
Your Lordship's merry!
Tic because you look pleasant,
A very handsome Lodging, is there any
Accommodations that way.
Ther's a garden,
Wilt please your Lordship taste the ayre on it.
I meant oath•r convenience, but if
You please Isle waite upon you thither.
You and I had better stay, and in their absence
Exercise one another.
How mean you Page.
Isle teach you away that we may follow em,
And not remove from hence.
How prithee?
Shall I beg your lip?
I cannot spare it.
Isle give you both mine.
What means the Child?
Because I have no upper lip, dee scorn me?
I ha kissed Ladies before now, and have
Been sent for to their Chambers.
You, sent for!
Yes, and been trusted with their Closets too!
We are such pretty things, we can play at
All hid under a Fardingale; how long
Have you bin a waiting creature?
Not a month yet.
Nay then I cannot blame• your ignorance•,
You have perhaps your maidenhead.
I hope so.
Oh lamentable! away with it for shame,
Chaffer it with the Coachman, for the credit
Of your profession, do not keep it long,
Tic fineable in Court.
Good Moister Page,
How long have you bin skilled in those affairs?
Ere since I was in Breeches, and you'll find
Your honesty so troublesome.
How so.
When you have trucked away your Maidenh•ad,
You have excuse lawful, to put off gamesters,
For you may swear, and give em satisfaction,
You have not what they looked for, beside the benefit
Of being impudent as occasion serves,
A thing much in r•qu•st, with waiting cr•atures,
We Pages can instruct you in that quality,
So you be tractable.
The boy is wild.
And you will lead me a Chase, il• follow you.
Why, did you ever think, I could affect
Of all men living such a thing as you are.
What hope, or what encouragement did I give you
Because I took your Diamond, must you presently
Bound like a stoned horse.
Shoe's a very Colt!
Cause you can put your hat of like a dance•r,
And make a better leg, then you were borne to,
For to say truth your calfe is well amended,
Must this so overtake me, that I must
Strait fall in love w'e ye, one step to Church,
Another into the Sheets, more to a bargain
You're wide a bow, and some thing over shot.
Th•n this is all that I must trust to, you
Will never ha me?
In my right mind, I think so•
Why, prithee tell me what I should do with thee?
Can you find nothing to do with me!
To find any Monkey spiders, were an office
Perhaps you would not execute!
You're a gypsy!
And none of the twelve Sibills in a Tarverne,
Have such a tand complexion, there be Dogs
And Horses in the world.
They'll keep you company!
Tell me of Spiders?
Isle wring your Monkeys neck off.
And then puzzle
Your brain to make an Elegy, which shall be• sung
To the tune of the devil and the baker, good!
You have a pretty ambling wit in Summer,
Dee let out, or keep for your own•
Riding, who holds your stirrup, while you jump
Into a jest, to the endangering•
Of your ingenious quodlibets.
Come tha'st said enough.
To him, you would have some•.
Some testimony of your love, if it please you.
Indeed I have heard you are a precious gentleman,
And in your younger, could play at trap well.
Fare you well gentlewoman, by this light a devil,
Isle follow my old game of horse-rasing.
I could tear her Ruff! I wo'd thou wort
A Whore then id be revenged, and bring the Prentices
To arraign thee on Shrovetuesday, a pox upon you.
A third man, a third man, two fair gamesters.
For shame lets go!
Will you stay gentleman; you ha no more wit,
To venture, keep your heads warm in any case,
There may be dregs in the bottom other brain pan,
Which may turn to somewhat in seven years, and set
You up again, now Sir.
Lady I am come to you.
It does appear so.
To take my leave.
Tic granted Sir god buy.
But you must stay and hear a little more,
I promise not to trouble you with Courtship,
I am as weary as you can b• displeased wooed.
On these conditions, I would have the pati•nc•
To hear the brazen head speak.
Whether, or how I purpose to dispose
My self hereafter, as I know you have
No purpose to enquire, I have no great
Ambition to discourse, but how I have
Studied your fair opinion, I remit
To time, and come now only to request
That you would grant, in lieu of my true service
One boon at parting.
Forboone I proceed!
But you must swear to p•rforme truly• what
I shall desire, and that you may not think
I come with any cunning to deceive you,
You shall except what ere you would deny me,
And after all Isle make request.
How's this?
But it concerns my life, or what can else
Be nearer to me that you swear.
To what?
When you have made exceptions and thought,
What things in all the world you will exempt,
From my petition, Isle be confident
To tell you my desire.
This is fair play!
I would not for an Empire by a trick
Oblige you to perform, what should displease you.
This is a very strange request; are you in earnest;
Ere you begin shall I except? tic odds
But I may include, what you have a mind to, then
Wheres your petition?
I will run that hazard.
You will, why look you; for a little mirthes sake,
And since you come so honestly, because
You shannot say, I am composed of Marble,
I doe consent.
Swear!
I am not come to that,
Isle first set bounds to your request, and wh•n
I have left nothing for you worth my grant,
Isle take a zealous oath to grant you any thing.
You have me at your mercy!
First, you shannot
Desire that I should love you!
That's first, proceed!
No more but proceed, dee know what I say.
Your first exception forbid's to ask
That you should love me.
And you are contented.
I must be so.
What in the name• of wonder will h• ask• m•,
You shall not desire me to marry you.
That's the second.
You shall neither directly, nor indirectly with m• to
lye with you,
Have I not clipped the wings of your conceit.
That's the third.
That's the third, is there anything a young man would
Desire of his Mis, when he must neither love, marry, nor lye with her.
My suite is still untouched.(with her.•
Suite! if you have another suite tic out of fashion,
Ye cannot beg my state, yet I would willigly
Give part of that to be rid on thee.
Not one Jewel.
You wo'd not have me spoil my face•, drink poison,
Or kill any body.
Goodness forbid that I should wish your danger.
Then you wo'd not ha me ride through the City naked,
As once a Princess of England did through Coventry.
All my desires are modest.
You shall not beg my Parrot nor entreat me
To fast, or wear a hair smock.
None of these.
I wonot be confined to make me ready
At ten, and pray till dinner, I will play
At gleek as often as I please, and see
Plays when I have a mind to it and the rac•s,
Though men sho'd run Adamits before me.
None of these trench on what I have to ask•.
Why then I swear—stay
You shannot ask me before company
How old I am, a question most untoothsome,
I know not what to say more, Isle not be
Bound from spring garden, and the Sparagus.
I wo'not have my tongue tide up, when Iv'e
a mind to jeer my suitors, among which
Your worship shall not doubt to be r•m•mbr•d,
For I must have my humour, I am sick else;
I will not be compelled to hear your sonnets,
A thing before, I thought to advise you of,
Your words of hard concoction rude Poetry
Have much impaired my health, try sense another while
And calculate some prose according to
The elevation of our pole at London,
As says the learned Almanac—but com• on
And speak your mind, I ha done, I know not what
More to except, if it be none of these
And as you say feasible on my part,
I swear.
By what.
For once a kiss, it may be a parting blow,
By that I will perform what you desire.
In few words thus receive it, by that oath
I bind you, never to desire my company
Hereafter, for no reason to affect me,
This I am sure was none of your exceptions.
What has the man said?
Tic clear, I am confident
To your understanding.
You have made me swear
That I must never love you, nor desire
Your company.
I know you will not violate,
What you have sworn, so all good thoughts possess you.
Was all this circumstance for this? I never
Found any inclination to trouble him
With too much love, why should he bind me from it,
And make me swear, an oath that for the present,
I had no affection to him, had been reasonable,
But for the time to come, never to love,
For any cause or reason, that may move m•
Hereafter, very strange, I know not what to think on it,
Although I never meant, to think well on him,
Yet to be limited, and be prescribed,
I must not do• it? it was a poor trick in him,
But Isle go practise something to forget it.
Lady you're welcome to the spring, the Park
Looks fresher to salute you, how the birds
On every tree sing; with more cheerfulness
At your access, as if they prophesied
Nature would dye, and resign her providence
To you, fit only to succeed her.
You express
A Master of all Complement, I have
Nothing but plain humility, my Lord
To answer you.
But isle speak our own English,
Hang these affected strains, which we sometime•s
Practise, to please the curiosity
Of talking Ladies, by this lip you are welcome,
Isle swear a hundred oaths upon that book,
An't please you.
They are at it.
You shall not need my Lord, I'm• not incredulous.
I doe believe your honour, and dare trust
For more than this.
I wonot breakē my credit
With any Lady that dares trust me.
She had a cruel heart, that would not venture•
Upon the engagement of your honour.
What? what durst thou venture now, and be plain• wo'm•
There's nothing in the verge• of my command
That should not serve your Lordship.
Speak, speak truth and flatter not,
Upon what security?
On that which you propounded sir, your honour,
It is above all other obligation,
And he that's truly noble will not stain• it.
Upon my honour will you lend me then
But a nights lodging.
How sir.
She is angry
I shall obtain, I know the trick ont, had
She yielded at the first it had been fatal.
It seems your Lordship speaks to on• you know not.
But I desire to know you better Lady.
Better! I should desire my Lord.
Better or worse, if you dare venture one,
Isle hazard t'other.
Tic your Lordships mirth.
You're in the right, tic the best mirth of all.
Isle not bele•ve my Lord you mean so wantonly
As you profess.
Refuse me if I doe not
Not mean? I hop• you have more Charity
Then to suspect, Isle not perform as much,
And more than I ha said, I know my fault,
I am too modest when I undertake,
But when I am to Act let me alone.
You shall be alone no longer
My good Lord.
Frank Tryer.
Which side holds your honour.
I am o'thy side Frank.
I think so! for
All the Park's against me, but 6. to 4.
Is odds enough.
Is it so much against you.
Lady I think tic two, to on•.
We were on even terms till you came his•r,
I find her yielding, and when they doe run?
They say presently.
Will you venture any thing Lady?
Perhaps she reserves her self for the horse rac•.
There I may venture somewhat with his Lordship.
That was a witty one.
You will b• doing.
You are for the foot•m•n.
I run with the Company.
Isle go• your half.
No thank you Jack•, would I had tenn• p•ec•s more
On it.
Which side.
On the Irishman.
Done! Isle maintain the English,
As many more with you, I love to cherish
Our own Countrymen.
Tic done my Lord.
Isle rooke for once, my Lord Isle hold you twenty more
Done with you too.
Your Lordship is very confident.
Isle lay with you too.
Lye with her h• means.
Come, you shall venture something,
What gold against a kiss, but if you lose,
You shall pay it formally down upon my lip•.
Though she should win, it would be held extortion
To take your money.
Rather want of modesty,
A great sin if you observe the circumstance,
I see his Lordship has a disposition
To be merry, but proclaim not this free lay
To every one, some women in the world
Would hold you all day.
But not all night swe•te Lady.
Will you not see 'em my Lord?
Frank Tryar, you'll waite upon this g•ntl•woman,
I must among the gamesters, I shall quickly
Return to kiss your hand.
How dee like this gallant.
Hoe's one it becomes not m• to censure•.
Dee not find him coming, a wilde gentleman
You may in tim• conv•rt him.
You made me acquainted with him to that purpose,
It was your confidence, Isle do what I can,
Because he is your noble Friend, and one
In whom was hid so much perfection
Of honour, for at first it was most invisible•,
But it begins to appear, and I do perceive
A glimering, it may break out a flame,
I shall know all his thoughts at our next conference,
He has a secr•t to impart he says
only to me.
And will you hear it?
Yes Sir, if it be honourable there is no harm• in it,
If otherwise you do not doubt my innocence.
But do not tempt a danger.
From his Lordship.
I do not say from him.
From mine own frailety.
I dare not conclude that but from the matt•r
Of his discourse, on which there may depend
A circumstance that may not prove so happy.
Now I must tell you Sir, I see your heart
Is not so just as I deserve, you have
Engaged me to his conversation,
Provoked by jealous thoughts, and now your fear
Betrays your want of goodness, for he never
was right at home, that dare suspect his Mistress,
Can love degenerate in noble breasts,
Collect the arguments, that could invite you
To this unworthy trial, bring them to
My forehead, where you shall inscribe their names
For virgins to blush at me, if I do not
Fairly acquit my self.
Nay be not passionate•.
I am not Sir so guilty to b• angry,
But you shall give me leave unless you will
Declare, you dare not trust me any further,
Not to break off so rudely with his, Lordship.
I Will hear• what he means to say to me,
And if my council may prevail with you,
You shannot interrupt us, have but patience
Isle keep the story for you, and assure
My ends have no base mixture, not my lov•
To you could bribe me to the least dishonour,
Much less a stranger, since I have gone so far
By your commission, I will proceed
A little further at my peril Sir.
I know thou art proof against a thousand Engines,
Pursue what ways you please.
This morning married?
That your brothers Mistress.
She that Ieeres all within Gunshot.
In the way of Suitors,
She is reported such a tyrant.
My Brother.
Frank Tryer.
Brother do you know that gentlewoman.
Tic she, then you and I must seem more familiar,
And you shannot be angry.
What gentlewoman's that?
She does not know thee.
Was this his reason, pray if you love me lets
Walk by that gentleman.
Master Fairefeild.
Is that well trust gentleman on• of them that run.
Your sweet heart.
Ha, ha, Id laugh at that!
If you allow a bushel of salt to acquaintance•,
Pray vouchsafe two words to a bargain while you live
I scarce remember him, keep in great heart.
Oh Sir you are very well met here.
We are met indeed, Sir thank you for your music•.
It is not so much worth.
I made you merry Mast•r Brid•grom•.
I could not choose but laugh.
Be there any races here.
Yes Sir horse and foot.
You'll give me leave to take• my Course then.
This is the Captain that did Dance.
Not so nimbly as your wit, pray let mē ask• you a que∣stion.
I hear that gentlewoman's married.
Married without question Sir.
Dee think he has bin aforehand.
How dee mean.
In English has he plaid the forward gamest•r
And turned up trump.
Before the Cards be shuffled?
I lay my life you m•an a coat Card
Deal again, you gave one to many
In the last trick, yet Isle tell thee what I think.
What?
I think she and you might ha shown• more wit.
Why she and I?
She to ha kept her self a Widow, and
You not to have asked me such a foolish question,
But if sh• had been half so wise, as in
My conscience she is honest, you had mist
That excellent occasion, to show
Your notable skill in dancing, but it pleased
The learned destinies to put things together,
And so we separate.
Fare ye well Mistress.
Come hither, go to that g•ntleman Mr. Fairefeild.
Prithee sweet heart who runs?
An Irish and an English footman?
Will they run this way?
Just before you, I must have a bet!
Nay, nay you shannot leave me.
Do it discreetly, I must speak to him,
To ease my heart I shall burst else,
Weal expect em here, Cousin, do they run nak•d?
That were a most immodest sight.
Her• have• bin such fellows, Cousin.
It would fright the women!
Some are of opinion it brings us hither,
Hark what a confusion of tongues there is,
Let you and I venture a pair of Gloves
Upon their feet, Isle take the Irish.
Tic done, but you shall pay if you lose.
Here is my hand, you shall have the Gloves if you win•.
I think they are started.
A Teag, A Teag, make way for shame.
I hold any man forty pieces yet.
A hundred pound to ten, a hundred p••ces to t•n, will
No man take me?
I hold you Sir.
Well you shall see, a Teag a Teag hey.
Ha well run Irish.
He may be in a Bog• anon.
Can they tell what they doe in this Noise,
Pray Heaven it do not break into the Tombs
At Westminster, and wake the dead.
She's yonder still, she thinks thee a new Mistress.
I observe her.
How go things Frank.
Prithee observe that creature.
She leers this way.
I ha done such a strange• cure upon her,
Sh'as sent for me, and I will entreat thee Frank
To be a witness of my triumph, tic
Now in my power to punish all her Ieeres,
But Isle go to her, thou shalt keep a distance
Only to hear, how most miraculously
I ha brought things about.
The cry returns.
Make way there, a Teag, a Teag, a Teag.
Forty, fifty, a hundred pieces to ten.
I hold you.
Well you shall see, you shall see.
This gentleman does nothing but talk, he make•s good
No bet.
Talk? you prate, Isle make good what I please Sir.
Make the best you can of that.
For heavens sake lets remove.
What for a naked weapon!
Fight gentlemen, you're fine fellows, it is a noble cause,
Come Lady Isle discharge your fears,
A Cup of Sack, and Anthony at the Rose
Will reconcile their furies.
I make a doubt whether I should go to h•r,
Upon a single summons.
By any means.
What women are forbidden
They're mad to execute, she's here, be you
It'h reach of her voice, and see how I will humble h•r.
But keep at some fit distance.
You honour me, and shall
Command me any service.
He has gone a strange way to work• with me.
Well advised, observe and laugh without a noise.
I am ashamed to think what I must say now.
By your leave Lady! I take it you sent for me?
You wonnot be so impudent, I, send for you▪
By Whom or when?
Your servant—
Was a villain if he mentioned
I had any such desire, he told me indeed
You courted him to entreat me that I would
Be pleased to give you another audience,
And that you swore, I know not what confound you,
You would not trouble me above six words.
You are• prettily disposed.
With much ado you see I have consent•d,
What is it you would say?
Nay, what is it, you would say?
Be you no prompter to insinuate
The first word of your studied Oration,
He's out once part, come, come Isle imagine it,
Was it not something to this purpose—Lady,
Or Mistress, or what you will, although
I must confess; you may with justice laugh at
My most ridiculous suite, and you will say
I am a fool.
You may say any thing.
To come a gen, whom you have• so torm•nted,
For ne'er was simple Camomile so trod on,
Yet still I grow in love, but since there is
No hope to thaw your heart, I now am desperate,
Oh give me, lend me but the silken tie,
About your leg, which some doe call a garter,
To hang my self, and I am satisfied, am not I a witch.
I think you are past it,
Which of the furies art thou made already,
I shall depart the world, ne'er fear it Lady,
Without a necklace, did not you send for me.
I shall laugh a loud sir.
What madness has
Possessed you? have I not sworn you know by what,
Never to think well of you, of all men
Living, not to desire your company,
And will you still intrude, shall I be haunted
For ever, no place give me privilege;
Oh man what art thou come to?
Oh woman!
How far thy tongue and heart doe live asunder,
Come; I ha found you out, off with this veil,
It hides not your complexion, I doe tell thee,
I see thy heart, and every thought within it,
A little peevishness to save your credit
Had not b•en much amiss, but this over
Over doing the business it appears
Ridiculous, like my suite as you inferred,
But I forgive thee and forget thy tricks
And trillabubs, and will swear to love thee
Heartily; wenches must ha their ways.
Pardon me sir, if I have seemed too light,
It was not rudeness from my heart, but a
Disguise to save my honour if I found
You still incredulous.
I love thee better
For thy Vagaries.
In vain I see I should dissemble w'e•,
I must confess you've caught me, had you still
Pursued the common path, I had fled from you,
You found the constitution of women
In me, whose will, not reason is their law,
Most apt to doe, what most they are forbidden,
Impatient of curbs in their desires.
Thou say right.
Oh love I am thy Captive, but I am forsworn▪
Am I not sir?
Ne'er think of that.
Ne'er think on it.
It was a vain oath, and well may be dispensed with,
Oh sir, be more religious, I never
Did violate an oath in all my life,
Though I ha been wilde, I had a care of that,
An oathe's a holy obligation,
And never dreaming of this chance, I took it
With true intention to perform your wishes,
It was but a kiss, Isle give it thee again.
But tic enroled in that high Court already,
I must confess, I could look on you now
With other eyes, for my rebellious heart
Is soft and capable of loves impression,
Which may prove dangerous, if I cherish it,
Having forsworn your love.
Now I am fitted.
I have made twigs to jerk my self—well thought on
You shall absolve your self, your oath does not
Oblige you to perform what you excepted,
And among them, if you remember, you
Said you must have your humour you'd be sick else,
Now if your humour be to break your oath
Your obligation's void.
You have relieved me!
But do not triumph in your conquest sir,
Be modest in your victory.
Will not you
Fly off again, now You're at large.
If you
Suspect it, call some witn•sse of my vows,
I will contrct my self.
And I am provided,
Frank Tryer appear, and show thy Phinomy,
He is a Friend of mine, and you may trust him.
What sum of money is it you would borrow.
I borrow?
This gentleman your friend has fully
Possessed me with your wants, nay do not blush,
Debt is no sin, though my own monies sir
Are all abroad, yet upon good security,
Which he answers you can put in, I will
Speak to a friend of mine.
What security?
Your selves, and two sufficient Aldermen,
For men are mortal and may break.
What mean you?
You shall have fifty pounds for forty we•kes
To do you a pleasure.
You'll not use me thus?
Fare you well, you have miraculously brought things about.
You work by stratagem and Ambuscado.
Do you not think your self a proper gentleman,
Whom by your want of hair some hold a wit too,
You know my heart, and every thought within it
How I am caught, do I not melt like honey
It'h dog days, why do you look so staring.
Do not you love me for all this?
Would I had Art enough to draw your picture,
It would show rarely at the exchange, you have
A medley in your face of many Nations,
Your Nose is Roman, which your next debauchment,
At Tavern with the help of pot or candlestick
May turn to Indian flat, your lip is Austrian,
And you do well to bit it; for your Chin
It does incline to the Bavarian poke,
But seven years may disguise it with a b•art,
And make it more ill favoured; you have eyes
Especially when you goggle thus, not much
Unlike a Jaws, and yet some men might take em
For Turks, by the two half Moons that rise about •m,
I am an Infidel to use him thus.
Till now I never was my self, farewell
For ever woman, not worth love or anger.
Dee hear one word,
I'd fine speak kindly to him,
Why dost not rail at me?
No, I will laugh at thee and at my self,
To have bin so much a fool, you're a fine may game.
I shall fool too much, but one word more,
By all the faith and love of womankind,
Believe me now, it wonot out.
Farewell
When next I dote upon thee be a Monster.
Hark sir the Nightingale, there is better luck
Coming towards us.
When you are out of breath
You will give over, and for better luck,
I do believe the bird, for I can leave thee,
And not be in love with my own torment.
How sir.
I ha said, stay you and practise with the bird,
It was Philom•l th•y say, and thou were on•,
I should new ravish thee.
I must to the Coach and weep, my heart will br•ak else,
I'm glad he does not see me.
Whither will you walk my Lord? you may engage•
Your self too far and lose your sport!
I would
Go farther for a little sport, you m•an
The horse race, they're not come into the Park y•t,
I might doe something else, and return time
Enough towinn• five hundred pieces.
Your Lordship had no fortune in the last match,
I wished your confidence a happier success.
We must loose sometimes—hark the Nightingale•
You win my Lord I dare engage• my self.
You make the Omen fortunate, this bird
Doth prophecy good luck.
Tic the first time I heard it.
And I this spring, lets walk a little fur th•r.
I am not weary but—
You may trust your person Lady.
I were too much wicked to suspect your honour
And in this place.
This place, th• place were good •nough
If you were bad enough, and as prepared
As I, there have been stories that some have•
Struck many dear within the Park:
Foul play,
If I did think your honour had a thought
To Venture at unlawful game, I should
Ha brought less confidence.
Ha Tryer,
What does he follow us?
To show I dare
Be bold upon your virtue, take• no notic•
Isle waft him back• ag•n, my Lord walk forward.
Thus far alone? yet why doe I suspect?
Hang jealousy tic nought, it breeds too many
Worms in our brains, and yet she might ha suffered m•,
Master Lacy, and his bride!
I was wont to have one always in my chamb•r.
Thou shall it have a whole quire of Nightingales.
I heard it yesterday warble so prettily.
They say tic lucky, when it is the first
Bird that salutes our ear.
Doe you believe it.
I am of his mind, and love a happy Augury.
Observe the first note always
Cuckoo?
Is this the Nightingale?
Why doe you look so?
Are not we married,
I wood not have been a bachelor to have heard it.
To them they say tic fatal.
And to married men
Cuckoo is no delightful not•, I shall
Be superstitious.
Lets walk a little furth•r.
I waite upon thee, hark still ha ha ha.
I am not much in love with the broad ditty.
Frank Tryer, I ha been seeking thee
About the Park.
What to doe,
To be merry for half an hour•, I find
A scurvy Melancholy Creep upon me,
Isle try what sack will doe, I ha sent my footman
To the Maurice for a bottle, we shall meet him,
Isle tell thee to'ther story of my Lady.
Isle waite on you.
But that she is my sist•r,
Id ha thee forswore women, but lets walk•.
This way they marched, I hop• th•y wonot leap
The pale, I do not know the disposition
Of my capering gentleman, and therefore two not
Be indiscretion to observe him, things
Must be a little better reconciled,
The Nightingale—this can presage no hurt,
But I shall lose my Pigeons, they are in view
Fair and far off.
He must be a Pegaus that beats me.
Yet your confidence may deceive you, you will tide
Against a Jockey, that has horse-manshippe.
A Jockey, a Iackanapes a horse-backe rather,
A Monkey or a Misty dog would show
A Giant to him, and I were Alexander
I would lay the world upon my Mare, she shall
Run with the devil for a hundred pieces,
Make the match who will.
Not I, you shall excuse me,
Nor would I win his money.
Whose?
The devils, my gold has burnt this 12. months in my pock•t,
A little of his amongst, would scorch my thighs
And make such tinder of my linings, that
My breeches never after, would hold mon•y,
But let these pass; wheres Lacy and his Bride?
They are walked to hear the Nightingale.
The Nightingale? I ha not heard one this year•▪
Listen, and we shall hear one presently,
Cuckoo.
The bird speaks to you.
No tic to you.
Now do I susp•ct
I shall lose the race.
Despair for a Cuckoo.
A Cuckoo wo'not flatter,
His word will go before a gentle•mans
It'h City? tic an understanding bird
And seldom fails, a Cuckoo, Isle hedge in
My money presently.
For shame be confident.
Will you go half.
Isle go it all, or any thing.
Hang Cuckoo's then.
My Lord, Bonvile, Lacy, and his bride!
How now gentlemen?
Your honours servants.
Ladies, I kiss your hands.
You are the man, will run away with all
The gold anon.
Your Jockey must fly else.
Isle hold your honour thirty pieces more.
Tic done.
Do you ride your self.
I shall have the Rains in my own hand Lady.
Master Rider, saw you not my Cousin.
Cry mercy she is here, I thought y'ad followed us.
Your kinswoman,
I shall be honoured to be your servant Lady.
Alas my Lord you'll lose by it!
What?
Honour me being my servant! her's a brace▪
Of gentlemen will tell you as much.
But will say nothing for our credits.
You look as you had wept.
I weep! For what?
Come toward the Lodge, and drink a syllabub.
A match!
And as we walk, Jack Venture thou shalt sing,
The song thou mad•st ot'h horses.
You shall pardon me.
What among friends? my Lord if you'd speak to him.
A song by all means, prithee, let me
Entreat it, what's the suct•ect▪
Of all the running horses.
Horses and Mares put them together.
Lets have it, come I heard you can sing rarely.
An excellent voice.
A Ravishing tone.
Tic a very ballad my Lord, and a course tune.
The better, why does any tune become
A g•ntleman so well as a ballad, hang
Curiosity in music, leave those crotchets
To men that get their living with a song,
Come come begin.
COme Muses all that dwell nigh the fountain,
Made by the winged horses heel,
Which firk'd with his rider over each Mountain,
Let me your galloping raptures feel.
I doe not sing of fleas, or frogs,
Nor of the well mouthed hunting dogs.
Let me be just all praises must,
Be given to well breathed Eileen Thrust.
Young Constable and kill dears famous,
The Cat the Mouse and Noddy Gray,
With nimble Pegabrig you cannot shame us,
With Spaniard nor with Spinola.
Hill climbing white-rose, praise doth not lack,
Handsome Dunbar, and yellow Jack.
But if I be just all praises must,
Be given to well breathed lilian Thrust.
Sure Spurred sloven, true running Robin,
Of young shaver I doe not say less,
Strawbery Some, and let Spider pop in,
Fine Briskly and brave lurching Bess.
Victorious too, was herring shotten,
And spit in's arse is not forgotten.
But if I be just all honour must
Be given to well breathed Eileen Thrust.
Lusty Gorge and gentlemen, hark yet,
To wining Mackarell fine mouthed Freak,
Bay Tarrall that won the cup at Newmarket,
Thundering tempest, black dragon eake.
Precious sweetelippes, I doe not lose,
Nor Toby with his golden shoes,
But if I be just, all honour must,
Be given to well breathed Eileen Thrust.
Excellent, how think you Lady?
I like it very well.
I never thought you were a Poet sir.
No no, I doe but dabble.
You can sing early too, how w•re these parts
Observed, invisible?
You may see Lady.
Good sir your pardon▪
Doe you love singing, hum, la la.
Who would ha thought these qualities were in you,
Now or never.
Why I was consent.
You are not the first I ha consent, shall I wash
Your faces with the drops of Helicon, I ha fancies in my head.
Like Iupiter you want a Vulcan but
To cleave your skull, and out peepes bright Minerva.
When you return Isle tell you more my Lord.
Give me a subject.
Prithee Cos doe.
Let it be how much you dare suffer for me.
Enough—hum, fa, la la.
Master Venture y' are expected.
Are they come?
This half hour my Lord.
I must see the Mare, you will excuse this rudeness,
Sir stay you and waite upon these Ladies.
Tic tim• to make me ready,
Ladies I take this leave in prose,
You shall see me next in other fe•te.
I wish your syllabub were nectar Lady.
We thank you sir, and here it comes already.
So so, is it good milk?
Of a Red Cow.
You talk as you inclined to a consumption,
Is the wine good?
It comes from his excellence• head!
My service to you Lady, and to him
Your thoughts pr•far.
A health!
No de•pe one? tic lawful for gentlewomen
To wish well to their friends.
You have obliged me—the wishes of all happen•sse
To him you heart hath chosen.
Duty now▪
Requires I should be willing to r•ceiv• it
As many joys to you both, when you are marry•d.
Married?
You have not vowed to dye a virgin,
I know an humble servant of yours Lady?
Mine!
Would be sorry you should be a Nun.
Dee think he loves me then?
I doe not think
He can dissemble where he does profess
Affection: I know his heart by mine;
Fairefield is my brother!
Your Brother? then th• danger's not so great, but
Let us change our argument: with your pardon,
Come hither pretty one; how old are you?
I am young Lady, I hope you doe not take me for a
Dwarf.
How young I pray then?
Four summers since my life was questioned,
And then a Iewry of years did pass upon me.
He is upon the matter then, fifte•n•.
A game at Noddy.
You can play your Cards already it se•m•, come drink•
A this syllabub!
I shall spoil your game Ladies, for if there be sack
In it it may make you flush a three.
The boy would seem witty.
I hope Ladies you will pardon me, my Lord
Commanded me to waite upon you, and
I can doe you no better service, than
To make you laugh.
They are here, bless you!
Master Fairefield you are welcome.
I presume so, but howsoever it skils not.
I doe not come to borrow money.
And yet all they that doe so are no fools,
Money or Lands make not a man the wiser,
I know handsome gentlemen ha paun'd
Their clothes.
Isle pane my skin too with a woman.
Wipe your mouth, here's to you sir!
Isle pledge ye quicksilver, whore's your Lord?
He has left Virgo sir, to go to Libra,
To see the horsemen weighed.
Lady my service!
Brother, you interpose too far, my Lord
Has used me honourably, and I must tell you
Some body has made a fault.
Master Fairefield!
I kiss your hand.
My Lord and you have• walked.
Yes sir.
My sister shall excuse, here's to thee and thy cream bole•.
I thank your worship.
There is more honesty in thy petticoat•
Than twenty satin ones.
Doe you know that?
I know by her pale, and sh• were oath•rwise
T'would turn her milk, come hither let me kiss th•e,
Now I am confirmed, he that shall marry thee
Shall take thee a Virgin at my peril.
Ha you such skill in Maidenheads.
Isle know it by a kiss,
Better then any Doctor by her urine,
Be merry with thy Cow, farewell! com• Frank,
That wit and good clothes should infect a woman.
Isle tell you more hereafter, pray lets hear
Who wins.
Your servant Ladies.
What dost think Jockey.
The crack oth'field against you
Let em crack Nuts.
What weight.
I think he has the heals.
Get but the start.
How ever if I get within his quarters let m• alone.
Mounts Chevall.
They are started.
Twenty pounds to fifteen.
Tic done with.
Forty pounds to thirty.
Done, done, Isle take all odds.
My Lord I hold as much.
Not so.
Forty pounds to twenty.
Done, done.
You ha lost all my Lord, and it w•r• a Million.
In your imagination, who can help it?
Venture had the start and keeps it.
Gentlemen you have a fine time to triumph,
Tic not your odds that makes you win.
Shall w• v•nture nothing of the horses,
What odds against my Lord?
Silk stockings.
To a pair of persum'd gloves I take it.
Done!
And I as much.
Done with you both!
Isle have em Spanish sent.
The stockings shall be Scarlet, if you choose
Your sent, Isle choose my colour.
Tic done, if Venture
Knew but my lay it would half break• his neck now,
And crying a Jockey hay.
Is the wind in that coast, hark the noise.
Is Jockey now?
Tic but a pair of gloves.
Within a Jockey.
Still it holds.
How ha you sped my Lord?
Won, won, I knew by instinct,
The mare would put some trick upon him.
Then we ha lost, but good my Lord the circumstance.
Great Iohn at all adventure and grave Jockey
Mounted their several Mares, I shan'ot tell
The story out for laughing, ha, ha, ha,
But this in brief Jockey was left behind,
The pity and the scorn of all the odds,
Plaid bout my ears like Cannon, but less dangerous.
I took all still, the acclamations was
For Venture, whose disdainful Mare threw dirt
In my old Jockeys face, all hopes for saking us,
Two hundred pieces desperate, and two thousand
Oaths sent after them, upon the sudden,
When we expected no such trick, we saw
My rider that was domineering ripe,
Vault ore his Mare into a tender flough,
Where he was much beholding to one shoulder,
For saving of his neck, his beast recovered,
And he by this time somewhat mortified,
Besid•s mortified, hath left the triumph
To his Olympic Adversary, who shall
Ride hither in full pomp on his Bucephalu•
With his victorious bagpipe.
I would fine see how Venture looks.
Hoe's here, ha, ha,
I told you as much before, you would not
Believe the Cuckoo.
Why, how now sir!
And I had broke my neck in a clean way,
Twou'ld ne'er ha grieved me, Lady I am yours,
Thus Caesar fell.
Not in a slough de•re Jack.
You shall hear further from me.
Come to Knightsbridge.
That Cuckoo was a witch Isle take my death on it.
Here comes the Conqueror
From the Conquest of Jerusalem
Returns Vespasian, &amp;c. ha, ha, mer mercy Jockey.
I told you if I came within his quarters,
Omnes. A Jockey, a Jockey.
This shall be but your earnest, follow me
At pretty distance, and when I say draw,
Play me a galliard, by your favour sir,
Shall I speak a cool word with ye.
With all my heart.
You do owe me a dance if you r•member,
And I will have it now, no dispute, draw!
That wonot serve your turn, come shake your heals,
You hear a tune, I will not change my tool,
For a case of Rapiers, keep off at your perils
I ha sworn.
For h•avens sak• some to part em.
Dost hear.
And you may hear the bagpipe• is not dumb,
Will you to this gear, or doe you mean to try
How this will scour you, come, come, Isle have it.
Hold, I will!
So, now we are on even terms, and if
You like it not, Isle use my tother instrument.
You are a brave fellow, come your ways.
Hold! you shannot fight, isle understand
Your quarrel.
Good my Lord lets have one pass.
Your weapons shall run through me,
And I must tell you sir, have been injurious.
Good Lady why? in doing my self right.
In wronging me.
I am not sensible of that.
Could any shame be fastened upon him
Wherein I have no share.
I was provoked
By him if you remember, and was not
Borne so unequal to him I should •uffer
His poor affront.
This was a day of peace,
The day wherein the holy priest hath tied
Our hearts together, Hymen's Tapers yet
Are burning, and it cannot be a sin
Less than a sacrilege, to extinguish them
With blood, and in contempt of heavens proceeding
Thus to conspire our separation
No Christian would profane the marriage day,
And when all other wish us joys, could you
Intrude your self to poison all our mirth,
Blast in the very bud all our happiness
Our hopes had laid up for us.
I was a stranger,
That makes ye more uncivil, w• were• merry
Which could not offend you.
I had no thought
To violate• your mirth.
What came you for?
With whom had ye acquaintance, or what favour
Gave you access, at so unfit a time
To interrupt our calm and free delights;
You cannot plead any abuse, where you
Were never known, that should incite you to
Revenge it there, I take it you were never
His Rival.
Tic confessed!
What malice then
Prevailed above your reason to pursue• us
With this injustice?
Lady, give me leave!
I were a villain to be guilty of
The baseness you accuse me? your servant
Shall quit me from intrusion, and my soul
Is my best witness, that I brought no malice
But unstay'nd thoughts into your roof, but when
I was made the common laughter, I had bin
Less than a man, to think of no return
And had he been the only of my blood,
I would not be so much the shame of soldi•r
To have been •am'd and suffered, and you are
Too hasty in your judgement, I could say
More, but tic dishonour to expostulate
These causes with a woman, I had reason
To call him to account, you know not all
My provocation, things are not with me as with another man.
How is that? the matter
May spread too far, some former quarrel, tic
My best to reconcile em, sir I may
Be ignorant if any thing have past
Before this morning, I pray pardon m•
But as you are a gentleman, let me▪
Prevail, your differences may here conclude;
Alas I am part of him now, and between
A Widow and his wife, if I be thus
Divorced—
Isle be his servant.
Sir you show
A noble disposition, good my Lord
Compose their differences, prithee m•ete his friendship.
I have satisfaction, and desire his love.
You have done but like a gentleman, thy hand
Isle love thee while I live.
Why so all friends.
I meet it with a heart, and for disturbing
Your mirth to day.
No, no disturbance.
Then give me but th• favour
To show I wish no sorrow to the bride,
I have a small oblation, which she must
Accept, or I shall doubt we are not friends,
Tic all I have to offer at your Wedding.
Ha.
There's my hand to justify it at fit tim•,
Peruse it, my Lord I shall be studious
How to deserve your favour.
I am yours.
My Lord let me obtain, you'll honour m•
To night.
I was taken by a Turkish Pirate, and detained many years
A prisoner in an Island, where I had dyed his Captive,
Had not a worthy Merchant thence redeemed &amp; furnished me,
Blessed delivery.
To me? from Venture he is very mindful, good,
I shall make use of this.
Till then conceal me.
Excellent stuff, but I must have• another
Name subscribed.
Will you walk Ladies.
Your servants waite upon
We humbly thank your honour.
A brave spark.
Spark, he's the v•rye Bonfi•e of Nobility.
My Lord you honour us.
And what we want
In honourable entertainment, we b•se•ch
Our duties may supply in your construction.
What needs this ceremony.
Thou art welcome too Frank Tryer.
I give you thanks, and wish you still more joy sir.
Weal show your Lordship a poor Gallery.
But whore's my new acquaintance?
His Nag outstripped the Coaches,
He will be your guest anon, fear not!
While they complement with my Lord, let you and I
Change afew words.
As many as you please.
Then to the purpose
Touching your brother, Lady,
It were tedious to repeat, he has b•n• pl•asked
To think well of me, and to trouble you
With the discourse how I have answered it
It were vain, but thus how ere he seem to carry it
While you were present, I doe find him desperate.
How!
Nay I speak no conjecture, I have more
Intelligence than you imagine, you are his sister,
And nature binds you to affect his safety,
By some convenient Messenger send for him;
But as you love his life doe not delay it;
Alas I shall be sorry, any gentleman
Should for my sake take any desparat• course.
But are you serious?
Perhaps good counsel
Applied while his despair is gre•n• may cure him,
If not?
You make• m• wonder.
I know the inconsiderate will blame•
Me for his death, I shall be railed upon
And have a thousand cruelties thrown on me,
But would you have me promise love and flatter him?
I would doe much to save his life, I could
Show you a paper, that would make you ble•d
To see his resolution, and what
Strange and unimitable ways he has
Vowed to pursue, I tremble to think on em.
There's not a punishment in fiction
And Poets write euough of hell, if you
Have read their story, but heel try the worst,
Were it not that I fear him every minute.
And that all haste were requisite• to save him,
Yo• should peruse his letter.
Letter! since we saw him▪
Since, I must confess, I wondered,
But you in this shall see I have no malice,
I pray send for him, as I am a gentlewoman
I have pure intention to preserve his life;
And cause I see the truth of his affliction,
Which may be yours or mine, or any bodies
Whose passions are neglected, I will try
My best skill to reduce him, here's M. Tryer!
He now depends upon your charity,
Send for him by the love you bear a brother.
Will you not Chide my want of Manners gentlewomen
To interrupt your dialog••
We ha done sir.
I shall be still your servant.
Here's a riddle; but I will do it,
Shall I presume upon you for a favour.
You shall impose on me a 〈◊〉 trouble
My Lord, 〈◊〉 〈◊〉▪
We miss you above Lady.
My Lord I waite upon you, I beseech
Your pardon but a minute—will you doe this,
It is an office he may thank you for,
Beside my acknowledgement.
Yes Isle go
And yet I doe not like to be sent oft,
This is the second time.
Now I am for your Lordship,
What's your pleasure.
I would be your Echo Lady, and return
Your last word—pleasure.
May you never want it.
This wonot serve my turn.
What my Lord?
This is the charity of some rich men,
That passing by some monument that stoop•
With age, whose ruins plead for a repair
Pity the fall of such a goodly pile,
But will not spare from their superfluous wealth
To be the benefactor.
I acknowledge
That empty wishes are their sham•, that have•
Ability to doe a Noble work,
And fly the Action.
Come! you may apply it,
I would not have you a gentlewoman of your word
Alone, they're deeds that crown all, what you wish m•
Is in your own ability to give;
You understand me; will you at length consent
To multiply, weal point a place and time,
And all the world shall envy us.
My Lord!
Lord me no lords, shall we enjoy lips upon it,
Why doe you look as you still wondered at me,
Doe I not make a reasonable motion,
First only in my self, shannot you share
In the delight, or doe I appear a Monster
'Bove all mankind, you shun my embrace thus▪
There be some Ladies in the world ha drawn•
Cuts for me, I ha been talk•d on and commended,
How ere you please to value me.
Did they see you thus perfectly.
Not always, it was
Some•times a little darker when they praised me,
I have the same activity.
You are
Something, I would not name my Lord.
And yet you doe, you call me Lord, that's something
And you consider, all men are not borne to•t.
It were better not to have been borne to honours,
Than forfeit em so poorly, he is truly
Noble, and best justifies his blood
When he can number the descents of virtue•.
You'll not degrade me.
Tic not in my power
Or will my Lord, and yet you pr•sse me strangely
As you're a person, separate and distinct
By your high blood, above me and my fortunes
Thus low I bend, you have no noble title
Which I not bow to, they are Characters
Which we should read at distance, and there is
Not one that shall with more devotion
And honour of your birth, express her service,
It is my duty, where the king has sealed
His favours, I should show humility
My best obedience to his act.
So should
All handsome women that will be good subjects.
But if to all those honourable names,
That marked you for the peoples reverence,
In such a vicious age, you dare rise up
Example too of goodness, they which teach
Their knees a Complement, will give their heart,
And I among the number of the humblest.
Most proud to serve your Lordship, and would r•fuse
No office or command, that should engage me
To any noble trial, this addition
Of virtue is above all shine of State,
And will draw more admirers; but I must
Be bold to tell you sir, unless you prove
A friend to virtue were your honour ce•tupled,
Could you pile titles till you reach the Clouds.
Were every petty Manor you possess
A Kingdom, and the blood of many Princes
United in your veins, with these had you
A person that had more attraction
Then Poesy can furnish, love withal,
Yet I, I in such infinite distance am
As much above you in my innocence.
This becomes not.
Tic the first liberty
I ever took to speak my self, I have
Bin bold in the comparison, but find not
Wherein I have wronged virtue, pleading for it.
How long will you continue thus?
I wish
To have my last hour witness of these thoughts,
And I will hope before that time, to hear
Your Lordship of another mind.
I know not,
Tic time enough to think o'that hereafter,
Isle bee a convertite within these two days,
Upon condition you and I may have
One bout to night, no body hears.
Alas you plunge too far, and are within this minute,
Further from heaven then ever.
I may live
To require the courtesy.
Live my Lord to be
Your Countries honour and support, and think not
Of these poor dreams.
I find not desire to sleep, and I were a bed wee.
Tic not improbable my Lord but you
May live to be an old man, and fill up
A seat among the grave Nobility,
When your cold blood shall starve your wanton thoughts.
And your slow pulse beat like your bodies knell,
When time hath snowed upon your hair, oh then
Will it be any comfort to remember
The sins of your wild youth, how many wives,
Or virgins you've dishonoured? in their number,
Would any memory of me (should I
Be sinful to consent) not fetch a tear,
From you perhaps a sigh to break your heart,
Will you not wish then you had never mixed
With Atheists, and those men whose wits are vented
In oaths and blasphemy, now the pride of Gentlemen,
That strike at heaven, and make again of thunder.
If this be true? what a wretched thing should I
Appear now, if I were any thing but a Lord,
I do not like my self, give me thy hand
Since there is no remedy, be honest! theres no harm
I'this I hope, I wonot tell thee all
My mind at once, If I doe rurne Carthusian,
And renounce flesh upon this, the devil is like
Toha the worst ont—but I am expected.
My Lord isle follow ye.
Brother welcome?
Sir we are both obligd to you
A Friend of yours desirers some private conference.
With me?
He does not look so desperate; how dee brother?
Well—dost not see me?
Isle come to thee presently.
What's the meaning?
Nay I know not, She is full of mysteries a late;
Shees here again, there is some trick in it.
Brother I sent for you, and I think it was time,
Pray harken to this gentlewoman; she will
Give you good council, you and I withdraw sir.
Whither you please.
You're• a strange• gentleman,
Alas, what doe you mean? is it because
I have dealt justly with you, without flatt•rye
Told you my heart, you'll take these wicked courses?
But I am loath to chide, yet I must tell you
You're too, too blame, alas you know affection
Is not to be compelled, I have bin as kind
To you as other men, nay I still thought.
A little better of you, and will you
Give such example to the rest,
Because forsooth, I doe not love you,
Will you be desperate?
I will be desperate!
It were a fine credit for you, but perhapp•s
You'll go to hell to be revenged o me,
And teach the other gentlemen to follow ye,
That men may say it was long of me and rail at
My unkindness, is this all your Christianity?
Or could you not prosecute your impious purpose,
But you must send me word on it, and perplex
My conscience with your devilish devises
Is this a letter to be sent a Mistress?
I send a letter?
You were best deny your hand.
My names subscribed, who has done this?
Rivers of hell I come, Charon thy Oar
Is needless, I will swim unto the shore,
And beg of Pluto, and of Proserpine,
That all the damned torments may be mine,
With Tantalus Isle stand up to the chin
In waves, upon Ixions wheel Isle spin
The sisters thread, quail Cerberus with my groan,
And take no Physic, for the rolling stone
Isle hang my self, a hundred times a day.
There be short days in hell.
And burn my self as often if you say
The word.
Alas not I.
And if I •ver chance to come
Within the Confines of Elizium,
The amazed Ghosts shall bee aghast to see,
How I will hang my self on every tree,
Here is a strange resolution.
Is it not?
Whither is fled your piety! but sir
I have no meaning to exasperate
Thoughts that oppose your safety, and to show
I have compassion, and delight in no
Mans ruin, I will frame my self to love you.
Will you? why thank you!'
Here is my hand I will;
Be comforted, I have a stronger faith.
I see then you have charity for an no•d.
Isle lose my humour to preserve a life,
You might ha met with some hard hearted Mistress,
That would a suffered you to hang or drown
Your self.
I might indeed.
And carried new•s
To the distressed Ghosts, but I am merciful,
But doe not you mistake me, for I do not
This out of any extraordinary
Former good will, only to save your life.
There be so many beams convenient,
And you may slip out of the world before
We are aware, beside you dwell to near
The River, if you should be melancholy
After some tides, you would come in, and be
More talked off then the Pilchards, but I ha done:
You sha'not go to hell for me, I now
Am very serious, and if you please
To think well of me instantly weal marry,
Isle see how I can love you afterword,
Shal's to the Priest?
By your good favour, no
I am in no such tune.
You do• suspect
I ieere still? by my troth I am in earnest.
To save my life you are content to marry me,
Yes.
To save thy life, I will not be troubled with thee•
How?
No Madam jeer all, I am now resolved,
Talk, and talk out thy heart, I wo'not lose
My self a scruple, ha you no more letters,
They're pretty mirth, would I knew who subscribed
My name▪ I am so far from hanging of my self,
That I will five yet to be thy tormentor,
Virtue I thank thee for it, and for the more
Security, Isle never do•e again;
Nor marry, nor endure the imaginations
Of your frail sex, this very hight I will
Be fitted for you all, Isle geld my self,
It is something less then hanging, and when I
Have carved away all my concupiscence,
Observe but how Isle triumph, nay Isle do it,
And there were no more men in the world.
Sir, sir, as you love goodness
Isle tell you all, first hear me, and then execute,
You wonot be so foolish, I doe love you.
I hope so, that I may revenge thy peevishness.
My heart is full, and modesty forbids
I should use many words, I see my folly,
You may be just, and use me with like cruelty,
But if you doe I can instruct my self,
And be as miserable indeed as I
Made you in supposition, my thoughts
Point upon no sensuality, remit
What's past, and I will meet your best affection,
I know you love me still, do not refuse me.
If I go once more back, you ne'er recover me.
I am as ticklish.
Then lets clapped up wisely,
While we are both in the humour, I do find
A grudging, and your last words stick in my stomach•
Say first a Match? speak quickly, or for ever
Hereafter hold your peace.
Done!
Why done!
Seal and deliver.
My hand and heart, this shall suffice till morning.
Each others now by conquest, come lets to i'm
If you should false now.
Hold me not worth the hanging.
I knew not, she was thy Mistress, which encouraged
All my discourses.
My Lordy' ave richly satisfied me, and
Now I dare write my self, the happiest lover
In all the world, know Lady I ha tried you.
You have it seems.
And I have found thee right
And perfect gold, nor will I change thee for
A Crown imperial.
And I have tried you,
And found you dross, nor doe I love my h•art
So ill, to change it with you.
How's this?
Unworthily you have suspected me,
And cherished that bad humour, for which know
You never must have hope to gain my love,
He that shall doubt my virtue, out of fancy,
Merits my just suspicion and disdain.
Oh fie Frank, practise jealosie so soon,
Distrust the truth of her thou love, suspect
Thy own heart sooner, what I have said I have
my pardon for; thou were a wife for him
Whose thoughts were ne'er corrupted.
It was but a trial and may plead for pardon.
I pray deny me not that liberty,
I will have proof too, of the man I choose
My husband, believe me, if men be
At such a loss of goodness I will value
My self, and think no honour equal to
Remain a Virgin.
I have made a tree•spas
Which if I cannot expiare, yet let me
Dwell in your Charity.
You shall not doubt that.
Pray my Lord know him for your servant.
I am much honoured.
You cannot but deserve more by the title of her brother.
An other couple.
Master Fairefield and my Cousin are contracted.
Tic time I think, sister isle shortly call you.
I ever wished it.
Frank Tryer is melancholy, how hast thou sped?
No no I am very merry.
Our banes sir are forbidden.
On what terms?
My Lord you meet but a course •ntertainem•ned,
How chance the music speaks not, shall us dance?
Rivers of hell I come!
Charon thy Oar is needless, save you gallants!
I will swim unto thy shore, art not thou Hero.
But you are not Lender if you be not drowned,
In the Hellespont.
I told thee I would drown my self a hundred times a day
Your letter did.
A ha?
It was a devilish good one.
Then I am come
To tickle the confines of Elizium,
My Lord I invite you to my wedding,
And all this good company.
I am glad your shoulder is recovered;
When is the day?
Do thou set the time.
After to morrow, name it, this gentleman
And I shall be married in the morning, and you know
We must have a time to dine, and dance to bed.
Married?
Yes you may be a guest sir, and be welcome.
I am bobbed again,
Isle bob for no more Eels, let her take her course.
Oh for some Willow garlands.
This is my boy, how now sir?
My Lord I am employed in a devise;
Room for the melancholy wight,
Some doe call him willow Knight,
Who this pains hath under taken,
To find out lovers are forsaken,
Whose heads, because out little wetted,
Shall with Garlands straight be fitted.
Speak who are tossed on Cupids Billows,
And receive the Crown of willows,
This way, that way, round about,
Keep your heads from breaking out.
This is excellent, nay nay Gentlemen
You must obey the Ceremony.
He took measure of my head.
And mine.
It must be my fate too.
Now we beth:
And if you please to try, I doe not think
But this would sit you excellently.
Mine! What does he mean?
I prithee Master Lacy try for once,
Nay he, he has some conceit.
For thy sake Isle doe any thing, what now?
You're now a Mess of willow gentlemen,
And now my Lord Isle presume to bid you welcome,
Is not this the gentleman made you dance.
My new acquantance, whore's thy beard?
I left it at the Barbers, it grew rank,
And he has reaped it.
Here, take thy toy again.
It shannot need.
You tell me wonders Lady; is this gentleman
Your Husband?
Ca. How her husband my Lord?
Yes indeed Lady, if you please you may
Call me your kinsman, seven year and misfortune,
I confess, had much disguised me, but I was
And by degrees 〈…〉 her husband.
After a tedious 〈…〉
Arrived to make me happy.
This is rate!
My Lord and Gentlemen,
You're no less welcome than before, M. Lacy droop not.
This turn was above all expectation
And full of wonder, I congratulate
Your 〈◊〉 happiness.
All of a brotherhood.
M. Bonavent, a my Conscience tic he!
Did fortune owe me this?
A thousand welcomes.
Equal joys to thee, and Master Fairefield.
Nay then you but obey the c•remony.
I was not ripe for such a blessing, take her,
And with an honest heart I wish you joys,
Welcome to life again, I see a providence
In this, and I obey it.
In such good company twould never grieve
A man to wear the willow.
You have but changed
Your host, whose heart proclaims a general welcome.
He was discovered to me in the Park,
Though I concealed it.
Every circumstance
Of my absence, after supper weal discoutse of,
I will not doubt your Lordship means to honour us.
Isle be your guest, and drink a jovial health
To your new marriage, and the joys of your
Expected Bride, h•r• after you may do•
As much for me, fair Lady will you write
Me in your thoughts, if I desire to be
A servant to your virtue, will you not
Frown on me then?
Never in Noble ways;
No virgin shall more honour you.
By thy cure
I am now my self, yet dare call nothing mine,
Till I be perfect blessed in being thine.

YOu stars of Honour, brighter than the day,
Or new raised Phoebus in his morning Ray;
A• rich in Wisdom as in Virtues rare;
Accept the choicest dish our wits prepare,
As a third course to please your eye, which still
Covets to have of novelties its fill.
We have not bundled up some Kickshaws here
To bid you welcome; Wee doe hate such gear.
Our braine's the Kitchen, and our wit's the meat,
Preparitive to which, wee bid you eat,
If liked, if not refrain't; you Judges sit
To damn or save our not yet ripened wit:
So rest upon your goodness; if you frown,
Our poor endeavours then are trodden down.
HOW still the morning is, as if it meant
To steal upon us without Times consent,
And pry into our errors. I have been
Searching in every Thicket, Wood, and Greene
To find my Lamb, and many doleful cries
Entered my ears ever day. What's this that lies
In such an obscure place, where none scarce tread,
Unless the Ghosts of the disturbed dead?
Bless me great Pan, I see it's Clitons face
With a sword drawn; how happy was my chase
This way! I hope his folly has not made
Himself a Beast, as butchered with this Blade;
'T may be he sleeps: I'll speak to him, and try;
Yet I half doubt him because he here doth lye.
Cliton, awake, the Night's dislodged, and now
Bright Morn is trimming of her Virgin brow,
To court the Sun, when from the Western deep
And Thetis lap his glimmering beams doe peep
T'ascend his glorious Carre. Cliton — awake,
And with thy sleep all dreams of horror shake
That may affright thee.
Kind Alexis, thanks,
How found you me?
Walking those flowery banks,
Twixt the greene valley, and the place which wee
Have consecrated to Loves Deity:
Seeking a strayed Lamb, I did hear sad moans
Proceed from some like peals of parting groans,
Which I pursued, but in my search I found
None but your self: you resting on this ground
I wondered much to see you!
So you might.
But when you've heard the cause on it, twill affright
Your easy breast. Doe you observe this Hand,
This fatal Hand, at my unjust command
Did: — Oh, I could destroy't!
For what offence?
This hand has spilt the blood of Innocence,
My Florida's.
How?
And when I'd done
(As I might well) did hide me from the Sun,
Fearing his eye would be the only cause
To find me out; and here from men and laws
I have obscured my self, and could not say
It was justly night, when night: Nor day when day;
My fact had sulled both.
What urged thee to such inhumanity?
Only suspicion of her loyalty,
Dreaming Lysander had enjoyed her love,
My jealousy to cruelty did move:
I slew her three days since, and since have bin
Each night at that place I stained with my sin,
To seek the body, but some sacred Power,
For none else durst approach her purity,
Has certainly made her immortal, and
Conveyed the body to some holier land.
Is the body gone then?
Or else my eyes doe fail me as an▪ abject not worth their help.
Thy crime requires contrition; to that end,
Thou shalt with me. Thy days to come shalt spend
In holy uses; I'll prepare for thee,
In the best form I can, each property
Belonging to a pensive man. You must
Forget all youthful pleasures, think on dust,
And penitence the only means to bring
Thy soul to rest after this wandering.
Will you with me?
To death, or otherwise, since Florida is dead.
•tay my darling, doe not fly,
This place is private, here's none nigh.
Fear not Wench, I'll doe no harm,
But embrace thee in my arm;
Cull and kiss, and doe the thing
Shepherds doe at wrasteling,
Oh help, if any Shepherds, near,
Hear my laments.
Yet creature, doe not fear:
But if you with coy disdain,
Doe think to leave me in my flame,
I'll force those golden locks of thine
To lye beneath these feet of mine;
Then yield and here enjoy such sweet
As with our embraces meet.
Oh haplesse Maid, no aid will come.
Fear not Virgin; here is some
Natures monster; Villain, why
Does thy flame now burn so high?
Will no other serve thy turn
To quench the heats that in thee burn,
But so fair a soul as she?
Villain hence, or else I'll bee
Thy Butcher.
Kind Youth, to whom am I
Bound for this fair curtsy?
First unto Heaven fair Creature; next to me
A poor unworthy Shepherd.
May your Sweetest whom you love,
Ever constant to you prove.
Be she brighter than the Sun,
Pleasing as our day at noon;
Fresher than the morning dew:
Sweeter than a new killed Ewe;
Like Aurora decked with flowers,
Or the welcome April showers.
May she love you, and you be
The mirror for true Constancy;
Go gentle Youth, and this day prosperous be
Amongst our Swains in your Activity.
A thousand thanks reward you
Pan be my guide, and thou fair Gloriana,
Whose beauty has encinder'd my poor heart
Almost to nothing this day; thou shalt find
Thou hast a power above our humane kind.
Bright sun, why dost thou shine on me?
Is it to mock me? keep thy light; for I
Had rather live in darkness, and so dye.
Or dost thou show thy lustre in disdain,
Because I have so oft with speech profane
Blasphemed against thy goodness, And in praise
Of a poor earthly creature spent my days?
Dost thou yet smile? forgive me, and I'll bee
No more her servant, but will honour thee.
Keep thou thy brightness Phoebus, and this day
From all our Swains I'll bring the prize away.
Fairest, this day, be pleased to smile on me,
And let those hidden favours yet unshewne,
Flow in abundance, that Swains may see
None ever can conquer me, but you alone.
My favours friend is past, and you have tasted
So much of my poor bounty, that it's wasted.
We stay too long son, pray make haste,
Let us not spend time in waste.
Daughter, you shall go with me,
Where their pastime wee may see.
Hark, I hear 'em make a noise; 
Oh my hearts my bonny boys,
Play your parts; when I was young
I was full as stout and strong.
Dearest, I must part; this calls me hence.
Father, I leave you.
For ever I hope, would I could prophecy,
And be effectual; it should be so.
Daughter, this way let us high;
I am old, I'll not come nigh:
Nor shalt thou my dapper Girl,
Lest those staves that often whirl
Hit thy face. What again!
Nay then I fear wee go in vain.
Yet Father let us go, that w•
May know who gained the victory.
Because Dame Nature, pox of all her tricks,
Has not dealt so well with me as she ought,
Making me but a lump of rough-hew'n stuff,
The pettish Wenches will not play with me,
Nor tick nor toy, and cause I'm apt for sport:
How ever I'm formed, I've put on this disguise,
To fright the baggages, when getting some
Twixt these my arms, •'le force 'em to my will,
Yet pass unknown. Thus I my senses fill.
What noise is yon?
Through the Woods, and through the Woods have I run after the Run-away my Master. — What art thou in the devils name?
Sirrah, I am —
A devil, I know it before: Thou should be a lecherous devil by thy hayrie hide: but I am no Succubus goodman devil.
Dost thou fear me?
Oh Lord, me Sir. I have met such another devil as thou art, in my Porridge dish.
And did thou know him?
Know him? how doe you mean know him? I should be loath to know him or thee, or hee thee, or thy grand-Master me for any ill; for I have defied the devil and his works ever since the general Earthquake, and that my Mothers Cat miscarried in the horse Pond.
Was thy Mother a Witch?
How a Witch you devil — I'll witch you.
Hold man: she was an honest woman.
Nay, now thou lie, and thou be the devils devil:
For I have heard her soberly say, she had six —
Bastards by a Sowgelder before she pigg'd me.
Hold, hold man.
The devil afraid of blows! I'll make you spent fire.
Friendly Swain, the day is yours; you see
My prayer it seems successful was to thee.
Pity my maiden tears; till now, I ne'er
Sued to a shepherd, but the shepherds were
My suitors.
Nor deem me light▪ because my love is such;
I love indeed, and fear I love too much.
You saved my life, my chastity, what more?
Take me as one that was your own before.
How much I grieve fair Shepherdess, my Fa••
Will not allow me such a just proportion,
To render thee, as thy deserts have merited
From me.
Oh friend!
I•le be your servant, and your flocks will keep.
I'll nightly watch while you doe sweetly sleep▪
And in the morn I'll willingly to field,
While you doe taste the sweets Loves valleys yield,
And with industrious labour against noon,
Will get your dinner ready, so you will
But smile on me, and say well done.
To starve your hopes from further prosecution in this suit.
Know I've already fixed my resolution
To love none but fair Gloriana, she
Is the Commandress of my life, and fortunes:
So much I pity you, that I could wish
I had two hearts, that you might share in one
As a just recompense for your love, but why do I
Entertain such frivolous unnecessary talk.
May you live happy, and enjoy as rare,
And constant Shepherd as your self is fair.
Is my face withered? or has Nature so
Deformed me lately that I am not Cloe?
For thee poor Cloe Shepherds have pitched the Bar,
Wrestled, and leaped, and shown the feats of War.
For thee each strove to gain thee as his Dove;
But thou did slight and scorn their simple love.
How many Verses have the Shepherds made,
In praising of thy Beauty, whilst thou laid
Thy heart on him that hates to hear thee named,
And thy delight is still to have him famed?
How many Rings and Gloves hast thou received
From the poor Swains thou often times deceived?
For thee on Holy days they often would
Meet on the Heath next to the Pinders fold,
Where they with Music, and such sweet content,
Would spend their time to make thee merriment.
Since then my love is not one mite rewarded,
And that my Beauty is no more regarded:
I'll tear these golden locks, that shepherds may
Leave off their sport, and make no Holy-day.
I will follow through yon Grove,
Where I soon shall meet my Love;
Then with sweet embraces wee
Will clip, and cull, and none shall see.
A willow Garland I will make,
And sweetly wear it for his sake.
Then through Thickets, Woods, and Plains,
I will hide me from the Swains?
Hy da, hy da, what art thou?
You were not wont to question that; how fares my dea∣rest Love?
Hence thou coward, hence from me:
Blush at thy disloyal•y.
Did not tell me thou would gain
Me reputation by thy fame;
And suffer now a stranger bear
The prize, and thou to have no share?
Your frowns my Fairest, and not hee,
Gained from me the victory.
Had you smiled as you did frown,
All his strength I'd mauger'd down.
What has disturbed my Love? who has committed
This injury to thy person?
Ha, ha, ha; fool, fool! see you now fool?
Fool! kiss — kiss — kiss —
What fickle things are women? yet they are such men cannot be without; our too much doting on 'em makes 'em proud; for loving them, they'd make us hate our selves. I doe suspect this bad distemper in her proceeds from some denial Lysander has given her to her unlawful suit, knowing my love to her. It is so. I must not let her suffer in too high a nature.
Dearest Love, fair as the Eastern morn,
When with her Summers robe she decks the Plains,
And hangs on every bush a liquid pearl,
In Mays triumphing month▪ sweet as the ayre,
The Phoenix does expire in, sit while I play
The cunning Thief, and steal thy heart away,
And thou shalt stand as Judge to censure me,
To recompense thy loss I must agree;
To give my heart, which being understood,
It is but exchange, I keep your heart, you mine.
Content my Love thus, she would court thee,
And thus and thus she would play a Wantons part:
Doe I not blush Atones.
Oh, you must not blush! you spoil the jest on it,
I'll span thy Waste, and doe as Wantons use;
I'll be Atones, but will not refuse.
Nay fie, you stray beyond your limits.
Modesty allows such undefiled mixtures.
Ah! where are my eyes? what cursed unruly winds Have blown 'em out, and in their stead placed these base counterfeits! Oh you Deities? you are unjust to suffer this? If these eyes be my own may they be blasted, that without my License
Durst see this object: but yet let reason
Sway my passion.
Why doe I wish a mischief on my self
That must see their destruction? I have long
Suspected him by reason of her Necios,
And the continual scorn dwelt on her brow
When I did proffer love, were I provided
I'd rush upon 'em, and from his base arms
Snatch the false Girl, but I'll stand secure
A while and over-heare 'em.
It is time to part, w'ave dallied Time too long.
Lysander, will you walk?
Thinks Gloriana
That Time is lost that's spent with her Lysander
Deluding devil
I could Lysander.
(Might it not stain my Mayden-yeares) live only
By gazing on thy Beauty.
Nay, now you mock me; but I hope ever long
Wee shall with more security enjoy
What our hearts wish for. Where shall wee next meet?
In this very place to morrow be sure you meet.
I will not fail.
Nor I to meet you both. Oh my best stars!
How I shall weave my self into revenge just, just Gods
you've stamped my brain for mischief▪ which on them
I'll execute.
And none shall pry into my faults within.
Revenge has Coverts, fit to hide his sin.
Hey down a down derry,
And shall not wee be merry?
A fire on thy hole,
It is as black as a cole,
And thy nose is as browne as a berry.
Hi ho. What a thing this love is?
When Love did act a women's part,
She could have died with all her heart,
It swelled her so in every part;
She swore it was wind, and then did —
Hi, hi, hi, hi,
Nymphs to her
Sing about her.
Love cannot choose but pity yield,
He never lived in tented field,
Amongst iron hearted men,
He knows both how, and when
Thee to restore
To what thou were before.
He has a tender breast, which knows
Your wants by the tormenting woes
He's subject to himself.
Then doe not you despair,
That are both young and fair.
Thus wee convey you hence.
Where doe you lead me?
How blessed are wee, that Fortune hath
So much befriended us in this happy?
Convenient opportunity?
It is an unaccustomed favour,
And we ought in duty to acknowledge
A thankfulness for it.
So sits the pride of Nature to out-vye
Each glorious Beauty of the chequered field,
And Flora's richest Wardrobe.
I perceive
You've practised long in th'flattering Rules of love.
What will reward you?
A kiss is more than I can merit.
Will you sing.
And you'll give me another for my pains.
Put it to the trial,
You shall not loose your labour.
Sit while I doe gather flowers,
And depopulate the Bowers.
Here's a kiss will come to thee;
Give me one, I'll give thee three.
Thus in harmless sport wee may,
Pass all idle hours away.
Hark, hark how fine
The Birds doe chime,
And pretty Philomel
Her moan doth tell.
Then pity, pity love, and all is well.
Here's the Violet, Pink, and Rose,
The sweetest breathings for the nose.
Yet thy breath to me doth yield
More fragrant scents than all the field.
Love cares not for flowers or toys,
Play games for your apish Boys.
Nor superstition
For his condition
Is for to know
— if you love or no?
Then answer, love I or no.
But yet me thinks that face should be
The Model of true constancy:
Therefore no reason have I,
To suspect thy loyalty,
Here's another kiss for thee.
Give me one, I'll give thee three.
Thus in harmless sport wee may,
Pass all idle hours away.
Hark, hark how fine
The Birds doe chime,
And pretty Philomel,
Her moan doth tell▪
Then pity, pity Love, and all is well.
You've sung me most a sleep, my eyes are dull and heavy,
Faith I must make thy lap my pillow.
Repose thy gentle head on it. Alas!
I'm heavy too, and must obey my destiny.
Sleep on, sleep on,
For wee have so decreed,
That thou must bleed:
Sleep on, sleep on,
And moist thou never rise,
For blood the shepherd cries.
Sleep on, sleep on.
Rise, rise Lysander to prevent
What the Destinies decreed.
Thou art constant, permanent,
And must not bleed▪
Thy constant seed
Shall be the shepherds joy,
No annoy
Shall attend
Such a friend
As the Lasses need.
Rise, rise, awake!
And sleep off shake;
The Heavens are pleased thy part to take,
For thy Love's sake.
Lysander, where ar't? Lord how my fancie's troubled!
How fares my Gloriana? I have had
Strange thoughts that would have dispossessed
Me of my rest, had I not took it here
On your sacred lap.
That is the man: upon him instantly
While I attach his Mistress.
Ah me Lysander, what means these sad spectacles▪
Wee must have life and death.
Both life and death: how can that be?
Thy life, and thy Lysanders death.
I've heard that voice ever now
Afford more milder language.
Stop her mouth lest she does charm me
Unto pity.
Are you but men, and dare doe this?
Oh spare Lysander, sheath your swords in me.
We'll not expostulate: take that.
And that.
Oh Lysander!
Stay, stay, let me but breath my last
Upon her lips, and I'll forgive this Butchery.
Cowards, Villains, Miscreants, have you left me?
But oh my fairest, whether art thou fled?
Fear has made pale those cheeks that were so red.
I'll follow thee: they shall not dare to touch
The least hem of thy garments. But oh, I faint;
And must surrender up to earth that part
I took from her. Gloriana, oh Gloriana!
Wee may for recreation walk,
And use some pretty harmless talk.
Religion does not tie us to
A stricter course than wee can doe.
Tic dangerous walking, every field
Doth nought but sounds of horror yield,
And to my fancy doth appear
Poor slaughtered Maids; the Butchers bear
The name of Lovers, and can find
A way in killing to be kind.
Ah me, whence came that groan?
It is a Shepherd wounded sore.
Sure I've seen this face before!
Oh it is Lysander the truest Swain,
That ever breathed on Grove or Plain.
What, is hee marked for present death?
No, there is hopes of life: his breath
I feel come coldly.
Help him in.
Pan be just, reward this sin.
The devil and his dam I think have carried away my Master; I cannot find him in never a Wenches placuit, (pocket I should say) and yet I have been in a simple ma∣ny since I came among these Mutton-Mongers, these sheepe-eaters, unless they have hid him amongst their wool, I cannot imagine where hee should be I will wear my shoes to pieces but I'll find him.
Religious Matron, from your divine hand
I have received my life next to heavens providence:
Sure my wounds were not desperate, or else
Some Angel did afford a sovereign Balsam
To cure 'em in such an instant: but howsoever,
I must ascribe it to your pious care:
For which I owe you more than I can pay,
Unless it be my life.
The Surgery I use is sent from Heaven,
And you owe them your life, not me.
But Florida,
Did you ne'er hear of your Cliton since?
Never.
Yet I would gladly see him, did I know
By what means to achieve it?
Dear friend, the stories of us both if weighed
In an equal balance, would poise each other
Yet to put her love to the Test, I'll undertake your message.
Thou wilt endear me to thee then, about it.
You heard how Cloe came to our happy Cure.
Never.
The Wood Nymphs brought her to our Cell, finding
Her strayed where ever since sh'as bin.
If you will with me, I'll promise you, you shall see your Cliton:
On those conditions I will.
Whether now?
No farther than with your consent, and if you please, yo• may go with us.
I am contented.
I know Lysander's dead,
Then farewell maidenhead;
Thou art but one:
When I am gone:
It never shall be said — hy ho, ho.
Oh Lysander.
Save you fair Maid, I wish you joy,
Free from ought that may annoy
Your quiet, or disturb your sense;
Send you health and penitence.
Ha, ha, ha, what, are you Lysander? what, with that beard there's a great beard indeed: hark you Fryer Tuck, doe you see you handsome shepherd Lysander?
Why did you say he was dead?
You are mistaken, I'm a Hermit that can cure
All wounds, but what sin makes impure;
And those are cured by one above:
I can help those ills that move
Man to distraction, jealous fears,
In man or woman. I have years
Has gained experience to apply
For all sorts a safe remedy.
Doe you see where he doth stand,
With a Crosse-Bow in his hand.
I will follow thee my Dear,
Though the Goblins keeps there.
Stay pure Maid.
Why doe you hold me old man? insooth you shall not.
•f you will be ruled by me,
You shall your Lysander see.
•hall I indeed now?
•ome with me and you shall know
More, if you will but patient grow.
Good Father, be patient.
〈◊〉 not my daughter lost, my only daughter,
•he only staff whereon my age did rest,
And only comfort which I had on earth?
Oh! I am miserable.
•here's hopes yet left to find her.
•ever. Some rude and savage hand has killed my Girl,
•avenge deflowered her of her virgin honour.
Talk not of patience, it is the only means
To cure a bad distemper, to grow worse,
And fire it out of him. Oh my Alexis!
I'm lost in loosing her.
Let us endeavour to find her,
I'll take thy counsel, goodness guide me still,
Sometimes are Parents cross against their will.
W'are almost at his Cell, where hee do's waste
Himself away with grief, thinking you are
A Citizen in Heaven, and that wrong
He did you, has so defiled his soul,
It cannot be purged off but by such penitence.
You've moved my heart that it dissolves to tears,
Of blood, and water, for the strictness hee
Has undergone for me.
I'm glad I've found you; doe you see w'are coupled as
Lovers ought to doe: but your Gloriana is lost beyond
Recovery.
How?
She hearing of your death fell frantic, and
Since I have not seen her ne'er our Groves.
Let us put wings to our pursuit to find her;
And first we'll search his Cell.
Great Pan send all things well.
Oh Conscience, how thou dost buzz into my ears; despair
The thing attends my guilt, Gloriana lost:
For whose sweet sake I hooped new sins upon me?
What has my fury purchased nothing? Yes!
Hell, and destruction, which only by a hair hangs o'er my head, which blown by the least wind, falls down and sinks me.
You sirrah, madcap, that creeps like a Crab there: Hark you, doe not you know one Francisco and Pisander, two vagabonds, that cannot live in peace with Poultry, but they must fly after sheep?
I owe that wretched name Francisco.
Who? you with that face! pray whore's Pisander then?
I left him at the Court when I came thence.
I see you shepherds will lye abominably, hee has been from the Court ever since seven years before hee was borne.
Friends, wee are happy made, Fortune and Love reserved these blisses to crown the end of things.
The story you related Florida.
How this divine Matron did take your body,
Finding it warm, and did apply such Balsams
As hath preserved your life, makes me most happy.
I'm blessed in my Gloriana.
I in my Cloe.
And I in Florida.
And wee to see you possess such bliss.
Ah! Protect me some blessed power: keep farther off. I am yet reconciled with heaven. I doe confess I killed you! Oh be merciful for their sweet sakes, whose innocence cannot see, or be disturbed by thee. There they are by thee; thy once dear Gloriana.
What a distemper's this?
What will appease thy Ghost? give me but time to ask forgiveness of those sacred powers I've most offended, by depriving thee of life and being, and thou shalt have my life for thy just sacrifice.
I apprehend his guilt: shepherd, fear not; your hate grew not to such desperate effects as you expected. Feel, I live and breath!
Delude me not, it is impossible.
These shall witness it.
Wee doe.
Can you forgive then my attempt?
With a true heart.
Lysander's still himself, noble and wise.
And can you Fairest wipe that Ignominy off, I deserved from you?
My Lysanders word suffices for us both.
Then may you both live happy many years:
May your joys, never be disturbed by fears.
Hark you sir, now all your talk is over, I would know one thing of you?
And what's that?
Have you met with one Pisander, Leon, and Francisco in your Travails?
The Duke is dead that banished good old Leon, and could I find him; his lands shall be restored.
I am that Leon that with my son and daughter here have lived ever since in this Rural way.
Blessings doe follow blessings.
Then I am that Pisander that left the Court, to gain thy Daughters love by the name of Lysander. Scrub, dost thou know me now?
A pestlence on it, you are hee indeed.
Pisander, embrace thy friend Francisco.
Francisco! thou cloy me with joy.
I left the Court for the same end you did.
Shoe's mine now Sir, is she not?
As fast as the Priest can make her,
Fortune has made all happy: Yet it is fit
If they will wed, your hands should licence it.

The first thing that presented it self to the eye, was the Ornament that went about the Scene: in the midst of which, was placed a great Arms of the Kings, with Angels holding an Imperial Crown, from which hung a Drapery, of crimson Velvet, fringed with gold, tacked in several knots, that on each-side, with many folds, was wound about a Pilaster; in the
freeze, were festones of several fruits in their na∣turall colours, on which, in gracious postures lay Children sleeping; at each end was a double shield, with a Gorgons head, and at the foot of the pilasters, on each side, stood two Women, the one young, in a watchet Robe looking up∣wards, and on her head, a pair of Compasses of gold, the points standing towards Heaven: the other more ancient, and of a venerable aspect, ap∣paroled in tawny, looking downwards; in the one hand a long ruler, and in the other, a great pair of iron Compasses, one point whereof, stood on the ground, and the other touched part of the ruler. Above their heads, were fixed, compare∣timents of a new composition, and in that over the first, was written Theorise, and over the second Practica, showing that by these two, all works of Architecture, and Engining have their perfe∣ction. The Curtain being suddenly drawn up, the first Scene appeared, which represented a Roman Atrium, with high Collombs of white Marble, and ornaments of Architecture of a com∣posed manner of great proiecture, enriched with car∣avenge, and between every return of these Col∣lombs, stood Statues of gold on round pedestals, and beyond these, were other pieces of Archi∣tecture of a Palace royal.
Over all was a serene sky, out of which a cloud began to break forth, and as it discen∣ded, a person was discovered, sitting in it, which by his Petasus and Caduceus, was known to be Mercury, the messenger of Jove.
Behold! I come not from above,
To hyde, or hunt out wanton Love,
Or doe what Man can doe:
But to spread all my nimble wings,
And like a God, doe Godlike things
Grateful, and Gracious too.
Observe! But see ye be not nice,
Prepare to give, and take advice,
As wise-Men ought to doe:
Lest when your subtle wits have done,
Your Notes, like Motes, thought in the Sun
Prove far beneath vs too.
Admire! but censure not their Powers,
That sink not with Times sandy hours,
As mortal Creatures doe.
And since the Shaft that is addressed,
At Heaven may hurt the Shooters breast,
Be pleas'a and please vs too.
Happy, thrice happy is that hour
Wherein a God descends,
Either in person, or in power
And Mans poor state befriends.
Olimpian JOVE to the bright ALBA sends
No vulgar God to bear his dear Commends.
And with pure eyes, and a paternal hand,
This Universe having surveyed, and span'd,
In Counc•ll with himself, he hath decreed,
From fair ALBIPOLIS shall soon proceed
A Triumph: Mighty, as the Man designed
To wear those Baize; Heroic, as his mind;
Just, as his actions; Glorious, as his Reign.
And like his Virtues, Infinite in Train.
The Immort all Swans, contending for his Name,
Shall bear it singing, to the House of Fame.
And though at distance yet High JOVE is played
Your laboring eyes shall with his sight be eased,
This from a God, unto a Goddess sent,
A God Relates, that could use Complement:
But when such States, negotiate by such means
We speak in Acts, and scorn words trifling Scenes.
Ye Powers Divine make room, prepare a Seat
On the Northside, for ALBANACT the Great,
Earth is not fruitless: nor your nombers full,
Ther's One to come will make some Stars look dull.
What mak's me so vnnimbly rise,
That did descend so fleet?
There is no vp-hill in the skies;
Clouds stay not feathered feet.
Thy wings are singed: and thou can fly
But slowly now, swift MERCVRY.
Some Lady here, is sure too blame
That from Loves starry skies,
Hath shot some Beam, or sent some flame,
Like Lghtning, from her Eyes.
Tax not the Stars, with what the Sun,
Too near aproch't (insens't) hath done.
I'll roll me in Auroras Dew,
Or lye in Tithes bed;
Or from cool Iris beg a few,
Pure Opal shewrs new shed.
Nor Dew, nor showers, nor sea can slake
Thy quenchless heate, but Lethes lake.
When MERCVRY is Re-assum'd into Hey∣ven in Pomp. Here the Scene is changed into the Forum of the City of Albipolis, and Albanactus triumphing, attended like a Roman Emperor is seen a far off to pass in pomp.
The Scene is turned into an Amphitheater, with people sitting in it, a Patrician and a Plebe∣ian come forth, &amp;c.
Though I have earned it with the sweat of my brows in January, yet I am glad I saw it, for there never was such a sight seen.
What sight Publius?
The Triumph.
Whose Triumph?
The Triumph of ALBANACTVS.
Did thou see it?
See it, yes, and feel it too. Every one there (I can assure you) went not upon his own feet.
No, I think, some rid.
They did so, for some rid me. Some trod on my toes. Some cried, some kept it in; for my part, I confessed all, for fear I should have been p•est to death.
Though thy body was pinched, thine eyes were feasted.
Were not yours so too?
Yes.
Where stood you?
I stood not,
You had the better friends sir, I pray where sate you?
In my study.
Is not your study backward? with a shop-light in it, where one can see nothing but the sky?
I confess it, what of that?
Why then you saw no Triumph.
But I did, and a true one, thine was but a show.
If what I saw was but a show, what you saw was but a shadow, or at the most a Vision. For it seems your body kept home, though your spirit walked.
It did so. And travelled to better purpose then most men doe, that go, and see, and say, but know nothing.
To confute that Heresy of yours, I have gone, and seen, and know, but I will say nothing.
That's impossible; The meat thou hast lately fed upon, is so windy, out it must, thou wilt burst else.
Faith sir, I am very full indeed.
Purge then, and tell thy Doctor all.
ALBANACTVS CAESAR from his sumptuous Palace, through the high-streets of ALBI∣POLIS rid Triumphing, on a Chariot, made—
Of wood, perhaps guilt, perhaps gold. But I will save you all those charges, if you will go on to the Per∣sons, and let the Pageants alone.
Sir I saw him not as he was borne, naked, but since you affect such brevity, I saw the King and a great deal more, and so I turned my back, and went away.
Nay good Publius, now thou art too brief.
When you begin to tell your dreams, I'll not jog you, till you wake of your self.
Nay prithee be not angry.
I am not angry, but a little short-winded upon oc∣cession. Yet to give you some satisfaction because you have done me wrong. Before CAESAR Marched Captive Kings, with their hands bound. And Ladies, with their Arms across, furious wild Beasts, great Giants, and little Dwarfs with Lictors, and Pictors, and a number of Pry•ts that were as you would have them, In their shirts. These with certain Princes that were behind him: made up a Triumph too great to come out of any mortal mans mouth.
That's most certain.
I mean in words. But as you hunt me you would hunt a Hare off her legs.
I confess thou hast made more haste, then good speed: But for a supplement to thy lame Story, Know, I have seen this brave ALBANACIVS CAESAR, seen him with the eyes of understanding, vew'd all his Actions; looked into his Mind: which I find armed with so many moral virtues that he daily Conquers a world of Vices, which are wild Beasts indeed.
For example Ambition, is a Lyon; Cruelty, a Bear; Avarice, a Wolf. Yet He subdues them all. To be short, no Vice is so small, to scope him: Nor so great, but he overcomes it: And in that fashion he Triumphs overall the Kings, and Queens that went before him. All his Passions, are his true Subjects: And Knowledge, Judgment, Merit, Bounty and the like, are fit Comma ders, for such a General, Th•se Triumph with him, And these are the Princes you saw about him. And this Publius, is more then you can find in the street.
I grant it, But yet grant me one Request dear
Platonicus?
What's that?
Go but with me to the Amphitheater.
To Gaze.
Yes.
Why beforehand I know there will be Gladiators, Saltators, and sights to please the People. Were not thou better stay here, and see CAESAR present himself to this fair Goddess, seeking sweet rest, after all his labours.
I should sleep at such a sight.
Then after a Play, thou art all for a Pryze.
All together, and so (I hope) are you
At this time, I am. For I will go with thee, if it be but to teach thee to Read in thy own Book. Outsides, have Insides, Shells, have Kernels in them. And under every Fable, nay (almost) under every thing, lies a Moral.
What art thou doing Publius.
Lifting up the stone I stumbled at.
To what end?
To see what lies under it.
What should lye under a stone, but a Worm, or a
Hoglouse.
If there lye not a Moral under it, then have you taught me false Doctrine.
Such thanks have they that teach such Sch•l∣lers. Come away Fool, they begin to throng to the Theater.
Such kind of pastimes as Victorious Emperors were wont to present as Spectacles to the People, are h•••e pro∣ducat for Anti-Maskes upon the s•age.
The Scene is changed into a pleasant Grove of straight Trees, which rising by degrees to a high place, opens it self to discover the aspect of a stately Temple; All which, was sacred to JOVE; In this grove, sat the Emperor ALBA∣NACTVS, attended by fourteen Consuls,
who stood about him, not set in ranks, but in se∣viral gracious postures, attending his commands: his habit, like a Roman Emperor in a Curase of yellow Satin embroidered with silver, his gore∣get clincant, cut round, and on his breast an Angels head embossed of gold, the Labells of the sleeves, and short Bases of watchet embroidered with the same, the under sleeves, and long stockings of white, on his head a Burgonet richly enchased with silver, turned up before in a serowle, with an artificial wreath of Laurel, out of which, sprang rays like a piked Crown, the habit of the Consuls were after the same manner, excep∣ting the rays of gold, issuing from his Laurel wreath.
Sit not secure, nor think in ease
Still vndispleas'd, your selves to please:
Diana, Chaste Diana stoop,
And help to wound this war like troop.
Wants Love a Bow, or shaft of mine?
This suit will make my Crescent shine.
Love is grown wise, and means to bring
To his smart Bow, a double string.
Behold our Mark? taks't thou not pride
In such a Glory to divide?
I doe, I doe, since I am sure,
When we two join, our flames are pure.
As pure, and Clear, as ALBAS skin,
As her fair Fame, or thoughts within:
Pure as my self; nay pure like Thee,
Now Love is that which Love should be.
Bow bearing Gods, shoot, shoot, and hit,
And make our CAESAR greater yet:
Yet leave him with vs, Let him shine
Still here; And make him all Divine
Ye Worthies of this Isle,
That led by your brave Chief,
In an Heroic style,
Have over done Belief:
Subdued by ALBAS eyes
Come down, Loves Sacrifice!
It is no shame to yield,
Where it is in vein to strive:
The Gods would quit the field,
Should they these wars revive
Or Conquered, by her Eyes,
Come down Loves Sacrifice.
Straight Cedar, that hast stood,
The shock of many a wind:
The top of this Tall wood,
By a high hand designed
Subdued by ALBAS Eyes,
Come down Loves Sacrifice!
Great ALBA though eche Grande here,
At this High Court of thine,
Like a true Liege Man doth appear,
And offers at thy Shrine:
It is no Conquest for thine Eyes,
When petty Princes fall,
That are some single Beauties pryse,
Or a lone Virtues Thrall:
Here comes the Trophy of thy praise,
The Monarch of these Isles,
The Mirror of thy Cheerful Rays,
And Glory of thy Smiles:
The Virtues and the Graces all,
Must meet in one, when such Stars full.
Afterword taking his seat by the Queen. The Scene is varied into a Landscipt, in which was a prospect of the Kings Palace of White∣hall, and part of the City of London, seen a far off, and presently the whole heaven opened,
and in a bright cloud were seen sitting five per∣sons, representing Innocence, Justice, Religion, af∣fection to the Country, &amp; Concord, being all Com∣pinions of Peace, and thus attired. Innocence, a woman in a pure white robe, with a garland of flowers on her head: Justice, a woman in a yellow garment richly adorned, her mantle white, and on her head golden rays, in her right hand a sword, and in the midst thereof an Imperial Crown: Religion, a woman in a short Sir∣plus of lavvne full gathered about the neck, and under it a garment of watchet, with a short vale of silver and about her head, beams of gold like the Sun, and in her left hand, she held a book open: Affection to the Country, a young man in a Coat armour of yellow, with a purple Man∣tle, his buskins adorned, his plumed Helm of silver, and in his hand a Garland of long grass: Concord, a man in a sky coloured Robe, and a yale∣low Mantle; on his head a Garland of wheat, and in his hand a bunch of arrows tied together with a white band, these moving towards the earth sing together as follows. Praising their Piety, and wishing they may perpetuate them∣selves by a Royal Posterity, Present them with several Gifts.
Blessed Pair whose prayers like Incense rise,
Opening, and pulling down the Skies
Take your Reward! Just as ye met,
So hand in hand live many a Day,
And may your Virtuous minds beget
Issue that never shall decay,
And so be fruitful every way.
May Plenty Proteus like appear,
Varying your Pleasures every year:
Wee five come freely to impart,
Such favours as we can afford: 
One gives hiss Hand, the next hisb Heart,
The third herc Robe, the fourth herd Sword,
The fifth full many ae Suppliant Word.
And to fulfil your future Bliss,
Sweet Peace salutes you with a Kiss.
Frighted by Day; And in the Night diseased,
I fled to Heaven, and left the World displeased.
F•nd Men that strive more for a Province there,
Then looking upward to possess a Sphere.
Yet vanquished and Victorious, both at last,
Their weary Limbs, on my soft Bed would cast.
 Lyons, and Lambs together lye,
When Lovely Peace stands smiling by
 Temples and Towns by thy stayed hand,
First learn to Rise, And then to Stand.
 It is not the Laurel Tree that brings,
Anointing Oil for sacred Kings:
Those Princes see the happiest Days,
Whose Olive Branches stand for Baize.
Arms are laid by: Early and late,
The Traveller goes safe to Bed:
Men eat and Drink in Massy Plate,
And are with Dainties daily fed.
Why should this Isle aboue the rest,
Be made (great Gods) the Halcions nest?
Imperious Peace her self Descends
Then here our search, and wonder ends,
We'll steal away
Earths Rulers, stay!
Doth soft Peace call?
Yes: and will straight employ ye All.
How, and wherein?
Give ear, your Charge doth now begin.
N•ptune to Sea, And let no Sail,
Meet ALBIONS Fleet, But make it veil.
Bellona Arm, That Foes may see,
Their Lilies kept by Lyons be.
Their fruitful fields (Cabal) make
Pay Centupl• for all they take.
And let Both Indies (Pluto) meet,
And lay their wealth at ALBAS feet.
When Peace commands such pleasing things,
From Love and Time we'll steal their wings.
Laden with Wealth and Honour may,
These Gods return to crown this Day,
And MARY-CHARLES whose minds within,
And Bodies make but Hymens Twin,
Long live they so, And Breast, to Breast,
May Angels sing them to their Rest.

Circa by her allurements inamo∣red
a young Gent. on her per∣son,
who a while lived with
her in all sensual delights until
upon some jealousy conceived,
she gave him to drink of an
enchanted Cup, and touching him with her gol∣den
wand transformed him into a Lyon. After
some time she remembering her former love, re∣transformed
him into his former shape. Which
he resuming took the first occasion by flight to
quit the place and coming into the presence of
his Majesty, whose sight frees him from all fear
he relates the story of his fortune.
When Circa had notice of her Lovers escape it,
put her into a furious anger and then into a la∣mentation
or love passion. But being consolated
by her Nymphs; she commands that all such
delights be prepared as may sweeten her sorrow:
and presently all the voluntary beasts under her
subjection are introduced to make her sport.
After which the way being first prepared by Har∣money,
and the Influences; divine Beauty accom∣panied
with fourteen stars of a happy constella∣tion,
descends to the Music of the Spheres and
joins with heroic virtue, where in presence
of love &amp; Cupped, Circa knowing the design of the
destinies on this glorious Interview, voluntarily
delivers her golden rod to MINERVA. So all
the enchantments being dissolved. TEMPE
which for a time had been possessed by the volun∣tarry
beasts of CIRCES Court; is restored to
the true followers of the MVSES.
IN the upper part of the border serving for or∣nament
to the SCENE, was painted a fair
compartment of scrolls and quadratures, in
which was written TEMPE RESTAVRA∣TVM.
On each side of this, lay a figure bigger
then the life, the one a woman with wings on
her head like MERCVRIE and a pen in her
hand: the other a man looking down in a
book lying open before him, and a torch lighted
in his hand: that figured Invention; this Know∣ledge.
Near to these were children holding oug∣lie
Masks before their faces in action as if they
would affright them; others riding on tame beasts
and some blowing such wrethen Trumps as
m•ke confused noise, in the corners sat other
Children hardening of darts in Lamps. But In∣vention
&amp; Knowledge seem not to be diverted
from their study by these childish bugbears. In
the midst of the two sides of this border in short
nieces sat two ugly figures, the one a woman
with a forked tongue, and snaky lockes, and
the under part of a Satire, this Hag held in her
hand a smiling vizard crowned with Roses, and
was figured for Envy, under the Mask of friend∣ship.
On the other side was sitting as horrid a
man Satire with a wreath of poppy on his head,
and a Frog sitting on the fore part thereof; and a∣above
a Batt flying, this represented curions Igno∣rance.
The rest of the Border was filled up with
several fancies, which lest I should be too long
in the description of the frame, I will go to the
picture it self, and indeed these shows are no∣thing
else but pictures with Light and Motion.
A Curtain being drawn up, the Lightsome
Scene appeared, showing a delicious place by na∣ture
and art; where in a Valley environed with
Hills a far off was seated, a prospect of curious
Arbours of various forms. The first order of
marble Pilasters. Between which were nieces
of rock work and Statues; some spurting
water received into vazes beneath them, and o∣theirs
standing on Pedestals. On the returns of
these Pilasters run slender Cornishments. From
which was raised a second order of gracious
terms with women's faces which bear up the
ornaments. Under this to a leaning height was
a Ballestrata enriched. All this second story seemed
of silver work mixed with fresh Verdures which
on the tops of these arbours covered some of the
returns, in the form of tips with tender bran∣ches
dangling down: others were covered flatt
and had flower pots of gold for finishing: be∣hind
these appeared the tops of slender trees,
whose leaves seemed to move with a gentle
breath coming from the far off Hills.
Out of this pleasant place comes in hast, a young
Gentleman, looking often back, as if he feared
a pursuit; and being come into the midst of the
room, looking still distractedly about him, hee
wipes his face with an handkercher, and then ad∣vanceth
towards the State, and speaks.
Was I a Lyon! that am now afraid!
I fear no danger; nor I fear no Death;
But to be Retransform'd, into a Beast:
Which while I was, although I must confess,
I was the Bravest: What could she doe less,
That saw me Subject, to no base desire:
Yet was there in me, a Promethean fire,
That made me covet to be man again,
Governed by Reason, and not ruled by Sense.
Therefore I shun this place of Residence,
And fly to Virtue: in whose awful sight,
She dares not come, but in a Mask, and crouch,
As low as I did, for my liberty.
Her Bower is pleasant, and her Palace Rich;
Her Fare Delicious; and her Language fine;
But shall the Soul, the Minion of the Gods,
Stoop to her Vassalls? Or stand by and starve,
While they sit swelling, in her Chair of State?
Tic not her Rod, her Philters, nor her Herbs,
(Though strong in Magic) that can bound men's minds;
And make them Prisoners, where there is no wall.
It is consent that makes a perfect Slave:
And Sloth that binds us to Lusts easy Trades,
Wherein we serve out our youths Prentiship,
Thinking at last, Love should enfranchise vs,
Whom we have never, either served or known:
He finds no help, that uses not his own.
The further part of the Scene opening, there
appears seated on the side of a fruitful hill, a
sumptuous Palace, with an open Terrace before
there appears seated on the side of a fruitful hill,
a sumptuous Palace, with an open Terrace before
it, and a great stair of return, descending into the
lower grounds; the upper part environed with
walls of Marble, along which were planted,
Cypress trees. From the foot of the hill, Cheese at∣tended
by the Naiads, and Dryads comes forth
in fury, for the escape of the young Gentle∣man,
her Lover; and having traversed the stage
with an angry look, sings to her Lute.
Dissembling Traitor, now I see the cause,
Of all thy fawning, was but to be free:
T'was not for nothing, thou had teeth and claws,
For thou hast made a cruel prey of me.
Ingratitude is apt, to slink away,
And shun that bounty which it cannot pay.
And he is gone (aye me) is stolen from hence,
And this poor Casket of my breast, hath left
Without a Hart: that should for recompense,
Have locked in two: O most inhumane theft!
Send not your sighs, after a fickle mind,
That Sails the faster for such Gales of wind.
Then take my keys! and show me al my wealth.
Lead me abroad! Let me my subjects view!
Bring me some Physic! though that bring no health!
And feyne me pleasures, since I find none true.
Ye willing servants! And ye Souls confined
To several shapes, by powerful Herbs and Art,
Appear, transformed each in your sever all kind,
And strive to temper the distempered Heart,
Of sullen Circa, stung with Cupids dart.
Her song ended, she sits, and before her are pre∣scented
all the Antimasques, consisting of Indians,
and Barbarians, who naturally are bestial, and
others which are voluntaries, and but half trance∣formed
into beasts.
The Anti Masques being past; Circa and her
Nymphs retire towards the palace from whence
she came, and the Scene returning into the vale
of TEMPE.
Harmony comes forth attended by a Chorus
of Musique, and under her conduct• fourteen
Influences of the stars, which are to come. She
with the Chorus goes up to the State and sings.
Not as my self, but as the brightest Star,
That shines in Heaven, come to Reign this day.
And these the Beams and Influences are
Of Constellations, whose Planeticke sway,
Though some foresee, all must alike obey.
Such a Conjunction, of auspicious lights,
Meet but in Honour, of some Regal rights.
Ladies! lend vs your ears.
And let no Lovers sigh be heard!
Or Suite, (though just) be now preferred
A consort of the Spheres,
Admits no whisper, nor no sound,
But what is descant, to their ground:
Nor can we hold ye long,
For there are Stars to rise,
That far aboue, our song
Are Music to all eyes.
If any Beauty here,
In her own glass appear
Or Lovers eye, most clear?
Looking but up, she may with sma•l ado
Perceive that flatters, and her servant too.
Her Song ended they retire with a Sarabant
and the fourteen Influences fall into their
dance. Which being past they are placed on the
degrees by the Lords and Ladies where they sit
to see the Masque.
When Divine Beauty, will vouchsafe to stoop,
And move to Earth: it is fit the Heavenly Spheres,
Should be her Music: And the Starry Troop,
Shine round about her, like the Crown she wears.
No mortal Breast,
Can entertain:
So great a Guest,
And such a Train.
I cannot blame ye if ye gaze,
And give small ear to what I say:
For such a presence will amaze,
And send the Senses all one way.
The Music that ye hear, is dull,
But that y• see, is sweet indeed:
In every Part exact, and full,
From whence there doth an Ayre proceed,
On which the Intelligences feed,
Where fair and good, inseparably conioynd,
Create a Cupped, that is never blind.
Then the Scene is changed into an oriental
sky, such as appears at the Sun rising, and
a far off a Landscipt and a calm Sea which
did terminate the Horizon; in the hither part
was a Heaven with a Citadel, and opposite to
that, were broken grounds and craggy rocks.
In the midst of the ayre the eight Spheres in
rich habits were seated on a Cloud, which in
a circular form was on each side continued
unto the highest part of the Heaven, and seemed
to have let them down as in a Chain.
To the Music of these Spheres there ap∣pear'd
two other Clouds descending, &amp; in them
were discovered eight Stars; these being come to
the middle Region of the sky, another greater
Cloud came down aboue them; Which by little
and little descending, discovered other glistening
Stars to the number of six: and aboue all in
a Chariot of gold-smithes works richly adorned
with precious lemmes, sat divine Beauty, over
whose head, appeared a brightness, full of small
stars that environed the top of the Chariot, stri∣king
a light round about it.
The eight Stars that first descended being by
this time past the Spheres came forth, and the
Clouds on which they sat with a swift morion
returning up again, and the other still descending
showed a pleasing contention between them as
they past. When divine Beauty and her atten∣dants
were lighted, that great Cloud that bare
them flies up again, leaving the Chariot standing
on the Earth.
This sight altogether was for the difficulty of
the Engining and number of the persons the gre∣test
that hath been seen here in our time. For
the apparitions of such as came down in the
ayre, and the Chorus standing beneath arrived to
the number of fifty persons all richly attired,
showing the magnificence of the court of England.
In the description of the several habits of the
maine Masques and Masquers and Chorus with
all the persons employed, would make a book a∣lone
as big as this, and ask more time in setting
down then can bee now spared; only thus
much the Queens Majesties was in a garment of
watchet Satin with Stars of silver embroidered
and embossed from the ground, and on her head a
Crown of Stars mixed with some small falls of
white Feathers. And the Ladies were in the same
manner. The stuff was rich and the form No∣ble,
and all suiting to the Magnificence of so great a
Queen.
The Queen and the Ladies dance their Entry;
after which Harmony, and the highest Sphere
sing, assisted by all the Chorus together.
How rich is earth? and poor the skies?
Deprived of heavenly Beauties eyes?
Whose Image men adore.
Heroic Virtue, is that kind
Of Beauty, that attracts the mind,
And men should most implore.
Ianus was happy that could see,
Two ways at once: And happier he
That round about him kept
Watches, that never slept.
But we most happy, that behold,
Two that have turned this Age to Gold,
Making old Saturns Reign,
In theirs, come back again.
And since more, th'obiect, then the sight,
Makes every seer Blessed;
How are we ravished with delight,
That see the best.
The Mockers dance their maine Dance, which
done, and the Queen seated under the state by
his Majesty, the Scene is again change•d into a
shady wood, and a new Heaven appears diffe∣ring
in shape and colour from the other. In the
midst of which Jove sitting on an Eagle is seen
hovering in the ayre with a glory beyond him.
And at that instant Cupped from another part of
the Heaven comes flying forth, and having past
the Scene, turns soaring about like a bird, and
at the same time Pallas, Circa and her four
Nymphs appear on the Stage: the great Chorus
consisting of five and thirty Musicians standing
below to assist them.
It is but Justice, to torment a heart,
That tortured thousands: And my gentle reign,
So wronged with acting of a Tyrants part,
I must Restrain,
My power abused; And right my iniurd Train.
Thou claim'st her Subjects: And I claim the Soil,
As Sovereign Lord: The Hecatomes she brings,
Though great Oblations, yet deduced from Spoil,
Are sordid Things:
And sent of Earth: Virtue pure Incense brings.
The Gods, more freedom did allow,
when Jove turned Io to a Cow.
Are mortal Creatures, grown so proud
To tax the Sky, for every Cloud:
Man-Maide, bee gone!
Though I could turn thee, to a Stone
Isle beg thy peace:
Dear Daughter cease!
Cease Dreadful Jove! Finding thy Drift,
My Bounty, shall prevent thy Gift:
This Machles Pair,
I make, my Heir:
All I possess, I here, Resign,
Thou hast 〈…〉 And I have Mine.
She gives but what she can not keep.
Then was the wound I gave her deep.
T'was I whose power none can withstand,
That opened both her heart, and hand.
How would they morn, to loose ye quite!
That are so loath, to say, Goodnight.
Yet wee may plead, in our Excuse,
Should you, these Loanes of Love forsake
The Gods themselves, such Sommes would take
And pay vs, use.
When this was past, the Eagle with love flew
up, and Cupped took his flight through the Ayre,
after which the Heavens close. Palas and Circa re∣turns
into the Scene with the Nymphs, and Cho∣rus;
and so concluded the last Intermedium. After
which the Queen and her Ladies began the Re∣veals,
with the King and his Lords, which conti∣nued
all the night.
In the young Gentleman, who Circa had
first enamoured on her Person, and after, through
Jealousy conceived, Transformed into a Lyon.
And again remembering her former Love, re∣transformed
into his former shape, is figured
an incontinent man, that striving with his af∣fections,
is at last by the power of reason per∣swaded
to fly from those Sensual desires, which
had formerly corrupted his Judgment.
Circa here signifies desire in general, the
which hath power on all living Creatures, and
being mixed of the Divine and Sensible, hath
divers effects, Leading some to Virtue, and
others to Vice. She is described as a Queen,
having in her service, and subjection, the Nymphs,
which participate of Divinity, figuring the
Virtues, and the bruit Beasts, denoting the Vices.
The description of her person, of extraordinary
Beauty, and sweetness of her voice, shows that
desire is moved either by sight or hearing, to love
Virtue, or the contrary, and the Beautiful aspect
of her enchanted Palace, glistening with gold,
and Precious Ornaments, that desire cannot bee
moved without appearance of Beauty, either true
of false.
The Dryads, and Naiads, Nymphs of the
Woods, and Waters, that is to say; the good spy∣ritz
defused through all the Universe, are servants
to this Queen, and live with her in all Liberty
and pleasure whose employment is to gather
the most exquisite Herbs, and Flowers of the
earth for the service of their Mistress; Figuring the
Virtues and Sciences, by which the desire of Mans
Spirits are prepared and disposed to good, the
beasts, in part transformed, who contrary to
their Natures, make her sport, represents unto vs
that Sensual desire makes men loose their Virtue
and Valour, turning Parasites and Slaves to their
Brutish affections. That these Intemperate
Beasts of Circes Court, should for a time possess
TEMPE. The happy retreat of the Muses and
their followers, is meant, the enchantments of
vicious impostures, that by false means, seek to
extirpate the true Lovers of Science and Virtue, to
whom of right only that place belongs.
That divine Beauty accompan'ed with a troop
of Stars of a happy Constellation joining with
Heiroicke virtue should dissolve the enchant∣mints,
and Circa voluntarily deliver her golden
rod to Minerva, is meant that a divine Beam
coming from aboue, with a good inclination,
and a perfect habit of virtue made, by the Har∣money
of the Irascible and concupiscible parts obe∣dient
to the rational and highest part of the
soul. Making man only a mind using the by∣die
and affections as instruments; which being his
true perfection, brings him to all the happiness
which can bee enjoyed here below.
In Heiroicke virtue is figured the Kings Ma∣jest,
who therein transcends as far common
men, as they are aboue Beasts, he truly being the
prototipe to all the Kingdoms under his Mo∣narchie,
of Religion, Justice, and all the Virtues
joined together.
So that Corporeal Beauty, consisting in si∣metry,
colour, and certain unexpressible Graces,
shining in the Queens Majesty, may draw vs
to the contemplation of the Beauty of the soul,
unto which it hath Analogy.
All the Verses were written by Mr. Aurelian
Townesend.
The subject and Allegory of the Masque,
with the descriptions, and Apparatus of the
Scenes were invented by Inigo Iones, Surveyor of
his Majesties work.

GAllants, and Friends-spectators, will ye see
A strain of Wit that is not Poetry?
I have Authority for what I say:
For He himself says so, that Writ the Play,
Though, in the Muses Garden he can walk;
And choicest Flowers pluck from every stalk
To deck the Stage; and purposes, hereafter,
To take your Judgements: now He implores your laughter;
Says He would see you merry; thinks it long
Since you were last delighted with a Song.
Your Books, he says, can show you History;
And serious Passages better then Hee;
And that He should take pains in Act to show
What you already by your Studies know
Were a presumption. Tic a Modesty
Vn-vs'd amongst Poets. This being only Hee
That boasts not his worth; and doth subscribe•
Himself an vnder-seruant in their Tribe.
Yet though he slight himself, We not despair,
By him, to show you what is Good and Rare.
But I beseech you sir, Take me somewhat
nearer your Council. May I assure my
self, that this report goes true; that you
are on this treaty of Marriage with that
Widow?
Faith cousin, I take it as my fortune; and •m fully
bent on the adventure.
Troth in my mind, you were better venture your
self, and fortune to the Bermudas. Tic true, she has a
good estate: some nine thousand, I think: and were an apt
match for one that knew how to govern it, and her; some
hard bred Citizen, crafty Lawyer, or country Justice. But
you, a tender Nur•ealing of the Court, altogether vnmixt
with such nature or education, to cast your self upon her,
who for her years might be your Mother (they say: I no∣ver
saw her) and has been the Town widow these three
years, still conversant with Doctors, and Proctors of the
civil Law; of which Tribe her husband was too. Never
look to bee the better for her Riches: She'll consume
yours and you too▪ though your back were Herculean; and
lay you in your grave, or in Bedlam (my life on it) before she
dream of dying, though it be all that you can hope, or pray
for, after Marriage.
You speak sir out of some unfortunate examples,
and your extraordinary care of me. But truth is, all deswa∣zion
comes too late; and all vrgings against it are now un∣charitable:
For wee are already Man and Wife.
What married!
Lustily promised sir. Absolutely contracted.
Send you joy. Isle out of Town.
I hope you'll see our Marriage. I sent indeed to bid
you.
No, good sir Phillip, rather then I would be in sound
of a Bell that should ring at it, I would have my brains fill∣leapt
out with the Clapper.
Nay good cousin: I intended you my principal
Guest. We'll have all very private: not aboue four or five
friends more.
Sir, I intend to bee none of your Mourners, which
indeed my presence there would m•ke me; and so, perhaps,
infect the rest. I leave my best wishes to you, and will in∣devour
to pray for you. Indeed I will.
Indeed this is very abrupt.
Mr. Tridewall! well met. Why so fast sir, I took
you for a Foot-post.
A Foot-post! Indeed your fine wit will post you into
another world one of these days, if it take not the whip∣ping
post in the way. And why Foot-post, in your little wit∣tie
apprehension?
Because you went so fast. B•t since you are angry,
I would you were going twice as last. If I interrupt you,
hang me. Dee hear?
Nay I know you are apt to decline any mans anger,
good Captain Anvil: you have been beaten to it.
Why, if he have, hee may thank such as you are,
that can endure no jest.
What are you there too? Mr. Widgine, I take it?
My name is Walter Widgine sir, not to be denied▪ the
only brother here of sir Phillip Luckless his betroch'd. She
is a Widgine borne sir, and of the best family: Our Ancestors
flew out of Holland in Lincolnshire to prevent peri•cation.
From Crowland, I warrant you, a little before a
Moulting time.
Like enough sir. My sister can tell you. Since, by mar∣riage,
she was made a Fitchow: Her husband was Fitchow
the civil Lawyer; Hee was called the great Canoe••r of
the civil Law: because he could dischardge or make report
of every Canon therein; Canon after Canon, or Canon up∣on
Canon at his fingers ends, as readily as I can tell these
pieces.
A fair Demonstration!
He had many rare parts in him, besides sir, as my
sister can tell you.
This fellow cannot choose but have a rare sister: Hee
quotes her so!
But all the good I can speak of him is, that he left
my sister rich; or at least a reasonable estate, half a score
thousand pounds or so: which she, with her self, bestows
upon this honourable knight sir Phillip Luckless, to bee a La∣die▪
of that name, and God give him joy. And for you: being
his kinsman, I shall desire your nearer acquaintance.
In good time sir.
The match was not altogether her own seeking
sir, though she refused two Aldermen for him, on my own
knowledge.
Might she have had'hem both sir?
I and half a score Aldermens fellows to boot: yet
refused all for him.
In deed six yoke of such cattle would plow up all
his acres in a forenoon.
My sister can tell you more sir.
Still she is his Authority. I will see this woman.
Sir Phillip, here are Guests will applaud your match. Bid'hem
welcome▪ God buy.
For my part I honour any Man, that marries my
sister. Sir Phillip, and my noble brother in expectation, I
pray embrace my Governor, Captain Anvil, here; and
give him and me our gloves: you shall find him worthy your
acquaintance. Hee has wit, I can tell you; and breaks as
many good jests as all the VVits, Fits, and Fancies about the
Town, and has trained up many young gentlemen, both
here, and in divers parts beyond the Seas. Hee was dry nurse
(thats one of his own jests upon himself) to the English
youth, a dozen years together beyond Sea: And now he is
my Governor, and I find profit in it: you cannot think
what an ass I was before I met with him: And I mean to
travel with him, two or three years hence, my self. In
the mean time, he shall spend a hundred a year out of Wat
Widgines purse. Shall it •faith Governor, what ails thou?
art thou not right?
I shall find a time to right my self, I doubt not.
But will you travel at these years Mr Widgine?
Will you not call me brother? Two days hence
when you have married my sister, you must. Must hee not,
Governor?
Yes an't please him.
Hee ails something.
Well then, Brother two days hence, will you
travel?
I some two years hence, mistake me not. I know
I am but young yet: besides I mean to marry first as other
young heirs doe. And then towry lowry, faith, my noble
Governor, and I! Twill be brave going into France then: I
may learn half their fashions before I go, and bate so
much, being taught at when I come there. VVhats the mat∣la
Governor? thou were not wont to bee thus. Is thy
money all gone? Here is five pieces to buy pomps against
my sisters wedding.
Have I eyes and ears, and can think of trifling
Money matters?
Pox on it I had forgot. That sciruy surly gentleman
angerd him ere while, and put him out of patience. How the
hot •ome of his rage boils out at his Mouth▪ If I durst
go so near the heate of him I would skim the pot.
If I try not this Tridewell; put him to the dearest
trial of his life.—
I there tic, he will never come to himself till he beat,
or bee beaten.
Let me have these knocked out; these pulled off; these
plucked out, and these sawd off.
I must venture on him. Nay Governor: pray thee
consider.—
The time and place you mean. Think you hee
durst have done it, but in his kinsmans house; hee and the
multitude of his servants present.
I, and wee know not how many armed men in the
next room. Hark Governor.
What things are these! I shall marry into a fine
stock! How untimely some considerations fall into my
mind▪ My Cousins council, which hath ever been oracu∣lously
good; against which I violently bear my self, to
mix my blood amongst a race of fools. Had but these
thoughts been mine but one day past, they had prevented
all that may prove dangerous in this, so great and doubtful
undertaking.
Sir, there's a gentlewoman would speak with you.
Who is it? Doe you not know her?
I never saw her before sir. I asked her name. But I per∣ceiu'd
some displeasure in her look (whether it were shame,
gre•e, or anger I know not) that made her conceal it: On∣lie
telling me she was a woman very hurtles, and warren∣table
against your fear.
I warrant tic my sister. She frowned, did she not,
and looked fightingly? If she did, it is my sister, your wife
that shall be. She will look so at you, I can tell you, or me,
or my Governor, for all he is a Captain. She fears no
colours I faith, to tell you true, she beat him once for a
jest he broke upon her Monkey. Is it not she, think thou?
No sir it is not she. I know my Lady that shall be.
My Lady that shall bee! how sweetly it chimes.
Here is something for that word.
Go bring her up. Good brother VVidgine, fly in∣to
the next room, with your Governor. Isle waite on you
presently.
My Lady! And brother VVidgine! I must admire.
Our house is raised by this two stories higher.—
There's no recalling time; and vows of this high
nature are no trif•les.
Sir I suppose you are sir Phillip Luckless.
I am the man Lady.
And you are shortly to marry a City Widow, one
Mistress Fitchow?
Most true.
For whose dear sake you purchased a four hun∣dred
pounds knighthood, to go a wooing in: out of which
she is to give nine thousand pounds for a Ladyship for term
of life.
What mean you Gentlewoman?
Sir not to scold, or brawl, (a vice to frequent in our
Sex.) But, in few words (and civil ones) to make you sen∣sible
of a little of that infinite injury, you have done to one,
whose vnvaluable portion of virtue makes her fit, (besides
the right she has already in you) to take a brides place, be∣fore
your later choy•, or any she, whose wealth might
weigh down hers. You stand as if you knew not who I
mean.
Nor what neither. Sure my name's abused.
Pray sir bethink your self. Has there not been a
former contract made betwixt you and some other.
No. Nor any faithful promise neither.
That I may well believe, when you forget it.
I pray speak nearer to my understanding: whom
may you suggest to be the woman •o much forgotten?
If you have soul, or sense, you must remember her:
No? Read then her name subscribed to that.
If pity, love, or thought of me,
Live in your breast I need not die.
But if all these from thence be fled;
Live you to know, that I am dead.
Farewell good Constance. I am sorry I have no further
for thee.
Doe you know that name sir?
Yes Lady so well, that I am sorry, that a gentlewo∣man
of your good seeming should have to doe for so light a
piece of vanity. Leave going of the devils Errants: His
kingdoms large enough, and too much peopled already.
Pray sir, are you in sober earnest?
I good faith am I.
You are unhappy then. For you shall loose, in this
disdain of yours, more honour then your life time in ripen∣tance
can recover. So fare you well sir.
Farewell old Whiskin. Slid Isle marry out of the
way; tic time I think: I shall bee tan up for whores meat
else. Constance! she had a Bastard tother day too. What a
mischievous Maw has this she Caniball that gapes for me!
Slight a common Trader, with I know not how many! I
marvel she was left out of Cupids Muster. Sure she bribed
the Ballat-maker: One that I have paid at all times too;
here is one, there's tother▪ And now she hears I am to∣wards
marriage pretends a claim to me. And what a Mi∣nister
she had procured! A Devil in a most gentlewoman∣like
apparition. It had been well to have pumped her. Is
she gone?
Who sir, the Gentlewoman? I put her in her coach.
Her Coach! Coaches must needs bee common,
when their carriages are so. By this light, Oliver, a Bawd; a
very Bawd. Whore's my brother Widgine, and his Gover∣nor,
Anvil! They are wholesomer company of the two,
yet.
A Bawd I Bless my Masters wits. But the best is, if
hee be mad, there's that at hand will tame him, or any man:
A fine Cooler, called Marriage, to take his bachelors button
a h•le lower! Can it bee possible? She might have been
Mother of the Maids, as well, to my seeming; or a Matron,
to have trained up the best Lady Daughters in the Country.
Here comes her Man, again.
Is sir Phillip Luckless in the house still sir?
Are you the Cock-bawd to the hen was here, ere
while sir.
Are you mad, or are you drunk sir?
C•me you to bargain for a Punk sir? Faith whore's
the meeting? Wher's the Supper? at the Bridgefoot, or the
Cat? or where is it?
Nay then sir, though your Master be allowed to mea∣sure
his manners, by his pleasure, here, on his own yard,
Isle bee bold to pull you out on it by the ears, and beat you
into better fashion.
Hold, hold. Pray hold a little sir. I cry you mercy.
I might bee mistaken. I see thou art a good fellow. I have
half a dozen for thee faith. S' foot what big words and la∣rible
action he has! Is this the Bawds language? Pray par∣don
me sir: I have been overwatched of late, and knew nei∣there
place, person, not what I said at the instant.
Indeed?
I sir, tic an infirmity I am much troubled withal;
a kind of a—between steep and waking—I know not what
to call it. I would give tvventie nobles to bee cured on it.
I pray take it not ill sir; I use any man so, when the fits on
me, till they thoroughly wake me.
What as I did now? by the ears? Are you come
to your self enough yet? or shall I help you further sir?
No, tic very well now I thank you sir. Alas I put
my Master to the pains, twice or thrice a week, I assure you,
to my grief.
A very strange disease! How might you get it?
Faith I fell into 't first, with a conceit I took for
overbuying a bargain of Drink. Your business with my
Master sir? I pray.
Only to speak with him from the Gentlewoman
was here even now.
I shall acquaint him with it.
I shall be your servant.
I pray pardon my error.
And you my boldness.
O not so sir. Well master Pimp I have a plot upon
your employment, as bravely as you carry it. I know he is
a Bawd by his out-facing. And I doe humble and disguise
my Manhood to work on him by policy: And if I put not
a fine• slur upon him for all his brave brauados, then Oliver
Pate has no brains; nor is there any difference betwixt a
Serving-man and a Pander.—
What a Trim-tram trick is this? the Master and the
Man both brain-cras'd; as the one used me, so did the other
my Mistress. But I have brought this into a kind of civil
sense again. Doe wee look like Bawds? There is some
strange ground for this mistaking. I am sure she has ever
been reputed a virtuous Gentlewoman; and has now the
government, and bringing up of a Virgin, of a most hope∣full
goodness. And I think, I know my self; and dare
beat any Man into a better construction of my quality.
Now wit, and bee thy will! Sir, my Master desires
to bee excused: for he is with some friends, on private bu∣sins,
concerning his Marriage; which is to be to morrow.
But says, if it please you to meet him in the Evening, be∣tweene
four, and five, in the great Palace; and condnuct
him to the Gentlewoman, hee will attend her with his best
service.
Between four, and five in the Palace: but how
shall I know him? I never saw him.
As I wished: But you may easily. Hee is of a come∣lie
stature; and will be in a red cloa•e and a white Feather,
Besides Isle waite on him.
I thank you sir.
Fare you well sir. Good Foist, I shall make a
Whiskin of you now, and for nothing too. I have been a
little bold with my Masters name in this answer; the know∣ledge
of which he is unguilty of. I saw how he shifted her
off: Therefore I will further bee bold both with his name
and person, which I will put upon a friend in store. My spe∣ciall
friend, Captain Anvil, a notable lecherous Tuppe:
He has been at me for a bit out of my Masters flock any
time these three weeks. Isle pleasure him with her for rea∣die
money. I know tic some cast stuff, that my Master has
done withal. And let him take what follows.
Well sir. And what said Master Luckless?
Sir Phillip you mean forsooth.
The very same sir. But I begin to call him now,
as I must call him hereafter. Ladies doe not call their hus∣bands,
as they are Knights: as sir Phillip, sir Timothy, or sir
Gregory. Did you ever hear my Lady Squelch call her hus∣band
sir Paul? No. But master Squelch. Indeed all others
must sir them by their Christen names; because they are
Knights, and to bee known from other men: only their
own wives must master them, by their Surnames; because
they are Ladies, and will not know them from other men.
But to our business. What said he to you?
His worship said forsooth—
Nay, What said you to him first? I love to hear
things in order.
I said that as you bad me forsooth.
As I bad you, Clotpoll? what was that? Shall I
ever mould thee into a Gentleman Usher think thou, that
stand so? Come forwards sir, and repeat.
My Mistress commends her best love unto your Worcester∣ship;
and desires to know how your Worship came home
last night; and how your Worship have rested; and how
your Worship dos this morning? She hopes the best of
your Worships health; and would be glad to see your Worcester∣ship
at your Worships best leisure.
This was very well: word for word as I instructed.
But did you worship him so much?
Yes truly, and hee commended me for it; and said I
showed my breeding.
Now sir. His answer? in his own words.
Quoth hee. I thank thy Mistress, and I thank thee.
Prithee commend my service to her, and tell her, my worcester∣ship
came home upon my worships Foot-cloath; my worcester∣ship
took very good rest, in my worships bed: My worcester∣ship
has very little to doe this Morning, and will see her at
my worships leisure.
Did hee say so?
It was either so, or so much I am sure. But he did not
make me repeat, as you did, till I had cond it by heart.
Well Howdy get you down. And •o you hear
Howdee? If sir Paul Squelch come, bring him up.
I will forsooth Mistress.
I bad you learn to call me Madame.
I shall forsooth Ma-dame.
You shall forsooth Madame. Tic but a day to it; and
I hope one may be a Lady one day before her time.
A day too soon • doubt in this forward age.
In the mean time, let me study my remembrances
for after marriage.
Imprimis, To have the whole sway of the house; and all
domestic affairs; as of accounts of household chardges,
placing and displacing of all servant• in general; To have
free liberty, to go on all my visits; and though my knights
occasions bee never so urgent, and mine of no moment, yet
to take from him the command of his Coach; To be in spe∣ciall
fee with his best trusted servant; nor to let one live
with him, that will not bewray all his counsels to me. To
study and practise the Art of jealousy; To fine anger, me∣lancholly,
or sickn•sse, to the life. These are Arts that wo∣men
must bee well practised in, ere they can attain to wise∣dome,
and ought to be the only study of a widow, from the
death of her first husband, to the second: From the second
to the third, matters of deeper moment; From the third to
the fourth deeper yet; And so proportionably to the sea∣uenth,
if she be so long blessed with life: But of these I may
find time hereafter to consider in order as they fall. Besides,
in all, to be singular in our will; to reign, govern, ordain
laws and break 'hem, make quarrels and maintain 'him;
profess truths, devise falsehoods; protest obedience, but
study nothing more then to make our husbands so; Con∣trole,
controvert, contradict, and be contrary to all confor∣mity:
To which end wee must be sure to be armed always
with prick and praise of the deceased; and cary the Inuen∣tory
of our goods, and the gross sum of our Dowry per∣petually
in our mouths. Then dos a husband tickle the
spleen of a woman, when she can anger him to please him;
chide him to kiss him; Mad him to humble him; make
him stiff necked to supple him; and hard-hearted to break
him; to s•t him up, and take him down, and up again, and
down again, when, and as often as we list.
Madame.
I marry, now thou say well.
Andt please your Ladyship.
Well said again.
One M. Tridewell, • Gentleman, desires to speak with
your Ladyship, from Sir Phillip.
Tridewell! O it is Sir Phillips Kinsman. I have heard
him speak much good of him; and entreated me to give
him good respect; which were enought to mar his enter∣tainment,
had I not another purpose of mine own, that may
prove as ill. Bring him up Howdee.
I will Madame—
I that was very well. This Howde• doe I mean
with a cast Gown to put in apparel, and make my Gentle∣man
Usher; Not only for the aptness of his name, to go
on my visits; but for his proportionable talent of wit and
manners.
If I can yet redeem him, he is happy. By your leave
Lady: May my boldness prove pardonable?
Sir the name of him, you come from, is warrant suf∣ficient
to make your welcome here: All that is here be∣ing
his.
Is this she trow!
I understand you come from Sir Phillip Luckless.
It is true, I brought his name thus far to enter me
to your presence. But here I shake it off, as I would doe his
remembrance: but that I know him too well.
Too well Sir? How mean you?
Too well indeed Lady; but in the ill part. I know
him to be no equal Match for you. Yet I hear you receive
him as a Suitor.
Right Sir. and him only.
It is not gone so far I hope.
Beshrew me but it is; and farther too Sir. Hee has
all wooed and won me.
Beshrew your fortune then. And if my coun•ell;
The friendliest counsel ever you hearkened to,
Stop not your venturous foot from one step further,
(For now you are upon the brink of danger)
You fall into a Sea of endless sorrows.
This is pretty!
Look back into your self; read o'er your Story,
Find the content the quiet mind you lived in,
The wealth, the peace, the pleasure you enjoyed;
The free command of all you had beneath you,
And no•e to be commanded by aboue you.
Now glance your eye on this side, on the yoke,
You bring your neck to, l•den down with cares,
Where you shall faintly draw a tedious life,
And every step encounter with new strife.
Then, when you groan beneath your burdenous charge,
And wearily chance to revert a look
Upon the price you gave for this sad thraldom,
You'll feel your heart stabbed through with many a woe,
Of which one dyes not while a thousand grow.
All will be then too late: Now is the time,
Now rings the warning bell unto your breast:
Where if you can but entertain a thought,
That tells you how you are beset with danger,
You are secu•e; Exclude it, you are lost
To endless so•rows, bought with dearest cost.
Pray Sir deal freely with me. What respect
Moves you to make this strong dissuasion?
Is it your care of me? or love of him?
A subtle question! This woman is not brainelesse.
Love of him Lady? If this can be love,
To seek to cross him, in so great a hope,
As your enjoying; being all the means,
Or possibility he has to live on;
If it be love to him, to let you know
How lewd and dissolute of life he is,
By which his fortunes being sunk, he is grown
The scorn of his acquaintance, his friends trouble,
B•ing the common borrower of the Town.
A Gallant lights not a Iobacco Pipe,
But with his bore•owing letters (shoe's not moved)
And if you put him off a fortnight longer,
Hee•l be laid up for moneys he took up
To buy his Knighthood; besides his deep engagements
To Goldsmith, Silkman, Taylor, Milliner,
Sempster, Shoemaker, Spurrier, Vintner, Tipster,
(All stirs her not, she stands as if prepared
To hear as much of truth and bear with it.)
Men of all Trades, and Occupations,
From his Mercer downward to his Waterman,
Have ventured the last sixpence on his Credit;
And all but wait to pay themselves from you.
And I may well imagine how't would grieve
A woman of your wealth, to disburse all,
To save a Knight out of his Ward in the Counter;
And lack with all his company at home;
While he frequents youthful society
To make more charge for Nurseries abroad:
For I have heard him say you are old; and that
It is your wealth he marries, ••d not you.
If this be love to him, that I discover
(The means to save you to be his undoing,)
Let no man take a friends help in hi• wooing.
And how this should proceed from care of me
Falls not into my understanding Sir.
Consid•r Lady—
Sir I have considered
Before, and in your speech, and since; and cannot
By all that can be said remove a thought.
I loved him not for words: Nor will I use
Words against yours: it were poor expression
Of love to boast it. Tic enough I know it.
Boasters of love, how can we Lovers call,
When most of such love one no more then all.
Sure, I was much mistaken in this woman.
Nor would I have you to expect a railing,
To say you basely wrong the Gentleman:
A way so common, common women use it.
But this Sir I will say, I were too blame
If I should think your love to him were less
Then the great care of me, you seem to urge,
As you pretend it is.
She will discover me.
You are his Kinseman nearly; and reputed,
By his own mouth, his best of chosen friends;
My selse an utter stranger, one from whom
You never had, or can expect least good.
And why you should, for a respect so contrary,
Call my poor wit in question to believe you,
Is most unconscionable.
Me think I stand
Like a false witness against another life,
Ready to take his punishment.
Nor will I foudly think you meant to seek,
Crossing his Match, to make it for your self:
Both for my known unworthiness; and your
Deprauing him being no possible way
To make me think the better of your worth.
Can this be she? how strangely am I taken!
But I forgive, and charitably think
All this brought no ill purpose; pretty Pageantry
Which may hereafter, among our marriage mirth,
Fill up a Scene: for now Isle take no notice.
Indeed I will not: you may, if you please,
And tell your Cousin how heinously I take it.
If thou hast mercy, Love, keep't from my heart.
Will it please you hear me?
Sir I have, enough.
And crave but leave to speak this little to you,
Which shall by heaven be uncontrolled as Fate.
If I shall find him bad, I'll blame my fortune:
Never repent or thank you for your counsel.
If I shall find him good; and all this false,
Which you so violently have urged against him;
Isle love him ne'er the more, nor you the worse:
For I am not so poor, nor weakly spirited,
That should all friends to whom my faith is bound,
Say on their knowledge, that all this were true,
And that one hours protraction of our Marriage
Should maked appear, that I would give allowance
To all their bugbear reasons, to defer
That hour the uniting of our hands: because
Our hearts are linked by the Divinest laws.
What have I done? The curse of ouer-weening brains,
Shame, and disgrace are guerdon of my pains.
O, I shall fall beneath the scorn of fools:
A punishment as just, as great for such,
That doe in things, concern them not, too much.
What ails the Gent?
O• what a settled rock of Constancy
She plants her affection? not to move,
Though all the breath of sl•nderous reproach,
Driving tempestuous clouds and storms of horror,
Should beat, at once, against it.
Sir How dee?
Ma-dame.
Not you Sir.
I would I had not seen, at least not heard her
In all so contrary to all opinion.
You are not well Sir.
They said she was old, unhandsome, and uncle•will,
Forward, and full of womanish distemper.
Shoe's none of these: but opposite in all.
Sir.
My witty purpose was to save my friend
From such a hazard; and to loath her so,
That I might make her loathsome to his fancy:
But I my self am fallen into that hazard;
To wrong my friend; to burn in lawless lo•e;
Which oh that prayers or penance may remove.
You are not going Sir?
I beg your pardon; dare not look upon you.—
Gone in a dream▪ Well, I perceive this juggling.
This strain was only to explore the strength
Of my affection to my luckless Knight.
For which, if both their Cunnings I not fit,
Let me be called the barren wife of wit.
The strangeness of this Gentleman's action will not out
of my mind yet. Sir Phillip could not but have a hand in it.
Do's he repent his bargain already; and desire to bee quit
with loss of his earnest? Tic but his faith and troth.
Sister, where are you? My Governor and I are
come to waite upon you in sir Phillip Luckless coach. It
waits at door for you; and what to doe think you?
I can not tell. Perhaps to inuit me forth into the
ayre of •ideparke or Maribone; or else—
Or else me no or elses, sister, you cannot guess it.
And I was a fool to ask you the question, now I think on it.
That was well remembered brother.
Sister, you are to be a Lady, within this half hour.
Your knight is ready, so is the Parson too. My Governor
here knows.
Yes Lady; and that hee entreats you, to bear with
the sudden•sse of the occasion, which hee protests, deeply
urges him to be married presently; desiring you not to trow∣ble
your self in examination of his reasons: for upon his
honesty and honour, the end of it is for good to you both.
Come sweet Madame (now I am bold to give you your dew
title) your knight is ready pressed on his aduontures (dee hear)
and tic only you, that hee seeks to encounter.
There's a jest now: but she understands it not.
He makes her an Infidel, a wild beast or a Monster, by that
word Encounter; what doe Knights adventurers encounter
else? look all the Mirror over. He will encounter her. O the
wit of a Governor!
Tic as I say Madame, (dee hear) the good fit's come
on him.
Ever at the tail of his dee hear, I am sure to
smell a jest: the fits come on him:
This sudden importunity confirms my former
doubt: He thinks his Scare-crow will make me keep off
now; but hee is consent. Well sir. He shall find me obedi∣ent
to his hand. I am in all prepared to meet his purposes;
Though, Brother I had thought to had conference this More∣ning
with sir Paul Squelch touching a match for you.
For me sister: have you found out a wi•e for me?
have you? pray speak, have you?
And a good match too brother; Sir Pals Niece:
on whom, hee, being childless, means to bestow a large
Dowry.
By my faith, and he may do it. Hee is rich Gouer∣nor;
one of the best Ten in the hundred men about this
Town.
Hee is a right good man. Within there.
Bid Flaps your fellow bring my Fan and Masque.
Is hee bounteous and liberal ha? Do's he make large
Suppers and lend money. Dee hear? Is he good at that?
Nay, there you mistake Governor. A good man
in the City is not called af•er his good deeds, but the known
weight of his purse. One, whose name any Usurer can
read without spectacles; One that can take up more with
two fingers and a thumb upon the Exchange, then the
great man at Court, can lift with both his hands; One that
is good only in riches, and wears nothing rich about him
but the Gout, or a thumb Ring with his Grandsites sheep∣mark,
or Grannams butter-print on it, to seal bags, acquit∣tanc•s
and Counternanes.
A Butter-print?
I it were a cunning Herald could find better Arms
for some of 'hem: though I have heard ••r Paul Squelch
protest he was a gentleman, and might quarter a coat by his
Wives side. Yet I know hee was but a Grassier when he left
the Country; And my Lord his father whistled to a team
of horses (they were his own indeed.) But now hee is
right worshipful, and I would I had his Niece vnsight and
unseen I faith for her monies sake. You never heard me
ask if she were fair or handsome, dee mark that sister?
My fathers rule right. And if I be not a true Widgine. (God
forgi' me) I think he was none.
But she is very fair brother, and very hansom•
and the prettiest innocent country thing withal. Doe I
want nothing here?
I now you bring me to bed sister.
Your Masque sits well forsooth.
But whore's my Wimple forsooth?
Upon the Cupboards head, pray Humfrey fetch it.
Hee lives not that loves a Country thing like me▪
Alas none loves a Country thing l•ke me. And though I
am a Cockney, and was never further then Hammersmith;
I have read the Country mans common wealth; and can dis∣course
of Soccage and Tenure, Free-hold, Copy-hold; Lease,
Demeans, Fee-simple and Fee-taile, Plowing, Hedging,
Diking, Grubbing, occupying any Country thing whatso∣ever;
and take as much pleasure in it, as the best Clown
borne of 'h•m all.
And she is very young, 〈◊〉 aboue fifteen, brother.
How this fellow stays! Go you.
And that's a safe age for a Maid in the country: dee
hear?
Pardon me Governor. I doe hear and not hear
thee at this time.
And sings, and speaks so pretty northenly they say.
Is she Northern (dee hear) will she not shrink
in the wetting?
Governor, I know thou spokst a jest now, by thy
dee hear: but prithee forgive me; I cannot applaud nor
mark thee at this time.
What make•s you stay so? I fear you have been
among my sweet meats.
She said it was upon the Cupboard; and it was
under the Cupboard.
Is this my Wimple? Doe you bring Carpenters
tools to dr•sse me withal.
Here is your Wimple forsooth.
I sh•ll teach you to know a difference between
gentlewoman's gear and Carpenters tools. I shall
Nay, she is so vexed now I Dear sister to the Coun∣trey
Lass again. You said, she spoke and sung Northernly.
I have a great many Southern songs already. But Northern
airs nips it dead. York York for my money.
Yes brother she is Northern, and speaks so: for
she has ever lived in the Country, till this last week, her
Uncle sent for •er up to make her his child, cut of the Bish∣oprick
of Durham.
Bishop, nor Bishopric shall hold her from me.
And brother—
S•ster no mo•e, though I have never seen her.
No Bishopric in the land from me shall win her. If you
will go, and clap hands with your knight, come; I would
see you matched first: because that will add some honour
to the Widgine•, when my self shall bee brother to a Lady.
I shall write first of that name. And then am I no sooner
married, Governor, but wee will set our travels a foot: to
know Countries, and Nations, Sects and Factions, Men and
Manners; Language and Behaviour.
And so in height of complement grow complete
More goes to making of a Man, the• meat.
Pray tell me; and tell me truly. What is the most
has past between you? I• it bee the maine loss of your
Mayden-head, it shall near go further: the•before let me
know it.
As I live Mistress Trainewell, all that ere he had o'me
was but a kiss. But I mun tell ye, I wished it a thoosnnd,
thoosand till him.
How often have you seen him?
Feath but that bare eance another, and your seln
were by too. Trow ye that Id not tell ye and it were maer.
By my conscience Mrs. Trainewell I lee not.
That once that I saw him with you, your V•cle
was there, too, in the Orchard, but last week.
Vary true, Mine Uncle was than by too. And hee
brought sir Phillip to see his Orchard. And what did hee
than doe, trow you, but tuke me thus by the haund, and thus
hee kust me; hee sed I were a deft Lass: but there he fiend.
But for my life I could not but think, he war the likest man
that I had seen with mine eyne; and could not devaise the
thing I had, might be vnbeggen by him. Then by and by as
we walked, he asked mine Uncle, gin hee would give him me
to make a Lady till him. And by my troth Mistress Trainwell,
I lee not, I blushed and luk'd upon him as I would feine a head
it so: Mine Uncle said yes, and sir Phillip shuke my haund,
and good feath my heart joyed at it. God gin the Priest had
been by. But I thought all sure enough; and would not have
sold my part for the Spanish Ladies Ioincture. But straight
anon mine Uncle and he fell on other talk, of Lords and La∣dies,
and many found like things, I minded not: For I is weell
sure, this kept me waking ere sine. And God pardon me
what I misthought every hour in the night.
How have you made me wrong this Gentleman, to
challenge him as if hee had been your due upon this idle
complement? when I undertook the Message, I presumed
(for so your words did intimation•e to me) you had been sure,
as fast as faith could bind you, man and wife. Where was
my discretion? Now I perceive this was but common
Courtship; and no assurance of a Marriage promise.
I wot not what he meant. But I is weell sure, Isle ne'er
bee sure to any Man but hee. And if hee love me not as
weell, God pardon him. For I meant him none ill.
I know not how to counsel or comfort you, until I
hear him speak. My man tells me, hee appointed him to
meet, and bring him to you about this hour. Poor heart I
pity thee. Before thou come to half my years thou wilt
forget to love half so truly.
Mistress.
O, are you come? whore's the Knight?
He stays below, and wild me to come up first, to
to make his passage clear and secure.
That was discretion.
Rather fear I think: for he asked me if the house
were not much haunted with Roarers or Swaggerers, pone∣arts
and pistols: whether there were not an Assurer for it as
upon the Exchange, as i• his life were upon hazard? when∣there
a Man might come on without loss of credit, and off
without need of a Surgeon? Much odd talk hee delivers;
that in my conceit betrays, at once, both a •asciuious and
cowardly disposition; and upon my understanding, ca•not
bee so generous, or nobly spirited, as hee is received. Doe
what you will.
I suspect something.
Will hee not come Mrs. Trainewell?
Yes sweetheart. But go you to your Chamber
and let me have a word before you see him. Go call him in.
Doe so swetheart. Isle not be long.
Isle doe ought you bid me God gin I saw him
eance.
A place of fair promising! How have I lived that
never discovered this place before? This place royal! But
sought my recreation, in by-lanes, and sluttish corners, uncle∣uory
Allies and Ditch sides? when here the whole house is
perfumed: An Earl might think it his own lodging;
Ladies might come to see the pictures, and not blush, to go
in or out unmasked.
Sir, will you speak to my Mistress? The man is
transported sure!
I understand thy office, leads thee no further; thy
pains are abroad and below stayres. Here honest Fetch.
Look thee, here is the poor price of a new pair of shoes;
take it. Descend, and execute thy duty.
Bless me! this is another man. More abuse yet?
Now gentlewoman to you. What fees belong to
your Key? Come, vvher's the bed? vvhere's the party?
Here's the man: her•'s the money. Chunk chunk you old
Gamester, dost hear? Here's half a piece to buy t•ee com∣plection,
sack or Aqua-vitae. What thou lik'st.
What are you sir I pray?
Faith one thats a little ill given at this time. Whore's
the ••ec? here are the pieces • tell thee.
What piece sir? If you can imagine what you are,
where you are, what you would have, or where you would
be, I pray tell me sir. •le doe the best I can to satisfy you.
Of my discretion will I sir.
Give me but a little space to wonder at thy strange
demands and I will tell thee, good discretion. If I should pur∣chase
a broken Cock•comb, or bruised ribs now, for mista∣king
another mans habit, the smart were only mine. The
villain swore to me, his Master was sent for; and that his
Master swore this w•s a Bawd to his choice Whore, newly
entertained; and that she knew not him, and might well
mistake me for him. On which presumption I ha•e waded
thus far: and if I stick in the Mud, or be driven back by
a tempest, I am armed. Tic not the first time I have been
Weatherbeaten, or Dry-beaten, dee hear?
Sir.
You doe not know me? or, at least, not remember
me?
If I art therein sir, I hope your pardon. For as
you shall reveal your self, I shall either repent me of my
oblivion, or accuse you of vnaduisednesse.
She speaks like the wife of an Orator, that could
dictate her husbands speeches! Were not you this More∣ning
at sir Phillip Luckless lodging? spoke not you with
him? sent you not for him afterwards to repair hither to
the party? And know you not the man?
O infinite abuse! Sir I cry you mercy. I hope you
will pardon my weak sightednes. The worlds •ad and we
love to deal securely. Could not your worship make your
self known sooner? Please you to entertain you self
here a while, I will instantly provide for your better well∣come.
O horrible indignity! But if Porters and cudgels
may be had for money, and I fit you not, let me loose my dis∣creation.
I am furnished with blankets already.—
I will instantly provide for your better welcome!
Will you so? Twill pass: and by this light I think for my
Masters jest: I will recover my chardges, and gain over
and aboue for three returns more with the bare repetition
of it out of one ma•s pu•se, the Widgine. My jests are his nu∣triment;
and my wit is his own•, he pays so duly for it. If
the Wench be but pleasing, now, •o my expectation, my fe∣licity
is crowned.
O child, wee are undone.
Mary, God shield Mrs. Trainewell. Is hee geane?
Must I not see him?
A lass it is not he: but some Villain s•ned by him to
vex and spite you. One that persuades himself, we are of
those common creatures▪ that sell their honesties.
Heaven bliss vs, and give vs leave to dee first. Can
he be so vnkaind, to scorn me so, Woe i• me.
He is so dishonourable. But I wi•• fit his Vnderta∣kerr,
what ere he bee. Look you, is that he think you?
O Weell a near Mistress Trainewell! Sir Phillip is
the likest man that ere you saw days of your life. This Lo∣zell
dow not. Nor would he send him. So trim a Man can∣not
have •eke bad purpose.
Mistress, theres a Gentleman, one Master Tridewell,
that says he is sir Phillips Kinseman, will by all means speak
with him.
Sweet heart, can you dissemble your sorrow with a
Song, to pass a little time? Isle down and sift out the sub∣tlety
of this deceit.
There is no government under the Sun, like the
politic government of a Bawdy-house.
You say my Love is but a Man.
But I can find more odds.
Twixt him and others then I can,
find between him and Gods.
H• has in's eye
such Majesty.
His shape is so divine.
That were I Owner of the world.
Hee only should be mine.
Sweet prolog•e to the ensuing Intertude• 
Dost hear me honest fellow? was this the Parties voice?
Only hers upon my sincerity sir.
Excellent! She has raised my desire aboue her
notes. Why am I th•s ravished, and yet delayed?
Sir, for that my Mistress craves your Pardon. Tic
not her neglect, that works upon your patience; But the
necessity to rid a troublesome Lord or two out of the house,
be•ore the Party can appear to you. But please you to obe∣sucre
your self in this dark Cl•set, while I convey them
hence, and then, instantly, the top Gallant of pleasure shall
crown your Maine-mast, she says.
O how her wit and care revives me! From hence
forth she is my Bawd for ever. My discretion! But are
they wholesome Lords Sirah?
Tic no matter for any thing they did here sir, I war∣rant
you. Inquickly pray si•.
Must I be locked in?
You cannot be safe else sir.
The politic government of this little common
wealth!
Indeed Lady, I am so far from being in any plot
herein, that I protest it was merely by his outside, and that
in the do•btfull light of the Evening, that I could guess
it was hee. An• had he been denied, I had gone well satis∣fied,
it had been some other man. Which if it prove, and so
his name be abused—Or if it be he indeed, though hitherto
my most respected Cousin, that offers such an outrage, as you
deliver it to be: I am so much a friend to honesty, that let me
but see the man or beast, Isle doe the fair office of a Gentle∣man
to right you. Indeed Lady I will.
You profess nobly sir. First will it please you, see
this Gentlewoman; so much the servant of your Kinsman?
What she is I have told you. Only I present her to your
judgment, whether her outward seeming may d•s•rue such
scorn?
Alas fair Lady, would they injure you?
Yea feath, and scorn me too sir. Ill betide them.
But and you doe me help, and ma' sir Phillip love me, God
reward you.
And has your youth and b•auty placed your love on
him?
Good •eath sir, I may not say how well I love him:
But were I one of near •a mickle, heest even have all. And
yet he loves me not.
Indeed tic pitiful. Weep not sweet Lady. He shall
love ye.
Now Gods benison light o'yee for it.
Show me the mischief, that hath abused vs all. Can
you conceal him longer?
In thus much▪ to conjure you by your Manhood;
to doe nothing that law may question, to your, or our
disuantage: we shall not need,
For our own •ight, to doe our selves misdeed. There∣fore
take this in hand.—
You doe instruct me well. Pray let me see him.
Oh for a large Window, one of the last edition, to
leap out with half my life or limbs.
Lo ye lo ye, the worst like man to Sir Phillip ye
saw in all your days.
Mischievous Devil! What magical madness con∣iur'd
you i•to this shape?
Indeed Isle conjure you out on it.
Oh hold: for heavens sake hold. Isle confess.
Nay, indeed Isle beat you a little first, you'll confess
the better. Twill come the easier from you. Tic a good
preparati•e.
Oh! oh, isle co•f•sse any thing.
No sir, n•t any thing. But the truth the truth sir.
The truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth 〈◊〉 h•lp me—
You would be sweari•g now would you? there's for
th•t.
No indeed, indeed, and indeed la I will not.
Go•d sir no more. What may this poor thing bee,
that br••' it •o bu• n•w?
Isle t•ll you Lady. The most notorious, base, beat•n
Rascal ••out the Town. It were l•st breath to say more by
him. H•e is as you see▪ Only is name is Anvil: and they
that know him not, call •im Cap•aine.
Anvil? Pray sit let me try in▪ blade on him too.
I pray thee doe, to lave me a l•bore: for hee is not
h•lf• b•at•n yet.
Oh, oh. Ladies speak for me. have you no mercy?
Hold. No more.
Well sir, thank the Ladies. Now sir, put this La∣dies
favour here in your p•cket; and keep it there till I call
f•r it. And mark what I say, if ever I find thee without
this Instrument or the like, when I shall call for it, to beat
the• (mark me) indeed •le •eat thee 〈◊〉. And now to
your •xamination. How got your rotten Mutton ship into
this Lyo•s case? was it by the Owners knowledge? was
the Master of these Clothes privy to your undertaking?
Answer• sirah, bonafide, I or no.
No upon my life; only his Man abused me for my
Mo•ey.
What presumption made you think so vilely of
the•e Ge•tlewomen?
Sir Phillips own words to his Man, upon a letter
this Lady delivered to him this Morning.
The Error's found. Her name you say is Constance,
which likewise is the name of a prostituted Strumpet, with
whom, tic thought, the wantonness of his youth hath held
former familiarity; and now it seems makes doubt, image∣ning
that letter to be hers, that she pretends a claim to him.
Right sir: which hee took so contemptuously,
that instantly he resolved to mary the Widow, Mistress Fit∣chow;
and was this Morning married privately in a Cham∣ber,
within an hour after you saw him.
And I undone than.
And I if it bee so.
It is undoubtedly true. I saw them married, and di∣ned
with them, at his lodging, where they will sup too: But
after S•pper they go to her house in the Town to bed.
This foe•le mistaking we shall all repent; if we pre∣u•ned
not what may issue from it.
Alas sir all will be too late.
Will you but trust my service for your honour?
Wee will waite on you sir.
Then Sir for this time you shall be reprieved,
•rome further penance: Rise and be our Guide.
But ke•pe your fear still: for if all out art
Miscarry, thou art sure to share the smart.
Brother Hum•rey, take my hand and word for thy
instructions. I will acquaint thee with an old Ladies Usher,
in the Strand, that shall give thee thy Gait, they Postures, thy
Language, thy Habit, and thy whole chardge in so plain• a
Method, that thou shalt instantly start up as pretty a Gen•le∣man
Usher, none dispraised as any between Temple-bar
and Charing-crosse; mary further I cannot promise you•
B•t prithee tell me. Is our Lady of so hot a temper and
stately carriage as she is reputed?
O I brother. She must command all, or all shall
smoke for it. She did so in my old Masters days I a• 〈◊〉.
And hee glad of peace at that rate too.
But how is she to her servants? Bountiful and free?
Y•s both of her voice, and han•s.
She will not strike will she?
And she could bite as well, the rankest Jade that ere
was curried could not come neat her.
Heaven be good to vs! she ne'er struck thee, did she?
Tic no matter for that.
Nay brother, you know we have vowed to be all one:
the Marriage hath united vs. Prithee tell me.
She broke me a tooth once with a deaths Head∣ring
on her finger? it had like to have cost me my life! 't has
b•en a true Memento to me ever since: bobs of the lips,
tweakes by the nose, cuffs of the ear, and trenchers at my
head in abundance.
Will she throw too?
Any thing she can lift. and makes vs pay for all she
bre•kes, though she break our heads or races withal.
Fan-handles, Look•ng-glasses or any thing.
Wee shall have a foul h• use on it I fear• But since it
is too •ate, fight Dog, fight B•are. Isle turn my Master
loose to her. Here they come. By this light me thinks they
look as if they were fallen out already.
Though I were absent at the Ceremony, I now
bring my wishes of much joy.
And not too late I hope sir Paul. Wee may yet
c•rry them to bed with vs▪
You had been chiefly sir invited, had we not stolen
a day fr•• Time, to have done a• others part at Church,
to which 〈◊〉 yo•r absence, I entreated our worthy friend Mr:
App •he•zion Bulfi•ch •ere.
M•st•r Bulfinch, I rejoice t• meet you here directly.
Look you sir. Doe you know this young Gentleman?
Yes sure, methinkes I should know him. But I am
sure I never saw him before. ha—
Have you forgot sir Hercules?
I apprehend him to be Master Salom•• Nonsense, Son
and Heir to my right worthy friend, sir Hercules Nonsense
of Cornwall. If you be not hee sir. I am sure it is you. I m•y
bee deceived, but I am certain tic hee.
Hee is doubtful, but yet hee is sure hee knows
him. What a Bulfinch is this I sure tic his language they call
bull-speaking.
You say very well sir. And never credit me as you
knew my Father, I would be very ready, as you know how
duty binds: for because it is a usual thing in these days,
desiring the love and friendship, I protest and vow sir. I
sh•uld—
Most perfect Nonsense! this is a finer youth then
tother. My wives acquai•tance are most answerable to her
Kin•red.
Tic so dir•ctly Master Bulfinch, and I have brought
him to Town—I vnderst•nd my N••ce is in your house,
my Lady Bride. Is she employed in your Chamber?
She is not here sir. Is she Howdee?
Certes no Ma-dame.
How! not here? Sir•h what did you tell me?
What shall I say or doe? 〈…〉 hanged directly.
How was she accompanied?
By my Mist•is sir, and 〈◊〉 Gentlemen of her ac∣quaintance,
whose names I know not.
Kmuery, Villainy and •he•very! • s••ll it rank.
Shoe's stolen, shees gone directly.
Tic indirectly sir if she bee stolen. There your
word fails you.
If she bee in the land I will recover her, I hope I
shall find 〈◊〉 much right in Law, as a Broker or a Joiner.
Good sir Paul, I have not seen you thus d••••m∣perd.
What a•flicts you?
Oh Mistress Fitchow, my Niece, my Niece.
Hoe's mad I think. Sir you forget my sister is a
lady.
Shoe's is lost, shoe's stolen, and all my joy is gone.
My Niece my Constance.
Constance!
Who your young Niece that came la•y•• out of the
Country?
My Country thing sister, that you promised me?
Promised you? I am abused. I doe suspect you ac∣cessaries.
Sir I have purposed and promised her to this
Gentleman. And here I charge you to restore her me.
Are you the Man si• that must have her?
Never credit me sir, if I have her, or have her not
to my knowledge.
Sir Phillip, you are courteous and noble: as you
will continue so in opinion of honest men, let me have right.
Sir Paul, upon my faith I am ignorant of any such
wrong. And, for her part, should she fare amiss, I should
suffer in her injury equally with your self: for I profes••• to
you, I did love the Lass so well; and at the first sight, that
had I not been otherwise allotted, and indeed contracted to
her, from whom now there is no starting, she should have
been my Bride, if all my love and fortune might have
won her.
Had you spared this Protestation, Sir, you might have
dissembled your love to me the better.
Dissemble?
Tic said sir.
By this hand my Laddie's jealous already.
Bless vs! what looks are these!
Sir I must take my leave, this is no time to trouble
you.
Nay good sir stay, and share in our ill Banquet.
Hark, some friend I hope. Look firah.—
Some of your old companions have bro•light you a
sit of Mirth. But if they enter to make a Tavern of my
house, isle add a voice to their consort shall drown all their
fiddling. What are they?
Some that come in gentile fashion to prese•e a Mask.
Locke up the doors, and keep them out.
Break them open and let them in—
Shall I not bee Master of my own house?
Am not I the Master of i• and you—
Nay sister.
Passion of my heart.
Bu••. Madame, Madame.
you must allow of reasonable things.
Be contented, sir Phillip in a noble Gentleman, and
a Courtier, and as I apprehend.
I dare warrant you sister these are of his friends,
that come with their Loves to congratulate his fortune.
Speak Master Nonsense. A speech of your would do it.
Never credit me, but I for sooth am of that opinion,
that it is as it were. I protest and vow—I should be as sor∣rye
as any Man.—
It this were to bee put into latin now. Which
were the principal Verb.
M. Nonsense, you have preuaid. You see Jam content.
But what I purpose, Fate shall not prevent.
Did I not tell you.
More lights, and let them enter. Gentlemen take
your places. Sir Paul to night forget your sorrow. So will
I mine, though I renew • tomorrow. Come sit sit. M•stress
please you.
You wrong your honour sir, your most humble
Hand-maid.
Brother I told you always she had hasty humours,
and as unreasonable as heart can wish: but soon over. Now
shoe's as mild as any Dove again.
Then wee are friends; and shoe's my Dove again.
Nor Love, •or Fate dare • accuse,
For that my Love did mere •use;
But oh mine own unworthiness,
That durst presume so mickle bliss.
It was too much for me to lou•
A Man, so like the Gods aboue;
An Angels shape, a Saint-like voi•e,
Are to Divine for Humane choice.
Oh had I wishly go•'n my heart,
For to have loved him but in part;
Sought only to enjoy his face;
Or any one peculiar Grace
Of Foot, of Hand, of Lip, or Ey,
I might have lived where now I dye.
But I presuming all to choose
Am now c•domned all to loose.
Tic well performed. Now we would gladly know.
To whom we owe our thanks.
That Isle deliver to you. Mean while the rest de∣sire
they may withdraw a while.
Light and all fair respect be given unto them.—
The Women's voice had much in it like my Niece.
•our No•ce sir Paul, odds me I must go see her.
Nay brother give them all their free pleasures. By
your leave you shall stay.
〈◊〉 sh•ll? I will then.
Now to your 〈◊〉 I disclose my self.
Whoo• 〈◊〉 Gouer•our: Look you sister.
Look you 〈◊〉 •hillip. Did nor I always tell you he was
the 〈◊〉 wit •the world? This was his own inven∣tion
•e bee hanged else. Sweet Governor the conceit of
the Willow, and why tho• wear it?
My self, only to make the number in the Dance
suitable. And so did all the rest to fulfil the fashion, only two
excepted, that were the Leaders and subject of the Dance.
The one, your Cousin Tridewell, who holds himself a lost
Lover, in that you Madame to whom his affection is wholly
devoted, have made your self incapable of him, in being
the lawful right of another. This paper shows him more
at large.
First possible! Did hee for that so earnestly dissuade
me from her this Morning?
I never saw him before this day, nor he me. These
are tricks and studied fooler•es to abuse me—
Who was the other.
She was your fair Niece sir Paul; the most dis∣consolate
Beauty that ere I saw, giving her self for ever lost
unto your love sir Phillip, presuming you once promised her
Marriage, of which she made a claim this Morning by her
Nurse, whom you reviled by name of Bawd, calling fair
Constance Whore; and to her more despite, hastened your
Marriage sooner by • day, then you before intended with
this Lady.
Constance! May that name in all other women bee
accursed beyond themseLucs. Hell it self could not have
vapor'd such an error forth, as I am lost in. Constance! why
was that name made her•, that Saint-like Maids, when it
brought to my mind a Devils, nay worse, a Whores? to
whom before was given.
Sir Phillip, and Madame, you apprehend these things
as things done, when they are not things indeed, but as it
were show and devise, as by the sequel you may at large
apprehend.
I am of your mind Master Bulfinch. And trust me I
am glad my Niece was drawn into the witty conceit. For
which with a new Gown he thank her.
Where is she? I will endure no longer till I see
her.
The Masquers are all gone sir.
Gone Will•in.
They took their Co•ches instantly, and disperse•t
themseLucs by 〈◊〉 ways, I had no Commission to stay
them.
Are you so sensible of her loss?—
My Niece might not withstanding her lost love
have tan me home in her Coach.
You shall have mine sir Paul and my company so
far to see her; and whether their presentation were jest
or earnest, I will not rest till I be satisfied; My Coach. •le
make no stay S•eet-heart. Shoe's gone.
Excellent! the Bride's stolen to bed.
It should be so. I like the custom well.
• or if you apprehend it rightly, it expresses duty
in the Woman to lye prepared for him; and love in the
Man, not to be slack to •mbrace that duty.
A p••tty M•r•ll• A Women's duty to lye down,
and a Mans love to get up. One may learn something of
these old fellows every day.
Therefore no Coach, no Company noble Knight.
Pursue your home occasions, and God g•'yee joy.
Nay sir Paul. I protest.
Not a word more of it directly.
Take me with you good sir Paul to see your Niece.
I find Master Nonsense here very indifferent, And I know
•will be the great•r •oy to her to match but into the family
of sir Phillip, of which I am a half Pill•r now. Besides
my sister made me half a promise of her in good saith, my
•over•ours my Witness, and I have loved her ever since.
But you never saw her face.
No, but isle bee hanged if I did not love her Visor
the best ere while, though I cou•d not tell whose it was, nor
which was which.
Good Master Water Widgine, this is no time of night
to dive into business of this depth. It is Nestling time I
take it. How think you Master Bull•inch.
I apprehend it to be past 12• Clock very near.
Therefore what your sister hath promised you, let
her perform if she can; mean time this Gentleman is my
choice: come Master Nonsense, you have had a long time of
silence. Master Bull•inch.
I apprehend you sir.
Weell, ••e you to the Gate by your leave Ex Omnes.
What has she written here? It is the same hand I
read in the Morning.
I am not your c•unterfeit, or unchaste Constance; But that on∣lie
Constance, that truly love you, and that will, if you live not
for me, die for you. Oh that• could at any price or penance
now redeem one day! Never was hasty Match sooner
repented.
Hoe's me• cholly me thinks. Slid my sister may
lye long enough languishing for a Ladyship, if this fit hold
him: for she has it not really till he go to bed and •u• her.
Will you not go to bed sir? wee waite for your
p•ints.
I will. But is it time? Brother, would you would
doe me the favour to inquire.
Yes, isle go see for the Posits sake.—
Captain, deal fairly with me. By what mean•s
joined you with this society? or how grew so soon your
trust or great acquaintance with them?
Without offence isle tell you. You know this More∣ning
at your Lodging, there past some words betwixt me,
and your sullen Kinsman, Master—indeed la, Tridewell, and
from him too much indeed for me, a professed Soldier to
bear: But the place protected him. Till after upon m•∣ture
consideration I made after him for satisfaction, thus
armed as you see. Purposing with this Ropes end to right
me; and to maintain that right with this sword, which I
thank Mars never yet failed me; as it hath well been mani∣fested
by the effusion of much unworthy blood of my abu∣sers,
in France, Spain, Italy, Poland, Sweden, Hungary, all
parts of Germany.
Good Captain travel not so far in your relation:
but come home again to the business.
I have used it in some score or two of Sea fights too
by the way.
But to the matter Captain; where met you my
Cousin?
The first sight I recovered of him, was as he was en∣tring
the house of the greasy Knight there, what call you
him?
Sir Paul Squelch?
Squelch, I a pox squelch him. I waited a quarter of
an hour at his door, for your Kinsman; and longer I would
not, had he been Kinsman to the Emperor, and my Enemy.
Therefore in I went, told Master Tridewell in his ear, my
coming was to call him forth, to dischardge the office of
a Gentleman with his Sword, in answering those wrongs
wherewith I held my reputation wounded. Was it not
well, ha? Could a poor Gentleman say more? and that in
civil fashion very privately in respect of the company,
not showing any the least distemper, in look or gesture.
But the Women read presently in his countenance the
whole matter; and briefly by their pretty persuasion I
took ordinary satisfaction of him.
What was that Captain?
Why hee confess•'d hee wronged me, was sorry for it,
and so forth. What should we speak more on it. This you
must not speak of neither. You must promise me that of
your honour, as you desire to hear what follows: I
love no ripping up old so•res.
Not a word I, Captain upon my word. What a
Rascals this! to the point good Captain.
Then thus sir? I soon perceived, their dressed to ap∣peas,
&amp; win me to their friendship was for my assistance,
and indeed to bear the• out in this nights work, the
Mask. The whole plot of all which was merely to so we
dissention between you and your new married Lady, to
work if they can a separation, before carnal copulation, in
which if they can prevail, and that the dislike continue be∣tweene
you to that height, that a divorce be required equal∣lie
by the consent of you both, your Marriage then is frustra∣ted,
and you stand in stat• quo prim dee hear. So your Cousin
Tridewell may lawfully pursue his hopes in your Bride, whō
he loves as eagerly as the melancholy virgin dotes on you.
But may this hold good in Law Captain?
There's a Ganon for it Sir. If both parties agree to
a divorce after Marriage, so it be before Copulation.
Though the former part of his discourse, was a
most egregious lye, yet the last hath some sound of pleasure
in it: which I may make use of.
Come gi'me the instrument. Shall I never find thee
any where, but thou wilt by just desert exact a beating from
me? Hast thou no conscience? would thou have me lame
my self, or melt my grease upon thee. Come Sir, I have
ouer-heard you all; give me the Instrument, the instrument
I say. Indeed I'll have it. So. Now Sir—
Nay Cousin, for the service hee hath done you to
night, and love of me, pardon him this time. Besides, his
charge is in the house, at whose charge he lives. You will
both shame and undo him.
Well Sir, I shall for this time pardon you, and never
beat you more, it before Sir Phillip here you will subscribe to
this. Tic nothing but a faithful protestation to do reasonable
things as I shall appoint, and not to reveal what I shall trust
you withal.
If you will covenant on your part in defence of my
reputation, to let me rail at you behind your back, I will
subscribe▪
Take your pleasure. I am content. Write Sir.
In what without a Knave we cannot end,
A Knave employed do's the o•fice of a friend.
Here Sir, I deliver it as my deed.
Here, and I deliver you this again to keep. Indeed
you shall for performance of covenants.
Oh Sir you are defeated. My sister hath fortified
her lodging with locks, bolts, bars, and barricados.
To what •nd brother: for what cause?
I know not whither it be discontent or wilfulness,
that possesses her: but you are to have no entrance there to
night. That she has suificiently sworn.
Good.
How! am I denied? To my wish.
Pray let me speak with you Sir.
At large you shall. For though it bee my wedding
night you shall be my Bedfellow. Lights there. Good night
brother.
Good night Captain.
How now Goue•nor? what has angerd thee?
something troubles thy countenance.
Your coming, and the privilege of this place hath
once more preserved that unworthy Tridewell from the ju∣stice
of my fury, which should have fallen on him, had he bin
tu•nd with me by this light.
By this light, Governor? would you have fought
by Candle•light.
Sir I dare do it by day light, Moone-light, Star-light.
Ow'e-light.
Any light under the S•nne. And that shall bee tried
well on Tridewel• head, dec hear?
A good jest! Tried well upon Tridewell. He has
wit in his anger. But Governor, laying your anger aside,
let me be behol•en to your wit in achieving this Northern
Lass. Thy acquaintance with her must be the means. Pri∣thee
go lye with me, and help me to dream •ut some
course. Nay look now thy fury blows so high thou dost
not hear me.
Not h•are? ye•, were I in a Combat as great as
ever I my self fought any, I could both hear, and give
counsel. Therefore say unto your self, by the help of your
Governor she is your own.
O Man past example!
But dee hear?
Here, here. Thou shalt have anything—
Come your ways huswife. No more of your why∣nings,
and counterset tricks. If this Gentleman be not worthy
of your love, I am not worthy to be your Uncle•e, directly.
Alas, what mean you sir.
Accept of him, you accept of me. if you refuse him
you deny me directly.
She understands you not a word sir.
If you will join hands and faith with him, Here's
your portion, there's your ioincture; if not, your way lies be∣fore
you, pack directly.
Good sir, consider her disease. If her understanding
were direct, you might speak directly to her. But if I have
any discretion she is too full of melancholy to be purged this
way.
What would you have me doe? Or how in your dis∣creation
would you council me?
Not to be mad sir, because she is melancholy, not by
taking a wrong course for her recovery to ruin her, and forfeit
your judgment Doe you think, that commands with chidings,
threats, or stripes have power to work upon her, when she
has neither will nor reason within her self to doe, or not to
doe anything whatsoever.
Now the g•gs up.
If her health in sense and understanding were perfect:
yet as she is Woman, her will were first to be wrought upon
by fair and gentle treaty. But as she is at this time so sick in
mind, that knowledge of what she i•, what she do•, especi∣ally
of what she should doe is dead in her, her Mind must bee
first recovered; and that by a due course, in soft and temperate
proceedings; to which fit time as well as means must bee •i∣lovved.
Moreover—
Oh. No moreouers I besee•h you, not more of her
at this time. I understand your purpose already. I doe directly.
Therefore speedily take what course, and use what means shall
in your discretion be thought fit. I will subcribe, I will direct∣lie
〈◊〉 to your descry•ion. My wise when thee went out
of the wo•l• le•t me as great a c••e behind her in the charge
she gave me with this Woman, this quick fighted Guide of
my house, a blind one were better.
You should first see, if it pleased you, how her affecti∣on
may b•e wrought upon by the Gentleman's own fair in∣treaty.
Pray sir speak to her like a Su•er, look upon him
Sweet heart: This Gentleman loves you. Pray speak sir. Doe
you not?
N•for credit me pretty Gentlewoman—
Nor will I, fear it not. Nor any man that says hee
loves me. For alas! I was too lately sco•n'd.
You are a L•sse indeed. I pro••st and vow, and such •
•no, as I would bee very ••rry to appear any way, or in the
least 〈◊〉, as it were please you to understand me: for Isle be
sworn, •he•e is not in the World.
Truth in swearing, less in promising.
If you will believe me Lady.
Nor no man for your sake.
There is not in the world I say—
I say so too sir. What wast I pray.
There is not in the world any Gentlewoman—
Tell that no further; for wee are all too gentle lessen
men were less cruel.
Hear him speak Constance.
You shall hear me sing first by your leave.
Poor heart.
Here's wise work! direct ••nacy and Ideotismc.
Bless my house from the Ward Masters Informers,
Pray sir, are you sir Phillip?
Say you are.
Yes Lady, I am sir Phillip.
But you are none of my Sparrow. Your mouth's not
wide enough for your words.
She has stopped his mouth there.
His words would soften Adamantine ears.
And looks would melt a Marble hey•t to tears. O Wea is me!
Nay you must not weep Swe•t-heart.
What 〈◊〉 I doe them? Shall I ever get him by singing
trow ye? In truth I would never but sing, if I thought that
were the gainest way.
I had rather hear you sing though, then see you weep.
It must bee of my Love than, my Sparrow as I told
you. And thus it goes.
A bonny bonny Bird I had
A bird that was my Marroe:
A bird whose pastime made me glad,
And Phillip it was my Sparrow.
A pretty play-fere: Ch••p it would,
And hop, and fly to fist,
Keep• •ut, as • were a Vsur•rs Gold,
And bill me when I list.
Phillip, Phillip, Phillip it cries
But hee is fled and my loy dyes.
But were my Phillip combed a gain,
I would not change my Love
For Iuno's bird with gaudy train,
Nor yet for Venus Dove.
Nay, would my Phillip come again,
I would not change my state,
For his great Name sakes wealth of Spain,
To be another Mate.
Phillip Phillip, &amp;c.
No no, you cannot be the Man. I know him right weel by
you sir, as w•lie as you be. Gin you had all his trim gear up∣on
you, and all his sweets about you, yet I should not bee so
fond to mistake a Ienny How let for a Tasse• Gentle. Ah, ah, ha.
Why Lone, what foul• doe you find in this Gentle∣man?
Feath, but even eane. That her is not •ir Phillip. For
thus would hee doe. Thus would hee kiss his hand; and thus
to me by mine. Thus would hee look, and set his eye on
mine: And give me lea•• to see my self in's eye•. It was the
best Glass in truth that ere I saw. I ne'er look weell fine. Nor
ere shall ime sure, until I see me there again.
But hee is give, alas hoe's geane, and all too late I sorrow.
For I shall never bee well again, till yesterday be to marow.
God you good Even sir.—
•ollow her sir.
And put her to it sir, and out of this humo•. Isle add
the tother five hundred to her portion, and you bring her about
handsomely. O when I was a Bachelor! I think I can doe
somewhat yet in my old days. But when I was a Bachelor,
how I could have handled this gear.
Never credit me sir, if you will believe me but—
I doe believe you sir sufficien•lie good Master Nonsense.
No more of your impertinent spies•es. But follow her, and
put her to• I say, to• directl•. Take her into the Orchard•
•as there she fell in love they say It may bee the place is
O neno •.
Sir, there will bee no way for her recovery, but to re∣m•u.
her lodging, and have some good Physicians about her.
Where you please; and use whose help you please:
sh•e is your own; dispose of her treely, as I will of what is
〈…〉 course of life directly. Let me see. She
〈◊〉, past recovery. Say I should marry, I might yet have an
〈…〉 mine own.
Yes, but of whose getting sir?
There might rise a fearful question.
Think not of it sir. A man of your years, and gre∣uity,
with the respect the World gives you for your place and
worship in the Common Wealth, together with the riches
you have p•lt up in a Mountainous estate; to cast all down with
your 〈◊〉, and fortune at the foot of a stranger I Think what
would be thought of you, if such a dotage should possess you
Shoe's falling into a tedious Lecture.
Pray how was Master Spartledirt talked on tother
day for doing such a trick? yet he was held a wise Lavvyer:
You see a fair example in the late Marriage of sir Phillip Luck∣less,
and his Fitchow, a Match of your own making, and
••use of your Nieces and your ow•e Misfortune.
No more I beseech you.
There's tugging for a Mastery, and buffeting for the
breeches. He barks at her, she snaps at him; she breaks his
wine Glass, hee her looking Glass; she puts away his Ser∣uants,
hee turns away hers; she locks her Chamber door, he
bolts his, begetting nothing but a World of strife and disorder.
I pray shut up that point, I will not marry. No directly
I will not, though the truth is my purpose: was to have cast
my self and fortune wholly upon y•u, if 〈◊〉 might hove seemed
well in your discretion, vmh vmh.
I pray stay a little sir, take me along with you.
Not a step further, this way by your leave. I think I
have pusseld •er discretion.
Understand me sir. As I would not have you fall rash∣lie
upon anything; no more would I have you fly suddenly
from any purpose, without advise and sober deliberation. If
you should marry one that would be a Comfortable Nurse unto
you, as (though I say'•) you partly know—
Say you nothing, •er I doe know nothing, nor I will
know nothing more of this matter directly: For if ever I
ma•rye, let me suffer a• that the-Law provides for Periuty; let
me bee cropped and slit worse then a French Curtal, or a parley∣mental
delinquent for blaspheming the blood royal. No, I
wi• now bestow my wealth in Mo•umentall good deeds, and
ch•ritable uses in my life time, to bee talked well on when I am
dead.
Yes, build Alms houses and Hospitals for beggars, and
provide in Bridewell, and houses of Correction for your friends
and ki•d•ed. Pray give enough to Bedlam, you may feel some
part of that benefit your self before you die, if these sits hold
you.
She would have me doe no good with that I have n••∣there.
Let me consider. The most I have to say directly 〈◊〉
not been very well gotten. Were it not a point of good con∣science,
to spend that prodigally, and save a 〈…〉
And that which I have g•t well and honestly, hath been 〈◊〉
much care and travel; were it not then a point of equity to
my self, to spend that with ease and pleasure? Tic done di∣rectly,
what I have is mine own; and I will be merry with it.
Within there ho.
What's the toy now?
Sirah. Take there twenty pieces. B stow it all pre∣sently
in choicest meates, and richest Wines for my Supper.
This one nights Supper directly. What I have is mine own:
and I will be merry with it.
Cl•. Bless vs!
Six brace of Partriches, and six Pheasants in a Dish.
Godvvits, Knots, Quails, and the rest of the meares ansvve∣rabble
for half a score, or a dozen persons of the best quality:
whom I will think of presently.
Brain of a down right Justice! What means my
Master, to leap out of thirty shillings a Week house kee∣ping
into tvventie pounds a Supper? I may sell my Clerks
place: for sure he means to thrust himself out of the Com∣mission.
Hee can be no Justice long if this humour hold. Who
shall be the Guests trow•?
I h•ue it directly. You shall go to the Ordinaries, and
from thence inuit such young G•llants as you find to be Ga•∣••rs.
I mean of the highest cut.
Men that you doe not know sir?
I directly. If they know me, or have heard of me tic
sufficient: we shall be s• one acquainted. Bring not a man with
any paid for gold Lase or Searlet about him, I charge you, nor
without a Protection in his pocket.
You run a great hazard in this sir. You may perhaps be
cheated of all you have, if I have any discretion.
And much good do it their good hearts. What I have
is mine own, and I will bee merry with it directly. You have
put me by one or two courses: But not all your discretion shall
beat me out of this. If you take some care in the business, and
huswife the entertainment to make it brave for my credit,
you may get a Gown or a Jewel by it. If not—
Sir isle obey you. If he bee mad I will not bee foolish,
bat strike in for a ••are. And for your Guests sir, let me alone.
My man is b•st acquainted at the Ordinaries.
Why now you speak.
Within there. Beef. But in truth sir, I doubt whither
any such Guests will come, you have always been so strict
and terrible in your iustitrary courses.
Let him say mine eyes are opened, and their virtue is re∣uealed
unto me. And if any of the youngsters have Mistress•,
let' hem bring'hem. They shall have Mn•cke• what I have is
mine own, and I will be me••y with it. My flesh, though not
in the way of marriage, requires some satisfaction too. Where
might a man in all this plenti•ull Town, find a choice piece
directly that he might make his own? only his own? A very
hard question. And custom has made it almost an vnreasona∣one,
though it were in ones own Wife. In a Citizens or
Tradesmen's Wife; a Man must suffer the Riuall-ship of a sloe∣uenly
husband: the stink of his horns ever under ones nose.
A cast Lady, or Gentlewoman of courtly acquaintance, to
maintain her, is to •eed a Fountain, that wastes it self through
many Spow•s: What I supply her with, will be drawn out by
twenty. All her friends must share of my prodigality. To
train up an innocent country Girl, is like hatching a Cuc∣koe;
as soon as she is ripe, and sees the world before her, she
flies at her advantage, and leaves me dead in the nest. How
now.
Sir, here's a Delinquent brought before your worship
to be examined, a Gentlewoman sir.
Who brings her?
Ve•hem the Constable sir.
Look on his feet. Sure tic the Devil in his likeness:
That old Bawd knowing how it stood with me, has brought
me one of his Succubae Art. Sure tic Vexhem?
Sure sir? The devil himself knows him not better
then I know him from the Devil. I am sure, hee has been in
see with me these nine years: almost ever since hee was Con∣stable;
and has brought more profit to my desk then all the
honest Officers in the counties of your Commission sir. Oh
hoe's a rare fellow, he will tickle a Whore in Coany.
You know my mind. I will in and handle this g•ere in
privity.
Beef, You understand me. Prithee go discreetly
about it.
Pray let me see a little of this first.
If I put her to it or ever offer to put any Woman to it
again, never credit me: let me never be trusted, I protest and
〈◊〉 Gentlewoman she has used me—
Very ill fauouredly me thinks.
Have you put herto't sir.
I cannot put her to it, nor she will not be put to it. Sing.
I wo'not go to it, nor I man not go to it,
For love, nor yet for see:
For I am a Maid, and will be a Maid,
And a good one till • •aye.
Yet mine intent, I could repent, for •no mane company.
But you are not he Sir. If you b•, you are wondrously changed.
I am sure his faults were not written on his forehead. God
pardon him.
If mine bee, you can best read'hem, it is your own
hand-writing.
She has done a cure on him. Hee spoke sense now.
Alas Sir, that a fair hand should make such blots I what hand i•
it? Secreter, Roman, Court, or Text? I have not seen the
like: it is all dominicall letters, red Ink. His face is like an
Almanac of all Holy •ayes.
Sure tic Stenography, every Character a word: and
here and there one for a whole sentence.
Here's one might serve for a whole History. The life
and deatho' Raw head, and Bloody bones.
I see I am not such an Ass, I would I might never
stir but I am—Wh•r•'s S•r Paull If I doe not tell him—
What did you to prove•ke her thus?
Nothing but what I can ans•ere in a sort dee see me as
well as—never 〈◊〉 credit I had warrant under his hand
How Sir?
By word of mou•h sir.
That's about hand by your leave.
Is it so? Good S•r, his meaning was, you should put
her fairly on like a Lover, with sweet speeches, and gentle be∣haviour.
S•ee vnd••stands nothing that I can speak.
Nor any body else I think.
And therefore you fell to express your self in rude
action. She has sorn'd you but well: you are a sine putter to it
indeed.
Mum to•t Mun toot, Muntara rara Muntara ra ra rare,
And ever I sigh and croy alack for Phillips love I die.
•used so did our Dairy Maid at home serve my Lady Fiddle∣does
Battler. And there I learnt it. But when she had so done
what did she than doe? Bestowed a pennyworth of Vnguentum
Album, and it made him whole presently. Good Mrs. Train∣well
send to your Pod•cary for some: twill make him wee •
even•• now.
I sweet-heart: but first you shall go in the Coach
with•• to the Doctors.
I know I am not weell too. But Isle ha'no Doctor but
Sir Phillip.
It shall be Sir Phillip, (poor soul,) all must be Sir Phil∣lip.
•ou shall lye at his house.
But not wi•h him by my faith, and your leave, in it wee
be married.
Prithee Beef gar him wash his face he will scare some bodies
Barnes else.—
Isle throw him into the Dock rather then he shall suc∣ceede
Jack O'Dandy. Come sir, all shall be well again. Fear not.
I thank you sir.
Cousin, I understand you at full. And am glad that oc∣cession
hath pointed out a probability to lead me out of this la∣birinth;
and you to your desired end.
Follow but the way you are in Sir, and you shall arrive
at your own wishes.
She has put me into it her self too.
By sequestering her self from you the first night.
For which Cousin, if I take not occasion to keep my
self from her, all nights, days, and times hereafter, may the
act of our bodies beget prodigious monsters and nothing else.
A fearful vow! look too't. And I warrant she sues
for the Divorce first.
May wee prove but as certain as you are confident in
out other project, for recalling Constance to her self, and me
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
then to her, these •etters being shaken off, may they pro•e g•l∣den
ones to you, I shall not envy you.
For her take no thought sir. The interest I have in her
Tu•resse, with the work I have fashioned upon my Anvil, shall
bring all to your wish. I expect to hear from him instantly.
Isle freely resign your wish to you, and add half I
have to a•gment her estate to you. Oh I tremble •o think on
her: her presence shakes the house like an earthquake: the out∣rage
of Prentices is not so terrible to a Bawd or a Cutpurse, as
her voice is to me. Yet to you she may be calm as the breath
of friendship, and mild as the midnight whispers of chaste
love.
Sir, I profess my affection flies eagerly at her. She
takes me deeply, how ever you have mistaken one another.
Oh here comes my Anvil! Me thinks his very countenance
invites me to strike him▪ though I know hee dos me good ser∣vice
now.
Tic done sir. I warrant shoe's placed, successfully, dee
hear?
How prithee?
I have sent her before his Worship by a Constable.
Who has he sent? before whose Worship?
You shall know all. He has sent your cast whore before
sir Paul.
The Mystery, Gentlemen?
The success shall unfold it in good time to your and my
benefit? doubt not, if she but follow her instructions.
Nay, if she be not Mistress of her Art, there is no de∣ceit
among Trades men, no bribery among Officers, no bank∣rupt
out of Ludgate, nor Whore out of Bridewell.
And if I have not fitted her with a Second, my friend vex
h•m, the Constable, then say there is no wit among Kna•es,
no want among Scholars, no rest in the grave, nor unquietness
in Marriage, dee hear?
Of which here comes the truest testimony.
Out of my doors thou Miscreant.
Nay sister. O governor, art here.
Avoid my house, and that presently, Isle claw your skin
off after your Liuory else, and make you so much nakeder then
time makes all other serving Creatures.
Doe you talk of turning away my Man? You shall
give me leave to turn away your Howdee first, and then put
off my, God a mercy how dost thou.
Am I ieerd? flouted to my face? Is this fit usage for
a Wife?
A Wife? a Witch.
A Husband? a Hangman.
Out pusse.
Nay sir, indeed the fault is yours most extremely
now. Pray sir forbear to strain beyond a Women's patience.
Am I scorned and reuild?
Ah, ha ha.
Made a property for laughter?
A ha, ha.
Have I no friend, no Servant to command?
Ah ha, ha,
Has my Ladyship made me so lamentable a thing, that I
have lost the power of a Mistress? You sir, run and call some
friends to succour me, or Isle throttle you.
Stir but a foot sirah, or utter but a syllable, and isle cut
your throttle pipe.
I shall be carved out betwixt them.
What will become of me? you, VVood-cock, Nine∣hammer.
Have you forgot my name sister? would not Widgin•
become your mouth, as well? forget your natural brothers name?
Can you call me sister, and see me abused thus?
Foutre for sisters; I am not to meddle with an other
mans Wife. I am about one for my self. You mentioned her
first to me. But I must be be holden to others wits and means
to compass her: or else—
Doe as I bid you, or—
O sir she'll rend me in pieces, tear me like a Lark.
Dost thou fear her or me. Do it or I—
Sir, there's Master Walt•r can sing it rarely.
So he shall sir, and so will all; but you must put vs in.
Begin.
Hey down down, &amp;c.
S•ster, Wife, and a•l, is a present nothing to this.
Come rou•d Gentlemen▪ Keep her but off, and let me alone.
They all take hands, and dance round. VVidgine in the midst
sings this Song. They all b•are the burden, while she• scold• and
strives to be amongst'hem. T•••ewell holds 〈◊〉 off.
Hee that marries a Scold, a S•old,
Hee has most cause to be m•rry:
For when shoe's •n her fits, he may cherish his wits
By singing hey down derry.
—Hey down down derry down down down, &amp;c.
I cry you mercy Gallants. I apprehend you would bee
private.
O 〈◊〉 M•ster Bulfinch, you shall make one of our
Counc•ll.
I appreh•n• Gen•lemon you are merrily disposed; in
good •oddness.
App•e•end a •o•les head. Come into play.
I, 〈◊〉 with him, and about again.
He that marries a merry Lass,
He has most cause to be •ad;
For let her go free in her merry tricks, she
Will work his Patience mad.
But he that marries a 〈◊〉 a Scold, &amp;c.
He that weds with a Roa•ing 〈◊〉,
that will both •crat•• and 〈◊〉▪
Though he study all day to make her away,
will be glad to please her at night.
And he that copes with a sullen Wench,
That •carc• will speak at •ll,
Her doggedness more then a Scold or a Whore,
Will perpetr•te his Gall.
Hey down down, &amp;c.
He that's matched with a Turtle Do•e,
That has no spleen about her,
Shall wast so much life in the love of his wife,
He were better be without her.
But hee that marries a Scold, a Scold, &amp;c.
O scorn upon scorn, torment upon torment. Let me
rather be buried alive then bear this. 〈◊〉 She gets loose.
Slaves, Rascals, get ye all out of my doors. By virtue of my
nails, I cha•g• ye. •e not leave an Eye 〈◊〉 a No•e amongst
ye
O Lord, O Lord.
Come bouncing after my boys.
Oh how am I wronged.
Sure I 〈◊〉 apprehend this 〈◊〉 as •ight as could bee
possi•le the wrong way.
Madame, I see too much of your vexation; and in∣deed
I suffer too much with you. As I am a Gentleman I will
give you right friendly Counc•ll, if you will hear me.
Sir I ha•e per•••'d humanity in you and doe love it in
you. But I know not what to doe, nor whom to hear. I am
fallen •nto the pit of bondage, and will take any course for my
Redemption. Oh Master Bulfinch.
This will make to my purpose.
Sir I am wrong• b•yond e•pression. This Gentleman
is an eye witness of my sufferings. Pray come in Sir. I will hear
your counsel together with this Gentleman's advise.
Madam•, your case is in my apprehension, most
d•sperate, yet 〈…〉 comfort in regard you seek ad•ise and
cons•l. Mine is ever ready, and more fortunate oftentimes
the 〈◊〉. For I doe nothing but upon good reason and
de••beration.
Sir I bes••ch your worship, deal not so severely with
me.
Sirah I will teach you how to deal with Dealers, and
not with virtuous Gentlewomen; bring Innocence before
Justice; and be able to lay nothing to her charge.
Indeed sir, the Captain informed me of her; and said
he would be here ready to accuse her. Good sir.
Most officious Sir. What warrant had you? None.
What is the Captains name? you know not. Whore's his lodge∣ing?
you are ignorant. But here was your cunning; it appears
most plainly, that you thinking her to bee one of the trade,
thought to make a Prey of her pu•se: which since your affright∣meant,
could not make her open unto you, you thought to make
her Innocence smart for it. I will make your Knavery smart
for it directly. Come is the Mittimus ready? give mee't—
Good your worship, hold your hand. For my poor
family sake.
Here take him forth, and let the next Constable convey
him to Nougat.
Sir it is the first time that ever I offended in this kind.
I pray your worship be of a better mind towards me.
Away I say directly. As I am in my right Mind and
Middlesex. I will show my justice on thee.
Ah, ha, ha.
Do's the Knave laugh? Bring him back. May a man
ask the cause of your Mirth? Vex. Sir I have laughed at the vex∣ation
of a thousand in my days. I hope I may have lea•e once
in my life to laugh at mine own.
Oh is it so? Pray hold you merry sir.
Ah, ha, ha, ha—
Now Lady, whereas you were brought before me as
a Delinquent, I retain you as my Mistress. I like her beyond
measure. A pretty young thing: new brought to a pace! Ah, h•!
She has committed a little Country folly, as she priu•tely
confesses. Whats that • It may stand in rank with that they
call virtue here; and then she is content to li•e as privately as
I please. She shall up, I will winter and summer her before
she shall see a high way of this Town. Shoe's for my turn
directly. Mistress Holdup, is your 〈◊〉 say you?
Camitha Holdup sir. A poor Gentlewoman. My fa∣there
bore the office of a Commissioner for the peace in the
West country, till Misfortune wr••gth his estate out of his
hands.
Holdup! I have heard of him, and know what it was
that sunk him. Hee lived by the Sea side; it was trading with
the Pirats. Buying their goods, and selling them victuals;
Tic too true sir. He paid so dearly for it at last, that
I have no more, but my bare breeding, and what I bear about
me to live upon.
Which is enough • enough directly; if you can bear
your self discreetly, and contain your self within those
bounds of Fortune, in which Isle plant you. Alas good soul,
weep not; let Money and Authority bee thy comfort. By
which tho• shalt fe•le no want, nor fear no danger. But to
our business. I have already acquainted you with my Niece
Constances disease, and that she is removed out of my house for
her health. I will lodge you at a trusty Tenants house where she
is unknown. You shall take her name upon you.
Which is mine own already.
And if you can but a little counterfeit her Melancholy,
you may freely pass for her; and my accesses to thee, my
sweet Girl, shall crown vs with f•lnes of delight and pleasure.
Sir, you have most worthily made me your own;
and all my study shall be to obey you.
Now had I but • fit attendant for the person of my love▪
Some simple honest body sir.
Then we were fitted. How now.
My Lady Luckless man desire to speak with you.
Stand you by unseen a while. Send him in. I doe ex∣pect
some Message now, in the behalf of her unlucky Lady∣ships
wise brother, Master Wedge•e, tou•hinge my Niece. Now
stend how do's my good Lady?
I left her very ill sir; for she has beaten me, and thrust
me out of doors with her own hands, without penny in my
purse, or other Cloak o'my back, then the bare Liuory, that a
cast Se•uing man can not shake off, of Kna•e and Beggar.
Thou leftest her very ill indeed. But well, thou would
have me bee a means to reestablish thee in thy Lady.
In her service sir.
I speak by a figure Humfrey: for to be inward with,
or indeed within a Mistress, is to be a ser•••e in the most Court∣lie
phrase.
I sir. Those are convenient S•uants sir. Wee are co∣uenant
servants. They are respected aboue husbands: Wee
abased beneath slaves. They purchase place, honours, and off∣ces
oftentimes with their Ladies 〈…〉, when wee find not
our wages without hard words, and are in fear, (poor ••aches)
to have our sloughs pulled over our ear•s before the year go
about. Wee drudge for our Ladies, they play with their La∣dies:
But the best is, wee labour and sweat it out for our La∣dies,
when they are fine to tal•e Physic, and lye in for their
Ladies.
Most intelligent Humfrey. Let vs retire to the pur∣pose.
Put •as I have a Mistress in store for you; to whom I may
comm•nd you upon my own credit, and undertake for your
entertainment and means by my own purse. What would
you say? what would you doe?
Sir, I will say over the Gent. ushers Grammar to you,
and doe her service by the rules.
Well said directly.
Incipe Humfride. Say your part.
In a Gentleman Usher there be eight parts. Boldness,
Neatness, •attery and Secrecy, rewarded. Diligence, Obedi∣ence
True•h and Hon•sty, unrewarded.
What is his B•ldnesse.
His Boldness• is the use of his Manhood in right of
his Lady•s honour, degree, place or privilege, at home, abr•ad,
in private or public meeting, for the hand, for the w•ll, for
the what she will, •or the what she calls.
How is it rewarded?
By obtainin• of Suits made out of cast Gowns or
P•••icoates. Which if 〈◊〉 be a Taylor, as most of our middle
sort of Professors are, hee is thereby made a Man in spite of
the proverb, and th•used into the high way of advancement.
Perge Humfrey His neatness now?
His neatness consists most dive•sly▪ sir. Not on•lie in
the decent wearing of those clothes and c•eane linen, pruning
his hair•, rufsling his Boo•es, or ordering his shoe• ties; these
are poor expressions, a •journey man Barber will do it. But to
doe his office neatly, his g•rb•, his pace, his postures, his co•es
on and his comes off, complement•, his visits 〈◊〉▪
His Howdies.
In which a profound judgment •old be pussell•d.
I believe thee.
And the most absolute or artificial memory set of the
rack. To be able to relate how this Ladies tooth does; and to∣there
La•ies toe. How this Ladies Milk does: and how •others
Doctor liked her last water: how this Ladies husband•; and
how tother Ladies dog slept last night: how this child, that
Monk•y, this Nurse, that Parrot, and a•thousand such. Then his
neatness in Chamber-wo•ke, or about the person of his Lady,
in case her Maid or her Woman be otherwise occupied, to con∣uey
a pin into her r•ffe neatly, or add a help to her head dres∣sing,
as well as Iohn among the Maids, Lastly, his dexterity in
Carving, and his discretion in Marshaling of meates; to give
eu•rye mess the due service, and every dish his lawful prehe∣minence.
And how is this neatness rewarded Humfrey?
Doubly sir: at board and at bed▪ by good bits, and the
love of the Chambermaid.
Well Humfrey, because wee will not make this scene
too long, we will omit the rest: only why are your last four
parts, Diligence, Obedience, Truth and Honesty unrewarded?
Sir. They are parts that spring out of virtue, and are
therefore borne with their reward in their mouths, and ought
to expect no further from any service in these times.
Most edifying Humfrey. I have a Mistress in store for thee.
I long to see her sir.
Did thou never see my Niece Constance?
No sir. But I have heard she is diseased with Melan∣cholly;
and if she should prove mad too, like my old Lady, I were
then as far to seek as ere I was.
Fear it not Hum•rey. My 〈◊〉 ease thy care. Niece
come forth.  I shall fit you with a ser∣uant.
Fall to your Postures Humfrey. Your C•rbe. 
 So. Your Pace. So. Your Congie. So.
Hand your Lady. Good. Arm your Lady. Good still. Side
your Lady. Very good. Draw out your Lady. Excellent. Pre∣sent
your Lady. Singular well, good Humfrey.
Sir, I can Shoulder my Lady too: but that is when 〈◊〉
takes Co•ch; and Foot my Lady, when she alights.
Precious Humfrey, I admire thy Art.
I learnt all of a good old Ladies man in the Strand sir,
that must be nameless.
Now Humfrey, Walk your Lady to the Burse.
O most Hostlerly spoken! Under correction sir, Wait
your Lady I pray sir.
Well said Humfrey. Here's something for my instru∣ction.
Now wait your Lady to the Burse. She has some tri•les
to buy there. I will find you there presently, and conduct you
to your lodging.
What shall I doe with all this sir? I would indeed but
buy an ounce or two of thread; some Netting pins and Needles,
an• a Frame to flourish my work on. Hereafter I will work
in gold and silver, if you please, for your own wearing.
As I would wish! her simplicity takes me aboue her
beauty. Go I say. I'll follow. Me thinks I even feel my
self, thank my self for being in this good humour. What I
have is mine own, and I will be merry with it directly.
—
Gentlemen, you now know the calamity I suffer un∣der.
And you have sh•wed me the best way to comfort: for
which I thank you. I have given you my resolution for a Di∣vo•ce,
upon condition. Before which, I must promise you no∣thing
sir. But I assure you in the mean time, you stand prime
in my affection: for I have in all found you a right worthy
Gentleman.
Madame, I have not utterance to declare my acceptance
of your love. It must therefore be locked up in my breast, the
treasure of my heart. Now for the condition upon which
your Divorce depends, we must see that performed, and then—
Sir, I will make good more then I now may promise.
You speak nobly.
It relish• a little • do much of womanly ••lfulnesse I
confess. But all my wilfulness (that I'll promise you sir) shall
die in the end of this business.
Well then, before your discreet neighbour M. Bulfi•ch
here. If you have not your will in this, I will disclaim in your
favour hereafter. Sir, the condition is (as you may remember—
I apprehend it Sir. That sir Paul Squelch his Niece be
first married or contracted, and then she consents to a divorce:
And that you be assistant to her brother here to obtain her for
him.
To which I promise my ready help, only I must not
appear in the business.
I will only appear in it, for I will not be seen in the
•atter.
As how sir?
As thus sir. I will keep your counsel: not only in
holding my peace to all the world, but in saying nothing to sir
Paul himself. Dee apprehend me sir?
And thank you sir. Now every man to his part M.
Widgine, You have both your sisters and my best directions al∣ready,
which I doubt not but with the help of your Governor
you will make good use of. Madame will you in, and but wish
well to our proceedings, and trouble your thoughts no further.
Sir, what help he has of me, is for the Ladies and his
own sake, not yours dee hear.
No blustering now good Governor: Prithee restrain
thy fury. Thou can never hear nor speak to that Gent. with
any patience; and yet he is on our side now. Prithee let's loose
no time. I never •ong'd more for my mothers coming from
a Christening, then to be at this Northern Lass.—
Wanton, you have begun propitiously: Proceed but
confidently, and I'll warrant thee a wealthy husband by it, or a
composition that may prove the better purchase.
Sir, be you and thy• Lady but as confident of my fideli∣tie,
and trust me in this action, and if I break not the toils your
Kinsm•n is in, and make you Mistress of my Interest in sir Paul,
let all the good you intended me, bee a lockram Co•fe, a blew
Gown, a Wheel and a clean Whip. You are sure the Lady
will yield to Divorce, if Constance whom I now person•ate be
first married or contracted.
Right. She do's but hold off till then, and that wilful∣lie;
because she fears it is for Constances love only, that her
Husband desires the Divorce.
And you are sure that Constance is safe from her disco∣very.
I upon the hazard of my discretion.
To any then that knows her not very well, If I ap∣pear
not the same Constance—you have given me her Chara∣cter
right?
The best that we can possibly.
Nay, I have a few•there help then, you both imagine yet.
May wee know it.
It shall be no secret. My Servant Howdee, whom you
and sir Paul, suppose his Lady turned away, was by her Lady∣ship
taught only to feign it; and cunningly instructed to
work himself into the se•vice of Constance, to further her
brothers proceedings. And since fortune has put him upon
me, whom hee takes to bee the same Mistress, if I make not
•pt use of it—
Tic most fairly ominous. Come Lady. Hee cannot.
but bee at hand; and our stay may doe hurt, (You remember
the
Doctors lodging I told you of, and sir Phillips appointment
to m•et you there an hour hence?
All sir. I would use no other. She is there already. Ex.
No more then; away. Fare you well sweet Creature.
If my deceit now, should bee disco•ered, before my
work be ended, my Brain tricks might perhaps, in stead of all
these fair hopes, Purchase me the Lash. fore Ve•us. my flesh
〈◊〉 trembles to think on it. It brings likewise into my consi∣deration,
the baseness of my condition; how much unpitied
the punishment of a Whore is, an• how suddenly it overtakes
her? My joint Con•piratours are in no danger. I only run the
hazard, though they are as deep in fact as my s•lfe. Well. If
I scope this pull, and draw any fortune by it, isle change my
function sure. A common Whore? Isle be a Nun rather. They
come most fitly, and I must into my fit—Withdraws behind
the •anging.
Indeed sir, it was my Ladies plot, but you must take
no notice of it.
Isle thank her with all my heart, and she shall never
know on it.
But if sir Paul, my now Master should discover my
deceit, how shall I scope his vengeance.
What dost thou think of me, weak fellow? Am
not I a Commander, ha?
I, in the war Captain: but hee is a Justice of
Peace, and a Commander of Captains in Middlesex, sends two
or three drunken Ones to Newgate at a clap sometimes.
Fear no discovery Humfrey. Let me but see her, and
Isle warrant thee.
She'll see none but sir Phillip, you must be no body
else. Remember that: you must know no other name you
have. Now if you can sir Phillip it handsomely there's it.
I warrant thee, and my Governor shall sir Phillip
me at every word; and if I doe •ot sir Phillip her, better then
ever she was Phillips in her life, then say I am no Legitimate
Widgine.
•is pa•• your ••rength or reach either by forty I be∣leeue.
I doubt your middle finger is too short Master Widgin•.
Well, I must venture it. Here she comes. Has a Baby.
What's she doing. Odds me • making a Baby I think
Are you good at that in faith? Isle be at that sport with you, it
shall cost me a fall else.
Oh she has a hundred such • pish toys. E•no now
she was great with Child for•ooth as she could go. And
was persuaded she had a Child as big as I in her belly. I won∣dred
at it, and she told me she had had a hundred there as big
in her days.
What, what?
I but she knew not what she said. By and by, I must
be a Man-Midwife forsooth and deliver her: for it was past all
Women's skill? Now she thinks she is brought a bed, and
nurses the Child her self.
And who's the father?
O none but sir Phillip.
•le father it as well as hee. I•t a Boy or a Girl trow▪
Would she would make a Christening Banquet while wee are
here. Hark she sings.
Peace wayward Barn; O cease thy mo•e:
Thy far more wayward Daddy's gone:
And never will recalled be
By cries of either thee, or 〈◊〉:
For should wee cry,
until wee dye,
VVee could not sc•ned his cr•elty.
Ballow, Ballow, &amp;c.
H•e no•ds might in himself forese•,
What 〈◊〉 ••ccessiuely might be;
And •old hee then, (though me forego)
His Infant leave, ere hee d•d know,
How like the Dad
would bee the Lad,
In time, to make fon• Maidens glad•
Ballow, ballew, &amp;c.
How is this pretty Mrs. Con••ance, that you complain
of your Love before he be lost?
Who be you I pray?
Pray thee tell her Governor. I haven't the heart to
lye now.
It is sir Phillip Lady, come to doe you right. De•
hear?
Yes sir, I hear you vary weell; and could •en wish
〈◊〉 my heart I could believe you.
Speak your self sir.
You may Mistress Constance; for as I am an honest man,
I never meant to wrong you.
I doe bele•ue you sir. But pray prote•• no more by
that name till you make your self such by marrying me. You
have gotten a barn by me, I is sure o'that.
I come for the same purpose Sweet-heart. Isle both
father and keep thy Child, and make thee an honest Woman.
Give me your hand before this Gentleman, and your Servant
here; and say but the word; •le get a Licence presently, fetch
you away, and dispatch you to night.
Marry me, marry me, quoth the by••y Lass: and when
will you begin.
As for thy w•dding Lass wee'•• doe well enough, in spite
•' the best of thy Kin.
I can but thank you, obey you, and pray for you sir.
Governor; wilt thou believe me? It ee•e pities my
heart, to wrong so sweet a piece of simplicity. But Fortune
has dressed her for me to seed on; and Isle fall to.
Or the Devil to choke you. Well boisterous Master
Tridewell, your Ropes end hath driven me into a business, here,
deserves a whole Rope. But I hope that Dostiny attends not me,
though this Marriage be his: And since it is his Fate, fair be∣fall
it him, I am discharged
Come Governor, we are agreed• lets go that wee
may hye vs again, and dispatch.
Nay sir. You shall not say, you married me for nought:
you shall hear me sing before you go.
What an Owsell tic • she means hee shall marry her
for a Song. B•rlady a competent Modern portion.
As I was gathring April's flowers,
He• straight let fall one of his showers;
Which dra•e me to an arbour.
It were better I my Lap had filled.
Although the wet my clothes had spilled,
Then to ha'found that harbour
For there a subtle Serpent was,
Close lying, lurking in the Grass.
And there while harmless thinking I,
Still watching when the 〈◊〉 would dye,
Lay listening to a Bird,
That singing •ate upon the By•er,
Her notes unto the falling shower,
the Snake beneath me stirred;
And with his sting gave me a clap,
that swole my belly not my lap.
By my troth tic pretty.
And by my conscience tic true, it were made 〈◊〉 Durham,
on a Lass of my bigness.
And in thy clothes I believe.
But will you be began now, than all my joy leaves me.
Sweet soul, thou shalt have thy joy again. I will joy
thee, enjoy thee, and over joy thee. Governor let vs fly about
this business. I will not sleep, before I have got a License,
stolen her away, wedded her, bedded her, and put her in her
wits again.
Are you able to doe that think you?
Isle warrant thee: for all Maids are mad till they be•
married.
What say you to that Lady. P•x on you, I run•
sweet hazard to advance your fortune, doe I not?
Remember your Covenant with Master Tridewell
Captain. And when the work is done, here's my hand, you
shall partake of what I get by it. And hark you.
She may perhaps, when she comes to her self, and
finds me to be no sir Phillip, be a little startled. But I mean the
f••st night to put so much of my own love into her, as shall
work out his I doubt not, or any his that came there before
me.
O Gentlemen! my Masters coming, alls spoiled if
hee take you. Part quickly.
Is mine Uncle combed? and mun we part than?
Kiss, and part; kiss and part.
Sweet heart, not a word of me till I come to fetch
you off with honour.
All be•icons bee with you. Indeed you be the goodly∣est
man, that ere made Maiden fine.
Poor heart she dotes. I doe not know how much I
am in debt to my conscience, till I have made her amends.
—
This may breed good blood. If I come but as well off
of my old Uncle, as •••like to come on with my young Cos•,
here will be a match unlooked for; a match without treaty; a
m•tch vntalk'd or unheard of. Hee is coming before I have
shifted my •ace. Me thinks I hear the rusting of •is bristles
hither. •et my lips must stand the assault; pray love the Pore∣cupine,
leave none of his quills in 'hem.
Whore's my Girl? My honey sweet Girl? Kiss m•e;
〈◊〉 I say directly: I'll s•cure thee. As I am a Man of Authori∣tie,
and that of Middlesex, I 'le secure thee. Ha my Las••, these
lips have the true Elixi• in 'hem indeed, to restore youth and
strength; past all Medeas charms, or what the Poets would
have fai•'d. How now 〈…〉 Love? I hope my Nieces
habit has not wrought her di•ease into thee.
No: now I see you sir, I am well: perfectly well: yet
pardon me sir. Your absence cannot but breed me fear, when
I have leisure to think on my unworthy condition, and the
danger I undergo in it.
It was a thousand pities that this Wench was seduced.
She might have ma•e a Wi•e for a good Esquire. She would
serve a Tradesman yet, most vnblemishably. And when I have
done with her, doing that f•r her, as I mean to doe. She may
perhaps match with a younger brother, purchase him a place,
advance his fortune, to bee able in the end to repay h•r with a
Ladyship. It is not without a president; and I will help her to
follow the example directly. For what I have is mine own,
and I will be merry with it. Ha my bird, my chick • Kiss me.
Kiss me up. So. Kiss me up I say. So again. Thou hast don't
directly. Maintain it now, with a cordial •isse. So, so, so▪
Good. Very good; and while it is so, a word with you in pri∣uate.
Come my bird, mh mh mh.
Sit, there's a woman below.—
Sir, what have I to doe with any woman below:
Doe you with your woman below, I am very well here.
Is the old man mad trow. Sir, she will have to doe
with you aboue, if you speak not with her below. I had much
a doe to keep her down stayres, her case is so lamentable she
says. I never saw a woman so importunate in my life sir. You
must down sir.
I am down already. Ell's nought. What limb of the
devil is' •? Dost thou know her?
She says she is wife to a Constable s•r, that you
lately committed; and if your Worcester. dos not release him pre∣sently,
that hoe's undone, and shoe's undone, all their children
are• undone, that unborn in her belly is undone, and I know not
how many more are undone for ever.
Hell take her. How could she know that I was here?
She spied you in the Street sir, and followed you,
and follow you she would, had you gone into the Privy
Chamber she swears; her cause enforces her she says. And
she is so great with child too, that no man dares give her a
thrust to keep her back. I hear her blow up stayres.
Keep her down, I'll follow thee—
Good sir be pitiful for the woman's sake, and release
him. Perhaps her reckoning is out, and she has no body to call
the Midwife.
I must home to my Clerk then: for I cannot write
here; nor do any good besides I am so vexed. But I will return
to th•e in the evening, Duck: And since I am so apt to be spied,
• will come disguised.
Indeed I'll put out the Candle when you are here then,
for I shall never endure to •ee other shape of Man. O these
trunk ho•• are a comely wearing.
I will be •i•guessed directly. I will run through all
the shapes of Iupi•er, before• I will again be prevented. Fare∣well.
O my •weet! At seven in the eu•ning expect me.—
Sweet say thou? Thou art not I'll swear. I am glad
he was prevented. I should never held out a course with him,
that cannot endure a breathing: a Cheese-shop on fire cannot
out-stinke him.
Your Vncle's gone Mistress, and says hee will be here
at seven a clock ag•in. But shall I tell you a five thing Mistress?
Yea marry Humfrey, what may that be and tic not of Sir
Phillip
But it is of him Mistress. Hee says hee will bring a
Coach for your at six a clock to fetch you away: will you go
with him?
By my saule that will I an't be all the world over.
How shall you Uncle find you at 7 then?
We'll leave him at six and seauens. I mean betwixt
both. Twill be trim trust me. And hear thou me Humfrey.
Thou must bid Mistress Traynwell 〈◊〉 to me a little before six •
for a very good reason.
Hmh
—
Nay, it shall hinder nothing. Wee 'le away the faster.
I think she be in her wits already. If not, I must hue∣more
her, though I bee put to the trouble to shift her away
again. She shall mar no sport that's certain.
Come with me Humfrey, thou shalt go even now, and
tell her; and I'll be packing up the while.
—
This Clinches. I shall win my Ladies heart for ever.
To manage two such bus•n•sses more, were enough to raise
me Agent for a State.
To discourse a tedious Lecture unto you, Lady, in
speaking philosophically of the disease of Melancholy, were to
show more learning then discretion. There are large volumes
of it in Print, to very slender purpose.
Sir, I desire rather your discretion, then the gloss of
Learning. I am rather governed by the wholesome effects of the
one, then the smooth directions o• the other.
To the point then Lady. I see no reason why I should
vex and torment this delicate and tender body, with Physic.
Her disease is Melancholy; The cause of this disease I have
found apparently in the two hours probation since you left her
with me, to be Love, which she hath so greedily taken in, that
it hath overwhelmed her spirits, and turned the faculties of all
her senses into a rude confusion, sending forth the use of them
extravagantly.
Sir, I must not only approve, but applaud your skill.
Tic love indeed, And • am right glad that your opinion iumps
with my own knowledge: for now I doubt not of your speedy
address to the cure.
It is done in three words. The Party that she loves,
must be the Doctor, the Medicine, and the Cure.
Sir, the Gentle•man is below, he came with me, only I
would not bring him to her fight without your approbation,
•caring it might doe hurt.
Pray call him up, on peril of my judgement.
G•ue me your hand Mrs. Constance. I have good news for you.
Tic a lo•g whayle •in I hear• any.
The Gentleman, whom you love best, shall be your bed∣fellow.
He is wed already Sir. Another wife would gar him
be put down at gallows: an • I would not •ee sh•e for all the
wordly good that ere I •awe with 〈…〉. And of my
consci•nce I•e be none of his 〈…〉
She pra•tl•s very prettily me thinks. 〈◊〉 already?
Sure Cupped shot you with a f•or•ed arrow out o• his Crossbow.
But what will you say Lady, i• by my Are• I 〈◊〉 this Gent•e∣man
unmarried again, and a Suitor unto y•u pr•sen•lie?
Marry▪ shall I tell you what I'll say sir? Th•t d•serves
hanging worse then tother •at•er, you would poison his wife
by your Art, wot ye? and make your gown th•re the Hang∣mans
•ee the second time? It looks as it had been once his
already; and you like such a Doctor I mu•• tell ye, by your
leave. God bl•sse me fro thee. Mrs. Traynwell where are you?
Out of her wits say they? I fear she is 〈◊〉 then
all of vs, that have to doe with her. She knows my gown
b•tter th•n I doe: for I have had but two ho•res acquaintance
with it. It is •o longer since I hired it of the hangmans Mer∣cha•t
a Broker. It might have been Lopus gown for ought I
know.
They are fallen out I think.
O Mrs. Traynwell, for dear Charities •ache have me soon•
〈◊〉 this Man: for I'll ne'er take any thing at him. Hee talks
of poisoning.
By my faith you wrong me: Nor of any poisoning pur∣po•e.
I was but putting a case of—
Pray put up your Pipes sir. I like not your Music:
troth nor his countenance nather. Sweet Mrs. Traynwell gar me
be shut on him. Now all the joys of Immortality light of
ye sir.
Is that the Gent?
Yes sir. Pray observe. But how fell you out sir?
I must first •alute him by your favo•r. Sir, all the accu∣mule•tions
of honour shower down upon you.
S•r. May you r••pe the whole harvest of your fruit∣full
wishes.
Dear sir, keep• further fro him.
But one word sweet Lady; and you shall have the
whole benefit of h•s presence to your s•lfe.
•e not afraid sweet-heart, he dares not hurt sir Phillip.
In •roth he breathes to near him.
〈◊〉 wa•rant y•u. What has hee done to m•ue her thus?
I know not what thy• 〈◊〉 Doctor is. But M. Tridewell put
me upon him; and his •pproved honesty has and must kill all
m•s •rust in me.
Your C•ach is ready at door you say.
Ye• my most d•licit Doctor.
As you find her then after a few words away with
her. I have 〈◊〉 my part sir. In le hold the discreet •o∣uernesse
in talk in the nix• room.
But one word call ye this?
I have done sweet soul. Lady I have instructed the gent.
shall we l•au• th•m?
One word, by your leave first M. Doctor, and I'll at∣tend
you. Sir not alone my Discretion, but my Reputation lies at
stake: and I make no doubt of your nobleness upon your
Kin•mans word, my Complotter in this business. Therefore
while I hold argument with the Doctor (who shall by no means
perceive our deceit) slip you away with her in your Coach,
where M. Tridewell▪ hath appointed, till the Eueni•g; and let me
alone to scuffle with the old man the while▪ And then I doubt
not all our troublesome labours shall have a peaceable end. Isle
send old Mad-cap to your Lady in a Thunder-clap. But noble•
sir, your reputation—
My life and honour be her Guard, and your security.
No more sir. Isle lay no conjurations upon so noble a
spirit. Come Master Doctor—
But doe you love me Constance?
O right weell sir.
And will you be my Woman?
I is sure, isle nener be mine own else•.
But you will not go away with m•c now, if I request
you?
Any whither but to bed before wee be married.
What from your Governess, your Uncle, and all the
World?
And thank you too sir. And to me but fro this ill
looking Doctor; for I shall be weell with you sir.
Come, since you trust me so well, wee two will not
part till wee are lawfully made one.
Heaven bliss the hour you speak in, and all Saints
be with•sses.
Whore's this Doctor? whore's this melancholy Gen∣tlewoman?
O me is hee come?
Is this her Uncle?
E•en he sir. Whore's my charge; Mistress Constance?
S•ue ye sir Isle go find her—
Whore's my charge? Isle go find her! What's the
meaning?
She was here but now sir, while the Music plaid.
And wee withdrew our sclues, thinking she might sleep sir.
There went a Coach away as I came in. Whole was it?
A C•ach sir? Alas I am afraid; my flesh trembles.
At what in your great Master the Devils name?
Whore's my Ncece?
Sir here came in one Master Widgine, the Lady Lucked•s
brother—
Well.
As acquainted with the Doctor sir—
Well, well.
And he saw her sir. But seemed to depart, when wee
withdrew our selves to talk about the cure.
Very very well. While you were wisely talking a∣bout
the cure, a Widgine flies away with the Patient. Whore's
this Doctor? Doctor I say. Doctor! Hoe's run away too, my
life on it. A mere plot, a Conspiracy; tic so directly, below
there. I can not see how it can bee otherwise. 
Saw you the Doctor? Yes sir, hee went now forth at the water-Gate,
and took boat in hast.
Exceeding well▪ How came your Discretion acquain∣ted
with this Doctor?
Sir he was reported to me by very good Judgements,
to be a rare Practitioner.
A most rare fellow, and do's admirable tricks, by slight
of heals. But I may perhaps out-run 'hem—
My purge works as I wished. I am amused though at
the flight of the Doctor. But I have too many businesses to in∣tertaine
new thoughts.
May I belceue it, Good sir? may I be so happy, that my
brother has her?
As I have truth in me, I am most credibly told so. Mary
the worst is, her Uncle is so mad at their escape, th•t hee will
never give consent to the match, whereby her portion will bee
less.
Hang him Clod. My will shall be a portion su•ficient
to my brother, I care not, though hee give her not a penny, so
What has the Wench.
Make you no more doubt of that, then I doe Ma∣dame,
who have upon the report of it already, prepared the
Learned of the Civil Law, those that you nominated of your
good acquaintance, and are forward to doe you the best office,
who have appointed to meet before the In•ge of the Archdeaa∣cous
Court p•assent•y, whither I have promised to bring, and
will attend you.
But the other side must be summoned by process.
Sir Phil•p hath wa•ning already M•dame; and with∣out
needless process will bee there before you, and wait your
co•ming. So that my self and his serua•t, who have never
been both absent from one of your companies, since your
Marriage, justly depose•g you no•er did the reallest Rite of Ma∣riage,
the bed o•lice, Madame; y•u both consenting, and d•si∣ring
a Divorce, It i• inst•ncly g•au••ed, with•ut any prose∣dings
i• Law. So that all will be outed in three whispers. Odds
pity, look who here is.
O are you here my Lady Lu kiesse?
It was time you found me sir; you might ha'mistaken
my name else. F•r withi• this hour, • m•light have retu••'d
the ancient title of your friend, and Awdery F•tchow.
Slow wov, where is my N••••?
Where are your wits si•? you come upon me inde•d •
What Niece? What's the matter?
My Niece Constance, that your brother Wedge•e stole
from the Doctor, and is stowne away witha•. But hee must not
think to scope so? I may take him, and his Duck too, in my
D•coy, before they be coupled, as sure as your Ladyship or
your Fitchow ship, and they think your selves.
Sure the old Gentleman is fallen mad. What hath hap∣pend?
The plot smells of your Ladyships policy; you• Lady∣ships
Lily white fist is t•ule in t•e business. But I will have a
b•utat sisticuffs in Law with your Ladyship: your great ac∣queen••nce,
and alliance in the Whatshical. Court No••b•• 〈◊〉
•our•• 〈◊〉 there must not cary it, my great Lady. Directly it
must not.
Your •re an uncivil greasy Co•pinion, to upbraid and
revile me thus in my own house.
O good Madarne, hurt not your self with anger
better laugh it out.
Hee makes me forget my self by his example. Sir you
are a Commissioner for the Peace I take it. Do's it become a
M•n of you• place and gravity, to fly out in these extremes?
You spend too much breath in these loud notes, very hurtful
to the Lungs, If you will fall into a lower Key, and speak
peaceably, I will answer you.
I pray you, Forsooth, or sweet Madame, or what you
please; Where is my Niece?
Will you believe me sir? you may: For tic Truth, as I
have any; And before this worthy Gentleman; I never saw
your Niece in my life; only I have heard she is a pretty Gen∣•evvoman:
likely to make a good Match, for which I told my
brother of her, and would have treated with you for her,
cou•d I have spoken with you as I wished by two or
three Mess•ges. But whither my brother has got her, or wh•r
hee, or she is of my own knowledge, I cannot say directly.
She mocks me to my face all this while. Well good-Wise,
Mi•ris, Madame—
Well my Lord Innekee pers second Son: Do's your
Pro•ender prick you?
Prick Madame: I tell thee thou Thing, made up of
Chippings, broke•n Bear, Candle-ends, and sisting of Sea cole.
O•t you Curry-combe.
Forbear sweet Lady, let him be mad by himself.
I will be so revenged—
How pray?
Hee had been better to have kilt a Man, ravished •
Virgiue; nay, done the most dangerous contempt that law
•••lt devise to punish, then if I take him to suffer under my
revenge.
Ha, ha, ha.
Isle m•ster up my Constables, and send out a privy
search immedia•lie.—
What think you of your Brothers success, now Ma∣dame?
Much the better, that it vexes him so: Sciruy foul
unouth'd fellow.
Look you now Madame. See who here come•.
Sister fall down, and adore me for my great at chieue∣meant.
H•msrey kneel down to her that she may dub thee
for thy sernice. Never did the best nosed Dogs, that ever were
coached for their goodness, hunt more truly, take more brave∣lie,
and cary away more cleanly, then we have done this dainty
piece of flesh here. Sister kiss her, and be better acquainted:
she is mine own flesh, Isle uphold it.
She is a Holdup her self, if I mistake not her name.
Being your flesh brother, her nearest affinity of blood
runs in my veins. Therefore with a sisters love I embrace
you, and bid you welcome.
Mine Uncle will by right wood I fear me. But Isle
near greet for that sir, while I have your love.
I know it is she by her tongue, though I never heard
her before. Nor ever fear sweet sister, wee shall be all friends
shortly.
I would be glad and it were so.
Sister come hither. Now hear and admire my wit; as
well as my Fortune. Humfrey come and take thy share of my
sisters wonder.
I hope I performed my duty.
Which wee must not see unrewarded sister.
No: I mean to give him my Maid, and a hundred
Marks with her, besides all she has about her.
I am made for ever. I thank your languishing Lady∣ship.
Well said Howdee: for my Ladyship is even at the last
gasp. I am to bee Divorced within this half hour. But your
proceedings brother? How did she receive you at first?
O at first, she was the prettiliest mad that ere you
saw. You your self can not devise to be so mad, as she was.
I thank you sir.
And all for sir Phillip, she would love none but sir
Phillip, speak to none but sir Phillip. I told her I was sir Phil∣lip,
(ah God a mercy Humfrey: that was thy invention.) Then
the little Vip•r hang upon me, not to be shook off, till I promised
her Marriage, and to father a Child, which, in her distraction,
she conceited she had by me. I promised her any thing; so
took her into an inner too me, to make all sure, as well within
as without; and I so phillipt her—
Enough brother, no more. I understand you.
But I must have more, and shall never have enough on it.
It passes your understanding and mine too, the delight of it.
 Oh what a delight she gave me. And how light I am af∣la
〈◊〉 Heigh. My pretty sweet Rascal.
Enough I say.
You doe not love to hear on it, because you lack it. But
you shall hear the Miracle it wrought sister. The loss of her
Maiden head recovered her wits. I made her right and straight
in an instant. And now she loves me in my own person;
knows me for a Widgine, and will not give her Wat for the
best sir Philip of them all. And longs for nothing but the
Priest and Bed time. Ha my sweeter and sweeter I My Gouer∣nour's
gone sor a Licence.
So, ha you done now?
Isle undertake—
Yet again.
That Humfrey, and I with the tricks and trinkets, wee
have about vs will cure all the mad Maids of her standing in the
Town. And doe not think, but much may be gotten to pro∣fesse
it.
You have made a large relation Master Widgine, and a
pleasant, I doubt not.
Oh I could live and dye in this discourse sir.
Lady doe you think of the time?
I will instantly along with you. Hewdee come you
with me. Brother, the search hath past this house already.
You any go in with your Svveet-heart, and stay here safely.
Go in, and keep close, till I send to meet me at Supper.
In and in sister, and be close enough, sear not—
Now sir when you please.
I am your servant Lady—
Mistri•, I will go no further in this business, then you
have limb••ed me in your directions: twill be revenge enough
for my disgrace to make him see his error.
Therefore be discreet and secret. The disguise hee is
in I have told you. The place is this. At the door you shall leave
me. The hour 7 a clock.
Mistress, I will not watch more truly at Midnight, then
I will pray for you for this Less•very. I will instantly call my
priuy-search, guard, and catch a bird, of Justice in the lime-twigs
of his own Warrant.—
I tit not speak with Sir Paule then, it seems, to know
the reason why I am subdoodled thus, In I protest and vow a
kind of •ooles Paradise.
Good sir bear your injury with a Mans patience. Sir
Paule will not be long absent. And till hee comes, my Mistress
entreats you (for your own good) to take his part upon you,
in giving entertainment to divers of his friends, who are envy∣ted
hither to a Feast to night.
H• you any Whitpots?
Much better meat sir. But here's the strangeness of it;
and the only occasi•n that r•quires you aid in the entertain∣meant.
This great Supper or ••ast (as I may properly call it) was
appointed by Sir Poule himself, the money to buy the Prove∣zion•d
live•'d by his own hand, to his own Servant; the Guests
of h•s own election; vet he, out of the multiplicity of cross of∣fairs,
that have happened this day, hath quite forgot that there
was any such preparation, or any such m•eting intone•ed, as ap∣pears
evidently by his absence. But •y Mistress has got all the
meat privately made ready at the next house, on purpose that
h•sh u•d see nothing—
To try is he would forget it or no?
Right sir. I have bidden all the Guests: and expect
them immediately.
But what must I say to 'hem?
Only sal•te 'hem, bid 'hem welcome; Tell'hem Sir
Paule was hastily called forth on his Majesties affaites; Entreat
their patience till his return, which you know will be every
sudden although you know not where he is; and so forth, as
occasion serves.
Your Master abroad and not within say you?
Yes. But good sir stay his coming, I pray you, for
his good.
I partly apprehend you at full. Mistress Traynwell ap∣pointed
me to come too with all possible speed. M. Vonsens•
you are well apprehended.
Only salute 'hem, bid' hem welcome. Tell'hem Sir
Paule was hast•lie called forth on his Majesties affairs. Entreat
their patience till his return, which you know will bee very
sudden, although you know not where he is. And so forth as
occasion serves.
Love has made you a Courtier. M Nonsense
No I protest and vow. I doe but speak as they say.—
What have you said Sir?
What you said I have an ill verbatim else.
I said but the meaning of what you should say, and put
it in your own words.
No sir. I will take your own words for this matter.
I am beholden to you.
I am glad Fortune has sent one man of Civil govern∣meant
before the Roarers come. Here comes some of 'hem al∣ready.
I'll down and look to the rest of the house.
Save you sir. Are you the Worshipful of the house?
I apprehend you sir.—
How sir?—
Mistake me not I beseech you, I apprehend you to be
some great stranger here: because you know the place better
then the Master of it.
You doe not mock me sir?
Sir, This is one of the Guests?
Only salute 'hem. Bid 'hem welcome—
What's this?
Tell 'hem Sir Paule was hastily called forth on his Ma∣jests
affairs—
Is this a Parrot or a Popingay?
Entreat their patience till his return, which you know.
Doe you know what you say sir?
Will be very sudden, although you know not where
hee is—
If I did I would not seek him here sir.
And so forth as occasion serves.
This is some inchaun•ed P•ace, and the people are
charmed. I have mistaken the house sure.
Whore's this hospitable Knight that invites Strangers. I
mean mere Strangers, that hee knows not. Show me the Lad
of bounty. I hunger not for his Sapper as I doe to salute him.
Hee will prove the greatest stranger here himself I
think, for he is not at home sir. I am a Guest as you are, and
would be as glad to see him.
He dos not mean to jear vs dos he?
I bese•ch you mistake not so his purpose sir: which is
fair welcome, and good cheer to you all. Therefore Gen∣tlemen
and ladies, will it please you to entertain one another
a while.  Look ye.
Here's good Sack, and good I'obacco. And before the rest of
the Guests b•co•e, Sir Paule will be here himself.
This fellow speaks.
As I am a Justice of Peace I cannot apprekend, and yet
me thinks I doe. What sort of people these Gentlemen may
be. See: more I Is sir Paule turned swaggerer? Or is his house
abused by servants? I will not leave it, until they go out be∣fore
me like a lilac delivery. They lo•ke like men betwixt a
Reprive and Pardon. Friend: Are these sir Paules elected
friends?
His protected friends sir.
Protected?
I sir. There is a fraternity of them. The brothers of
the Protect. There's not a man of 'hem, but has all Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Sergeants at Mace, Marshalls men, Consta∣bless,
and other his Majesties Officers, in a Combcase in his pose∣ket.
They are a Generation that never eat but in Parliament
time, and now every table is full of them.
I should wonder what they did here else. See. A roa∣ring
Doctor too, broke out of the Kings Bench.
By your leave Gallants. I perceive your Company is
not yet full.
Are you of the invited sir?
It is not to be doubted sir. Yet a Voluntary. But there
are some without that are more then invited, yet come against
their wills.
How mean you M. Doctor?
Brought sir by a Constable and Officers, to be examined.
Whore's the jolly Justice?
What are they can ye tell sir?
A Gentlewoman, and a Spaniard.
A Spaniard, Ha!
I, a Spaniard, Ha: if you will have it so:
If we had but a Justice among vs to Examine 'hem, it
might pass the time well till sir Paule came.
Sir, here is a Justice, and for the same purpose too for
ought we know, that shall not resuse to doe it, and in sir Paules
Gown and Cap too.
This is a witty fellow.
Sir, you cannot doe a more acceptable office for your
friend, then to execute his place in his absence. Your anthori∣tie
makes you capable of it; and I doe the rather persuade it, be∣cause
the Gentlemen whom you wisely suspect for loose per∣son•,
may see some example of Justice; which may prevent
some present evil in their stay here.
I apprehend you friend. Give me the Gown and
Chair, and let the Delinquents approach. Vmh, vmh.
Tic a Spaniard indeed.
An English Spaniard sir, And therefore the verier
knave: as will bee proved I doubt not, to his shame, and my re∣noun
in the Common 〈◊〉. By your Worships leave.
What news b•ing •ou M. Constable?
Spanish news sir. Wi•t please your Worship to exa∣mine
the virtue of my Warrant, and then these Persons ae∣cordingly?
Very good! I am brought before my self to bee exa∣mined,
and before a fine rabble too! how the devil broke this un∣known
N•tion into my house, or doe not I mistake it? My
foolery has led me into a fine predicament. I will not yet dis∣close
my self: but look a little surther towards the event.
Are you a Spa•iard sir?
Such a one as you see Signior.
See Signior. Hee speaks nothing but Spanish. The
question will be how we shall understand this Examinant.
Hey day!
I do see Signior I thank the light, that you are a good∣lie
man of outward parts, and escaped it were the black Knight
himself, or him with the Fistula, the proprest man I have seen
of your Nation. They are a People of very spare diet, I have
•eard, and therefore seldom fat. Su•e you you have had most
of your br•eding in this C•untrey, the diet whereof you like
better then your own, which makes you linger here, after all
you Country men, upon •ome un•ouch plot. And I shall won∣der
therefore how you can speak no English. Can you speak
no English at all sir? Answer me I pray.
Not an English word not I s••. Alas I have not been
sieve •ayes in the K•ngio•e.
This is exc•llent!
I, peace Y u'll mar all if you laugh.
〈◊〉, what shall wee doe then? Gentlemen, have any
of you any Spanish, to help me to understand this strange
S•a•get?
Not a Real sir not I.
Nor a Rialls worth amongst vs of any language but
sh•er• English.
What S•iere of our Nation is next to Spain? Perhaps
he may vnd•rst•nd that Shi•r, English.
Devonshire or Corn•all sir.
Never credit me, but I will spout some Cornish at him.
Peden bras vidne whee his cregas.
Am I transform' • utterly? Is my Language altered with
my apparel, or are you all mad? what unspeakable misery is this.
I see we shall never understand, nor doe good on him, till
hee be instructed in the English tongue.
And please your worship, the best University for this pur∣pose
will be Bridewell. I am acquainted with the best Tutors there,
Master Cleanewhip, Master Dri•lash, and divers others.
You o•licious Rascal, are you mad?
No such matter sir. But in my right mind, and Middlesex
fear it not.
It must be so. His instruction will cost little there, if hee
be not too old to learn. Therefore set him by, and let me fall up∣on
the Gentlewoman.
Oh, hoe's rarely vexed.
Now Gentlewoman, will it please you to be vnmasqu'd.
Yes sir look you, I dare show my face.
Mistress Trainowell, as I apprehend.
Mistress Trainewell.
Trainewell!
Even she Gentlemen, as I will more circumstantially re∣ueale
unto you presently, after a word or two with my fellow pri∣sooner,
for which I crave your favour.
With all my heart, so you can speak Spanish and make
him understand you.
You see I am not the Woman you took me for: but one
ordained for your greater good. If you will give me my present
demand. I will turn all your disgrace into laughter; make you
of worthier esteem now at the instant, then ever you were, by
the general approbation of these, and all that know you beside.
Your Niece to shall be restored to your own liking, and all shall
be as well as you can wish. Otherwise, if you have a mind to bee
everlastingly shamed, by being perpetually laughed at, take your
own course, Isle take mine.
I am astonished. What is your Demand?
Whereas your purpose was to make a Whore. Make me
your honest Wife; no more. Bee sudden in your resolve, all will
be nought else.
I am in a mischievous straight then. Redeem to captum.
Thy wit deserves my love. Isle do it; here's my hand and faith, Isle
do it. Tho• art mine, and I am thine directly.
Then •jerk you sir.
Sir what will you say, if this Gentlewoman convert the
Spaniard, turn him true English subject, and present him to you
with the oaths of Alegiance, &amp; S•primacy in his mouth presently?
I will say, she •e•erues •or ever hereafter to hold her peace.
Now bear• up sir. Look confidently, and say, you put on
your Disguise purp•sly to entertain disguised Guests. Come a∣uant
with your Peace de goat, and begin with the Justice here.
Thou hast made me a M•n for ever, and I will make thee
a Woman directly. Gallants save you. See here the Metamor.
phosis, that means to metamorphose you all. Alas I know you for
all your Disguises, and thought to entertain you in your k•nd.
Sir P•ul Squelch!
I••st out of you, my Usurper, and most Vpstartical
Justice, whose o•lice is your trade, and Clerk your Prentice, I
will draw a man of little, or no Moment: yet my friend, and Master
Bulfinch, out of the Chair of Justice. •his my prognosticate
the p•t•ing of my self, or many others out of Commission with∣in
these few years; though I am no Prophet. Doe I speak English
now? Doe I know you now, or you me?
Question 〈◊〉, we should know one another sir Paul: or
else o•e of vs two were both very ignorant.
To proceed in my Metamorphosis. I will change you
most confused Roarer, into an accomplished Knight. And bid you
welcome, noble sir Phillip Luckless.
I like the change well, and thank you sir.
Next sir of you Roarer, or Iieter, or whatsoever you are,
I will make a complete Gentleman, most answerable to you name
Master Tridewell.
Very well sir.
But out of you Master Doctor, I will pick a certain
Known. W•ere is my Niece slrah?
Which of your N•eces sir?
Have I so many sir? I mean my only one Constance, find
her me, •r I will translate you out of an Aesculapian Cock into a
Newg••e •ird immediately.
Sir if you will Metamorphose me out of a Batch• lore, into
a Bridegroom, Isle show you your Niece.
This my Niece?
O have I found you Mistress? Sir this is the Gentlewoman
I brought before your worship to day.
Hold they peace; art in thy right mind?
As I am in my right mind and Middlesex, it is she sir. I
had not matter enough then to lay to her charge; for which I
thank your worship I kissed Newgate. But now I have sir; she has
lest a Child upon our Parish, I am sure got by an unknown fa∣there;
and has been a loose Liven, both at Duke Humfreyes, and
most of the winkd it houses about the Town these four years:
which I can sufficiently prove.
Hold thy peace Knave. Isle put these plums in thy mouth
else
Sir, my Child shall trouble your Parish no longer, here
is a Father, my troth plight Husband, sufficient to keep it and
me, wilt thou not Duck?
Duck? my name is Wedge•e, you mistake the man sure.
Sure I doe not. This Gentleman, and this Gentlewo∣man,
and this trusty Servant of ours are my witnesses, I am your
Wife sir.
O I am un•one, quite cast away. Sister help me now
with your Law wit, or I perish for ever.
This is not to bee endured: cheating, and vile abuse, This
contract can not bee lawful. One person mistaken for another a
lawful impediment to be diuore'd for, though they were married.
I• might doe well if (as hee con•esses himself) he had not
made all too sure, as well within as with•ut.
Sir Phillip, while they wrangle out their cause, l•t vs a∣gre:
Find you but the means to make her lawfully your Wife,
and here take her with my faithful promise, of the equal half of
any estate presently.
Sir Paul I thank you.
I say this is no lawful contract: And though we are le∣gally
divorced, yet neither he nor I may lawfully marry, while w•
both live, having been lawfully married. And till you can dis∣prove
that, sir Isle forbid your Banes good sir Phillip, and lay your
hopes a cooling, friendly Master Tridewell, for your love in mana∣ging
this business.
Lady give me leave, if I have strained a point of friend∣ship,
it was your love gave the strenght to my wit. Fit. 〈◊〉 love?
Your love indeed Lady. Which (and which Cupped par∣don
me for) now, that I see I may enjoy, I am not so eagerly ta∣ken
with, yet if you will—
Sir you cannot enjoy me, not he her, less you can disprove
the lawfulness of our former Marriage.
To clear that point, doe you know the Minister?
Tic not so long since, but I can remember his face.
Then to continue sir Pals Metamorphosis? Isle draw him
out of this Doctor. Is not this hee?
It is. But is not hee a lawful Minister; I would know that.
To clear that doubt there lies my Order of Priesthood.
Who, Oliuer!—
Even hee, the Parson Nochurch, and this my Patron, whom
I must beseech together with the whole company, to preserve me
out of the high Commission: for look you, here is again your
Licence.
Would you doe this Master Tridewell?
Faith I foresaw an unto wardnesse in the Match: which if
you repent the breach of, there's your Licence; and the way to
Church lies before you.
No sir. First get my brother free
of his contract, and then a Licence with your own name, and
Isle waite on you to Church, as soon as you will.
O that's
done already. What are •ou agreed?
Most happily sir, sister
alls well again. I have given her a hundred pound to relinquish
her right in me. Which before all these witnesses you doe; doe you
not?
Yes most freely.
Well then, I will not for∣swear
to marry, But if ever I steal a Wife again, let her be a
witch, and may I ourn with her for company. Governor, thou art
out of countenance, and thou too honest Humfrey, me thinks.
Come bear up. I forgive. It was your errors, not malice.
Sir for my part, isle take my corporal oath—
It s•ll not need good Humfrey.
And for me sir—wid. Nay, I dare not but beeleeue
th•e before thou speak Couernour: therefore prithee lets not
talk o•'t our selves, but quietly, and presently begin our travels,
that we may hear no body else talk on it.
Gentlemen and
L•dies, I •ee you all at peace•o well, that I wish no further content
to any, except Master Nonsense h•re.
Never credit me but I
have had sport en•ugh'o conscience, and if I doe not make a Stage
phyen't, when I come into Cornwall: I protest and vow then say
there was Nonsense in this.
I am glad you conclude so
•rendly with the rest. All the unquietness will be in the Kitchen
presently If your meat stay for you. Gallants. 
I was time to speak. They knock at Dresser already. Will ye in?
You •re all Welcome: And I wish every Guest
as merry, as our Northern •asses Feast.

WHether so fast Sr. Marmaduke, a word.
My honourable blood? wot I could stay
To give thee twenty, I am now engaged
To meet a noble Gentleman.
Or rather
A Gentlewoman, let her alone, and go
With me.
Whether.
Isle show thee a Lady of fire.
A Lady of the Lake were not so dangerous.
I mean a spirit in few words, because
I love thee, Isle be open. I am going
To see my Mistress.
Isle dispense with my
Occasion to see a handsome Lady,
I know you'll choose a rare one.
She is a creature
Worth admiration, such a beauty, wit,
And an estate besides, thou can not choose
But know her name, the Lady Lucina.
Is she your Mistress?
Mine, whose but mine?
Am I not nobly borne, does not my blood
Deserve her?
To tell you truth, I was now going thither,
Though I pretended an excuse, and with
A Complement from one that is your rival.
Does she love any body else?
I know not,
But she has half a score upon my knowledge
Are suitors for her favour.
Name but one,
And if he cannot show as many coats.
He thinks he has good cards for her, and likes
His game well.
Be an understanding Knight,
And take my meaning, if he cannot show
As much in Heraldry.
I doe not know how rich he is in fields,
But he is a gentleman.
Is he a branch of the Nobility,
How many Lords can he call cozen? else
He must be taught to know he has presumed
To stand in competition with me.
You wonot kill him.
You shall pardon me,
I have that within me must not be provoked,
There be some living now that ha been killed
For lesser matters.
Some living that ha been killed!
I mean some living that ha seen examples,
Not to confront Nobility, and I
Am sensible of my honour.
His name is
Sr. Ambrose.
Lamont a Knight of yesterday,
And he shall die to morrow, name another.
Not so fast Sir. you must take some breath.
I care no more for killing half a dozen
Knights of the lower house, I mean that are not
Descended from Nobility, then I doe
To kick any footman, and Sr. Ambrose were
Knight of the Sun, King Oberon should not save him,
Nor his Queen Mob.
Unluckily hes her'e sir.
Sr. Ambrose
How does thy Knighthood? ha.
My Nymph of honour well, I joy to see thee.
Sr. Marmaduke tells me thou art suitor to
Lady Lucina.
I have ambition
To be her servant.
Hast, thar't a brave Knight, and I commend
Thy judgement.
Sr Marmaduke himself leanes that way too.
Why did conceal it, come, the more the merrier▪
But I could never see you there.
I hope
Sir we may live.
Isle tell you Gentlemen,
Cupped has given us all one Livery,
I serve that Lady too, you understand me,
But who shall carry her, the fates determine,
I could be knighted too.
That would be no addition to
Your blood.
I think it would not, so my Lord told me,
Thou know my Lord, not the Earl, my tother
Cozen, theres a spark his predecessors
Have matched into the blood, you understand
He put me upon this Lady, I proclaim
No hopes, pray lets together Gentlemen;
If she be wise, I say no more, she shanot
Cost me a sigh, nor shall her love engage me
To draw a sword, I ha vowed that.
You did but jest before.
It were pity that one drop
Of your Heroic blood should fall to the ground,
Who knows but all your cozen Lords may die.
As I believe them not immortal sir.
Then you are gulf of honour swallow all,
May marry some Queen your self, and get Princes
To furnish the barren parts of Christendom.
Sir Marmaduke in private? my Lady wot
Speak with you.
Tic her servant, whats the matter?
I hope he is not sent for.
But come alone, I shall be troubled
With their inquiries, but Isle answer 'em.
Solomon?
My Lady would speak with you sir.
Me?
Not too loud, I was troubled with Sr. Marmaduke.
This is good news.
I doe not like this whispering,
Forget not the time, and to come alone.
This is excellent.
Solomon, dost not know me?
My business is to you sir, these
Kept me off, my Lady Lucina
Has a great mind to speak with you,
Little doe these imagine how she honours me.
If I fail, may the Surgeon
When he opens the next vein, let out all my honourable blood,
There's for thy pains, what thou shalt be hereafter
Time shall declare, but this must be concealed.
You look pleasant.
No, no I have no cause, you smile Sr. Ambrose.
Who I? the Coronell.
But of our file, another of her suitors.
Noble Coronell.
My honoured Knights, and men of lusty kindred.
Good morrow.
Morrow to all Gentlemen, Isle tell you
Who is returned?
From whence.
A friend of ours that went to travel.
Who, who?
I saw him within these three minutes, and know not how I
Lost him again, he's not far off, dee keep a Catalogue
Of your debts.
What debts?
Such dullness in your memory, there was
About six months ago a Gentleman
That was persuaded to sell all his land,
And to put the money out most wisely,
To have for one at his return from Venice,
The shotten Herring, is hard by.
Jack Freshwater, Isle not see him yet.
Must we pay him?
It will be for your honour, marry wee
Without much stain, may happily compound,
And pay him nothing.
Here comes the thing
With what formality he treads, and talks,
And manageth a toothpick like a Statesman.
How hoe's transformed?
Is not his soul Italian?
Isle not bid him welcome home.
Nor I.
Whats the tother Rat thats with him?
Dee not know him, tic the Court dancing Weasel.
A Dancer, and so gay.
A mere French footman Sir, does he not look
Like a thing come off of the Saltcellar.
A Dancer?
I would allow him gay about the legs,
But why his body should exceed decorum,
Is a sin of the state.
Thats all.
I can inform you of their dance in Italy,
Marry that very morning I left Venice,
I had intelligence of a new device.
For the dance Monsieur.
Si Signior, I know not
What countryman invented, but they say
There be Chopinoes made with such rare art,
That worn by a Lady when she means to dance,
Shall with their very motion sound forth music,
And by a secret sympathy with their tread
Strike any tune that without other instrument,
Their feet both dance and play.
Your lodging Monsieur,
That when I have leisure I may dare
Present an humble servitor.
I do lie
At the sign of Dona Margarita de Pia
In the Strand.
At the Maggot a Pie in the Strand sir.
At de Magdepie boon adieu servitor.
He wonot know us.
Dee see those Gentlemen.
Thou Platalone be silent.
Isle speak to him,
Y are welcome home sir.
Signior.
He wonot know me, this is excellent,
He shall be acquainted better, ere I part
With any sommes.
Next time weal not know him.
Would all my creditors had this blessed ignorance.
Now Coronell I'll take my leave.
I am enga'd too.
Well.
I shall meet you anon,
I am to waite upon a cousin of mine.
A Countess.
My Lord?
Cousin.
Your Lordship honours me in this acknowledgement.
Coronell.
Dee not know me sir?
Y are not a proclamation that every man is bound to take notice on,
And I cannot tell who you are by instinct.
A kinsman of mine Frank?
Good morrow to your Lordship.
Coronell? your humble servant, hark you Frank.
You are acquainted with my Lord then,
Is he not a complete Gentleman? his family
Came in with the Conqueror.
You had not else been kin to him.
A poor slip, a syens from that honourable tree.
He is the Ladies Idol, they ha not leisure
To say their prayers for him, a great advancer
Of the new Ball.
Nay hoe's right, right as my leg Coronell.
But tother Gentleman you doe not know his inside.
I ha seen him, he looks philosophical.
Who! hoe's the wit, whom your Nobility
Are much obliged to for his company,
He has a railing genius, and they cherish it,
Fling dirt in every face when hoe's in the humour,
And they must laugh, and thank him, he is dead else.
Will the Lords suffer him.
Or lose their mirth, hoe's known in every science,
And can abuse em all, some ha supposed
He has a worm ins brain, which at some time
Of the Moon doth ravish him into perfect madness,
And then he prophesies, and will depose
The Empeorr, and set up Bethalem Gabre.
Hoe's dead, I hope he wonot conjure for him.
His father shanot scope him nor his ghost,
Nor heaven, nor hell, his jest must ha free passage,
Hoe's gone, and I lose time to talk on him,
Farewell,
Your Countess
May expect too long,
Farewell Coronell.
Why doe you so commend him?
Does he not
Deserve it? name a gentleman in the Kingdom,
So affable, so moving in his language,
So pleasant, witty, indeed every thing
A Lady can desire.
Sure thou dost love him,
Isle tell his Lordship when I see him again,
How zealous you are in his commendation.
If I be not mistaken, I have heard
Your tongue reach higher in his praises Madam,
How ere you now seem cold, but if you tell him
My opinion, as you shall doe him no pleasure,
You can doe me no injury, I know
His Lordship has the constitution
Of other Courtiers, they can endure
To be commended.
But I prithee tell me,
Is not love whence this proceeds, I have
I must confess discoursed of his good parts,
Desired his company.
And had it?
Yes, and had it.
All night.
You are not I hope jealous,
If I should say all night I need not blush,
It was but at a Ball, but what of this?
En what you will
I hope you ha no patent
To dance alone with him, if he ha privilege
To kiss another Lady, she may say
He does salute her, and return a curse
To show her breeding, but Isle now be plainer,
Although you love this Lord, it may possible
He may dispose his thoughts another way▪
He may so.
Who can help it, he has eyes
To look on more than one, and understand
Perhaps to guide, and place his love upon
The most deserving object.
Most deserving,
This language is not level with that friendship,
You have professed, this touches a comparison.
Why doe you think all excellence is thronged
Within your beauty.
You are angry Lady,
How much does this concern you to be thus
Officious in his cause, if you be not
Engaged by more than ordinary affection.
I must interpret this no kind respect
To me.
Angry, ha, ha.
You then transgress against civility.
Good Madam why? because,
I think, and tell you that another Lady
May be as handsome in some mans opinion,
Admit I loved him too, may not I hold
Proportion with you, on some entreaty.
They're loud, Isle not be seen yet.
What is it that exalts you above all
Comparison? my father was as good
A gentleman, and my mother has as great
A spirit.
Then you love him too.
Twill appear
No greater miracle in me I take it,
Yet difference will be, perhaps I may
Affect him with a better consequence.
Your consequence perhaps may be denied too,
Why there are no such wonders in your eye
Which other composition doe not boast of,
My Lord no doubt hath in his travels clapped
As modest cheeks, and kissed as melting lips.
And yet mine are not pale.
It may be they blush for the teeth behind them.
I have read
No sonnets on the sweetness of your breath.
Tic not perfumed.
But I have heard of your tongue exalted much,
Highly commended.
Not above your forehead,
When you have brushed away the hairy pentehrush,
And made it visible.
Isle now interrupt 'em.
Theyle fall by the ears else presently.
My Lord.
What in contention Ladies?
Oh my Lord you're welcome.
Express it in discovery of that
Made you so earnest, I am confident
You were not practising a Dialogue
To entertain me.
Yet it did concern you.
Do not you blush, fie Madam.
Nay and you come to blush once, and fie Madam,
Isle know the secret, by this kiss I will,
And this.
You were kissed first, discover now
At your discretion.
My Lord we were in jest.
It might ha turned to earnest, if your Lordship
Had not interposed.
Come out with it.
We had a difference.
Well said.
About a man in the world, you are best name him.
You have the better gift at telling secrets.
Yet again, come Isle help it out, there is
A gentleman in the world, some call a Lord.
Did your Lordship over-heare us?
Nay nay, you must stand too't,
One, whom you
Love, it will appear no greater miracle
In you I take it, one no doubt that hath
Travelled, and clapped as modest cheeks, and kissed
As melting lips, thus far ime right, but what
Name this most happy man doth answer too,
Is not within my circle.
Yet you know him.
Not to retain your Lordship in the dark,
Confident you'll not accuse my modesty
For giving you a truth, you shall not travel
Beyond your self to find his name, but doe not
Triumph my Lord.
Am I so fortunate,
Then love I doe forgive thee, and will cherish
The flame I did suspect would ruin me,
You two divide my love, only you two▪
Be gentle in your Empire heavenly Ladies,
No enemy abroad can threaten you,
Be careful then, that you maintain at home
No civil wars.
How dee mean my Lord?
You are pleased to smile upon me gentle Lady,
And I have took it in my heart more than
Imaginary blessings with what pleasure
Could I behold this beauty, and consume
My understanding to know nothing else,
My memory to preserve no other figure.
My Lord, I am not worth your flattery.
I flatter you? Venus her self be judge,
To whom you are so like in all thats fair,
It were sin but to be modest.
How my Lord?
Do not mistake me, it were
A sin but to be modest in your praises,
Here is a hand, nature show me such another,
A brow, a cheek, a lip, and every thing,
Happy am I that Cupids blind.
Why happy?
If he could see, he would forsake his Mistress
To be my rival, and for thy embraces
Be banished heaven.
My Lord Isle take my leave.
If you did know how great a part of me,
Will whither in your absence, you would have
More charity, one accent of unkind
Language from you, doth wound me more than all
The malice of my destinies, oh dear Madam,
You say you'll take your leave of your poor servant▪
Say rather, you will dwell for ever here,
And let me stay and gaze upon
Your heavenly form.
I can be patient
To hear your Lordship mock me, these are but
A course reward for my good thoughts.
This tic to use plain dealing, and betray the inside
Of our hearts to women, did you think well of me
So late, and am I forfeited already,
Am I a Christian?
Yes I hope my Lord.
Make me not miserable then, dear Madam,
With your suspicion, I dissemble with you,
But you know too well what command your beauty
Has upon me.
Give me leave
My Lord to wonder you can love me,
With such a flame you have expressed yet she,
Your mistress?
You are both my Mistresses.
I like not this so well.
There is no way but one to make me happy.
I wish my Lord I had the art to effect
What you desire.
Or I.
It is within
Your powers.
Speak it my Lord.
Since it is so
That Ime not able to determine which
My heart, so equal unto both, would choose,
My suite is to your virtues, to agree
Between your selves, whose creature I shall be▪
You can judge better of your words than I,
My allegiance shall be ready if you can
Conclude which shall ha the supremacy;
Take pity on your servant gentle Ladies,
And reconcile a heart too much divided,
So with the promise of my obedience
To her that shall be fairest, wisest, sweetest
Of you two, when I next present a lover,
I take distracted leave.
Why, this is worse than all the rest.
Hoe's gone,
And has referred himself to us.
This will
Ask counsel.
And some time I would be loath
To yield.
And I, Cupped instruct us both.
ANd what made you to undertake this voyage▪
Sweet Signior Freshwater.
An affection
I had to be acquainted with some countries.
Give him good words.
And you return fraught home with the rich devices▪
Fashions of steeples, and the situations
Of galouses, and wit no doubt a bushel,
What price are Oats in Venice?
Signior
I kept no horses there, my man, and I
Were Asses.
How Signior?
Give him good words, a Pox take him.
Had not you land once?
I had some durrie acres.
I am his witness.
Which I reduced into a narrow compass,
Some call it selling.
He would sell bargains of a child.
And it was a thriving policy.
As how?
It was but two hundred pound Per annum sir,
A loan revenue.
And did you sell it all?
I did not leave an acre, rod, or perch,
That had been no discretion, when I was selling
I would sell to purpose, doe you see this roll,
I have good security for my money sir,
Not an egg here but has five chickens in it,
I did most pollitickely disburse my sums,
To have five for one at my return from Venice,
And now I thank my stars I am at home.
And so by consequence in three months your estate
Will be five times as much or quintupled.
Yes Signior quintupled,
I wonot purchase yet I mean to use
This trick seven years together, first
Isle still put out, and quintuple as you call it,
And when I can in my Exchequer tell
Two, or three Millions, I will fall a purchasing.
Kingdoms I warrant.
I have a mind to buy
Constantinople from the Turk, and give it
The Emperor.
What think you of Jerusalem?
If you would purchase that, and bring it nearer,
The Christian Pilgrims would be much obliged to ye,
When did you wash your sockes?
I wear none Signior.
Then tic your breath, to your lodging▪ and perfume it,
You'll tell the sweeter lies to them that will
Lose so much time to ask about your travel,
You wonot sell your debts?
Sell 'em, no Signior.
Have you as much left in ready cash as will
Keep you and this old troule a fortnight longer,
Die, and forgive the world, thou moist be buried,
And ha the Church-cloth, if you can put in
Security, the Parish shall be put
To no more charge, dost thou hope to have a penny
Of thy own money back, is this an age
Of five for one, die ere the town takes notice,
There is a hideous woman carries ballets,
And has a singing in her head, take heed
And hang thy self, thou moist not hear the time,
You remember Coriate.
Honest Tom Odcombe.
We'll ha more verses o'thy travels Coxcomb,
Books shall be sold in bushels in Cheap side,
And come in like the Pescods, wane loads full
Of thee, and thy man Apple Iohn that looks
As he had been a senight in the straw
A ripening for the market, farewell Rusiting,
Thou art not worth my spleen, doe not forget
My counsel, hang thy self, and thou go off
Without a Sessions.
Fine, Ime glad hoe's gone, Gudgine, what dost thou think.
I think you're well rid of railing Madcap.
Nay, nay he will not spare a Lord
But were not I best call in my monies Gudgin,
My estate wonot hold out, I must be more
Familiar with my gentlemen.
Jack Freshwater welcome from Venice.
I thank your honour.
Was it not Frank Barker that parted from you?
Yes my Lord.
Whats the matter?
There is a sum, my Lord.
Where is it Signior?
There was a sum my Lord delivered
From your poor servant Freshwater.
I remember,
But I have business now, come, home to me,
The monie's safe, you were to give me five▪
For one at your return.
I five? Your Lordship has forgot the Cinquepace.
Something it is, but when I am at leisure
We will discourse of that, and of your travel,
Farewell Signior.
First come to this? if Lords play fast and loose,
What shall poor Knights, and gentlemen?
Hum, tic he.
A Pox upon him, what makes he in my way.
Noble Coronell.
Que dite vous monsieur.
Que dite vous?
A wy, Ie no pa parley Anglois,
There were five English pieces.
Ie no parley Anglois, me speak no word English,
Votre seviteur.
Adieu five pieces,
Gudgin gape, first not he?
They wonot use me o'this fashion,
Did he not speak to me in the morning?
Yes sir.
I think so,
But then you would not know him in Italian,
And now he will not know you in French.
Call you this selling of land, and putting out money
To multiply estate?
To quintuply five for one, large interest.
Five for one, tic ten to one if I get my principal.
Your roll is not at the bottom, yet try the rest.
I ha, Signior farewell.
Did speak with the Coronell?
I met him opportunely after all the rest,
And told him how much it would concern
His livelihood to make haste.
He must not be seen yet, you know where
To attend for him, give him access by
The garden to my chamber, and bring
Me nimbly knowledge when he is there.
I shall forsooth.
Very well an dat be skirvy you run trot, trot, trot,
Pisha, follow me, foot Madame, can you not tell
So often learning—Madam you foot it now
Ply it ill.
Excellent, better den excellent pishaw—you be laughed
When you come to do Ball; I teach tree hundred, never
Forgot so much, me sweat taking pain, and fiddling Ladies.
Fiddling Ladies, you Molecatcher.
Purquoy for telling you
Dance not well, you commit fat, and beat me for my
Diligence becar you dance your pleasure.
No Monsieur Le Frisk put not up your pipe, my La∣die
Was but in jest, and you must take it for a favour.
I veare no favours in dat place, should any gentleman
Of England give me blow, diable me teach him French Passage.
Nay you shanot be so angry, I must have a Coronte,
Pray Madam be reconciled.
Come Monsieur I am sorry.
Sorre, tat is too much par ma foy, I kiss tat white hand,
Give me one two tree buffets, aller, aller look up your
Countenance, your English man spoil you, he no teach
You look up, pishaw, carry your body in the swimming
Fashion, and deu allei moi moselle ha, ha, ha,
So for boon excellent becar.
Nay a Country dance Scutilla, you are idle,
You know we must be at the Ball anon, come.
Where is the Ball this night.
At my Lord Rainebowes.
Oh he dance finely becar, he deserve the Ball of de world,
Fine, fine gentleman, your oder men dance lop, lop with
De lame leg as they want crushes begore, and look for
Argent in the ground pishaw,
Ho, ho, for boon.
Now Madame we take our leave.
Isle recompense this kind visit: does your coach stay?
Yes Madam,
Your Ladyship will be too much troubled.
I owe more service.
Monsieur you'll begone too.
I have more Lady, my Scholars.
Is that the way of your instrument.
All a murdu France, fit, fit adieu
Madam votre servitor,
Adieu demi Monsieur.
Sir, you are welcome.
I thank you Lady.
The tim's too narrow to discourse at large,
But I intend you a service,
You have deserved it
In your own nobleness to one I call a kinsman,
Whose life without your charity had been
Forfeit to his generals anger, it was not
Without his cause you after quit your regiment.
He was my friend, forget it.
You were sent for
By the Lady Lucina.
Whose command I waite.
It was my desire to prepare you for
The entertainment, be but pleased to obscure
Your self behind these hangings a few minutes,
I hear her, you may trust me.
Without dispute, I obey you Lady.
Now Scutilla we are ripe, and ready
To entertain my Gamesters, my man said
They promised all to come, I was afraid
These Ladies in their kind departure wo'd not
Bequeath me opportunity, and the mirth
Doth in the imagination so tickle me,
I wo'd not willingly ha lost it for a Jewel
Of some value.
Then your purchase holds.
If they hold their affections, and keep touch,
Weal ha some sport.
Sr. Marmaduke Travers.
Away Scutilla, and
Laugh not loud between our acts, weal meet
Again like music, and make our selves merry.
I waite ne'er you.
Sr. Markmaduke I thought I should have had
Your visit without a summonds.
Lady you gave
One feather to the wings I had before,
Can there be at last a service to employ
Your creature?
Something hath pleaded for you in your absence.
Oh let me dwell upon your hand, my stars
Have then remembered me again.
How doe the Fens?
Goes the droning forward, and your Iron Mills?
Droning, and Iron Mills? I know not Madam.
Come, you conceal your industry, and care
To thrive, you need not be so close to me.
By this hand Lady, have I any Iron Mills?
I am abused else, nay I doe love
One that has Wind-mills in his head.
How Madam?
Projects, and Proclamations, did not you
Travel to Yarmouth to learn how to cast
Brass buttons, nay I like it, it is an age
For men to look about 'em, shall I trust
My estate to one that has no thrift, a fellow
But with one face? my husband shall be a Ianus,
He cannot look too many ways, and is
Your patent for making Vinegar confirmed:
What a face you put upon it nay, ne'er dissemble,
Come I know all, you'll thank that friend of yours,
That satisfied my inquiry of your worth
With such a welcome character, but why
Doe I betray my self so fast? beshrow
His commendations.
How is this? some body
That meant me well, and knew her appetite
To wealth hath told this of me, Isle make use ont;
Well Madam, I desired these things more private
Till something worth a mine, which I am now
Promoving had been perfect to salute you,
But I perceive you hold intelligence
In my affairs, which I interpret love,
And Isle requite it, will you be content
Be a countess for the present.
I shall want
No honour in your love.
When shall we marry?
Something must be prepared.
A licence, and say no more,
How blessed am I, doe not blush,
I wonot kiss your lip, till I ha brought it.
Ha, ha, Scutilla.
Be secret still.
Can thou not laugh?
Yes Madam you have kept your word,
The Knights transported, gone
To prepare things for the wedding.
How did thou like the Iron Mills.
And the Brass buttons rarely, have you devices
To jeer the rest.
All the regiment on 'em, or Isle break my bowstrings.
Sr. Ambrose Lamont.
Away, and let the Swallow enter.
Why Sir, did I command you give access to none▪
But Sr. Ambrose Lamont?
Whom you know I sent for,
Audacious Groom.
It is Sir, Madam.
It is Sr. Ambrose Coxcomb, is it not,
Cry mercy noble sir, I took you muffled
For one that every day solicits me
To bestow my little dog upon him, but you're welcome,
I think I sent for you.
It is my happiness
To waite your service Lady.
I hear say you have vowed to die a Bachelor,
I hope it is not true sir.
I die a Bachelor?
And that you'll turn religious Knight.
I turn religious Knight, who has abused me?
I would only know the truth, it were great pity,
For my own part I ever wished you well,
Although in modesty I have been silent,
Pray what's a clock?
Howes this?
I had a dream last night, me thought I saw you
Dance so exceedingly rarely, that I fell
In love.
In love with me.
With your legs sir.
My leg is at your service to come over.
I wondered at my self, but I considered,
That many have been caught with handsome faces,
So my love grew.
Upwards.
What followed in my dream
I ha forgot.
Leave that to finish waking!
Since the morning
I find some alteration, you know
I have told you twenty times I would not love you,
But whether it were your wisdom or your fate
You would not be satisfied, now I know not
If something were procured, what I should answer.
A licence, say no more.
Would were my estate were doubled.
For my sake.
You have not Purchased since you fell in love?
Not much land.
Revels have been some charge to you, you were ever
A friend to Ladies, pity but he should rise
By one, has fallen with so many, had you not
A head once?
A head? I have one still.
Of hair I mean,
Favours ha gleaned too much, pray pardon me
If it were mine, they should go look their bracelets,
Or stay till the next crop, but I blush sir
To hold you in this discourse, you will perhaps
Construe me in a wrong sense; but you may use
Your own discretion till you know me better,
Which is my souls ambitions.
I am blessed.
Cunning Gypsy she'll use me thus too
When I come too't?
Lady I know your mind, when I see you next.
You'll see me again, ha ha ha, Scutilla.
Here Madam almost dead with stifling my laughter,
Why hoe's gone for a Licence, you did enjoin him no Silence.
I would have 'em all meet and brag o'their several
Hopes they wonot else be sensible, and quit me o'their
Tedious visitation, who's next?
I would the Coronell were come,
I long to have about with him.
Mr. Bostocke Madam.
Retire, and give the lay admittance.
Madam, I kiss your fair hand.
Oh Mr. Bostocke,
The humblest of your servants.
Two not become your birth, and blood to stoop
To such a title.
I must confess dear Lady,
I carry in my veins more precious honour
Then other men, blood of a deeper crimson,
But you shall call me any thing.
Not I sir,
It would not become me to change your title,
Although I must confess I could desire
You were less honourable.
Why I prithee,
First a fault to spring from the Nobility?
There be some men have sold well favoured Lordships,
To be ill favoured Noblemen, and though
I wear no title of the state, I can
Adorn a Lady.
That is my misfortune,
I would you could not sir.
Are you the worse
For that? consider Lady.
I have considered,
And I could wish with all my heart you were
Not half so noble, nay indeed no Gentleman.
How Lady?
Nay, if you give me leave to speak my thoughts,
I would you were a fellow of two degrees
Beneath a foot man, one that had no kindred,
But Knights of the post, nay worse, pardon me sir,
In the humour I am in, I wish, and heartily,
You were a son of the people rather then.
Good Madam give me your reason.
Because I love you.
Few women wish so ill to whom they love.
They doe not love like me then.
Say you so.
My welds a beggar, nay the title of
A Lady which my husband left, is a shadow
Compared to what you bring to ennoble me,
And all the children you will get, but I
Out of my love desire you such a one,
That I might add to you, that you might be
Created by my wealth, made great by me,
Then should my love appear, but as you are,
I must receive addition from you.
No body hears, why hark you Lady, could
You love me, if I were less honourable?
Honourable? why you cannot be so base
As I would have you, that the world might say
My marriage gave you somewhat.
Say you so,
Under the Rose, if that will doe you a pleasure,
The Lords doe call me cousin, but I am.
What?
Suspected.
How?
Not to be lawful, I came in at the Wicket,
Some call it the Window.
Can you prove it.
Say no more.
Then I prefer you before all my suitors,
Sr. Ambrose Lamont, and Sr. Marmaduke
Travers are all Mountebanks.
What say to the Coronell.
A Lanse pre sado, how my joy transports me,
But shall I trust to this, doe not you flatter?
Will not you fly from that, and be legitimate,
When we are married, you men are too cunning
With simple Ladies.
Doe but marry me,
Isle bring the Midwife.
Say no more, provide
What you think necessary, and all shall be
Dispatched.
I guess your meaning, and thus seal
My best devotion.
Away now and present your self.
Oh Scutilla, hold me, I shall fall
In pieces else, ha ha, ha.
Beshrow me Madam, but I wonder
At you, you wound him rarely up.
Have not I choice of precious husbands? now and
The Coronell were here, the task
Were over.
Then you might go play,
Madam the Coronell.
Is he come once more? withdraw, bid him march hi∣there.
Now is my turn Madam.
Yare welcome sir, I thought you would have gone,
And not graced me so much as with a poor
Salute at parting.
Gone whither?
To the wars.
She jeers me already, no Lady I'm already
Engaged to a siege at home, and till that service
Be over, I enquire no new employments.
For honours sake what siege?
A Citadel,
That several forces are set down before,
And all is entrenched.
What Citadel?
A woman.
She cannot hold out long.
Ostend was sooner taken then her fort
Is like to be for any thing I perceive.
Is she so well provided?
Her provision
May fail her, but she is devilish obstinate,
She fears nor fire nor famine.
Whats her name?
Lucina.
Ha ha ha, alas poor Coronell;
If you'll take my advice remove your siege,
A province will be sooner won in the
Low countries, ha ha ha.
Lady, you sent for me.
It was but to tell you my opinion in this business,
You'll sooner circumcise the Turks dominions,
Then take this toy you talk off, I doe know it,
Farewell good Soldier, ha ha ha, and yet tic pity,
Is there no stratagem, no trick, no undermine;
If she be given so desperate, your body
Had need to be well victualled, theres a city
And suburbs in your belly, and you must
Lay in betimes to prevent mutiny
Among the small guts, which with wind of avenge else
Will break your guard of buttons, ha ha ha
Come weal laugh, and lie down in the next room Scutilla.
So so, I did expect no good,
Why did not I strike her, but Isle doe something,
And be with you to bring before you think out,
Malice and Mercury assist me.
SO so, yau'e a precious time on it.
Who can help it Frank, if Ladies will
Be wilde, repentance tame 'em, for my part
I court not them, till they provoke me toote.
And doe they both affect you.
So they say,
And did justify it to my face.
And you did praise their modesty.
I confess I praised 'em
Both when I saw no remedy.
You did, and they believed.
Religiously?
Do not
Doe not believe it my young Lord, theyle make
Fools of a thousand such, they doe not love you.
Why, and shall please your wisdom?
They are women,
Thats a reason, and may satisfy you,
They cannot love a man.
What then?
Themselves,
And all little enough, they have a trick
To conjure with their eyes, and perhaps raise
A masculine spirit, but lay none.
Good Cato
Be not over-wise now, whats the reason
That women are not sainted in your Calender,
You have no frosty constitution?
Would you were half so honest.
Why a woman
May love thee one day.
Yes when I make legs
And faces like such fellows as you are.
Monsieur La Frisk.
Servitor.
Nay Frank thou shat not go.
Isle come again when you ha done your Jig.
A Monsieur.
Come you shall sit down, this fellow will make thee laugh.
I shall laugh at you both, and I stay.
Hark you Monsieur, this gentleman has a great
Mind to learn to dance.
He command my service,
Please your Lordship begin tat he may
See your profit alkey — ho.
How like you this Frank?
Well enough for the dogge-dayes, but have
You no other dancing for the Winter, a man
May freeze and walk thus.
It be all your grace Monsieur, your
Dance be horseplay begar for de stable not
De chamber, your ground passage ho
Never hurt de back Monsieur, nor trouble
De leg mush, ho plait ill you learn
Monsieur.
For mirth sake, and thou love me.
Begar I teach you presently, dance with all de
Grace of de body for your good, and my profit.
Pardon me my Lord.
Oh not pardon moi.
Doe but observe his method
I shall never endure it, pox upon him.
Tic but dis in de beginning, one, two, tree, four, five, the
Cinquepace, alley Monsieur, stand upright an begar.
Let him set you in toth posture.
My brother my Lord know well for de little kit he fiddle
And me for de posture of de body, begar de King has no too
Such subjects ho, dere be one foot, two foot, have
You tree foot, begar you have more den I have den.
I shall break his fiddle.
Thou art so humorous.
One, been two ho, you go to fast, you be at Dover
Begar, and me be at Greenwich, tree toder leg pishaw.
A pox upon your legs, isle no more.
Purquoy.
Ha ha ha, I wot some Ladies were here to laugh
At thee now, you wonot▪ be so rude to meddle with
The Monsieur in my lodging.
Isle kick him to death, and bury him in a Base-violl Iackalent.
Iackalent, begar you be Iackenape, if I had my weapon
You durst no affront me, I be as good gentleman, an for
All my fiddle as you, call me a Jack a de lent.
Rail upon him Monsieur, Isle secure thee, ha ha ha.
Because your leg have de pose, or someting dat make
Em no vell, and frisk, you make a fool of a Monsieur.
My Lord use me like Gentleman, an I care no rush for
You, be desperate, kill me, and me complain to de
King, and teach new dance, galliard to de gibbet, you
Be hanged in English fashion.
Go, yar'e an impertinent Lord, and I will be revenged
Ha, ha, good Diogenes, come Monsieur,
You and I wonot part yet.
My Lord, if you had not been here, me wot have
Broken his head with my fiddle.
You might sooner have broke your fiddle, but strike up.
Allei ho boon.
I spy Sir Marmaduke coming after me,
This way Isle take to avoid his tedious questions,
Heel interrupt me, and I ha not finished
Things fit for my design.
Tic Mr Bostocke, little does he think
What I am going upon, I fear I shanot
Contain my joys.
Good fortune to Sr. Ambrose.
Sir you must pardon, I cannot waite
Upon you now, I ha business of much consequence.
I thought to have made the same excuse to you,
For at this present I am so engaged.
We shall meet shortly.
Ha ha ha.
Poor Gentleman how is he beguiled.
Your nose is wiped, hum, tic Sr. Marmaduke,
I must salute him.
The Coronell? theres no going back.
What misfortun's this? but tic no matter,
Noble sir how first?
As you see sir.
As I could wish noble Mr. Bostocke,
Your humble servant Coronell.
Nay nay a word.
I shannot forbear jeering these poor things,
They shall be mirth.
What all met so happily? and how my
Sparks of honour?
Things so tickle me,
I shall break out.
When saw, you our Mistress Lady Lucina.
My suite is cold there, Mr. Bostocke carries
The Lady clean before him.
No no not, it is Sr. Marmaduke.
I glean by smiles after Sr. Ambrose.
None of you see her to day?
I may as soon marry the Moon, and get
Children on her, I see her not this three days,
Tic very strange, I was to present my service
This morning.
You'll march away with all.
I cannot tell, but theres small sign of victory,
And yet me thinks you should not be neglected,
If the Fens go forward, and your Iron Mills.
Has she betrayed me?
Some are industrious,
And have the excellent skill to cast brass buttons.
Coronell softly.
How will you sell your vinegar a pint,
The Patent something saucy.
The Coronell jeers him.
Excellent, ha ha.
Had not you a head once,
Of hair I mean, favours ha gleaned too much,
If Ladies will ha bracelets, let 'em stay
Till the next crop.
Hum, the very language she used to me.
Does he jeer him too, nay nay, prithee spare him. ha▪ ha.
You may doe much, and yet I could desire
You were less honourable, for though you have
Blood of a deoper crimson, the good Lady
Out of her love could wish you were a thing
Beneath a foot man, and that you had no kindred
But Knights of the post.
Good Coronell.
Nay pardon me,
In the humour I am in, I wish, and heartily,
You were a son of the people.
Coronell,
How the devil came he by this?
Under the Rose there was a gentleman
Came in at the Wicker, these are tales of which
The Greeks have store, fair hopes Gentlemen.
How came you by this intelligence.
Nay Isle no whispering, what I say to one
Will concern every man, she has made
You coxcombs.
It does appear.
And more then does appears yet
I had my share.
Thats some comfort, I was afraid.
But you shall pardon me, Isle conceal
The particulars of her bountiful abuses
To me, let it suffice I know we are all
Ieer'd most abominably, I stood behind
The hangings when she signed your several passes,
And had my own at last worse than the Constables,
That this is true, you shall have more than oath,
Isle join wee in revenge, and if you wonot,
I will do it alone.
She is a devil.
Damme her then, till we think on something else,
Lets all go back, and rail upon her.
Agreed, a pox upon her.
We cannot be to bitter, shees a hell Cat.
Dee hear, listen to me our shames are equal,
Yet if we all discharge at once upon her,
We shall but make confusion, and perhaps
Give her more cause to laugh, let us choose one,
To curse her for us all.
Tic the best way, and if you love me gentlemen,
Engage me, I deserve this favour for my
Discovery, Isle swear her into hell.
Troth I ha no good vein, I me content.
Gentlemen, noble Coronell as you respect
A wounded branch of the Nobility,
Make it my office, she abused me most, and if
The devil doe not furnish me with language,
Isle say he has no malice.
If they consent.
With all our hearts.
I thank you gentlemen.
But lets us all together, Isle not be barred,
Now and then to interpose an oath,
As I shall find occasion.
You'll relieve me
When I take breath, then you may help, or you,
Or any to confound her.
Let away.
Never was witch so tortured.
Noble Mr. Freshwater welcome from travel.
Where be the Ladies?
In the next room sir;
My Lady Rosomond is sitting for her picture,
I presume you will be welcome.
An English Painter?
Yes sir.
Prithee let me see him.
This way,
Honest Gudgin,
How, and the matters abroad, a touch of
Thy travel, what news.
First, let me understand the state of things
At home.
We have little alteration since thou went,
The same news are in fashion,
Only gentlemen are fine to ramble, and stumble
For their flesh since the breach of the bank side.
Is my aunt defunct.
Yet the Viragoes ha not lost their spirit, some on
'Em have challenged the field, every day where
Gentlemen have met 'em, oh the dogge-dayes bit
Shreudly, it was a villainous dead vacation.
Is Pals alive still?
Yes, yes, a little sick of the stone, she voids some
Every day, but she is now in physic,
And may in time recover.
The Exchange stands?
Longer than a Church,
There is no fear while the Merchants have faith;
A little of thy travels, for the time is precious, what
Things have you seen or done since you left England?
I have not leisure to discourse of particulars, but first
My Mr. and I have run France through, and through.
Through and through, how is that man?
Why once forward, and once backward, thats through
And through.
It was but a cowardly part to run a Kingdom
Through backward.
Not with our horses Solomon, not with our horses.
Madam, I did not think your Ladyship
Had so little judgement
As how Seignior?
As to let an English man draw
Your Picture, and such rare Mounsieurs in town.
Why not English?
Oh by no means Madam,
They ha not active Pencils.
Think you so.
You must encourage strangers while you live,
It is the Character of our nation,
We are famous for dejecting our own countrymen.
Is that a principle.
Who teaches you to dance?
A Frenchman Signior.
Why so, tic necessary,
Trust while you live the Frenchman with your legs,
Your faces with the Dutch, if you mislike
Your faces, I mean if it be not sufficiently
Painted, let me commend upon my credit
A precious workman to your Ladyship.
What is he.
Not an English man I warrant you,
One that can please the Ladies every way,
You shannot sit with him all day for shadows,
He has Regallias, and can present you with
Suckets of fourteen pence a pound, Canary,
Prunellas, Venice glasses, Parmisan,
Sugars, Bologuia, Sausages all from Antwerpe;
But he will make Ollepodredos most incomparably.
I have heard of him by a noble Lady
Told me the tother day, that sitting for
Her picture, she was stifled with a strange
Perfume of horns.
A Butcher told me of 'em, very likely.
When I have need
Of this rare Artist I will trouble you
For my directions, leaving this discourse,
How thrives your Catalogue of debtors Signior.
All have paid me, but;
You shannot name me in the list of any
That are behind, beside my debt a purse
For clearing the account.
You are just Madam,
And bountiful, though I came hither with
Simple intention to present my service
It shall be crossed. Gudgin remember too,
Her Ladyships name.
My Coffin has the
Same provision for you.
Sir, Master Barker.
Madam Isle take my leave, Isle find another
Time to attend my Lady, there's no light,
I cannot abide this fellow.
Madam, Master Barker hath some design
Which he pretends concerns us both.
Hoe's welcome, what first?
My Lord commends him to ye.
Which Lord Sir?
The Lord, the fine, the wanton dancing Lord,
The Lord that plays upon the Gitterne, and sings,
Leaps upon tables, and does pretty things,
Would have himself commended.
So Sir.
He loves you both, he told me so,
And laughs behind a vilard at your frailty,
He cannot love that way you imagine,
And Ladies of the game are now no miracles.
Although he use to rail thus, yet we have
Some argument to suspect his Lordships tongue
Has been to liberal.
I find it too, and blush within to think
How much we are deceived, I may be even
With this May-Lord.
But does his Lordship think
We were so taken with his person.
You wot not, and you knew as much as I.
How Sir?
I ha been acquainted with his body
Ha known his baths and physic.
First possible, I am sorry now at heart.
I had a good thought on him, hee shall see it,
For I will love some other in revenge,
And presently if any gentleman
Ha but the grace to smile, and court me up too't.
Hum?
A bubble of Nobility, a giddy
Fantastic Lord, I want none of his titles,
Now in my imaginations he appears
Ill favoured, and not any part about him
Worth half a commendation, wot he were here.
Your make more on him.
That I might examine,
And doe my judgement right between you two now▪
How much he would come short, you have an eye
Worth forty of his, nose of another making;
I saw your teeth en now compared to which,
His are of the complexion of his comb,
I mean his box, and will in time be yellower,
And ask more making clean, you have a show
Of something on your upper lip, a Witch
Has a Philosophers beard to him, his chin
Has just as many hounds as hairs that ever
My eyes distinguished yet, you have a body
And unpromising in his slashes, one
May see through him, and for his legs they both
Would but make stuffing for one handsome stocking,
They are a Lords I will be sworn, I dote upon him,
I could wish somewhat, but I me sworry sir
To trouble you so much, all happy thoughts
Possess you.
How is this, if I have wit
To apprehend, this Lady does not hate me?
I have professed a cinicke openly,
This language melts, Isle visit her again.
Sir, I have a small request to you.
Lady command.
If you think I have power
Or will to deserve from you any curtsy,
Pray learn to dance.
To dance?
At my entreaty sir to dance,
It was the first thing took me with his Lordship,
You know not what may follow, fare you well.
What pretends this to dance, theres something in it,
I've revenged my self already upon my Lord,
Yet deeper with my Lady is the sweeter,
Something must be resolved.
Enough enough of conscience, lets reserve
Part of the mirth to another time, I shall
Meet some other hot worships at the Ball;
Unless their appehension prompt 'em,
Earlier to know their folly in pursuing me.
Madam, the Gentlemen that were here this morning
In single visits are come all together,
And pray to speak with you.
They've met already give 'em access.
I wonder what they'll say.
Be confident she shall endure it.
So so,
How dee Gentlemen, yar'e very welcome.
Tic no matter for that we doe not come to be
Welcome, neither will we be welcome, speak Mr. Bostocke.
We come to mortify you.
You will use no violence.
But of our tongues, and in the names of these
Abused gentlemen, and my self I spit
Defiance, stand further off, and be attentive,
Weep or doe worse, repentance wet thy linen,
And leave no vein for the Doctor.
They're mad.
There is no danger Madam, let us hear 'em,
If they scold we two shall be hard enough for 'em,
And they were twenty.
Thou Basilisk.
At first sight?
Whose eyes shat fire, and poison,
Malicious as a Witch, and much more cunning,
Thou that dost ride men.
I ride men?
Worse than the night Mare, let thy tongue be silent.
And take our scourges patiently, thou hast
In thy own self all the ingredients
Of wickedness in thy sex, able to furnish
Hell if it were insufficiently provided
With falsehood, and she fiend of thy own making
Circa that charmed men into swine, was not
So much a Jew as thou art, thou hast made
Vs Asses, dost thou hear?
He speaks for us all.
But it is better we be all made such,
Than any one of us be monstred worse
To be an Ox thy husband.
Luc. Ha ha ha.
Dost thou laugh Crocodile?
That was well said.
Spirit of flesh and blood Isle conjure thee,
And let the devil lay thee on thy back
I care not.
Admirable Bostocke.
That spirit of flesh and blood was well enforced.
You thought us animals insensible
Of all your juglings did you Prorsepnie?
I come to that.
And that we loved, loved with a pox your physiognomy,
Know we but tried thee Beldam, and thou art
Thy self a son of the earth.
How, she a son?
It was a mistake, but she knows my meaning,
I begin to be a weary gentlemen,
Isle breath a while.
Tic time, and that you may
Not want encouragement take that.
Gentlemen Coronell, what dee mean.
You shall know presently, dare but lift thy voice
To fright this Lady, or but ask thy pardon,
My sword shall rip thy body for thy part,
And nail it on her threshold, or if you,
The proudest offer but in looks to justify
The baseness of this wretch your souls shall answer't.
Howes this?
Oh impudence unheard, pardon Madam
My tedious silence, the affront grew up
So fast I durst not trust my understanding
That any gentleman could attempt so much
Dishonour to a Lady of your goodness;
Was this your project to make me appear
Guilty of that I hate beyond all sacrilege,
Was it for this you prayed my company,
You todpoles? tic your presence charms my sword,
Or they shall quickly pay their forfeit lives,
No Altar could protect 'em.
We are betrayed.
Was it not his plot to have us rail?
Say, shall I yet be active?
By no means,
This is no place for blood, nor shall any cause
Engage to such a danger.
Live to be
Your own vexations then till you be mad,
And then remove your self with your own garters.
You shannot go before I know from whose
Brain this proceeded, you are the mirth,
Was ever civil Lady so abused
In her own house by ungrateful horseleeches?
Could your corrupted natures find no way
But this to recompense her noble favours,
Her courteous entertainments, would any
Heathens done like to you? admit she was
So just to say she could see nothing in you
Worthy her dearer thoughts as to say truth,
How could a creature of her wit and judgement
Not see how poor and miserable things
You are at best? must you impudent
In such a loud, and peremptory manner,
Disturb the quiet of her thoughts and dwelling
Gentlemen rather hinds scarce fit to mix,
Unless you mend her manners with her drudges.
This shows a nobleness, dost not Scutilla?
Why sir, did not you tell us?
What did I tell you?
Nothing.
Be gone, least I forget my self.
I have a token to remember you
A palsy upon your fingers noble Coronell.
Was this his stratagem? we must be gone.
Sir I must thank ye, and desire your pardon,
For what has past to your particular.
Ya've more than satisfied my service in
Th'acknowledgement: disdain cannot provoke
Me to be so insolent.
Again I thank you.
I can forget your last neglect, if you
Think me not too unworthy to expect
Some favour from you.
How dee mean.
Why as
As a servant should that is ambitious?
To call you Mistress, till the happier title
Of wife crown his desires.
I must confess,
This has won much upon me: but two words
To such a bargain, you're a gentleman,
Ime confident would adventure for me.
As far as a poor life could speak my service.
Thats fair and far enough, I make not any
Exception to your person.
Body enough
I hope to please a Lady
But.
To my fortune.
To that the least, I have estate for both.
Though if hold no comparison with your,
It keeps me like a gentleman.
I have a scruple.
You honour me in this,
Theres hope, if I can take a way that care,
You may be mine.
Sir can you put me in security
That you have been honest?
Honest, how dee mean?
Been honest of your body, you are gentlemen,
Out of the wars live lazy, and feed high,
Drink the rich grape, and in Canary may
Doe strange things, when the wine has washed away
Discretion.
What is your meaning Lady?
I doe not urge you for the time to come.
Pray understand, have you been honest hitherto
And yet because you shannot trouble friends
To be compurgators, Isle be satisfied;
If you will take your own oath that you are.
Honest of my body?
Yes sir, it will become me to be careful
Of my health, Isle take your own assurance,
If you can clear your body by an oath,
Isle marry none but you, before this gentlewoman.
Your reason why you use me thus?
I wonder you will ask, doe not I hear
How desperate some ha been, what pain, what physic.
This is a tale of a tubbe Lady.
You rid no match without a shirt, to show▪
The complexion of your body, I ha done sir
When you resolve to swear you're honest, I
Vow to he yours, your wife: I am not hasty,
Think on it, and tell me when we meet again
Anon, to night, to morrow, when you please;
So farewell noble Coronell, come Scutilla.
First come to this? I am jeered again, first possible
To be honest at these years, a man of my
Complexion, and acquaintance? was ever
A gentleman put to this oath before a this fashion?
If I ha the grace now to forswear my self,
Something may be done, and yet tic doubtful
Sheele have more tricks, if widows be thus coltish,
The devil will have a task that goes a wooing.
Such an affront my Lord, I was ashamed on it,
A mere conspiracy to betray our fems▪
But had you seen how poorly they behaved
Themselves, such carven Knights, a pair of Drone-Bees
In the midst o'my vexation, if I could
Forbear to laugh, I ha no blood in me,
They were so far from striking that they stood
Like Images, things without life and motion,
Fear could not make so much as their tongue tremble,
Left all to me.
So so, what then did you.
The Lady laughed too, and the Coronell
Increased his noise, to see how she derided
The poor Knights.
Leave their Character and proceed
To what you did.
You shall pardon me my Lord,
I am not willing to report my self,
They and the Lady, and the Coronell
Can witness I came on.
But how came you off cousin? that must commend you.
I ha my limbs my Lord, no sign of loss
Of blood you see, but this was fortune, how
The Coronell came oft's uncertain.
Doe not you know?
No, I left him, I think tic time.
You did not kill him?
Upon my faith my Lord I meant it not,
But wounds fall out some time when the swords in,
These are poor things to brag on, I ha saved my
Self you see.
If it be so Isle call you cousin still, my satinist
Hark you shall beat this fellow.
Shall I my Lord without cause?
He shall give you cause presently, how now
Gummed taffeta.
I pay for what I wear
My sattaine Lord? your Wardrobe does not keep
Me warm, I doe not run of the ticket with
The Mercers wife, and lecher out my debts
At country houses.
Theres something else you doe not.
I doe not use to flatter such as you are,
Whose bodies are so rotten, theyle scarce keep
Their souls from breaking out, I write no odes
Upon your Mistress to commend her postures,
And tumbling in a coach towards Paddington,
Whether you hurry her to see the Pheasants,
And try what operation the eggs have
At your return, I am not taken with
Your mighty nonsense, gleaned from Heathenish plays,
Which leave a curse upon the Author for 'em,
Though I have studied to redeem you from
The infection of such books, which martyr sense
Worse than an Almanac.
Excellent Satire,
But lash not on, stop here, or I shall kick
Your learned worship.
But doe not, I advise you doe not.
Why doe not?
It will fall heavy o'some body, if your Lordship
Kick me, I shall not spare your cousin there.
On that condition what doe you think o'that?
What doe you think?
Excellently well followed by my troth la,
Heel pitch the bar well, I warrant, he does
So follow his kick.
Let it go round.
Good, right as my leg again.
Your leg, it was hee that kicked you.
Dee think I doe not feel it?
Why dee not use your toes then?
What for a merry touch,
A trick, a turn upon the toe, dee hear sir
Yare good company, but if thou love me.
Love you? why dee hear sir,
I, I,
What a pox should any man see in you,
Once to think on you? love a squirt?
Shall I tell thee what thou art good for?
I.
For nothing.
Good again, my Lord observe him, for nothing.
Yes thou wot stop a breach in a mud wall,
Or serve for a Priapus in the garden to
Fright away crows, and keep the corn, bean shatter,
Thou wot.
Ha ha ha.
Or thou wot serve at shrove tide to ha thy legs
Broken with penny trounchens in the street,
Tic pity any Cock should stand the pelting,
And such a Capon unpreferr'd.
Ha ha ha.
Cry mercy you're a kinsman to the Lord,
A Gentleman of high and mighty blood.
But cold enough, wonot all this provoke him?
Dost hear? for all this I will undertake
To thrash a better man out of a wench.
That travels with her butter milk to market
Between two dorsers, any day of the week,
My twice sod tail of greene fish, I will do it
Or loose, my inheritance, tell me, and doe not stammer,
When were thou cudgell'd last? what woman beat thee?
Excellent Barker.
Thou art the town top,
A boy will set thee up, and make thee spin
Home with an Eeleskinne, do not marry, doe not,
Thy wife will coddle thee, and serve thee up
In plates with Sugar and Rose water to
Him that had the grace to cuckold thee;
And if Pythagoras transmigration
Of souls were true, thy spirit should be tenant
To a horse.
Why to a horse?
A switch and spur would doe some good upon you,
Why dost thou interfere, get the grincomes, go,
And straddle like a gentleman that wot
Not shame his kindred, but what doe I
Lose time with such a puppy?
Well, go thy ways Isle justify thy wit
At my own peril.
I would speak with you,
Be not too busy with your Lordships legs,
Isle tell you somewhat.
Speak to the purpose then.
I bestowed
A visit on the Ladies which you wot on,
They have their wits still, and resolve to keep 'em,
They wonot hang themselves for a young Lord,
Nor grow into consumption, other men
Have eyes, and nose, and lips, and handsome legs too:
So fare you well Lord, my I left your kick
With your cousin buy buy otter.
Very well.
But hark you cousin Bostocke, you have a mind
And modest constitution, I expected
You wot have lifted up your leg.
To kick him,
Why, and you wot ha given a thousand pound,
I could not do it for laughing, beside,
He was your friend my Lord.
Did you spare him
For that consideration?
Howsoever,
What honour had it been for me to quarrel?
Or wit indeed, if every man should take
All the abuses that are meant, great men
Would be laughed at, some fools must ha their jests,
Had he been any man of blood or valour,
One that professed the sword, such as the Coronell,
Less provocation would ha made me active.
The Eagles takes no Flies, is that it, how now
Sir Ambrose, and my honoured friend Sr. Marmaduke?
You are strangers.
Your Lordships pardon, Mr. Bostocke.
Now shall I be put too't, this taking will undo me?
Prithee tell me? is the Coronell alive still?
Alive my Lord, yes yes, hoe's alive.
Did your Lordship think absolutely he was dead?
But he is shrewdly wounded.
No my Lord,
He is very well, but it was your kinsemans fortune.
Prithee ne'er speak on it.
What?
To have a blow, a box of the ear.
How?
With his fist, and an indifferent round one.
Yes, yes he did strike me, I could ha told you that,
But wherefore did he strike, ask 'em that.
If you would know my Lord, he was our orator
To rail upon the Lady for abusing us,
Which I confess he did with lung and spirit,
Which in the conclusion, the Coronell
Stroke him to the ground.
He did so tic a truth.
And did you take it?
Take it: he gave it me my Lord, I asked not for it.
But tic not yet revenged.
Tic truth we suffered
A little, but the place protected him.
It was no place indeed.
Now since you had the greatest burden in
The affront.
The blow?
Right, wo wot know whether your resolution
Be first, to question him, for our cause appears
Subordinate, and may take breath till you
Ha called him to account.
I proclaim nothing,
And make no doubt the Coronell will give me
Satisfaction like a Gentleman.
We are answered, and take our leave my Lord.
We shall meet at the Ball anon gentlemen.
Your Lordships servants: now to our design.
My Lord I take my leave too.
Not yet cousin, you and I ha not done.
What you please cousin.
You have cozened me too much.
I my good Lord?
Thou most unheard of coward,
How dare you bossed relation to me?
Be so impudent as to name, or think upon me,
Thou stain to honour, honour? you are beneath
All the degrees of baseness: quit thy father,
Thy supposed one, and with sufficient testimony,
Some Serving-man leapt thy mother, or some Juggler
That conjures with old bones, some women's tailor,
When he brought home her petticoat, and took measure
Of her lose body, or Isle cullice thee
With a bottom.
Good my Lord.
Be so baffoul'd?
In presence of your Mistress, tic enough
To make the blood of all thou know suspected,
And Isle ha satisfaction.
My Lord.
For using of my name in Ordinaries,
In the list of other whom you make your privilege,
To dominere, and win applause sometimes
With Tipsters, and thread-beare Tobacco Merchants,
That worship your gold lace, and ignorance
Stand bare, and bend their hams, when you belch out
My Lord, and tother cousin in a Baudihouse,
Whom with a noise you curse by Jack and Tom,
For failing you at Fishstreete, or the Still-yard.
My very good Lord.
Will you not draw?
Not against your honour, but you shall see.
And vex my eyes to look on such a Land-rat,
Were all these shames forgotten, how shall I
Be safe in honour with that noble Lady,
To whom I sin fully commended thee,
Though it were not much, enough to make her think
I am as base as thou art, and the Coronell,
And all that have but heard thee call me cousin,
What cure for this you Malt-worme? oh my soul
How it does blush to know thee, bragging puppy,
Dee hear me thunder, and lightning, what
Nobility my predecessors bosted,
Or any man from honours stock descended;
How many Marquesses and Earls are numbered
In their great family? what coats they quarter,
How many battles our forefathers fought?
Tic poor, and not becoming perfect gentry
To build their glories at their fathers cost,
But at their own expense of blood or virtue,
To raise them living monuments, our birth
Is not our own act, honour upon trust,
Our ill deeds forfeit, and the wealthy sums
Purchas'st by others fame or sweat, will be
Our stain, for we inherit nothing truly
But what our actions make us worthy of;
And are you not a precious gentleman,
Thou art not worth my steel, redeem this love
Some generous way of undertaking, or
Thou shalt be given up to boys, and ballets,
The scorn of footman, a disgrace more black
Than bastard, go to the Coronell.
I will my Lord.
But now I think ont twill be necessary,
That first you right my honour with the Lady,
You shall carry a letter, you will do it?
Isle carry any thing.
Expect it presently.
Such another conjuring will make me
Believe I am illegitimate indeed,
This came first keeping company with the blades,
From whom I learnt to roar and run away:
I know tic a base thing to be a coward,
But every man is not borne to be a Hercules,
Some must be beat that others may be valiant.
Let it be so, they will else be troublesome.
This cannot I hope displease you Lady, tic
No new affection I protest, although
This be the first occasion I took
To express it.
You did ill in the impression,
Although your bashfulness would not permit you
To speak in your own cause, you might have sent
Your meaning, I can make a shift to read
A scurvy hand, but I shall tell you sir.
Prithee doe.
First possible your heart hath been tormented
In loves flame, and I the cause.
Your beauty hath the power
To melt a Cithians bosom, those divine
Beams would make soft the earth, when rugged Winter
Hath sealed the cranies up with frost, your eye
Will make the frigid region temperate,
Should you but smile upon it: account it then
No wonder if it turn my breast to ashes.
I see you are in love by your mention,
And cause I pity a gentleman should lose
His passion Isle acquaint you with a secret.
The Lady Honoria?
What misfortune it was
You did not first apply your self to her
That can reward your love, and hath a heart
Spacious to entertain you; she does love you
Upon my knowledge strangely, and so
Commends you in your absence.
Say you so Lady?
Pardon I beseech you the affection
I professed to your Ladyship, it was but
A complement, I am sorry I protest.
Oh tic excused sir, but I must tell you,
Perhaps you wonot find her now so tractable
Upon the apprehension she was slighted;
But to prescribe you confidence were to
Suspect your art, and bold discretion.
Tic as I tell you sir, no Lady in
The world can speak more praises of your body?
She knows not yet your mind.
First possible?
And yet because she saw your complements
Directed so unhappily to me,
I know not how you'll find her on the sudden,
But tic not half an hour since you possessed
The first place in her thoughts.
Shall I presume,
You will excuse the love I did present
Your Ladyship? it was not from my heart,
I hope you will conceive so.
A slight error.
I am a shamed on it.
Tic sufficient
That you recant no more neglect.
You are pleasant.
Be you so too; Isle justify thou shalt
Have cause.
To wonder at you, whats your meaning sir?
Sweet Lady,
What thoughts make sad your brow? I have observed
Your eyes shoot clearer light.
You are deceived,
I am not melancholy.
Be for ever banished
The imagination of what can happen
To cloud so rare a beauty, you're in love.
In love, who told you so?
But thats no wonder,
We all may love, but you have only power
To conquer where you place affection, and triumph ore your wishes.
I love you, you're strangely sir mistaken,
Put your devices on some other Lady,
I ha been so far from my affection to you,
That I ha laboured I confess to unsettle
The opinion of my Lady Rosomond,
Who I confess loves you, and that extremely.
How? she love me? then I ha made fine work.
What cunning she is mistress of to hide
Her strange affections, or what power she has,
She does fly into your arms I know not.
Are you so dull?
Why, this was but to try your constancy,
I have heard her swear you are the proprest Knight,
The very Atones: why, she has got your picture
And made it the only saint within her closet,
I blush at your credulity.
First even so?
I have undone my self with her already,
Pardon me gentle Madam, I must leave you.
With all my heart.
We are relieved,
Monsieur Le Frisk.
Tres humbla servitor Madam,
Me sweat with de hast to waite upon your Ladyships;
I pray give me do leve dispatch presently,
For I must figures to be done.
Gentlemen let your passions breath a while,
A little music may correct the error,
And you may find your selves.
Aller.
With all my heart Sr. Marmaduke lets help
To exercise the Ladies.
A good motion.
And begar noting in de world more profit
Your body den de motion all a more de France.
I am for any frisk.
Ha de frisk you jump upon my name, and
Begar you have my nature to de right, hey, and
All de world is but frisk.
A Country dance then.
Ho, Monsieur Madam aller,
Forboone, tres excellent begar, so I crave your patience
Madam, gentlemen, you be at de Ball, mofoy you
See dat was never in dis world.
What Monsieur?
What doe you think dat is, me tell you, begar
You see me play de part of de Cupped.
A French Cupped.
Begar French Cupped, why? dere is no love like
De French love, dat is Cupped, love is hot, and de
French is hot
How comes it to pass that you are to play Cupped Moun.
My Lord give me cōmand me have device, &amp; de masque
For de Ladies, and me no trust little Iacknape to play
Young Cupped but my self.
Cupped is a child, you have a beard Monsieur.
Me care not de hair for dat, begar de little god may have
De little beard, Venus his • oder have de mole, and Cupped
Her shild may have the black mussel.
But Monsieur, we read Cupped was fair, and
You are black, how will that agree?
Cupped is fair, and Monsieur is black, why Monsieur
Is black den, and Cupped is fair, what is dat? a fair
Lady love de servant of the black
Complexion de ban eur, the colour is not de mush,
Vulcan was de black Smith, and Cupped may be de
Black gentleman his son legitimate.
Tic de way to make Cupped the boy no bastard.
But doe you no publish this invention, me meet you
At de Ball armed with quiver, and de bow.
You wonot shoot us, I hope you'll spare our hearts.
Begar me shit you if me can, and your arts shall
Bleed one, two, tree, gallowne adieu Madame
Servitor gentlemen tresemble.
Adieu Monsieur, now Madam with your favour,
I must renew my suite.
Yad better buy a new one,
Nay then we shall be troubled.
You'll withdraw,
Isle follow you.
Come, come I know you love me.
You may enlarge your folly my dear knight,
But I have pardoned you for love already.
This shannot serve your turn, I came hither
Not to be jeered, and one of you shall love me.
Oh impudence dares he return.
It seems so.
Most gracious Madam, my cousin your Lord Loveall
Commends himself in black and white.
To me?
Dee think tic from my self.
You might ha don't in black and blew.
Scutilla how does thy poor soul, thou
Hast no husband nor children to commend me to.
The poor solo's well, I hope your body is
Recovered, dos not your left cheek burn still,
We ha so talked on you?
I am sorry any gentleman that has relation to me should
Be so forgetful of your honour, &amp; his own, but though he have
Forfited opinion, let me continue innocent in your thoughts?
I have sent you a small jewel to expiate my offence for
Commending him, I expect your Ladyship at the Ball,
Where you shall make many happy to kiss your hand,
And in their number the true admirer of your virtue,
My Lord is honourable.
A slight jewel Madam.
I am his servant.
Nay faith my Lord is right, I ha not met
The Coronell since you know when.
You ha more reason to remember.
I would be so bold to ask you a question.
In the mean time give me leave, we are none
But friends, I know you're valiant.
No, no, you doe not know it, but I know my self.
Thats more.
But will you answer me? why did not you strike him again?
That might ha cause blood.
You're ith right.
You did not fear him.
But blood are not a like, terms were not even,
If I had killed him there had been an end.
Of him.
Right Madam, but if he had wounded me,
He might ha killed, heaven knows how many.
Strange?
Do ye not conceive it? so many drops of mine,
So many gentlemen, nay more, who knows
Which of these might ha been a Knight, a Lord.
Perhaps a Prince.
Princes came from the blood,
And should I hazard such a severation
Against a single life, tic not I fear
To fight with him by these hills, but what wise gamester
Will venture a hundred pound to a flaw'd six pence?
Madam, the Coronell.
And he were ten Coronells, Isle not endure his company▪
Sweet Lady, you and Isle retire.
And were less honourable.
He should not seek me then.
He should rather hardly find you, Ime your servant.
I was wishing for you sir,
Your judgement of these Diamonds.
The stones are pretty.
They were a Lords, sent me for a token,
You cannot choose but know him, the Lord Loveall.
So, so, so, I am like to speed.
Is not he a pretty gentleman?
And you are sure hoe's honest?
As Lords go now adays that are
In fashion;
But cry you mercy, you ha put me in mind,
I did propound a business to you sir.
And I came prepared to answer you.
Tic very well, Isle call one to be a witness.
That was not I remember in our Covenant,
You shannot need.
Isle fetch you a book to swear by▪
Let it be Venus and Atones then,
Or Ovids wanton Elieges, Aristotles
Problems, Guy of Warwick, or Sr. Beeves,
Or if there be a Play Book you Love bettter,
Isle take my oath upon your Epilogue.
You're very merry, well, swear how you please.
In good time,
You doe expect now I should swear Ime honest?
Yes sir, and tic no hard condition,
If you reflect upon my promise.
What?
To marry you, which act must make you Lord
Of me and my estate, a round possession,
Some men have gone to hell for a less matter.
But I wonot be damned for twenty thousand
Such as you are, and every one a million,
And I the authority of a Parliament
To marry wo'yee all, I wot not buy
This flesh now I ha sworn.
I think so Coronell,
Bless me? twenty thousand wives, two'd ne'er
Come to my turn, and you'd not live to give
The tithe benevolence.
They would find Pages, fools, or Gentlemen-Vshens.
Then upon the matter,
You being not willing sir to take your oath,
I may be confident you are not honest.
Why look upon me Lady, and consider
With some discretion what part about me
Does look so tame you should suspect me honest,
How old dee think I am?
I guess at thirty.
Some in the world doubted me not so much,
At thirteen I was ever plump and forward,
My dry Nurse swore at seven, I kissed like one
Of five and twenty, setting that a side,
Whats my profession?
A Soldier
So examine a whole army, and find one
Soldier that hates a handsome woman, we cannot march
Without our bag and baggages, and is it possible,
When we come home where women's pride, and all
Temptation to wantonness abounds
We should lose our activity?
You soldiers are brave fellows.
When we have our pay,
We vow no chastity till we marry, Lady
Tic out of fashion indeed with gentlemen
To be honest, and of age together tic sufficient,
We can provide to take our pleasures too,
Without infection, a sound body is
A treasure I can tell you, yet if that
Would satisfy you, I should make no scruple
To swear, but otherwise you must pardon us
As we must pardon you.
Vs sir.
Yes you, as if you Ladies had not your figures,
And martial discipline, as well as we,
Your outworkes, and redoubts, your court of guard,
Your centuries, and perdues, sallies, retreates,
Pasties, and stratagems, women are all honest,
Yes, yes, exceeding honest; let me ask you
One question, Isle not put you to your oath,
I doe allow you Hide-Parke, and Spring-Garden,
You have a recreation called the Ball,
A device transported hither by some Ladies
That affect Tonic, what dee play a set?
Theres a foul racket kept under the line,
Strange words are bandied, and strange revels Madam.
The world imagines so.
Nay, you're all talked of.
But if men had no more wit, and honesty,
They wot let fall their stings on something else,
This is discoursed, but when Corantaes fail,
Or news at ordinaries, when the phlegmatic Dutch
Ha tan no Fisher-boates, or our Cole-ships land
Safe at New-Castle, you're fine gentlemen,
But to conclude of that we met for your honesty,
Not justified by an oath, as I expected,
Is now suspended, will you swear yet.
Why, I thought you had been a Christian? widow
Have I not told you enough, you may meet one
Will forfeit his conscience, and please you better,
Some Silke-worme of the City, or the Court,
There be enough will swear away their soul
For your estate, but I have no such purpose,
The wars will last I hope.
So so, Scutilla.
You were present when I promised the Coronell,
To be his wife upon condition.
He could secure my opinion by his oath,
That he was honest, I am bound in honour
Not to go back, y ave done it, I am yours sir,
Be you a witness to this solemn contract.
Are you in earnest Lady, I ha not sworn.
You have given better truth,
He that can make this conscience of an oath
Assures his honesty.
In mind.
Whats past
I question not, if for the time to come
Your love be virtuous to me.
Most religious,
Or let me live the Soldiers dishonour,
And die the scorn of gentlemen, I ha not
Space enough in my heart to entertain thee.
Is not this better than swearing?
I confess it.
Now I may call you husband?
No title can more honour me.
If please you Isle show you then my children.
How, your children?
I ha six that call me mother.
Hast, faith?
The elder may want softness to acknowledge you,
But some are young enough, and may be counselled
To ask your blessing, does this trouble you?
Trouble me? no, but it is the first news Lady
Of any children.
Nay, they are not like
To be a burden to us, they must trust
To their own portions left 'em by their father.
Where.
But of my estate, I cannot keep▪
Any thing from 'em, and I know you are
So honest, you'd not wish me wrong the Orphans,
Tic but six thousand pound in money Coronell
Among them all, beside some trifling plate
And jewels worth a thousand more.
No more?
My Jointure will be firm to us, two hundred
Per annum.
Is it so? and that will keep
A Country house, some half a dozen Cowes,
We shall ha cheese and butter-milke, one horse
Will serve me, and your man to ride to markets.
Can be content to live in the country Coronell?
And watch the Peas, look to the Hay, and talk▪
Of Oats and Stubble, I ha been brought up too't,
And for a need can thrash.
That will save somewhat.
Ith year, beside my skill in farrowing pigs,
Oh tic a wholesome thing to hold the plough,
And wade up to the calfe in the dirty furrows▪
Worse than sleeping in a trench, or quagmire,
You ha not heard me whistle yet.
No indeed.
Why? theres it, she does counterfeit, well Lady,
Be you in jest or earnest, this is my
Resolution Isle marry you, and y'ad forty children,
And not a foot of land to your Jointure, heaven
Will provide for, and we doe our endeavours,
Where be the children, come how many boys.
As many as can get sir.
How?
No more.
Since you're so noble, know I tried your patience,
And now I am confirmed, my estate is yours
Without the weight of children or of debts,
Love me, and I repent not.
Say thou so?
I wot we had a Priest here.
There remains to take away one scruple.
Another gintracke.
I have none, tic your doubt sir,
And ere we marry you shall be convinced
Some malice has corruted your opinion
Of that we call the Ball.
Your dancing business.
I will entreat your company to night,
Where your own eyes shall lead you to accuse
Or vindicate our fems.
With all my heart.
Madam, Mr. Bostocke
Expects within.
You shall be reconciled to him.
With Bostocke willingly, then toth Ball,
Which for your sake I dare not now suspect,
Where union of hearts such Empire brings,
Subjects methings are crowned as we as Kings.
BOne forbone here a little, dere a little more, my
Lord hire dis house of the city Merchant, begar
It smell musty, and he will have all sweet for de
Ladies, perfume, perfume every corner presently
For dere is purpose to make all smoke anon
Begar;
Where is my Lord?
Hee waite on you presently Monsieur de Freshwater.
Monsieur Le Frisk these Ladies were pleased
To command my attendance hither.
Welcome to de Ball, par ma foy
You pardon Monsieur, I have much trouble
In my little head, I can no stay to
Complement, a vostre service.
In all my travels, I have not seen a more
Convenient Structure.
Now you talk of your travels Signior, till my Lord
Come you shall doe us a special favour to
Discourse what passages you ha seen abroad.
Were you ever abroad before Signior.
I hardly ever was at home, and yet
All countries lost wiseman are his own?
Did you never travel Ladies,
We are no Ladies errant, tic enough
For such as you, that look for State employment.
Yet there be Ladies ha your languages,
And married to great men prove the better Statesmen.
We have heard talk of many countries.
And you may hear talk, but give me the man
That has measured 'em, talks but talk.
Have you seen a fairer City than London?
London is nothing.
How nothing?
To what it will be a hundred years hence.
I have heard much talk of Paris.
You have been there I me sure.
I tell you Madame, I took shipping at
Gravesend, and had no sooner past
The Cantons, and Grissons, making some stay
In the Valtoline, but I came to Paris a pretty
Hamlet, and much in the situation like Dunstable,
Tic in the Province of Alcontora, some three leagues
Distant from Civil, from whence we have our Oringes.
Is the fellow mad?
I have heard Civil is in Spain.
You may hear many things,
The people are civil that live in Spain, or there
May be one town like another, but if Civil
Be not in France, I was never at Civil in my life.
Proceed Sir.
Doe not I know Paris, it was built by the youngest Son
Of King Priam, and was called by his name, yet some
Call it Lutetia, because the gentlewomen there
Play so well upon the Lute.
What a Rascal is this?
Here I observed many remarkable buildings, as the
University, which some call the Lore, where the
Students made very much of me, and carried me
To the Bear-garden, where I saw a play on the
Banke-side, a very pretty Comedy called Martheme,
In London.
First possible?
But there be no such Comedians as we have here,
Yet the women are the best Actors, they play
Their own parts, a thing much desired in England
By some Ladies, Innes a Court Gentlemen, and others,
But that by the way.
See Sir.
I had staid longer there, but I was offended with a
Villainous sent of Onions, which the wind brought from
St. Omers.
Onions wot make you sleep well.
But the sent tic not to be endured, I smelt
On 'em when I came to Rome, and hardly escaped the
Inquisition fort.
Were you at Rome too Signior.
Tic in my way to Venice, Isle tell you Madam I was very
Loath to leave their country.
Which Country?
Where was I last?
In France.
Right, for I had a very good Inn, where mine Host
Was a notable good fellow, and a Cardinal.
How a Cardinal, oh impudence.
Oh the catches we sang, and his wife a pretty woman,
And one that warmes a bed one of the best in Europe.
Did you ever hear the like.
I did before suspect him.
But mine Host.
The Cardinal.
Right, had a shrewed pate, and his ears were some∣thing
Of the longest, for one upon the oath of a w—
Walloune that — from Spain to the Low-
Countries, and the other from Lapland into Germany.
Say you so?
A parlous head, and yet loving to his guests,
As mine host Banks, as red in the gills, and as merry
A —but anger him, and hee sets all Christendom
Together by the ears, well shortly after I left
France, and sailing along the Alps, I came to
Lombardy, where I left my cloak, for it was very
Hot travelling, and went a Pilgrim to Rome
Where I saw the Tombs, and a Play in Pompeys
Theater, here I was kindly entertained by an anchorite,
In whose chamber I lay, and drink Cider.
Nay, now he is desperate.
Doe not interrupt him.
What should I trouble you with many stories? from hence
I went to Naples, a soft kind of people, and clothed
In silk, from thence I went to Florence from whence we
Have the art of working custards, which we call
Florentines, Millan a rich state of
Haberdashers, Permount, where I had excellent Venison,
And Padua, famous for the pads, or easy saddles
Which our physicians ride upon, and first brought from
Thence when they commenced Doctor.
Very good.
I see little in Mantua, beside dancing upon the ropes,
Only their strong beer, better than any I
Ever drunk at the Trumpet, but Venice of all
The Champion Countries, do not mistake they are the
Valiantest gentlemen under the Sun.
Is that it?
O the Catazaners we turned there.
Who was wee ye?
Two or three magnifico's grandees of the State,
We tickled 'em in the very Pialto, by the same
Token two or three English spies told us they had lain
Ledger three months to steal away the Piatzo, and ship
It for Covent. Garden, a pretty fabric and building
Upon the — but I was compelled to make
Short stay here by reason of the Dukes Concubines
Fell in love wee me, gave me a ring of his, out of
A solide Diamond, which afterwards I lost washing my
Hands in the salt water.
You should ha fished fort, and as good luck as
She that found her wedding ring in the
Haddocks belly.
No, there was no staying, I took post horse presently
For Genoa, and from thence to Madrill, and so to
The Netherlands.
And how sped you among the Dutch?
Why, we were drunk every day together, they get their
Living by it.
By drinking?
And making bargains in their tippling,
The Jaws are innocent, nay the devil himself
Is but a Dunce to 'em, of whose trade they are.
Whats that?
They fish, they fish still, who can help it, they
Have nets enough, and may catch the Province
In time then let the Kingdoms look about 'em,
They can't be idle, and they have one advantage
Of all the world, theyle ha no conscience to trouble
'Em, I heard in whispered they want butter, they have
A Design to charm the Indies, and remove their
Darie, but that as a secret, shall go no further;
I caught a surfeit of Bore in Holland, upon my
Recovery I went to Flushing, where I met with a handsome
Fro, with whom I went to Middleborough, by the —
And lest her drunk at Rotterdam, there I took
Shipping again for France, from thence to Dover,
From Dover to Gravesend, from Gravesend to Queen
Hive, and from thence to what I am come to.
And noble Signior you are very welcome.
I hope he did not over-heare me.
I am much honoured Ladies in your presence.
Absence had been a sin my Lord where you▪
Were pleased to invite.
Fie, fie, my Lord give me one ear.
Interrupt me no more good Moursieur.
Monsieur La Frisk, a word, a word, I beseech you,
No excuser moi.
Have you thought Ladies of your absent servant?
Within whose heart the civil war of love,
May end in a soft peace.
Excellent, Lady▪
We had armies too my Lord, of wounded thoughts.
And are you agreed to which I must devote
My loving service, and which is wisest, fairest,
Is it concluded yet?
You did propound
A hard Province, and we could not
Determine as you expected, but if
Your flame be not extinct, we have devised
Another way.
You make my ambition happy,
And indeed I was thinking it was impossible
That two such beauties should give place to either,
And I am still that humble notary
To both your loves.
Then this we have made lots,
That what we cannot, fate may soon divide,
And we are fixed to obey our destiny,
There is but two, one and your wishes guide you.
And will you satisfy my chance.
We should
Be else unjust.
What method shall we use?
Your hat my Lord,
If you vouchsafe the favour?
Dare you expose your head to the ayre so long?
Most willingly put in.
There is Fortune▪
That draw which quickly tell how much I love you.
So, so now let me see, I commend your device,
Since I am incapable of both,
This is a way indeed, but your favour.
Lets have fair play my Lord.
What fool is he?
That having the choice of Mistresses will be
Confined to one, and rob himself, I am yet
The favourite of both these, is no policy,
I could make shift with both abed.
You are merry?
In troth, and so I am, and in the mind
I am in, will give my self no cause to the contrary,
Dee see? Isle draw you both.
How? both.
You cannot otherwise be reconciled,
Isle be content to marry one, and doe
Service to the others petticoat, I must tell you,
I am not without president.
There you triumph.
Within the name of Venus, — ha a blank▪
By this light nothing, neither name nor mark.
Ha, ha, ha.
This is a riddle yet.
Tic quickly solved,
Your Lordship was too confident,
We never were at such a loss my Lord,
As with the hazard of our wit or honour
To court you with so desperate affection.
By our example know, some Ladies may
Commend, nay love a gentleman, and yet
Be safe in their own thoughts, and see as far
As modesty, and honour will allow us,
We are still servants to your Lordship,
Say so? why look you Ladies that you may perceive,
How I can be temperate too; first, I thank you
Heartily, and to recompense your wit▪
Present another Lottery, you shannot
Suspect I have a thought that will betray
Your innocence to scandal, let me entreat
You take your chance too, this for you Madam,
And this is left your fortune, doe me honour
To wear these pair of Jewels for my sake,
So with a confidence of your happy pardon,
To what is past hereafter I shall pay
To your true virtues, better service then
So unnecessary trials.
And to show
We are not coy my Lord, weal wear your Jewel.
And be their ornament.
All happiness to your Lordship,
Your cruels are not full set noble Ladies.
Your presence will so no make us active, Madam
I was bold.
She has your Diamond my Lord.
And can you pardon?
Nay, nay, we are friends, are
We not Madam?
I were else unmerciful.
The Coronell too has given me satisfaction.
I think you had enough.
As much as I desired, and here is my hand,
While I can draw a sword command me.
What?
To put it up again, all friends, all friends,
A pox a quarrelling.
I kiss your hand sir.
Kiss my hand, kiss my— noble Ladies here.
Why is Music silent all this while?
Has it no voice to bid these Ladies welcome?
Come Boy now draw thy powerful Bow,
Here are Ladies hearts enough
To be transfixed, this meeting is
To ruffle Ladies, and to kiss,
These are my Orgies, from each eye▪
A thousand wanton glances fly;
Lords, and Ladies of the Game,
Each breast be full of my own flame:
Why shoots not Cupped? these are all,
Met in honour of my Ball,
Which Paris gave to Ida hill,
Isle maintain these revels still:
Why stays Cupped all this while.
Venus doth her self beguile.
Diana here go back again.
These are none of Venus train,
No spark of this Lascivious fire,
Dwells in their bosoms, no desire,
But what doth fill Diana's breast,
In their modest thoughts doe rest.
Venus this new festival,
Shall be still Diana's Ball:
A chaste meeting ever here,
Seek thy votaries other where.
You're chaste indeed, doe not we know,
You to your sweete-heart nightly go,
Envying one is not kissed, no you
On his face but let fall dew▪
Some may wonder what doth aisle,
Your lips but kisses made them pale
Me thinks the Moon should blush,
I doe
Some times, but tic for such as you:
Then hide my self within a mist,
For shame to see thee clipped and kissed.
Draw Cupped, shall thy mother be
Brand by a Huntress, let me see
I want one shaft.
Moder not so,
You may quickly break my bow,
Here Diana doth command,
My Bow is frozen to my hand,
Beside, the Ladies breasts are here,
Such proofs against my shafts I fear,
Each arrow would to our disgrace,
Break, or rebound in my own face;
Moder, fly hence or you will be,
If you'll stay, made as chaste as she.
Can her Magic charm them so,
Then tic time that Venus go
To seek her own more choice delight,
Against my will, enjoy this night.
Cupped if you mean to stay,
Throw your licentious shafts away,
Then you are Love, then be embraced,
Love is welcome while he's chaste;
Now some other strain to show,
What pleasures to this night we owe.
My Lord, my Ladies, will you see a Monster,
I have not met such another in all my travails.
What have we here a Satire.
No, tic a dancing Bear.
What is the deviso.
Wonder that a Satire can
Put off wildness and turn man,
Love, such miracles can doe,
But this owes it self to you
Bright Lady.
Keep the goblin from me Gentlemen.
You'll know me. Omnes, Barker.
No more, the Cynic, I protest
You have converted me.
Your meaning Sir.
I am the man you did encourage Madam
To learn to dance, I shall doe better shortly,
Your love will perfect me, and make me soft,
And smooth as any Reveller.
Ha, ha, ha, my Love, I am not mad to love a Satire,
For that's thy best condition, judgement all,
How scurvily this civility shows in him.
Faith rail, and keep your humour, still it shows excellent,
Does he not become the beast,
The Lords allow you pension.
Ha, ha, ha.
You are a Witch, Isle justify it, and there is not
One honest thought among the whole Sex of you,
Dee laugh, loose wetted Ladies, there are not
In hell such furies, that's a comfort yet
To him that shall go thither, he shall have
Less torment after death then he finds here.
Why Barker?
Your wit has got the squirt too, Isle traduce
Your Ball for this, and if there be a post,
That dares write mischief, look to be worse
Then executed.
He will come to himself again, when he hath purged
Freshwater.
Madam your servants beg this favour from you.
What first?
That since your resolutions will admit
No change of hearts you will not publish how
We ha been jeered.
Not jeered, but you came on so desperate.
We love our own when we preserve,
Gentlemen's honour.
Then lets toss the Ball.
Signior Freshwater,
Mercy and silence as you are honourable.
May it concern these gentlemen.
Why if I must gentlemen, you imagine I ha been
At Venice, but I staid at Gravesend
All this Summer expecting a wind, and finding it
So uncertain, will defer the voyage till the Spring,
I am not the first whom the winds, and seas have crossed.
Then you have crossed no Sea?
If you please, Isle require
But my principal, and for your good company,
Isle stay at home for good, and all to be merry.
Nay, nay, you shall go your voyage,
We wot not have you lose the benefit
Of travel, when you come home, you may summon
Your debtors by a drum, and showing your bag
Of certificates.
Receive your money when you can get it, and be
Knighted.
I thank you gentlemen, I am in a way now,
I have sold my land, and put out my money
To live I see my heart wonot dance to night,
I may to Gravesend in the morning,
I can be but pickled in salt water, and Isle
Venture one drowning to be revenged
Again, again, set, set.
What think you of all this?
To my wishes, an innocent, and generous recreation.
Ladies and Gentlemen, now a banquet waits you,
Be pleased to accept, twill give you breath and then,
Renew our Revels, and to the Ball again.

THe Ship is safe in the Pool then?
And makes good,
In her rich fraught, the name she bears, the Speedwell:
My Master will find it, for on my certain knowledge
For every hundred that hee ventu∣red in her
She hath returned him five.
And it comes timely,
For besides a payment on the nail for a Manor
Late purchased by my Master, his young daughters
Are ripe for marriage.
Who? N•n, and M•••.
Mistress Anne and Mary, and with some addition,
Or it is more punishable in our house
Then Scandalum magnatum.
It is great pity
Such a Gentleman as my Master for that title
His being a Citizen, cannot take from him,
Hath no male heir to inherit his estate,
And keep his name alive.
The want of one
Swells my young Mistresses, and their madam mother
With hopes above their birth, and scale. Their dreams are
Of being made Countesses, and they take state
As they were such already. When you went
To the Indies, there was some shape and proportion
Of a Merchants house in our family, but since
My Master, to gain precedence for my Mistress
Above some Elder Merchants Wives, was knighted
It is grown a little Court, in bravery,
Variety of fashions, and those rich ones:
There are few great Ladies going to a Masque
That do out-shine ours in their every-day habits.
It is strange my Master in his wisdom can
Give the reins to such exorbitance.
He must,
Or there's no peace nor rest for him at home;
I grant his state will bear it, yet hoe's censured
For his indulgence, and for Sir John Frugal
By some styled Sir John Prodigal.
Is his brother
Mr. Luke Frugal living?
Yes, the more
His misery, poor man.
Still in the Counter?
In a worser place. He was redeemed from the hole,
To live in our house in hell: since his base usage
Considered, it is no better. My proud Lady
Admits him to her Table, marry ever
Beneath the Salt, and there he sits the subject
Of her contempt and scorn; and dinner ended,
His courteous Nieces find employment for him
Fitting an under-prentice, or a Footman,
And not an Uncle.
I wonder, being a Scholar well read, and travelled,
The world yielding means for men of such desert,
He should endure it.
He does, with a strange patience; and to us
The servants so familiar, nay humble.
I'll tell you, but I am cut off. Look these
Like a Citizens wife and daughters?
In their habits
They appear other things; but what are the motives
Of this strange preparation?
The young wag-tails
Expect their suitors. The first, the Son and Heir
Of the Lord Lady, who needs my Masters money,
As his daughter does his honour. The second Mr. Plenty,
A rough heaven gentleman, and newly come
To a great estate, and so all aids of Art
In them's excusable.
You have done your parts here:
To your study, and be curious in the search
Of the Nativities.
Me thinks the mother,
As if she could renew her youth, in care,
Nay curiosity to appear lovely,
Comes not behind her daughters.
Keeps the first place,
And though the Church-book speak her fifty, they
That say she can write thirty, more offend her,
Then if they taxed her honesty: t'other day
A Tenant of hers, instructed in her humour,
But one she never saw, being brought before her,
For saying only, Good young Mistress help me
To the speech of your Lady-mother, so far pleased her,
That he got his Lease renewed for it.
How she bristles:
Prithee observe her.
As I hope to see
A Country Knights son and heir walk bare before you
When you are a Countess, as you may be one
When my Master dies, or leaves trading; and I continuing
Your principal woman, take the upper-hand
Of a Squires wife, though a Justice, as I must
By the place you give me, you look now as young
As when you were married.
I think I bear my years well.
Why should you talk of years? Time hath not ploughed
One furrow in your face; and were you not known
The mother of my young Ladies, you might pass
For a Virgin of fifteen.
Here's no gross flattery:
Will she swallow this?
You see she does, and glibly.
You never can be old, wear but a Masque
Forty years hence, and you will still seem young
In your other parts: What a waste is here? O Venus?
That I had been born a King! and here a hand
To be kifs'd ever; Pardon my boldness, Madam:
Then, for a leg and foot you will be courter
When a great Grandmother.
These indeed, Wench, are not
So subject to decayings as the face,
Their Comeliness list's longer.
Ever, ever:
Such a rare Featured, and proportioned Madam
London could never boast of.
Where are my Shoos.
Those that your Ladyship gave order
Should be made of the Spanish Perfumed Skins.
The same.
I sent the prison-bird this morning for em,
But he neglects his duty.
He is grown
Exceeding careless.
And begins to murmur
At our commands, and sometimes grumbles to us,
He is forsooth our Uncle.
He is your slave,
And as such use him.
Willingly, but hoe's grown
Rebellious Madam.
Nay like Hen, like Chicken.
I'll humble him.
Pere he comes sweating all over,
He shows like a walking frippery.
Very good Sir,
Were you drunk last night, that you could rise no sooner
With humble diligence to do what my Daughters,
And woman did command you.
Drunk, an't please you.
Drunk, I said, Sirrah. Dare thou in a look
Rapine, or grumble? thou unthankful wretch,
Did our charity redeem thee out of prison,
Thy Patrimony spent, ragged, and lousy.
When the Sheriffs basket, and his broken meat
Were your Festival exceedings, and is this
So soon forgotten?
I confess I am
Your Creature Madam.
And good reason why
You should continue so.
Who did new cloth you?
Admitted you to the Dining-room?
Allowed you a fresh bed in the garret?
Or from whom
Received you spending money?
I owe all this
To your goodness, Madam: For it you have my prayers,
The beggars satisfaction; all my studies,
(Forgetting what I was, but withal duty
Remembering what I am) are how to please you.
And if in my long stay I have offended,
I ask your pardon. Though you may consider,
Being forced to fetch these from the Old Exchange,
These from the Tower, and these from Westminster,
I could not come much sooner.
Here was a walk
To breath a Foot-man.
It is a curious Fan.
These Roses will show rare; would it were in fashion
That the Garters might be seen too.
Many Ladies
That know they have good legs, wish the same with you:
Men that way have th'advantage.
I was with the Lady,
And delivered her the Satin
For her Gown, and Velvet for her Petticoat,
This night She vows She'll pay you.
How I am bound
To your favour M. Luke.
As I live, you will perfume all rooms you walk in.
Get your Far,
You shall pull'em on within.
That servile office
Her pride imposes on him.
Tradewell.
My Master calls. We come Sir.
What have you brought there?
The Cream of the market, provision enough
To serve a garrison. I weep to think on it.
When my Master got his wealth, his family fed
On roots, and livers, and necks of beef on Sundays.
But now I fear it will be spent in poultry.
Butchers meat will not go down.
Why, you Rascal, is it at
Your expense? what Cooks have you provided?
The best of the City. They have wrought at my
Lord Mayors.
Fie on em, they smell of Fleet-Lane, and Pie-corner.
And thinks the happiness of mans life consists
In a mighty shoulder of mutton.
I'll have none
Shall touch what I shall eat, you grumbling Cur,
But French-men and Italians; they wear Satin,
And dish no meat but in Silver.
You may want, though,
A dish or two when the service ends.
Leave prating,
I'll have my will; do you as I command you.
YOu were with Plenty?
Yes Sir.
And what answer
Returned the clown?
Clown Sir! he is transformed,
And grown a gallant of the last edition;
More rich then gaudie in his habit, yet
The freedom, and the bluntness of his language
Continues with him. When I told him that
You gave him Caution, as he loved the peace,
And safety of his life, he should forbear
To pass the Merchants threshold, until you
Of his two Daughters had made choice of her
Whom you designed to honour as your wife.
He smiled in scorn.
In scorn?
His words confirmed it,
They were few, but to this purpose; Tell your Master,
Though his Lordship in reversion were now his,
It cannot awe me. I was born a Free-man,
And will not yield in the way of affection
Precedence to him. I will vifit em,
Though he sate Porter to deny my entrance.
When I meet him next I'll say more to his face.
Deliver thou this, then gave me a piece
To help my memory, and so we parted.
Where got he this spirit.
At the Academy of valour,
Newly erected for the institution
Of elder Brothers. Where they are taught the ways,
Though they refuse to seal for a Duellist,
How to decline a challenge. He himself
Can best resolve you.
You Sir?
What with me Sir?
How big you look? I will not loose a hat
To a hairs breadth, move your Beaver, I'll move mine,
Or if you desire to prove your sword, mine hangs
As near my right hand, and will as soon out, though I keep
Not a Fencer to breath me, walk into Moor-fields,
I dare look on your Toledo. Do not show
A foolish valour in the streets, to make
Work for shop-keepers, and their clubs, it is scurvy,
And the women will laugh at us.
You presume
On the protection of your Hinds.
I scorn it:
Though I keep men I fight not with their fingers,
Nor make it my Religion to follow
The gallants fashion, to have my family
Consisting in a Foot-man, and a Page,
And those two sometimes hungry. I can feed these,
And cloath'em too, my gay Sir.
What a fine man
Hath your Taylor made you?
Tic quite contrary,
I have made my Taylor, for my clothes are paid for
As soon as put on, a sin your man of title
Is seldom guilty of, but Heaven forgive it.
I have other faults too very incident
To a plain Gentleman. I eat my Venison
With my neighbours in the Country, and present not
My pheasants, partridges, and grouse to the usurer,
Nor ever yet paid brokage to his scrivener.
I flatter not my mercers wife, nor feast her
With the first cherries, or pelcods, to prepare me
Credit with her husband, when I com to London.
The wool of my sheep, or a score or two of fat oxen
In Smithfield, give me money for my expenses.
I can make my wife a jointure of such lands too; as are not encombred, no annuity
Or statue lying on'em. This I can do
And it please your future honour, and why therefore
You should forbid my being a suitor with you
My dullness apprehends not.
This is bitter.
I have heard you Sir, and in my patience shown
To much of the stoics. But to parley further,
Or answer your gross jeers would write me coward.
This only thy great grandfather was a Butcher,
And his son a Grassier,
Thy Sire Constable of the hundred, and thou the first of your dunghill, created gemtleman
Now you may come on Sir, you, and your thrashers.
Stir not on your lives.
This for the graziers, this for the butcher. 
So Sir.
I'll not stand idle, draw my little rapier
Against your bumb blades. I'll one, by one despatch you.
Then house this instrument of death, and horror.
Beat down their weapons. My gate ruffians hall:
What insolence is this?
Noble Sir Maurice,
Worshipful Mr. Plenty.
I blush for you,
Men of your quality expose your same
To every vulgar censure. This at midnight
After a drunken supper in a Tavern,
(No civil man abroad to censure it)
Had shown poor in you, but in the day, and view
Of all that pass by, monstrous
Very well Sir;
You look for this defence.
It is thy protection,
But it will deceive thee.
Hold, if you proceed thus
I must make use of the next Justices power,
And leave persuasion. And in plain terms tell you
Neither your birth, Sir Maurice, nor your wealth,
Shall privilege this riot. See whom you have drawn
To be spectators of it? can you imagine
It can stand with the credit of my daughters,
To be the argument of your swords? 'ith street too?
Nay ever you do salute, or I give way,
To any private conference, shake hands
In sign of peace. He that drawsiback parts with
My good opinion. This is as it should be.
Make your approaches, and if their affection
Can sympathize with yours, they shall not come
On my credit beggars to you. I will hear
What you reply within.
May I have the honour
To support you Lady.
I know not what's supporting,
But by this fair hand, glove and all, I love you.
You are come with all advantage. I will help you
To the speech of my Brother.
Have you moved him for us?
With the best of my endeavours, and I hope.
You'll find him tractable.
Heaven grant he prove so.
However I'll speak my mind.
Do so M. Hoist.
Go in. I'll pay my duty to this Lord,
And then I am wholly yours. Heaven bless your honour.
Your hand Mr. Luke, the world's much changed with you
Within these few months; then you were the gallant:
No meeting at the Horse-race, Cocking, Hunting,
Shooting, or Bowling, at which Mr. Luke
Was not a principal gamester, and companion
For the Nobility.
I have paid dear
For those follies, my good Lord, and it is but justice
That such as soar above their pi•ch, and will not
Be warned by my example, should like me
Share in the miseries that wait upon it.
Your Honour in your charity may do well
Not to upbraid me with those weaknesses
Too late repented.
I nor do, nor will;
And you shall find I'll lend a helping hand
To raise your fortunes: How deals your brother with you?
Beyond my merit, I thank his goodness for it.
I am a Freeman, all my debts discharged,
Nor does one Creditor undone by me
Curse my loose riots. I have meat and clothes,
Time to ask heaven remission for what's past;
Cares of the world by me are laid aside,
My present poverty's a blessing to me;
And though I have been long, I dare not say
I ever lived till now.
You bear it well;
Yet as you wish I should receive for truth
What you deliver, with that truth acquaint me
With your brothers inclination. I have heard
In the acquisition of his wealth, he weighs no:
Whose ruins he builds upon.
In that report
Wrongs him, my Lord. He is a Citizen,
And would increase his heap, and will not lose
What the Law gives him. Such as are worldly wise
Pursue that tract, or they will ne'er wear scarlet.
But if your Honour please to know his temper,
You are come opportunely. I can bring you
Where you unseen shall see, and hear his carriage
Towards some poor men, whose making or undoing
Depend upon his pleasure.
To my wish,
I know no object that could more content me.
WHat would you have me do? reach me a chair.
When I lent my moneys I appeared an Angel;
But now I would call in mine own, a Devil.
Were you the Divelsdamme, you must stay till I have it.
For as I am a Gentleman,
There you may hear all.
I pawned you my land for the tenth part of the value,
Now, cause I am a Gamester, and keep Ordinaries,
And a Livery punk, or so, and trade not with
The money-mongers wives, not one will be bound for me:
It is a hard case, you must give me longer day
Or I shall grow very angry.
Fret, and spare not.
I know no obligation lies upon me
With my honey to feed Drones. But to the purpose,
How much owes Penury?
Two hundred pounds:
His Bond three times since forfeited.
Is it sued?
Yes Sir, and execution out against him
For body and goods.
For both, Sir.
See it served.
I am undone; my wife and family.
Must starve for want of bread.
More Infidel thou
In not providing better to support'em.
What's Fortunes debt?
A thousand, Sir.
An estate
For a good man. You were the glorious Trader,
Embraced all bargains; the main venturer
In every Ship that launched forth; kept your wife
As a Lady, she had her Coach, her choice
Of Summer-houses, built with other men's moneys
Took up at Interest, the certain road
To Ludgate in a Citizen. Pray you acquaint me
How were my thousand pounds employed?
Insult not
On my calamity, though being a debtor,
And a slave to him that lends, I must endure it.
Yet hear me speak thus much in my defence;
Losses at sea, and those Sir, great, and many,
By storms, and tempests, not domestical riots
In soothing my wives humour, or mine own,
Have brought me to this low ebb.
Suppose this true;
What is it to me? I must, and will have my money,
Or I'll protest you first, and that done have
The Statute made for Bankrupts served upon you.
It is in your power, but not in mine to shun it.
Not as a brother, Sir, but with such duty
As I should use unto my Father, since
Your charity is my parent, give me leave
To speak my thoughts.
What would you say?
No word, Sir,
I hope shall give offence; nor let it relish
Of flattery, though I proclaim aloud:
I glory in the bravery of your mind,
To which your welds a servant. Not that riches
Is or should be contemned, it being a blessing
Derived from heaven, and by your industry
Pulled down upon you; but in this dear, Sir,
You have many equals: Such a mans possessions
Extend as far as yours, a second hath
His bags as full; a third in credit flies
As high in the popular voice: but the distinction
And noble difference by which you are
Divided from 'em, is, that you are styled
Gentle in your abundance, good in plenty,
And that you feel compassion in your bowels
Of others miseries (I have found it, Sir,
Heaven keep me thankful for it) while they are cursed
As rigid and inexorable.
I delight not
To hear this spoke to my face.
That shall not grieve you,
Your affability, and mildness clothed
In the garments of your debtors breath
Shall every where, though you strive to conceal it
Be seen, and wondered at, and in the act
With a prodigal hand rewarded. Whereas such
As are born only for themselves, and live so,
Though prosperous in wordly understandings,
Are but like beasts of rapine, that by odds
Of strength, usurp, and tyrannise o'er others
Brought under their subjection.
A rare fellow!
I am strangely taken with him.
Can you think Sir,
In your unquestioned wisdom, I beseech you,
The goods of this poor man sold at an out-crie,
His wife turned out of doors, his children forced
To beg their bread: this gentleman's estate
By wrong extorted can advantage you?
If it thrive with him hang me, as it will damn him
If he be not converted.
You are too violent.
Or that the ruin of this once brave Merchant
(For such he was esteemed though now decayed)
Will raise your reputation with good men.
But you may urge, pray you pardon me, my zeal
Makes me thus bold and vehement, in this
You satisfy your anger, and revenge
For being defeated. Suppose this, it will not
Repair your loss, and there was never yet
But shame, and scandal in a victory
When the rebels unto reasons passions fought it.
Then for revenge by great souls it was ever
Contemned, though offered; entertained by none
But cowards, base, and abject spirits, strangers
To moral honesty, and never yet
Acquainted with religion.
Our divines
Cannot speak more effectually.
Shall I be
Talked out of my money?
No, Sir, but entreated
To do your self a benefit, and preserve
What you possess entire.
How my good brother?
By making these your beads-men. When they eat,
Their thanks next heaven, will be paid to your mercy
When your Ships are at Sea, their prayers will swell
The Sails with prosperous winds, and guard'em from
Tempests, and pirates: keep your ware-houses
From fire, or quench'em with their tears.
No more.
Write you a good man in the peoples hearts,
Follow you every where.
If this could be.
It must or our devotions are but words,
I see a gentle promise in your eye,
Make it a blessed act, and poor, me rich
In being the instrument.
You shall prevail.
Give'em longer day. But do you hear, no talk of't.
Should this arrive at twelve on the Exchange.
I shall be laughed at for my foolish pity.
Which money men hate deadly. Take your own time
But see you break not. Carrie'em to the Cellar,
Drink a health, and thank your Orator.
On our knees Sir.
Honest M. Luke!
I bless the Counter where
You learned this Retorick.
No more of that friends.
My honourable Lord
I have seen and heard all,
Excuse my manners, and wish heartily
You were all of a piece. Your charity to your debtors
I do commend, but where you should express
Your piety to the height, I must boldly tell you
You show your self an Atheist.
Make me know
My error, and for what I am thus censured,
And I will purge my self, or else confess
A guilty cause.
It is your harsh demeanour
To your poor brother.
Is that all?
It is more
Then can admit defence. You keep him as
A Parasite to your table, subject to
The scorn of your proud wife: an underling
To his own Nieces. And can I with mine honour
Mix my blood with his, that is not sensible
Of his brothers miseries?
Pray you take me with you,
And let me yield my reasons why I am
No opener handed to him. I was born
His elder brother, yet my fathers fondness
To him the younger robbed me of my birth-right:
He had a fair estate, which his loose riots
Soon brought to nothing. Wants grew heavy on him
And when laid up for debt, of all forsaken,
And in his own hopes lost, I did redeem him,
You could not do less.
Was I bound to it my Lord?
What I possess, I may with justice call
The harvest of my industry. Would you have me,
Neglecting mine own family, to give up
My estate to his disposure?
I would have you,
What's passed forgot, to use him as a brother;
A brother of fair parts, of a clear soul,
Religious, good, and honest.
Outward gloss
Often deceivs, may it not prove so in him,
And yet my long acquaintance with his nature
Renders me doubtful, but that shall not make
A breach between us: Let us in to dinner,
And what trust, or employment you think sit
Shall be conferred upon him: If he prove
True gold in the touch, I'll be no mourner for it.
If counterfeit, I'll never trust my judgment.
The like was never seen.
Why in this rage man?
Men may talk of Country-Christmases, and Court∣gluttony,
Their thirty pound buttered eggs, their Pies of Carps tongues,
Their Pheasants drenched with Ambergreece, the carcasses
Of three fat Weathers bruised for gravie to
Make sauce for a single Peacock, yet their feasts
Were fasts compared with the Cities.
What deer dainty
Was it thou murmur at?
Did you not observe it?
There were three sucking pigs served up in a dish,
Took from the sow as soon as farrowed,
A fortnight fed with dates, and muskadine,
That stood my Master in twenty marks a piece,
Besides the puddings in their bellies made
Of I know not what. I dare swear the cook that dressed it
Was the Devil, disguised like a Dutch-man.
Yet all this
Will not make you fat, fellow. Holdfast.
I am rather
Starved to look on it. But here's the mischief, though
The dishes were raised one upon another
As woodmongers do billets, for the first,
The second, and third course, and most of the shopps
Of the best confectioners in London ransacked
To furnish out a banquet, yet my Lady
Called me penurious rascal, and cried out,
There was nothing worth the eating.
You must have patience,
This is not done often.
It is not fit it should,
Threesuch dinners more would break an Alderman,
And make him give up his cloak. I am resolved
To have no hand in it. I'll make up my accounts
And since, my Master longs to be undone:
The great Fiend be his Steward, I will pray,
And bless my self from him.
The wretch shows in this
An honest care.
Out on him, with the fortune
Of a slave, he has the mind of one. However
She bears me hard, I like my Ladies humour,
And my brothers sufferage to it. They are now
Busy on all hands; one side eager for
Large portions, the other arguing strictly
For jointures, and security; but this
Being above our scale, no way concerns us.
How dull you look? in the mean time how intend you
To spend the hours?
We well know how we would,
But dare not serve our wills.
Being prentices,
We are bound to attendance.
Have you almost served out
The term of your Indentures, yet make conscience
By starts to use your liberty? Hast thou traded
In the other world, exposed unto all dangers,
To make thy Master rich, yet dare not take
Some portion of the profit for thy pleasure?
Or wilt thou being keeper of the Cash,
Like an Ass that carries dainties, feed on Thistles?
Are you gentlemen born, yet have no gallant tincture
Of gentry in you? You are no Mechanics,
Nor serve some needy shop-keeper, who surveighs
His every-day-takings. You have in your keeping,
A mass of wealth, from which you may take boldly,
And no way be discovered, He's no rich man
That knows all he possesses, and leaves nothing
For his servants to make prey of. I blush for you,
Blush at your poverty of spirit, you
The brave sparks of the City?
M. Luke,
I wonder, you should urge this, having felt
What misery follows riot.
And the penance
You endured for it in the Counter.
You are fools,
The case is not the same. I spent mine own money,
And my stock being small, no marvel it was soon wasted.
But you without the least doubt or suspicion,
If cautelous, may make bold with your Masters.
As for example; when his Ships come home,
And you take your receipts, as it is the fashion,
For fifty bales of Silk you may write forty,
Or for so many pieces of Cloth of Bodkin,
Tissue, Gold, Silver, Velvets, Satins, Taffaties,
A piece of each deducted from the gross
Will never be missed, a dash of a pen will do it.
I, but our fathers bonds that lye in pawn
For our honesties must pay for it.
A mere bugbear
Invented to fright children. As I live
Were I the master of my brothers fortunes,
I should glory in such servants. Did thou know
What ravishing lechery it is to enter
An Ordinary, ca pa pe, trimmed like a Gallant,
(For which in trunks concealed be ever furnished)
The reverence, respect, the crouches, cringes,
The musical chime of Gold in your crammed pockets,
Commands from the attendants, and poor Porters?
Oh rare!
Then sitting at the Table with
The braveries of the kingdom, you shall hear
Occurrents from all corners of the world,
The plots, the Counsels, the designs of Princes,
And freely censure'em; the City wits
Cried up, or decri'd, as their passions lead'em;
Judgment having nought to do there.
Admirable!
My Lord no sooner shall rise out of his chair,
The gaming Lord I mean, but you may boldly
By the privilege of a gamester fill his room,
For in play you are all fellows; have your knife
As soon in the Pheasant; drink your health as freely,
And striking in a lucky hand or two,
Buy out your time.
This may be: but suppose
We should be known.
Have money and good clothes
And you may pass invisible. Or if
You love a Madam-punck, and your wide nostril
Be taken with the sent of cambric smocks
Wrought, and perfumed.
There, there, M. Luke,
There lies my road of happiness.
Enjoy it,
And pleasures stolen being sweetest, apprehend
The raptures of being hurried in a Coach
To Brainford, Stones, or Barnet.
It is enchanting,
I have proved it.
Hast thou?
Yes in all these places,
I have had my several Pagans billeted
For my own tooth, and after ten pound suppers
The curtains drawn, my Fiddlers playing all night
The shaking of the sheets, which I have danced
Again, and again with my Cockatrice. M. Luke,
You shall be of my counsel, and we two sworn brothers,
And therefore I'll be open. I am out now
Six hundred in the Cash, yet if on a sudden
I should be called to account, I have a trick
How to evade it, and make up the sum.
Is it possible?
You can entrust your Tutor.
How? how? good Tom.
Why look you. We cash-keepers
Hold correspondence, supply one another
On all occasions. I can borrow for a week
Two hundred pounds of one, as much of a second,
A third lays down the rest, and when they want,
As my Masters monies come in, I do repay it,
Call me, call thee.
An excellent knot! it is pity
It •••e should be unloosed; for me it shall not,
You are shew'n the way friend Tradewell, ou may make use on it,
Or freeze in the ware-house, and keep company
With the Cator Holdfast.
No, I am converted.
A Barbican Broker will surnish me with out side,
And then a crash at the Ordinary.
I am for
The Lady you saw this morning, who indeed is
My proper recreation.
Go to Tom,
What did you make me?
I'll do as much for you,
Employ me when you please:
If you are enquired for,
I will excuse you both.
Kind M. Luke;
We'll break my Master to make you;
You know.
I cannot love money, go boys. When time serves
It shall appear, I have another end in it.
Ten thousand pounds a piece I'll make their portions,
And after my decease it shall be double,
Provided you assure them for their jointures
800l. per annum, and entail
A thousand more upon the heirs male,
Begotten on their bodies.
Sir, you bind us
To very strict conditions.
You my Lord
May do as you please: but to me it seems strange,
We should conclude of portions, and of jointures,
Before our hearts are settled.
You say right,
There are counsels of more moment, and importance
On the making up of marriages to be
Considered duly, then the portion, or the jointures
In which a mothers care must be exacted,
And I by special privilege may challenge
A casting voice.
How's this?
Even so my Lord,
In these affairs I govern.
Give you way to it?
I must my Lord.
It is fit he should, and shall:
You may consult of something else, this Province
Is wholly mine.
By the City custom Madam?
Yes my young Sir, and both must look my daughters
Will hold it by my Copy.
Brave i'faith.
Give her leave to talk, we have the power to do;
And now touching the business we last talked of,
In private if you please.
It is well remembered,
You shall take your own way Madam.
What strange lecture
Will she read unto us?
Such as wisdom warrants
From the Superior bodies. Is Stargaze ready
With his several Schemes?
Yes Madam, and attends
Your pleasure.
Stargaze, Lady: What is he?
Call him in. You shall first know him, then admire him
For a man of many parts, and those parts rare ones.
Hoe's every thing indeed, parcel Physician,
And as such prescribes my diet, and foretells
My dreams when I eat Potato's; parcel Poet,
And sings Encomiums to my virtues sweetly;
My Antecedent, or my Gentleman Usher;
And as the stars move, with that due proportion
He walks before me; but an absolute Master
In the Calculation of Nativities;
Guided by that ne're-erring science, called,
Judicial Astrology.
Stargaze! sure
I have a penny Almanac about me
Inscribed to you, as to his Patroness,
In his name published.
Keep it as a jewel.
Some States men that I will not name, are wholly
Governed by his predictions, for they serve
For any latitude in Christendom,
As well as our own climate.
I believe so.
Must we couple by the Almanac?
Be silent,
And ever we do articulate, much more
Grow to a full conclusion, instruct us
Whether this day and hour, by the planets, promise
Happy success in, marriage.
In omni
Part, &amp; toto.
Good learned Sir, in English.
And since it is resolved we must be Coxcombs,
Make us so in our own language.
You are pleasant:
Thus in our vulgar tongue then.
Pray you observe him.
Venus in the West-angle, the house of marriage the
7th house, in Trine of Mars, in Conjunction of Luna, and Mars
Almuthen, or Lord of the Horoscope.
Hoy day
The Angels language, I am ravished! forward.
Mars as I said Lord of the Horoscope, or geniture, in mutual reception of each other, she in her Exaltation, and he in his Triplicitie trine, and face, assure a fortunate combine∣tion to Hymen. excellent prosperous and happy.
Kneel, and give thanks.
For what we understand not.
And have as little faith in'c.
Be credulous,
To me it is Oracle.
Now for the sovereignty of my future Ladies, your daughters after they are married.
Wearing the breeches you mean.
Touch that point home,
It is a principal one, and with London Ladies
Of main consideration.
This is infallible: Saturn out of all dignities in his detriment and fall, combust: and Venus in the South-angle elevated above him, Lady of both their Nativities; in her essen∣teal, and accidental dignities; occidental from the Sun, oriental from the Angle of the East, in Cazini of the Sun, in her joy, and free from the malevolent beams of infortunes; in a sign com∣manding, and Mars in a constellation obeying, she fortunate, and he dejected, the disposers of marriage in the Radix of the native in feminine figures, argue foretell, and declare pre-eminence, rule, preheminen ce and absolute sovereignty in women.
Is it possible!
It is drawn, I assure you, from the Aphorisms of the old Chaldeans;
Zoroastes the first and greatest Magician,
Mercurius Trismegistius, the later Ptolomy, and the everlasting
Prognosticator, old Erra Pater.
Are you yet satisfied!
In what?
That you
Are bound to obey your Wives, it being so
Determined by the stars, against whose influence
There is no opposition.
Since I must
Be married by the Almanac, as I may be,
It were requisite the services and duties
Which, as you say, I must pay to my wife,
Were set down in the Calender.
With the date
Of my Apprenticeship.
Make your demands;
I'll sit as Moderatrix, if they press you
With over hard conditions.
Mine hath the Van,
I stand your charge, sweet.
Silence.
I require first
(And that since it is in fashion with kind husbands,
In civil manners you must grant) my will
In all things whatsoever, and that will
To be obeyed, not argued.
And good reason.
A gentle Imprimis.
This in gross contains all;
But your special Items, Lady.
When I am one
(And you are honoured to be styled my husband)
To urge my having my Page, my Gentleman-Usher;
My Woman sworn to my secrets; my Caroch
Drawn by six Flanders Mares; my Coachman, Grooms,
Postilian, and Footmen.
Is there ought else
To be demanded?
Yes Sir, mine own Doctor; French, and Italian Cooks;
Musicians, Songsters,
And a Chaplain that must preach to please my fancy;
A friend at Court to place me at a Mask;
The private Box took up at a new Play
For me, and my retinue; a fresh habit,
(Of a fashton never seen before) to draw
The Gallants eyes that sit on the Stage upon me;
Some decayed Lady for my Parasite,
To flatter me, and rail at other Madams;
And there ends my ambition.
Your desires
Are modest, I confess.
These toys subscribed to,
And you continuing an obedient Husband
Upon all fit occasions, you shall find me
A most indulgent Wife.
You have said, give place
And hear your younger Sister.
If she speak
Her language, may the great Friend booted &amp; spurred,
With a Sith at his girdle, as the Scotsmen says,
Ride headlong down her throat.
Curse not the Judge
Besore you hear the sentence.
In some part
My Sister hath spoke well for the City pleasures,
But I am for the Countries, and must say
Under correction in her demands
She was too modest.
How like you this Exordium?
Too modest, with a mischief I
Yes, too modest:
I know my value, and prize it to the worth;
My youth, my beauty.
How your glass deceives you?
The greatness of the portion I bring with me,
And the Sea of happiness that from me flows to you.
She bears up close.
And can you in your wisdom,
Or rustical simplicity imagine,
You have met some innocent Country girl, that never
Looked further then her fathers farm, nor knew more
Then the price of corn in the Market; or at what rate
Beef went a stone? that would surveigh your dairy,
And bring in mutton out of Cheese, and butter?
That could give directions at what time of the Moon
To cut her Cocks, sor (apons against Christmas,
Or when to raise up Goslings?
These are arts
Would not mis-become you, though you should put in
Obedience and duty.
Yes, and patience,
To sit like a fool at home, and eye your thrashers;
Then make provition for your slavering Round,
When you come drunk from an Ale-house after hunting,
With your Clowns and Comrades as if all were yours,
You the Lord Paramount, and I the drudge;
The case Sir, must be otherwise.
How, I beseech you?
Marry thus. I will not like my Sister challenge
What's useful, or superfluous from my Husband,
That's base all o'er. mine shall receive from me,
What I think fit. I'll have the State conveyed
Into my hands; and be put to his pension,
Which the wise virago's of our climate practise,
I will receive your rents.
You shall be hanged first.
Make sale, or purchase. Nay I'll have my neighbours
Instructed, when a passenger shall ask,
Whose house is this? though you stand by to answer,
The Lady Plenties. Or who owes this manner?
The Lady Plenty. Whose sheep are these? whose oxen?
The Lady Plenties.
A plentiful Pox upon you
And when I have children, if it be enquired
By a stranger whose they are, they shall still Echo
My Lady Plenties? the Husband never thought on.
In their begetting I think so.
Since you'll marry
In the City for our wealth, in justice, we
Must have the Countries Sovereignty.
And we nothing.
A Nag of forty shillings, a couple of Spaniels,
With a Spar-Hawk is sufficient, and these too,
As you shall behave your self, during my pleasure,
I will not greatly stand on. I have said Sir,
Now if you like me, so.
At my entreaty,
The Articles shall be easier.
Shall they i'faith?
Like Bitch, like Whelps:
Use fair words.
I cannot;
I have read of a house of pride, and now I have found one:
A whirl wind overturn it.
On these terms,
Will your minxship be a Lady?
A Lady in a morris,
I'll wed a Peddlers punk first.
Tinkers trull,
A beggar without a smock.
Let Monsieur Almanac,
Since he is so cunning with his Jacob's Staff,
Find you out a Husband in a bowling Ally
The general pimp to a Brothel.
Though that now,
All the loose desires of man were raked up in me,
And no means but thy Maiden-head left to quench'em,
I would turn Cinders, or the next Sow-gelder,
On my life should lib me, rather then embrace thee.
Wooing do you call this?
A Bear-baiting rather.
Were you worried, you deserve it, and I hope
I shall live to see it.
I'll not rail, nor curse you,
Only this; you are pretty peates, and your great portions
Adds much unto your handsomeness, but as
You would command your Husbands you are beggars,
Deformed, and ugly.
Hear me.
Not a word more.
I ever thought it would come to this.
Wee may
Lead Apes in Hell for Husbands, if you bind us
To articulate thus with our suitors.
Now the Cloud breaks,
And the Storm will fall on me.
You rascal, juggler.
Dear Madam.
Hold you intelligence with the Stars,
And thus deceive me?
My art cannot err,
If it does s'le burn my Astrolabe. In mine own Starr
I did fore see this broken head, and beating;
And now your Ladyship sees, as I do feel it,
It could not be avoided.
Did you?
Madam,
Have patience but a week, and if you find not
All my predictions true touching your daughters,
And a change of fortune to your self, a rare one,
Turn me out of doors. These are not the men, the Planets
Appointed for their Husbands, there will come
Gallants of another metal.
Once more trust him.
Do, Lady mother.
I am vexed, look to it;
Turn o'er your books, if once again you fool me,
You shall graze elsewhere: Come Girls.
I am glad I escaped thus.
THe plot shows very likely.
I repose
My principal trust in your Lordship; twill prepare
The physic I intend to minister
To my Wife, and Daughters.
I will do my parts
To set it off to the life.
It may produce
A Scene of no vulgar mirth. Here come the Suitors;
When we understand how they relish my Wife's humours,
The rest is feasible.
Their looks are cloudy.
How fits the wind? Are you ready to launch forth.
Into this sea of marriage.
Call it rather
A Whirle-pool of afflictions.
If you please
To enjoin me to it, I will undertake
To find the North-passage to the Indies sooner,
Then plough with your proud Heifer.
I will make
A Voyage to Hell first.
How, Sir?
And court Proserpine
In the fight of Pluto, his three headed Porter
Cerberus standing by, and all the suries,
With their whips to scourge me for it, then say, I Jeffrey
Take your Mary for my Wife.
Why what's the matter?
The matter is, the mother, with your pardon,
I cannot but speak so much, is a most insufferable,
Proud, insolent Lady.
And the daughter's worse.
The Dam in years had th'advantage to be wicked.
But they were so in her belly.
I must tell you,
With reverence to your wealth, I do begin
To think you of the same leaven.
Take my counsel;
It is safer for your credit to prosesse
Your self a Cuckold, and upon record,
Then say they are your Daughters.
You go too far Sir.
They have so Articl'd with us.
And will not take us
For their Husbands, but their slaves, and so aforehand
They do profess they'll use us.
Leave this heat:
Though they are mine I must tell you, the perverseneess
Of their manners (which they did not take from me,
But from their mother) qualified, they deserve
Your equals.
True, but what's bred in the bone
Admits no hope of cure:
Though Saints, and Angels
Were their Physicians.
You conclude too fast.
God bowy you, I'll travail three years, but I'll bury
This shame that lives upon me.
With your licence,
I'll keep him company.
who shall furnish you,
For your expenses?
He shall not need your help,
My purse is his, we were rivals, but now friends,
And will live and die so.
Ever we go I'll pay
My duty as a son.
And till then leave you.
They are strangely moved.
What's wealth, accompanied
With disobedience in a wife and children?
My heart will break
Be comforted, and hope better;
We'll ride abroad, the fresh air and discourse,
May yield us new inventions.
You are noble,
And shall in all things, as you please command me.
DEad doings, Daughter.
Doings! sufferings mother:
Men have forgot what doing is;
And such as have to pay for what they do,
Are impotent, or Eunuchs.
You have a friend yet,
And a striker too, I take it.
Goldwire is so,
And comes to me by stealth, and as he can steal, maintains me
In clothes, I grant; but alas Dame, what's one friend?
I would have a hundred for every hour, and use
And change of humour I am in a fresh one.
It is a flock of sheep that makes a lean Wolf fat,
And not a single Lambkin. I am starved,
Starved in my pleasures. I know not what a Coach is,
To hurry me to the Burse, or old Exchange,
The Neathouse for Musk-mellons, and the Gardens
Where we traffic for Asparagus, are to me
In the other world.
There are other places Lady.
Where you might find customers.
You would have me foot it
To the Dancing of the Ropes, sit a whole afternoon there
In expectation of Nuts and Pippins;
Gape round about me, and yet not find a Chapamn
That in curtsy will bid a chop of mutton,
Or a pint of Drum-wine for me.
You are so impatient.
But I can tell you news will comfort you,
And the whole Sister hood.
What's that?
I am told
Two Ambassadors are come over. A French Monsieur,
And a Venetian, one of the Clarissimi,
A hot reined Marmosue. Their followers,
For their Countries honour after a long Vacation,
Will make a full term with us.
They indeed are
Our certain and best customers: Who knocks there?
Open the door.
What are you?
Your constant visitants.
Let 'em not in.
I know em swaggering, suburban roarers,
Six-penny truckers
Down go all your windows,
And your neighbours too shall suffer.
Force the doors.
They are out-laws, mistress Shavem, and there is
No remedy against em, what should you fear?
They are but men, lying at your close ward,
You have foiled their betters.
Out you Baud. You care not
Upon what desperate service you employ me,
Nor with whom, so you have your fee.
Sweet ladie-bird
Sing a milder key.
Are you grown proud?
I knew you a wastcotier in the garden allies,
And would come to a sailors whistle.
Good Sir Ramble,
Use her not roughly. She is very tender.
Rank and rotten, is she not?
Your spittle rogueships
Shall not make me so.
As you are a man, Squire Scuffle,
Step in between em. A weapon of that length
Was ne'er drawn in my house.
Let him come on,
I'll scour it in your gut, you dog.
You brach,
Are you turned mankind. You forgot I gave you,
When wee last joined issue, twenty pound.
O'er night,
And kick it out of me in the morning. I was then
A novice, but I know to make my game now.
Fetch the Constable.
Ah me. Here's one unsent for,
And a Justice of Peace too.
I'll hang you both you rascals,
I can but ride. You for the purse you cut
In Powl's at a sermon. I have smoked you. And you for the bacon
You took on the high way from the poor market woman
As she road from Rumford.
Mistress Shavem.
Mistress Secret,
On our knees we beg your pardon.
Set a ransom on us.
We cannot stand trifling. If you mean to save them,
Shut them out at the back-door.
First for punishment
They shall leave their cloaks behind em, and in sign
I am their sovereign, and they my vassalls,
For homage kiss my Shoo-sole rogues, and vanish.
My brave virago. The coasts clear. Strike up.
My Goldwire made a Justice.
And your scout
Turned Constable, and the Musiclans watch-men.
We come not to fright you, but to make you merry.
A light Lavolto.
I am tired. No more.
This was your device.
Wholly his own. He is
No pig sconce Mistress.
He has an excellent head-peece
Fie no, not I: your jeering gallants say
We Citizens have no wit.
He dyes that says so.
This was a master-piece.
A trifling stratagem,
Not worth the talking of.
I must kiss thee for it
Again, and again.
Make much of her. Did you know
What suitors she had since she saw you.
In the way of marriage.
Yes Sir, for marriage, and the other thing too.
The commodity is the same. An Irish Lord offered her.
Five pound a week.
And a cashiered Captain, half
Of his entertainment.
And a new made Courtier.
The next suit he could beg.
And did my sweet one
Refuse all this for me?
Weep not for joy,
It is true. Let others talk of Lords, and Commanders,
And country heirs for their servants; but give me
My gallant prentice. He parts with his money
So civilly, and demurely; keeps no account
Of his expenses, and comes ever furnished.
I know thou hast brought money to make up
My gown and petticoat, with th'appurtenances.
I have it here Duck, thou shalt want for nothing.
Let the chamber be perfumed, and get you Sirrah
His cap, and pantables ready.
There's for thee,
And thee. That for a banquet.
And a caudle
Again you rise.
There.
Usher us up in state.
You will be constant.
Thou art the whole world to me.
WHere is this Uncle?
Call this Beadsman, brother: he hath for∣got attendance.
Seek him out: idleness spoils him.
I deserve much more then their scorn can load me with, and it is but justice,
That I should live the families drudge, designed
To all the sordid offices their pride
Imposes on me; since if now I sate
A Judge in mine own cause, I should conclude
I am not worth their pity: such as want
Discourse, and judgment, and through weakness fall,
May merit man's compassion; but I
That knew prosusenesse of expense the parent
Of wretched poverty, her fatal daughter,
To riot out mine own, to live upon
The alms of others! steering on a rock
I might have shunned: O heaven! it is not fit
I should look upward, much less hope for mercy.
What are you devising, Sir?
My Uncle is much given to his devotion.
And takes time to mumble
A Pater noster to himself.
Know you where
Your brother is? It better would become you
(Your means of life depending wholly on him)
To give your attendance.
In my will I do:
But since he rode sorth yesterday with Lord Lacie,
I have not seen him.
And wh• went not you
By his stirrup? how do you look? were his eyes closed,
You'd be glad of such employment.
It was his pleasure
I should wait your command, 〈◊〉 those I am ever
Most ready to receive.
I know you can speak well,
But say and do.
Here comes my Lord.
Further off:
You are no companion for him, and his business
Aims not at you, as I take it.
Can I live in this base condition? 
I h•p'd, my Lord,
You had brought Mr. Frugal with you, for I must ask
An account of him from you.
I can give it, Lady;
But with the best discretion of a woman,
And a strong fortified patience, I desire you
To give it hearing
My heart beats.
My Lord, you much amaze me.
I shall astonish you. The noble Merchant,
Who living was for his integrity
And upright dealing (a rare miracle.
In a rich Citizen) Londons best honour;
Is — I am loath to speak it.
Wondrous strange!
I do suppose the worst, not dead I hope?
Your supposition's true, your hopes are false:
Hoe's dead.
Ay me.
My Father.
My kind Father.
Now they insult not.
Pray hear me out.
Hoe's dead. Dead to the world, and you. And now
Lives only to himself.
What Riddle's this?
Act not the torturer in my afflictions;
But make me understand the sum of all
That I must undergo.
In few words take it;
He is retired into a Monastery,
Where he resolves to end his days.
More strange.
I saw him take post for Dover, and the wind
Sitting so fair, by this hoe's safe at Calice,
And ere long will be at Lovain.
Could I guess
What were the motives that induced him to it,
It were some allay to my sorrows.
I 'le instruct you,
And chide you into that knowledge: it was your pride
Above your rank, and stubborn disobedience
Of these your daughters, in their milk sucked from you:
At home the harshness of his entertainment,
You wilfully forgetting that your all
Was borrowed from him; and to hear abroad
The imputations dispersed upon you,
And justly too, I fear, that drew him to
This strict retirement: And thus much said for him;
I am my self to accuse you.
I confess
A guilty cause to him, but in a thought,
My Lord, I ne'rc wronged you.
In fact you have;
The insolent disgrace you put upon
My only Son, and Mr. Plenty; men, that loved
Your daughters in a noble way, to wash off
The scandal, put a resolution in 'em
For three years travel.
I am much grieved for it.
One thing I had forgot; your rigour to
His decayed brother, in which your flatteries,
Or sorcevies, made him a coagent with you,
Wrought not the least impression.
Humph! this sounds well.
It is now past help: after these storms, my Lord,
A little calm, if you please.
If what I have told you
Showed like a storm, what now I must deliver
Will prove a raging tempest. His whole estate
In lands and leases, debts and present moneys,
With all the movables he stood possessed of,
With the best advice which he could get for gold
From his learned counsel, by this formal Will
Is passed o'er to his brother. With it take
The key of his counting house. Not a great left you,
Which you can call your own.
Undone for ever.
Marie. What will become of us?
Humph!
The Scenes changed,
And he that was your slave, by fate appointed
Your governor, you kneel to me in vain,
I cannot help you, I discharge the trust
Imposed upon me. This humility
From him may gain remission, and perhaps
Forgetfulness of your barbarous usage to him.
Am I come to this.
Enjoy your own, good Sir,
But use it with due reverence. I once heard you
Speak most divinely in the opposition
Of a revengeful humour, to these show it;
And such who then depended on the mercy
Of your brother wholly now at your devotion,
And make good the opinion I held of you;
Of which I am most confident.
Pray you rise,
And rise with this assurance, I am still,
As I was of late, your creature; and if raised
In any thing, it is in my power to serve you,
My will is still the same. O my Lord!
This heap of wealth which you possess me of.
Which to a worldly man had been a blessing,
And to the messenger might with justice challenge
A kind of adoration, is to me
A curse, I cannot thank you for; and much less
Rejoice in that tranquillity of mind,
My brothers vows must purchase. I have made
A dear exchange with him. He now enjoys
My peace, and poverty, the trouble of
His wealth conferred on me, and that a burden
Too heavy for my weak shouldiers.
Honest soul,
With what feeling he receives it.
You shall have
My best assistance, if you please to use it
To help you to support it.
By no means,
The weight shall rather sink me, then you part
With one short minute from those lawful pleasures
Which you were born to in your care to aid me,
You shall have all abundance. In my nature
I was ever liberal, my Lord you know it.
Kind, affable. And now me thinks I see
Before my face the Jubilee of joy,
When it is assured, my brother lives in me,
His debtors in full cups crowned to my health,
With Paeans to my praise will celabrate.
For they well know it is far from me to take
The forfeiture of a Bond. Nay I shall blush,
The interest never paid after three years,
When I demand my principal. And his servants
Who from a slavish fear paid her obedience
By him exacted; now when they are mine
Will grow familiar friends, and as such use me,
Being certain of the mildness of my temper,
Which my change of fortune, frequent in most men
Hath not the power to alter.
Yet take heed Sir
You ruin it not with too much lenity,
What his fit severity raised.
And we fall from
That height we have maintained.
Fl build it higher,
To admiration higher. With disdain
I look upon these habits, no way suiting
The wife, and daughters of a knighted Citizen
Blessed with abundance.
There Sir, I join with you;
A fit decorum must be kept, the Court
Distinguished from the City.
With your favour
I know what you would say, but give me leave
In this to be your advocate. You are wide,
Wide the whole region in what I purpose.
Since all the titles, honours, long descents
Borrow their gloss from wealth, the rich with reason
May challenge their perogatives. And it shall be
My glory, nay a triumph to revive
In the pomp that these shall shine, the memory
Of the Roman matrons, who kept captive Queens
To be their hand-maids. And when you appear
Like Juno in full majesty, and my Nieces
Like Iris, Hebe, or what deities else
Old Poets fancy; your crammed ward-robes richer
Then various natures, and draw down the envy
of our western world upon you, only hold me
your vigilant Harms with aerial wings,
My Caduceus my strong zeal to serve you,
Pressed to fecth in all ra•ities may delight you,
And am made immortal.
A strange frenzy.
Off with these rags, and then to bed. There dream
Of future greatness, which when you awake
I'll make a certain truth: but I must be
A doer, not a promiser. The performance
Requiring host, I kiss your hands, and leave you.
Are we all turned statues: have his strange words charmed us?
What muse you on Lady?
Do not trouble me.
Sleep you too, young ones?
Swift winged time till now
Was never tedious to me. Would it were night.
Nay morning rather.
Can you grouud your faith
On such impossibilities? have you so soon
Forgot your good Husband?
Hee was a vanity
I must no more remember.
Excellent!
You your kind Father?
Such an Uncle never
Was read of in Story!
Not one word in answer
Of my demands?
You are but a Lord, and know
My thoughts soar higher.
Admirable! I will leave you
To your Castles in the Air, when I relate this
It will exceed belief, but he must know it.
Now I may boldly speak: May it please you Madam,
To look upon your Vassal; I foresaw this,
The Stars assured it.
I begin to feel
My self another woman.
Now you shall find
All my predictions true, and nobler matches
Prepared for my young Ladies.
Princely Husbands.
I'll go no less.
Not a word more,
Provide my night-rayl.
What shall we be to morrow.
It was no fantastic object, but a truth
A real truth. Nor dream I did not slumber,
And could wake ever with a brooding eye
To gaze upon it! It did endure the touch,
I saw, and felt it. Yet what I beheld
And handled oft, did so transcend belies
(My wonder, and astonishment passed ore)
I faintly could give credit to my senses.
Thou dumb magician that without a charm
Did make my entrance easy, to possess
What wise men wish, and toil for. Harms Moly;
Sybilla's golden bough; the great Elixir,
Imagined only by the Alchemist
Compared with thee are shadows, thou the substance.
And guardian of felicity. No marvel,
My brother made thy place of rest his bosom,
Thou being the keeper of his heart, a mistress
To be hugged ever. In by corners of
This sacred room, silver in bags heaped up
Like billets sawed, and ready for the fire,
Unworthy to hold fellowship with bright gold
That flowed about the room, concealed it self.
There needs no artificial light, the splendour
Makes a perpetual day there, night and darkness
By that still burning lamp for ever banished.
But when guided by that, my eyes had made
Discovery of the caskets, and they opened,
Each sparkling diamond from it self shot forth
A pyram'd of flames, and in the roof
Fix it a glorious Star, and made the place
Heavens abstract, or Epitome. Rubies, Sapphires, and ropes of Orient pearl; these seen I could not
But look on with contempt, And yet I found
What weak credulity could have no faith in
A treasure far exceeding these, Here lay
A manor bound fast in a skin of parchment,
The wax continuing hard, the acres melting.
Here a sure deed of gift for a market town,
If not redeemed this day, which is not in
The unthrists power. There being scarce one shire
In Wales or Englands where my moneys are not
Lent out at usury, the certain hook
To draw in more. I am sublimed! gross earth
Supports me not. I walk on air! who's there
Theivs, raise the street, thievs!
What strange passion's this?
Have you your eyes? do you know me?
You, my Lord!
I do: but this retinue, in these shapes too,
May well excuse my fears. When it is your pleasure
That I should wait upon you, give me leave
To do it at your own house, for I must tell you,
Things as they now are with me, well considered,
I do not like such visitants.
Yesterday
When you had nothing, praise your poverty for it,
You could have sung secure before a thief;
But now you are growu rich, doubts and suspicions,
And needless fears possess you. Thank a good brother,
But let not this exalt you.
A good brother:
Good in his conscience, I confess, and wise,
In giving o'er the world. But his estate
Which your Lordship may conceive great, no way answers
The general opinion. Alas,
With a great charge, I am left a poor man by him.
A poor man, say you?
Poor, compared with what
It is thought I do possess. Some little land,
Fair household furniture; a few good debts,
But empty bags I find: yet I will be
A faithful Steward to his wife and daughters,
And to the utmost of my power obey
His will in all things
I'll not argue with you
Of his estate, but bind you to performance
Of his last request, which is for testimony
Of his religious charity, that you would
Receive these Indians, lately sent him from
Virginia, into your house; and labour
At any rate with the best of your endeavours,
Assisted by the aids of our Divines,
To make 'm Christians.
Call you this, my Lord,
Religious charity? to send Infidel,
Like hungry Locusts, to devour the bread
Should feed his family. I neither can,
Nor will consent to it.
Do not slight it, it is
With him a business of such consequence,
That should he only hear it is not embraced,
And cheerfully, in this his conscience aiming
At the saving of three souls, twill draw him o'er
To see it himself accomplished.
Heaven forbid
I should divert him from his holy purpose
To worldly cares again. I rather will
Sustain the burden, and with the converted
Feast the converters, who I know will prove
The greater feeders.
Oh, ha, enewah Chrish bully leek.
Enaula.
Harrico botikia bonnery.
Ha! In this heathen language,
How is it possible our Doctors should
Hold conference with 'em? or I use the means
For their conversion?
That shall be no hinderance
To your good purposes. They have lived long
In the English Colony, and speak our language
As their own Dialect; the business does concern you:
Mine own designs command me hence. Continue,
As in your poverty you were, a pious
And honest man
That is, interpreted,
A slave, and beggar.
You conceive it right,
There being no religion, nor virtue
But in abundance, and no vice but want.
All deities serve Plutus.
Oracle.
Temples raised to our selves in the increase
Of wealth, and reputation, speak a wiseman;
But sacrifice to an imagined power,
Of which we have no sense, but in belief,
A superstitious fool.
True worldly wisdom.
All knowledge else is folly.
Now we are yours,
Be confident your better Angel is
Entered your house.
There being nothing in
The compass of your wishes, but shall end
In their fruition to the full.
As yet,
You do not know us, but when you understand
The wonders we can do, and what the ends were
That brought us hither, you will entertain us
With more respect.
There's something whispers to me,
These are no common men; my house is yours,
Enjoy it freely: only grant me this,
Not to be seen abroad till I have heard
More of your sacred principles, pray enter.
You are learned Europeans, and wee worse
Then ignorant Americans.
You shall find it.
NOt speak with him? with fear survey me better;
Thou figure of famine.
Coming, as we do,
From his quondam patrons, his dear Ingles now,
The brave spark Tradewell.
And the man of men
In the service of a woman, gallant Goldwire.
I know'em for his prentices without
These flourishes. Here are rude fellows Sir.
Not yours, you rascal?
No, Don pimp: you may seek'em
In Bridewell, or the hole, here are none of your comrogues.
One of 'em looks as he would cut my throat:
Your business, friends?
I'll fetch a constable,
Let him answer him in the Stocks.
Stir and thou dat'st.
Fright me with Bridewell and the Stocks? they are flea-bitings
I am familiar with
Pray you put up.
And sirrah hold your peace.
Thy words a law,
And I obey. Live scrape-shoo, and be thankful.
Thou man of muck, and money, for as such
Know salute thee. The Suburban gamsters
Have heard thy fortunes, and I am in person sent to congratulate.
The news hath reached
The ordinaries, and all the gamsters are
Ambitious to shake the golden golls
Of worshipful Mr. Luke. I come from Tradewell
Your fine facetious factor
I from Goldwire.
He and his Helen have prepared a banquet
With the appurtenances to entertain thee,
For I must whisper in thine ear, thou art
To be her Paris, but bring money with thee
To quit old scores.
Blind chance hath frowned upon
Brave Tradewell. Hoe's blown up, but not without
Hope of recovery, so you supply him
With a good round sum. In my house I can assure you
There's half a million stirring.
What hath he lost?
Three hundred.
A trifle.
Make it up a thousand,
And I will fit him with such tools as shall
Bring in a miriad.
They know me well,
Nor need you use such circumstances for'em.
What's mine is theirs. They are my friends, not servants;
But in their care to enrich me, and these courses
The spetding means. Your name, I pray you?
Gettall;
I have been many years an Ordinary-keeper,
My Box my poor Revenue.
Your name suits well
With your profession. Bid him bear up, he shall not
Sit 'ong on pennilesse-bench.
There spake an Angel.
You know Mistress Shave'm?
The Pontifical Punk.
The same. Let him meet me there some two hours hence,
And tell Tom Goldwire I will then be with him,
Furnished beyond his hopes, and let your Mistress
Appear in her best trim.
She will make thee young,
Old AEson. She is ever furnished with
Medaeas Drugs, Restoratives. I fly
To keep 'em sober till thy worship come,
They will be drunk with joy else.
I'll run with you.
You will not do as you say, I hope.
Inquire not,
I shall do what becomes me—to the door. 
New Visitants: What are they?
A whole batch, Sir,
Almost of the same leaven: your needy Debtors,
Penury, Fortune, Hoist.
They come to gratulate
The fortune fallen upon me.
Rather, Sir,
Like the others, to prey on you.
I am simple,
They know my good nature. But let 'em in however.
All will come to ruin, I see beggary
Already knocking at the door. You may enter—
But use a conscience, and do not work upon
A tender-hearted Gentleman too much,
Twill show like charity in you.
Welcome Friends:
I know your hearts, and wishes; you are glad
You have changed your Creditor.
I weep for joy
To look upon his Worships face.
His Worships?
I see Lord Major written on his forehead;
The ••ap of Maintenance, and City Sword
Born up in state before him.
Hospitals,
And a third Burse erected by his Honour.
The City Po•• on the Pageant-day
Preferring him before Gresham.
All the Conduits
Spouting Canary Sack.
Not a prisoner left,
Under ten pounds.
We his poor Beads-men feasting
Our neighbours on his bounty.
May I make good
Your prophecies, gentle friends, as I'll endeavour
To the utmost of my power.
Yes, for one year,
And break the next.
You are ever prating, Sirrha:
Your present business, friends?
Were your brother present,
Mine had been of some consequence; but now
The power lies in your Worships hand, it is little,
And will I know, as soon as asked, be granted.
'I is very probable.
The kind forbearance
Of my great debt, by your means, heaven praised for it,
Hath raised my sunk estate. I have two Ships,
Which I long since gave lost, above my hopes
Returned from Barberry, and richly freighted.
Where are they?
Near Gravesend.
I am truly glad of't.
I find your worships charity, and dare swear so.
Now may I have your licence, as I know
With willingness I shall, to make the best
Of the commodities, though you have execution,
And after judgment against all that's mine,
As my poor body, I shall be enabled
To make payment of my debts to all the world,
And leave my self a competence.
You much wrong me,
If you only doubt it. Yours Mr. Hoist.
It is the surrendering back the mortgage of
My lands, and on good terms, but three days pa∣tience;
By an Uncles death I have means lest to redeem it,
And cancel all the forfeited Bonds I sealed too
In my •i••ts to the Merchant, for I am
Resolved to leave off play, and turn good husband.
A good intent, and to be cherished in you.
Yours Penury.
My state stands as it did, Sir:
What I owed I ow, but can pay nothing to you.
Yet if you please to trust me with ten pounds more,
I can buy a commodity of a Sailor
Will make me a freeman. There Sir is his name;
And the parcels I am to deal for. 
You are all so reasonable
In your demands, that I must freely grant 'em.
Some three hours hence meet me on the Exchange,
You shall be amply satisfied.
Heaven preserve you.
Happy were London if within her walls
She had many such rich men.
No more, now leave me;
I am full of various thoughts. Be careful Holdfast
I have much to do.
And I something to say
Would you give me hearing.
At my better leisure
'Till my return, look well unto the Indians.
In the mean time do you as this directs you.
ALl that is mine is theirs. Those were his words
I am authentical.
And that I should not
Sit long on penniless bench.
But suddenly start up
A gamester at the height, and cry at all.
And did he seem to have an inclination
To toy with me?
He wished you would put on
Your best habiliments, for he resolved
To make a jovial day on it.
Hug him close wench,
And thou may'it eat gold, and amber. I well know him
For a most insatiate drabber. He hath given,
Before he spent his own estate, which was
Nothing to the huge massehee's now possessed of,
A hundred pound a leap.
Hell take my Doctor,
He should have brought me some fresh oil of Talk,
These Ceruses are common.
Troth sweet Lady,
The colours are well laid on.
And thick enough,
find that on my lips.
Do you so, Jack sauce.
I'll keep'em further of.
But be assured first
Of a new maintainer ever you cashier the old one.
But bind him fast by thy forceries, and thou shalt
Be my revenue; the whole college study,
The reparation of thy ruined face;
Thou shalt have thy proper and bald-headed Coach-man:
Thy Tailor, and Embroiderer shall kneel
To thee their Idol. Cheap-side and the Exchange shall court thy custom, and thou shalt forget
There ever was a Saint Martins. Thy procurer
Shall be sheathed in Velvet, and a reverend Vail
Pass her for a grave Marton. Have an cie to the door,
And let loud music when this Monarch enters
Proclaim his entertainment.
That's my office.
The Consort's ready.
And the god of pleasure
Mr. Luke our Comus enters.
Set your face in order,
I will prepare him. Live I to see this day,
And to acknowledge you my royal master?
Let the iron Chests fly open, and the gold
Rusty for want of use appear again.
Make my ordinary flourish.
Welcome, Sir,
To your own Palace.
Kiss your Cleopatra,
And show your self in your magnificent bounties
A second Anthony.
All the Nine Worthies.
Variety of pleasures wait on you.
And a strong back.
Give me leave to breath, I pray you.
I am astonished! all this preparation
For me? and this choice modest beauty wrought
To feed my appetite.
We are all your creatures.
A house well furnished.
At your own cost, Sir.
Glad I the Instrument. I prophesied
You should possess what now you do, and therefore
Prepared it for your pleasure. There's no rag
This Venus wears, but on my knowledge was
Derived from your brothers Cash. The Lease of the house
And Furniture, cost near a thousand, Sir.
But now you are master both of it and me.
I hope you'll build elsewhere.
And see you placed
Fair one to your desert. As I live, friend Tradewell,
I hardly knew you, your clothes so well become you.
What is your loss; speak truth?
300, Sir.
But on a new supply he shall recover
The sum told twenty times o'er.
There is a banquet,
And after that a soft Couch that attends you.
I couple not in the day-light. Expectation
Heightens the pleasure of the night, my sweet one
Your musick's harsh, discharge it: I have provided
A better Confort, and you shall frolic it
In another place.
But have you brought gold, and store Sir?
I long to wear the Caster.
I to appear
In a fresh habit.
My Mercer and my Silkman
Waited me two hours since.
I am no Porter
To carry so much gold as will supply
Your vast desires, but I have taken order for you,
You shall have what is fitting, and they come here will see it performed. Do your offices: You have
My Lord Chief Justices Warrant for'c.
Seize em all.
The Citie-Marshal!
And the Sheriff. I know him.
We are betrayed.
Undone.
Dear M. Luke.
You cannot be so cruel: your persuasion
Chid us into these courses, oft repeating,
Show your selves City-sparks, and hang up money.
True, when it was my brothers I contemned it,
But now it is mine own, the case is altered.
Will you prove your self a devil? tempt us to mischief,
And then discover it.
Argue that hereafter.
In the mean time, M. Goldwire, you that made
Your ten pound suppers; kept your puncks at livery
In Brainford, Stones, and Barnet; and this in London.
Held correspondence with your fellow-cashers,
Call me, call thee; And knew in your accompis
To cheat my brother, if you can evade me,
If there be law in London your fathers Bonds
Shall answer for what you are out.
You often told us
It was a bug-bear.
Such a one as shall fright'em
Out of their estates to make me satisfaction,
To the utmost scruple. And for you Madam,
My Cleopatra, by your own confession
Your house, and all your movables are mine;
Nor shall you, nor your Matron need to trouble
Your Mercer, or your Silkman; a blew gown,
And a whip to boot, as I will handle it
Will serve the turnu in Bridewell, and these soft hands,
When they are inut'd to beating hemp, be scoured
In your penitent tears, and quite forget
Powders, and bitter almonds.
Will you show no mercy?
I am inexorable.
I'll make bold
To take my leave, the gamsters stay my coming.
We must not part so, gentle M. Gettal.
Your box, your certain in-com, must pay back
Three hundred as I take it, or you lie by it.
There's half a million stirring in your house,
This a poor trifle, Mr. Shriefe, and M. Marshall
On your perils do your offices.
Dost thou cry now
Like a maudlin gamester after loss? I'll suffer
Like a Boman, and now in my misery,
In scorn of all thy wealth, to thy teeth tell thee
Thou were it my pander.
Shall I hear this from
My prentice?
Stop his mouth.
Away with'em. 
A prosperous omen in my entrance to
My altered nature. These house-thievs removed,
And what was lost, beyond my hopes recovered,
Will add unto my heap. Increase of wealth
Is the rich mans ambition, and mine
Shall know no bounds. The valiant Macedon
Having in his conceit subdued one world,
Lamented that there were no more to conquer: in my way he shall be my great example.
And when my private house in crammed abundance
Shall prove the chamber of the City poor,
And Genoways banquers shall look pale with envy
When I am mentioned, I shall grieve there is
No more to be exhausted in one Kingdom.
Religion, conscience, charity, farewell.
To me you are words only, and no more,
All humane happiness consists in store.
A T M. Lukes suite? the action twenty thousand?
With two or three executions, which shall grind
You to powder when we have you in the Counter.
Thou dost belie him varlet. He, good gentleman,
Will weep when he hears how we are used.
Yes milstones.
He promised to lend me ten pound for a bargain,
He will not do it this way.
I have warrant
For what I have done. You are a poor fellow,
And there being little to be got by you,
In charity, as I am an officer,
I would not have seen you, but upon compulsion,
And for mine own security.
You are a gallant,
And I do you a curtsy; provided
That you have money. For a piece an hour
I'll keep you in the house, till you send for bail.
In the mean time yeoman run to the other Counter,
And search if there be ought else out against him.
That Done, haste to his creditors. Hoe's a prize,
And as we are City pirates by our oaths,
We must make the best on it.
Do your worst, I care not.
I'll be removed to the Fleet, and drink and drab there
In spite of your teeth. I now repent I ever
Intended to be honest
Here he comes
You had best tell so.
Worshipful Sir,
You come in time to free us from these ban-dogs.
I know you gave no way to it.
Or if you did,
'T was but to try our patience.
I must tell you
I do not like such trials.
Are you Sergeants
Acquainted with the danger of a rescue,
Yet stand here prating in the street. The Counter
Is a safer place to parley in.
Are you in earnest?
Y s faith, I will be satsfi'd to a token,
Or build upon it you rot there.
Can a gentleman,
Of your soft and silken temper, speak such language?
So honest, so religious.
That preached
So much of charity for us to your brother?
Yes when I was in poverty it showed well,
But I inherit with his state, his mind,
And rougher nature. I grant, then I talked
For some ends to my self concealed, of pity,
The poor mans orisons; and such like nothing.
But what I thought you all shall feel, and with rigour.
Kind M. Luke says it. who pays for your attendance?
Do you wait gratis?
Hear us speak.
While I,
Like the Adder stop mine ears. Or did I listen,
Though you spake with the tongues of Angels to me
I am not to be altered.
Let me make the best
Of my ships, and their freight.
Lend me the ten pounds you promised.
A day or two's patience to redeem my mortgage,
And you shall be satisfied.
To the utmost farthing.
I'll show some mercy; which is, that I will not
Torture you with false hopes, but make you know
What you shall trust to. Your Ships to my use
Are seized on. I have got into my hands
Your bargains from the Sailor, it was a good one
For such a petty sum. I will likewise take
The extremity of your Mortgage, and the forfeit:
Of your several Bonds, the use, and principle
Shall not serve. Think of the basket, wretches,
And a Coal-sack for a winding-sheet.
Broker.
Jew.
Imposer.
Cut-throat.
Hypocrite.
Do, rail on.
Move mountains with your breath, it shakes not me,
On my knees I beg compassion my wife and children
Shall hourly pray for your worship.
Mine betake thee
To the Devil thy tutor.
Look upon my tears.
My rage.
My wrongs.
They are all a like to me.
Entreats, curses, prayers, or imprecations.
Doe your duties Serjants, I am else where looked for.
This your kind creditor?
A vast villan rather.
See, see, the Sergeants pity us. Yet hoe's marble.
Buried alive!
There's no means to avoid it.
NOt waite upon my Lady?
Nor come at her,
You find it not in your Alminack.
Nor I have licence
To bring her breakfast.
My new master hath
Decreed this for a fasting day. She hath feasted long
And after a carnival Lent ever follows.
Give me the key of her ward-robe. You'll repent this:
I must know what Gown she'll wear;
You are mistaken,
Dame president of the sweet meates. she and her daughters
Are turned Philosophers, and must carry all.
Their wealth about em. They have clothes laid in their chamber,
If they please to put em on, and without help too,
Or they may walk naked. You look M. Stargaze
As you had seen a strange comet, and had now foretold,
The end of the world, and on what day. And you,
As the wasps had broke into the galley-pots,
And eaten up your Apricots.
Stargazer. Milliscent.
My Ladies voice.
Stir not, you are confined here.
Your Ladyship may approach them if you please,
But they are bound in this circle.
Mine own bees
Rebel against me. When my kind brother knows this
I will be so revenged.
The world's well altered.
Hoe's your kind brother now. but yesterday
Your slave and jesting-stock.
What witch hath transformed you?
Is this the glorious shape your cheating brother
Premis'd you should appear in?
My young Ladies
In buffin gowns, and green aprons! tear'em off,
Rather show all then be seen thus.
It is more comely
I wis then their other whim-whams.
A french hood too;
Now it is out of fashion, a fools cap would show better
We are fooled indeed, by whose command are we used thus?
Here he comes that can best resolve you.
O good brother!
Do you thus preserve your protestation to me?
Can Queens envy this habit? or did Juno
Ever feast in such a shape?
You talked of Hebe,
Of Iris, and I know not what; but were they
Dressed as we are; They were sure some Chandlers daughters
Bleaching linen in Moor-fields.
Or Exchange-wenches,
Coming from eating pudding-pies on a Sunday
At Pemlico, or Islington.
Save you Sister.
I now dare style you so: you were before
Too glorious to be looked on; now you appear
Like a City Matron, and my pretty Nieces
Such things as were born, and bred there. Why should you ape
The fashions of Court-Ladies? whose high titles
And pedigrees of long descen, give warrant
For their superfluous bravery? it was monstrous:
Till now you ne'er looked lovely.
Is this spoken
In scorn?
Fie, no, with judgment. I make good
My promise, and now show you like your selves,
In your own natural shapes, and stand resolved
You shall continue so.
It is confessed Sir.
Sir! Sirrah. Use your old phrase, I can bear it.
That if you please forgotten. We acknowledge
We have deserved ill from you, yet despair not;
Though we are at your disposure, you'll maintain us
Like your brothers wife, and daughters.
It is my purpose.
And not make us ridiculous.
Admired rather,
As fair examples for our proud City dames,
And their proud brood to imitate: do not frown
If you do, I laugh, and glory that I have
The power in you to scourge a general vice,
And rise up a new Satyrist: but hear gently,
And in a gentle phrase I'll reprehend
Your late disguised deformity, and cry up
This decency, and neatness, with th'advantage
You shall receive by 't.
We are bound to hear you.
With a soul inclined to learn. Your father was
An honest Country farmer. Good-man Humble,
By his neighbours ne'er called master. Did your pride
Descend from him? but let that pass: your fortune,
Or rather your husbands industry, advanced you
To the rank of a Merchants wife. He made a Knight,
And your sweet mistris-ship, Ladyfi'd; you wore
Satin on solemn days, a chain of gold,
A Velvet hood, rich borders, and sometimes
A dainty Miniver cap, a silver pin
Headed with a pearl worth three-pence, and thus far
You were privileged, and no man envied it,
It being for the Cities honour, that
There should be a distinction between
The Wife of a Patrician, and Plebeian.
Pray you leave preaching, or chcose some other text;
Your Rhetoric is too moving, for it makes
Your auditory weep.
Peace, chattering Mag-pie,
I'll treat of you anon: but when the height
And dignity of Londons blessings grew
Contemptible, and the name Lady Maioress
Became a by-word, and you scorned the means
By which you were raised, my brothers fond indulgence
Giving the reigns too't; and no object pleased you
But the glittering pomp, and bravery of the Court.
What a strange, nay monstrous Metamorphosis followed!
No English workman then could please your fancy;
The French, and Tuscan dress your whole discourse;
This Baud to prodigality entertained
To buzz into your ears, what shape this Countess
Appeared in the last mask; and how it drew
The young Lords eyes upon her; and this usher
Succeeded in the eldest prentices place
To walk before you.
Pray you end.
Proceed Sir,
I could fast almost a prentiship to hear you.
You touch'em so to the quick.
Then as I said,
The reverend hood cast off, your borrowed hair
Powdered, and curled, was by your dressers art
Formed like a Coronet, hanged with diamonds,
And the richest Orient pearl: Your Carkanets
That did adorn your neck of equal value:
Your Hungerland bands, and Spanish quellio ruses:
Great Lords and Ladies feasted to survey
Embroidered petticoats: and ficknesse feigned
That your night rayls of forty pounds a piece
Might be seen with envy of the visitants;
Rich pantables in ostentation shown,
And roses worth a family; you were served in plate;
Stirred not a foot without your Coach. And going
To Church not for devotion, but to show
Your pomp, you were tickled when the beggars cried
Heaven save your honour, this idolatric
Paid to a painted room.
Nay, you have reason
To blubber all of you
And when you lay
In child bed, at the Christening of this minx,
I well remember it, as you had been
An absolute princess, since they have no more,
Three several chambers hung. The first with Arras,
And that for waiters; the second Grimson Satin
For the meaner sort of guests; the third of Scarlet,
Of the rich Tirian die; a Canopy
To cover the brats cradle: you in state
Like Pompie's Julia.
No more I pray you.
Of this be sure you shall not. I'll cut off
What ever is exorbitant in you,
Or in your Daughters, and reduce you to
Your natural forms, and habits: not in revenge
Of your base usage of me, but to fright
Others by your example: It is decreed
You shall serve one another, for I will
Allow no waiter to you. Out of doors
With these uselest drones,
Will you pack?
Not till I have
My trunks along with me.
Not a rag, you came
Hither without a box.
You'll show to me
I hope Sir more compassion.
'Troth I'll be
Thus far a suitor for him. He hath printed
An Almanac for this year at his own charge,
Let him have th'impression with him to set up with.
For once I'll be entreated: let it be
Thrown to him out of the window.
O cursed Stars
That reigned at my nativity! how have you cheated
Your poor observer.
Must we part in tears?
Farewell, good Milliscent.
I am sick, and meet with
A rough Physician. O my pride! and scorn!
How justly am I punished!
Now we suffer
For our stubbornness and disobedience
To our good father.
And the base conditions,
We imposed upon our Suitors.
Get you in,
And Catterwall in a corner.
There's no contending.
How lik'st thou my carriage, Holdfast?
Well in some part,
But it relishes I know not how, a little
Of too much tyranny.
Thou art a fool:
Hoe's cruel to himself, that dares not be
Severe to those that used him cruelly.
YOu care not then, as it seems, to be converted
To our religion.
We know no such word,
Nor power but the Devil, and him we serve for fear,
Not love.
I am glad that charge is saved.
We put
That trick upon your brother, to have means
To come to the City. Now to you we'll discover
The close design that brought us, with assurance
If you lend your aids to furnish us with that
Which in the Colony was not to be purchased,
No merchant ever made such a return
For his most precious venture, as you shall
Receive from us; far, far, above your hopes,
Or fancy to imagine.
It must be
Some strange commodity, and of a dear value,
(Such an opinion is planted in me,
You will deal fairly) that I would not hazard.
Give me the name of't.
I fear you will make
Some scruple in your conscience to grant it.
Conscience! No, no; so it may be done with safety,
And without danger of the Law.
For that
You shall sleep securely. Nor shall it diminish,
But add unto your heap such an increase,
As what you now possess shall appear an Atom
To the mountain it brings with it.
Do not rack me
With expectation.
Thus then in a word:
The Devil. Why start you at his name? if you
Desire to wallow in wealth and worldly honours,
You must make haste to be familiar with him.
This Devil, whose Priest I am, and by him made
A deep Magician (for I can do wonders)
Appeared to me in Virginia, and commanded
With many stripes (for that's his cruel custom)
I should provide on pain of his fierce wrath
Against the next great sacrifice, at which
We grovelling on our faces, fall before him,
Two Christian Virgins, that with their pure blood
Might die his horrid Altars, and a third
(In his hate to such embraces as are lawful)
Married, and with your ceremonious rites
As an oblation unto Hecate,
And wanton Lust her favourite.
A devilish custom:
And yet why should it startle me? there are
Enough of the Sex fit fort his use: but Virgins,
And such a Matron as you speak of, hardly to be wrought to it.
A Mine of Gold for a fee
Waits him that undertakes it, and performs it.
Know you no distressed Widow, or poor
Maids, whose want of dower, though well born,
Makes'em weary of their own Country?
Such as had rather be
Miserable in another world, then where
They have surfeited in felicity?
Give me leave,
I would not loose this purchase. A grave Matron!
And two pure virgins. Umph! I think my Sister
Though proud was ever honest; and my Nieces
Untainted yet. Why should not they be shipped
For this employment? they are burden some to me,
And eat too much. And if they stay in London,
They will find friends that to my loss will force me
To composition. It were a Master-piece
If this could be effected. They were ever
Ambitious of title. Should I urge
Matching with these they shall live Indian Queens,
It may do much. But what shall I feel here,
Knowing to what they are designed? They absent,
The thought of them will leave me. It shall be so.
I'll furnish you, and to indear the service
In mine own family, and my blood too.
Make this good, and your house shall not
Contain the gold we'll send you.
You have seen my Sister, and my two Nieces?
Yes Sir.
These persuaded
How happily they shall live, and in what pomp
When they are in your kingdoms, for you must
Work'em a belief that you are Kings.
We are so.
I'll put it in practice instantly. Study you
For moving language. Sister, Nieces. How
Still mourning? dry your eyes, and clear these clouds
That do obscure your beauties. Did you believe
My personated reprehension; though
It showed like a rough anger, could be serious?
Forget the fright I put you in. My ends
In humbling you was, to set off the height
Of honour, principle honour, which my studies
When you least expect it shall confer upon you.
Still you seem doubtful: be not wanting to
Your selves, nor let the strangeness of the means,
With the shadow of some danger, render you
Incredulous.
Our usage hath been such,
As we can faintly hope that your intents,
And language are the same.
I'll change those hopes
To certainties.
With what art he winds about them!
What will you say? or what thanks shall I look for?
If now I raise you to such eminence, as
The wife, and daughters of a Citizen
Never arrived at. Many for their wealth (I grant)
Have written Ladies of honour, and some few
Have higher titles, and that's the farthest rise
You can in England hope for. What think you
If I should mark you out a way to live
Queens in another climate?
Wee desire
A competence.
And prefer our Countries smoke
Before outlandish fire.
But should we listen
To such impossibilities, it is not in
The power of man to make it good.
I'll do it.
Nor is this seat of majesty far removed.
It is but to Virginia.
How, Virginia!
High Heaven forbid. Remember Sir, I beseech you,
What creatures are shipped thither.
Condemned wretches,
Forfeited to the law.
Strumpets and Bawds,
For the abomination of their life,
Spewed out of their own Country.
Your false fears
Abuse my noble purposes. Such indeed
Are sent as slaves to labour there, but you
To absolute sovereignty. Observe these men,
With reverence observe them. They are Kings,
Kings of such spacious territories, and dominions:
As our great Brtitain measured, will appear
A garden too't.
You shall be adored there
As Goddesses.
Your litters made of gold
Supported by your vassalls, proud to bear
The burden on their shoulders.
Pomp, and ease,
With delicates that Europe never knew,
Like Pages shall wait on you.
If you have minds
To entertain the greatness offered to you,
With outstretched arms, and willing hands embrace it.
But this refused, imagine what can make you
Most miserable here, and rest assured,
In storms it falls upon you: take em in,
And use your best persuasion. If that fail.
I'll send em aboard in a dry fat.
Be not moved Sir.
We'll work'em to your will: yet ever we part,
Your worldly cares deferred, a little mirth
Would not misbecome us.
You say well. And now
It coms into my memory, this is my birth-day,
Which with solemity I would observe,
But that it would ask cost.
That shall not grieve you.
By my art I will prepare you such a feast,
As Persia in her height of pomp, and riot
Did never equal: and ravishing Music
As the Italian Princes seldom heard
At their greatest entertainments. Name your guests.
I must have none.
Not the City Senate?
No.
Nor yet poor neighbours. The first would argue me
Of foolish oftentation, The latter
Of too much hospitality, and a virtue
Grown obsolete, and useless. I will sit
Alone, and surfeit in my store, while others
With envy pine at it. My Genius pampered
With the thought of what I am, and what they suffer
I have marked out to misery.
You shall;
And something I will add, you yet conceive not,
Nor will I be flow-pac'd.
I have one business,
And that dispatched I am free.
About it Sir,
Leave the rest to me.
Till now I ne'er loved magic.
BElieve me, gentlemen! I never was
So cozened in a fellow. He disguised
Hypocrisy in such a cunning shape
Of real goodness, that I would have sworn
This devil a Saint. M. Goldwire, and M. Tradewell,
What do you mean to do? put on.
With your Lordships favour.
I'll have it so.
Your will, my Lord, excuses
The rudeness of our manners.
You have received
Penitent letters from your sons I doubt not?
They are our only sons.
And as we are fathers,
Remembering the errors of our youth,
We would pardon slips in them.
and pay for'em
In a moderate way.
In which we hope your Lordship
Will be our mediator.
All my power,
You freely shall command. It is he! you are well met.
And to my wish. And wondrous brave,
Your habit speaks you a Merchant royal.
What I wear, I take not upon trust.
Your betters may, and blush not for it.
If you have nought else with me
But to argue that, I will make bold to leave you.
You are very peremptory, pray you stay.
I once held you an upright honest man.
I am honesten now
By a hundred thousand pound, I thank my stars for it,
Upon the Exchange, and if your late opinion
Be altered, who can help it? good my Lord
To the point. I have other business then to talk
Of honesty, and opinions.
Yet you may
Do well, if you please, to show the one, and merit
The other from good men, in a case that now
Is offered to you.
What is it? I am troubled.
Here are two gentlemen, the fathers of
Your brothers prentices.
Mine, my Lord, I take it.
Mr. Goldwire, and Mr. Tradewell.
They are welcome, if
They come prepared to satisfy the damage
I have sustained by their sons.
We are, so you please
To use a conscience.
Which we hope you will do,
For your own worships sake.
Conscience, my friends,
And wealth are not always neighbours. Should I part
With what the law gives me, I should suffer mainly
In my reputation. For it would convince me
Of indiscretion. Nor will you I hope move me
To do my self such prejudice.
No moderation.
They cannot look for it, and preserve in
Me a thriving Citizens credit. Your bonds lie
For your sons truth, and they shall answer all
They have run out. The masters never prospered
Since gentlemen's sons grew prentices. When we look
To have our business done at home, they are
Abroad in the Tenis-court, or in partridge-alley,
In Lambeth Marsh, or a cheating Ordinary
Where I found your sons. I have your Bonds, look too't.
A thousand pounds a piece, and that will hardly
Repair my losses.
Thou dare not show thy self
Such a devil.
Good words.
Such a cut-throat. I have heard of
The usage of your brothers wife, and daughters.
You shall find you are not lawless, and that your
Moneys cannot justify your villainies.
I endure this.
And good my Lord, now you talk in time of moneys,
Pay in what you owe me. And give me leav to wonder
Your wisdom should have leisure to consider
The business of these gentlemen, or my carriage
To my Sister, or my Nieces, being your self
So much in my danger.
In thy danger?
mine.
I find in my counting house a Manor pawned,
Pawned, my good Lord, Lacie-Mannour, and that Manor
From which you have the title of a Lord,
And it please your good Lordship. You are a noble man
Pray you pay in my moneys. The interest
Will eat saster in it, then Aqua fortis in iron.
Now though you bear me hard, I love your Lordship.
I grant your person to be privileged
From all arrests. Yet there lives a foolish creature
Called an Under-sheriffe, who being well paid, will serve
Au extent on I ords, or Lowns land. Pay it in,
I would be loath your name should sink. Or that
Your hopeful son, when he returns from travel,
Should find you my lord without land. You are angry
For my good counsel. Look you to your Bonds: had I known
Of your coming, believe it I would have had Sergeants ready:
Lord how you fret! but that a Tavern's near
You should taste a cup of Muscadine in my house,
To wash down sorrow, but there it will do better,
I know you'll drink a health to me.
To thy damnation.
Was there ever such a villain! Heaven forgive me
For speaking so unchristianly, though he deservs it.
We are undone.
Our families quite ruined.
Take courage gentlemen. Comfort may appear.
And punishment overtake him, when he least expects it.
BE silent on your life.
I am or'ejoy'd.
Are the pictures placed as I directed?
Yes Sir.
And the musicians ready?
All is done
As you commanded.
Make haste, and be careful,
You know your cue, and postures.
We are perfect.
It is well: the rest are come too?
And disposed of
To your own wish.
Set forth the table. So.
A persit Banquet. At the upper end,
His chair in state, he shall feast like a Prince.
And rise like a Dutch hang-man.
Not a word more.
How like you the preparation? fill your room,
And taste the cates, then in your thought consider
A rich man, that lives wisely to himself,
In his full height of glory.
I can brook
No rival in this happiness. How sweetly
These dainties, when unpay'd for, please my palate!
Some wine. Joves Nectar. Brightness to the star
That governed at my birth Shoot down thy influence,
And with a perpetuity of being
Continue this selicity, not gained
By vows to Saints above, and much less purchased
By the thriving industry; nor fallen upon me
As a reward to piety, and religion,
Or service for my Country. I owe all this
To dissimulation, and the shape
I wore of goodness. Let my brother number
His beads devoutly, and believe his alms
To beggars, his compassion to his debtors,
Will wing his better part, disrobed of flesh,
To sore above the firmament. I am well,
And so I surfeit here in all abundance;
Though styled a cormorant, a cut-throat, Jew,
And prosecuted with the fatal curses
Of widows, undone Orphans, and what else
Such as malign my state can load me with,
I will not envy it. You promised music?
And you shall hear the strength and power
Of it, the spirit of Orpheus raised to make it good,
And in those ravishing strains with which he moved
Charon and Cerberus to give him way
To fetch from hell his lost Euridice,
Appear fwifter then thought.
It is wondrous strange.
Does not the object and the accent take you?
A pretty fable. But that music should
Alter in friends their nature, is to me
Impossible. Since in my self I find
What I have once decreed, shall know no change.
You are constant to your purposes, yet I think
That I could stagger you.
How?
Should I present
Your servants, debtors, and the rest that suffer
By your fit severity, I presume the sight
Would move you to compassion.
Not a mote.
The music that your Orpheus made, was harsh
To the delight I should receive in hearing
Their cries, and groans, If it be in your power
I would now see'em.
Spirits in their shapes
Shall show them as they are. But if it should move you?
If it do. May I ne'er find pity.
Be your own judge.
Appear as I commanded.
Ha, ha, ha!
This move me to compassion? or raise
One sign of seeming pity in my face?
You are deceived: it rather renders me more flinty, and obdurate. A South wind
Shall sooner soften marble, and the rain
That slides down gently from his flaggy wings
O'reflow the Alps: then knees, or tears, or groans
Shall wrest compunction from me. It is my glory
That they are wretched, and by me made so,
It sets my happiness off. I could not triumph
If these were not my captives. Ha! my tarriers
As it appears have seized on these old foxes,
As I gave order. New addition to
My Scene of mirth. Ha, ha! They now grow tedioue
Let'em be removed, some other object. If
Your art can show it.
You shall perceive it is boundless.
Yet one thing real if you please?
What is it?
Your Nieces ever they put to Sea, crave humbly
Though assent in their bodies, they may take leave
Of their late suitors statues.
There they hang,
In things different I am tractable.
There pay your vows you have liberty.
O sweet figure
Of my abused Lacie! when removed
Into another world; I'll daily pay
A sacrifice of sight, to thy remembrance;
And with a shower of tears strive to wash of
The stain of that contempt, my foolish pride,
And insolence threw upon thee.
I had been
Too happy, if I had enjoyed the substance,
But far unworthy of it, now I shall
Thus prostrate to thy statue.
My kind husband,
Blessed in my misery, from the monastery
To which my disobedience confined thee,
With thy souls eye, which distance cannot hinder,
Look on my penitence. O that I could
Call back time past, thy holy vow dispensed,
With what humility would I observe
My long neglected duty.
Does not this move you?
Yes as they do the statues, and her sorrow
My absent brother. If by your magic art
You can give life to these, or bring him hither
To witness her repentance, I may have
Perchance some feeling of it.
For your sport
You shall see a Master-piece. Here's nothing but
A superficies, colours, and no substance.
Sit still, and to your wonder, and amazement
I'll give these Organs. This the sacrifice
To make the great work perfect.
Prodigious.
Nay they have life, and motion. Descend.
And for your absent brother. This washed off
Against your will you shall know him.
I am lost.
Guilt strikes me dumb.
You have seen my Lord the pageant.
I have, and am ravished with it.
What think you now
Of this clear soul? this honest pious man?
Have I stripped him bare. Or will your Lordship have
A farther trial of him? it is not in a wolf to change his natute.
I long since confessed my errors
Look up, I forgive you,
And seal your pardons thus.
I am too full
Of joy to speak it.
I am another creature,
Not what I was.
I vow to show my self
When I am married, an humble wife,
Not a commanding mistress.
On those terms
I gladly thus embrace you.
Welcome to
My bosom. As the one half of my self,
I'll love you, and cherish you.
Mercv.
Good Sir mercy.
This day is sacred to it. All shall find me
As far as lawful pity can give way too't,
Indulgent to your wishes, though with loss
Unto my self. My kind, and honest brother,
Looking into your self, have you seen the Gorgon?
What a golden dream you have had in the possession
Of my estate? but here's a revocation
That wakes you out of it. Monster in nature
Revengeful, avaricious Atheist,
Transcending all example. But I shall bee
A sharer in thy crimes, should I repeat 'em.
What wilt thou do? Turn hypocrite again,
With hope dissimulation can aid thee?
Or that one eye will shed a tear in sign
Of sorrow for thee? I have warrant to
Make bold with mine own, pray you uncase. This key too
I must make bold with. Hide thy self in some desert,
Where good men ner'e may find thee: or in justice
Pack to Virginia, and repent. Not for
Those horrid ends to which thou did design these.
I care not where I go, what's done with words
Cannot be undone.
Yet Sir, show some mercy;
Because his cruelty to me, and mine,
Did good upon us.
Of that at better leisure,
As his penitence shall work me. Make you good
Your promised reformation, and mistrust
Our City dames, whom wealth makes proud, to move
In their own spheres, and willingly to confess
In their habits, manners, and their highest port,
A distance twixt the City, and the Court.

MOst sacred Majesties, if ye doe wonder,
To be saluted by an aged Prologue,
Know that upon these temples I doe wea•e
An Emblem of our Mothers fate, who since
She has in expectation of your presence
Numb•ed the tedious moments, is grown old:
For each expecting minute that has passed
Has seemed an hour, and every hour a year.
But will ye see what power ye retain?
Wee by your presence are made young again.
FOrtune as yet is kind, well done my boy,
Hold up your head, a little higher, yet,
And can you weep?
I can, &amp; have some cause,
O Lucius!
And sigh?
I would I could not.
Most wretched Isabella.
Constantine.
When shall mine eyes feed on that blessed sight?
Or when wilt thou with one kind look dissolve
This cloud which now obscures me? and makes me seem
Another from my self?
She stirs not yet
Why Constantine.
O my Lucius!
Might I but once more see thee, I could go
Unto the grave me thinks with such a look
As should make death enamoured on me.
Ha?
Not yet? O what a sleepy girl is this?
But in this house I'ue learned Pandora lives,
Who now does reap my harvest: here I hope
I may enjoy at least a sight of him,
And that is all that ever I must hope for.
But I shall be observed.
O now she comes.
Placenta.
Not so loud (take heed) for fear
The Dragon should be waking; have you yet
Got on your masculine habit?
Long ago.
Descend then, if your mind be still the same,
Before the Sun rise to betray your flight.
But have you dressed the Boy in my apparel?
Tic done, and not a creature but my self
And the dumb night are guilty of it.
Well,
I come.
In truth I doe confess I wonder
What should induce this peevish girl to take
This strange disguised habit, and forsake
Her uncles house, but it is love forsooth:
Well, be it what it will, I have procured,
By her entreaty, and the gold she gave me,
A boy as near her stature as I could,
Whom I have clothed in her own apparel,
And veiled in her scarf. Come on my boy.
You have not yet forgot, I hope, the instructions
I read to you within. Come, let me see
You vent a sigh now. Excellent: but be sure
You speak not very often.
Doubt not that:
They are shallow griefs that make a noise.
Well said.
But tell me you, sir boy, what wast that made
You leave the London Players?
Indeed forsooth
I was abused there; besides, that trade
Begins to fail of late, most of your Gallants
Are grown so wise and frugal, that they choose
Rather to spend their money on a whore
(Which they call necessary) then on such toys.
Go to, you are a wagg. See now she comes.
But ô the Father! what pismire is this?
Ah, I shall swooned to look upon her legs:
Surely one blast of wind will break them quite.
Now out upon her! mine are mill-posts to them.
Placenta, you doe see how much I trust you,
That put mine honour thus into your hands.
Lead you this picture of mine into my chamber,
And there instruct him how he should behave
Himself, that no suspicion of my flight
Be nourished by my Uncle, till I bee
Past his recalling. So farewell good midwife.
How my left eye-brow beats? I do not like it,
It does presage no good. My Constantine,
Go back again I pray you, in good sooth
Tic very dangerous thus discompanied
To undertake a journey.
All in vain:
I am resolved either to find my Cleopes,
Or else to sleep with death closed in mine arms.
If it must needs be so, why then farewell.
I cannot choose but weep: sweet Constantine —
Well, it was the goodest Gentlewoman—but sh 's gone—
Many a dear morsel has she helped me to—
But we must all depart—I doe remember
When she was but a little one, she ever
Was fond of me —but I must be content.
Come on my boy, let not your face so much
Be seen— when I have shown her lodging to you,
And left you there— I cannot yet forbear,
It will not from my heart— I'll go and visit
The fair Pandora, that kind Gentlewoman,
And see if that her closet can afford
Any good thing to hold the heart. Come boy.
I knew there was a woman in the wind.
I smelt her. Stay. —but now she's gone—Isle forward.
Why I am not at leisure now to take
An ounce of Tobacco in a week, they doe
So haunt me up and down. And this forsooth
Is our Saint Valentine, wherein our lovers
Doe use to imitate Iack-dawes, and Rooks,
Doe bill and couple. But (my store's be thanked)
I'm now delivered from those petulant females.
But stay, and let me recollect my self.
What part about me first (I wonder) can
Be guilty of their sin of loving me?
In truth me thinks I am not very fair;
A pretty winter countenance I wear
After a cup: and I have often seen
A better nose dwell better eyes between.
As for my legs (not for to flatter them)
Surely I think under a boot they might
Become the Court, so I refrained to play
At Goff— but oh the traitor's apprehended,
I have him fast. Oh thou pernicious nose,
Rebellious member, have I so often raised
Thy dull complexion with the spirits of sack
Unto that height that thou hast dared to ourface
The Sun in Cancer, and have I this reward?
But if I doe not humble thee again,
Reduce thee to thy former state of paleness
With rot-gut, and cuds-nigs—let me be married.
But whom have we here?
Tic Lucius one of our loving fools:
O ho? why then I must be tortured,
That's all that I can say, I must be tortured.
Ah my Endymion, see thou yond rising Sun?
I doe, but what of that?
Why nothing boy
But at his presence why doe those lesser-fires
Pluck in their shamefaced heads? doest thou not mark
Dull heavy Page? I can but meditate
Upon the wit of Nature, who by objects
Low and inanimate, as is that Sun—
Now heavens be good unto me, this is called
Lovers philosophy.
does read unto us
A lecture of her higher mysteries.
What doest thou think is meant by that same Sun?
And those extinguished tapers? —he alas
Poor aged wretch but coldly imitates
That which Pandora does unto the life.
Whilst she is absent thousands of petty beauties
Doe twinkle in the night, let her appear,
And they all vanish.
Ha brave, is not this dainty? for all this,
Surely the man would take it unkindly now
If I should go and tell him he was mad.
Endymion, lend me thine eyes a little;
Doest thou desire to see a Map, a Model
Of all the world in brief and in one word?
View this— why readst thou not? thy happy lips
Should thirst me thinks to have that blessed ayre
Divorce them. read.
Pandora.
Ah Pandora.
Look here's the Sun, this place does Iupiter
Possess, here Venus, and there Phoebe; mark—
Here is the Earth, but in her bravery,
And smiling as when Sol does sleep betwixt
The twining Gemini.
Thou daring mortal:
But where in this your Idol of the world
Is Styx, Cocytus, or the blessed place
Of the dear Furies? or the three chapt Dog?
Are they without the verges of the World?
Fortune! how happy were I was this face
Of thine not counterfeit. Speak Endymion:
But art thou sure that my Neander drew
The fair Constantine for his Valentine?
I never said it Sir.
How never said it?
Only her name, so was Pandora yours.
O too too true presage of both our fortunes.
But let it be. When I doe violate
That love, that more then mortal bond, wherewith
My soul is tied unto Neander, may
I fall unpitied, may no gentle sigh
Be spent at my last obsequies, may I want
A man to wish me again, would that prevail.
Without all question this is Magic— oh
How I doe fear a Metamorphosis.
But I doe feel a poverty of words
Begin to cease me. Good Endimyon,
Where is my boy Luscinio? Call him in,
That hee may touch a string which may dissolve me
Into a flood of tears—come on my boy,
Oh teach that hollow pensive Instrument
To give a true relation of my woes
Whilst I lye here, and with my sighs keep time.
O how I sweat. 300000 fevers
Are now upon me. O—
Have pity (Grief) I can not pay
The tribute which I owe thee, tears;
Alas those Fountains are grown dry,
And tic in vain to hope supyly
From others eyes, for each man boars
Enough about him of his own
To spend his stock of tears upon:
O O O. Will it be ever done?
Woo then the heavens (gentle Love)
To melt a Cloud for my relief
Or woo the Deep or woo the Grave,
Woo what thou wilt so I may have
Wherewith to pay my debt, for Grief
Has vowed, unless I quickly pay
To take both life and love away.
Gods, and the World! you everlasting Twanger—
Avoid.
What means the Gentleman?
Isle tell you.
The Gentleman does mean for to consult
With the entrails of your breeches, boy; the Gentleman
Does mean to whip you boy, unless you straight
Avoid the place with that seducing Fiddle.
And you his Squire his Pander that procures
This bandy Cockatrice Music for him. fly.
How fares it with our Lucius?
As with one
That is of all men the most miserable.
Ah my Pandora, when I record thy name,
(Thy name that's bounded with that sacred number
As showing all Perfection bides in thee)
Me thinks the numerous Orbs dwell in mine ear,
After which sound all others seem unpleasing,
Harsh, void of Harmony—Pandora—oh
How sweet a life had the Chameleon
Might hee but ever feed upon such aires!
Am I not yet transformed? me thinks I feel
My self becoming Wolf— I am half Bear already.
Live happy still, and when thine aged head
Laden with years Shall bee enveloped
Within this earth, may a perpetual spring
Be on thy Grave.
Shall I put forth my Paw,
And so command him silence?
But when I
Forget to love thee or thy memory,
May my white name be stained with the blot
Of baseness, and I dye without one tear
To wash it out.
Forget to love her? — oh
Not for a world. And er't be long we shall
Have some decayed piece of Arras, that
Is brought to his last suit, and has no more
Lands for to sell or mortgage for new plush
Will beg you for your fair revenues Sir
—Death Sir I cannot flatter,
Let me not live a minute if I can.
You look not like your self in that same passion;
It is not man-like; ere I'd loose a sigh,
Or set my soul one scruple of a note
The lower for these scarcrowes in clean linen
These chippings of nature: I'd dam my self
To a thatched Alehouse, and St. Kits Tobacco,
And dabble there eternally:
Ah Anteros, thou art too rough a Surgeon
To handle my wounds.
Pandora, ah Pandora.
Does not this sound deliciously from a man?
Doe not blaspheme good Anteros; she is
The model of the world.
Why so am I,
And you, and every man besides, wee all
Are little worlds.
But my Pandora is
The abstract of them all; when she was borne,
The whole house of heaven did meet, and there decreed
Only in her mortality should reach
Perfection.
And for heavens cause why in her?
Are wee not all made of the self same clay?
And of the same ingredients? by the same workman?
It is madness Lucius this, it is not love.
Sir I must leave you.
Nay but stay a while,
I have not finished yet. Besides all this,
If you doe love her so, what hinders then
But you might marry her, since (as I hear)
The Girl is not composed of adamant
Or flint, but of a supple and kind nature,
And loves you too?
O my dear friend Neander,
Shall I doe this to thee? to such a friend?
Oh I am undone. Farewell.
But see Pandora.
Oh how amazed and sudden is the flight
Of all the spirits of darkness, when the day
But shows her face!
What if I take this way?
It may be I shall find them in the grove,
Whither they oft resort— but stay, perchance
They may be in the arbour that doth look
Into the forest.
Oh ye immortal Gods!
Why did ye suffer those vain Lunatic Poets
So much to antedate the works of nature,
Who living many ages since did write
I know not what of many Nymphs and Graces,
Muses and Sirens? they are mere fables all;
With my Pandora they had all their births,
And when she dyes they'll perish with her.
Ah?
How like unto this Daisy was I once
Whilst I did live recluse! my innocent heart
Like to this little Globe of gold, enclosed
Within the whiteness of my thoughts, was safe
From all the violence that Love, or shame
His child could doe: but when his warmer beams
Displayed that Ivory guard, and laid me open
Unto the tyranny of his assaults,
I was — but I will sigh out all the rest.
Ah Lucius.
Oh happy name!
Why Lucius?
Neander is as dear to me as hee.
Dost thou not blush to speakt * thou shame of woman?
But here he comes, I will address my self.
With all the winning Graces that I have
To entertain him.
Tic my friend Neander.
Fair Nymph, God save you.
Dearest love Neander.
The welcom'st man alive.
Nay but sweet Lady
Forbear the encounter.
Whether dost thou turn
So cruelly from her that loves thee more
Then her own soul? are you not well good Sir?
You see I walk, look fresh, and laugh. (ha, ha, he)
Symptoms of one that is not very sick.
But am I thus despised?
You're troublesome.
Ha, ha, he, tic pretty, very pretty
* How scurvily doth sorrow laugh? (ha, ha, he)
Most excellent, beyond compare (ha ha, he)
Why doe you follow me?
I doe not fell complexion Lady, nor
Have I the art to cure the timpani,
I have no great devotion to the tub
Nor the hot house, as yet, what are you rampant?
But pray thee speak Neander, am I so
Deformed grown of late, for to deserve
All this neglect?
What shall I answer? Madam,
If you have spoke all that you mean to speak
And have no greater business, I desire
I may crave pardon, I must take my leave,
I have affairs expect me. O misery!
That which I long for most, I fly from farthest.
Where shall I find my Lucius?
What is hee gone?
Lucius, were you so nigh, and not discovered?
All hail, but whither in such haste my love?
If thou doest love me stay a little.
Love you?
Now all the God's forbid it. I love you?
My better Angel guard me from such a sin.
Should I love you, a Thief?
A theife?
A theife
I and the worst of Thieves— * Villain thou least.
But why a Thief? Speak.
My divining soul
Tells me that Lucius is not far from hence.
Ha! it is he, I will observe a little
Lady, Isle tell you, since you doe so long
To hear your praises trumpeted to the world,
First, thou hast robed thy Father, thine own Father,
Of all that little stock of virtue and goodness
Which nature gave him, and (most covetous)
Hast powered it to thy greater heap; besides
Thou hast undone thy Sister, stolen from her
All that was beautiful and lovely in her;
That fair majestic straightness which attracts
The eyes of thousands to admire, Was hers;
Those rosie buds that open on your cheeks
Were cropped out of her garden; upon her ruins
Is that fair Aedifice of thine erected:
Last, thou hast stolen from me and from Neander
(Which are not two that have deserved the worst
Of thee in all the world) our happiness
All our content, our joy, our very selves.
You see how amiable a creature you are,
How well deserving love. Should I love you?
I'd first embrace a Succubus, court the plague,
Or kiss a cloud that's big with lightning— (heavens,
Have ye no thunderbolts in store to strike
This sacrilegious head that thus blasphemes
One of your dearest pieces? —) I love you?
Whose face dressed up in that same innocent lawn
Shows like a dunghill set about with Lilies.
* (Thou art a perjured wretch) — should I love you!
Whose eyes are like two fired barrels set
Upon a Beacon only to astonish
And fright the neighbouring people—* (oh my heart!
It is a hundred thousand miles betwixt
Thee and my tongue) — what doe you meditate on?
The nearest way unto the grave.
The grave?
If thou would have the shortest cut to hell,
To that same receptacle of black souls,
(Where such as dye for love doe walk in shades
As dark as were their thoughts, whilst they lived here)
Lend me thy hand and I will show it thee.
Let it be speedy then good Lucius.
Why thou art at thy journeys end already.
Whore's that?
Amongst the departed souls,
Where the dire furies have their habitation,
It is in this breast.
Why doest not open then
And let me in? — Oh if they live so here,
Farewell for ever to the upper world.
Ha? does he embrace her? sure it cannot be.
Away thou prostitute, immodest, go.
Who is it dares say I must not love this man?
Or you, or I must leave this place.
Stay Lucius.
It is I that will be gone, the most unhappy
Of all, on whom nature hath written woman;
Forsaken Constantine, thou and I
Will have a Dialogue in tears anon.
Neander!
Lucius!
I, I, love on, ha, ha, he, and see what ye will get
By that at last, I'll love my sefe, my self, ha, ha, he,
This day old Lively thou art just fourscore,
Quickly some Sack, I have not yet baptised
Mine eyes this morning as I use to doe.
Why boy? ha, ha. I am as lusty now,
As full of active spirits, as when I wore
But twenty on my back, ha ha, he, this laughing
Surely's restorative aboue your gold,
Or all your dearer drugs. The very thought
How quaintly I shall gull my expecting Scholars
My Neophytes that gape to hear the news
When I shall nod into the grave, does add
Such vigour to me, that I doe not feel
Not feel the ground I stand upon.  But see
More Suitors still —  Now they begin to flock.
Sir if I may advise you wade no farther
Into this business, but desist; I have
A promise (I'll assure you) from the Justice.
Sir I may use the same words unto you
I have a promise too, but yesterday
My Father did present him with a horse
Of Robin-red-breast's getting —  by your leave.
Nay Sir come on, if you be good at that.—
You have a promise. God-a-mercy horse. ha, ha, he.
These and some dozen more doe daily haunt
This Cormorants house, and all (good men) pretend
It is pure love unto his crooked daughter
That draws them thither, when there's not one of 'em
That would vouchsafe her a look, nay hardly a thought
Unless it were for to contemn her; but
There is a thing they call a Parsonage
An impropriate Parsonage which the well given Matrons
Have rescued from the Laity, and returns
After my death unto the Church, which living
The Justice here has sold them, but reserving
The first donation for himself, with which
He intends to put his foolish daughter off.
It was once my brothers land, but this same Hook
By a golden bait did pluck it from him: well,
It is no matter, I have my life in it. Ha, ha, he.
But I will cheat them all, will cozen them.
Why Boy.
Here Sir.
Well said my honey, well said.
Oh how it smiles upon me! (hum hum) give it me
This is mine Antidote against the Sith of time.
He that desires to live, let him doe thus —
Drink Sack in the morning. Boy, another cup.
How now? another? see how he prunes himself.
Boy, there's a teston for you, see you look
Well to my Nag — I must be generous now.
But let me see, I will accost him thus.
Sir if it please your worship — (it must be so)
These Country Justices doe love a life
For to be worshipped at every word,
I come now from my Lady.
(And you may
Return again unto her Ladyship
And tell her that old Lively is not yet
Intended for to dye.
And doe desire
That as you shall approve of my good parts—
Well 't will doe — now I will knock —
But I will open and enter, it is a Solaecismo
For to be modest in such businesses.
Well done my Squire of the bottles, stand you there.
Sir I doe come now from my Lady, ha, ha, he,
And doe desire, that as you shall approve
Of my good parts— ha, ha, he —
Well take the glass, and get you home, hum, hum, hum.
If I can win the Girl, I'll find a trick
For to dispatch old Lively presently
And with much ease; a peace of bread and a pin
Will doe the cure, or else an honest bur
Lapped up in butter.
Here's a precious rogue,
Oh it is Hugo Obligation
The precise Scrivener, that these three years space
Has laboured for orders, this same villain
Sure is the likeliest man to carry her—
But see where Lively stands, Isle not be seen.
Being one whom he does use in all his Covenants.
But I'll out live them all, the Knaves. Isle now
Go taste a bowl of pure refined ayre
Upon yond hill.
Yet stay a little, who is this? hoe's gone.
Once more the coast is clear, now I'll adventure
Towards the Shepherds door: not far from hence
Hid in a thicket I have provided for me
A Shepherds robes, these, if I can prevail
With this same Stipes for to undertake
A Servant of my commendation,
Will I straight leap into, and so remain
Disguised with him, for (as I understand)
The family doth consist of himself and's dog,
As for his wife she seldom is at home
Being a famous Midwife. Blessed house!
Surely in such a place Hippolytus
Did hunt away his solitary hours.
But I forget (tick took) why Shepherd, Stipes. How?
Not yet awake?
Is not this Anteros?
How I was dealt withal by nature when
She molded this same lump of clay together,
And seasoned it with soul, I know not, but
Let me get out of the world with obloquy
If ever I could find in all the herd
Of woman-kind yet so much excellence
As could procure a sigh, or kindle in me
The least spark of a desire.
Tic he, his phrase
Betrays him.
I confess like Whelps or Kitlings
Whilst they are young, and suck, and doe not know
The use of tongue, they're pretty creatures, and
They may be looked upon without the danger
Of either stool or vomit— but—
But— Well Sir Ruffian, I hope to see this Blasphemy of yours against that feathered Deity sent home with a shaft in your bosom for interest ere long.
What my little ubiquitary Loyal? my Page of the Smock? my commodity aboue stairs? my Court Shuttlecock? tossed from one Lady to an other? The Kernel of thy glove sweet lack.
Take shell and all.
Why here's a Parcel of mans flesh of another temper now, that has the art of placing his affections wisely, can love one because shoe's fair, a second because shoe's modest, and has his packets of reasons in readiness too; if he meets with a wanton Girl, that property takes him, there is hope of activity, she will not fill a bed like Pygmalions Image before hee sacrificed to Venus: if she bee rude, and ignorant, her harmless simplicity catches him; he loves this for the graceful writhing of her neck; another because she can veil her borrowed teeth neatly with her Fan when she venters at laughter: nothing can scope him, every part of woman is full of limetwigs to him: which though it bee an humour contrary to mine, who care for none, yet I like it far aboue your whining constancy as savouring more of the Man.
True. For why should I confine my love to one Circle? we see that labo∣rios creature the Bee, which is often set before vs for a Copy of industry, not always droaning upon one flower, but as soon as she has sucked the sweetness from one, throws her little airy body upon a second, and so to a third, till at last she comes home with her thighs laden with that pretty spoil.
Well said my Loyal, I perceive thou wilt never dye for love then.
No, If I doe, let me lye when I am dead by that Cynic Philosopher with a staff in my hand, to fright the beast sand fowls from my unburied carcass. —
But is there any news I pray thee grown
Up in this country since I went to court?
O tanto e piu.
First Cleopes your sisters Lover—
What? he is not dead I hope?
I would he were.
Is gone, has forsook her.
How?
And she forsooth
Since his departure has betook her self
Unto a veyle, silence, and tears; in which
Monastic habit she does spend her days.
I doe but tell you by tradition Sir,
Not from my self; but this I can assure you,
It is with vs the Parenthesis of eating.
Ther's nothing man within me. After such vows?
Such protestations? but the Gods make Loyal
No creature, if he does not suffer for it,
Buy this disloyalty of his, at a dear rate.
Can you be quiet? next your fair Kinswoman
Sweet Mistress Vrsly (who without all question
Was Kitlin to Nib, of the Queen of Faries Kitchen,
Sent to your Uncle for a Newyeeres gift
Upon exchange by the Elf) has the Parsonage
Old Lively lives in hung on her crooked back;
With which fair bait, your good and virtuous Uncle
Does angle for some young and hungry Scholar,
And daily expects the taking of the Gudgeon.
This very hour no less then 6 or 7
Are nibbling at it, but the hook is seen;
Your Uncle is not cunning in his fishing,
And so I pray you tell him —
But stay Anteros.
I have discovered (unless mine eyes deceive me)
A stranger thing then is all this you told me,
What's that in your hat? tic not a Valentine
I hope?
But I have got a counter hope
Against that hope of yours; I hope it is.
But art thou turned a Lover? hast thou got
A Mistress? thou a Mistress? let me see
That I may worship that great name, that has
Begot this miracle in thee.
Away,
Keep back those common eyes, they be profane.
By all the lips of honour I must see it.
Come you have learned such perfumed oaths at Court,
By all their Feather-men and Tire-women,
Boxes of sucus, cabinets for cerusse —
Nay look you now— not for a million.
For a far lesser sum sweet Sir nay come
I must and will.
Death! what a mad man's this?
Why if you must and will, then see.
What's here?
Rex et regina magnae Britannia? what's this? what's this?
What are the King and Queen thy Valentines? ha, ha, he.
Yes marry are they; why doe you laugh so Loyal?
Who can refrain? ha, ha, he.
For whom should I admire,
Love, or adore more? I tell thee Jack, I care not
For such poor weak Idolaters that lye prostrate
To every little Star that can but twinkle;
Those petty votaries of Egypt, which
Worship this Onion and the Leek— for me
I will not bend a knee unless it be
Unto the Sun or Moon.
Thou art mad, stark mad,
A citizen of Bedlam.
I am mad,
Yes, Yes, I am. You then that are so wise
Enjoy your wisedomenesse alone—farewell.
Come back in the name of goodness —Anteros—
My company may infect you Sir, I am mad.
What is my little boy grown sullen now,
And will not eat its dinner?
Well, what then?
This day my Anteros I will dedicate
To thee and laughter, to morrow I will study
Some deep revenge for my abused sister
Upon that villain; but no more, thy hand.
Shall wee be merry and laugh each man his rubber?
I'm for you for a single game or so.
Well, shall I make a motion then? stay you
But here a little.
Call you this a motion?
One word before you travail, whether now?
I will return immediately.
So you shall.
Speak ere you go.
Well, if I must I will.
Last night it was my chance to overtake
Upon the way a brace of fine tame fools,
Which I have brought along with me, these now
Will I go fetch unto thee.
Peradventure.
Surely the man has Quicksiluer in's heals.
I pray thee tell me, what are they for creatures?
Wee shall loose time.
Rather shall gain it Sir.
The first of them is a fine spiced gallant,
One that has been some three years in coddling
At the Innes of the Court, and (as hee tells me) intends
To lye, and soak a while to make him relish
In the rose-water of a Knighthood, strewed
O'er with the Sugar of a yearly rent
Of some nine hundred — after the old mans death.
And all this cookery is to please the palate
Of some nice Minion, who to make her weight
Drags peradventure some three thousand after her.
The thing (to doe it right) beside the managing of it's rapier, and a pretty competencie of play parcels, can salute you, and take it's leave of you in French, but so miserably harsh that any one may conclude, hee never travailed for his language further then Littleton — He —
Is a very ass, no more of him; but what's the other?
His kinsman. What hee is now he knows not himself, else he would have told me, but he has been a Lawyer; Clerk in's days, his prattle is altogether about the complexions, and hee will read you a lecture of simple bow∣dairy for some two hours in your ear if you'll suffer him, and af∣la all this, he feels you by the nose, and cries Mark the end on 't.
And is this all? give me thy hand, I have a brace of the like creatures at my service. I will play with thee from a Stiuer to a Guilder, from a Guilder to a Dollar, from a Dollar to a French crown, from a French crown to a pound, from a pound, to a hundred (mark what I say) in the way of friendship, with those two grand coxcombs thou hast all to be worded so.
You will, are you so confident?
Yes marry am I. Only I will not cloy you with an inuentory of your dishes be∣fore hand, take this in brief. One of them is a Scholar newly warm in a lambskin, Nephew to old bully Lively, at whose house they are both now, the other is an elder brother, and an heir, and he shall tell you so as soon as he sees you. But stay where shall our Campus Martius be?
No place Better then this, but speak the hour.
Let me see,
it is just eight now, some half an hour after nine I will not fail.
To bring your champions with you.
Or else I'll make good the place my self, which I would be loath to doe I tell you.
My first work now is for to see my Uncle,
And as I hear my melancholy sister.
That done through the back door that leads to the Stables
(where they are taking order for their horses.)
I will go visit my two creatures and
Prepare them for the Combat.
Cupped if a God thou art,
Transfix this Monsters stubborn heart.
But if all thy shafts be flown,
And thy quiver empty grown,
Here be Ladies that have eyes
Can furnish thee with new supplies.
Yet winged Archer doe not shoot at all,
It is pity that hee should so nobly fall.
Heigh hoe —
It is a fine morning this as I have seen,
And a most early Spring — but daughter Merda,
Why Merda I say, why daughter Merda, what,
Have not the Fleas yet made a breakfast of you?
You'll rise? or doe you mean that Mistress Vrsely
Shall take you in your bed? she'll not be long
Ere she be here — Oh me! shoe's here already.
Why Merda, Merda I say, go to,
I, I by'r Lady.
Fa, la, la, la, I have found six Checkstones in my
Father's yard, all in my Father's yard, and now I
Will go see if Merda will play with me —
Oh Stipes, where is your daughter Merda?
Oh sweet Mistress Vrsely, oh that I were a young
Scholar now for your sake; ha, this is she that
The beggars fight for: come on in faith young Mistress,
Which of all the blackcoates doe you love best?
Blackcoates? I care not this for any of them,
I ne'er will love any but Anteros;
But pray you Stipes call your daughter Merda,
Is she not up yet?
Merda, will you come? or doe you long until
I fetch you out — At length forsooth: are
You not ashamed of this you great Maukin you?
Oh Merda, will you play at Checkstones with me?
Where is your answer, and your curtsy Maiden?
If it please you forsooth, say.
If it please you forsoothsay.
Say? thou filthy harlotry, thou;
Oh here's a Girl brought up most daintily;
Well was it not for shame I'd take you up—
Father, good Father, forgive me but this once, I'll never
Doe so any more.
Stipes, you shall forgive her,
I'll make my Father take his house from you,
And the North close, unless —
Thank your young Mistress; young Mistress I
Doe thank you say.
Young Mistress I doe thank you say.
Again? but oh the diggers!
What doe I see? My Sheep have quite disgrest
Their bounds, and leaped into the several.
Who, who, why Scab, the last, the last, there scab
It is the best Cur
That ever mumbled crust.
How daintily he caught that Sherehogge! there,
So, so, au, au: why so; hap, hap, you rogue
But I will follow him.
Come Merda, will you play now?
No, I wo'nt unless you'll give me those bracelets.
Take them.
And your gloves to.
Here, fa, la, la.
Stay while I put them on though.
What shall we play for?
Two pins a game.
Stake then: heigh ho Anteros!
How many shall we make up?
One and thirty.
Will you have Winter, or Summer?
— Summer— no Winter.
•i, Winter, Winter, Winter:
But you said Summer first, I wo'nt play.
Au, but I said Winter afterword though.
Begin then.
One—
So, so, you touched the other stone, now I must play.
You lie, I did not touch it.
You lie, you did touch it, and you shall have no pins here.
Sh'ant I so? but I will though; doe you scratch hussy?
I that I will scratch, and bite too.
Give me my gloves, and bracelets again.
You may go look 'vm, I wo'nt, as long as you gave
Them me. Give a thing, and take a thing
That's the Devils gold-ring.
Well if I don't tell my Father of this, you Pusse you.
You Munkey.
You Bastard.
Doe you abuse one's friends you Jade you?
And you call me Jade you are a Whore.
Doe you call Whore?
I that I will call Whore, well, well, the next time
That you eat any Cheesecakes at our house
You shall have better luck shall you.
Your Cheesecakes? we have as good of our own.
Au, hau, you shall ne'er make no dirt pies
With me in our Barn hussy.
Who cares? then you shall gather no more Violets, nor
Primroses in our Close.
Your Close? I'll gather there in spite of your teeth.
It is my Fathers Close, so it is, so it is.
Your Father does but hire it — Oh here he comes
Here he comes, here comes my Father,
Now you shall see.
Au but I'll run home.
Come on, I am not of that rank of Patrons
Which set to sale the livings of the Church.
(Oh are you here my daughter? wipe your nose;)
I take no bonds in secret, sell no horse
For his price centuple, nor doe I send
The eager suitors up unto my Lady,
That she might judge which is the better gifted.
(Sir if your father will be bound to pay
The first years revenues, you are the man shall speed,
A reservation of mine own tithes too
Must be concluded on before you have it)
But as a true lover of virtue, doe
Choose rather to confer a double good
Then the least damage on the man I deal with.
Behold my young and tender daughter here;
I doe confess shoe's not the rarest piece
That ever nature drew, nor is it fit
That such as you, who either are, or should be
Wedded unto your Books, should have a loud
And clamorous beauty to disturb your studies.
You need not fear the thought of her perfection.
Will call you from a piece of Greek to read
Miracles in her face. Hold up your head,
And tell me now which of this goodly troupe
You have most mind to, for on him will I
Bestow old Liuely's Parsonage, and thee
In Marriage.
Excellent, excellent good, ha, ha, ha.
I will have Anteros, Terpanders son.
Let me not hear another syllable,
You peevish girl, you; you have Anteros?
What doe you weep? no more: come on your ways,
And sit you down here by me, while your Suitors
Explain themselves and their good parts before you.
Father, huff, huff, I will none of those two men
With the short hair, doe what you can I will not.
Why so my daughter? peace.
Huff, huff, —because I know
As well as can be by their looks, that they
Cannot contain themselves within an hour,
And you doe know I cannot hold my wa —
Peace thou most arrant fool, before your wooers
Thus to proclaim your imperfections?
Ha, ha, he: another bout with my conserves for that;
This box shall add three months unto my life,
And this same slice of Quinces seven. I, I,
Begin to plead, doe, doe.
My sweetest Mistress,
I will divide this my Oration
Just into three and thirty parts, all which
With your vouchsafed patience at this time
I will run through.
The candle of the day
Will burn within the socket, ere thou'st done;
I pray thee leave.
No sir, I will not leave,
I am not yet arrived at the point.
And he doth use to tyre all his hearers.
Oh; he hath don't already, don't already
Besides all this —
Now out upon his lungs,
My dinner will bee spoiled, the capon burnt,
The beef as black as mummy; this mans breath
Will blast them all.
Ha, ha, he.
Hast thou taken Orders fellow?
If it please you, no.
Did ever preach?
Only one Sermon sir
For approbation to a female Audience.
But I have here letters of commendation
From seventeen honest men of good report
Amongst their neighbours.
Spare your pains good sir.
As for my self, fair Gentlewoman,
I cannot but inveigh against these times
Wherein—
What says hee?
If it please your Worship,
He's lost his voice with railing against Bishops,
And the fair discipline of the Church.
Oh villain,
Command him silence.
It is a curtsy sir
You inflict upon him, tic not a punishment.
The holy Matrons now will rob their husbands
To contribute to the afflicted Saint.
And think they merit in it. But no more;
I will go gull them all, and presently.—
o—o— o—o—oo—ooo—
The longest day I see will have his evening,
o—o— o — oo — o — ooo —
But see old Lively; stand close and observe.
O! now the wished for minute does approach
Which I so long have waited for, and not I
Alone—but let them now enjoy their wishes.
o—o —oo— ooo—
I feel my heart-strings crack, and the whole lump
Groans for a speedy dissolution.
How's this? but yesterday he was in's sack,
Told me he hoped to live to eat a Goose
Which grazed upon my grave: so suddenly?
Have I no friends about me? must I go
Out of the world in private thus? from home?
Without one friend to take his leave of me?
Kind Justice Hook, O that good man Mr. Hook.
Peace, not a word: what does he name me for?
Would thou wast here, but to participate
Of my last dying breath, I would pronounce thee
Mine heir in total.
Bear witness Gentlemen —
Good Mr. Lively, 'lasse how fares it with you?
Whoe's that names me?
He whom you asked for,
Sacrilege Hook.
Sacrilege Hooke's mine heir,
And so farewell thou false and flattering world.
Alas hee 's dead.
Peace, not so loud for fear you call him back.
Ye all can bear me record I'm his heir.
Wee can.
Why Robert, Oliver,
Run to the Church immediately, and cause
The bell bee told with speed: old Mr. Lively
Is newly dead—Alas, I can but weep
To view this spectacle of mortality,
And I have cause to spend some tears for him— ha ha he.
I doubt he is not fully dead yet Patron,
Shall I make sure work with him? give him a knock?
Offer no violence unto the dead
I charge you, it is as bad as sacrilege,
Which I have always hated.
So has the Devil.
Sweet Mistress Vrsely.
Fairest Lady.
Stay,
No haste good sir.
But by your leave sweet sir.
Tic I have right unto her, shoe's a creature,
And you are one of the wicked.
Out thou rascal that liv'st upon thy railing;
Good Mistress Vrsely,—
I have a share therein.
Why father, father,
O me, me, me, they'll pull me into pieces;
O my hand, O my arm, my arm, O my back.
Ha, ha, he.
Forbear this rudeness gentlemen, my daughter
Shall have her choice; these are not ways to gain her,
They must bee gentle, soft behaviours
That win a woman, not such boisterous Rhetoric.—
But hark, the bell doth toll: I'll presently
Go seize upon his goods and chattel,
Ha?
And will you so? but I doe know a trick
Worth twenty of that.— I pray good M. Hook,
Whom toll's this bell for?
Oh! for my hopes,
What does hee live again?
And lives to laugh at thee, and at thy baseness,
Covetous wretch. Ha, ha, he.
Sir, as I take it I may change my will. Ha, ha, he.
Oh what a knave is this? a rank old knave?
A stinking knave? a knave in grain? fie, fie,
That I should thus bee gulled? follow me daughter,
And you Gentlemen.
Ha, ha, ha, Away you Ravens,
I'll make ye all go barefoot ye young villains.
But let me now muster my wits together
Call all my fancies into rank, and place
Each several quirk of this my working brain
In its true file.— It is an unheard of love,
A miracle of Friendship this, for two young men,
In the exaltation of their bloods, both Rivals
In such a beauty, for to plot and sweat
How to be miserable, that's how to place
His friend in the fruition of his Love;
It is not within the compass of a faith.
This morning each of them entreated me
In private, that I would invent some way
To win the whole affection of Pandora
Not for himself, but for his friend: which is
(Though in another Idiom) as if
They should have said, get me a comely rope
My Bully Lively, and hang me up, or else
Provide me an ounce or two of Mercury,
Which I will take in posit drink and dye.
But Lucius is the man whom I desire
To pleasure most, therefore I now have counsaild
Neander for to counterfeit a wedding,
Which being fancied true by Lucius
And the indifferent Gentlewoman, might cause
A speedy marriage twixt his friend and her.
This does he swallow, and now there nothing wants
But—ha? what's here to doe? what Boy is this
That Stipes thus drags after him?
Why quickly Merda, bring me a chair out quickly.—
O O you villain.—Why when?—So, so, go to, go to,
Tarry you still my daughter,
That you may hear some of your Fathers wisdom.—
Come on you Crack-rope, what is your business, 'pray you,
To lurk thus in my Masters grounds? you are
A scout? one that discovers are you not?
It is a pretty Lad, and being dressed
May easily pass for Woman. Well Isle mark
O you're a stubborn gallows, you will answer?
O me unfortunate; what shall I say?
Heigh!
An ill year on you, you great Maukin you,
Making of Puppets? one of your age and breeding?
You have an Husband Minion? you a rod. —
But to return again unto the purpose,
Where dwell you sirrah? will you not answer me?
Come on your ways, I'll have you to my Master.—
Unhappy wretch! what shall I answer him?
Nay good Sir stay, I'll tell you: oh how I tremble—
Then quickly Sirrah.
Lest this robustious Clown
Should hale me before my Uncle in this habit.
What's that you mutter on? you have a trick
To say your prayers backwards? have you not?
This Lad is mine, I'll take him from the Shepherd.
Not far from hence I had both friends and parents.
(Howsoever how I want) but cruel Fates
Have envied them their lives, and me my friends.
It shall be so, I'll make a contract straight
Betwixt Neander and this Boy. Now Stipes,
God save you.
Salve Domino. But why put you your Sickle
Into my Harvest thus? go to, go to,
You're troublesome— well Sirrah.
Well Sirrah? Slave,
Thou unpolished piece of clay, how dare thou thus
Vncivilly use a young Gentleman
Whose friends and kindred I have known to bee
Worthy of more respect then thou of scorn,
Which both come near to infinite?
Very good.
And doe you know his friends and kindred then?
Would thou did know thy betters half so well,
Vntutourd dunghill.— In what state you sit?
Stand up, or else Isle make thee lye for ever.
Are you in earnest or in jest?
How think you?
You great Rigs-norton you, doe you stand still
And see your only Father wronged thus? ha? —
Well, if I doe not fit your cap for this
(If it be made of wool) when you tithe Lambs,
I'll never go to Church more, if th'whole flock
Has any worse then other t'shall go hard
But some of them shall fall unto your lot.
Alas I doubt he knows me
His eyes so dwell upon me.
Come my boy,
What will you go with me?
Thanks to my stars;
He knows me not.
Boy will you dwell with me?
Thou shalt have dumpling Boy, enough, and Bacon
Shall be so deep in fat, that thou moist wade
Up to the chin in lard: Salute your Master.
And kiss your masters daughter that's the next
Thing you must practise.
You his Master, Hempseed?
Truly me thinks I could even love this Boy
It is such a pretty thing; Father, I pray you
Good Father, let him dwell with vs.
No more,
Peace, so he shall.
Hands off you lease of Sheepe-skinnes.
No, I will dwell with this old Gentleman.
Well said, sweet youth.
But on this condition,
That you will use me like a Gentleman
Of quality and worth, for I must tell you
With tears, how ever my fortunes are dejected
Now, I doe come of no mean house nor blood.
Fear not my boy, thou shalt have cause to thank me:
Follow; my maids shall presently vnpage him,
And hang woman on his back.
But I doe hope
That some kind God or other will find out
Some means for my escape; if not (I'ue said it)
This hand shall make a passage for my soul
To leave this body.
Boy, doe you come?
I come.
What is he gone? — hi-day! what again?
Let me be hanged, my dog and my whole Family,
My Wife and all, I'll put her in, if I
Doe not so 'flict your buttocks Minion;
Isle break you of this trade of making children
Before your time, if I can find a willow
Within a mile of an Oak.
What shall I do? oh what shall I do? what shall I do?
My father's gone to get a rod, what shall I doe?
Oh, oh, here comes my mother.—
Placenta, you have heard my cares, my griefs
And which hath cause them all, you know my love,
Now by those tender years, by that first ray
Of blessed light these infant eyes received
Upon those vigilant knees, I doe conjure thee
Forsake me not in these my miseries
Mother, Mother, Mother, what shall I doe?
What news with you, you fayrie brat? you changeling?
Daughter to Madam Pusse the kitchen maid,
Take that and get you in, or Isle—
Um um, um.
Will you not stir?
Carry that chair in with you Milderkin.
What would you have me do?
You've heard my sick∣ness,
It is the physician must prescribe the medicine
And not the patient.
Will it suffice
If ere the Sun does set you doe embrace
One of your Lovers?
By all my vows it will;
Nor am I much solicitous in the choice,
So I have one.
But I must have your help,
You must not merely be a patient
In this same plot; can you dissemble think you?
I am a woman, and may learn in time.
Well then it is thus: you see your pampered Lovers
(Like two fat Oxen in a Stall) stand blowing
Upon their meat, are nice forsooth, and squeamish,
Will not fall to, because they're cloyed with dainties,
The only way for to procure them stomachs,
Is to withdraw their fodder; take your love
Before their eyes, and give it to another,
Or seem to doe at least, twill fetch them back;
And make them lick their lips at you, scratch for you:
I know not by what Fate, but true it is,
Wee never prize ought right till the departure,
And then our longing's multiplied. Can you fain
A love unto some other Gentleman?
And seem quite to neglect them and their service?
I fear I cannot, it is too hard a Province:
But what will this advantage me I pray you?
So much, as nothing you can doe, will more.
A Louer's like a Hunter, if the game
Be got with too much ease hee cares not for it;
She that is wise in this our wayward age
Will keep her Lovers sharpe, make them to ceize
Upon a firebrand for meat.— What say you?
Why I will try I say.
Try? Oh that I
Had but that beauty in my managing,
In-faith I would not part with a good look
Under a brace of Tens.
Indeed Placenta
As you are now, you'd need to sell them dear,
It is a rare commodity, your Shop
Affords not many of them.
For a kiss
I'd have a Lordship; a whole Patrimony
For a nights lodging; Come, you Maidens now
Are grown too kind, too easy in your favours,
A few smooth, oily, verses now adays
Bought of some Poet, and so justly called
The Gallants own that sends them, where your tresses
Are termed Sunbeams, and your ruby lips
Congealed Nectar, have more power to win you,
Then in my days two velvet Petticoats,
Or an hundred acres turned into Taffaties.
Speak, can you doe it?
Sure I think I can,
If need require.
It is enough, but see,
What Strip•ing's this comes here? Ha? it is most happily
This is Endymion Lucius his Page.
There's not a solitary walk, nor Grove
Wherein a Lover may retire himself
Free from the eyes of the profaner people,
But I have traversed o'er to find my Master;
I have not left a Spring unquestioned,
Or any spreading Oak, whole quavering top
Is but half Phoebus proof, nor can I hear
Ought of Neander his companion.
Pandora, this same Boy was sent on purpose
Unto this place by some kind Nymph or other
Inhabiting these Woods in mere compassion
Of thee and of thy miseries; wee could not
Have studied for a better Stale then this:
Prepare your self to fine a love unto him.
But see Placenta, and my Masters Love,
I will enquire of them.
Endymion
All happiness.
As much to you Placenta.
And what to me?
What you deserve fair Lady,
Which is aboue my wishes.
But Endymion,
Prithee sweet Lad, let me entreat a curtsy,
What Country-man are you?
What Country-man?
An English man I take it.
An English man?
I rather think thou art a Russian
Thou carry such a Winter in thy breast.
How can thou suffer such a winning beauty
To stand neglected? without a salutation?
Go to, you shame-fac'd fool, go kiss her, go.
How kiss her? it does not become a servant
To be so saucy with his Masters Love.
It rather not becomes Endymion,
A Youth of that same mould and symmetry
To be so bashful before a Gentlewoman:
As for thy Master I disclaim his love
As one unworthy.
How? disclaim his love?
And with his love, all the whole world of men,
Except 'be thee my soul: why fliest thou me?
Come on, Come on you little frozen-nothing,
I think wee must be fain to make you take
Your love potion in a horn, you are so skittish.
Nay but Placenta.—
O most redolent!
Aurora's spiced bed is not more sweet,
Not all the odours of the early East.
You do but mock me.
How? but mock thee sweet?
By all the Cupids in thy face, I love thee
Beyond the expression of a women's tongue.
This was that simple one that could not counterfeit.
By this same nest of kisses I protest—
What would thou more?
More of your protestations.
But can thou love me then?
Indeed fair Lady
I doe not know, I am but newly entered
Into this loving trade.
You are a Wag:
Take her by the hand and strain it gently, so. —
Now kiss her fan and sigh. — Good, excellent.
(Well I have seen some Gallants in my days,
Though it was my fortune to be married,
To that same lob my husband, but no matter;)
Fie on this modesty, it is out of fashion,
Give her a greene gown quickly, she will thank you.
Will not as much satin of the same colour
To make her one doe as well?
Come, you're a fool;
Down with her, she will discard you else,
As bashful, and unfit for Ladies service.—
Ay me! what mean you Sir?
Why there, why so;—
Oh for Neander now and Lucius
To view this spectacle, this would crack that great
That strong and mighty bond of friendship, and
Make them both quarrel for her: nay Endymion,
As she did pluck you down, so it is your office
To take her up, else she'll forget her self
Good soul, and slumber there eternally.—
Now fie upon you Sir, you've spoiled my linen.
Pray Heavens no body saw vs: good Placenta
Reedify what is amiss.
Ell's well,
Ell's well, save only here does want a pin.
But stay I'll furnish you. —
Yes, here's a knot molested too.—
Fair Sir,
This may seem lightness in me.
Rather gravity
Who naturally tend downward thus.
But Sir,
Let me entreat you for to entertain
A better faith of her that is your servant,
Give it the right name Sir, and call it Love.
I'll call it what you please fair Gentlewoman.
Hee never thinks of's Master: well this Boy,
Must wee train farther with vs till wee meet
With our two icy Lovers. Come Pandora
Will you entreat your fairest Paramour
T'accompany vs into the Grove? vvee may
Perchance there meet his Master, whom hee seeks.
Sweet shall I crave?
Not where you may cōmand
So, so, I'll now go plant this billing couple
Under some pleasant tree, which done I'll go
And range the fields for Lucius and Neander,
And bring them to behold their close embraces,
This certainly will make them hungry, and bite,
Waken their dull and sleepy appetite,
VVee never prize ought truly, think it dear,
Until the time of parting does draw near.—
To the Ladies, Joy, delight,
And a servant that dares fight;
No need of painting, but a face
With perpetuity of grace.
To the Lords a gracious eye
If they have a Mistress by.
To them both, more then all this,
Their Princes happiness, and bliss.
The day's our own, we have the Sun, the wind,
And all that can be called advantages, bear up.
As I'm a Gentleman, and an elder brother—
St, not a word.
You wrong me Sir, I will swear out my swear, as
I am a Gentleman I must, and will swear.
Nay sweet Master Mongrel
Mistake me not, I doe not go about,
For to deprive you of that ornament,
That fashionable quality: I but entreat you,
For to bee frugal in your language, and,
To husband your lungs; you have an enemy
That will require them all, had you more oaths.
How? Doe you think I have no more? by my—
Oh, hold, hold, hold.
Nay, you shall hear me, by —
O, O, O.
By my— by— my indad law.
By my indad law, you'll spoil all, why you'll spend
all before the time. But see your adversaries are at hand.
This is their Captain, their Conductor. Love. Stay.
I'ue hit the very punto, this same minute,
Do's cut the hour into two equal portions.
You that are grown a Time-obseruer, you
With that fine pocket Saturn in your hand;
Look this way.
But are these your Champions?
They are my Conqerours, if you please: but where are your employments?
They'll bee here immediately.
No more. Loyal, please you to take notice
Of these Gentlemen, they are of rank, and my friends.
Sweet Sir, my only wish is that my fortunes were but of growth, to show in what degree of honour, I hold any whom you shall vouchsafe to call a friend. —I thirst to know you Sir.
Doe not swear yet.
Why so?
Nay as you please.
Sir I desire you to pardon me, I must not swear yet, my General will give the word when I must vent.
It is no great matter, if you throw away Cudnig•,
Or beswiggers, or some such innocent oath upon him.
Say you so?
When will he come towards me?
Sir may I know your name?
My name Sir? why Sir? I am not ashamed of my name Sir. My name is Sir M. Mung. Sir. A poor elder brother Sir. And yet not very poor neither Sir. Heir to six, or seven hundred a year Sir. My father is a Gentleman Sir. I have an Uncle that is a Justice of Peace Sir. I can borrow his white Mare when I please sir. She stood him in thirty pieces sir.
A Mongrel Sir?
Only be sure you be not dashed.
Ashamed of your name, say you? You come of a very great house, I'll assure you; I know many of the Mungrels that are able to despond, yearly, more then I am willing to speak of at this •ime; and which keep their Sons as Gentlemanlike, at the Innes of the Court wi•h as good clothes on their backs, as rich belts, and as fair guilt rapiers, as the best Gentlemen of the Land Sir— O well said, come lift up bravely now.
Tic a hundred to nothing, but these are they, look to your standing, and be sure you suffer him to offer first; you have the more advantage.
Let me alone, if I doe not utterly confound him, let me never wear good suite of clothes more, I have not read the Arcadia for nothing.
Anteros, a co•pie of friends of mine.
Sir I shall count my self fortunate in their acquain∣tance; Sweet Sir— worthy Sir.
Sans complement Monsieur, Ie suis, vostre treshumble varlet.
There's one of his parcels gone, he has but three more in all the world.
Signior mio molto honorifico, per testa del mio padre, io non he altro, advffirirui, che me stesso, però fate capitale di me, è splendetemi per qual chio vaglio.
Do's he speak French Sir?
How think you Sir?
Nay but well I mean?
O admirably, take heed what you doe, hoe's a great Travailer I tell you.
Gods me! is he so? I'll not meddle with him then, I would have tickled him else.
Signior, io mi tarry ricco s' io hanessi solamente le december de i vostri favori.
Nay Sir I am not so well skilled in the language, as I
could wish I were, for your sake, I can speak a little Sir, Ʋn pave, Monseur, tellement quellement.
May I be so by• as to bear your name Sir?
My name is Nodal Empty Sir.
An Inns other Court man Sir?
I have pissed in some greene pots in my days Sir.
Wis. My name is William Wiseacres Sir. I am of a San∣guinea complexion.
In good time Sir.
Very melancholy sometimes Sir.
Like enough Sir
Ha, he, he, he—
Ha, ha, ha, he,— O my sides—
Gods my life! I should loose it all were my patrimony laid on it. Come on Sir, brace me your invention to the height, you see your Antagonist.
To him, ferret him, ferret him.
Noble Sir may I bee so ambitious, as to desire my name, to be enrolled in the Catalogue of your well wishers.
I doe honour the very shadow of your shoe strings.
Your mocked Sir, hee wears boots.
And am wholly yours cap a pea.
Pox on 't, I made full account, to have had that next my self, how came hee by it trow?
What say you Sir?
I say Sir, that it is your best course, to take heed how you make a deed of gift of your self, for fear some of your friends suffer for it, for the Physiognomy of your boot, tells me, it was never made for you, I doe not think but you bore∣rowed them.
And I say Sir, that it is better to borrow then to take upon trust, and never pay, as many such gallants as you doe.
Loyal, this heat is done, lets rub, and walk.
Agreed, Master Empty, take some pity on the School∣ler, let him breath a little, wilt please you walk?
I am your Servant.
Well done, it was smartly followed; but lets walk;
Ha, I don't think ne'er go Law, but I have seen you some where.
You're beholding to your eyes for that.
It may be so.
Loyal, look, look, look, another heate.
Don't you use sometimes about Stamford side?
Yes Sir, I have hunted, and hawked, there abouts Sir in my days, and been in Sara's he•e too Sir, I was at the last horse race, Sir, when Veluet-heeles, and Currants run Sir, I have some reason to remember it, I am sure, I was cheated of twen∣tie pieces there, Isle swear unto you Sir as I'm a Gentleman, and an elder Brother, I'm a very fool—
Out you Nullifidian, don't let the Gentleman swear, tak't upon his bare word.
Nay Sir, I'll believe you without swearing.
Nay but conceive me Sir. I was a very fool (as I said before) to bee drawn in after that manner, I would fine see the best cheater of them all, gull me of so much now.
Well sir, I desire your better acquaintance. I have the best wine in Town for you, please you to accept.
Thank you sir.
I think you &amp; I are much upon a complexion. He, he, he, you have lost your mayden-head. If it please you Sir to come to my lodging Sir, when you come to London, I shall think my self very much bound to you, I have some pretty books there to lend you, I have Aristotle's Problems in English, and Al∣bertus magnus de secretes, I, as I am a living soul.
Let's take 'em off.
Troth Sir you have a very neat suit there, I am much taken with the proportion of your hose, it is a deep French Sir. I have a Satin suit to make shortly, and I would bestow, some twenty dozen of gold lace upon it, if I could but purchase the knowledge of such a Taylor as yours, I should think my self beholding to my Stars for it.
O your walking faculty, it is the only thing, now adays your Gentlemen practise.
Indeed Sir, I think it bee time for you to seek out for a new one, for I think your old one will trust you no longer.
Should you but see them walk in Paules, or in the Temple, with what a ravishing garb—you would admire.
He, he, you are such a merry man, but indeed I hold that Tobacco is very good for Phlegmatic complexions.
Your hilt a little forwarder; very good, your very ra∣pier speaks French; I protest hee shows in the graceful carri∣age of his leg, as though he had been a man of forty plays, fifteen moutings.
Nay, I shall doe well in time.
Gods me! you have stained your cloak sir, how will you doe? I doubt the Gentleman that lent you it will be angry.
Think you so sir?
Well, there's no remedy, I must go and relieve my Scholar.—Sir, a word in private, do you know that gentleman?
Yes sir, I have read Overburies Characters; he is a sell∣lie fellow in black, I take it.
Well sir, how ever you dis-esteeme him, I could wish you would take heed of him; I wonder hee did not strike you all this while. Go to, I say no more, I hold him to be the stou∣test man of his hands in all this side of the country.
Is he so?
Why he is sent for far and near by the valiant of the Parishes, to play matches at football: I tell you hee is the only Hammershin this Shire can boast of; not a Serving-man can keep a leg or an arm whole for him, he he's a pension from all the Surgeons within the compass of forty miles, for breaking of bones.
Nay for my part sir, let him be as tall a man as he will, I doe not care a 〈◊〉 for him, (doe you see) for I doe not mean to quarrel with him, only I make account to jeer him a little.
Well, take heed, say I.
Nay sir, I'll take your counsel, I'll go and fetch my ra∣pier I left within, and then let him doe his worst.
Follow him, follow him, the exalted mushroom— a whoreson butterfly, he he's nothing to jeer you for but your borrowed cloak and boots; and I don't think but they bee your own for all his talking.
No indeed, to tell you the truth, I borrowed them of a Bachelor of our house, mine own lye in limbo at a Bar∣bers shop for Tobacco.
But why dost not beat him man? Gods me! beat him.
Nay, I would have bin at him, but that I was afraid—
They say many of 'em are very desperate fellows.
Faith, to doe them right, there be many of' um that have run through the discipline of a Bawdy-house, &amp; learnt to quarrel there, and have seen the entrails of a Fence-schoole too, and in one word are sufficiently valiant; but that proves not a genera∣litie. There are of them (I'll warrant you) as there are of your scholars, some that wear swords, only to scare fools.
Nay sir, I would have you to know, that I am neither afraid of him, nor his sword: but I would not willingly die yet, if I could help it.
Fear 't not man, thou shalt live I warrant thee, to see thy good name buried before thee. Have you nothing about you to strike him with?
Yes, I have the key of my study door in my pocket.
O nothing better then that, follow him, to him, to him.
Shall I, in faith? shall I?
Never stand, shall I? shall I? but doe 't.
Ne'er go, and so I will: Isle teach him to abuse any of our cloth again.
St, Mr Mongrel.
As I'm a Gentleman, and an elder brother—
But how now Anteros? what business is this?
Can you but hold your peace, and follow them
With your sweet William? nay, but will you go? 
You'll loose the banquet if not presently.
O, O. —
Would I could loose my self, become a Mouse,
Or fly, that I might find a cabin here,
To hide my self from these same women. O, —
But I will climb this tree—
I wonder much
Where our two loving friends should lye so close;
There's not a place where they doe use, but wee
Have visited this morning. I doe long
To give them this most pleasing spectacle:
But I will now search the Justice his house,
Perchance they may be there.
Endymion,
Another kiss; lo thus I will revenge
My self on those two frozen Lovers; thus,
And thus, and thus — Revenge, how sweet thou art
Unto a woman!
O — I am afraid
They will offend, commit, commit before me.
And can thou love me, sweet Endymion?
Behold a taste what I can doe.
These kisses
Have not that masculine relish yet me thinks,
Which I enjoyed in the manly embraces
Of Lucius, or Neander.
It is strange,
Not one about this house that can instruct me
What should become of them, I wonder at it;
But I am glad that Constantina's flight
Is not suspected yet, so well that Boy
Doe's personate her.
Are they not there Placenta?
St; No. O yes your Uncle is at home.
It will not yet bee dinner time this hour;
You may embrace another walk.
Content;
Endymion, will it please you to accompany us?
Why so then— What again?
You'll leave your blubbering, Minion, come your ways.
You set your mind on such a man? yet more?
You might as well bee in love with that same Sun,
And should as soon enjoy it.
He speaks high,
Pray heavens hee does not look so high, for fear
He should descry me.
Father, I cannot last
Out two days longer without Anteros.
How's that? now all my stars be merciful!
It is a vision sure, this cannot bee.
Come, you're a foolish girl, he marry you?
That day that hee does marry you, will I
Bring back to life all that were dead before
The universal Deluge.
Nay, Isle help
You with a far better expression, sir,
That day that hee does marry her, shall you
Become an honest man; a harder Province
Then to bring all the dead, to life again.
There are a hundred reasons (daughter) why
You should not hope it, first hee hates all women,
Next if he did not, you that are deformed,
Lame, and misshapen, black, besides, ill mannered.—
(Hee does not see the wallet on her back.)
Have the lest cause to hope.
But there are (father)
Six hundred reasons, why I should love him.
His manly carriage, his full breasts, his hair,
And his fine clothes, his golden breeches, and—
His traitorous nose: I, I, it is that I know,
It is like the Ivy-bush unto a Tavern,
Which tells vs there is Wine within; but I
Will take an order with you Sir ever long,
And have you par'd.
Well I will never leave
My crying (that's resolved) until I see him.
O! Could I commit a crime ever I was made,
Against nature worthy such a punishment?
It is decreed, I will unman my self, immediately.
What shall I doe? tic strange—
Well, 't must be so: I will go seek Terpander,
And move him to this match: most of his lands
I have in mortgage, nay indeed they are
Forfeited to me, for the day is past
Wherein hee was bound to pay in the money,
The advantage of this forfeiture, will I
Threaten to take, unless hee does compel,
His son to take my daughter, to his wife.
Nay, rather then I will bee disappointed,
Hee for a portion, shall have in his bonds,
Come daughter, bee of comfort, wee will go
Directly to Terpander, where I'll use
Such arguments, as shall enforce him make
His son both love, and marry you.
Like enough.
It is very likely Sir, but that this tree
Does not afford any such fruit, I'd throw
An old shoe after you,—such arguments
As shall enforce him make his son, both love,
And marry you—well how his pills may work
Which the old man, I know not: for my self
I will provide a quick deliverance.
Why shepherd? Stipes?
now I must, and will
Go forward in this plot, of my disguise.
What make you there?
Why nothing Jack.
Come on, you are a fine fellow, to go and set them together by the ears thus, are you not?
But have they done it finely?
Finely doe you call it? why your Scholar he's so mauld Mr. Noddle with the key of his study door, made such a breach in his Pericranium, that without question all his French ends have taken their flight, through that passage; as for my co∣sen Mr. William, hoe's crept into an old hole, behind the hang∣ings, that in the days of old, he has been the Asylum, for decay∣ed boots, and shoes out of date, and there lies hee, all alone, very melancholy.
Ha, ha, he, but how was my Gentleman, and my elder brother employed all this while?
As Gentlemen use now adays, in swearing; when he saw that hee could not draw his sword, hee ran up and down the room, and measured out the time of the combat with oaths.
Death! that I had but seen this.
Would thou had: for I have e'ene taken a surfer of them. I pray thee let's invent some way, or other
For to bee rid of them, can thou not think?
Think, think, man — think— which I'll effect, unless
All that is called Fortune, doth forsake me.
See thou that brace of Cabins, on each side
My Vncle's house?
They are Dog-kennels I take it.
They are, no more, but see they come, I'll slip
Aside lest I bee seen.
I wonder what
His brain is now so hot in travail with.
How now?
Lend me your hankercher, if you have one about you Cousin, mine he's not a dry place in it.
What doe you bleed Mr. Noddle?
Yes Sir a little wild blood, hold that Cousin, un pave Monsieur.
Did not you tell me, all his French ends were gone? un pave will not forsake him.
Not a word.
A whoreson cowardly slave, to strike a man ever one was aware of him, and to give one no time, to draw his rapier—
S'me, it is somewhat deep I doubt.
Nothing by Hercules Sir, a scratch, a scratch, well I'll say nothing, but by this good blood, that runs—
Faith if you had done as that good blood does, Mr. Noddle, it had been better for you.
No Sir, I scorn it, I am not of that strain i'faith, and that hee shall know, the sempiternall rascal.
Come on Mr. Wiseacres, I believe you and your Kinse∣man are much of a complexion.
I am very melancholy at this time.
I but you must take heed of these fits, they'll spoil you, I heard say, that you crept into a private, retired room even now, and there conversed with spiders and crickets, fie up∣on it, you must labour against that humour; but indeed me thinks your Cousin is of a very deep sanguine.
Ha, he, you are such a witty man.
Cousin? Yes I am much beholding to my Cousin; I might have been kilt for him.
Come, come, I like him well for it, the Gentleman does weigh how much the Republ. might bee impeached, by the loss of a man.
Republi{que}? Repuddingpy. By this light, a man is lit∣tle better then mad, that will keep company with such snow-heapes, such white-liverd, counterfied lackdawes—but ell's one.
I, I betwixt friends, and kinsemen; ye two are all one I know. Your Cousin is very choleric now.
I but I am very seldom so, for Albertus Magnus faith —
Now the good Gods! where shall I find these most unfortunate Gentlemen?
Why how now Jack? what inauspicious wind
He's raised this cloudy weather in thy face?
O Anteros, wee are undone, undone;
I'll have this day wear black in the Calender,
That after ages may beware of it,
It is so full of Omen —
Whats the matter? I pray thee speak.
O they bee here, — who's there?
Pray heavens it bee not the Constables officious industry: how will you doe Sir? You have slain the Scholar.
I would I had else.
Nay Sir, this is neither time nor place for such idle wishes, here he's been a Surgeon already, that lives hard by, and his sentence is, that hee cannot live aboue two hours, hee sounded six times since you left him, it seems you bruised him so with falling on him, with the hilt of your rapier, that hee bleeds inward — I know not what to say to it— I was bewitched I think, nay think, think, think what course you will take, you must bee sudden, the officers are sent for to apprehend you.
Is this in jest (I wonder) or in earnest?
Is he so indeed? I pray you tell me true Sir.
Why, what doe you take me to bee Sir? have I this for my love, and care of your safety? as you sowed, so reap for me; I hope you will believe your own senses, I think I see the officers coming.
'Sme! what shall I doe? Mr. Loveall, nay good Sir, I doe believe you, I know not which way to take.
Nay there's no stirring that way, you'll meet them in the teeth.
What if I go through the back door, and take horse?
They'll meet you that way too.
Any thing, good Sir, I beseech you, look the door goes, I protest twenty Sergeants could not have struck such a fear into me.
Well, will you trust your fortunes into my hands?
And lives sweet Sir.
Quickly then enter here, I'll shut you in until the search bee past: nay will you in? who's there? immediately, good Master William.
Nay sir, I'll go to my horse if there were twenty Con∣stables, they have nothing to doe with me, for I am sure I did not strike a blow, no as I'm a living soul. —
Gods me, what will you doe? were not you in the company with him? that makes you accessory; have you read so much law, and know not that? nay, will you in?— Ha, ha, he.
What sai'st thou now my Anteros?
What say I?
I say thou art an arch-dissembler,
A workman in the trade: By all that's good,
I should have been thus gulled my self, thou did
So smoothely act it, with such passion,
And anger at their incredulity.
I was afraid thou would have beat the fool,
Because he would not let himself be gulled
So soon as thou would have him, but stay now—
How shall we dress our other brace?
That province
Is yours; as for mine own, you see I have
Provided for them, and conveniently:
Yet if you will embrace my counsel, write
After the copy I have set you, doe,
Behold a pattern, and see (happily)
A chest where Stipes in the days of old
He's kept tame Cones, now uninhabited.
Right, but I fear, it is not capacious
Enough for both.
It is nothing, look you here,
See you that fine spruce new erected hogsty
On the other side of Stipes house?
I doe.
And doe you see it may be pinned without?
Hist, easily, softly, I'll fill up the time
With some discourse, till you have framed your countenance.
Wu'd I might ne'er stir Mr. Mongrel, if I care a pin for a hundred such, an Inns of the Court man quoth a? ne'er go, I think they learn nothing there, but how to swagger, and bee proud.
Nay Sir, now I must chide you, will you accuse all, for the default of some particulars? by the same reason, I'll con∣clude, that all ye Scholars, are coxecombes, because I see one that is so.
Meaning me Sir?
Meaning you Sir? pardon me it is mere injustice in you, I'll assure you Sir, this whole realm, yields not better qua∣lified Gentlemen, and more gently parted, then many of them are, and to whom, the common weal is more indebted.
Because hee has got a good suit of clothes upon his back (I'll bee hanged if they bee paid for yet) and a ring in 's band string, to play withal when he wants discourse, he thinks hee may carry the ball on 's toe before him, and that no man must dare to meet him.
No more Scholar, you have met with him sufficient∣lie, why Anteros, when? and here's a brave Pylades too, that would not see his Orestes oppressed by multitude.
Arrest me Sir? soft, and easily Sir, more words to a bargain; s'duds! I think my sword be mortil'd into a snail,
I cannot entreat him out of his shell. Arrest me Sir? As I'm a Gentleman, and an elder bro∣there, I owe no man a farthing that I mean to pay him. Nay come Sir, I am fleshed now i'saith.
You will not quarrel with your friends Sir, will you?
Friends Sir? I know not whether you be my friend, or no; I am sure you use no friendly language.
Prithee Scholar, tail off Mr. Mongrel a little, he will never leave now hee has drawn blood once.
Come, you're a fool; the Gentleman's of worth, and our friend.
Nay I have done now, I did but try how I could quarrel a little.
Faith Sir, this would have made a fair show in a Country Ale-house.
Nay Sir, as soon as my father dyes, (which will not bee long I hope, for hee lies sick now) I'll go to Londorn, and learn to quarrel there, for a year or two, and then come down again, and practise amongst my Tenants.
Why Anteros; pray thee relieve me.
St, not a word, for a million of worlds. Hark you Scholar.
I hope you are not angry?
Angry old Bully? hee had a hard heart, that would be angry with thee.
It is as I tell you, his wound he's been searched by a very skilful Surgeon, and his Pia matter is found to be perished, and when that's gone, you know there is small hope.
None at all Sir, I've read it in Magirus, Cozen Mun∣grell, come hither quickly —
Now, now, how greedily the Scholar sucks it in.
What's the matter? but is this true?
As true as you're a Gentleman.
Hee never emptied a buttry pot after a match at footeball, with greater appetite, then hee devours this gullery.
Take heed what you doe, the least protraction is full of danger.
O the Lord! what will become of vs?
Loveall stir the door a little — passion O me! there's some body at the door, look, look, creep into this chest, I'll shut you in.
Any where good Sir.
Where will you hide me sir? I'll go into the chest too.
Here's hardly room enough for my self.
Stay, stay, stay. In good sooth Mr. Constable here's no such men this way— what say you, you three-penny crack crown? I tell you, they have already taken horse. Here, here, here, creep in, stoop man, stoop.
Ha, ha, he.
Why so, wee'r now at Liberty, farewell.
My sisters wrongs, and sorrows call for me,
And shall be answered.
Well adieu sweet Sir.
I must bee sudden, or l'me lost for ever.
By this time sure my father melts (why shepherd.)
The ample benefit, that shall acrew
Unto him by this worthy match, this instant
Arrives at 's weather-beaten apprehension;
(I doe but know it, am but sure of it)
O, what a dainty pleasant thing it is
For to bee free from care! to sleep a night,
Without the dreaming of a Creditor,
Or the disturbance of that gobbling Forfeit!
It cannot but be so, upon my soul,
Hee trades in this same cogitation,
This very minute — Stipes. che ti avenge l' cancro.
Well, if hee be aboue ground, I will find him,
Or loose my self, I'll seek him in the pastures.
But why
Doe the winged minutes fly
so fast away?
Stop your course ye hasty hours,
And solicit all the powers
to let you stay.
For the earth could ne'er show forth
An object of a greater worth.
But why
Doe the winged minutes fly
so fast away?
It is because that they which follow,
Crowd on to have a sight as well as they;
Hark how the ghosts of passed moments groan,
because they are gone:
And rail at Fate,
And curse the date
Of their short lives expired so soon.
Then stop your course, you hasty hours,
And solicit all the powers
to let you stay,
For the earth could ne'er show forth
An object of a greater worth.
Ha, ha, he,
I have discovered more then ever Columbus,
Or our own water-fowle, Drake: my pretty stripling,
Which I did take away from Stipes even now,
Is proved a woman, proved an errant Lady,
That is in quest after her errant Knight,
Who is enchanted. It is the Niece (forsooth)
Of our good virtuous Justice, Mr Hook,
Who has put on this habit for to follow
Her lover Cleopes, who has forsook her.
All this did she confess to me in private,
'Soone as she saw I had descried her sex
And name; but I have stayed her pilgrimage,
Shoe's fast enough, I warrant her, in the noose
Of wedlock now, to stir in haste. No sooner
Did I read woman in her looks, but straight
I did command my maids for to unpage her,
And cooke her in her kind, in her own sauce;
Shoe's pickeld now in some three yards of lawn:
Here she has it, and there she has it, fie, fie.
Was I a young man now again, and should
Venture on such a dish to carve, by'r Lady,
I should not know which side for to begin on:
Hardly distinguish breast from back. Well, well,—
Beshrew my heart the queens, where ever they had them,
Have hung good rags about her; sure they borrowed them.
This being done, I went unto Neander,
Told him, that I had got a Boy, and dressed him
Fit for his palate: he rejoiced, made haste
Unto the contract, and (as kind Fortune would)
That very time a good old merry Vicar
Of my acquaintance came to visit me.
I craved his aid, and (in one word) I brought her
Veiled, but first softened by a thousand threatenings,
If she but moved towards a discovery.
The good kind Gentleman thinking her boy,
And therefore in his power when ever he please
For to untie the knot, is before witness,
Contracted to her by the Vicar.— Oh for Lucius now.
See where hee comes; but yet how heavily!
How full of earth me thinks his paces bee!
Hee looks as though his teeth had played this fortnight,
Kept Holiday. But I'll accost him.—Lucius.
The Gods befriend thee, whosoe're thou art,
That I am thought worth naming yet, not lost
Unto all mankind quite, though to my self!
These words doe savour of too much distractio'n.
You must take comfort sir.
Who 's that dares talk
Of comfort to me? But once name the word
That is exiled whole Nature? good Mr Lively
Wast you that spoke?
It was, and I must have you
Remove this same December from your looks:
I come to make you happy.
Thou art come
To loose thy labour then; I am below
Both all the love, and all the spite of Fortune,
She will not make me happy, and she cannot
Make me more wretched then I am. I lye,
She may doe both. But speak thou reverend head,
Has ought that 's good befallen my Neander,
That thou dare venture out that name of happy
So confidently upon me? —say.
There has,
But more to you.
What's that?
Good, happiness.
How? happiness to me? thou should have put
The space of fifteen ages twixt those words,
They are so far from reconciliation;
Thou hast no Grammar in thee, know no concord.
But I have Music in me, and that's better.
I'll make thee dance my solitary one.
Pandora shall be thine to day.
How? mine to day?
Thy wife, thy self, but in another character.
Vnspeak't again, it must not be.
It must.
Doest thou intend to buy me to thee? and
To break me and my fortunes with a curtsy,
Which I shall ne'er be able to repay?
Employ thy art then, all thy quicker plots
To further my Neander in his love:
Who by how much the more his virtues be
Greater then mine (who hardly have so much
As will redeem me from the name of vicious)
So much the more will apprehend the benefit,
So much the more reward thee.
Speak no further,
Pandora's thine, shoe's thine, thine own, believe.
Hee is already married to another.
I doe confess that I am something fallen
Oft from that height of reason which before,
While I had liberty, I did enjoy:
But thou dost wrong me much, if thou dost think
That Love has eaten up all man in me.
I tell you, I doe know your plots, your drifts,
And all your consultations, as well
As if I had had a cabin in your bosom,
And had from thence betrayed them; did not I
Hear when Neander did solicit thee
For to procure a Masculine Bride for him?
Did not I hear thee promise him to doe it?
Hast thou not now performed it? are not they
By thy procurement now contracted? speak;
It is not so easy to deceive the eyes
Of Love, how ever our frantic Poets say
He feeds on nought but Lolium.
Lucius,
As I doe hope to live, as I doe prize
My lungs, my breath, laughter, and sack, (believe me)
I have Neander fast, hee 's married
To one that is as truly woman, as
Was she that did produce thee, and because
You shall be certain of 't, it is Constantine.
But can thou utter this (without a blush?)
Or hath thy many years
Blocked up those channels of thy blood, that now
They are not able to afford that face,
(That starved face of thine, bankrupt of virtue)
The least relief? but I'll undo your plots.
Since you doe force me, I'll confess a secret,
Which hitherto I'ue hardly whispered
Unto my privat'st thoughts. I am no husband,
No husband (mark you) for Pandora, nor
For any woman living; for kind Nature
Has stamped Eunuch on me from my cradle.
What do I hear?
That which is true.
An Eunuch!
But see Neander comes with his new Bride.
Why doe you weep and sigh so boy? no more.
Doe you hear that?
But see my Lucius.
I must quite alter my discourse, my garb,
And all my actions. Hence dull melancholy,
I now must find a face that must out-smile
A morn in June. Lucius, a thousand hails.
Unhappy Constantine! to whom Fate
Neither permits to live, nor yet to die.
Break off those sighs you peevish girl, or i'll — not yet?
What means this strange and ponderous eye?
As though you were to take our Altitudes
Lucius? what? and doe you smile? faith speak.
How doest thou like my Choice? perhaps you wonder
At this so sudden match; but (Friend) you see
What Love and a fair Gentlewoman can doe.
I am the boldest wretch alive. It cannot,
Cannot be long before he needs must know her.
What will become of thee then Lively? ha?
You must be sure not to unveil him Sir,
The boy would not be known.
What muse you on
So deeply Lucius? does your first sons name
You shall beget on the most fair Pandora
Perplex you now? come on, I'll answer for you,
He shall be called Fortunate.
Not so,
Rather that name belongs to you Neander,
That shall have no such care to trouble you:
For if my art deceives me not (fair creature
Your hand) this wife of yours is never likely
For to bear children, but on her back, or arms.
Why pray thee sweet?
Because in this little vale
That lies at the foot of Venus mountain, here,
I doe discover something too much for mother.
Come, come, Neander, these are poor devices,
Tricks of the Scene, and stale, they will not take.
And you gray hairs, me thinks that thou should owe
A greater and more filial reverence
To the fair Ceremonies of the Church, then thus
To stalk with them, to make them stales unto
Such base ridiculous—
Lucius, doe but hear.
I will not hear thee.
Here's a benefit
Placed most deservingly! I doe not like it.
I do not apprehend him.
A fair gown
Indeed, and soap, and starch enough, to dazzle
The eyes of some young country heir, that has
Never been drilled through Drury lane, or Bloomsbury.
But 'pray thee (friend) whose daughter hast thou married?
What may she have to name?
What shall I answer?
I am in the briars.
Tell him it is Constantine
Our Justices Niece.
Most excellent dissembler!
As though you know not Constantine sir.
But is this Constantine?
True.
It is truer;
Somewhat then you doe believe it is.
Is this
Jack Loveall's sister?
It is.
But is this she
Whom Cleopes once loved, and has forsaken?
O me! why doe I live and hear that name?
Did you not mark that sigh? how smartly't came?
No, no, I have not fitted you, I have not.
It is a young Roscius I tell you. No sooner
Was Cleopes named, but the arch-villain sighed,
As if it had been truly Constantine.
I doe not like this business yet.
Is this
That cried up wonder? that Fidelia?
A sudden change.
Yet at the last? it is well, I'll give the word
Unto Pandora: but with special care
That the boy knows not of his Masters presence.
What business is it that this same Midwifes face
Does fetch and carry thus about I wonder?
Hy, she appears again.
All health old man.
Old? and how old? but what's the news that you
Are rigged with now? and whither bound I pray you?
Next to that loving pair of friends, whose sorrows
I have lamented oft, and amongst which
I judge it not the least, that while ye two
Discourse in sighs, and tears, that wanton maid
That is the cause of all your heaviness,
Lasciviously does sport herself, and melts
In the embraces of an other.
How?
Regardless of your woes, or her own honour.
Now all the Gods! where is he?
Woman speak,
What is hee for a man?
I know him not,
So far as to his name; but this mine eyes
Dare witness, tic a composition
Of blood and spirits not to be despised.
A feature able enough to tempt; besides—
Neander, whilst wee strive about the shadow
Wee have the substance ravished from vs.
Ha?
It cannot bee, 'tas no affinity
With truth; It must not bee belieu'd good Lucius.
Can ye retire your selves under this tree
A little, and expect? but ever I go,
Ye shall both promise as yee'r Gentlemen
To endure the sight with patience.
Wee will.
It is enough.
But does this woman gull vs?
Or is it real think thou?
Hark.
No more.
Can ye believe it yet? are your eyes yet
Instructed?
Tic my boy Endymion,
Now hell and tortures!
Were all odours lost,
And beggared Nature had not sweets enough
To embalm the dying Phoenix left, from hence
From this same lip, She might restore her self.
Ah Lucius! must he not dye?
Neander,
It is a sacrilege unpardonable
To pluck him from that Altar.
Once more sweet—
Two pendant Cherryes when some gentle gale
Makes them to kiss, meet not with such a touch!
Villain, and Traitor dye.
O me! my Master.—
What doe you mean? ah.
Alas.—Sweet Gen∣tlemen.—
Did all mankind inhabit in that breast,
I'd put the Gods unto a second trouble
For to create that species a new.
Woman forbear.
I doe not like these tumults.
I'll get me home and drink a cup of Sack.
Neander,—
Lucius,—
Ah by that Monster of my love, your friendship,
Lucius, by these eyes of mine, which thou
A thousand times and more hast dared to liken
Unto the brighter star of Venus, which
Is both the Prologue and the Epilogue
Unto the glorious Sun: By thine own eyes
Which are two clearer stars, I doe conjure thee
Forbear to prosecute such a revenge
Upon this innocent Boy: for here I swear
By all those blessed powers, which know our thoughts,
I never loved him.
Most impudent woman,
Did not our eyes behold it?
O Neander,
Why doe we stand thus coldly here? and not
How out a passage through this prostitute
To travail to the just destruction
Of her base Lover, and my baser vassal?
Rather let all your fury end in me,
See here my naked breast employ your valours:
Why doe you stand and gaze one on another?
What is the naked bosom of a Virgin
A spectacle of such terror? if it be,
And that the fight of it hath cooled your bloods,
Then hear me speak: you Lucius may remember
That ancient stock of love, those many vows,
Those many tears, those many longings, which
Have past betwixt vs: nor can you justly stile it
A fault of mine, that Time is now so old
And yet does see vs two; but partly yours
Partly my •others nearness (for I must not
Give it the name it merits, Covetousness)
Who seeing your so fervent love unto me,
Did strive to thrust me out with nothing, or
At least with such a portion, as you liked not;
Whilst thus I wavered, betwixt hope, and fear,
It fortuned, that this Gentleman Neander
Became your Rival▪ who had not long been here,
Not long solicited, but I (shame of women)
Began to love ye both, and which is more
I loved ye with an equal flame, (but see
What Pageants Cupped can play!) it chanced
(Contrary to all men's expectations)
That by degrees such a strong tie of friendship
Did grow betwixt ye, that each of ye refused
(For his friends sake) what then was proffered you,
My love; whilst I bewailed my miseries
Unto this Midwife here, my friend, and grieved
At this my harder fortune—Good Placenta
Give them the rest.
Then take it in a word.
Supposing it the only way to win
One of you to her, I counselled her to fine
A love unto some other Gentleman.
Whilst we were busy in these Consultations,
As fortune would, your Page Endymion
Came hither (Lucius) to seek his Master.
We lay the train for him, she courts the Boy,
And he (poor Lad) thinking her serious
Was caught immediately.
But is this true?
Would I could call it false—But otherwise
Then was expected hath it prospered.
Placenta, ah Placenta.
Who's that calls me?
Shall I disclose my self? I am ashamed.
If it be so, Pandora, we crave pardon.
And doe restore him life; but now
If thou dost aim to reach a life so happy
So full of all content, that thou may fit
Within thy Sphere (like Venus) and look down
On all thy Sex, and pity them; love this man.
Love this man. For as for my self I am
Already furnished with a Mistress, see
My wife here— Sweetest wife.
Is this your wife?
I judge her happy who so ever she is,
Believe him not, this is Boy, a villain
(Whom I, but that—)
Lucius forbear.
Dressed up
In women's Clothes by that same dotard Lively.
Sweetest Neander leave.
It is a woman.
By all the gods, it is a boy, it is false.
But for to rob you of all hope of me
Give me but care, I am an Eunuch, if
You can endure to have a frozen statue,
Sleep by your side, whilst you awake, recount
The tedious minutes of your widowed nights
And sigh, and think, and think, and sigh again,
Behold an husband for you, I am he.
O me! an Eunuch?
Hold the Gentlewoman
Ay me! she swonnes, sweetest Pandora, ah.
What is the matter?
Ah good Lucius help,
Shoe's gone — alas good heart. What shall I doe?
But see she breathes again.
Ah honey sweet
Pandora speak.
Ah!
Hands off thou out-side of a man; and thou
Ʋxorious creature, I doe crave no aid
From you, forbear.
How doe's my sweetest honey?
I am not well Placenta, let vs go
Into your house a while.
Please you fair Lady
To use my service?
How? Your service sir?
You can doe nothing, nor doe I expect it.
But if your love towards me be worthy, lend me
Your Page, but for an hour.
Hee is yours.
Then sir adieu.
Shall I be vanquished thus
In friendship? But I will once more to Lively.
And see what further counsel hee will give me,
Fair wife let's go—Rise up you villain boy;
Lucius farewell.
What is he gone? so soon?
To's Engineer I know, to his contriver;
But I will follow them so fast, that not
A syllable shall pass without my Knowledge.
How now you Rascal? where are your eyes I wonder?
In as a good a headpeece as yours, I warrant you that, for all your fine clothes, Sands, I think my penny as good silver as yours, every day in the week, I'll tell you but so.
A Maid of eighteen, to play with babes-clouts, well, it is no matter, Let that pass though, go to, go to, it is an ill wind that blows no body good, cry I, sure •rose of the right side to day, I shall have a servant by and by, and a lusty Knave too, and here's the chincke, the chincke; as I was getting this rod even now, for my wise daughter, comes me Terpanders son, the angry boy, the smoaker of Tobacco, the whoreson which could not endure his mo∣there, S•nds I was afraid at first to see my self alone with him, he did so stare with'is rolling eyes, and it was no force by'r Lady, for I had five good shillings in my purse; But he to put me out of doubt salutes me most lovingly, as thus, Stipes God save you, Save you Stipes — no, Stipes God save you — Stipes be hanged — a blockhead, Sd•nds J doubt I should make but a scurvy Gentleman, I want the trick ont.— But let that pass though, I have the mo∣ny here, and presently, my man will come, which Anteros will send me, whom, if I have not paid me every morning my forty brace of legs and caps —no more.
Why so, I me fairly accoutred, as becomes a Sheep∣herds servant — But swig for see my Master. Here must I quite disrobe my self of all my former manners, garb, behaviour, and put the plod of the Cou•try on.—
How now?
What jolly whistler have we got here trow?
Hi, hi, a dancer too? I, I, by'r Lady
For ought I know, this is the man I spoke of,
Or else if not, here's one could wish hee were.
A sturdy knave, a lusty proper knave.
I like him well, he he's a back for burdens.
You Sirrah, you;
What say you, you?
I say whom doe you seek here you?
I seek a Shepherd you.
I am a Shepherd.
But I seek a Shepherd, whose name is Stipes.
I am the man you knave, you come from Anteros?
Yeas.
To serve me?
Yeas.
In good time, how now saucy Jack? how now proud, prodigal knave? where are your twenty legs unto your Master? Go to, Go to, to work, begin, well said. Anteros makes legs. 1.2.3.4 5 6. So, so, enough, I doe forgive the rest. Turn you about, um, um, a good squat fellow, a well quarterd man, By'r Lady, and if hee had but moans would make a pretty husband for my daughter Merda.
Has he a daughter? and are there women here? o o o— O I am fallen from heaven into a Colepit!
Why Merda, I say, my daughter Merda I say, the foolish girle's afraid I know, go to, go to, I will forgive her. Merda I say. But you Sir Squire'oth' dog, what is your name? Hy, which way look you?
My name is Ieoffry.
I, I, how now? how Ieoffry? a hard name by'r Lady. why when?
O I could creep into a catskin purse,
Endure the sent of a Court-fardingall
For a concealment now.
Good-hony-sweet-sugercandy Father, forgive me but this time, and if ever I doe so any more, I'll never bee seen neither bide, or hair again.
Ho, ho, oho, ho a great lob, stand up.
I doe forgive you, but on this condition, that for your penance you shall wear this rod, stuck at your back till night.
With all my heart good Father stick it on.
So: how doest thou like my man Chuckin? go to, look on him well.
Does hee come a wooing Father? if hee does, I'll
run away, and make him believe I'm •oy.—
Whither now you great baggage? You'll come again? But stay am not I an old fool? an old dotardly fool, that have not enquired what my man can doe yet? Ieoffry.—
Is his name Ieoffry? Father, good father doe, pray you father let him dwell with vs, you know you promised me, that you would hire a man, and buy him a Cloak, that he might go before me as they doe before Gentlefolkes daughters, when my new gown was made, I that you did, so marry did you.
What have wee now to doe?
Peace and catch a mouse.
There's claglocks •now 'ith house to make him a cloak Sweet—honey—sugar—comfit father let him.
No more. Ieoffry, how now you sloutch? how doe you stand? Come hither, go to, go to, did you ever wear a cloak in your life? answer me roundly.
No not I, I can't tell how.
Ah beggars brat! how now? but I must have you learn, that you may man your young Mistress there sometimes. Come on let me see how finely you can doe the feat, walk be∣fore her, follow him daughter.
Here's a sweet office!
You great lobcocke you.
Isle teach you to look behind you, to see whether your charge follows, or no, what? would you bee gadding without your charge?
I, am I arrived at this?— whoffer did you strike one?
Doe you prate too? look you here, mark but me, I have seen the day, when I could have stinged it before my sweet heart.—short and thick citizen like, you mankin, what? two acres breadth at a stride? I, I by'r Lady; Isle cut you short in smock-timber, for this minion; is your smock so wide, with a murren to you? short and thick citizen like: how now?
Hy, strike up brave boys, hy, for our town.
Hy, for your town say you? you are a company of lazy,
lubberly knaves, there's the short and the long on it, ho, ho, boys, ho, ho boys? what drabs too? girls too? doxyes too? ye are a company of slowbackly Queens, there's sauce for your eels.
Come Kate, crowd on.
O, O, the whole torrent of all woman kind is broke in upon me, what shall I doe?
Cuds, cuds, these are Mr. Livelyes men and maids, that are come to dance upon the greene. Pray you Father let me dance with them.
•ou dance with them? you are a great princockly pup∣lady; there's mustard for your beef too, since you will needs have it; 's•nds I have been a wit in my days, there's some relics left yet, go to, go to.
Oh Stipes! I pray you let your daughter dance with vs a little.
Dance with you? pray you vpsolue me this question, what holy day is this? Latter Lemmas? or St. Ginnyes Even?
Come on brave Shepherd, our Master ha• go∣ven vs leave to trip it for an hour, or two, I'faith we have had a wedding at our house to day.
A wedding? a wedding? what wedding? vpsolue me that question.
Between a gentleman and a gentlewoman, but what care wee what they bee.
Come on old Grummelseedes, what must we stand thrumming of caps all day, vvaiting on your grave ignorance? by the faith of my body, either let your daughter dance with vs, or I'll make your old bones rattle in your skin, I'll lead you a Coranto I'faith.
An Amazon, by heavens an Amazon, a Penthiseleia.
I, I by'r Lady? are you avis'd of that?
Pray you forsooth, good-hony-sweete-plumpudding father, vvee'l have but one spirt I'faith law; Sellengers round in sippits, or put on thy smock on monday.
But what flap-mouth'd fellow's that behind the tree there?
Now comes my Cue.
Who he? ano∣there gates fellow then you take him for, go to, go to, it is my man I tell you.
But can bee dance?
Oh in print, he trips it like a fairy.
Hy, hy, how now? what? tricks? how now?
How now young man? what so modest? come on, take me by the hand.
Take me Ieoffry. I'll dance with our Ieoffry, or else I won't dance at all, no I won't, law you now.
I can't dance.
Hoe's a lying knave, I saw him my self; to him, to
to him, frolic it nimbly whilst I come back; because it is his first day he shall have leave, my daughter too, for half an hour, no more. Go to, go to.
But strike it out, we burn day-light.
Ah the Lord! but whore's our Ieoffrey?
Cuds me! I doubt the great clowne's run away.
Whoo! hoe's got up into the tree there.
Where? where? oh cuds wowkers &amp; swowkers, I have him by the leg: Robin, help here Robin.
What a murren ails you? can't you let one alone?
Come, come, you must needs dance, we want one.
Can't dance.
Can't you dance, my little shamefaced one?
Can you kiss a pretty wench in a corner?
Let one alone, I can't I tell you, I won't dance.
I but you shall sirrah, in spite of your teeth.
Pish, won't dance.
Come Merda, you must entreat him, he will dance with you I know.
Prithee now Ieoffrey doe, prithee now good Ieoffrey doe, wu'd I might ne'er stir law, if I don't make you a bisning posit, with a great lump of honey in it, when my father and mother bee gone to bed, if you will.
Pish I can't dance.
Come let the great fool alone, we'll dance our selves.
Prithee now Ieoffrey.
What shall I say? you'll laugh at one.
Wu'd I was whipped if I doe.
Besworn I won't.
Nor I on my mayden-head.
Come on then, since there is no remedy.
Hi, now every one kiss his marrow.
I ne'er was miserable 'till now
Ieoffrey, Ieoffrey.
Why don't you kiss your marrow?
I won't, I can't kiss.
No can't? we'll try that: Robin, hold his tother arm fast: so, so, now Merda, now, well said, again, again; why so then.
They live in Paradise that thrash.
Tihy.
Tihy, Robin, come hither.
Those happy Paracelsians are in heaven,
That trade by night in the minerals of the city.
What doe you mean to fight Merda?
Ay-me—I forgot the rod.
Fie, why doe you blush so Merda?
I don't blush, you are a liar.
Fie upon you Merda, a great maiden, and blush.
Awe, but you lye though, I did not blush, I won't dance no more with you.
O by any means doe not forsake us yet, one dance more; who was it that said she blushed? she did not blush, I know she scorns to blush; come take your Ieoffrey by the hand again.
I'm weary, I can't dance no more.
Weary? faith I'd squiffe it; weary? about with it I say.
O lazy varlets! is this a time to dance? you idle persons; What will you leave I say? look here I pray; doe's this same spectacle agree with turning on the toe, or capering? go to, go to, fie, fie, ah my sweet lambs, I dare bee sworn for you, ye think no body hurt at this instant. Come hither you my nim∣ble skipper, upsolue me this question, what's your pinion must be done with these?
Pish lets away, strike up, Stipes adieu.
Farewell Merda.
And you my ninny pease-straw-wispe that cannot kiss.
Stipes farewell, hey.
Stipes farewell? but Stipes cannot farewell, if his affairs go thus quite arsy varsy; you whoreson crab-fac'd lizard, you left-leg'd rogue, what is there nothing else belongs unto this gear, think you, but only to stare on them with your two saucers of mustard? s'duds, either take them up quickly, and to work about them, or Isle —
This is the second time; this once I'll suffer:
But by yon palace of the Gods I swear,
Let him but once more touch me with the top
Of his least finger, and I'll ram his trunk
Into the center: I have said it.
Are you muttering? you'll in with them, and dispatch them; go you home too, my daughter Merda.
Um, um, um, you might have let one dance a little longer, so you might, so you might; I am not yet hot in my geares.
Are you mumbling too? what my whole family turned rebels? s'duds—I promise you, I promise you, it is not my best course I see to beat my man thus often; a surly knave by'r Lady, a surly knave, a strong knave too, I doe not like his looks, he has a vinegar countenance: but peace and catch a mouse, cry I.
But see, I will enquire; honest man, a word.
Honest man in your face, whosoe're owes you; studs, have I nothing to doe, but to prittle, prattle, with every one I meet, think you?
What an unheard of rudeness have we here?
Are these the manners of the country? well.
This is the place, as I am told, wherein
That Lucius lives, who not long since prevailed
With his fair flattering speeches, for to have
My son Endymion to be his Page.
But oh ye awful powers!
I had no father in me should I suffer
Mine only son to lead a servile life
With one that is mine enemy, nay more,
The ruin and subversion of my family.
O daughter Isabella!
Whilst thy false Lover melts within the arms
Of his new purchased Mistress, thou (poor girl)
Embracest scorn and poverty, or else
(Which I doe rather wish were true) cold death.
But I doe hear,
Since my arrival, of some Country people,
That they have seen, some fortnight since or more,
A pretty boy, lingering about this village
Much about her stature, and complexion,
Which did enquire for a Gentleman
That was without a Page; this may be she,
Who for the love of Lucius, has put on
Some strange disguise. Whom cannot love transform?
Ha, ha, he.
Whilst the poor fly does sport her self too long
About the amorous flame, she burns her wings.
Her counterfeiting of a Love, is now
Turned into earnest. Endymion's now the man
She swears she loves; as for the other two
She has forgot their very names already.
Does not this woman name my son?
Let me see, is not this Endymion? it is hee,
And with him a fair gentlewoman. Ha?
But tell me dearest, did thy Master Lucius.
Once love thy sister Isabella so,
Whom now he has forsaken?
Yes.
Behold
That treachery repayd him.
See, they kiss.
But what old Gentleman is this?
I'll show my self.
All health to this fair loving couple.
O,—
Why dost thou fly me?
It is my father,— father
God save you.
Dearest son, my best of blessings.
How have you done sir, since I saw you last?
As well as one can doe that has departed
Wed's only daughter.
Why, is my sister dead?
I know not that. But I am sure her credit,
The candor of her name is perished.
Good sir, as how? Instruct me.
Ah Endymion,
Since that most treacherous Lucius left the City
I have not seen her, only I hear of her,
But little to my comfort.—But no more,
I have forgot her, and her folly both.
Prepare thy self (my son) immediately,
To leave this place and service; for thy fortunes
(How ever they were before, slender and poor)
Must not now see thee hold a trencher for
A better man then Lucius. Thy old uncle
As he lived well, in a seasonable age
Is gone into the grave, and by his will
Hath given to thee eight thousand pound, and three
Unto thy sister, (though unworthy) what
Else he was worth in lands and goods, is mine.
Pandora, kiss me girl, kiss me I say,
I have deserved it, it was my invention,
My plot this (girl) you are happy wench, you are happy.
Is this your father sweet?
It is fair Mistress.
Sir, I congratulate our fortunes with you;
But if you doe desire to have my joys
Full and o'reflow their banks, grant me your leave
To marry this fair Gentlewoman.
Alas,
This is not in my power Endymion:
But if thou can procure her friends consent—
Sir fear not that, I will entreat my father.
As for a portion, it is not thought upon
My son, if you be pleased.
Sir, I am pleased,
She is to me most dear.
Placenta, run,
See if my father be within,—I know
(Most worthy sir) that I shall win him to it.
But can thou tell no news of Isabella,
Sweet son?
No, none at all sir.
Ah poor heart!
But it is no matter, I'll forget her quite.
Where is thy Mr Lucius?
I know not.
Your father's walked abroad with Mis. Vrsely
Your sister, but whither, there's none can tell me.
As yet the plot concerning Constantine
Is not descried.
Most reverend sir, wilt please you
To walk into the pastures, peradventure
There we shall meet my father.
But I had rather
That I could compass that same villain Lucius,
That he might hear what he deserves.
Villain.
I am undone.
Ah me! Neander with his naked sword!
Ple run in here.
Ah!
Let's away good father,
O that thou had
As many lives as hairs, that I might be
An age in killing thee, that I might score up
Each passing minute with a life: — But speak,
How durst thou thus abuse me?
I did not know
She was a woman.
No, did thou not know it?
But thou shalt know thy self to be a man,
One that can dye.
—O—O—
How poor is this revenge? hast thou any children,
Or kinsfolks (speak) that I may kill them too?
Ha? wilt thou not answer? how durst thou offer this?
Because I loved your friend Lucius
Better then you.
Better then I? that word
Does merit death though thou had been preserved
White from thy cradle to this hour.—
Doest thou love Lucius? ha?
Yes.
Live; no, no thou must not;
Thou might have killed my father, broke the urn
Wherein my mothers ashes sleep, far cheaper.
But for his sake, thus much I'll grant thee, choose
The manner of thy death—shall I take off thy head?
Or had thou rather dye upon the point?
Think quickly, nay be instant.
Worthy Sir:
Let me entreat some little space to pause
I have not yet determined.
Well thou hast it. But see that it bee speedy.
Most perfidious. Contemner of all goodness.—
Excellent.
Nay forward, on, wee know you have a tongue.
Ha? is this Lucius?
Where is my Isabella,
Whom thou hast laden with disgrace? restore me
Her honour (villain) her good name.
I must
Defer my just revenge I see a little.
He must not know that I am angry, not
How I am gulled.
Thou base unworthy man.
Would you could raise your voice a little sir,
You are not heard.
Thou stain of all mankind.
Thou owe thy life unto my Lucius.
I am not now at leisure for to kill thee.
Nor I for to be kilt for a trick I know.
Are you drawn dry so quickly, Mr Lickthumbe?
Have you no more good names in pickle for me?
Nay come in faith, let's have an other bout.
But is he gone? he must not so escape me.
Where is my daughter? where is my daughter, rascal?
Ah Isabella.
So: but Sir resolve me,
Have ye no Empericks? no Physicians
In the City, that you thus doe send your mad men
Into the country to be cured? but Sir
I'll leave you.
But I will not so leave you.
You will not?
No, I'll be a torment to thee.
You will? but yet take heed that your ill language
Procures not me to turn Physician.
This sword of mine opens a vein but harshly,
Doe you hear.
Have you a desire to see
The glorious heavens Epitome?
Or an abstract of the Spring?
Atones garden? or a thing
Fuller of wonder, Natures shop displayed,
Hung with the choicest pieces she has made?
Here behold it open laid.
Or else would you bless your eyes
With a type of paradise?
Or behold how Poets fine
Jove to sit amidst his train?
Or see (what made Action rue)
Diana amongst her Virgin crew?
Lift up your eyes and view.
Why so then, now we are all alone. We? you great near,
What have you pig's in your belly? by'r Lady, If I wist
I had, I would not unkennel this secret yet, well if there
Were hog's in my belly too, I see that it will out;
This mouth of mine was not cut out for secret's—
O wicked servant! lewd daughter!
O Merda, Merda, thou hast lost thy self
For ever, thou hast defiled my house, my good name, my fami∣lie. As I even now came from my sheep, I found my daugh∣la, at her nooning forsooth, fast a sleep upon her bed, and there was she (as she uses often) campring to her self alone in her sleep, 'scoursing to her self, but what was her 'scourse think you? Not about her housewifery; not how many hens were with egg, but fie upon you Ieoffry are you not ashamed? O! Ah! fie upon you Ieoffry are you not ashamed to touch one by the skin? Isle tell my father (ne'er move) if you will not bee quiet. I, I by'r Lady, worse then this, worse stuff then this, what shall I say? without all doubt this left legd-rascall has dubbed me Gran-father without Matrimony. But peace and catch a mouse cry I, some wiser then some, old birds will not be caught wi•h shaffe. I have a trick in store if it will take, to be revenged sufficiently—no more. Ieoffry, Why Ieoffry.
What gaping knave is that?
How now Ieoffry? know you not me Ieoffry? know you not me? But let that pass though—I'll bee with you anon i'faith for all this gear. Come hither Left-legs, come hi∣there. Peace and catch a mouse cry I. Did you ever when you were at your old Masters, learn to set a trap, Ieoffry?
Yes a mouse trap.
O sirrah, sirrah; but wee must have to doe with other gates kind of cattle, I mean a fox trap Left-legs, come hither, come hither, look you here, and learn, for this same night must
I send you into the Pastures to inuit my fine Reynold to more∣row to breake-fast, go too, go too, hee is something too fa∣miliar with my Lambs, mark you that left-legs? A little nigh∣er I pray you. Help me to twist this Corde — Well said, be a faithful servant Ieoffry. You know I have a daughter Ieofry. Peace and catch a Mouse Ieoffry. You great dunder nose — Souds— You'•e lay both hands to work—A bots on you; you hang on my back to see you. Your tother hand in, and draw behind thus, thus look you here.
Ha, ha, he, foh. How rank he smells? but it is no matter, I begin to grow old, and it is good (they say) Against the Palsy. Ha, ha, he, he, ho. You villain, Hee loves
Mutton well, that dips his bread in'th wool.
No less then your Masters daughter Left-legs?
Come on in troth, vpsolue me this question is she not tender?
is she not delicate? a pretty morsel? does she not relish well? a pretty morsel? but I'll teach you sirrah to play the Mason, and lay your chips of the rock where you're desired Left-legs, where you're desired. But I am something feeble through my age,
And cannot longer hold out 'scourse with you,
Without my staff, without my supporter, sir,
I pray you doe not stir till my return,
But let me find yeu here, I have some business,
Go to, go to, I have some business with you.
Nay it is no matter I deserve it all,
Troth I doe hope that he will bast me soundly.
Beshrow his fingers if he does not, soundly.
I must be in my tricks, forsooth, my tricks:
Have my devices, and my turns, my changes.
But torment of all torments! here comes Loyal.
Why this is worse then five and twenty beatings;
O that some greedy vndertaker of lives
Would give me but a double Stiuer now
For mine, that I might cozen him. As sure
As Death, or Justice Hooks devouring paws,
I shall be ieer'd to death, immediately.
It is a strange dark melancholy this
That thus torments my Sister, I have been
An hour with her, and in all that time
Cannot persuade her troubled soul to form
The least ayre she breathes, into articulate language.
But stay what have wee here?
Now it begin's.
A man tied to a tree?
I would your tongue
Was tied as fast; then there was hope I might
Escape with life.
What are you fellow, speak?
You may go look, go meddle with your own.
So angry 'pray thee? how came thy hands in mortgage?
Shall I redeem them?
Redeem your own land's I pray you,
Let me alone or else I'll spurn yo u— yet
Hee knows me not.
Sure I have seen that face.
O, O, O —
Is 't hee or not, ha? Anteros.
No more.
Death not a word.
But heaven and earth man! how
Comes this to pass? What has begot this change?
Wilt thou untie me? I will tell thee all.
But pray thee Anteros.—
But pray thee Jack
Thou wilt undo me quite by thy delays,
Wilt thou undo me?
It is not a friendly part.
Pox of that jest, as common as a woman,
Or her Synonomy; wilt thou untie me?
It is done.
Thou art my Patron Loyal, So.
But stay a while, I must desire your aid
A little further.
What has hee now in hand?
Can you become a peaceable man?
How now?
A Snake, a Snake; hoe's young again, ha, ha, he.
What? Pinks and Roses too? Why so, hee plucks
June out of 's pocket.
Can you be quiet yet?
And Garters too?
That slipper▪ tongue of yours
I doubt will spoil all.
What? and a band? so, so;
The veil of Tempo's not so fresh, the picture,
The very picture of the Spring, when the earth
Lays by her freeze-coate, and turns Forester.
Thus far it prospers, once more your help sweet Jack,
Nay come, and take me that same rope again,
And bind me as I was before, directly
In the same garb you found me — Doe not stand
Gazing, but do 't.
Thou art not mad I hope?
If I be mad, I will not trouble you
For counsel, nor for Physic; nay wilt thou come?
But hold a little, I must first borrow of you
Your Hat, and Sword.
Which way this plot will look
I know not— there— come let me see your hand's
Since you will needs.
Why now you're right, you're right,
What will you have me doe besides? come on,
Your legs too if you will.
No more, St. hark.
The Shepherds door. Trouble vs not good Loyal.
Only stand close and hear.
What should this mean?
Fie Ieoffry, are yeu not ashamed, to touch one by the skin? My daughter denies all this most stiffly but I will Ferret-claw my Lobcock i'faith. So, now I am armed. Go to, go to, come you knave, where are you?
Ha, ha, he.
Ha? ha? ha? How now by'r Lady? How now? I, I by'r Lady? what's this? What's this? gaudy? gaudy? Fine clothes? fine clothes? Ha? has no body stole my eyes? let me be sure of that in the first place. Am I Stipes or not? ha? ha? ha? Is this our Ieoffry or not?
Stipes, Stipes I say.
This is another voice an other face
Without all question this is Fayrie Ground;
My man is changed.
ha, ha, he.
St. Step. hi, hi, hi. A swore too? a swore too? a whiniard too?
Stipes.
Well I will venture to speak what ere come on 't, but stay, I'll first say o'er the charm my Mother learnt me.
Be thou devil gentle, or be thou devil cursed,
In the name of Saint Sweden doe thy worst.
There's sauce for your Isles what ever you are. Now see if I cannot shape you an answer.
Come nearer to me.
Are you advised of that? older and wiser, Soft fire makes sweet Malt, No hast to hang true men; come nearer quoth you? I am near enough already for the good you'll doe me I doubt, Come nearer say you? No good M. Devil I am very well I thank you, go to, come nearer when you have a Swore, a Twybill?
My hands are bound man.
What will become of this?
St'. Step. If your feet were bound too, I'll not trust you As long as you have a Swore by your side, a Whiniard.
Do but hear me. Had not you a man to day called Ieoffry?
Yes marry had I; what say you to that now? Nay I'll keep my self out of your clouches I warrant you.
But what's become of that same Ieoffry?
Become? become? 'spose I spurt you an answer, and said I know not, what can you make of that now? make me a horsenaile of that.
Doe you desire to know?
Yes marry doe I. Crack me that nut now if you be a Gentleman Devil.—
I am that Ieoffry, but no servant now
Of yours, but mine own man: and am become
Since your departure, noble, rich, valiant,
Am formed a new out of the Mint, —behold me.
And this great miracle Obron the Fairy King
Has wrought upon me.
Oberum? Oberum? you tell me strange things.
But shall I tel thee stranger things thē these?
'Spose you did.
And such as shall be for thy benefit?—
Would you would else. Nay stare on with your gogles till Barley comes to six pence a bushel. You know your wages, some wiser then some, cry I: I'll keep far enough off you: I'll tell you but so. Go to, go to, I am a crafty colt.
You know I was your servant to day.
Well put the case.
Poor, ill apparelled.
Put the case the second time.
But now you see how strangely altered.
Well put the case again.
What will you say now to the man that shall
Pet you into the same condition?
Recover you from rag's and Russet, and
Dye you in scarlet: lick that rude lump your body
Into the shape, and garb of the court? or (once)
Make you a gentleman as I am now?
Would you not thank him Stipes? ha? would you not thank him?
Thank him Mr. Ieoffry? I, with all my heart.
Set him at liberty then that will perform it. Quickly unloose me?
I, I by'r Lady? will you so Mr. Ieoffry? will you so? go to, go to, a gentleman? said you me so? I con you thank Mr. Ieoffry.
So, now will I unfold the mystery.
But first you here shall promise me that you
Will take no prentices to learn your trade,
When I have taught you the art; you will impoverish
The herald's office, and forestall his market.
No truly Mr. Ieoffry.
I am satisfied;
See thou that tree? it was made for thy advancement.
Give me thy hands that I may tie them quickly.
Are you avis'd of that?
What doe you mean?
You'll bee prevented by another—death!
Yonder comes one will be before you—quickly
There's such a virtue (man) in this same tree,
That who-soere is bound unto it, shall
Bee turned immediately to a gentleman.
Nay come.
but is this true?
believe your eyes.
Heart of my father, man! you'll bee prevented.
A gentleman? said you me so? go to, go to,
Good Master Ieoffry quickly—so but stay. When I'm a gentleman may I not use, my old trade of sheep∣herd still? I would not leave it.
O, and enclose; it is all in fashion.
I, I, by'r Lady? thats well, but stay again.
Nay you are like to stay now, I have you fast enough
Studs, if thou be a good conjurer make me a knight to. I have a pestilent itch after a knighthood.
You must take gentleman first 'ith way.
Let me skip gentleman good Mr. Ieoffry, duds
I know knights in this country that never were
Gentlemen—but vpsolue me this question? can you make
My daughter Merda a gentleman too?
A gentlewoman
Stipes I can.
I, I, so I meant it— Merda, Merda,
A bots on you, Merda, are you dreaming again?
O for some nimble pated fellow now
To make an Ob'ron of.
Isle furnish thee.
There is a notable witty bedlam begging
At our back gate just now. I'll fetch him to thee.
If thou dost love me, doe.—
Why Merda, you'll come when your noun father calls?
What doe you say Father forsooth?
That 's a good girl. Nay she 's towardly enough, shee'• quickly learn. Why doe you stare so on Mr. Ieoffry?
What man is this Father?
Come you're a fool, let that man alone. Wee shall bee gentlefolkes ourselves my chucken, give him your hands to tie I say, be obedient.
Thou presently shalt see thine own sweet father,
As fine as hee, and thou my little Sweet-lipp's
Shalt be a gentlewoman too, go to, good Ieoffry tie her hands.
How Ieoffry?
Good Mr. Ieoffry.
That's another thing.
Father forsooth shall I have as fine cloth's on as Mistress V•sly forsooth?
O! she's half turned already: forsooth and a curtsy at eve∣rye word; Mrs. Vrsely? thou shalt put Mrs. Ʋrsly into a pint pot.
O the Lord! pray you forsooth Sir who so ever you are doe me quickly forsooth.
But here 's not rope enough.
Take off your garter quickly you Maukin you.
Here forsooth. And father, must I take place of my mother when I'm a Gentlewoman?
Good.
Marry shalt thou goldy locks, and be a La∣die, and contemn her.
Call her the good old country woman too.
Stipes, but one word more and then I'll leave you
Unto your new creation—have you nothing
Within your house to cover you? the crows
Perhaps may bee too impudent and saucy
With you, and now you can not help your self you know.
I, I by'r Lady? it was well thought upon,
Good Mr. Ieoffry step into my house,
You there shall find my cloak, use that.
It is of a swooping cut, but new be sure
You doe not speak a word what noise so ere
You chance to hear, perhaps the fairy King
Will take some pause, study a while, consult
With his Queen Mob about you how to polish
And frame you of a purer shape then ordinary.
Doe you mark that? St, not a word good Stipes.
Ah sweet Mr. Ieoffry.
Peace and catch a mouse cry I.
Come on brave Tom, come on brave Tom, Remem∣ber your instructions Tom.
Let brave Tom alone. Let brave Tome alone.
A most authentic rogue, how he does stretch it? paratragoediate?
Newly from a poach'd Trade, and
A broil a Viper, King of Fairy land
I Ob'ron doe arise, to see
What mortal Fortune here hath tied unto my sacred Tree.
O Mr. Ieoffry, is that Ob'rum? Pray you let me see him.
Is this Obrum? studs, hee is but poorly parrelled himself me thinks.
St. Step. Peace and catch a mouse cry I, but once more good Mr. Ieoffry. Let me have but
one sight more of him. Mr. Ieoffry does hee use to give away his clothes when hee makes gentlefolkes? studs I doubt he has none left for me.
What doe you mean?
Peace and catch a mouse cry I.
Good father let me see Obrum too •ah, hee has a horn like a Tom of Bedlam.
Peace, I wu'd not for the best cow in my yard that he should hear thee.
Be thou ruder then was ever
The half excrement of a Bear,
Or rougher then the Northern wind
Came thou of a Satyrs kind.
Be whatsoever thou can be
So thou shalt remain for me.
Did you hear that Stipes?
I, good Master
Ieoffry, stand farther you great baggage and make room for your rathers' proaching greatness.
But see my father,
'Pray thee convey away the Bedlam any whether, carry him into your house again and shoot him out at the back door.
Anteros, I'll leave you to your business. I'll in and fetch an other hat. Come bra•e Tom. 'Bed, Let brave Tom alone.
The Justice too, it is so. Now am I hunted for about a wedding.
Terpander, you have heard how much this match
May both concern you and your Son, your fortunes:
The greater part of your inheritance
You know is mortgaged to me, nay
If I would use that rigour of the law
It is forfeited and past recovery;
Think therefore quickly, if you would be free
From all those cares and troubles which afflict
Such as do live in debt, compel your Son
To marry this my daughter.
I am a witch,
A witch, a witch a rank, stark stinking witch.
It is an ample dowry I confess,
And little it is agreeing to my nature
To buy a husband at so dear a rate,
But I have something that sounds father in me;
And must not loose a daughter, if there bee
A remedy in nature. True it is,
That (by what angry Deity I know not)
She has so fixed her love upon your Son,
That I doe think nought but a quick fruition
Can rescue her from a death.
Good Justice Hook,
I doe confess your offer's fair, and would
Accept it willingly, but that—
But what?
I fear my Son will not agree unto 't.
Sir had you taken an oath upon the same
I would have borne your sin, had you been perjured.
You know he hates all women.
very good.
Is he not yours, and under your command?
Wee fathers make our children refractory,
By being too indulgent over them;
Besides, I am persuaded that his virtues
Will not permit him for to contradict
The authority of a father.
O ye Gods!
Can ye permit this Villain to profane
The sacred name of Virtue thus, who himself
Is nothing else but a mere heap of vices?
I ever yet found him obedient,
Nor doe I doubt to win him now: how ever,
I am resolved if he in this shall cross me,
I'll disinherit him immediately.
I? is it come to that already? well
Prepare thy self now Anteros for the encounter.
But see your son. Tic your best course at first
To accost him gently.
How now my son? how fare you?
I am not well sir.
How not well? your colour
Does not proclaim you very sick, but say.
Ther's something in my eyes that troubles me.
What's that?
A mote, a woman.
After the old fashiō still?
Come on my son, I have bin seeking of you,
And peradventure you may guess the cause.
I would I could not.
Hold up your head my daughter
And summon your best looks into your face.
As I did walk even now into my pasture,
I did begin to think.
That I was old,
That must be next.
That now I'm struck in years.
Good, struck in years;
And could he not as frugally have dispatcht it
In that one word of old?
And —
That it will be a comfortable sight
To see you married before I dye.
That it will be a comfortable sight
To see you married before my death.
I told you so, it is the common road
Which they all use when they would pin a wife
Upon the son. I wonder all this while
The staff of's age, prop of his family
Did not come in.
Whilst I was thinking thus,
Old justice Hook, a Gentleman of rank,
And of a family not to be despised,
Came to me with his daughter, and desired
Our friendship and affinity; and to be brief,
We have concluded twixt ye two a marriage,
Which must be present; as for the portion,
He has promised in the wedding fire to sacrifice
The Bonds wherein our Lands stand forfeited.
A thing beyond my hopes, or your deserts.
A pox upon that thumb under the girdle,
There 's mischief ever toward's: I never knew
One of that garb that proved an honest man.
It is the grave cheating posture of the city.
What's that you mutter to your self? come speak.
I am contented sir.
Well said my son.
But upon this condition, that it shall
Be lawful too for me to sacrifice
Unto the aforesaid fire a certain trifle
Of mine.
Whats that?
My wife, &amp; your fair daughter.
Out on you traitor.
Sir, by yea and nay
It cannot be afforded cheaper.
Wretch
And profane person.
Sai'st thou so thou villain?
Hast thou no more regard into thy father,
Nor to his shipwrecked fortune, that thou thus▪
Doest study his undoing plot his 〈◊〉?
But father, if I marry her to day,
When must the wooing be? to morrow sir?
Thou shalt not need to woo her Anteros,
She is thine own already.
Is she so?
Would you was hanged sir for the nowes.
Pish, dome,
I will not spend an article of ayre
Upon him more — good Mr Hook lets go,
The following hour shall see him no son of mine.
O, mildly sir.
It is determined
By all the stars, they have consulted, plotted
To make me miserable.
Come Terpander,
You are too harsh with him, I know your son
Does more esteem of Virtue and Religion —
Good Master Sucriledge, a word in private:
(A little farther, yet a little farther)
How came you by that strange exotic word
You used but now? had you're on interest?
Or was it lent you gre• of a friend?
What word good Anteros?
Religion,
For I am sure yet thou never had,
Nor ever wilt have any of thine own.
O profane person!
This once I speak it.
Wilt have his daughter?
What shall I answer him?
I shall be dis-inherited that's certain.
He melts, Mr Hook, hee melts, I feel him coming.
Hee is our own.
But why so suddenly?
Good sir, at least give me some time to think.
Never hope it.
But why sir to day?
Because it pleases him it most concerns.
Doe but defer it till to morrow sir,
(Could I obtain but this request, I was happy,
I'd keep to morrow in another world)
Until to morrow? not for an hour: I know
Your disposition son too well for that.
I have you now, but where you'll be next day,
Hee 's wiser then your father that does know.
But father, I beseech you hear.
But son
I will not hear, I tell you. Master Hook,
You here doe give your daughter?
Willingly.
Anteros, receive thy loving wife.
How now?
You will not urge me?—go too, doe not doe it.
O that mine arms are now at liberty!
O Stipes, happiest man alive, thou hast
No hands to make a contract, —is there never
A Mouse-hole hereabouts to creep into?
But stay a while, my paper portion.
The writings.
Take them.
You're an honest man.
Tic right.
Now take your wife.
I wish you a Barber sir.
Is that fair Edifice yours?
It is my son.
Gooder and gooder still; my son? then take
My counsel sir, go to your house and purge,
You will be mad else presently; prevent
The current of the humour, for I see
(With that poor little reading which I have
In the volume of man) by your distempered looks,
That some strange deep, and conquering Melancholy
Ever long will seize you: why doe you follow me
Thus with your braided ware? nay never frown,
Good Mr Justice, let's have no Warrants made,
Nor Mittimusses with your distorted looks;
Wee have a forehead too, and can look grim,
And make as ugly and prodigious faces,
As the most ignorant Justice of you all.
But shall I tell you (sweet Mr Velvet-hose)
What I will doe, because you were so kind,
For to deliver in the Bonds for nothing?
Nay sir, I must transplant these thumbs, before
I can resolve you: so.—Thou 'rt a damned rascal,
And I will cut that throat of thine (doe you mark?)
And when I'ue done, will fillip that morsel, woman,
On an embassage to my Hawks, no more;
By heavens I'll do 't.
Oh Traitor, Miscreant,
Daughter take heed; Terpander, O Terpander,
He threatens me to cut my throat.
How's that?
Sir, you must pardon him, the man is mad.
He swears he will make hawkesmeat of my daughter.
On my virginity sir, he does me wrong;
I did not charge a syllable upon him,
But fell as coolely from me as a dew.
Upon a drooping field; each word I vented
Was steeped in an hony-combe. I did but bid him
In a plain, civil dialect to provide
An other husband for his daughter: for
I doubted that I should not be at leisure
This brace or two of years to marry her.
And I may tell you sir, indeed I cannot.
O, O, am undone, cheated and gulled, undone,
Villain I'll bind thee to thy good behaviour.
I would you could sir, I would thank you for it:
But fie M. Hook, a head of that silver dye,
A beard of such an honourable length,
For to bee gulled? and so egregiously?
By a young man with ne'er a hair o'ns face?
Come son, I doe not like these courses, nor
Doe they become a Gentleman, I'll not have
That contumely dwell on our family,
That we should use such indirect proceedings
For to reedify our tottering fortunes.
By all the Magic in the name of Father
I doe conjure thee; by this aged head,
And these gray hairs, by thy dead Mothers Urn,
By all her cares and fears, by what is dearest
Unto thy soul, I charge thee, take his daughter.
Without all question I am the first, the first
That ever piety has made miserable.
Well Master Hook, you see what may be done,
What angry spirits a man may lay, while he
Does stand secure within the circle of father.
Your daughter I will have; only know this,
There is another thing which belongs to her,
Which I must have too, that's the Parsonage;
It was ever yet allotted for her portion,
And I expect my right.
How? woe is me,
I am undone.
Before I stretch forth a paw
Towards her, i'll have it.
Father, good father let him,
He will go back from his word else.
Well, he shall have it.
Hold: by the virtue of this writing, it
Is lawful for you (after old Liuelyes death)
For to present the first Fie, fie, fie, fie.
I had this drawn (alas) for another end.
My law does tell me it will doe. Come on,
Since there's no remedy, let's even to it.
Yes hangman, I forgive thee heartily,
It is but thy office.
Come Terpander, we
Will keep the wedding, at my house, but hear you?
The cost and charges shall be yours.
Agreed,
Most willingly. Follow me son and daughter.
Come husband Anteros, will you play at chackstones
With me?
Follow, follow, follow, follow,
I will bee there immediately: nay go.
So, I have made a fine days work of this:—
Well, there's no remedy, it must be so.
But I must take my leave in form: Farewell
Ye chimney gods, protectors of our family;
Stipes.
A bott's upon you, that same tongue
Of yours must needs be wagging.
Indeed Father
I did not speak a word, no that I did not.
Wee must begin again now for your tattling,
Did not the Gentleman command vs silence?
Stipes adieu, I am exceeding sorry
I cannot stay to see you a Gentleman.
Spruce M. Noddle, even adieu to you.
Good M. Mongrel, kind Sir Hammershin.
Sweet M. William, I am Melancholy
To part with you as I am a living saule.
Why whether in such hast?
To banishment.
My name is written in the oyster shell;
I am too happy in a wife Jack Loyal,
My fellow Citizens doe envy me.
Farewell.
In troth I thank you heartily,
I hope you'll first deliver back again
My Sword and Hat.
By my best wishes Jack
I thought not of them; 'pray thee take them to thee.
I will take thee my little Cupid-whipper.
You must not go.
Let me alone good Loyal,
Doest thou not hear how with an even gale
That Southwest wind murmers amongst the trees?
Within these four and twenty hours I may
Touch on the Belgic shore.
The Belgic shore?
What wilt thou doe there man?
I'll trail a pike,
Turn Lanceprezado, or Bedee, or any thing
To patch up a wretched life.
You'll turn a coxcomb.
I never shall endure to live a husband
The very name of wife will turn my stomach.
I shall have threescore vomits in a day.
What wilt thou say now Anteros if I set thee
As free from this same marriage, as the child
Which ten months since was but an Embryo?
Thou can not.
I can doe it, fear it not.
Thou can nor man, it is past recovery.
What wilt thou give me if I doe effect it?
Give thee? I'll sacrifice my self unto thee
My Iupiter, build up a Temple for thee
Shall take the heavens from Atlas shoulders, and
Give him a Jubilee for ever—Speak.
Hee shall be at leisure all the rest of's life,
For to catch Butterflies— But you doe mock me,
Farewell.
But stay.
Doe but effect it Jack.
And I will straight make war upon the Turk,
Give thee his Diadem and Sceptre — Speak.
The Persian shall be the Master of thy Horse,
The Germane I will make thy cup-bearer.
Ha, ha, he. And so I shall have all my drink drunk up,
Thank you for that.
Nay wilt thou speak, or else
Let me be gone. — The Dukes of Italy
Shall be thy footboyes.
Here's a brave promiser!
Why this out does the Court; but dost thou hear?
How wilt thou doe all this?
Nay 'troth I know not,
But I will doe it, and let that suffice.
Well then be silent. — Placenta the Shepherds wife
Soon as she heard a marriage was in motion
Betwixt my Kinswoman and your self, came running
To me in hast, and cried what doe they mean?
It is not fit, nor can it be (unless
That they will violate the laws of Nature)
That Anteros should have this Gentlewoman;
I ask the cause, the Midwife answers
Because she is his Sister.
How? my Sister?
And is it possible that this is true?
True.
Stay.
Nay will you hear with patience?
Or else—
as silent as a midnight minute,
Or else a Counsellour without a fee,
I'll stand and hear, and suck it in, and —
Yet?
I'ue done.
Then hear; it seam's that Dorothaea
My Uncles wife, some seventeen years ago
Supposing she had been with child, provided
Such necessaries for her, as a woman
That is in her estate might stand in need of;
It was famed about the Country: but at last
She found her self deluded by a timpani,
But fearing lest she should prove the table talk of the country,
Takes counsel with Placenta for to feign
A birth, and to that end employs her
(Being a Midwife) to procure for money,
The Child of some poor woman new delivered.
At the same time it fortuned Anteros
That your mother cried for Innos help,
Which she obtained, and was delivered
Of this your Sister, whom when she perceived
To be deformed, and distort; at length
She was or'ecome by the Midwife for to part
With her new purchased Infant, t'was agreed,
And the birth straight given out to be abortive,
And which is more, believed, and for to colour
The matter o'er the better, they did bury
An empty coffin. In the mean time your sister
Was secretly conveyed unto my Aunt,
Who presently did feign to be in travail,
And was delivered in conceit of Her,
Who but a while ago was called your wife.
T'was not long after, but the brace of mothers
Did travail both together to the dead,
And left my uncle a supposed daughter.
You have the history.
And with it heaven,
And immortality: O Loveall, Loveall;
By all the Deities I could embrace thee
For this thy happy news, were it thou a woman.
But whats become of all your promises?
O tic a taste, a spice of greatness, Jack,
To promise.
And to perform just nothing.
You doe not hear me say so. VVhat's the matter?
But see the wooers are discarded quite
My uncle beats them out of doors.
You villains—
Out of my house ye brood of caterpillars.—
Son of a hedge and Moone-shine; go—fie, fie, fie.
O misery beyond— come out you rascal,
And bring your piping nose along with you; —
A fire upon this hollow ruff of yours,
It is like your heart—out rogues, and ruffians—
O I am undone.—
Ha, ha, he. Loveall, these men are mine;
I am the Patron of the living now,
Dost thou see this?
I heard as much within.
I will behave myself most scurvily,
Like to some surly crabbed Patron now,
That has some 6, or 7 tired horses tied
At • door. How now?
Patron.
What says my Client?
Loveall, I pray thee catechise this box,
Ther's good stuff in 't I warrant thee.
Good Patron.
Hear me Sir, I'll dispatch it in three words,
This is a tedious Ass, and reads nought
But English Treatises.
Sir, will it please you
To take particular notice?—
Sir.
But Patron—
Patron.
Who! now the sent grows hot, it is rank,
The game's in view. Hap,—rate them there—no more
You Sir, that are the ring-leader of this rout.—
Kings be profane.
'Sdeath! what a pack of rogues
Are got together here? what is your name?
Zealous Knowlittle:
Zealous Knowlittle? good;
Of which University?
Of both the Universities.
A very likely thing: good Mr Knowlittle
Separate your self a little from the people.
With all my heart, I'll separate.
Your name?
My name is Tempest Allmouth sir.
How? Tempest Almouth? where are thy brains man?
He has not any.
Bear him company.
What have we here? Item, to send forth tickets
To all the Brethren that doe inhabit
Within this Shire, to give them intimation,
That M. Mother-tongue stands the first of June.
You that are next him?
Arthur Armestrong sir.
You there Colossi?
My name is Stutchell Leg.
Troth, and thou art well underlay'd indeed,
A couple of foot-ball players I warrant them.
Item: — a pox upon it, here's bawdery,
Isle rake no deeper in this puddle. — so.
And what must we call you?
Ganimede Filpot▪
Thou should be a good fellow by thy name.
Come on; what glorious title I beseech you
Has bounteous Nature fixed on you: nay open.
My name is Hugo obligation.
How? Hugo obligation? 'pray thee Loveall
Is not this shorn beard villain the precise Scriveneur,
Would fine turn Priest?
The very same I take it.
Meddle not with me
Nay doe not hold me.
A whoreson Inkebottle, and two skins of parchment,
Dares he hope for my sister, and a living?
You slave, are Parsonages in this age so cheap?
'Pray thee Anteros.
Doe not entreat me Loveall,
He dyes: this hat is not more mortified.
'Pray thee be quiet.
Hang him, a death's too good
For such a rascal. — Sirrah, 'le cut indentur's
Upon your skin. And here's another Villain,
Whose very countenance speaks Serving-man,
Filpot come hither.
Nay but Anteros.
Death man! our Universities doe swarm,
They have more Scholars then they know to spend
While they are Sweet: and must such Rogues as these,
Whose height of knowledge, is to spit and snuffle,
And talk some 3. hours non-sense, shoulder them
Out of their places? what is 't that makes so many
Of our quick wit's turn Iesuits, and forsake
Both their Religion, and their Country think you?
Sirrah no more then thus, lye and thou die.
Have not you been a Serving man sometimes?
Yes truly sir, I'll not deny it, I was
A gentleman's butler once.
I told you so.
The very chipping's hang in's eye-brow's still.
His face unto this instant minute shines
With broken beer that was his fees, stand by,
And doe not hope so large a benefit
From me as to be killed, live, live, unhappy.
You M. know little know you whose box is this?
Truly it is mine, verily.
Away you stinkards,
I will be visited no more to day.
Avoid I say. Have I not done it well?
Oh no, you want the pawles, and the hums,
And the grave thumb under the girdle too.
Oh, that's for old living brokers, I'm a young one.
You must indent then with them, for to keep you
Some hounds or cocks, and get a handsome wife
To entertain you.
A wife? a thunderbolt
Is entered me, 'pray thee no more.
How now?
And get you packing too, thou old impostor,
With your distorted puppet here; and you
That make the custards quake where ere you come,
Thou enemy to sweet meats.
Mr. Hook
It would relish more of wisdom if you did
Bear out this matter coolely. Come my daughter.
O me! the very boy's will laugh at me.
Anteros salute your sister, and embrace her.
I am undone again! what shall I doe
Loveall?
What shall you doe? why kiss her man.
Sister god save you, — and as much to you
My never-to-be-hereafter father in law.
Woe's me! what shall I say? what shall I doe?
I have given in the mortgage, and without money.
But what new spectacle is this?
Whats here?
How? the dead body of a gentle-woman?
Is this Neandur?
Hold the cut throat fiddlers
Whilst we doe bring this gentlewoman before the justice.
A kind and loving husband sure, that has.
Made a fair hand on's wife thus the first day.
Ha? what is this I see? O traitorous eyes:
Can I believe ye any more? my sister?
Constantine?
How's that?
It cannot be.
It is she. O partial heavens! but yet it is not,
It is not long since I left my sister safe
With in her chamber, and in another habit —
By all the powers it is she — I doe profane
The god's; it is not she, it is not. — once more.
The twins of Leda were not half so like.
I'll be resolved immediately.
Good M. justice,
I pray you hear me. As we did dance even now
In your North field, we found this gentlewoman,
Lying all along (as to say) even quite dead,
And this her husband with his naked sword
Standing hard by her.
Another riddle yet.
Her husband? ha? Why is not this Neander
One of the rival's in my daughters love?
Ander, or Pander, wee know not that,
But it is her husband, that wee'r sure of
Is he not Robin?
I that he is our Edward,
We both were present when they were detracted.
Subtracted you fool. But as I said before
Seeing him stand so desperately with his sword
We stole behind him, and so caught him.
A valiant act believ't. Good sir, let's go.
Ah Constantine, ah good heart! was this
The journey you intended?
Sir, I beseech you —
We shall be poisoned with these women's sighs
It is worse then a Germain hot-house.
Anteros
Stay, we will see the end of this.
Fie, fie, Hell is broke loose upon me: all her furies
Are come at once t'assault me.
Ah Cleopes!
She lives again, O miracle of women!
Where art thou Cleopes?
Oh hated name,
Enough t'infect the world, but that it comes
Out of those lips.
Speak Constantine.
What have I to doe
With light or heaven? I will not live.
O me!
She swounds again.
Why doe you rub her head
And face so much, you foolish woman you?
Let me alone, I'll find her wound I warrant you.
Forbear, or I'll find that swines face of yours.
I am too bad for hell, they'll not receive me,
They are afraid I should infect those souls,
Those virtuous souls which doe inhabit there.
Art thou not softened yet Neander? Ha?
Had thou an heart cut out 'oth Diamond rock,
Sure this would melt it.
O my Cleopes!
What will you give sir, and I will let you
Shift for your self?
What thou deserve villain.
Half part, or else she shall not go.
Take half.
I will divide my gifts betwixt ye — there.
Thou Temple of Virtue, fairest Constantine. —
Oh I shall die again if I see him.
But will you live if I doe presently
Make a divorce betwixt you and Neander?
And place you in the arms of him you so
Love, and adore, your Cleopes?
You cannot.
You're all divinity, indeed I cannot.
See where Pandora comes; but now I can.
Behold my Lucius.
Nay, I will still persist to follow thee
Basest of men.
Good father.
Suffer him;
His tongue has learned the palsy from his hands;
Alas hoe's old, and must bee pardoned for it.
But what imports this multitude? and see Neander
With his Boy-bride. Pandora, sweetest Lady —
An other tempest! where shall I shelter me?
By all the joys in Love, by all the sorrows,
By all his Roses, and his Wormwood, take
Thy thoughts from me, and let them doubled fall
Upon my friend Neander. —Fairest foul,
Doe but contemplate that most curious frame
Of man, in what a pleasing harmony
Nature has married all those provinces
His limbs together: view but his sparkling eye,
And read divinity there; look on his hair,
Survey his face, and fee how Majesty
And sweetness there doe strive for victory,
And still the issue's doubtful.
Lucius,
Thou shalt not overcome; disguise farewell.
O thou that art the shame of all thy sex,
Fair Constantine, yet not half so fair
As virtuous, here behold thy Cleopes;
Neander's vanished; why doe you wonder so?
I doe confess I loved that Gentlewoman,
And for her love I took on this disguise,
And here for thine I put it off again,
And on my bended knee doe beg my pardon
For all the wrong I'ue done thee
Cleopes!
It is a miracle: but the bonds, the living.
O heavens! it is he, most happy Constantine!
My Cleopes? grant me some respite joy
Before thou kilst me — Oh my Cleopes!
Whom doe I embrace? into whose arms am I fallen?
O constant virgin!
But how shall I hereafter
Give any credit to my senses? O
Placenta, courteous Midwife, pray thee tell me,
Where am I now? in heaven?
Bridle your passion.
Am I my self? or doe I dream all this?
Lucius, take truce with wonder, I am Cleopes,
And I doe hope though now I wear that name,
As dear to thee as when I heard Neander.
You may remember when as first the beauty
Of fair Pandora did attract your eyes
To wonder, and to love, that I was then
A busy wooer unto Constantine:
But so it pleased Cupped, that while I
Drew out a languishing and luke-warme suit
To her, the vigour of Pandora's beams,
(As doth the Sun unto our culinar fire)
Did quite extinguish that same petty flame.
Thinking it vain t'attempt her in that shape,
I presently did take some discontent,
And feigned a journey into Belgia,
And not long after took on this disguise,
And returned hither; where I have remained
Your Rival, and capital friend together:
And (which I wonder at the most) unknown:
You have my Metamorphosis. But sweet,
How came thou 'pray thee, unto Mr Lively?
And by what tricks did he inveigle thee
Unto this contract, since thou did not know
That Cleopes was there invisible?
My better Genius, you shall hear within
The story whole, it is too tedious
To be told here.
But now Pandora, why
Stand you so dully here, and doe not fly
Into his strict embraces, who alone
Loves you, and who alone deserves your love?
Doe I love her? doe I deserve her love?
Hast thou (sweet friend) for me forsaken her,
Whom thou did prize above thine own proper soul?
And now hast married her whom thou did fly?
And all for my sake, and shall I thus repay thee?
But for her love thou ne'er had been Neander;
And but for mine had been Neander still;
Friend Cleopes, or if thou wilt Neander,
(Under both titles most beloved of me)
Was she all Venus; did each hair of hers
Fetter a Love, were there as many Cupids
That hovered o'e her head, as there be lights
Which guild yon Marble roof, by them I swear,
By all that's Sacred, by what ever flies
The touch of mortal eye, I swear again,
I would disclaim her and her love for ever.
Troth Lucius, I doe pity you, that do•
Spend so much breath unto so little end,
What need all these deep protestations?
I care not this for all your love, nor yet
For your friend Ianus there with the two faces;
Nor do I think ye men.
So quickly?
Yes.
I doe confess I am a woman; see,
Here is the man has won what ye have lost;
Stout soldiers sure, that when the City gates
Were open to ye, durst not enter in.
O Isabella, it is for thy sake I know
That all these miseries doe happen me.
(Forgive me good Laurentio) Isabella,
At length I have experience what it is
To love an outside, the mere bark of woman,
And to forsake an inward virtue: but
If once I have thee in possession more —
Follow me Witch, devil, strumpet, prostitute.
Ah whither will he drag me? oh my heart!
What have ye done with my dead sisters body?
Thy sisters body now has got a soul.
(O my sweet Cleopes!) most welcome brother.
But doth she live then?
And so happily,
As I have called it impudence to wish
What I doe now enjoy.
Whom doe I see?
My daughter Isabella?
But is this Cleopes?
I dare not look upon that wronged face.
It is, and now thy sisters husband.
Brother,
All health, all happiness.
More then all to you,
Good Cleopes.— But dost thou live, my sister?
Why wast thou dead but now?
Thou shalt hear that
Some other time.
See thou that virgin?
Yes, it is my sister Isabella.
Peace.
I am undone! my father, and my brother.
Sir, I beseech you pardon what my love,
And younger years have trespassed.
Rise my daughter;
Joy will not suffer me for to be angry.
See thou that face?
It is Endymion
My brother.—Brother, God save you.
Sister!
Thy Brother? it is thy traitor that I mean,
That has undone thee and thy name.
It is Lucius.
Sir I beseech you doe not hearken to him.
No more.
A pox upon this honesty,
It will undo us all: it is ten to one
But that his tender Conscience will persuade him
To pay in the money for all this.
Fair soul
Can thou forgive thy Lucius?
Can thou love
Thy Isabella?
Give me a man dares ask
That question? Good Laurentio let me crave
Your liking and consent.
Consent? to what?
To marry this your daughter.
Marry my daugh∣la?
No perjured wretch.
Sir I beseech you grant it.
O Lucius! O happy hour!
Thou hast her,
And with her such a portion as shall please thee.
I will not hear of Portion, she her self
Is dowry enough to me.— O Isabella!
What? Is the Players boy proved woman too?
Father.
I say trouble me not—the mortgage.
Sir I beseech you hear me.
Fie, fie, fie.
And let me have your approbation▪
In this young Gentleman for my husband.
O.
Perhaps sir you may doubt of his estate,
But if you'll credit me, I can instruct you,
I am his Father, hee mine only Son,
And (I doe thank my stars) our fortun's are
None of the meanest. Speak Sir, will you give
Your daughter here, without a portion?
Without a Portion? take her what ever thou art
So, So, that care is past yet, this a little
Help's out with the other losses.
Master Hook,
You shall not frown, since all things here doe smile;
To morrow I will pay you half your money,
So you will grant me a general acquittance;
It is in my power (you know) and I may choose
Whether I'll pay a farthing, but no more,
(There is a thing called conscience within me;
And) you shall have it: therefore be frolic Sir.
Thou art an honest man. Ye are all honest, ye are all honest.
All this while have I
Employed mine cares about this business.
Now show thy self, and of what house thou come.
All health to this fair company—much joy—
Much happiness — and a young Son to you;
Are you at leisure for to kill me yet?
You see I'm come again.
Let me embrace thee
Thou instrument of all our good.
Yes, yes,
I was a fool, knew nothing, knew just nothing,
Could not divine a whit, not tell, not tell,
How this same gear would come to pass, not I;
How doe you like your Lively now? your Lively?
Wee will discourse of that within. Terpander,
Sir will it please you follow? you my Son,
Gentl'men you're all my guests to night. Me
Think's I am grown Pestilent kind upon the sudden,
The Music too, wee will be merry, come,
Nay come, come, take me while the homours hot.
Loyal, a word: nay troupe on, let them troupe.
The news?
Faith nothing but to take my leave,
Bid you far well.
Why so? I pray thee stay,
You'll in I hope.
What among such a kennel
Of women? no, adieu.
Nay prithee go.
Not for the Fay'ry Kingdom.
Mr. Loveall,
Sweet Mr. Loveall.
Anteros.
How now?
As I am a gentleman, and an elder brother, I am almost choked.
Sweet Mr. Loveall, O Mr. Loveall. It is vt∣terly against my complexion,
To lye here any longer.
Death! our fools,
Our dish of buffles: as I hope to prosper
My thoughts had lost them quite.
I thought not of them.
Good Mr. Loveall are the officers gone?
Anteros, Anteros, is the coast clear yet?
But how shall wee dispose of them?
Weed best
Barrel them up and send them for new England.
A pox there's fools enough already there.
Let's pickle them for winter Salads.
No;
They are not capable of Salt, man; rather
Let's get some broken trumpet, or old drum,
And show them to the people from some strange
Beasts out of Africa
Father, my gown is not silk yet.
A bots on you.
Hark, there's another egg sprung, my shepherd and his fair daughter.
Loveall, Mr. Loveall, I am of a sanguine complexion.
Anteros.
Now all the world! what shall wee do with them?
But stay, a word,—perform it, I'll take order
To uncase vm' to your hands.—
Now quickly Nodle, all is quiet now,—
Come Mr. William — Not a mouse is stirring—
Safe, safe, all 's safe. Ha, he, he.
I'ue spoiled my clothes quite, would I had a brush;
How now? wee're gulled.
I, as I am a living saule. — mark the end on it.
Who have wee here? does his ghost walk?
Wee are all gee•'d I perceive it plain now.
Who's that? Mr. Mongrel? is the Scholar alive a∣gain? I should have been very melancholy to have been hanged as I am a living saule.
If I could get my raepier and a brush,
I'd steal away.
Would you have a brush? I'll brush ye ye villains,
Nay, Mr. Loyal told me what dusty companions ye were,
And that ye wanted brushing, and how ye bad
Abused my husband, and my daughter, tied them
To a tree, come one your ways, want ye brushing?
Ye rascals, I'll brush you, would ye be brushed▪
Come on, lets see what covered dish •'haue here now?
Hy day! you lubberly knave; what Madame Gillian too?
What? is she come now to trouble vs!
My daughter, I doe charge you on my blessing
Look scurvily upon her.
Yes forsooth Father.
Call her not Mother darling, but disclaim her,
She is no wife of mine, she does conspire
Against our gentility daughter, and she lies;
Call her the plain old woman, sweet-lips, doe;
Isle bear you cut in it, doe as your father bids you.
How now?
But forsooth father, my neckercher is not turned into Gold yet.
They are both mad of a certain.
I am a gentleman, and I will be a gentleman, I will enclose, and I will raise rents—I will be a lower-house man, and I will be—
An old cox-combe, and you shall be beaten.
But does this stand good in law?
Fear not that; I'll find an old statute for it, doubt it not. You are a gentleman? and you will be a gentleman? I'll make you gentle enough ever I have done with you.
O, O, O.
And you my sweet lips that will not call me mother, but look scurvily,
Come on your ways I have the common law on my side too for this.
Oh mother, I'll never bee a gentlewoman more while I live, nor never talk of gold neckerchers, no that I won't truly.
Yes, you shall bee a Lower-house man, you shall; I'll take you down a Pin, you're too high now.
O, O, good wife—O, O, honey wife.
You'll in?
Buzz, peace and catch a mouse cry I.
What is my Scholar returned? prithee go in Jack Loveall, I'll change but two words with him
And follow. Well said, nay look not sourly on the matter.
You have abused me Sir, and go to the fence School with me if you dare, or else wr•stle a fall with me.
He give thee satisfaction my rowser
My Hit-her better, nay put off these frowns;
What say thou to my sister, and the Living?
I know you have heard the news from out the Cabin,
And you was once a Suitor to her; speak,
Will that content thee? come you are not the first
Has got a Parsonage with fooling Sir,
I will procure it for thee, fear it not:
Nay spare your Hat, it will be tedious,
My thanks shall be in Oats.
But Master Ieoffry.
Follow Jack Loveall in.
You know I was your Master to day.
Well put the case.
Poor, and ill parell'd.
Put the case again.
But now you see how strangely altered.
Put the case the third time.
Are you avis'd of that? I'll ne'er trust winking beast again for your sake, I'll tell you but so. Did you not tell me that Obrum would make me a gentleman? Obrum? Obrum? if Obrum has no better tricks then these, let Obrum keep his tricks to cool his porridge, studs I looked every minute when Obrum would have put a greene scarlet suite upon my back like yours, all to bee daubed with spingle spangles; and in the mean time comes my wife with a black and blew home spun of her own making. Well that same Obrum is a sembling cony catching knave, and I know what I could call you too, but for your whiniard, and your staring goggles.
Stipes, no more, advance thy duller eye,
Know thou what all those blazing stars portend?
I, I, by'r Lady? how now? studs I think forty Obrums have been here, (Master Ieoffry is that Obrum that makes gentlefolkes, a Taylor?) one Obrum could never have painted them thus.
PEace profane rudeness; what alteration's this?
What mean these bended Knees? but are these women?
Am •a Convert then? so suddenly?
Surely some Power greater then all that Sex
Is interposed, veiled in a female outside,
Else how come I so supple jointed, that
Before was stiffer then the Rhodian Statue?
There is an Homage due, and I must pay't
Spite of my proudest nerues. Most Sacred Goddess,
Behold a Penitent, that falls thus lowe
Before your feet: as you have shown your self
More then a Mortal, in converting me,
Confirm it by your Pardon; it is a Virtue
No less deserving, and as near to miracle.
And You great Monarch, that the world may know
How nigh a Kin to heaven and all the Gods
You are in blood and power, confute that bold
Erroneous tenant, prove the Age of Wonders
Still to endure. What I have promised
Unto this Shepherd (as a miracle)
To be performed by Obron and this tree,
Doe you effect; make vs all gentlemen.
Which one Kind ray sent from Your gracious eyes
Will doe, and in that confidence wee rise.

THou hast delivered my Letter?
Yes Sir, to Mr. Saveall your Uncles friend: But hee has stood your friend so long, and so often, to so little purpose in moving your Uncle for you, that he holds it utterly in vain, to urge him any further, he told me.
Thou should have told him, I would not be so answered.
Yes; and then he would have told me, let your Master take his course.
Then you should have told him again, I have taken all the courses I could, or as any Gentleman can to main∣taine my self like one; But all my courses are run out, and I have not breath, nor know any ground whereon to begin a new one, unless that thing my Uncle sets me
up again, nor have I any means to attain to that, but by his Mediation.
Then would he have told me again, what all your courses have been. Namely, running into debt by all the ways can be imagined, and cheating by all could be in∣vented, then that the said thing, (as you call it) your Uncle, before he cast you quite off, had redeemed you out of Prison, and several holds, within the space of 15. Months 14. times.
That was not once a Month then, or if it had, what had that been to him? it was I that suffered, thou should have told him, not he.
Hee would have told me then again, That seve∣rall Redemptions, cost your Uncle at least 2000 l. And that upon your last revolt when he quite gave you over for a cast-away, two years since, he cast the third thou∣sand with you, upon condition never to afflict him more. And then he Married in hope to get an heir.
I that Marrying spoy'ld all.
Because you should not after his death cast away all the rest of the thousands, and ten thousands which you might have lived to inherit, if your Uncles love or Mr. Savealls counsel could have prevay'd with you against the Devil, and Debauchednes.
Pox on it, let it all go, let that wretched Uncle go, and let Saveall go for a punctual ass as hee is. I confess he has by his saving help pieced me with my Uncle a score of times at least. What had once more been to him?
Sir, it were better for you to think upon some course by our self, and me your Creature (that have stuck to you, or followed you through all fortunes) to maintain Rich Lace, and Bravery upon you. And think in time too before this be worn out, upon some new ways for your supplies—
I cannot, nor will I trouble my brains to think of any, I will rather die here in Ram alley, or walk down to the Temple, and lay my self down alive, in the old Synagogue, cross-leg'd among the Monumental Knights there, till I turn Marble with'em. Think quoth a • what should I think on?
On your poor Whore Sir (as you have brought her) shoe's in worse case then your self; your Clothes are good enough—
I ther's the Devil. I would doe something for her if I knew how. But what have I not done that can be done by a forlorn heir?
Why though the Dice, and all other Household games, and all the Cheats belonging unto them have fayld you by your and their discoveries, till none dare venture so near you as a Man hue•les a Die or Skirrs a Card. Though all your hidden ways in Hide-parke races are trod out, and all your bowling booties beaten bare off of the Grounds and Allies; and the sweet Honey-combes of all your Cockpit cosenages cut off. Though all your Arts of borrowing are crossed out of all Men's Books before you offer at 'em, while your old Debts stand fairly written, and all your Marts miscarry of putting out for credit, Venison to Citizens, or early Cherries, Codlings and Apricots to their Wives avail you nothing, cannot something yet be found?
Nothing, nothing. All Projects are confounded.
Did your Father leave you nothing but wit to live upon for this? And did hee leave you that but for years, and not for Life? and is the term ex∣pir'd?
Hold thy peace. I am casting for something to be done by me, that shall be worth, and cost my life, to shame my Uncle.
There's a plot! Think of your poor whore Sir,
how shall she live, if you cast away your self?
I must leave her once thou know.
If you could leave her now, and betake your self handsomely to other Women, I have thought on a course.
What, quickly, what first?
To set up a Male bawdy house.
Fie upon'•.
You are handsome, lovely, and I think able to do one Mans work, two or three such Gentlemen more which I know, and can describe to you, with the ways I'll find to bring in custom shall fill your purses—
And amped our bones. I ever had enough of one Mistress Variety would destroy me. No Gentlemen can be able to hold it out. They are too weak to make com∣mon He whores.
For a little while Sir, till we have got a stock of rich clothes; And then we will put Drey-men, and Wine∣porters, Cornish Wrestlers &amp; such like into those clothes; and make them Country Cavaliers. Have you not seen course snowt-faire drudges, clapped into bravery, that would doe more bodily service in a Brothel then twenty Ladies Daughters? They are the Game-beares of a Bawdy-house, can play ten single courses for a cleane-bred Gentle-wo∣mans one, wee will hire fellows for groats a piece a day, that shall (without the additaments of Clary, Caudle or Cock-broth) get us forty pieces a Man before Night, or perhaps a hundred by next Morning, out of such she▪ customers, as an Aunt of mine shall find ou• for us.
O base Villain! No I'll never fall so deep below a Gentleman, as to be Master of a Baudy-house.
Very good decayed Gentlemen have done a much; though I urge this, but for your pastime sir.
No my first plot shall stand, I will do some no∣torious death-deserving thing (though these clothes go to th'Hangman for it, what care I) in defiance of him that was my Uncle, and his Methodical, Grave, and Ortho∣graphical speaking friend, Mr. Saveall that calls People People.
O Mr. Saveall how have you honoured me, how am I bound to you for this visit! Sir hearing that my Uncle was come to Town, and you with him, I did pre∣sum to write to you.
Send forth your Man.
Go forth—
One Servant is not fit for all Offices, although you keep no more; you presumed indeed, I can no less then call it a presumption, although it were but unto me you write; I speak not this in the behalf of any dignity in me; but that you should overweene that I had ability to wrestle any more with your overgratefull Uncle in your behalf. Therein was your outrecuidance.
The miserablest Man on Earth! in having we•∣ried out my worthiest friend, on whom the sum of all my hopes was cast.
No, I am not wearied; But still in the same full strength: yet my modesty disswadeth me from using strength above reason, and my reason prevails with me not to strive against a Torrent.
He is then inexorable, and I must perish. But did you try him for me this last time?
I have both tried, and tempted him to his vexation.
But did you urge that pious act of mine Which he once vowed should never be forgot, O• unrewarded by him?
Your standing upon merit in that Act
Perplexes nature in him, and confounds
Both your desert, and his benevolence,
And now since you have urged it, I'll tell you,
Your Act was undeniable, most noble,
And glorious in a Nephew, greater piety
Could not have been expected in a Son:
When from the Swords of Thieves and Murderers,
Your valour rescued him—But—
I and my Man I'm sure made four of the stoutest purses fly for it, that ever set our Country of the skore: After they had him down, and their points at his breast and throat, hee crying out for help, when I came on by chance at a time too when I was in his displeasure, nay he hated me a whole year together before that, and yet I did it, and more then so—
Fare you well Sir, I thought to have said all this for you, and more then so too. But—
Nay sweet Mr. Saveall—
Good Mr. Careless, as I can hear I would be heard sometimes.
End•ed I cry you mercy, pray sir speak.
I was commending of your act, and do so still.
You did express your self in blood and nature
A perfect Kinsman; and your piety
Drew blessings on you: for whereas before
Your Uncle left you off to Reprobation,
He then receives you a Son, (being his Sisters.)
Adopted you, intended you his heir,
And out of his Estate then presently
Allowed you two hundred pounds per annum,
And gave your Man for what he suffered
In the confl•ct an hundred Marks—
Poor Rogue! and he deserved it, I'll be sworn for a Thieves mark that he received; a cut of the Cocks∣comb that cracked his skull, so that •ee could never bear his drink since, as hee could have done before. For sir, as we
came in, I having put by the thrusts of three of 'em, the fourth man with a full blow—
Fare you well Sir the second time—
Nay courteous Mr. Saveall.
I came to speak not with you altogether, but unto you for to be heard.
Sir I will hear you with all due respect.
Your Uncle having done so gratefully, and so plentifully for you.
You building still on merit for that service,
Did hold him so fast bound that you presumed
To run upon more extravagances
In all the out-wayes of debauchery,
Till for the one good deed you did for him
He did you forty, in restoring you
From Surfeits, Wants, Wounds and Imprisonments,
Till overborne with charge, and more with anguish,
At your outrageous, unexampled Riots,
Hee gave you an irrevocable farewell, yet then at your departure.—
Yet then I lived and could have done till now, merely by being his Nephew, and supposed his heir, had not he married; but his Marriage turned the hearts of all believing Citizens from me, where before a Taylor could have made me run through all the credit in the Town, When in a suit Chinquant, and Ala-mode They could inform themselves, whose heir I was, But to say truth I vexed him into Wed-lock, for before he valud not a Wife at a bachelors Button.
Farewell to you the third time.
Sir, you shall see me die first, and that instantly; That you may tell my Uncle I'll be no more his trouble, or charge, unless in charity he will send to bury me.
You will not desperately work a violent end up∣on your self?
No Sir, the D•vills not so great with me; but my heart, I feel it ready to break. My Uncle is no more my Uncle, nor you my friend, all by my own fau•t, and what should I do here, but in to my Bed, and out of the World presently. Wat. Wat.
I here Sir!
I have dalyed too long, and tempted him too far I fear.
Lay down my Bed.
Your Wench is come indeed, but I hope you will not to bed before he be gone.
Lay down my bed I say. But first unbutton me.
Lord how his heart beats! pangs of death I fear.
Not so I hope. I will now come to the point Sir, Mr. Careless be comforted.
I am, and well resolved, I thank my better Angel.
Your Unkle's friends with you.
Alas, how can that be?
I thought your spirit had been higher.
It will be Sir anon, I hope.
I have but dallied with you to search your temper.
But you have searched too deep I fear sir.
Ah!—
Your Uncle is friends with you, I say so far as to make a further trial of your nature, you may be yet his heir; for your Aunt despairs of any Child by him, having fruitlessly been married now these two years.
Ah!—But good Sir, can this be?
It is, and I will bring you to him. And see that all be well.
Your noble friendship hath revived me sir, O run and fetch my cloak.
Tell Phebe I cannot stay to give her any satisfaction now, I must go see my Uncle first.
Poor Gentleman, how weakly he stands! The sight of his Uncle will recover him. Come Mr. Careless let us go.
Sir what do you think if I should first according to the reformation of my mind cut off my indecent hair, and change this garish apparel for a civil well worn Students suit, I can be fitted presently hard by.
No, the mind reformed is enough, your habit well becomes you.
Now Wit and't be thy will go with him. And I hope this will be his last hot fit of the Uncle.
Your Masters gone forth it seems.
Called by his fortune, hee is so.
Shuns he the sight of me? i'll overtake him.
O your patience sweet Mistress Phebe, a little patience.
Hoe's gone to be happy, and to make you happy. I dare promise you a Satin Gowen within this sea'night.
For let me tell thee Mistress Phebe bright Hoe's reconciled to his Uncle Knight.
Away Pimp, Flamsted, I came to be serious with him, to let him know the miseries I suffer, by the wrongs hee has done me, and that I can nor will no longer bear 'em.
Nor him neither will you? Take heed what you say Madam Marion▪
No nor him neither, you pandarly Parasite, till •e make his vows good, and me an honest Woman.
Byr'lady, a shrewd task, and I fear an impossible work.
Sir, I will claw your ugly Face till thou under∣take it with him, to make it easy.
Hold, hold, I'll doe you all the good I can,
O will you so?
How desperately valiant a Whore grows, when she is so poor that her clothes fear no tearing.
But by what means can you hope to bring this work about?
You know I have a wealthy Kinsman in the City.
O Mr. Saleware, and he has a Wife too that bears it up bravely.
Pimp impudent, shall I claw your Face into blushes at my injuries, to be mocked out of my Maiden∣head, when I was upon a good Match in the Country; Then with a promise of Marriage, to be enticed from my friends into fools Paradise (that was a new title for the City) and here to be used, and abused from Lodging to Lodging, by him that now flies me, for the decays hee hath brought me to? But my Kinsman has money though I have none, and for money there is Law to be found, and in a just cause he will not let me sink, he says: for I have told him all.
But not the how many times, the whens, the whore's, and the wherewithalls, I hope have you?
Sirrah, I shall show you and your Master too a way to more civility, since I am thus abused, and slighted.
You have schooled me handsomely, and brought me into sense of your injuries: you have been over∣wronged, but not over-wrought, nor overworn, you doe excel in Beauty, Strength and Spirit, which makes you in your very anger now appear so lovely, that I profess my self your Creature. What would a kiss of this fair Hand now make me do, and of those Lips what not?
Away you Creature.
Leave these temptations; doe not strike me too deeply in love with you.
Away you Creature.
It is true I am your Creature, as I am my Masters; And sometimes the serving Creature, breaks his fast with a bit off the Spit before the same meat is served up to his Masters table, but is never denied to Dive upon his Ma∣sters leavings, you cannot think what an appetite that frown gives me.
You are no saucy Rascal.
Good wit too! My appetite• needs no Sauce; nor shall you need to make use of Law, or Friend against my Master, but my self.
You!
Be ruled by me, if I doe not lay you down, and join with you presently in a course that shall content you, then—hang me Lady at your door.—
What doe you mean?
In the next room we shall find Pen, Ink and Paper, you shall write him such a Letter (as I will dictate to you) that shall so nettle him.
Nay I did intend to leave him part of my mind in writing before I went.—
O Cousin, I want you.—
A pox of this interrupting Cuckold, hee hinders all Trading, but his Wives, zownds I was going with full speed a Tilt, as the learned say, had not this horne-head come, we had writ lines together should have put down Her• and Lender—
Hark you Mistress Phebe, is this your Kinsman that you told me, you had told all the business to?
Yes, sir, I am the Gentleman, and she has told me so much, Sir that I must tell you, to tell your Master from me, and as I would tell him my self if hee were here personally present, hee is a most dishonest Gentle∣man if he doe her not lawful right by Marrying her; and
that right I came to demand, and obtain of him, or to denounce the Law against him.
How happy are you, that you came short to tell him so, else hee would ha• so beaten you, as never was Citizen beaten, since the great Battle of Finsbury-Field.
Your great words cannot make▪ me fear his blows (I am not dashed nor bashed) nor cross him out of my Book, for fear of any such payment. I have him there for four score pound as you know, though you are pleased to forget me, But Sapientia mea mihi stultitia tua tibi.
Cry mercy Mr. Saleware, is it you? I hope Mi∣stress Saleware is well, your most exquisite, and most court∣lie wife; the Flower-de-luce of the City.
Well wag well, you must not now put me off with my wife, shoe's well and much respected; I come to speak of, and for my distressed Kinswoman, her whom your wicked Master has most wickedly dealt withal. Hee has deflower'd and deluc'd her, and led her from her Friends, and out of her Country into Fools Pa∣radice—By making her believe he would Marry her, and here he has put her on, and put her off, with hopes and delays till she is come to both woe and want; And (which may prove her most affliction, if hee be suffered to forsake her) she is with child by him.
Say you so, Mistress Phebe? here's small show of it yet.
Sirrah, I shall show you and your Master too a way to more civility, if I be thus abused and slighted.
By the way Mr. Saleware, how many children have you by your most amiable wife?
Sir, that needs not to fall by the way of our dis∣course.
But by the way I speak of getting children. Or
I pray tell me, did not you correct one of her children once, for which your wife reprehended you, and bad you correct your own? And how then shall my Master be sure that this (if it be one) is his?
What an Asinego's this? I shall find a time sir, to talk with your Master. In the mean time I tell you that my Kinsewoman is a Gentlewoman of as good blood as himself, and of the best in Herefordshire.
Yes, Welsh-blood.
And shall find friends that shall not see her abused by you nor him. There is Law to be found for money, and money to be found for Friends, and Friends to be found in the Arches, and so tell your Master, come away Cousin.
But one word before you go Sir, is this Gentle∣woman, (who was but a Country Chamber-maide when my Master took her to his mercy) of such boasted blood, your Cozen by your own, or by your Wives side I pray?
Sirrah, like a saucy companion as you are, though you meddle with me that am a Common-councell-Man; I charge you meddle not with my wife, you have had two or three jerks at her.
I was warned before Sir, in my own understand∣ing: for she is for great persons.
Then know your distance Sir.
Yet give me leave to wait you down Sir, cud shoe did it tell it Kinseman that it is got with Champkin.
You are a Pandarly Rascal, and I'll be a terror both to you, and your Patron.
How can you think so?
Think! I see it apparently upon your Face, and hear it in your sighs, your broken sleeps to night, when your own groans waked you, declared no less;
But had I had the power of some wives with their hus∣bands I could have fetched it out of you waking once (• thank you) you took me in your arm, but when you found it was I you turned away as in a dream.
Sure you dream now, whence can this talk pro∣ceed else?
I must not give it over till I know the cause of your melancholy fit, doe you doubt my duty, or my loyalty? perhaps you do, and so make me the cause of your affliction.
May such a thought within me, stick me to the endless torments.
It is lately entertained, what ever it be; you came heart whole to Town, and Jovial. Have you been drawn for security into Bonds by any of my friends, for great sums, and forced to pay 'em?
Fie, fie.
Are any great friends of yours in question, attained∣ed, imprisoned, or run away?
Psewh.
Or are you further grieved about your Nephew, Careless? I thought that your friend Saveall, and my self had made his peace with you; and that you had sent for him, do you repent that?
No, no, sweet heart, hee shall be welcome. And pray let me entreat you make no further inquisition; If (as you suppose) there be a trouble in my thoughts, I shall soon pass it over.
Tell me, or I shall prove the greater trouble. I would those few examples of women, that could not keep their husbands counsels had been burnt, and the woman too rather then I should be distrusted thus, and slighted by a Husband—
Nay then you'll grieve me indeed.
There has been many examples of discreet wo∣men
that have not only kept their husbands counsels, but advise and help 'em in extremities, and delivered 'em out of dangers.
I pray content your self.
Be you content to tell me then what troubles you. And I pray you tell me speedily, now presently; or (excuse me in my vow,) it is the last request that ever I will make to you, and the last question I'll ever ask you, and (the easier to get it from you) I promise you by the continuance of my faith to you (which by this kiss I seal) Be it a deadly injury to my self, I will for∣give it freely; not be troubled at it.
I shall do that now, which few wise men would.
But shoe's discreet, and has a fortitude
Above the boast of women; should that fail,
And this too weighty knowledge for a wife
Should prove a torment to her, I'm excused
She pulls it on her self, and for Revenge
Should she against her protestation move it,
I am enough above her.
You are resolved it seems to keep your secret Unto your self, much good Sir may it doe you.
No, you shall know it, sir, and (if unshaken
Now, in your love to me) the wonder of all wives
You're bound by a fair pledge, the kiss you gave me,
To be unmoved, and to forgive it though
It be a deadly injury to your self;
It is, and it is a great one; and so great
But that you have sealed my pardon, the hid knowledge
Of it should feed upon my Heart, and Liver,
Till life were banished thence, rather then pull
Your just revenge upon me; yet you frown not!
But before I declare it to your Justice,
Let me renew your mercy.
And on this Altar, which I have profaned
While it breathed sacred incense, now with penitence
Offer religious vows, never to violate
My Faith or Love to you again. One more
Before you hear it: for if then you stand not
Firm to your Mercy, it must be my last.
What do you but violate your Love to me,
Now in your most unjust suspicion?
I'll trespass so no more; yet many husbands
(I wish they had my sorrow, and no less
Purposer to reformation) wrong their wives.
Leave these perambulations; to the point:
You have unlawfully lain with some woman!
It is said; and now your doom.
Ha, ha, ha. Here's a busies!
Would somebody heard you faith: nay of five hundred
That now might overhear us (I mean not only
Gallants, but grave substantial Gentlemen)
Could be picked out a twelve good men and true,
To find you guilty, I would then condemn you,
But such a Jury must be panelled first.
And can you be so mild? then farewell thought.
Thought of your Mistress Sir, And then farewell
My jealousy, for let me tell you Sir,
That I have had an ache upon these brows
Since your last being in Town. And since you have dealt
So faithfully as to tell me it is one,
(There's no more, is there?)
No upon my vow.
Name me the woman: if it be the same
That I suspect, I'll never suspect more.
As faithfully as to my Confessor;
Saleware my Silke-mans wife.
The same I meant,
You're a fair dealing husband. On what condition?
Come this is merry talk. Prithee on what condition?
Only to bring good custom to her shop,
And send her husband Venison (flesh for flesh)
I did observe you bought all there last term,
And wished me to her Shop, and Mr. Saveall
With divers others to bestow our monies.
Troth shoe's a handsome one; Prithee on what con∣ditions?
Thou shalt know all to purge me of my folly.
Well said.
After a costly, and a tedious Suit
With many an answer no, and no such Woman,
At length she yields for a hundred pieces;
Had 'em, and I enjoyed her once.
That was,
When you last Term sat up all Night, and said you sat up with the three Lady Gamesters.
It is confessed.
Fair dealing still.
But here was the foul dealing, and for which
I hate her now: I having paid so great a fine, and
Tan possession thought after to deal Rent-free.
A Pepper-corne a quarter, if she be Pepper∣proof.
But she at my very next approach, which was but yesterday denies me Egress, except I make it a new purchase at the same former rate, and so for all times after.
Troth it is unreasonable, a hundred pound a time? How rich would Citizens be, if their wives were all so paid, and how poor the Court and Country! But hushed, here comes Mr. Saveall with your Nephew, I take it; A handsome Gentleman, could hee be so de∣bashed?
Sir, I have brought you home a Reformado▪
and doe entreat (for what I have said unto him, and he hath fairly answered unto me) that words may not by you be multiplied.
Not a word of unkindness, Nephew, you are welcome, give me your hand. George, thou art welcome.
I shall be George of horse-back once more I see. In all humility I thank you Sir.
Nay now thou speak, and look too tamely George, I would have thee keep and use the lively spirit that thou had, but not to let it fly at random, as it has done George.
Sir, I have learnt now by the inconveniences I have met with, in those extravagant out fl•guess, the better to contain it within the limits of your leave, and fair allowance hereafter.
Well said, and again welcome George. But (and this you shall give me leave to say Mr. Saveall) I remit your thanks for any inclination I had towards this re∣concilement till I doe you some further kindness; only you had good advocates, who pleaded friendly for you, Mr. Saveall, and your Aunt there before she ever saw you whom you may thank.
A man must be so tied now.
Pray take notice of her.
I cannot use respect enough Sir.
I like that modesty.
Doubt him in nothing, for he is come home.
Madam as you are my gracious Patronise, and my self so all unworthy, my duty checks me in my ap∣proach to you.
You are the more entirely welcome Cousin.
She Kisses like an old mans wife, That is, as a Child late starved at Nurse, sucks a fresh flowing Breast.
You must not Sir be bashful.
Twill less become me to presume good Ma∣dam.
George, here's a Lodging for you in this house, and my Table has a place for you, send for your man to wait upon you.
Have you Wat still?
Yes Sir, an honest true hearted civil fellow he is, as I have managed him, he can say grace now.
The world's well mended. To morrow you shall give me a note of your debts George, which I'll take or∣der for, if I may presume you have any.
Some driblets Sir, My credit has not lately wronged me much.
You speak sententiously, for credit sought With Trades-men, then their wares are dearer bought; So Gentlemen are wronged.
Then not to wrong our selves, lets in to Dance.
ALL Cheapside, and Lombard street Madam, could not have furnished you with a more com∣pleat bargain, you will find it in the wearing, and thank me both for the goodness of the stuff, and of the Menu∣facture.
But now the price Mistress Saleware. I grant your Commodity is good, The Gold and Silver Laces, and the Frienges are rich, and I hope well wrought. Has your Man made a note of the particulars, and their prices, at
the rate of ready-money (for I buy so) and not as you would book 'em to an under-ag'd heir, or a Court-Cavalier to expect payment two or three years hence; and find it perhaps never. I come with Here is one for tother.
I know your Ladyships payment such; And they are prized so Madam to a farthing.
Let me see, broad plate Silver and Gold-lace, 206 Ounces half, and a dram, at five and ten pence the Ounce. 60 l. 5 s. 3 d. obe. 4. five and ten pence an Ounce is dear.
I protest unto you Madam that parcel of Lace for a Bed as you intend it, was bespoken, and agreed for at six shillings the Ounce by a very great person: but be∣cause ready money came not to fetch it off, Fortune re∣served it here for you, you could not have been so fitted on the sudden else within London walls; and I am glad the same fortune was so favourable to me, as by my hands to design it for your Ladyships use and pleasure. I hope Madam we shall hear of a young heir a coming shortly, and that will make it a rich and fortunate Bed indeed; And then Sir Olive•r would thank me too.
What a bold slut it is, well then the rest of the particulars here of Laees, and Frienges, Loops, and Buttons, makes the sum of all an hundred pound eight shillings four pence, halfe-penny. I am no good Arith∣metician, but if any be overcast, and overpaid, you must allow restitution.
Yes, good Madam.
Is all put up into this Box?
All Madam.
Give me my Purse. Take you home that while I make payment for it; your Gold-weights Mistress Sale∣wa•e.
Here Madam all in readiness.
You take no Gold but what is weight I presume.
It is but light pains to weigh it Madam. But let me save your Ladyship that labour.
Nor shall it be your trouble, command your Ser∣vant I pray for a glass of your beer—
Some beer for my Lady presently.
That I may tell you in more privacy, what per∣haps you would not have him hear: for Prentices though they are bound to keep their Masters secrets, are not all privy to their Mistresses; that's more a Journeymans Office.
Your Ladyship is pleased.
Not very well with my self, for I have gone be∣yond my Commission in this bargain, and exceeded my Husbands allowance. Here's one hundred pounds eight shillings 4 d. obe. in the Bill, and he allows me but the bare hundred pound.
The od money is but a small matter Madam.
A great matter in an honest poor Country La∣dies purse, may serve her a whole Christmas at Post and Pare, or Farthing gleek, when the gay Gamsters wives of the City may command the hundreds, out of the pur∣ses of such poor Ladies Husbands. But here is the odd money, eight shillings four pence, half penny, and so ell's paid.
What means your Ladyship?
Doe you not understand me then? I'll tell you that which I thought fit to conceal from your servant; And from your husband too had hee been here, perhaps he knows not on it. My husband left with you, or lent you the last Term a hundred pound, which hee assigned to me; and now I have it in Commodity. Had you for∣got it, when it was to do you a good turn, when your absent husband failed you, and you wanted it.
A good turn Madam?
Yes, was it not to have the free use of a hundred pound ready money, a whole quarter of a year, through a dead Vacation, and at last to take it out in wares? A good turn I think for a Trades-woman; take heed you do not by your fullennesse make me suspect another kind of good tu•no, or that you did my husband any to my injury, nor deny the receipt of his money, lest I take up a violence that will not become me, no• you be able to bear. Be therefore well advised both in what you say, and who hears m•. Somebody comes.
Madam your Beer.
In•e pledge you Mistress Saleware.
I shall presume then Madam—Drinks.
This was right cast, was it not friend?
Your Ladyship will find it so—La. Drinks.
And I hope you will find your money so well bestowed Madam, that you will vouchsafe always to know the Shop.
Ever upon the like occasion, Mistress Saleware, so most kindly farewell sweet Mistress Saleware.
The humblest of your servants Madam. Open the Boot for my Lady.
It is done my Coach-man does it.
I would the Devil were in your Coachman's Coat to take his carriage for his pains.
One word more Mistress Saleware, can it be he?
Lay your commands on me good Madam.
Not to your trouble, I perceive a young Gentle∣man attends for conference with you. Is not his name Fitzgerrard?
No Madam, his name is Bellamie, much depend∣ing on the young Lord Lovely.
I thought I had known him, hee is a handsome youth. I cannot blame you now with him: but beware
of old Knights that have young Ladies of their own. Once more adieu sweet Mistress Saleware.
Most courteous Madam—and once more to the Devil. But on my life her chaste Ladyship is taken with this beard-lesse Bellamie. How she shot eyes at him!
Now may your servant obtain a hearing L••y.
My ears are open Sir.
But you are sad or angry, why seems that brow to threaten a subjection over him that is your vanquished captive; or has Cupped placed his Bow there be•t at me, whose heart already lodges all his Arrows, never to be restored but by your pity?
Fie, fie upon it! what talk is this? I am vexed, and you would m•• me.
What has displeased you?
A cross business that has happened in my Shop to day, I being none of the wisest Chapwoman, have un∣dersold a parcel of the best Commodities my husband had. And should hee know it wee should have such a scwable.
Husbands should be so served that do impose Those mercenary Offices on their wives.
Talk so, and I will hear you, your amorous notes sound like Play-speeches.
Servile, nay slave•sh Offices, ranking their wives with their prentices.
They pretend only that wee should over-looke our servants, when they but set us there for show to draw in custom: but in making us such over-seers they are overseen themselves; Shopkeepers-wives will be med∣ling and dealing in their kind, and as they are able, as well as their husbands (some much better, and more profit∣able) but I was overreached I confess.
For no great matter I hope.
No, the matter was not much (that never fretted me) but the manner has even kilt a She shop-keeper. I cannot be long-liv'd, here under a Pent-house, as my Lord (you know) told me when he said he would shut me out of this servitude, and that I should change my Coat, though my husband could not, before hee were an Alderman, and be ranked with Ladies.
My Lord has still the same regard of you.
So it appears by the Tailor and the Mercer, whom he sent four days since to measure me out, and suit me to his Honour, and no return of them found, yet his Land might ha• been measured all and sold, while a poor suit is dreamt on, had he borne the mind of some Lord?
I doubt not but this paper will clear that jea∣lousy. And while you read I'll speak that which I dare not utter through, Sighs and Blushes to an entire attention.
I am of Noble-blood my self, free-borne,
And not without good education;
But since I am engaged in this employment,
And made an instrument of others lust,
I find my self a scandal to my Name,
To Honour, and to Virtue, the base blot
Of Pander sticking on me. But not this▪
Alone is my affliction. Here's my torment,
That while I doe true service to my Lord
(Whom I must ever honour) in my Agency
U•to your self (whom I cannot but love)
I find my self a Traitor to his trust,
In my negotiation for my self.
Nor can I find it possible to desist,
Mine own attempts, to you, or forbear to urge
Your constancy to him.
How easy a work
It were for one woman to supply 'em both,
And hold her husband play to level Acoile,
A wooden two-leav'd book, a pair of Tables
Would do it.
How wretched is that suppliant, who must make
Suit to obtain that, which he fears to take!
At the bear at the Bridge-foot six a clock, good.
Sir, I find my Lords honourable appointments here, and have heard you all this while.
Now I could wish, and was in hope you had not.
I will not blame you on your Lords behalf;
Because you have enough rebuked your self.
But Sir, if you presume upon the favour
I give your Lord, and therefore to obtain me,
Cause I am his, you undervalue me
To think that I can stoop unto his servant,
Though almost his Companion, you may think
After that degradation by degrees,
I may, in time, descend unto his Footman, I'm no cast
Garment of his Lordships yet.
You have schooled me fairly, I am humbled, Lady—
Dee hear, dee hear sir, Mr. Bellamine,
One word before you go.
What would hee buy Mistress? can you take his money?
Sir dee hear?
Pray attend you the tother end of the Shop, If I cannot handle a Customer, why dos •your Master trust me? Could a frown fright you? Let a smile then cheer you.
And that's a heavenly one,
As that of Cynthia at Endymion.
Pray leave your Player-like passionate expressions▪ And if you love me, like a Man speak to me.
As I am a Woman; are you silent? if you doubt th• length of my mans Ears at that distance, you may which∣per what so? But that is a right shop-whisper indeed with Trades-women that are handsome; Is that the most you will give sir? Could I afford it so, doe you think I'd make two words w'ye? yet this before you go—Kiss. Now match it for the price I'll give it you for nothing.
I shall forget I have a Lord. I must forget him here.
Doe so, and if (I say) you love me, speak plainly what you▪ would have me doe, or what you would doe with me (I love to dant these young thing• that love before they can love to the purpose, or speak to it▪ handsomely like a Boy that would fine be shoot∣ing at wildfowl, before hee knows how to discharge a Birding-piece) I would hear you speak, you have often mu•tered and fribled some intentions towards me, but I would hear you speak. Come, if you love me lay by the fear of the Lord that sent you, and tell me round∣lie now, what you would have me doe?
I would entreat you—
Well; what?
That you would be pleased—
With what? or to doe what?
To wear this pair of Silk stockings for me▪
Is that all your suit, it is granted, with my thanks to you; Have you no more to say?
Yes, I say you are the beautifull'st of Women; and that my Lord in your enjoyment is the hap∣piest—
Nay think not of your Lord, but ask me, some∣thing.
I would but dare not hope for such a favour, •ou'l never grant i•, my unworthiness.
How can you tell?
You will not wrong my Lord, so as to doe it.
Not in his sight perhaps. What is it? come.
It is—
It is then, let it be so. Go to School child.
It is—That you would, let me—give you this ring,
And grace it with your Finger.
Will that be a wrong to your Lord?
Yes, to wear any favours, but his own.
Dos he know this?
No, nor I would not that he should (and given by me) for all the Rubies in Cheapside, where I bought this but now, over the way.
Come sir, I'll dally w'ye no longer, I know what you would have with me.
And now you will betray me: I am shamed then and undone.
No, but I have you of• the hip. It is plain you would lie with me: deny it if you can.
O dear, did I say so now?
What need you when I know it, you would lie with me, and you shall. Take courage man.
But, in good earnest, shall I? shall I?
Yes, in good earnest, you'll find it no trifling business, when you come to it once. But sir, upon con∣dition.
Any condition Lady.
All purpose on it is lost, and all comes out else.
Name your condition, I'll perform it if it be in the power of my life.
You saw here at your coming a fair Lady.
I took no notice of her.
But she did of you, she is called the Lady Thrivewell.
Sir Oliver Thrivewells Lady?
The same, you have known her it seems.
Seen her before she was married.
I will be brief with you, as you love me she loves you as eagerly, but with much more boldness, you saw her whisper me, and how loath she was to depart, when her eye was upon you.
I did observe it.
She is my noble friend, and the sweetest Lady, I need not set her out. But though you think you suffer in your honour, in being an instrument twixt your Lord and me, with the base blot of Pander sticking on you, (these were your words) I have engaged my self for her to be your Pandaresse; be so, I shall be even with you in business if you account it so.
What dee mean Lady?
To urge against my self, for that sweet Lady, which no Woman else I think would doe, that loves you so unfeignedly as I. But it is my fate, and the injuncti∣on I must lay upon you, to make me yours. That first you give your self to her Embraces; I'll give you means for your access to her, and your success with her, which done, and on your faith affirmed to me, it is so, I will perpetually bee yours more freely then your Lords.
You urge this but to try my constancy.
For that I'll satisfy you soon, my husband coming we must to night at the Bear—
My Lord writes so.
And there I will direct you in your progress.
Ally how dost? Mr. Bellamy how first? How dos my noble Lord? You are sad methinks. Have you overbought any thing here, and so repent your bargain? Or cannot my wife, and you agree upon it▪ you must use Mr. Bellamy
kindly my sweet Ally: hee is our noblest Lords most spe∣ciall favourite, and must find all fair dealing here, as well when I am abroad as at home sweet heart.
You hear not me complain sir, fare you well.
What an Assinego's this! He might have thanked me for my good words, though I meant him no good will, I hope thou hast overreached him indeed.
Thomas your hopes are vain, Thomas in seating me here to overreach, or underreach any body. I am weary of this Mechanic course Thomas; and of this courser habit, as I have told you divers and sundry times Thomas, and indeed of you Thomas that confine me to it, but the bound must obey.
Never the sooner for a hasty word, I hope sweet Ally; Not of me nor of my shop I prithee at seasonable times Love. But for thy habit (though this be decent on a Citizens wife) use thine own fancy, let it be as Courtly, or as Lady-like as thou please, or my Lords desires.
Then I am friends again.
Troth, and I'll call thee friend, and I prithee, let that be our familiar and common compilation: friend it will sound daintily, especially when thou shalt appear too gallant to be my Wife.
Then let it be so friend.
Intrude it shall, and I am very much taken with it. Friend I have found a Customer to day that will take off my rich parcel of broad Bed-lace, that my Lord Paylate bespoke, and left on my hands, for lack of money.
I have sold it already friend, with other Laces at a good rate.
And all for ready money friend?
Yes friend, a hundred pounds, and somewhat more.
Who would be, or who could live without such a friend, in such a shop? This money comes so pat for a present occasion, to stop a gap. It has stopped a gap already friend.
I have disposed of the money, the odd hundred pound for apparel, friend, and other accommodations for my self.
Never the sooner for a hasty word I hope friend.
I have done it friend, whereby to appear more Courtly, and Ladilike as you say, to gain you more cu∣stome to your Shop.
Uuch friend—Is it so?
And friend you must not be angry, or think much of it, if you respect your profit friend.
I were no friend but a wretch if I would. No let it go friend, and—Sapientia mea mihi is my word, I must not grudge at my friend in any thing.
Then friend, let your shop be your own care for the rest of this day, I have some business abroad.
Whither sweet friend?
Is that a friendly question?
I am corrected friend, but will you not take a Man to wait upon you?
To watch me, shall I? and give you account of my actions? was that spoke like a friend?
I am again corrected friend,
Doe your own pleasure, you'll return to supper.
Yet again?
And again, I am corrected friend?
Neither to supper, nor to bed perhaps.
Never the sooner for a hasty word I hope.
But if I chance to stay, you cannot be a faithful friend and ask me where, or in what company, friend∣ship you know allows all liberty.
Sapientia mea mihi. A witty wife, with an im∣perious will,
Being crossed, finds means to cross her Husband still;
And Tradesmen that so match, must not with Gall
Temper their Wives, but sweetly by wit-all.
Dos not the World come finely on, Wat, ha?
And have not wee convenient comings in already, ha!
Better then wee know how to have paid, for that's the glory on it.
I need no more ensconcing now in Ram-alley, nor the Sanctuary of White-fryers, the Forts of Fullers∣rents, and Milford-lane, whose walls are daily battered with the curses of bawling creditors. My debts are paid; and here's a stock remaining of Gold, pure Gold hark how sweetly it chincks.
Yes, and twill ring the changes shortly.
For necessaries Wat, for necessaries it shall change, and Ring all out, and 'twil so long as I have an Uncle, and know to manage him, let money fly,
I can no faster spend then he supply.
For necessaries sir, but you must not now count Sack and Tobacco, Whores and Fiddlers in abundance, noses∣saries.
Why pray?
Because you'll have but little then for extraor∣dinaries, That is to say in a Gentleman for charitable, and pious works and uses.
The fellow's spoy'ld.
Not spoy'ld neither: For I would but wave your purpose of flying at all new Game, and neglect your poor whore, who now begins to be so violent for
wrongs, she can no longer bear, that she intends to pursue you with her complaints hither to your Uncles House.
My Uncles house? my house. Is not the first More∣nings draught mine?
With great reason, for you are first dry in the morning.
Is not the question first asked me, what will you have to breakfast? what will please you for Dinner, and what for Supper? Has not my Uncle let out mo∣niece, and taken Bonds and Mortgages in my name? doe not his Tenants crouch to me, and his servants all call me young Master? And dos not my Uncle take care to marry me to ten thousand pound, and a thing like a wife?
You have got a brave possession here, I must needs say; and I applaud your fortune most in this, tha• your young Aunt the noble Lady here, who you see feared would prove a cruel Stepdame to you, appear• to be more friend to you then your Uncle. It is a mo•• gracious Sun-shine in her.
She shall lose nothing by it. I have thought a way to requite her.
But sir, for Mistress Phebe, will you take no or∣der for the poor soul?
I do not like your zealous solicitation, but her• an order for her, in answer of her Malapert Letter yo• brought me last night. Give it her, and these five pieces upon condition that she never come, write, or send to me again, till I send to her.
That's somewhat hard Sir.
Nay look you Wat, you are a little mistaken i• me. I must give over whoring, for special causes there unto me moving.
O now I find you. And it were richly wort•
your patience, if you could win the Widow by it, for whom you stood in fair election once, until your last debauchment.
I shall stand fairer for her sir, when I leave worcester∣king but a week or two, shall I not?
Yes, if you leave it quite, but to forsake her whom you have brought low, to fall to others, were such a thing—
Well sir, it may be I will, it may be I wo'nt, what's that to you? carry you the Letter, and the Money, and try how that will work with her.
I'll doe my best, but if she should exclaim, and bring on her Cousin Mr. Saleware to bee clamo∣rous—
Her Cozen's a Cuckold, exclaim and clamorous! give me my money again.
Nay I am gone sir.
The Rogue's in faction with 'em; O noble Mr. Saveall, you have most fairly kept your minute with me, I have written my Letter, sealed it and all, here to the Widow.
So early? that is well.
I have written no less then six large Epistles this morning, and sent'em now by my Man to be con∣vey'd into the Country to Lords and Knights, with all the news spiritual, and temporal, foreign and dome∣stick that could possibly fall into a private Gentleman's Collection.
Is it possible?
With such dexterity, that if I would make a Trade on it, I could undo all the Newes-mongers in Town that live by it.
It is a most commendable practise in a Gentle∣man, and it will mature your judgement in the both
Common-wealth and State affairs, and in short time in∣vite you unto the chair of Helm.
When I am once married, and settled, you shall see what an ass it is, he believes me.
How am I comforted in my Meditation for you, and how over-joy'd will your Uncle be at the use you make of your retirements!
I confess it is (by reason of my unwontednesse to it) some difficulty for me to write to women; where∣fore since you have so nobly undertaken the conveyance of this, let me beseech you to apologize for the rudeness of my stile.
To the fair hands of the most acomplish'd in ver∣tu Mistress Anne Crostill, present, I pray with my service; The out-side hath no rudeness on it, and (I doubt it not) she shall find within all sweetness and ur∣banity.
As you may interpret it to her sir.
Sir, what I have already said, and do intend to say unto her from your Uncle, and my self on your be∣half, together with what you have here written, shall (I doubt it not) prepare so fair a way of proceeding for you; That at your visit of her you may say, veni, vidi, vici, she is your own.
And then—a ha, Mr. Saveall!
Expect your fortune modestly, and when it comes embrace it with discretion.
Sir, I am edified.
It is well if you be so; I will put my undertaking in action presently, Pray for my good success.
I dare not tell him now I cannot; but I wish well for the Monies sake; and let the Vintners pray, and all the decayed Sparks about the Town, whom I will raise out of ashes into flame again. Let them pray for my good wokes. O my young Lady aunts grave waiting
Woman. If she were not hers, and out of this house I should take her for a Bawd now. But being hers, and here how much may I mistake? all flesh is frail.
Not to disturb your morning Meditations, my Lady has sent you—
And you have brought me, what sweet Mistress Closet?
A part of her Ladyship• own breakfast, it is very cordial and comfortable to the spirits, I assure you, and delectable to the younger sort, and profitable to the old.
One of Robert Greenes works, or the mad Doctor that preaches boiled in it I think.
It is a composition of mine own Sir, of many excellent decoctions, of most wholesome restorative, and costly ingredients.
That it was sent by her makes it more excel∣lent, whose bounteous care of me, I must acknowledge exceeds all cost in carving to me, and countenancing me at her Table, in gracing me in presence of the Ladies that come to visit her; in giving charge for decency in all things for my Chamber, my fires shining, my odours burning, my livery served in, my soft and costly bed pre∣par'd and spread with perfumed linen—here's Amber∣greece in this now—
O is it so, doe you find that?
But though she is my own Uncles wife, I could •'ne say it is pity a young man had her not.
What a wig's this?
She is a most sweet Lady.
She is a sweet Lady indeed, I can best speak
it that have known her from the womb hitherto: A sweet infant she was borne, and a sweet babe I swad∣led it, and a sweet child I nursed it, I trained it up a sweet child. It was in manners a sweet child, at her Book and Sample a sweet child. I never whipped it but once, and then it was sweet too, and sprawled but a little, and whimpered but a little it was so sweet a child; And so she grew upwards, and upwards towards wo∣man, and a sweet youngling she was, and so grew up∣wards and upwards towards man, and then a sweet Bride she was, and now a most sweet Lady she is, (as you say, and I commend you for it) And so she stands at a stay. For now she grows no more upwards then upon her Wedding day, not upwards as I would have her upwards, here I mean young Gentlemen, could I but see a sweet babe of hers once by my Master, I could be then content to sleep with my Ancestors.
I had rather see your Gibship hanged up with Polcatts in a Warren, and your sweet Lady with you, though I confess that were some pity. I hope her bar∣rennesse, or his will preserve her from my curse.
I hope still, and she hopes still; and I make him of this broth for every morning, and many other good strengthening things (I cannot say for the same purpose) for I shall never see him have an heir by her.
Excellent! that's best of all.
Because you then are heir, say you so? Is that your love to your Aunt?
No I protest Nurse, I meant by the broth, the bottom was the best of all.
Then I cry mercy.
Cannot all thy art, and her cost find help for my Uncle, think thou, to get a child?
Help! what dee mean. He might have help
and helps enough, were she not too virtuous.
Still thou mistake me Nurse.
Away wag away, your Aunt loves you too well to think so of her.
Nurse as I hope to inherit any thing here∣after—
I should but serve you well to tell her your good thought of her.
Nurse, by this good—piece I think no harm.
Nay, nay.
Take it I say. And tell her if thou wilt, that I love her so well, that were she not mine Uncles wife, I would get her an heir my self rather then be his.
Kind young Master, now I am heartily sorry that I moved you.
And for my Uncle were I his heir apparent, I rather wish he might live till all this World were weary of him, and the next afraid to take him.
Then I survive him (Tonuge, a pox punish you for lying)
Now I live well, and merrily good Nurse,
Wealth and Estates, bring cares and troubles with'em,
Were all young heirs of my contented mind,
Parents and Patrons would be better prayed for.
Good Gentleman.
Nurse Closet.
O my Lady calls.
Present my thanks and best respects unto her.
I should have told you first—I have forgot. My head is nought,
What member hast thou good then?
My Lady desires you—This talk has put me out—O this head! My Lady desires you—
Desires she me Nurse?
Yes sir, she desires you.
Refuse me if I desire not her as much, for all she is my Uncles leavings.
My Lady desires you.
And she shall have me Nurse—And she were ten Uncles wives, and she ten of mine Aunts.
O this head! nay now you will not hear me, she desires you to go abroad in the Coach with her.
Any whither, to Islington, Newington, Pading∣ton, Kensington, or any of the City out-leaps (I know'em all) for a spirt and back again, tell her I am up and ready for her, and could have been without her stirrup porridge, though I thank her for her care. A man can not be too well prepared, or provided for so sweet a Lady, in so much distress. A very Andromeda, chained to a Rock.
What's this you say? I understand no word of it, I would take your answer right, though I faltered in my Ladies message.
The Devils in this overruning Tongue of mine, I could find in my heart to worm him out with my teeth.
What must I tell my Lady Sir?
That I am more obliged to her Ladyship then I was to my Mother, she has brought me a new man into the World, and that my Being and my Life is hers.
I hope hoe's a true convertite, did I send you to hold discourse here, Closet?
Nor did I Madam but I could hear this Gentle∣man a whole day methinks. Hee speaks so acknow∣ledgingly of your Ladyships virtue, and goodness to∣wards him.
I am beholding to him, will you go with me Nephew to the Exchange? I am to buy some toys there for the Country, you may get a fancy by it.
Good, I must wear her favours.
Or cannot you forbear your study so long?
To doe you service Madam, under whose com∣mands I build my happiness.
Be not at the distance of complement with me good Nephew.
I would not be thought insolent dear Madam.
Come the Coachman grumbles at my stay, and twill be Dinner-time presently, so the Cooke will be an∣gry too.
You are all tenderness to your servants Ma∣dam.
A sweet Gentleman, and bountiful, if my Lady had been blessed with such a Husband, what a place had I had!
DOe you know the contents Mr. Saveall of the familiar Epistle you have brought me here?
No Lady, but I guess it a fair expression of the Writers affection to you, although hee desired me to crave your pardon for the rudeness of his stile, it being the first that hee hath composed of that con∣sequence.
Ha, ha, ha, I'll trust you sir, with the full know∣ledge of it, pray read it your self.
I find she is pleased, and my endeavour pros∣porous, for the young Gentleman, I am sorry that I de∣laid a day in the delivering of it.
Pray read it out sir, for I find it so pleasant that I could hear it a whole day together.
In the first place you shall give me leave to wonder at your impudence (though it be but in your dreams) to have a thought that I ever intended, or can be drawn by persuasion, force, or the power of witch∣craft to marry you—
Bless me! sure if hee writ this, the Devil dictated to him.
On sir, that's but his first charge.
Secondly, I am to tell you, that I am warm in mine Ʋnkles favour. And it is not a piece a time, or five pieces for a piece of pleasure can undo me; and so I can have change, and scope the captivity of Wedlock.
This could no otherwise be done but by the Devil that ought him the shame.
What follows I pray, there's the first and second point past? mark his method.
Thirdly, and lastly, let me advise you, since you are so hot upon Marriage, though I assure my¦self you love none but me, (and I thank you for it) that you frame or dissemble an affection to some one of the City, who is but comparative to your self in blood and fortune, and so you may make by-use of me as your friend, and have children like me,
Have you ever heard so quaint a Love Letter?
Lady, the injury done in it, to your self is un∣answerable, but my wrong in being his Messenger, I will make him answer.
Excuse me Sir, he has done me a favour; I pray inform him so with my great thanks. But for what you conceive a wrong to your self, use your discretion, you have no more to say to me for him at this present, have you sir?
Not for him but against him, I will un say all that I said before intended for his good.
But i'll not hear you wrong your former love, and judgement of him so, which made so deep impres∣zion here, that I had locked his love up as a Jewel in my Breast, and you in striving now to wrest it thence may break the Cabinet; I rather wish you'll be a friend∣lie means to draw his presence hither, that I my self may mildly question him.
Are you serious Lady?
I fear I shall not rest before I see him, but doe not tell him that, lest in this •ullen humour, hee force his absence to afflict me more; I'll hold you sir no lone∣ger, deal for me as you can, I know you have a guess at my desire.
I'll doe you service in it.
I guess that her desire is to doe some act of Revenge upon him. And (so it be not mortal) it were but Ju∣stice in her for so gross a scorn by him cast upon a well reputed Gentleman. Yet is it observed in her that she has a violent humour to do, and not to doe things often∣times wilfully against all good council or persuasion, she has the spirit of contradiction in her, and an unal∣terrible resolution upon sudden intentions, a most encore∣rigible will she has that will not bow nor break. This cross abusive Letter therefore may doe good upon her,
however mischievous hee might intend it. If she meant well to him before, it may the faster bring her on, but it amazes me that hee should write so, bearing his Uncle, and my self in hand, that hee so fairly loved her, and besought us to negotiate with her for him, should she forgive it, yet the wrong to us in his vile manners is un∣pardonable, and so sir, I come to you.
O Mr. Saveall—
What mischief or despite have I ever done you,
That could provoke your desperate spleen against me,
To wound mine honour?
What doe you mean good sir?
You have employed me basely, made me your
Carrier of scandal, and scurrility to the hands
Of nobleness and virtue. Could the Fiend
Lust that is in you suffer you to write
No other Sense or Language to a person
Of her fair Name, and Worth, then such as Ruffians
Would send to strumpets? or it being such.
Could not a Porter, or your Pander there
Serve for the lewd conveyance?
What a welcom's that!
You might safer
Have sent it so, and your own right hand with it;
Then to have drawn my just revenge upon you.
Hold I beseech you, and sir, though I lose the Widow by my error (which was indeed but a mere accident) let me not be so miserable made as to lose you, before you hear a short Examination—
Delivered you the Letter which I sent
Yesterday to the Damsel that you wot of?
Yes sir, she read it, kissed it a hundred times,
Then made a bosom Idol on it,
And says you are the noblest Gentleman,
Under a Saint that ever took care for sinner.
Hell take her for a mistaking whore,
She has the widows Letter, and the widow hers,
I found it sir, when you judiciously
Said it was Ruffian-like, and Strumpet▪ language.
How could you err so strangely?
O slightly, slightly, curse of my heedless brain!
And then too be trapp'd with carelessness.
When I was so religiously resolved,
T'incline to virtue, and a Marriage life,
Thinking with one hand to cast off my follies,
And to take hold of virtue with the other,
For sir, (I will confess my self to you)
The Letter you conveyed was in defiance,
A loose lived wanton, intended to a whore,
That impudently hopes an interest in me.
It was not so directed.
I there was
(The Hell confound it on it) my giddiness:
I sealed both Letters ever I superscribed 'em,
And so gave each the contrary direction.
It was a gross carelessness, and if you lose
A fortune by it, do not blame your friends.
That fortune should favour a whore before
An honest woman. It was the sweetest Letter,
The daintiest winning things—(the Devils in it)
She must not carryit from the widow so.
Fetch me the Letter again.
Do you think she'll part with it sir?
Cannot you beat it out of her sir?
I cannot tell how to do that.
Thus sir—i'll give you demonstration, you ma∣licious Rogue, you that conspirst with her to betray me, so good a Master I have been to thee, and so good a friend to her, i'll recompense you both.
You have undone us both, and will discard us now you are warm in your Uncles bosom again—but—
But what you Traitor you?
You put me in good mind, and if I do not some∣what.
I owe you somewhat for your last-nights absence, too pernicious Villain that kepst thy self out of the way of purpose that I should bee drunk, and abuse my self, and the house here all lay of your absence, There's somewhat more for that.
It is all upon account sit.
Who knows an honest Serving-man that wants a good Master.
Was it your mans fault Mr. Careless? if I be not revenged &amp;c.
No faith, To speak truth he was as much abused in it, as you in doing a thing as contrary to his vile con∣ditions, as you did to your noble Name. But I crave only your pardon, I know not what I doe besides. This cross blow of chance staggers my reason so—
Well sir, since I have found the error, my reason reconciles me to you, and since it grew out of your equal intent to cast off the evil, as to embrace the good, I will re-mediate for you to the widow.
But yet she'll know I have had a whore. Yet then you may say, it is such a running Disease among young Gentlemen, that not one of a hundred has escaped it, that have proved stayed men afterwards, and very so∣ber husbands; As look you yonders one may prove, whom now I have in good sooth a great desire to beat.
In your Aunts presence, and your Uncles house; Though I were not his friend; could you be so outrage∣os? I muse I see him here though.
Cry you mercy sir, are you his friend?
I make my self so, hee being dependent to my noblest Lord, whom I am bound to honour.
What Lord I pray, that I may honour him too.
The Lord Lovely.
That loves women above wine, wine above wealth, wealth above friend, and friends above himself. There's no scandal in all that sir.
It goes so of him indeed, but he loves honour above all those.
Mr. Saveall a word.
Your servant Madam.
In the name of flesh, for what dos his Lordship employ that Angle-worme to my Aunt? Hee has had her this hour in private conference, close chamberd up together, not so much as Matron Nurse in the room with 'em, It is a fine sleek thing, and almost pity to hunt it, but sure I must beat it, as place and time conve∣nient may serve.
Pray• Mr. Saveall move you my Husband for it, I would not meddle in his money matters will∣lingly.
Five hundred pound for my Lord upon the men∣tioned security, I will break it to sir Oliver.
Is that the business after so much privacy? •very pretty, my Aunts a woman too, and me Uncle may have as forked a fortune, as any of the City, that lend out mo∣ney to hedge in Lordships.
I am his Lordships servant.
And I your Lordships good Madam. And yours Mr. Saveall.
I am for your way Mr. Bellamy.
And I sir, and't please you.
George Careless, I would speak with you.
May I not wait upon your Gentleman to the Gate Madam?
No good George, though I commend your cur∣tesie, yet would I not you should neglect your own dignity.
Umh—I am under Government.
The young man, if you have modesty will think you mock him, if not you'll make him become arrogant, know you not whose man he is?
No tic apparent, this over-slighting of him pro∣claims she loves him, whose follower Madam, and I know Lords followers, Knights fellows.
Not all Lords followers to all Knights George.
To as many as their fair Ladies will give way to, that are not faint-hearted.
I understand you not George; something troubles you, you are not right to day.
I am only as I am in your favour Madam.
Come I know what perplexes you▪ and it is there∣fore that I desire to talk with you; I am not angry with you, but let me tell you George, although not openly I took notice of the pickle you came home in last night, after your Uncle was in Bed; to whom, mer∣veiling at your absence I excused you, as gone at my request to visit some Ladies with whom you staid Supper, I told him, when you were with your Roucers.
But did you never go?
Indeed I did, and he was satisfied.
O my sweet Lady Aunt•! I was indeed amongst'em, and deeply merry.
And drunk as deeply!
I will abuse your goodness so no more.
Say and hold George, for your own good.
What's now become of me, I am under cor∣reaction.
I would you could have seen your self, and how your disguise became you, as I was told, I do but friend∣lie tell you of some passages, as they were to me related, by those whom I have charmed to speak no more on it. Be secure therefore in your Uncle.
O my dear heavenly Aunt!
First, at the door you bounced like a Giant at the Gate of an enchanted Castle, before which could be opened offence was taken by you at your Sedan-men; for asking money (as appeared afterwards) more then you brought from the Tavern, and leaving their office fouler by a distempered stomach-full, then you found it. In the strife for these sad causes your Sword being seized on, you being unable to use it, were found by my servants at Luggs with your brace of Corps bearers, in the dirt, and their poor hovel Chair turned on his ridge in the Kennel.
I'll never be drunk again.
I hope you will say so, when you have heard all George; but by the way your late stock being spent, here are ten pieces towards a supply.
O sweet golden Aunt!
Well sir, the strife appeased, you were tan in. Then hay is there no Sack in the house? Tic for you in you Chamber is replid, up you are had, where is the Rogue my man? not seen since Yesterday; Fetch me a wench. Bless us cries old Simon the Butler, wee have none in the house, nor cannot send for any out of doors. Dost—tell me that? is not my Ladies Woman, my Ladies Chamber-maide, the Laundry-maide, the wench under the Cooke, my Ladies Nurse old Winter plum, nor my Lady her self within? I know, or will know all the she things in the house.
But why me up in your bedroll George?
P•eigh.
You remember none of this!
It is not worth it Madam.
Nor how you scared Chamber-maid, whom I sent in love to see care taken for you, not dreaming of any ill thought in you, doe you remember how you told her, and what you would give her, when your Uncle died for a small present courtesy? she was fine to saisfie you with a false promise to steal to bed to you before four men could force, or humour you into it.
What an unhallowed Rascal was I!
It is well you consider it now. And still consider George.
How ill excess of Wine, Roaring and VVhoring be∣comes a Gentleman, and how well sobriety, courtesy, and noble action, and dangers wait upon the one sort, and what safety accompanies the other!
Wine, Roaring and Whoring, I will lay that say∣ing of yours Madam to my heart; but Wine is the great wheel that sets the rest a whirling.
True George, for had you not first been •ullied with Wine, you would not have abused your self to ha tumbled in the dirt with your Litter-mules, nor offered to seduce my Chamber-maide. Suppose you had over∣come her, how could you have come off but with shame to your self, and the utter ruin of the poor Wench?
Still she corrects me for my meddling with base matters and people, she is not angry she says, though I called for her last night i'my drink, she gives me mo∣ny, I will now understand her, and whereunto all her former favours and her later admonitions are directed, and presently appear a grateful Nephew.
Nay, bee not sad upon it George, as I would win you from your faults, I would have you still be cheer∣full. If any thought troubles you, you may be free with me George.
O Madam you have made me, and now take me to you.
How mean you?
Freely and wholly, the truest, faithfullst servant, and I think the ablest that any Lady of your lacks and longings ever bestowed a favour on, though I say'• my self. You'll swear it when you have tried me, and't be but hour∣lie for a month together.
Is the man sound trow?
I defy Surgeon, or the Apothecary can come against me.
Sound in your senses sir, I mean.
O for blabbing Madam never fear me, now I am resolved to live soberly, and be only yours. And with such pleasure, with such safety, secrecy, and fullness, I will so constantly supply you, that you shall not have time to dream of the defects of your old man.
Doe you mean your Uncle, and not know whose wrong you unnaturally and sinfully pursue?
No man living Madam can doe it for him, more naturally and less sinfully; I am of the same flesh and blood, and bring his youth to your pleasure, how can you think old Uncles children are got? or how came up the proverb, She is one of mine Aunts, doe you think? You would have a child by him. All your Cawdells and Cock-broaths will never doe it, An old mans generative spirit runs all into brain, and that runs after covetousness too, get wealth, not children. Believe it, much Nephews help belongs to it, and then the i will∣drone are not degenerate, I cannot think but many Uncles know it, and give way to it, because stranger bloods shall not inherit their Lands, and so sweet Aunt if I live not to inherit his, my son may, in your first born. There will be a sweet comfort to you.
But is all this in earnest?
In earnest? yes, And I pray so take it, and let it be a bargain, and now presently in the Chamber, I will make you my first payment for the purchase.
Fie, fie, you doe but say so?
That shall be tried presently. Come sweet Ma∣dam, I find you are willing, and I swear I am resolute, and will be as secret as your own woman, if you will not go I protest i'll carry you.
Nay preythee George set me down a little.
Psewgh—I need none of these whesings I.
But prithee tell me, dost thou not all this only to try me, or am I a Rogue think you, or would thou seriously that thine own natural Uncle, thy bountiful Patron, nay thy father on the matter, should suffer such a wrong, and done by us?
Hark there again, Madam have I not proved sufficiently and plainly, that I shall in doing the feat for him doe him the greatest right in the world, in getting him, and you an indubitable heir, and to give him both the comfort, and the glory of it?
Was ever such a Reprobate?
And you can doe him no wrong (though you had not a Ladies privilege) to Cuckold him, for assure your self hee Cuckqueanes you, now come Madam.
You speak not on your knowledge.
I never was his Pimp, but what I have heard, I have heard. Now come Madam.
I heard Mr. Saveall protest within these three days that hee thought my Husband the chastest man (of a Gentleman) that he knows.
O did hee so, Madam, believe it they two have whored together, and that Saveall has pimped for him of∣tener then you ever lay with my Uncle.
What! since he married me?
What else? Saveall is not only his grave Para∣site, but his Pimp, and has spent my Uncle more in these civil punctual ways, then I in all my whole de∣bashes, what did you think hee kept him for? O they are a brace of subtle dry Tweakes, come now Madam.
What an inhumane Villain's this▪
I'll tell you all now upon our inward acquain∣tance.
You have told too much already to have any ac∣quaintance with me at all, nor shall you, unless you pre∣sently recant all that you have, or would have said upon this subject.
Madam—
Stand further and reply not, less I call in those that shall sadly silence you. Have you abused your Uncle, and the next best friend you have in the World, in hope thereby to abuse me most, that was no enemy of yours till now you justly have provoked me?
I took not a right course.
Was this the best construction you could make of my love to you, or a fit requital, to make me an incestu∣os Whore?
Yes, yes, a pox my course was right enough, but I undertook her at an ill season. Her spruce springall left her but now, i'll tell her so Madam.
Come I perceive you are sorry; and that's a part of satisfaction. Therefore for once I'll wink at your transgression, especially before others. Here's one you see.
I doe, the Devil blind her.
Madam—
But tempt me so again, and i'll undo you.
I know how you'll undo me witty Madam, Ah—
Nay be not sad George, discover not your self, and you are safe, for once I tell you.
She'll come about I see.
But will you Cozen go, and doe that for me?
Most readily good Madam, I have your full di∣reactions.
All Cousin, if you forget not.
I cannot be so negligent in your service Madam, I find by this feigned errand she dares not trust her trol∣lop there, I love her wit now too.
He is both schooled, and cooled I hope. Now Closet what's your News?
Of a Citizen Madam that entreats to speak with your Ladyship.
Doe you not know his Name, or Trade?
Yes, I had both even now, but I have such a Head.
If you have lost 'em by the way pray go back and seek 'em, or bring you his business.
I asked his business Madam, and told him hee might trust me with it without a hand to his book, but he said it could not be delivered, but by his own word of mouth to your Ladyship.
What strange matter is it trow? or what Citizen, is not his Name Saleware?
Yes Madam, and he is a (O this head) a—
A Silkeman is he not?
Yes Madam the same.
I hope his impudent Wife has not told him all; if she has, whore's his remedy in this Women's Law∣case?
There's a Gentleman with him too Madam.
Then wee shall have it, It is his Wife sure, well I
am prepared for the encounter. Bid 'em come up, if they grow violent or too bold with me, i'll set my Nephew George upon 'em. It is not his Wife, what Creature is it trow with me, Mr. Saleware?
Craving your pardon Madam, a few words in the behalf of this poor Kinsewoman of mine, touching a Gentleman, who I hear lives in your House, Mr. George Careless, Madam, by whom she has received much injury.
How sir I pray?
Pray Madam read this Letter, weep not, but hold up thy head Cousin, wee will not be dashed, nor bashed in a good cause; pray read you Madam.
I am now (Lady) in favour with my Ʋnkle, and in fair possibility of a good Estate, deporting my self (I intend to doe) a civil Gentleman. To which end (induced as well by reason, as by long continued affections) I tender my self to you in the holy con∣dition of Marriage. If you vouchsafe your consent, (which is my most earnest request) I shall not only declare my self a good Husband, but the most happy,
Wherein appears the injury to your Kinswo∣man?
In flying from his Word, and Deed Madam. He has borne her in hand these two years, and use her at his pleasure, detaining her from her choice of many good fortunes, and at last sends her this to make amends for all, and denies his act the next day, sending his man to take the Letter from her, pretending it was directed to another. But never the sooner for a hasty word Cousin, we will not be dashed nor bashed, I warrant thee.
Here's the direction. To the Lily white Hands of Mistress Mariana Gimcrack, is that your Name Lady?
I am the sorrowful one that is known by it Madam.
Never the sooner for a hasty word Cousin.
I conceive the business, and find the error, and my great doubt is over.
Weep not I say.
What would you have me doe Mr. Saleware?
You have discretion Madam, and I made choice of your Ladyship to open this matter unto you, rather then to Sir Oliver himself, whom I would not willing∣lie exasperate against his Nephew, you may be pleased in a milder way to temper him, and work a satisfaction for my Kinsewoman; Sir Oliver and your self Madam, are noble Customers to my Shop, and for your sakes I would not deal rigorously with your Kinseman, if a gentle end may be made. But, if you cannot so compound it, the Law lies open, money and friends are to be found, a good cause shall not be starved, I will not be dashed not bashed, Sapientia mea mihi is my word, and so good Madam you know my mind.
It is pity a Gentlewoman should suffer too much, and I like her so well at first sight, that I am easily moved to doe good for her, is she your Kinsewoman in blood Mr. Saleware, or your wives?
Mine I assure your Ladyship, though my wife can boast as great and noble friends I thank fortune, as the wife of any Tradesman that carries a head in the City, (but that's by the by) yet I came of a better house, and am a Gentleman borne, none dispraised.
Well Mr. Saleware, leave your Kinsewoman with me a little while, you shall not be scene in my act, i'll try what I can doe for her.
With all my heart good Madam, and dee hear Marina, This is a noble Lady, bear your self discreetly in the business, and towards her: you may get a Hus∣band by it, or at least a composition that may purchase one to sholder you up. But carry it high and worthy of the house I brag of, or—Sapientia mea mihi, stultitia tua tibi, That's my sentence.
Well sir, you need not doubt my high Car∣riage.
Closet.
Madam.
Take▪ this Gentlewoman to your Chamber, and I charge you let none see her, or take notice of her, but your self and me, till I give order.
I shall doe something for her doubt not Master Sale∣ware.
I shall be bound to your Ladyship, now to my Shop, to which I thank my Wife she has been a Wild∣cat these two days, which must be borne with as wee are friends. And from my House all Night, and yet no Greene-goose-faire-time; Nor though she were so ab∣sent must I be so unfriendly as to question her, where, or with whom she was; a new Article this twixt Man and Wife! But Sapientia mea mihi, stultitia sua sibi. Thus it must be where Man and Wife are friends, and will continue so in spite of chance, or high held shoes, that will awry sometimes with any Women. She is not yet come home here. What Ladies that, and not my Wife there to handle her handsomely for her Money? My servants are such Assinegoes! stay, are mine eyes perfect? It is she, it is my Friend∣wife, and in the Courtly habit, which so long she has longed for. And my Lord Lovelies Gammed with her.
His Lordship lay not at home to Night, neither at his Lodging, I heard that by the way. I cannot think my Lord and she both sate up all Night to see the Taylors at work, and to hasten the finishing of those Clothes, if she were with him which I would not be so unfriend∣lie to inquire for the worth of a Wife. It was right ho∣norably done of him to send her home as gallantly at∣tended as attired, if she die—a—a—lie with him all Night, which I will not be such a beast to believe al∣though I kn•w it. I must come on her with a little wit though, for which I will precogitate.
Once more your story, for I am not satisfied with thrice being told it.
Can a Woman take so much delight in hearing of another Women's pleasure taken?
As it was given by you I can, for I am prepared by it to take pleasure from you, and shall with greediness expect it till I have it.
Then know I pleased her so, that she protest∣ed, (and I believe her) her Husband never pleased her so.
Or any other man you should have put her to that, her Husband's but a Bungler.
How know you that?
I doe but guess.
Nay she swore deeply, and I believed her there too, no man besides her husband but my self had ever enjoyed her, but let me tell you Lady, as she was amply pleased she may thank you.
For sending you, I know she did and will.
That was the first respect, but not the greatest:
For in our Act of love, our first and second Act—
Indeed!
In real deed, I can speak now like an emboldened Lover.
Well, but what in your Acts of Love?
I had you still in my imagination, and that en∣abled me to be more grateful to her Ladyship, which wrought her thankfulness to you, expressed in a hundred pieces, sent by me, more then I told before, which are your own she says, since tother morning she was here with you.
That token confirms all. Had I the spirit of Witchcraft, when putting upon chance for my Revenge, to find Reward! Have you the money?
Safe at my Chamber for you.
O you are cunning, less I should break with you you thought to oblige me by it.
I'll rather run and fetch you twice the sum, I concealed it only to give it you unexpectedly.
Sweet Bellamy I am yours, I could be sorry now I have lost so much of thee. This Kiss, and Name your time—
Would they had done whispering once, that I might enter safe in my manners.
To morrow night.
Shall you be ready so soon think you after your plentiful Lady-feast.
O with all fullness both of Delight and Ap∣petite.
And with all faith and secrecy I am undone else, you know my vows unto my Lord.
And can you think I dare be found your mean, to break'em.
No more my husband comes. Pray Sir return my thanks unto my Lord for his right noble bounty, and not mine alone, for so my husband in much duty bound also presents his thanks unto his Lordship.
Yes, I beseech you sir.
I am your willing Messenger.
Hee is my most honoured Lord, and has so many ways obliged me both by my wife, and in mine own particular that—
I take my leave.
Still this is an Assinego. I can never get him to stand a Conference, or a Complement with me. But Sapientia mea mihi, what was that friend you made me send thanks for to his Lordship, what new favour has hee done us, besides his council—These Clothes, the cost was mine you told me, out of the odd hundred pound you took, what late Honour has hee done us?
I•t not enough I know Friend? will you ever trance∣gresse in your impertinent inquisitions?
I cry you mercy friend, I am corrected justly.
Will you never be governed by my judgement, and receive that only fit for you to understand, which I de∣liver to you undemanded? Doe not I know the weight of your floor think you? Or doe it you on pur∣pose to infringe friendship, or break the peace you live in?
Never the sooner for a hasty word, I hope Friend.
Did you not Covenant with me that I should wear what I pleased, and what my Lord liked, that I should be as Lady-like as I would, or as my Lord desired; that I should come, and go at mine own pleasure, or as my Lord required; and that we should be always friends and call so, not after the silly manner of Citizen and Wife, but in the high courtly way?
All this, and what you please sweet Courtly∣friend I grant as I love Court-ship, it becomes thee bravely.
O dos it so?
And I am highly honoured; And shall grow fat by
the envy of my ripening Neighbours, that cannot main∣taine their Wives so like Court-Ladies, some perhaps (not knowing wee are friends) will say shoe's but Tom Salewares Wife, and she comes by this Gallantry the Lord knows how, or so. But Sapientia mea mihi, let the Assinegos prate while others shall admire thee, sitting in thy Shop more glorious, then the Maiden-head in the Mercers arms, and say there is the Nonparrell, the Pa∣ragon of the City, the Flower-de-luce of Cheapside, the Shop Court-ladie, or the Courtshop Mistress, have my sweet Courtly friend?
How do you talk? As if you meant to instruct'em to abuse me.
Sapientia mea mihi.
To prevent that I will remove out of their walk, and keep shop no more.
Never the less for a hasty word I hope Friend.
Fie, it is uncourtly, and now i'll tell you Friend, unaskd, what I have done for you besides in my late ab∣sense, and all under one.
Under one! yes, I could tell her under whom if I durst.
What's that you say Friend? me thinks you mutter.
No Friend, I was guessing what that other thing might bee that you have done for me, all under one. You have taken the House i'll warrant, that my Lord liked so.
By my Lords favour and direction I have taken it, And I will furnish it so Courtly you'll ad∣mire.
Must I then give up Shop, or lie so far remote?
No you must keep your Shop Friend, and lie here if you please.
And not with you but there?
No not with me at all Friend, that were most un∣courtly.
But I shall have a Chamber in your house, and next to yours. Then in my Gown and Slippers Friend at Mid∣night—or the first Cock.—
Softly for stumbling Friend, i'll doe you any honourable offices with my Lord, as by obtaining suits for you, for which you must look out, and find what you may fitly beg out of his power, and by courtly fa∣four. But keep your Shop still Friend, and my Lord will bring and send you such custom, that your Neighbours shall envy your wealth, and not your Wife; you shall have such comings in abroad and at home, that you shall be the first head nominated in the next Sheriff sea∣son, but I with my Lord will keep ▪you from prick∣ing. Bee you a Citizen still Friend, it is enough I am Courtly.
Here's a new Courtly humour, I see no remedy, unless I run my self out of credit, defy the life of a Cit∣tizen, and turn Courtly too.
What's that you say? doe you not mutter now Friend?
No, not a syllable Friend, but may not I give up Shop and turn Courtly too Friend?
As you respect my Lord, and your own profit, you must be a Citizen still, and I am no more a Citizens Wife else, and she must be a Citizens Wife, that wust doe all in all with my Lord Friends. Though my Lord loves the Clothes of the Court, hee loves the diet of the City best Friend, what ever I wear outwardly hee must find me Citizens Wife, which Friend, O hoe's a sweet Lord.
Well it shall be then as the sweet Lord will have it, Sapientia mea mihi.
LAdy, it is true hee is a bashful Lover,
Unskilled to court a Widow, has not yet,
The Act methodical to swear he loves you,
Must and will have you, nor the moving boldness
To stir your blood by putting of you to it,
Or showing you how tic, before the Priest
Declares it lawful. But he has love and sweetness,
Which you will find with full and rich content;
And look (look here) what a long, middle finger he has,
Which with thin Jaws, and Roman Nose,
Are never failing signs of Widows joys.
Your Lordship is disposed to mirth;
It is
My care to put you in a course of mirth,
Nay of felicity.
In marrying of that stripling!
Do not think sl•ghtly of him, tho'he appears
Modest and bashfully, if I have any judgement,
Hoe's a fit match for you. His outward fortune
For his estate, I will make good to him,
And for his inward virtue never doubt
He will make that good to you; However still
He holds his much commended Modesty.
My Lord you much commend his modesty,
And bashfulness, urging your confidence
Of his strange inward hid abilities
(I hope your Lordships pardon) can you tell,
If hee has with that bashful modesty
Got any of his Mothers Maids with child?
Or of his Fathers Tenants Wives, or Daughters?
I would have some assurance.
Then i'll tell you.
These Widows love to hear of manly acts,
And choose their husbands by their backs, and faces.
My Lord you said youl'd tell me.
Yes, but I would not have you cunningly
To sift discoveries from me to his wrong.
I am loath to speak so plainly to you my Lord,
But by the worst that you can speak of him
I may the better like him.
That's her humour;
Then hark you Widow, to avoid his blushes,
Suppose I tell hee has got a bastard.
You may as well suppose i'll• say it was well.
What say you to two or three!
The more the merrier.
He has no less then five old Gentlemen's Young Wives with child this Moon, but got all in One week.
Indeed!
Yes, in good deed, and lusty.
Good deed call you it, to get other Men's Children?
Suppose they have the husbands consents.
I suppose they are wittalls then.
No they are wisealls, and it is a thing in much request among landed men, when old and wanting issue of their own, to keep out riotous Kindred from in∣heritance, who else would turn the Land out of the Name.
An excellent policy!
You know the Lady Thrivewell.
And her old husband, and his riotous Kinseman too.
You will hear more hereafter, but now to him again, for whom I am spokesman.
In a strange way me thinks.
Hee is sent for far and near on those occasions, hee is of so sweet a Composure, and such sure taking mettle, that hee employs my care to have him well bestowed before he begins to wast.
First possible hee has done so much, and says so little?
The deepest waters are most silent,
But he can speak, and well to Bellamy.
My Lord.
I have made your love known to this Lady.
My love my Lord?
And have begun your suit; follow't your self.
My suit my Lord to her? I never moved your Lordship to it, Though I presume she may be a happy fortune to one of my condition; a poor and younger brother; only made rich and happy in your Lordships service, and over-flowing favours.
Which i'll take off of you if you slight my care in seeking your preferment to this Lady, of beauty equal with her fair estate, in both which she is great, and her achievement will be the Crown, and the continuance of all my favours to you, you are lost▪ if you pursue it not, I would thy old Uncle Bellamy saw thy Bash∣fullness.
Your Lordship seems now to woo for me, not him, however I am bound in thanks to your nobleness, in your fair proportion, I hope, I shall not be so poor to require an advocate, when I shall yield to have a hus∣band. But your mirth becomes your honour, and the young gentleman's reservednes him, Ha, ha, ha.
How mean you Mistress Crostill?
I doe commend your mirth my Lord, for the lusty strain you spoke him in, that he had yet five children in one week, wherein I may presume you thought you had moved to my liking, ha, ha, ha—
I am glad I have made you merry, But you will wish if you reject him—
If I reject one that tenders not himself! yet I commend his caution.
As how I pray?
As thinking I am one of your cast pieces
(Knowing how well your Lordship loves the game)
And now would put me on him,
But you misprise me sinfully sweet Youth
In such a thought, how ever you should not scorn
To ride in your Lords cast boots, though you be Gentle∣man of's house.
Come now he shall have none of you.
I'll hear him say he will not first, by your Lord∣ships leave.
Spirit of contradiction!
Stay sir, would you be content to have me?
You heard my Lord say I should not.
But say he say again you shall, speak, will you have me?
Say no (I find her now) that is the way to win her.
Without instructions good my Lord.
Lady I find so much your scorn already,
That to be wedded to it, I should despair
(My much unworthiness considered) to convert it
Ever to love, and it is your love, before
Your Person or Estate, that my affection
Ought to direct me to.
In answer therefore, to your will, you have me,
I must say no, till I perceive some sign
Of love in you towards me.
I now he speaks!
Some signs of love in me? How would you have it?
Must I declare it to you, before you seek it?
No; I would seek it zealously, but my Lord
Is off on it now, and I may lose his favour.
Is your love limited by his favour then?
Not limited: but (as it is as yet,
But in its infancy) a little checked,
Though it still grows, and may extend beyond
All limitation to so fair an object
As is your self: But still my own demerit
Curbs my ambition more then love emboldens.
He speaks within me now.
Stay, let us retire. Here is the Lord Lovely.
Be he a Lord of Lords i'll not retire a foot.
What servants Mistress Crostill doe you keep.
To let intruders in?
O Mr. Saveall!
The humblest of your Lordships servants.
What Gentlemen is that you bring with you?
It is the Newphew of the good Knight Sir Oliver Thrivewell, of which Sir Oliver, I have procured unto your Lordship the sum which you desired by your servant Mr. Bellamy.
For that I thank him and you, but I could wish you had not brought that Nephew hither now.
Certes my Lord I am sorry.
My reason is, I have entered Bellamy a suitor to the Widow.
He also comes a suitor.
And is in deep discourse with her already,
I'll see fair play.
But you shall hear me Widow, and that to the point and purpose.
Lady at my request, doe this Gentleman (who made the first approach) the favour to be, heard, and answered first.
As his approach was first my Lord, she has heard him first already, and my request is to be heard now, and then let her answer both him, or me, or neither, what care I?
Your Name is Careless I take it.
I came to talk with this Gentlewoman.
Pray my Lord forbear him, and let him speak, what do you say sir?
I say I love you, doe resolve to marry you, and then to use you as I list.
I say I love you, doe resolve to marry you, and then to use you as I list.—To Bell.—
This to me Lady? i'll take you at your word.
Stay, I doe but tell you what he says.
Take her at her word again sir, and I shall take you by the luggs. I say again you shall have none but me.
I say again, you shall have none but me,—To Bell.
What, doe you fool me, or him, your self, or all?
Pray sir how old are you?
Are you good at that, pray sir, how old are you?—To Bell.
You press beyond your privilege, which is only to speak to the Gentlewoman.
My Lord I am a Gentleman.
You may tell her so.
Let we beseech your Lordship.
How can you use a Gentleman that loves you
Dearer then Life, and only bends his study
By all means to deserve you, one that (can not?)
Will not, while there are ways to die, live out of
Your favour, with so much despiteful scorn,
That when he speaks his soul to you through his lips,
You make his Language yours, and give it a Boy?
What Gentleman's that you speak of?
The man that speaks it I am he.
All this sir in effect, and more of my affection, can I speak to you.
Uncle, but you shall not, you mistake the person to whom you are, or ought to direct your affection, you mistake strangely.
No more then once a Lover, or at least,
A bold pretender, having in civil language
Expressed in writing his affection
To a chaste Mistress sea•'d, and directed it,
And on the contrary, courted his virtuous friend in bro∣thell language;
To a lewd strumpet. Have I hit you sir?
What can I say now! Slife if that anger you after the error found, and confessed, i'll write worse to you, and in earnest.
Mr. Bellamy some other time I shall be glad to see you.
She means that to me now, but i'll take no notice; i'll find as good a Widow in a Tavern Chim∣ney, O shoe's a dainty Widow!
Hee looks with scorn at me, I must not lose him, yet dare not stay, for fear I tell him so.
I humbly crave your pardon good my Lord,
For my ill manners, and abrupt departure;
The cause is urgent, and I beseech your mercy,
Question it not.
Let your will guide you.
Mr. Saveall I thank you for my Suitor.
Nay but Lady.
Yes you shall control me in my own House.
Yes, yes, I mean so too, but you shall woo me hard first.
It is a mad Widow, which of these two now think you has the Better on it?
I think he shall in the end have the best my Lord, that can slight her most.
It is my opinion too, and hear me—
Sir, I have seen you but twice, and it has been at places where I cannot allow of your resorts, first at my Aunts, and now here at my Widows.
Your Widow sir! I thought she had been the Widow of one deceased.
Thou art a witty, pretty Child. But doe you here use your wit, out of the smell-reach of your Lords perfumed Gloves, and I shall take you by the Nose.
Forbear sir, I have a Handkercher.
And let me find you there no more, nor here I charge you.
I hear your charge sir, but you must leave it to my discretion to obey it, or not.
Trust to your discretion!
And so commend me to my Lady Thrivewel Come Bellamy away, what's your discourse?
All fair and friendly my Lord.
Very good.
So should it be with Rivals, fare you well Mr. Careless.
Your Lordships—with a whew.
Will you walk homewards?
Excuse me sir I pray.
It will not be convenient to return this day un∣to the Widow.
Fear it not sir, I like her not so well now.
Doe your pleasure.
Have you cross tricks Mistress Crostill? well I will go drink your Crotchets out of my Pate, then home, and doe that which mine Aunt and I must only know. This is her Night of Grace, if she keep touch with me.
IN truth your story is pitiful, but your own folly has brought your scourge upon you.
It was through the blindness of my love, and my credulity Madam, wrought by his strong Temp∣tations.
Well, for this once i'll strain a point of honour for you, chiefly indeed in answer of his rude unnatural presumption in attempting me. That a Villain can still be so barbarously lustful! If in this way I fit him not, and cause him to desist his beastly purpose, I will discover all to his undoing. Closet you know my mind, and few•l directions for the conveyance of our design.
Yes Madam, doubt not. Though I have but a naughty head at most, other matters, I dare not trust it for a sure one at such conveyances.
I presume to further the matter, he will come
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
home Drunk by his not coming to Supper.
Then he may forget what he so much expected, or sleep away his expectation.
No, hee will then be the more vehement till his desire be over.
You know his humour best it seems, away, away, my husband comes.
Well Wat, for this discovery i'll make thy re∣ward worth ten such masters services.
Sweet heart I have a suit to you—But first what Woman's that with Nurse?
A Kinswoman of hers whom she would pre∣far to me, but I have answered her, I will not charge your purse with more attendants; only I have given her leave to entertain, and lodge her this night.
That's my good Girl.
Now what's your suite sir, (as you are pleased to call it) which I would have to be your free com∣mand?
It is for my absence from thee, to accompany Mr. Saveall, to bring a dear friend on his way to Graves∣end to night, who is suddenly to depart the Land.
These sudden departures of friends out of the Land, are so frequent, and that I may believe you intend really, and no fained excuse; now will I think as long as you have good and substantial Made-worke at home, that you will seek abroad for any more slight sale-ware.
No more o'that Sweet heart, farewell, expect me early in the morning.
I am glad of his absence to night, lest there should happen some cumbustion in the house by his un∣•uly Nephew, in case hee should discover my deceit in beguiling him with his own wench instead of me, I do even
tremble to think upon the unnatural Villain, that would offer so to wrong his Uncle. I thought I had schooled him sufficiently, and beaten him off at his first attempt, and hee to assail me again with more forcible temptations urging me to a promise.
The young Gentleman is come in Madam, and as you foresaw very high flown, but not so drunk as to forget your promise! Hoe's going to bed in expectation of your approach.
And have you put his Damsel into her night∣attire?
Most Lady-like I assure you Madam.
And let her be sure to steal from him before Day.
Yes, with all silence Madam, she has promised.
May Ladies that shall hear this story told,
Judge mildly of my act since hoe's so bold.
NAy but look you Mr. Bellamy, it is not I protest that I am jealous, I make this inquiry for my wife. I jealous? I an Asinego then, I am as confident of my wife, as that she is in this house, how ere you deny her to me.
Why Lady, you are not jealous now? If you were not, you would believe me she is not here.
Without equivocation, Mr. Bellamy, she is not here—indeed, under your foot, but shoe's here in the house, and under some body for ought any body knows, but my self, that doe confide in her as I say, and will
know no such matter; And so my Lords will be done with her, I hope I shall see h•r well to morrow, and at her own house.
Can such language proceed out of any but a jealous mouth?
What an Assinego's this! I say again, I doe con∣fide in her, nor will I be dashed, or bashed at what any man says of, or against her; And therefore me thinks tic very strange that you should deny her to me, that comes not to molest her.
There you are again. But since no denial will serve your turn, indeed she is here in this house, and in bed by this time.
Away, away, you mock in faith, you are a wag shoe's no more here then I am, if sh•e were here can I think you would tell?
How came you to think, or dream she was in this house at all?
I neither thought it, or dreamt it. I but sir, a wa∣terman brought me a Letter in hast from one Mr. Ano∣nimus, intimating that my Ally was with a private friend at this house, and to lie here all night (a very likely matter) what private friend has she but my Lord, and that in a right honourable way, I confide in 'em both for that; but at this house is such a thing my Lord having divers Lodgings, and she a house of her own at his dis∣pose and command, that is such a thing to be thought or dreamt on!
Why came you to inquire then of such a thing?
Why sir, this Anonimus writ that I should come hastily hither, and ask to speak with you Mr. Bellamy, and I should know further; hither I came, here I find you▪ you deny she is here, and what doe I inquire any further?
You hear me say again she is here.
Go you are a wag again, she here? is my Lord here? or any private friend? alas, alas you are too young Mr. Bellamy, and may as well persuade me I am jealous.
Well sir, to put you out of all jealousy and doubt (if you be in any) I was the Anonimus that sent you the Letter to draw you hither and declare my self your friend, which shall instantly be manifest to you, if now you have a mind to lie with your own wife before any other man.
Then she is here indeed belike.
Pray come with me into the next Chamber.
This is some waggery plotted by my wife, I smell it.
But you must be sure to say when she discovers you, that you came of your own accord, unsent for, as inspired or possessed by some Dream or Vision, to find her here.
Well, if this be not my wives waggery in a maine proof of her chastity, I am not here. I will doe so sir.
So then, obscure your self a while, while I ap∣proach her.
Who's there?
It is I, your servant Lady.
Sweet Bellamy why come you not to Bed?
Good.
Dos the love that was so hot, and the desire that was so fervent, begin to cool in you?
Good again, as if hee an Assinego had ever made love to her fine waggery!
Has my mere consent to satisfy you, cloyed you?
Consent to my Lords man, a likely matter!
Or did you court me to a promise only to try my fidelity to your Lord, and then betray me?
Dear Lady think not so, but that I am struck into stone with wonder, and amazement at the most un∣expected accident that ever crossed a Lover.
Dainty waggery this, what little mad Rogues are these to plot this to make me jealous?
Pray, are you serious? what is the accident?
I will not be so crossed, but kill him rather. To in∣joy such a Mistress, who would not kill a horned beast? yet blood is such a horror—
Very pretty.
Will you not tell me?
Speak lower gentle Lady.
Why prithee, who can hear us?
I know not by what Magic your jealous hus∣band has made discovery of our being here, he wrought sure with the Devil!
I am undone then. He will tell my Lord.
I shall undo my self then Friend. No, Sapientia mea mihi. Be not dashed nor bashed for that good Friend, if there were any such matter: but this is waggery, fine waggery plotted betwixt you▪ to tempt my jealousy, but never the sooner for a hasty word I warrant you. Mr. Bellamy that my Wife is here I thank you; But how I came to know it you shall never know from me; you sent not for me, I am sure you were not the Anonimus. Indeed it should have been Anonima Friend-wife: for it was thy act I dare swear; However you doe not hear me say I was sent, or writ for at all, more then by a Dream or Vision: But here I am and mean to remain to night; I hope the house can afford you another Bed in it Mr. Bellamy, and you to leave me to my own Friend-wife, I like the lodging most curiously sweet Friend, and I prithee, lets try heartily what luck
we may have in a strange place, I would so fine have a little one like thee.
I'll leave you to your wishes, a good night to you.
Pray sir a word first, husband be farther.
Faces about Tom Saleware, and march forwards.
You told me sir, of a hundred pound that your sweet Lady Thrivewell sent me.
It is true I have it for you.
But she has since countermanded you to keep it, has she, and to mock my expectation of that, and you▪ why have you foold me thus?
I rather should suspect your craft in this proven∣tion: but love forbids me, and I must conclude, it is witch∣craft in your husband.
Come let's kiss friends, and (sweet) to morrow night I will prevent his Witchcraft, in the full enjoyment of our free pleasures: be you true to me.
May all that's Man in me forsake me else.
Another kiss and then good night.
Are you •still whispering? no matter, let 'em whiswer.
Good night.
Now may the spirits of all injured women, be ad∣ded to mine own, for my revenge, which I this night will dream of slighted and mocked, hee and his like shall know,
That when a yielding woman is so crossed,
All thoughts but of revenge with her are lost.
O hoe's gone—Ally, Friend I would say, And now I prithee tell me how, or why thou came hither.
Will you pardon me?
Yes faith, I were no friend else.
It was but to try if I could make thee jealous.
In waggery! did not I say so! when doe my pro∣phecies fail?
But what brought you hither think you?
A Letter from one Anonimus, but i'll eat Spy∣ders, and break if you sent it not.
Give me the Letter.
Where is it? facks I have lost it.
It was I indeed that sent it.
Did not I say so too? and that it should have been Anonima, Sapientia mea mihi, when doe my prophecies fail? i'll to bed instantly while the prophetic spirit is in me, and get a small Prophet or a South∣sayer.
No, i'll have no bed-fellow to night.
Ne'er the less for a hasty word, I hope Friend.
I am at a word for that.
I'll lie upon thy feet then.
Well, you may draw the Curtains, and sleep by me.
Sapientia mea mihi, stultitia tua tibi.
Puts in the bed,
MAdam, Madam, sweet Madam, twill not be day these three hours, stay but three minuets longer, but a touch more, she's whipped into her Cham∣ber. Could I but find the Door—I know my Unkle's from home—O she returns with light: that's well.
What ail you! Are you mad?
Would not any man be mad for losing such a Bed-fellow? sweet Madam, let us retire without any noise.
What an insatiate beast are you? would you un∣doe for ever both me and your self?
Not with one doe more I warrant you, come away Madam, Madam, somebody knocks mainly at the gate; and I believe it is my Master returned before his time!
I cannot think it is he.
It is the Rogue my man I warrant drunk, and has forgot I turned him away, but he shall spoil no sport. Come away Madam.
Closet, go your ways down, and hark before you—
—I will Madam—
So now come Madam, I commend you in the charge you have given your watch-woman.
What charge doe you guess?
Why to tell my Uncle (if he be come) that hee must not come near you, that you have had no rest to Night till just now you are fallen asleep, and so forth.
Go you are a wicked fellow; I am sorry for any the least favour I have done thee, and doe thou dare to attempt me once more, i'll have thee turned headlong out of my doors.
I have got her with child to night, with a spark of mine own spirit, and longs already to doe me mis∣chief. The boy will be like me, therefore it is pity to knocked of the head: But come Madam tother crash and good night, must I drag you to it?
Touch me but with a finger, and I'll raise the House.
You dare not sure, and now take heed you vex me not, have you not been my whore?
You dare not say so, for spoiling your fortune.
Faith but I dare, and if you will not obey me in a course of further pleasure to night, fetch me a hundred pieces to take a course abroad withal, doe ye look? I'll make you fetch me hundred after hundred Huswife, when I want it, or shall be pleased to call for it. All comes out else, the gates of your fame flies open Lady, I will proclaim our Act.
Dare you forfit your own Reputation so?
I shall gain Reputation by it in the company I keep abroad, and if the Cuckold my Uncle come to the knowledge of it at home, I shall possess him that you lustfully tempted me to it.
Can thou be so villainously impudent todestroy thine own fortune to ruin me?
You may conceal all then, and so will I, and mend my fortune by yours, I will live bravely upon your fortune, and the heir which I have got to Night shall inherit it, my Uncles estate. And therefore indeed I would have all concealed; for my child's good, or rather for mine own: for it shall go hard if I put him not in∣to a course in his minority to consume the estate upon me before he come to age.
I am undone.
And O that ever I did it!
Thou Villain, hast undone me.
Come i'll doe you again, and then ell's whole again;
You're both undone, O you prodigious monsters
That have betwixt you made me monster too!
What's to be done, but that I kill you both,
Then fall upon my sword.
Sir, you resume the temper of humanity,
And let the Law distinguish you from them,
You neither are to be their Executioner,
Nor to fall with them.
Life to me is torment.
O the Devil, what a case am I in now!
Pray hear me sir?
Can more be said to aggravate thy shame,
Or my affliction, then I have heard already?
Let me entreat you hear her.
What shame did you, or what affliction I
Suffer, when you discovered unto me
Your bargain of a hundred pound in Saleware,
You understand me. How was life a torment
To me then think you?
Did you not vow forgements then? and thus,
You freely would forgive my act? and thus
Now to revenge it on me to my ruin,
And your own endless infamy? O it is horrid.
It is no revenge at all, only a show
To startle you, or try your manly temper,
And so near to be even with ye as to let you know,
what some wife might perhaps have done being so moved,
It was my plot indeed to strain you hither to this false
fire discovery, for which i'll give you reasons.
O gross dissimulation.
Mr. Saveall, you have done many fair offices for his Nephew, doe this for me, entreat him to a Confe∣rinse a few minutes in my Chamber; if I clear not my self in his and your opinion, and that by witnesses, let me be found the shame of all my Sex.
Sir, my counsels have been prevalent with your judgement, let me persuade you.
But I will have that friend thrust out of door first.
I would not that you should, nor give a look, or word to him till you have heard me; Then exercise your Justice.
Sir be induced to it.
You have prevailed.
Go to your Bed again George, and sleep, be not afraid of Bug-beares.
Hows this? Shoe's come about again, and has patched all up already. I hope she'll work mine Uncle to reward me for my Night-worke, and bring him in time to hold my sty•rope while his George mounts her; Shoe's a delicate well-going beast! I know but one to match her in a course, just the same pace and speed as if I had only had the breaking, and managing of her my self, but the mark goes out of Phebes mouth now; and i'll play my Aunt against all the Town. But how she thought to fright me with villain and impudent. And now go to bed George, ha, ha, ha, I find her drift. No wit like women's at a sudden shift.
BEllamy thou art welcome, and for thy Nephew I must ever thank thee, he is my best companion.
O my good Lord without boast be it spoken, I have ever been right and straight to your honour, and never did you an ill office in Man, Woman, or Child, what I have said of 'em they have proved at first, or I have wrought 'em to at last. But what doe I speak on it, I
have ever been for your Lordship, all things I have sworn for you, I have fought for you, I have brok'd for you; I have pimped for you, but what doe I speak on it?
You need not Bellamy: for I know all.
Oh the Gentlemen's Wives, and Farmers Daugh∣ters that I have presented to you in your Summer Pro∣gresses, and winter Journeys about the Countries. But what doe I speak on it—
Because thou love to champ upon the bit to please thy old coltish tooth still, thou love the memo∣rye of the former sweets which now thou can not relish.
And here in the City, I have pledged more of your several Mistresses, then in my conscience there be honest Women in it. But what doe I speak on it?
I never had so many man.
Or if you had, what doe I speak on it? and in my conscience again, I have drunk more to your Lord∣ships health in my days, then any Wine-cellar in the City at this day, contains of Spanish French, and The∣nish; but what doe I speak of that either?
True Bellamy, fall then upon •ome other subject.
Yes, my good Lord, and I pray your Lordship tell me, dos not my Nephew drink and wench pretty handsomely? I would fine have him take after me, and not his drunken father.
How well hee shifts his subject, wicked old fell∣low!
Dos he not begin to fall to yet?
Not he.
Not a bit nor a soope? dos hee doe nothing by example? or has your Lordship left it? or dos he carry it like a Gentleman?
Discreetly and Virgin-like.
Pretty commendation for a young Courtier.
I would for my deserved love to him have put him upon a fair young Widow of a great fortune, but could not make him look upon her like a suitor.
Just such a bashful puppy was my brother, his Father; I wonder how my Mother came by him; My Fa∣there was right, and she was right, and I have been right, but what doe I speak on it?
True Bellamy, speak of somewhat else.
The Boy will ne'er grow up to me, I thought to have left him somewhat, I must discard him.
If you do, he is in me provided for.
What can your Lordship love him for?
Come i'll tell thee, and be comforted. Hee has something of thee in him. Hee will pimp most conve∣niently.
That's something indeed.
And for his modesty which is a rare benefit of na∣ture in him, I dare trust him with a Mistress, as I would an Eunuch.
Benefit! A defect I fear, yet I may hope in time some Mistress of your Lordships may tempt, and bring him forwards.
No I am confident—Now your news.
Good Bellamy walk in the Gallery a while.
Some Mistress is coming to him, but what doe I speak on it?
Go bid her come in.
What brings her so unseasonably?
Stay you at distance yet a while Friend, till I call you.
Faces about Tom Saleware.
How now! How is it with my love? Ha! How comes a trouble on this Face, where my delights are ever wont to Revel?
O my Lord—
Say who has injured thee? Has thy husband taken up the uncivil boldness to abuse thee? or be it any other man, it shall be death, or an undoing to him.
My Lord, I am wronged, but would be loath to engage your noble person in my quarrel, some servant of yours may do it.
Of what condition is thy wrong? tell me; and who of my Servants thou would have to right thee?
I would have Bellamy, how think you? is hee faith∣full to you?
How can thou question it? Has hee not ever been so?
Your Lordship has well trusted him I know.
I doe not know the man, I trust, or love so well.
But would your Lordship part with any Jewel, or choice thing you love, and have intended only for your own particular use, to him, or let him be your own partner in it?
Troth I think I should; only thy self excepted, but what's thy wrong I prithee, or wherein should Bella∣my right thee?
Bellamy has wronged me to think me so unwor∣thy as to be tempted to his lust; Bellamy has wronged your honour in that ambitious attempt.
Thou amazest me.
And Bellamy must right me, and your honour; or you must cast off him or me.
Give me at least some circumstance to make this probable.
Must not▪ I be believed? you shall have instance then to make it truth, Friend Thomas.
Pray verify unto my Lord the discovery you made last night of me, and Mr. Bellamy.
It was thus my Lord an't like your Lordship, my wife was forth at evening ant like your Lordship, as she may have often been ant like your Lordship, and may be as oft again ant like your Lordship.
Well pray thee on.
Forth she was ant like your Lordship, I staid supper, and almost bed time for her ant like your Lord∣ship; And had even given her over for all night ant like your Lordship, as I may of any night ant like your Lordship.
O• I pray thee.
Yes ant like your Lordship upon some private notice given to me an't like your Lordship, that she was at a private lodging ant like your Lordship, with a pri∣vate friend ant like your Lordship, over I went, and found her abed ant like your Lordship, and Mr. Bellamy even ready to go to bed to her ant like your Lordship.
Is this true?
As true as your Lordship lives ant like your Lordship.
How could you be betrayed so?
The Villain fetched me forth, and lodged me there as by your appointment, and for your own plea∣sure; but when it was late, and that your Lordship came not, thinking hee had an advantageous opportunity, hee soon discovers his love to me, and his treachery to your Lordship; I being in a strait only (finding happy means to send for my husband
to prevent him) made him a false promise being secure in my husband; and what had followed your Lordship understands.
I'll ne'er trust man can blush and weep again.
Insooth ant like your Lordship I thought all had been but waggery ant like your Lordship, to tempt me unto jealousy, and my wife knowing well enough that I was by, bade Sweet Bellamy come to Bed, O Wag!
What messenger brought you the notice Mr. Sale∣ware?
A waterman my Lord, and like your Lordship, here's the letter, and like your Lordship.
You told me you had lost it, when I asked •ort to burn it.
I thought I had Friend, but I found it now, and given it my Lord before I was aware Friend.
Hell take that Letter.
Now abotts on it for me, if thou be angry Friend.
You had better ha swallowed it full of Ratsbane.
Ne'er the sooner for a hasty word I hope Friend.
Mr. Saleware, if you will avoid a new addition of horns, come with this bearer over into Montagues close, where you shall find your Wife with a private Friend, at a private lodging; Hast thither, and ask for one Bellamy.
What Riddles this? This is Bellamies own hand, I know it, why should hee send to prevent himself? or how could she write his Character? This Woman is not right.
Doe you note my art my Lord, to write as in a Mans Name, when I wrought it my self?
And did not I tell you Friend, it should have been Anonima? Sapientia mea mihi.
Within there call Bellamy.
Hoe's not within my Lord, and has not been to night.
His absence is another circumstance to a probabi∣lity my Lord.
But hee was seen this morning to go in at Sir Anthony Thrivewels.
Go let my Coach be ready presently.
He should receive 500 l. there for me, I trust he will not •urnish himself with it for a flight.
My Lord I gave you an inkling of a familiarity be∣twixt him and the Lady Thrivewell, he has since declared their act of lust to me, and urged it for an instance to my yielding.
Can you affirm this?
Yes, to his face and hers.
O Mr. Saveall! welcome.
My Lord your servant Bellamy is receiving your money at Sir Anthony Thrivewells.
I thank you.
But my Lord, there is fallen an unhappy accident between Sir Anthony, his Lady and his Nephew, in which your servant Bellamy also is concerned; And your Lord∣ship is much, and most humbly besought by the Lady to hear, and examine the difference.
I was preparing thither. Oh Mr. Bellamy, you have not eavesdropped, have you?
Will you pardon me my Lord?
Yes if thou hast.
I have my Lord, and am overjoyed to hear so well of my Nephew.
You may hear more anon, come all along with me.
I may hear more anon, your Lordship though knows not of what so well as I doe know.
I Need not cast thee off, or bid thee go Now, and for ever from me, thine own shame Will force thee hence.
You are deceived in that.
What is thine own take with thee, here it is all Phebe.
Thou ever get, or can expect from me.
She was mine own before your wife became our coupler, in English plain our Bawd.
Use no uncivil Language while you are well.
For which you have your witnesses, this false Traitor, that brought you on.
By my direction George.
No Traitor neither fince you left to be my Master, wounded and turned me off.
And this dark Lantern here, this old deceptio visus, That juggled the wrong party into my Bed.
Ha, ha, ha.
Doe you grin Grim Malkin? But sweet Ma∣dam, if your fine Springall Bellamy had lien there in my stead she would ha• brought the right party; your Lady∣ships Lily white self.
How's that?
No more of that good George.
Nay, it shall out, since you have wrought my ruin, I will be the destruction of you all; And there∣fore now hear me O Knight, and first resolve to make me rich in my reward, for wonders i'll unfold.
Can thou expect reward from me for any thing that can by thee be utterd?
Reward? why not? why should not you reward my good Offices as well as punish my ill? I must and will rely upon you for all the good that can befall me; or if I must expect no further from you, i'll give it you gratis, And if you be any thing but a Withal hear me.
What doe you mean?
To set you out livelier, then all your paintings: or dee hear, will you give me a hundred pound a quarter for my silence?
Not a penny; if you seek my undoing, heaven forgive you.
What (Villain) can thou speak to her pre∣judice?
That which (if you are no Withal) you'll be leath to hear, but you shall have it.
Dare thou talk so?
And since you hold my attempt at her, so hay∣nous, you may be pleased to know I was incited to it by example of him I named, that smooth Faced Bellamy.
Dare thou accuse her with him?
You may ask her bolster there, her Madam Nurse old Mother Cock broth.
O me.
I, O you ask her sir, what she did with him, or he with her, in their two hours privacy in her chamber,
when hee came to take up five hundred pound for his Lord, There was a sweet taking up, sir she confessed all to me, and on purpose, I dare be sworn to embolden me in my attempt to her Ladyship.
I confess?
What did she confess?
That hee made use of your Bed with your wife, what language shall I utter't in? you were best fee it done before you believe it.
O me most miserable if this be true!
Well, there's for them two.
Go Closet till I call you.
Now for that Rogue (because I must expect no further good of you, but this which is mine own you say) i'll lay him open to you, you remember how once I ingratiated my self to you by rescuing you from a Robbery and Murder (as you supposed) for which you took me into favour—
Yes, and have wished a thousand times since, that I had lost the thousand pound I had about me then, and tan some wounds for it in exchange rather then by that rescue to have taken thy Viperous self into my by∣some.
This Rogue plotted that business, it was a mere trick of his invention. The supposed Thieves were his companions, and wrought by him only to scare you and run away when wee came to your succour, only to in∣dear me to you. There was no hurt meant, but the slap I gave him over the Pate to colour the business, with little blood, I wish now I had cleft his brains.
Your wish though against your will is a good re∣ward to him, for I love him the better for his wit in that plot, and care of his then Master.
Doe you so sir? Then it was mine own invention, let him deny it if he can.
Indeed the plot was his sir, I only found the Actors.
I cannot condemn the conceit however; and am something taken with the wit on it, would all the rest were no worse.
And now I have utterd my whole mind sir, and you declared I must expect no further good of you, come away Phib, I have injured thee long, i'll make the• now amends for all; i'll marry thee, and sell Tobacco with thee.
Let him not go sir, I beseech you in this desperate way, nor till I answer to his accusation.
Sir you shall stay, and make your self good be∣fore authority, or clear my wife.
You'll have your house then known to have been a bawdy-house?
The Courts of Princes and Religious Houses May so have been abused.
Under such Governesses.
You'll anon be silent, what's the matter? wee are busy.
Mistress Crostill, Madam is come in great hast to visit you, and a Kinseman of your Ladyships with her.
At such a time? excuse your self.
They are here sir, entered against all resistance.
Mistress Crostill! you have much honoured me—
Cozen Fitzgerrard! welcome.
I have a private suit to you Madam.
Pray Mr. Thrivewell entertain the Lady.
Another sprunt youth.
Sir, I perceive some discontent here, I hope your▪
Nephew has not again displeased you?
He is a villain, seeks my utter ruin,
Pray say not so, for fear you force me love him.
You are undone for ever if you doe.
Doe not say so, for fear I fly to him,
The thought of him already breaks my sleeps,
I could not rest to night for thinking of him,
Which made my early hast to unload my mind,
Presuming that your judgement may excuse
A simple Women's weakness, what is she
That hee courts so?
I tell you, shoe's a Whore with Child by him, lays claim to him, and I think he will marry her.
Still you speak better of him, and my love must not see him so lost, sir let me speak with you.
Me Lady? I am busy; I am busy.
What mettle am I of? his scorne's a Load-stone;
No Courtship like his carelessness to me;
And all dispraise speaks for him,
Sir I will speak with you.
I blush for you, what would you say now, were it not too late?
Nay only to your ear.
Stand off a while Phib.
His Lordship Madam shall give me account
To each particular.
You shall doe well to put it to him Cousin—
Husband, I overheard you, and commend you,
That though you cast your Nephew from all hopes
Of good from you, you will not yet destroy
His fortunes other ways.
How doe you mean?
For that I find by your reviling him
You more inflame that cross fantastic Widow
With eager love to cast her self upon him.
Had I thought so, I had spoke well of him
Against my conscience.
No, let me entreat you.
Be that way charitable, and speak worse;
The worse the better.
Tempt me not good Lad•,
To your own prejudice, your destruction;
I am one you cannot live and lie withal
A fortnight you, alas you're but a grissell,
Weak picking meat; Here's one will hold me tack,
Seven constant ordinaries every night,
Noonings, and intermealiary Lunchings,
At freedom every day, hold belly hold,
The Cupboard never shut.
I understand you not.
Nor mind me Lady; Twill be better for you.
You had a thin chained husband, plaid at Doublets with ye,
And that perhaps, but twice or thrice a week,
You are incapable of better Game,
Here's one shall hold me Tick tack night by night,
And neither of us guilty of a Why-not,
Shoe's bred up to my hand, and knows her play.
Can you so slight me?
Slight? I honour you.
In caring for you to preserve your life,
And your estate, which I confess my self
Unworthy of: besides I am engaged
To doe a poor soul right for my issues sake
She goes withal.
But say on composition she acquit you.
O but conscience is conscience.
I'll die or have him presently.
Can you refuse me for a prostitute whore?
Take heed what you say, i'll shake your estate,
If you dare call her whore before witnesses.
Call all the World to hear me Madam,
Sir Anthony, and the rest, be all my witnesses;
Give me your hand sir, here before you all
I plight my faith upon this Gentleman,
He is my Husband, and I am his Wife.
You are then undone.
I care not sir, for your ill will: no more shall hee.
Are you caught Widow? Future, for Uncles now?
Why answer you not me, in troth plight?
I doe, but yet I tell you again conscience is con∣science;
The Woman's not compounded with.
I'll give her a brace of hundred pounds.
The Woman will not take it.
The Woman shall take it, for now know sir, I love you not so ill as to undo you. This Woman has been mine as much as yours, she has done as much with me for Offices, and Service I have done for her, as she has done with you for Love and Money, let her deny it.
I have lately suspected so.
And if her Friends will make her brace of hun∣dreds a leash i'll marry, and honestifie her.
Honest Wat in good earnest • Gentlewoman with your hand give him your consent, and i'll supply you with the od hundred pound, for Wats love to his Master.
Will you?
Yes, and with your allowance; it shall be in lieu of the hundred I took in Commodity of her Kinswo∣man Mistress Saleware, which would never thrive with me (as it may properly with them) as it was the price of lust you know it was, and how untowardly things have chanced amongst us since it was so; And now that
I have declined it, you shall se• how sweetly all will be reconciled.
Doe as you please.
Go get you to the Priest presently, and bring him hither for thy Master, Wat.
Madam you sent for me, though I had former cause to require a conference with you.
My cause my Lord, is almost ended among our selves. Pray let your former therefore be determined first, your Lordship may be pleased to sit.
I desire first by good Sir Anthony's patience, Madam a word with you in absence of all the rest, except this Gentlewoman.
With all respect my Lord.
No you shall stay, and all the rest, speak openly my Lord, I doe beseech you.
My modesty forbids.
I'll speak it for you then; Good my Lord sit judge▪ This Woman comes to accuse me of incontinence with your servant Bellamy, is it not so?
I marry dos she Madam to make her word good to my Lord that he would have lien with her too; And says that Bellamy affirmed to her that he did, I ma∣rye did he with your Ladyship.
Ha, ha, ha, I have a Nephew here affirmed as much.
I am sorry I said so much, it was but my suspicion in the days of my wickedness, I am honest now, and can think no such matter—O is the parson come—
I fear I shall be wretched.
You are wretched in your fear, note your Wives confidence; Can Guilt look with that Face?
I understand that Bellamy is in your house.
Forth coming my good Lord. Good Master Bellamy, fetch your Nephew, you'll find him in my Chamber.
And in this respect you shall give me leave
My Lord to call your honour into question.
You're very •and with me Mr. Fitzgerrard,
What is your question?
Where is my Sister Amie?
Ask you me?
Yes, and in honour you're to answer me,
It is too evident, your courtship won
Her Virgin honour.
Then I forced her not.
The blame of that lay therefore on her self,
That loss I seek not after: but I ask
Her life and being (if she live or be)
Of you my Lord, since it is manifest,
She left her friends, and Country shortly after
Her folly had betrayed her into shame,
To be at your dispose, as wee presume
She is since in her two years absence; we
Have sought all other ways in vain; you shall
Do therefore well my Lord to render her,
Or give me leave to urge you •'an account
Of what's become of her.
You cannot sure
Compel me sir.
To hazard of my life I will my Lord.
That she is lost I am grieved; But for your stout demand i'll answer you at Weapons, time and place convenient.
I'll end your difference Cousin Fitzgerrard, here is your Sister Amie my Lord, here is your servant Bellamy, whom I preferred to you as my Nephew, to be a Go-betwixt you and Mistresses, which quality I now abhor, as I could wish your Lordship would leave—Winching for this inconstant Women's sake that would be prostitute unto your servant. It was a flat bargain, and but a flat one, but for the non-per∣formance her husband may thank their party of Sex, not his wives want of desire.
Ne'er the sooner for a hasty word I hope.
What further end she had to serve your Lord∣ship she may relate her self.
Lost to my self, and friends being made unfit
In any other Region to appear,
And more unable to live other where;
Then in the presence of my loved Lord
(Although not as my self) I did assume
That Masculine boldness▪ so to let you know
My Lord, that I more fully could subsist
By the mere sight of you, and so contain
My self, then she your more respected Mistress
Could in the rich and plentiful enjoyments
Of your most real, and essential favours.
Sweet let us speak aside.
What ails my Friend? is not all this now but a plot to make me jealous?
I am discovered and undone.
Ne'er the sooner for a hasty word I hope Friend. Come leave your waggery, is not all this but a plot now to make me jealous?
Your Plot good Mistress Saleware would not hold.
Nor shall it hold good Madam, I cannot be jea∣lous, Sapientia mea mihi.
Yet the young Gentleman (such as you see he is) has lien with me of old, before I was married; doe not look so dismaydly, I will not detect you with my hus∣band for a hundred pound—
Nor will I be jealous for a thousand Madam, your plot's too weak Facks, but whore's my injured Kinswo∣man, Madam?
O Phebe Gin crack! she is by this time righted, that is Married.
Sapientia mea mihi, again then for that, that was my plot, and it held Madam.
My dear, dear Amie, and my Bellamy,
I doe commend your vow of future chastity,
Vowing the same my self, and here before
Your Brother, and these friends to help your marriage
I freely give you two hundred pounds a year
During your life.
Now doe you note the effect of all Sir An∣thony?
I doe with my much joy.
And Mistress Saleware, for your falsehood
(Which I forgive, because you are a Woman)
I quit familiarity with you, and advise you
To love your husband, giving him no cause
Of fear or jealousy.
Your Lordship counsels well.
Hang fears and jealousies, I would there were no greater in the Kingdom, then in Tom Salewares Cox∣comb; But by your favour friend, we will be friends no more, but loving man and wife henceforward.
That shall be as you please.
See new Married couples, please your Lordship
to take notice?
Uncle and Madam, I am come to call you to my house to Dinner, and your Lordship if you please, and all the rest here, I want one, my Rival Bellamy, where is he? we'll be all friends to day; and at night sweet heart,—at night, at night, at night—
We'll get the Boy that shall become a Knight
You promise lustily.
And Phebe if thou be not better provided al∣ready, if I get not thee with Squire, let me turn clown.
But whore's this Bellamy, what new Ladies that?
This new Lady sir, is that Bellamy you inquire for.
The same Gentleman that you accused your Aunt with.
That I confess had line with her.
Ha, is it so in faith? and (now I think on it) in truth I thought so; would I have tax'd'her think you, but with a Woman? pray Mr. Bellamy let me salute your lips, and good Uncle now wee are Neighbours, and both good House-keepers, let us not be strangers to one another.
Well sir, as I shall find you by your wives report I shall be still your Uncle.
I shall be his heir in spite of the Devil, and all his works and mine.
Come Madam, I find here's Music, let's lead the Brides a Dance to stir their appetites to Dinner.
And now my Lord to grace our Wedding feast,
As you in honour are the greatest Guest
You have full power to welcome all the rest.
WEll! had you Mirth enough? much good may it doe you,
If not, it is more then I did promise to you.
It is your own fault, for it is you, not wee
Make a Play good or bad; and if this be
Not answerable to your expectation
Ye are the free-borne People of this Nation,
And have the power to censure Worth and Wit,
But wee must suffer for what you commit.
Yet wee're resolved to bear your gentle Hands,
And if you will tie us in any Bands,
Let us be bound to serve you, and that's thus,
To tell you truth, as long as you serve us.

THE English Moor, OR THE MOCK-MARRIAGE.
A Comaedy as it was often acted with general applause by her Maje∣sties Servants.
Innocence permit jocose cur ludere nobis
Non liceat?—
LONDON, Printed by J. T. for A. C. and Henry Broom, and are to be sold at the Gun in Ivie-lane, 1658.
MOst noble, fair and courteous, to ye all
Welcome and thanks we give, that you would call
And visit your poor servants, that have been
So long and pitiless unheard, unseen.
Welcome, you'll say your money that does do,
(Dissembling is a fault) we say so too.
And your long absence was no fault of your,
But our sad fate to be so long obscure.
Jove and the Muses grant, and all good Men,
We feel not that extremity again:
The thought of which yet chills us with a fear
That we have bought our liberty too dear:
For should we fall into a new restraint,
Our hearts must break that did before but faint.
You noble, great and good ones, that vouchsafe
To see a Comedy, and sometimes laugh
Or smile at wit and harmless mirth, As thus
ye have begun to grace and succour us;
Be further pleased (to hold us still upright,
For our r•lief, and for your own delight)
To move for us to those high powers whom we
submit unto in all humility,
For our proceeding, and we will make it good
To utter nothing may be understood
Offensive to the state, manners or time,
We will as well look to our necks as climb.
You hear our suit, obtain it if you may;
Then find us money and we will find you play.
DEar Sister, bear with me.
I may not, brother.
What! suffer you to pine, and peak away
In your unnatural melancholy fits;
Which have already turned your purer blood
Into a toad-pool dye. I am ashamed
(Upon my life) almost to call you brother
But nature has her swing in me. I must.
Therefore I crave you (as you are my brother)
To shake this dull and muddy humour off,
By visiting the streets, and quit your chamber,
Which is a sickness to you.
O my sister!
I can say, O my brother too, to show you
How it becomes you. I have the same cause
Equally with your self, to spend my life
In solitary mourning; and would do it,
Could it make good our loss: My honoured Father!
A tear has escaped me there: But that's by th'by,
And more of anger against his enemy,
And his for ever cursed posterity,
That robed us of a Father, then of sorrow
For what we know is unrecoverable.
But to sit grieving over his Memory
In a resolved silence, as you do;
Killing your own blood while a vein holds any
Proceeding from the flesh, that drew out his,
Is merely idle. Mingle then your grief
With thought of brave revenge: And do it not
In private Meditation in your Chamber;
But bear it out till it proceed to Action.
By pouring blood on blood?
By quenching fire
Of high revenge, with base unmanly blood;
By stopping of our Fathers cureless wounds
(Which still bleed fresh in our vexed memories)
With the proud flesh of him that butchered ours.
We know he lives not that has slain our Father:
Or, if he lives, tic where I cannot reach him:
He ne'er saw English harbour since his sword
Unfortunately had the better of my father.
But his son lives.
Good sister cool thy passion
With reasonable means
O whore's the spirit
That my slain father had. Have you no part of't?
Must I now play the Man, whilst you inherit
Only my Mothers puling disposition?
I know thy drift, good sister Dionisia,
Is not unto revenge, or blood; but to stir up
Some motion in me, to prevent the danger
A sad retiredness may bring upon me.
Be it as you think it, so you will abroad;
And make the house no longer dark with sighing.
Now Sir the news with you?
News worth your hearing,
Merely to laugh at: Good for nothing else.
Is the old Ruffian tan, and hanged, that slew
My Father; or his son Brain-battered; or
His Daughter made a prostitute to shame?
How merciless are your wishes!
Lady, no.
But as I was hankring at an ordinary,
In quest of a new Master (for this, here,
Will never last to a new livory
'Less he were merrier) I heard the bravest noise
Of Laughter at a wicked accident
Of Marriage, that was chopped up this Morning.
What marriage? Quickly.
Who do you think
Has married fair Mistress Millicent?
Theophilus (I can name him, though his father
Was fatal unto mine) was sure to her.
Yes, but without a Priest. She has slipped his hold,
And is made fast enough unto another,
For which fine Mr. The. so whines and chafes,
And hangs the head! More then he would do
For's father, were he hanged, as you did wish
For laughing news even now. Ther's sport for you.
It does me good to hear of any cross
That may torment their family. I wish
Joy to the man that did beguile him of her
What ere he be.
But who has married her?
Thence springs the jest. Old Mr. Quicksands, Sir,
The bottomless devourer of young Gentlemen;
He that has lived, till past three-score, a bachelor,
By three-score in the hundred; he that has
Undone by Mortgages and under-buyings
So many Gentlemen, that they all despaired
Of means to be revenged.
But whore's your Jest?
The Jest is, that they now have found that means
(As they suppose) by making of him Cuckold.
They are laying their heads together in every corner,
Contriving of his horns, and drinking healths
To the success. And there were sport for you now,
If you were any body.
I'll abroad however.
That's nobly said. Take courage with you Brother.
And yet me thinks I know not how to look
The wide world in the face, thus on the sudden
I would fain get abroad, yet be unknown.
For that Sir (look you) I have here, by chance,
A false beard which I borrowed, with a purpose
To have worn't and put a jest upon your sadness.
Does it do well with me?
You'll never have
One of your own so good: you look like Hector.
Go fetch my sword and follow me.
Be sure you carry a strict eye o'er his actions,
And bring me a true account.
I warrant you Mistress.
Do, and I'll love thee everlastingly.
Why, now you are my brother.
Farewell Sister.
I hope he has some stratagem a foot
In our revenge to make his honour good:
It is not grief can quit a fathers blood.
Prithee be and answered, and hang off o'me,
I have no more to say to you in the way
You wot on Phillis.
Nor do I seek to you
In that way which you wot on, wanton Sir,
But to be honest, and to marry me.
You have done too much the tother way already.
I wish you were more thankful, Mrs. Phillis,
To one has taught you a trade to live upon:
You are not th'first by twenty I have taught it
That thrive well in the world.
There are so many
Such teachers in the world; and so few
Reformers, that the world is grown so full
Of female frailties, the poor Harlotries
Can scarce already live by one another,
And yet you would have me thrust in among'em.
I do not urge you. Take what course you please,
But look not after me: I am not marked
For Matrimony, I thank my stars.
Should I run evil courses, you are the cause;
And may in time, curse your own act in it:
You'll find th'undoing of an honest Maid
Your heaviest sin upon your bed of sickness;
T will cost your soul the deepest groan it fetches;
And in that hope I leave you.
Farewell wag-tail.
Marry thee quoth a! That's wise work indeed!
If we should marry every Wench we lie with,
'T were after six a week with some of us.
(Marry love forbid) when two is enough to hang one.
Not, we have sought diligently, for fear
The news that is abroad should fly before us.
What news? What flying fame do you labour with?
News that makes all the Gallants in the Town
Fly out o'their little wits: They are so eager,
Upon the joy. I mean such youthful Gallants
As have, or sold, or mortgaged; or been cheated
By the grave patron of Arch-cosonage,
Whose sad misfortune we are come to sing:
Shall I need to name him to thee?
Who, the old Rascal Quicksands? speak good Vince,
What! has he hanged himself? speak quickly prithe.
Worse, worse by half man. Durst thou hear a news
Whose mirth will hazard cracking of a rib?
I, and't be two. Here's hoops enough besides
To hold my drink in. Pray thee speak; what mischief
Is come upon him.
I pray thee guess again.
Has somebody over-reach'd him in his way
Of damnable extortion; and he cut his throat,
Or swallowed poison?
Ten times worse then that too.
Is he then hoisted into the Star-Chamber
For his notorious practises? or into
The high Commission for his blacker arts?
Worse then all this.
Pox, keep it to your self then,
If you can think it be too good for me.
Why did you set me a longing? you cry worse
And ten times worse; and know as well as I,
The worse it is to him, the better wel-come
Ever to me: And yet you tell me nothing.
He has married a young wife.
Has he Cadzooks?
We bring you no comfort, we.
Ne'er go fine sport, Ha, ha, ha. What is she?
Would he had my wench, was here e•no now,
What is she he has married? quickly prithe.
One much too good for him.
The beauteous Millicent.
Driven by the tempest of her Uncles will,
Is like a pinnace forced against the Rock.
But he will never split her, that's the b•st on it.
I hope she'll break his heart first. Gentlemen,
I thank you for your news; and know what I
Will presently go do.
Pray stay a little.
And take us with you. What will you go do?
That which we can all at once, Do not hold me.
We came to cast a plot w'ye.
Cast a pudding—How long ha'they been mar∣ried?
But this morning.
You'll ha'me come too late.
Ne'er go it is a shame he was not Cuckolded
Before Dinner.
That had been a fine first course
At a wedding feast indeed. A little patience.
Pray let me take my course before supper yet.
The business belongs to us as much as you,
He has wronged us all alike. He has cozened us
As much as you.
He has made me so poor
That my poor whore even now claimed marriage of me.
The case is ours. His wrongs are common to us,
So shall his wife be, can we purchase her:
Did we bring you the news for you to run
And prevent us do you think?
Pardon my zeal good Gentlemen; which only
Considered but the fitness of the Act,
And that it is more then time it were done in faith.
And see here comes a fourth man that has lost
More on her part, then we upon the Bridegrooms.
He's very sour and sad. It is crept upon him
By this untoward accident.
It would anger any man to be nosed of such a match;
But Isle remove his sorrow—
Gentle Theophilus, you are well met,
Your sorrow is familiar with us all
In the large loss of your betrothed love;
But, sir, be comforted: you have our pity
And our revenge to ease you. Tic decreed
Her husband shall be instantly a Cuckold.
Most sinfully thou lie; and all that give
Breath to that foul opinion.
What do you mean.
Give me that thought from you; nay, from you all,
Or I will rip you for it.
Zooks what mean you.
Hold, Sir, forbear.
Isle have that thought out first.
I say he does deserve to be a Cuckold;
Let him be what he will, a pox upon him.
So we say all.
What's that to ill in her?
I stand upon that point. Mans evil merit's
No warrant for a women's dishonesty.
I say had she a man forty degrees
Beneath his undeservings, it were more possible
For him to deceive her with a good Life,
Then she him with a wicked.
I say so too.
But then I say again, The more's the pity.
Do and undo.
Zookes now your bitch has bit me,
I say he will be one, he shall be one;
Il'e make him one my self.
And weell both help him.
Why here's trim stuff. Help ho, Murder, Murder.
This is oppression gentlemen; an unmanly one.
What devils this raised? fall off, tic an ill busi∣nos.
Have you no hurt Sir.
No I'm confident.
By your favour, I will see.
What fortune's this,
I fought against friends to save mine enemy,
But I hope neither know me. I desire
To rest hid to my friends for my offence to them,
And to mine enemy, till I make him dearer.
I told thee there was •one.
I'm glad it proves so.
But wher's the Gentleman?
Do you not know him sir?
Not I, tic the first time that ere I saw him;
To my remembrance; yet he fought for me.
Beshrew thy idler care that made me lose him,
What should he be that so could fight for me,
Yet care not for my company? beshrew thy heart.
Why should he use me thus? I shall be sick to think on it.
I'm made beholding now to I know not whom;
And I'm the worst to sue or seek to a man—
That scurvy, between proud and bashful quality,
You are famous for, as tother toy that haunts you.
What's that?
Why, to be deadly angry, sir,
On least occasion, and friends as quickly.
Hot and cold in a breath: you are angry now
With him that fought for you I warrant you.
In troth I am, and friends with them I fought with;
He used me peevishly to leave me so,
Ere I could thank him.
So tic that I told you.
But did you mark th'humanity of my Gentlemen,
Cause shoe's disposed by her self willed uncle
On that unworthy Quick sands (Devil take him)
They thought twould sound like music in my ears
To hear her disgrace sung; when her fair honour
Is all I have to love, now shoe's took from me:
And that they'd go about to rob me of.
Heaven grant me patience. O my slaughtered father!
I am thy son, and know by thy infirmity.
Me thinks, Sir, his example should allay you:
Impatience was his ruin.
Push, we see
Thieves daily hanged for Robberies; yet some
Go on still in the practice! What a fine
Is set upon the head of foul Adultery,
And yet our neighbours Wives can hardly scope us!
There's Laws against extortion, and sad penalties
Set upon Bribes,
Yet great men's hands ha'their fore-fathers itch!
Prisons are filled with Banckrupts; yet we see
How cra•tie Merchants often wrong their credits,
And Land•ners fly to live at Amsterdam!
Nothing can banish Nature: That's the Moral.
It was indeed your Fathers known infirmity,
And ever incident to the noblest Natures.
But of your Father, is there yet no hope
Of better news?
No, certainly he's slain.
I have not heard a story of more wonder;
That two such men, of such estates and years,
Having lived always friends and neighbours nearly,
Should at the last fall out so mortally
On a poor cast at bowls! Where wast they sought?
It is uncertain. All we heard of'em
Was, they rode sorth (it is now a whole year past)
Singly to end their quarrel: But to what
Part of the kingdom, or the world they took,
We can by no inquiry find or hear
Of either of them. Sure they crossed the Seas,
And both are slain.
You speak poor comfort Sir.
I speak as my heart finds. She's gone for ever too;
Her hearts desire be with her.
Now he's there again.
Then my poor Sisters sickness; that torments me,
Never in health since our dear Father left us.
And now there.
How shall I do to see these men again?
I shall not be at rest till I be friends with'em.
Why here's the noble nature still. 'Twil show it self.
I'll seek'em out. Nathaniel always loved me.
Here's an unsettled humour. In these fits
Hel'e ne'er be mad, nor ever well in's wits.
Go to I say, go to; as y're my Niece,
And hope t'inherit any thing that's mine:
Shake off this Maiden peevishness. Do you whimper
Upon your wedding day? Or, do you think
You are not married yet? Did you not say
I Millicent take Mandevill? A ha!
Was it not so? Did not I give you too?
I that have bred you from the cradle up
To a fit growth to match with his fair years;
And far more fair estate.
I, there's the Match—
Love him I charge you.
Isle endeavour't Sir.
You will endeavour't! Is it no further yet?
Stand from her, Nephew! I'll so swinge her. Ha!
Let me entreat your patience. She's my wife Sir.
Dandle her in her humour, do; and spoil her.
It is but her modesty.
Her sullen doggedness,
I'll baste it out of her. You do not know her
As I do, Nephew.
I shall, Sir, before morning
Better I doubt not. Come we shall agree.
You will endeavour't! Come I'll see it done.
Marry a man first, and then endeavour
To love him will you? Ha! Is it but so?
I'll see you love him presently. So to bed.
What before Supper?
A posit and to bed,
I'll see it done. And cause you are so nice
(To bed I say) there I will see more done
Then I will speak. Tell me of your endeavour!
Be not so rough and stiff with her, good Uncle,
I know my supple tender dealing will
Get more upon her love then all your chidings.
Such tender dealers spoil young Brides; and get
Nothing of stubbornness. Down with her I say
Now in her wedding sheets: She will be nought else.
Construe more charitably, I beseech you,
My Virgin blushes.
It is your sullenness;
Would you have breded it so lumpishly
With your spruce younker, that fine silken beggar,
Whose Land lies in your Husbands counting house;
Or the most part.
O my Theophilus.
Indeed the better half; not without hope
To have the rest as he may want my money.
Would you have whined and pulled, had you had him,
To bedward think you? yet to speak the truth,
And that wherein she has vexed me a thousand times,
I never saw her laugh, nor heard her sing
In all my life: yet she could both, I have heard,
In company she liked.
It has being mong Maidens then.
But honoured Sir (I know what I will do)
To let you see and hear, since you desire
To have me show a cheerfulness unto
My reverend Husband: Look you Sir, I'll kiss him,
Clap him, and stroke him: Ha, my Joe, ha, ha, ha, &amp;c.
H•y day.
She'll make me blush anon I think.
I'll sing him songs too.
Whoop, how's this?
That I will chick, old songs and over old ones,
Old as thy reverend self, my Chick a bird.
She calls me chick and bird: The common names
With wives that Cock•lt their old cravend husbands.
She made him a bed of the thistle down soft,
She laid her self under to bear him a loft,
And ever she sung sweet turn thee to me,
We'll make the new bed cry Jiggy Joggy.
What impudence is this.
Shoe's gon as far
Beyond it now as it was to it.
Now may you answer.
Go to bed sweet heart I'll come to thee,
Make thy bed fine and soft I'll leg with thee. Ha, ha, ha.
Is this your bashful Niece.
What can thou mean by this? dos this become thee?
Pray do not beat me o'my wedding might, but tell me
How this and half a dozen chopping Children may
Become an old mans wife some five years hence.
O intolerable!
Is it possible thou can do thus?
Let women judge. Tic very possible
That a young Iusty wife may have six Children
By one at once in five years, Sir, and by
One Father too. Isle make him young enough
To Father mine.
She'll make a youth of me.
There was a Lady loved a swine.
And will• thou be true love mine.
Do you hear gentlewoman; are you in your wits?
Yes, and my own house I hope. I pray be civil.
Shall we to bed, Sir, supperless? you need
No stirring meats, it seems. I'm glad on'•.
Come, biddy, come away, will you see Uncle
How I will love him •oat? come away.
My edge is taken off. this impudence
Of hers, has outfac'd my concupisence.
Dashed all quite out of Countenance! what a beast
Was I to marry? Rather, what a beast
Am I to be? * How now! O horrible.
What hideous noise is this.
I cannot help it.
While I went forth for the half pint of Sack
To make your prodigal posit; and the maid
(Watching the Milk, for running ore) sorgot
To shut the door, they all rushed in.
What they, what all?
Vizarded people, Sir, and oddly shaped.
You'll see anon. Their tuning o'their pipes,
And swear they'll gi'ye a willy nilly dance
Before you go to bed, tho'you stole your Marriage.
Outrageous Roisters.
Call and raise the street.
That were to let in violence indeed.
These are some merry harmless friends I warrant.
I knew I could not be so ill beloved
Among the bachelors, but some would find
Way to congratulate our honoured Marriage.
What, with horn music?
A new kind of flourish.
Tic a flat conspiracy.
This is •our bash•ul modest whimpring Niece.
Then let'em in. If they wrong us to night,
The Law to morrow shall af•ord us right.
Pray let's resolveto s•et. Here comes their Prologue.
At a late Parliament held by the Gods,
Cupped and Hymen •ell at bitter odds
Upon an argument; wherein each did try
T'advance his own 'bove tothers deity,
Out of this question, which might happier prove
Love without Marriage, or Marriage without love.
By the effects the trial must be made:
So each from others Office drew his aid;
Cupped no more of Hymens matches framed;
Nor Hymen married those that love inflamed.
Now mark, the sad effects this strife begot,
Cupped his fiery darts and arrows shot
As thick as ere he did; and equal hearts
He wounds with equal love. But Hymen parts
Their forward hands (alas!) and joyneth none
But those which his new match-Maker brings on,
(Old greedy Avarice) who by his spells,
In breasts of Parents and of guardians dwells,
That force their tendelings to loathed beds;
Which uncouth Policy to sorrow leads
Thousands a thousand ways, of which the least
Is this with which we celebrate your feast.
A special drove of horn beasts.
These few are thought enough to show how more
Would appear horrible, the town hath store.
The first's a Lawyer, who by strife prevailed
To wed a wife, that was by love in∣tailed
Unto that Courtier, who had the hap
Soon after to adorn him with that cap.
The next a country cormorant, whose great wealth,
By a bad fathers will, obtained by stealth
That valiant Soldiers Mistress: •or which matter
The Engineer his sconce with Rams did batter.
This an old Goatish Usury, that must
Needs buy a wretches daughter to his lust;
Doted, and married her without a great,
That Herald gave this crest unto his coat.
And that's the Citizen, so broadly pated,
Which this mad Butcher, cuckold antedated.
Now by this dance let husband that doth wed
Bride from her proper love to loathed bed
Observe his fortune. Music strike aloud
The cuckolds joy, with merry pipe &amp; crowd.
How now! all vanished! The devil take the hidmost.
The foremost I say; and lay him a block
For all the rest to break their necks upon.
Who are they? Can you guess.
Truly, not I Sir.
Some of my husbands friends perhaps, that came
To warn him of his fortune.
Well considered.
Lock the doors after 'em, and let us to bed;
And lock our selves up, chick, safe from all danger.
We will to bed chick, since you'll have it so.
This key shall be your guard: And here's another
Shall secure me. My house has store of beds in it.
I bring you not to an unfurnished dwelling.
Be not afraid to lie with me, good man,
Isle so restore through gain with Cawdels and Cock-broths,
So cuckle the up to morrow, thou shalt see—
O immodesty.
Thou hast good store of goid, and shalt not want it
In Cullises: in every broth Isle boil
An angel at the least.
Isle hang first.
I am quite out of wits; and yet Isle counsel
Thee, Nephew. Hark thee.
Tic like to be mad counsel.
But will you not lie with me then?
No marry shall he not.
Nephew, You shall not, till she bride it modestly.
Tic now too late, but Isle so rattle her up to morrow.
Tic too late now, &amp; yet have• do it to morrow! good!
Will you to your lodging?
Where be my bride-maids?
They wait you in your chamber.
The devil o'maid's i'chis but my fellow Madg the Kitchen maid, and Malkin the Cat, or bachelor but my self, and an old Fox, that my master has kept a prentiship to palliate his palsy.
Where be the maids, I say; and Bachelors
To disappoint my husband.
Mark you that?
I mean, to take your points. But you have none.
O thrifty age! My Bridegroom is so wise,
In stead of points, to hazard hooks and eyes.
She means the eyes in's head, Isle hang else.
My Master is like to make a blind match here.
Take up the lights, sirrah.
I hope she talks so idly, but for want
Of sleep; and sleep she shall for me to night.
And well said Nephew. Will you to your chamber, Mistress?—
Hey ho, to bed, to bed, to bed.
No Bride so glad—to keep her Maiden-head.
You're the first Maid that ere I entertained
Upon so small acquaintance. Yet you're welcome,
I like your hand and carriage.
It is your favour.
But love, they say sweet Mistress, is received
At the first sight, and why not service then,
Which often brings more absolute returns
Of the dear trust imposed, and firmer faith
By Servants then by lovers?
Stay there Phillis.
I may, by that, conjecture you have been
Deceiv' by some false Lover.
Who, I Mistress?
I hope I look too merrily for such a one,
Somewhat too coursly too, to be beloved;
If I were sad and handsome, then it might
Be thought I were a little love sick. Pray
How long has this disease affected you;
This melancholy, Mistress? Not ever since
You lost your father I hope.
For the most part.
Thou said, me thought, that love might be tan in
At the first fight
There it is. I find her.
Love, Mistress? yes, a Maid may take in more
Love at one look, or at a little loop-hole,
Then all the Doddy poles in Town can purge
Out of her while she lives; she smothering it,
And not make known her passion. There's the mischie▪
Suppose she love an enemy to her house.
An enemy! Put case the case were yours.
But it is no case of mine; put by I pray thee.
I'll put it to you though I miss your case.
Suppose it were your house, and Master Arthur,
Whose father was your fathers enemy,
Were your beloved—
Pray thee no more.
Now I have struck the vein. Suppose I say,
All this were true; would you confound your self
In smothering your love, which, in it self,
Is pure and innocent, until it grow
To a pernicious disease within you;
And hide it in your bosom, till it work
Your kindled heart to ashes?
Thou hast won
My patience to attention: Therefore tell me
If thou can find or think it honourable
In me to take such an affection?
Yes, and religious; most commendable,
Could you but win his love into a marriage,
To beget peace between your families.
How many, and what great examples have we,
From former ages, and of later times,
Of strong dissentions between furious factions,
That to their opposite houses have drawn in
Eiders Allies and F•iends, whole Provinces,
Yea, Kingdoms into deadly opposition;
Till the wide wounds on both sides have sent forth
Rivers of blood, which only have been stopped
By the forced bands of love in marriages
Of equal branches, sprung from the first roots
Of all those Hell-bred hatreds!
My good Maid—
Yes, I have been a good one to my grief.
Thou hast given me strength to tell thee, and I hope
When it is told, I shall have yet more ease.
I warrant you Mistress. Therefore out with it.
I love that worthy Gentleman; and am confident
That in the time of our two fathers friendship
Have affected me no less: But since that time
I have not seen him, nor dare mention him
To wrong my brothers patience, who is so passionate,
That could he but suspect I bred a thought
That favoured him, I were for ever lost.
For this sad cause, as well as for the loss
Of my dear Father, I have sighed away
Twelve Moons in silent sorrow; and have heard
That Arthur too (but for what cause I know not)
Has not been seen abroad; but spends his time
In pensive solitude.
Perhaps he grieves
As much for the supposed loss of you,
As of his Father too.
The best construction,
I make of his retiredness, is the blessed
Prevention (which I daily pray for) of
A fatal meeting twixt him an• my Brother,
Which would be sure the death of one or both.
And now that fear invades me, as it does always,
My Brother being abroad; and such an absence
Has not been usual: I have not seen him
Since yesterday—
Fear nothing, Mistress. Now you have eased your mind,
Let me alone to comfort you. And see your Brother.
How is it with you Sister?
Much better now then when you le•t me Brother,
If no ill accident has happened you
Since your departure; as I fear there has:
Why look you else so sadly? speak, dear Brother.
I hope you did not meet the man you hate.
If you did, speak. If you have fought and slain him,
I charge you tell, that I may know the worst
Of fortune can befall me: I shall gain
Perhaps a death by it.
You speak as if you loved the man I hate,
And that you fear I have killed him.
Not for love
Of him I assure you Sir; but of your self.
Her fear in this case, Sir, is that the Law
May take from her the comfort of her life
In taking you from her, and so she were
But a dead woman. We were speaking
Of such a danger just as you came in;
And truly, Sir, my heart even tremble-tremble-trembles,
To think upon it yet. Pray, Sir, resolve her.
Then it was your frivolous fear that wrought in her.
Good Sister be at peace: for, by my love to you,
(An oath I will not violate) I neither saw
Nor sought him, I. But other thoughts perplex me.
What, were you at the wedding, Brother?
Whose wedding, Sister?
Your lost love Millicents. Are you now sad
After your last leave taking?
What do you mean?
There may be other matches, my good Brother—
You wrong me shamefully, to think that I
Can think of other then her memory.
Though she be lost and dead to me, can you
Be so unnatural as to desire
The separation of a thought of mine
From her dear memory; which is all the comfort
My heart is married to, or I can live by.
Surely good Sir, in my opinion,
Sharp, eager stomachs may be better fed
With every smell of meat, then the bare thought
Of the most curious dainties—
What piece of impudence have you received
Into my house?
Pray Brother pardon me.
I took her, as I find her, for my comfort,
She has by council and discourse wrought much
Ease and delight into my troubled thoughts.
Good Maid forgive me; and my gentle Sister,
I pray thee bear with my distractions.
A good natured Gentleman for all his hasty flashes.
And now I'll tell you Sister (do not chide me)
I have a new affliction.
What is it brother?
I am engaged unto a Gentleman,
(A noble valiant Gentleman) for my life,
By hazarding his own, in my behalf.
It was then against Arthur.
What villain was it durst take your cause in hand
Against that man?
You wrong me beyond suffrance,
And my dear fathers blood within your self,
In seeming careful of that mans safety—
His safety Sir? Alas! she means, he is
A villain that would take the honour of
His death out of your hands, if he must fall
By sword of man.
Again, I ask you pardon. But I had
A quarrel yesterday, that drew strong odds
Upon my single person; Three to one:
When, at the instant, that brave Gentleman
With his sword, sides me, puts'em all to flight—
But how can that afflict you?
How quick you are!
Good Brother I ha'done.
My affliction is,
That I not know the man, to whom I am
So much engaged, to give him thanks at least.
O Sir you're welcome, though we parted somewhat
Abruptly yesterday.
I thank you Sir.
Pray thee Not. tell me, for I hope thou know him;
What Gentleman was that came in betwixt us?
If the devil know him no better, he will lose
A part of his due I think. But to the purpose,
I knew your wonted nature would be friends
With me before I could come at you. However, I
Have news for you that might deserve your love,
Were you my deadly enemy.
What is it pray thee?
Sweet Mist•iss Lucy so long unsaluted?
My Brother attends your news Sir.
My Wench become her Chamber-maid! very pretty!
How the Jade mumps for fear I should discover her.
Your news good Not? what is it ready made,
Or are you now but coining it?
No, it was coined last night, of the right stamp,
And passes current for your good. Now know,
That I, and Mun, and Vince, with divers others
Of our Comrades, were last night at the Bride-house.
What mischief did you there?
A Masque, a Masque lad, in which we presented
The miseries of enforced Marriages
So lively—Zooks, lay by your captious countenance,
And hear me handsomely.
Good brother do, it has a fine beginning.
But mark what follows;
This morning, early up we got again,
And with our Fiddlers made a fresh assault
And battery against the bed-rid bride-grooms window,
With an old song, a very wondrous old one,
Of all the cares, vexations, fears and torments,
That a decrepit, nasty, rotten Husband
Meets in a youthful, beauteous, sprightly wife:
So as the weak wretch will shortly be afraid,
That his own feebler shadow makes him Cuckold.
Our Masque o'er night begat a separation
Betwixt'em before bed time: for we found
Him at one window, coughing and spitting at us;
She at another, laughing, and throwing money
Down to the Fiddlers, while her Uncle Testy,
From a third Port-hole raves, denouncing Law,
And thundering statutes against their Minstrelsy.
Would he refuse his bride-bed the first night?
Hang him.
Our Horn-masque put him off it, (bless my in∣vention)
For which, I think, you'll Judge she'll forsake him
All nights and days hereafter. Here's a blessing
Prepared now for you, if you have grace to follow it.
Out of my house, that I may kill thee; Go:
For here it were inhospitable. Hence,
Thou busy vaillain, that with sugard malice
Hast poisoned all my hopes; ruined my comforts
In that sweet soul for ever. Go, I say,
That I may with the safety of my man-hood,
Right me upon that mischievous head of thine.
Is this your way of thanks for courtesies;
Or is it our luck always to meet good friends,
And never part so? yet before I go,
I will demand your reason (if you have any)
Wherein our friendly care can prejudice you;
Or poison any hopes of yours in Millicent?
Pray brother tell him.
Yes: that he may die
Satisfied, that I did but Justice on him,
In killing him. That villain, old in mischief,
(Hell take him) that has married her, conceives
It was my plot (I know he does) and, for
A sure revenge, will either work her death
By poison, or some other cruelty,
Or keep her locked up in such misery,
That I shall never see her more.
I answer—
Not in a word, let me entreat you, go.
Fair Mistress Lucy—
Neither shall she hear you.
Her Maid shall then: or I'll not out to night.
On what acquaintance Sir.
Be not afraid: I take no notice of the,
I like thy course, Wench, and will keep thy council,
And come sometimes, and bring thee a bit and th'wilt.
I'll see you choked first.
Thou art not the first
Cast Wench that has made a good Chamber-maid.
O you are base, and I could claw your eyes out.
Pray tell your Master now: so fare you well Sir.
I thank you, Brother, that you promise me
You will not follow him now, some other time
Will be more fit. What said he to you, Phillis?
Marry he said (help me good apron strings.)
What was it that he said?
I have it now.
It was in answer, Sir, of your objections.
First, that you feared the old man, wickedly,
Would make away his wife: to which he says,
That is not to be feared, while she has so
Much fear of Heaven before her eyes. And next,
That he would lock her up from sight of man:
To which he answers, she is so endued
With wit of woman, that were she locked up,
Or had locks hung upon her, locks upon locks;
Locks of prevention, or security:
Yet being a woman, she would have her will;
And break those locks as easily as her Wedlock.
Lastly, for your access unto her sight;
If you have Land he says to sell or Mortgage,
He'll undertake his doors, his wife and all,
Shall fly wide open to you,
He could not lay so.
Troth, but tic like his wild way of expression.
Yes; I knew that: my wit else had been puzzled.
And now I find my self instructed by him;
And friends with him again. Now, Arnold, any tidings.
Not of the gentleman that sought for you. Ent. Earn.
But I have other news thats worth your knowledge.
Your enemy, young Arthur, that has not
Been seen abroad this twel'moneth is got forth
In a disguise I hear, and weapon'd well.
I have it from most sure intelligence.
Look to your self, sir.
My blood chills again.
Pseugh, Isle not think of him. To dinner sister.
Here was a good night, and good morrow to
Given by a crew of Devils.
It was her plot,
And let her smart •or's.
Smart, Sir, did you say?
I think it was smart enough for a young Bride
To be made lye alone, and gnaw the sheets
Upon her wedding.
Rare impudence!
But for your satisfaction, as I hope
To gain your favour as you are my Uncle,
I know not any acter in this business.
Sir, her's a letter thrown into the entry.
It is some villainous libel then I warrant.
Saw thou not who conveyed it in?
Not 1. I only found it, Sr.
Pray read it you. Not my own house free from'em!
The devil owed me a spite; and when he has ploughed
An old mans lust up, he sits grinning at him.
Nay, I that have so many gallant enemies
On fire, to do me mischief, or disgrace;
That I must provide tinder for their sparks!
The very thought bears weight enough to sink me.
May I be worthy, Sir, to know your trouble?
Do you know your self?
Am I your trouble then?
Tic sworn and written in that letter there
Thou shalt be wicked. Hundreds have tan oaths
To make thee false, and me a horned Monster.
And does that trouble you?
Does it not you?
A dream has done much more. Pray, Sir, your pa∣tience,
And now I will be serious, and endeavour
To mend your faith in me. Is it in their power
To destroy virtue, think you; or do you
Suppose me false already; tic perhaps
Their plot to drive you into that opinion.
And so to make you cast me out amongst'em:
You may do so upon the words of strangers;
And if they tell you all, your gold is counterfeit,
Throw that out after me.
Now she speaks woman.
But since these men pretend, and you suppose'em
To be my friends, that carry this presumption
Over my will, Isle take charge of my self,
And do fair justice, both on them and you:
My honour is my own; and i'm no more
Yours yet, on whom my Uncle has bestowed me,
Then all the worlds (the ceremony off)
And will remain so, free from them and you;
Who, by the false light of their wild-fire flashes
Have slighted and depraved me and your bride bed;
Till you recant your wilful ignorance,
And they their petulant folly.
This sounds well.
Both they and you trench on my Peace and Honour;
Dearer then beauty, pleasure wealth and fortune;
I would stand under the fall of my estate
Most cheerfully, and sing: For there be ways
To raise up fortunes ruins, were her towers
Shattered in pieces, and the glorious ball
She stands on cleft asunder: But for Peace
Once ruined, there's no reparation;
If Honour fall, which is the soul of life,
Tic like the damned, it ne'er lifts the head
Up to the light again.
Niece, thou hast won me;
And Nephew, she's to good for you. I charge you
Give her her will: Isle have her home again else.
I know not what I can deny her now.
I ask but this, that you will give me leave
To keep a vow I made, which was last night
Because you flighted me.
Stay there a little.
I'll lay the price of twenty Maidenheads
Now, as the market goes, you get not hers
This seav'night.
My vow is for a month; and for so long
I crave your faithful promise not to attempt me.
In the mean time because I will be quit
With my trim, forward Gentlemen, and secure you
From their assaults; let it be given out,
That you have sent me down into the country
Or back unto my Uncles; whither you please.
Or, tarry, tarry—stay, stay here a while.
So I intend, Sir, Isle not leave your house,
But be locked up in some convenient room
Not to be seen by any, but your self▪
Or else to have the liberty of your house
In some disguise, (if it were possible)
Free from the least suspicion of your servants.
What needs all this?
Do we not live in a well governed City?
And have not I authority? Isle take
The care and guard of you and of your house
Against all outrageous attempts; and clap
Those Goatish Roarers up, fast as they come.
I understand her dressed, Sir, and applaud
Her quaint devise. Twill put 'em to more trouble,
And more expense in doubtful search of her,
The best way to undo 'em is to foil'em
At their own weapons. Tic not to be thought
The'l seek, by violence to force her from me,
But wit; In which we'll overcome'em.
Agree on it twixt your selves. I see you're friends.
I'll leave you to your selves.
Hark hither Niece—Now I dare trust you with him:
He is in years, tic true. But hear thou girl
Old Foxes are best blades.
I'm sure they stink most.
Good keeping makes him bright and young a∣gain.
But for how long.
A year or two perhaps.
Then, when he dies, his wealth makes thee a Countess.
You speak much comfort, Sir.
That's my good Girl.
And Nephew, Love her, I find she deserves it;
Be as benevolent to her as you can;
Show your good will at least. You do not know
How the good will of an old man may work
In a young wife. I must now take my journey
Down to my country house. At your months end
Isle visit you again. No ceremony
Joy and content be with you.
And a good journey to you.
You are content you say to be locked up
Or put in some disguise, and have it said
You're gone unto your Uncles. I have heard
Of some Bridegrooms, that shortly after Marriage
Have gone to see their Uncles, seldom Brides.
I have thought of another course.
Be it any way.
What if it were given out you're run away
Out of a detestation of your match?
'T would pull a blot upon my reputation.
When they consider my unworthiness
'T will give it credit. They'll commend you for it.
You speak well for your self.
I speak as they'll speak.
Well; let it be so then: I am content.
We'll put this instantly in act. The rest,
As for disguise, or privacy in my house,
You'll leave to me.
All, Sir, to your dispose,
Provided still you urge not to infringe
My vow concerning my virginity.
Tic the least thing I think on,
I will not offer at it till your time.
Why here's a happiness in a husband now
Thou tell me things, that truth never came near.
Tic perfect truth: you may believe it. Lady.
Maintain't but in one fillable more, Isle tear
Thy mischievous tongue out.
Fit reward for Tell-troths.
But that's not the reward you promised me
For watching of your brothers actions;
You said forsooth (if it please you to remember)
That you would love me for it.
Arrogant Rascal.
I bad thee bring account of what he did
Against his enemy; and thou reportst.
He took his enemies danger on himself,
And helped to rescue him whose bloody father
Kilt ours. Can truth or common reason claim
A part in this report? My brother do it!
Or draw a sword to help Theophilus.
Tic not for any spite I ow my Master,
But for my itch at her that I do this.
I am strangely taken. Such brave spirited women
Have cherished strong backed servingmen ere now.
Why dost not get thee from my sight, false fellow?
Isle be believed first. Therefore pray have patience
To peruse that.
My brothers character!
Theophilus sisters name—The brighter Lucy
So often written? nothing but her name—
But change of attributes—one serves not twice.
Blessed, divine, Illustrious, all perfection;
And (so heaven bless me) powerful in one place.
The worst thing I read yet, heap of all virtues—
Bright shining, and all these ascribed to Lucy.
O I could curse thee now for being so just
Would thou had belied him still.
I ne'er belied him, I.
O mischief of affection! Monstrous! horrid.
It shall not pass so quietly. Nay stay.
She'll cut my throat I fear.
Thou art a faithful servant.
It may do yet:
To you I am sweet Lady, and to my master
In true construction: he is his friend I think
That finds his follies out to have them cured,
Which you have only the true spirit to do.
How I do love thee now!
And your love Mistress,
(Brave sprightly Mistress) is the steeple top
Or rather Weathercock o'top of that
To which aspires my lifes ambition.
How did thou get this paper.
Amongst many
Of his rare twelve-moneths melancholy works,
That lie in's study. Mistress tic apparent
His melancholy all this while has been
More for her Love, then for his fathers death.
Thou hast my love for ever.
Some small token
In earnest of it. Mistress, would be felt,
Take that in earnest then.
It is a sure one.
And the most feeling pledge she could have given:
For she is a virago. And I have read
That your viragoes use to strike all those
They mean to lie with: And from thence tic taken
That your brave active women are called strikers.
Set me that chair.
The warm touch of my flesh
Already works in her. I shall be set
To better work immediately. I am prevented.
A way and be not seen. Be sure I love thee.
A ha! This clinches. Another time I'm, sure on'c.
Sister! where are you? How now! not well or
Sick brother—sick at heart, oh—(sleepy.
Passion of heart! where are our servants now
To run for doctors? ho—
Pray stay and hear me.
Her's no work for them. They'll find a master here
Too powerful for the strength of all their knowledge.
What at thy heart?
Yes, brother, at my heart.
Too scornful to be dispossessed by them.
What may that proud grief be? good sister name it.
It grieves me more to name it, then to suffer't.
Since I have endured the worst on it, and proved constant
To sufferance and silence, it were a weakness
Now to betray a sorrow, by a name,
More fit to be severely felt then known.
Indeed I'll know it.
Rather let me die,
Then so afflict your understanding, Sir.
It shall not afflict me.
I know you'll chide me for it.
Indeed you wrong me now. Can I chide you?
If you be true and honest you must do it,
And heartily.
You tax me nearly there.
And that's the physic must help me or nothing:
With grief I go about to cure a grief then.
Now speak it boldly, Sister.
Noble Physician—It is—
It is! what is it? If you love me, speak.
Tic—love and I beseech thee spare me not.
Alas dear sister, can thou think that love
Deserves a chiding in a gentle breast?
Do you pity me already. O faint man
That tremble but at opening of a wound!
What hope is there of thee to search and dress it?
But I am in thy hands, and forced to try thee.
I love—Theophilus—
Ha!
Theophilus, brother;
His son that slew our father. Ther's a love!
O more then time it were looked, for fear it festers.
S•e has put me to it indeed. What must I do?
She has a violent spirit; so has he;
And though I wish most seriously the match,
Whereby to work mine own with his fair Sister,
The danger yet, in the negotiation
May quite destroy my course; spoil all my hopes.
Isle therefore put her off on it if I can.
Can you be tender now?
What! To undo you?
I love you not so slightly. Pardon me.
A rough hand must be used: For here's a wound
Must not be gently touched; you perish then,
Under a Brothers pity. Pray sit quiet;
For you must suffer all.
I'll strive to do it.
To love the Son of him that slew your Father!
To say it shows unlovingness of nature;
Forgetfulness in blood, were all but shallow
To the great depth of danger your fault stands in.
It rather justifies the act it self,
And commends that down to posterity
By your blood-cherishing embraces. Children,
Born of your body, will, instead of tears,
By your example, offer a thankful joy
To the sad memory of their Gransiers slaughter.
Quite contrary! How fearful it is to think on it!
What may the world say too? There goes a daughter,
Whose strange desire leaped from her Fathers ruin;
Death gave her to the Bride-groom; and the marriage
Knit fast and cemented with blood. O Sister—
O Brother.
How! Well? And so quickly cured?
Dissembler; foul dissembler.
This is plain.
Th'hast played with fire; and like a cunning fell∣low
Bit in thy pain o'purpose to deceive
Another tender touch. I know thy heart weeps
For what't has spoke against. Thou that dare love
The daughter of that Fiend that slew thy father,
And plead against thy cause! unfeeling man,
Can not thy own words melt thee? To that end
I wrought and rais'd'em: 'T was to win thy health,
That I was sick; I played thy disease to thee,
That thou might see the loathed complexion on it,
Far truer in another then ones self.
And, if thou can, after all this, tread wickedly,
Thou art a Rebel to all natural love,
And filial duty; dead to all just council:
And every word thou mock'dst with vehemence
Will rise a wounded father in thy conscience,
To scourge thy Judgement. There's thy Saint crossed out,
And all thy memory with her. I'll ne'er trust
Revenge again with thee (so false is man∣hood)
But take it now into mine own powerfully,
And see what I can do with my life's hazard;
Your purpose shall ne'er thrive. There I'll make sure work.
How wise and cunning is a women's malice;
I never was so cozened.
Out of my doors pernicious knave and harlot;
Avaunt I say.
Good Master.
Pray you worship.
You have all the wages you are like to have.
Nay, I dare take your word for that: you'll keep
All moneys fast enough whose ere it be,
If you but gripe it once.
I am undone,
And shamed for ever by your negligence,
Or malice rather: for how can it be
She could depart my house without your knowledge.
That cursed Mistress that ever she came here!
If I know of her flight, Sir, may these hands
Never be held up, but to curse you only,
If you cashier me thus: because you have lost
your wife before she was well found, must we
Poor innocents be guilty?
For my part,
Or ought I know she may as well be gone
Out of the the chimney top as out o'door.
The door must be your way; and find her out,
Or never find my door again. Be gone.
Mad. O, you are a cruel Master.
So, so, so.
These cries are laughter to me: Ha, ha, ha.
I will be Master of my invention once,
And now be bold to see how rich I am
In my concealed wealth. Come, precious mark
Of beauty and perfection, at which envy
And lust aim all their ranckling poisonous arrows.
But Isle provide they ne'er shall touch thy blood.
What, are your servants gone?
Turned, turned away
With blame enough for thy supposed escape:
Which they will rumour so to my disgrace
Abroad, that all my envious adversaries
Will, betwixt joy of my conceived misfortune
In thy dear loss, and their vain hopes to find thee,
Run frantic thorough the streets, while we at home
Sit safe, and laugh at their defeated malice.
But now for my disguise.
I, that, that, that.
Be but so good and gentle to thy self,
To hear me and be ruled by me in that,
A Queens felicity falls short of thine.
Isle make thee Mistress of a Mine of treasure,
Give me but peace the way that I desire it—
Some horrible shape sure that he conjures so.
That I may fool iniquity, and Triumph
Over the lustful stallions of our time;
Bed-bounders, and leap-Ladies (as they terme'em)
Mount-Mistresses, diseases shackle'em,
And spittles pick their bones.
Come to the point. What's the disguise, I pray you.
First know, my sweet, it was the quaint devise
Of a Venetian Merchant, which I learnt
In my young factorship.
That of the Moor?
The Backamore you spake of? Would you make
An Negro of me.
You have past your word,
That if I urge not to infringe your vow
(For keeping this month your virginity)
You'll wear what shape I please. Now this shall both
Kill vain attempts in me, and guard you safe
From all that seek subversion of your honour.
Isle fear no powdered spirits to haunt my house,
Rose-footed fiends, or fumigated Goblins
After this tincture's laid upon thy face,
'Twil cool their kidneys and allay their heats.
Bless me! you fright me, Sir. Can jealousy
Creep into such a shape? Would you blot out
Heavens workmanship?
Why think thou, fearful Beauty,
Has heaven no part in Egypt? Pray thee tell me,
Is not an Ethiopes face his workmanship
As well as the fairest Ladies? nay, more too.
Then hers, that daubs and makes adulterate beauty?
Some can be pleased to lye in oils and paste,
At sins appointment, which is thrice more wicked.
This (which is sacred) is for sins prevention.
Illustrious persons, nay, even Queens themselves
Have, for the glory of a nights presentment,
To grace the work, suffered as much as this.
Enough Sir, I am obedient.
Now I thank thee.
Be fearless love; this alters not thy beauty,
Though, for a time obscures it from our eyes.
Thou moist be, while at pleasure, like the Sun;
Thou dost but case thy splendour in a cloud,
To make the beam more precious in it shines.
In stormy troubled weather no Sun's seen
Sometimes a month together: It is thy case now.
But let the roaring tempest once be over,
Shine out again and spare not.
There's some comfort.
Take pleasure in the scent first; smell to it fearlessly,
And taste my care in that, how comfortable
It is to the nostril, and no foe to feature.
Now red and white those two united houses,
Whence beauty takes her fair name and descent,
Like peaceful Sisters under one Roof dwelling
For a small time; farewell. Oh let me kiss ye
Before I part with you—Now Jewels up
Into your Ebon Casket. And those eyes,
Those sparkling eyes, that send forth modest anger
To singe the hand of so unkind a Painter,
And make me pull'c away and spoil my work,
They will look straight like Diamonds, set in lead,
That yet retain their virtue and their value.
What murder have I done upon a cheek there!
But there's no pitying: It is for peace and honour;
And pleasure must give way. Hold, take the Tincture,
And perfect what's amiss now by your glass.
Some humbler habit must be thought on too.
Please your own fancy. Take my keys of all;
In my pawn Wardrobe you shall find to fit you.
And though I outwardly appear your Drudge,
It is fit I have a Maid for private service:
My breeding has not been to serve my self.
Trust to my care for that. One knock. In; in.
Is it to me your business?
Yea, if you
Be Master Quick-sands Sir; the Masters worship
Here of the house.
I am so. What's your business?
It is upon that, Sir, I would speak Sir, hoping
That you will pardon my presumptuousness,
I am a Mother that do lack a service.
You have said enough. I'll entertain no Mothers.
A good Maid servant, knew I where to find one.
He is a knave, and like your worship, that
Dares say I am no Maid; and for a servant
(It ill becomes poor folks to praise themselves,
But) I were held a tydie one at home.
O you are a Norfolk woman (cry thee mercy)
Where Maids are Mothers, and Mothers are Maids.
I have friends i'th'City that will pass their words
For my good bearing.
Hast thou?
Yes indeed, Sir.
I have a Cousin that is a Retorney
Of Lyons-Inn, that will not see me wronged;
And an old Aunt in Muggle-street, a Mid-wife,
That knows what's what as well's another woman.
But where about in Norfolk were thou bred?
At Thripperstown Sir, near the City of Norwich.
where they live much by spinning with the Rocks?
Thripping they call it, Sir.
Dost thou not know one Hulverhead that keeps
An Innocent in's house.
There are but few innocents in the country Sr.
They are given too much to law for that: what should
That Hulverhead be a councellor, Sir.
No a husband man.
Truly I know none.
I am glad she do's not. How knew thou I wanted
A servant.
At an old wives house in Bow-lane
That places servants, where a maid came in
You put away to day.
All, and what said she?
Truly to speak the best and worst, forsooth,
She said her fault deserved her punishment
For letting of her Mistress run away.
The news goes current. I am glad o'that.
And that you were a very strict hard man,
But very just in all your promises.
And such a master would I serve to choose.
This innocent country Mother takes me.
Her looks speak Wholesomness; and that old woman
That Bow lane purveyor hath fitted me
With serviceable ware these dozen years.
I'll keep her at the least this Gander month,
While my fair wife lies in of her black face,
And virgin vow; in hope she's for my turn.
Lust, when it is restrained, the more tvvil burn.
May I make bold to crave your answer, Sir?
Come in, I'll talk with you.
Prosper now my plot,
And hulk, thou art twixt wind and vva••r shot.
You're welcome Gentlemen.
Let's ha'good wine, Boy, that must be our welcome.
You shall, you shall Sir.
Within. Ambrose, Ambrose;
Here, here, anon, anon, by and by, I come, I come.
Jerome, Jerome, draw a quart of the best Canary into the Apollo.
This is a language that I have not heard.
You understand it, Gentlemen.
So shall you anon master Buzzard.
Your friend and Jonathan Buzzard kind gentlemen.
What excellent luck had we, friend Buzzard, to
meet with thee, just as thy Master cast thee off.
Just Sir, as I was going I know not whither:
And now I am arrived at just I know not where. Tic a
rich room, this. Is it not Goldsmiths hall.
It is a Tavern man—And here comes the wine.
Fill boy—and her's to thee friend, a hearty draft to
cheer thee—fill again boy—There, drink it off.
Off with it man—hang sorrow, cheer thy heart.
And truly ti's the best cheer that ere I tasted.
Come taste it better, her's another to thee.
—And truly this was better then the first.
Then try a third. That may be best of all.
—And truly, so it is—how many sorts of wine
May a vintner bring in one pot together?
By Bacchus Mr. Buzzard, that's a subtle question.
Bacchus! whose that I pray?
A great friend of the vintners, and master of their company indeed.
I was never in all my life so far in a tavern before.
What comforts have I lost.
Now he begins to talk.
Nor ever was in all my two and twenty years under that Babilouian Tyrant Quicks ands, so far as a Vint∣ners bar but thrice.
But thrice in all that time?
Truly but thrice Sir. And the first time was to fetch a jill of sack for my Master, to make a friend of his drink, that joined with him in a purchase of sixteen thou∣sand pound.
I, there was thrist. More wine boy. A pottle and a beer bowl.
The second time was for a penny pot of Musca∣dine, which he drank all himself with an egg upon his wedding morning.
And to much purpose, it seemed by his wives run∣ning away.
The third and last time was for half a pint of sack upon his wedding night, of later memory; and I shall ne'er forget it, that riotous wedding night: when Hell broke loose, and all the devils danced at our house, which made my Master mad, whose raving made my mistress run away, whose running away was the cause of my turn∣ing away. O me, poor masterless wretch that I am.—O—
Hang thy master, here's a full bowl to his con∣fusion.
I thank you. Let it come Sir, ha, ha, ha.
Think no more of Masters, friends are better then Masters.
And you are all my friends kind gentlemen, I found it before in your money when my Master (whose confusion I have drunk) took your Mortgages; And now I find it in your wine. I thank you kind gentlemen still. O how I love kind Gentlemen.
That shows thou art of gentle blood thy self, friend Buzzard.
Yes friend—Shall I call you friend?
By all means, all of us.
Why then, all friends, I am a gentleman, though spoiled i'che breeding. The Buzzards are all gentlemen,
We came in with the Conqueror. Our name (as the French has it) is Beau desert; which signifies—Friends, what does it signify?
It signifies, that you deserved fairly at your ma∣sters hands, like a Gentleman, and a Buzzard as you were, and he turned you away most beastly like a swine, as he is. And now here is a health to him, that first finds his wife, and sends her home with a boun∣cing boy in her belly for him to father.
Ha, ha, ha. Isle pledge that: and then Isle tell you a secret.
Well said friend; up with tha•, and then out with thy secret.
I will friend. And tother two friends, here's upon the same.
I hope he will show us a way, out of the bottom of his bowl to find his Mistress.
This fellow was happily found.
This was an excellent draught.
But the seeret, friend, out with that, you must keep no secrets amongst friends.
It might prove a shrewed matter against my mis∣chevious Master as it may be handled.
Hang him cullion, that would turn thee away.
We'll help thee to handle it, fear it not.
Hark you then all friends. Shall I out with it?
What else.
Isle first take tother cup, and then out with it al∣together—And now it comes—If my Mistress do bring him home a bastard, she's but even with him.
He has one I warrant. Has he cadzooks?
That he has by this most delicate drink. But it is the Arsivarsiest Aufe that ever crept into the world. Sure some Goblin got it for him; or changed it in the nest, thats certain.
I vow thou utterest brave things. Is it a boy?
It has gone for a boy in short coats and long coats this seven and twenty years.
An Idiot is it.
Yes: A very natural; and goes a thissen; and looks as old as I do too. And I think if my beard were off, I could be like him: I have taken great pains to practise his speech and action to make my self merry with him in the country.
Where is he kept, friend, where is he kept.
In the further side of Norfolk, where you must never see him. Tic now a dozen years since his father saw him, and then he compounded for a sum of money with an old man, one Hulverhead, to keep him for his life time; and he never to hear of him. But I saw him within these three months. We hearken after him, as land-sick heirs do after their fathers, in hope to hear of his end at last.
But hark you, friend, if your beard were off, could you be like him think you? What if you cut it off, and to him for a father.
Pray thee hold thy peace.
My beard, friend, no: My beard's my honour.
Hair is an ornament of honour upon man or woman.
Come, come; I know what we will do with him. Mun, knock him down with the other cup. We will lay him to sleep; but yet watch and keep him betwixt hawk and buzzard as he is, till we make excellent sport with him.
Hey ho. I am very sleepy.
See he jooks already. Boy show us a private room.
This way, Gentlemen.
Down, Plumpton▪park, &amp;c.
Indeed you were unkind to turn away
M• maid (poor harmless maid) whose innocent mirth
Was the best cheer your house afforded me.
I am sorry sister, trust me, truly sorry,
And knew I which way to recover her
With my best care I would. Yet, give me leave,
I saw her overbold; and overheard her
Say, she foresaw that Arthur my sole enemy
Should be your husband. Isle marry you to death first.
Now you fly out again.
Your pardon again your sister,
And for your satisfaction I will strive
To oversway my passion. How now Arnold,
Me thinks I read good news upon thy face.
The best, Sir, I can tell is, the old Jew
Quicksands has lost his wife.
She is not dead,
Tic not so well for him: for if she were
He then might overtake her though she were
Gone to the devil. But she's run away:
But to what corner of the earth, or under
Whose bed to find her is not to be thought.
It has raised such a laughter in the town
Among the Gallants—!
And do you laugh too?
Yes; and if you do not out-laugh all men
That hear the joyful news, tic too good for you.
I am too merciful, I kill thee not.
Out of my doors, thou villain, reprobate.
Hold, Pray Sir, hold.
Never while I have power to lift a hand
Against thee, mischievous Villain.
Is not this passion, brother?
Forbear, sister.
This is a cause turns patience into fury.
Arnold, forbear his sight.
And my house too.
Or villain, look to die, oft as I see thee.
Turned out o• doors! A dainty frantic humour
In a young Master! Good enough for me though;
Because tic proper to old serving-men
To be so served. What course now must I take?
I am too old to seek out a new Master.
I will not beg, because Isle cross the proverb
That runs upon old serving creatures; stealing
I have no mind to: Tic a hanging matter.
Wit and invention help me with some shift
To help a cast-off now at a dead lift.
Sweet fortune hear my suit.
Why how now, Arnold! What, at thy devotion?
Isle tell you in your ear, sir, I dare trust you.
Could earthly man have dreamt this Rafcal
Whose Lechery, to all our thinking, was
Nothing but greedy Avarice and cosonage,
Could have been all this while a concealed whoremaster,
To have a Bastard of so many years
Nursled in the Country?
Note the punishments
That haunt the Miscreant for his black misdeeds;
That his base off-spring proves a natural Idiot;
Next that his wife, by whom he might had comfort
In progeny, though of some others getting,
Should with her light heels make him heavie-headed
By running of her Country! And lastly that
The blinded wretch should cast his servant off,
Who was the cover of his villainy,
To show us (that can have no mercy on him)
The way to plague him.
Ha, ha, ha—
What dost laugh at?
To think how nimble the poor uzzard is
To be revenged on's Master; How he has Shaped himself;
Cut off his beard, and practised all the postures
To act the Changeling bastard.
Could we light
Upon some quaint old fellow now, could match him
To play the clown that brings him up to town,
Our company were full, and we were ready
To put our project into present action.
Gentlemen, we are fitted: take this man w'ye
He is the only man I would have sought,
To give our project life. I'll trust thee Arnold,
And trust thou me, thou shalt get pieces by it;
Besides, Isle piece thee to thy Master again.
That clinches Sir.
Go follow your directions.
Come away then.
Sweet mirth thou art my Mistress. I could serve thee.
And shake the thought off of all woman kind
But that old wonts are hardly lest. A man
That's entered in his youth, and thoroughly salted
In documents of women, hardly leaves
While reins or brains will last him: Tic my case.
Yet mirth, when women fail, brings sweet encounters
That tickle up a man above their sphere:
They dull, but mirth revives a man: who's here,
The solitary musing man, called Arthur,
Possessed with seriours vanity; Mirth to me!
The world is full: I cannot peep my head forth
But I meet mirth in every corner: Ha!
Sure some old runt with a splay-foot has crossed him!
Hold up thy head man; what dost seek? thy grave?
I would scarce trust you with a piece of earth
You would choose to lye in though; if some plump Mistress
Or a deft Lass were set before your search.
How vainly this man talks!
Get ye good den forsooth.
How vainly this man talks! speak but truth now,
Does not thy thought now run upon a Wench?
I never looked so but mine stood that way.
It is all your glory that; and to make boast
Of the variety that serves your lust:
Yet not to know what woman you love best.
Not I cadzooks, but all alike to me,
Since I put off my Wench I kept at Livory:
But of their use I think I have had my share,
And have loved every one best of living women;
A dead one I ne'er coveted, that's my comfort:
But of all ages that are pressable;
From sixteen unto sixty; and of all complexions
From the white flaxen to the tawney-Moor;
And of all statures between Dwarf and Giants;
Of all conditions, from the Doxy to the Dowsabel.
Of all opinions, I will not say Religious:
(For what make they with any?) and of all
Features and shapes, from the huckle-back'd Bum-creeper,
To the straight spiny Shop-maid in St. Martins.
Briefly, all sorts and sizes I have tasted.
And think thou hast done well in it!
As well as I could with the worst of'em tho'l say it.
Few men come after me that mend my work.
But thou ne'er think of punishments to come;
Thou dream not of diseases, poverty,
The loss of sense or member, or the cross
(Common to such loose livers) an ill marriage;
A hell on earth to scourge thy conscience.
Yes, when I marry, let me have a wife
To have no mercy on me; let the fate
Of a stale dovting Bachelor fall upon me;
Let me have Quicksands curse, to take a Wife
Will run away next day, and prostitute
Her self to all the world before her Husband.
Nay, that will be too good: If I foresee
Any thing in thy marriage destiny,
'Twil be to take a thing that has been common
To th'world before, and live with thee perforce
To thy perpetual torment.
Close that point.
I cannot marry. Will you be merry, Arthur?
I have such things to tell thee.
No, I cannot.
Pray thee come closer to me. What has crossed thee?
Is thy supposed slain father come again,
To dispossess thee for another life time?
Or has thy valiant sister beaten thee? Tell me.
It shall go no further.
Let your valiant wit
And jocund humour be supposed no warrant
For you t'abuse your friends by.
Why did tell me of marrying then? But I
Have done. And now pray speak what troubles you.
I care not if I do: For twill be Town talk.
My Sister on a private discontent
Betwixt her self and me hath left my house.
Gone quite away?
Yes, And I know not whither.
Beyond Sea sure to sight with th'Air, that took
Her fathers last breath into it. Went she alone?
No, No; My man's gone with her.
Who, the fellow
That brags on's back so; the stiff strong chained Rascal?
Even he.
The devil is in these young Tits,
And wildfire in their Cruppers.
Let me charm you,
By all our friendship, you nor speak nor hear
An ill construction of her act in this,
I know her thoughts are noble; and my wo
Is swollen unto that fullness, that the addition
But of word in scorn would blow me up
Into a cloud of wild distempered fury
Over the heads of all whose looser breath
Dare raise a wind to break me. Then I fall
A sudden storm of ruin on you all.
I know not how to laugh at this: It comes
So near my pity. But isle to my Griggs
Again; And there will find new mirth to stretch
And laugh, like tickled wenches, hand ore head.
How does my habit and my arms become me?
Too well to be a woman, manly Mistress.
Wher's the pistol you provided for me.
Here Mistress and a good one.
Tic too long.
No Lady would wish a shorter. If it were
'T would bear no charge, or carry nothing hotne.
Isle try what I can do. Thou think me valiant.
I'm sure I have often felt it.
All the virago's that are found in story,
Penthesilea and Symaramis
Were no such handy strikers as your self:
But they had another stroke, could you but find it,
Then you were excellent. I could teach it you.
I dare not understand thee yet. Be sure
As you respect my honour, or your life
That you continue constant to my trust,
And so thou can not know how much Isle love thee.
There is a hope as good, now, as a promise.
Here at this Inn abide, and wait my coming
Be careful of my guildings: Be not seen
Abroad for fear my brother may surprise you.
Ther's money for you; and ere that be spent
Tic like I shall return.
Best stars attend you,
Mars arm thee all the day; and Venus light
Thee home into these amorous arms at night.
Be cheered my love; help to bear up the joy,
That I conceive by thy concealed Beauty,
Thy rich imprisoned beauty, whose in•ranchisement
Is now at hand, and shall shine forth again
In its admired glory. I am rapt
Above the sphere of common joy and wonder
In the effects of this our quaint complot.
In the mean time, though you take pleasure in it,
My name has dearly suffered.
But thine honour
Shall, in the vindication of thy name,
When envy and detraction are struck dumb
Gain an eternal memory with virtue;
When the discountenanced wits of all my jierers
Shall hang their heads, and fall like leaves in Autumn.
O how I laugh to hear the cozened people
As I pass on the streets abuse themselves
By idle questions and false reports.
As thus: good morrow Master Quicksands; pray
How fares your beauteous bedfellow? says another
I hear she's not at home. A third says no:
He saw her yesterday at the still-yard
With such a Gallant, sousing their dried tongues
In Rhemish, Deal, and Back-rag: Then a fourth
Says he knows all her haunts and Meetings
At Bridgfoot, Bear, the Tons, the Cats, the Squirrels;
Where, when, and in what company to find her,
But that he scorns to do poor me the favour:
Because a light piece is too good for me.
While a fifth youth with counterfeit show of pity,
Meets, and bewails my case, and says he knows
A Lord that must be nameless keeps my wife
In an enchanted Castle two miles West
Upon the River side: but all conclude—
That you are a monstrous cuckold, and deserve it.
Knowing my safety, then, and their foul errors,
Have I not cause to laugh? Yes, in abundance.
Now note my plot, the height of my invention
I have already given out to some,
That I have certain knowledge you are dead,
And have had private burial in the country;
At which my shame, not grief, forbad my presence:
Yet some way to make known unto the world
A husbands duty, I resolve to make
A certain kind of feast, which shall advance
My joy above the reach of spite or chance.
May I partake, Sir, of your rich conceit?
To morrow night expires your limited month
Of vowed virginity; It shall be such a night;
In which I mean thy beauty shall break forth
And dazzle with amazement even to death
Those my malicious enemies, that rejoiced
In thy supposed escape, and my vexation.
I will invite 'hem all to such a feast
As shall fetch blushes from the boldest guest;
I have the first course ready—
And if I
Fail in the second, blame my houswifery.
Away, some body comes; I guess of them
That have jeered me, whom I must jeer again.
Gallants you're welcome. I was sending for ye.
To give us that we come for?
What may that be?
Trifles you have o• ours.
Of yours, my Masters?
Yes, you have in mortgage
Three-score pound Land of mine inheritance.
And my Annuity of a hundred Marks.
And Jewels, Watches, Plate, and clothes of mine,
Pawned for four hundred pound. Will you restore all?
You know all these were forfeited long since,
Yet I'll come roundly to you, Gentlemen.
Ha'you brought my moneys, and my interest?
No surely. But we will come as roundly to you
As moneyless Gentlemen can. You know
Good Offices are ready money Sir.
But have you Offices to sell, good Sirs.
We mean to do you Offices worth your money.
As how, I pray you.
Marry, Sir, as thus;
We will help you to a man that has a friend—
That knows a party, that can go to the house—
Where a Gentleman dwelt, that knew a Scholar
That was exceeding well acquainted with a Traveler
That made report of a great Magician beyond the Seas.
That might ha'been as likely as any man in all the world.
To have helped you to your wife again.
You are the merriest mates that ere I cop'd withal.
But to be serious Gentlemen, I am satisfied
Concerning my lost Wife. She has made even
With me and all the World.
What is she dead?
Dead, Dead: And therefore as men use to mourn
For kind and loving wives, and call their friends
Their choicest friends unto a solemn banquet
Served out with sighs and sadness, while the widowers
Blubber, and bath in tears (which they do seem
To wring out of their fingers ends and noses)
And after all the demure ceremony.
Are subject to be thought dissemblers, I
(To avoid the scandal of Hypocrisy,
Because it is plain she loved me not) invite
You and your like that loved her and not me,
To see me in the pride of my rejoicings,
You shall find entertainment worth your company,
And that let me entreat to morrow night.
You shall ha'mine.
To morrow night say you.
Yes gallants: fail not, as you wish to view
Your mortgages and pawns again. Adieu.
We came to jeer the Jew, and he jeers us.
How glad the raschal is for his Wives death.
An honest man could not have had such luck.
He has some further end in it, could we guess it,
Then a mere merriment for his dead wives niddance.
Perhaps he has got a new Wife, and intends
To make a funeral and a Marriage feast
In one to hedge in charges.
He'il be hanged rather then marry again.
Zooks would he had some devilish jealous hilding,
It would be a rare addition to his mirth,
For us to bring our antic in betwixt'em
Of his changeling Bastard.
How ere we'll grace his feast with our presentment.
When's the Buzzard?
We left him with his foster father, Arnold,
B•sy at rehearsal practising their parts.
They shall be perfect by to morrow night.
If not unto our profit, our delight.
Brother be comforted.
Let not the name
Or empty sound of comfort mix with th'air
That must invade these ears: They are not capable,
Or, if they be, they dare not, for themselves,
Give the conveyance of a syllable
Into my heart, that speak not grief or sorrow.
Be grieved then, Isle grieve with you: For each sigh
You waste for Millicents untimely death
Isle spend a tear for your as fruitless sorrow.
That's most unsuitable; you're no company
For me to grieve with if you grieve for me;
Take the same cause with me; you are no friend
Or sister else of mine. It is enough
To set the world a weeping!
So it is;
All but the stony part of't.
Now you are right. Her husband's of that part;
He cannot weep by nature: But Isle find
A way by art in Chemistry to melt him.
At least extract some drops. But do you weep
Indeed for Millicent? What, all these tears?
All for your love.
She is my love indeed; and was my wife.
But for the empty name of marriage only,
But now she's yours for ever. You enjoy her.
In her fair blessed memory; in her goodness,
And all that has prepared her way for glory.
Let me embrace thee sister. How I reverence
Any fair honour that is done to her,
Now thou shalt weep no more: Thou hast given me com∣fort
In showing me how she's mine. And tears indeed
Are all too weak a sacrifice for her
But such as the heart weeps.
Sit down brother.
Sing boy the mornful song I bad you practise.
Call you this mournful. Tic a wanton air.
Go you're a naughty child indeed, Isle whip you
If you give voice unto such notes,
I know not brother how you like the air,
But in my mind the words are sad, Pray read'em.
They are sad indeed▪ How now my boy, dost weep?
I am not angry now.
I do not weep,
Sir, for my self. But ther's a youth without
(A handsome youth) whose sorrow works in me:
He says he wants a service, and seeks yours.
Dost thou not know him▪
No: but I pity him.
O, good boy, that can weep for a strangers misery!
The sweetness of thy dear compassion
Even melts me too. What does he say he is.
Tic that Sir, that will grieve you when you hear it.
He is a poor kinsman to the gentlewoman
Lately deceased that you so loved and mourn for.
And dost thou let him stay without so long?
Merciless Villain! run and fetch him quickly.
O brother—
Sister, can I be too zealous
In such a cause as this? For hark you, sister,
There was no way like this to get within'em,
Now courage keep true touch with me. Isle vex
Your cunning and unnatural purpose, brother,
If I do nothing else.
Sir, here's the youth?
A lovely one he is, and wondrous like her,
O let me run and clasp him; hang about him,
And yoke him to me with a thousand kisses!
I shall be troublesome and heavy to thee,
With the pleased weight of my incessant love.
Youth of a happy kindred, which foreruns
A happy fortune ever. Pray thee, sister,
Is he not very like her?
If I durst
I would now say, this were the better beauty,
For it resembles Arthurs.
I'st not her face? you do not mind me sister:
Hers was a good one once, and this is now.
Why sister, you were wont to take delight
In any comfort that belonged to me;
And help to carry my joys sweetly: now
You keep no constant course with me.
This man
Melts me—alas, Sir, I am a poor boy.
What, and allied to her? impossible!
Where ere thou liv'st her name's a fortune to thee.
Her memory amongst good men sets thee up;
It is a word that commands all in this house.
This snare was not well laid. I fear my self.
Live my companion; my especial sweet one,
My brother and my bedfellow thou shalt be.
By liken but I must not, though I find
But weak matter against it.—This my courage!
She took from earth, how kind is heaven, how good
To send me yet, a joy so near in blood!
Good noble youth, if there be any more
Distressed of you, that claims alliance with her
Though a far off; deal freely; let me know it,
Give me their sad names; Isle seek'em out,
And like a good great man, in memory humble
Ne'er cease until I plant'em all in fortunes,
And see'em grow about me.
I hear of none, my self excepted, Sir.
Thou shalt have all my care then, all my love.
What make I here? I shall undo my self.
Yet note him sister.
I ther's the mark my malice chiefly aims at;
But then, he stands so near, I wound him too.
I feel that must not be. Art must be shown here.
Come, you shall kiss him for me, and bid him welcome.
You are most welcome, Sir, and were her name
To which you are allied, a stranger here,
Yet, Sir, believe me, you in those fair eyes
Bring your own welcome with you.
Never came Malice among so sweet a people.
It knows not how to look, nor I on them.
Let not your gentle modesty make you seem
Ungentle to us, by turning so away.
That's well said sister, but he will and shall
Be bolder with us, ere we part.
I shall too much I fear.—
Come gentle blessing,
Let not a misery be thought on here,
(If ever any were so rude to touch thee)
Between us we'll divide the comfort of thee.
I have heard thy story often, and with pity
As often thought upon it, and that the father,
Of my best loved Theophilus, together with
His, then, friend Master Meanwell (who have since
Become each others deathsman acts thought)
By suits in Law wrought the sad overthrow
Of thy poor Fathers fortune; by which means,
Poor Gentleman he was enforced to leave
His native Country to seek foreign means
To maintain life.
Or rather to meet death.
For since his traval, which is now six years,
I never heard of him.
Much pitiful!
So is your story, Mistress unto me.
But let us dry our eyes; and know we must not
Stick in the mire of pity; but with labour
Work our delivery: yours is now at hand
If you set will and brain to it. But my honour
(If a poor wench may speak so) is so cracked
Within the ring, as twill be hardly soldered
By any art. If on that wicked fellow,
That struck me into such a desperate hazard.
He will be here to night, and all the crew
And this must be the night of my delivery,
I am prevented else for ever, wench.
Be sure, among the guests, that you make choice
Of the most civil one to be your convoy,
And then let me alone to act your Mores part.
Peace, he comes.
Isle to my shift then.
Wher's my hidden beauty?
That shall this night be glorious.
I but wait the good hour
For my deliverance out of this obscurity.
Tic at hand.
So are my guests. See some of'em are entered.
O my blithe friend, Master Nathaniel, welcome.
And Master Arthur Meanwell as I take it.
Yes, Sir, a Gentleman late possessed with sadness,
Whom I had much a do to draw along
To be partaker more of your mirth then cheer.
You say here shall be mirth. How now, what's that?
Ha'vou a black coney berry in your house?
Stay Catelina. Nay, she may be seen.
For know, Sirs, I am mortified to beauty
Since my wives death. I will not keep a face
Better then this under my roof I ha'sworn.
You were too rash, Sir, in that oath, if I
Move be allowed to speak.
Tic done and past, Sir.
If I be not taken with yon'd funeral face,
And her two eyes the scutcheons, would I were whipped now.
Suppose your friends should wish you to a match
Prosperous in wealth and honour.
Isle hear of none, nor you if you speak so.
Sir, I ha'done.
It is the handsom'st Rogue
I have ere seen yet of a deed of darkness;
Tawny and russet faces I have dealt with,
But never came so deep in blackness yet.
Come hither Catelyna. You shall see, Sir,
What a brave wench she shall be made anon
And when she dances how you shall admire her.
Will you have dancing here to night.
Yes I have borrowed other Moors of Merchants
That trade in Barberry, whence I had mine own here,
And you shall see their way and skill in dancing.
He keeps this Rie-loaf for his own white white tooth
With confidence none will cheat him of a bit;
Isle have a sliver though I loose my whittle.
Here take this key, twill lead thee to those orna∣mints
That decked thy mistress lately. Use her casket,
And with the sparklingst of her jewels shine;
Flame like a midnight beacon with that face,
Or a pitched ship a fire; the streamers glowing
And the keel mourning, (how I shall rejoice
At these prepostrous splendours) get thee glorious;
Be like a running fire-work in my house.
He sets me more a fire at her. Well old stick breech
If I do chance to clap your Barberry buttock
In all her bravery, and get a snatch
In an odd corner, or the dark to night
To mend your cheer, and you hereafter hear on it,
Say there are as good stomachs as your own,
Hist, Negro, hist.
No fee, O no, I darea note.
Why, why—pish—pox I love thee,
O no de fine white Zentilmanna
Cannot a love a the black a thing a.
Cadzooks the best of all wench.
O take—a heed—a my mastra see—a.
When we are alone, then wilt thou.
Then I shall speak a more a.
And Isle not lose the Moor-a for more then I
Will speak-a.
I muse the rest of my invited Gallants
Come not away.
Zooks the old angry justice.
How comes it Sir, to pass, that such a news
Is spread about the town? is my Niece dead,
And you prepared to mirth Sir, ho?
Is this the entertainment I must find
To welcome me to town?
She is not dead, Sir. But take you no notice
You shall have instantly an entertainment, that
Shall fill you all with wonder.
Sure he is mad;
Or do you understand his meaning sirs?
Or how or where his wife died?
I know nothing;
But give me leave to fear, by his wild humour,
He's guilty of her death; therefore I hope
He will hang himself anon before us all
To raise the mirth he speaks of.
Fie upon you.
Yet trust me, sir, there have been large constructions,
And strong presumptions, that the ill made match
Betwixt her youthful beauty and his covetous age;
Between her sweetness and his frowardness
Was the unhappy means of her destruction;
And you that gave strength to that ill tied knot
Do suffer sharply in the worlds opinion,
While she, sweet virgin, has its general pity.
Pray what have you been to her? I ne'er found you
Appear a suitor to her.
I ne'er saw her,
Nor ever should have sought her, Sir; For she
Was only love to my sworn enemy,
On whom yet (were she living and in my gift
Rather a thousand times I would bestow her
Then on that man that had, and could not know her.
I have done ill; and wish I could redeem
This act with half my estate.
This Devils bird,
This Moor runs more and more still in my mind.
O are you come? And ha'you brought your scene
Of Mirth along with you?
Yes, and our actors
Are here at hand: But we perceive much business
First to be set a foot. Here's Revels towards.
A dance of furies or of Blackamoors
Is practising within;
But first there is to be some odd collation
In stead of supper.
Cheap enough I warrant,
But saw you not a Moor-hen there amongst'em.
A pretty little Rogue, most richly decked
With pearls, chains and jewels. She is queen
Of the Nights triumph.
If you •h•nce to spy me
Take her aside, say nothing.
Thou wilt filch
Some of her jewels perhaps.
Isle draw a lot
For the best jewel she wears. But mum my Masters.
Enter the house pray Gentlemen: I am ready
Now with your entertainment.
We'll follow you.
N•w for six penny custards, a pipkin of baked
Pears, three saucers of stewed prunes, a groats worth
Of strong ale, and two peniworth of Gingerbread.
If she does live (as he bears me in hand
She is not dead) Isle tell you briefly, Sir,
If all the law bodily and ghostly,
And all the conscience too, that I can purchase
With all the wealth I have can take her from him,
I will recover her, and then bestow her
(If you refuse her) on your so you speak of,
(whose right she is indeed) rather then he
Shall hold her longer. Now mine eyes are opened.
Will you walk in.
I pray excuse me, Sir,
I cannot fit my self to mirth.
Your pleasure.
Mil. Have I with patience waited for this •ou•,
And does fear check me now? I'll break through all,
And trust my self with yon'd mildeGentleman.
He cannot but be noble.
A goodly creature!
The Rooms illumined with her; yet her look
Sad, and cheek pale, as if a sorrow sucked it.
How came she in? What is she? I am fear▪struck.
Tic some unresting shadow. Or, if not,
What makes a thing so glorious in this house,
The master being an enemy to beauty?
She modestly makes to me.
Noble Sir,—
Speaks too.
If ever you durst own a goodness,
Now crown it by an act of honour and mercy.
Speak quickly; lose no time then: say, what are you?
You look like one that should not be delayed.
I am th'unfortunate woman of this house,
To all men's thoughts at rest. This is the face
On which the Hell of jealousy abused
The hand of Heaven, to fright the world withal.
Were you the seeming Moor was here?
The same;
And only to your secrecy and pity
I have ventured to appear my self again.
What's to be done? Pray speak, and tic performed.
In trust and Manhood Sir, I would commit
A great charge to you, even my life and honour
To free me from this den of misery.
A blessed tasque! But when you are freed Lady—
I would desire Sir, then to be conveyed.—
Whither? to whom? speak quickly: why do you stoop?
Pray let that rest. I will relieve your trouble
When I am freed from hence, and use some others.
Nay, that were cruelty. As you love goodness tell me.
Why dare you bear me Sir, to one you hate.
What's that, if you love? Tic your peace I wait on.
I look upon your service, not mine own.
Were he the mortall'st enemy flesh bred up
To you I must be noble.
You profess—
By all that's good and gracious, I will die
Ere I forsake you, and not set you safe
Within those walls you seek.
Then, as we pass
Isle tell you where they stand, Sir.
You shall grace me.
Now to our Revels. Sit ye, sit ye gallants
Whilst, Uncle, you shall see how I'll requite
The masque they lent me on my wedding night.
It was but lent Gentlemen, your masque of horns,
And all the private jeers and public scorns
You've cast upon me since. Now you shall see
How Isle return them; and remarried be.
I hope he'll marry his Moor to anger us.
Isle give her something with her, if I catch her,
And't be but in the cole-house.
Attend Gentleman.
The Queen of Ethiop dreamt upon a night
Her black womb should bring forth a virgin white.
She told her king; he told thereof his Peers.
Till this white dream filed their black heads with fears:
A whoreson blockheads.
Blackheads I said. Isle come to you anon
He puts the blockheads on'hem grossly.
Brave impudent rogue. He made the speeches last year
Before my Lord Marquess of Fleet Conduit.
Till this white dream filed their blackheads with fear,
For tic no better then a Prodigy
To have white children in a black country.
So it was decreed that if the child proved white,
It should be made away. O cruel spite!
The Queen cried out, and was delivered
Of child black as you see: Yet Wizards sed
That if this damsel lived married to be
To a white man, she should be white as he.
The moral is, If Quicksands marry her,
Her face shall be white as his conscience.
The careful Queen, conclusion for to try,
Sent her to merry England charily
(The fairest Nation man yet ever saw)
To take a husband; such as I shall draw,
Being an Egyptian Prophet.
Draw me, and isle hang thee.
Now I come to you, Gentlemen.
Now mark my Jeers.
You must not have her: For I find by your hand
You have forfeited the mortgage of your land.
Pox o'your Palmistry.
Now me.
Nor you: For here I plainly see
You have sold and spent your lifes Annuity.
The devil take him, made thee a soothsayer.
I find from whence your skill comes. Yet take me
For thy little Princess of darkness, and if
I rub her not as white as another can
Let me be hung up with her for a new
Sign of the labour in vain.
Nor you, sir: For
T•e only suit you wear smells of the chest
That holds in Limbo Lavender all your rest.
Would his brains were in thy belly that keeps the key on it.
This is the worthy man, whose wealth and wit,
To make a white one, must the black mark hit.
Your jeers are answered, gallants. Now your dance.
We applaud your devise, and you'll give me leave
To take your black bride here, forth in a dance.
With all my heart, sir.
Music, play a Galliard,
You know what you promised me, Bulls.
But howa can ita be donea.
How I am taken with the elevation of her nostrils.
Play a little quicker—Hark you—if I lead you
A dance to a couch or a bed side, will you follow me?
I will doa my besta.
So, so; quick Music, quick.
O ugly! call you this dancing; ha, ha, ha.
Do you laugh at me.
By your leave Gentlefolks.
O brave, o brave.
How now.
What are these?
Hack ye there, hack ye there,
O brave pipes. Hack ye there.
Hay toodle loodle loodle loo.
What are you men or devils?
You are advised enough: Sir, if you please
But to be short, I'll show you I am a Norfolk man,
And my name is John Hulverhead.
Hold thy peace.
You cannot hear o'chat side it seems.
I know thee not, not I.
But you know my brother Matthew Hulverhead
Deceased, with whom you placed this simple child of yours.
I placed no child in Norfolk nor Suffolk nor any
Folk I—say thou mistookst me: Isle reward thee. Go.
I cannot hear o'that ear neither, sir.
What's the matter, Mr. Quicksands?
Ha'you any more jeers to put upon us? what are these?
Hay toodle loodle loodle loo.
Get you out of my house.
I may not till I be righted. I come for right, and
I will have right, or the best of the City shall
Hear on it.
I swear the Rascals act it handsomely.
What art thou fellow? What dost thou seek?
Tell that Gentleman: He is an upright Majestrate
And will see thee righted.
I am a poor Norfolk man, sir. And I come to ease myself of a charge, by putting off a child nat'ral to the natu•al father here.
My child! Am I his father? Dare thou speak it.
Be not ashamed on it, sir: You are not the first grave and wise Citizen that has got an idiot.
Here's good stuff towards.
Ha, ha, ha—with a Hay toodle loodle loodle loo.
How should I get him. I was never married till this month.
How does other bawdy Bachelors get children?
With a hay toodle loodle loodle loo, &amp;c.
Have you been a bastard-getter and marry my Niece.
Now it works.
I•e teach you to get a bastard, sirrah.
He needs none o'your skill it seems.
Hay toodle loodle, &amp;c.
Well, Gentlemen, to take your wonder off,
I will lay truth before you.
For a poor servant that I had, I undertook and paid
For keeping of an idiot.
Who, your man Buzzard?
Even he.
Hay toodle loodle, &amp;c.
It is like this is the child. But for a certain sum
Which I did pay, it was articled, that I should ne'er be
Troubled with it more.
Now what say you to that Sir?
It is not denied Sir, There was such agreement,
But now he is another kind of charge.
Why, he gets something towards his living me thinks.
Yes, he has learned to thrip among the Mothers;
But Sir, withal, to do more harm then good by it,
And that's the charge I speak of: we are not bound
To keep your child, and your childes children too.
How's that?
Sir, by his cunning at the Rock,
And twirling of his spindle on the Thrip-skins,
He has fetched up the bellies of sixteen
Of his Thrip-sisters.
Hay toodle, loodle, loodle, &amp;c.
Is it possible.
So well he takes after his father here it seems.
Take heed o'that friend: you heard him say it was his mans child.
He sha'not fright me with that, though it be
A great mans part to turn over his bastards
To his servants. I am none of his hirelings, nor
His Tenants I. But I know what I say; and I know
What I come about; and not without advise; And you
May know, that Norfolk is not without as knavish
Council, as another County may be. Let his man Buzz.
Be brought forth, and see what he will say to it.
Hay toodle loodle, &amp;c.
Wretch that I was to put away that fellow!
But stay! where is my wife? my wife, my wife—
What say you, Sir?
My Moor I would say. Which way went my Moor?
Your Ethiopian Princess.
is gone to dance with her in private, because you laughed him out of countenance here.
Mischief on mischief! worse and worse I fear.
What do you fear, why stare you? Are you frantic?
I must have wits and fits, my fancies and figures.
Your jeers upon poor Gallants.
How do you feel your self.
Hay toodle loodle, &amp;c.
Ask your father blessing Timsy.
Hay toodle loodle, &amp;c.
Upon your knees man.
Upon all my knees. A—ah. Hay toodle loodle.
What was it to you, you slaves?
Must you be peeping.
What's the matter now?
What was it to you, ye Rascals?
It is to us Sir, We were hired to dance and to speak speeches; and to do the Gentleman true service in his house: And we will not see his house made a bawdy house, and make no speech o'that.
What is the business?
Marry Sir a naughty business. This Gentleman has committed a deed of darkness with your Moor, Sir; We all saw it.
What deed of darkness? speak it plainly.
Darkness or lightness; call it which you will.
They have lain together; made this same a bawdy house;
How will you have it?
Undone, most wretched. O, I am confounded.
I see no art can keep a woman honest.
I love her, and will justify my Act.
And I the best of any man on earth.
Thou speak good English now.
O Ruin, ruin, ruin—
Hay toodle loodle, &amp;c.
Why take you on so, for an ugly fiend?
She is my wife, Gentlemen.
How Sir, your wife.
In conceit you mean.
I say my lawful wife; your Niece; and so dis∣guessed
By me on purpose.
I said he was mad before, ha, ha, ha.
Now I applaud my act, it was sweet and brave.
I'll be divorced before a Court in public.
Now will I use Authority and skill.
Friends, guard the doors. None shall depart the house.
Mun. Vine. Content, content.
Shall I, Sir, and my charge stay too?
Oh—
Marry Sir, shall you.
I fear we shall be smoked then.
No, no, fear nothing.
You know your Chamber huswife. I'll wait o'your Master
To night. We will not part until to morrow day,
Justice and Law lights every one his way.
Is this your merry night, Sir?
Oh—oh—oh—o—
Why roar you so?
It is the Cuckolds howl. A common cry about the City.
Oh o—Buzz. Hay toodle loodle, &amp;c.
Now my good Host, since you have been our friend
And only council keeper in our absence,
To you, before we visit our own houses
We will render a relation of our journey,
And what the motive was that drew us forth.
It is true, we did pretend a deadly quarrel
At a great bowling match upon Black-heath;
Went off; took horse; and several ways, forecast
To meet at Dover, where we met good friends,
And in one Bark past over into France:
Here it was supposed to fight, like fashion followers
That thither fly, as if no sand but theirs
Could dry up English blood.
Now, by the way,
Suppose that supposition had been true,
And the supposed deaths of you, and you
Had moved your sons to combat in earnest,
And both been killed indeed, as you in jest,
Where had been then your witty subtlety,
My noble Meanwell, and my brave Rashly?
Ha! have I twight ye there?
Thou keepst thy humour still my running Host.
My humour was, nor is, nor must be lost:
But, to the question, was it wisely done,
When each of you might so have lost a son?
We had no fear of that Sir, by the Rule,
The common Rule o'th'world. Where do you find
Sons that have lives and Lands, will venture both
For their dead Fathers that are gone and cared for?
Nor was it only to make trial of
What husbands they would be; how spend, or save;
How manage, or destroy; how one or both
Might play the Tyrants over their poor Tenants,
Yet fall by Prodigality into th'Compters:
And then the dead by pulling off a Beard,
After a little chiding and some whining,
To set the living on their legs again,
And take 'em into favour; pish, old play-plots.
No Sir, our business runs another course;
Know you this Gentleman yet?
Nor yet, nor yet;
Best wits may have bad memories; I forget.
It is my part to speak. Mine Host, you've known me,
My name is Winloss; a poor Gentleman,
Yet richer, by my liberty, then I was
For six years space, till these good Gentlemen
In charity redeemed me.
Master Winloss!
I thought I could as soon forgot my Chriss-Cross,
Yet (pardon me) you have been six years gone,
And all of them in prison saving one,
In Dunkirk as I wean.
It is most true;
And that from thence these Gentlemen redeemed me
At their own charge, by paying five hundred pound,
Which was my Ransom.
It is a rare example.
Worthy brass tables, and a pen of steel.
No more good neighbour Winloss. What we did
Was to discharge our conscience of a burden
Got (and it was all we got) by your undoing,
In a sad suit at Law.
I do remember;
And, without ruin I'll tell you, That sad cause,
In which you joined against him, overthrew him
And all his Family: But this worthy act
Of yours in his enlargement, crowns your piety,
And puts him in a way of better Fortune,
Then his first tottering estate could promise.
Shut up that point. You have heard no ill, you say,
Among our sons and daughters in our absence.
Not any Sir at all. But, Mr. Winloss,
You that have past so many sorrows, can
(I make no doubt) here one with manly patience.
Tic of my daughter Phillis! Is she dead?
Tic well and't be no worse with her: I fear
She's gone the tother way of all flesh, do you hear?
Why dost thou tell him this?
To have him right
His daughters wrong upon that wicked beast
That has seduced her.
Who is it? can thou tell?
Even the Ran•k-rider of the town, Sir, one
Master Nathaniel Banelasse, if you know him.
He has my sons acquaintance.
And mine's too.
You may be proud on'•, if they scope his doctrine.
But does he keep my daughter to his lust?
No, Sir, tic worse then so. He has cast her off
To the common, as tic feared.
Owretchedness!
How came thou by this knowledge.
Sir, Isle tell you.
I have, i'th'house, a guest, was once your man,
And served your son, since you went ore I'm sure on'c,
Though now he has got a young spark to his Master,
That has a brace of gueldings in my stable;
And lusty ones they are. That's by the way.
But to the point, I pray thee.
Sir, the young gallant is abroad, the man
Scults close in the•ouse here, and has done these two days
Spending his time with me in drink and talk.
Most of his talk runs upon wenches mainly;
And who loves who, and who keeps home, and so forth;
And he told me the tale that I tell you
Twixt Banelasse and your done and undone daughter.
Mine host—cry mercy Gentlemen—
Nay, nay, come on.
I told you he was very shy to be seen.
My old master alive again? and he that he killed too?
Whom do you serve? was I so ill a master,
That, in my absence, you forsook my children?
Or how have they misused you? Why dost look
So like an apprehended thief? I fear
Thou serve some robber, or some murderer,
Or art become thy self one. If the Devil
Have so possessed thee, strive to turn him out:
He add my prayers to help thee. Whats the matter?
O honoured master! Isle keep nothing from you.
There is an act of horror now on foot,
Upon revenge of your supposed murder,
Of which to stand and tell the circumstance,
Would wast the time and hinder the prevention
Of your sons murder, and your daughters ruin.
O fearful!
Let not your amazement drown
Your reason in delay; your sudden hast
Was never so required as now. Stay not
To ask my why, or whither. As ye go
I shall inform ye.
Go, we follow thee.
What a fierce conflict twixt revenge and love,
Like an unnatural civil war, now rages
In my perplexed breast. There, fight it out;
To it Pel-mel my thoughts. The battel's hot.
Now for the day! revenge begins to stagger,
And her distracted Army at an instant
R•uted and put to flight. All conquering love,
Thou hast got the victory; and now I sue
(Like a rent kingdom by self-opposite thoughts)
Unto thy sovereignty, to be the liege-right.
Take me to thy protection, kingly love,
And having captivated my revenge,
O, play not now the Tyrant. A firm hope
Persuades me no: But when I shall
Reveal my self I shall obtain Theophilus love.
Which now is ten times sweeter in my thought
Then my revenge was, when it was first begot.
What, still alone? we have been seeking thee.
O it is the service that I ow you Sir.
Indeed you are too pensive: two whole days
And nights among us, and no more familiar?
May I crave your name, Sir?
That's to little purpose,
My business is the thing—yonder's the star!
What young Gentleman is that your Mistress arm
Appears so courteous too?
One she thinks well on Sir,
No matter for his name, as you said, neither.
He seems some well graced suitor. It is my fear,
If he should now—I must be just however.
Sir, a Gentleman desires to speak with you.
Dost thou not know his name?
He will not tell it Sir.
You treacherous boy, do you bring you know not whom?
O it is the Gentleman I was so bound to, Sister:
The welcom'st man alive; Thanks my good boy.
What's she he brings in veiled, and this way leads?
Sir, though I am still a stranger in my visit,
To works of gentleness, I am partly known.
There (if you chance t'enquire of me hereafter
(When I shall more deserve your inquisition)
I may be found, if not exact in service,
A least a poor pretender in my wishes:
And so presenting this white gift, (more modest
Then the most secret duty of mans friendship
Can ever be) I take my leave—
This man
Would breed, at every time ht's seen, a wonder!
Sir, leave me not thus lost: let me once know you,
And what this mystery means? This bears a shape
I may not entertain: I have set my vow
Against all woman kind, since Heaven was married
To my first love; and must not willingly
Discover a temptation with mine own hand.
How shy and nice we are to meet our happiness!
Like dying wretches, '•raid to go to rest.
Because you shall be guilty of no breach
I'll op the Casket for you.
Bless me, it is—
Warm, so Love cherish me and comfortable.
O death, my hopes are blasted.
How is it with you, sir.
Might a man credit his own senses now
This were my Millicent. How think you, sister?
Indeed I am so, my Theophilus.
She lives, and he is lost to me for ever,
I shall be straight discovered too. False Love
Thou hast dealt loosely with me; And Revenge
I re-invoke thy nobler spirit: Now
Possess me wholly; let it not be thought
I came and went off idly.
Sir, something troubles you. See your kinswoman
My brother stands entranced too; Brother, brother▪
Noble Lady, speak to him.
I was in my discovery too sudden.
Strong rapture of his joy transmutes him—Sir,
Be not so wonder-struck; or, if you be,
Let me conjure you by the love you bore me,
R•turn unto your self again. Let not
A wandering thought fly from you, to examine
From whence, or how I came: If I be welcome
I am your own and Millicent.
And in that
So blessed a treasure, that the wealth and strength
Of all the world shall never purchase from me.
Heaven may be pleased again to take thee, but
Isle hold so fast, that we'll go hand in hand;
Besides, I hope his mercy will not part us.
But whore's the man now more desired then ever
That brought you hither?
You ask in vain for him.
I can resolve you all; but for the present
He will be known to none.
This is a cruel goodness: To put thankfulness
Out of all action. Sirah, how went he?
I know not, Sir, he vanished suddenly.
Vanished! good Lucy help to hold her fast
She may not vanish too. Spirits are subtle.
This was my fear. Will you have patience,
And fit but in this chair while I relate my story.
Isle be as calm in my extremest deeps
As is the couch where a sweet conscience sleeps.
Tic now determinate as fate; and so
At the whole cluster of'em. Bless me ha!
My father living! Then the cause is dead
Of my revenge.
What is he killed out right.
Or else but hurt? Theophilus! my boy!
Dead, past recovery. Stay the murdress there.
Look you, Sir, to her. I suspect your son too
Is not without a hand in it by the hast
We met him in.
He is not hurt at all
My honoured father, as I desire your blessing,
But stricken with an ecstasy of joy.
Look up my boy. How dost?here's none but friends.
Sure, sure w'are all then in Elisium
Where all are friends and filled with equal joy.
Earth can have no felicity like this.
If thisbe any thing.
Thou can not see nothing,
Look well about thee man.
I see, I feel, I hear and know ye all:
But who knows what he knows, sees, feels, or hears?
Tic not an age for man to know himself in.
He is not mad I know by that.
If I know any thing, you are my father—
Thou art a wise child.
And I beseech your blessing.
Thou hast it. Millicont, I have heard your story,
And Lucy, you betwixt you sooth his fancy,
He will be well anon. Keep'em company Arthur,
And Lucy, bid him welcome.
More then life, Sir.
You Dionysia would be chid a little;
But, Sir, let me entreat her pardon•
Dry your eyes: you have it.
Go instantly resume your sexes habit,
And with the rest be ready, if we call ye
To Quicsands house. The rumour of our coming
Already calls us thither to be assistant
To justice Testy in a ponderous difference.
How does he now?
He's fallen into a slumber.
In with him all I pray.
He shall have all our cares.
Come my friend Meanwell. Now to Quick-sands cause,
To keep it out of wrangling lawyers jaws.
The face of danger is almost made clean
And may conclude all in a comic scene.
Come, we will hear this cause tried.
See the Judges
Have tan their seats, while we stand here for evidence.
My worthy friends, you're come unto a cause
As rare, as was your unexpected coming
From the supposed grave—
To the point I pray.
How quick you are! Good Mr. Rashly, know
(Though I craved your assistance) only I
Supply the chief place in Authority.
And much good do'c you. I have other business—
Your Niece Sir was too good for my poor son.
How's that?
Nay Gentlemen, we came to end
A business: Pray begin no new one first.
Well Sir, I ha'done.
Pray Sir fall to the question.
Bring in the parties.
The first branch of the question rises here
If Quicksands wife, my Niece, be dead or living
Speak Gentlemen. What can you say to this?
Quicksands affirmed to us, that she was dead.
Though, since in a distracted passion
He says she lives.
She lives, and is that strumpet,
From whom I sue to be divorced.
That Moor, there?
Did you wed her since your fair wives decease?
Tha• same is she, and all the wives I had
That black is but an artificial tincture
Laid by my jealousy upon her face.
This is most strange.
Braver and braver still,
I aimed but at a cloud and clasped a June,
Will you be only mine?
I have sworn it ever.
Then I am made for ever.
Remove her, and let instant trial be made
To take the blackness off.
Then if her shame,
And my firm truth appear not, punish me.
However, your consent to be divorced
From Millicent is irrecoverable.
Before you all, Isle forfeit my estate
If ere I re-accept her.
Then she's free.
Now Mr. Banelass—
Now for the honour of Wenchers.
Your fact is manifested and confessed.
In fewest words it is.
Are you content
To take this woman now in question,
If she be found no Moor to be your Wife,
In holy marriage to restore her honour?
Or else, before you all, let me be torn
To pieces; having first those dearest members,
In which I have most delighted, daubed with honey▪
This protestation
Is clear, without respect of portion, now,
Or that she is my Niece: For you must know
She is no Niece of mine that could transgress
In that lean kind: Nor must she ever look
For favour at my hands.
I am content, to take her as she is,
Not as your Niece, but as his counterfeit servant,
Hoping he'll give me with her all about her.
My chains, and Jewels, worth a thousand pounds,
I'll pay it for my folly.
'Twil be twice
The price of my pawned goods. I'll put the rest
Up for your jeers past on my friends and me.
You are agreed.
To take her with all faults.
I take you at your word.
Ho—
Hell and her changes.
Lead by the hope of justice, I am bold
To fix here fast, here to repair my ruins.
The devil looks ten times worse with a white face,
Give me it black again.
Are we not one, you know from the beginning?
Get thee from me.
Sirrah you have your suit and your desert,
It is your best part to pass it patiently.
It is Winloss daughter; we have found the error.
I am confounded here. Where is my Wife?
I, that's the point must now be urged. The Law
Asks her at your hands. Answer me, where is she?
I am at my joys end, and my wits together.
You have brought her fame in question: Tic re∣veng'd
Now you are in both for her life and honour.
S•eak villain, Murderer, where is my Niece?
I have snar'd my self exceeding cunningly;
That queen there knows.
Take heed, Sir, what you say,
If she must be my wife. Hands off I pray,
These are my goods she wears. Give me'em, Phil.
For fear he snatch, Isle put'em in my pockets.
Sweet heart, my own will hold'em.
Sweet heart already! we are soon familiar.
You know we are no strangers.
Well Mr. Quicksands: because you cannot answer
(To put you by the fear of halter-stretching)
Since you've engaged your word and whole estate
To be divorced: And you good Mr. Testy,
I• you'll be willing yet that my poor son
To wed your Niece, as I shall find it lawful,
Isle undertake her safe recovery.
I have in heart given her your son already.
And he has her already.
As for example, see Sir.
See, see, the heaven that I am justly fallen from,
O may I yet find favour.
Never here.
Had thou not given thy faith to a divorce,
On forfeiture of thine estate, which thou
Dost hold more precious; or could now redeem
That great engagement; and then multiply
Thy past estate into a tenfold sum.
Make me inheritrix of all; and last assure me
To die within a week, Isle not re-marry thee:
Adulterate beast, that brok'st thy former wedlock
In thy base lust with that thy servant there.
What a pox no, I trow—My wife that must be?
It was your own doing, to put me to my shifts.
The devil shift you, then you will be sure
Of change enough.
O shame unto my blood.
I will henceforward council all my friends
To wed their whores at first, before they go
Out o'their hands.
How can you answer this?
I utterly deny it upon my oath.
So do I, and safely for any act.
That's well again.
It was but in attempt, I told my Mistress,
Had it been done, sure I should ne'er have spoke on it.
Those are the councels women can only keep.
Nothing in act I assure you.
In him it was foul enough though.
O hateful vice in age.
It is an old vice grown in him from his youth,
Of which bring forth for proof his bastard there.
I fear we shall be whipped for counterfeits;
My long coats have a grudging of the lash.
I see my old Masters face again, and I will
Fear nothing.
Then Isle bear up again—
Hay diddy daddy, come play with the Baby
Dindle dandle on thy knee, and give him a penny,
And a new coat, o ho—
My grief and shame is endless.
Let not grief master you, Mr. Quicksands.
We are your friends, and pity your afflictions.
What will you give us now and we will release you
For ever of this changeling charge of yours?
And prove he's not your bastard. Speak now roundly.
I'll cancel both your mortgages.
A match. Now look you Sir, your quondam servant,
All but the beard he wore; for loss of which
We will recompense him.
O Buzzard, Buzzard, Buzzard.
O Master, Master, Master. Your servant and no bastard,
Nor father of your Idiot in Norfolk,
He's there, and well Sir, I heard lately of him.
How could thou use me thus?
How could you turn me away so?
Ha, ha, ha. Come hither Buzzard. Thou shalt not want a M•ster.
Nor I, I hope, while my old Master lives. You're welcome home Sir.
And thou to me my good old servant Arnold.
Well fare a misery of a mans own seeking;
A tough one too will hold him tack to's end,
This comes with wiving at •hreescore and three;
Would doting fools were all served so for me.
To shut up all: Theophilus, take my Niece,
We'll shortly find a Lawful course to marry ye.
I will take care for it. Arthur, take my daught•r well bestowed.
With a glad fathers blessing.
And mine with it, wishing my daughter were as
Sir take no thought for me, till my strict life
(By making man, and the world mere strangers to me,
In expiation of my late transgression
Against maiden modesty) shall render me
Some way deserving th'honour of a husband.
Spoke like a good new woman.
How now! do you look squeamish on your fortune,
Sir her's a Gentleman shall maintain her blood
As worthy as your own till you defile it,
Tic best you cleanse it again.
Cadzooks I will—
Forgiv'me for swearing, and turn Precision, a•d pray
I'che nose that all my brethren whoremasters spend no worse.
My father—
O my child.
Though Mr. Quicksands made a Mock-marriage with his English Moor,
Isle not mock thee.
Enough, euough. I hope all pleased at last
But Master Quick-sands here.
I yield to fortune with an humble knee,
If you be pleased, your pleasure shall please me.
Now let me be a modost undertaker
For us the players, the play and the play-maker:
If we have failed in speech or Action, we
Must crave a pardon; If the Commedy
Either in mirth, or matter be not right,
As it was intended unto your delight,
The Poet in hope of favour doth submit
Ʋnto your censure both himself and it,
Wishing that as you're judges in the cause
You judge but by the ancient Comic Laws.
Not by their course who in this latter age
Have sown such pleasing errors on the stage,
Which he no more will choose to imitate
Then they to fly from truth, and run the State.
But whether I avail, you have seen the play,
And all that in defence the Poet can say
Is, that he cannot mend it by a jest
In the Epilogue exceeding all the rest;
To send you off upon a champing bit,
More then the scenes afforded of his wit:
Nor studies he the Art to have it said
He skulks behind the hangings as afraid
Of a hard censure, or pretend to brag
Here's all your money again brought in in the bag
If you applaud not, when before the word
It was parcel'd out upon the shearing-board.
Such are fine helps; but are not practised yet
By our plain Poet who cannot forget
His wonted modesty, and humble way
For him and us, and his yet doubtful play,
Which, if received or but allowed by you,
We and the play are yours, the Poet too.

