As in the vaults of this big-bellied earth,
Are dungeons, whips, and flames, for wicked Ghosts;
So fair Elision fields; where spotless souls
Doe bathe themselves in bliss. Among the rest,
Two pleasant Groves by two sorts are possessed:
One by true Lovers crowned with myrtle boughs,
Who hand in hand sing Paeans of their joy:
Brave Soldiers hold the second, clad in steel,
Whose glittering Arms brighten those gloomy shades,
In lieu of Starry lights. From hence I bring
A pair of Martial Imps, By Ioues decree,
As sticklers in their Nations enmity.
Furious Camillus, and thou Britain bold
Great Brennus, sheath your conquering blades: In vain
You threaten death: For Ghosts may not be slain.
From the unbounded Ocean, and cold climes,
Where Charles his wayne circles the Northern Pole:
I first lead out great swarms of shaggy Gaules,
And big-bon'd Britains. The white-pated Alps,
Where snow and winter dwell, did bow their necks
To our victorious feet: Rome, proudest Rome,
We clothed in scarlet of patrician blood,
And about your Capitol prauns'd our vaunting steeds,
Defended more by Geese, than by your gods.
But I cut short your fury, and my sword
Redeemed the City, making your huge vast trunks
To fat our Crows, and dung our Lotion fields:
I turned your Torrent to another Coast:
And what you quickly won, you sooner lost.
Leave these weak brawlings. Now swift time hath spent
A Pylian age, and more, since you two breathed,
Mirrors of Britain, and of Roman valour.
Lo, now the black Imperial Bird doth clasp
Under her wings the Continent, and Mars
Trampling down nations with his brazen wheels,
Fights for his Nephews, and hath once more made
Britains and Romans meet. To view these deeds
I Harms bring you to this upper sky;
Where you may wander, and with ghastly looks
Incite your Country-men, when night and sleep
Conquer the eyes, when weary bodies rest,
And senses cease: Be Furies in their breast.
Never two Nations better matched. For Jove
Loves both alike: whence then these armed Bands?
Mavors for Rome, Neptune for Albion stands.
Then let war op his jaws, as wide as hell,
And fright young babes, my Country-folke more sterne
Can out-looke Gorgon: Let the Fates transposed
Hang beaten Flags up in the victors land:
Full dearly will each Pace of ground be sold,
Which rated is at dearest Blood, not Gold.
What, are their ruined Fanes, demolished Walls
So soon forgot? Doth Ally yet run clear?
Or can three hundred Summers slake their fear?
Arise thou Iulian Star, whose angry beams
Be Heralds to the North, of war, and death.
Let those black Calends be revenged; Those Ghosts,
(Whose mangled sheaths deprived of Funeral rites,
Made the Six hills promise a Cadmus crop:)
Be expiated with a fiery deluge.
Jove rules the Spheres, Rome all the world beside:
And shall this little corner be denied?
Bandy no more these private Frowns; but hast,
Fly to your parties, and enrage their minds:
Till at the period of these Broils, I call,
And back reduce you to grimm Pluto's hall.
Me thinks I hear Bellona's dreadful voice
Redoubled from the concave shores of Gaul:
Me thinks I hear their neighing Steeds, The groans
Of complemental Souls, taking their leave:
And all the din and clamorous route, which sounds
When falling Kingdoms crack in fatal flames.
Dye Belgickes, Dye like men. Free minds need have
Nought, but the ground they fight on, for their grave:
And we are next. Think ye the smoky mist
Of Sunne-boyld Seas can stop the Eagles eye?
Or can our watery walls keep dangers out,
Which fly aloft? That thus we snorting lye,
Feeding impostum'd humours, to be launched
By some outlandish Surgeon:
As they are now: whose flaming towns, like Beacons,
Give vs fair warning, and even guild our Spyres,
Whilst merrily we warm vs at their Fires.
Yet we are next: who charmed with peace and floath,
Dream golden dreams. Go, warlike Britain, go,
For Olive bough exchange thy Hazel bow:
Hang up thy rusty Helmet, that the Bee
May have a hive, or Spider find a Loom:
In steed of soldiers fare, and lodging hard,
(The bare ground being their bed, and table) lye
Smothered in down, melting in luxury.
In steed of bellowing drum, and cheerful flute,
Be lulled in Ladies lap with amorous Lute.
But as for Nennius, know, I scorn this calm:
The ruddy Planet at my birth bore sway,
Sanguine adust my humour; and wild fire,
My ruling Element. Blood, and rage, and choler,
Make up the Temper of a Captains valour.
Welcome thus far, Partners of weal and woe,
Welcome brave bloods: Now may our weapons sleep,
Since Ariovist in cocke-boate basely flies:
Vast Germany stands trembling at our bridge:
And Gaul lies bleeding in her mothers lap.
Once the Pellaean Duke did Eastward march,
To rouse the drowsy Sun, before he rose
Adorned with Indian rubies: But the Mayne
Bad him retire. He was my Type. This day,
We stand on Natures western brink; Beyond,
Nothing but Sea and Sky. Here is Nil ultra.
Democritus make good thy fancy, give me
More worlds to conquer, which may be both seen,
And won together. But me thinks I ken
A whitish cloud kissing the waives, or else
Some chalky rocks surmount the barking flood.
Comius, your knowledge can correct our eyes.
It is the Britain shore, which ten leagues hence
Displays her shining clefts unto your sight.
I'll hit the white. That Sea-marke for our Ships,
Invites destruction, and gives to our eye
A treacherous Becko. Dare but resist: your shore
Shall paint her pale face with red crimson gore.
Thus much I know, Great Caesar, that they lent
Their secret aid unto the neighbour Gaules;
Fostering their fugitives with friendly care:
Which made your victory fly with slower wing.
That's cause enough. They shall not henceforth range
Abroad for War, We'll bring Him to their doors:
His ugly Idol shall displace their gods,
Their dear Penates, and in desolate streets
Raise trophies high of barbarous bones, whose stench
May poison all the rest. I long to stride
This Hellespont, or bridge it with a Navy,
Disclosing to our Empire unknown Lands,
Until the Arcticke Star for Zenith stands.
Then raise the Camp, and strike a dreadful March,
And unawares pour vengeance on their heads:
Be like the winged Bolt of angry Jove.
Or chiding Torrent, whose late-risen stream
From mountains bended top runs raging down,
Deflouring all the virgin dales.
First let's advise; For soon to ruin come
Rash weapons, which lack counsel grave at home.
What need consulting, where the Cause is plain?
The likeliest Cause without regard proves vain.
Provide for Battle, but of Truce of word.
Where peace is first refused, should come the sword.
But tic unlike, their selfe-presuming might
Will curbed be with terms of Civil Right.
Tic true: yet so, we stop the peoples cry,
When we propose, and they doe peace deny.
We'll therefore wise Ambassadors dispatch,
Parents of Love, the Harbingers of Leagues,
Men that may speak with mildness mixed with courage,
Having quick feet, broad eyes, short tongues, long ears;
To warn the British Court.
And further view the Ports, faddome the Seas,
Learn their complotments; where Invasion may
Be soonest entertained. All this shall lye
On Volusene, a Legate, and a Spy.
My care and quickness shall deserve this kindness.
Mean time unite, and range your scattered troupes.
Embark your Legions at the Iccian shore,
And teach Erynnis swim, which crawled before.
Although the peoples voice constrains me hold
This Regal staff, whose massy weight would bruise
Your age and pleasures: yet this, Nephews, know:
Your trouble less, your honour is the same,
As if you wore the Diadem of this Isle.
Mean while Androgeus hold unto your use
Our Lady-City Troynovant, and all
The Toll and Tribute of delicious Kent;
Of which each Quarter can maintain a King.
Have you, Themantius, Cornewalles Dukedom large,
Both rich and strong, in metals and in men.
I must to Verulams fenced town repair,
And as Protector for the whole take care.
My heart agrees. Henceforth ye Sovereign cares,
State-mysteries, false graces, jealous fears,
The Linings of a Crown, forsake my Brain:
These Territories neither are too wide,
To trouble my content; nor yet too narrow,
To feed a Princely train.
All thanks I render: your will shall guide ours,
With treble-twisted love we'll strive to make
One Soul inform three Bodies, keeping still
The same affections both in good and ill.
Now am I for a hunting match. You thickets
Shelter a Boar, which spoils the plough-mans hope:
Whose jaws with double sword, whose back is armed
With bristled Pikes; whose fume inflames the ayre,
And some be-snowes the trampled Corn. This Beast
I long to see come smoking to a feast.
Here comes my Belgic friend, Landoraes servant:
What news, Rollano, that thy feet so strive
To have precedence of each other? Speak,
I read disturbed passions on thy brow.
My trembling hart quauers upon my tongue,
That scarce I can with broken sounds vent forth
These sad, strange, sudden, dreary, dismal news.
A Merchants ship arrived tells, how the Roman
Having run Gaul quite through with bloody arms,
Prepares for you: His navy rigged in bay,
Only expects a gale: Farther, they say,
A pinnace landed, from him brings command,
Either to loose your freedom, or your land.
And dares proud Caesar back our vn-tam'd surges?
Dreads he not our Sea-monsters? whose wild shapes
Their Theaters near yet in Picture saw.
Come Sirs, To arms, To arms: Let speedy posts
Summon our petty Kings, and muster up
Our valorous nations from the North, and West.
Androgeus hast you to the Scots and Pictes,
Two Names, which now Albaniaes kingdom share:
Entreat their aide, if not for love, yet fear:
For new foes should imprint swift-equall fear
Through all the arteries of our Isle.
Belinus, thy authority must rouse
The vulgar troops within my special charge,
Fire the Beacons, strike alarms loud,
Raise all the country against this common Foe:
We'll soon confront him in his full career;
This news more moves my choler, then my fear.
I am by birth a Belgic, whence I fled
To Germany, for fear of Roman Arms:
But when their bridge bridled the stately Rhine,
I soon returned, And thought to hide my head
In this soft Halcyons nest, this Britain Isle.
But now, behold, Mars is a nursing here,
And gins to speak aloud.
Is no nook safe from Rome? doe they still haunt me?
Some peaceful God transport me through the ayre,
Beyond cold Thule, or the Suns Bed-chamber,
Where only Swine or Goats doe live and reign.
Yet these may fight. Place me, where quiet Peace
Hushes all storms, where sleep and silence dwell,
Where never man nor beast did wrong the soil,
Or crop the First-fruites, Or made so much noise
As with their breath. But foolish thoughts adieu:
Now catch I must, or stand, or fall with you.
The Court a wardrobe is of living shapes:
And Ladies are the tissue-spangled suites,
Which Nature wears on festival high days.
The Court a Spring, each Madame is a Rose.
The Court is Heaven, fair Ladies are the Stars.
I, falling Stars.
False Echo, don't blaspheme that glorious sex,
Whose beauteous rays can strike rash gazers blind.
Love should be blind.
Pray, leave this Cynic humour, whilst I sigh
My Mistress praise: Her beauty's past compare:
O would she were more kind, or not so fair.
Her modest smiles both curb and kindle love:
The Court is dark without her; when She rises,
The morning is her hand-maid, strewing roses
About loves Hemisphere: The lamps aboue
Eclipse themselves for shame, To see her eyes
Out-shine their Chrysolites, and more bless the skies,
Than they the Earth ???
Give me her Name.
Her body is a Crystal cage, whose pure
Transparent mould not of gross elements
Compacted, but the extracted Quintessence
Of sweetest forms distilled: where Graces bright
Doe live immured, but not exempt from sight. ???
I prithee speak her.
Her model is beyond all Poets brains,
And Painters pencils: All the lively Nymphs,
Sirens, and Dryads, are but kitchin-maydes,
If you compare. To frame the like Pander,
The Gods rapine, and Nature would grow poor.???
By Love, who first? hath she no mortal Name?
For here you find great Iunoes stately front,
Polo's gray eye, Venus her dimpled chin,
Auroraes rosie fingers, the small wast
Of Ceres daughter, and Medusaes hair,
Before it hist:???
O Love, as deaf, as thou art blind! Good Eulinus
Call home thy soul, and tell thy Mistress name.
O strange! what ignorant still? when as so plainly
These Attributes describe her: why? She is
A Rhapsody of Goddesses. The Elixir
Of all their several perfections. She is
(Now bless your ears) by mortals called Landora.
What: Landora the Trinobanticke Lady?
How grow your hopes, what mettle is her breast?
All steel and adamant. Tic beauties pride, To stain
Her lily white with blood of Lovers slain.
Their groans make music, and their scalding sighs
Raise a perfume, and vulture-like she gnaws
Their bleeding hearts. No gifts, no learned flattery,
No stratagems can work Landoraes battery.
As a tall Rock maintains majestic state,
Though Bores gallop on the tottering seas,
And tilting split his froth out spurging waives
Upon his surly breast: So she resists:
And all my proiects on her cruel hart,
Are but retorted to their Authors smart.
Why then, let scorn succeed thy love, and bravely
Conquer thy self, If thou wilt conquer her:
Stomachs, with kindness cloyed, Disdain must stir.
Most impious thoughts! O let me rather perish,
And loving die, than living cease to love:
And when I faint, let her but hear me cry,
Aye me, there's none, which truly loves, but I.
O ye cross darts of Cupped! this very Lady,
This Lady-waspe woes me, as thou dost her,
With glances, jewels, bracelets of her hair,
Lascivious banquets, and most eloquent eyes:
All which my heart misse-consters as immodest,
It being pointed for another Pole.
But hence learn courage, Coos; why stand you dumb?
Women are women, and may be ore-come.
Your words are eare-awigges to my vexed brain
Like henn-bane juice, or Aconite diffused
They strike me senseless.
My kinsman, and Hirildas to my end:
But I'll near call you Counsellor, or Friend Adieu.
Stay, stay. For now I mean with gentler breath.
To waft you to your happy landing place.
Seeing this Crocodile pursues me flying,
Flies you pursuing: we'll catch her by a trick:
With promise feigned, I'le' point a Cupids stage,
But in the night, and secret, and disguised:
Where thou, which art my self, shalt act my part;
In Venus games, all Coosning goes for Art.
Blessed be these means, and happy the Success.
Now gin I rear my creast aboue the Moon,
And in those gilded books read Lectures of
The Faeminine Sex. There moves Cassiope,
Whose garments shine with thirteen precious stones,
Types of as many virtues: Then her Daughter,
Whose Beauty without Perseus would have tamed
The monstrous Fish, glides with a Starry Crown:
Then Just Asttea kembes her golden hair:
And my Landora can become the skies,
As well as They. Oh, how my joys doe swell!
He mounted not more proud, whose burning Throne
Kindled the Cedar-toppes, and quaffed whole fountains.
Fly then, ye winged hours, as swift as thought,
Or my desires: Let days bright Waggoner
Fall headlong, and lye buried in the deep,
And dor-mouse-like Alcides night out-sleep.
Good Tethys, quench his Beams, that He ne'er rise,
To scorch the Moors, to suck up hony-dewes,
Or to betray my person.
But prithee tell, What Mistress you adore?
The kind Cordella, Loving, and Beloved:
Only some jar of late about a Favour
Made me inveigh against women. Come, away,
Our plots desire the night, not babbling day.
We must give way: Here come our reverend Bard
To sing in Synod, as their Custom is,
With former chance comparing present deeds.
At the Spring
Birds doe sing:
Now with high,
Then low cry:
Flat, acute;
And salute,
The Sun borne,
Every morn.
Hes no Bard that cannot sing:
The praises of the flowery Spring.
Flora Queen
All in greene,
doth delight
To paint white,
Woods renew
Hunters hue.
Shepherds gray
Crowned with bay,
And to spread
Cruel red,
With a blew,
Colour true.
 Hes no bard, &amp;c.
With his pipe
Care doth wipe,
Till he dream
By the stream.
 Hes no bard, &amp;c.
Faithful loves,
Turtle Doves,
Sit and bill,
On a bill.
Country Swains
On the plains,
Run and leap,
Turn and skip.
 Hes no bard, &amp;c.
Pan doth play
Care-away.
Fairies small
Two foot tall,
With caps red
On their head
Dance around
On the ground.
 Hes no bard,
Phyllis bright
Cloth in white,
With neck fair,
Yellow hair:
Rocks doth move
With her love,
And make mild,
Tigers wild.
 Hes no bard that cannot sing,
The praises of the flowery spring.
Thus spend we time in laughter,
While peace and spring doe smile:
But I hear a sound of slaughter,
Draw nearer to our Isle.
Leave then your wonted prattle,
The Oaten reed forbear:
For I hear a sound of battle,
And Trumpets tear the ayre,
Let bag-pipes dye for want of wind,
Let Crowd and Harp be dumb;
Let little Taber come behind:
For I hear the dreadful drum.
Let no Birds sing, no Lambkins dance,
No fountains murmuring go:
Let Shepherds crook be made a lance:
For the martial horns doe blow.
Heavens favour Credos fair Albaniaes King:
And Britael decked with the Demotion Crown:
The same to famous Guerted, whose command
Embraces woody Ordovickes black Hills.
Legate, you may your message now declare.
By me great Caesar greetes the Britain state:
This letter speaks the rest.
Then read the rest.
Since Romulus race by will of Jove,
Have stretched their Empire wide:
From Danowes banks by Tygris swift,
Unto mount Atlas side:
And Provinces and Nations strong.
With homage due obey.
We wish that you hid in the Sea,
Doe likewise tribute pay.
Submitting all unto our wills,
For rashly aiding Gaul:
And noble Lads for hostages
Make ready at our call.
These granted may our Friendship gain:
Denied shall work your woe:
Now take your choice, whether you'd find
Rome, as a Friend, or Foe.
Bold mandates are unwelcome to free Princes.
Legate withdraw; you shall be soon dispatched.
He writes more like a Victor, than a Foe;
Whose greatness risen from subdued nations,
Is fastened only with feare's slippery knot.
Nor can they fight so fierce, for wealth or fame,
As we for native liberty. With answer rough
Bid him defiance. So thinks Credos.
Guerted maintains the same, and on their flesh
I'll write my answer in red Characters.
Thou Ravenous woolfe, Imperious monster Rome,
Seuen-headed Hydra; know, we scorn thy threats:
We can oppose thy hills with mounts as high;
And scourge usurpers with like cruelty.
And thus thinks Britael.
Let Caesar come: Our land doth rust with ease,
And wants an object, whose resisting power
May strike out valorous flashes from her veins.
So shadows give a Picture life. So flames
Grow brighter by a fanning blast. Nor think,
I am a Courtier, and no Warrior borne:
Nor Loue-Obiect: For well my Poet says,
Militate omnis Amens, Each Lover is a Soldier;
I can join Cupids bow, and Mars his Lance.
A pewter-coate fits me, as well as silk.
It grieves me see, Our Martial spirits trace
The idle streets, while weapons by their side
Dangle and lash their backs, as it were to upbraid
Their needless use. Nor is it glory small,
They set upon vs last, when their proud Arms
Fathom the Land and Seas, and reach both Poles.
On then, So great a Foe, so good a cause,
Shall make our name more famous. So thinks Eulinus.
Then Friends and Princes on this Blade take oath:
First to your Country, to revenge her wrongs:
And next to me, as General, to be lead
With unity and courage.
The gods bless Britain, and Cassibelane.
Now royal friends, the Heirs of mighty Brute:
You see, what storm hangs hovering ore this land,
Ready to pour down cataclysmes of blood;
Let ancient glory then inflame your hearts:
Beyond the craggy hills of grim-fac'd death,
Bright honour keeps triumphant Court, and deeds
Of martial men live there in marble rolls.
Death is but Charon to the Fortunate Isles:
Porter to Fame.
What though the Roman armed with foreign spoil,
Behind him lead the conquered world, and hope
To sink our Island with his Armies weight:
Yet we have gods, and men, and horse, to fight:
And we can bravely die. But our just cause,
Your forward loves, and all our people edged
With Dardane spirit, and the powerful name
Of Country; Bid vs hope for victory.
We have a world within our selves, whose breast
No Foreigner hath vn-revenged pressed
These thousand years. Though Rhine and Rhoane can serve,
And envy Thames his never captive stream:
Yet maugre all. If we our selves are true,
We may despise, what all the earth can doe.
Lets then dismiss the Legate with a frown:
And draw our forces toward the Sea, to join
With the four Kings of Kent, and so affront
His first arrival. But before all, let
Our Priests and Druids in their hallowed groves
Propitiate the gods, and scan events
By their mysterious Arts.
Well, so: your tongue's your own, though drunk or angry.
Vmh.
Speak not a word upon your life: Be dumb.
Vmh.
I'll winch up thy estate. Be Harpocrates.
Vmh.
Thy fortunes shall be double-guilt. Be midnight.
Vmh.
An excellent instrument to be the Bawd
To his dear Lady. ??? But Rollano, hark:
What words, what looks did give my letter welcome?
Vmh.
Nay, now thy silence is ante-dated. Speak.
Vmh.
I give thee leave, I say. Speak, Be not foolish.
Then???with your leave: She used upon receipt
No words, but silent joy purpell'd her face,
And seeing your Name, strait clapped it to her heart,
To print there a New Copy: As she would say,
The words went by her eyes too long a way.
You told her my Conditions, and my Oath
Of silence, and that only you be used.
All, Sir.
And that this night???
I, Sir.
You guard the Door???
I, Sir.
But I ne'er mean to come.
No, Sir? Oh wretch!
Shall I deceive, when She remains so true?
No. Thou shalt be true, and She remain deceived.
I'll lye, and yet I will not lye. My Friend
Eulinus in my shape, shall clime her Bed.
This is the point. You'll promise all your aid.
Your Servant to Command, and then Reward.
We'll draw thee Meteor-like by our warm favour
Unto the roof and feeling of the Court:
We'll raise thee (hold but fast) on Fortunes ladder.
This Fellow is a Medley of most lewd
And vicious qualities: A braggart, yet a coward,
A knave, and yet a slave: True to all villainy,
But false to Goodness. Yet now I love him,
Because he stands just in the way of love.
Coos, I commend you to the Cyprian Queen;
Whilst I attend Diana in the Forest,
My kinsman Mandubrace, and I must try
Our Grey-hounds speed after a light-foot hare.
O Love! whose nerves unite in aequall bonds
This massy frame. Thou Caement of the world:
By which the Orbs and Elements agree:
By which all Living creatures joy to bee,
And dying live in their Posterity.
Thy holy raptures warm each noble breast,
Sweetly inspiring more Soul. Thy delight
Surpasses melody, Nectar, and all pleasures
Of Tempe, and of Tempo's eldest Sister
Elysium: A banquet of all the Senses!
By thy Commanding power, Gods into Beasts,
And Men to Gods are changed, as Poets say:
When Sympathy rules, All like what they obey.
But Love triumphs, when Man and Woman meet
In full affection: Double vows then fill
His sacred Shrine. Yet, This to me denied,
More whets my Passion: Mutual Love grows cold.
Venus, be thou Propitious to my wiles;
And laugh at Lovers perjuries and guiles.
That Souls immortal are, I easily grant:
Their future State distinguished, Joy, or Pain,
According to the merits of this Life.
But then I rather think, being free from Prison,
And bodily contagion, they subsist
In places fit for Immaterial Spirits:
Are not transfused from Men to beasts, from beasts
To men again: wheeled round about by change.
And were it not more cruel, to turn out
Poor naked Souls stripped of warm flesh, like Landlords,
Bidding them wander: Then (forsooth) imagine
Some unknown Cave or Coast, whether all the myriads
Of souls deceased are slipped, and thrust together.
Nay, Reason rather says: As at one moment,
Some dye, and some are borne; so may their Ghosts,
Without more cost, serve the succeeding age:
For sure they do'nt wear; to be cast aside.
But enter strait, less, or more noble bodies,
According to desert of former deeds.
The valiant into Lyons, coward minds
Into weak Hares, The ambitious into Eagles
Soaring aloft; But the perverse and peevish;
Are next indenniz'd into wrinkled Apes:
Each vice and virtue wearing seemly shapes.
So you debase the gods most lively image,
The humane Soul, and rank it with mere Brutes,
Whose life of reason void, ends with their sense.
Hail to Heavens privy Counsellors. The King.
Desires your judgment of these troublesome times.
The gods foretold these mischiefs long ago,
In Eldells reign, The Earth and Sky were filled
With prodigies, strange Sights, and hellish shapes.
Sometime two Hostess with fiery lances met,
Armour and Horse being heard amid the Clouds:
With Streamers red now march these airy Warriors,
And then a sable hearse-cloath wrappes up all:
And bloody drops speckled the grass, as falling
From their deepe-wounded limbs:
Whilst staring Comets shook their flaming hair.
Thus all our Wars were acted first on high,
And we taught what to look for.
Nature tunes step-dame to her brood, and dams
Deny their monstrous issue. Saturn joined
In dismal league with Mars portends some change.
Late in a grove by night, a voice was heard
To cry aloud, Take heed, more Troianes come.
What may be known or done, we'll search, and help,
With all religious care.
The King and army doe expect as much:
That powers divine perfumed with odours sweet,
And feasted with the fat of Bulls and Rams;
Be pleased to bless their plots.
All rites and orisons due, shall be performed.
Chifely Night's Empress fourefold Honour craves,
Mighty in Heaven, and Hell, in Woods, and Waives.
What land, what people, and what answer; Show.
We saw a Paradise, whose bosom teemes
With silver oar: whose Seas are paved with pearl:
The Meadows richly spread with Floras tapestry:
The fields even wonder at their harvest loads.
In Crystal streams the scaly nations play,
Fringed all along with trembling poplar trees:
The Sun in Summer loath to leave their sight,
Forgets to sleep, and glancing makes no Night.
Then for the men, Their statures tall and big,
With blue-stain'd skins, and long black dangling hair
Promise a barbarous fierceness. They scarce know,
And much less fear our Empires might; but thus
Returned defiance:
Seeing your Empire's great. why should it not suffice?
To covet more and more, is Tyrants usual guise.
To loose what Jove you gave, you'd think it but unjust:
You have your answer then: Defend this Isle we must;
Which from the world cut of, and free from her first day,
Hath Iron more for swords, than Gold for tributes pay.
If amity, and like fear, succour to Gaul impartes:
Pardon: For this small brooke could not divide our hearts.
We hope the gods will help, and fortune back our Cause,
Who take Arms, but to keep our lives, our Wives, and Laws.
As you from Troy, so we; Our pedigree do claim:
Why should the branches fight, when as the roote's the same?
Despise vs not, because the Sea and North vs close???
Who can no further go, must turn upon their foes.
Thus rudely we conclude: Wage war, or change your will:
We hope to use a lance, far better than a quill.
I grieve to draw my sword against the stock
Of thrice-renowned Troy: But they are rude,
And must be frighted, ere we shall be friends.
Then lets aboard, and hoisting sails convey
Two legions over: For I long to view
This unknown land, and all their fabulous rites;
And gather margaritas in my brazen cap.
Nature, nor Fates can valorous virtue Stop.
Now Caesar speaks like Caesar: stronger and stronger,
Rise like a whirlwind, tear the mountains pride;
Shake thy brass harness, whose loud clattering may
waken Gradivus, where he sleeps on top
Of Haemus, lulled with Bores roaring Base:
And put to flight this Nation with the noise.
A Fly is not an Eagles combatant:
Nor may a Pygmy with a Giant strive.
Health and good fortune on Cassibelane tend.
My love to you and Britain, waft me hither,
To make atonement, ere the Roman Leader.
Bring fire and spoil and ruin on your heads.
No herb can ever grow, where once he treads.
Nothing withstands his force. Be not too hardy,
But buy a friend with kindness, least you buy
His anger dearly.
Comius, speak no more: He knows our mind.
O let not rage so blind your judgment, but
Prevent with ease the hazard of a war,
Of war, a word composed of thousand Isles.
O be not cruel to your selves. I'll undertake
Without discredit to appease his wrath,
If you'll cas-sheere your soldiers, and receive
Him like a Guest, not like an Enemy.
False-hearted Gaul, dare thou persuade even me,
For to betray my people to the sword?
Now know I, thou art sent for to solicit
Our Princes to rebel, to learn our strength.
Lay hands on him: A Spy.
A Spy, a spy, a traitor, and a spy.
Is this the Guerdon of my loving care?
You break the laws of Nature, Nations, Friends:
But look for due revenge at Caesars hand.
Expect in prison thy revenge. Away with him.
Belinus, have you mustered up our Forces?
Yes, if it please your Highness.
And what are the particulars?
First Credos leads from the Albanian realm,
Where Grampiu's ridge divides the smiling dales,
Five thousand horse, and twenty thousand foot,
Three thousand Chariots manned. The Brigants come
Decked with blew-painted shields, twelve thousand strong.
Under the conduct of Demetiaes Prince,
March twice three thousand, armed with Pelts and Glaues:
Whom the Silures flank, eight thousand stout,
Greedy of fight, borne soldiers the first day,
Whose gray-goose-winged shafts near flew in vain.
Then Guerted mounted on a shag-haire steed,
Full fifteen thousand brings, both horse and foot,
Of desperate Ordovicians, whose use is
To rush half naked on their foes, enraged
With a rude noise of pipes.
Your Province bounded with that boiling stream,
Where Sabrine lovely Damsel lost her breath,
And with curld-pated Humber, Neptunes heir:
Affords eight thousand Cars, with hooks and sides,
And fifty thousand expert men of war:
All brave Lhoegrians, armed with Pike and Spear:
Each nation being distinguished into troops,
With gaudy pennons flickering in the air.
Beside these, Kent is up in arms, to blunt
The edge of their first furious shock.
We'll now invite them to a martial Feast,
Carving with Fashions, and carousing healths
In their lives moisture. Well returned Androgens:
Have you obtained, or is your suite denied?
Our message told unto the Scots, Their King
With willing sympathy, leauies a Band,
Ten thousand footmen, whose strange appetites
Murder, and then devour; and dare gnaw, and suck
Their enemies bones. Conducted thence, we saw
The Pictish Court, and friendly entertained,
Receive eight thousand, whose most ugly shapes,
Painted like Bears, and VVolues, and brinded Tigers,
May kill, and stonifie without all weapons.
More aide they promise, if more need. These forces.
Lead by Cadallan hither march with speed.
Tic well, our Kings consent for common good.
When all are joined, we shall ore-spred the hills,
And soldiers thicker than the sand on shore,
Hide all the landing coasts. Ere next day break,
The rocks shall answer, what the drum doth speak.
That ceremonious fear, which bends the heart
Of mortal creatures, and displays it self
In outward signs of true obedience;
As prayer, kneeling, sacrifice, and Hymns:
Requires again help from immortal Deities,
As promise, not as Debt: we laud their names,
They give vs blessings, and forgive our blames.
Thus gods and men doe barter. What in Piety
Ascends, as much descends again in pity:
A golden chain reaching from Heaven to Earth.
And now's the time, good Brother, of their aide,
When dangers, black face frowns upon our state.
Away, away, ye hearts and tongues profane:
Without devotion mysteries are vain.
Draw near ye heavenly powers,
Who dwell in Starry bowers.
And ye who in the deep,
On most pillows sleep.
And ye who keep the center,
Where never light did enter.
And ye whose habitations,
Are still among the nations;
To see, and hear our doings,
Our births, our wars, our wooings.
Behold our present grief:
Belief doth beg relief.
By the veruaine, and Lunary,
By Fernefeed planetary,
By the dreadful Mistletoe,
Which doth on holy Oak grow.
Draw near, draw near, draw near.
Help vs beset with danger,
And turn away your anger:
Help vs begirt with trouble,
And now your mercy double:
Help vs oppressed with sorrow,
And fight for vs to morrow.
Let fire consume the foe-man,
Let air infect the Roman,
Let Seas entomb their fury,
Let gaping earth them bury:
Let fire and air and water,
And earth conspire their slaughter.
By the veruaine, &amp;c.
Help vs, help vs, help vs.
We'll praise then your great power,
Each month, each day, each hour:
And blaze in lasting story,
Your honour and your glory.
High altars lost in vapour;
Young Heifers free from labour;
White Lambs for suck still crying,
Shall make your music dying.
The boys and girls around,
With honie-suckles crowned:
The Bardes with Harp and riming,
Greene baize their brows entwining,
Sweet tune, and sweeter ditty,
Shall chant your gracious pity.
By the vervaine, &amp;c.
VVee'l praise, we'll praise, we'll praise.
Fix, holy Brother, now your prayers on One,
Britains chief Patronise; with humble cry,
Let vs invoke the Moons bright Majesty.
Thou Queen of Heaven, Commandress of the Deep,
Lady of Lakes, Regent of Woods and Dear,
A Lamp dispelling irksome night: The source
Of generable moisture. At whose feet
With garments blue, and rushy garlands dressed
Waite twenty thousand Naiads. Thy Crescent
Brute Elephants adore, and man doth feel
Thy force run through the Zodiac of his limbs.
O thou first guide of Brutus to this Isle,
Drive back these proud usurpers from this Isle.
Whether the name of Cynthiaes silver globe;
Or chaste Diana with a gilded quiver;
Or dread Proserpina, sterne Dis his spouse;
Or soft Lucina, called in child-bed throws:
Doth thee delight. Rise with a glorious face,
Greene drops of Nereus trickling down thy cheeks,
And with bright horns, united in full orb,
Toss high the Seas, with billows beat the banks,
Conjure up Neptune, and the Aeolian slaves,
Contract both Night and Winter in a storm:
That Romans loose their way, and sooner land
At sad Avernus, than at Albions strand.
So moist thou shun the Dragons head and tail:
So may Endymion snort on Latmian bed:
So may the fair game fall before thy bow:
Shed light on vs, but lightning on our foe.
Me thinks, a gracious luster spreads her brow:
And with a nod she ratifies our suite.
Behold, an Oracle flies out from her Shrine:
Which both the King and State shall see, before
We dare unfold it.
Follow me.
Follow? what means that word, who art, Thy will?
Follow me Nennius.
He names me: Sure it is some friend which speaks.
I'll follow thee, though't be through Stygian lakes.
Tic Ancient Brennus calls, whose victories
Europe and Asia felt, and still record.
Dear Nennius, now's the time to steel thy courage.
Can thou behold thy Mother captive, then
Look back upon thy Ancestors enrolled
Among the Worthies, who spread wide her Fame?
First let thy Eye-balles power out poisoned beams,
And kill them with Disdain, who dare but lift
Their hand against her. No: no Confull must
Boast of her Thraldom, and outbrave our Walls.
I wonder that such impudent Owls should gaze
Against the splendour of our Britain clefts:
Play thou a second Brennus, Let thy Lance,
Like an Herculean club, Two monsters tame,
Romes Avarice and Pride; So come Life or Death,
Let Honour have the Incense of thy Breath.
Farewell heroic Soul: Thou shalt not blush,
At Nennius deeds. The smallest drop of Fame
Is cheap, If death and dangers may it buy.
Yet give thy words new vigour to my spirits,
And spur the Pegasus of my mounting thoughts:
I'll follow thee, ore piles of slaughtered foes,
And knock at Plutoes gate. I come. Come Life or Death,
Honour, To thee I consecrate my Breath.
Iulius, stay here: Thy friend Camillus speaks.
O thou Preserver of our present Race,
Our Cities Second founder! What dire fate
Troubles Thy Rest, that thou should trouble Mine?
Only to bid thee fight.
Thou shalt not need.
And bid thee take a full Revenge on this,
This Nation, which did sack and burn down Rome,
Quenching the coals with blood, and kicked Our ashes,
Trampling upon the ruins of our state.
Then led the Gaules in triumph thorough Greece,
To fix their Tents beside Euxinus gulf.
Is this that Northern route, the Scourge of kingdoms?
Whose names till now unknown, We judged Gaules;
Their Tongue and Manners not unlike.
Gaules were indeed the Bulk, but Brennus lead
Then Brother to the Britain King, those armies,
Backed with great troops of warlike Ilanders.
To thee belongs, To render Bad for Ill:
O bee my Spirit doubled in thy breast,
With all the Courage of three Scipioes,
Marius, and Sylla: That this nation fierce
In feats of war, be forced to bear our Yoke.
So may thou sweetly rest, as I shall strive
To trace your steps: Nor let me live, If I
Thence disappointed ever seem to fly,
Ancient Bards have sung,
With lips dropping honey,
And a sugared tongue,
Of our worthy Knights.
How Brute did Giants tame,
And by Ices current,
A second Troy did frame;
A Center of Delights.
Locrinus eldest son
Did drown the furious Hunne,
But burnt himself with Elstrids love,
Lie, Rex Pacificus.
Elude, Judicious,
How heavenly Bodies roll aboue.
Wise Bladud founded hath,
Both Soul and Bodies Bath:
Like Icarus he flew.
How first Mulmutius wears
A golden crown: whose heirs
More than half the World subdue.
Thou nurse of Champions, O thou Spring
Whence Chivalry did flow:
Thou Diamond of the worlds great Ring,
Thy glorious virtue show:
Thou many a Lord hast bred,
In Catalogue of Fame read:
And still we have
As Captains Brave,
As ever Britains led.
Then dub a dub, dub. The Armies join, Tantara.
Cassibelane with armour gay,
And strongly couched lance:
His courser white turned into bay,
On carcasses shall prance.
What a crimson stream, the Blade
Of Nennius sword hath made.
Black Alliaes day,
And Cannaes Fray,
Have for a Third long stayed.
Then dub a dub, dub. The Armies join, Tantara.
Our Landing cost vs dearly, many lives
Between the ships and shore being sacrificed.
Our men with heavy armour clogged, and ignorant
Of all the flats, and shallows, were compelled
To wade and fight, like Tritons half aboue,
Half under water. Now we surer tread,
Though much diminished by so many lost.
Come on. Come on.
So, let them land. No matter which they choose
Fishes or Crows to be Executors:
They'll find the Land as dangerous as the Sea.
The Nature of our Soil won't bear a Roman,
As Irish earth doth poison poisonous beasts.
On then: charge close, before they gather head.
Brother, Advance. On this side, Isle lead up
The new-come Succours of the Scots and Pests.
What, still fresh Supplies come thronging from their dens?
The nest of Hornets is awake: I think
Heere's Natures Shop: Here men are made, not borne,
Nor stay nine tedious months, But in a trice
Sprout up like mushromes at Wars thunder-clap.
We must make out a way.
Since I must fight, I am prepared to fight:
And much inflamed, with noise of Trump and Drum:
Me thinks I am turned Lyon, and durst meet
Ten Caesars. Where are all these Covetous rogues?
Who spoil the rich for gain, and kill the poor
For glory? Blood suckers, and public Robbers.
Nay stay, and brag, Rollano did thee kill:
Stay, let me flesh my sword, and wear thy spoils.
Come. Will ye forsake your Ensign, and fall off?
I call to witness all the gods, I here
Perform my duty. Thou can not scope.
Now dye, or yield thy self.
I yield, I yield, Oh save my life, I yield.
I am no Britain, but by chance come hither:
I'll never more lift weapon in their quarrel.
How may I trust your faith?
Command me any thing.
Lay down your neck.
Give up your sword.
Base coward live: Such foes will near do hurt.
Rollano, what at stand? pursue the chase.
I made their strongest Captain fly: This hand,
This martial hand, I say, did make him fly.
Some silly scout.
He was a match for Cyclops, at each step
The ground danced, and his nostrils blew the dust:
Armed as the God of Battle pictured is.
What were his looks?
His brows were like a stormy winter night,
When Iuno scolding, and Mars male-content
Disturb the air: At each look lightning flies,
Jove against the Giants needed but his eyes.
How eloquent is fear!
So came he stalking with a Beame-like spear,
I gave the onset, then received his charge,
And next blow cleft his morrian: So he flies.
O bravely done. Here comes a straggling soldier.
Tic he, tic he. I care not for vain glory:
Its sweeter live, than dead to be a story,
O valiant coward, stay. Theres not a spark
Of Britain Spirit doth enliue thy corps.
Fight Britains, fight. The day is ours. I'm cloyed
And glutted even with slaughter. There some fly,
And flying die, and dying mangled lie.
I twice broke through the ranks, yet cannot find
That venturous Captain Caesar, on whose breast
I long to try my blade, and prick that bladder
Puffed with ambition, and victorious fight.
We may confess, they come of Trojan kind,
An hundred valiant Hectors here we find.
Fairly encountered, let our blades discuss
Who hath the justest cause: And on this combat
May victory her equal Balance hang.
Thou seem a worthy Prince, and Caesars match.
Stay, stay. Thou art at home: Heere's Campus Martius.
The Britains sought-for see thy frighted back:
Return, and take possssion of our Isle,
And by thy death be styled Britannicus.
Leave not thy blade unsheathed: A tyrants heart
To his own sword a scabbard should impart.
Ye Senators, and gaily-gownd Quirites,
Open the Capitols ivory gates, and lead
Fat bulls with garlands greene, and gilded horns:
Let supplications last for twice ten days:
Caesar returns a victor.
Prepare the laureate Coach, and snow-white steeds,
Embroidered Canopy, and scarlet gowns:
Let Altars smoke, and Tholes expect our spoils:
Caesar returns in Triumph. ??? Basely flies,
And leaves his conquest in weak infancy.
For had he won this coast, yet many blows
Must pass, ere he could pass the Thames; And then
Ere he touch Humber, many nations must
Be tamed: And then before he Tweed can drink,
And climb the craggy rocks of Caledon:
A Life is spent: yea, many thousand lives.
Oh my wound rages, and tormented brain
Doth labour of a Fury, not a Pallas.
This Blade was steeped in poison: O, I am poisoned:
Well did thou fly, or I had made thee taste
Thine own provision. Now my wrath and pain,
With double force shall flow in purple streams.
The three infernal Ladies with wyar-whips,
And speckled snakes, shall lackey close my steps;
Whilst that I offer Hecatombes of men
The Lotion Shepherds brood shall ban those stars,
Whose glimmering Sparks lead their audacious Pines,
To lye so far from home in foreign soil.
When Cedars fall, whole woods are crushed: nor dye,
Can Nennius private without company.
Thou runst upon thy death.
A Roman never daunted was with looks;
Else had not Sarmatane, and Lybian bug-beares
Bin captive led in chains.
But our looks kill.
Dye Slave, by Caesars sword. Thou art his friend.
Dye, as the Ransom of his greater ghost:
And learn as well as I, how venom smarts.
Be thou my Post to the Tartarian Prince,
And tell him, Nennius comes: But first, I'll send
More of you headlong home, a nearer way,
Then by the cloudy Alps.
Now hot Alarms dye in fainter notes:
Tempestuous night is gone: Victorious joy,
(As when pale Eos cleaves the Eastern fogs,
And blushing more and more ops half her eye,
With holy water sprinkling all the meads,
Whose clear Reflex serves as her Morning glass:)
Doth paint with gaudy plumes the checkerd sky.
The only Name of Victory sounds sweeter,
Than all mellifluous Rhetoric.
Thanks to Andates, whose power kingdoms feel:
Andates, greatest goddess: In whose train,
Fear, red-fac'd anger, and confusions wheel,
Murder, and Desolation run before:
But joyful shouts, mirth, Olive-budding Peace,
And Lawrell-crowned triumph, at her back,
Do pace with stately steps. Thy Temple is,
The Earth: where furious Monarchs play the Priests:
Armies of men imbrue thy Altar stones.
Thanks also to the Trident-shakers Mace,
Drawn by two romping Sea-horses: at whose Beck,
The waters wrinkled frown, or smoothly smile.
But thou Heavens Diamond, fair Phoebus Sister,
Nor Delian Dames, nor the Ephesian Towers,
Shall blazon more thy Praise. Thy influence strong
Struck up the sandy ooes; that matting waives
Bettered their ships, and dashed their bended sails,
And with a tempest turned them round in scorn.
But whore's the Answer which her Idol gave:
Can you expound the sense?
Dread Sovereign, Thus runs the Oracle???
Loud doth the King of Beasts roar,
High doth the Queen of Birds soar:
But her wings clipped soon grow out:
Both repent they are so stout.
Till C. against C. strike a round,
In a perfect Circle bound.
The meaning wrapped up in cross doubtful terms,
Lies yet thus open: That disastrous fate
Must be the Prologue to a joyful close.
The rest we'll search out, if our skill don't fail.
Renowned Cassibelane, might my counsel speak!
I know thy loyal heart, and prudent head,
Upon whose hairs Time's child experience hangs
A milke-white badge of wisdom: And can wield
Thy tongue in Senate, and thy hands in field.
Speak free, Belinus.
We forfeit fame, and smother victory
By idle lingering: The Foe discomfited
Must needs be much amazed: His Ships dismembered
Doe peece-meale float upon the waives: The Horse,
Whose succour he expects, are beaten back
By friendly winds: His Camp contracted is,
A tithe of soldiers left, the rest all slain:
His chief munition spent, or lost: provision,
An Armies soul, but what we give, he wants.
What then shall hinder to destroy their name?
So none again shall venture, but our Isle
Rounded with Nereus girdle may enjoy
Eternal peace.
I like thy warning: with united stroke
Of all our Nations, we'll his Camp beleaguer,
Devouring ships and men. But one mischance,
My Brother's wound, his mortal wound I fear,
Turns all to wormwood. Why were ye dumb ye Idols!
No Sainted Statue did foretell this grief.
Come lets go visit him. You may, Lord General,
Set Comius free: We love not to insult,
But render good for ill.
Heaven, Sea, and Wind, and all the Elements,
Conspire to work vs harm. Our Ships in Gaul
Wind-bound, at length put forth, and come in view
Are tossed, and torn: Our Navy on the shore
With civil discord break each others planks.
The airy Rulers are displeased, all day
Noises and nimble flashes mixed with rain
Amaze our soldiers.
To make grief full, my Daughters death I hear.
When, powerful Fortune, will thy anger cease?
Never till now did Caesar fortune fear.
Mount Palatine, thou Throne of Jove, and ye
Whose lesser Turrets pinnacle Rome's head:
Are all your Deities fled? or was I bold,
To out-goe Nature, and our Empire stretch
Beyond her limits? Pardon then my fault.
Or doe we basely faint? Or is our might
Answered with like, since Troy against Troy doth fight?
Nor can I write now, I came over, and
I overcame: Such foes deny such hast.
The Ilanders consult, and sure intend
Some sudden stratagem. And now the scales
Poyze equal day and night, when rougher Seas,
And stormy Pleyads may our passage stop.
Then Sirs, to ship: Compelled I leave this land:
But to return, if gods doe not withstand,
We won the day: and all our foes are fled?
Yes noble Nennius, scattered on the shore
Thick lay the Latines, and the glutted stream
Spewes up her dead, whom death hath taught to swim,
Though ignorant alive: Their flowing blood
Made a new Red Sea. But those few we lost,
Sweetly reposed upon their mothers breast,
And wounded all before, kept in their face
A warlike frown.
Where is false Caesars sword, called Crocea Morse,
Which never hurt, but killed: Let it be placed
Within my tomb.
Here is the fatal Blade.
Death like a Parthian flies, and flying kills:
In midst of Conquest came my deadly wound.
Accursed weapon, more accursed man,
Who Serpent-like in poison bathes his sting:
Tyber doth breed as venomous beasts as Nile:
We scorn such cruel craft. But death draws near,
A giddy horror seizes on my brain.
Dear Brother, and thou holy Priest of Heaven,
Witness my words; I leave my Country free,
And dye a victor. Thus, with lighter wing
My purified soul mounts to her First-best Cause.
I long even to behold those glorious Cloisters,
Where Brutus, great Dunwallo, and his sons,
Thrice noble Spirits walk.
Thou mighty Enginer of this wondrous Globe,
Protect this Isle, confound all foreign plots:
Grant Thames and Tyber never join thair channels;
But may a natural hate derived from vs
Live still in our long-trailed progeny.
(My eyes doe swim in death.)
Before this land shall wear the Roman yoke;
Let first the adamantine excel crack,
Which binds the Ball terrestrial to her poles,
And dash the empty air; Let Planets drop
Their scalding gelly, and all flame being spent,
Entomb the world in everlasting smoke.
Come faster, Death: I can behold thy grim,
And ugly Jaws with quiet mind: Now, now:
I hear sweet music; and my spirit flies.
His breath is gone: who was his Countries prop,
And my right hand. Now only doth he crave,
To see him laid with honour in the grave.
A mind content, Oh, tic a mind of pearl,
A Mint of golden thoughts, A Heaven on Earth!
When eager longer meet full-but their scope,
And hopes are actuated beyond hope.
So Iason joyed, the golden Fleet obtained:
So Hercules joyed, the golden fruit being gained:
So Venus joyed, the golden Ball to hold:
So Midst joyed, when he turned all to gold.
So, and much more rejoiced, the Phrygian swain,
When he conveyed the fairest (except mine)
Which air did ever kiss: His brazen keel
Proud of her burden, sliced the capering brine:
The Tritons blew their horns, and Sea-gods dance,
Before, behind, about his Ship they prance:
The meare-Maides skip on high, but to compaire
Their dangling tresses with her silken hair.
These were but shadows of my bliss. A robe
Of pure beatitude wraps me round about,
Without a speck, or blemish: nor can Invention
Wish more unto me, than I have, Landora.
I'm rich, free, learned, honoured, all; in this.
Who dares conceive against the Female sex,
But one base thought? Lo here I stand, their Champion,
And will maintain, He is a beast, a devil,
Begot between a Bitch-woolfe, and an Incubus.
Women, all good, all perfect, and all gracious,
Men-making creatures, Angels clad in flesh;
Let me adore your Name.
??? And let me speak.
Why: Landora loves not you, but me in you.
But I in you enjoy Landoraes love.
But she enjoys not your love, cause unknown.
No matter; I in you, or you in me:
So that I still possess my Dearest dear.
A paltry fancy last night in her bed
Turmoiled my thoughts, which since I shaped in Rimes. Thus.
Prithee let's hear: I know thou art turned Poet.
Night having drawn the Curtain, down I lye
By one, for worse Saturnius left the sky.
Slumbering at last: For love can hardly sleep:
Strait-waies I dreamed: For love doth Revels keep.
A Damsel fair, and fashioned for delight,
(Our day-borne objects doe return at night)
With flowery chaplet, and red velvet gown,
Which from her breast was fastened along down
With rich enamelled lockes, all which one key,
Whose bright gold about her silver neck did play,
Could open and divorce. A veil most fair,
(Such witness only Paphian doves doe wear)
With false light did her beauteous Front improve;
From this Arch Cupped shot his darts of Love.
With gentle strain she took me by the hand,
(Touches in love doe more than tongue's command)
Then leads me with an amorous smile along:
Hoe's easily led, whom beauty draws, more strong???
Than Cable-roapes. An Altar we descry,
Where Incense-franke, and Amber fumes did fly,
In little rolling curls: A reverend Priest,
With snowy beard waving upon his breast,
There kneeling did his eyes in sorrow steep:
Whose passionate cry made me, though ignorant, weep.
Phlegons hot breath no sooner lickes up dew,
Than joy had dried those tears: For lo I view
A circular room, all built with marble clear,
The title, Natures Store-house. Most strange here
It seemed: I know not how we came, nor whence,
Nor any passage saw to get from thence.
But Oh the rich delight, and glorious fire
Which dazzled me: No hart can more desire.
Her first my guide op'd her spice-breathing door,
Ask what thou wilt, this is the Arc of store,
No vows are here repulsed, she said. But I
Surprised with extreme joy and ecstasy,
By chance a Scorpion's tail behind her spied:
Pity, such beauty such a monster hide.
Trembling, yet silent, doubtful what to crave:
Lo, with a stink and fearful screech this brave
And glorious Dame doth vanish, and a dart,
Which still I quake at, struck me to the heart.
But waking I revived, and found in bed,
Such Sovereign Balm, would cure old Peleus dead.
Ha, ha. Your tedious dream hath made me drowsy.
But hark, we must attend the Funeral pomp.
Set down that heavy load with heavier hearts.
Could virtuous valour, honourable thoughts,
A noble scorn of Fortune, pride, and death;
Myriads of vows and prayers sent to heaven,
Could Countries Jove, or Britains Genius save
A mortal man from sleeping in his grave:
Then had thou lived great Nennius, and out-liu'd
The smooth-tongu'd Greek. But we may more envy,
And less bewail thy loss, since thou did fall
On honours lofty Field-bed, on which Stage
Never did Worthy act a statelier part.
Nor durst pale death approach with Cypress sad,
Till flourishing Bay thy conquering temples clad.
Turnus may conceal his Name,
Nennius had Aeneas fame.
Hannibal let Africa smother,
No??nius was great Scipioes brother.
Greece forbear Achilles story,
Nennius had brave Hectors glory.
Thrush and Nightingale be dumb:
Sorrowful songs befit a Tomb.
Turn ye marble stones to water:
Ices Nymphs forswear al laughter:
Sigh and sob upon your bed:
Belyes noble Son is dead.
I like such slaughtering well, of birds and beasts;
Which wear no swords, nor shake a fatal pike:
When hogsheads bleed, and Oxen mangled lye.
O what a world of victuals is prepared
For sacrifice and feasting. Forty thousand
Fat Bullocks: than the Parks and Forests send
Full thirty thousand wild beasts, armed with horns,
And dangerous teeth: The maine battaillion
Consists of Sheep, an hundred thousand fat:
The wings are both supplied with birds, and fowls,
Sans number: And some fish for succours serve.
A goodly Army. Troynouant doth smoke,
And smells all like a kitchen. The King, Princes,
And Nobles of the land a Triumph hold.
Music, and songs, good cheer, and wine; and wine,
And songs and Music, and good cheer??? High, brave.
No more shall barley broth pollute my throat,
But Nectar, Nectar of the grapes sweet blood:
Come heavenly Potion, wine: whose gentle warmth
Softens the brain, vnlockes the silent tongue,
Wits Midwife, and our spirits vestal Priest
Keeping alive the natural heate. A health,
A health (to make short work) to all the world:
So will it sure go round.
Sorrow must doffe her sable sable weeds, and joy
Furbish the Court with fresh and vernant colours:
Else should we seem ungrateful to the gods.
Triumphs must thrust out Obsequies: And Tilt
With Turny, and our ancient sport called Troy,
Such as Iulus about his Grandsires tomb
Did represent. And at each Temples porch
Games, songs, and holy murdering of beasts.
The Roman Eagle threatening woe,
The Sea did shadow with her wing:
But our Goose quills did prick her so,
That from the clouds they down her bring.
Both. Sing then ye Hills and Dales so so clear:
That Io Paean all may hear.
They may vs call Isles Fortunate;
They sought for life here, not for Fame.
All, yield to them, they to our State:
The world knows but our Double Name.
Both. Sing then ye Streams and Woods so so clear:
That Io Paean all may hear.
It was foully plaid.
You lye, it was fairly hit.
I'll give a quittance.
Do your worst, vain braggart.
Oh, I am slain.
Hold, hold: my Nephew's slain before my face.
Life shall be paid with Life.
He shall not dye.
Shall not? Your King and Uncle says, Hee shall.
No kingly menace, or censorious frown,
Doe I regard. Tent, for all your power.
But the compunction of my guilt doth send
A shuddering chillness through my veins inflamed:
Why doe ye stare, ye grisly powers of night?
There, there, His soul goes: I must follow him.
He was provoked and did it in defence:
And being My kinsman shall be judged by laws
Of Troynovant: Such custom claims our Court.
No custom shall bar Justice: I command
That he appear before vs.
Trials are vain, when Passion sits as Judge.
I'll soon rebate this Insolent disdain.
Let not this dismal chance deface our joy:
Most royal Friends.
War being silenced, and Enyoes rage
In hell fast fetterd: Sound we now retreat,
That soldiers may regreete their household gods.
Their children cling about their armed thighs.
And place their Trophies about their smoky halles;
There hang a Gauntlet bright, here a stabt Buckler,
Pile up long piles, and in that corner plant
A weighty sword, brandished by some Centur??on.
Not he, who near on snaky perils trod,
But happy He, who hath them stoutly past:
For danger's sauce gives joy a better taste.
Great Monarch, if thy Summons call vs back,
We tender here our Service, Men, and Arms:
As duty bids, and binds.
Should he return: Our Province dares him front.
So a most kind adieu unto all three.
I know your faithful love, Kents foure-fold Head,
Will check rash Rebels, and as firmly stand
As hearty Oaks, who bear off Aeolus blows,
And with a whistle but deride his force.
Burst gall, and dye my actions in flame-colour:
I saw Hirildas fall, and breath his soul
Even in my face. As though hell watched a time,
To crush our pomp, and glory into sighs.
The conduits of his vital spring being ripped,
Spurtle'd my robes, soliciting Revenge. Belinus,
Attach the Murderer, and if abettors
Deny obedience, then with sword and fire
Wast their Dominions. For a Traitors sake,
Whole towns shall tremble, and the ground shall quake.
Shall Justice, and just Libra near forsake
The embroidered Belt? No sign of them on earth?
Are Gods dim-sighted grown, or doe they sleep
The morning, and carouse the after noon?
That mortal motions tumble thus by chance:
Cleave thou blew Marble Seeling, that heavens King
With clearer aim may strike a tyrants crown,
Nor spend his brimstone bullets against some hill,
Or innocent Pine.
Your injuries run low; Mine break all bounds.
My Father butcherd at his lawless will:
I banished from my lands, deposed from rule,
Owing my Life to night and flight.
I doe confess, You may complain aloud,
And tear the Element with a dolorous note:
Call down Astray from her crystal chair,
Or call up Nemesis from the direful deep,
To expiate your wrongs.
Else would the Manes of your father slain,
In a white sheet come sliding to your Bed:
And be revenged on you. He gave you life;
How can you better spend it, than to wreak
His death and slaughter? But our case and Cause,
Brother, is not the same: Eulinus slew
His innocent friend; And we defend the fact;
With hostile noise drowning Lawe's reverent voice:
But Murder out-cries Both. Give me then leave
To be a Neutral: My young years unfit
For any desperate course, can but complain:
The King our Uncle doth not use vs well.
Usurpers use this method still: At first
Hee as Protector flily got the sterne,
During our nonage: Then the Commons voice,
Bought with a fawning brow, and popular grace,
Confirms his Regiment: Wee appointed shares,
With empty titles to beguile our thoughts,
Like puppet-Lords, dressed up with crown and scarf,
Glad that wee live, and hunt, and reign ore brutes.
Our Uncle is the King. So when he saw,
His throne established, and his foes repulsed,
Grown big with prosperous fortune, proudly spurns
All fear of God or man.
His anger nursed by jealousies must feed
On Princes flesh, who loose both state and life,
If they but look awry. A tyrants growth
Reared up by Ruins, thence may learn his fall:
For whom all fear, Hee justly fears all.
In Antiphones thus tune wee female plaints:
But plots and force beseem vs. Thus. Great Caesar
Shall pull him down below vs. Thou Mandubrace,
Sure pledges take of our revolt, and quickly
Implore his aid: blow up his drooping fire
With hopeful terms. But let him stronger come.
I fly unseen, as charmers in a mist.
Grateful Revenge, whose sharp-sweet relish fats
My apprehensive Soul. Though all were par'd of,
Which doth accrue from Fortune, and a man left
As barely poor, as Nature thrust him out:
Nay worse, though spirits boyle, rage, anger, care,
And grief like wild-horse tear the affrighted mind:
Though wrongs excoriate the heart: yet all is sweetened,
If vengeance have her course. I wreak not how;
Let Common-wealth expire, and owls proclaim
Sad desolation in our Halls; Let heaps
Of dust and rubbage Epitaph our towns;
Let fire and water fight, who first shall spoil
This universal frame. From North, or South,
Revenge, you are welcome. No sin worse than pity:
A tyrants only physic is Phlebotomy.
Rejoice O Brittany,
Britain O rejoice:
The stormy cloud past over,
And only made a noise.
A clattering sound was heard;
And still we felt no wound:
Rejoice; Rejoice:
Thou happy Britain ground.
O that sweet plenidh,
Eloquent Orone,
Were now to chant our victories,
With a melodious tone:
And rousing Echo from the dales,
With harmony to sound:
Rejoice; Rejoice:
Thou happy Britain ground.
Gang ye lads and lasses,
Sa wimble and sa wight:
Fewle mickle teene betide ye,
If ye ligg in this plight.
Bee bonny, buxom, jolly.
Trip haydegues believe:
And gif night gorse the welkin merk
Tom piper doe you blive.
Hitter, eke and shidder,
With spiced sow ycramd;
Sa that vnneath thilke borrells
May well no yede, no stand:
As leefe as life doe weet it,
When timbarins gin sound;
Fore harvest gel prankt up in lathe,
To lout it low around.
A Story first, or fable; That sterne Mars,
Thy weight did Romulus sleepy mother press?
Since we thy Brood degenerous, stand at gaze,
Charmed in the circle of a foaming flood,
And trail our dastard pikes? Burst Ianus prison,
Roar as thou did at Troy, drown Stentors voice
By many eights, which Pindus may re-beate,
Which Caucasus may as a Catch repeat,
And Taurus loch the fame: That Pygmies small
May squeak, It thunders, and dive into burroughs.
Let the four winds with dreadful clamour sing
Thy anger through the affrighted world.
What Lemnian chain shackles our mounting Eagle?
The Moone's round Concave is too strait a cage
For her advanced Pinions.
If pity can have room in angry breast,
Favour a Britain Prince, his Father slain,
His regiment bereft, his dearest blood
Drawn by the sword of false Cassibelane.
Having got Crown, he then struck at my head:
Nor can I safely suck my native air.
His Coos Androgeus also, and whole regions
In open war withstand his violence.
Lo, Albions aged arms spread wide t'inchaine
Thee as her Patron, in a true-loue knot.
Wherefore dread Caesar, let thy mercy strike
Revengeful fire; and be justly styled,
Tamer of Tyrants. Then fame blows aloud,
When valour helps the weak, pulls down the proud.
Arise unhappy Prince, our deeds shall show,
We grant thy suite.
Fortune repents at last;
The Moon is changed, the Globe doth to vs turn
Her shining cheek, and woes vs with a smile.
But what firm signs of Faith, what faithful aide,
What furtherance can you give at our arrival?
See here Androgeus heir, whose tender age
His Father venters, and makes bold with nature,
To pledge his Darling. He and thirty more
Of noble linage shall assure our faith:
Besides I pawn my life.
Enough. I'll once more cross the Seas,
For your good, more than mine; That happier sky
May bless your Towns with peace, your fields with plenty;
Perpetual spring in gay perfumed attire,
Surname your Isle, the Garden of the West.
Thanks, gracious Caesar, for this kind acceptance,
My knee doth kiss the ground, my lip your knee.
Pardon ye gods, if any haunt our land,
Ye Nymphs, and Lares, Fawns, and Silvanes wild;
That thus I bring a stranger on our coasts,
Whose foreign shape and language, may affright
Our lazy clowns, and on my Countries back
Once tread victorious steps: Be pleased to view,
Wrongs now redressed, neglected first by you.
Now Volusene:
Our glorious state, like the noone-pointed Sun,
When he bestrides the Lyons flaming fleece,
Doth North-west roll his burning brand, whose fire
The Oceans blue lake cannot stop, but flies
With brighter blaze to thaw the frozen Isles.
But how proceeds our preparation?
Many strong Ships are built, five Legions armed
Ready to launch.
Blow gently Africus,
Play on our poops: When Hyperions Son
Shall couch in West his fome-bedappled jade;
We'll rise to run our course.
Though Orpheus Harp, Arions Lute, the Chimes
Whose silver sound did Thebane towers raise:
Though sweet Vrania with her ten-string Lyre,
Unto whose stroke the daily-rowling spheres
Dance their just measures; Should with tune and tone
Tickle my eare-bred ayre: Yet can their notes
Those fabulous stones more enter, than my Soul.
Lead, poppy, Slumber stupefy my heart:
But Bedlam grief acts gambols in my brain.
The Centaurs Wheel, Prometheus Hawk, The Vulture
Of Tityus, Sisyphus never mossy stone,
The tale of Danaids tubbe, and Tantalus gaping,
Are but flea-bitings to my Smart: I've slain
A kinsman: more, A friend I dearly loved:
Nay more, no cause provoking, but in rash
And hellish choler.
I had thought my Love had cannon-proofe bin against
A world of injuries: when see, all is split
By a small wind. Cursed be thou my Sword,
The Instrument of Fury: Cursed hand,
Which made the thrust: But most accursed Part,
Whose ruddy flesh triangular boiled in flame,
Like an Aetnean, or Vesuvian Salamander.
That Breast, I so could hug, that faithful breast,
That snowy white, I with dark sanguine stained;
And from the wounds red lips, his panting heart
Did seem to speak, Is this a friendly deed?
O no, Hirildas: Bears can harmless play,
Lyons can dally, and sheath up their claws:
I only, worst of brutes, kill friends in jest.
Why dost Androgeus kindly-cruell keep
Me from their Sentence? Say, Law bids me dye:
If Law should not, Isle make that Law my self.
Shall Ensigns be displayed, and Nations rage
About so wild a wretch? Shall foreign hooves
Kick up our trembling dust, and must a Caesar
Redeem my folly with a kingdoms fall?
First may I stop black Cerberus triple jaws.
Dye, Dye, thou hast outlived thy self. Thou only,
Phoenix of females, still dost bind and bound
My runagate spirit in these walls of mud:
From thee, and For thee tic, I breath. Yet how
Borrow can I his Shape, or use mine own?
Odious before, now worse than hell-borne goblin
With brand and chains, to scare this Dove all quaking
Twixt wrath and fear. But Time may favour win:
When Hope doth fail, then Knife or Rope begin.
Wisdom confirm my Sense: what seemed their number?
Rising from shore Conjecture might descry
A thousand Ships with painted prowes, to pave
The briny fields of Neptune, their broad sails
Did Nereus canopy, Titans taper veil.
As nations twenty nine against Troy built up
A floating Delos of a thousand Ships,
To plough the liquid glass: No frame of Pallas,
No crafty Sinon; but Those wooden horse
Did Troy dis-Troy: So Troynovant shall feel
Her Mothers Fate: Achilles comes again:
And Pergamus again shall sink in dust:
They threaten.
Wonder! What can their Arsenals spawn so fast?
Last year his Barks and Galleys were debauched;
This spring they sprout again: Belike their Navy
Like the Lernean adder faster grows,
The more tic pruned. They come their last. Lord Deputy,
Lead on the present troops, and levy new.
It were best I think to let Him land, least view
Of his huge Navy should our Commons fright:
Retire our selves to some place of advantage,
Entice him from his ships: So cut the veins
Which nourish both: Enclosed he cannot scope.
I rather judge, We should oppose his footing,
Using the benefit of our natural mound.
Uncertain tic, where, when, he makes in-road:
To furnish all, unlikely: to neglect
Any, were dangerous, as Pelides heel.
Our shores are large, and level: Then t'attend
His time and leisure, would exhaust the state,
Weary our soldiers.
All places may be strengthened more, or less:
As by last year, Discretion now may guess.
The Clefts themselves are Bulwarks strong: The Shelves
And Flats refuse great ships, the coast so open,
That every stormy blast may rend their cables,
Put them from anchor: Suffering double war,
Their men, pitched battle; and ships, naval fight.
For charges, tic no season to dispute:
Spend something, or loose all: Shall he maintain
A fleet to enthral vs, we detract small costs,
When freedom, life, and kingdom lye at stake?
But the Assailants are the flower of Italy
Backed with four hundred Gallic horse, all tried
And gallant troops, joined in one martial body,
To give a fuller stroke; When we Defendants
Scattered along, can weak resistance make:
Plainness of ground affoording vs no shelter.
For what serves Art and Engines, Mounts and Trenches,
But to correct the nature of a plain?
A few on firm land may keep out a million,
Weakened by sea, false footing, billows rage,
And ponderous rage. When as received within,
He prospers by our spoil; We feed a Viper:
And male-contents and rebels have a refuge.
Nor were it safe, to venture all at once:
When one fought field being lost, swift ruin runs
And rushing throws down all.
We know our strength, and his: we'll fight in field.
Some dozen miles from sea. An open Theater
Gives luster to our prowess: To keep him out
Supposes fear, not manhood. No, let him march,
Till he rouse death, and stride his future grave.
Your will commands, and mine obeys.
The coast is clear. Our honour is the Goal.
In vain doth Tagus yellow sand obey,
Rhenes horned front, and nimble Tygris running
For wager with the wind, which skimmes his top:
In vain from Ganges to Hesperian Gades,
The Bounds marked out by Ioues two base-borne Sons,
Our Echoed Name doth sound: If we recoil
From hence again not victors.
Ye Pilots old, who were begot on mere-Maides,
Whose Element is the Sea, bred and brought up
In cradles rocked with storms, and wooden walls,
Fear not to grapple with their seas. Fear not
Their bulks, Brave veterans: That extended mass
Is not of iron, but can bleed, and dye:
They were not dipped in Styx: nor are they Giants,
Or wild Poetic Centaurs we assail:
Let then this voyage quit our credit lost,
And let Rage lash on Courage. Heere's the Game:
Life may be lost, but sure weal hold fast Fame.
Our first attempt doth prosper: They retiring
Scudde to the bosom of their Firre-tree vaults,
And under hatches hide themselves from death.
The Cornish band made havoc of their ranks,
Like Scythian wolves midst of a bleating fold:
The jingling lances, rattling chariot-wheeles
Matted their horse. The Bow men merrily shot.
Yet would our tributary Kings had succoured!
We are decayed they much in number grown,
And surely will make head again.
Fear not, thou know I can even with a whistle,
Hide Kent with glittering arms: More flaming sparkles
Paint not a freezing night: nor speckled Bees
Buzz not about sweet Hyblaes bloomy head.
But what need millions, when some thousands serve?
O did my Brother live! wee'de clime the Alps;
Like brave Mulmutius sons; make Romulus woolfe
Howl horror in their streets, and Rome look pale,
As when the Punicke Captain eyed her walls.
Are ye the Men, who never fought in vain?
Who wear Bellonaes favours, in your skarres:
I, ye are They. What then benummes our Spirits?
Our Empire from Quirinus narrow Center
Doth circling spread, and finds no brink nor bottom.
Titan no later sets, nor earlier wakes,
Than he beholds our Provinces, Why, then?
What Privilege hath this place? Have wee, or They
The Phrygian powers? Have they Palladium got?
No, no, Those gods our Capitol keep with joy:
These only have vn-daunted minds from Troy.
What news, good Atrius?
No good news from Atrius.
When ominous Earth with shade and cloudy vapours
Had darkness doubled, storms began to sound,
The dabled South, ruffe-footed Aquilo,
Came rushing like two Rams, whose steeled horns
Dart fiery sparks: The clouds crushed breathe out flames:
Thunder and Lightning daunt all ears and eyes.
The winds and billows strive, who loudest roar.
The sky distilled in rain: his room to fill,
Ambitious waives would clime the starry hill.
Our ships are bettered all, some forty sunk.
What diuell-Cacus drags our Fortune back?
Doth She move retrograde? and hoist vs up.
That we may fall at height? Why doest Camillus
Each night torment my sleep, and cry, Revenge?
I strive against the stream.
Thus join we Standards: And resign the keys
Of Troynovant, with all our warlike forces.
By me the Trinobants submit, and Cenimagnians,
Segontiackes, Ancalites, Bybrockes, and Cassians,
Six worthy nations doe desire thy guard.
All, all shall know our love.
The Tyrant lies on Ices flowery banks,
Where a full Queer sing of white-surplist swans.
The fords vnleuell belly they have fenced,
With sharpe stakes under water.
Nor stakes, lakes, fords, nor swords shall check our progress:
Those downy swans shall hear more funeral notes.
Their Kings departed, Nennius dead, whose loss
Would tears extort even from Pumicean eyes;
Had Britain nursed but such another Champion,
They might have stuck their darts on our barred gates,
And Latium trembled with contrary fates.
In what now lies their hope?
Great numbers still remain: nay worse, they laugh
At death, and boldly trust (as Druids preach)
Their souls who die in fight shall live in joy.
Hence count they dangers, benefits: and die
With freedom in their mouth, and wilful rage.
But let soft mildness waite on women, Let
Thy wrath ring through the woods in dusty noise,
To tell thy coming. No man's built so lofty,
But his foundation meets the humble dust:
Which undermined, how high he pierced the clouds,
So deep he sinks.
Hostile and civil foes shake top and root
As winds invade aboue, and Vines below.
And so will We.
No doubt: This blow shall like an earth-quake move
The roots and pillars of this sea-clipt Isle.
A cloud of vultures shall attend our Camp,
And no more shall the fields bear Vert, but Gulls:
The grain en-graind in purple die shall loose
His verdant hue. Bones, marrow, humane limbs
Shall putrefying reek, whose vapoured slime
Kindled on high may breed long-bearded Stars,
To tell more mischief, and out-beard Apollo.
Let's wast no time, least more unto him flock,
As humours glide to guard the wounded member.
Atrius, let our ships be drawn on shore,
New-rigg'd and mended. I must needs confess him
A darling of the gods; under whose colours
Stars, winter, sky, and tempests serve in pay,
And know both march and skirmish by his Drum.
O my dear Lady, hast thou slain thy self?
So fairly pure, so kindly chaste, so
A Venus and Diana mixed in one.
She eat her meat with studdes of Pearl, she kissed
With Rubies, and she looked with Diamonds bright.
Fish seas, and foul the air, hunt all the earth,
For such another bit, and loose your labour.
O, why dost thou complain.
Had she not killed her self, no cruel Atropos,
No fury could for pity cut her thread.
She was the Load-stone of all eyes, The whet-stone
Of all brains, the touch-stone of all hearts: She was???
O my presaging thoughts in ugly form
Suggest some Tragedy. Speak: yet stay a while:
I know thou kill with speaking. Be then dumb:
Let sound near give those Notions airy robes.
Yet speak, dispatch me: Feare's as bad as death.
Oh, could no tongue affirm it! Is she dead?
My Mistress is.
VVither ye pleasant gardens, where she trod:
White lilies droop, and blasted daisies wink,
And weep in poorly dew. Blind Vesper morn,
Hang thy cold tears on every grassy blade.
Groan loud ye woods, and tear your leafie hair:
Let wind and hoary frost kill every flower:
For she is gone, who made continual May.
Let foggy mists envelop Sun and Stars:
For she is gone, who made perpetual day.
Confounded Nature stand amazed, dissolve
Thy rolling engines, and unbrace the Seas:
Fling all into their first disordered lump.
For thy chief paragon, thy rich Master-piece,
The Jewel, for which thou did venture all,
Is lost, is lost. And can I live to speak it?
How died she?
By a poisoned draught.
The very word (poison) infects my breath.
Durst thou presume to pass that corrall portch?
Were not her Lips sufficient Antidote?
Durst thou descend through those close winding stairs
With treacherous intent? How could thy venom
Seize on her, and not sweetened loose his virtue,
Or rather vicious quality? May toads,
Dragons, and mandrakes be thy gally-pottes:
This Body was a casket for the graces,
No cask for poison. With her dies all love:
Cupped may break his Bow, his arrows burn,
Then quench his Taper in a flood of tears.
Is she dead?
Or in a long trance.
She may revive:
I'll visit her: Art may prolong her days,
Whether she will or no.???
Alecto rising from the lakes
Of nights sad Empery:
With knotty bunch of curled snakes,
Doth lash fair Brittany.
More ghastly monster did not spring,
From the Hybernian flood:
With which Morindus combating,
Of foe became his food.
Shall no more Shepherds in the shade
sit whistling without care?
Shall never spear be made a spade,
And sword a plowing share?
Grant heaven at last, that Music loud
Of bloody Mars be still:
That Britain Virgins in a crowd,
With hymns the sky may fill.
Nor is Landoraes loss,
The least part of our mournful muse:
Jove Iuno for to cross,
This Trojan Dame for Bride did choose.
Where She doth shine,
Above Guendoline,
The Amazon of her days:
And Mercy wise
Law to devise. O sound Landor. praise.
There doth she shine aboue,
Clear as great Deliaes horned bow,
Bright as the Queen of Love,
To shoot down gentle beams below.
Sabrina dare
Not to compare
With her most splendent rays:
A ring the sky,
A gem her eye: O sound London. praise.
Thus gain we ground: yet still our foes will fight,
Whether they win or loose. With bloody drops
Our path is printed: Thames his maiden-cheekes
Blush with vermilion: Nations crave our League
On every side: Yet still Cassibelane braves vs,
Nor will submit.
Not far hence Verolame lies, his chiefest fort,
By nature guarded round with woods and fens,
By Art enclosed with a ditch and rampire:
From hence we must dislodge the Boar.
There are but two ways to assail this Town:
Both which I know. Your parted army must
Break thorough both at once, and so distract
His doubtful reskues.
Draw slaves unwilling, I dare meet my death:
And lead my Leader.
You'll repent anon,
If I doe ill: But not for suffering ill.
Your stoical apathy will relent I know.
This Priest I caught within a shady grove,
Devoutly kneeling at a broad Oaks foot.
Now He awaits your Doom.
What god adore you?
Him, whom all should serve.
Whats the Moon?
Nights Sun:
Whats Night?
A foil to glorify the Day.
What most compendious way to happiness?
To dye in a good cause.
What is a man?
An Hermaphrodite of soul &amp; body.
How differ they in nature?
The body hath in weight, the soul in length.
One question more: What dangers shall I pass?
Many by land and sea: As steps to glory???
Throw Palatine on Aesquiline, on both
Heap Aventine, to raise one Pyramid: for a
Chair of Estate, where thy advanced Head
Among those Heroes pictured in the Stars,
Orion, Perseus, Hercules, may consult
With Jove himself. But shun the Senate house.
March round about the Caspian sea; search out
Among Cedars tall the Arabian Phoenix nest;
Run counter to old Nile, till thou discover
His sacred head wrapped up in cloudy mountains:
And rather than work fail, Turn Hellespont
Out of his channel; Dig that Isthmus down,
Which ties great Africa. Shun the Senate house.
Be Saturn, and so thou shalt not be Tarquine.
A Brutus strong,
Repays in Fine:
Thy brutish wrong
To Brutus line.
We'll talk at leisure more.
No rampires keep him back: He presses forward,
Though every stamp he treads, seems to conjure
The fates from their infernal center. None
But he, durst be so bold.
Yes, when Britains lead, and Mandubrace insulting
With naked sword calls on the lagging soldiers:
When fearce Androgeus with revolted nations,
Usher his army. No way half so quick
To ruinate kingdoms, as by home-bred strife.
Thus while we single fight, we perish all.
I, I, those treacherous caitiffes, rebel slaves:
O may their countries heavy curse them sink
Below the nine-fold brazen gates of hell:
That princox proud: I, it was a scope in policy,
I should have slain the whelps with their good Sire.
Let Britains climactericall year now run,
The Series break of seventy Kings: Nay let
One urn conclude our ashes and the worlds.
Befall what will: In midst of horrors noise,
And crackling flames, when all is lost, we'll dye
With weapons in our hands, and victory scorn:
There's none that dye so poor, as they are borne.
Faithful Belinus, let a Post command
The Kentish Kings to set upon his fleet:
Whilst we here bid the base. Four thousand charioteers,
(Such as did glide upon the Phrygian Plains,
And wheeling double service doe perform,
Both horse-mans speed, and foot-mans stable strength)
Still doe remain: With these and flocking voluntaries
We'll give him once more battle. Let the Captains
Enter, and hear my charge.
Subjects and Fellow-souldiers; We must now try
For ancient freedom, or perpetual bondage.
There is no third choice. The enraged foe
With cruel pride, proud avarice, hath spoiled
From East to West, hunting for blood and gain.
Your wives and daughters ravished, ransacked towns,
Great bellies ripped with lances, sprawling babes,
The spouse about her husbands neck run through
By the same spear. Think on these Objects:
Then choose them for your Lords, who spoil and burn
Whole countries; and call Desolation, Peace.
Yield, yield; That he ennobled by our spoils,
May clime the Capitol with triumphant carte,
You led fast fetterd through the staring streets,
For city Dames to mock your habit strange,
And fill their arras hangings with our story.
No: Brennus ghost forbid, who this night stood,
Before my eyes, and grimly furious spake:
Shall Britain stoop to Roman Rods and Hatchets,
And servile tribute? Will ye so defame
Your ancestors, and your successors wrong,
Heirs but of slavery??? O, this day make good
The glory of so many ages past!
I see, you are incensed, and wish to use
Your weapons, not your ears.
All. To arms, to arms, to arms: We'll fight, and dye.
So the Siluer-feathered swan,
Both by death and colour wan,
Loves to sing before she dye,
Leaving life so willingly.
But how can I sing a note?
When dead hoarseness stops my throat:
Or how can I play a stroke?
When my heart-strings all are broke.
Come guilty night, and with black velvet wings
Mantle me round; Let melancholic thoughts,
Hang all my brain with Blacks: This darksome grove,
My gallery. So, all things suite my mind:
Such funeral colours please a gasping heart.
I dyed with thee Landora once: Now only
Some struggling spirits are behind, to be
Laid out with most thrift on thy memory.
Where shall I first begin my last complaint,
Which must be measured by my glass of life?
At thee Hirildas? Slain in furious mood,
By whose help only I enjoyed my love?
Or thee Landora? dying for his sake,
And in thy death including mine?
Or at my Countries wrack? whose surface torn
Doth for my vengeance importune the Pole?
Or at my self? I, there is sorrows spring.
Shall I go wandering lurk in woods unknown,
A banished Hermit, and sigh out my griefs?
Teaching the pretty birds to sing my dear,
My dear Landora: There to feed on acorns,
Drink the clear fountain, and consume with weeping,
Were but an easy life, an easy death:
My violent passion must have sudden vent.
Refined Soul, whose odoriferous light,
The damned hags stare at, and whining elves,
Thinking it Heaven in hell: Behold my pangs,
Pity my dying groans, and be more soft.
O may our shadows mingle; then shall I
Envy no more those Citizens aboue,
The ambrosian iuncates of the Olympian hall
And all that gorgeous Roof. But cowards talk.
Come thou last refuge of a wearisome life;
A passport to the Elision land, A key
To unlock my grieved in-mate. Lo I come.
O let this river from my eyes, this stream
From my poor breast, beg favour of thy ghost:
O let this luke-warme blood thy Rigour steep,
And mollify thy adamantine heart.
Leander-like I swim to thee through blood:
Be thy bright eyes my Pharos, and conduct me
Through the dull night of gloomy Erebus.
Flow, flow, ye lively drops, and from my veins
Run winding to the Ocean of my bliss:
Tell her my love, and if She still shall doubt,
Swear that ye came directly from my heart.
I stay too long.
Sweet Lady give me welcome.
Though I shall pass twelve monsters as the Sun,
Or twelve Herculean labours on a row:
Yet one kind look makes all my journey sweet
Thou Fayry-Queene of the Tartarian Court,
To whom Proserpine may the Apple give,
Worthier than She, to warm old Plutoes bed:
See thy poor vassal weltering in his gore.
I faint, I faint.
I dye thy Martyr, as I lived thy Priest:
Great Goddess be propitious, Sweet Landora ???
What shall I doee? How shall I scope?
I scorn to take advantage, Rise and Fight.
I had rather be killed quickly, quickly.
Then die, as thou destrest.
O let me wink first.
I shall never endure it. Oh, oh. I am peppered and salted.
O that base Fortune should great spirits damp,
And fawn on muddy slaves: That envious fate
Should ripen villainy with a Syrian dew,
And blast sweet virtue with a Sirian flame.
A Catalogue of mischiefs doe concur
Our Britain Hector, Nennius dead: Our Kings
Angry to be refused, sit still at home:
And then those traitors with their train augment
His huge and expert Army: Nothing stops him;
Rivers, nor Rampires, Woods, nor dangerous Bogs;
On this side Thames his dismal Ensigns shine:
Last, Kents unhappy rulers are at Sea
Ore-throwne, and our men almost spent. Then, General,
In desperate pride, and valours scornful rage,
Let vs run head-long through their armed tents,
And make their Camp a Shambles: So to raise
Our lofty tombs upon their slaughtered heaps.
Nay, rather first lets parley for peace.
Ye Country-gods and Nymphs, who Albion love,
Old Father Neptune, all ye powers divine,
Witness my loyal care: If humane strength,
Courage, and policy, could a Kingdom save;
We did our best. But discord, child of hell,
Numbers of traine-men, and each Captain picked
Out of a Province, make vs bow or break.
In vain we strive, when Deities doe frown:
When Destinies push, Atlas himself comes down.
No mediator is so fit as Comius: And heir's the man.
Doe not the dangers which environ you,
Call for a good conclusion? which I wish
As friend to both sides.
No Comius: There is more behind, than Caesar
Hath ouer-runne: Our Chariotters still drive,
Our harness still is worn: Through woods and lakes
We'll tire his dainty soldiers: Then set fire
On Towns, and sacrifice our selves, our wives,
Our goods, and cattle, in one public flame:
That wind may blow our ashes in his face.
So shall dead Elements curse your causeless fury.
Rather conclude some friendly peace.
Thus far we hear you: If with honoured terms,
And royal looks, he will accept our faith:
We will obey, but never serve.
I'll undertake as much.
Thus civil war by me, and factious broils,
Deface this goodly land: I am revenged:
The cause Eulinus dead, my Anger dies.
He is our Uncle, and in danger's mouth;
Both claim relenting pity. Whom peace made
A rampant Lyon, war hath made a Lamb.
Caesar shall not proceed, for private ends,
To captivate our Isle: whose clamorous curse
Doth knock, I know, at Heavens Starre-nailed gates:
For that Ioues bird, impt with our plumes, ore-flew
The Oceans wall; To seek her prey in Britain.
I, we have made a Rod for our own backs:
Fetters of gold are fetters. No gap worse
To let destruction in by, than to call
A foreign aide: who having seen our weakness,
And tasted once the fatness of our land,
Is not so easily thrust out, as admitted.
Such medicine is worse than the malady,
Fretting the bowels of our kingdom.
I know their hatred just; and here resign
All my birth-right to thee, my second self:
I must forsake my Countries sight, and seek
New fortunes with this Emperor; In hope
To be raised up, by his now rising wheel.
O, doe not so, dear Brother. So to part,
Were to divide one Individual Soul.
Nor think me so ambitious: I can live
A private life, and see a regal Crown,
With no more entry than I see the Sun,
Glitter aboue me. Let not Lud's two sons
Be parted by a Sea: I hold your presence,
At higher price than a whole kingdoms pomp.
Keep then your right: like those admired twins,
Let vs rejoice, morn, live, and die together.
You shall a Sceptre gain.
And loose a Brother.
Bear you the Sovereign power of this land.
A body politic must on two legs stand:
I'll bear a part, so to diminish envy.
I must away, and shun the peoples eye.
If to your self unkind, be kind to me:
For my sake stay at home: why will you fly?
Think you a stepdame soil gives sweeter sap?
I: For trees transplanted do more goodly grow.
And I'll count men but stocks, when they do so.
I am resolved: All troubles brought a sleep:
To leave you with a parting kiss.
And by that kiss
May I transfuse my soul, or quite expire?
Brothers have often for a kingdom fought:
We strive to loose it. This is holy strife.
But here I vow, if ere that sacred Lace
Shall gird my Temples: Rome must keep her bounds,
Or fish for Tribute in the dreadful deep.
Let gracious favour smooth wars rugged brow:
Cassibelane will compound: All rage must end:
We choose you Umpire, for a friendly close.
It is my glory to end all with peace:
And for that cause, I Comius sent in hast,
For to conduct him hither.
This trump gives warning of the Kings approach.
Fate, and no fault of mine, makes me appear,
To yield as far as honour gives me leave.
Hail valorous prince, disdain not this ingrafting
Into Romes Empire, whose command encloses
The whole Leuant, and whose large shadow hides
The triple-bounded Earth, and bellowing Seas.
We shall observe your will; so you impose
A league, no yoke.
Thus we determine: That Crown still shall stand;
Reign as the total Monarch of this Isle:
Till death vn-kings you. It were, Androgeus, best
You in our train kept honourable place:
And let Themantius wear the royal wreath.
You must forgive the Towns which did revolt,
Nor seek revenge on Trinobants, but let
Young Mandubrace possess his Fathers Princedome.
Be all wrongs drenched in Lethe.
Pardon my rash attempts.
Count me your loyal friend.
In sign of league, you shall vs pledges give,
And yearly pay three thousand pound of silver,
Unto our Treasury. So let these decrees
Be straight proclaimed through Troynovant, whose Tower
Shall be more fairly built at my charge, as
A lasting Monument of our arrival.
All shall be done: Renowned Prince, whose worth,
Unparalleled both as a Friend and Foe,
We doe admire.
Accept this Surcoate, starrified with pearls,
And Diamonds, such as our own shores breed.
And you receive this massy Cup of gold,
Loves earnest, and Memorial of this day:
By this, suppose our Senate calls you friend.
Now time, best Oracle of Oracles,
Father of truth, the true sense doth suggest
Of Deans answer;
The Lyon and the Eagle doe design
The Britain and the Roman states, whose arms
Were painted with those Animals: Both fierce
Weary at last conclude: The Semicircles,
First letters of the Leaders names, we see
Are joined in true loves endless figure.
Both come of Trojan race, both nobly bold,
Both matchless Captains, on one Throne behold.
Now the Tarpeyan rock ore-lookes the world;
Her Empire bounded only by the Ocean;
And boundless Fame beats on the starry Pole.
So Danow crawling from a mountains side,
Wider and deeper grows, and like a Serpent,
Or Pyramid reversed; improues his bigness,
As well as length: Till viewing countries large,
And fed with sixty rivers, his wide mouth
On the Euxine Sea-nymph gapes, and fear doth stir,
Whether he will disgorge, or swallow her.
Since the great guide of all, Olympus King,
Will have the Romans his viceroys on earth:
Since the red fatal eyes of crow-blacke night,
Fling their malignant influence on our state:
Since Britain must submit: It was her fame,
None but a Iulius Caesar could her tame.
Come fellow Bards and sing with cheer;
Since dreadful Alarms we shall no more hear.
Come lovely peace, our Saint divine,
Olive and Laurel doe love for to twine.
The Graces, and Muses, and Nymphs in a round:
Let voice beat the air, and feet beat the ground.
So Hells black image chased away,
Eos doth dandle the goldy-lock'd day:
So Bruma banished all forlorn,
Cupped and Flora the spring doe adorn.
And so the grim fury of Mars laid in grave,
A merrier ending doth friendly peace crave.
The Sky is glad that Stars aboue,
Doe give a brighter splendour:
The Stars unfold their flaming gold,
To make the ground more tender:
The ground doth send a fragrant smell,
That air may be the sweeter:
The air doth charm the swelling Seas,
With pretty chirping meeter:
The Sea with rivers water doth
The plants and flowers dainty:
The plants doe yield their fruitful seed,
That beasts may live in plenty:
The Beasts doe give both food and cloth,
That man high Jove may honour:
And so the world runs merrily round,
When peace doth smile upon her.
Oh then, then Oh: Oh then, then Oh:
This Jubilee last for ever:
That Foreign spite, or Civil fight,
Our quiet trouble never.
How bravely Caesar past the angry Maine?
How bravely was he back repulsed again?
How did he wheel his sword in Nennius face?
How did he loose his sword, and fly apace?
How did again his Army fill your coast?
I, when our Princes did conduct his host.
How did they pierce through Ices dangerous flood?
But made her swell, and bankrupt with their blood.
Mirror of Captains, Iulius stile hath won.
But we may justly brag of two for one.
Confess, our valorous race hath now repaid
The Alien Massacre, and our cities Flame:
See how they yield, and yearly Tribute pay.
No, proud Dictator: Both do weary stand
On equal terms: Both wish a peaceful League.
But if they shall oppress; know, Generous spirits
Will break this Compact, like a Spiders web.
Ioues will is finished: And (though Iuno frown,
That no more Trojan blood shall die the stage)
The worlds fourth Empire Britain doth embrace.
The Thunder-bearer with a Ianus look
At once views ruddy morn, and cloudy West:
Her wings displayed ore this Terrestrial egg,
Will shortly hatch an Universal peace:
For Jove intends a favour to the world.
It now remains, That you two martial wights
Cease from your braving one another worth:
You must be friends at last. The close is sweet,
When after tumults, hearts and hands doe meet.
Nec Lusisse pudet, sed non insider Ludum.

Studies have, of this Nature, been of late
So out of fashion, so vnfollow'd; that
It is become more Justice, to revive
The antic follies of the Times, then strive
To countenance wise Industry: no want
Of Art, doth render wit, or lame, or scant,
Or slothful, in the prchse of fresh baize;
But want of Truth in Them, who give the praise
To their selfe-loue, presuming to out-doe
The Writer, or (for need) the Actor's too.
But such THIS AVTHOVR'S silence best befitt's,
Who bidd's Them, be in love, with their own wit's
From Him, to clearer Iudgement's, wee can say,
Hee shew's a History, couched in a Play:
A History of noble mention, known,
Famous, and true: most noble, because our own:
Not forged from Italy, from France, from Spain,
But Chronicled at Home; as rich in strain
Of brave Attempts, as ever, fertile Rage
In Action, could beget to grace the Stage.
Wee cannot limitt Scenes, for the whole Land
It self, appeared too narrow to with-stand
Competitors for Kingdoms: nor is here
Unnecessary mirth forced, to indeere
A multitude; on these two, rest's the Fate
Of worthy expectation; TVH and STATE.
STill to be haunted; still to be pursued,
Still to be frighted with false apparitions
Of pageant Majesty, and new-coynd greatness,
As if wee were a mockery King in state;
Only ordained to lavish sweat and blod
In scorn and laughter to the ghosts of York,
Is all below our merits; yet (my Lords,
My friends and Counsailers) yet we sit fast
In our own royal birth-right; the rent face
And bleeding wounds of England's slaughterd people,
Have been by vs (as by the best Physician)
At last both thoroughly Cured, and set in safety;
And yet for all this glorious work of peace
Our self is scarce secure.
The rage of malice
Conjures fresh spirits with the spells of York;
For ninety years ten English Kings and Princes,
Threescore great Dukes and Earls, a thousand Lords
And valiant Knights, two hundred fifty thousand
Of English Subjects have in Civil Wars,
Been sacrifid to an uncivil thirst
Of discord and ambition: this hot vengeance
Of the just powers aboue, to utter ruin
And Desolation had reigned on, but that
Mercy did gently sheath the sword of Justice,
In lending to this bloud-shrunck Common-wealth
A new whole, new birth in your Sacred person.
Edward the fourth after a doubtful fortune
Yielded to nature; leaving to his sons
Edward and Richard, the inheritance
Of a most bloody purchase; these young Prince
Richard the Tyrant their unnatural Vcle
Forced to a violent grave, o just is Heaven.
Him hath your Majesty by your own arm
Divinely stringeden'd, pulled from hi Boars sty
And struck the black Usurper to a Carcass:
Nor doth the House of York decay in Honours,
Tho Lancaster doth repossess his ight.
For Edwards daughter is King Henries Queen.
A blessed Union, and a lasting blessing
For this poor panting Island, if some shreds
Some useless remnant of the House of York
Grudge not at this Content.
Margaret of Burgundy
Blows fresh Coals of Division.
Painted fires
Without to heate or scorch or light to cheerish.
Yorkes headless trunk her Father, Edwards fate
Her brother King, the smothering of her Nephews
By Tyrant Gloster, brother to her nature;
Nor Glosters own confusion, (all decrees
Sacred in Heaven) Can move this Woman-Monster,
But that she still from the vnbottom'd mine
Of Devilish policies, doth vent the Ore
Of troubles and sedition.
In her age
(Great Sir, observe the Wonder) she grows fruitful,
Who in her strength of youth was always barren
Nor are her births as other Mothers are,
At nine or ten months end, she has been with child
Eight or seven years at least; whose twins being borne
(A prodigy in Nature) even the youngest
Is fifteen years of age at hi first entrance
As soon as known 'ith world, tall striplings, strong
And able to give battle unto Kings.
Idols of Yorkish malice.
And but Idols,
A steely hammer Crushes 'em to peces.
Lambert the elest (Lords) is in our service,
Preferred by an offious care of Die
From the Scullery to a Faulkner (strange example!)
Which shows the difference between noble natures
And the base borne: but for the upstart Duke,
The new revived York, Edwards second son,
Murdered log since 'ith Tower; he lives again
And vows to be your King.
The throne is filled Sir.
True Stanlie, and the lawful heir sitts on it;
A guard of Angels, and the holy prayers
Of loyal Subjects are a sure defence
Against all force and Counsel of Intrusion.
But now (my Lords) put case some of our Nobles,
Our GREAT ONES, should give Countenance and Courage
To trim Duke Perkin; you will all confess
Our bounties have vnthriftily been scattered
Amongst unthankful men.
Unthankful beasts,
Dogs, villains, traitors.
Dawbney let the guilty
Keep silence, I accuse none, tho I know,
Foreign attempts against a State and Kingdom
Are seldom without some great friends at home.
Sir, if no other abler reasons else
Of duty or alegiance could divert
A head-strong resolution, yet the dangers
So lately past by men of blood and fortunes
In Lambert Simnells party, must Command
More than a fear, a terror to Conspiracy,
The high-borne Lincoln, son to De la Pole,
The Earl of Kildare, Lord Geraldine,
Francis Lord Louell, and the German Baron,
Bold Martin Answered, with Broughton and the rest,
(Most spectacles of ruin, some of mercy;)
Are presidents sufficient to forewarn
The present times, or any that live in them,
What folly, nay, what madness it were to lift
A finger up in all defence but yours,
Which can be but impostorous in a title.
Stanlie wee know thou love Vs, and thy heart
Is figured on thy tongue; nor think wee less
Of anie's here, how closely wee have hunted
This Cub (since he vnlodg'd) from hole to hole,
Your knowledge is our Chronicle: first Ireland
The common stage of Novelty, presented
This gewgaw to oppose vs, there the Geraldines
And Butlers once again stood in support
Of this Colossicke statue: Charles of France
Thence called him into his protection;
Dissembled him the lawful heir of England;
Yet this was all but French dissimulation,
Aiming at peace with vs, which being granted
On honourable terms on our part, suddenly
This smoke of straw was packed from France again,
T'infect some grosser ayre; and now wee learn
(Maugre the malice of the bastard Nevill,
Sir Talor, and a hundred English Rebels)
Thei'r all retired to Flaunders, to the Dam
That nursed this eager Wholpe, Margaret of Burgundy.
But wee will hunt him there too, wee will hunt him,
Hunt him to death even in the Beldams Closet,
Tho the Arch-duke were his Buckler.
She has styled himThe fair white rose of England.
Jolly Gentleman, more fit to be a Swabber
To the Flemish after a drunken surfeit.
Gracious Sovereign, please you peruse this paper.
The Kings Countenance, gathers a sprightly blood:
Good news believe it.
Vrswick thine ear
You have lodged him?
Strongly, safe Sir.
Enough, is Barley come to?
No, my Lord.
No matterphew, hoe's but a running weed,
At pleasure to be plucked up by the roots:
But more of this anonI have bethought me.
(My Lords) for reasons which you shall partake,
It is our pleasure to remove our Court
From Westminster to the Tower: Wee will lodge
This very night there, give Lord Chamberlain
A present order for it.
The Tower  I shall sir.
Come my true, best, fast friends, these clouds will vanish,
The Sun will shine at full: the Heavens are clearing.
You trifle time Sir.
Oh my noble Lord,
You construe my griefs to so hard a sense,
That where the text is argument of pity
Matter of earnst love, your gloss corrupts it
With too much ill placed mirth.
Much mirth Lord Daliell?
Not so I vow: obeerue me sprightly gallant:
I know thou art a oble lad, a handsome,
Descend from n honourable Ancestry,
Forward and active, dost resolve to wrestle,
And ruffle in the world by noble actions
For a brave mention to posterity:
I scorn not thy affection to my Daughter
Not I by good St. Andrew; but this bugg-beare,
This whoresome tale of honour, (honour Daliell)
So hourly chatts, and tattles in mine ear,
The piece of royalty that is stitched up
In my Kates blood, that it is as dangerous
For thee young Lord, to perch so near an Eaglet,
As foolish for my gravity to admit it.
I have spoke all at once.
Sir, with this truth
You mix such Worm wood, that you leave no hope
For my disordered palate, ere to relish
A wholesome taste again; alas, I know Sir,
What an unequal distance lies between
Great Huntley's Daughters birth, and Daliells fortunes.
Shoe's the Kings kinswoman, placed near the Crown,
A Princess of the blood, and I a Subject.
Right, but a noble Subject, put in that too.
I could add more; and in the rightest line,
Derive my pedigree from Adam Mure,
A Scottish Knight; whose daughter, was the mother
To him who first begot the race of Iameses,
That sway the Sceptre to this very day
But kindreds are not ours, when once the date
Of many years, have swallowed up the memory
Of their originals: So pasture fields
Neighbouring too near the Ocean, are soopd up
And known no more: for stood I in my first
And native greatness, if my Princely Mistress
Voutsafd me not her servant, it were as good
I were reduced to Clownery; to nothing
As to a throne of Wonder.
Now by Saint Andrew
A spark of mettle, a'has a brave fire in him.
I would a had my Daughter so I knew not.
But must not bee so, must not: well young Lord
This will not doe yet, if the girl be headstrong
And will not harken to good Counsel, steal her
And run away with her, dance galliards, doe,
And frisk about the world to learn the Languages:
T'will be a thriving trade; vo may set up by it.
With pardon (nble Gordon) this disdain
Suites not your Daughters virtue, or my constancy.
You are angrywould awould beat me, I deserve it.
Daliell thy hand, w'are friends; follow thy Courtship
Take thine own time and speak, if thou prevail'st
With passion more then I can with my Counsel,
Shees thine, nay, she is thine, tic a fair match
Free and allowed, Isle only use my tongue
Without a Fathers power, use thou thine:
Self doe self have, no more words, win and wear her.
You bless me, I am now too poor in thanks
To pay the debt I owe you.
Nay, you are poor enough  I love his spirit infinitely.
Look ye, she comes, to her now, to her, to her.
The King commands your presence Sir.
The gallantthis this this Lord, this
Servant (Kate) of yours, desires to be your Moister.
I acknowledge him, a worthy friend of mine.
Your humblest Creature.
So, so, the games a foot, I'm in cold hunting,
The hare and hounds are parties.
Princely Lady,how most unworthy I am to employ
My services, in honour of your virtues,
How hpelesse my desires are to enjoy
Your faie opinion, and much more your love;
Are only matter of despair, unless
Your goodness give large warrant to my boldness,
My feeble-wing'd ambition.
This is scurvy.
My Lord I interrupt you not.
Indeed?
Now on my life sheel Court him nay, nay, on Sir.
Oft have I tuned the lesson of my sorrows
To sweeten discord, and enrich your pity;
But all in vain: here had my Comforts sunk
And never ris'n again, to tell a story
Of the despairing Lover, had not now
Even now the Earl your Father.
A means me sure.
After some fit disputes of your Condition,
Your highness and my lowness, given a licence
Which did not more embolden, then encourage
My faulting tongue.
How how? how's that?
Embolden? Encourage? I encourage ye? do ye hear sir?
A subtle trick, a quaint one, will you hear (man)
What did I say to you, come come toth point.
It shall not need my Lord.
Then hear me Kate:
Keep you on that hand of her; I on this
Thou standst between a Father and a Suitor,
Both striving for an interest in thy heart:
Hee Courts thee for affection, I for duty;
Hee as a servant pleads, but by the privilege
Of nature, tho I might Command, my care
Shall only Counsel what it shall not force.
Thou can but make one choice, the ties of marriage
Are tenures not at will, but during life.
Consider whose thou art, and who; a Princess,
A Princess of the royal blood of Scotland.
In the full spring of youth, and fresh in beauty.
The King that sits upon the throne is young
And yet unmarried, forward in attempts
On any least occasion, to endanger
His person; Wherefore Kate as I am confident
Thou dare not wrong thy birth and education
By yielding to a common ervile rage
Of female wantonness, so I am confident
Thou wilt proportion all thy thoughts to side
Thy equals, i not equal thy superiors.
My Lord of Daliell youug in years, is old
In honours, but nor eminent in titles
Or in estate, that may support or add to
The expectation of thy fortunes, settle
Thy will and reason by a strength of Judgment;
For in a word, I give thee freedom, take it.
If equal fates have not ordained to pitch
Thy hopes aboue my height, let not thy passion
Lead thee to shrink mine honour in oblivion:
Thou art thine own, I have done.
Oh y' are all Oracle,
The living stock and root of truth and wisdom.
My worthiest Lord and Father, the indulgence
Of your sweet composition, thus commands
The lowest of obedience, you have granted
A liberty so large, that I want skill
To choose without direction of EXAMPLE:
From which I daily learn, by how much more
You tae off from the roughness of a Father,
By so much more I am engaged to tender
The duty of a Daughter. For respects
Of birth, degrees of title and advancement,
I nor admire, nor slight them; all my studies
Shall ever aim at this perfection only,
To live and dye so, that you may not blush
In any course of mine to own me yours.
Kate, Kate, thou grow upon my heart, like peace,
Creating every other hour a Jubilee.
To you my Lord of Daliell, I address
Some few remaining words, the general fame
That speaks your merit even in vulgar tongues
Proclaims it clear; but in the best a President.
Good wench, good girl y' faith.
For my part (trust me)
I value mine own worth at higher rate,
Cause you are pleased to prize it; if the stream
Of your protested service (as you term it)
Run in a constancy, more then a Complement;
I shall be my delight, that worthy love
Leads you to worthy actions; and these guide ye
Richly to wed an honourable name:
So every virtuous praise, in after ages,
Shall be your heye, and I in your brave mention,
Be Chronicled the MOTHER of that issue,
That glorious issue.
Oh that I were young again,
Shed make me ort proud danger, and suck spirit
From reputation.
To the present motion,
Hears all that I dare aswer: when a ripeness
Of more experience, and some use of time,
Resolves to treat the freedom of my youth
Upon exchange of troathes, I shall desire
No surer credit, of a match with virtue,
Then such as lives in you; mean time, my hopes are
Preser'd secure, in having you a friend.
You are a blessed Lady, and instruct
Ambition not to soar a farther flight,
Then in the perfumed ayre of your soft voice.
My noble Lord of Huntley, you have lent
A full extent of bounty to this parley;
And for it, shall command your humblest servant.
Enough; wee are still friends, and will continue
A hearty love, oh Kate, thou art mine own:
No more, my Lord of Crawford.
From the King I come my Lord of Huntley,
Who in Counsel requires your present aid.
Some weighty business!
A Secretary from a Duke of York,
The second son to the late English Edward,
Concealed I know not where these fourteen years,
Craves audience from our Moister, and tic said
The Duke himself is following to the Court.
Duke upon Duke; tic well; it is well hears bustling
For Majesty; my Lord, I will along with ye.
My service noble Lady.
Please ye walk sir?
Times have their changes, sorrow makes men wise,
The Sun it self must set as well as rise;
Then why not Ifair Madam I waite on ye.
You find (Sir Robert Clifford) how securely
King Henry our great Moister, doth commit
His person to your loyalty; you taste
His bounty and his mercy even in this;
That at a time of night so late, a place
So private as his Closet, hee is pleased
To admit you to his favour; doe not falter
In your Discovery, but as you covet
A liberal grace, and pardon for your follies.
So labour to deserve it, by laying open
All plots, all persons, that contrive against it.
Remember not the witchcraft, or the Magic,
The charms, and incantations, which the Sorceress
Of Burgundy hath cast upon your reason!
Sir Robert bee your own friend now, discharge
Your conscience freely, all of such as love you,
Stand sureties for your honesty and truth.
Take heed you doe not dally with the King,
He is wise as he is gentle.
I am miserable,
If Henry be not merciful.
The King comes.
Clifford!
Let my weak knees rot on the earth,
If I appear as leap'rous in my treacheries,
Before your royal eyes; as to mine own
I seem a Monster, by my breach of truth.
Clifford stand up, for instance of thy safety
I offer thee my hand.
A sovereign Balm
For my bruised Soul, I kiss it with a greediness.
Sir you are a just Master, but I
Tell me, is every circumstance, thou hast set down
With thine own hand, within this paper true?
Is it a sure intelligence of all
The progress of our enemies intents
Without corruption?
True, as I wish heaven;
Or my infected honour white again.
Wee know all (Clifford) fully, since this meteor
This airy apparition first discradled
From Tourney into Portugal; and thence
Advanced his fiie blaze or adoration
Toth superstitious Irish; since the beard
Of this wilde Comet, Conjurd'd into France,
Sparkled in antic flames in Charles his Court:
But shrunk again from thence, and hid in darkness,
Stole into Flaunders, flourishing the rags
Of painted power on the shore of Kent,
Whence hee was beaten back with shame and scorn,
Contempt, and slaughter of some naked out-lawes:
But tell me, what new course now shapes Duke Perkin!
For Ireland (mighty Henrie:) so instructed
By Stephen Frion, sometimes Secretary
In the French tongue unto your sacred Excellence,
But Perkins tutor now.
A subtle villain!
That Frion, Frion, you my Lord of Durham
Knew well the man.
French both in heart and actions!
Some Irish heads work in this mine of treason;
Speak em!
Not any of the best; your fortune
Hath dulld their spleens; never had Counterfeit
Such a confused rabble of lost Banquerouts
For Counsellors: first Heron a broken Mercer,
Then Iohn a Water, sometimes Major of Cork,
Sketon a taylor and a Scrivenor
Called Astley: and what ere these list to treat of,
Perkin must harken to; but Frion, cunning
Aboue these dull capacities, still prompts him
To fly to Scland to young Iames the fourth;
And sue for aid to him; this is the latest
Of all their resolutions.
Still more Frion.
Pestilent Adder, hee will hiss out poison
As dangerous as infectionswe must match 'em.
Clifford thou hast spoke home, wee give thee life:
But Clifford, there are people of our own
Remin behind untold, who are they Clifford?
Name those and wee are friends, and will to rest,
Tic thy last task.
Oh Sir, here I must break
A most unlawful Oath to keep a just one.
Well, well, be brief, be brief.
The first in rank
Shall be Iohn Ratcliffe, Lord Fitzwater, then
Sir Simon Mountford, and Sir Thomas Thwaites,
With William Dawbegney, Chessoner, Astwood,
Worsley te Deane of Paules, two other Friars,
And Robert Ratcliffe.
Church-men are turned Devils.
These are the principal.
One more remains
Vn-nam'd, whom I could willingly forget.
Ha Clifford, one more?
Great Sir, do not hear him:
For when Sir William Stanlie your Lord Chamberlain
Shall come into the list, as he is chief
I shall loose credit with ye, yet this Lord,
Last named, is first against you.
Vrswick the light, view well my face Sirs,
Is there blood left in it?
You alter
Strangely Sir.
Alter Lord Bishop?
Why Clifford stabbed me, or I dreamed a'stabd me.
Sir, it is a custom with the guilty
To think they set their own staines off, by laying
Aspersions on some nobler then themselves:
Lies waite on treasons, as I find it here.
Thy life again is forfeit, I recall
My word of mercy, for I know thou dare
Repeat the name no more.
I dare, and once more
Upon my knowledge, name Sir William Stanlie
Both in his counsel, and his purse, the chief
Assistant, to the fai'd uk of York.
Most strange!
Most wicked!
Yet again, once more;
Sir William Stanlie is your ecret enemy,
And if time fit, will openly profess it.
Sir William Stanlie? Who? Sir William Stanlie
My Chamberlain, my Counsellor, the love,
The pleasure of my Court, my bosom friend,
The Charge, and the Controlment of my person
The keys and secrets of my treasury;
The all of all I am: I am unhappy:
Misery of confidence, let me turn traitor
To mine own person, yield my Sceptre up
To Edwards Sister, and her bastard Duke!
You loose your constant temper.
Sir William Stanlie!
Oh doe not blame me; hee, it was only hee
Who having rescued me in Bosworth field
From Richards bloody sword, snatched from his head
The Kingly Crown, and placed it first on mine.
Hee never failed me; what have I deserved
To loose this good mans heart, or hee, his own?
The night doth waste, this passion ill becomes ye;
Provide against your danger.
Let it be so.
Vrswick command straight Stanly to his chamber.
Tic well wee are ith Tower; set a guard on him;
Clifford to bed; you must lodge here to night,
Weel talk with you to morrow: my sad soul
Divines strange troubles.
Ho, he King, the King,
I must have entrance.
Dawbneys vice; admit him.
What new combustions huddle next to kepe
Our eyes from rest? the news?
Ten thousand Cornish grudging to pay your
Subsidies, have gatherd a head, led by a
Blacksmith, and a Lawyer, they make for London,
And to them is joined Lord Audlie, as they march,
Their number daily increases, they are 
Rascals talk no more;
Such are not worthy of my thoughts to night:
And if I cannot sleep, Isle wake:  to bed.
When Counsels fail, and theres in man no trust,
Even then, an arm from heaven, fights for the just.
COme Ladies, hears a solemn preparation
For entertainment of this English Prince;
The King intends grace more then ordinary,
It were pity now, if a'should prove a Counterfeit.
Bless the young man, our Nation would be laughed at
For honest souls through Christendom: my father
Hath a weak stomach to the business (Madam)
But that the King must not be crossed.
A'brings
A goodly troop (they say) of gallants with him;
But very modest people, for they strive not
To fame their names too much; their god-fathers
May be beholding to them, but their fathers
Scarce owe them thanks: they are disguised Princes,
Brought up it seems to honest trades; no matter;
They will break forth in season.
Or break out.
For most of em are broken by report; The King,
Let vs observe 'em and be silent.
The right of Kings (my Lords) extends not only
To the safe Conservation of their own;
But also to the aid of such Allies
As change of time, and state, hath often times
Hurled down from careful Crowns, to undergo
An exercise of sufferance in both fortunes:
So English Richard surnam'd Cor-de-lyon,
So Robert Bruce our royal Ancestor,
Forced by the trial of the wrongs they felt,
Both sought, and found supplies, from foreign Kings
To repossess their own: then grudge not (Lords)
A much distressed Prince, King Charles of France,
And Maximilian of Bohemia both,
Have ratified his Credit by their Letters.
Shall wee then be distrustful? No, Compassion
Is one rich Jewel that shines in our Crown,
And we will have it shine there.
Doe your will Sir.
The young Duke is at hand, Daliell from vs
First greet him, and conduct him on; then Crawford
Shall meet him next, and Huntley last of all
Present him to our arms; sound sprightly Musique,
Whilst Majesty encounters Majesty.
Most high, most mighty King! that now there stands
Before your eyes, in presence of your Peers,
A subject of the rarest kind of pity
That hath in any age touched noble hearts,
The vulgar story of a Princes ruin,
Hath made it too apparent: EVROPE knows,
And all the Western World what persecution
Hath ragd in malice, against Vs, sole heir
To the great throne, of old Plantaginetts.
How from our Nursery, wee have been hurried
Unto the Sanctuary, from the Sanctuary
Forced to the Prison, from the Prison hald
By cruel hands, to the tormentors fury;
Is registered already in the Volume
Of all men's tongues, whose true relation draws
Compassion, melted into weeping eyes,
And bleeding souls: but our misfortunes since,
Have ranged a larger progress through strange Lands.
Protected in our Innocence by Heaven.
Edward the Fifth our brother, in his Tragedy
Quenched their hot thirst of blood, whose hire to murder
Paid them their wages, of despair and horror;
The softness of my childhood smiled upon
The roughness of their task, and robed them farther
Of hearts to dare, or hands to execute.
Great King they spared my life, the butchers spared it;
Returned the tyrant, my unnatural Uncle,
A truth of my dispatch; I was conveyed
With secrecy and speed to Tourney; fosterd
By obscure means, taught to vnlearne my self:
But as I grew in years, I grew in sense
Of fear, and of disdain; fear, of the tyrant
Whose power swayed the throne then, when disdain
Of living so unknown, in such a servile
And abject lowness, prompted me to thoughts
Of recollecting who I was; I shook off
My bondage, and made hast to let my Aunt
Of Burgundy acknowledge me her kinsman;
Heir to the Crown of England, snatched by Henry
From Richards head; a thing scarce known ith world.
My Lord, it stands not with your Counsel now
To fly upon invectiues, if you can
Make this apparent what you have discoursed
In every Circumstance, wee will not study
An answer, but are ready in your Cause.
You are a wise, and just King, by the powers
Aboue, reserved beyond all other aids
To plant me in mine own inheritance:
To marry these two Kingdoms in a love
Never to be divor'd, while time is time.
As for the manner first of my escape,
Of my Conveyance, next, of my life since,
The means, and persons, who were instruments;
Great Sir, tic fit I over-passe in silence:
Reserving the relation, to the secrecy
Of your own Princely ear, since it concerns
Some great Ones living yet, and others dead,
Whose issue might be questioned. For your bounti,
Royal magnificence to him that seeks it,
WEE vow hereafter, to demean our self,
As if wee were your own, and natural brother:
Omitting no occasion in our person,
To express a gratitude, beyond example.
Hee must bee more then subject, who can utter
The language of a King, and such is thine.
Take this for answer, bee what ere thou art,
Thou never shalt repent that thou hast put
Thy cause, and person, into my protection.
Cousin of York, thus once more Wee embrace thee;
Welcome to Iames of Scotland, for thy safety,
Know such as love thee not, shall never wrong thee.
Come, wee will taste a while our Court delights,
Dream hence afflictions past, and then proceed
To high attempts of honour, on, lead on;
Both thou and thine are ours, and wee will guard ye.
Lead on. 
I have not seen a Gentleman
Of a more brave aspect, or goodlier carriage;
His fortunes move not him Madam, yare passionate.
Beshrew me, but his words have touched me home,
As if his cause concerned me; I should pity him
If a' should prove another then hee seems.
Ladies the King commands your presence instantly,
For entertainment of the Duke.
The Duke
Must then be entertained, the King obeyed:
It is our duty.
Wee will all waite on him.
Have ye condemned my Chamberlain?
His treasons condemned him (Sir,) which were as
Clear and manifest, as foul and dangerous:
Besides the guilt of his conspiracy pressed him
So nearly, that it drew from him free
Confession without an imortunitie.
Oh Lord Bishop,
This argued shame, and sorrow for his folly;
And must not stand in evidence against
Our mercy, and the softness of our nature
The rigour and extrmite of Law
Is sometimes too too bitter, but wee carry
A Chancery of pity in our bosom.
I hope wee may reprieve him from the sentence
Of death; I hope, we may.
You may, you may;
And so persuade your Subjects, that the title
Of York is better, nay, more just, and lawful,
Then yours of Lancaster; so Stanlie holds:
Which if it be not treason in the highest,
Then we are traitors all; perjurd and false,
Who have took oath to Henry, and the justice
Of Henries title; Oxford, Surrey, Dawbney,
With all your other Peers of State, and Church,
Forsworn, and Stanlie true alone to Heaven,
And Englands lawful heir.
By Verse old honours,
Isle cut his throat dares speak it.
Tic a quarrel
To engage a soul in.
What a coil is here,
To keep my gratitude sincere and perfect?
Stanie was once my friend, and came in time
To save my life; yet to say truth (my Lords,)
The man staid long enough t'indanger it:
But I could see no more into his heart,
Then what his outward actions did present;
And for 'm have rewarded 'em so fully,
As that there wanted nothing in our gleft
To gratify his merit, as I thought,
Unless I should divide my Crown with him,
And give him half; tho now I well perceive
Twould scarce have served his turn, without the whole.
But I am Charitable (Lords) let Justice
Proceed in execution, whiles I morn
The loss of one, whom I esteemed a friend.
Sir, he is coming this way.
If a'speake to me,
I could deny him nothing; to prevent it,
I must withdraw, pray (Lords) commend my favours
To his last peace, which I with him, will pray for:
That done, it doth concern vs, to consult
Of other foelowing troubles.
I am glad hoe's gone, upon my life he would
Have pardoned the Traitor, had a'seene him.
It is a King composed of gentleness.
Rare, and unheard of;
But every man is nearest to himself,
And that the King observes, tic fit a' should.
May I not speak with Clifford ere I shake
This peace of Frailty off?
You shall, hes sent for.
I must not see the King?
From him Sir William
These Lords and I am sent, hee bad vs say
That he commends his mercy to your thoughts;
Wishing the Laws of England could remit
The forfeit of your life, as willingly
As he would in the sweetness of his nature,
Forget your trespass; but how ere your body
Fall into dust, Hee vows, the King himself
Doth vow, to keep a requim for your soul,
As for a friend, close treasured in his bosom.
Without remmbrance of your errors past,
I come to take my leave, and wish you Heaven.
And I, good Angels guard ye.
Oh the King
Next to my soul, shall be the nearest subject
Of my last prayers; my grave Lord of Durham,
My Lords of Oxford, Surrey, Dawbney, all,
Accept from a poor dying man, a farewell.
I was as you are once, great, and stood hopeful
Of many flourishing years, but fate, and time
Have wheeld about, to turn me into nothing.
Sir Robert Clifford comes, the man (Sir William)
You so dsire to speak with.
Mark their meeting.
Sir William Stanlie, I am glad your Conscience
Before your end, hath emptied every burden
Which charged it, as that you can clearly witness,
How far I have proceeded in a duty
That both concerned my truth, and the States safety.
Mercy, how dear is life to such as hug it?
Come hither by this token think on me
This token? What? I am abused?
You are not.
I wetr upon your cheeks a holy Sign,
The Cross, the Christians badge, the Traitors infamy:
Wear Clifford to thy grave this painted Emblem:
Water shall never wash it off, all eyes
That gaze upon thy face, shall read there written,
A State-Informers Character, more ugly
Stamped on a noble name, then on a base.
The Heavens forgive thee; pray (my Lords) no change
Of words: this man and I have vs too many.
Shall I be disgraced without reply?
Give losers
Leave to talk; his loss is irrecoverable.
Once more
To all along farewell; the best of greatness
Preserve the King; my next suite is (my Lords)
To be remembered to my noble Brother,
Derby my much gre'd brother; Oh! persuade him,
That I shall stand no blemish to his huse,
In Chronicles writ in another age.
My heart doth bleed for him; and for his sighs,
Tell him, hee must not think, the stile of Derby,
Nor being husband to King Henries Mother,
The league with Peers, the smiles o Fortune, can
Secure his peace, aboue the state of man:
I take my leave, to travail to my dust,
"Subjects deserve their deaths whose Kings are just.
Come Confessor, on with thy Axe (friend) on.
Was I called hither by a Traitors breath
To be upbraided? Lords, the King shall know it.
The King doth know it Sir; the King hath heard
What he or you could say; Wee have given credit
To every point of Cliffords information,
The only evidence against Stanlies head.
A' dyes fort, are you pleased?
I pleased my Lord!
No echoes: for your service, wee dismiss
Your more attendance on the Court; take ease
And live at home; but as you love your life,
Stir not from London without leave from vs.
Weal think on your reward, away.
I go Sir.
Dye all our griefs with Stanlie; take this staff
Of office Dawbney, henceforth be our Chamberlain.
I am your humblest servant.
Wee are followed
By enemies at home, that will not cease
To seek their own confusion; it is most true,
The Cornish under Awdley are marched on
As far as Winchester; but let them come,
Our forces are in readiness, weal catch 'em
In their own toils.
Your Army, being mustered,
Consist in all, of horse and foot, at least
In number six and twenty thousand; men
Daring, and able, resolute to fight,
And loyal in their truths.
Wee know it Dawbney:
For them, wee order thus, Oxford in chief
Assisted by bold Essex, and the Earl
Of Suffolk, shall lead on the first Battalion:
Be that your charge.
I humbly thank your Majesty.
The next Division wee aigne to Dawbney:
These must be men of action, for on those
The fortune of our fortunes, must rely.
The last and mayne, our self commands in person,
As ready to restore the fight at all times,
As to consummate an assured victory.
The King is still oraculous.
But Surrey,
Wee have employment of more toil for thee!
For our intelligence comes swiftly to vs,
That Iames of Scotland, late hath entertained
Perkin the counterfeit, with more then common
Grace and respect; nay courts him with rare favours;
The Scot is young and forward, wee must look for
A sudden storm to England from the North:
Which to withstand, Durham shall post to Norham,
To fortify the Caste, and secure
The frontiers, against an Invasion there.
Surrey shall follow soon, with such an Army,
As may relieve the Bishop, and icounter
On all occasions, the death-daring Scots.
You know your charges all, it is now a time
To execute, not talk, Heaven is our guard still.
War must breed peace, such is the fate of Kings.
Tic more then strange, my reason cannot answer
Such argument of fine Imposture, couched
In witch-craft of persuasion, that it fashions
Impossibilities, as if appearance
Could cozen truth it self; this Duk-ling Mushrome
Hath doubtless charmed the King.
A' courts the Ladies,
As if his strength of language, chaynd attention
By power of prerogative.
It matted
My very soul, to hear our Masters motion:
What surety both of amity, and honour,
Must of necsite ensue upon
A match betwixt some noble of our Nation,
And this brave Prince forsooth.
Twill prove to fatal,
Wise Huntley fears the threating. Bless the Lady
From such a ruin
How he Consaile privy
Of this young Phueton, doe screw their faces
Ito a gravity, their trades (good people)
Were never guilty of? the meanest of 'em
Dreams of at least an offce in the State.
Sure not the Hangmans, tic bepoke already
For service to their rogueshippes  silence.
Doe not
Argue against our will; wee have descended
Somewhat (as wee may term it) too familiarly
From Justice of our birth-right, to examine
The force of your allegiance: Sir, wee have;
But find it short of duty!
Break my heart,
Doe, doe, King; have my services, my loyalty,
(Heaven knows untainted ever) drawn upon me
Contempt now in mine age? when I but wanted
A minute of a peace not to be troubled?
My last, my long one? Let me be a Dotard,
A Bedlam, a poor sot, or what you please
To have me, so you will not stain your blood,
Your own blood (royal Sir) though mixed with mine,
By marriage of this girl to a straggler!
Take, take my head Sir, whilst my tongue can wag
It cannot name him other.
Kings are counterfeits
In your repute (grave Oracle) not presently
Set on their thrones, with Scepters in their fists:
But use your own detraction: tic our pleasure
To give our Cousin York for wife our kinswoman
The Lady Katherine: Instinct of sovereignty
Designs the honour, though her peevish Father
Usurps our Resolution.
O tic well,
Exceeding well, I never was ambitious
Of using Congeys to my Daughter Queen:
A Queen, perhaps a Queen?Forgive me Daliell
Thou honourable Gentleman, none here
Dare speak one word of Comfort?
Cruel misery!
The Lady gracious Prince, may be hath settled
Affection on some former choice.
Enforcement, would prove but tyranny.
I thank 'ee heartily.
Let any yeoman of our Nation challenge
An interest in the girl: then the King
May add a Jointure of ascent in titles,
Worthy a free consent; now a' pulls down
What old Desert hath builded.
Cease persuasions,
I violate no pawns of faiths, intrude not
On private loves; that I have played the Orator
For Kingly York to virtuous Kate, her grant
Can justify, referring her contents
To our provision the Welch Harry, henceforth
Shall therefore know, and tremble to acknowledge,
That not the painted Idol of his policy,
Shall fright the lawful owner from a Kingdom.
Wee are resolved.
Some of thy Subjects hearts
King Iames will bleed for this!
Then shall their bloods
Be nobly spent; no more disputes, hee is not
Our friend who contradicts vs.
Farewell Daughter!
My care by one is lessened; thank the King for it,
I and my griefs will dance now,  Look Lords look,
Hears hand in hand already?
Peace old frenzy.
How like a' King a looks? Lords, but observe
The confidence of his aspect? Dross cannot
Cleave to so pure a mettle; royal youth!
Plantaginett undoubted!
Ho brave Lady!
But no Plantagenet bier Lady yet
By red Rose or by white.
An Union this way,
Settles possession in a Monarchy
Established rightly, as is my inheritance:
Acknowledge me but Sovereign of this Kingdom,
Your heart (fair Princes) and the hand of providence,
Shall crown you Queen of me, ad my best fortunes.
Where my obedience is (my Lord) a duty,
Love owes true service.
Shall I? 
Cousin yes,
Enjoy her; from my hand accept your bride;
And may they live at enmity with comfort,
Who grieve at such an equal pledge of trothes.
You're the Princes wife now.
By your gift Sir;
Thus I take seizure of mine own.
I miss yet
A fathers blessing: Let me find it;  humbly
Upon my knees I seek it.
I am Huntley
Old Alexander Guerdon, a plain subject,
Nor more, nor less; and Lady, if you wish for
A blessing, you must bend your knees to Heaven;
For Heaven did give me you; alas, alas,
What would you have me say? may all the happiness
My prayers ever sued to fall upon you,
Preserve you in your virtues; prithee Daliell
Come with me; for, I feel thy griefs as full
As mine, lets steal away, and cry together.
My hopes are in their ruins.
Good kind Hunley
Is over-joy'd, a fit solemnity,
Shall perfect these delights: Crawford attend
Our order for the preparation.
Now worthy Gentlemen, have I not followed
My undertakings with success? Hears entrance
Into a certainty aboue a hope.
Hopes are but hopes, I was ever confident, when I traded but in remnants, that my stars had reserved me to the title of a Viscount at least, honour is honour though cut out of any stuffs.
My brother Heron, hath right wisely delivered his openneon: for he that threads his needle with the sharpe eyes of industrie, shall in time go through-stitch, with the new suite of preferment.
Spoken to the purpose my fine wetted brother Sketon, for as no Indenture, but has its counterpawne; no Noverint but his Condition, or Defeysance; so no right, but may have claim, no claim but may have possession, any act of Parliament to the Contrary notwithstanding.
You are all read in mysteries of State,
And quick of apprehension, deep in judgement,
Active in resolution; and tic pity
Such counsel should lye buried in obscurity.
But why in such a time and cause of triumph,
Stands the judicious Major of Cork so silent?
Believe it Sir, as ENGLISH RICHARD prospers,
You must not miss employment of high nature.
If men may be credited in their mortality, which I dare not peremptorily aver, but they may, or not be; presumptions by this marriage are then (in sooth) of fruitful expectation. Or else I must not justify other men's belief, more then othere should rely on mine.
Pith of experience, those that have borne office,
Weigh every word before it can drop from them;
But noble Counsellors, since now the present,
Requires in point of honour (pray mistake not)
Some service to our Lord; it is fit the Scots
Should not engross all glory to themselves,
At this so grand, and eminent solemnity.
The Scots? the motion is defid: I had rather, for my part, without trial of my Country, suffer persecution under the prssing Iron of reproach: or let my skin be pinched full of eyelet holes, with the Bodkin of Derision.
I will sooner loose both my ears on the Pillory of Forgerie.
Let me first live a Banckrout, and die in the lowsee hole of hunger, without compounding for six pence in the pound.
If men fail not in their expectations, there may be spirits also that digest no rude affronts (Master Secretary Frion) or I am cozened: which is possible I grant.
Resolved like men of knowledge; at this feast then
In honour of the Bride, the Scots I know,
Will in some show, some mask, or some Devise,
Prefer their duties: now it were uncomely,
That wee be found less forward for our Prince,
Then they are for their Lady; and by how much
Wee out-shine them in persons of account,
By so much more will our endeavours meet with
A livelier applause. Great Emperors,
Have for their recreations undertook
Such kind of pastimes; as for the Conceit,
Refer it to my study; the performance
You all shall share a thanks in, twill be grateful.
The motion is allowed, I have stole to a dancing School when I was a Prentice.
There have been Irish-Hubbubs, when I have made one too.
For fashioning of shapes, and cutting a crosse-caper, turn me off to my trade again.
Surely, there is, if I be not deceived, a kind of gravitie in merriment: as, there is, or perhaps ought to be, respect of persons in the quality of carriage, which is, as it is construed, either so, or so.
Still you come home to me; upon occasion
I find you relish Courtship with discretion:
And such are fit for Statesmen of your merits.
Pray waite the Prince, and in his ear acquaint him
With this Design, Isle follow and direct ee'.
O the toil
Of humoring this abject scum of mankind?
Muddie-braynd peasants? Princes feel a misery
Beyond impartial sufferance, whose extremes
Must yield to such abettors; yet our tide
Runs smoothly without adverse winds; run on
Flow to a full sea! time alone debates,
Quarrels forewritten in the Book o fates.
HOw runs the time of day?
Past ten my Lord.
A bloody hour will it prove to some,
Whose disobedience, like the sons 'oth earth,
Throw a defiance against the face of Heaven.
Oxford, with Essex, and stout De la Poole,
Have quieted the Londoners (I hope)
And set them safe from fear!
They are all silent.
From their own battlements, they may behold,
Saint Georges fields orespred with armed men;
Amongst whom, our own royal Standard threatens
Confusion to opposers; wee must learn
To practise war again in time of peace,
Or lay our Crown before our Subjects feet,
Ha, Vrswicke, must we not?
The powers, who seated
King Henry on his lawful throne, will ever
Rise up in his defence.
Rage shall not fright
The bosom of our confidence; in Kent
Our Cornish Rebels cozened of their hopes,
Met brave resistance by that Countries Earl,
George Aburgenie, Cobham, Ponings, Guilford,
And other loyal hearts; now if Black heath
Must be reserved the fatal tomb to swallow
Such stifneckt Abjects, as with weary Marches,
Have travaild from their homes, their wives, and children,
To pay in stead of Subsidies their lives,
Wee may continue Sovereign? yet Vrswick
We'll not abate one penny, what in Parliament
Hath freely been contributed; wee must not;
Money gives soul to action; Our Competitor,
The Flemish Counterfeit, with Iames of Scotland,
Will prove, what courage need, and want, can nourish
Without the food of fit supplies; but Vrswicke
I have a charm in secret, that shall loose
The Witch-craft, wherewith young King Iames is bound,
And free it at my pleasure without bloud-shed.
Your Majestie's a wise King, sent from Heaven
Protector of the just.
Let dinner cheerfully
Be served in; this day of the week is ours,
Our day of providence, for Saturday
Yet never fayld in all my undertakings,
To yield me rest at night; what means this warning?
Good Fate, speak peace to Henry.
Live the King,
Triumphant in the ruin of his enemies.
The head of strong rebellion is cut off,
The body hewed in pieces:
Dawbney, Oxford,
Minions to noblest fortunes, how yet stands
The comfort of your wishes?
Briefly thus:
The Cornish under Awdley disappointed
Of flattered expectation, from the Kentish
(Your Majesties right trusty Liegemen) flew,
Featherd by rage, and hartned by presumption,
To take the field, even at your Palace gates,
And face you in your chamber Royal; Arrogance,
Improu'd their ignorance; for they supposing,
(Misled by rumour) that the day of battle
Should fall on Monday, rather braved your forces
Then doubted any onset; yet this Morning,
When in the dawning I by your direction
Strove to get Dertford Strand bridge, there I found
Such a resistance, as might show what strength
Could make; here Arrows hayld in showers upon vs
A full yard long at least; but wee prevailed.
My Lord of Oxford with his fellow Peers,
Invironing the hill, fell fiercely on them
On the one side, I on the other, till (great Sir)
(Pardon the over-sight) eager of doing
Some memorable act, I was engagd
Almost a prisoner, but was freed as soon
As sensible of danger: now the fight
Began in heate, which quenched in the blood of
Two thousand Rebels, and as many more
Reserved to try your mercy, have returned
A victory with safety.
Have we lost
An equal number with them?
In the total
Scarcely four hundred: Awdley, Flammock, Ioseph,
The Ring-leaders of this Commotion,
Raled in ropes, fit Ornaments for traitors,
Waite your determinations.
Wee must pay
Our thanks where they are only due: Oh, Lords,
Here is no victory, nor shall our people
Conceive that wee can triumph in their falls.
Alas, poor souls! Let such as are escaped
Steal to the Country back without pursuit:
There's not a drop of blood spilt, but hath drawn
As much of mine, their swords could have wrought wonders
On their Kings part, who faintly were unsheathed
Against their Prince, but wounded their own breasts.
Lords wee are debtors to your care, our payment
Shall be both sure, and fitting your Deserts.
Sir, will you please to see those Rebels, heads
Of this wilde Monster multitude?
Dear friend,
My faithful Dawbney, no; on them our Justice
Must frown in terror, I will not vouchsafe
An eye of pity to them, let false Awdley
Be drawn upon an hurdle from the New-gate
To Tower-hill in his own coat of Arms
Painted on paper, with the Arms reversed,
Defaced, and torn, there let him loose his head.
The Lawyer and the Black-smith shall be hanged,
Quartered, their quarters into Cornwall sent,
Examples to the rest, whom wee are pleased
To pardon, and dismiss from further quest.
My Lord of Oxford see it done.
I shall Sir.
Vrswicke.
My Lord
To Dinham our high treasurer,
Say wee command Commissions be new granted,
For the Collection of our Subsidies
Through all the West, and that speedily.
Lords wee acknowledge our engagements due
For your most constant services.
Your Soldiers
Have manfully and faithfully acquitted
Their several duties.
For it, wee will throw
A Largess free amongst them, which shall horton
And cheerish up their Loyalties, more yet
Remains of like employment, not a man
Can be dismissed, till enemies abroad
More dangerous then these at home, have felt
The puissance of our Arms, oh happy Kings
Whose thrones are raised in their Subjects hearts.
Now, Sir a modest word with you (sad Gentleman)
Is not this fine, I trow, to see the gambolds,
To hear the Iiggs, observe the friskes, b'enchanted
With the rare discord of bells, pipes and tabors,
Hotchpotch of Scotch and Irish twingle twangles,
Like to so many Choristers of Bedlam,
Trowling a catch? the feasts, the manly stomachs,
The healths in Vsquabaugh, and bonie clabbore,
The Ale in dishes never fetched from China,
The hundred thousand knackes not to be spoken of,
And all this for King Oberon, and Queen Mob,
Should put a soul int 'ee: look 'ee (good man)
How youthful I am grown, but by your leave,
This new Queen Bride, must henceforth be no more
My Daughter, no burladie, tic unfit.
And yet you see how I doe bear this change,
Methinkes courageously, then shake off care
In uch a time of jollity.
Alas Sir,
How can you cast a mist upon your griefs?
Which how so ere you shadow, but present
To any judging eye, the perfect substance
Of which mine are but counterfeits.
Foe Dalie
Thou interrupts the part I bear in Music
To this rare bridal feast, let vs be merry;
Whilst flattering calms secure vs against storms,
Tempests when they begin to roar, put out
The light of peace and cloud the Suns bright eye
In darkness of despair, yet wee are safe.
I wish you could as easily forget
The Justice of your sorrows, as my hopes
Can yield to destiny.
Pish then I see
Thou doest not know the flexible condition
Of my ap't nature, I can laugh, laugh heartily
When the Gout cramps my joints, let but the stone
Stop in my bladder, I am streite a singing,
The Quartain fever shrinking every limb,
Sets me a capering strait, doe but betray me
And bind me a friend ever. what  trust
The loosing of a Daughter, (thogh I doted
On every hair that grew to trim her head)
Admits not any pain like one of these.
Come you are deceivd in me, give me a blow,
A sound blow on the face, Isle thank thee for it,
I love my wrongs, still you are deceived in me.
Deceived? Oh noble Huntley, my few year
Have learnt experience of too ripe an age
To forfeit fit credulity, forgive
My rudeness, I am bold.
Forgive me first
A madness of ambition, by example
Teach me humility, for patience scorns,
Lectures which Schoolmen use to read to boys
Incapable of injuries; though old
I could grow tough in fury, and disclaim
Allegiance to my King, could fall at odds
With all my fellow Peers, that durst not stand
Defendants against the rape done on mine honour.
But Kings are earthly gods, there is no meddling
With their anointed bodies, for their actions,
They only are accountable to Heaven.
Yet in the puzzle of my troubled brain
One Antidote's reserved against the poison
Of my distractions, tic in thee t'apply it.
Name it, oh name it quickly Sir!
A pardon
For my most foolish sleighting thy Deserts,
I have could out this time to beg it, prithee
Be gentle, had I been so, thou had owned
A happy Bride, but now a cast away,
And never child of mine more.
Say not so (Sir,) it is not fault in her.
The world would prate
How she was handsome; young I know she was,
Tender, and sweet in her obedience;
But lost now; what a banckrupt am I made
Of a full stock of blessings.  must I hope
a mercy from thy heart?
A love, a service,
A friendship to posterity.
Good Angels
Reward thy charity, I have no more
But prayers left me now.
Isle lend you mirth (Sir)
If you will be in Consort.
Thank yee' truly:
I must, yes, yes, I must; here is yet some ease,
A partner in affliction, look not angry.
Good noble Sir.
Oh hark, wee may be quiet,
The King and all the others come: a meeting
Of gaudy sights; this days the last of Revels;
To morrow sounds of war; then new exchange:
Fiddles must turn to swords, unhappy marriage!
Cousin of York, you and your Princely Bride,
Have liberally enoy'd such soft delights,
As a new married couple could fore-thinke:
Nor he's our bounty shortened expectation;
But after all those pleasures of repose,
Or amorous safety, wee must rouse the ease
Of dalliance, with achievements of more glory,
Then sloth and sleep can furnish: yet, for farewell,
Gladly wee entertain a truce with time,
To grace the joint endeavours of our servants.
My Royal Cousin, in your Princely favour,
The extent of bounty hath been so unlimited,
As only an acknowledgement in words,
Would breed suspicion in our state, and quality:
When Wee shall in the fullness of our fate
(Whose Minister necessity will perfect,)
Sit on our own throne; then our arms laid open
To gratitude, in sacred memory
Of these large benefits, shall twyne them close
Even to our thoughts, and heart, without distinction.
Then Iames, and Richard, being in effect
Oe person, shall unite and rule one people.
Devisile in titles only.
Seat yee';
Are the presentors ready?
All are entering.
Dainty sport toward Daliell, sit, come sit,
Sit and be quiet, here are Kingly buggs words.
To all a general thanks!
In the next Room
Take your own shapes again, you shall receive
Particular acknowledgement.
Enough
Of merriments; Crawford, how fir's our Army
Upon the March?
At Hedenhall (great King)
Twelve thousand well prepared.
Crawford, to night
Post thither Wee in person with the Prince
By four a clock to morrow after dinner,
Will be wee; speed away!
I fly my Lord.
Our business grows to head now, whore's your
Secretary that he attends'ee not to serve?
With March-mont your Herald.
Good: the Proclamations ready;
By that it will appear, how the English stand
Affected to your title; Huntley comfort
Your Daughter in her Husbands absence; fight
With prayers at home for vs, who for your honours,
Must toil in fight abroad.
Prayers are the weapons,
Which men, so near their graves as I, doe use.
I've little else to doe.
To rest young beauties!
Wee must be early stirring, quickly part,
"A Kingdoms rescue craves both peede and art.
Cousins good night.
Rest to our Cousin King.
Your blessing Sir;
Fair blessings on your Highness, sure you need 'em.
Iane set the lights down, and from vs return
To those in the next room, this little purse
Say we'ele deserve their loves.
It shall be done Sir.
Now dearest; ere sweet sleep shall seal those eyes,
(Loves precious tapers,) give me leave to use
A parting Ceremony; for to morrow,
It woud be sacrilege to intrude upon
The temple of thy peace: swift as the morning,
Must I break from the down of thy embraces,
To put on steel, and trace the paths which lead
Through various hazards to a careful throne.
My Lord, I would fine go w'ee, theres small fortune
In staying here behind.
The churlish brow
Of war (fair dearest) is a sight of horror
For Ladies entertainment; if thou hearst
A truth of my sad ending by the hand
Of some unnatural subject, thou withal
Shalt hear, how I dyed worthy o my right,
By falling like a KING; and in the close
Which my last breath shall and, thy name, thou fairest
Shall sing a requiem to my soul, unwilling
Only of greater glory, because divided
From such a heaven on earth, as life with thee.
But these are chimes for funerals, my business
Attends on fortune of a sprightier triumph;
or love and Majesty are reconciled,
And vow to crown thee Empress of the West.
You have a noble language (Sir,) your right
In me is without question, and however
Events of time may shorten my deserts,
In others pity; yet it shall not stagger,
Or constancy, or duty in a wife.
You must be King of me, and my poor heart
Is all I can call mine.
But we will live;
Live (beauteous virtue) by the lively test
Of our own blood, to let the Counterfeit
Be known the worlds contempt.
Pray doe not use
That word, it carries fate in it; the first suite
I ever made, I trust your love will grant!
Without denial (dearest.)
That hereafter
If you return with safety, no adventure
May sever vs in tasting any fortune:
I ne'er can stay behind again.
You're Lady
Of your desires, and shall command your will:
Yet it is too hard a promise.
What our Destinies
Have ruled out in their Books, wee must not search
But kneel too.
Then to fear when hope is fruitless,
Were to be desperately miserable;
Which poverty, our greatness dares not dream of,
And much more scorns to stoop to; some few minutes
Remain yet, let's be thrifty in our hopes.
Your name is Pedro Heals: a Spaniard?
Sir a Castillian borne.
King Ferdinand
With wise Queen Isabel his royal consort,
Write 'ee a man of worthy trust and cndo.
Princes are dear to heaven, who meet with Subjects
Sincere in their employments; such I find
Your commendation (Sir,) let me deliver
How joyful I repute the amity,
With your most fortunate Moister, who almost
Comes near a miracle, in his success
Against the Mores, who had devoured his Country,
Entire now to his Sceptre; Wee, for our part
Will imitate his providence, in hope
Of portage in the use o'nt; Wee repute
The privacy of his advisement to vs
By you, intended an Ambassador
To Scotland for a peace between our Kingdoms;
A policy of love, which well becomes
His wisdom, and our care.
Your Majesty
Doth understand him rightly.
Else, your knowledge can instruct me, wherein (Sir)
To fall on Ceremony, would seem useless,
Which shall not need; for I will be as studious
Of your concealment in our Conference,
As any Counsel shall advise.
Then (Sir)
My chief request is, that on notice given
At my dispatch in Scotland, you will send
Some learned man of power and experience
To join in treaty with me.
I shall doe it,
Being that way well provided by a servant
Which may attend 'ee ever.
If King Iames
By any indirection should perceive
My coming near your Court, I doubt the issue
Of my employment.
Be not your own Herald,
I learn sometimes without a teacher.
Good days guard all your Princely thoughts.
Vrswicke no further
Then the next open Gallery attend him.
A hearty loe go with you.
Your vowed Beadsman.
King Ferdinand is not so much a Fox,
But that a cunning Huntsman may in time
Fall on the sent; in honourable actions
Safe imitation best deserves a praise.
What' the Castillians past away?
He is,
And vndiscovered; the two hundred marks
Your Majesty conveyed, a' gently pursed,
With a right modest gravity.
What wast
A' mutterd in the earnest of his wisdom,
A' spoke not to be heard? It was about
Warbecke;
How if King Henry were but sure of Subjects,
Such a wilde runagate might soon be caged,
No great ado withstanding.
Nay, nay, something
About my son Prince Arthurs match!
Right, right, Sir.
A humd it out, how that King Ferdinand
Swore, that the marriage twixt the Lady Katherine
His Daughter, and the Prince of Wales your Son,
Should never be consummated, as long
As any Earl of Warwick lived in England,
Except by new Creation.
I remember,
It was so indeed, the King his Moister swore it?
Directly, as he said.
An Earl of Warwick!
Provide a Messenger for Letters instantly
To Bishop Fox. Our news from Scotland creeps,
It comes so slow; wee must have airy spirits:
Our time requires dispatch, the Earl of Warwick!
Let him be son to Clarence, younger brother
To Edward! Edwards Daughter is I think
Mother to our Prince Arthur; get a Messenger.
Wee trifle time against these Castle walls,
The English Prelate will not yield, once more
Give him a Summons!
See, the jolly Clarke
Appears trimd like a ruffian.
Bishop, yet
Set op the ports, and to your lawful Sovereign
Richard of York surrender up this Castle,
And he will take thee to his Grace; else Tweede
Shall overflow his banks with English blood,
And wash the sade that cements those hard stones,
From their foundation.
Warlike King of Scotland,
Vouchsafe a few words from a man enforced
To lay his Book aside, and clap on Arms,
Unsuitable to my age, or my profession.
Courageous Prince, consider on what grounds,
You rend the face of peace, and break a Leage
With a confederate King that courts your amity;
For whom too? for a vagabond, a straggler,
Not noted in the world by birth of name,
An obscure peasant, by the rage of Hell
Loosd from his chains, to set great Kings at strife.
What Nobleman? what common man of note?
What ordinary subject hath come in,
Since first you footed on our Territories,
To only fine a welcome? children laugh at
Your Proclamations, and the wiser pity,
So great a Potentates abuse, by one
Who juggles merely with the fawns and youth
Of an instructed complement; such spoils,
Such slaughters as the rapine of your Soldiers
Already have committed, is enough
To show your zeal in a conceited Justice
Yet (great King) wake not yet my Masters vengeance:
But shake that Viper off which gnaws your entrails
I, and my fellow Subjects, are resolved
If you persist, to stand your utmost fury,
Till our last blood drop from vs.
O Sir, lend
Me ear to this seducer of my honour!
What shall I call thee, (thou gray bearded Scandal)
That kickst against the Sovereignty to which
Thou owe alleagance? Treason is bold-faced,
And eloquent in mischief; sacred King
Be deae to his known malice!
Rather yield
Unto those holy motions, which inspire
The sacred heart of an anointed body!
It is h surest policy in Princes,
To govern well their own, then seek encroachment
Upon another right.
The King is serious,
Deee in his meditation.
Lift them up
To heaven his better genius!
Can you study, while such a Devil raves? O Sir.
Well,  Bishop,
You'll not be drawn to mercy?
Construe me
In like case by a Subject of your own!
My resolutions fixed, King Iames be counseld.
A greater fate waits on thee.
Forage through
The Country, spare no prey of life, or goods,
O Sir, then give me leave to yield to nature,
I am most miserable; had I been
Borne what this Clergy man would by defame
Baffle belief with, I had never sought
The truth of mine inheritance with rapes
Of women, or of infants murdered; Virgins
Deflowered; old men butchered; dwellings fired;
My Land depopulated; and my people
Afflicted with a Kingdoms devastation.
Show more remorse great King, or I shall never
Endure to see such havoc with dry eyes:
Spare, spare, my dear dear England.
You fool your piety
Ridiculously, careful of an interest
Another man possesses! Wheres your faction?
Shrewdly the Bishop guest of your adherents,
When not a petty Burgess of some Town,
No, not a Villager hath yet appeared
In your assistance, that should make 'ee whine,
And not your Countries sufferance as you term it.
The King is angry.
And the passionate Duke,
Effeminately dolent.
The experience
In former trials (Sir) both of mine own
Or other Princes, cast out of their thrones,
Have so acquainted me, how misery
Is destitute of friends, or of relief,
That I can easily submit to taste
Lowest reproof, without contempt or words
An humble minded man, now, what intelligence
Speaks Moister Secretary Frion.
Henrie
Of England, hath in open field ore'throwne
The Armies who opposd him, in the right
Of this young Prince.
His Subsidies you mean: more if you have it?
Howard Earl of Surrey,
Backed by twelve Earls and Barons of the North,
An hundred Knights and Gentlemen of Name,
And twenty thousand Soldiers, is at hand
To raise your siege. Brooke with a goodly Navy
Is Admiral at Sea and Dawbney follows
With an vnbroken Army for a second.
It is false! they come to side with vs.
Retreat:
Wee shall not find them stones and walls to cope with.
Yet Duke of York, (for such thou say thou art,)
Isle try thy fortune to the height; to Surrey
By Marchmount, I will send a brave Defiance
For single Combat; once a King will venture
His person to an Earl; with Condition
Of spilling lesser blood, Surrey is bold
And Iames resolved.
O rather (gracious Sir,)
Create me to this glory; since my cause
Doth interest this fair quarrel; valued least
I am his equal.
I will be the man;
March softly off, where Victory can reap
"A harvest crowned with triumph, toil is cheap.
ARe all our braving enemies shrunk back?
Hid in the fogs of their distempered climate,
Not daring to behold our Colours wave
In spite of this infected ayre? Can they
Look on the strength of Cundrestine defaced?
The glory of Heydonhall divested? that
Of Edington cast down? the pile of Fulden
Orethrowne? And this the strongest of their Forts
Old Ayton Castle yielded, and demolished?
And yet not peep abroad? the Scots are bold,
Hardy in battle, but it seems the cause
They undertake considered, appears
Vnjoynted in the frame ont.
Noble Surrey,
Our Royal Masters wisdom is at all times
His fortunes Harbingr; for when he draws
His sword to threaten war, his providence
Settles on peace, the crowning of an Empire.
Rank all in order, it is a Heralds sound,
Some message from King Iames, keep a fixed station.
From Scotlands awful Majesty, wee come
Unto the English General;
To me? Say on.
Thus then; the wast and prodigal
Effusion of so much guiltless blood,
As in two potent Armies, of necessity
Must glut the earths dry womb, his sweet compassion
Hath studied to prevent; for which to thee
Great Earl of Surrey, in a single fight
He offers his own royal person; fairly
Proposing these conditions only, that,
If Victory conclude our Masters right;
The Earl shall deliver for his ransom
The town of Berwick to him, with the Fishgarths,
If Surrey shall prevail; the King will pay
A thousand pounds down present for his freedom,
And silence further Arms; so speaks King Iames.
So speaks King Iames; so like a King a' speaes.
Heralds, the English General returns,
A sensible Devotion from his heart,
His very soul, to this vnfellowed grace.
For let the King know (gentle Heralds) truly
How his descent from his great throne, to honour
A stranger subject with so high a title
As his Compeere in Arms, hath conquered more
Then any sword could doe: for which (my loyalty
Respected) I will serve his virtues ever
In all humility: but Berwick say
Is none f mine to part with: In affairs
Of Princes Subjects cannot traffic rights
Inherened to the Crown. My life is mine,
That  dar really zard; and (with pardon
To some unib'd vaine-glorie) if his Majesty
Shall aste a change of fae his liberty
Shall me no Articles. If I fall, falling
So bravey, I refer me to his pleasure
Without condition; and for this dear favour,
Say (if not countermanded) I will cease
Hostility, unless provoked.
This answer
Wee shall relate partially.
With favour,
Pray have a litle patience Sir, you find
By these gay-flourishes, how wearied travail
Inclines to willing rest; hears but a Prologue
Howeve confidently vtterd, meant
For some ensuing Acts of peace consider
The time of year, vnseasonablenesse of weather,
Charge, barrenness of profit, and occasion
Presents it self for honourable treaty,
Which wee may make good use of; I will back
As sent from you, in point of noble gratitude
Unto King Iames with these his Heralds; you
Shall shortly hear from me (my Lord) for order
Of breathing or proceeding; and King Henrie
(Doubt not) will thank the service.
To your wisdom Lord Bishop I refer it.
Be it so then.
Heralds, accept this chain, and these few Crowns
Our Duty Noble General.
In part
Of retribution for such Princely love,
My Lord the General is pleased to show
The King your Moister, his sincerest zeal
By further treaty, by no common ma;
I will my self return with you.
Y'obliege
My faithfullest affections t'ee ( Bishop.)
All happiness attend your Lordship.
Come friends,
And fellow-Souldiers, wee I oubt shall meet
No enemies, but woods and hills to fight with:
Then it were as good to feed, and sleep at home,
Wee may be free from danger, not secure.
Frion,  Frion! all my hopes of glory
Are at a stand! the Scottish King grows dull,
Frosty and wayward, since this Spanish Agent
Hath mixed Discourses with him; they are private,
I am not called to counsel now; confusion
On all his crafty shrugges; I feel the fabric
Of my designs are tottering.
Henries policies
Stir with too many engines.
Let his mines,
Shaped in the bowels of the earth, blow up
Works raised for my defence, yet can they never
Toss into ayre the freedom of my birth,
Or disavow my blood, Plantaginetts!
I am my Fathers son still; but  Frion,
When I bring into count with my Disasters,
My Wives compartnership, my Kates, my lifes;
Then, then, my frailty feels an earth-quake; mischief
Damb Henries plots, I will be Englands King,
Or let my Aunt of Burgundy report
My fall in the attempt, deserved our Ancestors?
You grow too wilde in passion, if you will
Appear a Prince indeed, confine your will
To moderation
What a saucy rudeness
Prompts this distrust? If, if I will appear?
Appear, a Prince? Death throttle such deceits
Even in their bearh of utterance; cursed cozenage
O trust? Y'ee make me mad, it were best (it seems)
That I should turn Impostor to my self,
Be mine own counterfeit, belie the truth
Of my dear mothers womb, the sacred bed
Of a Prince murdered, and a living baffeld!
Nay, if you have no ares to hear, I have
No breath to spend in vain.
Sir, sir, take heed
Gold, and the promise of promotion, rarely
Fail in temptation.
Why to me this?
Nothing
Speak what you will; wee are not sunk so low
But your advise, may piece again the heart
Which many cares have broken: you were wont
In all extremities to talk of comfort:
Have yee' none left now? Isle not interrupt yee'.
Good, bear with my distractions! if King Iames
Deny vs dwelling here, next whither must I?
I preethee' be not angry.
Sir, I told yee'
Of Letters come from Ireland, how the Cornish
Stomach their last defeat, and humbly sue
That with such forces, as you could partake,
You would in person land in Cornwall, where
Thouands will entertain your title gladly.
Let me embrace thee, hug thee! you have reviud
My comforts, if my cousin King will fail,
Our cause will never, welcome my tried friends.
You keep your brains awake in our defence:
Frion, advise with them of these affairs,
In which be wondrous secret; I will listen
What else concerns vs here, be quick and wary.
Ah sweet young Prince? Secretary, my fellow Counsellers and I, have conulted, and jump all in one opinion directly, that if this Scotch garboils doe not fadge to our minds, wee will pell mell run amongst the Cornish Choughs presently, and in a trice.
It is but going to Sea, and leaping ashore, cut ten or twelve thousand unnecessary throats, fire seven or eight towns, take hafe a dozen Cities, get into the Market place, crown him RICHARD THE FOVRTH, and the business is finished.
I grant yee', quoth I, so far forth as men may doe, no more then men may doe; for it is good to consider, when consideration may be to the purpose, otherwise still you shall pardon me: Little said is soon amended.
Then you conclude the Cornish Action surest?
Wee doe so. And doubt not but to thrive abundantlie: Ho (my Masters) had wee known of the Commotion when wee set sail out of Ireland, the Land had been ours ere this time.
Pish, pish, it is but forbearing being an Earl or a Duke a month or two longer; I say, and say it again, if the work go not on apace, let me never see new fashion more, I warrant ye I warrant yee', wee will have it so, and so it shall be.
This is but a cold phlegmatic Country, not stirring enough for men of spirit, give me the heart of England for my money.
A man may batten there in a week only with hot loaves and butter, and a lusty cup of Muscadine and Sugar at breakfast, though he make never a meal all the month after.
Surely, when I bore office, I found by experience, that to be much troublesome, was to be much wise and busy; I have observed, how filching and bragging, has been the best service in these last wars, and therefore conclude peremptorily on the Design in England; If things and things may fall out; as who can tell what or how; but the end will show it.
Resolved like men of judgement, here to linger
More time, is but to loose it; cheer the Prince,
And hast him on to this; on this depends,
Fame in success, or glory in our nds.
Fance, Spain and Germanie combine a League
Of amity with England nthyg wants
For eting peace through Chisdoom, but lo
Betwen th British Mnachs, Iames, and Henrie.
The English Merchans (Si,) hau en received
With gnerall procession into Antwrp;
The Emperor confims th Cominatin.
The King of Spain, sols a marriage
For Katherine his Daughter, with Prince Arthur.
France court's thy, holy contract.
What can hinder a quietness in England?
But your uffrage
To such a silly creature (mighty Sir?)
As is but in effect an apparition,
A shadow, a mere trifle?
To this union
The good of both the Church and Common-wealth
Invite ee'
To this unity, a mystery
Of providence points out a greater blessing
For both these Nations, then our humane reason
Can search into; King Henrie hath a Daughter
The Princess Margaret; I need not urge,
What honour, what felicity can follow
On such affinity twixt two Christian Kings,
In leagued by ties of blood; but sure I am,
If you Sir ratify the peace proposed,
I dre both motion, an effect this marriage.
For weal of byh the Kingdoms.
Dare thou Lord Bishop?
Put t to  Iames, by sding
Some nob  to the English Cout
By way of . Hial, Part of the business,
Shall suite my mediation.
Well; what Heaven
Hath pointed out to be, must be; you two
Are Ministers (I hope) of blessed fate.
But herein only I will stand acquitted,
No blood of Inocents shall buy my peace.
For Warbecke as you icke him, came to me
Commended by the States of Christendom.
A Prince, though in distress; his fair demeanour,
Lovely behaviour, unappalled spirit,
Spoke him not base in blood, how eer clouded.
The bruit beasts have both rocks and caves to fly to,
And men the Altars of the Church; to vs
He came for refuge, Kings come near in nature
Unto the Gods in being touc with pity.
Yet (nobe friends) his mixture with our blood,
Even with our own, shall no way interrupt
A georal peace; only I will dismiss him
From my protection, throughout my Dominions
In safeie, but not ever, to return.
You are a just King.
Wise, and herein happy.
Nor will wee dally in affairs of weight:
Huntley (Lord Bishop) shall with you to England
Ambassador from vs; wee will throw down
Our weapons; peace on all sides now, repair
Unto our Counsel, wee will soon be with you.
Delay shall question no dispatch,
Heaven crown it.
A league with Ferdinand? a marriage
With English Margaret? a free release
From restitution for the late affronts?
Cessation from hostility and all
For Warbeck not delivered, but dismissed?
Wee could not wish it better, Daliell
Here Sir.
Are Huntley and his Daughter sent for?
Sent for, and come (my Lord.)
Say to the English Prince,
Wee want his company.
He is at hand Sir.
Cousin, our bounty, favours, gentleness,
Our benefits, the hazard of our persn,
Our peoples lives, our Land hah eviden't,
How much wee have engaged on yur bhalf:
How trivial, and how dangerous our hpes
Appear, how fruitless our attempts in ware,
How windy rather smoky your assurance
Of party shows, wee might in vain rpeat
But now obedience to the Mother Church,
A Fathers care upon his Countries weal,
The dignity of State directs our wisdom,
To seal an oath of peace through Christendom:
To which wee are sworn already; it is you
Must only seek new fortunes in the world,
And find an harbour elsewhere: as I promised
On your arrival, you have met no usage
Deserves repentance in your being here:
But yet I must live Master of mine own.
How ever, what is necessary for you
At your departure, I am well content
You be accommodated with; provided
Delay prove not my enemy.
It shall not
(Most glorious Prince.) the fame of my Designs,
Soars higher, then report of ease and sloth
Can aim at; I acknowledge all your favours
Boundless, and singular, am only wretched
In words as well as means, to thank the grace
That flowed so liberally. Two Empires firmly
You're Lord of, Scotland, and Duke Richards heart
My claim to mine inheritance shall sooner
Fail, then my life to serve you, best of Kings.
And witnesse EDVVARDS blood in me, I am
More loath to part, with such a great example
Of virtue, then all other mere respects.
But Sir my last suite is, you will not force
From me what you have given, this chaste Lady,
Resolved on all extremes.
I am your wife,
No humane power, can or shall divorce
My faith from duty.
Such another treasure
The earth is Banckrout of.
 gue her (Cousin)
And must avow the gift: will add withal
A furniture becoming her high birth
And vnsuspete costance provide
For your attendancewee will pat good friends.
The Tudor hath been cuning in his plots:
His Fox of Durham would not fail at last.
But what? our cause and courage are our own:
Be men (my friends) and let our Cousin King,
See how wee follow ate as willingly
As malice follows vs. You're all resolved
For the West parts of England?
Cornwall, Cornwall.
The Inhabitants expect you daily.
Cheerfully
Draw all our ships out of the harbour (friends)
Our time of say doth seem too long, wee must
Prevent Intelligence; about it suddenly.
A Prince, a Prince, a Prince.
Dearest; admit not into thy pure thoughts
The least of scruples, which may charge their softness
With burden of distrust. Should I prove wanting
To noblest courage now, here were the trial:
But I am perfect (sweet) I fear no change,
More then thy being partner in my sufferance.
My frtunes (Sir) have armed me to encounter
What chance so re they meet withIane it is fit
Thou stay behind, for whither wilt thou wander?
Never till death, will I forsake my Mistress,
Nor then, in wishing to dye with ee' gladly.
Alas good soul.
Sir, to your Aunt of Burgundy
I will relate your present undertakings;
From her expect on all occasions, welcome.
You cannot inde me idle in your srvices.
Gee, Frion, ge! wisemen know how to soothe
Adversity, not serve it: thou hast waited
Too long on expotation; never yet
Was any Naion rd of, so besotted
In reason, as to adore the etting Sno.
Fly to th Arch-Dukes Court; say to the Duchess,
Her Nephew, with fair Katherine, his wife,
Are n their expotation to bgin
The rasing of an Empire. If they fail,
Yet the report will never: farewell Frion.
This man Kate he's been true, though now of late,
I fare too much amiliar with the Fox.
I come to take my leae you need not doubt
My interest in this sometime-childe of mine.
Shes all yours now (good Sir) oh poor lost creature!
Heaven guard thee with much patience, is thou can
Forget thy title to old Huntley family;
As much of peace will settle in thy mind
As thou can wish to taste, (but in thy grave,)
Accept my tears yet, (prithee) they are tokens
Of charity, as true as of affection.
This is the cruellest farewell!
Love (young Gentleman)
This model of my griefs; she calls you husband;
Then be not jealous of a parting kiss,
It is a Fathers not a Lovers offering;
Take it, may last,  I am too much a child.
Exchange of passion is to little use,
So I should grow to foolish,goodness guide thee.
Most miarable Daughter!  have you ought
To add (Sir) to our sorrows?
I resolve
(Fair Lady) with your leave, to waite on all
Your fortunes in my person, if your Lord
Vouchsafe me entertainment.
Wee will be bosom friends, (most noble Daliell)
For I accept this tender of your love
Beyond ability of thanks to speak it.
Clear thy drowned eyes (my fairest) time and industry
Will show vs better days, or end the worst.
No news from Scotland yet (my Lord!)
Not any
But what King Henrie knows himself; I thought
Our Armies should have marched that way, his mind
It seems, is altered.
Victory attends
His Standard every where.
Wise Princes (Oxford)
Fight not alone with forces. Providence
Directs and tutors strength; else Elephants,
And barbed Horses might as well prevail,
As the most subtle stratagems of war.
The Scottish King showed more then common bravery,
In proffer of a Combatt hand to hand
With Surrey!
And but showed it; Northern bloods
Are gallant being fired, but the cold climate
Without good store of fuel, quickly freezes
The glowing flames.
Surrey upon my life
Would not have shrunk an hairs breadth.
May a' forfeit
The honour of an English name, and nature,
Who would not have embraced it with a greediness,
As violent as hunger ruees to food.
It was an addition, any worthy Spirit
Would covet next to immortality,
Aboue all joys of life: wee all mist shares
In that great opportunity.
The King: see a' comes smiling!
O the game runs smooth
On his side then believe it, Cards well shuffeld
And dealt with cnning, bring some gamester thrift,
But others must rise losers.
he train takes?
Most prosperously.
I knew it should not miss.
He fondly angles who will hurl his bait
Into the water, because the Fish at first
Plays round about the line, and dares not bite.
Lords, wee may reign your King yet, Dawbney, Oxford,
Vrwicke, must Perkin wear the Crown?
A Slave.
A Vagabond.
A Glowworm.
Now if Frion,
His practiced politician wear  brain
Of proof, Kig Perkin will in progress ride
Through all his large Dominions; let vs meet him,
And tender homage; Ha Si? Liegmen ought
To pay their fealty.
Would the Rascal were
With all his able, within went miles
Of Lon.
Farther ff is near enough
To Iodge him in hi home; he wager odds
Surrey and all his men are either idle,
Or hasting back, the have no work (I doubt)
To keep them busy.
It is a stange conceit Sir.
Such voluntary faus as ur people
In duty aid vs with, wee never scaer'd
On Cobweb Parasites, or lavished out
In riot, or a needless hopitalitie:
No vdeserving favourite doth boast
His issues from our treasury; our charge
Flows through all Europe, proving vs but steward
Of every contribution, which provides
Against the creeping Canare of Disturbance.
Is it not rare then, in this toil of State
Wherein wee are embarked, with breach of sleep,
Cares, and the noise of trouble, that our mercy
Returns nor thanks, nor comfort? Still the West
Murmur and threaten innovation,
Whisper our government tyrannical,
Deny vs wht is ours, nay, spurn their lives
Of which they are but owners by our gift.
It must not be.
It must not, should not.
So then. To whom?
This packet to your sacred Majesty.
Sir attend without.
News from the North, upon my life.
Wise Henry
Divines aforehand of events: with him
Attempts and execution are one act.
Vrswicke thine ear; Frio  caugh, the man
Of cunning is out-reacht: wee must be safe:
Should reverend Morton our Arch-bishop move
To a translation higher yet, I ll thee,
My Durham owns a brain dsrues that Se.
Hes nimble in his industry, and mounting:
Thou hear me?
And conceive your Highness fitly:
Dawbney, and Oxford; since our Army stands
Entire, it were a weakness to admit
The rust of laziness to eat amongst them:
Set forward toward Salisbury; the plains
Are most commodious for their exercise.
Our self will take a Muster of them there:
And or disband them with reward, or else
Dispose as best concerns vs.
Salisbury?
Sir,  is peace at Salisbury.
Dear friend 
Th chg must be our own; we would a little
Partake the pleasure with our Subjects ease.
Shall I entreat your Loves?
command our Lies.
You're men know how o de not to forethink:
My Bishop is a jewel tried, ad perfect;
A jewel (Lords) the Post ho brought these Letters,
Must speed another to the Mayor of Exceter
Vrswicke dismiss him not.
He waits your plaur.
Perkin a King? a King?
My gracious Lord.
Thoughts, busied in the sphere of Royalty,
Fix not on creeping worms, without their stings;
Mere excrements of earth. The use of time
Is thriving safety, and a wise prevention
Of ills expected. W'are resolved for Salisbury.
After so many storms as wind and Seas,
Have threatened to our weather-beaten Ships,
At last (sweet fairest) wee are safe arrived
On our dear mother earth, ungrateful only
To heaven and vs, in yielding sustenance
To lie Usurpers of our throne and right.
These general acclamations, are an OMEN
Of happy process to their welcome Lord:
They flock in troops, and from all parts with wings
Of duty fly, to lay their hearts before vs,
Unequalled pattern of a matchless wife,
How fares my dearest yet?
Confirmed in health:
By which I may the better undergo
The roughest face of change; but I shall learn
Patience to hope, since silence courts affliction
For comforts, to this truly noble Gentleman;
Rare vnexampled pattern of a friend?
And my beloved Iane, the willing follower
Of all misfortunes.
Lady, I return
But barren cropps, of early protestations,
Frost-bitten in the spring of fruitless hopes.
I waite but as the shadow to the body,
For Madam without you let me be nothing.
None talk of sadness, wee are on the way
Which leads to Victory: keep cowards thoughts
With desperate sullenness! the Lyon faints not
Locked in a grate, but loose, disdains all force
Which bars his prey; and wee are Lyon-hearted,
Or else no King of beasts. Hark how they shout.
Triumphant in our caue? byde 
Marches on bevenly, cannot quake at 
Sae King Richard the fourth,  Ki of earts? the Cornish blades are men of mettle, hae  through Bodnam ad the whole County, my sweet  onarch of England, fur thouad tall yeomen, with  radie vow to live and dye at the foot o KING RHARD.
The Mayor our fellow Coseller, i rvant for n Emperor. Exer is appointed for the Red  and othyg wants to victory but courage, and resolution. igillatum &amp; datum decimo Septembris, Anno Rogue Regis primo &amp; ; confirmatum est. Al's cock sure.
To Exceter, to Exceter, mach on.
Commend vs to our people; wee in person
Will lend them double spirits, tell them so.
King Richard, King Richard.
A thousand blessings guard our lawful Arms!
A thousand horrors pierce our enemies souls!
Pale fear vnedge their weapons sharpest points,
And when they draw their arrows to the head,
Numnesse shall strike their sinews; such advantage
Hath Majesty in its pursuit of Justice,
That on the proppers up, of truths old throne,
It both enlightens counsll, and gives heart
To execution: whiles the throats of traitors
Lye bare before our mercy. O Divinity
Of royal birth? how it strikes dumb the tongues
Whose prodigality of breath is bribed
By trains to greatness? Princes are but men,
Distinguished in the fineness of their frailty.
Yet not so gross in beauty of the mind,
For there's a fire more sacred, purifies
The dross of mixture. Herein stands the odds
"Subjects are men, on earth Kings men and gods.
IT is decreed; and wee must yield to fate,
Whose angry Justice though it threaten ruin,
Contempt, and poverty, is all but trial
Of a weak women's contansy in suffering.
Here in a strangers, and an enemies Lad
Forsaken, and vnfurnisht of all hopes,
(But such as waite on misery,) I range
To meet affliction where so ere I tread.
My train, and pomp of servants, is reduced
To one kind Gentlewoman, and this groom.
Sweet Iane, now whither must wee?
To your Ship
Dear Lady: and turn home.
Home! I have none
Fly thou to Scotland, thou hast friends will weep
For joy to bid thee welcome; but  Iane
My Iane, my friends are desperate of comfort
As I must be of them; the common charity,
Good people salmes, and prayers of the gentle
Is the revenue must support my state.
As for my native Country, since it once
Saw me a Princess in the height of greatness
My birth allowed me; here I make a vow,
Scotland shall never see me, being fallen
Or lessened in my fortunes. Never Iane;
Never to Scotland more will I return.
Could I be Englands Queen (a glory Iane
I never fawned on) yet the King who gave me,
Hath sent me with my husband from his presence:
Delivered vs suspected to his Nation:
Rendered vs spectacles to time, and pity.
And is it fit I should return to such
As only listen after our descent
From happiness enjoyd, to misery
Expected, though uncertain? Never, never;
Alas, why dost thou weep? and that poor creature,
Wipe his wet youes to? let me feel alone
Extremities, who know to give them harbour:
Nor thou, nor he, he's cause. Yu may live safely.
There is no safety whiles your dangers (Madam)
Are every way apparent.
Pardon Lady;
I cannot choose but show my honest heart;
You were ever my good Lady.
O dear souls!
Your shares in grief are too too much.
I bring
(Fair Princess) news of further sadness yet,
Then your sweet youth, hath been acquainted with.
Not more (my Lord) then I can welcome; speak it;
The worst, the worst, I look for.
All the Cornish,
At Exceter, were by the Citizens
Repulsed, encountered by the Earl of Devonshire
And other worthy Gentlemen of the Country.
Your husband marched to Taunton, and was there
Affronted by King Henries Chamberlain.
The King himself in person, with his Army
Advancing nearer, to renew the fight
On all occasions. But the night before
The battles were to join, your husband privately
Accompanied with some few horse, departed
From out the camp, and posted none knows whither.
Fled without battle given?
Fled, but followed
By Dawbney, all his parties left to taste
King Henries mercy, for to that they yielded;
Victorious without bloodshed.
O my sorrows!
If both our lives had proved the sacrifice
To Henries tyranny, wee had fallen like Princes
And robed him, of the glory of his pride.
Impute it not to fainthesse, or to weakness
Of noble courage Lady, but foresight:
For by some secret friend he had intelligence
Of being bought and sold, by his base followers.
Worse yet remains untold.
No, no, it cannot.
I fear you're betrayed. The Earl of Oxford
Runs hot in your pursuit.
A' shall not need,
Weal run as hot in resolution, gladly
To make the Earl our Jailer.
Madam, Madam, they come, they come!
Keep back, or he who dares
Rudely to violate the Law of honour,
Runs on my sword.
Most noble Sir, forbear!
What reason draws you hither (Gentlemen!)
Whom seek 'ee?
All stand off; with favour Lady
From Henry, Englands King, I would present,
Unto the beauteous Princess, Katherine Gordon,
The tender of a gracious entertainment.
Wee are that Princess, whom your moister King
Pursues with reaching arms, to draw into
His power: let him use his tyranny,
Wee shall not bee his Subjects.
My Commission, extends no further (excellentest Lady)
Then to a service; it is King Henries pleasure,
That you, and all, that have relation t'ee,
Be guarded as becomes your birth, and greatness.
For rest assured (sweet Princess) that not ought
Of what you doe call yours, shall find disturbance,
Or any welcome other, then what suits
Your high condition.
By what title (Sir)
May I acknowledge you?
Your servant (Lady)
Descended from the Line of Oxfords Earls,
Inherits what his ancestors before him
Were owners of.
Your King is herein royal,
That by a Peer so ancient in desert
As well as blood, commands Vs to his presence.
Invites 'ee, Princess not commands.
Pray use
Your own phrase as you list; to your protection
Both I, and mine submt.
There's in your number
A Nobleman, whom fame hath bravely spoken.
To him the King my Moister bad me say
How willingly he courts his friendship. Far
From an infocement, more then what in terms
Of curtsy, so great a Pince may hope for.
My name is Daliell.
It is a name, hath won
Both thanks, and woder, from report; (my Lord)
The Court of England emulates your merit,
And covets to embrace 'ee.
I must waite on
The Princess in her fortunes.
Will you please,
(Great Lady) to set forward?
Being driven
By fate, it were in vain to strive with Heaven.
The Counterfeit King Perkin is escaped,
Escape, so let him; he is hagged too fast
Within the Circuit of our English pale,
To steal out of our Ports, or leap the walls
Which guard our Land; the Seas are rough, and wider
Then his weak arms can tug with; Surrey henceforth
Your King may reign in quiet: turmoils past
Like some unquiet dream, have rather busied
Our fancy, then affrighted rest of State.
But Surrey, why in articling a peace
With Iames of Scotland, was not restitution
Of Losses, which our Subjects did sustain
By the Scotch inroads, questioned?
Both demanded
And urged (my Lord,) to which the King replied
In modest merriment, but smiling earnest,
How that our Master Henrie was much abler
To bear the detriments, then he repay them.
The young man I believe spake honest truth,
He studies to be wise betimes. He's Vrswicke,
Sir Rice ap Thomas, and Lord Brooke our Steward,
Returned the western Gentlemen full thanks,
From Vs, for their tried Loyalties?
They have:
Which as if health and life had reigned amongst eem',
With open hearts, they joyfully received.
Young Buckingham is a fair natured Prine,
Luely in hopes, and worthy of his Father:
Attended by an hundred Knights and Squires,
Of special name, he tendered humble service,
Which wee must ne'er forget: and Devonshires wounds
Though slight, shall find sound cure, in our respect.
Life to the King, and safety fix his throne:
I here prsent you (royal Sir) a shadow
Of Majesty, but in effect a substance
Of pity; a young man, in nothing grown
To ripensse, but th'ambition of your mercy:
Perkin the Christian worlds strange wonder.
Dawbney, Wee observe no wonder; I behold (tic true)
An ornament of nature, fine, and polished,
A handsome youth indeed, but not admire him.
How came he to thy hands?
From Sanctuary
At Beweley, near Southhampton, registered
With these few followers, for persons privileged.
I must not thank you Sir! you were too blame
To infringe the Liberty of houses sacred:
Dare wee be irreligious?
Gracious Lord,
They voluntarily resigned themselves,
Without compulsion.
So? it was very well,
T'was very very well  turn now thine eyes
(Young man) upon thy self, and thy past actions!
What revels in combustion through our Kingdom,
A frenzy of aspiring youth hath danced,
Till wanting breath, thy feet of pride have slipped
To break thy neck.
But not my heart; my heart
Will mount, till every drop of blood be frozen
By deaths perpetual Winter: If the Sun
Of Majesty be darkened, let the Sun
Of Life be hid from me, in an eclipse
Lasting, and universal. Sir, remember
There was a shooting in of light, when Richmond
(Not aiming at a crown) retired, and glady,
For comfort, to the Duke of Britains Court.
Richard who swayed the Sceptre, was reputed
A tyrant then; yet then, a dawning glimmered
To some few wandering remnnts, promiseg day
When first they ventured, on a frightful shore,
At Milford Haven.
Whither speeds his boldness?
Check his rude tongue (great Sir!)
O let him range:
The player's on the stage still, it is his part;
A' does but act: what followed?
Bosworth field:
Where at an instant, to the worlds amazement,
A morn to Richmond, and a night to Richard
Appeared at once: the tale is soon applied:
Fate which crowned these attempts when est assured,
Might have befriended others, like resolved.
A pretty gallant! thus, your Aunt of Burgundy,
Your Duchess Aunt informed her Nephew; so
The lesson prompted, and well conned, was moulded
Into familiar Dialogue, oft rehearsed,
Till learnt by heart, it is now, received or truth.
Truth in her pure simplicity wants art
To put a feigned blush on: scorn wears only
Such fashion, as commends to gazers eyes
Sad ulcerated Novelty; far beneath
The sphere of Majesty: in such a Court,
Wisdom, and gravity, are proper robes,
By which the Sovereign is best distinguisht',
From Zanies to his Greatness.
Sir, shift
Your antique Pageantry, and now appear
In your own nature, or y'oule taste the danger
Of fooling out of season.
I expect
No less, then what severity calls Justice,
And Politicians, safety; let such beg,
As feed on alms: but if there can be mercy
In a protested enemy, then may it
Descend to these poor creatures, whose engagements
To th'bettering of their fortunes, have incurred
A loss of all; to them, if any charity
Flow from some noble Orator, in death
I owe the fee of thankfulness.
So brave!
What a bold knave is this? which of these Rebels
He's been the Mayor of Cork?
This wise formality:
Kneel to the King 'ee Rascals!
Can thou hope,
A Pardon, where thy guilt is so apparent?
Under your good favours, as men, are men, they may err: for I confess, respectively, in taking great parts, the one side prevailing, the other side must go down: herein the point is clear, if the proverb hold, that hanging goes by destiny, that it is to little purpose to say, this thing, or that, shall be thus, or thus; for as the fates will have it, so it must be, and who can help it.
O block-head! thou a privy Counsellor?
Beg life, and cry aloud, Heaven save King Henrie.
Every man knows what is best, as it happens: for my own part, I believe it is true, if I be not deceived, that Kings must be Kings, and Subjects, Subjects. But which is which; you shall pardon me for that; whether we speak or hold our peace, all are mortal, no man knows his end.
Wee trifle time with follies.
Mercy, mercy.
Vrswicke, command the Dukeling, and these fellows,
To Digby, the Lieutenant of the Tower:
With safety let them be convay'd to London.
It is our pleasure, no uncivil outrage,
Taunts, or abuse be suffered to their persons;
They shall meet fairer Law then they deserve.
Time may restore their wits, whom vain ambition
Hath many years distracted.
Noble thoughts
Meet freedom in captivity; the Tower?
Our Childhoods dreadful nursery.
No more.
Come, come, you shall have leisure to bethink 'ee.
Was ever so much impudence in forgery?
The custom sure of being styled a King,
Hath fastd in his thought that HE IS SUCH.
But wee shall teach the lad, another language;
It is good we have him fast.
The Hangmans physic
Will purge this sacie humour.
Very likely:
Yet, wee could, temper mercy, with extremity,
Being not too far provoked.
Great Sir, be pleased
With your accustomed grace, to eertaine
The Princess Katherine Gordon.
Oxford, hero
Wee must beshrew thy knowledge of our nature.
A Lady of her birth and virtues, could not
Have found Vs so vnfurnisht of good manners,
As not on notice given, to have met her
Half way in point of Love. Excuse (feye Cos)
The oversight!  fie, you may not kneel:
It is most unfitting; first, vouchsafe this welcome;
A welcome to your own, for you shall find Vs
But guardian to your fortune, and your honours.
My fortunes, and mine honours, are weak champions,
As both are now befriended (Sir!) however
Both bow before your clemency.
Our arms
Shall circle them from malice He sweet Lady?
Beauty incomparable? Here lives Majesty
At league with Love.
O Sir, I have a husband.
We'll prove your father, husband, friend, and servant,
Prove what you wish to grant vs, (Lords) be careful
A Patent presently be drawn, for issuing
A thousand pounds from our Exchequer yearly,
During our Cousins life: our Queen shall be
Your chief companion, our own Court your Home,
Our Subjects, all your servants.
But my husband?
By all descriptions, you are noble Daliell,
Whose generou truth hath famed a rare observance!
Wee thank 'ee, it is a goodness gives addition
To every title, boasted from your Ancestry,
In all most worthy.
Worthier then your praises,
Right princely Sir, I need not glory in.
Embrace him (Lords,) who ever calls you Mistress
Is lifted in our charge,  a goodlier beauty
Mine eyes yet near encountered.
Cruel misery
Of fate, what rests to hope for?
Forward Lords
To London: (fair) ere long, I shall present 'ee
With a glad object, peace, and Hunleys blessing.
Make room there, keep off I require 'ee, and none come within twelve foot of his Majesties new Stocks, upon pain of displeasure. Bring forward the Malefactors. Friend, you must to this gear, no remedy, open the hole, and in with his legs, just in the middle hole, there, that hole; keep off, or Isle commit you all. Shall not a man in authority be obeyed? So, so, there, it is as it should be: put on the padlock, and give me the key; off I say, keep off.
Yet Warbecke clear thy Conscience, thou hast tasted
King Henries mercy liberally; the Law
He's forfeited thy life, an equal Jury
Have doomed thee to the Gallows; twice, most wickedly,
Most desperately hast thou escaped the Tower:
Inveighling to thy party with thy witch-craft,
Young Edward, Earl of Warwick, son to Clarence;
Whose head must pay the price of that attempt;
Poor Gentleman  unhappy in his fate 
And ruined by thy cunning! so a Mongrel
May pluck the true Stag down: yet, yet, confess
Thy parentage; for yet the King he's mercy.
You would be Dicke the fourth, very likely
Your edigree is pubiht, you are known
For Osbecks son of Turney, a loose runagate,
A Landloper: your Father was a Iewe,
Turned Christian merely to repair his miseries.
Wheres now your Kingship?
Baited to my death?
Intolerable cruelty! I laugh at
The Duke of Richmonds practise on my fortunes.
Possession of a Crown, ne'er wanted Heralds.
You will not know who I am!
Lambert Simnell;
Your predecessor in a daungeros uproar;
But on submission, not alone received
To grace, but by the King, vouchsafed his service.
I would be Ear of Warwick, toyld and ruffled
Against my Moister, leapt to catch the Moon,
Vaunted my name, Plantaginet, as you doe:
An Earl forsooth! When as in truth I was,
As you are, a mere Rascal: yet, his Majesty,
(A Prince composed of sweetness! Heaven protect him)
Forgave me all my villainies, reprieved
The sentence  a saefull end, admitted
My surety of obedie to his service;
And I am now his alkoner, live plenteously;
Eat from the Kings purse, and enjoy the sweetness
Of liberty, and favour, sleep securely:
And is not this now better, then to buffett
The Hangmans clutches? or to brave the Cordage
Of a tough halter, which will break your neck?
So then the Gallant totters; prithee (Perkin)
Let my example lead thee, be no longer
A Counterfeit, confess, and hope for pardon!
For pardon? hold my heartstrings, whiles contempt
Of injuries, in scorn, may bid defiance
To this base mans foul language: thou poor vermin
How dare thou creep so near me? thou an Earl?
Why thou enjoyst as much of happiness,
As all the swinge of slight ambition flew at.
A dunghill was thy Cradle. So a puddle
By virtue of the Sun-bames, breathes a vapour
To infect the purer ayre, which drops again
Into the muddy womb that first exhaled it.
Bread, and a slavish ease, with some assurance
From the base Beadles whip, crowned all thy hopes.
But (Sir) ran there in thy veins, one drop
Of such a royal blood, as flows in mine;
Thou would not change condition, to be second
In Englands State without the Crown it self!
Course creatures are incapable of excellence.
But let the world, as all, to whom I am
This day a spectacle, to time, deliver,
And by tradition fix posterity,
Without another Chronicle then truth,
How constantly, my resolution suffered
A martyrdom of Majesty!
Hes past
Recovery, a Bedlum cannot cure him.
Away, inform the King of his behaviour.
Perkin, beware the rope, the Hangman's coming.
If yet thou hast no pity of thy body
Pity thy soul!
Dear Lady!
Whither will 'ee
Without respect of shame?
Forbear me (Sir)
And trouble not the current of my duty!
Oh my Loved Lord! Can any scorn be yours,
In which I have no interest? some kind hand
Lend me assistance, that I may partake
Th'inflictio of this penance; my lifes dearest
Forgive me, I have stayed too long, from tendering
Attendance on reproach, yet bid me welcome.
Great miracle of Constancy! my miseries,
Were never banckrout of their confidence
In worst afflictions, till this now, I feel them.
Reort, and thy Deserts, (thou best of creatures)
Might to ternitie, have stood a pattern
For every vrtuous wie, withut this conquest.
Thou hast out-done belief, yet, may their ruin
In after marriages, be never pittid,
To whom thy Story, shall appear a fable.
Why would tho prove so much unkind to greatness,
To glorify thy vows by such a servitude?
I cannot weep, but trust me (Dear) my heart
Is liberal of passion; Harry Richmond!
A women's faith, hath robbed thy fame of triumph.
Sir, leae off your juggling, and tie up
The Devil, that ranges in your tongue.
Thus Witches,
Possessed, even their deats deldd, ay,
They have been wolves, and dogs, and I sailed in Eggshells
Over the Sea, and rid on fiery Dragons;
Past in e ayre more then a thousand miles,
All in a night; the enemy of mankind
Is powerful, but self; and falsehood confident.
Remember (Lady) who you are; come from
That impudent Impostor!
You abuse vs:
For when the holy Church-man joined our hands,
Our Vows were real then; the Ceremony
Was not in apparition, but in act.
Be what these people term Thee, I am certain
Thou art my husband, no Divorce in Heaven
He's been sued out between vs; it is injustice
For any earthly power to divide vs.
Or wee will live, or let vs dye together.
There is a cruel mercy.
Spite of tyranny
Wee reign in our affections, (blessed Woman)
Read in my destiny, the wrack of honour
Point out in my contempt of death, to memory
Some miserable happiness: since, herein,
Even when I fell, I stood, enthroned a Monarch
Of one chaste wif's troth, pure, and uncorrupted.
Fair Angel of perfection; immortality
Shall raise thy name up to an adoration;
Court every rich openion of true merit;
And Saint it in the Calender of virtue,
When I am turned into the self same dust
Of which I was first formed.
The Lord Ambassador,
Huntley, your Father (Madam) should a' look on
Your strange subjection, in a gaze so public,
Would blush on your behalf, and wish his Country
Vnleft, for entertainment to such sorrow.
Why art thou angry Oxford? I must be
More peremptory in my duty;  (Sir)
Impute it not unto immodesty,
That I presume to press you to a Legacy,
Before wee part for ever!
Let it be then
My heart, the rich remains, of all my fortunes.
Confime it with a kiss pray
Oh, with that
I wish to breathe my last upon thy lips,
Those equal twins of comeliness, I seal
The testament of honourable Vows:
Who ever be that man, that shall vnkisse
This sacred print next, may he prove more thrifti
In this worlds just applause, not more desertfull.
By this sweet pledge of both our souls, I swear
To dye a faithful widow to thy bed:
Not to be fore't, or won. , nver, never.
Free the condemned person, quickly free him.
What he's a yet confessed?
Nothing to purpose;
But still'a will be King.
Prepare your journey
To a new Kingdom then, (unhappy Madam)
Wilfully oolish! See my Lord Ambassador,
Your Lady Daughter will not leave the Counterfei
In this disgrace of fate.
I never pointed
Thy marriage (girl) but yet being married,
Enjoy thy duty to a husband, freely:
The griefs are mine. I glory in thy constancy;
And must not say, I wish, that I had mist
Some portage in these trials of a patience.
You will forgive me noble Sir?
Yes, yes
In every duty of a wife, and daughter,
I dare not disavow thee,  to your husband
(For such you are Sir) I impart a farewell
Of manly pity; what your life he's past through,
The dangers of your end will make apparent?
And I can add, for comfort to your sufferance,
No Cordial, but the wonder of your trailtie,
Which keeps so firm a station.  Wee are parted.
Wee are a crown of peace, renew thy age
Most honourable
worthy Crawford?
Wee may embrace, I never thought thee injury.
Nor was I ever guilty of neglect
Which might procure such thought. I take my leave (Sir.)
To you Lord Daliell: what? accept a sigh,
It is hearty, and in earnest.
I want utterance:
My silence is my farewell.
Ohoh,
Sweet Madam,
What doe you mean!my Lord, your hand.
Dear Lady,
Be pleased that I may wait 'ee to your lodging.
Look 'ee, behold your followers, appointed
To waite on 'ee in death.
Why Peers of England,
Weal lead 'em on courageously. I read
A triumph over tyranny upon
Their several foreheads. Faint not in the moment
Of Victory! our end, d Warwick's head,
Innocent Warwick's head, (for we are Prologue
But to his tragedy) conclude the wonder
Of Henries fears; and then the glorious race
Of fourteen Kings PLANTAGINETTS, determine
In this last issue male, Heaven be obeyed.
Impoverish time of its amazement (friends)
And we will prove, as trusty in our payments,
As prodigal to nature in our debts.
Death? pish, it is but a sound; a name of ayre;
A minutes storm; or not so much, to tumble
From bed to bed, be massacred alive
By some Physicians, for a month, or two,
In hope of freedom from a Fevers torments,
Might stagger manhood; here, the pain is past
Ere senibly it is felt. Be men of spirit!
Spurn coward passion! so illustrious mention,
Shall blaze our names, and stile vs KINGS O'ER DEATH.
Away-Impostor beyond president:
No Chronicle records his fellow.
I have
Not thoughts left, it is sufficient in such cases
Just Laws ought to proceed.
Wee are resolved:
Your business (noble Lords) shall find success,
Such as your King importunes.
You are gracious.
Perkin, wee are informed, is armed to dye:
In that weal honour him. Our Lords shall follow
To see the execution; and from hence
Wee gather this fit use: that public States,
As our particular bodies, taste most good
In health, when purged of corrupted blood.
HEre he's appeared, though in a several fashion,
The Threats of Majesty; the strength of passion;
Hopes of an Empire; change of fortunes; All
What can to Theater's o Greatness fall;
Proving their weak foundations: who will please
Amongst such several Sight's, to censure These
No birth's abortive nor a bastard-brood
(Shame to a parentage, or fosterhood)
May warrant by their loves, all just excuses,
And often find a welcome to the Muses.

PRologues to Plays in use, and common are,
As Ushers to Great Ladies: Both walk bare,
And comely both; conducting Beauty they
And wee appear, to usher in our Play.
Yet, be their faces foul, or featured well,
Be they hard-fauoured, or in looks excel;
Yet being Usher, he owes no less duty
Unto the most deformed, then the choice Beauty.
It is our case; we usher Acts and Scenes,
Some honest, and yet some may prove like Queens.
(Loose and base stuff) yet that is not our fault,
We walk before, but not like Panders halt
Before such crippled ware: The Acts we present
We hope are Virgins, drawn for your content
Unto this Stage: Maids grateful are to Men,
Our Scenes being such, (like such) accept them then.
THat she should do it?
She?
May we build upon it?
As on a base of Marble; I have seen
Strange passages of love, loose interchanges
Of hands and eyes betwixt her and the Prince,
Madame look too't.
What hope hath he in one
So meanly bred? or she to obtain a Prince
Of such descent and linnage?
What but this
That you must undergo the name of wife,
And she to intercept the sweets of love
Due to your bed.
To be his strumpet Stroza?
Madame a woman may guess unhappily.
Thou should be honest Stroza.
Yes, many should
Be what they are not: but I always was,
And ever will be one, (that's still my self.)
The General Sforsaes daughter? is it not she?
Is that yet questioned? as if the chaste Court
Had save her self one so degenerate,
So dissolutely wanton, so profuse
In prostitution too, so impudent
And blushless in her proud ambitious aim,
As if no man could her intemperance please,
Save him whom Heaven hath destined to your bed.
I never saw them yet familiar.
Ha, ha, as if they'd send for you to see it,
To witness what they most strive to conceal,
Be gulled? be branded: 'lasto me, ell's nothing,
I shall ne'er smart for it, what is it to me?
If being a Bride, you have a widowed fortune;
If being married, you must throw your self
Upon a desolate bed, and in your arms,
Clasp nought but Ayre, whilst his arms full of pleasure
Borrowed from a stolen beauty, shall this grieve
Or trouble me? break my sleeps? make me start
At midnight up, and fill the house with clamours?
Shall this bring strange brats to be bred and brought
Up at my fire, and call me Dad? No: this
Concerns not me more then my love to you
To your high Sovereignty.
I now repent
Too late, since I too lavishly have given him
The utmost he could ask, and stretched my honour
Beyond all lawful bounds of modesty.
Hoe's covetous of others, and neglects
His own; but I will part those their stolen pleasures,
And cross those lustful sports they have in chase,
Not be the pillow to my own disgrace.
The game's on foot, and there's an easy path
To my revenge; this beauteous Millanois
Unto th'Duke sole heir, still courted, craved,
And by the Parma Prince solicited,
Which I still study how to break, and cast
Aspersions betwixt both of strange dislike;
But wherein hath the other innocent Maid
So injured me, that I should scandal her?
Her Father is the General to the Duke:
For when I studied to be raised by Arms,
And purchase me high eminence in Camp,
He crossed my fortunes, and returned me home
A Cashiered Captain; for which injury
I scandal all his means unto the Duke,
And to the Princess all his daughters virtues,
I labour to invert, and bring them both
Into disgraceful hatred.
Stroza?
My Lord?
Saw you the Princess?
Iulia?
She?
I have my Lord of late no ear of hers,
Nor she a tongue of mine; the, time hath bin
Till soothing Sycophantsand Court Parasites
Supplanted me.
I have the power with her
To bring thee into grace.
Have you the power
To keep your self in? doe you smile my Lord?
I tell thee Stroza, I have that interest
In Iulias bosom, that the proudest Prince
In Italy cannot supplant me thence.
Sir,
Ino way question it: but have I not known
A Prince hath bin repulsed, and meanest persons
Bosomed? the Prince would once have looked upon me,
When small entreaty would have gained an eye,
An ear, a tongue, to speak yea, and a heart,
To think I could be secret.
What means Stroza?
But it is the fate of all mortality:
Man cannot long be happy; but my passion
Will make me turn blab, I shall out with all.
Whence comes this? it is suspicious, and I must be
Inquisitive to know it.
A Jest my Lord,
I'll tell you a good Jest.
Prithee let's hear it.
What will you say, if at your meeting next
With this fair Princess? she begins to rave,
To rail upon you, to exclaim on your
Inconstancy, and call the innocent name
Of some chaste Maid in question, whom perhaps
You never eyed my Lord.
What of all this?
What but to excuse her own: (I'll not say what)
Put off the purposed Contract: and my Lord
Come, come, I know you have a pregnant wit.
We parted last with all the kindest greeting
Lovers could add fare-well with: but should this change
Suite thy report, I should be forced to think
That, which cuen Oracles themselves could never
Force me to that she is.
All women are not
Sincerely constant, but observe my Lord.
Minion is it you? there's for you, know your own.
Observed you that my Lord?
Why did you strike me Madame?
Strumpet, why?
Dare you contest with vs?
Who dare with Princess? subjects must forbear
Each step I tread I'll water with a tear.
I spy a storm a coming, Isle to shelter.
Your meaning Madame?
Did it Sir with yours
But correspond, it would be bad indeed.
Why did you strike that Lady?
Cause you should pity her.
Small cause for blows.
I struck her publicly.
You give her blows in private.
Stroza still?
Go periurd and dispose thy false allurements
Amongst them that will believe thee, thou hast lost
Thy credit here for ever.
I shall find
Faith else-where then.
Eye spread thy snares
To catch poor innocent Maids: and having tan them
In the like pit-fall, with their shipwrecked honours,
Make seasure of their lives.
Injurious Lady,
All thou can touch my Honour with, I cast
On thee, and henceforth I will fly thee as
A Basilisk. I have found the change of lust,
Your loose inconstancy, which is as plain
To me, as were it writ upon thy brow,
You shall not cast me off: I hate thy sight,
And from this hour I will abjure thee quite.
Isle call him back: if Stroza be no villain,
He is not worth my clamour. What was that startled
Within me? Oh I am dishonoured
Perpetually; for he hath left behind
That pledge of his acquaintance, that will for ever
Cleave to my blood in scandal, I must now
Sue, send, and crave, and what before I scorned
By prayers to grant, submissively implore.
Lady your suite?
So please your Grace peruse it,
It is included there.
Our generals Wife?
We know you Lady, and your beauteous Daughter,
Nay you shall spare your knee,
More plot for me;
My brain's in labour, and must be delivered
Of some new mischief?
You petition here
For Men and Money I making a free relation
Of all your Husbands fortunes, how supplies
Have been delayed, and what extremities
He hath endured at Naples dreadful Siege;
We know them all, and withal doe acknowledge
All plenteous blessings by the power of Heaven,
By him wee doe obtain, and by his valour
Lady we grieve he hath been so neglected.
O Royal Sir, you still were Gracious,
But twixt your Virtues and his Merits there
Hath been some interception, that hath stopped
The current of your favours.
All which shall bee removed, and hee appear
Henceforth a bright star in our courtly sphere.
But no such Comet here shall daze my sight,
Whilst I a Cloud am to Eclipse that light
We sent out our Commissions two Months since
For Men and Money, nor was it our intent
It should bee thus delayed: though we are Prince,
We only can command, to Execute
Tic not in vs but in our Officers,
We understand that by their negligence
He has been put to much extremity
Of Dearth and Famine; many a stormy night
Been forced to roof himself in the open field,
Nay more then this, much of his own revenue
He hath expended, all to pay his Soldiers:
Yet Reverend Madame, but forget what's past,
Though late, weal quit his merit at the last.
Your Highness is most Royal?
Her Father shall be in the Camp relieved,
She graced in Court, how will she brave you then?
If suffer this take all? why the meanest Lady
Would never brooke an equal? you a Princess?
And can you brooke a base competitor?
It shall not, we are fixed and stand immou'd,
And will be swayed by no hand.
Iulia?
A Suitor to that Lady Royal Father,
Before she be a widow that you are
So private in discourse?
O you mistake,
For she the suitor is and hath obtained.
I'm glad I have found you in the giving vain
Will you grant me one boon to?
Question not,
To hast your Marriage with the former Prince,
Or at the least the contract, is it not that?
Say it were my Lord?
It could not be denied
But speak? thy suite?
To have this modest Gentlewoman
Banished the Court,
My Daughter Royal princess,
Show vs some cause I beg it?
Lady though
You be in the begging vain, I am not now
In the giving, will you leave vs?
Wherein O Heaven
Have I deserved your wrath, that you should thus
Pursue me? I have searched, indeed beyond
My understanding, but yet cannot find?
Wherein I have offended by my chastity.
How chastitiy?
A thing long sought amongst Captains wives and daughters,
Yet hardly can bee found.
Fair Lady yield
Unto my daughters spleen her rage blown 'ore,
Fear not, Isle make your peace, as for your suite
Touching your husband, that will I secure.
Haste Stroza, unto the Prince his chamber,
Give him this letter, it concerns my honour,
My state, my life, all that I can call good
Depends upon the safe delivery
Of these few broken Letters.
Madam, tic done???
What stays she to out-face me?
Madam, I yield
Way to your spleen, not knowing whence it grows,
Bearing your words more heavy then your blows.
Small hope there is to see the Father righted.
When the child is thus wronged.
Must speak with the Duke,
Must fellow? stay your hour, and dance attendance
Until the Duke's at leisure.
Isle doe neither,
I come in haste with news,
Why then keep out sir.
Ha Milksop? know percullist gates
Though kept with Pikes &amp; Muskets, could ne'er keep me out
And dost thou think to shut me out with VVainscot?
VVhat's he?
A Soldier,
Whence?
The Camp
The news?
A mighty loss; a glorious victory
But which the greater?
Tic uncertain Sir:
But will you hear the best or bad news first?
Cheer me with conquest first, that being armed
With thy best news, we better may endure
What sounds more fatal.
Hear me then my Lord,
We sack't the City after nine Months siege,
Furnished with store of all wars furniture,
Our (never to be praisd enough) brave General
Fought in the Cannons face, their number still
Increased, but our diminished; their soldiers pay
Doubled, and ours kept back: but we (brave spirits)
The loss we had of Coin, the more we took
Unto our selves of Courage, but when all
Our furniture was spent even to one day,
And that to morrow we must be enforced
To raise a shameful siege, then stood our General
(Our valiant General) up, and breathed upon vs
His own undaunted spirit, which spread through
The Camp, returned it doubly armed again:
For he did mean to lay upon one shot
His state and fortune, and then instantly
He bad vs arm and follow: On then he went,
We after him; oh! it was a glorious sight,
Fit for a Theater of Gods to see,
How we made up and maugre all opposure,
Made way through raging storms of showering bullets;
At last we came to hook our ladders, and
By them to scale. The first that mounted, was
Our bold courageous General: after him
Ten thousand, so we instantly were made
Lords of the City, purchased in two hours
After a nine Months siege: all by the valour
Of our approved General.
I never heard a braver victory,
But what's our loss?
Oh that, which ten such Conquests
Cannot make good, your worthy General.
My Lord and husband? spare me passion,
I must with-draw to death.
How perished he?
What dyed he by the sword?
Sword? No alas,
No sword durst byte upon his noble flesh,
Nor bullet raze his skin: he whom War feared,
The Cannon spared, no steel durst venture on.
No Duke, it was thy unkind ingratitude
Hath slain brave Sforsa.
Speak the cause?
I shall:
This City seized, his purpose was the spoil
To give his Soldiers; but when his sealed Commission
He had unripped, and saw express command,
To deal no farther then to victory,
And that his great Authority was curbed,
And given to others, that respect their profit
More then the worth of soldiers: even for grief,
That he could neither furnish vs with pay
Which was kept back, nor guerdon vs with spoil,
What was about him he distributed,
Even to the best deservers, as his garments,
His Arms, and Tent, then some few words spake,
And so oppressed with grief, his great heart brake.
There's one gone then.
Attend for thy reward,
So leave vs.
Pray on whom shall I attend?
Who is it must pay me?
I sir.
You sir? tell me,
Will it not cost me more the waiting for,
Then the sum comes to when it is received?
I doe but ask the question.
You are a bold
And saucy soldier.
You are a cunning slave,
And cowardly Courtier.
See all things be dispatcht
Touching conditions of atoned peace
Twixt vs and Naples: see that soldier to
Have his reward.
Come will you pay me sir?
Sir, will you walk: as for your sauciness
I'll teach you a Court-tricke: you shall be taught
How to attend.
But that our General's lost:
Is it not now peace, what should a General doe?
Had he returned, he would have looked for honours,
This suite and that for such a follower:
Now Royal sir, that debt is quite discharged.
But for his wife, we must be mindful of her,
And see we doe so.
Speak, will he come?
Madam, I found him ready to depart
The Court with expedition: but at my vrgence
He promised you a parley.
It is well:
If prayers or tears can move him, Isle make way
To save my own shame, and enforce his stay.
Come fellow soldiers, doe you know the reason
That we are summoned thus unto the house
Of our dead General?
Sure it is about
Our pay.
But stand aside, here comes the Lady.
Are all these Gentlemen summoned together,
That were my Husbands followers, and whose fortunes
Expired in him?
They are if please your Ladyship: though I was never Tawny-coate, I have played the summoners part, and the rest are already paid, only these three attend your Ladyships re???muneration.
Welcome Gentlemen,
My Husband led you on to many dangers
Two years, and last to poverty: His revenues
Before hand he sold to maintain his Army,
When the Dukes pay still failed, you know you were
Stored ever from his Coffers.
He was a right
And worthy General.
He was no less.
He was no less; and all you know hee was no more, well, had he lived, I had been placed in some house of office or other ere this time.
It was his will, which to my utmost power
I will make good, to satisfy his soldiers
To the utmost farthing. All his Gold and Jewels
I have already added, yet are we still
To score to soldiery? what is your sum?
Pay for three Months.
There's double that in Gold.
I thank your Ladyship.
What yours?
Why Madam,
For four Months pay.
This Jewel ????????? mounts that.
I am treble satisfied.
You are behind hand too:
Ey but Madam, I think he be no true soldier.
No true Soldier your reason?
Marry because he walks without his Arms.
The Dukes Treasure
Cannot make good that loss, yet are we rich
In one thing:
Nothing we have that were of nothing made,
Nothing we have, my Husbands debts are paid.
Morrow Gentlemen.
Madam, Hearts, Swords and hands, rest still
At your command.
Gentlemen I'm sorry that I cannot pay you better,
Unto my wishes and your own desert,
It is plainly seen great Persons oft times fall,
And the most Rich cannot give more then all.
Good morrow Gentlemen,
May you be ever happy.
I but Madam, this is a hard case being truly concede???red, to give away all, why your Shoe-maker, though he hath many other Tools to work with, he will not give away his All.
All ours was his alone, it came by him.
And for his Honour it was paid again.
Why, say I had a piece of Meat, I had a mind to, I might perhaps give away a Modicum, a Morsel, a Frog???meant or so, but to give away and bee a hungry my self, I durst not do it for my Guts, or say I should meet with a friend that had but one Penny in his Purse, that should give me a Pot of Ale, that should drink to me, and drink up all, I'll stand too't there's no Conscience in it.
What hath been done was for my Fathers Honour.
She might have given away a little, and a little, but
When all is gone, what's left for me?
VVee will leave Millaine and to Florence straight,
Though wee are poor, yet where we live unknown
It is the less grief, sirrah, will you consort
With vs, and bear a part in our misfortunes?
Troth Madam, I could find in my heart to go with you but for one thing.
What's that?
Because you are too liberal a Mistress: and that's a fault seldom found among Ladies: For look, you use o give away all, and I am all that is left; and I am afraid when you come into a strange Country, you'll give away me too, so that I shall never live to be my own man.
Tush, fear it not.
Why then I'll go with you inspire of your teeth.
Leave Milleine then, to Florence be our guide,
Heaven when man fails, must for our help provide.
This Letter came from you, it is your Character.
That hand in Contract you so long have had,
Should not seem strange to you now.
You are with-childe,
So doth your Letter say: what change your face?
My blushes must speak for me.
And this Child
You would bestow on me: y are very liberal Lady,
You give me more then I did mean to ask.
And yet but what's your own Sir, I am serious,
And it will ill become your Oaths and Vows
To jest at my undoing.
You would say
Rather your doing.
In doing thus, you should undo me quite.
What doe you weep, that late did rail in clamour?
Your thunders turned to showers? It is most strange.
You have dishonoured me, and by your flattery
Have robed me of my chaste Virginity:
Yet ere I yielded, we were man and wife,
Saving the Churches outward Ceremony.
But Lady, you that would be won by me
To such an act of lust, would soon consent
Unto another.
Can this be found in man?
This Strozas language moves me, and I intend
To try what patience, constancy, and love
There can be found in woman: why do you weep?
You are not hungry, for your bellie's full;
Lady, be ruled by me: take the advice
A Doctor gave a Gentleman of ate,
That sent to him to know, whether Tobacco
Were good for him or no: My friend quoth he,
If thou did never love it, never take it;
If thou did ever love it, never leave it:
So I to thee; if thou were as thou hast
Been always honest, I could wish thee still
So to continue; but being a broken Lady,
Your only way's to make use of your Talent,
Farewell, I'll to my Country.
Oh miserable,
Let me but reckon up ten thousand ills
My looseness hath committed, the aspersion
And scandalous reputation of my Child,
My Father too, 'tmust come unto his care,
Oh???
Iulia.
Away.
Come hither, but one word.
That all those black occurrents should conspire,
And end in my disgrace.
Ha! what's the business?
If all men were such,
I should be sorry that a man begot me,
Although he were my father.
Iulia, how's that?
Oh Sir, you come to know whether Tobacco be good for you or no; Isle tell you, if you never took it, never take it then, or it you ever used it, take it still; Nay, I'm an excel???lent Philistian grown of late I tell you.
What mean these strange Anagrams?
I am thy Father and I love thee sweet.
Love me thou dost not.
Why thou doest know I doe.
I say thou doest not: lay no wager with me,
For if thou dost, there will be two to one
On my side against thee.
Ha! I am thy Father
Why Iulia?
How my Father! then doe one thing
For me your Daughter
One thing? any thing,
Ey all things.
Instantly then draw your sword
And pierce me to the heart.
I love thee not so ill,
To be the Author of thy death.
Nor I my self so well, as to desire
A longer life: if you be then my Father,
Punish a sin that hath disgrac't your Daughter,
Scandald your blood, and poisoned it with mud.
Be plain with vs.
See, I am strumpeted,
A bastard issue grows within my womb.
Whose fact?
Prince Parmaes.
Stroza.
My Lord.
Search out
Prince Parma, bring the Traitor back again
Dead or alive.
My Lord, he is a Prince.
No matter; for his head shall be the ransom
Of this foul Treason. When I say begone.
But as for thee base and degenerate???
Doe show your self a Prince: let her no longer
Live, that hath thus disgrac't your Royal Blood.
Nature prevails above honour: her offence
Merits my vengeance, but the name of Child
Abates my Swords keen edge: yet Royalty
Take th'vpper hand of pity: kill the strumpet,
And be renowned for Justice.
Strike, I'll stand.
How easy could I period all my care,
Could I her kill, and yet her Infant spare:
A double Murder I must needs commit,
To ruin that which never offended yet.
Oh Heaven! in this I your assistance crave,
Punish the falter, and the innocent save.
You are not true to your own honour Father.
To let me longer live.
Oh Iulia, Iulia,
Thou hast overwhelmed upon my aged head
Mountains of grief, t'oppresse me to my grave.
Is Parma found?
My Lord, hoe's privately
Fled from the Court
Then fly thou after villain.
Sir, are you mad?
What's to be done? Alack,
I cannot change a father and a Prince
Into a euiell Hang-man: tell me Iulia,
Is thy guilt yet but private to thy self?
It is my Lord.
Conceal it then: we'll study
To salve thy honour, and to keep thy looseness
From all the world concealed, compresse thy grief,
And I will study how to shadow mine.
Wipe from thy cheeks these tears: oh cursed Age,
When Children against their Parents all things dare,
Yet Fathers still prove Fathers in their care.
Oh misery beyond comparison!
When save the Heavens we have no roof at all
To shelter vs.
That word all
Sticks more in my stomach then my victuals can: For in???deed wee can get none to eat now; I told you, you were so prodiga'l we should pinch for it.
What place may wee call this? what Clime? what Province?
Why this is the Duke-dome of Florence, and this is the Forest where the hard-hearted Duke hunts many a Hart: and there's no Dear so dear to him, but he will kill it: as goodly a large place to starve in, as your Ladyship can de???sire to see in a Summers day.
Yet here, since no man knows vs, no man can
Deride our misery: better dye starved,
Then basely beg.
How better starve then beg; all the Ladies of Florence shall never make me of that belief. I had rather beg a thousand times, then starve once, doe you scorn begging? Your betters doe not, no Madam; get me a Snap-sacke, I'll to Florence: I'll make all the high ways ring of me with for the Lords sake. I have studied a Prayer for him that gives, and a Pox take him that gives nothing: I have one for the Horse-way, another for the Foote-way, and a third for the turning-ftile. No Madam, begging is grown a gentleman???like Calling here in our Country.
I have yet one poor piece of Gold reserved,
Step to the Vi???lage by and fetch some Wine.
You had better keep your Gold, and trust to my begging Oratory, yet this is the worst they can say to me,
that I am my Ladies Bottle-man.
Here's a strange change: we must be patient,
Yet can I not but weep thinking on thee.
Madam on me? there is no change of Fortune
Can puff me or deject me; I am all one
In rich abundance and penurious want:
So little doe my miseries vex me,
Or the fair Princess wrong, that I will end
My passions in a Song.
It seems the Duke is Hunting in the Forest,
Here let vs rest our selves, and listen to
Their Tones, for nothing but mishap here lies;
Sing thou fair Child, I'll keep tune with my eyes.
This way the voice was, let vs leave the Chase.
Behold my Lord two sad dejected Creatures
Thrown on the humble verdure.
Here's beauty mixed with tears, that poverty
Was never bred in Cottage: I'll farther question
Their state and fortune.
Wee're discovered,
Daughter arise.
What are you gentle Creatures?
Nay answer not in tears.
If you by casual loss, or by the hand
Of Fortune have been crushed beneath these sorrows,
He demands your grief
That hath as much will as ability
To succour you, and for your own fair sake;
Nay beauteous Damsel, you need not question that.
If by the front we may believe the heart,
Or by the out-side judge the inward virtue:
You fair Sir, have even in your self alone
All that this world can promise; for I ne'er
Beheld one so complete; and were I sure
Although you would not pity, yet at least
You would not mock our misery: I would relate
A Tale should make you weep.
Sweet if the Prologue
To thy sad passion move thus: what will the Scene
And tragic act it self doe? Is that Gentlewoman
Your Mother sweet?
My wretched Mother Sir.
Pray of what Province?
Milleine.
What fortune there?
My Father was a Noble Gentleman,
Rank't with the best in Birth, and which did add
To all his other virtues, a bold Soldier;
But when he dyed???
Nay, proceed beauteous Lady,
How was your Father styled?
To tell you that,
Were to exclaim upon my Prince, my Country
And their Ingratitude: For he being dead,
With him our fortunes and our hopes both failed;
My Mother loath to live ignobly base,
Where once she flourished, having spent her means
Not loosely nor in riot, but in the honour
Of her dead Husband: left th'ingratefull Land,
Rather to spend her years in poverty,
Amongst those that never knew her height of Fortune,
Then with her thankless Friends and Countrymen,
Fled here to perish.
More then her Charming beauty
Her passion moves me: where inhabit you?
Here, every where.
Beneath these Trees?
We have
No other roof then what kind Heaven lends.
Gentle Creature,
Had you not told me that your Birth was Noble,
I should have found it in your face and gesture.
Monsieur.
My Lord.
Go wind thy Horn abroad, and call to vs
Some of our train: we pity these two Ladies,
And we will raise their hope: Cheer you old Madam,
You shall receive some bounty from a Prince.
Who keeps the Lodge below?
Your Highness Hunts-man.
Command him to remove, and instantly
We give it to these Ladies: besides, add
Unto our Guest three thousand pounds a year:
We will see it furnished too with Plate and Hangings.
Alas pretyt Maid, your father's dead you say,
We will take you now to our own Patronage,
And trust me Lady, whiel wee're Prince of Florence,
You shall not want nor food, nor harborage.
Pardon Great Sir, this our neglect of duty
Unto a Prince so gracious and complete
In virtuous endowments.
To excuse
Our former negligence, behold I cast
Me at your foot.
Arise sweet, pray your name?
Lauretta.
Fair Laure???t???, you shall be henceforth ours,
Oh Monsieur! I ne'er saw where I could love
Till now.
How now my Lord, remember pray,
What you are to this poor dejected Maid.
Well Monsieur, well; when ever I match, pray Heaven,
We love so well: but love and toil hath made vs
Even somewhat thirsty, would we had some Wine.
Nay, now I think I have fitted you with a Cup of
N???psi??????t???.
How now sirrah, what are you?
What am I? Nay what art thou?
I think you le prove little better then a smell-smocke,
That can find out a pretty wench in such a Corner.
P???ace sirrah, it is the Prince.
What if he be? he may love a Wench as well as a???another man.
What hast thou there?
A bottle of Wine and a Manchet that my Lady sent me for.
Thou ne'er could come to vs in better time,
Reach it vs Monsieur.
Your bottle quickly sirrah, come I say.
Yes, when? can you tell? doe you think I am such an Ass, to part so lightly with my liquor? Know thou my friend, before I could get this bottle filled, I was glad to change a piece of Gold, and call for the rest again. And doe you think I'll loose my liquor, and have no Gold nor rest a???gain? Not so my Friend, not so.
There's Gold sir.
Madam, will you give me a Licence to sell Wine?
I could get no P???ate in the Forest but a wooden Dish.
Fill to the Prince Lauretia.
Will it please
Your Highness drink out of a wooden Miser?
Yes sweet with thee in any thing: you know
Wee are a Prince, and you shall be our taster.
Why should I love this Prince? his bounteous gifts
Exalt me not, but make me much more poor,
I'm more dejected then I was before.
Sir.
Lady, thanks: I fear me he is caught,
But if he be, my Counsel must divert him.
The bottom of the bottle is at your service Sir,
Shall you and I part stakes?
T???cie's more Gold for you.
I had rather you had broke my pate then my draught, but hark you Sir, are you as a man should say, a belonger to?
A belonger to? what's that sir?
Oh ignorant! are you a follower?
I seldom go before when my betters are in place.
A Serving-man I take it.
Right sir.
I desire you the more complement: I have the cour???tesie of the Forest for you.
And I have the curtsy of the Court for you sir.
That's to bring me to the Buttery hatch, and never make me drink.
Sirrah, conduct those Ladies to the Lodge,
And tell the Keeper we have stored for him,
A better fortune; you shall hear further from vs,
You usher them.
Come Ladies will you walk?
How now sawce-boxe, know your manners: was not I Gentleman usher before you came? Am not I hee that did the bottle bring? Come Ladies follow me.
Your purpose Sir, is to love this Lady,
And hazard all your hopes.
Oh gentle Friend,
Why was I borne high? but to raise their hopes
That are dejected: so much for my bounty.
But for your love.
It is with no intent
To make the Maid my wife, because I know
Her fortunes cannot equal mine.
Then it were more dishonourable
To strumpet her.
Still thou mistake, mine
Is honourable love, and built on virtue;
Nor would I for the Emperors Diadem,
Corrupt her whom I love.
Brave Prince I'm glad
That ere I kept thy Company.
Come Monsieur, night steals on, not many years
Shall pass me, but I purpose to revisit
This my new Mistress, my auspicious fate
To thee my happy love I consecrate.
Thou should be mind: and durst I for my Head
Even in the open Court I'd challenge thee.
But I have so incensed th'offended Duke,
And laid such heavy spots upon her head,
I cannot do it wiht safety: methinkes this Child
Doth look me in the face, as if it would call
Me Father, and but this suspected Stroza
Stuffed my too credulous ears with jealousies.
For thee sweet Babe I'll swear, that if not all,
Part of my blood runs in thy tender veins,
For those few drops I will not see the perish;
Be it for her sake whom once I loved,
And shall doe ever: Oh injurious Stroza!
I now begin to fear; for this sweet Babe
Hath in his face no bastardy, but shows
A Princely semblance: but Stroza and the Duke,
This will I keep as chary as her honour,
The which I prize aboue the Vniuerse.
Though she were forced to be unnatural,
I'll take to me this Infants pupillage;
Nor yet resolved, till I a way have found
To make that perfect which is yet unsound.
Forbear my Lords for a few private words:
Fair Daughter, we'll not chide you farther now
Nor add unto your blushes: by our rude
Reproofs your faults are covered with these your sighs,
Since all your fire of lust is quenched in ashes.
Durst I presume my Lord, to know
Whither you have send my son?
I'll not have it questioned.
I strive to salve thy honour, and thou seek
To publish thy disgrace: my study is
Where I may pick thee out a noble Husband,
To shadow these dishonours, and keep thee
From the like scandal.
Whom but Parmaes Prince.
Oh name him not thou strumpet.
I have done.
There's a Prince of noble hopes and fortunes,
The Prince of Florence: what if I sent to him
About a speedy Marriage? for I fear,
Delay may breed strange doubts.
Since I have lost the name of Child,
I am a servant now and must obey.
Stroza.
Your ear my Lord, it is done.
Laid out?
To safety as I hope.
What, and suspectlesse?
Unless the silent Grove of Trees should blabe,
There is no fear of scandal, mantled close,
I left the sucking Babe where the next passenger
Must find it needs, and so it happened for
Some two years after,
Passing that way to know where it was become,
It was gone, and by some courteous hand I hope
Removed to gentle fosterage.
My excellent friend,
For this we'll bosom thee: your counsel Stroza,
Our Daughter's grown to years, and we intend
To pick her out a Husband, in whose issue
Her name may flourish, and her honours live:
Most carefully deuis'd.
But where my Lords
May we provide a match to equal her?
Ferrari hath a fair and hopeful Heir.
And so hath Mantua.
How do you prize the Noble Florentine?
In fame no whit inferior.
But in state
Many degrees excelling: aim no further
Sir, if that may be accepted.
To Florence then we'll straight dispatch Embassy???dours,
Stroza, be it your care to manage this high business.
Oh to see
How Parents love descends: and how so ever
The Children prove ungrateful and unkind,
Though they deride, we weep our poor eyes blind.
Nay, nay, the case is altered with me since you saw me last: I was never in any hope to purchase any other suite then that I wore yesterday; but now I can say Ass sig???number, the case is altered. Now every beggar comes upon me with good Gentleman, good Gentleman: when yesterday Gen???tlemen would have shunned the way for fear I should have begged of them. Then comes another upon me with good your Worship, good your Worship, then doe I double my files, and cast him a ????????? two pence.
Sirrah, thou may st thank the Prince for this.
Tnou say true; for he hath changed our wooden Dishes to Si for Coblets: goodly large Arras that never yet deserved hanging, he hath cause to be hanged round about the Chamber: My Lady and Mistress, now my Lady and Mistress lies over head and cares in Down and Feathers: well, if they be rui'd by me, I would have them to keep their beds.
Why would thou have them lye a bed all day?
Oh dull ignorant ! I mean knowing how hard they have bin lodged in the Forest; I would not have them sell a???way their beds, and lie upon the boards.
Oh now I understand you sir.
Ey, ey; thou may get much understanding by keeping my company: But Sir, does not the new Gown the Prince sent my Mistress, become her most incompa???rably?
It is true: it is strange to see how Apparel makes or maries.
Right: for yesterday thou would have taken me for a very Clown, a very Clown; and now to see, to see.???
Sirrah.
Madam.
To see if the Tailor that made your Gown, hath put ne'er an M???un???er your Girdle, there belongs more to bea???ten S???tin then sirrah.
What think you Mother of the Prince his bounty,
His venue, and perfection?
He's a mirror, and deserves a name
Amongst the famous Worthies.
H???igh???e.
Why sigh you?
Pray tell me one thing Mother: when you were
Of my years, and first loved, how did you feel
Your self?
Love Daughter?
She talks: Now, if she should be enuamored of my comely shape; for I have (as they say) such a foolish young and relenting heart I should never say her nay, I should no???for wear off this stand further off.
Stand farther off sir.
No, I'll assure your Ladyship it is beaten Satin.
Then take your Satin farther.
Your Ladyship hath conjured me, and I will avoid
Satan.
Had you not sometimes musings, sometimes ecstasies,
When some delicate aboue other
Was present?
I advise you curb your sense in time,
Or you will bring your self into the way
Of much dishonour.
And speak you by experience Mother? then
I doe begin to fear lest that his shape
Should tempt me, or his bounty work aboue
My strength and patience; pray Mother leave vs never,
Lest that without your Company, my love
Contending with my weakness, should in time
Get of the upper hand.
For this I love thee.
So hoe Mistress Madam, yonder is the Prince, and two or three Gentlemen come riding upon the goodliest Whore???ses that ever I set my eyes upon: and the Princes Horse did no sooner see me, but he weeighed and wagg'd his tail: now I thinking he had done it to take acquaintance of me, said a???gain to him, Gramery Horse; so I left them, and came to tell your Ladyship.
Go see them stabled, my soul leapt within me
To hear the Prince but named.
Now my fair Friend.
Your hand-mayd mighty Prince.
Look Monsieur,
Can she be less then Noble? nay deserves she
Thus habitat, to be termed less then Royal,
What think thou Monsieur?
Faith my Lord,
I never love a woman for her habit,
When sir I love, I'll fee my lone stark naked.
Right courteous Lady,
Our bounty is too sparing for your worth,
Yet such as it is accept it.
Royal Sir,
It is beyond hope or merit.
I prithee Monsieur,
A little comp amened with that old Lady,
Whilst I confer with her.
I thank you Sir:
See, you would make me a sir Panderus,
Yet far as I can see you, I will trust you.
Sweet Lady, how long is it???nay keep that hand,
Since those fierce wars twixt Florence and great Millaine
Nay that hand still.
And have you ne'er a love then?
Yes my Lord:
I should belie my own thoughts to deny,
And say I had none.
Pray acquaint me with him,
And for thy sake I'll give him state and Honours,
And make him great in Florence. Is he of birth?
A mighty Duke-domes Heir.
How now my Lauretta?
I prithee sweet where lives he?
In his Country.
Honour me so much
As let me know him.
In that your Grace must pardon me.
Must? then I will. Is he of presence sweet?
As like your Grace as one Prince to another.
Honour me so much then, as let me know him.
In that excuse me Sir.
Thee, love I will
In all things: wherefore study you?
Why my Lord?
I was even wishing you a mighty harm;
But pardon me it was out even unawares.
Harm? there's none can come from thee Lauretta,
Thou art all goodness, nay confess it sweet.
I was wishing with my self that you were poor:
Oh pardon me my Lord, a poor, a poor man.
Why my Lauretta?
Sir, because that little
I have, Might doe you good: I would you had
No, money, nay, no means: but I speak idly,
Pray pardon me my Lord.
By all my hopes
I have in Florence, would thou were a Duchess,
That I might court thee upon equal terms;
Or that I were of low dejected fortunes,
To rank with thee in Birth: for to enjoy
Thy beauty, were a greater Dowre then Florence
Great Duke-dome.
Oh my Lord, my Lord,
Are you close at it? and you too crabbed Age, and you the???there's Rods in peace for some of you.
Now sir, the news?
Oh my Lord, there's a Nobleman come from the
Court to speak with you.
Monsieur, upon my life it is some Ambassador.
Good Sir make haste, lest I be challenged for you.
No worthy Friend, for me thou shalt not suffer,
At our best leasur'd hours we mean to visit you;
Now give me leave to take a short fare-well.
Your pleasure is your own,
To part from him I am rent quite asunder.
And you can but keep your legs close,
Let him rend any thing else and spare not.
Speak the true Tenor of your Embassy.
If Florence prize the Duke of Millaines love,
His endeared Amity: If he have mind
To mix with him in con???anguinity,
To strengthen both your Realms: he make the project
To your fair Treaty, that your hopeful Heir
Shall with the princeise Iulia his fair Daughter,
Be joined in Marriage; her large Dowre shall be
A spacious Duke-dome after his decease.
But which my Lord counts most, is a fair League
Twixt your divided Duke-domes.
We doe conceit you:
But for the Dowre you crave?
Ten thousand Crowns
By th'yeare.
It is granted: only our Sons consent
Is wanting: but see here, he wished for comes.
Monsieur what are those?
Ambassadors my Lord.
Whence are these Lords?
From Millaine.
Their business Royal Sir?
About a match,
Which if you't please, we highly shall applaud.
They offer you a fair and virtuous Princess
Unto your bed:
Unto my bed my Lord?
I am not so afraid of spirits Sir,
But I can lye alone without a bed-fellow.
It is the fair Princess Iulia you must Marry.
Marry my Lord?
I marry must you Sir,
Or you divorce your self from our dear love.
But is she fair?
As ever Helen was.
What, and as Charte?
It were not Princely in you, Royal Sir,
To question such a Princess Chastity;
I could have instanced Lucrece.
Would you had,
For both were ravished.
How's this my Lord?
They offer love and beauty, which being both
So freely offered, doe deserve acceptance,
Your answer Sir?
That I am yours:
The States; and if you please
So to dispose me, hers: what ere she be,
Come friend, I must impart my Love this news,
Or it will rend my heart.
I shall return this answer.
Faithfully
As we intend it: But you first shall taste
The bounty of our Court, with royal Presents
Both to the Duke your master, and the Princess;
It done, prepare we for this great solemnity,
Of Hymeneal Iubilies. Fixed is the day,
Wherein rich Florens shall her pomp display.
Only to you, of all the Millaine Peers,
I dare expose my safety.
In these arms
My Lord, you are Sanctuared.
I doe not doubt it:
But I pray you tell me, since I left the Court,
How is my absence taken?
Of the Duke,
With much distaste.
But of the Princess Iulia?
Full two Months
She kept her Chamber, grievously distracted,
They say, mere grief for your departure hence.
Bravely managed,
The Duke I see was more kind to her fame,
Then to his pretty grand-childe; well Isle salt it all,
But what think you if after all I should
Send Letters to her, or Ambassadors?
I should not win her, for I know
Th'aue her heart in bondage.
Why worthy Prince,
Have you not heard the news: She hath been offered
Unto the Florentine, the match accepted,
And the Nuptial day the tenth of the next Month.
No more: Pray leave me Sir.
I will: Pray Sir
Regard your safety.
To bee married, Ruimus in vestitum semper,
I did neglect her, but being denied,
I dote upon her beauty: Methinkes it is fit,
If I begot the Child? I wed the Mother:
The Prince, I pity hee should bee so wronged,
And I the Instrument: Now help me brain,
That near was wont to fail me: It is decreed
Something to Plot, although I fail to speed.
I wonder you should bee so sad and melancholy,
Isle lay a years wages before hand Isle tell your disease,
As well as any Doctor in Florence, and
Let me but feel your pulse.
Away, you are a fool, and trouble vs.
That's no matter whether I bee a fool or a physician,
If I loose, Isle pay, that's certain.
Try the fools counsel daughter, but bee sure
To forfit, and to pay.
Now sir, your skill.
Nay, I must feel your pulse first, for if a Women's pulse bee near a place, I know there's few here of my years but would bee glad to turn Doctors.
Now sir, you see I doe not smile.
Nay, if it bee nothing else, Isle fetch that will cure you presently.
Child I must chide you, you give too much way unto this humour: It alters much your beauty.
Oh young Mistress, where are you, the Prince,
The Prince.
Oh Mother, doe you hear the news, the Prince,
The Prince is coming. Where is hee, oh where?
Where is hee? Why at the Court; where should hee bee? I did but do it to make you smile: Nay, Isle tickle you for a Doctor: Madam I have a years wages before hand.
Is hee not come then?
No marry is hee not.
My soul did leap within, to hear the Prince
But named: It started every joint.
Nay Madam, the Prince is come.
Away, your foolerie's unseasonable,
Weal not believe you.
If you will not believe me, will you believe these?
Welcome my Lord: And wherefore doe you sigh?
I figh Lauretta, cause I cannot choose.
Nor could I choose, should you but sigh again.
Isle tell thee Love, strange news: I must be married.
Married my Lord!
Why doe you weep? You blamed me now for sigh???ing: Why doe you melt in tears? Sweet what's the cause?
Nay, nothing.
And as I told thee Sweet; I must bee married,
My Father and the State will have it so;
And I came instantly to tell the news
To thee Lauretta; As to one, from whom
I nothing can conceal.
Why should you grieve
For that? For I, my Lord, must have a Husband too.
Must you? But when's the day?
When's yours my Lord?
The tenth of the next month.
The self same day,
And selfsame hour that you enjoy your love,
My Princely Husband I must then enjoy.
But doe you love him?
Not my self more dear.
How happy are you aboue me fair friend,
That must enjoy where you affect? When I
Am tide to others fancies: It was your promise
That I should know him further.
You shall see him
That day, as richly habitat as the great
Heir of Florence: But royal Sir, what's she
That you must bed then?
It is Iulia,
The Duke of Millaines daughter: Why change your Face?
That she that hates me most should live to enjoy
Him I affect best: O my ominous fate,
I thought to have hid me from thee in these deserts,
But thou dost dog me every where.
Look to her safety, not for the Crown
Of Florence I would have her perish.
Help to support her.
Oh Friend, that I should change my Royalty
To weakness now: I doe think this lodge
A Palace, and this Beauteous Mayden-head
Of greater worth then Iulia.
Come my Lord,
Lay by these idle thoughts, and make you ready
To entertain your Bride.
The Prince, the Prince,
I come to seek the Prince, and was directed
Unto this place.
Thy news.
A Letter.
Whence?
Read, the Contents will show you; their eyes are from me, and I must hence.
The Millaine Princess is betrothed; deflowered,
Not worthy of your love, believe this true
Upon a Prince his word; when you, shall bed her,
And find her flood in her Virginity,
You shall have cause to think upon his love
From whom you had this caution;
But doe it with that Princely management,
Her honour bee not slandered: Hee that loves,
Admires, and honours you:
Whore's hee that brought this Letter?
Fled my Lord.
Post after; bring him back,
Could hee not set his hand to 't???
How now, the news?
Hoe's fled upon a milk white Gannet Sir,
Seeming t'out strip the wind, and I???lost him.
Thou hast lost me quite.
What means this passions Sir?
Monsieur read there,
What will confound thee: Oh if she bee unchaste!
Could they find none but me to work upon.
It confounds me my Lord.
If she bee Chaste,
How shall I wrong her, to question her fair Virtues?
Right.
But if she bee not right? I wrong my Honour,
Which after marriage, how shall I recall?
It is certain.
Yes: Oh how am I perplexed!
Come, Isle to Court,
Isle not bee swayed: Were she a Potent Queen,
Where Counsel fails me, Isle once trust to spleen.
Let me see, the Prince is to bee married to morrow, and my young Mistress means to keep a Feast in the Forest, in honour of his wedding at the Court: Now am I sent as Ca???terer into the City to provide them victuals, which they charged me to buy; no ordinary fare, no more it shall, and therefore I have cast it thus; First and foremost, wee will have???(yes down it shall) we will have a Gammon of Bacon roasted, and stuffed with Oysters; And six Black-Puddings to bee served up in Sorrell-sops; A pickell'd shoulder of Mutton, and a sirloin of Beef in White-broth, so much for the first course. Now, for the second, we will have a Cherry-Tart cut into Rashers and broiled; A Custard Carbonado'd on the coals; A live Eel
swimming in clouted Cream; And six Sheepes-heads baked, with the horns peer??????gout of the pasty-crust. The moral is, because it is a wedding dinner.
The joyful day's to morrow. Pass this plunge
And we are made for ever.
What, my old Politician? hee that undermined my old Lady and my young Mistress? now that I could find but one stratagem to blow him up; I would toss him, I would blanket him in the Ayre, and make him cut an Italian caper in the Clouds: These Politicians can doe more execution with a pen, in their studies, then a good Soldier with his sword in the field, but he hath spied me.
Thee friend I should have known?
And you too, I should have known, but whether for a friend, or no, ther's the question?
Thou serve the General Sforsa.
I confess it; but whether you have served him well, or no, there hangs a Tale.
How doth thy noble Lady, fair Lauretta?
They have left Millaine long, reside they here
Near to the City Florence?
Some three miles off, here in the Forest, not half an hours riding.
I pray thee recommend me to them both,
And say, It shall go hard with mine affairs
But Isle find seasoned hours to visit them.
You shall not want directions to find the place, come when you will, you shall be most heartily???poisoned.
Tell them, The news that they are well
Is wondrous pleasing to me, and that power
I have in Millaine is reserved for them,
To work them into grace: I can but smile,
To see how close I have plotted their exile.
Now business calls me hence: farewell.
And behanged, Monsieur Stroza, whose description
My Muse hath included in these few lines;
Stroza, Thy Head is of a compely Block,
And would show well, crowned with the comb of Cock:
His Face an Inn, his Brow a sluttish Room,
His Nose the Chamberlain, his Beard the Broom,
Or like New-market Heath, that makes thieves rich,
In which his Mouth stands just like Deuills-ditch
And so farewell to your worship, grave Monsieur Stroza,
For I must about my market.
Stay till we be resolved.
What means our son?
Not to be gulled by the best Prince in Europe;
Much less by Millaine.
Sir, be plain with vs.
I much suspect that Ladies Chastity.
Hers.
I have said.
Ther's Wormwood.
I came in terms of Honour,
Brought with me, all my comforts here on earth,
My daughter; to bestow her on thy son:
Poor Lady, innocently coming, forsaking all,
Father and Country, to betake her self
Unto his bosom; and is she for all this,
Branded with shame?
Who can acuse her, speak? what probabilities?
What ground? the place? the means? the season how
She did become corrupt?
Sir, so we have heard.
Produce the witness; and behold, I stand
The Champion for her honour, and will aver
Her Chaste, aboue degree; infinitely honest:
Oh Prince! what, can you ground such injury
Upon vain heare-say? Speak for your self, take spirit
Came we thus far, to be thus wronged?
Was the slave never Christened, hath hee no name?
Have you sent for me, to accuse me here
In this stange Clime? It is not Princely done.
O Heaven, how am I perplexed!
Son, Son, you wrong
Your self and me too, to accuse a Lady
Of such high birth and fame; unless you confess
Your self to have erred, you needs must forfeit vs.
My Lord, yield to your father, lest you draw
His wrath upon you.
Well, since I must, I will:
Your pardon, Royal Father: Yours fair Princess:
And yours great Duke:
If I shall find my self truly to have erred,
I shall confess your chastity much injured.
Submission is to me full recompense.
My daughters honour?
Doe not stand off my Lord,
If she be wronged, shoe's not much behind-hand.
Oh let me alone Stroza.
Nay, good Brother
Accept him as your Son.
My hearts no closet for revenge; tic done.
Now hear my protestations: I receive
This Ladies hand on these Conditions;
If you, my Lord, her father, or her self,
Know her self faulty, Oh confess it here,
Before the Ceremonies fasten on me: for if hereafter
I find you once corrupted? by this right hand,
My future hopes, my Fathers royalty,
And all the honours due unto our house,
He have as many lives and heads for it,
As he hath Manners Castles, Lives and Towers;
It shall be worthy to be booked in Chronicles
Of all strange tongues: And therefore beauteous Lady,
As you esteem a Prince his name or honour,
That your be a Mecenas unto virtue;
If in the least of these you guilty be,
Pull back your hand.
What if you find her chaste?
If chaste? she shall be dearer far to me.
Then my own soul: I will respect her honour,
Equal with that of my great Ancestors;
All this I vow, as I am Prince and virtuous.
Then join their hands.
Shoe's mine: Set forwards then.
All goes not well, This juggling will be found,
Then where am I then? would I were safe in Millaine.
Here Matchiuell th'wast hatched: Could not the same
Planet inspire this pate of mine with some
Rare stratagem, worthy a lasting Character:
No, twill not be; my brain is at a non-plus,
For I am dull.
Stroza.
My Lord.
Oh now, or never Stroza!
I am turned Fool, Ass, Iddeott; Are they married?
Yes, and the Prince after the Ceremony,
Embraced her lovingly.
But the hell is,
That they must lie together, ther's the Devil.
And then???
And then we are disgraced and shamed.
Can thou not helped man?
Why you would make
A man???midwife, wooed you? I have no skill.
Stroza, awake, you are drowsy.
Peace, interrupt me not,
I ha'te: so to revenge me upon her
Whom most I hate. To Strumpet her it were brave.
Counsel advise me.
You'll make me mad my Lord:
And in this sweet revenge, I am not only
Pleased (with just satisfaction for all wrongs)
But the great Prince most palpably deceived.
The time runs on,
Think on my honour Stroza.
If you'll eat grapes unripe, edge your own teeth,
Isle stay the mellowed season, do it your self,
Unless you give me time for it.
But think with mine, on thine own safety Stroza.
Peace, give me way my Lord, so shall the Prince
Bee palpably deceived, Fair Iulia's honour
Most prosperously deserved, The Duke my master,
Freed from all blame, Wane hindered, Peace confirmed,
And I secured; Oh I am fortunate
Beyond imagination!
O dear Stroza,
Help now, or never!
Hee was a a mere Ass
That raised Troys Horse: it was a pretty structure.
Oh me!
Synon, a fool, I can doe more
With precious Gold, then hee with whining Tears.
Oh my tormented soul!
Pray my Lord, give me
Five hundred crowns.
What to doe with them man?
See how you stand on trifles; when our lives,
Your honour; all our fortunes lie a bleeding:
What shall I have the Gold?
Thy purpose prithee?
I know a desolate Lady, whom with Gold
I can corrupt.
There are five hundred Crowns,
Snroza bethink thee what thou vndertak'st,
Such an Act, would make huge Atlas bend his head
Unto his heel.
But say I cannot win her,
They bide the brunt of all, here let them stay,
With these five hundred Crowns Isle post away.
Madam, yonder's a Gentleman comes to speak with you in all hast.
Admit him in.
Lady bee happy, and from this blessed hour
Ever rejoice fair Virgin, for I bring you
Gold, and Enlargement; with a recovery
Of all your former loss, and dignity,
But for a two hours labour: Nay, that no labour
Nor toil, but a mere pleasure.
Your words like music, please me with delight,
Beyond imagination: Offered to vs?
Being exiled our Country, and our friends,
Therefore good sir, delay not with long complement,
But tell these hopes more plain.
Have wee not here
Too many ???ares?
Wee would bee private sir,
And therefore leave vs.
You have seen the Prince of Florence?
Yes, I have.
Is he not for his Feature, Beauty, Goodness,
The most Complete? So absolute in all things.
All this is granted.
How happy doe you think that Lady then
That shall Enjoy him? Nay, that shall bee the first
To prove him,
And exchange Virginity,
Were it not bright Lady a great happiness?
I wish that happiness were mine alone,
Oh my faint heart: Passion ouer-swayes me quite,
But hide thy grief Lauretta: Sir, you 'le make
Me fall in love with him: Were I his equal,
I then should judge him worthy of no less.
Love him: What's she doth not, if she have eyes?
Were I my self a Woman: I would lay
My self a prostitute unto the Prince:
She is not wise that would refuse him Lady.
Good Sir bee brief:
To what pray tends these speeches?
To thee sweet Lady: I offer all these pleasures,
Oh happy fate that hath selected me
To be your raiser: Lady take this gold,
But that's not all: For there are greater honours
Prepared for you; the Duke of Millaine doth
Commend him to you: Iulia his daughter
Hath in her honour late miscarried,
Now 't lies in you to salve and make all good.
Who? Lies this in my daughter?
Yes, in her,
She hath the power to make the Duke her friend,
Iulia her sister, and all Millaine bound
To offer up for her their Orisons.
Good Sir bee plain.
This night lie with the Prince
In Iulia's stead: There's way made for you,
Who would not woo, for what you are wooed too?
Doe you not blush, when you deliver this
Pray tell the Duke, all Women are not Iulia,
And though wee bee dejected, thus much tell him,
Wee hold our honour at too high a price,
For Gold to buy.
Nay Lady, hear me out;
You shall preserve her honour, gain the Duke,
Redeem your fortunes: Strengthen you in friends,
You shall have many Towns and Turrets standing,
Which future War may ruin: Think on that.
Lauretta, oh behold thy mothers tears!
Think on they Father, and his honour won,
And call to mind our exile: All the wrongs
Wee have endured by her, to whom wee gave
No cause, and now are plundg'd in a deep stream.
Which not resisted, will for ever blemish
The name of Sforsa thy great Ancestors,
Thou'lt waken thy dead Father from his grave,
And cause his honoured wounds which hee received
From that unthankful Duke, to bleed afresh,
Pouring out new blood from 's grisly wounds,
If thou consent to this abhorred fact,
Thy Mothers curse will seize on thee for ever:
Oh child, behold me on my knees: Isle follow thee,
Oh doe not leave me thus, and pull on thee
An everlasting stain, to scandal all
Thy former Virtues, for the momentary
Short pleasures of one night.
She doth not council well; it is foolish rashness,
Womanish Indiscretion
Sir bee answered,
If Iulia bee disloyal: Let her bee found
So by the Prince she wedds: Let her be branded
With the vile name of strumpet: She disgraced
Me, that ne'er thought her harms; publicly struck me,
Nay in the Court: And after that, procured
My banishment: These Injuries I reap't
By her alone, then let it light on her.
Now see your error,
What better; safer, or more sweet revenge,
Then with the Husband? what more could woman ask?
My blood rebels against my reason, and
I no way can withstand it: It is not the Gold
Moos me, but that dear love I bear the Prince,
Makes me neglect the credit and the honour
Of my dear Fathers house: Sir, what the Duke desires
I am resolved to doe his utmost will.
Oh my dear daughter.
Good Mother speak not, for my word is past.
And cannot bee recalled, Sir will you away?
I am resolute.
She yields unto her shame; which makes me blessed,
Let Millions fall, so I bee crowned with rest.
Oh me, unhappy, that here knew grief till not.
Thou art our trusty Counsellor; if this pass ?????????
We're past all fear: What is she prithee? What?
What's that to you, bee she what ere she can,
Ell's one to vs, so she be found a Virgin;
I have hired her, and shoe's pleased.
But gave you charge
As soon as ere the Prince was fast asleep,
That she should rise and give place to our daughter?
Doubt you not that; what, jealous already?
How long she stays, I fine would be a bed;
Pray heaven she doe not fail
By him asleep, and so forget her self.
Heir's in my heart, a violent Fever still;
Nor shall I find my self in my true temper,
Until this brunt bee past.
What, not yet? had she with Parma been a bed so long,
It would have more perplexed me.
See, here she is;
The news?
The Prince is fast, all done.
Step in her place;
Nay when? and counterfeit sleep presently.
Away to bed my Lord: You to the Forest.
I'll to my Coach, ell's well.
And for my part, it was not much amiss,
Because my Lord the Prince had such content
Which cause him give his Charter to my hand,
The full assurance of fair Iulia's dowre:
Day gins to break, and I must to the Lodge.
Oh what a grief it was to leave the Prince!
But leave those thoughts: These Gifts to me assigned,
Are nothing worth the Gem I left behind.
What doe you not like your bed-fellow, my Lord;
That you are up so soon?
Oh friend, was never man blessed with a Bride
So chaste! I'm fearce my self, till this be known
To my fair Forest friend: Let's mount away,
The nights quite spent; and now begins the day.
And what was it you said sir?
Marry, I would entreat your Lady-ship to turn away
My fellow Ierom, for I think hoe's
No true man.
No true man, Why?
Marry we were both in the Tavern together tother day???
And hee stole some Plate?
No Madam, but there stood at our elbow a pottle Pot???
And hee stole the Pot?
No Madam, but he stole the wine in the Pot, and drunk it off,
And made himself so drunk hee be-pist himself:
Your Ladyship could not be better be-pist in a Summers-day.
Good morrow Lady: Wher's your daughter pray?
She took so little rest last night, my Lord
I think she is scarce well.
Pray may wee see her?
My Lord you may.
HEnce with Passion, Sighs and Tears,
Disasters, Sorrows, Cares and Fears.
See, My Love (my Love) appears,
That thought himself exiled.
Whence might all these loud Joys grow?
Whence might Mirth, and Banquet's flow?
But that hoe's come (hoe's come) I know.
Fair Fortune thou hast smiled.
Give to these blind windows, Eyes;
Daze the Stars, and mock the Skies,
And let vs two (vs two) devise,
To lavish our best Treasures
Crown our Wishes with Content,
Meet our Souls in sweet consent,
And let this night (this night) bee spent
In all abundant pleasvres.
Oh good morrow Lady,
I come to tell you news!
They are welcome to me my Lord.
You know the Princess Iulia was supposed to bee Adulterate???
So we have heard it rumor'd
Oh but fair friend, she was indeed belied!
And I this morning rose from her chaste bed:
But wherefore sweet cast you that blushing smile?
But you have broke promise with me: For you told me
That the same day and hour I took my Bride,
You should Enjoy a Princely Husband.
True
My Lord, I did.
And are you married then?
And lay with him last night.
Is hee oft fortunes?
That you may soon conjecture by this gift.
What have you then, some tokens that were his?
Some few my Lord, amongst the rest, this diamond
Hee put upon my finger.
You amaze me!
Yet Rings may bee alike: If then your husband
Bee of such state and fortunes, What dowre are you allotted.
Sir, ten thousand crowns by the year.
I gave no more unto my Iulia.
But where is the security you have
For the performance of it?
See here, My Lord,
Sir, Is not that sufficient for a dowry?
This is the Indenture that I gave to Iulia;
Prithee Lauretta, but resolve me true,
How came you by this Charter?
Pardon great Prince; for all that love you spake
To Iulia, you whispered in my ear:
She is unchaste; which, lest you should have found,
Her father sent me here, five hundred crowns
By Stroza; but neither his gold, nor all
His sly temptations, could one whit move me;
Only the love I ever bare your honour,
Made me not prise my own. No lust full appetite
Made me attempt such an ambitious practise,
As to aspire unto your bed my Lord.
Rise, dee not weep, Oh I am strangely rapt
Into deep strange confusion?
Millaine should know, were it my case my Lord,
A better Prince then hee should not wrong me.
I have bethought already how to be are me;
This Charter and this Ring, fair Love, keep you;
And when I send for you, you shall repair
Unto the Court: This all I shall enjoin you.
Great Sir, I shall.
Come Monsieur, now it is cast,
Revenge near rules, so it be found at last.
Who saw the Prince last? Is it a custom with him
To rise thus early?
Sir, hee never sleeps
Longer then th'day, nor keeps his bed by Sun:
It is not the lone of the fairest Lady lives,
Can make him leave his morning exercise.
He never exercised with me, I'm sure;
I might have lain as safe, free, and untouched,
By any Lady living.
Pardon Lords,
I have stayed you long, your blessing royal Father.
My custom is, ever to rise before
A women's hour: Now hear me speak my Lords,
I'm married to a Lady, whose chaste honour,
Reports and false Suggestions, did enforce me
To call in public question; but that we leave
Unto our last nights rest.
True my good Lord;
But did you find me faulty?
I doe protest, my Lords, I bosomed with
As true and chaste a Virgin, as ere lodged
Within a Princes arms; All this I vow
As I am Royal.
Ell's well my Lord?
Ell's excellent Stroza.
Now for a???ends and public satisfaction,
For the foul wrong I did her, questioning
Her Virtue, Isle confirm her dowre, and that
Before I eat: Sweet Lady, reach the Charter
I gave you last night, before you were full mine?
I received none Sir.
Sweet, will you tel me that?
With which you did receive a Ring the Duke
My father gave me.
When?
Last night.
Where?
In your Bed.
It was in my dream then.
Being broad awake.
I like not this: I smell a Rat.
Stroza, I fear too.
Brazen fore-head, Wilt
Thou leave now: It is true my Lord. You did
Receive them both, Have you forgot sweet Lady,
This very morning, that you gave them both
To me? The Princess jested, to see how
You wooed but take it.
Excellent Villain!
It was well put off:
It is strange shoe's so forgetful: I prithee Stroza
Where are they?
Where are they? they are???
Where?
Why study you?
They are there???
Where man?
I posted them
To Millaine, sent them safe, dare you not trust my word
Not till I see my deeds.
By one of the Princes Train.
See which of the Train is wanting.
I shall my Lord.
I would I were in Turkey.
Would I were on horse-backe.
Nay, look not you dejected beauteous Bride,
For this is done only to honour you.
The Prince, my Master, hearing your solemnities,
Hath sent this dish, to add a present to
Your royal Feasts, wishing himself therein
To be a welcome guest.
Your Masters name?
Prince Parma.
Give this Gentleman
A 100. crowns: This will much grace our banquet.
Ther's in that dish, some Moral.
Coming from him,
Meethinks it should be seasoned with some strange
And dangerous poison: Touched not, my Lord.
There should be more in it, then a feasting dish;
What's here, a Child?
Oh my perplexed heart!
Upon his breast ther's something writ, Isle read it.
It is fit, if Justice bee not quite exiled
That he that wedds the mother, keep the child.
This Child was sent to me.
From whom? whom, Parma? break the bastards neck,
As I would doe the Fathers, were hee here.
Sure spare't for the Mothers sake; t'was sent to vs:
Which of the train is wanting?
None my Lord.
Stroza, where is this Charter and the Ring?
I know of none.
Why, t'was confessed.
Right, I confessed it; but your grace must know,
It was but to please your humour, which began
To grow into some violence.
I can forbear no longer; Impudent Stroza,
Thou art a Villain, perjured, and forsworn:
That Duke dishonourable; and she unchaste:
Besides, thou hyredst a Virgin in her room;
(Slave as thou art) to bosom with the Prince;
Gau'st her five hundred Crowns. That this is true,
I will maintain by combat.
That I did this? Hee lies below his entrails,
That dares to brave me with such a proud affront:
And in the honour of my Prince and Country
I will approve thee recreant.
A strife, that nought save combat can decide,
The cause so full of doubts, and intricate.
See, they are both armed, and evenly, without odds,
Save what the justice of the cause can yield.
Be it no intrusion held, if a strange Prince
(Setting behind, all complemental leave)
Amongst strange Princes enters: Let me know
Which is the Prince of Florence?
Wee are hee.
And Parma?
Parma?
Excuse me Sir,
I know him not: But if I much mistake not,
Wee are late indebted to you for a present.
It was a gift, I should bee loath to part with,
But upon good conditions. Am I then
To all a stranger: Doe you not know me Lady?
Hear him not speak, I charge thee by thine honour?
Parma speak, and if thy speech was bent to me?
Ere I proceed, let me behold this babe;
Ne'er a Nurse here? Pray hand it you sweet Lady,
Till I find out a Mother.
Touch it not,
I charge thee on my blessing.
Pardon Sir,
It well becomes my handling.
Parma proceed.
Then Florence know, thou hast wronged me beyond, thought;
Shipwrecked my Honour, and my Fame; nay strumpeted
Her, whom I term my Bride.
It is false, I never embraced save with one,
And her, I found to bee most truly chaste.
Then It maintain: Hast thou a Wife here?
Yes.
Then Isle approve her to bee none of thine,
That thou hast fetched her from another arms.
Nay more, that shoe's unchaste?
Know Parma, thou hast kindled such a Flame,
That all the Oceans billows scarce can quench:
Bee that our quarrels ground.
Princes, forbear:
First see the Issue of the former Combat,
Before more blood you hazard.
Wee are pleased.
And wee content.
Yield thy self recreant villain, or thou dy'st.
Save me, I will confess; Is Parma here?
Yes, here wee are.
I falsely stuffed thy head with Jealousies,
And for some private ends of my revenge,
Disgraced the General, and set odds betwixt
Lauretta and the Princess: All these mischiefs
Proceed from my suggestions.
Damn him for it.
Is that your kindness? Give me lean to live,
Be it but to taint his honour.
Tell me Stroza,
Was Iulia chaste?
No.
Did her Father know it?
Yes, and more too: I had the Gold from him,
To bribe the Generals daughter.
Injuries,
Beyond the thought of man.
Which wee 'le no longer strive with, since the hey???uens have laid that op most plain and palpable, which most wee thought to conceal.
Will Parma fight?
Resolve me first? Was Iulia found Chaste?
I here protest, wee parted both, as clear,
As at our first encounter.
Then I accept her, If you my Lord
Bee pleased so to part with her.
Willingly.
Now have I my desires: Had I withal,
The Princely babe I boar.
See Iulia,
Whom thy hard-hearted Father doomed to death,
My care hath still Conserved, Embrace it Lady;
Nay, it is thy own ne'er fear it.
Then Prince Parma,
With your words Isle proceed.
It is fit all Justice hee not quite exiled,
That hee that wedds the Mother keep the child.
But Peers, the Virgin that this Stroza hired
To Justify thee wrongs?
At hand my Lord:
Monsieur conduct them hither?
I shall Sir.
The Generals Wife and Daughter.
Yes and their man too; all that's left of him.
This the Maid,
To whom I am so bound?
Oh let me lie
As prostrate at your foot in Vassalage,
As I was at your pleasure.
Sweet arise.
Your Lordship hath bin up already, when she was down: I hope if the thing you wott of go no worse forward then it hath hegun, and that you take charge of my young Lady, you need not bee altogether unmindful of her Gentleman-Vsher.
Of what birth is that Lady?
Even the least
Envy can speak, She is a Soldiers Daughter,
Decended from a noble parentage.
Who with her mother,
Thus kneels to him, as to their Sovereign.
Entreating, grace and pity.
You have both:
Sure, sure, the heavens for our Ingratitude,
To noble Sforza, our brave general,
Hath saved crossed our proceedings: which to recompense,
We'll take you unto our best patronage.
Millaine is honourable.
But by your favour Sir,
This must bee our own charge.
With which we are pleased.
Stroza was cause of all, but his submission
Hath saved him from our hate, arise in grace.
Whilst we thus greet Lauretta.
Royal Princess,
I still shall be your hand-maide.
Who would strive,
To bee a villain, when the good thus thrive?
You crown me with your wishes, Royal father;
My Mistress first, and next my bed-fellow,
And now my Bride most welcome. Excellent Sir,
Embrace the Millaine Duke, whilst I change hand
With Princely Parma; Iulia, once my Wife?
Back to your husband I return you chaste:
Monsieur, bee still our friend: You our kind Mother:
And let succeeding Ages, thus much say:
Never was Maiden-head better given away.
NEw Plays, are like new Fashions; If they take?
Followed and worn: And hippie's hee can make
First into 'th Garb: But when they once have past
Censure, and prove not well, they seldom last.
Our Play is new, but whether shaped well
In Act or Seane, Judge you, you best can tell:
Wee hope the best, and it is our least of fear,
That any thing but comely should show here;
However Gentlemen, it is in your powers,
To make it last; or wear out, in two hours.

ARe you the Author of this Play?
What then?
Out of this Poetry, I wonder what
You doe with this Disease, a seed of Vipers
Spawnd in Parnassus poole, whom the world frowns on,
And here you vent your poison on the Stage.
What say you sir?
Oh you are deaf to all
Sounds, but a Plaudit, and yet you may
Remember, if you please, what entertainment
Some of your Tribe have had, that have took pains
To bee contemned, and laughed at by the Vulgar,
And then ascribed it to their ignorance.
I should be loath to see you move their spleens
With no better success, and then with some
Commendatory Epistles fly to the Press,
To vindicate your credit.
What if I doe?
By my consent Isle have you
Banished the Stage, proscribed, and interdicted
Castalian water, and Poetical fire.
In that you wrong th'approved judgments of
This noble Auditory, who like a Sphere
Moved by a strong Intelligence, sit round
To crown our Infant Muse, whose celestial
Applause, she heard at her first entrance.
This way of Poetry has deceived many;
For tic not every one that writes a Verse,
Has washed his mouth in Helicon, or slept
On the two topped Parnassus, there's great difference
Betwixt him, that shall write a lawful Poem,
And one that makes a paper of loose Verses,
To court his looser Mistress; there's much ayre
Required to lift up the Dircaean Swan,
When he shall print his tracts among the clouds:
Not as your ignorant Poetasters use,
In spite of Phoebus, without Art or Learning,
T'usurpe the Stage, and touch with impure hands,
The lofty Buskin, and the Comic stile.
This I confess; but when the prosperous gale
Of their auspicious breath shall fill our sails,
And make our high-borne thoughts swell like a tide:
And when our bolder Muse shall put on Buskins,
And clap on her Talaria on her feet,
Then like swift Mercury, she may aspire
To a sublimer Region, with that force,
And bear that weighty burden on her wings,
That she shall fear to crack her pincons.
Tic this licentious generation
Of Poets, trouble the peace of the whole Town;
A Constable cannot get his Maid with child,
A Baker nor a Scrivener loose his cares,
Nor a Justice of Peace share with his Clerk;
A Lord can't walk drunk with a torch before him,
A Gallant can't bee suffered to pawne's Brecches,
Or leave his cloak behind him at a Tavern,
But you must jerk him for it.
In all ages
It hath been ever free for Comic Writers,
If there were any that were infamous,
For lust, ambition, or avarice,
To brand them with great liberty, though I
Disclaim the privilege; no impure language,
As Stygian mud stirred up with Charons oar,
Ne'er belched so foul an ayre, shall ever mix
With our ingenious mirth, nor need we fear,
Any their foul aspersions; whilst the wise,
Sit to control and judge, in whose clear eyes,
As we deserve, we look to stand or fall,
Passing profaner people, and leave all
To be determined as you censure. Boy
Go and subscribe it quickly what I say.
Hoe's grown contemptuous, &amp; flings away
In a rapture; for this, when I am in,
If I can't laughed it's play, Isle laugh at him.
Tic true indeed, our love is like our life,
There's no man blessed in either, till his end.
And he whom Fate points to that happiness,
A thousand passions mock his doubtful hopes,
Till Virtue that can never be extinct,
Shall rise aboue their rage, and call down Hymen,
Attended with as many several joys,
To triumph in the circle of our brow.
But that the fatal union of our hearts,
Should breed such issues of extremity,
In both our fortunes, yet the greatest grief
I feel, is in your wrongs, not in my own.
Ne'er think of it; what though my father made me
A stranger to his loins, and cut me off
From my inheritance, because he thought me
A rival in his love, that fatal love
Whose jealousy prevailed so in a Wore,
That it kilt al affection in a father.
These ill begotten thoughts he still maintained,
And cherished to his death, whose period
Of life, was the beginning of my mischief:
For he gave all the land unto my brother.
One less deserving, would I could report
That he had any worth, his il wrought mind,
Too apt for the impression of all vice,
As if he were to strive with his estate,
And had no other Enemy, would make
A conquest of his ruin. So negligent
Of what his father wrongfully bereft me,
That he spends all inryot, and so vainly,
As if hee meant to throw it after him,
Only he has a foolish flashing wit,
Too weak to sustain, or prevent his fall,
But no solidity of mind or judgement.
And now imagines he can salve it up,
By being styled, A Fine Companion.
Let that entitle him to all my right,
Whilst I secure in my imputed crime,
Think thee a better portion; all my fault
Was honesty, and true affection.
And those still envious fate insults upon.
But we will live together, and what ere
Shall interpose to poison our true love,
Still triumph o'er their malice.
Dear Valerie,
Had fortune pleased to place me in that means
My birth assured me, we had spent our life
Luld in the lap of peace, our days had run
Smooth as the feet of time, free from all tumults.
And why not still?
It may doe so, but I
Have not a fortune equal to your virtues,
And to support the title of your worth.
My mind was never yet ambitious.
And there is nothing but your company,
Can satisfy, or limit my desires.
I love you better then to injure you.
I will resign you to some richer heir,
Whose heaps of wealth left by his greedy father,
Untouched as is your goodness, may advance you,
And make you happy, think on it, be not cruel
To your own self.
On how have I deserved that you should think
So ill of me? you may divorce the luy,
The Vine from her embraces, me you can not.
Where is the care you wont to have of me?
What is my fault? you can be well without me,
And I shall please you best when I am absent.
Nay my Valerie doe not weep so sore,
Thy grief adds more to mine, it is enough
I part from thee, my heart with drops of blood,
Pays tribute to the Ocean of thy tears:
This treasure of thine eyes, if spent for those,
That lye untired, wanting their funeral rites,
And restless walk upon the Stygian strand,
So long as fate has limited their curse,
Would send them over to Elisium.
One grain of that same grief which clogs her heart,
Would lye in balance against the vniuerse.
The joy and happiness of all mankind,
Are given to me in her, and she was borne,
T'upbrayd the world, and tell them they are false.
What shall I doe when you are ravished from me?
Could Portia rather swallow glowing coals,
Then burn with a desire of her lost Brutus?
Shall the example of those times descend
To shame my love? Could the Egyptian Queen,
Rather endure the poignant stings of Adders,
Then that of death which wounded Antony???
And must I then survive you? can I live,
When you that are my soul are taken from me?
Oh tic not now as when Penelope
Could stay ten years the coming of her love,
And span a tedious web of foolish thoughts,
In expectation.
Faith that fled to heaven,
And truth, that after once men's hearts grew cold,
Would go no longer naked, now again
Are come to dwell with mortals. Here's a woman,
In whose comparison all wealth is sordid.
And since she proves so constant, fate it self
Shall not be blamed for me that I for sooke her.
Are you so well resolved? but I may cross you.
Oh me my father, I am quite undone
I am no body.
Yes, you are the wickedst,
The most ungracious child, that ever lived
Under so good a government, but that
Shall turn to tyranny, since your discretion
Can not distinguish of the difference.
Have I, what should I say? cherished you up,
With tenderness, and costly education,
To have you made a Sacrifice to beggary,
To one that's cut off, disinherited,
The son of the people?
Pray sir forbear,
My wrongs doe not permit you to abuse me.
Sir tic most basely done of you, to use
The charity, and freedom of my house,
Thus to seduce my daughter: but for that
If you can keep her as well from your mind,
As I can from your sight, you may in time,
Learn to forget her. You were best go travel,
Repair your self by some new found plantation,
Not think to supplant my issue. This place,
Is moralised with thrift and industry,
Suites not with men of your condition,
That have no stock but their gentry. Get you in,
And for your part sir, know my house no more,
Isle provide her a husband. So farewell.
How ere I speed, comfort attend thee still,
And so my best Valerie farewell.
Ne'er tell me on it, a Gentleman must show himself to be a Gentleman.
I so he must sir, but in you there's small resemblance of one.
Come you are an importunate Ass, a dull heavy fell???low, and I must bear with you must I? by this light I will not live out of the blaze of my fortunes, though it last but a minute, to linger out a tedious siege of adversities.
Yet you may live with more credit, at a competent rate as your land will allow you.
Land? there was my unhappiness to have any, I was borne to none, it was merely thrust upon me, and now I can not be quiet for it; tic like a wife that brings a thousand im???pediments,
I must take an order, I can not walk the streets in peace, your Magnifico stops his great horse to salute me, an other treats of marriage, and offers me his daughter, your Advocate racks me with impertinences, and to free my land from encumbrances troubles me ten times worse, what with friends and Counsellors, fellows that seem to me of an o???there species I could resign my interest.
All this sir is a grace to you, if you conceive it.
I'll sell all, it were a sin to keep it. When did thou know an elder brother disinherited, and the land conti???nu with the issue? now for me to live thriftily upon it, were no otherwise then to mock fate and contemn providence.
But now you know the danger, you may prevent it.
What should I dote upon casualties, trust Scriveners with my money, fellows that will break, and all the wit in Town can't solder them up again?
You may scorn my advice, but when tic too late???
I tell thee, I'll keep no Land, not no houses, candle rents that are subject to fire and ruin, I can't sleep for fear of them; theres no danger in coin, twill make a man re???spected, drink, and bee drunk, wear good clothes, and live as free as a Parthian.
But when ell's gone, whore's your respect, and gentile???tie then?
Where first? why in my blood still, we'll both run one course ne'er out of the vain I warrant thee.
If you can hold in this vain tic more lasting then a mineral.
Prithee good honest, old patched piece of expire???ence, go home and wear thy self out in contemplation, and doe not vex me with problems, they can doe no more good upon me, then a young pitiful Lover upon a Mistress, that has the sullens.
Well sir, I could willingly waite upon you in the way of honour and reputation.
No no, you shall not need my homo frugi, go about your business, and though men of my quality, doe seldom part with any thing, for good uses, for Gamesters and Cour???tiers have but little charity, yet for this once, I will trespass against custom, and here's something to put you into a for???tune,
I could wish it more, but you know how my man has u???sed me, and my occasions.
I see yet in his good nature a reluctance against ill courses, hee has not quite shook off his humanity, there are hopes to reclaim him; if not sir gallant, when all is spent, the return of this money will be grateful; and so farewell.
Adieu, and commend me to my Uncle, tell the Me???chanicks without, that I vouchsafe them admittance. I will not spend all in whoring and sack. I will have some clothes of value, though they be but to pawn in a vacation, for this purpose I have sent this morning to consult with the authen???teal judgements, of my Taylor, Sempster and Haberdasher; and now am I studying with what state I shall use them.
Come in fellows, I sent for you together, because you should receive your instructions: I am to make me a suit, and I would have you determine, about the form and the accou???trements, for the fitting of the points and the garters, and the roses, and the colours of them. Nature is much beholding to you, though there be a difference in the accidents, yet you can reconcile them, &amp; make them suit handsomely together. I am a Gentleman, and would not be disgraced for my irregularity.
You say well sir.
I tell you my disposition, I am wholly addicted to ra???rites, things that are new take me; new plays, new mistresses, new servants, new toys, new fangles, new friends, and new fashions, and these I deal with, as in a quarrel I would not be behind hand with any of them.
Sir you shall command our endeavours.
I thought fit to take your advise, &amp; you are beholding to me, you are the only men in the world that can rule me.
Sir for curiosity wee have the maidenheads of all the wits in Europe, and to your service wee will employ both our art and our industry.
I am informed of your qualities, I hear you are men of intelligence, by this light I wonder the state is not afraid of you.
Wee hope they have no reason for that sir.
Yes, you are dangerous follows, and have plots and devices upon men's bodies, and are suspected to bee sorcerers, that can transform a man into what shape you list.
It pleases you to bee merry sir.
Nay by this hand, it is given out, that you are great scholars, and are skilled in all the habitual Arts, and know their coherences, and that you are a kind of Astrologers, observers of times and seasons, and for making of Matches, beyond all the gallants in the Kingdom.
We would match things as near as we could sir.
And besides that, you are proud of your knowledge, for when you have once got a mans good name, you make what account you list of it.
Not so sir.
Yes, and presume upon it, and think what ever in???jury you doe a man, you can bee saved by your Book This is true, and care not a pin for the Law, for you hold good Cu???stome to bee far beyond it.
We would be loath to give any Gentleman distaste sir.
I must commend you, in that you are not partial, for you make the like reckoning of every man. Well, to the pur???pose.
You'll have your suit of the Spanish fashion?
What with two wallets behind me, to put up faults and abuses, or else Isle cashier my men, and they shall serve me for attendants, hangers on, ha? No by this air, I am too good a gentleman to have my arms tricked up with such gewgaws.
Sir, you must be conformable.
Well, I am content to be persuaded: when shall I have them?
You shall not miss within these three days, and what else is requisite, ttust to my care to apply it.
Well I am satisfied, and hereafter believe me, as I believe thee.
Sir, Master Spruce is come to visit you.
Master Spruce? prithee bid him come up. Well, ther's a Gentleman, of all I know, can justly claim admiration, for his complement, his discourse, his habit, his acquaintance, and then for proffering of courtesies, &amp; never doing any; I may give
away all I have, before I shall arrive at the grace of it.
Pray sir, when did you see the noble Captain?
Who Captain Whibble; Mass now think on it thou shalt go seek him out, and entreat him to meet me at the Hors-shooe Tavern at dinner, I love that house for the signs sake, it is the very print of the shoe that Pegasus wore, when hee broke up Helicon with his hoof, and now in relation of that, your Poets and Players, still haunt about the brinkes of it. Sirrah tell him withal, that Master Lackewit the Citizens son will bee there, and other good company, and wee will have music and vvenches, go thy ways, and you Master Snip, meet me about three a clock to take up these commode???ties, so now I have done with you.
Save you Master Careless.
Master Spruce you have much honoured me with your presence.
I met with a disaster coming up, something has ravished the tassel of my Garter, and discomposed the whole fabric, 'tvvill cost me an hours patience to re???form it; I had rather have seen the Common wealth out of order.
Sure it was not fast tied to your leg.
As fast together, as the fashion is for friends now adays to be tied, with certain knots of complement, which the least occasion dis-joynes. Isle only tucke it up, and when my better leisure permits, reduce it to perfection.
What box have you there?
A conceit, a conceit, a rare invention one of the hap???piest that ever my wit teem'd withal.
Bless me with the discovery.
You shall swear to be silent then.
As close as that covering.
Then look you, I will participate the mystery; this petty fogging box promises that I have great suits in law, this is to delude the world now: But I must tell you I am a kind
of a Solicitor, an earnest suitor to every wench I see.
Very pretty, proceed.
What doe you think I have in this box then?
I know not.
A bundle of blank love letters, ready pend with as much vehemence of affection, as I could get for money, only wanting the superscription of their names, to whom they shall be directed, which I can instantly, and with ease endorse upon acquaintance.
And so send them to your Mistress?
You understand me. I no sooner fall into discourse with any Lady, but I profess my self ardently in lone with her, and being departed, return my Boy with one of these Letters, to second it, as I said passionately deciphering how much I languish for her. Which she can not but deeply apprehend, together with the quickness and promptitude of my ingenuity in the dispatch of it.
Isle practise this device. Prithee let me see one of them, what's here? To the fair hands of???
I there wants a name, they fit any degree or person whatsoever.
Let me see this then. To the Lady and Mistress of his thoughts, and service.
There wants a name too. They are general things.
Isle open it by your favour sir, whats here? Most resplondent Lady, that may justly bee stiled, the accomplishment of beauty, the Seat and mansion of all delight, and virtue, in whom meet the joy, and desires of the happy. Some man here perhaps might fear, in praising your worth, to heighthen your disdain, but I am forced though to the peril of my neglect, to acknowledge it: For to this hour my curious thoughts, and wandering, in the Sphere of feminine perfection, could never yet find out a subject like your self, that could so de???taine and command my affection.
And so it goes on: How doe you like it?
Admirable good, put them up again.
Nay I have so strange a wit, few men do jump with it.
All my delights are steeped in Elegance,
And censured by an Arbitration,
Before I doe approve them; I have searched
The dust of antiquity to find out
The rare inventions that I am versed in,
My several Garbs and Postures of the body,
My rules for banqueting, and entertainment:
And for the titillation of my laughter,
Buffoons and Parasites, for I must tell you,
I still affect a learned luxury.
You have a very complete suit on too me thinks.
Tic as fresh as the morning, and thats the grace on it, a new Play, and a Gentleman in a new suit, claim the same pri???viledge, at their first presentment their estimation is double.
And whither now doe your employments direct you?
I took your lodging by the way, I am going to da???zell the eyes of the Ladies with my apparition.
I am not so conformable as I could wish, or else I would attend you. I took up a new man, for pities sake, some three days since, to waite upon me, which foolish sin I will abandon whilst I live for it. Hee ran away with two hundred pounds, the remnant of a mortgage, and since that I was put to a new perplexity to supply me.
By this hand, if you had spoke but yesterday I could have furnished you.
Why what a rare way is here now, to engage a man for nothing? I must study it.
How does your brother digest the loss of his inhe???ritance?
Very well sure, for sometimes he has nothing else to digest; and hee has enough of that too: it sticks in his sto???macke worse then a Surfeit. Alas wee landed men are but fools to him, it makes him sober, and wise, very temperate.
Theres Valerie a foolish peevish thing that he calls Mistress, good for nothing but to whet a mans wit, and make a Whore on, I can't believe there's any real love between them.
Has she received any of your Letters?
Yes twenty, and nothing will prevail. I have sought to corrupt her any time this twelve month, and can doe no good on her, her father gives me opportunity out of pretence of good will, but I use it clean contrary; for alas, I can not love any wench farther then to lye with her. I can not
fashion my tongue to speak in any other Character. I would not willingly loose all this time and labour. I'll make short of it, either work her to obedience, or doe her a mischief.
Tic well resolved, and there's her sister Aemilia. She will glance sometimes affectionately upon me; were it not a mad thing, when I have sold all my Land to her father to get her into advantage? I think that will be the end of it.
Me thinks Lackwit her brother might stand thee in some stead for the conveyance.
Well tic the truest spaniel that, I put a hundred jeers upon him, and yet he loves me the better, I can pawn him as familiarly as my cloak.
The time calls upon me.
Isle dismiss you, will you present my service to the Ladies and excuse me?
I shall bee proud to make my tongue the Organ of your commands sir.
I will hold you no longer from your happiness, but I shall envy the intercourse of your mirth.
Then he is past hope?
Hee has no sense of his misery, a strong stupidity, a lethargy has possessed him: his disease is infectious, it has caught hold of his estate, &amp; brought that into a consumption.
No means to reclaim him?
I know not what to apply, when remedies are hurt???full, give him good counsel, and you poison him.
I would my brother had been better advised, then to give his Land to a Prodigal.
Fitter indeed the right Heir should have had it: you might doe well to turn your compassion upon him: a poor injured Gentleman, and stands equal in your blood.
No Isle marry a wife, and get an heir of mine own, I have made a motion to Master Little good the Usurer, about one of his daughters, and wee are partly agreed, I am going to ask her good will in it.
Look you sir. Pray stand by, here hee comes with his train.
Is it not well resolved Captain?
Yes by the soul of Hercules, tic a good foresight, to sell all and prevent misfortunes. The world's full of uncer???taineties: Land may be barren, servants deceitful, make money I say, &amp; what a man spends with his friends, shall ne'er perish.
I say by the heart of valour, that man lives best at ease, that has no money at all.
What shall he doe then Lieutenant?
By the faith of a soldier, for the exercise of his wits hee may doe any thing: if all trades fail he may turn Pimp, tic a noble profession to live by, if he can perform that office well, hee need ask no more of his Genius.
Body of me, nor no better preferment.
As I am a sinner tic a good science, a mathematical mystery of undermining holds, and when the breach is open, be the first man that shall enter.
But I think there bee so many of them, they can hardly live one for an other.
As I am virtuous tic grown into credit, and you have very good men that study it. Good Knights and Squires that have thrived by it.
Stab me, what sullen Saturn is that, looks so obe???lique upon us, as I am Martial I will confront his aspect.
Good Captain be appeased, it is my Uncle, I can not avoid him: let me entreat your absence for a while, meet me at the Horse-shooe.
Fire of my blood you shall rule me: come Lieutenant???nant.
Shall I speak or hold my peace?
Even which you please, good Uncle.
I tic all one to you, for any impression I shall make: would I could refrain to take notice of thee, but still nature over sways me, and affection breaks out into counsel but to no purpose.
Troth uncle youth will have his swing.
I upon a Gallows, if you hold on, that will bee the end of you. That I should live to see my brothers goods so
misspent, the life of his labours sucked out by such Horse???leaches.
Horseleaches, doe you know what you say? no, you doe not apprehend the worth that dwells in these men: to see how a man may be mistaken in the distinction of virtue.
Nay sir, tic as I told you, you may as soon recall an are???row when tic flying, or a stone from praecipice, as reclaim him.
Oh uncle, that you should thus carpe at my happiness, and traduce my Camradoes, men of such spirit and valour.
Yes, Captain and Lieutenant, how a vengeance came they by these titles? fellows that have been only fleshed in the ruin of black pots, and glass windows, the very skum of all rudeness.
Have you any money about you?
What to doe?
Bribe me to keep counsel: you are but a dead man if they know on it: you have pust out your soul in their ca???lumnies.
Hang them fellows so sordid, that no disgrace can stick upon them, they are choice company; for there's hard???lie the like of them. A man cannot discern the ground of their discourse for oaths, unless you were divorced from all reason, you would not be wedded to such acquaintance.
Why how now mongrel, are you barking? by this ayre tic an indignity to my discretion, that is so happy in the election of their virtues: the only prime wits in town, things come so rarely from them, a man is kept in a perpetual appetite. I would not let them stay to offend you, neither can I endure their reproach. Farewell uncle.
Well I will not trouble my self any more to look after him, Isle marry, and thrust him out of all, that's the con???clusion.
Desinit Actus primus.
But are you certain of it?
I oreheard it.
When she did plot her own destruction,
And sealed it with her hand, and kissed upon it.
You know Aurelio?
Yes sir, was it he?
That Beggar, that undone thing.
Let me alone
To fetch her off the quick-sands, and then Isle board her,
And steer her my self.
That I were so happy
To know she loved you. Huswife doe you hear?
Here is a Gentleman has Land and means,
And wit, and beauty, more I wis then tother:
Make much of him, and what he says, be ruled by him.
Let me alone, I warrant you.
I leave you.
Now all the powers of love assist me in it,
To counterfeit a Passion and Dissemble.
All my delight's to fool them, and then leave them.
I serve your women, as the Hollanders
Doe by some towns they get; when they have won them,
They slight them straight. Now I address my self.
Lady how fare you? you are melancholy.
If you doe know it so well, why doe you ask me?
Tic from the tender care I have of you:
But an ill fate pursues my true endeavours,
To have them still misconstrued: Tic not well done,
To lay the burden of your cruelty
On my affection, and to make that faith,
The passive subject of your dire disdain,
That is so active in obedience.
Pray let me counsel you.
Counsel, whats that?
Not Phoebus with his art, or all the drugs
Of Thessaly can ease my grief; the Sea
Knows no such straight as I now labour in.
Why whats the matter?
Oh my heart, my heart.
Would you would rip it up, that you might see
Your self enthroned, and all my faculties
Paying their homage to your memory.
I think I doe it indifferently.
All this and more, Lovers can speak at pleasure.
Propose a course how I might win belief:
Were there a way to it, as deep with danger,
As to the Center, I will search it out.
When I have nothing else to doe.
Your thoughts have found such easy utterance,
That I suspect their truth, they seem to savour
Of art, more then of passion. I have heard
Great griefs are silent, neither doe I find
Those Symptoms of affection in your looks.
You change no colour, and your joints are steady.
Your eyes appear too full of petulance,
As if they did reflect with inward scorn,
T'upbrayd your falsehood.
Now by all my hopes,
By all the rites that crown a happy union,
And by the rosie tincture of your cheeks,
And by your all subduing eyes, more bright
Then heaven.
Hold there.
I prize you above the world.
What should I say, when vows cannot prevail:
If you persist, and still so cruel be,
Isle swear there's no plague like loves tyranny.
And all this while I doe not care a pin for her.
I have engagd it to your friend already.
But love makes no distinction.
If you say so,
I must debar my heart the knowledge of you.
This will not doe, I must be more lascivious.
Come my fair Venus, sit by thy Atones.
What doe you start? are you afraid of love,
That is all fair, and from whose brightest heaven,
Are blown away all swollen clouds of despair?
His brow is smooth, and all his face beset
With banks full of delight, a golden Chain
Of wanton smiles hangs round about his neck;
And all his way before him strewed with roses.
Come let us sit and dally, taste those pleasures.
Love is no niggard, we may eat and surfeit.
And yet our dainties still remain as fresh,
As they were never touched.
First come to that?
I thought whither you tended. I am unskilful:
Untaught in those deep, but ill mysteries.
Isle teach you all, and lead your wandering steps,
Through all those ways, where to find the way
Will be to loose it.
I am very sorry,
The times disease has so prevailed upon you.
Tic the perfection now of complement,
The only end to corrupt honesty.
To prostitute your oaths, and win our hearts
To your belief, is the Court eloquence.
These are harsh tunes, and ill become your beauty:
Whose proper passion should be wantonness.
Why should you loose the benefit of youth,
And the delights? give freedom to your will.
When age and weakness mortifies your thoughts,
You may correct this looseness.
Sir I cannot
Hear you with safety.
I must dye then, I am slain, unless
Those words, and smiles, that wounded me, doe heal me.
Had I known that, I'd have condemned them both,
To silence and obscurity.
You had then,
Robed nature of her best perfection.
And that had been a sacrilege. Nay sweet,
Your beauty is a thing communicable,
And though you doe impart, you may retain it.
Sir I have summed th'accounts of all your cares,
And I doe find their number more then weight.
Things but of custom with you, and your vows
Are but a cloud of wind, and emptiness;
Forced by the storm of lust. When it is over,
And your thoughts calmed, then you will love that virtue,
Which as a tie and Anchor did withhold you,
From driving to destruction. So I leave you.
That ever any woman should be virtuous;
I have enclosed a fire within my breast,
Will burn this frame of nature into cinders,
Her beauty has surprised me, I am caught
In love; by this light, it were a mad jest now
If I should turn honest, and woe her so:
If she persists, I must doe so believe,
And hate my self, as long as I live for it.
Well I have played so long about the candle,
That my wings are singed with it, she is honest
I see it, and that something in this age.
Out of these doubts some strange thing will arise,
A strong disease must have strong remedies.
Crochet where are you?
I am here sir.
Crochet you know, that I am determind to marry my other daughter Aemilia, to old Dotario the Citizen.
Yes sir, and then she and I shall be both in one predicament.
How so man?
Why sir, for ought that I can perceive, she is like to have but a cold reversion, and thats the ordinary allowance for men of my function, ther's not so much left of him, as will satisfy a Ladies appetite for once, hee is picked to the very bones with age, and diseases.
Tic no matter so long as his purse is well crammed.
His purse that she looks after is lank enough I warrant it, it grieves me to the heart, that such a young beginner as my Mistress, should have no better hopes of trading.
Belike thou think that Nature is uncharitable in him, no he has benevolence in store for her; what because he is old, I am old my self, man.
And if he were older, tvvere no great matter.
If I were older knave?
No sir, if he were older.
Why what then?
His death would the sooner make her honourable: for having one foot in the bed, and the other in the grave, if she be ruled by me, it is but her giving him a lift, and the next turn marry with a Lord.
Say thou me so?
Yes sir, a Citizens wife no sooner casts her rider, but one of your Court gallants mounts her presently.
The knave is very pleasant.
Why sir, your Citizens widows are the only rub???bish of the kingdom, to fill up the breaches of decayed houses.
Whats her preferment then, Crochet?
Why then sir, she shall be made a Lady at the least, and take place of her mother. She shall have clients waite at her gates with presents, and yet have their servile offices pass unregarded, she shall manage her husbands estate, and advise him in his office.
Is that all?
No sir, she shall have more privileges then that, to be as proud as she list, and have new ways to express it, she shall ride up and down in her Litter, and have a Coach, and four Horses follow after, full of Gentlemen Ushers and waiting women.
And yet the foolish girl will not perceive it.
Alas sir, though you and I have so much wit to look into these things, how should my young Mistress be capable of it, when her husband that shall be is not able to put the case to her?
Go, fetch her hither, Isle advise my self.
O these perverse girls, that are led with nothing, but fan???cy foolish things, and yet have wit to bee obstinate, if they set upon a toy, they must have it because they are wilful, then they are as changeable in love as a Chameleon, and think they can live by the ayre of it. They will venture to sell their fathers fortunes and their own, for a nights lodging.
Come Aemilia, these showers are unseasonable. They will extinguish the torch, that should burn bright before thy unptiall; be not dismayed, you are young and so is Aurora, she
looks fresh every morning: yet disdains not to kiss her old Tithou, and lies all night with him, and when she rises, be???trayes with her blushes, the wanton heat of her paramour.
Good sir, think your power may command my du???tie, but not my affection.
Tempt not my patience, I would not willingly use the authority of a father to command, what I had rather win by entreaty.
You know sir, the incovenience still happens to these forced matches, they never come to good, and if you compel me to like of him, you must expect the same issue, you shall never make me any other president.
Not when I entreat you?
I shall never love him.
And you know sir, what an ominous thing it is, when a woman does not love her husband, she will either cuckold him, or poison him, and so be burnt for a Martyr in wedlock. a Lit. She must fashion her self to love him, I have un???dertooke it.
And then Isle undertake for the tother.
Will she have her liberty restrained? will she re???nounce my protection? shall not I dispose of her? if not, let her use her pleasure, betray her self, like her other sister to beggary, be like Scylla, cut the purple hair of my life, and then turn Monster, let her.
Oh me, what shall I doe? would my life were a sacrifice.
Isle tell you what you shall doe, be advised; refuse not a good offer, think of old Dotario, think how to love him, think of his wealth, think of his honour, think of me, think of your self, think what will come after, if you be stubborn.
And what ere you think to do, say nothing Mistress.
Well Crochet, Isle leave thee to persuade her whilst I fetch the old man to confime it
O my distracted thoughts, and the rash counsel
Of lone and hatred, when they are opposed
By avarice of parents, that confine
Their childrens fancies to there sordid mind.
Were the bright sun their of spring, they would join him,
Unto the earth, if gold might be engendered.
Wee in our selves have no part, if debarred
The election of our love, and our condition
Is worse then beasts, whose will acknowledges
No check in that; the Turtle takes her mate
Without compulsion, and in Summers prime,
Each bird will choose out her own Valentine.
Well, Mistress you doe not apprehend the good you may have, by marrying of an old man.
Prithee what good?
First, besides the honour he shall confer upon you by his age, you shall not find him so fiery, and unruly as common???lie your youths are, and thereupon being cold of his tempter, you may the easier manage him.
Thy mirth comes importunely on my grief.
Then you shall be his darling, and he shall dote upon you, and though he strives to please you never so much, he shall lament, that he can doe it no better, and acknowledge his weakness, that he comes short of your desert, and what he desires, and be sorry, that all he has, is too little for you.
I perceive it well enough Crochet.
The only thing that you need fear him for, is his tongue, for they say old men are great talkers, but you'll match that member well enough, and for any other part about him, you'll have but little to doe withal.
Look you here comes the old Lecher, he looks as fresh as an old play new vamped, pray see how trim hee is, and how the Authors have corrected him, how his Taylor, and his Barber have set him forth; sure he has received an other impression
I think the fool will be tedious.
Well, now I have brought you together, here Isle leave you, when lovers parley, Parents are no fit Auditors; see that you use the Gentleman respectively, and though sir, she seem coy and deny you, impute it not to perverseness but mo???desty. Maids in their first assaults consult with shame, in the next with weakness. So I leave you,
Fair Mistress, I would ask you a question, if you please to answer me.
No Mistress of yours Sir, yet if you ask nothing but what I please to answer, you may.
I would first demand your opinion of me.
Truly I have no skill to make any conjecture by the outward appearance, but by the Title page of your face, I should judge you to be somewhat ancient.
Take my word for it, the Index is false printed, if you please to turn to the book, you shall find no such thing written.
O tic worm eaten, time has cankered it, besides there be so many dashes, my understanding will not serve me to read it, and a woman has no use of her Clergy.
But love has renewed it sweet Lady, and this is ano???there edition.
How long is it since the copy has been al???ter'd?
Let it not seem strange to you that I have felt this transformation, your form has wrought a miracle upon me, the pulchritude of your feature, that is able to extract youth out of age, and could make Aeson young again, without the help of Medea, it has put a fire into me, and I must impute it neither to Herbs, nor Philtrums, but to the influence, and power of your beauty.
A fire, it is a foolish one, that leads you without the precinct of your gravity, I strange, a man of your judgement should talk so preposterously.
Why sweet Lady?
Sweet Lady, what a petulant word is there, for a man of your beard? a Boy of fifteen would not have spoke it without blushing, and ther's a smile able to turn my stomach. I wonder you will make your self so ridiculous.
If this be the best language she can afford him, it were safe for me not to hear it. I may be called for a witness.
Stay Crochet, whither goosed thou?
Isle come presently sir, Isle come presently.
Now you are alone, Isle tell you what I think of you, you are an old doting fool, one that twenty years
since, has drunk the Lethe of humanity, and forgot of what sex thou were, worn out of all remembrance of thy self, thou hast a body, that a fever cannot heat, nor poi???son work upon, a face more rugged then winter, thy beard is moss, and thy skin so hard, that the perpetual dropping of thy nose cannot soften it.
These indignities are not to be endured, her abuses are more monstrous, then the prodigy she would make of me.
And yet you would bee in love forsooth, whom Cu???bid with all his strength is not able to pierce, you have not one pore open to let in an Arrow, more need have a cordial to comfort you.
Rank injuries, mock me to my teeth.
If you had any.
I would your father heard you: he left no such thing in your Commission. How dare you doe it?
Yes and if I marry you, Isle use you accordingly, Isle have no mercy on thy age, I tell you before hand, that when it happens, it may not seem strange to you.
Well she may play with the line, Isle give her scope enough, but when I have her fast, Isle twitch her, and draw her as I list to me.
Doe but hear what I say to you, and it shall fall out, no Prognostication like it.
Sure tic some fury, it cannot be a woman she is so impudent.
When I am your wife, if you are so hardy to ven???la on me, your whole study shall be to please me, and yet I will not grace it with acceptance; I will live as your Em???press, lye a bed, and command you, and your servants, and you shall not dare to anger me.
Not dare to anger you.
No if you doe, I will fill the house with noise, and deaf thee with clamours.
Sweet heart you shall have all content, I love a life these spirited wenches, that are all fire and motion, they stir a quickness in a man, in fuse an activity.
Hee will not be put off, I must terrify him farther: and for your estate, you shall not meddle with it, Isle take up
your rents for you, and dispose of them, as I think fit; only Isle allow you to carry some farthings in your pouch to give to Beggars.
And what will you doe with the rest sweating?
For the rest, Isle spend it upon my self in bravery: there shall not be a new fashion, but Isle have it. Isle look af???la nothing else; your house shall be a mart for all trades. Isle keep twenty continually at work for me; as Taylors, Perfu???mers, Painters, Apothecaries, Coach-makers, Sempsters, and Tire-women. Besides Embroyderers, and Pensions for in???telligencers.
She'll waste all I have in a month: the expenses of an Army will not maintain her.
Besides, I will have acquaintance with all the La???dies in Court, and entertain them with banquets, yet for all that I will make my complaint of you to them, traduce your infirmities, and they shall conspire against you, and pity me.
I had rather bee under twenty Executions, then the lash of their tongue.
Then you shall kiss me very seldom, and when I vouchsafe you the favour: and you shall doe it not as a hus???band, but as a father, not a smack of lasciviousness.
What a sanctified creature shall I enjoy?
I will lye with you the first year once a month, as a Parson uses to instruct his Cure, and yet not bee questioned for neglect, or non residence: marry the next year, if you live so long, once a quarter shall suffice you.
The next year if I live so long? she thinks of my death already.
These are the least of your evils. I will have one to cuckold you, and you shall take it for a courtesy, and use him the kindlier for it.
Oh me, I can endure it no longer, that word strikes cold to my heart: were I an enemy, and she had vanquished me, I would not yield to such Articles. Isle propose these conditions to her father, and see if hee will allow them in all conscience to be reasonable.
Master Careless promised to bee here instantly. Isle tell him what a fine youth he has to his Uncle.
Here is the Gulf that I wallowes all my Land:
And to this desperate Whirlepit am I reeling.
And there's the smooth stream that must guide me to it.
Were I as provident, as was ??lisses,
That Siren there might sing me to my ruin.
Save you fair Lady.
Save you Master Careless.
Will you hear me speak any wise sentences?
I am now as discreet in my conceit,
As the seven Sophyes of Greece, I am full
Of Oracles, I am come from Apollo,
Would he had lent me his Tripos to stand upon;
For my two legs can hardly carry me.
Whence come you, from Apollo?
From the heaven
Of my delight, where the boon Delphic God,
Drinks sack, and keeps his Bacchanalias,
And has his incense, and his Altars smoking,
And speaks in sparkling prophesies; thence doe I come.
My brains perfumed with the rich Indian vapour,
And heightened with conceits: from tempting beauties,
From dainty Music and Poetic strains,
From bowls of Nectar, and Ambrosiacke dishes:
From witty Varlets, fine Companions,
And from a mighty continent of pleasure,
Sails thy brave Careless. Whore's your father Lady?
I thought I had been worthy salutation.
These Ceremonies are abolished with me.
I kiss none but my Punk, but in this humour,
Isle kiss any body. Isle marry thee;
But not a penny jointure.
Where I love,
I will not stand upon conditions.
I would accept this invitation,
But thy father is a Usurer, a Jew.
And if I marry in his tribe I shall thrive,
And I hate thriving. I am come to mortgage,
To pawn, or sell Lady.
Doe you want money?
Doe I want money? let me construe this.
Tic a good promising question, and requires
A sober politic answer, yes I want money.
I have not ready coin; but there's a jewel
Will fetch you twenty pound.
But doe you dare trust me?
I give it freely.
Then I say thy father,
In getting thee has redeemed all his sin.
She has confirmed my love, and I will marry her.
Let me survey it well, tic an Amethist.
Why doe you ask?
Because they say that stone
Has secret virtue in it to recover,
A man that's intoxicated, and I doe find
That I am not so drunk, as I was.
O Master Careless here has been your Uncle
A wooing to me.
What that piece of stockfish,
That has kept Lint thus long, would have young flesh now.
If hee could get it.
Tic such a rank Goat.
I made such sport with him, and terrified him, how I would use him if I were his wife,
That he is frighted hence.
Tic well done of you, he upbraided me to
That he would marry, but Isle cross his worship.
We'll vex him ten times worse yet, I have plots
Maturing in my head, shall crown thy wit,
And make him desperate, that he shall dye,
And leave us nothing. I would not be troubled,
With any of his wealth, no not so much,
As to morn for him, but I cannot stand
Now to relate it. Come Aemilia.
I have declared my mind, but when isle doe it,
Isle in, and sleep, and dream upon it, and tell thee.
Bring me to that, and isle yield to any thing.
Nay, good wife hear me.
You shall pardon me: he is my son I hope, as well as yours, and he shall bee fashioned after my humour: why, should you think to hinder my prospect from looking to him? I say he shall rank with the best, spend his money and learn breeding.
Doe, make a Gallant of him or a Gull, either will serve, he may ride up and down, and have his Coach waite for him at Plays and Taverns, take up upon trust, consort with wits and sword-men, bee afraid of Sergeants, and spend more for his Protection then would pay the debt: he may be a Stickler for quarrels, and compound them at his own charge: reel every night to his lodging, and be visited in the morning with borrowing Letters, dice at Ordinaries, and lend on all hands.: seal at all hours, or be beaten to it. These are gifts in a son, beyond art or nature, for a father to be proud of, or else he may run away with all he can get, and when tic gone, lye at a neighbours house till his peace be made.
No you shall keep him still at home with you; he shall not dare to enlarge his Charter, to have any more wit then his father, let him sit in the shop with ne'er a pair of cuffs on his hands, and play at Fox and Geese with the fore???man, entertain customers, with a discourse as moatheaten as your cloth, and not be able to look upon a Lady, but court some filly creature of his own tribe, with speeches out of books, ten times worse then any remnant; and after supper steal abroad and be drunk in fear, this you can be content with. Well, when he was a child, it was the prettiest talking thing, and the wittiest withal, the neighbours took such delight to hear it. There was a good Knight lay in my house then was so kind to him, but you ne'er knew the reason, since you have clean marred him that's apparent.
Isle doe any thing wife that you will have me.
Yes when tic too late; and the custom of rusticity is grown into an other nature with him, when his mind is settled upon the Lees of it, and the edge of his humour quite taken off, when learning has brought down his spirit, then you'll repent his restraint; has he not a pretty ingenuity?
So much the worse, when tic corrupted: mark me what I say, give him the reins, and if Fiddlers sleep in a
week, Taverns keep their doors shut, the Constable sit on a stall in peace, or wenches walk the streets for him (if he be like his father) ne'er credit me again.
So much the better, I would have it so, give him means to perform it, show your self a loving father, and be true in your prophecy.
I must yield to her for my quietness sake, was ever man thus tied to a Chimera, thus vexed with that should bee his happiness. I have married with tumult, and begot my affliction, not one of my generation will be ruled; and for my wife, she has a tongue will run post sixteen stages to???gether, and ne'er tire for it; with that she can work me to any agreement. Well take your son to your charge, doe what you list with him: but for the wenches, Isle either choose them husbands, or else they shall trudge without any other Dowry, then what nature has bestowed on them, that's cer???taine.
Within there, call your young Master hither Crot???chet, hee has been all this day at his study, makes the boy mopish with his scholarship, for want of better exercise; as revelling, courting, feasting, and the like, be stands plodding and musing as if his eyes turned with a wire, it has poisoned his very complexion, he is grown fallow with it, I know not what would become of him, if I did not sometimes put mo???ney in his purse, and send him abroad, to sin for his recrea???tion.
Sweet wife be pacified.
No, Isle teach you what tic to anger a woman that brought a Dowry with her.
See what a Picture of formality you have made of him, come hither son Lackwit, what book have you there?
This is a book of Heraldry forsooth, and I doe find by this book that the Lackwits are a very ancient name, and of large extent, and come of as good a Pedigree, as any is in the City; besides they have often matched themselves into very great families, and can quarter their Arms, I will not say with Lords, but with Squires, Knights, Aldermen, and the like, and can boast their descent to be as generous, as any of the Lafooles, or the Iohn Daws whatsoever.
What be the Arms son?
The Lackwits Arms, why they are three Asses ram???pant, with their ears prickant, in a field Or, and a Rams head for their crest, that's the Arms.
Well said son, stand for the credit of the house.
Nay, I will uphold it besides, though my father be a Citizen, yet I am a Gentleman's son by the mothers side.
I that he is isle be sworn, the Foundlings are as good Gentlemen, as any be in the City, the boy has a Parlous head, how should he find out this I marvel?
Find it out, as if I were such a fool, I did not know my own Coat.
Yet husband, I never saw you wear one in my life.
Not a fools coat, but I shall have one of your Spinning very shortly.
Isle tell you father if I lift now; I can go twenty degrees back like a crab, to find out the track of our gent???lity.
Lo you there, can you bee content thou man per???verse to all reason, having a son of so large and prosperous hopes, that might stand up the glory of his kindred, of such pregnancy of wit and understanding, so rich in the qualities that can bear up a Gentleman, to let him sink, and not che???rich him with those helps that might advance his gallantry. You have had your flourishing season, and are now withered, your blossoms of beauty are blown off &amp; therefore must be content out of that dry stalk to afford some sap to maintain his succession; pray how many young Gentlemen have you in this Town, that go in plush, and their fathers to plow in the country? shall we have worse Presidents in the City? impart I say, and give him twenty pieces, and when they are gone give him twenty more.
What to doe?
Will you disparadge him, as if he knew not what to doe with it? doe you think that Fencers, Dancers, Horse???matches (Isle have him versed in all these, and omit nothing that may demonstrate his breeding;) besides Mistresses, and implements that belong to them require, nothing?
Was ever any mother in this humour? that should re???claim her son from his ill courses, to animate him, and sup???ply
his riot: let her enjoy her follies, smart for them, and then repent; here hold, there's twenty pieces, I am sure all thrown away, they are in a consumption already, and will be dead, and drawn out by to morrow. What think thou Crotchet?
Nay sir they are condemned, that's certain, you have past your judgment upon them, and my young Master must execute it.
I give it lost Crotchet, I give it lost; but stay, my daughters; I had need have Argus eyes to look about me, or the Dragons that watched the Hesperides: I am beset on all hands; my daughters are wily, my wife wilful, my son I know not what, with the fear of my money, doe so distract me, that my wits are disioynted amongst them, all the remain???der of my hopes is, if Valerie have proved tractable to Mr. Spruce, and that Dotario has received comfort in his Aemilia. I labour with expectation till I go in, and be delivered.
Stay husband, Isle go with you: but hark you son Lack???wit, doe you know to what purpose this gold was given you?
To no purpose at all, but I know, what I purpose to doe with it.
What first?
I purpose to make a medicine of it.
A medicine.
Yes I will dissolve it into Aurum potabile, and drink nothing but healths with it.
Then you are right.
Nay I will domineer, and have my humours about me too.
Doe any thing, for the improvement of your discipline. Come Crotchet.
Stay Crotchet, doe you perceive nothing? you dull animal look here.
I sir, I hope you mean to give me one, or two of them.
No, I will not give, nor lend a friend a penny, there's no such confutation of a mans being a Gentleman; but when I am drunk, and have my wine and my whores about me, Isle spend twenty or thirty shillings upon you, but I will not give you a penny Crotchet.
Then farewell sir.
You know where to come to me, you shall find me in my pentificalibus.
COme sister, though our liberty be straightened,
Our mind stands free, without compulsion,
There's none can make a rape upon our will.
Well if they understood a women truly,
They would not seek to curb so, whose nature
Rejoices like a torrent, to make way
Spite of impediments. Now if their wisdom
Should let us alone, we might perhaps our selves
Find out the inconvenience, and prevent it,
Which they like a false perspective would seek,
To multiply upon us.
I shall never
Recall that faith, which I have plighted once
To my Aurelio. Isle run all hazards,
And violent attempts, to throw my self
Into his arms.
I would not have you leave him,
Nor yet turn desperate. Now would I rather
Get him by some devise, I love a witty
And an ingenuous trick aboue my life:
And should take more delight to over-reach them,
Then to enjoy my purpose.
But I dare not
Play with my fortune so, nor trust adventures,
If Fate would be so gracious to present
An opportunity.
Come fear it not.
You see what a man they would put upon me,
Might be my father. H' has less vigour in him,
Then any Catamite. There's not reserved
So much as one masculine grain in him.
A fellow that's as bald, as a Lookinglasse,
And whose diseases are beyond Arithmetic:
Not a joint of him free, a gouty numnesse
Has seized his feet and fingers, and there's all
The stiffenesse he has left: and were I married
I must spend all my life in rubbing of him
With hot woollen clothes, and applying Plasters,
And Cataplasmes, and trenchers to his belly;
Must undergo the person of a Surgeon,
Not of a wife: and yet I am not terrified:
It moves me not, I make a jest of it;
Because I mean to abuse them all, and choose
Where I like best.
It is a happy spirit,
That rules in you, I would I had one like it.
Like me; thou hast not studied thy self so well:
Nor hast that season of thy mother in thee.
Observe her fashions, take example by them:
Although her husband be penurious,
Hard as the mettle, that he dotes upon.
Yet she can make him mallemable, and work him,
And turn, and hammer him, and wire-draw him,
And rule him with as much correction,
As one would wish to govern. For my part;
When I have stretched my brains, made all the shifts,
The wit of woman can be pregnant of.
And showed my love by such experience,
As shall outstrip belief, all for his sake
That shall enjoy me, which is Master Careless.
And when he has me, if hee shall presume,
On former passages of my affection,
To oversway me in the least desire,
To contradict, and tempt my patience,
Isle shake off all obedience, and forget it.
Isle slight him, yet prevail.
Alas my heart is
Tender, and violable with the least weapons,
Sorrow can dart at me.
You are a fool,
And every one that will can make you so:
When was your sweet heart Master Spruce here with you?
But lately, and presented such a Scene
Of protestations, and then varied it,
So cunningly, that love and lust together
Were interwoven with such subtle threads,
That I could scarce distinguish them.
Take heed,
What ere he speaks, it tends but to corrupt you,
I'd join commerce of language with a Sphinx,
Ere I'd deign to answer him. Master Careless
Told me his humours, seems he boasted of it,
He gave his character, the most perfidious,
And love abusing creature in the world;
That all his vows were treacherous: his smiles,
His words, and actions, like small Rivulets,
Through twenty turnings of loose passions,
At last would run to the dead sea of sin.
What ere he says, I resolve ne'er to trust him.
Bee wise, and constant, and then govern fate:
And in the interim, how ere matters fall,
Wee I find a trick wench, how to cheat them all.
See here he comes again.
I come sweet Lady,
To rear the trophies of your conquest up.
And yield my self the greatest.
What's the matter?
Your looks have tan me prisoner. I am captived,
Bound with the golden chain of your loose hair,
And on your frowns depends my destiny.
Tic about the old matter; you may save
This labour, or go seek some new devise.
In faith these stale exordiums can not take me.
Indeed my sister, and I, know you well enough.
But Lady since my change you doe not know me.
I am now Metamorphis'd, and that fancy
That roved, and was rebellious, by her power
Is brought within command.
I so you told me.
Here I present a sad oblation.
A heart that brings its own fire with it,
And burns before your beanties deity.
Offered up with as much devotion,
As ever true love sacrificed any.
Well you may jest with mortals, but I am not
So blind, but I can see through all your mists:
Were I a goddess, as you term me one,
Sister to Phoebus, or armed like Minirva,
I would transform you straight; and fix you up
A monument, for your Hypocrisy.
Now by that sacred shrine, brighter then Venus.
To whom I pay my Orisons: that form
That fair Idea, that rules all my thoughts,
Thy self I mean, that spotless seat of pleasure:
The continent of all perfection,
This spring of love, that issues from my soul.
Runs in a stream as pure, as are your virtues,
Full fraught with zeal, immaculate and free
From all adulterate mixtures.
On my life.
I cannot frame me to believe one word.
Hold thy own there wench, and I warrant thee.
Phoebus, how have I angered thee, to lay
Cassandra's curse on me that was not trusted:
When she spake true and most prophetically?
Sir, he that is accustomed to deceive.
Gains this reward by it when he speaks truth,
Not to be credited.
Observe me Lady.
And mark the harmony, does it not sound
Upon the string; as if my heart kept touch?
And so it sounded first to the same tune.
That was ill set, this is a different passion.
But it is all show; and nothing serious.
You can not judge by former evidence.
It is not fit proof to confirm this motion,
This is a true text, that a false gloss of it.
But I shall never so interpret it.
What can I say more, then to swear I love you.
But should you now dissolve your eyes to tears,
Were every accent in your speech a sigh,
And every gesture, every motion in you,
An Hierogliphicke to commend that love:
Had you the spells of it, and magic charms
Set round about the circle of your arms,
To draw me to you, I would seal my ears,
Deaf as the sea, to shiprack't mariners:
And so I leave you to your better fortunes.
Am I despised, and slighted? foolish girl,
The hast lost thy self, that which is best in nature,
Turns to the worst corruption, my scorned love
Shall now convert to hatred. Tic decreed,
Fraud and revenge shall be my counsellors;
Whats here, a ring? she lost it now. I know it,
The same Aurelio, wont to wear on's finger;
He sent it as a gift, it is so, the poesy.
In love I write
All my grief, all my delight.
The very same. Were I best poison it,
And send it back to her? No, it shall serve
To poison her good name; there's no foul fact,
That Love, when it is injured, dares not act.
Come honest Fido, thy best love supplies,
Part of my hoped fortunes. Thats true friendship,
Misery cannot shake, which crowns thy merit.
Sir, could my power produce forth any thing
Worthy your acceptance, or my service,
I would with hazard of my life perform it.
So much I owe your virtues, so much pity
Your injuries; but this poor task so easy,
Consisting more of policy, then danger,
Gives not my love an equal testimony.
You could not doe an office more deserving,
Or grateful to my soul, then to bring tidings
How my love fares, each syllable she spake,
Though by an echo I receive the voice,
Is able to inspire new life into me.
How do's she? is she well? and mindful of us:
Speak it a thousand times; never did sound
Touch a more gladsome ear.
By all curcumstance
I could conjecture, I read in her looks
A strange disturbance. When I gave the ring,
A Letter to her, as if joy and fear,
Had run on several errants, and returned,
Swift as her thoughts, and spoke her love in silence.
The hast seen the treasury of my happiness.
Speak, am I rich or no?
She is a Mine,
A store-house of all beauty, all content:
Her brow a bank of pleasure; her bright eyes
The chief and only moouer of your love,
So multiplied their flames, that they appeared
To me most like a firmament of fires,
Yet chaster then the Vestal; and below
Clouded with sorrow, which dropped pearls for you,
And do's enclose a soul richer then it,
Wherein is locked the wardrobe of all virtues;
Yet sure that soul had left her mansion,
But that she stays to bid you welcome thither.
And why should I be staid from going to her?
Why should a covetous eye watch ore that wealth
That is my right, I will go claim my due,
And justify the seizure. Why should parents,
That can give to their children, neither minds,
Nor yet affections, strive to govern both?
It is not justice: yet where should I complain?
Love has no bar to plead at, nor no laws
To rule vs by, nor Court to judge our cause.
Sir, this is Captain Whibble, the Town stale,
For all cheating employments: a parasite
Of a new sect: none of your foothing Varlets,
But a swearing Sycophant, that frights a man
Into a belief of his worth; his Dialect
Is worse then the report of a Cannon,
And deafes a stranger with tales of his valour,
Till his conclusion be to borrow money.
His company is a Cipher in the reckoning,
'That helps to multiply it: your dear brother
Admires his discipline, and will swear to it.
Is this one of his comrades?
Sir, this is
His prime associate. Isle lay a hundred pound,
I guess by his physiognomy his business,
Hee is either trudging now unto a broker,
Or to invite some new heir to a breakfast,
To seal for the commodity; or else
Wandering abroad to skelder for a shilling
Amongst your bowling alleyes; most commonly
There lies his scene: or perhaps man some whore,
A province that he usually adorns.
Prithee good Fido, go and baffull him:
Put an affront upon him, if his valour
Prompt him to make resistance, Isle step out
And second thee.
His valour? it is the least
Thing to be feared, he has not one spark in him
To kindle a true anger.
Sulphur of Styx,
Can you not see? Death where be your eyes?
You'd have me wash them in the channel, would you?
Yes very fine sir, if you durst attempt it.
Heart, doe you stem me? and he had a beak
He might have split me: body of Iupiter,
He ran me athwart the midships. Spirit of fury,
I think that he has sprung a plank in me.
Then you may lye by the Lee, and mend it.
Horror of man, lay a Captain aboard.
A man of war, and not cry amain to him?
How, you a Captain? I rather believe
That you are one of those that upon service,
Were seen to carry Tomkins in your Guns,
And made a shift to discharge a league of:
Was it not so? that might take up your bullet,
And shoot again, and doe no hurt with it.
You a man of war?
S'life doe you question it?
Isle tell thee Slave to thy astonishment,
I have been styled, the rock of Pirats, I;
I have plowd up the Sea, till Bosphorus
Has worshipped me; I have shot all the Gulphes,
And seen the navel of the world, you stinkard.
How slave, and stinkard, since you are so stout,
I will see your Commission ere I part.
Strength of my brains, see my Commission?
Isle blow thee up like a deck. Son of Neptune,
Off or isle fire thee.
I am grappled with you,
And will hang by your side, till you be calmer,
And be so, or Isle lay my trident on you.
Come to your tacklings.
Tic a bold active boy,
I see there's nothing to be got but knocks by him.
Give me thy hand old Rover, hoes up thy top Sail,
And go in peace.
Sir this will not appease me,
I must have satisfaction.
Reach me thy fist,
And be reconciled: what thou dost not know me:
Though I am valiant, yet tic out of the road
Of my humour, to disgrace any man.
This will not satisfy me.
I say again,
Give me thy wrist. Know me, and my lodging;
Isle give thee a Supper: there's a good plump wench,
My Hostess, a watermans widow at the sign
Of the red Lattice in Southwark, shall bid thee welcome.
But I must have you leave your swearing first,
And be temperate.
Hear me honest Trojan.
As I am virtuous, as I love my friends,
That I may swear.
No, not as you are virtuous.
Why then on my word, isle give thee a supper.
What? I will not offend thee my good drumstick;
Isle conform my self, come to me at night,
And isle be as good as my word, old Bracer.
But if I come, and loose my labour, what follows?
Then Teucer, in pure zeal and verity,
Isle belabour you the next time I meet you.
What Scufler, dost thou think isle fail my friends?
No Hector I scorn it. Isle pawn my cloak first.
Farewell Actorides.
What is he gone?
I, and as glad he has escaped from me,
As from the Syrtes.
How he bore it out
With impudence?
Yes did you observe him?
There's nothing can discountenance him, still
This is his posture, he were excellent,
To venture at a Lottery.
Why mischief?
I doe not think he would ever draw a blank.
We must pursue the project. Sup with him
At any hand.
The jest is behind to see,
In what a miserable perplexity,
He will be put to entertain us.
Come.
You know father, for I must still call you so, how you
charged your daughter to use me respectively.
Yes marry did I: and to show a double duty, as might suite with the reverence of your age, and honour of her hus???band.
Well, and as soon as you were gone, she had no more regard to me, then if I had been an old horse, or an old Ser???vingman.
Why tic impossible she should transgress in such a high point of humanity.
Else there was some fury in her shape that did so. I am sure she shaped me out to bee the ridiculousest old ass in Europe.
Her modesty would not permit it in her.
If my words have any weight in them; she set as light by me, as by the least feather in her Fan.
Why is this true Aemilia?
No indeed sir.
How no indeed; doe you deny it? O palpable, she reckond up a whole Catalogue of abuses, and malicious pra???ctises, that she would assault me with, if I were her husband, the least of which were aboue all patience.
Doe you think sir, if I intended any such thing, I would have forewarned you?
No tic not likely.
That you had but heard the disgrace she put upon me, in calumniating the vigour, and ability of my person.
I cannot believe it.
And then terrified me, that the wind of her humour should be still against me, to cross me in every thing I desired, yet the course of my destiny should be more impetuous then before.
The old Gentleman did but dream so.
Nay more, she said I was an old dry stump, that had not the least drop of moisture in me, yet by the virtue of her humidity, she would make my temples so supple, that they should sprout, and bud a fresh.
Come she would not say so.
Yes, and that all my estate should bee too little, to maintain her in prodigality, and invite acquaintance.
Alas good Gentleman, I told him how other wo???men used their husbands, but I would conform my self to obedience.
I, that you might know what a blessing you had in her.
Oh was it so? I cry you mercy, I mistook you. Here take this Pearl for amends; I am sorry I have sinned against so sweet a simplicity.
Come I knew you were in an error.
Then to avoid all cavillation hereafter, see what I have provided.
What have you there?
I have here a Syngraphus, a writing with articles, that must be drawn between us, before there can be any copulation.
Wherefore, did you so?
Look you sir, I was in a little suspense of her beha???viour, and therefore in relation of that, which I thought she objected, yet has since proved to be otherwise: notwithstan???ding these rules, which may so much conduce to my happi???ness, and have been so much advised upon with deliberation, I would have establish't.
Pray lets hear them.
They are only some sew propositions, and except???once to bee observed on her behalf, for the better security of my quiet, when I shall be married to her.
Now I conceive you, read them out.
First, that after Hymen has once joined us together, she shall admit of no man whatsoever, to entitle him with any suspicious name of friend, or servant: doe you mark me.
Well proceed.
Next??? if any of her old acquaintance come to visit her, as Nurses, Midwifes, and the like, creatures of secrecy, she shall return them word, she is not within, or otherwise accommodated.
Very good.
Isle have it written so upon the doors.
You may perceive by her silence, she will consent to any thing.
Then to avoid alloccasions of writing Epistles, she shall receive none, nor have any Paper, Pen, Ink, or Wax in her closet.
That's somewhat hard.
She shall not have any masculine bawdy Picture hang in her Chamber, but shall take it down, and sell it away as a thing unprofitable, and an enticement of fantasy.
That in my conceit is very reasonable.
She shall bid no man to dinner, but I will invite them, and when they are set, she shall not cast amorous glances up???on them, nor drink to them, nor like her lips at them, nor show her teeth when she laughs, nor her tongue when she sneezes.
For all these, isle engage my self.
Besides, she shall not take upon her, to contrary me in any thing, nor seem more or less wise then my self.
That's not much amiss neither.
She shall send no Hieroglyphics, nor meat cut in Characters, nor tread upon any mans foot under the Table, nor when they are risen, give them her hand to kiss, or open her palm to have her fortune told her, nor yet show them her ring, or receive any of theirs, and read the poesies.
Is this all?
She shall know no language but her own, nor speak any equivocating word.
In my mind now these laws are very consonant to a good disposition, and if I were to marry my self, I'd pro???pose the like.
And for her religion, she may pray to any innocent goddess, as Diana and the graces, but if she have any thing to say to Mars, Mercury, or Apollo, she shall acquaint me with it, and I will present her devotions.
Have you done now?
Last of all, when she is ready to go to bed, she shall not put out the candle to walk up and down in her smock, and shake her body in the dark, and if she be content, I take her as my own.
All these she shall subscribe to, if she be my daughter.
Why then weal proceed to the Church?
Are you agreed or no?
Pray let me speak one word with him in private.
Yes what you-please sweet Lady, it is granted, were it a hundred pound to buy pins and petticoats.
Tic not a thing Sir, of that dear expense:
Though you were pleased to tax me for that crime???
It is only this, time was, I could not love you;
Though reason since, has rectified my judgment,
And cleared my eyes, that I can see my good.
Then I confess I made a solemn oath,
None should enjoy my love; but he that durst
Attempt to steal me; this is not intended,
For any peril to you, but for safeguard
Of my first vow, which I must needs perform.
Now if you please to come at a set hour,
None but your self, and fetch me, I will yield
To go with you, whither you shall command.
It is done bright Helen, I will be thy Paris,
And fetch thee, though thou were it at Lacedemon,
And care not a pin, for all the power of Greece.
What are you agreed?
Yes, wee are both agreed.
Some few ceremonies, and then wee have finish.
Fido, I am now advised upon a plot,
If it succeed, shall crown my invention.
Something about the Captain.
Hang him Kastrill.
I scorn to loose a thought on him; my brains
Rapine at his memory. Tic a new devise,
The issue of extremity. Tic thus,
I will turn a desperate Gamester in love,
And venture all upon one cast.
Take been sir,
There may be plots, but little policy,
Fortune and love, are insolent, and ticklish.
Come Isle doe it. Isle send thee with a letter
Unto my Mistress, that shall make her mad.
How, make her mad, what doe you expect from that: what can you gain by the loss of her wits?
I shall gain my desire.
And doe you prize
The satisfying of a lewd desire
So much, to rob your Mistress of her senses?
Can you accuse her of inconstancy?
Or tax her of dishonesty? Or will you
Prove false to her? what miscief do you intend?
What hopes can you conceive, that may secure
So great a sin from Heavens just punishment?
Have you a drug or incantation,
And think to make her senseless of her grief,
With the privation of her understanding?
Not any of these.
If you doe, you must employ
Some other messenger. Let me advise you
Keep her in her right mind while you have her:
Love of it self is an illusive spirit,
And will enough distract her without help.
She shall seem mad but in appearance Fido;
And with that feigned frenzy move a pity
From all, that must impute it to her sufferings.
It were a mad jest: but is this all your plot?
No, this is not the maine one, theres another
Of greater consequence, and secrecy,
For a sound mind to bear, and tic a burden
Worthy thy care and honesty: Think not
I am so desperate and heady, to launch forth
Into those dangerous Seas without a Pilot,
And I have chose thee for my Palinurus.
You never knew a man of less experience,
I doe not ken one Rock, or Shelf, and Love
Has many.
Tic no matter, thou and I
Will sink a Paean to loves victory.
COme my voluptuaries, my sons of comfort,
That know no sorrow, sing like Grasse-hoppers
And fear no winter, nor no poverty;
Lead on my moving pillars of delight,
My Alchemists of pleasure, that convert
All like your selves: can make old Cato dance,
And turn Fabricius to an Epicure,
Should he behold you.
Thou say right Telemachus;
Tic wine, and mirth that breed these raptures in thee.
Body of Jove, there's nothing but a rabble
Of lean and stary'd imaginations
Accompany sobriety: Some wine there,
That I may court my Cockatrice.
Good Captain
Bid our noble friend welcome.
You know my humour,
To men of ordinary pretence, I seldom
Use to debase my self below the Nod
Of salutation, but for your sake
I receive him as a man deserving.
Give me thy hand Cadmus.
I desire sir to incorporate my self into your ac???quaintance.
Tic well said, doe the like noble office to our friend here sweet Lieutenant.
Sir he shall command my heart and hand on his occasions, Isle as soon draw in his quarrel, as to peace against a wall.
These are the mirrors of the time old boy, that shall show you how to adorn your behaviour, that you may pass in all company with confidence of approbation.
And not err the breadth of a nail.
He shall be able to pass through the needles of all occurrences.
And they would but learn me to swear and take Tobacco, tic all I desire.
Come they shall doe it, and I must tell you, these suggestions in you are arguments of a generous disposition, whence doe they flow I wonder?
That mother wit that put them in my head, has put money in my purse, and as far as that money will lead me, I will be bold and wise: I have my humours, and I scorn the pollution of the Mechanics.
How doe you like these replies Captain?
Very well, by the faith of a soldier, excellent well, they are good relishing answers, and express an ebullition in his nature, swelling to conformity.
What, I will bear my self like a Gentleman.
I, and the way to bear your self like a Gentleman, is sometimes not to be able to bear your self at all. Lieve???tenant, what say you?
I say by Harms, he that has a fortune,
And power to acquaint the world with his perfections,
And seeks to smother them, let him dye wretched.
You have no other way then this, to render you worthy of society.
What, he may turn stinkard, and live in the Coun???try with roots and bacon, and not drink a cup of good wine in a twelve-moneth, nor know how the year goes a???bout, but by observation of Husbandry. He may keep two couple of dogs and a Sparrow-hawk, and level his discourse by them. He may be styled a civil Gentleman, ten spheres below a fool: He may marry a Knights daughter, a creature out of fashion, that has not one commendable quality, more then to make a corner pie and a salad, no manner of court???ship, but two or three dances, as old as Monsieur, and can play a few Lessons on the Virginals that she learnt of her Grandam: besides she is simple, and dull in her dalliance.
He tells thee right my brave Frisker, they are him???pish girls, heavy in their sport, and cannot move with art.
There's a wench, has her Suburb tricks about her I
warrant you: hold there Bellerophon, take thy Ocyrois, and mount her like Phlegon.
Now doe I want some two or three good oaths, to express my meaning withal.
Captain, what think you, shall he be a brother?
Yes he deserves it, let him be a brother.
Give him the principles of the brotherhood.
Are you resolved to be a brother sir?
Any thing I, you shall make a blowing horn, or what you list of me.
Nothing can be suddenly perfect, but must aspire by progression, he must be practised in certain duties, before he can be an ingrafted member of the fraternity.
He shall doe any thing that is requisite.
Well then, for the first two months we must dine every day at a Tavern, where it shall be lawful for any bro???there to bring his shadow with him; and besides the full in???come of wine and provision, to bespeak any superfluous dish that he affects: but that which shall most commend the dis???creation of your worth, is, that after the dissolution of the Feast, no man besides your self must know what's to pay, or take notice of the reckoning.
I must pay all, must I?
You understand me rightly, and I applaud your ca???pacity; from thence, we must have a Coach attend at the door, to carry us to a Play, and at night to a Bawdy-house.
And all at my charges?
What else? And if any brother need a Cloak, or a Suit, or so, you must not stay till he publish or intimate his wants; but presently, by the strength of your own Minerva, pick out the meaning, and take order to supply him: have you any credit with the Tradesmen?
Yes, I have a Taylor that will trust me for any thing that Isle have him.
That Taylor shall have custom, tell him so; and one thing more, now brother, for so I must call you, we must have all things in common, no difference in the possession of any thing.
Pray explain that rule to me, I do not understand you.
Why thus; this Hat is mine, and that yours, as you conceive now, but they are neither mine nor yours upon the premises: but may be transferred upon occasion to either, as thus, doe you conceive me? Tic usual amongst us.
Tic very well, is this all?
Isle make but one experiment more of your appre???hension, and have done. Look you.
O I shall doe this to a hair, and by the same con???sequence I shall be a Captain sometimes: shall I not?
Yes, when the date of your task is accomplished, you shall be any thing.
Tic enough, this once a week will render him ex???act. Shall's have a song and a dance Captain?
Hang a Song, you see what little room wee have for our mirth, and you would fill it up with air, would you?
Nay, but by that air, I hold a Song very delight???some, the very place, as a man would say, and superficies of pleasure.
Prithee let it alone, by that element it charms me into melancholy.
Then good Captain let's have a Dance, for these Gentlewoman's sakes; besides there be many that come to see nothing else.
Why can you dance?
What a question is there to a man of quality? Yes I can dance, and that some that are here shall see and feel before we part; for I mean to shake my heals with that fervour, that it shall strike them into a fit of my love, shall be worse then any ague to them.
Say you so? We'll try that in faith. Come on Squea???cares, rack up our feet and ears to your Instruments.
What tune Captain?
Play us the fine Companion.
Well said my efteminate Varlets, this was auspiciously per???formed.
I am afraid this dancing will breed spavins in my legs, this caper has put me in remembrance of a clicke in my back, I got at my last vaulting.
No thou art deceived my noble Hyacinth, tic a my???stery will exalt thee Hylas, twill make thee rise I say, and put gold in thy purse, thou shalt follow the Court like a Ba???boon, when a thousand proper fellows shall sherke for their ordinary; twill make thee conversant with Ladies, and they shall give thee Diamonds to pawn, and thou shalt ride up and down in thy foot-cloth my little Dolphin Some wine there Tony: I called for wine an hour ago, and could get none.
Fill out sirrah. What's here the Epitome of a glass? By the womb of Bacchus, a score of them are too little for a draught.
O Lord Captain, nine such hornets are able to sting a man to death.
By Saint George he that dyes so, dyes valiantly.
What my bold Bravo, be not afraid, and thou were dead it were nothing, Isle come but with a troop of Wen???ches: and a noise of Fiddlers, and play thee back like Orpheus. What's to pay Drawer?
Sir you have built a sconce since you came in of thirty pounds, and before you have any more, my Master in???tends to be satisfied.
What money have you brother?
Who I? O Lord brother Captain, I have not the third part of it.
No matter, I ne'er think upon such transitory rec???konings: come, lets have a health, and my brother Lackwit shall begin it. Reach three Joint stools hither Drawer.
What to doe Captain?
Isle show you, you shall ascend here, and be Captain of this Fort: Isle ensconce you; come entrench your self, and play from your Battery, and so every man round, there take your Lintstocke in your hand, and give fire, now every man as far off as he can from the command of his Ordi???nonce. Farewell brother.
Why Gentlemen, I hope you will not use me so, ????????? your brother, why Gentlemen.
There Drawer, take him for a pawn, tell him when he has no money he must be served so, tic one of his chief articles.
How now, what are you preaching ore your cups? Now you are in your Pontificalibus indeed.
Good Crochet help me down, I shall break my neck else.
How came you there?
I know not, an ill hour of the brotherhood, Isle after them with a vengeance.
You must stay and pay the reckoning first, besides the Musicians expect something.
Who I pay the recknoning? Slight I came but now in.
That's all one, you were all of a nest, they are flown away, and there's none left but your self.
S'death the Captain is gone away with my Hat, and my cloak too, I tell thee Isle pay no reckoning.
Tic all one to me, if you can satisfy my Master so.
What shall I doe Crochet?
Give him what you have, and if he will take your word for the rest, Isle excuse your Hat and cloak, and say you lost them in a skirmish; you must scratch your hands in half a dozen places with a pin.
I so I will, come sir, Isle go in and talk with your Master.
Besides, I have another business I came to tell you of, that you and I must doe together, you shall reap the whole credit on it your self, if you can manage it handsome???lie, twill gain you that reputation with your Father, that you shall never loose your self while you live again.
What is it Crochet?
Go in and Isle tell you.
You much amaze me.
Sir perhaps I might
With better judgement, and more thanks conceal
So great a wickedness, but my true love to you
Could not withhold it, you have read some stories,
And these are things not unheard of in nature,
No newness at all, the self same lust and pride,
As well rules her that treads upon the flint,
As her that rides upon the necks of slaves.
Stay let me pause awhile; she is a woman,
Whose age and form might tempt me to distrust her,
But yet her manners forbid me to believe it.
Believe it? She is a close Adulteress,
Of most strange exercise, a Fricatrice
Insatiable: and has she none but you,
That she can find to bait with her allurements,
To cover her lewd projects? This moved me,
I'd not have meddled else.
O doe not wrong her,
Good sir doe not wrong her, it cannot be.
You have bin still kept ignorant, for my part,
I never yet expected better from them
I count them but as ordinary chances,
Trivial, and drawn out from the lap of Fortune.
Believe me sir, there is no day so holy,
That ceases to betray a women's falsehood,
My medicine works, I shall be even with her.
I sought at first to make her mad in jest,
But now Isle make her mad in earnest: yet
Tic not good to be too credulous; a word sir.
I must have better proofs then your bare word,
To justify this accusation;
Her virtue must not stumble at a straw.
Sir tic not threats that can extort from me,
More then I list to speak: I see you troubled,
And therefore will not leave you in suspense;
Know that I made my self experiment.
For all let this confirm you: this she gave me
Upon the premises.
O I shall burst:
Here is a sight to make the Sun run backward;
Good sir forgive me, that I pressed you so,
Consider't as your own case: were you hee,
That put your confidence, your happiness,
All in a women's love, and found her false?
I must confess I think it would afflict me:
Isle leave you sir, I have discharged my conscience.
But of more ill, then she has goodness in her.
How now what Planet struck? how doe you sir?
This tic to be in love: what alterations
It breeds? it makes a man forget his friends.
Come sir be merry, your project has took.
She fell into her fit, soon as she read it,
And tore the papers and talked idly, and showed
The symptoms of the prettiest lunacy.
What have you lost your speech? those folded arms,
And rownes, express a sorrow, more then love.
His eyes, though fixed upon their object, show
The wandering sphere of his disturbed mind,
Is whirld about in error. Pray look up sir.
I am not dumb, I have a care within me,
Speaks to my troubled soul.
Why whats the matter?
O hear it then, and witness it for ever.
When ere thou feast a woman, in whose brow,
Are writ the characters of honesty,
And calls the gods to justify her truth,
Swear shoe's a Siren, and a Crocodile.
Conclude her false, it is enough she vows,
And speaks thee fair, the winds waite on her lips,
Straight to disperse her oaths.
You doe but jest sure
There is not one of them, that is the same
She would appear to be; they all are painted.
They have a Fucus for their face, an other
For their behaviour, their words, and actions.
Come come, these are but qualms of jealousy.
Give no faith to their brow: for in that greene
And flourishing field of seeming virtue, lurks
A Snake of lust, in whose voluminous wreaths,
Are folded up a thousand treacheries,
Plots, Mischiefs, and dissimulations,
That man ne'er thought of. For in wickedness,
The wit of woman was ne'er yet found barren.
I think he means to be mad himself too:
Your reprehensions are too general:
For by these words your own Valerie suffers.
Why there's the sum of all that I have spoke,
The abstract of all falsehood. Tic a name, will
Blister the tongue of fame, in her report
Is drowned the memory of all wicked women.
Is your Valerie false?
Once my Valerie, but now mine no more,
(For they are perished that have lost their shame)
Is fallen from virtue past recovery.
The golden Organs of her innocence
Are broke, not to be solderd
In my conscience
You wrong her, this is nothing but the abundance
Of love; will you go and sup with the Captain?
And drive away melancholy.
O no, my heart
Is shut against all mirth.
Then Isle go seek
Your brother out, and he shall go along with me:
Isle show him with a perspective in faith,
What a brave Captain he has: hee shall be
In a disguise, as my Companion,
Then if he will maintain a Paradox,
That he is either valiant, or honest,
Isle be made the scorn of their company.
But my fate guids me to the contrary:
For if my Mistress doe not honest prove,
She has put a period to my life and love.
Come, be not dismayed, what ere you say,
Isle swear it: you must affirm you lost your hat
And cloak in a skirmish.
So I will Crotchet.
Mass thou were not with us at the first neither.
Why what if I had sir?
Thou might have carried
Away two or three of the Captains oaths with thee.
I can coin them my self without any treason I warrant you.
Oh Crotchet, I am thinking now, how bravely isle live, when my father is dead.
Yes, pray let me hear you.
I have drawn the map of it already: Isle go every day in my cloak lind with plush, and my beaver hat, Isle keep my whores, and my running horses, and isle maintain thee in as good a pied livery, as the best footman of them all goes in.
You will sir, what ungratious villain could have said this? whore's your cloak and your hat? yes you shall have money to spend an other time.
How now what's the matter?
Look you, doe you know this Gentleman?
How comes this about?
Nothing but the fortune of the wars forsooth: my young master has been in as stout a fray as ever the Geni???us of Fleetstreet trembled at.
How was it son?
Let Crochet relate. I scorn to be the trumpet of mine own valour, I.
Doe, tell the story, Crochet.
Indeed hee made them all run away, that I am cer???taine of.
Nay but show vs the manner of it.
Why forsooth I came at the latter end of the feast, and the beginning of the fray, and there my young Master was got aboue them all, and stood upon his Guard, and held his weapon in his hand so dreadfully, as it he would have powered down his fury upon any man that should come near him.
And will you be angry with him for this? it was well done, take no wrong of them, better loose all the clothes off from his back, then to keep a cloak for his cowar???dise.
Now is the time to move the other business.
Well mother, if you will give me twenty pound more, Isle doe you such a piece of service, that you shall thank me for it as long as you live.
What is it son?
Nay you shall not know, before it be done: the conclusion shall crown it.
Well husband, give it this once, and Isle urge you no more, lets see how the Boy will employ it.
Yes, send one arrow after an other and loose both.
Nay, but give it him for my sake, I am confident he has a good project; you have example for it in your trade. How many have you, that break daily, and yet their friends set them up two or three times one after an other?
Once more you shall prevail with me. Here hold, but if this miscarry, nor ask me for a penny again.
I warrant you, come Crochet.
Must Crochet go with you?
Yes, tic a business that can not be done by one alone???
Well Mistress, pray throw an old shoe after vs.
Gentleman you are very welcome. What Hostess, come hither good Hostess.
You have a good handsome Hostess, I perceive Captain.
She is cleanly and good condition'??? ???hats my comfort, and by the power of beauty, if a man were combusti???le, hee might find in her eyes, that would kindle a conflagration.
What Gentlemen be these Captain?
Peace good Hostess, I would not willingly proclaim their disgrace: one of them is a Gentleman, that I bastinado???ed the other day; and now he is come to give me a Supper, to be reconciled to me, but take you no notice.
Captain here is a friend, that I would willingly com???mend to your acquaintance.
Sir as I am a true soldier, I embrace your love in him, and thats as much as I can say. Hostess these are not ordinary guests with you; therefore you must be respectful: and faith if you say the world Gentlemen, one of these nights, we'll every man procure as many of our acquaintance as we can, and be merry here at Supper for crowns a piece. What think you?
This is not the business wee come about sir.
I know it well enough. Hostess, prithee good sweet, honey Hostess, step and buy us a joint or two of good meat, and a Capon, and lay it to the fire presently.
Whore's the money?
Death to my honour, doe not question it, but doe as I bid you.
I have not six-pence in the world, the Cobbler had all I had, for mending of your boots.
Go you must make shift, and get more then.
Why if these Gentlemen come to bestow a Supper on you, let them give me money aforehand.
Speak lower woman, art mad?
I tell you I have not a penny in the house.
Speak lower I say. Go borrow it of thy neigh???bours, Isle see it paid.
Yes and turn me behind the door for my reckoning; You have served me so I know not how often, no I have trust???ed you too much already: you have not paid me a penny for your lodging, since you came to my house, besides what I have lent you out of my purse.
Bane to my credit, you will exile me beyond the confine??? of ???eputation: go pawn some Pewter, or one of thy brass pots. S'light doe not disgrace me, doe any thing rather, take the sheets off from my bed.
Yes, you care not what becomes of any thing. Why can you not ask them for money?
S'life, a man may plot till his heart ache, and you still seek to cross me, you will undo me in my designs.
You have more signs in your head, then hang at all the Alehouses in town again.
Prithee woman, hear me what I say. I know they come to spend upon me, and will crouch, and doe any thing, yet when I out of my nobleness, and beyond ex???pectation, shall use them so courteously, twill be such an engage???meant, that I can borrow ten or twenty pieces of them at my pleasure.
I tell you I can not doe it, nor I will not.
Faith Gentlemen I must entreat you to excuse me, my Hostess is not very well she tells me, and I think she is not so well stored with necessaries to entertain you, as I could wish; and indeed she has ne'er a spit in the house, therefore we'll defer it till to morrow night, when twill be more convenient at a Tavern.
Well sir, your excuse shall prevail, wee are not in???exorable upon extremity.
In his you have won me to your observance for ever.
Captain I have another thing to propound to you, here is a friend of mine has lately received injury from one
Master Careless, and upon debatement of the matter, this Gentleman is so apprehensive of his disgrace, that he can not possible put it up with safety of his reputation, and therefore desires to have it determined in plain field. Now as hee is in???formed, his adversary accepts of it, and has chosen you for his patron in the quarrel.
By the shine of Phoebus, I wonder what strange im???pudence has possessed him. As I am a man to honour, I have brought him successively off from a hundred of these, to the peril of my life, and yet am daily obnoxious to new assaults for him.
Then you disclaim to have any hand in the action.
By the passion of valour, Gentlemen Isle tell you, I love a noble employment with my life, but for such a pitiful, drunken, shallow coxcomb, I hate to be seen in such a bu???sinesse.
Doe you think no better of him, Captain? if he be so unworthy, I would advise you not to meddle with him.
By the faith of a Soldier, if he have any care of his credit, let him not deal with him, he will but defile himself with such an abject: I hold him to be so poor conditioned, I would not enter a Country Gentleman upon him.
Yet you keep him company, Captain.
I confess I have done, and my intendments were good in it; I saw him so raw, and young, I was induced to believe there might be some hopes of him: but after much impulsion, when I found him so unapt, and indocile in his own nature, I gave him lost, and so I esteem of him, by my life.
Oh thou treacherous villain, dost thou betray me to my self, and belie me to my face? how many quarrels have you brought me off from?
Never none by Jove.
I will not rail at you, but I will cudgel you, and kick you, you man of valour.
Hold as thou art a man of renown, thou wilt strike thy foot into me else, my body is as tender as a bog.
Thou cowardly perfidious rascal: have I for this made thee my associate, paid for thy swaggerings, and brea???king of Tipsters, and Ostlers pates, fed thee at a charge a man might have built an Hospital; drenched thee with Sack, and Tobacco, as thy face can witness?
Oh hold as thou art worshipful.
Come sir surrender your robes, that you have pollu???ted with cosenage. Here Fido, take this hat and cloak: I will not leave him a covering for his knavery: these are the trophies of your treachery, these.
Nay good sir doe not pillage me of all, stay till I get my own again.
If Lackwit will restore them he may, else you must re???solve to go bareheaded before your right worshipful for???tune, with a truncheon in your hand like a Verger, and so I leave you. Come Fido now for my Mistress.
Well, those good qualities that are bred in a man, will never out of him thats my comfort.
And since I am the scorn of Captains made,
Isle seek a better and more thriving trade.
Come sir, now I have found you, not the power,
And strength of fate, shall pull you from my vengeance.
And though I know thy life too mean a ransom
For the redeeming of the priceless loss
Of her abused honour, Yet what Nature
Enables thee to pay, Isle take in part,
And leave the execution of the rest
Unto Hells justice.
What doe you intend sir?
Look you: to unfold your heart sir with this sword,
And read the falsehood that is written in it.
Come I must know the truth, and reason too,
If there be reason for a wicked act.
You mean about Valerie?
The same.
Still an ill conscience will betray it self,
And sends forth many a scowling, fearful look,
To descry danger; if he stand confident,
And justify it to the face of terror,
Then she is false.
I hear she is run mad.
Is, and the cause of her distemperature
Is the reproach you put upon her honour.
The wound then is too deep, and an ill Fate
Has driven the shaft of my intended malice
Beyond the scope I aimed at.
Was it malice?
That word has struck me both with joy and anger,
Both in suspense, which should weight down the scale
Of my deep burdened mind. What horrid baseness
Durst so attempt to profane innocence?
It was my love to her.
What is his hate,
Whose love has proved so ominous?
That love
Being wronged, begot that hate.
Thou hast done ill.
And like a foolish and young Exorcist,
Hast conjured up a spirit of that fury,
Thy art cannot allay.
Repentance may.
I only meant to give her name a gash,
That might be healed again without a scarre,
Or any spreading plaster of wide rumour,
With help of her compurgators, but only
To vex her.
What's the offence that did provoke
This imputation? Did she ever wrong you?
Malign your wit? Disgrace you before your Mistress?
Disparage your behaviour? Had she done so,
Yet this revenge were disproportionate.
Urge me no more, I cannot look on her
Without such a reflection of my crime,
As must give shame a lustre; there's no man
But once in's life may sin besides his nature,
Nay perhaps contrary: this is a deed
I must abhor to justify.
You have given
Almost a satisfaction.
It was a scandal,
Arose from my repulse, and has no witness
Besides your ears; if it were silenced there,
The world were ignorant of it; I hear
She is run mad upon the grief, I am sorry
Her punishment has outstripped my desires.
Isle undertake, what ere you shall propose,
For the recovery of her wits, or honour.
And Isle make use of your kind profer sir.
I will resign her where she most affects,
And give you all assistance to obtain her.
You speak honestly, I shall employ you;
I know you have that credit with her father,
You may advise him in a thing that reason
Shall seem to second; bring but this to pass,
You have made requital for all injuries.
Show me the way, Isle do it; be you the mover,
Isle be the instrument.
You are my Genius,
My hope, my opportunity, my Fate;
And in effecting this you cannot err,
To make me happy, and recover her.
HOw doe I look now Crochet?
Very dreadfully: like a Citizen in a fray, as fear full as Priapus in a garden.
Well, and thou art sure there is but one of them, and
he comes disguised like Dotario, to steal away my sister?
Yes sir, and this is the old Gentleman himself, and somebody has stole away his habit to abuse him.
That man that has done so shall think of me and this place as long as he lives for it: Go and give warning Crochet, that no man withstand me, unless he be weary of his life.
If any man be so hardy, let him take his chance.
Let him expect my fury Crochet. I will batter any man that shall come near me, my fist is like a Sling, my head like a Ram, and my whole body an Engine, and I will make any man toothless that shall offend me.
Then you will make his mouth as unserviceable as your fathers gummed velvet.
I long to exercise my puissance: thou art sure there is but one of them? stand by a little, and let me flourish with my sword, to animate my spirits; now whatsoever hee is, that comes in my way, I pronounce him to be a miserable mortal.
What hast thou there Crochet.
I imagined there would be a great deal of blood spilt in the skirmish, and so I brought these to wipe the wounds, nothing else sir: look you here they come.
Give by Crochet, till I question them: it behooves a wise man to deal with words, before he descend to blows: what arrant knight are you sir? and whither doe you travel with that Damsel?
Press that point home.
O brother Lackwit, how came you so accoutred? or were you set here for a watch-man to guard us?
No sir, I doe not guard, nor regard any man, and yet Isle stand upon my guard, and this is the point Isle main???taine.
What doe you mean brother Lackwit?
How, I your brother? No, I scorn to have af???fiance with such a conny-catcher: you sir Nessus, deliver
up your theft, or I will play the Hereules with you.
I am going to marry her, my name is Dotario, and this is your sister Aemilia.
I, she is my sister, but you are a counterfeit, and have stolen her away.
Seize her for felons goods, she belongs to the Lord of the soil.
Thou villain, dost thou not know, if I were dead, and her other sister, she would be next heir, and then thou might be hanged for her?
But I had her consent, and her fathers, my name is Dotario your neighbour, that have fed you with custard and apple-pie a hundred times.
I, this Gentleman has, but you have abused him, and took his wrong name upon you.
I am the same.
He lies, beat him for lying, what doe you stay for?
I am considering with my eye, which part of him I shall first cut off.
Let's bind him fast, and then lay him upon his back, and geld him.
A match. Let's lay hold on him; what is he gone? how finely might my father have been cheated, and all wee now, if I had not been: that's some roguing Serving-man disguised Isle lay my life on it; if I be not fit to be chronicled for this act of discretion, let the world judge of it. Well Crochet, when I have married her to the right party, if my father does not give me forty pounds more, he shall marry the next daughter himself.
You must not be too sudden now in the opening of your plot, after you have married them.
Advise me good Crochet.
Why before you reveal your proceedings, you shall present your self with a great deal of confidence, and pro???mise of desert; walk up and down, with a joyful agony, and a trembling joy, as if you had escaped from a breach, or re???deemed your country: then when you see them sufficiently filled with expectation, you may draw the curtain of your valour, and stoned them with admiration.
So I will Crochet, come let us to the Church.
Come Master Littlegood, be comforted,
I have as great a share in the missortunes
Of your distracted daughter, as your self.
O doe not say so, she was all my joy.
Then men begin to understand their good,
When they have lost it, and an envious eye
Seeks after virtue when it is extinct,
That hated it alive.
You have reason
To pity me the more, and lament for her,
Because I destined her in marriage to you.
And I had well hoped to have been made happy
In her affection, a true Lovers griefs
Transcend a parents.
No, you are deceived,
A parent is confined, and his joys bounded,
And only limited to such a subject,
And driven from thence, have no where else to rest on:
For if his children be once taken from him,
Which are the cause, then his delight and comfort,
That are the effects, needs must vanish with them:
But in a Lover it falls otherwise,
Such as your self, whose passion, like a dew,
Can dry up with the beams of every beauty
That shall shine warm upon you, need not prize
The loss of any; you have no alliance,
Nor natural tie commands you to love any,
More then your fancy guides you; and the winds
Have not so many turnings, nor the Sands
So many shiftings, nor the Moon changes.
Sir you speak truth, upon my knowledge that,
He is as slippery, as an Eel, in love,
And wriggles in and out, sir, at his pleasure;
He can as easily dispense with vows,
As swear them; and can at a minutes warning,
If an occasion serve, supply himself
With a continual, and fresh entertainment
Of a new Mistress.
Troth I must confess,
I have been a little faulty that way.
And why would you sir, knowing this before,
Suffer your daughter to be abused by him?
Now by my life, I think, and it were not for me,
You'd wind your self into such Labyrinths,
You'd not know how to extricate your self.
Peace good Wife, since there is no remedy.
Doe not despair, there is yet remedy;
I know a scholar, a great Naturallist,
Whose wisdom does transcend all other Artists,
A traveller besides, and though his body
Be distant from the Heavens, yet his mind
Has pierced unto the utmost of the Orbs,
Can tell how first the Chaos was distinguished,
And how the Spheres are turned, and all their secrets,
The motion and influence of the stars,
The mixture of the Elements, and all
The causes of the Winds, and what moves the earth,
And then he has subjected to his knowledge
The virtues, and the workings of all herbs,
And is an Aesculapius in Physic,
No grief above his art.
Can he heal mad folks?
Were they as mad as Ajax Telamon,
That slew an Ox in stead of Agamemnon,
He will warrant them.
How should one speak with him?
I brought him with me, he is at the door.
Prithee go call him Fido, you shall hear him,
And as you like his speech, so credit him.
Is this the man?
This is the Doctor sir.
I am bold to make relation of your skill here
To this old Gentleman, who has a daughter
That is suspected to be mad.
Suspected, is she no otherwise?
She is stark mad.
It came by love?
Yes sure, what think you on it?
An ordinary disease, and cure, in some things
I am of an opinion that Stertinius
The Stoic was, who held all the world mad.
As how, good Master Doctor?
Thus I prove it;
What is ambition, and covetousness,
Or luxury, or superstition,
But madness in men? and these reign generally.
Your Lawyer trots, and writes, as he were mad,
His Client is madder then he; your Merchant that marries
A fair wife, and leaves her at home, is mad:
Your Courtier is mad to take up silks and velvets
On ticket for his Mistress; and your Citizen
Is mad to trust him.
Nay he is a rare man,
And has done many and strange Cures sir.
I have indeed.
Pray relate some of them.
To satisfy your Ladyship, I will.
Yes good Sir, let us hear them.
Then Isle tell you. There was once an Astrologer brought mad before me, the circulations of the Heavens had turned his brains round, he had very strange fits, he would ever be staring, and gazing, and yet his eyes were so weak, they could not look up without a staff.
A Iacobs staff you mean?
I, and hee would watch whole nights, there could not a star stir for him, he thought there was no hurt done, but they did it, and that made him look so narrowly to them.
How did you heal him sir?
Only with two or three sentences out of Picus
Mirandula, in confutation of the act; and as many out of Cor???nelius Agrippa, for the vanity of it.
That was excellent.
The next was a Soldier, and he was very furious; but I quieted him, by getting his arrerages paid, and a Pen???zion for his life.
You took a hard task in hand, Mr Doctor.
But the most dangerous of all was a Puritan Chand???ler, and he ran mad with illuminations, he was very strange???lie possessed, and talked idly, as if he had had a noise of bells in his head; he thought a man in a Surplice to be the Ghost of Heresy, and was out of love with his own members, because they were called Organs.
O monstrous!
I and held very strange positions, for he counted Fa???theirs to be as unlawful in the Church, as Plato did Poets in his Common-wealth, and thereupon grounded his conclusion for the lawfulness of whoredom; for he said that marriage, as it is now used, was the only ring-leader of all mischief.
How did you heal him sir?
Why Lady with certain pills of sound doctrine, and they purged his ill humours.
That was very speedy.
Then there was a Musician that run mad with Crochets, the fit was so violent upon him, that he would no???thing but sound perpetually.
How did you with him sir?
I served him as Hercules served his Master Linus, broke his Fiddle about his pate, and sent him away without ere a penny, and that brought his head in tune.
Isle remember this in faith.
Then there was a Huntsman that was very wood, he would nothing but hoop and hollow, and was wonder???fully in love with an Echo.
How did you reclaim him?
Why I served him in his own kind, he had a very handsome wench to his wife, and while he was playing the Cephalus abroad, and courting his Aura, I turned him into an Actaeon at home, set a fair pair of horns on his head, and made him a tame beast.
Husband that was exellent, was it not?
I cured a poet too, and indeed, they are a generate???on that are little better then mad at all times: I was fine to give him over, because himself, and others took such delight in his fury. I could not tell what to make of him, his disease was so pretty and conceited, and he was no sooner well, but he would presently fall into a relapse. I could make relation of a thousand such, as Painters, Alchemists and the like, but it would be tedious.
Nay sir, wee are confirmed of your skill. Will you have my daughter brought forth to you sir, that you may see her in her fit?
No by no means, twill spend her spirits too much. Isle take her home with me, and anoint her brows with a little Helleborum, and some other receipts that Isle give her, and Isle warrant you, Isle bring her safe too in three hours, and well recovered.
Sir, you will doe an office, that will not more deserve honour then reward.
Sir, I shall desire nothing but my pains for my satis???faction.
Good sweet Fido conduct him in, and go along with him, that if any hereafter shall be so averse, in his ignorance, to all goodness, as to question this miracle, you may be pro???duc'd as a witness.
And what will you doe sweet wife?
Why Isle stay here, and expect my son Lackwit, with his project. He sent me word he would come present???lie, and see where he enters.
Crochet, bid them stay without, till I call for them. Make room there, and let such produce there Game, that have good cards to show.
How now son Lackwit; whither away so furious?
I am sure all the wit and valour I had, was at stake for it.
Why whats the matter
There was old shuffling and cutting amongst them, and I had not spied their knavery they might have put a trick upon vs, faith.
Why were you at cards son?
No, I was at dice. I came the Caster with some of them I think, and I had like to have made their bones rattle for it. There was a Rooke would have gone at In and In with my sister, if I had not made a third man, he would have swept all away, and wiped our noses when he had done.
Tell vs how was it son?
No matter how; but if I have not played the wise man now, and done an act worthy of applause, let me bee hist off for my labour.
Letts hear, what is it?
If it be no more thanks worthy, Isle tell you at my leisure, when you have prepared your understanding.
What is it Crochet?
Peace sirrah, Isle have no man tell it but my self, because the praise of it belongs wholly to me; and I could but effect half a dozen more such exploits, Id write my own Commentaries.
You put vs too much into a longing, son.
Well I am content to open the sluices of your hap???pines???; let them in Crochet, but take heed you be not too gre???die of it, lest the sudden joy overwhelm you.
Whats here, Master Dotario, and my daughter Aim???lia, hand in hand, &amp; married together? Nay then tic as I would have it. The boy has done well, and I must applaud him for it.
O must you so sir? Well, there they are Bark and Tree, but as I am a hairy beast, if I had not been, they had been as far a sunder, as Temple bar and Algate.
How so son?
Why Isle show you. there was an other Changeling as like to him in shape, as Iupiter to Amphitrue, nay if I should say, as I am to, let me see what?
To a fool.
No, to my self.
Tic all one.
That would have married her in his stead, and car???ried her away, if I had not prevented them.
Whether it bee a shadow or a ghost, that haunts him in his own proper form, I know not, but there he comes again.
Why, how now son Dotario, you have made haste to beget one so like you already.
O sir, tic I am cheated, gulled, and abused, and which is worse, by one that says he is my self too.
Why what are you?
O sir I am that old Gentleman, that should have mar???ried your daughter, and there's an Asmodeus, a devil in my habit, that has beguiled me of her.
Come sir uncase, your self; tic no glory for you to lurk any longer under the person of such a wretch.
Who is here, my Nephew Careless? nay then tic ten times worse then I thought of: my disgrace will bee as common as Conduit water, the very Tankard-bearers will mock at me, I shall be made their laughter at Taverns, the table talk at Ordinaries.
Nay good Uncle doe not think so ill of me, abrace of thousands shall chain up my tongue, that you may live as concealed as you please.
O sir you have proved your self to bee a fine Com???pinion.
Nay hold up your head sir, this was your devise, your master piece of wit, and valour? nay you may brag of it, the credit belongs to you.
Crotchet I would thou were a post, that I might beat out my brains against thee.
Save you Gentlemen.
Look you sir; here's the Doctor, and your daughter already.
Well there's some comfort yet to make amends for the rest.
Come down on your knees sir.
How now what are you?
Lately the Doctor, but now your son Aurelio.
What more gulleries yet? they have consent me of my daughters, I hope they will cheat me of my wife too: have you any more of these tricks to show, ha?
No more sir, if we may obtain your favour for these, and think good sir what love may doe; you have been young your self.
Troth and so I have, and been as waggish as the best of you. Well Master Dotario, what shall we doe? the boys have out stripped us, there's now no remedy, and my affection relents.
So does mine too, and I would doe any thing, if I might bee freed of this ignominy, that it might not bee known what a fool this love has made of me.
Isle undertake for that sir if you will yield to a motion.
Any thing upon these terms.
Then thus: you are rich, and your Nephew Aurelio here is poor, yet hee was borne to an inheritance; now doe you but confer something presently upon him, and assure him the rest after your death, and Isle promise they shall obe???serve you with as much obsequiousness, as you desire.
And what shall my Nephew Careless doe?
Why Master Littlegood shall give him his Land again.
If he will doe one, Isle doe the other.
That he shall, Isle see that done upon my word.
Isle not stand against a good motion at any time.
Why then boys be happy in your Mistresses.
Sir this speech from you is more comfortable then if Hymen had spoke it: and for my brother Lackwit Isle take him to my protection, and stand in his defence against all ma???chinos Engines that shall bee planted for the battery of his wit and fortune.
Pray sir will you get him his cloak and hat again that he lost in the skirmish.
I so I will; Fido shall restore them to him.
Well I would know, how all these things had come to so good perfection but for me now.
Nay, if fortune should not favour such as you and I are, she would leave her old wont.
What's my old Reformado come again?
Nay you need not fear me now, I am as mild as my beer: I am her husband and your Host till death.
What turned Host?
Yes, and I thought it my duty to present you with the first fruits of my profession. Fill out a glass Tipster, that I may drink to this good company. Gentlemen you are all welcome.
Is this your Tipster Captain?
Yes, and does he not suit well with his function? he has learnt already to run up stairs and down stairs, as nimble as a Squirrel, and can answer to any man that shall call him, as loud and peremptorily as the best of them.
Thats a good entrance.
He is a little out of countenance at the first, but when you come to my house, you shall hear him speak in a big accent, whats to pay in the Lyon? whats to pay in the Dra???gon? be not dismayed Tipster, be not dismayed.
Well I perceive we must keep Holiday: there's no???thing angers me now, but Master Spruce is disappointed of his Mistress.
Take no care for that, I have more Mistresses then I can tell what to doe with.
Sir I have a sister, though she had no part in this bu???sins, yet for her beauty, virtues, and Dowry, may well de???serve you: if you can like of her, Isle doe what I can to obe???taine her for you.
Sir you shall command me in what you please, and my thanks for your love; and here I vow never to dissem???ble any more in this kind, but to be truly and sincerely affe???ctionated to whom soever you shall commend me.
Nay if you would not doe so, you were unworthy of her.
To gain a women's love thus all may strive,
But wealth shall be put back, when wit shall thrive.

you're welcome Gentlemen to Tot'nam-Court,
Where You (perhaps) expect some lusty sport;
Such as rude Custom doth beget in MAY,
When straggling Numbers court that jovial day
With early Riot. No such thing must be
The Subject of our easy COMEDY.
What then! a humorous, fiery, red-fac'd Host,
That will discourse his Guest into more cost
Then's Cheer is worth: and lies with so much credit,
As if it were Truths Authority, He se'd it,
Nor this! The AVTHOR surely then intends
Some Gowne-man of the Town, that daily spends
A thrifty Penny, to preserve his Lungs,
For a full Voice amidst the contentious throngs.
But here is no such Satire: nor is it sit
Abuse should bee the exercise of Wit.
To feast your sense and minds for Cakes and Ale,
New, and not stal'd with handling, heere's a Tale
Dressed up of a fair Milke-maid; whose chaste Theme
Shall close your stomachs up instead of Cream.
Cook'ry and Wit are like: the self same Meat
Delights one's taste, another cannot eat.
So it is in Fancie's Work: this loves a jest;
That Language; Matter pleases t'other best.
Our PLOY'S not larded with great store of these:
And how the relish of their salt will please
It is doubtful. Yet We are the less afraid;
Because Your Reck'ning is before-hand paid.
COme, my Delight; let not such painted griefs
Press down thy soul: the darkness but presents
Shadows of fear, which should secure us best From danger of pursuit.
Would it were day:
My apprehension is so full of horror,
I think each sound the ayre's light motion
Makes in these thickets, is my Uncles voice,
Threatening our ruins.
Let his rage persist
To enterprise a vengeance; we'll prevent it.
Wrapped in the arms of night (that favours Lovers)
We hitherto have escaped his eager search,
And are arrived near London. Sure I hear
The Bridges Cataracts, and such like murmurs
As night and sleep yield from a populous number.
But when will it be dy? the light hath comort.
 snses being lost,
The lst are less delighted.
Th'early Cock
Hath sung his summons to the days approach:
Twill instantly appear. Why, startled Bellamie!
Did no amazing sounds arrive your ear?
Pray listen.
Come, come; It is thy fear sugist's
Illusive fancies: under Loves protection
We may presume of saetie.
Follow, follow, follow. 
Ay me,it is sure mine Uncle. Dear Love. 
Astonishment gath seized my faculties.
My Love, my Bellamie. Ha!
Dost thou forsake me Worthgood?
Whore's my ova?
Dart from thy silver Crescent one fair beam
Through this black ayre thou Governess of night,
To show me whither she is led by fear.
Thou envious darkness to assit us hither,
And now prove fatal.
Follow, follow, follow.
Silence your noise, ye clamorous ministers
Of this injustice. Bellamie is lost;
Shoe's lost to me. Nor her fierce Uncles rage
Who whets your eager aptness to pursue me
With threats or promises; nor his painted terrors
Of laws severity, could ever work
Upon the temper of my resolute soul,
To soften't into fear, till she was lot:
Not all th'illusive horrors which the night
Presents unto th'imagination
T'affright a guilty conscience, could possess me,
Whilst I possessed my Love: the dismal shrieks
Of fatal Owls, and groans of dying Mandrakes,
Whilst her sustained palm warmed mine, were music to me,
And were this hand but once more clasp't in hers,
This should resist th'assault, inspired by love
With more then humane vigour.
Follow, follow, follow.
Their light appeare's. No safety doth confirst
In passion or complaints. Night, let thine arms
Again receive me; and if no kind minister
Of better fate guide me to Bellamie;
Be thou eternal.
Follow, follow, follow.
Come, wing your hastes: I'll sweeten all your labours
With large rewards: doe but recover them,
I'll ease your rents; exact no costly customs;
Quarrel no more about your commons title.
Good neighbours forward: London's not far off.
It is so far off, that I cannot see it.
The day will soon discover it.
That day is sure a notable informer; yet I believe
He spies more bad then he mends.
Come, follow me this way.
Yes, we will follow; but at some wiser distance: Stay neighbour let him go. Shall wee rob our carcasses of sleep all night, that have been sufficiently tired with the days toils, for his reward? what will that be think you? a Christmas dinner; with a Chine of his great Ox that died at watering of the blayne.
You say well neighbour:
And a stale hare with a great pudding in her belly.
And the discourse of his Worships hunting her: how many doubles she made, and mock't his Worcesterhips hope of a better dinner so long, till hee thought in his conference she was a Lancashire Witch.
Yes neighbour, and a choler of Brawn that was fattened with stale porridge.
And a goose that broke her neck, creeping through the hedge into the Parsons stubble.
No neighbour, let the young couple go, and much joy go with them. Let us take up our rests in this thicket, or the next house; for I am as sleepy as if I had eaten a Puppy.
How, eat a Puppy
Yes, a Puppy; I heard our Landlords Carter speak it last Whitsontide in a Play.
And I am as drowsy as a Constable at midnight.
Why then resolved: twill be day presently: let's put ont the candle, and go to bed, and farewell Landlord. 
The day begins to break; and trembling light
As if affrighted with this nights disaster,
Steals through the farthest ayre, and by degrees
Salutes my weary longings. Yet it is welcome,
Though it betray me to the worst of fate
Love and desire ever suffered. Oh my Worthgood,
Thy presence would have checked these passions;
And shot delight through all the mists of sadness,
To guide my fear safe through the paths of danger:
But thou art lost, and all my joys are fled
Not to return without thee.
New fears assault me. It is a women's voice.
She sings; and in her muscks cheerfulness
Seems to express the freedom of a heart
Not chained to any passions. Be propitious
Thou regent o'er my fate, and guide her hither
Unto my comfort.
What a dainty life the milke-maid leads?
When ov the flowery meads
She dabbles in the dew,
And sings to her Cow;
And feels not the pain
Of love or disdain.
She sleeps in the night, though she toils in the day;
And merrily passes her time away.
What a blessed state is this? the minds content
Sweeten's all sufferings of th'afflicted sense.
Those that are bred in labour think it sport
Aboue the soft delights which wanton appetite
Begets or others, whom indulgent fortune
Prefers in her degrees; though equal nature
Made all alike. Oh, might I change my misery
For such a shape of quiet.
She comes this way.
He venture to accost her.
Ha! what silken butterfly's yonder! She looks not like one that had kept her self warm all night at the Brick-kils: yet silk petticoats many times are glad with worse lodging.
Good morrow maid.
Should I salute you so, it would bring my wit in question. Pray you what are you?
A distressed maid.
A maid at your years, and so near London; where the tate of one at 15. is as rate a a light wenches conversion. Never an early walking gallant to take you up this morning! The Park here hath fine conveniences: or Tottenham Court's close by: Tic suspected that fine City Ladies give away fine things to Court Lords for a Country Banquet there.
I cannot constableue it; my innocence makes understanding useless. Good maid, wife or widow (for sure you are a woman) doe a courteous office to your sex in me, and guide me to London.
It seems you are a kind Country Gentlewoman, that have bestowed your Maidenhead on your Fathers servingman, and are come up to have a Citizen fodder your broken ware. The policy is grown stale: it would hardly take ever since the Ballad cursed the Carrier that brought her o town.
You're a bad woman sure: and from th'aboundance of you own foul else suspect all others.
The to, is angry, it would fine counterfeit something: perhaps to insinuate her self, and make me her agent. But you are deceived my pretty morfell of wantonness; my self and my Milke-paile are both honest: I have no disguised tone of Come, or three penny thrip to cloak a procurese. I am not the Blades intelligence whether Frank or Moll remove their lodgings to scope the Constables search and Bridewell. I will to my Cowes, and leave you to the fate of the morning: despair not of a customer; but be sure I catch you not napping; for if I doe, I have less mercy then Prentices at Shrovetide. I hate hedge-coupling worse then fasting at Christmas, or a Puritans long Grace over short Commons.
If you are good, pray stay and comfort me.
The sense of my 
Why let but an honest  in Middlesex) find you not guilty of any thing that may make compassion deaf  las, she sownes; pooe gentlewoman, bee comforted. Should she miscarry, I were in danger, having no witness to purge the suspicion of being her murderess.
Worthgood farewell.
Ha! what said she? Worthgood! I have heard my Father often speak that name, and sigh after it. Alas, she is dead; her breath scarce moves.
Oh Father, you are come in time to see me undone: I met this Gentlewoman as I was going to milking, and she is fallen dead. I shall be questioned.
Why what is she?
Nay that's as hard to tell, as the success of my danger. She named one Worthgood.
That word strike's deep amazement. Is she quite dead!
Dead as a herring Sir.
And are not you in a pickle Cicely? She is not dead Sir; she breathes.
She may be recovered. Pull her by the nose.
Pull it off: no matter for spoiling her face if she be dead.
Wring her by the little finger.
Her little finger is ringed; and I will wring it rome her.
No robbing the dead Slip.
Why should the dead partake of living ceremonies?
Cast water on her face.
Blow wind in her face. Can water make one alive that's dead? unless it be hot water.
Her spirits are returned; give her more ayre.
A women's spirits? they are devilish sure: I had best conjure them back again.
Where am I! what a pleasant vision
Pleased my dead slumbers, and presented joys.
As I was passing through th'eternall shades
Towards Elisium, one of fates Ministers
Told me I should return; and this same day
Enjoy my Worthgood.
What's he should own that name! wonder and doubt
Have raised a war within me, Look up mistress:
You shall not want what comfort we can give you.
Deend me gentle powers: yet ye shall never
O'retake my heart: thats still with Worthgood.
For some blessed Oracle to unfold the meaning
Of this so oft repeated name.
Ere you return me to my angry Uncle.
My soul shall lie and meet with his embraces.
What mean you gentlewoman?
You are murderers
O that content in me goodness would cherish
You serve the purposes of a passionate man
For base reward; and that shall render you
Base to opinion.
Pray sir, let me conjure down this Devil in her tongue; twill raise tempests else. Murderers, and base! Pray Gentlewoman, to whom speak you all this?
To you, the injurers of my true love
And Worthgoods.
Mistress, we know you not; and all your words
Appear distraction: Nor can they satisfy
Our yet amazement.
If you are not such
As my too fearful apprehension thought you,
Pray, what are ye?
Such as doe compassionate
Your feeling sorrows, and would comfort you.
You'll then perform an act of piety
Worthy record. Since my distress hath made me
The object of your pity; pray conduct me
To some near house, for I am wondrous faint.
Go home with her daughter; use your best care in administering to her: we know not what fate depends upon it. When I have walked the round I'll return. 
But pray Ciceley, withal, neglect not my breakfast. Rising early and walking gets us good stomachs: yet I could be content to fast with such laced mutton and a good cullice more then hale a morning.
What passions fight within me, that beget
Several constructions of this accident?
But what my hope interprets cannot be.
How apt is misery to dream that blessings
Are all immediate, and no underworkings
Of means and counsel! I'll not sltter it;
(Tic but th'effct of passion) but return
To my delight of labour. Saw you the heard
Last night sirah?
Yes, sir.
And how fed they?
With their mouths.
You'll not leave your saucy wit, until it be beaten out of you.
'T would be but saucily done of it to leave me so: but if it will not keep me from beating, I'll keep it no loneger; but be mannerly. The dear fed well sir, only a mischance. Some Cuckolds cur (for I saw him run towards London) had pulled down two or three young dear.
And what did you with them?
I sent a Fawn to a wanting poet, a friend of mine; who I presume will make profitable use of it. Dress it in
some lamentable pitaph and dedicate to his ningle: whose cmpssion to ounty must redeem his lavendered plush, and commend him again to converse with scke and good company.
You have surely gleaned from that Poet.
Something to make people laugh at me.
Wht did you with the rest?
A longing Lady in the strand had a pricket. Then I sned a soar to Baber-Surgeons Hall. A little soar makes them a great feast.
Well sirrah, round you the suth side oth'Parke; and meet me at the great Oak. I'll this way.
Pray stay sir, who comes yonder?
Hee seems a discontented Gentleman. Sme dueller perhaps.
Some hot spurred Gallant, that got a drunken feaver last night, and must bleed this morning.
Perhaps to revenge an affront done his Mistress.
His common Mistress you man sir.
It needs no adjective the sense is common enough.
So is the creature; a Cart take them. They have infected more honest Alehouses with bad names, then Cakes and Cream will ever restore again. A wench is grown a necessary appendix to two pots at Tottenham Court.
To your walk sirrah. I'll observe him.
And I'll home to observe how I can sleep after early rising. If my master should catch me napping, it is but dreaming a lie to excuse it. I'll persuade him it is as true Prophecy as Bookers Almanac. 
After so many longings to salte
The welcome light, it hath betrayed my sense
To worse affliction, then if sights privation
Had made it useless; since it wants the object
Can both delight and feed it, Back blushing morn
To thy Mygdonian bed; there shake the dew
From thy wet locks; and teach thy guilty shame
To dye that red in an eternal black,
Unless it bring more comfort.
Discontent
Rides on his forehead; and doth seem to trample
Upon his souls dejection. Would I knew him.
Good morrow Sir.
Ha! tic a fair salute.
I doe return your wish.
Sir, you must pardon me
If I seem curious in some few demands.
My office and this place are privilege
For more then questions. Pray Sir what are you?
This sure is Marrowbone-Parke, and he the Keeper.
A Gentleman that comes not to offend you.
I spoil no game: you see I am unfurnished
Of instruments for such a wanton mischief.
But Sir, without a better satisfaction
I must suspect you still. Mere recreation
To walk for health seldom invites young Gallants
To leave their beds so early. I must have more.
Must saucy groom! can any patience
Construe it manners? Your rude compulsion shall not
Enforce me to express so weak a spirit,
Whilst I have hands, and this.
At that guard Sir?
Then this must countercheck it. Either tell me
Your name, condition, and your business here;
By my just anger for this foul provoking
I shall not spare you else.
How happy now
Might this occasion make me, were she lost
Beyond that hope which whispers her yet safety!
I must preserve my selle. Yo thou tiumph'st
In my submission, because I had rather lose
A little outward credit to prevent
Wose mischief, know I can devise revenge,
Shall be a fair example for bse difference
From the pretence of any borrowed power
To overdo it's duty. My name's Worthgood.
Enough; that word hath power to check the force
Of any passion, though the hottest rage
Enslam'd it to be active.
Heir's a change.
Why sure my name's a spll. How it hath calmed
The tempest of his fury!
What black star
Was found th'ascendant in my crooked birth:
That all my lifes sad accidents should be
Such pregnant else begetting one another!
One sudden raness in a moment might
Perhaps have mined him my duty honours:
Making this hand a mover to his death,
Whose life I ought to cherish.
What would else?
Nothing but pardon Sir; or if you please
Th'occasion brought you hither. Lost you no company?
It cannot sure be fear that makes me jealous.
I dare the worst of fate. Be he an actor
In my pursuit, I'll venture all at once.
I have lost a Gentlewoman, and doubt her safety:
If any chance hath guided you to find her,
Doe not delay my satisfaction.
I joy that chance made me the instrument
Of such a good. Please you to follow me.
I'll guide you to this pensive one, that grieves
More your feared loss then her own misery.
She named you oft; when (by her fit transported)
Recovering from a sown, she thought her self
Surprised by some that meant her injury.
Shall I give faith? my resolution's mad;
Yet it shall try th'event. Despair my bring
A good success to an indifferent thing. 
FIe Frank; there's such a disproportion,
Twill ne'er be brought to an equality.
Why George, dost think th'exterior goods of ortune,
Or titular greatness that derives it self
From larger springs, and slow's to swell the blood
With attributes of gentle, or of noble
Can make the difference such, that the free soul
Must have the limits of her large desires
Prescribed by them? Nature's impartial:
And in her work of man preer's not names
Of ancestors She sometimes forms a piece
For admiration from the basest earth
That holds a soul: and to a Beggars issue
Gives those perfections make a beauty up;
When purer molds po'ish'd and g'oss'd with titles,
Honours and wealth, bestow upon their bloods
Deformed impressions; objects only fit
For sport or pity.
Yet never can the mixture
Of gold with clay make any transformation
Of that base matter into purer metal.
The Chemistry of Love can surely doe it.
Wedlock confers all honour that's a husbands
Upon his wife.
And therefore you will marry
A milk wench; one that's drudge unto necessity.
It would be a credit to that long continuance
Of noble matches which your ancestors
Have linked to the chain of their own bloods
To make the series of their Families
Spread in so many glorious divisions.
Come, let my counsel guide these passive Fires
To flame aright, and send their Pyramids
More upwards. Let the grosser stuff that feeds them,
By an inversion, choke them. From advice
Men must choose wives, not passion.
She is fair:
Upon her person all the graces waite,
And dance in rings about her. Her bright eye
Is Loves chief mansion where he keeps his Court.
Envy not fair ones, if my fancy doth
Give all your dues to her, save only those
Which your defects supply from wanton art.
Her white and red she borrow's not from any
Cosmetique drugs; nor puzzles the invention
Of learned practitioners for oil of Talxe
To blanch an Ethiops skin. Lilies and Roses
Are figures fitting common beauties: hers
Wants a comparison but its proper self.
You swell her praise too high; so mean a subject fits not these raptures.
Shoe's a subject, George,
For larger volumes then invention
Yet ever filled with flattering hyperboles.
The very thought of her hath strained my heart-strings
Up to a pitch of joy; whose music makes
My spleen dance lusty measures.
If she be
So rare a piece, her low condition
Makes me suspicious shoe's some common wanton
Lurks in that mask for safety.
Did not friendship
Restrain't, I should be angry: nay more; punish
So great a sin against her innocence.
I have laid all the baits that might entice
Apt inclination to sweet wickedness;
But could not catch her that way. She hath shunt them
With witty scorn, and such imperious checks
Have made me blush at my intentions soulenesse:
Which now is cleared with noble resolution
To give my hot desires their satisfaction
In fair embraces, such as the reverence
Of lawful Wedlock sweetens.
Vertuou policy.
Kill reputation, that you may preserve
A little better conscience. Any judgement
Would make a fair construction of my life,
That surfeits in delights, and plays the Epicure
In all variety and choice of pleasures
Sooner then of thy act. Where else doe want
A fair excuse (as thine doth) they are doubled.
When thou hast seen her, thou wilt soon acknowledge
In what a misty error thy invectives
Have lost themselves.
Nay rather hide her from me.
She may raise motions; and if I should rival thee,
I must be served: nothing was ere devised
To fright libidinous nature from it's proneness,
That can restrain me.
Shall it not make me jealous
Her soul is guarded with so many virtues
Temptations cannot btter it: and 'th'way
Of noble love (though yet she nver sung
The music of consent) I dare prefer
My self the first accepted.
Still be confident.
But who comes yonder?
Some City loving couple.
What's that Gallant?
Surely it is Will Changelove;
The rotcus of affection: one that vary's
As many shapes of love as there are objects.
But what that shee-thing is I doe not know.
She seems a handsome piece. That opportunity
Would play the Bawd a little.
You'd be nibbling.
Changlove is my acquaintance. If they come this way (as it is most likely Tottenham-Court's the end of their early walking) I'll be thy introdution. Let's walk softly.
Whilst I doe ruminate some policy.
Besides the recreation Sir, tic he althfull.
Indeed sloth dulls the spirits activenesse.
And too much sleeping blunts the senses quickness;
Though some be very needful; their affects
Are the preservers of their instruments.
I love early rising.
But me thinks a nap in a morning's good.
True Mris. Stitchwell; when the brain hath purged
It self of grosser fumes, the fancy yeeld's
Such solace to the inward waking sense
In pleasant dreams, that I have often wished
Those shadows real which they have presented;
Or their continuance to eternity.
Indeed I love to sleep in the morning.
But stirring and exercise, I say.
I would you would use it in bed then.
I tell you Mr. Changelove though I am a Taylor I keep servants that are stout knaves. I love them well, and they look well to my business. On holidays I give them leave to use exercise.
Yes husband, your finisher is a pretty a fellow as ever did tradesman or his wife service. He pitches the barr, and throws the stone; it doth me good to think of it.
I have a Cornish-Lad that wrestles well, and hath brought home Rabbits every Bartholmew-tide these five years. At stool ball I have a North-west stripling shall deal with ever a boy in the strand.
Now you speak of a ball, I would wee had one here; tic a commendable exercise: the great Physiteen Galen wrote a book, de exercitations parvae pile.
What's that, pray sir?
Concerning the exercise of the little ball.
It seems great Physicians will busy themselves about small things: but they are not of my mind.
How lik'st the project?
As the end proves it; howsoever, it promises fairly.
They are arrived: let us prepare our selves.
Mr. Changelove; a happy day follow this pleasant morning.
Worthy friend, I return your salute with double wishes: pray know this Gentleman and his bedfellow.
The day must needs bee fortunate, that begins with such fair Omens.
I pray sir, why doth that Gentleman shun your company? I hope we fright him not. It had been manners to salute me.
He always doth that by Attorney Mistress.
Then I must pay the fees.
The truth is, he is a great woman-hater.
Now out upon him. I thought he was gilt, hee is so fat. Beast that I was to be so unmerciful to a dumb thing; I had a dog served so for the same purpose.
It is a disposition in his will,
Not a defect of power.
How said you sir? cannot that Gentleman indure women?
Hardly their sight at distance. It is affliction
Unto his very soul to hear their virtues
Discoursed, unless in scorn.
A strange unmanly humour: I love not that.
May all the curses our injured sex can study, fall upon him for it: and I think we can curse.
I know, to him my company is dear;
And our intentions have the self same end
Of mutual enjoying: now, with what dejection
He doth expect I should divide my self
From you, may be conceived.
I beseech you kind sir leave us not.
I should love some witty plot upon him.
He is my friend: yet I would gladly aid
In any easy mischief, that might aim
At his reclaiming.
Let's get him arraigned as one was in a play. Let me alone to aggravate his indictment to the Jury; which shall be twelve Midwives of my acquaintance: yet Isle be sworn I never used any of them.
I have it.
Pray first hear mine: let's run to Ttenham-Court for a wager.
It is excellent; so his gross bodies toil
To follow us, shall be our laughter.
Right: or if he stay behind, let my wife alone o vex him.
Let's run then: it is a brave Olympic exercise;
I love it well; but how shall we dispose
Of all these cumbers?
Let us not be foot-men.
Indeed a seeming careless stayed formality
In such like wantonnesses best becomes
A gentleman. I love it.
Forwards then.
The wager?
Every man his dozen. 
Why sweetheart; why husband; why Iohn; doe you leave your Wife behind, to bee taken up by every body? Now the love of mans society defend me from this abuser of creation. Come not near me thou man of clouts; thou malkin of virility; thou half woman, and all beast: or with these nails I will tear out thine eyes, and all the double things are left about thee.
Be milder gentle mistress. There's nothing in me
Appears unto my self so full of guilt
It should deserve reproach from you a stranger.
There's nothing in you indeed sir; your friend hath given me your character. You pretend to hate women, because women have reason to hate you.
I hate women!
Now by my love of pleasure, no delight
Hath any relish on the wanton palate
Of my desires; unless some mixture season it
That is derived from them.
Yes sir; you may take delight in them, but they little in you. Come not too near, there's infection in it: my blood desires no freezing. The Summer of my youth is not yet half spent; or if it were Autumn with me, high feeding and ease requires something.
She takes me for an Eunuch. Sure my friend
Hath overdone his part; and drawn the counterfeit
Too near the life of truth. Sweet Mistress hear
The language of my heart that cannot gloss
My plainer thoughts with superficial words.
I love you; my desires are thoroughly fired,
And burn my blood: which but your free enjoying
Nothing can quench.
Why, I am a woman sir.
I think you are; and one made up for pleasure,
More then the dull converse of what's defective.
You say true sir: I hear it with a heavy heart.
But I hope sir, you would not have me make my husband a Cuckold.
Fie, that's a gross construction; only shame
And common knowledge doth it, not the act
Of a Wives wantonness.
I need no instructions for secrecy. Trust me a handsome Gentleman. The wickedness of his friend to believe him so. Dare you kiss me sir?
A pledge for what should follow.
You shall doe what you will with me, but making my husband Cuckold.
No more of that. Nay, this way.
What, back again! No by my Strand-honesty. Isle to Totenham-court after my husband. If there be that necessity at any time that I must make my husband a Cuckold, I'll doe it before his face: any Citizens Wife can doe it behind her husbands back.
Your will disposes mine: we there may find
Handsome conveniences; and I'll renew
My counterfeit of woman-hater: it
May cast a mist before his jealous eyes
Would watch us else. 
I hope you're satisfied: but to what end this change should serve, I would fine be instructed.
I'll tell you. When we feared pursuit, we left our horses, and the high way. The horses ae surely found; and by them my being hereabouts may bee conjectured. Now this disguise shall help me to scope their search.
Now out upon it. Had I no better an opinion of your honesty, then of your wit (both which smell all togethere of the country) I would againe-leave you to seek out your own dangr. You have gentle-side me with your clothe; and you are handsome enough in mine: for though I am but a milke-wench, I ever loved neatness. Now you shall personate my maid, and wait upon me to London; I'll personnate you, and if any thing ise from the mistake, we'll turn it to the best use. If I find not out your sweet-heart, let me never be counted a Prophetess: and I am sure I have foretold weather from the turning up of my Cowes tail.
Dispoe me as you please, I dare the worst
Of my malicious. Now love hath armed me
With better resolution.
In this disguise Isle meet the Gallant courts me every morning at Tottenham-Court, and sound the depth of his pretended honest meaning. My condition is to low to win upon his desires to marry me: and the other thing without it, he shall never have.
Why Ciceley, Ciceley, I say my breakfast A quick supply of meat, drink and sleep, or I rage presently.
Bless me, who's that?
My fathers man.
He will spoil all. 
Be you confident.
Whore's this Maggoti-pie of Marrowbone? Come you clean washed chitterling, and give me my breakfast. How now Ciceley, where hath your face been? at the painters? Hay-day; Ciceley's own face, and this Mistress dye for love Ciceley-id. Now I swear by hunger (and that's a strong oath) I think women have more figures then the Devil would have Clients, if he were a Lawyer and pleaded without fees.
Keep counsel sirrah you had best; and if my fathere ask for me, tell him I will not bee lost long. So fare you well. 
You will not bee lost long: hee is likely to have a sweet match of it that finds you. Yet I could be content my seven yeres service might bee so rewarded. But the baggage is as coy as an Aldemans eldest daughter: she hath beaten me a hundred times (coward as I was for suffering it) for attempting to kiss her. But now I will revenge it upon her Creame-bowles; over whose sweets I will triumph.
New mischief; I am again delayed. If I forbear my breakfast but two minutes longer, my guts will shrink into minikins: which I bequeath the poor Fiddlers at Totenham-Court, for a May-dayes Legacy.
You're welcome to this roof; too mean a covering
For such a guest.
Your first sir hath intitch't it.
And hallowed it into a Temple. Pray sir.
Conduct me to the Altar, where I may
Pay the due sacrifice of my desires
To her; and thanks to you.
Slip, call my daughter.
Which daughter sir? your daughter gentlewoman, or your gentlewoman daughter?
Your trifling's unseasonable sirrah.
Why sir, Ciceley's no more plain Ciceley, but Ciceley in laced satin. The gentlewoman and she are run out of themselves one into another.
But where are they?
For ought I know, run away one with another.
Run you after, and call them back.
It is impossible: who knows which way they are gone. Besides, it is a mist would choke a brewers horse; I cannot see one hand for the other.
Sir, my suspicion prompts me you are treacherous:
And these fair seeming undertakings traps
To catch me.
Sir, you make a worse constableuction
Of my good meaning, then so fair expressions
Can any wy deserve. Pray sir go with me,
We'll overtake them.
I will share the pains;
And venture once again to try you thoroughly.
Follow you sirrah. 
A killing command. The best is, it will break my heart, no matter then for my belly. Hunger, I defy thee; revenge I hug thee. I will lead you a wild-goose chase, till we come to Tottenham Court: where I will score two dozen, and reckon with mine hostess maid, whose belly I have raised with umbles. 
You are the Olympian, Sir.
Doe you think Gentlemen I'd let you out-strip me at exercise? I'll jump with ye for a dozen more.
Pray Sir let's jump: I love it mightily.
My breaths not yet recovered. By this time sir. your Wife hath converted my fiend to a civilleer disposition.
Let her alone. If she doe it not, I durst forswear exercise; and that would be the greatest vexation.
Greater then if your maid should drop the candle on your festival satin doublet?
Or the Cats peace upon your Military feather?
Or an inferior neighbour be preferred for a common counsel man?
Mere triles to the orbearing of exercise.
Or if a gallant should deal with your wife in your absence for body covering, and give her Court paymeant.
A very likely matter. She that goo's thrice a week to morning exercise, and will make reptition over sweet meates at a gossipping. I tell ye gentlemen, I have trusted her to a Mask, and the Innes a Court revelling: she knew the way home again without a Crier. She hath converted a hundred of her purer neighbours, by her example.
Heere's more then City confidence. But shall we enter?
You're welcome Gentlemen.
A handsome room sirrah.
The best in the house sir. 
Your Wife's come, sir.
Welcome sweet-heart.
Kind gentlemen, hold my heart, oh. Nay one at once: pray hold it hard, oh
Whats the matter chuck?
Oh my breath: there's not so much wind left in me, as would make a noise to bee excused with the creaking of ones shoo: oh You are a kind husband to leave me
behind. Had it been with one that had loved a woman, showed her the nearest way, or laid her down upon his cloak when she had been weary. But I think I fitted him.
And beshrew him if he fitted not you.
Here he is likewise.
You blow hard George.
Come Gentlemen, shall we walk in.
I would enjoy my friend a little here.
You shall enjoy your friend sir. 
And what success?
Why dost not heye her promise?
You shall enjoy your friend. Shoe's pliant Frank
Unto my wishes: nothing no remains
But to deceive her husband; thou must aid me.
Would have me Pandarize?
I'll do it for thee.
These are sweet sins, and only doe intend
The pleasure of desire, which would be killed
With two much scruple.
What are these?
What place is this? a common Ale-house?
Fear you nothing, but put on confidence.
I have seen that face, the figure's in my heart.
It is surely she: her habit cannot mock
My knowing sense. I'll venture on the trial.
This is his Milke-maid sure. I still suspected
It was some disguised name to conceal a Mistress.
Now by my life shoe's fair; I envy him;
And my desires have almost tempted me
To put in for a share: but friendship checks it.
She may perhaps be virtuous, and well borne.
And worthy his resolves: my City beauty
Shall serve at this time.
Did thou think that make
Could veil thee from my souls distinguishing?
Wherein thy form's impest, which fancy shows me
At every change of thoughts.
Clothes have not altered
My person nor condition. I am still
Plain Ciceley and your hand-maid. This exchange
Proceeds but fom an honest merriment:
And when you understand the story right,
You'll make a fair constableuction.
It were a sin
To think amiss of thee; tears cannot expiate
When thou art mine, I'll feed thy appetite
With pleasures best variety. Taylors daily
Shal shape proportions for thy dainty body,
To make invention pregnant of new fashions.
Th'Exchange shall be thy Wardrobe to supply
Thy will with choice of dressings t'hearken out
A jewel to adorn thee, if the value
Exceed not my estate; I'll sell it all
To purchase thy content.
Your promises
Are much too large. My too unworthy service
Cannot deserve to be commanded by you.
Gallant I'll try you.
Th'extasie hath made me
Forget my friend: it is she George changed in habit
I am your servant fair one, and my heart
Vow's an obedience when your commands
Assign me any task.
I doe not like
The courtship of these gallants: it is gross flattery,
And tends I fear to ill.
Come dearest will you
Accept the entertainment of this place?
Some worthy company within expects me.
I shall strain modesty, you excusing it.
Come maid.
Why should I fear; that have defence
From Worthgoods love, and mine own innocence?
you're welcome Gentlemen.
Now my parrot of froth, whose mouth is lined with tapestry; what company is in the house?
None of your acquaintance but Mr. Changelove.
Will Changelove? prithee call him hither.
I shall sir; By and by. Some stewed pruines for the two costive Citesns in the Bulls head; and more rolls for the three Taylors in the Smithfield-Lyon.
How shall we spend the day Sam?
Let's home to our studies and put cases.
Hang cases and books that are spoiled with them. Give me Iohnson and Shakespeare; there's learning for a gentleman. I tell thee Sam, were it not for the dancing-schoole and Play-houses, I would not stay at the Innes of Court for the hpes of a chief Iustice-ship.
Time would be better spent in reading laws,
Teaching our knowledge how to argue doubts:
For in our after-states such may arise
That without policies help may ruin it.
Formality; a grave youth in a gown. Thou think it is becoming to walk thus to Totenham-Court, and at
home so punctual in confomite. I had rather a French consumption should wear my hair off then a round cap.
It is not to make it my profession,
(Although in some it be most necessary)
(For how can government and laws subsist
Without their ministers, whose skill and judgement
Distinguish right from wrong) but to be able
To mange what's mine own, as time shall send it,
You are likely to inherit fair possessions,
Gin'd by a fathers industry ; perhaps
With some contention, and conveyances
My be defetive: were it not better fare
Your self could uderstand it, then to trust
The honesty or skill of a bought counsel?
Hang state: I took no pains to get, why then should I take any to keep it? if it will stay, so it is: if not, Shop-keepers that will trust, shall be paid when they can get it. A law of necessity Sam, and always in force with Gallants.
I had rather hear another resolution.
Will Changelove, well met at Totenham-Court.
What made thee rise so early?
The company of half a man: expound my Riddl, and be a whole Oedipus.
It must be more then thy Taylor.
Right, his Wife; who being half of himself, makes up the third part a half man. I love his company man, and pay him with nothing but courtesies: a Totenham-Courts kindness is principal, interest and security.
What shall we drink? Ale?
I love it best ; the old English natural drink. But can this gentleman study ala Ale?
If I avoid the excess.
Ale's muddy : what think you of Beer?
I love Beer best. The planting of hoppes was a rare projection in the Dutch; it hath taught some of them English naturally.
Shall wee hunt to day Will? I heard the common cry abroad.
Hunting! it is sport to make immortal activenes
Even in the dullest Earth. A well-mouth'd cry
Out-does the Spheres in Musique. Gods themselves
Have left their fabulous Heaven, to put on
The shapes of hunters: courting such delights
In these disguises, that hath made them wish
Th'exchange of their ethereal government
To live with mortals. I love hunting dearly.
What saith your friend?
Indeed sir, my affection
Is better pleased with solitary study:
A sober mornings walk, is exercise
Enough for me.
You ae to be commended.
Why, Contemplation is the very being
Of Mans delight : it shows his nobler part
Converse with things divine; the nimble soul
Climbs by it to a height of happiness.
I must confess I love it. 
Is there Musique with the company you left?
And good too: it is company of that curiosity, ordenariate stuff will not please them.
Would thou would enter me into their acquaintance; we might have a dance.
Why, I love dancing too. Agility
Commends the good composure of one's body;
And graceful garbs are taking. No perfection
Doth make the object of a handsome man
So pleasing in a Ladies eye, as Dancing.
This Room's more spacious: I'll invite them hither.
They have prevented me.
The room's posset.
You may command a resignation.
Please you t'admit us; we would fine partake
Your worth and company.
Your friends Will Changelove?
Yes, noble sir.
They are welcome to my knowledge.
Numbers addition will increase our mirth,
And swell it to more height.
Arm me now confidence,
And teach my tongue, that never spake untruth
From a consideration, practise lying,
And the dnyall of my proper self.
It is my brother, he will discover me.
It is surely she : they are all her lineaments.
Had I ne'er seen her ; had not knowing sense
Power to distinguish, nturall instinct
Would tell me it is my sister. Why disguised?
And why come hither? it hath wrapped my reason
In mists of wonder. Yet I cannot fear
She hath betrayed her honour to base wantonness.
She had a guard of virtues; else hypocrisy
Taught her to seem a Saint, and paint that goodnesse
With a false colour. Know you not my sweet heart?
No indeed sir.
Is not your name Bellamuel?
Neither sir.
Deny's her self.
There's something in it above my reach of fear.
Passion forbear me, and I'll work with policy,
To find the scope of all.
A sweet young Gentleman.
Is this your sweet-heart maid?
Is she your servant?
I woud have called her kinswoman for resemblance
She hath with one of mine.
Your Aunt or Cousin?
Means she in the mystical sense of ill?
Shall we dance gentlemen? Musicknesse, and let activenesse freeze! Shall I use you sweet Mistress?
Kindly sir, or I am waspish. A wasp you know hath a sting.
Please that gross gentleman?
By no means sir : dancing will hurt his Sciatia.
Doe you know him then?
Yes, and will know him better if he come near me.
He is one into whom the spirit of Swetnam's crept.
I hope sir you are of a kinder disposition to our sex.
You see Mistress I am for their compny any way.
Pray sir let's go nearer the women.
Pray sir forbear : you'll not compel me rudely.
Perhaps ther's an aversion in my nature.
The company of women's mine affliction.
My wife shall vex you then.
And I love Mans society: solid souls,
Void of all light impressions ; whose discourse
Tends not to superficial complement,
But hath more sense then sound.
You are for dancing;
Possess my room,
The women's creature sir.
There's Magic in their company that charms
All masculine affections, but of plesure
In their enjoying. I'll spin or thread their needles,
Read Spenser and the Arcadia for their company.
I'll dance with you Mr. Changelove.
One cup more, Isle be for the exercise.
You'll have more anon husband, then your head will well carry.
She means horns.
Which if I fail to give her, may I turn
Chastities convert, and be mortified
From my concupiscence with hourly discipline.
Why how now husband? you'll be tippled presently.
Hold good wife, before strangers? T'other dozen, and then I'm gone.
I would you were gone once for me.
So would I.
Gentlemen, a health to
Whom sir?
All the Cuckolds in the strand.
Fie husband, you forget your self. Nay, gentlemen hee is such another man; when hee hath got a cup or two he will not stick to abue his betters. I beseech you bear with him, I shall be ready to bear with any of you.
Wife, you shall drink a health to all the Cuckold-maker in Cornwall.
You mean wrestlers sweet-heart; you are so taken with your Cornish Pentice. I tell ye gentlemen, heyring him talk the other day of the hug, I wished him to show me what it was: the stiff knave presently gives me a fall: but it was upon a soft bed.
Otherwise there had been danger.
Come sweet Mistress, the other dance.
Will you make one sir?
Alas fair Mistress, my gross body wants
A mimic activenesse.
But you can move sir?
Bestir your stumps a little sir. Are women such bugbears, especially handsome ones? for I have been flattered.
Well said Wife; to him Wife.
I durst undertake yet, had you one of us in a corner.
How she instructs me! nay then. 
Will you be gone George?
After him Wife, put him too't, and tickle him home.
Isle warrant husband Isle bring him into play. 
It seems this gentleman loves not the company of women.
At least wise tic pretended. Were it a plot
To gull her husband, I should love it dearly.
Why did not I attempt it, that have had
More opportunities then ever made
Sin fruitful in the pleasure? If it be so,
The next share shall be mine. I love a wench
As well as he or any.
T'other health, and then farewell,
Mr. Stitchwell is your name?
A Taylor in the Strand; and I am as good a man there as Deputy Tag in the City, though he think himself an Aldermans fellow, and no Cuckold.
You mind Cuckolds much: good sir remember your self.
By your leave then; I must, and I will, I will and I must.
What must you sir?
Why, you may doe what you will; and I will doe what I list. 
The Tailor's paid.
By your favour, it is alye.
And his Wife too by this. Follow me gentlemen,
and if hee prevent it not, we'll share some pastime. Sweet, I'll return presently. 
Can my chaste thoughts within their spotless circuit
Retain a good opinion of this gentleman,
Who gives free scope to his libidinous will
In actions that stain conscience?
Can my ills
Grow to a greater height? my honours danger
Runs equal with my persons.
He hath courted
Almost beyond resistance, (had not goodness
Preserved me white) to ully me with lust;
And failing offered marriage.
Can a Brother
Construe this place, disguise, and company
Less then a lapse from virtue in a Sister,
Who laboured more to be good really,
Then ever hypocrite did to appear so.
I must not trust. Besides, mine eye hath seen
An object that delights it; and desire
Begins to burn my bosom with new flames
I yet ne'er felt. It is an ambitious love,
And must be checked. Why? sure my Birth's more noble:
My spirit argues it, which never yet
Harboured a common thought; but all above
The lowness of my fortune. How now Mistress?
Distressed beyond recovery. It was my brother;
Whose eye no sooner found me, but his looks
Expressed a troubled soul: but when he heard
My tongue deny my self; what passions then
Possessed him, may be thought.
Is he your Brother?
Fear not to be discovered: I have plots
To circumvent him, and prepare his temper
For mild impressions. 
Prithee Friend show us a private room.
With convenience Mistress.
For a retirement.
This way Mistress. I smell the reward of a knaves office: howsoever sin thrives by wickedness. Frothfilled Cans and over-reckonings will hardly raise a stock to set up with. Now will I inform the Gallants. 
Pray sir, forbear. Is this a place to make ones husband a Cuckold in?
Let not such weak excuses rob my hopes
Of that delight, for whose enjoying
Danger and all that weakness can be frighted with
Pray sir, talk not to me of weakness. The servents of the house will suspect us presently.
Be expeditious then, we lose that time
Might make the pleasure fruitful.
Indeed sir I durst ee'n venture to make him cuchold, might I be sure you would get a boy.
That's doubtless, sweet.
And shall he be like the father?
As ever Citizens son was.
I mean my husband.
I am a Courtier.
Kind sir, you even deserve it for your policy. But I am so afraid.
Mischief on these delays.
Sweet-heart, Wife.
Ay me.
Vexation racks me.
Prevented at the point of such a happiness!
Come Chuck and hold my head.
Pray sir, hide your self:
Where?
Happily, here's an empty tub. 
My head aches Wife; where art chicken?
Here husband. You must press upon women's retirement.
Oh my stomach; it is very sick.
Empty it in the fields then; let not the servants take notice you are such a sloven.
Why not in that rub?
Fie beast: defile a necessary implement of housewifery? This it is to drink healths to Cuckolds. You might have been one your self, were not I the honester woman; which is more then many of your neighbours can say for themselves.
Whet's Mr. Stitchwll? Fie, give out man, and steal away.
Oh gentlemen my head, my head; oh gentlemen.
Me thinks your forehead's swollen sir.
Truly no sir. There's no more then what hath been ever since I was his wife; fifteen years and upwards, a long time of barrenness.
What the Devil make all these gentlemen in my Dames wash-house? Get ye up to your chambers with a vengeance.
I wonder where my friend is.
Hold, hold; I am drowned.
George, what made you there?
Mischief on you sir: you have spoiled me a pail of conduit water cost me many a weary step the
fetching; beside the falls my sweet-heart Slip gave me.
Alas good gentleman; he hid himself from my Wife, and see what's happened.
Hell take your wife and you. Accursed women,
That in your curse made Man so.
Fie George, scold presently after your cucking.
Diogenes in dolio.
And lamentation.
Come forth George: now the Comedy is ended, away with the disguise.
Women or devils,
Made fair to be destructions instrument.
You seem to compassionate the mischance:
Good heart but that he cannot endure a woman,
She should kiss him for amends.
I think it would grieve any woman. I came hithere for something else then to be railed at.
Let's vex him no more Gentlemen. Come wife,
He go sleep a little. 
There will be a safe opportunity for me. I love this Cuckold-making.
Frank, though your self intend a reformation,
You might forbear me: this was your own plot.
Why mine? I ne'er had resolution yet
So stayed, but I could alter it for pleasure:
Nor can I hate or envy it in others.
I am sorry George you should drink water after your sweet-meats. 
Doe not abuse me left I think revenge:
I am almost tempted to attempt it.
The Gentlewoman hath withdrawn her self.
What Gentlewoman?
She in the satin gown. You know my meaning sir, shoe's as right
Thanks honest Robin. Here's for thee.
I must thank you sir.
I'll take the first opportunity.
The gentlewoman is retired sir.
What gentlewoman?
You know my meaning. Shoe's as right
Pox on your Pandarising.
How now sir? I wonder what quantity of myden modesty went to your making up. Few gentlemen of your complexion would have been angry with an honest Tipster for such intelligence.
My Sister turned a common prostitute?
I must discover it.
The gentlewoman's gone into another chamber Sir.
What gentlewoman?
She in the satin gown. There's a bed: you know my meaning. Shoe's as right
You are a rogue sirrah. 
Good sir, what mean you?
Mutter that thought again: I'll cut thy tongue out
And kill anon, anon sir. But cold rewards. Had none any better; Panders would never purchase. 
I'll take the Tipsters word, and try.
Come gentlemen, let's up again. By this time George your sorrow's dry. 
And why should you think so Slip?
If I find them not, count me no wiser then an Aapothecary, that looked for Jaws ears on an old Pillory; When the dead wood bore none but Scriveners.
Enquire diligently, sirrah.
I will sir, and arm my self like a country Juror: I cannot hold out too fast till I have given up my verdict. 
My patience Sir hath hitherto made fair
The outside and appearance of that good
Your promise seemed to mean me. Circumtance
Doth now instruct my fear, that this credulity
May be my danger. Treachery oft lurks
In complements. You've sent so many posts
Of undertakings, they out-ride performance.
And make me think your fair pretences aim
At some intended ill; which my prevention
Must strive t'avert. Then good sir, leave me.
Sir, though my outside's mean; I have a soul
Instructed in all dues belong to man.
I never yet mis-us'd a common action
With a prepared dissembling. My intents
Are fairer then your jealousy, which lives
But in the darkness of your ignorance.
It is a blind humour, let discretion guide it:
That th'end of your own good be not perverted
By ill receiving of the hopeful means
My freensse offers.
You have heardmy story;
But why it should so stir compassion
In any stranger, counsel cannot well
Remove the doubt.
Why Sir, I know a gentleman
Worthy in all things; but his crosser fortune
(On which mine had dependence as a servant)
Robed him at once of all those gifts she lent him;
Estate, life, wife; his infant-Issue left
To her blind pity. Can I think you then,
Without some feeling, hear the sad relation
Of a misfortune, is so like to that,
As if the self same inauspicious stars 
Were both their means. The news sirrah.
Very bad Sir. My incredulous hostess will not trust: therefore pray sir make hast; for without some supply
of drink I faint in the half way of my message.
Hast found them?
Ther's hopes or so: I herd an inkling. The house swarms with gallants; some of which have surely taken up Ciceley, paltry Baggage, she payes the Lady at least, and makes mincing faces like a country Bride at the upper end of the table.
Pray Sir let's in: we may perhaps find them here.
O fate, unless thy guiding kinder prove,
Despair kills all my hope, and ends my love. 
Oh Cakes and Ale, if you your sweets deny,
Let Slip despairing in a halter die.
Fear not Mistress any of their attempts in my house: you have your instructions and my aid. Make use of any thing I own for your honest ends, and if you need my person, I am ready in my bar at your call. 
We thank you Mistress.
Why should you fear the execution
Of my desires? why are women subject
To that disease? or else hath nature chose it
To show the difference? I was meant a man sure;
For I have Masculine resolutions,
Which no deluding spirits can abuse
With their mis-guiding; nor imperfect moone-light
Mock with false shadows. Danger frights not me.
Doubt of my loved friends safety (without whom
My souls abilities are dead to use)
Hath numbed the sense of action: I'm all passive.
Yet I have heard from him relations
Of horrid battaies, and his persons danger;
When as the murdering Canons choak't the ayre
With their curled mists, their loud noise ushering death
To his black triumph. A little custom made it
To be my pastime. Those were dangers past;
But these to come.
You have a soldier sweet-heart,
And no more courage! what a race of Cowards
Would spring from that loves joining? for Physicians
Say women have most right in the conception.
Were but our causes changed (our cases are)
I'd tell this brother al; and if his love
From a pretence of care denied me aid,
I'd school him soundly. Come, come, you shall, tell
Your Brother that I love him.
Love my Brother?
Your Brother Mistress. If my beauty can
(Which he's been slatter'd or a taking one)
Win upon his desires, I'll soon work him
To what you please. Nay, rather then the project
Should fail of a success, he shall enjoy me;
But fairly.
Aid me now discretion. Would you
Make mean agent to undo my Brother;
And but for such mean ends?
Why gentlewoman,
Disparage not my low condition.
Perhaps misfortune meant it not my birth;
That might be noble as your own, though boasted
From th'heraulds Catalogue of dead Ancestors.
My father oft hath told me when my fingers
Pressed the Cowes dugs, and from their fullness drew
Abundance of white streams, that Nature meant not
These limbs for labour. But this may appear
The flattery of my self.
Into what maze
My dangers lead me! 'th middle ther's a Monster,
If I go on, will ruin me: if back;
I want an Ariadnean Clue of policy
To be my guide.
If you'll preserve your self
From a discovery, you must counterfeit
Some other passions; or clothe these in mirth.
How now maid? why left you the door open?
It is shut again sweet Mistress. If it offend you, I will buy my pardon at your own rate.
What would you have sir?
A little pleasure Sweet. Come, come, what's your price?
You sure mistake me sir.
As if I had not practised winching suiciently to understand a dissembled modesty: because I am a stranger, I'll come to your lodging when I know where it is. But say your price? half a crown?
Have I found you gallant? I am dearer Sir; that's my maids rate. The truth is I have my Maiden-head yet, and have bargained with a gentleman below for it.
Let me have it; I'll double his reward.
I love to be as good as my word. Sure sir he would kill you if he knew of your attempt. That's he sir. 
And my young valour dare not encounter him.
Your Citie-borne coward never mike's fortunate whoremaster.
Would I were safe.
Best hide your self in this sir.
A handsome convenience. When hoe's gone, release me.
Fear it not sir, but be sure you lie still. Open the door maid; and doe you hear? get the key of the trunk.
What may this come to?
Pardon me fair one. My intrusion tends
To beg a happiness; please you to crown it
With your consent and welcome?
What's in me
To grant, you shall command.
I take your word.
The pleasure of your bed. I will reward it
With a new gown and angels; dally not
In any coy denial.
Not in this place.
But if you please 
New jealousy instructs.
My fear this woman's nought, and such a one
As sells her self to sin. What fates conspire
To make me miserable?
It is a motion
Suits with my liking. The pains will make the pleasure
More sweet in the enjoying.
Courting her!
George, it is not friendly.
Mischief on suspicion.
I've given you all the flattering commendations
That might confirm her love.
No more; I thank thee.
I leave ye. Now to my practice of revenge,
And the delight it comprehends within it
Above Elizium.
Dear, when shall my love
Be happy in enjoying what it makes
The object of desire? Shall this fair morning
Be consecrate to Hymen?
Worthy Sir,
Such is the difference twixt your birth and fortune,
And my condition (whose ineriour aim
Dae not be levelled higher then it's equality)
Makes (cowards policy,) fear, to be th'excuse
Of my delay. For were you satisfied
With that which you call pleasure; and satiety
Had taken the edge off, what's in me can when
New appeite, and revive a dying love?
Your esteemion branded with the infamy
Of a base choice: taunts from the mouth of envy:
Aspersions to beget a killing jealousi.
And when you shall relct
Prithee no more
These needless doubts. Im armed with preparations
For my resolves, that no assault can bitter.
Pardon me sir; thre's ground of circumstance
To build a faith on, that your desires end
Is my enjoying for your sense pleasure.
Nt the convrs which love instructs the soul in.
Why should false fears make such a bad construction?
Prithee no more.
But I must search you thoroughly.
You're noble sir; and now I will unmask
This false complexion of an hypocrite,
Which hitherto deluded your opinion
But with a show of virtue. The truth is
My inclination's wanton; and thy day
I meant to make a sale of that, for which
You have so fairly bid: my Maiden-head.
You see I'm fitted or it.
What doe I hear?
The gentleman that left me, is the Merchant.
A price is likewise set upon the ware.
The time and place of interchange appointed.
The means: a porter in that trunk must carry me
Unto his chamber: You seem troubled Sir
At the relation.
It is to try me sure:
She cannot mean it. How my thoughts rebel
Against their guide?
Troth sir, I must confess
Your person likes me better, and the love
You have professed deserves my gratitude.
Meet you this porter, and compel him with you;
You shall enjoy me first, and afterwards
When I set up the trade be still more welcome.
Should this be eanest. it would make me happy
Above mine own desire; and should she mock me,
It were but returning to my first intents.
Some way I must enjoy her. Shall this practice
Give me those sweets have been so long denied
With counterfeited modesty?
Be sure sir;
My Tutor in the Art left me instructions
To take the fairest offer.
My reward
Shall treble his. Be constant to my pleasure,
I'll keep thee like a wife; and serve thy will
With full content.
That as your liking pleases.
When you are weary, I'll but beg your bounty
For a new wardrobe to set up with.
How mans desire
Pursues contentment! it is the soul of action,
And the propounded reason of our life.
Yet as the choice appears, or gross or excellent,
We lye not from th'injoying; but are changed
In our opinion either of the object,
Or of the means that works it. Why should I
Alter a resolution? The contentment
Is still the same: and a far easier means
Without that tie necessitates the will
To a sixth bounds. Besides, my credit's safe.
To keep a Mistress youths excuse may serve;
But an inferior match brands my posterity,
If equal blood commix not. Hnce then scruple,
And all that frights saint conscience. Swet I welcome
The freeness of your kind and loving promise
With as much joy, as can possess a heart
Made jovial by th'effet of all it's wishes:
Be constant to it.
Be you confident;
I cannot be diverted from my purpose:
The end's too pleasant, Pray prepare your self;
The time draws on.
And till my expectation
Ends in that full possession of delight,
Times wings are clipped. So farewell sweet till then. 
And farewell base desires. May thy soul lust
Make thee still credulous, till abuse and shame
Teach thee amendment. What an Orator
Is Sin? that paints it self with golden words
Of pleasure and delight; as if the soul
Had it's eternal being and full powers
But for the senses satisfaction:
And their enjoying it Creations end.
Now to our Comedy. Ha fast asleep!
This fits our purpose. Lock it fast.
Will not the feathers choke him?
Hoe's armed against mischances. Give it the Porter,
I must withdraw. 
Now I perceive
Goodness guides all her actions: her minds brightness
Out-shines her outward beauty. But what use
Can my misfortune make of't? yes; th'example
Shall teach me how to counterfeit, if I
Can force my passion to it.
Heere's the Gentleman.
Now wench, is all ready?
I have packed her up in it, like a Bartholmew-babie in a box. I warrant you for hurting her.
It is a good wench. I'll give thee a new gown for it.
I thank you sir. When you are weary of my mistress, and cast her of (as I know you must have change) you shall have my maiden-head at the same rate if you please: I'll keep it for you.
It is a bargain.
But two words to it. Pray sir use her ne'er the wrs for my promise.
The better. I'll turn her off within this fortnight, and send for thee.
Oh sir, it is not fit a servant should shift her Mistress trencher before the bones are clean picked. You have flesh enough to hold out a month.
It shall be a month then?
Be careful Porter of your carriage.
Married? that I am to a freemans widow, and I wear the Citie-Armes by her first husbands copy.
The Porter is deaf sure.
Pray sir let me ask you one quesion.
Quickly then.
How many maiden-heads have you bought thus?
Some nineteen with thy mistresses.
Pray sir, let mine make up the score: an even reckoning.
It shall, it shall: heere's for thee Robin.
The trunk is worth more sir, besides the feathers that are in it. But to doe you a pleasure.
Help him down stayres with it.
Heir's a Totenham-Court project translated over the water from Holland.
Farewell wench. 
Adieu good sir, with your fair bed-fellow that must bee.
Had I y Worthgood here, this accident
Would strain my heart strings to a pitch of laughter,
And make my spleen dance. But his loss hath killed
All sense of joy. 
Now Mistress, what think you of it?
Have I not tan a course to punish lust?
At least wise with disgrace. Though custom calls
Those actions only honest, that are glorious
In public same; yet sometimes to dissemble
An ill that's not intended, when the end
Hath cle'd it to opinion, it attains
The greater praise.
Indeed, I must confess
My fears possessed me strongly you were noughe:
Nor is suspicion grounded on due circumstance
To be accounted ill. But now my knowledge
Instructs me better to commend your virtue;
And steer mine own course by the fair example
Of your discretion, were the like attempted
Upon my chastity.
Alas, my Brother.
Now must I practise unaccustomed impudence. By your leave gentle creatures: may I have my turn now for a little sport! Nay, nay, sweetheart, thou shalt serve: thy Mistress is too dear; and I am loath to pay over-much for repentance. It is but changing offices: let her hold the door for thee.
Pray sir, speak and mean civilly; you'll not be welcome else.
Good Lady light-heele; give your servant leave to practise the trade you have taught her. That such perfections as appear in this woman should be sold to every base desire. Come wench, thy browne complexion pleaseth me better then thy Mistresses: thou dost not paint, and art the likelier to be wholesome.
Good gentleman, hee is jealous, and would circumvent her.
Here's half a crown wench; me thinks it is a fair rate. Ha! singer in the eye? Keep thy tears for penance in Bride well. Cry when money's offered thee?
Oh Brother.
Ha! are you my Sister?
Your Sster Bellamie.
Why see's in the Country at mine Uncles,
Teaching her hand some neat industrious practice;
Or painting with her needle the rare form
Of some choice flower; to her busy servant
Discoursing Morals; or perhaps at prayers,
Or meditation: these were her exercises;
Not prostitution. What an impudence
Is this imposture?
Temper your anger brother,
For it appears in the wrinkles of your brow.
And let not passion burn your jealous fears
With an intemperate heat. I have a story
You'll pity, though all natural affection
Were quite extinguished.
Then you are my Sister?
Dissemble not those doubts; but hear me.
No.
I'm deaf to all excuse. It is too apparent.
Possess me virtuous rage; make me the instrument
Of a religious justice.
Guard me innocence.
Oh that the knowing soul, which can distinguish
It self and powers; should yield her government
To the lascivious appetite of sense:
And under such a base subjection
Ruin her noble parts. True estimation
Is grounded on the actions of the mind:
And to determine bravely, well as honestly,
Must be the last, and most refined digestion
Of a high flying nature. Such should hers be.
She wanted not th'instruction, nor example
Of worthy Parents, that honour is the most
Essential part of life, and valewd 'bove it.
Good gentleman, hoe's troubled.
Oh hypocrisy,
Thy painted shows must likewise mock our judgments
Into an apt credulity, that makes
Bad worse by the dissembling. Had she wanted
Or means of power or fortune to discover
This inclination; like the Serpent numbed
With a long rigidness, forbeare's to sting
His warmers bosom, not because he hath not
A poison; but because the force thereof
Is feebled by the cold.
You seem disturbed sir.
Who'lever trust devotion, or believe
That any zeal is earnest? I should rather
Have called an Eremite hypocrite: or suspected
Th'austerities of an Anchorite to be
But for vaine-glory or a common fame,
Then her appearing goodness. Fury prompts me
To a black act. It is well I have no sword.
But may she not survive her first repentance;
Which shame or punishment shall teach her quickly.
Lustful insatiate whore. Could not a husband
Have cooled your blood?
You need no other weapon, 
Those words have killed me.
Ay me, what have you done sir? help, help.
If it be earnest, cured a wounded fame.
My reputation would have bled a little,
Had she lived longer infamous: her death
May lose the memory of her dishonour.
Good gentlewoman she faints. Help, help.
The cry came from this Chamber.
'Sfoot sir, it is Mistress Cieley, and Ciceley Mistress. Ha, ha, sir; did you put her to the squeak? I'll put you
Hold sirrah.
Look up my love: ha! What malicious chance
Begets this new prevention of our happiness?
Oh let our souls together climb the height
Of their eternity; if fate denies
Other enjoying.
It is my Worthgoods voice.
That Orphean Music charms my senses back
From the dark shades of their privation.
Welcome again: I never more will lose thee.
What are you sir, that seem thus tender of her?
I give no answer to uncivil questions
With calmer words. And yet I scorn to strike,
Unless I saw some armour for resistance.
This is my Husband Brother, far as vows
Can join us, till Church-ceremony hath
Confirmed it stronger.
Hee your Brother sweet?
His pardon first; then leave I may embrace
His worthy love.
It is not your complement
Can win upon me. If your worth deserves
My Sisters love (I hope my Uncles care
Hath well examined it) freely enjoy
What you desire: But my opinion is
Scarce settled yet. You seem a Gentleman.
And am one: that was given me in my birth.
If not, my sword hath purchased it.
With leave
I would relate the accident to satisfy
Your curious love; which makes you doubt that ill
Ne'er stained a thought in her: and for my self,
My life's untouched by envy.
Gentle sir,
Let my persuasion work upon your temper;
And make it pliable to forgo all jealousy,
And misconstruction. Something is reserved
In mine own knowledge, shall disperse those clouds
That muffle error in their misty rolls;
And makes it blind in all things but in mischief.
If Bellamie be virtuous, shoe's my Sister;
And shall not lose that interest.
Now Ciceley,
It is time that you disrobe.
By no means father.
My part's not ended yet.
Please her accept
Th'exchange as my thanks gift; since to her care
And full discretion I must attribute
My safety. Something's now in action,
By her begun from an ingenious practice,
Will make the end more comic.
But twill turn
To a sad Tragedy, if I enjoy not
This worthy gentleman.
A larger room
Were more convenient. Please you sir the house
Is well accommodated.
What's more to be expected
Can cross or crown our loves with new events?
Go your ways and quarrel no more, lest I bee stickler with this terrible Emblem of a Butchers cruelty. 
The effects of drinking, Mr. Changelove: his head should be troubled with something else, were he ruled by me. But he cares not for my counsel, nor me. I could even curse mine own kindness, that am ready still to make more of him then he doth of me.
Why doe you not then
What sir? I warrant you mean make him a Cuckold.
That's a gross construction. Give a friend leave to do you a pleasure, or so. The truth is Mistress I love you.
You were ever kind Mr. Changelove.
And would your freeness give me leave t'enjoy
Those sweets, although forbidden, it would be a happiness
'Bove my desire. Be assured my secrecy
Is firm as night and locks.
Scrazy, Mr. Changelove? I would have you know I will be open to all the world. I'll doe no more in the dark, then in this very place, were my husbands eyes open.
Here then. He sleeps scurely, never dreaming Of any foreheads arming.
Fie Mr. Changelove, you are such a tempter. Pray  many a woman would not hold out so long.
Consent then sweet; wee' to it.
Ware horns there.
Mischief, what noise hath waked him?
An infirmity hee hath to talk in's sleep. Nay I assure you hee will rise sometimes and doe the office of a waking man in his dream, and not know of it in the Morning.
Rome for one of the headmen in his Parish: a monster of his wives making.
Wicked man; hee dreams now that I would make him a Cuckold.
Send it be no counterfeit.
And have I tan you sir Lancelot? would you be billing with my Gumiver?
Help me Mistress Stitchwell.
Take it patiently Sir: his sit will bee over presently.
For this attempt King Arthur doth here degrade thee from a Knight of his round Table, to bee a Squire of his Wives body. So conduct me to her bed; where I will beget a race of warriors shall cage thy great Turkship again, and restore Constantinople to the Emperor.
You mistake: oh. My Periwig is not a Turban.
Peace follows victory, let us now to rest.
Pray sir, forgive him: I dare undertake he will be sorry for it when he wakes. If any thing I can may make amends.
Prove his dream true. When the smart's over I shall forget it. 
A quest of inquiry is sent all the house over to look you Mistress. The gentlewoman's maid was in a swooned: they wanted your assistance.
Who wants assistance? who breaks the Kings peace? fetch me my Constables staff.
He will dream again: had I best stay?
Now drunkard, are you recovered yet?
Wife and Mr. Changelove, wheres the company?
Gone, being weary of such a sot as you make your self. Pretend a walk for health and recreation, to bee drunk so early? I had done well to have served you in your kind: here were gentlemen enough that would have brought me home; and some not far off that used me kindly, whilst you snorted to fright slas, and dream't perhaps some wickedness of me.
Prithee peace sweet wife: Isle mend all.
I promise you, you shall never mend me, till you doe better your self.
I'll buy my pardon for it with a new gown, and a journey into the Country next vacation.
You know Iohn I am easy to be wrought upon.
Will you discharge the reckoning Mr. Changelove?
Not willingly: I doe not love it. No revenge upon this dreaming tyrant over unpaid for gallantry? A protection to defraud him is long since provided. What is your reckoning, Robin?
Nine and three-pence sir.
The particulars.
Cakes two shillings. Ale as much. A quart of mortified Claret eight pence. Stewed pruins twelve pence.
They were dear.
Truly, they cost a penny the pound of the one-handed Coster-monger, out of his wives fish-basket. A quart of Cream, twelve-pence.
That's too excessive.
Not if you consider how many Carriers eggs miscarried in the making of it; and the charge of Ising-glasse and other ingredients to cremifie the sour milk.
All this is but a Noble.
Pray mark me sir, I'll make it more. Twelve-pence Sugar. You had bread sir.
And we had drink sir.
It is granted sir. A pound of sausedges, and other things, nine shillings and three-pence. Our Bar never erres.
I'll talk with your Mistress. You know my meaning Robin.
Oh the extortion of Tottenham-Court!
No matter Wife: kind Mr. Changelove will pay for all. Ha! where is hee?
Gone Sir.
Then give me my Cloak.
The reckoning first Sir.
How! must Taylors pay Gallants reckonings?
Sure husband, he intends this a satisfaction for his beating.
Have you such tricks? No great matter: it is but adding it to his bill in my debt-booke, and presently aresting him with a fat Martiallist. Here sirrah.
You're welcome Sir. Some profit comes from hence:
I have ore-reckon'd one and twenty-pence. 
A Heavy burden I assure you Sir.
That's strange: a light Wench, and feathers.
You say true Sir; it is enough to break a mans back.
His mistake hits upon truth. Rest thee Porter.
Oh this plots quaintness: witty luxury,
How it acutes invention, and makes pregnant
Even barren faculties to beget new issues
Of rare conceit. But my credulity
Was rash and sudden. If she hath abused it,
And mocked my hopes of pleasure, wht revenge
Can give m satisfaction? Here's the key,
Though late these doubts arise, I greatly long
To have mine eye resolve them. Company,
Forbear a little then, and rest thee Porter.
It is a fair circumstance, and may confirm
My first suspicion. Where found you the Horses?
In the high way near yonder houses. The place is called TOTENHAN-COURT.
Our intelligence hath something Landlord.
What's That?
The truth is being weary
Od men Landlord, old men. Labour agrees worse with us then wrangling with a lean Parson that hath a fat Benefice.
Pay' interrupt him not: Forwards Neighbour.
At a house yonder we prevailed to be let in:
where the little time that remained 'till morning we slept soundly.
And dreamt we were in Cranborne Church at a drowsy Sermon.
On good Neighbour.
Day no oon rpeet, but noise waked us. The house was presently full of Gallants with Music, and to dancing they went. We aknight the reason, they of the house told us it was customary for Gentlemen to have early reveals and rendezvous there. At length we heard one speak of a Gentlewoman in a sat gown: which we conceiving to be Mistress Bellamie, made haste to London to your Son to infome your worship.
Oh my cursed fate; they have prevented sure.
My care, by zeal and nature o instructed
To tender her good, that I have not left
Counsel or threats unurged to perfect it.
They are questionless matryed.
Might I advise your worship then let them alone 'till night: when they are in bed together, they are the likelier to be caught napping.
My Nephew's gone abroad too. Is it the custom
Of Students that pretend a love to Learning
And noble Sciences, to make the morning
Their time of recreation? Or have they
Had correspondence, and his friendly aid
Is in the plot! Yon Porter may perhaps
Inform us something.
If these question the Porter, I must answer for him.
Good speed fiend. Did see a Gentleman and a Gentlewoman abroad in the Fields?
Betwixt nine and ten.
He means the clock: his hearing is surely imperfect.
Did see a Gentlewoman in a satin gown?
Indeed it is a heavy burden: I fetched it from TOTENHAM-COURT.
Did see a Gentlewoman?
A Gentlewoman in a Trunk of Feathers! that were very pretty.
Oh villain.
A Gentlewoman at TOTENHAM-COURT!
I saw many there Sir, and one in satin: but they are all upon parting.
I thank you Sir. Come let's hasten. 
What may this be! It hath begot new jealousies.
And here's new mischief. Hath the Devil policy
To prevent ill? There's no avoiding him.
It is he: h'nath spied me; and his fears deject him.
Sweet constancy, how I could blame the good
Thy kindness means me, that had rather lose
Thine own white purity, then stain my credit
With spots time cannot wash out. Doubly happy
Shall I be in enjoying her, and punishing
A treecherous friend.
George, how long have you conversed with the Frock-trade?
I thought the smock had bin your chief delight.
The Porter waits upon me.
With stuffing for your bed.
A light commodity I bought at Totenham-Court. Did ever think I should have been so thrifty to buy featheirs at the best hand? When I have used them throughlie, there are Suburb Upholsters will give me my money again.
Me thinks they are very heavy.
Let them alone.
Have not you stolen mine Hostess great brass Pot she boiled old marrow-bones in, for the fat to make her
Cakes with when Butter is scarce? Porter you shall carry it along with me.
Prithee go back to thy milk Maid.
Dost thou deride me? Nay then Porter up with it, or hre's a goud to force you, and let out some of your Goats blood.
Thou dare not strike a friend basely.
Friendship is concealed.
You have broke the league that knit over our outward love:
For in consent of ill Lve's never solid.
Had not abused that love with foul intents:
I would have thanked th pains, which she contrived
Onlie or m t'enjoy her.
Is it even so!
You shall hear from me Frank. Come hither Porter,
She hath legs to walk with you.
But that I think disgrace a punishment
Worthy the guilt, this instant hour should give
The wrongs thou did intend a satisfaction.
I must be bold sweet: mine are no Porters shoulders.
A Coach waits not far off.
Lie still a little, here's company.
Let me ruminate.
I paid the reckoning Mr Changelove, and am sorry for it, I mean the wrong I did you.
It was no offence: or had it; you have satisfied.
I love the memory of it. Twill be a Story
To greet a ring of friends with: next I meet
Shall have it all.
It may pass indeed for a merry one by a good
fire in Winter, which I love dearly.
A good fire Mistress Stitchwell is Winters artificiall Sun, that renews Summer within doors. I love it.
With two or three good companions, and a gossips feast.
That's very right. Society is the use
Of mans best onaments. Speech and discourse
Are reasons messengers, that carry errands
From one soul to another. I confess
I love good company.
It is a good exercise to rise in a frosty morning, and kill Birds.
You say well Sir, We that have youthful blood,
That capers in our veins, and swells their concaves
With active warmth, should be inured to hardness.
Tic healthful, and I love it.
I have it. Doe you know these Frank?
Mischief, I must prevent them.
You may if please you, suffer the Porter to pass, and stay yourself. Credit is precious: let me enjoy my sport, yours may be preserved. Otherwise your trull and you shall both sufer. I am desperately resolute, and will reveal all.
And I as desperate. Up with it Porter.
Any thing: will you suffer this Gentleman?
Nay then Frank.
Help help.
If he be gone sweet heart, let me out. I am almost stifled. 
Whence that voice?
The Gentlemen that were in our company! Let us prevent them. Be not afraid Wife.
Alas I cannot endure such naked weapons.
What will this come to?
I beseech ye Gentlemen kill me not, I have been sufficiently mortified; and I believe you may smell, the effects of my fear.
Is this the lovely piece, for whose enjoying
I have attempted what by ill success
Makes me ridiculous: yet I swell with laughter
To think how finely she hath gulled us both,
And mocked our easy trust.
Pray Sir how came you hither?
I think upon that Ports shoulders.
But how into this Trunk?
Isle tell you sir. Bargaining for a little sport with the Gentlewoman, whom I thought to be a wanton, she possessed me with scare, (to which cowardice is always apt, and I must acknowldge in my self) that a Gentleman (one of you two I take it) had dealt with her for her Mayden-head, and that she expected him. He came: and I fearing lust as well as love would brooke no rival, made use of this for my safety. Whre being heavy headed with Ale, I have slept till your noise waked me.
An excellent conceit; how like you it Wife? This Gentleman cannot endure the company of Women.
I knew before he did but dissemble: that made me so desireus to try him. There was a Tub at Tottenham; you I now the success of it.
I ever thought Mistress Stitchwell that was your own plot; and I love you dearly for it.
Love me Mr Changelove? Take heed my Husband doe not dream of it.
That was her plot too. Now doe I see, some Women can counterfeit wickedness, as well as many dissemble honesy. Come Sir, let you and I drown the memory of our disasters in a cup of Sack. 
You see gallants what success attends your enteprises.
Henceforth account not every City Wife
Wanton, that onlie loves a merry life.
And here's a double comfort; being wedded,
Shoe's neither false, nor am I jealous headed. 
Accursed credulity. Could not those doubts
I shaped my jealousy, preserve my first,
And noble resolution I Had I urged it
With greater zeal, she must have forced her reason
To understand m'intention without practise
Of farther trial. Now she's lost for ever;
Though I should with submission and repentance
Beg reconciliation with her thoughts,
(Whose purity cannot endure to mix
With mine that were so foul) she would reject it.
Isle back, and try. Lustful affections hence.
My Lov's new clothed in virtuous innocence. 
Frank We are friends: since we have shared disgrace,
We kill all malice. Henceforth I shall strive
To live more chaste. Lust is a gilded pill,
Which sinful nature doth prescribe desire.
It mocks the sense with pleasure; but at last
The shining outside leaves a bitter taste. 
But prithee tell me, what's her condition?
Womanish. She'll cry when shoe's angry; laugh when she's tickled, and be sick when she cannot have her own will.
I mean her calling.
She is called Cicily.
Her profession then.
Not very honest, and yet very honest. She cheats all the world that thinks she is wanton: but you may find by the late stories, that neither your Aunts nor Cousins can keep their legs so close.
Here's money for thee.
You are as bountiful as a new made Knight, that
couts a City Widow by Attorney for the officers fees.
Petee tel me how was she borne?
You had bd ak the Midwife.
This fellow trifles. Is the Keeper thy Master her own Fathr?
Should you conjure th Devil into her dead Mothere, he might chance to tll you lye.
Is she a Gentlewoman or not?
She is and she is not. She is a Gentlewoman as she loves pride: which makes Gentlewomen apt to fall; especially those of the waiting form. Then she is no Gentlewoman becausebecause
Prithee no more.
It is well you interrupted me, for I had no reason: But Sir I will bring her to the bar of your presence, where she may answer for her self, whilst I convert your bountie into wholesome nourishment from a black Pot, and have a bout with mine own sweet Turneup.
Mine eye ne'er saw with aptness to desire
That beauty could enthral m'unbounded thoughts
With passionate affection. Yet this piece
Is absolute, and uch as cannot choose
But have a glorious mind. Love is a cement
That joins not earthly parts above, but works
Upon th'eternall substance making oe
Of two agreeing souls. Were she borne nobly,
(As surely such perfections cannot be
The issue of base parents) so that infamy
Might not succeed, here would I fix my choice.
Besides she's virtuous, and her education
Beseeming reatnesse: her discourse; pure language;
Judgment, and full behaviour argue it.
Shoe's come. How like an Angel, as if sent
On some celestial message to the soul
Of a departing Saint. White innocence
Is in each look and feature, as all goodness
Had built their mansion in her. Welcome fair one,
I hope my pardon's sealed for thus presuming
On what you might call rud enesse.
You have shaped
Needless apology to excuse a guilt,
When none appears. I owe much to your virtue
It doth command my thoughts.
Which are so glorious,
I must admire the actions that express them.
I hope your judgement doth not call it ill,
That my intemperate anger being grounded
On virtuous suspicion, did transport me
Beyond a moderate passion. I am satisfied.
Your innocence hath cleared my jealousy;
Which was I know instruction to my sister,
And th'onely working means that kept her safe.
The Gentleman she loves I find is worthy:
Though his estate through the improvidence
Of a free minded Father, low enough.
My Uncle may repair it: she hath hopes
T'inherite all. And trust me did I love
Where I perceived desert, no inequality
Of fortunes blind additions, birth or state,
Should interpose a let to my enjoying.
Sir, it is a noble resolution,
Pure love's a virtue Nature only teaches;
And's borne with generous Spirits that distinguish
The object truly; sleighting those respects
That work on grosser minds.
How she instructs me
In resolution? Fairest I shall use
None other circumstance, or paint a passion
My reasons eye allows: though first my sense
Conveyed the knowledge of your outward form,
And full perfections, which must needs contain
A richer inside. Virtue seldom dwells
But in a glorious frame. I love your goodness:
For that your beauty. In my new borne wishes
I have determined you the partner
Of all that's mine. My state's not very mean:
If'twere, zeal should supply; I'd strive to merit
The free gift of your self, and in exchange
Return my self.
Sir, I could answer you
With your own words: for I presume your thoughts
Are noble like your self; unmixed with slatt'ry,
Courtships infection; and the poisonous breath
That many times doth make pure love suspected
Whether it be found or plastered to deceive
Our credulous weakness, till it hath posest us
With some foul leprosy. Your handmaid yields
To what agrees with honour; if the meanness
Of her condition may presume to call
Her honest cdit so.
How you doe bless me
As suddenly as my desires could shape
A means to work it? Instantly the Church
Shall seal the bargain.
Would not you deliberate
Those acts are lasting, and concern the being
Of all your after life?
It is heavens providence
That hath disposed it. Thus I seal my vows
And here are witnesses.
My Uncle! what makes he here? new doubts arise.
See, see; my thoughts were prophecy: both here.
You are welcome to Tottenham Court Uncle.
But you're ill come Cousin. I had thought.
Your judgement had been stronger than to aid
A foolish Sister with your fond indulgence
In her undoing. She may hide her face
My rage distracts me, and I know not how
To frame th'induction.
Why sir, this is not Mistress Bellamie but anothere in her clothes.
How's that knave? hay day wife how came you by these? where
I am your Niece.
You my Niece?
Shoe's my Wife, Uncle.
Yet more plots I sure the Parson of  has been here.
Indeed I have heard he is a notable joiner.
And Totenham-Court Ale pays him store of tithe.
It causes questionless much unlawful coupling.
Pray whore's your Sister? I'll not fright her
With many threats, but mildly work her reason
To understand her errors; and prevent
Her ruin with dissuasions. Cos shoe's lost:
My love and care made useless.
Is she married Sir?
Yea; that's my greatest fear, shoe's past recov'ry,
Woman, what ere you are, you have some hand in it:
These were her clothes.
Let h slf satisfy,
f passion hath not made you too incapable.
Alas mine Uncle.
Killing spectacle.
Come from his arms: if any force restrain thee
But thine own freeness (which I most doe fear)
I will reveng't with laws extremity.
Come from his arms I say.
Uncle I owe
You many duties. One from natures precepts;
And moral gratitude for your great love
Istructs me in another: but necessity
 his compels a virtuous disobedience.
Girl hoe's a beggar. He had a prodigal father
That spent all ere he dyed: his whole estate
Depends but on the love of a rich Uncle;
And that's uncertain.
Pray upbaid me not
With a dead mans misfortune. I have been
A soldier, and perhaps am apt to anger.
Threaten your fill Sir, so my Niece forsake you.
Kind Uncle, call not poverty a sin.
Wealth's but the gloss and outside of desert.
And for my Sister, since she loves this Gentleman,
She hath some portion left her; your estate
Would be a fair addition: but the loves
Of Uncles are uncertain. The truth is,
I love this maid: shoe's but this Keepers daughter;
Yet I would marry her, please her good Father
To be consenting.
Blessings unexpected.
If she be willing. Shoe's a poor girl Sir.
Shoe's richer then the Indies.
Shall mine age
Be cursed to this misfortune. Isle build hospitals:
Where wooden legs and lazy hypocrites
Shall be mine heirs.
And the Devil your Executor.
They scorn my easiness.
I should have raged, and from a furious an
Sent threats, not calm entreaties.
That would likewise
Have been as useless. I conceive such joy
At these events, they almost have confounded
My preparations to begin the Story
Reserved to crown all. First doe you embrace
A natural Sister.
Mine own Sister, sir,
Supposed to have died an infant!
I still thought it
By an instinct.
This is Cicely Worthgood,
Whom my Wife nursed when both your Parents died.
I have been careful of her education
Well as her person; though my love concealed
The knowledge of her self still from her self.
Least I should lose her: being th'onely comfort
I wished from providence: Such was the duy
With which I honoured your dead Ancestors
That brought me up.
Sir, this concerns not me.
It doth your Nephew, to whose loves embrace
I next commend her, and a portion too.
She shall inherit something that hath been
Stored from my care; nor hath her industry
Wanted a share.
Still let me call you Father;
Whose love deserves it for my preservation,
And after being.
What a knot of fortunes
Is here untied. Oh let me wear you ever
Upon my heart with these. 
Mine Uncles servant! What new accident?
Oh Sir, never was endeavour so tired. But I am glad I have found you. Your Vncle's dead, and hath made you his heir.
Ha, ha! is it come about! nay then; are you married niece? if not, about it presently whilst it is morning. Thou shalt be mine heir likewise: love him; lye with him; Getboyes, and any thing now; you have my consent.
And now I owe you duty.
With what impudence
Shall I apparel my prepared excuse,
To make it pass? What mean so many people?
I am returned to chide your cruel practice,
That mock't my virtue into wicked frailty,
And an abused belief. I am your convert;
And come with more then sorrow, satisfaction.
Let not the memory of my past errors
Pervert your thoughts into a worse opinion
Of my reclaiming, then if ill intents
Had ne'er expressed themselves.
What means that Gentleman?
Hoe's one of those that 
If you'll have my Maidenhead,
A Husbands leave is light.
As your Commodity:
How did you like it Sir?
They will abuse me
Into a madness. Farewell virtuous Maid,
And bless his bed deserves thee. Here I banish
All after-thoughts of Women; but t'admire
The goodness makes them perfect; since such were
Added to be mans only comfort here. 
Most opportunely Widow. I have solicited long; and if you will now consent, let's bear these company.
With all my heart.
Why then to Pancreas: each with his loved consort
And make it Holiday at Totenham-Court.
Again you're welcome. There's no more to pay.
But your kind liking. Tipster take away
If you deny it, as due for such mean Cheer;
And say your first paid reckoning was too dear,
I beg it as a bounty. If I win
Your kind commends, twill bring more custom in:
When others filled Rooms with neglect disdain ye
My little House (with thanks) shall entertain ye.
And if such Guests would daily make it shine.
Our POET should no more drink Ale but Wine.

HE does not mean this building for a College, I hope?
That were an ill Foundation, there are more Scholars then can live one by another already; it is pity we should have more plenty of learned Beggars.
It is past all my conjecture, why he built it.
Signior Perotto, Captain of the Guard
Is of Counsel only with the Duke in it.
Signior Orpiano, and Fulvi.
My Spark? Whither in such hast? Let vs change Aye a little
You are travailing to your Mistress
Madam Donella is newly returned to Court.
With the Princess?
She was but late retired into the Country:
What's the matter?
Your Lordships I hope have heard, the Duke sent
Post for them, as they say, there is something in it.
What?
Does not your Lordship know?
Not I.
Your Lordships wisdom and mine is much about a scantling then, yet for ought I hear, there be others of the Court as ignorant as weyour Honours pardon I beseech you, I must in all haste to the Princesses Lodging.
Farewell Signior.
Your amorous locke has a hair out of order.
Um? what an oversight was this of my Barber, I must return now and have it corrected, dear Sign.
Here's a Courtier that will not miss a hair of his Complement, when he is to appear before his Mistress: every morning does this fellow put himself upon the Rack, with putting on's apparel, and manfully endures his Taylor, when he skrewes and wrests his body into the fashion of his doubletbut that the Court cannot subsist without a Fool, I should marvel what this fellow does to follow it.
There are more have much about his parcel of Brains, the benefit of youth and good clothes procured their places, and ignorance and impudence have since maintayn'd em.
Two great helps as the world goes.
Clear the presence, the Duke is entering.
I ever was obit ient
It is for thy Honour, which I know
Is to thy self a precious soundthat Building
I late erected, then shall be thy Palace.
Or my Prison Sir, if I doe rightly understand.
That name
Is too unworthy of it, my Eugenia,
Nor will it seem restraint to my loved daughter,
Since free to all delights, thy mind shall be
It's own Commander, every day shall strive
To bring thee in fresh rarities, Time shall bee.
Delighted with thy pleasures, and stay with thee.
Indeed I shall think Time has lost his wings
When I am thus Caged up.
Thou shalt give
To him feathers when thou please. Mantua
Shall power her rapture on theewhy have I
A Crown, but to command what thou can wish for,
My dear Eugenia.
A Dear it seems,
For as you had suspicion of my wildness,
You'll measure out my walk.
I am thy Father,
Who by example of the wisest Kings,
But build a place to lay my Treasure in,
Safe from the Robber, where Isle place a Guard
Doe you suspect I shall break Prison?
To keep off violence, and soliciting
Which may disturb thy pleasures, until we
Shall find out one to match thy Birth and Virtues,
My Dukedom is too poor that way, maintain
Thy Fathers Soul: thou hast no blood to mix
With any beneath Princeforget as I shall
Thy Love was ever falling from thy Greatness,
Into the Arms of one carries but stile of Honour.
Sir, I am your Daughter.
You have deserved my blessing, and thy obedience
In this, new Crowns thy Father: I see I need not
Urge what I am to move thee, and lay force,
Thy understanding does appear convinced,
And loving duty teaches thee to more,
Then the CommandPerenotto
What narrow ground I tread? I know he is
Too passionate to be denied his will,
And yet to yield will make me miserable;
It is my misfortune to be borne so great.
Each common man and woman can ijoy
The ayre, when the condition of a Princess
Makes me a Prisoner. But I must obey
In hope it will not lastI have a Soul
Is full of grateful duty, nor will suffer me
Further dispute your precept: you have power
To steer me as you please.
All the Graces
Speak in my GirlEach syllable doth carry
A Volume of thy Goodness: all my Cares
So well rewarded doe convert to sweetness
I thank thy filial piety: know my Girl
That place wherein I look so rich a Jewel,
I doe pronounce again, shall be thy Paradise:
Thy Paradise my Eugenia, saving that
In this man only finds no beingother
Delights shall stream themselves into thy Bosom,
And those that pass, shall flow again t'invite
Thy sense to tastingPerenotto.
Your Graces pleasure?
Admit those Ladies that attend
The Duke shows much Indulgence.
Observe the issue.
Wee will not limit thy companions,
Elect what Mantuan Beauties thou can best
Delight in, they shall serve thee: or if some
Of your own Train, whom we have thought most proper
To be your personal Guard, affect you, they 
Attend our pleasures: see, they are ignorant
Yet of our purpose, if to any, thy
Affection be not free, thy Breath discharge them,
And point thy own Attendants.
I shall be pleased with your appointment,
Ladies, I know you love me.
Doth your Grace hold suspicion, any of vs
Serve you not with our heart?
I doe not doubt,
Or if I did, you now approach a Trial,
For my sae can you be content to be
All Prisoners.
Prisoners?
Yes, shut up close Prisoners, and be bard
The , nay the sight of men.
Marry Heaven defend, wherein have we offended
That we must loose the sweet society
Of Men.
How have we for feyted our freedom?
No man argueit is our pleasure.
Alas Madam, I am new contracted to a handsome Signior.
I have but newly entertained a Servant, that gave me these Gloves, they smell of him still, a sweet Courtier.
Not one man among so many Ladies?
Not a Gentleman-Vsher? Nor a Page?
How shall we doe Madam?
I beseech your Grace let me be exempted,
If I have committed an offence, deserves your Anger,
Let one of your Lords cut off my head rather, Sign. Dondalo.
Shall we express,
So cold a duty to her highness? Fie Ladies.
You shall but suffer with me: I partake
As much Severity, as any of you shall.
I will expect your duties Lords in silence,
Orpiano, you shall to Ferrari, with
Our daughters picture, your Commissions sealed
Now fair Ladies,
I hope you're fixed to waite upon Eugenia.
If your restraint be a Burden, it shall be
In her power to enlarge you, and elect
New Friends into your places.
It is our Duties
To obey your Grace and her.
PerenottAre all things prepared?
They are my Lord.
For once thou let vs usher you.
Whether doe we go?
Isle tell you.
Whither?
To take Physic Madam.
The Duke has prepared to stay all looseness in your bodies
You must be all fast: stone walls and mortar will bind.
Come follow with a Courage.
I hope we shall be allowed our little Dogs and Monkeys.
Sweet Madam.
Madam Katherine, they are gone Signior.
Would I had known this before?
The Duke will be censured for this Act.
It is very strange, good Lady,
I read a forced obedience in her Eye,
Which hardly held up Rain.
Save you dear Sign. which way went the Ladies?
News, Signior News.
I beseech you I may partake.
Have you forgot there was suspicion
She affected Signior Philenzo the Cardinals Nephew?
Alas poor Gentleman, he suffers for it.
By this restraint he would make her sure, his jealo
Is not yet overSignior Morello, is your locke rectified,
You have mist your Lady but a hairs breadth.
Nay, but my Lords and Gentlemen, where are the
Ladies gone indeed?
We have told you.
What, committed to New Prison:
Very true, Signior.
Our dancing days are done, shut up close, not
A man must enter.
Would I were a Mouse thenwhy, but is the Duke mad
Take heed what you say Signior: though we be no Informers, yet walls have Ears.
Ears? Would I had left mine behind me, heere's
News indeed!
And yad come a little sooner, you might ha taken your leave, but it was your Barbers fault.
Would he had left me in the suds an hour ago! What shall we doe Gentlemen, it is a hard case, when a man that has an intention to marry and live honest
How now, what art thou?
Any thing, nothing: yet a man, yet no man for I want.
What? You are no Capon I hope.
Money sir, will you spare any from your precious sins.
You are very free.
Yet Sir I am in debt.
What dost owe?
Nobody harm.
Whence came
I dropped from the Moon.
So me thinks, thou talk very madly
You have much humour in thee.
Ha ye any thing to doe that ye account imposesible Gentlemen.
Why, wilt thou do it?
And you'll pay for it. Let me have money enough and Isle doe any thing.
Hold, hold.
Yes I will hold.
Isle lay with thee, what wilt hold
Why Paradoxes.
Paradoxes!
I hold you a Paradox.
Let's hear some.
There are no beasts but Cuckolds and Flatterers; no cold weather but in the Dog-dayes; no Physic to a whore, no fool to an Alderman, no Scholar to a Justice of Peace, nor no Soldier to a Belt and Buff Jerkin.
A smart fellow.
The Duke.
So my fears are over, in her restraint I brye all my
Jealousies:How now? What fellows this?
Such an Humorist as I never before conversed withall: it seems he makes himself free of all places.
What would he have?
Thy pardon mighty man, if it be no Treason to pray for thee, save thee, wilt employ me? It is Vacation, and I want work, ask me not what I can doe, let me have money enough, and Isle doe any thing.
You have your Senses?
Five, the small Birds dare not peep for him, I take it: I can see greatness big with an Impostume, yet towering in the Ayre like a Falcon: I can hear a man swear I am thy Eternal Slave, and will serve thee: whe if opportunity were offered, for price of a Plush Cloak, he will be the first shall strip thee to the very Soul: I can taste wine that another man pays for, and relish any thing that comes of free cost: I can smell a Knave through a Bared Gown, a Politician, through a Surplice; a Fool, through a Scarlet out-side: I can touch a Wench better then a Lute, and tell money with a Secretary, to show I ha lost my ealing: tush, ell's nothing, I have a humour to doe some thing to be talked on, nothing can come amiss to me, let me have money enough, and my life to a cheese pairing, Isle doe any thing.
You'll except somewhat.
Not to doe o'er the Seven Wonders of the World, and demolish 'em when I ha done, let me have money enough, what star so high, but I will measure by this acobs staff: Divine money, the Soul of all things Sublunary, what Lawyers tongue will not be tipped with silver, and will not money with a Judge make it a plain Case, does not gouty Greatness find ease with Aurum palpabile, and he's a slight Physician cannot give a Golden Glister at a dead lift:Money, I adore thee, it comes near the nature of a Spirit, and is so subtle it can creep in at a Cranny, bee present at the most inward Councels, and betray em: Money, t opens lockes, draws Curtains, buys wit, sells Honesty, keeps Courts, sights Quarrels, pulls down Churches, and builds Almeshouses.
A wilde fellow.
Will your Grace have him punished for this insolence?
No, his humour is good mirth to vs; whence art?
I am of no Country.
How?
I was borne upon the Sea.
When?
In a Tempest I was told
A blustering fellow.
Thy Name.
Rolliardo.
And how long hast thou been mad thus?
Your Highness may be merry-and if you have no
Employment for me, I am gone.
Stay we command you, and bethink again,
What to except in your bold undertaking.
I except nothing, nothing Duke, it were no glory
Not to be general, active in all, let me have Money
Enough and Isle doe any thing.
You shall.
Will your Grace set him aworke?
Name the Action.
What say you to a Lady?
I will fall upon her, as Iupiter on Dane, let me have a shower of Gold, Acrisius brazen Tower shall melt again, were there an Army about it, I would compass her in a Month or dye for it.
Ha?A Lady without guard would try your wit, and money to get her Love.
A toy, a toy.
Through a Credulity, you may too much
Traduce the Sex, and merit such a Justice
No Money will buy off:admit some Branches
Grow not so straight and beautiful, as Nature
Intended them, will you disgrace the stem
Or for some women's Leity, accuse
That fair Creation? Money buy their Love
Promise a Salary of that sacred flame
Themselves cannot direct, as guided by
Divine intelligence.
Your Highness Pardon; if you prohibit I must not undertake, but let me have freedom, and Money enough (for that's the Cicle I walk in) and if I doe not conjure up a spirit hot enough to inflame a frozen Lucrec bosom: make Mummy of my flesh, and sell me to the Aapothecaries: try me with some Master piece; A women's Love is as easy as to eat dinner without saying Grace, getting of Children, or going to bed drunk: Let me have
Money enough, and tax me to the purpose.
He's constant.
Admit there be a Lady, whom a Prince
Might Court for her Affection; Of a Beauty,
Great as her Virtue, add unto them Birth,
Equal to both, and all three but in her
Not to be matchedSuppose this Miracle
(Too precious for mans Eye) were shut up, where
A Guard more watch ull then the Dragons; did
Frbid access to mankind:Men picked out
Betweee whose Souls and Money were Antipathy
 that which we know; and you as soon
Mlight bribe to be a Saint:what would you doe
With your enough of money, were your life
Engaged to win her Love?
The sky may fall, and Aldermen cry Larks
About the City.
The fellow's impudent: Sirrah, thou hast landed thy self upon a Rock, you shall have sense of what you would contemn, a Life: put on a most fortified resolution, you shall need it; we have a daughter thus locked up
What does the Duke mean?
A Virgin.
He is in Passion.
Shalt not engage thee on a work so much
Impossible as procurement of her Love,
Make it appear with all the Art thou can
Get but access to her; a Month we limit
But take heed Boaster, if you fail; your Life
Shall only satisfy our charge, and teach
All other Mountebanks to be at distance,
With such bold undertakings: you shall expect
A severe Justice:
By this, I shall try the Fidelity of those are trusted.
It is a match, I shall have money enough?
You shall. What do ye call enough, yet it shall be under 20. thousand Crowns: I will not leave the Pawn here, for twice so much.
I will not be particular and agree of the Sum, you look I should dye if I perform not, and Isle look to bee merry and want nothing while I live, Isle not take the Advantage on you, because I hope to receive credit by it: if I use now and then a round sum set me up of the Ticket for it, but who shall pass his word if I doe this feat, you'll let me keep my head a my shoulders.
Our royal word secure thee.
It is enough.
What security can your Grace expect for his foorthcomming, if he fail.
We ha studied that,
It is but the loss of some superfluous Crowns,
Let the end carry what success Fate please,
All the expense will not be lost, to try
The faith of those we shall employ in this;
Our Citie's strong, the River that environs
On three parts, shall be carefully attended,
A wall makes safe the fourth, which shall be guarded
Our Vigils shall be so exact, he shall
Deserve his liberty, if he escape vs,
We are constant Sir.
Would he might pay for his curiosity.
Isle waite upon your Highness for some earnest: I have a Month good, let me have fair play and my bargain Money enough, if I doe come short, let my head be too heyvie for my shoulders; if I doe more then is expected, you'll believe it possible hereafter: when a man has money enough he may doe any thing.
Maintain your humour stillattend vs.
Here's a mad fellow, does he mean to get into the Ladies?
It seems so.
Or I wud not be in his taking when the Moon chages.
Our best course then is to observe and humour him, he may have a trick more then we know; he seems to be a good Fellow, let's be drunk together, and get him to confess itha?
A match.
Like orrand Knights our valiant wits must wrestle
To free our Ladies from the enchanted Castle.
do ye think this Hair
And habit will sufficiently disguise you,
From your inquiring Creditors?
No question,
Have you dispersed my Bills about the City,
Does every public place carry the scroll,
As I commanded?
I have been careful.
What doe they say abroad, doe they not wonder?
They are stricken dumb at reading, he that has
The use of tongue, employs it to express
His admiration of your Art, your deep,
Invisible Art.
There's hope then we shall prosper,
In this believing Age, Jtaly is full
Of Juggling Mountebanks, that show tricks with oils,
And powders, here an Empiric dares boast
Himself a Paracelsian, and daub
Each Post with printed follies, when he went
A'th ticket with some Midwife, or old woman
For his whole stock of Physic, here a fellow
Only has skill to make a handsome periwig,
Or to sow teeth in the gummes of some state Madam,
Which she coughs out again, when so much phlegm
As would not strangle a poor flea, provokes her,
Proclaims himself a rectifier of Nature,
And is believed so, gets more by keeping
Mouths in their quarterly reparations,
Then knowing men for all their Art, and pains
In the cure of the whole bodyshall we doubt
To be made rich, rich Carlo, by our Art
Whereof I am the first and bold Professor
In Jtaly, we shall grow fat and purchase,
Dost not think so?
To go invisible
Who will not learn at any rate.
True Carlo.
There may be in the throng of our admirers,
Some will presume't above the power of Art
To make men walk and talk invisible.
But we can clear the mystery, and make
Mantua in the proof acknowledge it
A matter feasiblehere's some Customer 
Ha? It is the Humorist, the Vndertaker,
The Bird I spread my Art for, he has money
Enough, and's apt to prove a fortune to me.
So the Covenants are sealed, I am like a famous Cathedral with two ring of Bells, a sweet Chime a both sides, now it is noised I ha money enough, how many Gallants of all sorts and Sexes court me, here's a Gentleman ready to run himself in the Kennel, for hast to give me the Wall, this Cavalier will kiss my hand, while the other Signior cinckles in the hams, as hee were studying new Postures against his turn comes to salute me. As I walk, every Window is glazed with eyes, as some triumph were in the street; this Madova invites me to a Banquet for my discourse, t'other Bone robe sends me a Spark, a third a Ruby, a fourth an Emerald, and all but in hope to put their Jewels to usury, that they may return again with precious InterestThus far it goes well, very well, what's next
Save you Signior.
What art thou?
One appointed by fate to doe you service Sir.
But I gave fate no Commission to take you up for
me, I ha more followers then the Duke already, prithee have me commended to the Lady Destinies, and tell 'em I am provided.
Mistake me not, he speaks to you, has power
To make you happy.
Prithee make thy self happy with a warm suite first, thy house is but poorly thatched, and thou be so good at making happy, why hast no better clothes.
It is no felicity, or admit: the Sun
Dispenses a rich warmth about the World
Yet hath no heate it self.
Philosophy.
To omit circumstance, I know what you
Have undertaken to the general
Amazement: upon penalty of death,
You must procure access to the fair Princess,
It is in my Art to helpto perfect what
The Duke holds so impossible.
How can thou assist me.
Although my outside promise not, my brain
Is better furnished, I ha gained by study
A secret, will advance the work you labour with,
Isle teach you Sir to go invisible
How? t'hast no cloven foot, I sent brimstone, and thou be a Devil tell me.
I trifle not, I am a man, whose fame
Shall out-liue time, in teaching you this Mystery
For which I must expect rewardyou are,
(Loud noise proclames it) able, &amp; can pay me
Out of the Dukes Exchequer, being your self
His walking treasury.
You'll teach me to go invisible you say.
I can, and with your safety, for I deal not
With magic, to betray you to a Faith
Black and Satannicall, I abhor the Devil.
Very like so.
Which some have conjured into a Ring,
To effect the wonder, I admit of no
Suffumigation, incense offered to
Infernal Spirits, but by Art, whose Rules
Are lawful and Demonstrative
You think I admire you all this whileHark, when did you eat? or doe you hope again, that you are put to this pitiful and desperate exigent. I see you my would be Invisible, fine Knave.
Do ye mock me, Sir?
Isle tell you a better project, wherein no Courtier has prefool'd you. Stick your skin with feathers, and draw the rabble of the City for pence a piece to see a monstrous Bird brought from Peru, Baboons have past for men already, been taken for Usurers, i'their furred Gowns and Night-caps, keep a fool in pay, to tell the multitude of a Gentle faith, that you were caught in a Wilderness, and thou may be taken for some far Country Howlet.
Doe you despise my Art?
Art? but such another word, and I shall mar the whole expection of your invisible traique, in, to your nest; and leave me, distinguish men before you practise on 'em, it is wholesome caution.
I leave you to the misery of your unbelief, when you hear of me hereafter, you will curse your fortune to have thus neglected me, fare you well, Sir.
This is Perenotto Captain of the Guard.
Not yet attempted you?
We have not seen him my Lord.
He's here.
Is that he that has gold enough? would I had some of his yellow hammers.
Dee hear, you are one of the List.
A poor Halberd man Sir.
Poor? hold thee, there's gold for thee:thou woo't be honest now?
O yes Sir.
Not a penny, and thou had not been a fool, thou would ha bin a Knave, &amp; so thou might have got by me, yet by those scurvy legs there's oe hope thou't be coverted at all adventures take it.
I will be what you please Sir.
Tell me what condition is that Sign. of? is he rich?
He loves money.
Come? Shalt be my Pensionerhere's more gold for 1 line
Do ye make question of that Sir? he bought his Office, &amp; therefore may sell his Conscience, he has sold 200. on's twice over, he was brought up at Court, and knows what belongs to his place, I warrant you.
Good.
Am I not a Knave now Sir?
I like thee.
To your cost:I hope you wo'not tell him what I say: but if you doe, and he chance to turn me out of my office, your gold is restorative.
To your stations, and be circumspect.
Noble Sir, you are the only man I have Ambition to honour.
I should be proud to merit such a Phrase.
It is in your power to oblige my Soulw'are private,
I am jealous of the Wind lest it convey
Our noise too far: This Morn I had some traffic
With a Jeweller, and if my Judgment err not,
He has richly furnished me.
What says your Lordship to this Diamond?
It is a glorious one.
Does it not sparkle most divinely Signior,
A row of these stuck in a Ladies Forehead,
Would make a Persian stagger in his Faith,
And give more Adoation to this Light
Then to the Sun beam: I ha fellows to 'em
A Nest of bright ones.
This Box is studded like a frosty Night with stars
You have out bid their Value, make me a gainer
In changing them for your commends.
How Sir.
I'm serious.
I never shall deserve this Bounty, if
You'd point me out some service to begin my gratitude
You have a Noble Soul
Isle teach you how to merit more.
I am Covetous of such a knowledge.
Make but my path a smooth one to the Princess,
I am brief, you know my undertaking.
So I should be a Traitor.
It comes not near the question of a life: do it Isle enable you, to buy another Dukedom, State, and Title.
Although it were necessary in the Affairs
Of such high consequence to deliberate,
Yet for this once, Isle be as brief as you,
I wo'not do it.
How?
No indeed Signior, you shall pardon me
At this time, and Isle keep your Jewels too
For they are gifts: hereafter you will know me
So fare you well Sir.
Was I not told this Officer was corrupt?
I want Faith to believe the Miracle.
Sure he does but jest with me, ha?
The Guard will accept no money.
What an ago do wee live in, when officers will take no bribes.
Not the Golden one.
Here's Rolliardo.
I'm quite lost.
It is he.
Yet he keeps my jewels, there may be some hope
Isle to him again, it is but his modesty
At first not to see me easy, he must be courted
Statesmen like Virgins first, should give denial,
Experience and opportunity make the trial.
Save you Gallants.
And you go thereto: save your self, you are in a worse pickle then wee are.
And how i'st wee Seignior?
Doe you thrive in your hopes?
I doe not despair Gentlemen, you see I doe not wear my hat in my eyes, crucify my arms, or entreat your Lordships brain to melt in a Petition for me.
I did but jest, I know you have a way to the
wood in your Pericranium, what is it wee are honest simple minded Lords.
I think so.
Nay nay, impart.
Wee tell no tales.
Wooed wee were whipped and wee doe.
Why shall I tell youyou are three.
Very secret
Coecombes.
How?
A miserable leash of Court Mimics.
Mimics? what's that.
You perfumd Goats.
Oh is that it, I never heard what a Mimic was before.
Dee think I am so wretched in a point that concorns my life and honour, to trust my ways and purposes to you that have no souls.
No souls.
Peace how comes he to know that?
Why hast thou none?
It was more then ever I could see in my self yet.
Things that have forfeited their Creation, and had not your Tailors took compassion on you, you had died to all men's thoughts, who long since wot ha forgotten that ever there were such things in Nature.
Shall wee suffer this?
Yes, and make legs, in token of your thankfulness, if I were at leisure, I would make you show tricks now.
Doe I look like a Johnanapes?
But I wonot.
It were not your best course.
How?
Alas Sir I should but shame my self, and be laughed at before all this Company.
When you see me next avoid me, as you would doe your poor kindred when they come to Court.
Get you home, say your Prayers, and wonder that you come off without beating, for it is one of my Miracles.
Had wee not better a gone to Tavern, as I plotted at first, he could not ha been more valiant in his drink.
Im'e glad hes gone.
I know not what to make on him.
Make on him quoth, he made little reckoning of vs, but and he had not gone as he did, I should ha made
What?
Urine in my breecheshe sqeezed me, I think I was ready to melt'o, both sides.
But hark you Signior, wee forget the Ladies still
Well remembered.
Lets consult to purpose about thatshall wee?
No, every one think what he can by himself, my thoughts shall be private, and not free at this time; every one scratch his own head.
And he that gets the first hint, communicate
A match.
Let me seeumh.
What if I didnothing, my brains are dull.
Ten to one, but if I didlet it alone, a pox on it, I were best drink some Sack, they say it helps inuention.
O rare.
Rub rub, out with it.
No, it is gone back again, I drunk buttered Sack this Morning and it slipped back when it was almost at my tongues endbut it was a delicate project, whatsoefor it was.
Recover it with thy finger.
Follow it Morello.
Now, now, now, let me alonemake no noise, it is coming again, I have it, I have it
Hold it fast now.
Loose it not, thou art great with wit, let vs deliver thee, what, first?
Some wiser then some.
Wilt not tell vs?
Did not promise.
No hastas occasion servesit cost more then so yet you may know it.
Well said.
Hereafter, but not nowaway, doe not tempt me I will eat the sweat of my own brain, O rare! never was such a strain of wit invented.Dee hear, Gentlemen; if you will command me any service to the Ladies, I doe purpose to visit emwith quirkhey.
How?
Marry doe I.
Nay Morelle.
Gentlemen, as I told you, if you have any thing to the Ladies, before I go I am the messenger,there is a crotchet and so fortha carwhichet is found out - your earsI will doe such a stratagem as never the like was heard of in the world.Oh rare.
Hes mad.
So am I, that he is so reserved
What shall's doe.
Save you Signiors, pray where abouts is the sign of the invisible man.
The invisible man.
Cry ye mercy now I see it.
See it he does more then wee can, the Gentleman's mistaken, hears no such sign, yet hee went in there.
Hee has better eyes then wee to distinguish it.
This, It his is it.
What is it pray?
Whats that to you?
In curtsy wee ask:
Then by the sign this is the house, whether I am going to enquire for a Gentleman that teaches men to walk invisible.
That wo'd be seen, this is news.
News, either you have slept long, or you are Gentlemen of very small intelligence, examine the next paper you see advanced, and inform your selves, farewell Gallants.
Hoe's entered there to.
Teach men to walk invisible, a very fine trade.
Would it were true, wee should desire no other device to get into the Ladies.
It is impossiblesee, see, more Gentlemen, prethee lets to him, this will bee a trick worth our learning.
Stay, wee are not acquainted, lets knock first.
Your pleasures Gentlemen.
Pray Sir, what signs is this?
The invisible man Sir.
Man, I see no man.
Here is nothing but a cloud.
Right Sir, and hoe's behind it, the mans invisible.
Pretty faith, It may bee the man in the Moon for ought weeknow.
Would ye any thing with my Master.
He does teach to walk invisible they say.
He is the only Professor of the miraculous envysible Art.
May wee change a little discourse with him.
There are some Gentlemen with himbut i'll tell him, I am prevented, hoe's coming forth himself.
Signior Altomaro I take it.
It is my name Sir, a poor Artist, not warm in these parts of Italy.
And you were not too busy Sir
Please you walk in, I am now alone, your persons will grace my poor habitation.
Wee saw 4. or 5. enter but now.
I ha dispatch 'em they are fresh departed.
Which way.
Here's not a man, are they not sunk, came they out here?
Upon my credit Sir no other way.
Then they went invisible.
Right Sir, they came hither to that purpose, their designs required hast.
This man can do it I see already.
Sir if you can assure vs this invisible walking, for wee are not so ignorant as wee seem, wee ha seen the Play of the Invisible Knight, and
That of the Ring too, ha ye not.
Yes.
The one was Magic, and t'other an imposture, what I doe is by Art fair and natural, are you in debt and fear arresting, you shall save your money in protections, come up to the face of a Sergeant, nay walk by a Shoal of these mankind horse-leaches, and be mace proof. If you have a mind to rail at 'em, or kick some a their loose flesh out, they shannot say blacks your eye, nor with all their lenses eyes discover you: would you see when the Mercers abroad, how his man plays the Merchant at home with his Mistress silkeworme, and deals underhand for commoditywould your self talk with a Lady in secret, sit down, play with her, ravish a Diamond from her finger, and bind her soft wrist with a bracelet, kiss her abroad, at home, before her servants, in the presence
of her jealous husband, nay truss her up, when the tame Lord is a bed with her, and to his eyes be vndiscovered as the wind Signiordoe you suspect your Mistress plays double? would you hear how she entertains the t'others love, and know what she does in the closet with the smooth Pagewould you be present at secret Counsels, betray letters, see how such a Lord paints his thighs, this perfume his breath, t'other marshall his fine French teeth, see this Statesmans eyes put out with a bribe, how that officer cozens the Duke, and his Secretary abuses 'em both, this Lawyer takes fees a both sides; while the Judge examines the fertility, and price of the Manor, before the witnesses and then decrees who shall have the Land? would you see justice employ her scales to weigh light Gold, that comes in for fees or corruption, and flourish with her sword like a Fencer to make more room for causes 'ithe Court.
All this and more may be done, if we can but go invisible, but how can you assure vs of that. I would fine see any man go invisible once.
See him Sir?
Video pro intelligo I mean Sir.
Nay Sir you need not distinguish, for it is possible to see a man invisible observe me, you see me now perfectly, in every part, if I should walk before you without a body.
How?
My head only visible and hanging in the Ayre like a Comet.
That were a strange sight?
Sometimes nothing shall be seen but my arm, another while one of my legs, hopping without a body.
This is admirable.
When I please I will have nothing conspicuous, but my hand, nay, perhaps my little finger.
Doe not you conjure then?
Come you will cast a mist before our eyes.
It is a Mystery indeed but a safe one Signiors.
Why look you Sir, if you will be pleased that
wee may see you first walk invisible, wee shall not only credit your Art, but at any rate be ambitious to bee your Disciples.
Why Gentlemen, you speak but Justice, you shall have experiment. I will be invisible first, but as to othere in this kind, I will not demonstrate without half in hand, let me have 50. Crowns apiece, le point you a day when I will be invisible
Can you not doe it presently.
I can be invisible in a twinkling, but what issuerance can you have, that I am here at the same instant, when you see no part of me, I may deceive you.
He says true.
I doe purpose therefore to give you reality and proof, for I will walk invisible, all butmy hand.
Your hand?
Only my hand, you shall touch it, see every line in it, and the rest of my body be to you invisible, this will require a little time for preparation, and when with the consent of your eyes and understandings, I keep my promise in this point, you will think your monies well expended to be taught the Mystery.
This is very fair.
The crown shall be ready Sir.
Expect'em within this hour.
At your own pleasures, ha Rolliardo? I must not be seen Gentlemen.
Farewell incomparable Signiorwhat luck had wee to light upon this Artist, he shanot publish it, we'll buy the whole secret at any value, and then get him remove into some other Province, who's this.
Am not I mad, sure I am, though I doe not know it, and all the World is but a Bedlam, a house of correction to whip vs into our senses, I ha known the time when jewels and Gold had some virtue in'em, the generation of men now are not subject to corruption; Democritus the
Worlds refined.
It is Rolliardo, he looks Melancholy, lets have a fling at him, give you joy of the great Lady Sir, which is the next way to the Moon pray?
Bolt upright Mnskat, and if you make hast you may be one of her Calves, next time she appears, you shall see her beckento you, with a pair of horns, just a'the size of those are preparing for your forehead, my precious anymall.
Ha, ha, ha, the fellows mad.
Can you tell Sir, what became of all the Swelllowes, Cuckoos, and small birds, wee had here last Summer?
Marry Sir they went to Sea, to aide the Cranes, and there have bin mustering ever since, but for want of a Woodcock they ha left behind 'em, they dare not venture upon the Pigmies, you may doe well to overtake the Buzzard and relieve the Army Sir.
Ha, ha, ha.
I shall be grind to death as I walk the streets, it is no policy to be dull and modestbut let me see, which way to compass my work, and put my self out of the common laughter the very children will ieere me shortly I think, and point me out with stones, the precious vndertaker. I might have had more wit then to run my self into this calamity whom have wee next.
The Duke? what stranger's that? I must not seem dejested.
Is this he your Highness discoursed of?
This is the piece made up of all performance
The man of any thing without exception,
Give him but Gold, Kings daughters and their heirs
Though locked in towers of Brass, are not safe from him.
Nay though I play the chemist with my trust
And from a Million of sure confidences
I draw the spirit of honesty into a few,
He can corrupt 'em.
You are my Prince great Sir, and you have spoke
Not much unlike a brave one.
Heel jeer the Duke too
If my head
Come to be paid to you, before Sunne-set
That day when it is forfeit, I ha cleared with you,
And shall depart out of your Royal debt
There's all you can demand, a good sharpe sword
Will make an even reckoning.
He seems confident.
With your Graces leave, let me come to him.
Now a fierce dog.
What came into thy mind, thou daring madman, fool is a word of favour to thee.
So Sir.
To undertake such an impossible task.
MushroumpeIsle cast away a few words on thee
Had I another life, I'd undertake yet
Though I below in all opinion,
To venture it, with the riches I have spread
To corrupt others, to make thee my parasite,
I would engage my life to wear no steps
To thy white daughter, thou and thy grave Matron
Most humbly should present her, when I was pleased too
For fear I should refuse the sport you brought me.
I never knew man bear his scorn so high, too him some other.
Not I Sir, you shall excuse me, it was the last thing I did.
In the position general, 'ile not touch him
For money may be said to purchase all things
But to aspire to my good Sovereigns daughter
Of blessed memory.
Shoe's not dead I hope.
There Gold and trash was impudently inferred,
And it was a task too insolent, in that point
You'd willingly give a pound of your proud flesh,
To be releast.
I heard a pound of flesh, a Jaws demand once
It was gravely now remembered of your Lordshipreleast?
Fortune, and curtsy of opinion
Gives many men Nobility of Birth,
That never durst doe nobly, nor attempt
Any design, but fell below their Honours.
Cased up in Chambers, scarcely ayre themselves
But at a Horse-race, or in the Park with Puppets,
That for which I'm your laughter, I speak to
You flattering tribe of Courtiers, to you Glowormes
Is my chief glory, that perhaps being sprung
From humble Parentage, dare yet attempt
A deed so far above me, that sets all
Your Wisdoms in Combustion, you may think
I've made a sorry bargain for my life,
Let Scorners know in aiming at her only
My memory after death, receives more honour
Then all your marble Pinnacles can raise you,
Or alabaster figures, whiter far
Then ere your souls were, and that hour I dye
If you dare look upon me, without fainting
(Which I much fear) you shall see death so scorned,
I mean for any terror, you shall think him
My slave to take my upper Garment off.
I told your HighnessHow you shut find him.
A brave Resolution.
Be this the Prologue to the mirth, my Lord
Attends to entertain you; set on, we'll leave him. Ha, ha, ha.
Sir, I observed you Noble, and not apt
To throw derision on me with the rest,
Which does encourage me, to ask you a question.
Name it Sir.
Pray what strange'rs that walked with the Duke?
It is an Ambassador from Florence Sir.
An Ambassador, his design I pray?
To treat of Marriage betwixt our Princess
And the great Dukes son, desired much by our'Master
Who has some hope,,t'wilbe effected too.
Has brought rich presents to her.
This is all.
You have it freely.
You've honoured me, married to Tuscany? so, if my ambition had been fortunate, I might have been his taster, but my stars want influence, they are too dull, and weary of my fate, Rolliardo then must forfeit, why that's the worst on it, I will make a glorious blaze in death, and while I live, make the Dukes treasure pay for it, nor shall he accuse me, I exhaust him poorly, i'll study out some noble way to build me a remembrance. ha.a Church or College? Tedious, my glass has but few sands, I must doe some thing I may live to finish: I have it, I will send to all the prisons ith City, and pay the poor men's debts for 'em: the world wants such a President: I ha money enough since I fail in my other ends, I will doe some good deeds before I dye, so shall I be more sure of Prayers, then if I built a Church, for they are not certain to continue their foundation, fate I despise thee, I sink under no cheap and common action, but sell my life too Fame, in catching my death by so brave an aspiring.
If I obtain a Monument, be this all
Write on my grave. This man climbe'd high to fall.
Come Gentlemen, wee must watch still, that none run away with the Princess.
He must have an excellent stomach, that can break these stone walls to come to her.
Beside this moveable wall of flesh which we carry.
One makes toward vs,it is a Lady.
So, now am I as valiant as Hercules, when he turned spnister, great Iupiter, the patron of scopes, assist my petticoat, and at my return, I will sacrifice my linnen-breeches to thee,here be the men, the men of mettle, now Venus I beseech thee, and they bee men they will let a Lady enter without many questions.
Save you sweet Lady, your affairs this way?
I go but in to the Princess.
From whom?
From the Dukes Grace.
What may be your Ladyships name?
I never thought to give my self a namemy name is Madamum. My name is something an odd name, butI doe not stand upon itmy name's Thorne.
Indeed Madam Thorne, if his Grace have sent you to such a purpose, you must show something for our discharge.
Why hark you it was but forgotten, of the Duke to send his signetbut I ha brought some of his Highness deputties wo'mee, I hope that will satisfy.
By this gold, breeches
No, they are but silkhere will be sport, I have a hint already.
Say you so? It is very wellbut Madam, we are many, and we would be loath to venturedeal ingeniously sweet Lady, have you no more gold in your breeches?
Not a doyt, as I am virtuous and sinful.
Passbut do ye hearand you shut not be secret now.
As I am a Gentleman.
A Gentleman? dost hear him? isle put him to it.
I have left some Crowns with your fellow.
Tush, that wo'not satisfy me.
Indeed, I ha no more money.
You have commodity, hang this transitory goldgive mewhat's this?
Nothing but a wart a'my little finger.
A wart, let me see it.
It is a Diamond, it was my Mothers Legacyor else
Is it your will I should have it?
It was my Mothers will I should wear it, her Ghost will haunt me, and I should give it away.
You know the way back Lady.
You will give me my gold again.
Not a doyt, as I am virtuous and sinful, stand with him for a toy, and know you've no warrant from the Duke, it is in our power.
Do ye hear Sir, and it were a Diamond of gold you shut have it.
Lady, I kiss your hand.
You've kissed the Ring of a my finger Ime sure.
Use your fortune, pass.
If I get to the Ladies, some body shall pay for this, that's my comfort.
Can you wrestle Madam.
Ahwrestle Sir, Ladies doe not use to wrestle.
They are thrown down with their good wills then, come you and I will have a bout, I must hug your little body.
Humour him, and you're past danger.
Wot you ha me tear my clothes?
Isle persuade him.
To tell you true Madam, this fellow is an abominable
Lecher, there is no scoping him without a fall, a very Satire, he leaps all comes near him, if your Ladyships modesty can dispence with a private favouryou understand; for our parts, we are satisfied otherwise, and our lips are sowed up, take him a 'toside, and see how you can mollify him, hoe's a Cock a the Game, and will tread you and you were ten Thorns.
Mollify him, doth he use Ladies so, he will mollify me.
And you were his sister, ell's one to him, the Devil is not more hot and Robustious, where he finds opposition to the sport; therefore the Duke made choice of him, as suspecting some Lord might come disguised a this fashion, to prevent dishonour to the Princess and Ladiesuse your own discretion.
What will become of me, if he be such a Wencher he'll ravish me, and discover all, what a Rascal was I to venture thus, isle give thee my Fan to persuade himhelp, help.
Nay then. 
Why how now? Breeches?
This is a man.
Sure it is a woman.
To tell you true Gentlemen, I am neither a man nor a woman, I am an Hermaphrodite.
How? an Hermaphrodite? What would you doe among the Ladies then.
An Hermaphrodite.
Let's search him.
Ah.
Stay let's be advised, if he be such a Monster, our best way is to carry him to the Duke.
Agreed.
I shall be undonedo ye hear Noble friends it is but a folly to dissemble, I am no such thing, I am no Harmphrodite, I am a friend of yours.
Of ours.
Your Name, I beseech you.
I did but jest all this while, the Duke himself put me upon it, to see whether I could cozen you, my Name's Morello.
Signior Morello, it is not possible.
As I am virtuous, I am, I am no Hermaphrodite, no matter for the Gold or Diamonds tic your ownisle acquaint his Grace how careful I found you, and if he doe not reward you beside, isle say hoe's the poorest Duke in Christendom: Isle tell him presently.
Noble Signior we'll waite upon you to him.
No, no, it is better for me to go alone.
Your pardon, you shall tell him how careful you found vs we'll relate to him how cunningly you carried the business.
Nay do ye hear Gentlemen.
It must be so Sir, come sweet effeminate Signior.
You've done me a noble office Signior in this
Discovery, where now lives her banished Lover?
My kinsman lives in Florence, but 2. days since
I received letters from him.
In Florence too?
Sir you may censure me,
But my affection to the iniurd Lord,
And not without respect unto the Honour,
Of your Master too, hath bin the cause of
My free Language.
Trust me Signior
We are all engaged to study you a recompense,
But Mantua was unjust to banish him,
For being too much a Servant.
Sir, when Princes resolve to punish.
Virtue shall be Treason
It was tyranny,why now is she thus caged?
I can conjecture nothing but his jealousy
Which will be ever active, by that Love
Wee interchanged at Pisa, when wee grew
Together in our studiesI conjure
Your Nobleness to silence me.
You will dishonour me by suspicion:I am charmed.
My honoured Lord.
Signior Perenotto.
My gentile sparks.
Your servants.
You are all Courtship.
Is your Lordship for this wonder?
What wonder my Lord?
These pair of Gentlemen have discoursed me into admiration, there's one has undertaken to go invisible.
Invisible?
This hour expected, and in this place.
How?
With a trick that he has.
Doe you believe him, Gentlemen.
You shall see it.
Wee were heretics in that point, but our understandings are convinced, he did demonstrate.
And because you shall know the truth of his Art, he will be invisible all but his hand, what think you of that? the rarest fellow in Christendom.
Nothing visible but his hand.
As sure as wee have given him a 100. Crowns in hand.
Why is not the Duke presented with this noueltie.
Hoe's travailing to the Emperor first, only as he goes for our sake, he will show vs a figgary of his Art.
Here's Rolliardo, hoe's somewhat costive a tother side wants Faith.
Save you nest of Courtiers, smooth faces, rich clothes, and sublime complements, make you amorous in sight of your Ladies. Donzell del Phby, and Rosiclee are you there? what pestilent diseases have you got, that you wear so much musk and civet about you. Oh for a Priest of Cupped to sacrifice you now, how your breeches would burn like incense, &amp; your hair disguised in sweet powder, leave your bodies in a mist, while your bones were inwardly consuming with the fire of Dame Venus altar.
The same humorist still.
I heard say, wee shall have strange apparitions in the air and yet invisible wonders, a hand must appear as fatall to some as that hung o'er the Capitol; for there is a suspicion some ses will be iugled empty, and as silent as the Moon, no bright Sol appearing, nor a piece of pale faced silver in your silken Hemispheres.
He is an Infidel.
Right Iehochanan, right, my precious Jew, wee are all In fidell that wonot believe the Court catechism - my Lord Ambassador you are welcome from Florence, does the great Duke pick sallats still, I mean continue his assize, return into his Exchequer once in seven years the wealth of Tuscany. Vespasian was held covetous for ordaining vessels to receive the beneficial public urine, but it is Heathenisme among Christians not to hold Dulcis odor Lucre  re qualibt.
Hoe's mad.
Signior Perenotto, it has puzzled my vnderstanding, how you can subsist at Court without making use of the common sins, flattery, and corruption; take heed, you're a great man, and it is ominous to dye in your bed, a sign your children are like to in hereto but weak brains, thou moist go to Heaven, but thy heir had rather thou shouldest make a journey to Erebus, for the proverb sake, happy is that Son, whose Father goes to the Devil.Why when comes out my Don invisible, may be, hoe's here already for wee cannot see him, what says my squirerill? thou look dull and Physical me thinks, the crowns will return again invisibly, never fear it, and how does my grave Gymnosophist whose ambition is to be registred an honest Lord, though thou be buried upon alms, carried to Church with four torches, and have an inscription on thy marble worse then the ballad of the Devil and the Baker, and might be sung to as wild a tune too.Gentlemen, i'll invite you shortly to see my head cut off, and doe only entreat, you would not laugh at me when I am dead, twill show but poorly in you, and I shall reavenge it with my Ghost walking.
Either he is very confident to achieve his design or late grown desperate, he talks so wildly.
I wonder, Signior Altomaro forgets vs. Now, now, ye shall hear, this is his servant I know he is not
far off, where is thy Master?
He is invisiblethis Letter is directed to you.
GEntlemen, that you may perceive I deal plainly with you, I am now invisible; all but my hand, and here it is, you may with ease read every line, as I promised upon the receipt of your Crowns.his hand.
I Sir, it is his own hand I can assure you.
Ha, ha, ha.
He does not mean to serve vs so, thou dost but jest, where is he invisible.
Here I think, for I cannot see him, nor doe I know when I shall, or where he will be visible again, upon diligent search I found this paper, but my Master is not to be found.
Then he is invisible indeed.
All but his hand. Ha, ha.
I doe incline to believe, that wee are cheated.
With a trick that he has. Ha, ha, ha.
You were Heretics in that point, till he did demonstrate. Ha, ha, ha.
I cannot contain my merry spleen. Ha, ha.
Come my Lord, lets leave them now, to be their own derision.
Signior Morello, ha, ha, ha. How came he in a Petticoat.
Carry me away quickly, they will laugh me out of my little wit.
No, no, doe not Gentlemen, remember your selves.
Wee wonot then.
Morello? 'Ile waite upon him to the Duke my self.
What wise man in Italy would be in my coat now.
I was costive, and an Infidel, you are Christian coxcombs, and so, while I see what will become of the mirth, that is gone before, I leave your wise Signiorships
to the mercy of your Garters, which is a speedy way, afla a little time, to make your selves invisible indeed. Fare you well.
Signior Grutti we are gulled.
I always thought he would cheat us, what shall's doe, to prevent more laughter?
I am resolvedI shall get no more money by him, Gentlemen be not head-hung, droop not, it is in this Sconce, to revenge your selves, and it may bee, recover your Crowns too.
How prithee?
My Master
Is invisible, we know it too well.
What will you give me, if I discover him to your eyes again, nay give him to your possession. Give him mny.
This.
And thisoh quickly.
Then first know, my Master is not that man you took him for, no Altomaro he, but Bonamico the decayed Artist, he that made Properties, and grew poor for want of Pictures, who for fear of is Creditors left his dwellling, and in this quaint disguise, set up the Trade of cosning such wise Gentlemen as you are.
Bonamico!
The same.
Oh that we could reach him again.
Follow me close, and I will bring you within an hairs breadth of his false Beard immediately.
That will be excellent.
Nimbly good Mercury, nimbly.
Madam you are too passive, if you bee dejected what must we, whose hopes and blisses depend upon your Fortune.
Oh liberty, liberty; are all the Roman spirits extinct? Never a Brutus in Nature, to deliver poor Ladies from this Captivity.
Since there is no probability of our enlargement, let's be merry, and despise our Sufferings, laugh, tell Tales,
sing, dance, any thing to cozen our melancholy.
There are some thoughts that stick upon my memory, I would fine discharge.
Shall we try our Lutes Madam?
And voices if you please.
Yes you may try, they say Music built the walls of Thebes, it were a greater miracle if you could charm these to fall, I shall never endure to live an Anchorite thus, and it were not for the happiness that I doe sometimes dream of a man, I should leap the Battlement. Now would I give all my jewels for the sight of a pair of Breeches, though there were nothing in em.
This but feeds our dullness, shall we dance Madam and stir our selves.
I am for that Music, we shall grow to the ground and we use no more activity.
With all my heart.
None a your dull measures, there's no sport but in your Country Figures, a nimble dance will heate, and and make us merry.
Hark, the Bell.
Some news from the Duke.
A Letter Madam and these jewels.
Ha! whencefrom Florence?
This is my fathers practise, isle peruse the Paper.
I have an excellent hint Ladies of a mirth,
Cannot but please the Princess.
What is it?
It will require every ones endeavour,
What if we play some pretty Commick Story,
A Play?
Shall we?
Wee? Doe not distrust your own performance, I ha known men ha bin insufficient, but women can play their parts.
I like it, t'wilbe new.
Wee will not present it to the Princess
But engage her person in the action,
We shall be too few else, some pretty Interlude
To square with our numberdo ye allow it.
Willingly.
Come 'ile acquaint you with a plot, then instantlie: refer your selves to me for your parts, we can receiue no disparagement, our spectators cannot jeer vs, for weal speak but to the people in the hangings, and they have as much Judgment, as some men that are but Clothes, at most, but walking pictures.
I shall be ont.
What part will you give me, I'll be a King.
Thou't play a Tyrant bravely.
Let me alone, Isle fit you all I warrant you.
Now our invisible Merchant is caged, wee may redeem our opinion and pass again in the rank of discrete Courtiers.
I think now to most of the beholders, he is invisible all but his head, for he has but a small grate to look out at.
He shall gull no more with his art I warrant him.
Nay, he is like to lye by it, for I hear since, all his Creditors, like so many Crows have light upon him, and they'll leave him but a thin Carcass.
Let 'em pick out his Eyes, what care wee.
He sent me an Epistle to take pity on him.
But I hope thou hast more wit then to show thy self a Christian to such a Rascal as he is.
I returned him my Court complement, that I was sorry I could not serve him: I would doe him any office that strecth'd not to mine own prejudice, that
wee had taken order with his Keeper; upon payment of our sums disbursed, he might be enlarged.
Which is impossible.
Prithee let me see his Letter, in what submissive language the Rogue does beseech vs,Most hoique Signiors,goodI throw my self at the feet of your mercy, for to your Justice, I beg I may not be made a Sacrificenay, we'll make him begere wee h'adone.
At the grate.
I confess I have done you wrongdoes he so? it shall not serve the turnthere is no hope I shall efor satisfy you,all the better, lye and rotif I be known a Prisoner to my Creditors, I am irrecoverably lost, oh compassionate, a miserable man, who otherwise must soon forfeit his day light, and dye in a dungeon. Ha, ha, ha.
Save you noble Signiors.
Ha.
Tic he.
Did he not dye in prison, and his Ghost haunts vs, brave!It is not hee.
When this eternal substance of my Soul, did live inprison'd in my wanton flesh, and so forth? and how do ye like Don Andrea Gentlemen; poor snake, but hee has cast his skin, and recovered a new coat of the destinies spinning. The Bird is flown again.
How the Devil came he at liberty.
And thus Gallant.
The slave does not beg of your Heroic Signorship, a Court compassion, debts must be paid, there is no danger of the grate as the case goes, nor of forfeiting his daylight in a dungeon, if I mistake not, my illustrious pair of widgens, my serene smooth-fac'd Coxcombs, whose brains are curdled this hot weather: will your neat worship sell your cloak, ha? or you that superfluos double hatched Rapier, there be sommes in Nature to lend you, upon security that I shall like of.
He jeers vs.
Would wee durst beat him.
You see me now Gentlemen perfectly, what if I should walk before you without a body, my head hanging in the air like a comet.
Would thou were it hanged any way.
Heere's Rolliardo too.
Let's be gone.
Or shall I appoint you a day when I will be envysible all but my hand?
No, I thank you Sir, we have some business at this present.
Let's to the prison, and know the wonder betterNoble Signior.
For your Crowns.
Wee are glad wee had 'em for you, dear Signior talk no more on 'em,
Farewell Phantasmas thenha? it is he, Sir.
Keep your way.
You doe not know me
But I ha brought a life which by your means
Has bin preserved from wretchedness, your Bounty,
Deserves you should dispose it.
What are you.
I was the object of a charity
Wee seldom meet in Mankind, from a prison
You sent a sum to free me.
Prithee friend, if you have received a benefit, go home, and say thy prayers:I would forget it.
Among many whom your Nobleness enlarged,
I came to make you tender of my service:
Despise not Sir my gratitude.
Do ye mock me?
May my soul want Heavens mercy then: to you,
Next my Creator, I doe owe my this Being
I have a Soul is full of thanks, but name
Employment to assure you, and you make me twice happy.
I ha nothing to say to you.
Then I ha something to say to you.
How.
And you shall hear it too, and give me thanks
You've sowed your Charity in a fruitful ground,
Which shall return it tenfold; nay one hundred.
What you have done for me you shall acknowledge
I will deserve to the height.
You are liberal in language.
Isle be activeoff with thissullen face,
It seurvily 'ecomes you, do ye hear.
I studied for you, since you paid my debts,
Il doe you a curtsy and save your life,
Which your attempt upon the Princess has
Left desperate, a happy fancy Sir,
If Heaven will please to prosper it, and you
Not be your own enemy to refuse it.
Ha, ha, ha, what mean?
Nay you shall laugh and heartily ere I ha done 
The Duke does love his Daughter, sends her all
Rarities are presented to him.
His solo's not dearer to himwhat of that?
Why then you shall be admitted into the Castle of comfort, that's all; the conceit is in my brain, and would you could as probably get her consent, to untie her Virgin Zone, as I dispose your access to her: it shall not cost you much, if I fail, instead of saying of my prayers, Isle curse the Destinies and dye with you.
Do ye hear, I ha bestowed 300. Crowns alreadie to set your heals at Liberty, if you doe mock me, it shall cost me 500. but Isle hayou clapped up again, where you shall howl all day at the Grate, for a meal at Night from the Basket.
You are in earnest now?
Yes.
By all that you have threatened, so am I, have but the patience to walk and hear me.
Can thy Art procure this?
My Art? Why look you, I made this Watch. Isle bestow it on you.
What to doe? to reckon the hours I ha to live.
It sha' not cost me so much trouble as that Toy did to make you master of your wishes, still if Heaven prosper it: come let's talk privately, you shall ha the plot.
He that doth many good deeds it may fall,
Among the rest, one may reward them all.
I long to be discoursing it, pray lead the way.
Provide again you mock me notcome on Sir.
ROllyardo pay his debts? Sure the fellow that never saw much money in's life, now by the Duke made Master of so many sums, is grown mad with 'em.
Many other he hath discharged they say.
He'll undo the Exchequer, and hee hold on, he shall be Chronicled for it.
He has some cause to imagine himself short lived, and that makes him so desperately charitable, toward his end. Signior Perenotto.
Dondolo and Grutti, News, News for ye.
What we beseech you.
You have lost the best mirth in Italy in your absense, your Companion Morello
Was carried to the Duke in a Petticoat, in which he attempted a passage to the sequestered Ladieswhat's the issue.
Mirth in Abundance.
How came he off?
Nay it is on still, the Duke to make himself sport, would call a Counsel, before whom the poor Signior
must be arraigned; not to hold you in circumstance, the Business was merrily discussed, &amp; the pitiful proiector was judged
How, how?
To wear the petticoat for a Month, if he appear without it during the Term, hee incurres his perpetual exile from Court.
Ha, ha, ha.
You may imagine with what variety of lamentable faces, the Courtier heard his unexpected sentence, some would have pleaded for him but for laughter, which continued so long and so high, hat he had time to collect his scattered senses, and instead of swooning, which was expected, he grew fortified, and most humbly besought the Duke, since his sentence had past so definitive, hee would be so merciful, to admit him that course of a Moon to be his Jester, that since hee could not shake off the Fools Coat, that he might have that favourable pretence to keep it on.
Very good
It was easily granted, but ever since, to the astonishment of the hearers, he is grown so jocund and airy, nay as if he had been borne with a Song in's head, he talks everlasting Ballad, no man laughs at him but hee lashes him in Rime worse then a Satyr, the Duke has privileged his mirth, made him foole-free, and now hee plays the Tyranthoe's here already.
Oyes, o yes, o yes,
If there be any one in City or in Town
Can show me a wise man Isle please him for his pain.
Disgrace has made him witty.
What will you say to him, will show you a wise man?
Marry if he go far, he is not so wise as hee should be. Dondolo, Grutti! Old acquaintance how is it? How is it?
The case is altered with you.
It does appear so, but nothing can make me proud, Isle know my Fellows.
How doe you mean Morello?
Your Lordship may make one at Football,
Tic all the sport now a days.
What other is the world then a Ball,
Which we run after with whoop and with hollow,
He that doth catch it is sure of a fall,
His heals tripped up by him that doth follow.
Doe not women play too?
They are too light, quickly down.
Oyes, they are the best Gamesters of all,
For though they often lye on the ground,
Not one amongst a hundred will fall,
But under her coats the Ball will found.
But we be three of old, without exception to your Lordship, only with this difference, Jam the wisest Fool, for you play the fool in your old clothes, and I have a new Coat on.
Does it not become him.
Rarely well, doe you ever mean to resign it.
It were pity but he should have a patent for it, to him and his posterity.
Hark you Gentlemen, do ye hear the News?
News! what news?
Dee not hear on it yet, why it is in a Ballad already.
And thou can sing it?
It was well guest, and I can but hit of the Tune.
There was an Invisible Fox by chance,
Did meet with two invisible Geese,
He led e a fine invisible dance,
For a hundred crowns a piece.
Invisible all but his hand he would go,
But when it came to be tried,
Not only his hand which was left he did show,
But a fair pair of heals beside.
Invisible since their wits have been,
But yet there is hope of either,
Their wit and their Crowns may return again,
Invisible altogether.
And he continue thus but a Moon, he'll make the Court mad.
Oh twill be excellent, since it is not safe for a wise man to speak truth, it were pity fools should loose their privilege.The Duke.
My Lord.
What is it?
Here's an important Suitor calls himself
An Artist, humbly craves admittance with
A present which he'd tender to your Acceptance,
And if my judgment err not, a most pleasing one.
Let us see him, and his present
It will reward my Daughters patience
Love and Obedience:All the Rarities
Ten Kingdoms yield, shall not be thought too weighty,
That she may shift each solitary hour
With a fresh Object.
Bonamico?
Tic he.
By my Love to goodness
It is a Master-piece, twill feed the Eye
With plenty of delight.
I am as jocund since I am admitted, I talk as glib
Me thinks, as he that farms the Monuments.
Is it not Sirs?
My Lord, I ha not seen so much delight
In any piece these 7. years.
Whore's the Master of this Work?
My Lord,
I am the Constable, that put all these in the Cage,
and you may call it a point of Injustice, for they never kept late hours, though they all wear feathers, there's not a Rorer amongst em, and yet were they suffered, they'd fly high, for some of 'em are very lofty minded.
A pleasant fellow too.
Oh my Lord, w'are all borne in our degrees to make one another merry, the Birds make me merry, I make my wife merry, the Fool makes your Courtiers merry, and the Courtiers make your Grace merry.
And whom doe I make merry?
The whole Common-wealth if you govern handsomely.
There's salt in's mirth:
Isle ha this fellow wait in the Court.
I shall be kicked out by the Pages.
Why so?
Because I cannot flatter.
A conoeyted Thing,
We lack the Humorist Rollyardo here.
We see him in the Court ere while my Lord.
This humour would habin a gadfly to him
And stung him to the quick.
Not altogether so Duke?
Fellow, what Bird is that?
Fellow?Cry mercy, I'd forgot you, fellow Isle tell thee, do ye not know him, tic an Arabian Woodcock, the same that carried a Bunch of Grapes in January last to Bethiem Gabor.
And what call you this?
This was the Duke of Venice his own Bulfinch,
And taken by the urkes.
By the urkes say thou? He droopes indeed.
Since his Captivity the Wretch endured
Much misery by the infidel, it had nothing
But bread and water for three Months.
A shrewd Calamity.
I doe affect this Fellows prate.
VVhat's this?
This is the Blackbird, which was hatched that day
Gondamoure dyed and which was ominous
About that time Spinola's Thrush forsook him.
Was this he
Yes.
And what was this?
This was the Pigeon was so shrewdly handled
For carrying Letters at the siege of Bergen.
Alas pretty Bird
This a Wagtail of the City, which a Silkeman
So dearly loved, he called it wife, but could not
(Though in much Jealousy he had caged her up)
Keep her from flying out: This was a Rail,
Bredup by a zealous Brother in Amsterdam
Which being sent unto an English Lady,
Was tan at Sea by DunkirksName but Rome,
And straight she gapes as she would eat the Pope
A Bird to bee made much on: She and the Horse
That snorts at Spain, by an instinct of Nature
Should ha shown tricks together: I could run over
But your gracious pardon.
How, our pardon?
I'm now another man, and know my distance.
This man is good at all.
My Buffoon face is off, I did but show
The impudent condition of a Mountebank
That sets off base Toys with miraculous Lies
Thus far Isle boast: they are the only choice
Italy and other parts of Europe yield
For the work if it prove so fortunate
To receive Grace from your divine acceptance
The workmanship (so duty suffer not)
I freely tender
No, that were to quench
The fire in all DeserversFulvio.
My Lord.
Pay the cost double, Isle send it to my daughter.
It takes, as Art could wish it.
I know it is a present, the sweet soul
Will raise much joy in:Signior Perenotto
My Lord.
There are two Birds I ha not med.
What are they
A pair of Gulls, which you may share between you.
It shall my Lord.
If Florence now keep touch, we shortly shall,
Conclude all fear, with a glad Nuptial.
Ye like this Story best then?
That of Jupiter and Dane comes near our own.
Be it so, we are all perfect in the plot I think.
You shall dispose the rest.
You will not be ambitious then, and quarrel About the parts, like your spruce Actor, that will not play out of the best Clothes, and the fine young Prince, who if he fight, it is six to four he kills all and gets the Lady.
We are constant, you shall appoint 'em.
Then Madam without Ceremony, you shall ply Dane, that is shut up in the Brazen Tower.
Well I'm contented, twill suit with my present fortun
I need not to instruct you in the Character: you shall bee the King Acrisius her father, a jealous, harsh, crabbed man, who in fear of the Oracle, commands her to be thus enclosed.
So:Isle fit you for a Vinegar King.
No matter for Properties
We will imagee Madam you have a eard.
What shall I play?
You must be Ladies whom the King leaves to keep her Company, entertain what humour you please.
This is our own parts indeed.
Ye will play it the more naturally, and let me alone to play the Thunderer, Isle wanton love it:now wht your inventions and about it, imagine our Scene expressed, and the New Prison the Title advanced in form.
The new Prison! why?
O it is an excellent Name, where Spectators throng ogether; as ours doe me thinks in the Arras already: the Musique ha their part, dispose your selves for your enrinses, while I speak the Prologue to our mixed audience of Silk and Cruel Gentlemen in the hangingshem.
Let it be a confident Prologue howsoever.
You're welcome to new Prison, we have still,
Our ancient Keeper, and we fear he will
Speak in his old Key too, but doe not look for
Choice diet, for alas, we play the Cooke for
All you are like to feed on, let your Palate
Expect at most then, but a Root or Sallied.
Picked from the Prison Garden, we know you are
Indicious Hangings, and well seen, nor dare,
We lift you up (too bold) let we incense
Your greene and spreading wits with impudence.
As I began, let me conclude in Rime.
Hang Still you learned Critics of the Time.
Now Dane and the Ladies.
Was ever Father to his Child
So unkind, it makes me wilde.
When to beguile a tedious hour,
From the top of this high Tower,
I see every other Creature,
Enjoy a Liberty by Nature.
Can the silver running Fountains.
And the Cloud aspiring Mountains.
 very Grove, and flowery field,
ut a new Affliction yield.
This is excellent, she has plaid the part before.
Waste not your self in woeful plaint,
orrow will not help Restraint.
Think Madam all is but a dream,
That we are inNow I am outbeam, cream.
Help me Katerina, I can make no sense rime to it.
Cream is as good a Rime as your mouth can wih, , ha, ha.
Does not the Arras laugh at me? it shakes me thinks
It cannot choose, there's one behind does tickle it.
A dream! Alas it is no relief
For us to flatter so much grief.
Fancy wants power to delight,
Or if we could think it might,
Such a dream so sad would make us,
That it could ot choose but wake us.
My Lady has helped her pretty well out of her dream.
The Sun with glittering golden Rays,
May appear one of these days.
You know always after Winter,
Comes the Spring and pleasant Summer.
Winter and Summer, ha, ha, ha.
Winter and Summer? By my faith that's wll, there's but half a year between, there be some call themselves Poets, make their Rimes straddle so wide, a 12. Month will hardly reconcile 'em, and I hope, a Lady may straddle a little by Poetical Licence.
Madam your father King Acrisius.
Must I enter alreadyhm.
This is his hour to visit us.
How fares our daughter?
What voice is that?
The King speaks through a Trune.
How is it heroic Birth, what dullness cold
As Saturnes, dwells on thy forehead, be bold
To give thy grief a Tongue, instruct, child
My paternal Nature, left I grow wild
As the rude North:thought of the makes my hairs
Silver, my blood is curdled with my cares.
Most high and mighty Nonsense, sure the King has swallowed Pills, and his stomach not able to digest 'em, does vomit 'em up again.
Is thy Organ dumb
Or am I grown cheap in Majesty, trivial Fool
Shall I reap crabbed Thistles in neglect for rich Love?
Crabbed Language I am sure.
Sure my Lady does not understand him.
If my brow so sad appear
My Fortunes Livery I wear,
Weep no more, thy eyes pave the ground with pearl.
My power is raced, My Crown thy Tribute Girl
Here is nothing to want.
Nothing to want indeed: to bee
A Prisoner speaks all Misery.
Curse not thy soft Stars, but take thy fair Bliss
With comfort, free from loud noise and Fear, is
Thy gaudy Station, when I have unskrew'd
Mistique Oracles, which not understood,
Doe perplex with involved sense,- I shall then
Enlarge thy person Dane, till when
If ought else doe clog thy Thoughts, with unkind
Thoughts, unload the dark burden of thy mind.
Pronounce thy grief aloud my amorous Darling
And I will
Let him choose his Rime I beseech you Madam.
Vh, uhcold phlegm obstructs my Languagebarling, carling.
Ha, ha, it is time to make an end,
He was almost choked with his own phrase.
And you get me to play an old man again.
We will have a young one for thee, 21. and a Coat, is a double game:my turn comes next.
Hoe's gone and leaves us behind
To tell our passions to the wind.
Ha? what of the sudden doth surprise
My active motion? On my eyes
What dark and heavy Cloud doth sit,
To persuade me it is Night,
It is some Charm, I cannot keep
These windows open, I must sleep.
This was well passionated, now comes Jupiter To take my Lady napping, we will sleep too, let the wanton
have her swinge, would she were a man for hr sake.
Let the Musique of the Spheres,
Captivate these Mortal Ears;
While Jove descends into this Tower,
In a golden streaming shower.
To disguise him from the Eye
Of Juno, who is apt to pry
Into my pleasures, I to day
Have bid Ganimed go play,
And thus stole from Heaven to bee
Welcome on Earth to Dane.
And see where the Princely Maid,
On her easy Couch is laid.
Fairer then the Queen of Loves,
Drawn about with milky Doves.
To thee let Paphian Altars smoke,
Priests thy better Name invoke.
When Hymen lights his holy fires
Thou that can infuse desires
In the Gods, from thy Lip
Let Jove heavenly Nectar sip.
And translate by kissing thee
Into thy breast his Deity:
But I rob my self of Treasure,
This is but the Gate of Pleasure.
To dwell here, it were a sin,
When Elizium is within.
Leave off then this flattering Kisses, 
To rifle other greater Blisses.
The BellNews from my Father.
Then your play is interrupted Iove-Madam Isle see.
Beshrew the Belman, and you had not waked as you did Madam, I should have forgot my self and played Inpeter indeed with you, my imaginations were strong upon me; and you lay so sweetlyhow now?
A present Madam from the Duke: one of the finst pieces of Pageantry that ere you saw: it is a Cage with
variety of Birds in it: it moves on wheels: your Assistance Ladies to bring it in.
A Cageif from Florence it shall to the fire,
Or whences're it cannot be intended
But as a Mockery of my Restraint
I'm very sad of the sudden: ha? tic so
Break it to pieces.
It were pity Madam to destroy so much Art.
Yet spare the Workmanship, in the perufall
There's something pleads for Mercy:I feel within
Some alteration, I know not what
Let me entreat your absence for some Minutes,
I am in earnest, pray doe without Reply.
Your eyes shell feed with plenteous satisfaction
On this gay object, when I call you.
We obey you.
Yet can't I say I am alone, that have
So many Partners in Captivity?
Sweet fellow Prisoners, it was a cruel Art,
The first Invention to restrain the wing.
To keep th'Inhabitants of the ayre close Captive
That were created to Sky freedom: Surely
The merciless Creditor took his first Light
And Prisons their first Models from such Bird Loops;
I know yo Nightingale is not long lived,
See how that Turtle mourns wanting her Mate.
And doth the Duke my Father, think I'can,
Take Comfort either in restraint, or in
The sight of these that every moment doe
Present it to me, were these tendered me?
They shall no more be Prisoners to please me,
Nor shall the woods be robed of so much Musique:
I take you at your word fair Princess,
I am the truest Prisoner, tremble not,
Fear flies the Noble mind, for injury dares not come near.
Sir, what are you?
The humblest of your Servants.
You are not mine, for in this bold Attempt
You have undone me.
You see I keep at distance.
You're too near, I will discover you, th
I fall my self by your presumption.
Hold, be counselled rather
But to calm Silence for a pair of minutes
And none shall perish, you shall save him too
That would for your sake loose himself for ever.
For my sake? What Relation has my Birth
Or any passion I call mine to you.
Nor doom me unto scorn, I am a Gentleman
And when my inimitable Resolution
In those Attempts whose very sounds breeds Earthquakes
In other hearers, shall your knowledge fill,
With wonder and amaze; you will at least
Think I fall too low, if I love beneath you.
Ha? this is a strange accident.
Was it less
Then death dear Princess to adventure hither.
It will be death how ever.
You're deceived Lady.
How I'm perplexed.
It had been death
Your sight gives me a Lease of longer life,
My head stands fast.
He speaks all mystery, I shannot get him off I fear without some stain.
The truth is Princess, if you now discover me,
(Tho I made nice at first to put your fright by)
You cannot harm me much, I have done my task,
Doe you fear me still? why is there such a space
Betwixt us Lady?Can you keep that man
At so unkind a distance, that for your sake
Has in his undertaking swallowed danger
Robed death, of all his fears.
For my sake.
Yoursfair Princess, dare you so far trust me yet
To let me  your hand.
Audacious Sir,
I shall grow loud if you forget your distance
Nor that you may hold long
I'm studying how I should bee rid of him without their
Knowledge: yet that's dangerous too, and might
Show guilt in me, for he will boast on it.
Such was the Duke your gracious fathers care
He would put confidence in none about him,
But saw me brought himself.
This is a fine Paradox.
Which must be to high purpose: come be wise
And keep me while you have me, it is but reaping
This fruitless Harvest, from my cheek and chin
And you can form the rest, you're young and beautiful
Loose not the blessing of your Youth sweet Princess
Fair opportunity waits upon your pleasure,
You want but the first knowledge of your joy.
Your Blood is ripe, come I am confident
Your will is but controlled by upstart Fears,
Like advanced Beggars, that will check their Princes,
My safest way is yours, now to conceal me,
It may be thought I have enjoyed you else,
Ill Censure soon takes fire, nay perhaps
To be revenged of your sterne cruelty,
Isle swear my self I have possessed you freely,
Play your game wisely then, your honour lies
Full at my mercy, come, it is in your love,
To lead me to a secret Couch.
Bold Villain
For these uncivil most unhallowed words,
Isle dye but Isle undo thee.
Stay and let me circle in mine Arms
All happiness at once, I have not Soul
Enough to apprehend my joy, it spreads
Too mighty for me: know excellent Eugenia
I am the Prince of Florence, that owe Heaven
More for thy virtues, then his own Creation.
I was borne with guilt enough to cancll,
My first purity, but so chaste a Love
As thine, will so refine my second being
When holy marriage frames vs in one piece,
Angels will envy me.
Ha? the Prince of Florence.
I ha made no travail for so rich a Blessing,
Turn me to Pilgrimage, divinest Beauty,
And when I have put a girdle about the World,
This Purchase will reward me.
Purchase?I am not bought and sold I hope?
Give it what name you will, you're mine Eugenia.
Yours Prince? I doe not know by what Title you pretend this claim; I never yet remember that I saw you,
And if I had any interest in my self,
Produce your witness, when I gave it you,
I have possession yet, ere I deliver it,
You must show stronger evidence.
Are we not Contracted?
Contracted? when? where?Good Prince I pity your abuse.
It is firm between our Fathers.
Mine cannot give away my heart.
Cannot?
Shall not Prince, your travail and your trouble
With this Conceit to boot, were it your own
Invention, withal your Birds about you
That can take me.
Is it my person Madam
You hold unworthy? For my birth and Fortune
Cannot deserve your scorn.
It takes not from
The greatness of your State, or blood my Lord
To say I cannot Love you, since Affection
Flows uncompel'd, and rests in the clear object,
Nor doe I rob your person of just value,
If to me other seem as fair, and comely
Fore may apparel, and become what we
Affect, not cause true Love, you have enough
To promise you a happier choice, attempt
A Nobler Fate, and leave me to my self
And humble Destiny, for know Florentine
I have but one Faith, one Love, and though my Father
Locke up my person, it is beyond his Will
To make me false to him I gave my faith to.
And you're not Noble now if you proceed,
Be then what you were borne, and doe not tempt
A woman to commit a Sacrilege:
For when I give my heart to any other
Then my Philenzo, I commit that sin.
If you'll not pardon, Isle deliver up.
Philenzo to be punished for this trialSee Lady.
My dear banished Philenzo!
O let not such a glorious building stoop
It is my duty,
I will make it mine.
I have a double duty, for I owe
Your Constancy as much respect and Reverence
As your most Princely person.
What for our safety?
Oh with what willingness could I be lost
In this distracted Wilderness of Joy.
To morrow Madam, I go to my Arraignment.
How?
Spend no fear upon it
Your Story shall be pleasing:I have much
To tell youfor your Ladies.
They are mine, what should our innocence
Fear in their knowledge, I desire to hear
The Circumstance of this wonder
It attends,
The Story past; we must some Counsel find,
The puzzle of our Fate, is still behind.
WE are sorry, we gave thee distaste, come let's be friends, you did apprehend too nicely.
Nicely? it might ha been your own case.
Come, you were unkind to rub us before the Duke so.
Be wise hereafter, and make the Fool your friend, it is many an honest mans case at Court. It is safer to displease the Duke then his Easter, every sentence the one speaks,   make an , but let the impudent fool bark never so absurdly, other men ha the wit to make a Jest on it, it is policy in State, to maintain a Fool at Court, to reach great men discretion.
Great men, we are none.
No but you may be, by the length of your wit and shortness of your memory, for if you have but wit enough to doe mischief and oblivion enough to forget good turns, you may come to great places in time, keep a fool a'your own, and then you are made
Made? What?
Cuckolds, if my Lady take  liking to the innocent, O your Fool is an excellent fellow upon all occasions.
Among all sorts of people the matter if we look well in,
The Fool is the best, he from the rest will carry away the Bell too.
All places he  free of and fools it without blushing
At Masks and Plays, is not the Baize thrust out, to let the plashin
Your fool is fine, he's merry, and of all men doth fear least,
At every word he Jests with my Lord, and tickles my Lady in earnest:
The fool doth pass the Guard now, he'll kiss his hand and leg it,
When wisemen prate, and forfeit their state, who but the fine fool will beg it.
He without fear can walk in, the streets that are so stony,
Your Gallant sneaks, your Merchant breaks, he's a Fool that does owe no money.
The Duke, where is the Duke?
He's forthcomming, there's no more money ith Exchequer.
I come to give up my accounts and reckon with him, some body tell him so.
And you doe not reckon well with him, he'll be even with you, Isle doe your Message.
Doe, and say I sent a Fool a my errand prithee, cry mercy, such an Office would have become either of you Gentlemen.
His tongue moves circular in abuses.
The Duke.
How now, what day is it?
It is Holiday.
How?
Therefore wee are preparing a Morris to make your grace merry, they have chosen me for the Hobbyhorse, and if doe not deceive their expectation, they will laugh at me extremely before I dye.
Doe you come like one prepared for death?
Not so well I hope, as I may be hereafter, unless you will be unjust and have a desire to be clapped into the Chronicles with some your Predecessors, for cutting off
heads, when you doe not like their complexion, tic but laying one block upon another, and I am quickly sent of a headless errand.
Unjust doe you remember what sommes you owe for, doe not jest away your life.
I crave no longer day for it, and I prove not my self free from my engagements.
How?
For although I had not the art to go invisible as these wise Courtiers nor could counterfeit another sex so becommingly as tother gaudy Signior, to introduce me to the Ladies, yet with your Princely licence I may say, it is done.
Done? what is done.
Hoe's mad sir.
I come not to Petition for a mercy
But to cry up my merit, for a deed
Shall drown all story, and posterity
When it shall find in her large Chronicle
My glorious undertaking, shall admire it
More then a Sybils leaf, and loose it self
In wonder of the action, Poets shall
With this make proud their Muses, and apparel it
In ravishing numbers, which the soft haird Virgin
Forgetting all their legends, and Love tales
Of Venus, Cupped, and the scopes of Jove
Shall make their only song and in full quire
Chant it at Hymens feast.
What means this boasting?
Rolliardo.
You think I am a lost man; and your gay things
That echo to your passions, and see through
Your eyes all thats presented, do already
Tickle their very souls, with expectation
To see me beg most miserably for life
But you are all deceivedhere I pronounce
The great work done that cancels all my debts
I have had access unto the fair Eugenia
Your Princely daughter, staid, discoursed with her
More, she has entertained me for her servant.
Sir doe you believe him.
Thou hast prophaind a name will strike thee dead,
It cannot be, for if you mean your daughter
It is that is my preserver, blessed Eugenia
To whose memory, my heart does dedicate
It self an altar, in whose very mention
My lips are hallowed, and the place a temple
Whence the divine sound came, it is a voice
Which should our holy Churchmen use, it might
Without addition of more exorcism
Disenchant houses, tie up nightly spirits
Which fright the solitary groves, Eugenia
When I have named, I needs must love my breath
The better after it.
Thou hast undone.
Thy self in the repetition, and in this
Wherein thou cunningly would beg our pity
Thou hast destroyed it, and not left a thought
To plead against our anger, where before
Thy life should have been gently invited forth
Now with a horrid circumstance death shall
Make thy soul tremble, and forsaking all
The noble parts, it shall retire into
Some angle of thy body, and be afraid
To inform thy eyes, least they let in a horror
They would not look on.
I am still the same, and let me be so bold
To plead your royal word, it was my security
Nor shall you take mine to induce your faith
To what is done I have more pregnant evidence,
Your highness knows that character.
Ha? it is not so, I'll not believe my eyes
Come hither Fulvio, Perenotto read
But not too loud, does she not write to me
It is unjust you let Rolliardo die
Unless Eugenia bear him company.
Give me the Paper.
It is counterfeit my Lord, cut off my head
If this be not a Jig of his invention.
My soul is in asweat. I feel my blood
Heave in my Veinshe looks as he had seen her.
More my Prophetic thoughts doe whisper to me
Believe it not Sir.
I wonnotPerenotto
I know not what to think.
The Duk's perplexed, observe.
Will either of you speak for me Gentlemen, if the Justice of my cause should fail me, Isle pay you for it, I know Courtiers that live upon countenance, must sell their tongues, what is the price of yours pray?
Humble your self you Coxcomb.
Away, and let not him stir I charge you.
This does entrench too much upon her person,
Have my endeavours to preserve Eugenia
Of whom I thought so many men unworthy
Ruined themselves? Humane invention
Could not instruct me to dispose her where
She could be more defenced from all men's eyes
An Anchorite lives not prisoned in a wall
With more security. It is not possible
Why am I troubled thus? My fear abuses me,
In such a cause I would check an Oracle.
And shall his dexterous forgery, unsettle
My confidence, I wonot show a guilt,
Of so much weakness in me, Fulvio
And Gentlemenwe'll speak to you anon.
I ha spoke too much already it seems, sure he has sent for her, I dare repose my life on her, to whose trust I gave my heart, she is a tbousand witnesses in her self.
It will be mirth Sir.
I like not this consulting, they break of pleasantlie now in the name of Mercury what crotchet.
I see it is in vain
To interrupt our fate, what is decreed
Above, becomes not mortals to dispute
Sit there,nay be not modest, you were borne to it
And therefore take your place, nay nay, be covered
Imagine that a Crown, and these your Subjects
As when I dye, you know twill come to that.
In right of my sole daughterso, does he not
Look like a Prince indeed, appears he not
A pretty lump of Majesty.
He's studying some speech Isle lay my life
Against his Coronation, to thank all
His loving Subjects, that as low as earth 
Thus offer him their duties.
Hold I beseech you
Let not my duty suffer misconstruction
If while my knee doth beg your blessing, here
I throw my arms, and circle next to Heaven
What must be dearest to me.
Ha?
My joy of life.
Destroy me not?
Alas-I would preserve all, am so far from killing,
That I would dye my self, rather than see
One drop of blood forced frow his crimson Fountain,
Or but one tear racked from your eye, oh hear me
And after let your anger strike two dead.
So you would let us dwell both in one Grave;
And did you know how near we were in life
You would not think it fitting that in death
Our ashes were divided, you have heard
When the poor Turtle's ravished from her Mate
The Orphaned Dove doth groan away her life
In Widows solitude, let me call him husband
And tell your self the rest.
Kill not thy Father with one word Eugenia,
Thy Husband?
I doe beseech you hear me.
Beg thou may be forgotten, it is sin
'Bove my forgiveness, this a match for thee?
What man can bring me a certificate
He had a father, or was christened? Hee?
We all are in a dream, awake me thunder.
Temper your passion Sir.
Some tortures to enforce confession from him
How he procured access.
They shannot need, you sent me Sir your self.
Wee?
The Cage was my conveyance.
That was presented lately with the Birds, you gave command.
Be dumb, I dare not hear you.
This was a Bird in a Cage indeed.
Search for the Traitor Bonamico presently
He has betrayed me, they shall suffer both
Before the noise be spread to our dishonour.
Yet will you hear me.
I hear too much, thou haft forgot thy birth,
Thy Fortunes, and thy Father, were my cares
So wondered at abroad, censured at home
Worthy of nothing but contempt from thee
For whom they were begotten? thou hast ploughed
Upon my Face, cant thou undo a wrinkle
Or change but the complexion of one Hair.
Yet thou hast greyed a thousand, taken from me,
Not added to my comforts, more then what
Like an indulgent Parent I have flattered
My self into.
Here is the other Traitor Sir.
Away with 'em to death.
Let me go too.
It needs not, thou art dead already Girl,
And in thy shame. I and the Dukedom suffer,
Thou may remember (false to thy own vow)
Philenze whom I banished, for thy sake.
The title of my Subject, and thy Love
To him, pulled our displeasure on him, since
Wee studying to add more height to thee,
Thou hast made thy self less, and for ought wee know,
Clasped with the son of Earth to cool the Fever
Of hot sin in thy veins, ungrateful to
Philenzo, cold already in thy memory.
It is happiness enough that you have mentioned him,
And whither to your Mercy, or your justice,
See that Philenzo kneel.
Lord Philenzo.
My Noble cozen so near me, and concealed.
Your daughters knees join with his bended hear
To beg your pardon.
Philenzo? were not you banished Sir.
It was your sentence.
In pain of death not to return, blessed Fate
Thou hast relieved me, had thou died before
By our command, it would have been thought Tyranny
Though none durst tell vs so, now wee have argument
Of justice, and our every breath is Law
To speak thee dead at once, wee shannot need
To study a diorce, thy second exile
Shall be Eternal, Death.
You doe me honour.
Be it your punishment, as you preferred him
By Art to her, now by another Art
For ever to divide 'em, be's Executioner,
And after make him higher by the head,
To cure's ambition, see it advanced.
Ere I go, dread Sir,
I have an humble suite, it is not life
Isle ask, for that I give up willingly
And call it Mercy in you to immortalise
The affection I shall owe Eugenia,
Your other banishment is only Death,
You new create me now, it was my aim
And my attempt you thought so bold, I made
To serve this end, that since I could not live
I might dye for her; pray reprieve my breath
But till I take my leave, one minute does it
It shall be a very short, and silent farewell.
It is granted.
My Lord Ambassador.
Not the least whisper of Philenzo, as you value our regardO my good Lord welcome.
Letters to your Grace.
They re grateful as my comfortPerenotto, let them withdraw; Her vain will be discoveredFulluio follow and part 'em, give order for his execution, off with his head instantlyI can read no more for joy, Perenotto use your bst oratory on my daughter to forget that Traitor, and prepare to marry Florence, it is concluded to be solemnised by proxy.
Isle see the execution.
Now to the rest,
Your last letters were acceptable; and our son before had intention to finish the marriage in his person, but lately resolving intelligence, that one  of Noble birth, now in exile, though without your consent, had long since interest in your daughters affection, wee thought meet rathere to advise for his repeal then  to our dishonor; where the hearts meet, there only marriages are sacred, and Princes should be exemplary in all Justice, although we disclaim in this design, on our parts, we will continue all other Princely correspondence.
I am justly punished and have run my self
Into a labyrinth, from whence no art
Can bring me of with safetymy Lord you may
Please to retire your self, a thousand wheels
Do move preposterous in my brain, what cre?
I loose my self, run with a hast thou wod'
Preserve my life, and stay the execution.
I will not have a drop of blood fll from
Philenzo for my Dukedom, fly I say
Thou should be there already.
How now, has Philenzo still a head on?
Yes my Lord.
Follow him, and with that Nimbleness thou would
Leap from thy Chamber when the Roofe's a fire
Proclaim aloud our pardon to Philenzo.
And bring him back to us.
It is too late Sir, Philenzo's dead already
He saved the Executioner that trouble.
The voice is, he is poisoned.
Poisoned, how
Where is Philenzo?
This fool reports him poisoned, what circumstance?
He had no sooner parted from Eugenia,
But suddenly he fainted, at which fall
Of his own spirit, he seemed grieved with shame
To show so little courage near his death,
Which he called Martyrdom, and presently
Whither supplied by other, or prepared
By himself we know not, he had a Viol
Of water sovereign as was pretended
To inlifne his dull heart, he drank it up
And soon showed cheerful in his eyes, wee led
Him smiling forward, but before we could
Approach the place of death, he sunk again
But irrecoverably, for in vain we applied
Our help, by which we did concludo he had
Drunk poison.
All this talk is such, and through
My ear I take it in, with as much danger,
I feel it active in my Brain already.
Call our Physicians I will hang em all
Unless they can recover him, it shall be
Death to save any man hereafter, if
They suffer him to perish.
Sir your Daughter
It seems the accident has arrived at her.
Arrived at her? Fame will soon spread it Fulvio,
About the world, and wee shall be their mockery.
He's dead they tell me Girl, poisoned they say, too.
Oh my Philenzo.
Eugenia 'shat not marry Florence now,
Nor any other since Philenzoes dead,
But thou wo't not believe me, had he lived
He had been thine, that minute took him hence,
Wherein I first resolved to ha given thee to him.
Oh doe not mock me Sir, to add to my
Affliction, you ne'er would give me to him.
May Heaven forgive me never then, but what
Avails too late compunction? Noble Gentleman
Thou shalt have Princely Funeral, and carry
On thy cold marble the Inscription of
Our son in death, and my Eugenias Husband.
Madam, this sorrow for his loss is Real.
We met the Florentine Ambassador
Who told me the Expectation of that Prince
Was now dissolved, and Messengers were sent
To stay the Execution.
Who now
Shall marry my Eugeniae, I have undone
The hope of our posterity.
Not so Sir,
If yet you'll give me leave to make my choice
Isle not despair to find a Husband.
Where?
Here Royal Sir, Philenzo is not dead
But made by Virtue of a drink to seem so
Thus to prevent his suffering, that I might
Or other friend by my confederacy
By begging of his body fit for burial,
Preserve him from your anger.
Dost not mock me 
Let me beg your pardon,
Confident of your change to mercy, I have
Confessed what terror could not force me to.
This is pretty Dondolo.
Blessings fall doubly on thee.
He expects
Not such a full stream of happiness, heaven dispose him
To meet it quickly,
Here are strange turnings, see he stirs.
Where am I now? no matter where I be
Tic Heaven if my Eugenia meet me here
She made some promise sure to such a purpose.
This Music sounds divinely, ha Eugenia
It is so, let's dwell here for Eternity
If I be dead, I wonot live again
If livingha! I'm lost, lost for ever.
Not found till now, take her a gift from me
And call me father.
I am not yet awake.
Thou art Philenzo, and all this is truth,
My Father is Converted.
It is a Miracle.
You must believe it,
In sign how we are pleased proclaim this day
Through Mantua a pardon to all offenders
As amply as when we took our Crown.
Then my Petticoat is discharged.
Now Lady you are free
Make me happy to renew my suit.
And mine, shall's to Barlibreake
I was in Hell last, tic little less to be in a Petticoat sometimes.
Madam vouchsafe him kiss your hand
Wee owe him much.
We'll take him to our Service.
I am too much honoured.
And you into our bosom, this day shall
Be consecrate to triumph, and may time
When it is decreed, the world shall have an end
By Revolution of the year make this
The day that shall conclude all memories.

What need you be so coy now?
Pray collect
Your self, remember what you are, and whose
You have a virtuous gentlewoman, think
Upon your faith to her.
Think of a Fiddle-sticke.
While you put me in mind of what I am,
You quite forget your self: my wife I allow
Your kinswoman far off, to whom a widow
Your father left you, with a handsome fortune,
Which by her marriage, I have in possession,
And you too; therefore as you hope to be
In due time worth a husband, think upon it:
I can deserve respect, then wisely use me,
As you would keep me.
This is but a trial
Of my strength, for I know you have more charity,
(Should I consent) then Ship-wracke your own honour.
But take heed sir, how you proceed to jest
With frailty, least too much disordering
Your good thoughts, you forget and by degrees,
Loose your own innocence.
I jest? you'd have me swear, and yet you should not think it such a wonder: to love come, shake off this frost, it spoils thee; your nature should be soft, and flexible; perhaps thou think, I doe not love thee heartily, I know not how to give thee better testimony, then by offering my self to thee if my wife-die, as tenn to one shoe's not immortal, we may couple tother way.
What argument is this to assure the truth of your affection to me, that break your vows to her?
Oh! great argument, and you observe: she was a widdow when I married her, thou art a young maid, and handsome.
Can you be so ungrateful, to punish whom you should reward, remember sir, she brought you that wealth you have took you from nothing 
Ther's reason then for nothing I should love her: hang her estate, I was held a proper man, and in that point, deserved her, and she had millions: and I were free again. I would not draw in the team of marriage for ten  not to command a Province.
Yet you said, were your wife dead you'd marry me.
Only thee, and no body else.
It were dangerous to: have many.
To have one, is little less then madness; come, wo't promise?
What?
A course, you know my meaning.
I doe not like this whispering, why with her
So close in parley?
Wo't thou doe this feat for me?
It is finished in a pair of minutes.
Yes, upon one condition.
What condition?
That your wife give consent, you shall then command me.
I'll undertake to go a pilgrimage
To Jerusalem, and return sooner: wood
I did not love thee, love thee infinitely,
That's all, two not doeMy wife, I hope.
She has not cav's-dropd, us; what pity tic
She cannot find the way to Heaven; I should not
Trouble her in hast, these wives will have no conscience,
But stick to us everlastingly. Now Lady,
How did your monkey rest last night, you look
As you had not done your prayers yet, I wonot disturb you.
Pray sir stay, let me but know
Some reason why you use me thus unkindly?
If I have been guilty of offence, I am not
Past hope, but with the knowledge of my error,
It is possible I may amend, and please you.
I doe not like you.
You did marry me.
Yes, I did marry you; her's too much record for it,
I would there were a Parson to unmarry us,
If any of our Clergy had that faculty,
He might repair the old; and build as many
New Abbeyes through the Kingdom in a tweluemonth.
Shall I speak truth? I never much affected thee,
I married thee for thy souls sake, not thy body,
And shall as soon get children on it: and yet
I doe not hate thee, witness, I dare kiss,
Hold thee by the hand, and sleep in the same house,
And in thy bed sometimes, something he's been done.
Within the memory of man, but
What sir?
You have a scurvy quality wife, I told you on it.
Once more, and I'll correct it.
You are given to be jealous, I cannot
Ramble abroad in gentlemen's company
Whole days, lie out a nights, but you suspect
I am wanton, it is ill done, it becomes no modest
Woman: that loves her husband, to be jealous,
What ever she see, or hears, mend, mend this fault,
You doe not know, how it may work upon me.
Some wife will bid her husbands leverets welcome,
Keep house together, and provide clean sheets,
And cullices to fortify; you near did it:
Know her own Chamber and not come forth
Till she be sent for; if her husband kiss her,
Sometimes, allow her clothes and other trinkets,
Suffer her carve at Table, she is satisfied,
And none of the parish talk, she carries it
So handsomely: these morals I have read
Before now, but you put them not in practise,
Nor for ought I perceive, have disposition too't,
Therefore i'll take my course.
To show I can
Be obedient to my griefs, from this time, sir,
I wonot urge with one unwelcome syllable,
How much I am neglected, i'll conceal it
Too from the world, your shame must needs be mine.
I see you doe not love me, where your heart
Hath placed a worthier thought, let it dwell ever,
Freely pursue your pleasures, I will have
No passion that shall mutiny, you are,
And shall be Lord of me still.
I like this, if it be no disguise.
Do not suspect me,
I would swear by a kiss, if you vouchsafe it,
You shall not keep a servant, that shall be more humble
And obedient to my will?
In all things.
But if I bring home a mistress?
I'll call her sister.
What if there be one
Already, that does please me, will you not
Rapine, and look awry upon's, when we
Make much of one another?
So you will but sometimes smile on me too, i'll endeavour.
Well said, this may doe good upon me as
I find you prompt in this, I may consider
Other matters: to tell you true, I love
Your kinswoman.
How?
In the way you wot on, but
I find her cold and peevish, how she may
Be brought about I know not, it would show well,
And be a president for other wives,
If you would put your help too't.
Goodness bless me.
One woman with another can doe more
In such a cause, then twenty men. I doe not
Wander, you see, out of the blood, this will
Be a way to justify your obedience.
You show a tyrant now, and stead of framing
My soul to patience, murder both.
I have gone too far a conscience; this may
Spoil all, and now I think upon it, I was
A coxcomb to discover any party,
I must deny it again, and carry things
More closely. How now Will?
How now Will? 's that all?
Look up, and ask me a question like a man,
What melancholy?
No, no; a toy, a trifle.
That should be a woman, who'st thou art thinking on?
I have been of your counsel.
I was thinking, of my Wife
I met her sad.
I cannot blame her;
We have had a dialogue; come, thou know my bosom,
when dost mean to lie with her?
I know not, but I have offered fair conditions:
She is very confident, I doe not dote
Upon her beauty, I have told her, sir,
I love her kinswoman.
You're not so mad.
The worlds deceived in her, sheele give me leave,
To ramble where I list, and feed upon
What best delights my appetite.
He that has
An ambition to be strangled in his sleep,
May tell his wife he loves another woman.
But I was not content with this, because
The other wench was somewhat obstinate,
I must needs urge my wife, to mollify
And mold her, for my purpose.
And she consented too?
No it would not doe.
This went against her stomach and we parted.
Next time you see her, look to be presented
With your mistresses nose for this, dost think a woman
Can be so patient, to know her rival
In the same roof, and leave her eyes, to see thee
Again? I am sorry for thee.
I am confident
She dare not: but for all that, would I had
Been less particular.
Come, I love thee well,
But not thy wit, to carry things no handsomer:
You must unravel again, and make your wife
Believe you did but try her.
How now, what's the news here?
Quickly to a Surgeon, bear him gently.
What's the business.
Nothing, sir, but a gentleman is kilt, and we are
Carrying him to a Surgeon.
Tic Jacke Delamore, he is not dead.
Who hurt him?
Master Beamont; we cannot stay, sir.
Why they were friends.
But wine made them fall out, some say, about
Their Mistresses.
I did expect a woman at one end on it.
What miserable fools are men, to kill
One another for these Cockatrices!
I am sorry for poor Beamont.
It would be long ere any mistress would
Be so desperate for her servant, this is valor,
High and mighty valour.
Men must preserve
Their honours man, thou dost not know their quarrel?
Thou art held a piece of a kill-Cow too, look too't before the sessions take an order w'ee: first not a great deal safer, now to skirmish with a Petticoat, and touse a handsome wench in private; then be valiant in the streets, and kiss the Gallows for it? hang, hang this foolery, let gentlemen rather live, and pay their Tailors, then let their clothes enrich the hangmans wardrobe.
But skirmishing as you call it, with the Petticoat,
Is by some, held away to this preferment,
Your wenches  been sticklers, and some men
Dropped in their quarrel.
Let them be such coxcombs
They cannot die too soon; cannot I have
A Lady of pleasure, but to please her humour,
I must be engaged to fight and kill men for her?
Because her healths refused, another nose
Or teeth preferrd, substantial grounds for murder,
We spend our blood too much another way;
Consumption take me, if I fight for one on'em,
I will drink single beer first, and live honest,
Gentlemen are come to a fine pass, doe not you
Think but tic possible, I may fight for all this?
There may be causes, that have women in'em,
But I confess, no polecats, or Iewd strumpets,
Though I doe use the trick of the flesh, shall drive
Me to the Surgeon; I had a mother.
And I have a wife, would thou had her.
No, No, she is well as she is,
There may be honour to defend these.
Sometimes.
But ther's a mischief greater then all these
A base and sorded provocation,
Used among gentlemen, they cannot quarrel
About a glass of Wine, but our files streigth
Son of a whore, dead mothers must be torn,
Out of their graves, or living, have their names
Poisoned by a prodigious breath: it were
A brave and noble Law, to make this tongue
Be cut for it, it wot save much blood ith year,
That might be spent more honourably.
The lie grew a dull provocation, this has quickened us, but leave this common place, thou can not help it, letts talk of something else. Stay is not this Beaumont?
Apprehended, alas poor gentleman; how now Ned?
As you see gentlemen, called to my account.
We heard a piece of the misfortune, but
Be not dejected, he may live.
I fear it.
Pray lead me where you please, alas. Violante! this news will
wound thee too.
I'll with him, and know the story.
Twill but trouble me
I can doe him no service, beside that,
I am engaged to meet old Master Barnacle.
Whither, whither Gentlemen, with your swords drawn?
Doest not see a gentleman led to Prison?
We'll reskue him from the Offcers, come join with us:
We shall draw more to the cause.
You doe not mean
this rashness: hide your swords be advised better;
Do ye know his fact?
He has slain a gentleman.
They say he is not dead, the wounds not mortal.
And will you make one past cure?
How dost mean?
Upon your selves, cool your hot bloods a little,
No mutuny my country men, remember,
If he recover that is hurt, the tother
Will come off well enough, without your volour:
Breath, breath a while, you may if you have a mind too't
Instead of reskuing, betray a gentleman,
And your selves too, to a danger.
He says right.
Tic scurvy wearing hemp, if you scope killing,
There be more butchers then sell flesh; and Citizens
Have no mercy in their Clubs, especially
When gentlemen have so little wit, to bring
There heads to'th knocking down, it is a revenge
They owe you for their wives, oh take heed mainly
Of these left handed Halberdiers.
Confound 'em.
How many will you kill with your bird-spit?
You have more legs and arms at home, which makes
You valiant, i'll not pare my nails to day,
And yet I love my friend, as the best on you;
You know I dare fight too, but in this cause
You must needs pardon me, I believe the stoutest
That now would seem all fire, and sword, will go
With as ill will to hanging, as another,
And will becomed as scurvily, take your courses.
I think it is better:
Of the two, to go to the Tavern, and be drunk
In your own defence, a wench is not so dangerous
Nor the Disease that waits upon her.
What if the gentleman that's hurt should die?
Then ther's no hope for tother.
Less for you,
You would be guilty of his murder too,
And snatch him from the Law, why you may do it:
Tic pity but the government should thank you,
And if you scope the halter for it, it may be
Another man in time, may cut your throat,
And ther's one for another, paid in the blood.
Come be your selves, these are not acts of gentlemen,
Where shame, not honour must reward your daring,
Though we be wild, it follows not we should
Be mad out-right.
I was ever of his mind.
Come let's to Tavern.
I am for that coast, now I think upon it
I'll meet you at the new randevow within
This halfe-houre, I expect a gentleman
That has engaged my promise; i'll come t'ee
Ere you be half drunk.
Doe not fail.
Drink Sack and think not on it, what should be
The business that old Barnacle has desired
My conference? it is not to lend me money sure,
Hoe's here.
Master Hazard.
I was coming to you, sir.
I am fortunate to prevent so great a trouble,
There is a business, sir, wherein I must desire your favour.
Mine? command it, sir.
Nay i'll be thankful too, I know you are
A gentleman.
That should incline, you think
I am not mercenary
I beseech you, sir,
Mistake me not, rewards are due to virtues,
And honour must be cherished.
What's your purpose?
Pray clear my understanding.
To be plain, sir,
You have a name in the Town for a brave fellow.
How, sir, you doe not come to jeer me?
Patience, I mean you have the opinion
Of a valiant gentleman, one that dares
Fight and maintain your honour against odds,
The sword-men doe acknowledge you, the baylies
Observe their distance, all the swaggering pusses
Strike their top-sailes, I have heard 'em in the streets
Say there goes daring Hazard, a man careless
Of wounds, and though he have not had the luck
To kill so many as another, dares
Fight with all them that have.
You have heard this.
And more, and more, mistake not.
I do not all this while acompt you in
The list of those are called the blades, that roar
In brothels, and break windows, fright the streets
At mid-night worse then Constables, and sometimes
Set upon innocent Bell-men, to beget
Discourse for a weeks diet, that swear, dams,
To pay their debts, and march like walking armories,
With Poniard, Pistol, Rapier, and Baton,
As they would murder all the Kings liege people,
And blow down streets; no I repute you valiant
Indeed, and honoured, and come now without
More ceremony, to desire your favour;
Which as you are a gentleman, I hope,
You'll not deny me.
Though your Language
Be something strange, yet, bcause I think you dare not
Intend me an abuse, I wonot question it,
Pray to the point, I do not think, your come
To have me be your second.
I am no fighter,
Though I have seen a fence-schoole in my Days,
And cracked a Cudgel, yet I come about
A fighting business.
You would have me beat some body for you.
Not so noble Hazard, yet
I come to entreat a valiant courtesy,
Which I am willing to requite in money,
I have brought gold to give you payment, sir,
Tic a thing you may easily consent to,
And twill oblige me ever.
Be particular.
Then thus you are not ignorant I have a Nephew, sir.
You have so.
One that's like
To be my heir, the only of my name
That's left, and one that may in time be made
A pretty fellow.
Very well, proceed.
You know or you imagine, that I have.
A pretty estate too.
You're held a maine rich man, sir,
In money able to weigh down an Alderman.
I have more then I shall spend; now I come close,
I would have this Nephew of mine, converse with gentlemen,
And hee does so.
I'll not pinch him in's allowance,
The University had almost spoiled him.
With what?
With modesty a thing you know
Not here in fashion, but that's almost cured,
I would allow him to be drunk.
You may, sir.
Or any thing to speak him a fine gentleman,
With your favour, sir, let me be bold a little
To interrupt you, were not you a Citizen?
Tic confessed, sir.
It being a thriving way
A walk wherein you might direct your Nephew,
Why do ye not breed him so?
I apprehend;
And thus I satisfy you, we that had
Our breeding from a Trade, cits as you call us,
Though we hate gentlemen our selves, yet are
Ambitious, to make all our children gentlemen,
In three generations they return again,
We for our children purchase Land, they brave it
In the Country, begets children, and they sell,
Grow poor, and send their sons up to be Prentices:
There is a whirl in fate, the Courtiers make
Us cuckolds; mark, we wriggle into their
Estates, poverty makes their children Citizens;
Our sons cuckold them, a circular justice,
The World turns round, but once more to the purpose.
To your Nephew.
This Nephew of mine, I do love dearly;
He is all my care, I would be loath to loose him,
And to preserve him both in life, and honour:
I come to you.
Now you come to me indeed, sir.
What shall I give you, sir, to let him 
What?
Pray be not angry.
By no means.
There is no such security in the World,
I'll pay for it heartily.
For what?
What shall I give you troth, and let him.
What?
Beat you, sir?
How?
Nay do not, sir, mistake me, for although
I name it, caursely I desire it should be
With your consent, no otherwise; my Nephew
Is raw, and wants opinion, and the talk
Of such a thing, to beat a gentleman,
That all the Towns afraid of, would bee worth
In's credit, heaven knows what, alas you cannot
Blame a kind Uncle, to desire all means
To get his Nephew fame, and keep him safe,
And this were such a way.
To have me beaten.
You're in the right, but doe not misconceive me
Under your favour, my intention is not
He should much hurt you, if you please to let him
Quarrel, or so at Tavern, or where else
You shall think fit, and throw a pottle-pot
At my head.
Yes, or say it be a quart, still under your correction,
Only that some of your acquaintance and
Gentlemen may take notice, that he dares
Affront you, and come off with honour handsomely,
Look her's a hundred pieces, tell, 'em in the Ordinary
They are weight upon my credit, play 'em not
Against light gold, this is the Prologue to
My thanks, beside my Nephew shall in private
Acknowledge himself beholding.
A hundred peces! I want money.
Right.
You give me this to let your Nephew beat me.
Pray take me w'ee, I do not mean he should
By beating, hurt you dangerously, you may
Contrive the quarrel, so that he may draw
Some blood, or knock you, o'er the pate, and so forth,
And come of bravely, this is all.
Well, sir,
You doe not mean, you say hee should endanger
My life or limbs; all you desire, if I
Mistake not, is to get your Nephew credit,
That being fleshed, he may walk securely, and be held
Valiant by gaining honour upon me.
You understand me right.
I'll put it up,
Pray send your Nephew to me, weal agree.
Agree, sir? you must quarrel, and he must beat you, else, tic no bargain.
Not before
We have concluded how things shall bee carried.
I must desire your secrecy and
Heir's my hand.
And ther's my money.
Your Nephew shall be a blade.
Why ther's ten pieces more, cause you come off
So freely, i'll send him to you.
Do so, why this, if the Dice favour me may bring all
My Lands again, be sure you send him, but
No words for your Nephews credit.
Mum I thank you heartily.
Be there such things in the World, i'll first to the Tavern,
There I am staid for, gentlemen I come,
I'll be beat every day for such a sum.
Wher's your Master, boy?
I know not Mistress.
Come nearer, sir, you are of your Masters
Counsel sometimes, come, be true in what
I shall desire, and I shall find a time, for your reward.
How do ye mean Mistress?
We Pages meet rewards of several natures,
This great man gives us Gold, that Lady Gloves,
Tother silk Stockings, Roses, Garters: but
The Lady, and Mistress whom we serve in ordinary,
Reserves another bounty, for our closeness.
I see you can be a wag, but be just to me, and secret.
As your Physician, or your looking-lasse;
That in your absence cannot be corrupted
To betray your complexion.
What private mistresses, does Master Wilding visit?
Who my Master?
Alas forsooth, do ye think he lets me know?
Nay, nay dissemble not.
I hire a Coach
Sometimes, or so, but ride always in the boot,
I look at no body but the passengers,
I do not sit in the same box at Plays with him.
I waite at Tavern, I confess, and so forth,
And when he has supped, we must have time to eat too,
And what should I trouble my conscience,
With being too officious, till I am called for?
Tic true, he waits upon the Ladies home,
But it is so dark, I know not where they dwell,
And the next day we have new ones, las mere strangers
To me, and I should be unmannerly
To Catechise 'em, if now, and then, there be
Any superuous cast waiting-woman,
There be so many serving men about her,
I cannot come to ask a question,
And how should I know any thing?
I see you are old enough for vice.
Alas forsooth,
You know tic ill to doe a thing that's wicked,
But it were a double sin to talk on it too,
If I were guilty; beside forsooth, I know
You would near trust me again, If I should tell you.
Thou art deceived, it shall endear thee more.
I must beseech you
To be excused, my Master is my Master,
My feet are at your service, not my tongue,
I wo'd not forfet my recognisance,
And shame the tribe, Pages, and Mid-wives are
Sworn to be close.
Hence thou old in villainy,
But it is in vain to chide, leave me, and bid
Mistress Penelope come hither.
Yes forsooth.
I know not which way to begin, to me
Hee has betrayed he loves her, she is present.
Will you be sad still Cozen, why do ye greeve?
Be kinder to your self, trust me, I weep
When I am alone, for you.
Sorrow and I
Are taking leave I hope, and these are only
Some drops after the cloud has wept his violence:
Were one thing finished, I should ne'er be sad more,
And I cannot despair to know it done,
Since the effect depends upon your love.
My love? tic justice you command my service,
I would I were so happy.
Make me so,
By your consent to my desire.
Pray name it.
I only ask your love, pray give it me.
My love? why doe you mock my poor hart, which
Pores all it has upon you? you're possessed of that already.
You examine not
The extent of my request, for when you have
Given what I ask, your love, you must no more
Direct it, as you please, the power's in me
How to dispose it.
And you shall for ever,
I have no passion that shall not know obedience to you.
Your love by gift
Made mine, I give my husband you, love him.
I always did.
But in a nearer way:
Love him as I doe, with a resolution
To give your self to him, if he desire it.
I understand you not, or if you doe
Suspect I cherish any lawless fame
Thou art to innocent; be less, and doe
An act to endear us both, I know he loves thee;
Meet it, dear coose, it is all I beg of thee;
I know you think it a most strange request,
But it will make fortunate.
Grief I fear
Hath made her wild, do ye know what you desire?
Yes, that you love my husband: modesty
Will not allow me to discourse my wish
In every circumstance, but think how desperate
My wound is, that would have so strange a cure,
He will love me then, and trust me i'll not study
Revenge, as other wives perhaps would doe,
But thank thee, and indeed an act like this;
So full of love, with so much loss and shame too,
For mine and his sake, will deserve all duty,
I have no patience to hear more, and could
I let in a thought, you meant this earnest,
I should forget I knew you; but you cannot
Be fallen from so much goodness, I confess
I have no confidence in your husbands virtue,
He has attempted me; but shall hope sooner
To leave a stain upon the sun, then bribe
Me to so foul a guilt; I have no life
Without my innocence, and you cannot make
Your self more miserable, then to wish it from me:
Oh, do not loose the merit of your faith,
And truth to him, though he forget himself,
By thinking to relieve your self thus sinfully,
But sure you doe but try me all this while.
And I have found thee pure, be still preserved so,
But he will stragle further
Cherish hope,
He rather will come back; your tears, and prayers
Cannot be lost.
I charge thee by thy love,
Yet be ruled by me; i'll not be so wicked
To tempt thee in a thought shall blemish thee:
But as thou would desire my peace, and his
Conversion, if his wantonness last with him,
Appear more tractable, allow him so much
Favour, in smile, or language, that he may not
Think it impossible to prevail at last.
This may engage him further, and my self to a dishonour.
It shall work our happiness,
As I will manage things; it is but to seem:
A look will cost thee nothing, nor a syllable
To make his hopes more pleasing, on my life
Thou shalt be safe both in thy fame, and person,
Will you doe this for my sake?
I'll refuse no danger, if I suffer not in honour,
To doe you any service.
I have cast it
Already, in my brain, but doe not yet
Inquire my purpose, as his folly leads
Him to pursue you, let me know, and i'll
By fair degrees acquaint you with my plot,
Which built on no foul ends, is like to prosper,
And see how aptly he presents himself,
Prithee seem kind, and leave the rest to me.
He shall not see me.
How now cousin? was that
My wife went off?
Yes, sir.
Let her go, what said she to thee?
Nothing.
Thou art troubled.
Pray to your knowledge, sir, wherein have I
Done injury to you, or her?
Has she abused thee?
I'll go kick her.
By no means, sir, I steal away your hart,
And meet at stolen embraces.
Does she twit thee? i'll kick her like a foot-ball,
Say but the word.
By no means think upon it, I have forgiven her,
You shanot sir, so much as frown upon her.
Pray do not as you love me,
Wee may study a more convenient revenge.
How's this?
I prithee if she have been peremptory,
Which was none of our articles, let me instruct thee,
How we shall be revenged.
Sir, I acknowledge
The groth and expectation of my fortune,
Is in your love, and though I wot not wrong her;
And yet to have my innocence accused
Is able to pervert it, sir, your pardon,
I have been passionate; pray love your wife,
No, no, i'll love thee, indeed, indeed I will,
Is she jealous?
You know she has no cause.
Let us be wise; and give her cause, shall's coose,
Sir, if it be a trouble to your House,
Your breath shall soon discharge me, I had thought
The tie of blood might have gained some respect.
Discharge thee the house? i'll discharge her,
And all her generation, thee excepted,
And thou shallt do it thy self, by this, thou shat;
Ha, she kisses with more freedom, this is better,
Then if my wife had pleaded for me, Pen,
Thou shalt be mistress, wooed? come thou shalt,
Shoe's fit for drudgery.
Oh, do not say so.
Then I wonot, but I love thee for thy spirit,
Cause thou wooed be revenged, punish her jealozie
The right way, when it is done, I doe not care
To tell her, it may kick up her heals too, another way.
Tell her what? you make me blush.
No, no, i'll tell no body, by this hand.
Stay I have a Diamond will become this finger,
Wear it, and let my wife stare out her eyes upon it.
I wonot take it on such conditions.
Take it on any; she is come about.
Sir Master Hazard desires your company at Tavern, he says there are none but gentlemen of your acquaintance, Master Acre-lesse, Master Little-stocke, and Master Sell-away, the three Gamesters.
He must excuse me.
As you love me, go, sir.
Have no suspicion that I wish your absence,
I'll wear your gift, and study to be thankful.
Well, ther's no great hurt in all this yet;
The Tides not strong against me, no talk now,
Of wives consent, i'll not remove my siege,
She'll study to be thankful, shoe's mine own,
As sure as I were in her maiden-head,
Now to the Tavern boy, and drink to the purpose.
More wine, is not this better gentlemen,
Then spitting Constables? you wot have fought now,
And had your braine-pannes opened
Right noble Hazard,
Heir's to thee.
Let come boy, fill it me steeple-high,
I am in vain of mirth, and I ha cause
As you shall see in due time gentlemen.
Master Little stock thou art dreaming of the Dice.
Hoe's melancholy.
Who I!
I'll play the farrier then, and drench thee for the sullens a health to all our Mistresses, we have had 'em single, letts shuffle 'em now together.
Master Acre-lesse.
Wilt please you Gentlemen to have a Song.
You have not washed to day, go get clean manners;
You rascal we have no wenches.
I see no body, sir, you have washed my eyes out.
It is not necessary thou should have any:
Fill me again.
This fellow wot ha t'other Cup.
I have had a Cup too much already gentlemen.
Let it go round, and then in hope you may
Look double, i'll show you a sight, I wonder
Jacke wilding Stays.
Hoe's come in the nick.
Save, save you gallants, may a man come in the rear?
Give him his garnish.
You're not Prisoners for the reckoning, I hope.
For the reckoning? now you're altogether gentlemen,
I'll show you a wonder but come not to near,
Keep out of the Circle, whatsoever you think on it,
This is a hundred pound, nay, not so close,
These Picturs do show best at distance, gentlemen.
You see it, presto
Nay let's see it again.
Like to your cunning juggler, I ne'er show
My trick but once you may hear more hereafter,
What think you of this Master Acre-lesse, Master Little-stocke,
And Master Sell-away?
We do not believe it is gold,
Perish then
In your infidelity.
Let me but touch it.
It will endure, take my word for it, why look you,
For your satisfactions, no Gloves off,
You have devices to defalke, preserve
Your talons, and your talents, till you meet
With more convenient Gamesters.
How came by it?
Tha'dst little or none this morning.
I have bought it gentlemen, and you in a mist
Shall see what I paid for it, thou hast not drunk yet:
Ne'er fear the reckoning man, more wine, you varlets,
And call your Mistress, your Scolopendia
If we like her complexion, we may dine here.
But hark thee, hark thee Will, did win it?
No, but I may loose it ere I go to bed,
Dost think it shall musty, what's a hundred pound?
A miracle, but they are ceased with me.
And me too, come let's drink.
No matter, how it came Will, I congratulate
Thy fortune, and will quit thee now
With good news of my self, my coose I told thee on,
Is wheeled about, she has took a Ring o'me,
We kissed, and talked, time out a mind.
I know it,
My Almanac says it is a good day to woo in,
Confirmed by Erra Pater, that honest Jew too,
I'll pledge thee.
Master Hazard there are two gentlemen below,
Inquire for you.
For me?
One's somewhat ancient, I heard him call
The tother Nephew.
Say I come to 'em presently,
Gentlemen, I doe caution you before
To be fair conditiond: one of them, the Nephew
Is of a fiery constitution,
And sensible of any affront, let this
Character prepare him for you.
Bring him not hither.
There is a necessity in it, I wot not for
A hundred pound but entertain him, now
He knows I am here.
This is old Barnacle.
One that is to fine for Alderman.
And that's his Nephew, I have been in's company,
Is this the youth Hazard prepared us for?
How bussie they are?
You could not wish better opportunity,
These are all gentlemen of quality,
I'll call him cozen first, if it please you,
To endear him to their acquaintance.
I'll not be a witness of your passages my self; these will report as much as I desire, sir, if you be beaten I am satisfied.
But do ye hear Uncle, are sure you have made
Your bargain wisely; they may cut my throat
When you are gone, and what are you the wiser,
Dwindle be you close to me.
I warrant you we shall do things with discretion,
If he have but grace, to look and talk courageously.
He may be valiant for ought I know,
Howsoever this will be a secure way
To have him thought so, if he beat you soundly.
I doe not like the company;
But I have drunk wine too, and that's the best on it,
We may quarrel on even Terms, look to
Thy basket-hilt Dwindle, and have a stool ready;
I will give your worship a stool.
As I am gentleman, be confident
I'll waite on you down, sir.
By no means, let him beat you to purpose, sir.
Buy Uncle.
Come, sir, pray gentlemen, bid my kinsman welcome: a spark that will deserve your knowledge.
His kinsman? you are welcome.
He has power to command your welcome.
If I mistake not, I have had the happiness
To ha been in your company before now.
Mine, sir? do ye hear, what if I quarrelled
With him first? twill prepare me the better.
Do as you please; that's without my conditions.
I'll but give him now and then a touch, i'll close
Well enough I warrant you, you been in my
Company, sir?
Yes, and at the Tavern.
I paid the reckoning then.
You came into our room
Tell me of coming into your room,
I'll come again, you are a superfluous gentleman,
How's this?
Let him alone.
Sir, remember your self.
I'll remember what I please, i'll forget what
I remember: tell me of a reckoning, what first?
I'll pay't, no man shall make an ass of me,
Further then I list my self, I care not a fiddle
Stick for any mans thundering, he that affronts
Me, is the son of a Worm, and his father a
Whore, I care not a straw, nor a broken point
For you, if any man dare drink to me; I
Wonot go behind the door to pledge him.
Why her's to you, sir,
Why there's to you, sir.
Twit me with coming into a Room, I couldfind in my heart, to throw a Pottle-pot, I name no body, I will kick any man down Stayres, that cannot behave himself like a gentleman, none but a slave would offer to pay a reckoning before me, whore's the Drawer? ther's a piece at all adventures; hee that is my friend, I cars not a rush, if any man be my enemy, he is an idle companion, and I honour him with all my heart.
This is a precious humour, is he used to these mistakes?
Your kinsman gives him privilege.
I desire no mans privilege, it skills not whether I be kin to any man living.
Nay, nay, cozen, pray let me persuade you.
You persuade me? for what acquaintance, mind your business and speak with your Tailor.
And you be thus rude
Rude, sir, what then, sir, hold me Dwindle.
Are you ready to have a stool, sir?
Nay, nay, Will, we bear with him for your sake,
He is your kinsman.
I am calm again,
Cozen, I am sorry any person here
Hath given you offence.
Perhaps, sir, you
Have given me offence, I do not fear you,
I have knocked as round a fellow in my days.
And may again
Be knocked, a pox upon him, I know not what to make on him.
Let me speak a word in private, sir.
I can be as private as you, sir.
Strike me a box of the ear presently.
Ther's my hand on it.
Nay, nay, gentlemen.
Master Wilding.
Let him call me to account, the recknings paid.
Come Dwindle.
I did not think the fool durst ha done this,
Tic a strange youth.
You shall hear more to morrow.
Ell's paid, and you are welcome gentlemen.
Why should not we two live together, being
So equal in our passions? oh Violante,
Our knowledge grew from children, and our loves
Allie us in our natures.
Tic my wish
To dwell with thee, I never knew that woman
In whom I took more pleasure to converse with,
But I have a father, and remembering him
A sorrow steals upon me, to betray
My hopes of blessing; for although hee love me,
And dearly as he says, for Children must not
Dispute with fathers, he affects not him
In whom I place all thoughts that can delight me,
He loves not Delamore, and what to me
Is all the World without him? I shall never
I fear, have his consent to be made happy
In marriage, and this, although our thoughts
Reflect with equal honour on our lovers,
Makes the distinction, and concludes me miserable,
Thy will depends upon no rigged parent,
Thy path is strewed with Roses, while I clime
A ragged cliff, to meet whom I affect.
Indeed, Leonara I much pity thee.
I prithee counsel me how shall I wrestle
With my sad destiny, and yet preserve
My filial obedience, I must loose
A father, or a husband.
Would I knew
Which way to bid thee steer, but lesson'd by
My own affection, I would have thy mind
Constant to him thou loust, time may correct
A fathers harshness, and be confident
If poor Violante have a power to serve thee,
She will forget her own heart, ere prove false to thee.
Oh my dear soul, I know it.
Oh mistress.
What's the matter!
This face betrays some miserable accident.
Speak, and assure us, what disaster makes
Thy countenance so wilde.
A friend of yours
Is sick, is dead, what more? and yet I have
So few, I can spare none.
Is dead, sinee you appear so fortified.
Is my father living, and Delamore?
Your father is in health, but
Stay, as thou would preserve thy mistress in
The number of the living.
How my fears increase!
Except Violante, whom I see
Enjoys her health, I have no friend but Delamore,
I hope hee is not dead.
Your Delamore is dead.
Friend, Leonora,
It was indiscreetly done to open sorrow
So like a torrent, Leonora; friend.
Why dost thou call me from him? sure I was
Going to meet my Delamore.
Give not such
Belief to these sad news, until you hear it
Confirmed, did see him dead?
I did not see him.
Have comfort then, this may
Bee checked again.
Would I could hope it.
Have more courage friend,
Did hear the circumstance?
He was slain they say.
Nay then believe it not, he was so innocent,
He could provoke no angry sword against him.
I wish your confidence were not deceived,
The last part of my story will concern
Your faith, and sorrow.
Mine? in her I share
Too much, but prithee since thou hast not been
Slow to wound her, let me know my affliction.
The general voice is, Master Beaumont slew him,
Your servant Lady.
Tell the general voice
It lies, my Beaumont prove a murderer?
And of his friend? he would not kill an enemy.
All I can say in proof of this, I saw him
Guarded to Prison, pardon my relation.
If thou believe thy eyes abused thee not,
Thou might with one breath spoken 'em both dead,
For the survivor lives, but to give up
His life with more shame, all my comfort is,
I shall not live to see it, oh Leonora,
Who is most wretched now? let thou, and I,
The few days that we have to live, be friends,
And die in perfect charity, I must leave you
To manage your own grief, I have enough
To break my poor heart too.
What Seas breake-in
Upon us? I that could have dyed within
A gentle wave, now struggle for my life,
My father?
What, it seems you heard the news,
Come let your sorrows dry up, you may see
What it is to be so rash, when you choose next,
You'll consult me, I hope; wipe, wipe your eyes,
Your tears are vain, I could say more.
What sir?
They are more then he deserved, and yet tic better
Thou should bestow thy tears upon his Funeral,
Then I sighed at thy marriage; come, Heaven has
Been kind in this divorce, preparing thus
Thy better fortune, and preserving mine,
I am sorry for the gentleman that kilt him.
Oh Murderer.
You are a fool, and know not
His provocation: in my youthful days,
I was not patient when affronts were offred me,
Nothing more dear to gentlemen, then honour.
Honour in murder?
This was otherwise:
In my own defence I would kill a family,
He showed his generous spirit, all the town
Speaks nobly of him, pity him, and pray for him,
And were he not desertfull, by this time
The general vote had hanged him.
Oh, my fate!
Tother a loose, and inconsiderate man,
Lost in estate, and would ha married thee,
To ha squeezed mine, it is better as it is.
Good sir, be charitable to the dead.
Be you first charitable to the living.
Speak well, and think so too, you do not know
What benefit may follow, and how ere
Your womanish sorrow for the present may
So mist your eyes, they will hereafter open,
To see, and thank my care.
Indeed your language,
Pardon my boldness, sir, is dark and mystical.
You have your wit to apprehend sometimes,
But it is not passion must excuse your duty to me.
I hope.
Your hopes may fail you if you doe,
Be obedient hereafter, if you please,
And love my directions
I'll not have
A thought shall disobey you, and if ever
I love again.
If ever? why suppose
I should propound one to you, now in the heate
Of this misfortune, can your heart be obstinate
To me, and your own good?
This is too soon
A conscience, sir, before his blood be cold,
To whom I professed love, to like another?
The World would much condemn me.
Is the World
Or I to be preferred, this makes the act
Of your obedience perfect, and because
I'll have assurance of what power I hold,
This minute i'll prefer one to your thoughts,
Dispose your heart to love the gentleman
That now's in Prison.
Whom do ye mean dear sir?
He that kilt Delamore, Master Beaumont:
Doe not suspect I trifle, he is of
A noble house, of a fair expectation,
Handsome in every part.
Shall not hee suffer
For the black deed already done?
Compose
Your self to love him, i'll find a way how to
Secure his life, and bring him freely off.
Oh! consider ere you move to far;
If having slain my comfort, for I must
Give it no other name, call not your justice
To my revenge, yet let me not be forced,
To have a thought so full of shame to women,
That he should be my husband, it is a stain
Time nor repentance can wash off, I know
You cannot mean so cruelly, beside
I shall commit a sin, foul as his murder,
Upon poor Violante, and rob her:
Their heart's love hath sealed up in the eye of Heaven,
It were sacrilege to part em, shoe's my friend too,
One that will rather die then injure me.
And he will rather suffer, if he be
Noble as you profess him, then consent to
So foul a guilt.
Let me alone for that,
If he refuse this offer for his life,
Why let him die, i'll put him too't, consider,
In this I shall behold thy naked soul,
Be ruled, and prosper; disobey, and be
Thrown from my care and blood, at better leisure
I'll tell you more.
Has Heaven no pity for me?
What killing language doth a father speak?
Poor hart prevent more grief, and quickly break.
This humour does become thee, I knew when
Thou did consider, what was offered thee;
Thy sullenness wood shake off, now thou look
Fresher then morning, in thy melancholy
Thy clothes became thee not.
You're in the right,
I blamed my Tailor for it, but I find now,
The fault was in my countenance, wo'd we had
Some Music, I could dance now, la, la, la, bra, &amp;c,
Excellent! and she be a bed but half so nimble,
I shall have a fine time on it; how she glides?
Thou wot not fail?
This night
At the hour of twelve.
But you must be as punctual ith conditions
For my vows sake, not speak a syllable.
I'll rather cut my tongue out then offend thee,
Kissing is no language.
If it be not to loud;
We must not be seen together, to avoid
Suspicion, I would not for a world my cozen
Should know on it.
She shall die in ignorance.
No piece of a Candle.
The Devil shall not see us
With his saucer eyes; and if he stumble in
The dark, there shanot be a stone ith Chamber,
To strike out fire wed's horns; all things shall be
So close; no lightning shall peep in upon us,
Oh, how I long for mid-night!
I have a scruple.
Oh, by no means, no scruples now.
When you
Have your desires upon me, you will soon
Grow cold in your affection, and neglect me.
Why hang me if I doe, i'll love thee ever:
I have cast already, to preserve thy honour,
Thou shalt be married in a fortnight, cousin,
Let me alone to find thee out a husband,
Handsome and fit enough, we will love then too.
When I am married?
Without fear or wit
Cum privilegio, when thou hast a husband,
Dost think I will forsake thee Pen? it were pity
A my life, sweet, oh there is no pleasure
To those embraces; I shall love thee better,
And the assurance that thou hast two fathers
Before thou hast a child, will make thee spring
More active in my arms, and I tell thee,
Tic my ambition to make a Cuckold,
The only pleasure of the World: I wot not
Wish to enjoy thee now, but in the hope
Of tother harvest, and to make thy husband
Hereafter cuckold, that imagination
Sweetness the rest, and I do love it mainly, mainly.
Tic double sin.
Tic treble pleasure wench;
But we loose time, and may endanger thus
My wife into a jealozie, if she see us,
Farewell, farewell dear Pen. at night remember,
I wonot loose my sport for half the country.
Thou hast hit my instructions excellently.
I have made work for some body, you have put me
Upon a desperate service, if you do not
Relieve me, I am finely served.
All has succeeded to my wish, thy place
I will supply to night, if he observe
All the conditions, I may deceive
My husband into kindness; and we both
Live to reward thee better, oh, dear cousin!
Take heed by my example, upon whom
Thou placest thy affection.
Master Hazard.
Save mistress Wilding.
You are welcome, sir.
He is a handsome gentleman.
Gone abroad?
I am not certain, i'll inquire.
Your servant
Ha! this is the frosty gentlewoman, in good time,
I care not if I cast away some words on her,
And yet shees so precise, and over honest,
I had as good ne'er atempt her, your name is
Penelope, I take it Lady.
If you take it,
I hope you'll give it me again.
What again?
My name.
What should I doe wot?
No, no, keep thy name,
How ere thou dost thy maiden-head.
Can you tell me
Of any honest man that I may trust with it?
I'll tell thee a hundred.
Take heed what you say, sir.
A hundred honest men, why if there were
So many in the City, it were enough to forfeit
Their Charter; but perhaps you live in the Suburbs.
This wench will jeer me.
I hope you are not one, sir.
One of what?
One of those honest men you talked of so,
One to whose trust, a Virgin might commit
A maiden-head, as you call it.
Yes, you may trust me,
I have possessed a hundred maiden-heads.
How long?
Nay, nay; they are no commodities to keep,
No fault of ours: truth is, they are not worth
Preserving, some of your own Sex acknowledge it,
And yet by your complexion, you have yours still,
Away with it, and in time.
Why you are modest.
Yave hit me Lady: come, i'll give thee counsel;
And more, i'll help thee to a chap-man too,
Besides what ere he pays for it, shall be at charge
To mold it of himself; how light thou 'lt be
Without thy maiden-head, dost not spoil thy sleep
And breed the night-mare?
Who can help it, you
Gentlemen are such strange creatures, so unnatural,
So infinitely chaste, so mortified
With Beef and Barly-water, such strange discipline,
And Haire-cloth.
Who wears Haire-cloth? gentlewoman?
Such severe ways to tame your flesh, such friends
To fry-dayes, Lent, and Ember-weekes; such enemies
To Sack, and marrow-Pies, Candles, and Crabs,
Fiddlers, and other warm restoratives,
A handsome woman can not reach your pity,
We may even grow to our Pillows, ere you'll comfort us; this was not wont.
Not wont to be, in my
Remembrance Lady.
You are a handsome gentleman
Why may not you drink Wine sometimes, or eat
Sturgeon, or forage in your Iustie-pie
Of Aartichoke, or Potato; or why may not
Your learned Physician Dictate amber-Greece,
Or Powders, and you obey him, in your Broths?
Have you so strange antipathy to women?
To what end will gentlemen
Come to, if this frost hold?
You are witty
But I suppose you have no cause of such
Complaint, how ever some men do want heat,
Their is no general winter; I know a gentleman
Can drink, and eat, and bear you company
A bed, for all your jeering: do not think
Tic I: thou shall recant this profane talk
And woo me for a kiss, ere i'll stoop to thee.
Here is none but friends, if Master wilding ha not
Told you already, I will justify
Tic possible, you may be got with Child.
By whom?
By him, you are but cozens a far off,
If you allow't, he need not travel far
For other dispensation, what say to him?
Was this at his entreaty?
My own mere motion
And good will toward him, cause I know his mind.
You are a fine gentleman, wher's your land?
You may be Knight of the Shire in time: farewell, sir.
I know not what to make on her, she may be
A tumbler, for all this, i'll to her again.
Nay, nay, be comforted, and mistake me not,
I did not mention Delamore to provoke
These tears: hoe's gone, think on your living friends.
If you be one, good sir
Yes, I am one:
And yet mistake me not, I doe not come
Awooing for my self, I am past Tilting,
But for my Nephew, oh that Nephew of mine!
I know Sr. Richard Hurry, you wise father,
Will think well of him,
Nay, nay, weeping still.
It is too soon to think of any other.
To soon to think of any other, why,
What woman of discretion, but is furnished
With a second husband ere the first be coffend?
He that stays till the Funeral be past,
Is held a modest coxcomb, and why should not
Maids  as early in their provision?
I blush to think, my father of his mind,
Distressed Leonora good. sir loose
No more breath, I am resolved to die a Virgin
I know not what love is.
And yet these tears
Are shed for one you loved.
He that was all
My treasure living, being lost must needs
Be a great part of sorrow: but my eyes
Though they can never pay to many drops
To the sad memory of Delamore,
Shed not all these for him, there is another
That makes me weep.
Another whom you love?
Heaven knows I never let into my heart,
Affection to a second, I am so far
From loving him, I wish we may ne'er meet,
I am not safe in my own bosom, while
I think upon him, it begets new springs
Within my eyes; which will in little time,
Rise to a flood, and drown me.
I conceive
This is no friend of yours, come i'll relieve you,
Nay, and there be any man that troubles you,
If there be any you'd have talked withal,
I'll rid you of that care, he that shall offer
But to disturb you in a thought, do ye mark me?
I'll take an order with him.
What will you doe?
Do not mistake me neither, i'll do nothing,
But send my Nephew, he shall top him,
And top him, and scourge him like a top too.
You know not how my Nephew is improved
Since you last saw him, valiant as Hercules,
He has knocked the flower of Chivalry, the very
Donzal del Phebo of the time. and all
The blades do reverence him; i'll say no more,
Name but the man whom you do frown upon,
And let me send my Nephew to him.
Shanot need.
I have no enemy to engage his sword,
My discontents flow from a nearer person,
I grieve to say my father.
How? your father
Say but the word and I will send my Nephew
To him, and he were ten fathers he can mollify him,
To please you Lady, my Nephew never spare him,
Oh, had you seen him baffle a squire this morning!
Pray no more, you shall do me a noble office.
To leave me to my self.
Mistress Violante
Is come to visit you.
I waite upon her,
Your gentle pardon.
Would my Nephew had her.
She is S. Richards heir, and here he is.
S. Richard?
Oh Master Barnacle, i'll waite upon you.
That's Master Probe the Surgeon.
No more you know my meaning.
Yes, sir.
Let him be buried.
I understand you, sir.
I have been discoursing
With your fair daughter.
Where is Leonora?
Shoe's within, sir.
Bid her come hither,
Master Barnacle I am something troubled about a gentleman.
And I am glad I met with you:
If you be troubled with any gentleman,
I'll send my Nephew to him.
To whom, or whither?
To any man alive, I care not whether.
Send him to Jerusalem.
That's something of the furthest, I shall be
Unwilling he should travel out of the Kingdom.
Leonera? Nearer
Who is that?
A pretty gentlewoman! save you mistress,
What is your name I pray?
I am called Violante.
Are you a maid?
I should be sorry else.
Do ye know my Nephew?
Not I, sir.
Not my Nephew? how have you been bred?
Why hoe's the only gallant of the Town,
Please you i'll send him to you.
What to doe, sir.
He shall do any thing, the towns afraid on him.
Oh! pray keep him from me then.
He will hurt no women, but for the men
Ther's one has hurt to much already.
What is he? i'll send my Nephew to him Lady,
If you have any occasion, never spare him.
Not I, sir.
Look to it, and correct this humour.
I'll to him presently, Master Barnacle,
Let me entreat your company to a gentleman,
I'll waite as much on you.
You shall command me:
If it be to any man you care not for,
We'll take my Nephew along.
It sha not need,
Oh Violante! I
Must now require some fruit of all thy promises.
You hold me not suspected.
Leonora
Cannot be so ungrateful: but we have
Small limit for discourse, my father means
To visit Beaumont, now in Prison, thou
Wilt hear too soon the story, and without
Prevention find thy self more miserable.
Oh Violante: I will suffer with him
Rather then injure thee, I prithee go
Uisit thy friend, not mine, and as thou love me,
As thou love him, or thy own life, Violante,
Bid him be constant to thee, tell him what fame
Dwells upon noble lovers, that have sealed
Faith to their Mistresses in blood: what glory
Can perjured men expect, that loose their honour
To save a poor breath? bid him be assured,
If for the hope of life, his soul can be
So much corrupted to embrace a thought
That I shall ever love him
You Leonora?
Never, oh, never; tell him so: by virtue,
And the cold blood of my slain Delamore,
Although my father threaten death.
Your father?
Make hast sweet Violante, to the Prison;
There thou shalt know all, there thou shalt have proof
How much thou art beloved, and by my death,
If he prove false to thee, how much I love thee.
I am amazed, and my soul much distracted
Twixt grief, and wonder, it grows late in the morning,
I le visit the sad Prisoner, my hart trembles,
More can but kill me too, I'm, fit to die,
And woes but hasten immortality.
How now? what Gamesters?
Little to any purpose yet, but we
Expect deep play to night.
Will Hazard, I have been seeking thee this
Two hours, and now I have found thee, avoid me.
Thar't not infectious.
No, but I swell with my imaginations
Like a tall Ship, bound for the fortunate Lands;
Top, and Top-gallant, my flags, and my figures
Upon me with a lusty gale of wind
Able to rend my sails, I shall o'rerunne,
And sink thy little Bark of understanding
In my career boy.
Pray heaven rather
You do not spring a leake, and forfit your
Ballast, my confident man of War, I
Have known as stout a Ship been cast away
In sight of the Harbour.
The wench, the wench boy.
The Vessel you have been chasing.
Has struck Sail,
Is come in, and cries aboard my new Lord of
The Mediterranean, we are agreed,
This is the precious night Will; twelve the hour;
That I must take possession of all,
Of all; there are some Articles agreed on.
Whoe's this?
Oh! the Gamesters now come in:
That gay man is a Lord, and with him Sell-away.
They are well coupled, a Lord and Sell-away.
He wears good clothes you see, and in the street
More looked at then the Pageants, he will talk little.
To purpose.
Right, he cannot walk
Out of his sincopace, and no man carries
Legs more in tune, he is danced now from his sempstresse.
A man much bound to his Tailor.
And his Barber.
He has a notable head.
Of hair thou mean.
Which is sometime hung in more Bride-laces
Then well would furnish out two Country weddings
Is he a Scholar?
Tic not necessary.
He is neither Scholar, nor a Courtier,
If report wrong him not.
Will. He plays money freely.
With more pride then he wears embroidery.
Tic his ambition to loose that: and
A wench mainetaines his swearing, let him pass.
What's next.
A Knight, and Acre-lesse.
Good again, a Knight and Acre-lesse, what's his condition.
A Gamester both ways.
Where be his Spurs?
Hang in his mistresses Petticoat, for which hee pound
His Knight-hood too, till a good hand redeem it,
He will talk you nothing but postilions
Embroideries for his Coach, and Flanders Mares:
What several suits for the twelve days at Christmas,
How many Ladies dote upon his physiognomy:
That hee is limited but a hundred pound
A month for diet, which will scarce maintain him
In Pheasant eggs an Turkey for his motion.
Now does his Barge attend him, if he came
By water, but if the Dice chance to run counter,
He stays till twelve in anger, devours smoke,
And desperately will shoot the Bridge at midnight
Without a waterman.
The house fills a pace
What are these ha?
A Country gentleman, and Little-stocke.
A Country gentleman? I have seen him sure
Appear in other shape, is he a Christian?
Why? dost thou doubt him?
Cause I have met him with a Turban once,
If I mistake not, but his linen was not
So handsome altogether as the Turks
In cuerpo with a Crab-tree cudgel too,
Walking and canting broken Dutch for farthings.
The apparition of an Angel once
Brought him to this.
Dost call him country gentleman?
His generation is not known in the Town,
You see what Dice can do, now hoe's admired.
For what I prithee?
For talking non-sense, when he has lost his money
You shall meet him going up and down the ordinary
To borrow money upon his head.
His head,
Will he go upon his head, or will he pawn it?
Pawn it, if any man will lend him money on it,
And says it is good security, because
He cannot be long without it, they shall have
The wit for the use too, he will talk desperately,
And swear he is the father of all the Bulls
Since Adam, if all fail he has a project
To print his jests.
His Bulls you mean,
You're right,
And dedicate 'em to the Gamesters, yet he will
Seem wise sometimes, deliver his opinions
As on the Bench: in beer he utters sentences,
And after Sack Philosophy.
Let's not be troubled with him, who are these?
Young Barnacle?
Will you endure him.
Yes, and the Vineger-bottle his man too: but now I think on it he shall excuse me, i'll loose no time; if I win, I shall have less cause to repent, if I loose, by these hilts i'll make him the cause and beat him.
Are they at play?
Deep, deep Gamesters.
Then luke with a hundred pieces.
I'll follow, how now Frank? what in the name of folly
is hee reading?
Save you gentlemen, save you noble gallants:
May a man loose any money? I honour, sir, your shadow.
This is another humour.
Do ye here the news gentlemen?
What news I pray?
The new Curranto.
Good, sir, impart.
Be there no more gentlemen to hear it
Here? it is extraordinary fine news, in black and white,
From Terra incognito.
Terra incognito?
I, sir, the quintessence of the World: for our four parts
Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, are as the four
Elements, and this, as the learned Geographers say, is
Like Coelum, a fifth essence or quintessence of the World.
Pray, Sir, what news from this quintessence, it must
Needs be refined novelties.
From Slavonia.
That's no part of Terra incognito, we know that.
But you doe not know that Slavonia I mean, it is
Inhabited by a Nation without a head.
Without a head in? what part are their eyes?
Peace Dwndle: a cursed kind of people that have
Neither Law, nor Religion but for their own purposes:
Their Country is somewhat low, and open to the Sea.
Do they not fear drowning?
They are safest in a tempest, if they be taken at any time by their enemies, and cast over-bord, they turn other creatures, some Rocks, some Sharks, some Crocodiles, and so retain part of their former nature.
What do those that dwell ashore?
They follow their work, and make nets not only to catch
Fish, but Towns and Provinces: the Jewes
Are innocent to 'em, and the Divella dunce, of whose
Trade they are.
A dangerous generation.
In Perwiggana a fruitful Country, the moon shines
All day, and the Sun at night.
That's strange, hee has a moral in it have not wee gentlemen that sit up all night a drinking, and go to bed when the sun rises?
In this Province the King never comes out of his Palace.
How does the Court remove there?
When he does purpose to change the air, hee has an Elephant richly trapped, that carries the Court upon his back into what part of the Kingdom he please.
I have heard of Elephants, that have carried Castles.
Snails, Snails in comparison: and to increase your wonder this beast does never drink.
I would be loath to keep him company.
How then?
Eat, eat altogether, and what nothing but men, and of what rank or condition, none but great men, and the fattest nobility, but like your good Monsieur hee cares for nothing but the head, and it is confidently reported hee has devoured more heads, within this three last years, then the Elephant wee had in England; eat Penny Loves in seaven.
The Devil choke him would hee had London Bridge in his belly too.
The subjects of the great Duke of Lubber-land he's been lately in rebellion.
I am sorry it will be inconvenient to hear out your Curranto, I am weary of a little money when that's lost I may bee a suitor for the rest of your news, and so I commend me to all your friends in Lubber-Land.
Dwndle, did hear this, now could I be angry.
Go to play then, sir, if you loose your money, you may talk roundly to 'em for they cannot bee so uncivil as not to give losers leave to speak.
But if I win.
Why then you may be drunk to night and i'llthe Caster to you.
A curse upon these reeling Dice, that last in, and in
Was out of my way ten pieces; can lend me any
Money, how have the cards dealt with thee.
Lost, lost I defy thee, if my Knight recover not
I must be sober to morrow.
Oh, for a hundred and all made now.
Yonderswins tirannically, without
Mercy, he came in but with hundred pieces.
I'll get a fancy presently.
And how thrive the bones with his Lordship
His Lordships bones are not well set they are maliciouslie bent against him they will run him quite out of all.
More money Dwindle call my Uncle: I must have it, for my honour, two hundred pieces more Will serve my turn; in the mean time I will play away my Cloak and some superfluous things about me.
By that time you are come to your shirt, I shall bee here.
Hoe's blown up too.
So, so, the Dice in two or three such nights will be out of my debt, and I may live to be a land-lord again.
You are fortunes minion Master.
You wot seem to be no fool, because she dotes not
Upon you gentlemen, I must take my chance; it was
A lucky hundred pown'd Jacke Wilding.
What eating the Boxes.
Let us in again.
Chewing thy cud a little, I have lost all my money Will
Thou hast made a fortunate night on it wot
Play no more.
Tic the first time I had the grace to give off a winner
I wonot tempt the Dice.
What hast won?
You doe not hear me complain
I have not been so warm
This tenn weeks.
Tic frost in my breeches.
Master Hazard, I was afraid you had been gone, there's a fresh Gamester come in with his pockets full of Gold; he dazzles the Gamesters, and no man has stock to play with him.
What is he?
A Merchant he seems; he may be worth your retire.
Not for the Exchange to night, I am resolved.
Temptation! now have I an infinite itch to this Merchants pieces.
If thou wot have any money,
Speak before I launch out, and command it.
A hundred pieces.
Call to the Master of the house by this tokenthou wot venture again then?
They may prove as lucky as thinebut what do I forget? the wench, the fairy at home, that expects me.
I had forgot too, you wonot play now.
Tic now upon the time.
By any means go.
Hum, I ha lost my money, and may recover a pretty wench. which hand? here covetousness, this lechery; money is the heyveer. Will, dost hear? i'll requite thy courtesy. Thou hast lent me a hundred pound, i'll pay thee again, and thou shat have for the use, the flesh device at home that expects, thou shat supply my place Will.
You wonot loose this opportunity, and fool your self.
I am resolved; five hundred pieces say i'll come to him, you love the sport as well as I: to morrow you shall thank me for it; be secret, she'll never know thee, for our conditions are toNeither light norand she must needs conceive tic I.
Are you in earnest?
Have you wit to apprehend the courtesy?
Let me alone: the wench, and I shall meet
Hereafter and be merry, here's my Key
The Merchants money cools away: be wise
And keep conditions to use her at thy pleasure,
There will be enough for me: nay no demurs,
You have not lost your stomach to this game
How ere I speed tonight, we'll laugh to morrow
How the poor wench was cozened.
But would ha me go?
I wot ha thee ride boy, I must to the Gamester
Farewell, remember not to speak a word, but
Kiss and embrace thy belly full.
If I do not,
The punishment of an Eunuch light upon me.
How now Will, thou look desperately this morning.
Did sleep well to night?
Yes, it is very like
I went to sleep; but such a bed-fellow!
What ails she; was she dull?
Do not enquire
But curse your self till noon, I am charitable
I do not bid thee hang thy self, and yet
I have cause to thank thee, I would not have lost
The turn, for all the money I won last night Jacke,
Such a delicious thieft.
I think so.
I found it so and dare make my affidavit.
Thou did not see her?
Nor speak to her, to what purpose.
She was so handsome in the dark, you know
My meaning, had been pity any light
Or voice should interrupt us.
Now doe I
Grow melancholy.
If thou dost envy me
There is some reason for it, thou dost imagine
I have had pleasure in my days, but never,
Never, so sweet a skirmish, how like joy
She grew to my embraces, not a kiss
But had Elisium in it.
I was a rascal.
If thou did know but half so much as I
Or could imagine it, thou would acknowledge
Thy self worse then a rascal on Record.
I have not words to express, how soft, how bounteous
How every thing a man with full desires
Could wish a Lady, do not question me
Further; tic too much happiness to remember
I am sorry I have said so much.
Was not I cursed
To loose my money, and such delicate sport?
But that I love thee well shud'st ne'er enjoy her.
Why?
I would almost cut thy throat.
You wot not.
But take her, and if thou part'st with her, one night more for less then both the Indies thou't loose by her, she has paid me for my service, I ask nothing else.
If she be such aprecious armefull Will
I think you may be satisfied.
Take heed,
And understand thy self a little better:
I think you may be satisfied with what?
A handsome wench it is heresy recant it
I never shall be satisfied.
You do not purpose.
Purpose a new encounter.
For thy sake
Tic possible I may not, I would have
My game kept for me; what I have done
Was upon your entreaty, if you have
The like occasion hereafter I
Should have a hard heart to deny thee Jacke.
Thou hast fired my blood, that I could call back time,
And be possessed of what my indiscretion
Gave up to thy enjoying, but I am comforted,
She thinks it was I, and we hereafter may
Be free in our delights: now, sir, the news
With you?
My mistress did command my diligence
To find you out and pray you come to speak with her.
When I am at leisure.
Tic of consequence,
She says, and much concerns you.
Is Penelope
With her?
Not when she sent me forth.
Let her expect: waite you on me.
I spy my blustering Gamester.
The younger ferret.
I care not if I allow thee a fit of mirth
But your boy must be in comfort.
Pray, sir, do not behave your self so furiously,
Your breath is able to blow down a house, sir.
My Uncle shall build 'em up again, oh Dwindle,
Thou dost not know what honour it is to bee
So boisterous, I would take the wall now
Of my Lord Majors Giants.
Doe as I bid you, sir.
Alas, sir, he will devour me.
He shanot hurt thee.
Be at my back then pray, sir, now I think on it
I have the beard here too with which I frighted
Our maids last night.
You know these gentlemen.
Hazard, and Wilding? how i'st? how i'st Bulchins?
Wo'dye had been with us; I ha so mald a Captain
Of the train band yonder.
Is not your name Barnacle?
Ancient Peare?
What's this?
The admiration of the Town.
For what?
For valour.
This inch and a half?
Ther's the wonder, oh the spirit, the tall spirit
Within him he has the soul of a Giant.
He has but a dwarfs body, ancient Ptar.
Sir, how dare you name a Captain?
Thou tun of ignorance, he shall eat my Pistol,
And save me the discharge.
Tell me of a tun? i'll drink twenty tons to thy
Health, who shall hinder me if I have a
Mind too't, your Pistol's a Pepper-corne, I will eat
Up an armoury, if my stomach serve, so long as I
Have money to pay for it, and you were as little again
As you are: fright me with your potguns, my name's
Barnacle, sir, call me what you please, and my
Mans name's Dwindle, and you go there to, do not
Think but I have seen fire-Dakes before now though
I never talked on it, and Rackets too, though my man
Be a Coxcomb here, and balls of wild-fire, no dispraise
To you; do ye think to thunder me with your Pick
Tooth by your side?
Let my sword show him but one flash of lightning
To singe the hair of his head off.
Good ancient Petarre.
Tic a very devil in decimo sexto, Peter d'e call him?
Thou dogbolt and cozen germane to Cerbenus.
Two heads once removed, hoe's somewhat like him.
I begin to think.
And I begin to
Again.
He does but think.
He think? is this a place for him to think in?
Minotaure, vanish immediately, or I will shoot death
From my Moustaches and kill thee like a Porcupine.
Ancient Petarre, I know thy name and I
Honour it, thar't one of the most vaineglorious
Pieces of fire-worke that ever water wet. I am a
Gentleman, and if I have said any thing to disgust
Thee, I can ask thee forgiveness, as well as the
Proudest vassal on 'em all, extend thy paw, thou
Invincible Epitome of Hercules, and let thy servant
Kiss it.
Come pray, sir, be reconciled; he submits.
I see thou hast something in thee of a Soldier, to no Purpose, and I will cherish it. Thou art a rascal in thy understanding, thou shat excuse me, Turk, in honourable love: I remember thy great grand-Father was hanged for robbing a Pedler-woman of six yards of inckle, and thou may, (maugre the Herald) in a right line, challenge the gallows by his copy; mongrel of mongrel Hall. I am thy humble servant, and will cut the throat of any man that says thou hast eythere wit or honesty more then is fit for a gentleman. Command my sword, my lungs, my life, thou art a puff, a mulligrube, a Metaphysical Coxcomb, and I honour you with all my hart.
I thank you noble ancient, and kind gentlemen.
Come Dwindle, we'll go roar somewhere else.
Was ever such an off?
The boy id hit his humour excellently.
Here, cherish thy wit.
Now shall I tell my mistress you'll come to her?
How officious you are for your mistress, sir?
What said she I came not home all night?
Nothing to me; but my eyes ne'er beheld
Her look more pleasantly.
Now farewell Jacke, I need not urge your secrecy
Touching your mistress, I have mounted for you:
Only i'll caution you, look when you meet
That you perform your business handsomely.
I ha begun so well she may suspect else,
And put thee out of service, if she doe,
You know your wages I shall laugh at thee,
And heartily; so farewell, farewell Jacke.
To say the truth I have showed my self a coxcomb.
A pox a play that made me double looser.
For ought I know, she may admit me never
To such a turn again, and then I ha punished
My self ingeniously.
My wife.
My Mistress, sir.
Keep you at distance, Penelope, and Leonora,
Shoe's as the boy reported something more
Pleasant then ordinary.
Tic hee good cozen,
Pretend some business offer at some wares,
Or ask the Gold-smith what your Diamond's worth,
Something to trifle time away, while I
Speak with my husband a few words.
She comes toward me.
I can contain no longer,
How do ye sweete-hart?
Well, but a little melancholy.
You look more sprightfully wife, something has pleased you.
It has indeed, and if it be no stain
To modesty, I would enquire how you
Sped the last night.
I lost my money.
I doe not mean that game.
I am not betrayed I hope; do not mean that game?
You're a fine gentleman.
Tic so, could she not keep her own counsel?
And have behaved your self most wittily,
And I may say most wrongfully: this will
Bee much for your honour, when it is known.
What will be known?
Do you not blush? oh fie.
Is there no modesty in man?
What riddle
Have you got now? I wonot yet seem conscious.
Tic time then to be plain, it was a wonder
I could be so long silent, did you like
Your last nights lodging?
Very, very well;
I went not to bed all night.
You did not lie with
Mistress Penelope my kinswoman?
Refuse me if I did.
You need not swear;
But it was no fault of yours, no fault no virtue:
But it is no place to expostulate these actions.
In brief know it was my plot, for I observed
Which way your warm affection moved, &amp; wrought
So with my honest cozen to supply
Her wanton place, that with some shame at last,
I might deceive your hard heart into kindness.
That, that again sweet wife, and be a little
Serious; was it your plot to excuse your cozen,
And be the bed-fellow?
Heaven knows it is truth.
I am fitted, fitted with a pair of horns
Of my own making.
Thank, and think upon
That providence that would not have you lost
In such a Forest of loose thoughts, and bee
Your self again; I am your hand-maid still,
And have learned so much piety to conceal
What ever should dishonour you.
It buds,
It buds already. I shall turn stark mad,
Horn mad.
What ail you? are you vexed because
Your wantonness thrived so well?
Well with a vengeance.
I did expect your thanks.
Yes, I do thank you, thank you heartily,
Most infinitely thank you.
Doth this merit
No other payment but your scorn, then know
Bad man, it is in my power to be revenged,
And what I had a resolution
Should sleep in silent darkness, now shall look
Day in the face, i'll publish to the World
How I am wronged, and with what stubbornness
You have despised the cure of your own fame;
Nor shall my Cozen suffer in her honour
I stoop as low as earth to show my duty,
But too much trampled on I rise to tell
The World I am a woman.
No, no; hark you,
I doe not mock you, I am taken with
The conceit, what a fine thing I have made my self.
Ne'er speak on it, thy device shall take; i'll love thee.
And kiss thee for it, tha'st paid me handsomely:
An admirable plot, and followed cunningly,
I'll see thee anon again, and lie with thee
To night, without a stratagemme. The gentlewomen
Expect thee; keep all close, dear wife, no sentences.
I am tricked and trimmed at my own charges rarely,
I'll seek out some body again.
I have presumed too much upon your patience,
I have discovered, and I hope t'will take.
I wish it may.
You are sad still, Leonora.
Remove these thoughts: come i'll waite on you now
To the Exchange: some toys may there strike off
Their sad remembrance.
I attend you.
Farewell.
The gentleman that was yesterday to speak with you
Is come again to visit you.
S. Richard Hurry?
The same, sir.
You may admit him.
Men of his quality
Do seldom court affliction, this, I must
Allow, is a most noble gratitude
For those good offices my father did him.
Sir, the respects I owe you make me again
Solicitor for your safety, and although
On the first proposition it appear
Strange to you, and perhaps incredible,
Which might dispose you to the slow embrace
Of what I tendered, yet again brought to you
After a time to examine and consider
What most concerns you, I am confident,
You will accept, and thank me
Noble sir.
You doe express so are is bounty, men
Will sloely imitate; I am not so
Lost in my wilde misfortune, but my reason
Will guide me to acknowledge and pay back
My service and my self, for so much charity
As you have pleased to show me.
Here's for thy pains: they are the same; make good
Thy word, and place me where I may unseen
Hear their discourse.
This way.
But with your pardon,
I would desire to hear again how much
I shall be obliged that knowing the extent
Of your desert I may pay back a duty,
That may in every circumstance become
My fortune and the benefit.
Then thus: you are a Prisoner; that alone
Is misery,
But yours the greater, in that guilt of blood,
Not sums that may bee recompensed, detain you.
I'll not dispute the circumstance, Delamore
Slain by your hand.
I have confessed,
The first jury having found it murder.
His blood calls to the law for justice, and you cannot
Left to your self, and looking on the fact,
Expect with any comfort what must follow.
Yet I in pity of your sufferings,
In pity of your youth which would bee else
Untimely blasted, offer to remove
Your sorrows, make you free and right again,
With clear satisfaction to the Law.
Good sir,
Pray give me leave to doubt here. I see not
How ere your will and charity may bee active
In my desires to save me, that you can
Assure my life and freedom, since in causes
Of such high nature, laws must have their course,
Whose stream as it were wickedness to pollute,
It were vanity for any private man
To think he could resist. I speak not this
To have you imagine I despise my life,
But to express my fears your will does flatter you
Bove what your power can reach.
For that I urge not
My being a Commissioner alone
To doe you service, I have friends in Court,
And great ones, when the rigour of the Law
Hath sentenced you to mediate your pardon:
Nor takes it from the justice of a Prince,
Where provocation and not malice makes
Guilty, to save, whom the sharpe letter dooms
Sometimes to execution: I am to far
From doubting your discharge, that I dare forfeit
My life if I secure not yours from any
Danger for this offence.
You speak all comfort
Which way can I deserve this?
That i'll show you.
I had an obligation to your father
Whose love when all my fortunes were in the ebb,
And desperately, relieved me with large sums;
By whose careful manage I arrived at what
I am, and I should be a rebel to
Nature and goodness not to love the son
Of such a friend by his misfortune made
Ripe for my gratitude.
You speak your bounty,
But teach not all this while how to deserve it.
Tic done by your acceptance of my daughter
To bee your Bride.
To be my Bride? pray tell tell me
Is she deformed or wanton, what vice has she?
Vice, sir, she will deserve as good a husband,
She is handsome though I say it, and shall be rich too.
She is too good, if she be fair or virtuous.
Pardon, I know she is both: but you amaze me,
I did expect conditions of danger:
A good wife is a blessing above health;
You teach me to deserve my life first from you
By offering a happiness beyond it.
If you find love to accept, it is the reward
I look for, Leonora shall obey
Or quit a father.
Ha goodness defend.
I know you doe but mock me, and upbraid
My act, that kilt her servant: wound me still,
I have deserved her curse: I see her weep,
And every tear accuse me.
May I never
Thrive in my Prayers to Heaven, if what I offer
I wish not heartily confirmed.
I now
Suspect you are not Leonora father,
It were better you dissembled, then made her
So past all hope of being cured again:
I marry Leonora! can her soul
Think on so foul a rape, she cannot sure.
She shall; I command.
By virtue, but
She shanot, nor would I to grasp an Empire
Tempt her to so much stain, let her tell down
Her Virgin tears, on Delamores cold Marble,
Sigh to his dust, and call revenge upon
His head whose anger sent him to those shades,
From whence she ne'er must see him; this will justify
She loved the dead: it were impiety
One smile should bless her murderer, and how ere
You are pleased to complement with my affliction,
I know she cannot find one thought without her
So foul to look upon me.
Let it rest on that, will you confern and timely make provision for your safety?
For my life
You mean, now on the chance, then I may live
You are confident, and think it not impossible
Your daughter may affect me ther's at once
Two blessings, are they not and mighty ones,
Considering what I am, how low, how lost
T'oth common air?
Now you are wise.
But if
Your daughter would confirm this, and propound
Her self my victory.
What then?
I should condemn her, and despise the conquest
These things may bribe an Atheist not a Lover.
But you perhaps are ignorant, I have given
My faith away irrevocablie, it is
The wealth of Violante, and I wonot
Basely steal back a thought, and yet I thank you,
I am not so inhumane.
Will you not
Prefer your life
To honour and religion?
For shame be silent could you make me Lord
Of my own destiny, and that Leonora
Had empires for her dower, and courted me
With all the flatteries of life, to quit
My vows to Violante, I would die
Upon her bosom to meet death
And death
You must expect which will take off this bravery.
And I will kiss it, kiss it, like a Bride.
So resolute?
And if I cannot live
My Violantes, I will die her sacrifice.
Good sir, no more, you do not well to trouble
The quiet of a Prisoner thus that cannot
Be a too careful Steward of those minutes
Left him to make his peace, tempt me no further:
The Earth is not so fixed as my resolves,
Rather to die then in one thought transplant
My love from Violante.
Bee undone,
And this contempt shall hasten the divorce
Of soul and love, die and be soon forgotten.
My Violante, if there can be any joy
Neighbour too so much grief, i'll power it out
To pay thy bounteous visit, if my eyes
Admit no fellowship in weeping, it is
Because my heart which saw thee first, would bid
Thee welcome thither, scorning; to acknowledge
There can be any thing but joy where thou art.
But sadness my dear Beaumont, while there is
A cause that makes thee Prisoner, I must weep
And empty many springs, my eyes are now
No prophets of thy sorrow but the witness,
And when I think of death that waits upon thee
I wither to a Ghost.
Why Violante,
We must all die, restrain these weeping Fountains,
Keepe'em till I am dead, dispense 'em then
Upon my grave, and I shall grow again,
And in the sweet disguise of a fair Garden
Salute the spring that gave me greene and odour.
Why should not love transform us?
Bee not lost
In these imaginations.
Or perhaps
Thast ambition, she whose love made up
A wonder to the World beside the pledge
Of duty to her Lord, famed Arthemisia
Shall bee no more in story for her Tomb:
For on the Earth that weighs my body down
When I am dead, thy tears by the cold breath
Of Heaven congealed to Beaumonts memory,
Shall raise a monument of Pearl to our doe
The great Mausolus Sepulchre.
No more
Of this vain language, if you have any pity
On the poor Violante.
I ha done,
And yet I am going now to a long silence;
Allow my sorrow to take leave Violante
It shall be so, be valiant my heart
Beaumont I come not to take leave of thee.
Perhaps you'll see me again.
Again and often,
Thy stars are gentle to thee, many days,
And years are yet between thee and that time
That threatens loss of breath; see, I can thus
Disperse the Clouds sate heavy on my brow,
Wipe the moisture hence, tic day again;
Take beams into thy eye, and let them sink
Upon thy better fortune, live, live happily.
Is Delamore alive?
Dead and interred.
From what can this hope rise?
From thy self Beaumont;
If thou wilt save thy self, I have heard all,
And by the duty of my love am bound
To hide your resolution, can you be
So merciless to your self to refuse life
When it is offered with the best advantage
Is Leonoras love? a price that should
Buy you from all the World? be counselled sir,
Oh, do not loose your self in a vain passion
For thought of me, I cancel all your vows,
And give you back your heart, bee free again
If you will promise me to live and love.
Leonora.
That best of woman-kinde, a mine of sweetness.
But can you leave me then?
I justify
Thy choice of me in that, that to preserve thee
Dare give thee back again, be Leonoras,
For being mine you are lost to all the World
Better a thousand times, thou be made hers
Then we both loose, i'll pawn my faith sheele love thee
I'll be content to hear my Beaumonts well,
And visit thee sometimes like a glad sister,
And never beg a kiss, but if I weep
At any time when we are together,
Do not believe it is sorrow makes my eyes
So wet, but joy to see my Beaumont living:
As it is now to hope.
If thou dost mean thus
Thou dost the more to inflame me to be constant,
Be not a miracle and I may be tempted
To love my life above thee, by this kiss,
Oh, give me but another in my death
It will restore me by this innocent hand,
While as I wish my soul I wonot leave thee
For the Worlds Kingdom.
But you must, unless
You change for Leonora, think of that,
Think ere you be to rash.
I'll think of thee,
And honour to be read, I love Violante
But never could deserve her, live thou happy,
And by thy virtue teach a nearer way
To heaven, we may meet yonder, do not make me
More miserable then I am, by adding perjury
To my bloody sin, the memory of thee
Will at my execution advance
My spirit to a that men shall think
I have changed my cause for martyrdom.
Then here
As of a dying man I take my leave,
Farewell unhappy Beaumont, i'll pray for thee.
Tic possible I may live yet and be thine.
These tears embalm thee
If in this World we never meet
My life is buried in thy winding sheet.
This exceeds all my sorrow.
I am justly punished now for all my tricks,
And pride of the flesh, I had ambition
To make men cuckolds, now the devil has paid me,
Paid me in the same coin, and i'll compare
My forehead with the broadest of my neighbours:
But ere it spreads too monstrous, I must have
Some plot upon this Hazard, he supposes
He has enjoyed Penelope, and my trick
To drive the opinion home, to get him marry her
And make her satisfaction: the wench
Has oft commended him, he may be won too't,
I never meant to part with all her portion,
Perhaps heel thank me for the moiety.
And this disposed on shoe's conjured to silence.
It must bee so.
Jacke Wilding how first man?
How goes the Plough at home? what says the Lady
Guinever that was humbled in your absence?
You have the credit with her, all the glory
Of my nights work; does she not hide her eyes,
And blush, and cry you are a fine gentleman.
Turn a toside, or drop a handkercher,
And stoop, and take occasion to leer,
And laugh upon thee?
Nothing less, I know not
What tha'st done to her, but shees very sad.
Sad; i'll be hanged then.
Thou must imagine
I did the best to comfort her
Shoe's melancholy
For my absence man, i'll keep her company
Again to night.
She thinks it was I enjoyed her.
Let her think whom she will, so we may couple.
And nothing now but sighs, and cries I have
Undone her.
Shoe's a fool, I hurt her not,
She cried not out I am sure, and for my body
I defy the College of Physicians:
Let a jury of Virgins search me.
To be plain,
Although she has no thought but I was her bed-fellow,
You are the only argument of her sadness.
How can that be?
When I had merrily
Excused what had been done, she fetched a sight,
And with some tears revealed her love to you,
That she had loved you long, but by this act
Of mine, do ye mark, she was become unworthy
To hope for so good fortune, I cannot tell,
But she is strangely passionate.
For me?
For you, but tho art soft and tender-hearted,
And in that confidence I did forbear
To tell her who had done the deed.
You did so:
It was wisely done now I collect my self,
She has sometime smiled upon me.
Nay believe it
She is taken with thee above all the World.
And yet she was content you should
'Bove all the World.
But it was your better fate
To be the man, it was her destiny
To have the right performance, thou art a gentleman
And can not but consider the poor gentlewoman.
What wot ha me doe?
Make her amends, and marry her.
Marry a strumpet?
You had first possession,
And thao'st been married earlier coldest but had
Her maiden-head, besides no body knows but we our selves.
Bee not abused I had
No maiden head.
My greater torment: come, come thou art modest;
Heaven knows she may be desperate.
A fair riddance,
Wee have enough of the tribe, I am sorry I cannot
Furnish her expedition with a pair
Of my own Garters.
I of Athens grown,
I know thou art more charitable, she may prove
A happy wife, what woman but has frailty?
Let her make the best on it, set up shop
In the Strand, or Westminster, she may have custom,
And come to speak most learnedlie in the Nose
Bid her keep quarter with the Constable.
And Justices Clarke and she in time may purchase.
She has a portion will maintain her like
A gentlewoman and your wife.
Where first?
In my possession, and I had rather thou
Should have it then another.
Thank you heartily,
A single life has single care, pray keep it.
Come thou shalt know I love thee, thou shalt have
More by a thousand pound, then I resolved
To part with cause I wot call thee cozen too;
A brace of thousands Will, she has to her Portion,
I hoped to put her off with half the sum;
That's truth some younger brother wot ha thanked me,
And given my quietus tush, it is frequent
With men that are so trusted, i'st a match,
Two thousand pound will make a maiden-head
That's crooked straight again.
You are in the right,
Or for the better sound, as the Grammarians
Say, I will call it twenty hundred pound
Belady a pretty stock, enough and need be,
To buy up half the maiden-heads in a County.
Heir's my hand i'll consider on it no further,
Is she prepared?
Leave that to me.
No more.
I'll instantly about it.
Ha, ha.
The project moves better then I expected,
What pains he takes out of his ignorance?
Oh! Sir I am glad I ha fonud you.
I was not lost.
My Nephew, sir, my Nephew.
What of him.
He's undone, he's undone, you have undone him.
What's the matter?
You have made him, sir, so valiant I am afraid
He's not long lived, he quarrels now with every body
And rores and dominers and shak's the pen-houses.
A woman that sold pudding-pies, but took
The wall on him, and he trips up her heals,
And down fell all, the kennel ran pure white-pot
What shall I doe I fear he will be kilt:
I take a little privilege my self
Because I threaten to disinherit him,
But no body else dares talk or meddle with him
Is there no way to take him down again
And make him coward?
There are ways to tame him.
Now I wish heartily you had beaten him
For the hundred pound.
That may bee done yet
I'st not to late? but do you think twill humble him?
I expect every minute hoe's abroad
To hear he has kilt some body, or receive him
Brought home with half his brains or but one leg.
Good sir.
What wot you have me doe?
I'll pay you for it
If you will beat him soundly, sir, and leave him
But as you found him; for if hee continue
A blade and be not kilt, he wonot scope
The gallows long, and it is not for my honour
He should be hanged
I shall deserve as much,
To allay this mettle, as I did to quicken it.
Nay it is my meaning to content you, sir.
And I shall take it as a favour too,
If for the same price you made him valiant,
You will unblade him: here's the money sir,
As weighty gold as tother; cause you should not
Lay it on lightly; break no limb, and bruise him
Three-quarters dead, I care not; he may live
Many a fair day after it.
You show
An Uncles love in this, trust me to cure
His valour.
Hee is here; do but observe.
And beat him, sir, accordingly.
How now Uncle?
Thou art no Nephew of mine, tha'rta rascal
I'll be at no more charge to make thee a gentleman,
Pay for your Dice and drinkings, I shall have
The Surgeons bills brought shortly home to me,
Be troubled to bail thee from the Sessions,
And afterwards make friends to the Recorder
For a Repreeve, yes, I will see thee hanged first.
And be at the charge to paint the gallows too;
If I have a mind the waits shall play before me,
And i'll be hanged in state three stories high, Uncle:
But first i'll cut your throat.
Bless me, defend me.
How now, whats the matter?
Master Barnacle?
Ther's an ungratious bird of mine own nest,
Will murder me.
He wonot sure?
Put up,
And ask your Uncle presently forgiveness;
Or I will hoffe thee.
Hoffe me? I will put up
At thy entreaty.
Gentlemen you remember
This noble gallant.
Cozen of yours I take it.
Cozen to a killing, in your company
Lent me a box of the ear.
No, no, I gave it,
I gave it freely; keep it, never think on it,
I can make bold with thee another time,
Wo'd't'had been twenty.
One's too much to keep.
I am a Gamester, and remembered always
To pay the box; ther's first your principal,
Take that for the use.
Use? wot thad'st given my Uncle.
They have cost him already two hundred pounds
And upwards, shotten Herring, thing of noise.
Oh, for my man Dwindle
And his basket-hilt now my Uncle shall rue this.
Down presently, and before these gentlemen
Desire his pardon.
How, desire his pardon?
Then let this go round.
I will ask his pardon, I beseech you Uncle.
And swear.
And do swear.
To be obedient, never more to quarrel.
Why look you gentlemen, I hope you are persuaded
By being kick so patiently, that I am
Not over valiant.
I suspect him still.
For more assurance doe you kick me too.
Am not I patient and obedient now?
Will you have any more gentlemen, before I rise?
If ever he prove rebellious in act,
Or language, let me know it.
Will you not give
Me leave to roar abroad a little for
My credit?
Never, sir, now i'll tame you.
I thank you gentlemen, command me for
This courtesy.
Tic possible I may
With less noise grow more valiant hereafter:
Till then I am in all your debts.
Be ruled,
And be my Nephew again: this was my love,
My love dear Nephew.
If your love consist
In kicking Uncle, let me love you again,
Follow me, sir.
Then his Uncle paid for it?
Heartily, heartily.
I thought there was some trick.
And whether are you going gentlemen?
We are going to visit Beomont in the Prison.
Tic charity, but that I have deep engagements,
I'd waite upon you, but commend my service to him,
I'll visit him ere night; you saw not Wilding?
We saw his wife and kins-woman enter
Sr. Richard Hurries half an hour ago.
His kins-woman? I thank you.
You have saved me travail, farewell gentlemen,
Farewell.
My father has some design, and bad me send for thee.
You're both too sad, come, come, we must divert
This melancholy.
I beseech your pardon,
But is my Beomont sent for?
Yes: we are
Too private.
I much fear Leonora now,
She looks not sad enough, although I could
Resign my interest freely to preserve him,
I would not willingly be present when
They interchange hearts, sly will show too much
A tyrant, if she be not satisfied
With what was mine, but I must be moite
To be their triumph.
Master Hazard?
All things
Succeed beyond your thought, pray give me a little
Opportunity with your kins-woman.
Weal withdraw.
I know not how to woo her now, sweet Lady?
Your pleasure, sir?
Pray let me ask you a question.
If you had lost your way and met one,
A traveler like my self, that knew the coast
Of the country, would you thank him to direct you?
That common manners would instruct.
I think so.
But there are many ways to the wood, and which
Would you desire, the nearest path, and safest
Or that which leads about?
Without all question.
The nearest and the safest.
Can you love then?
I were a devil else:
And can you love a man?
A man, what else, sir?
You're so far on your way. Now love but me,
You're at your journeys end, what say to me?
Nothing, sir.
That's no answer, you must say something.
I hope you'll not compel me.
Do ye hear Lady?
Setting this foolery aside: I know
You cannot choose but love me.
Why?
I have been told so.
You are easy of belief
I think I should be best acquainted with
My own thoughts, and I dare not be so desperate
To conclude.
Come you lie; I could have given't
In smother phrase: you're a dissembling gentlewoman.
I know your heart, you have loved me a great while.
What should I play the fool? if you remember
I urged some wild discourse in the behalf
Of your lewd kinsman, it was a trial of thee
That humour made me love thee; and since that thy virtue.
Indeed sir?
Indeed, sir? why I have been contracted to thee.
How long?
This half hour, know thy portion, and shall have it.
Strange.
Nay i'll have thee too.
You will?
I cannot help it; thy kind cozen will have it so:
Tic his own plot, to make thee amends, first not
Good mirth? but it is not love to thee or me,
But to have me possessed hee is no cuckold:
I see through his device, thou art much beholding to him:
He meant to have put thee off with half thy portion,
But that if things come out we should keep counsel.
Say first a match? I have two thousand pound too
I thank the Dice, let's put our stocks together,
Children will follow; he is here already.
So close! I am glad on it, this prepares, Will Hazard,
And my young Cozen; a word Penelope.
Now will he make all sure.
You used me courselie,
But I have forgot it, what discourse have you
With this gentleman?
He would seem to be a Suitor.
Entertain him; do ye hear, you may do worse, be ruled.
It was in my thought to move it, does he not
Talk strangely?
Of what?
Of nothing, let me counsel you
To love him, call him husband.
I resolve
Never to marry without your consent.
Gentlemen, welcome.
If you bestow me, sir, I will be confident
I am not lost, I must confess I love him.
No more: then loose no time, kind gentlemen,
You're come most seasonably to be the witnesses
Of my consent, I have examined both
Your hearts, and freely give thee here my kinswoman:
No sooner shall the Church pronounce your married
But challenge what is hers.
Two thousand pound.
I do confess it is her portion
You shanot stay to talk, nay gentlemen,
Pray see the business finished.
We attend you.
So, so, this will confirm him in the opinion,
Penelope was the creature he enjoyed,
And keep off all suspicion of my wife,
Who is still honest in the imagination
That only I embraced her, all secure,
And my brows smooth again, who can deride me?
But I my self, ha, that's too much I know it,
And spite of these tricks am a Cornelius.
Cannot I bribe my conscience to be ignorant?
Why then I ha done nothing, yes advanced
The man, that grafted shame upon my fore-head:
Vexation, parted with two thousand pound,
And am no less a cuckold then before
Was I predestined to this shame and mockery?
Where were my brains? yet why am I impatient?
Unless betrayed he cannot reach the knowledge,
And then no matteryes I am cursed again,
My torment multiplies, how can he think
He plaid the wanton with Penelope
When he finds her a maid? that ruins all:
I wot she had been strumpeted, he knows
My wives Virginity to well, I am lost,
And must be desperate, kill him; no, my wife.
Not so good, death is over black and horrid,
And I am grown ridiculous to my self.
I must do some thing.
Master Wilding, welcome,
You've been a great a stranger.
Do you know me?
Know you?
They say I am much altered alate.
There is some alteration in your forehead.
My forehead?
Tic not smooth enough, you're troubled:
Your wife's within.
She loves your daughter, sir.
When saw you Master Beaumont?
Not to day.
I have sent for him; pray stay, and witness
His further examination, I propounded
A way to doe him good but he is obstinate.
Would I could change condition with him!
He is not troubled now with being a cuckold,
You shall command.
Your husband Lady,
Wife you are a whore
You shall know more hereafter,
I must go live in the Forest.
And I in the Common.
Sheele turn prostitute.
Attend him hither. Master Beaumont's come
Nay you shall favour me so much, here's the gentleman
Already.
Sir, your pleasure? by your command I am brought hither,
I hope you have no more to charge me with
Then freely I have confessed.
Yes.
I must answer
You can have but my life to satisfy;
Pray speak my accusation.
Besides the offence known and examined
You are guilty
Of that which all good natures do abhor.
You have a privilege, but do not make me
Good sir, to appear monstrous, who are my
Accusers?
I am one.
And my judge too:
I have small hope to plead then, but proceed,
And name my trespass.
That which includes all
That man should hate; ingratitude.
You have
Preferrd a large indictment, and are the first
That ever charged me with it, it is a stain
My soul held most at distance, but descend
To some particular; this offence doth rise
Or fall in the degree, or reference
To persons sinned against, to whom have I
Been so ungrateful?
Ingrate as high as murder.
To whom?
Thy self, to whom that life thou ought to cherish
Thou hast undone
I am not so uncharitable
How ere you please to urge it, but I know
Why you conclude so, let me, sir, be honest
To heaven and my own heart, and then if life
Will follow, it shall bee welcome.
Still perverse:
Stand forth my Leonora, look upon her.
I see a comely frame which cannot bee
Without as fair a mind.
With her I make
Once more a tender of my wealth and thy
Enlargement.
How can you discharge him, sir?
Take you no care for that, it shall be secured
If he accept, it is the last time of asking,
Answer to purpose now.
There shall need none,
Sir, to forbid this marriage, but my self;
My resolution but warm before
Is now a flame I honour this fair Virgin,
And am too poor to thank your love, but must not
Buy life with so much shame, I am Violante,
My last breath shall confirm it.
Beaumont think on it
A little better, be not mad; if this be possible
Embrace her instantly.
She does not look
With any countenance of love upon me:
See, she does weep.
Sheele love thee afterwards.
And she doe not, she can but cuckold thee
There be more in the Parish man.
Since you are so peremptory
So peremptory: here receive your sentence.
Live and love happily.
My Dearest Beaumont.
To what purpose is this? he must be hanged for Delamore.
Heir's one can clear the danger.
The Surgeon? did not you say he was dead?
I did, to serve his ends, which you see noble:
Delamore is past danger, but wants strength
To come abroad.
You give me another life.
I see heaven has decreed him for thy husband,
And shat have my consent too.
Now you bless me.
I wished to call thee son, pardon my trial
Joy ever in your bosoms.
I feel a blessing
That only can be thought, silence my tongue,
And let our hearts discourse.
You leave gentlefolks; who wishes joy.
And a bundle of boys the first night?
Married.
Fast as the Priest could tie us.
We are witnesses.
Cozen two thousand pound, and Lady now
Tic time to clear all.
I'll be divorced now
Wife you're a Whore.
Ho there, no bug-words, come
Wee must tell something in your care. Be merry
You are no cuckold, make no noise, I know
That's it, offends your stomach.
Ha!
I touched not her, nor this with one rude action.
Weal talk the circumstance when you come home.
Your wife expected you, but when I came
She had prepared light, and her Cozen here
To have made you blush and chide you into honesty
Seeing their chaste simplicities, was won
To silence, which brought on my better fortune.
Can this be real
By my hopes of peace
In the tother World you have no injury:
My plot was only to betray you to
Love and repentance.
Be not troubled, sir,
I am a witness of my Cozens truth,
And hope you'll make all prosper, in renewing
Your faith to her.
Be wise and no more words
Thou hast a treasure in thy wife, make much on her:
For any act of mine, she is as chaste
As when she was new borne. Love love her Jacke.
As when she was new borne. Love; love her Jacke.
I am ashamed, pray give me all forgiveness
I see my follies, heaven invites me gently
To thy chaste bed, be thou again my dearest,
Thy virtue shall instruct me: joy to all:
Here be more.Delamore is living,
And Leonora marked to enjoy him,
Violante is possessed of Beaumont too.
These be loves miracles: a spring tide flow
In every bosom.
This day let me feast you
Anon we'll visit Delamore.
My soul
Longs to salute him.
Here all follies die.
May never Gamester have worse fate then I.

SO soon after dinner?
I am engaged, and must away, excuse me brother.
Well, make ready his horse.
His Worships pad shall be prepared: If your Golding be not ready in a minute, your Worship shall ride me.
I shall not need to urge your care upon
My Daughter, on whom next the devotion of
My soul to heaven, all my desires
And thoughts reflect, I leave her to your trust,
And in my absence doubt not you will be
Both Uncle and a Father.
Willingly, I would depose my self from both those titles,
To serve my Niece, her virtue will reward me,
I know she is your study, in your want
I will put on your jealousy.
It would not
Become me to confine your entertainments,
Of friends and visitants, but remember Brother,
Shoe's now my sole heir, and by the late death
Or her twin Sister, she derives the right
O all my wealth to her, Gallants I fear
In the Town hold too fruitful intelligence
In these affairs, and if they be not watched
They'll with their wit charm all the Dragons guard, these golden apples.
There are such indeed.
Oh sir, there are too many, not a Virgin
Left by her friends heir to a noble fortune,
But shoe's in danger of a Marriage
To some puffed Title, what are these enter the Garden?
The Gentlemen that dined with vs 
Why how now Frank, grown musty on a sudden? Head hung, and playing the thief thus with your friends, to steal your person from vs, what's the matter.
Nothing, nothing Gentlemen.
Very like, and yet you leave our company for this nothing.
Let's in again to the Ladies.
What's he.
One Master Fowler a reputed wit
In the Town, affected by young Gentlemen
For his Converse, yet lives upon no pension
But his own Fortune, and a Fair one.
The other Mr. Clare, a friend to Mr. Aymwell, whom they both seem to solicit.
Mr. Aymwell.
A hopeful Gentleman.
Brother, did you not observe at dinner
His eyes shoot beams upon my Daughter (more
Then I was pleased with) Mr. Aymwell call you him,
I may suspect unjustly, but such looks are often loose conveyers.
Make no part of him your fear.
I doe not, when I call to mind my Daughters virtue and obedience,
She knows my purpose to dispose her to Sir Nicolas Treadle.
And how doe you find her inclination?
As I would direct it.
She will maintain it to your comfort Sir,
How ever with what vigilance becomes me,
I will preserve it, while she remains within my custody.
Isle leave a Servant to waite upon her.
Brains.
The same.
He is a cunning fellow.
He has a sconce,
Carries some subtlety which he employs
Still honestly in discharge of any trust committed to him.
Good.
And it is his pride.
He was ne'er o're-reached in any action.
He knows his charge.
Perfectly, but I loose time, Sir Nicolas
Treadle expects me, this night in the Country.
When dee return?
Within these three days at most,
Trouble your self no further.
Isle waite on you to your horse Sir.
Sh'as shot a fire into my bosom, from
Her eye, or I have drawn in, at mine own,
Love poison. Oh my stars were too ungentle
To point her out the Mistress of my thoughts,
Who is so much like them, aboue the hope
Of ever climbing too, I see a fatal
Impossibility divide vs, yet
The more I would discharge this new guest, it
Strengthens it self within me, and renews
Vigour to keep possession, shees aboue me
And her great fortune makes my expectation
So dull and painful, a great heir her uncle?
Mr. Aymwell what alone, come lets
To cards, where be the Gentlemen.
Within Sir.
He has Sir George Richly left vs?
Some affairs importuned his departure.
When shall wee expect him?
Three days hence, this your enquiry
Doth promise you have business with him.
Little,
But you did motion cards, Isle choose my partner
And for a set or two I'm at your service.
Make your own election.
Why dee mock me.
How mock you.
Yes?
You doe not mean in earnest.
I shall betray my passion.
I find him.
You m 'y for I am lost.
Hoe's here  good Uncle, is my father gone?
Yes, gentle Niece.
Delight in both your walks
Isle take this Arbor.
So breaks the day and hides it self again
Among the Western shades, were she to dwell
Within your garden it should need no sun.
Her smiles were powerful to infuse a warmth
Into the flowers, her breath perfume your arbours
The trees grow rich in blossom and bear fruit
At the same instant, as it were ever Spring
And ever Summer when she seats her self
Within some bower, the feathered Choristers
Shall play their music to her and take pride
To warble aerie notes till she be weary,
Which when she shall but with one Accent of
Her own express, an hundred Nightingales
Shall fall down dead from the soft boughs before her
For grief to be orchanted.
Here's pretty madness.
It is so, you have done my passion justice Sir
For love is but a straggling from our reason.
If you doe love my Niece, let you and I
Talk out of Metaphor.
You know my Father.
Hee was my noble friend.
For his sake, give me your free answer to
One question.
What is it, promise your self
What I can doe or say is at your service.
Is there a possibility, admit
I loved your Niece, she might be won at last
To be my wife.
Isle not dispute the extent
Of what is possible, yet my answer may be
Satisfactory.
You were ever generous.
I were uncivil not to reply to
A question, you shall find my love more fruitful,
You shall have both my answer and my counsel.
Let me embrace a perfect friend.
Do ye know what
Fortune my young Niece may bring her husband.
I guess a great one, but I set more value
Upon her person, my affection springs
Not from her wealth.
But yet her portion
Is worth your taking notice Master Aymwell,
Her Father is a man who though he write
Himself but Knight, keeps a warm house in the Country
Amongst his Tenants, takes no Lordly pride
To travel with a Footman and a Page
To London, humbly rides th old fashion
With half a dozen wholesome Liveries,
To whom he gives Christian wages and not countenance
Alone to live on, can spend by the year
Eight hundred pounds, and put up fine sleeps quietly
Without dreaming on Mortgages or Statutes
Or such like curses on his Land, can number
May be ten thousand pound in ready coin
Of's own, yet never bought an oice for it
He's plate no question, and Ieweis too
In's old Ladies cabinet, beside
Other things worth an Inuentory, and all this
His daughter is an heir too, now pray tell me
What's your revenue?
Some 3. hundred pounds.
Per annum? Grant it, what expectation
Have you abroad?
None.
That's quickly summoned.
You have not made your love known to my Niece yet.
No, my intention was to preacquaint you.
You've done wisely, doe not think on her
When you're at prayers, she will but puzzell
Your devotion, theres no hope of her.
Ha!
I mean for you to arrive at her, your own disparity in fortune.
I doe find it.
Excuse my plainness sir, her Father looks
A great deal higher, and to take away
Your least encouragement, to prosecute
Within my knowledge she's designed already
To a wealthy Gentleman, and within few days
Twill be a marriage, you shall but procure
Your own affliction to employ your hope
Where things remain so desperate.
I thank you.
you doe your self more right.
If such affairs
Have past, it were not noble to continue
This path, you've done me gentle office Sir
I must believe you're generous, this new flame
My reason shall suppress, before it grow
Too mighty for me.
It becomes you well,
Love like to sin, inveterate is strong
He prevents danger, that destroys it young.
Come to your friends.
Your soft Stars will not let you be so cruel
Lady, to give repulse to a lover.
Doe not believe him, he does but complement,
I have known him court a hundred, with as much
Formality, wooed 'em ith nuptial cut, made verses
Of their hair, set Lilies and Roses, a whole
Garden i'their cheeks, cherries i'their lips, stellifie their eyes, and yet in a twinkling. 
Sure you doe him wrong sir.
Wrong?
He measures my affection by the length of his own, Prithee Satire choose another walk, and leave vs to enjoy this, thou know not my intent.
Thou may be honest with one, and that's a miracle
and will ask a strong faith to believe it, I hope she has more wit then to trust your voluble courtship, Isle seek out my friend Aymwell.
Sir, if your engagement require no hast.
I doe wonder a Gentleman of your knowledge should so deceive himself.
Express your self Fairest.
Fair sir, I am not taken with your flatteries, I can see through you.
If you have so active an eye Lady, you may see a throng of Passions flaming at my hart, set a fire by your beautie I protest t'ee; come, shame not your wisdom to believe report or opinion ath'world, it is a malicious age we live in, if your ears have been abused with any ill noise, a me you shall tell your self if you love me, the world is a shameless and miserable detractor, you doe not despise me Lady. 
No, I pity so handsome a Gentleman, and of So fair a fortune, should want his eyes.
How blind?
To your own follies sir.
Shall I swear I love you, as I am a Gentleman.
As you are a Gentleman, I know you can swear any thing it is a fashion you're most constant in, to bee religiously wicked, an oath in your mouth and a reservation in your hearts is a common Courtship, doe not swear as you are a Gentleman.
As I am an honest man.
Out upon it, that's a worse, my Taylor cozened me t'oher day with the same oath, save your credit and let swearing alone, I dare take your word.
Well said.
For a greater matter, but not for this, you and I ha not eaten a bushel of salt yet, in time I may be converted, and think your tongue and heart keep house together, for at this time I presume they are very far a sunder.
Would you have my tongue in my heart Lady?
No by my troth, I would rather find your heart in your tongue, but you are valiant, and it is only fear they say, brings a mans heart up to his mouth.
Why, your wit is a tyrant now, pray tell me doe not you love me mightily now aboue Potatoes, come I see the little blind Boy in your eyes already.
Love you Sir?
Yes, I know by your bitterness you wish me well and think there is some hope I may be won too, you take pains to whip me so handsomely, come Isle be a good child and kiss the rod.
You oblige my service to you, I am one
Aymwell called friend, and shall be happy to
Convey him any knowledge may concern him.
Then briefly thus I understand he loves me
Pray you doe him the true office of a friend
And council him desist, I am disposed of
Already in my fathers thoughts, and must
Show my obedience, he shall beget
But his own trouble, if he move it to
My Uncle or my Father, and perhaps
Draw their suspicion and displeasure
On me too, by so indiscreet proceeding,
I would not have a Gentleman of his worth
Doe himself so great injury to run
A course of so much hazard, if you please
To bear the burden of my thanks for his
On my part undeserved opinion,
And make him sensible, in time hee may
Place his affection where he may expect
Better return, you shall discharge a friendship
To him, and with it make my thoughts your debtor.
You have expressed a nobleness in this
Were all of your mind Lady,
There would be less Willow worn.
You would have me praise you now, I could ramble in your commendation.
I think so.
Dee but think so, why you shall hear me, Your hairs are Cupids Nets, a Forehead like the saytest coast of heaven without a cloud, your eybrow is loves bow
whiles either Eye are arrows drawn to wound, your ps the Temple or sacred phone of kisses often as they mere exchanging Roses your tongue Loves lightning, neck the Milky path or throne where sit the Graces, doe not I know that I have abused you all this while, or doe you think I love you a thought the better, or with all my Poetical daubings can alter the complexion of a hair now.
I would not have you sir.
No dispraise to
I have seen as handsome a woman
Ride upon a sack to Market, that never knew the impulseon of a Coat or the price of a Stammel petticoat, and I ha seen a worse face in a Countess; what's that? Must ye be proud because men doe call you handsome, and yet though wee are so foolish to tell you so, you might have more wit then to beeleeue it, your eyes may be matched I hope, for your nose there be richer in our sex, it is true that you have colour for your hair wee grant it, and for your cheeks, but what doe your teeth stand you in Lady, your lips are pretty but you lay 'em too open and men breath too much upon 'em, for your tongue wee all leave you ther's no contesting, your hand is fine but your gloves whiter, and for your leg, if the commendation or goodness of it bee in the small, there be bad enough in Gentlemen's stockings to compare with it; come remember you're imperfect creatures without a man, be not you a Goddess I know you're moretall, and had rather make you my companion then my Idol, this is no flattery now.
Where be these Gentlemen.
How now Frank.
You look well to your charge Brains.
A question Sir, pray you, are you married Sir?
Why dost thou ask?
Because you should answer me
I cannot see it in your forehead Sir,
How now my officious Trencher squire.
Excuse him Master Clare, it is his blunt zeal
To doe his Master service, who enjoyed
His best care and vigilance upon this
Gentlewoman.
I am married Sir.
Then I hope y'ane met with your match already I ha nothing to say tee.
This fellow's mad.
Nor my Master neither, though he left his brains behind him, I hope a man may ask a question Sir.
Come hither Brains.
Am life thou art in love.
You are not.
Doe not mistake your self for I am.
Caught, I am glad on it.
No indeed not caught neither, therefore be not ouerioy'd good morality, why dost thou think it possible a women's face or any thing without her can enchant me.
Let me alone.
Why dost thou court 'em then.
Why, to try their wits with which I sharpen my own, dost think I am so mad to marry, sacrifice my libertie to a Woman, sell my patromony to buy them Feathers and new fashions, and maintain a Gentleman Usher to ride in my saddle when I am Knighted, and pointed at with Piethagoras for my tame sufferance, ha my Wardrobe laid forth and my holiday breeches, when my Lady pleases I shall take the ayre in a Coach with her, together with her Dog that is costue, bee appointed my table what I shall eat, according as her Ladyship finds her own body inclined, fed upon this or that Melancholy dish by prescription, guarded with officious Sallets like a Prisoner in a throng, praise her beautiful allowance of course Mutton that have the world of dainty flesh before me, it were a sin oo discretion and my own freedom.
Young Mistress, I observe you.
You doe not mean to dye in this faith.
Prithee doe not talk of Dying, a pox of the Bellman and his Omnia benes, but that I think I know thy Fathere, I should hardly believe thou were a Gentleman, however
thy Aristotles  ibi will make thee incapable of their company shortly, if you Catechise thus you shall have few Gentlemen your Disciples that have any blood or spirit about 'em, there's no discourse so becoming your Gallants now, as a Horse race or Hide-Parke? what Ladies lips are softest? what Fashion is most terse and Courtly? what news abroad? which is, the best Vaulting house? where shall we taste Canary and be drunk too night, talk a morality  here be Ladies still, you shall hear me court one on 'em, I hope you wee' not report abroad among my friends that I love her, it is the love of mounting into her maidenhead I vow Jack, and nothing else.
You're a mad Lover.
That was cunningly cast about.
Whither is it Lady?
I'm walking in Sir.
I'll wait on you, and after that abroad, it is an inuiting day, are you for the Coach.
No.
Or for the Couch? Take me a Companion for either.
Neither.
How neither, blame your self if you be idle
Howsoever you shall not be alone, make use of
My arm Fairest, you will to your Lute, I heard you
Could touch it cunningly, pray bless my ears a little.
My Lute's broke sir.
A string you mean, but it is no matter, your voice is not, ravish a little with that, if you please I can help you to an heir by this black eye which Nature hath given you, Isle not leave you Isle follow ye.
All this from her?
You may believe me Sir.
Why this to him, could she not give me
Repulse, but she must thus proclaim it, I never
Moved it to her, her Uncle hath hd no opportunity
To acquaint her what's the Mystery,
Prithee repeat again the substance of what she said.
With my best memory her words, she wished you
not proceed for she was already disposed of in her Fathers thoughts.
In her fathers thoughts? Happily not in her own.
It would be fruitless to move her Uncle or her Fathere in'.
Ha, not move her Uncle or her Father?
This may beget encouragement hope I may to her
Propound my affection and be happy in it proceed.
She would be sorry a Gentleman of your worth
Should run a Course of so much hazard.
Hazard, that word does yet imply there is a possibilitie.
So with complement
Of her thanks for your fair opinion of her,
She wished me make you sensible in time
To place your Love where you might expect
Better return.
Ah that's wormwood, let me see, better return
This last return hath spoiled the whole Term
And undone my suite, um? No it doth admit
A fair Construction:
She would ha me sensible in time to plant
My love where I may expect better return,
Why? That I may from her for ought I know.
Amantes sibi somnia fingunt, how apt are Lovers to construe all to their desires.
I wonnot let my Action fall.
Doe not build Castles.
I'll smooth it with her Uncle, if it hit
Oh I my blessed Stars.
Hoe's a bed already.
Venus assist one to thy Altar flies,
And I'll proclaim, thy son hath found his eyes.
Whore's Marre-text my Chaplain.
He's newly walked out of his Meditation in the Kitchen, into the Garden.
Bid him read Prayers in the Dining-room.
Before your Worship come?
I wo'not pray too day, dost here? Bid my Tutor come down to me.
Which on them.
Why hee that reads Travail to me, the wit that I took up in Paules in a tiffany Cloak without a hatband, now I have put him into a doublet of Sattaine  stay hoe's here.
Morrow Tutor, what hour take you it?
It is no hour at all Sir.
How?
Not directly any hour, for it is between 8. and 9. Sir.
Very learnedly then I was ready between Six and seauens too day.
Are you disposed for Lecture.
Yes, yes Sir.
You remember my last prelection of the Division
Of the Earth into parts Real and Imaginary:
The parts real into Continent and Island,
The subdiuision of the Continent, into Peninsula,
Istmus, and Promontory.
In troth Sir, I remember some such things but I have forgotten 'em.
What is an Istmus?
Why an Istmus, is an Elbow of land.
A Neck, a neck.
A neck? Why I was near it, if you had let me alone, I should have come up too't.
It was well guest, what's an Island?
An Island is an high Mountain, which shoots it self into the Sea.
That's a Promontory.
Is it so? An Island then is, no matter let it go, it is not the first Island wee ha lost.
How are you perfect in your Circles? Great &amp; less, Mutable and immutable, Tropical and Polar.
As perfect in them as I am in these, faith I shall never conn these things handsomely, may not a man study Travail without these Circles, Degrees and altilatitudes you speak of?
Yes, you may.
I doe not care for the nearest way, I ha time enough to go about.
Very well, you shall lay aside your Globe then.
I, and if please you I will have it stand in my hall to make my Tenants wonder instead of the book of Martyrs.
It will doe well, now name what Kingdom or Province you have most mind to.
What say you to England.
By no means, it is not in fashion with Gentlemen to study their own Nation, you will discover a dull easiness if you admire not and with admiration prefer not the weeds of other regiments before the most pleasant flowers of your own garden, let your Judgment reflect upon a serious consideration who teaches you the minick postur of your body, the punctuality of your beard, the formality of your pace, the elbows of your cloak, the heel of your boot, doe not other nations? Are not Italian heads Spanish shoulders, Dutch bellies, and French legs, the only Notions of your reformed English Gentlemen.
I am resolved to be ignorant of my own country say no more on it, what think you if I went over to France the first thing I did.
By Sea.
Dee think I ha no more wit then to venture my self in the salt water, I had rather be pickled and powdered at home by half that I had.
I apprehend you are cautious, it is safe travelling in your study, but I will not read France to you.
No?
Pardon mo it is unnecessary, all the French fashionce are here already or rather your French cuts.
Cuts?
Understand me, there are divers French cuts.
We have had too many French cuts already.
First, there is your cut of the head.
That's dangerous.
Pshaw a hair a hair, a periwig is your French cut and in fashion with your most courtly Gallants, your own hair will naturally forsake you.
A bald reason.
Right observed their prudent and weighty policy who have brought up this artificial head-peice, because no man should appear light headed.
He had no sound head that invented it.
Then there is the new cut of your doublet or slash the Fashion of your apparel a quaint cut.
Upon Taffeta.
Or what you please, the slash is the emblem of your valour, and besides declares that you are open breasted.
Open as much as you will but no valour.
Then Sir, there is the cut of your leg.
That's when a man is drunk, is it not?
Doe not stagger in your judgment, for this cut is the grace of your body, I mean dancing of the French cut in the leg is most fashionable, believe it pupil a gentile carriage.
But it is fine to be supported sometime with a bottom.
Here is Sir George Richly Sir newly alighted.
Oh my Father in law that shall be.
Then wee are cut off.
There is a match concluded between his daughter and me and now he comes for my answer conduct him to the gallery.
Rather Sir meet him.
Let him go before and tell him we are coming and weal be there as soon as hee.
Brains.
What's the matter.
Lets risle the other bottle of wine.
Doe not endanger thy sconce.
How?
I'll drink no more.
Why?
Because I will not be drunk for any mans pleasure.
Drunk?
Tic good English now, t'was Dutch, may bee you ha some conspiracy upon me.
I? Who has betrayed me? his Mistress procured the Key of the Wine-seller, and bad me try if I could wind up his brains handsomely, he knows on it not one health more.
Not, not, good Whible if you urge again I shall susspect.
Suspect me?
And beat you Whible if you be not satisfied.
I am, but in friendship.
Dost tempt me?
I will drink your health and be drunk alone.
This whelp has some plot upon men, I smell powder my young Mistress would have blown up my brains this Peter-gunner should have given fire, it is not the first time she hath conspired so but two not doe, I was never yet cozened in my life, and if I pawn my brains for a boattle of Sack, or Claret, may my nose as a brand for my negligence carry everlasting Malmesey in it, and be studded with Rubies and Carbuncles, Mistress you must pardon my officeousnesse, be as angry as a Tiger I must play the Dragon and watch your golden fleece, my Master has put me in trust and I am not so easily corrupted. I ha but two eyes Argus had a hundred, but hee must be a cunning Mercury must pipe them both a sleep I can tell you. And now I talk of sleep, my lodging is next to her chambers, it is a confidence in my Master to let his Livery lye so near her, Serving-men have ever now proved themselves no Eunuchs, with their Masters Daughters, if I were so lusty as some of my own tribe, it were no great labour to commit Burglary upon a Maiden head, but all my nourishment runs upward into brains and I am glad on it, a temperate blood is sign of a good Liver, I am past tilting, here she is with the second part of her to the same tune, an other maid that has a grudging
of the greene sickness. and wants a man to reasonfor her.
Be this enough between vs to bind each to help others designs.
Hears Brains, hee has not yet been drenched.
Hee is too subtle.
How now Brains?
As you see forsooth.
Thou art very sad.
But I am in sober sadness I thank my stars.
Witty.
As much wit as will keep Brains from melting this hot weather.
A dry whooresone not thus to be wrought upon!
Very good Sack and Claret ith house.
Thou hast not tasted.
Oyes, oyes, my brains swim in Canary, exceedingly excellent Sack I thank ye Ladies, I know tic your pleasure I should not want of the best blood of the grape in hope there might be a stone in my cup to mar my drinking afterwards.
Mistress Sensible what egg ithe wind she moves so nimbly.
From whom?
Master Fowler.
A Letter? whence flew that paper kite.
What this?
An other enclosed without direction happily obeserved.
If you can love I will study to deserve and be happie to give you proof of my service, in the mean time it shall be a testimony of your favour to deliver this enclosed paper to your cousin from her servant Aymwell, farewell and remember Fowler, look you cousin what Mr. Fowler writes, I dare trust you with the secret at your opportunity peruset his paper.
Conveyances, I read juggling in that paper alreadie, and though you put it up I wo not oh, for so much Magic to conjure that paper out of her bosom into my pocket now I doe long to know what pitiful lover for it
can be no other, is doing penance in that white sheet already, Mistress Sensible hark ye; whence came that letter?
From Master Fowler to my Mistress.
It is a she Letter it seems.
A she Letter why so?
Because it had a young one it'h belly on it, or I am much mistaken.
Does he not write like a bold gamester?
And a bowling gamester too, for his bias was towards my Mistress, but I may chance to cast a rub in his way to keep him from kissing.
Hee hath very good parts in him questionless, but doe you love him.
O the cunning of these Gipses, how when they list they can talk in a distinguishable dialect, they call men foxes but they make, tame geese a some on vs, and yet like one a those in Rome I may prove so happy to peserue your distressed Capitol, what news brings this Kickshaw.
Master Fowler desires to speak with you.
Already he might ha delivered his own Letter.
Isle to my Chamber
It will doe very well.
I hope you will be careful that I am not troubled with any visit of Gentlemen, it will become your officiousness good Demotes to have a care of your charge Pamela.
So, I can suffer this jeer.
Ha? is he gone? I'm glad on it, Isle take this opportunity to read the Paper, Master Aymwell sent me no superscription?
Shoe's at it already, thus far of I can read her countenance if she spare her voice.
I doe not court your fortune but your love,
If my wild apprehension of it, prove
My error, punish gently, since the fire
Came from your self that kindled my desire.
So my poor heart full of expectance lies
To be your servant or your sacrifice.
It shall bee answered.
It shall, the games a foot, were I best to discover thus much, or reserve it to welcome home the old Knight withal, Isle be more familiar with this juggling, first, the Scrivener has a Name and if he be worth his own ears he shall be worth my discovery.
Here comes the Gallant and the tother toy now.
I received your Letter Sir?
In good time.
You might have spared your hand a labour, if you had resolved to put your feet upon this expedition.
Good.
I confess I wrote something in my own canse, but the chief cause was to convey my friends affection to his Mistress.
And I will convey your affection to somebody else.
Then you made me a property.
It is for your honour if you help any way to aduance an honest business, and yet mistake me not though the Rack should enforce from me without a second reason I had not wrote to you, yet for so much as concerned my self by this kiss, my pen hath but set down the resolveon of my heart to serve you.
To serve me, how?
How? why any way, give me your Livery I'll wear it, or a Coat with a Cognisance by this light, I fear you are an Heretic still and doe not believe as you should doe, come let me rectify your Faith, serve you
Since the Complement of Service came up, Gentlemen have had excuse for their love: I would not have you serve me Sir.
Not serve you? Why dee think a man cannot love and serve too.
Not one serve two, well.
You are too literal, and yet in the strict sense I ha known a woman has served half a dozen Gentlemen handsomely, so, so, and yet the last had enough of her too, why should not one man serve two Gentlewomen, it argues against your Sex, that you are more insatiable ath' two, but I have a simple affection I protest and individual, Isle near serve but one.
But one at once.
But one at once, and but one always, by this Dyamonte.
Nay keep your oath Sir.
I am forsworn if I doe not, for I vowed before I came to bestow it, come wear it in your bosom, it shall be an earnest of more precious jewels, though not of so bright a lusty that will follow.
I pray Sir resolve me one thing, and be plain, Doe you love me?
Love you?
It is my question.
It is a very foolish one, to what purpose have I been talking all this while, that you make it a question, has not it been the Theme of all my discourse hitherto, that I doe love you.
In what sense?
In what sense? Why in any sense at your own choice, or in all the senses together and you doubt me: I doe love to see your face, hear your voice, smell your breath, touch your tree, and taste your golden Apples.
But this does not satisfy me.
You doe not doubt my sufficiency dee?
Now you're immodest, I only asked if you love me.
And ha not I told you? Pray teach me a better way to express it. Does a Wiseman love Fools fortune, and a Nobleman another beside my Lady? Does the Devil love an Usurer, a Great man his Flatterer, the Lawyer a Full Term, or the Physician a dead time to thrive in.
Spare your self this is but course love.
Isle spin it finer and finer every day Sweet, to be
plain with thee, what dost thou think of me for a husband, I love thee that way.
Would you did else.
Is there my thing in me would commend it self, that I may spare my other commendations, for I am recallved to be yours at any ate of my own praise, or what I can purchase from my friends.
Sir, if your meaning be no stranger to your language, although I cannot promise my self, you bind me to bee thankful for it.
She nibbles already.
But pardon me if I suspect you still, you are too wild and aerie to be constant to that affection.
There be the Pigeons.
An't be no wotse I care not, Mr. Fowler
A most welcome Friend.
I would be to your daughter.
Let her use to entertain him so, and he will bid himself welcome, hark you sir, you doe like his compny?
Yes.
So I say, but if I were worthy to give your daughla counsel she should have a special care how she treads, for if this Gentleman be not a Whooremaster, he is very like one; and if she chance any way to crack her Venice-Glasse, twill not be so easily sowdred.
Meddle with your charge Sir, and let her alone.
I have done, here is a fresh Gamester.
By your noble leave.
You're welcome Sir.
I was directed hither to find a Gentleman.
Manly how first?
I was to inquire for you at your lodging.
Pray know this gentleman Lady Master Worthy heel deserve your acquaintance.
You oblige y services  but what make you here my woman ferritor.
Come hither Penelope.
Soliciting a cause of Venus.
I suspect as much, but with her? is she a whore?
No but I'll doe the best to make her one,
She loves me already, that's some engagement
I dare trust thee with my sins, who's here
Aymwell and Clare.
Withdraw your self.
Frank.
Master Worthy.
A knot of friends.
What of my letter?
It is delivered you must expect.
What news gentlemen?
We hear none, you visit the Exchange Sir, pray furnish vs.
What doe all these Butterflies here, I doe not like it.
I hope your daughter is in health.
Perfect, I thank Heaven.
And your Niece at whose naming I'm bold to tender my thanks for your last friendship, I might have plunged by this time into passion had not you nobly, just as I was falling prevented my unhappiness.
Your opinion of what I did, gives value to the action, however it was a duty I was bound to.
This is the youth, I'll pawn my brains, hark you Sir, what doe you call this Gentleman.
Master Aymwell.
He may shoot short for all his aiming,
He wears Bachelors buttons does he not.
Yes, old trupeny and loops too, thou art jealous now.
One word more.
I have a plot and thou must help me.
Let it be a safe one.
May we not see her?
Brains whore's thy Mistress?
She's a little busy.
Who's that.
my Niece.
And she be but a little busy shoe's more then half at leisure.
Doe not you know that a Woman is more troubled
with a little business, then some man with managing the troubles of a whole common wealth, it has been a prouerbe, as busy as a Hen with one Chicken, marry and she had twenty, twenty to one she would not be so fond on'em.
He says right, Gentlemen, wee are friends, it is my brothers pleasure who is her father, to deny frequent accesse to her, till hee hath finished a design, for my part, I am not of his mind, nor shall my daughter be a prisoner to his fancy, you see Sir I doe not seclude her, if she choose within any limits of reason, I move in her.
You speak nobly.
Sir George Richly Sir, and Sir Nicholas are newly arrived.
My brother, acquaint my Niece.
It is my office I'll doe it 
Shall's stay?
By all means let's see the doughty Knight that must free the Lady from her Enchanted Castle.
Did ever see him?
No, but I have heard his character.
Prithee let's have it.
They say hoe's one, was wise before hee was a man for then his folly was excusable, but since hee came to be of age, which had been a question till his death, had not the Law given him his Fathers Lands, he is grown wicked enough to be a Landlord, he does pray but once a year and that's for fair weather in harvest, his inward senses are sound, for none comes from him hee speaks words but no matter, and therefore is in Election to be of the Peace and Quorum, which his Tenants think him fit for, and his Tutors judgment allows, whom he maintains to make him legs and speeches, he feeds well himself, but in obedience to government, he allows his Servants fasting days; he loves Law, because it kilt his Father, whom the
Parson overthrew in a case of Tithes; and in memory, wears nothing suitable, for his Apparel is a or the ruins of ten fashions, he does not much care for Heaven, for he's doubtful of any such place, only Hell he's sure of, for the Devil sticks to his Conscience, therefore he does purpose when he dyes, to turn his sins into Almeshouses, that posterity may praise him for his bountiful of hot Pottage, but he's here already, you may read the rest as he comes towards you.
Brother.
Let your kindest respects meet this Gentleman.
Sir Nicholas Treadle, I desire you would write me in the number of your Servants.
It is granted, Gentlemen I have an ambition to be your eternal slave.
It is granted.
And I to be an everlasting Rascal.
It is granted.
A couple of Cockaloches.
Here comes my Daughter.
Lady and Mistress of my heart, which hath long melted for you.
This is my Daughter.
Then it melted for you Lady.
His heart is whole again.
Vouchsafe to entertain a Servant, that shall study to command.
Well said.
His extremest possibilities  in your business.
Abominable Courtship.
Sir, I am Servant to Mistress Violetta, who commends this Paper to you.
O my best Angel.
As the Devil would have it, are you there Sensible.
Mr. Worthy I take my leave.
Will you not stay supper.
Wee are engaged.
My service shall waite on you Gentlemen.
And mine.
Come on my Queen of Diamonds.
Master Worthy I take my leave.
Will you not stay supper.
We are engaged.
My service shall waite on you Gentlemen.
And mine.
Come on my Queen of Diamonds.
Brother lead the way.
If she carry away this letter so, call me shallow-braines, I was never yet cozened in my life, this night? it shall be so, I will not come with bare relation of your plots
Isle bring active intelligence that shall tell
Your secret aims, so crush 'em in the shell.
SVre this is it, my Mistress and her maid are both fast still, I ha watched under the bed all night, to rob her pocket of this paper, and I ha don't, some fellow at this opportunity would have wrigled himself into one of their flesh.
Who's there? Sensible.
Death her tongue is awake already.
Who's in the chamber.
Help me Brains, before she wakes the tother, it is I forsooth but looking for the chamber-pot.
Beshrew you for your noise.
Whore's the door  stumbles.
Who's there?
The tother spirit is raised in the Trundlebed
What will become o'me now.
Here's no body.
Make an end and get thee to bed.
An end of what, does she talk in her sleep, she was not wont.
So, so, ha the spring is open
I might forget to make it fast last night,
It is so, and happily some Cure or Cat
Has been in the chamber, for I hear a noise
About the door, I'll make it fast
And so to bed again, I think it is day already.
So this fancy wrote, for Sir Nicholas like a forked
Arrow points two ways, wenches are caught with
Such conceits, they will imagin't none of his
Invention, then whose but mine my person does inuit
More acceptance, but the Father aims
At the estate, no matter if I can
Insinuate my self into her opinion
It is no impossibility, her portion
Will be enough for both, shall I live still
Dependant and not seek ways to advance my
Self, busy my brains in ballads to the giddy
Chambermaids, beggar my self with purse and pincasin
When she that is the Mistress may be mine
T'will be a Master piece if I can gull him,
But he's here already.
Noble Tutor, Morrow to you, hay finished
The whimsy for my Mistress already?
I ha don't, this paper carries the Love powder.
For fear you had forgotten me, I ha made a quibling in praise of her my self, such a one as will fetch up her heart Tutor.
That were a dangerous vomit Sir, take heed of that.
I but I will not hurt her I warrant thee, and she die within a Twelve month and a day Isle be hanged for her.
Will you Sir.
Marry will I, look you Sir. But first let me see yours, can you not write it in my own hand, I shall hardly read it.
I'll read it to you.
Sir George G'ee mee't.
See they are at it.
And how doe you like it.
Morrow noble Sir Nicholas.
Morrow Gentlemen.
Morrow to you both, Sir George I ha been making Poetry this morning.
He has a subtle fancy.
What's the subject?
No subject, but the Queen of his affections.
I scorn subjects, it is my Empress your Daughters Muse hath set my muse on fire.
Read Sir.
No, you shall read 'em for me.
It is a hue and cry Sir.
A hue &amp; cry, for what?
For what, why for somewhat I'll warrant you.
You may call it Loves hue and cry.
Call it what you will, I know what it is.
Are you so Poetical.
I ha been dabbling in Helicon, next to travail it is all my study mark the invention.
In Loves name you are charged hereby
To make a speedy hue and cry,
After a face who tother day
Came and stole my heart away;
For your directions in brief
These are best marks to know the thief:
Her hair a net of beams would prove,
Strong enough to Captive Jove:
Playing the Eagle, her clear brow
Is a comely field of snow,
A sparkling Eye, so pure a gray
As when it shines it needs no day:
Ivory dwells on her nose
Lily married to the rose,
Have made her Cheek the nuptial bed
Lips betray their Virgins weed
As they only busht for this
That they one another kiss,
But observe beside the rest
You shall know this felon best
By her Tongue, for if your Ear
Shall once a heavenly Music hear
Such as neither Gods nor men
But from that voice shall hear, again
That that is she, Oh take her t'ee
None can rock heaven asleep but she.
How doe you like my pippin of Pernassus Gentlemen.
Very handsome.
Na, I'll warrant you, my Tutor has good furniture in him.
I doe not think hee made 'em.
Now you shall hear some verses of my own making.
Your own, did you not make these?
He betrays himself.
Hum? yes I made 'em too my Tutor knows.
I'll take my oath who made i'm.
But I wrote 'em for an other gentleman that had a Mistress.
My daughter you said.
I may say so, but that their faces are nothing alike, you would hardly know one from tother, for your betla understanding I will read 'em my self  Her foot.
Dee begin there?
Oh, I will rise by degrees.
Her foot is feat with Diamond toes
But she with legs of Ruby goes:
Thighs Loadstones, and doe draw unto her
The Iron pin of any wooer.
Precious conceit.
Her head.
Her head?
You were between her thighs but now.
It is my conceit, I doe now mean to go downwards again, and meet where I left in the middle.
Her head is Opal, neck of Sapphire,
Breast Carbuncles, shine like a fire.
And the naked truth to tell you,
The very mother of Pearl her belly:
How can she chose but hear my groans,
That is composed of precious stones.
I marry Sir.
Now if you liked you may.
A word with you Sir, pray what dee think of your pupil.
I think nothing Sir.
But deal ingeniously, your opinion.
Shall I tell you?
Pray Sir.
Nothing.
I think so too, what doth my Brother mean to make this fond Election.
For my own part you hear me say nothing, but the good parts and qualities of men are to be valued.
This fellow's a Knave, I smell him.
Some thing has some savour.
When you please, name your own time
I'm ready to be married at midnight.
About a seven-night hence.
Let it be 3. or 4. I care not how soon, is breakfast ready.
It waits upon you.
I doe love to eat and drink in a morning, though I fast all day after.
Isle follow brother.
We'll both attend.
This opportunity, let my covetous eye,
Take to enrich it self, but first prepare
With reverence, as to an Alter bring
No careless but Religious beams along
With you to this new object, this small paper
Carries the volume of my humane fate
I hold my destiny, betwixt two fingers
And thus am I wrapped up without a name
Being or expectation of worlds joy
More then this table (when the curtains drawn)
Presents in Character to my thirsty eye sight,
Hail thou ambassador from thine and my
Mistress, bringing peace or unkind war
Thou Emblem of her whiteness which I kiss
And thus again salute.
Then hoe's alone.
So leave vs.
Coming from her
Can it be guilty of defiance to me
Had she not meant me happy she had given
My letter to the flame, and with it I
In those thin ashes had been buried,
Nor had she deigned this answer with the circumstance
At my receiving prompts me to believe
Gracious the gentle messenger command it
Not as a thing she wooed a public, but
With eyes full of suspicion which had been
Needless, had she contenm'd my service.
So smilingly departed, Thus I sent my paper
Which what but love taught her to imitate
Without a superscription, Oh Clare welcome,
Welcome to that heart dance i'thy bosom
If thou be a friend and can rejoice to know me
Happy, you thought me ridiculous and that I did
With too much flattery of my self, expound your story
Had I been like thee of Frosty apprehension and cold
Phlegmatic judgment, I had mist a blessing
That wanton Jove would have been Rival for
Dost see this paper?
Nothing in the outside.
It is inly precious.
You have not searched the
Lining that you promise so.
I see through it, hast thou not heard the perfect Magnes
Will although enclosed within an Ivory box,
Through the white wall shoot forth embracing virtue
To the loved needle, I can read it Clare
And read a Joy in it that transports me, this
Came from my Mistress, having touched her hand
Whence it received a whiteness hath it not
Brought incense to dipersing a rich breath
Sweeter then Arabian spicery
About the room, in which while it remains
Wee suck in perfumed ayre, it came from her
My honest Clare, from her she whose rare wit taught
When in thy dull opinion I was lost,
My apprehension a new hope to thrive
In my ambitious love, excellent women
The top of all creation I shall bee
At once too happy, unrip thou the seal
Read it, and let thy voice convey it gently
Least I be surfeited, but why should any
Be honoured to receive her
But I, to whom she hath directed it,
By thy leave silent paper, confident
Of bless I open my Elizeum
And let my soul into it  ha.
Laden with mighty hopes how dispendant
Have I launched forth and find a storm.
What's this? Your own Letter returned
Can it be otherwise then in scorn.
In scorn.
Ha you not now cause of triumph, who is now the truer Prophet, you would nourish hope in spite of reason, now you feel a punishment in her derision.
Is this credible.
Credible? It is no wonder in a woman
Though she had promised, vowed affection to you
It had not been a miracle to find
A Change in their affection, yet you cannot
Accuse her much.
Appeared I so unworthy
That among so many ways she had to express
At what poor value she esteemed my proffered
Service, her pride could find out none but this
To send me mine own again.
Doe but imagine
You sent a servant with a message to her,
She not within, he is returned again
Without an answer.
Incivility,
She might have thanked me, and subscribed her name,
I was not bound to her observance.
Come be free again.
I will be so, with this
That I could cancel my affection.
What doe you mean, it having touched her hand
Is full of incense and Arabian spicery
You are too prodigal of your perfume.
Doe not thou mock me too.
Well, I ha done.
Would I had so I cannot empty all
My torment, wherefore should a man love woman
Such aerie mockeries, nothing but mere Echoes
That owe their being to our opinion
And in reward of honouring them, send back
As scornfully the language we bestowed.
Out of our too much dotage.
If they send,
All they receive from vs, accuse them not
We have our hearts again.
And Isle have mine,
I will, I ha not yet, here wants a guest
Inuit him home again, Why should not I
Be as coy as she, and with as much neglect
Throw her behind my thoughts, instruct me with
Witty revenge, and thou that see me toss
This shuttlecock with as much pride, and when
I'm sated with this sport, let fall this vanity
Into as low disdain, pshaw.
Nobly resolved.
Come to a Tavern, drench the memory
Of these poor thoughts.
Let's seek out Master
Fowler and Manly.
And warmed with sack, we'll try
Who can make Satyrs best.
A match, lets to 'em.
And thou dost not play the Doctor handsomely, Il'e set the College of Physicians upon thee for practising without a licence.
Can you bee sick?
I would but counterfeit.
So must I the Physician.
I have known a spruce Empiric hath given his patient 2 or 3. stools with the bare repetition of crude words, and knotty sentences, which have come from him like a Phlegm, which besides the operation in the hearers, who admire him for it, while he beats like a drum, at their barrel head, and turns their brains like beer, does him the benefit to scour his own dirty maw, whose dregs else would putrefy; and infest his cheeks worse then a gangrene.
Are you sure she will visit you?
As sure as I am well, for and I were sick and would sleep, I would rather, take a nap of the ridge of Etna, and thee fall of deafening Nilus, then endure the visitation, of any of their tribe  one knocks, my pilelow and lay my head in the eking posture.
Tic Aymwell and Clare.
Whore's my witty Bacchanalian, how now? what means this Apothecaries shop about thee, art Physical?
Sick, sick.
Did not look in a glass to day? how scurvylie this nightcap shows upon thee.
What's the disease?
A fever Sir.
Hang fevers, let's to the Tavern, and inflame our selves, with lusty wine, suck in the spirit of Sack, till wee bee Delphic and prophecy my bully rooke.
Alas.
Alas, is that the disease, Drench her, drench her in sack, sick for a lass, doe not fool thy self beyond the cure of Bedlam, be wise and well again.
You are merry, it seems you have won the Lady.
What Lady? the Lady ith'Lobster, I was half
sick for foolish thing called a woman, a toy took me in the head, and had like to have taken away my heart too but I ha recovered, doe not trust thy body with a Physician, heel make thy foolish bones go without flesh in a fortnight, and thy soul walk without a body a seven night after.
These are no Doctors?
Doctor! art a Parisian, a Paduan, or a Leaden Doctor?
How many and be true to vs hast thou kilt the last
Spring, will it puzzel thy arithmetic, my precious
Rectifier of nature, the wrong way,  faith
Thou must excuse me Jack that I cannot condole
With thee, by this whey beard of Eslapius, I dare
Not endanger my self with so much melancholy
Least I fall into a relapse  whom have wee here?
It is reported that Master Fowler is sick and keeps his chamber, I hope hoe's within.
Noble Sir.
Fair Lady.
How fare you Sir?
The better to see you here.
Upon the entrance of this Gentlewoman, I find your grief much altered.
Upon mine?
Yes, and by that I dare presume to say you are the cause of his distemper.
I Sir?
A cunning Doctor
For I observed so soon as his searching eye had fastened on her, his labouring pulse that through his Feauor did, before stick hard, and frequent now exceeds in both these differences and this Gallon himself found true upon a woman, that had doted upon a Fencer.
I?
She did long for tother bout then,
Give vs leave pray.
A very pretty fellow,
Well skilled in the pulse.
You know my disease too dee not? will not my complexion give you the hint on it
You are not very well.
How Sir?
By your favour you will come too't.
To what?
To a burning Feauor  is there not one woman in the world.
I think there is, and too much of that, what then what conclude you?
Nothing but Sirrup of Violet, would comfort you going to bed.
Violet?
Has giuen't you.
It does me good Lady to feel you by  the hand.
Would it were in my power to recover you.
The Doctor I thank him has taken pains with me, but he says  nothing will doe me good.
Nothing?
But that, which is another sickness to reveal.
Pray Sir acquaint me.
I know you love me.
I have a great mind and it were but for two or 3. Minutes, to have a maid warm my bed.
That may be done.
With her bodyelse t'will doe me no good the Doctor says  to put life in some of my limbs, a little virgin warm'th wo'd do it.
You have a burning Feauor.
But now and then I have such cold fits again  and it is the Doctors opinion  a very learned man.
A learned Pander.
He's at it.
Doctor.
Again passionate.
Why, I may love her name without offence, to you, why did hee waken my remembrance I had forgotten her.
Think upon her scorn then.
I ha done, and till I hear her name again I will throw this dullness off.
Lets choose another subject
How closely they consult, the Doctor is in a fit of counsel I suspect some juggling  hee comes of, Isle gage a limb this fellowe's an impostor.
Is there not much danger in him?
Within two minutes Gentlemen, I have discovered happier symptoms.
What crotchets be these, the fellows mad I think.
Oh look Sensible seek every where
About the chamber, I ha lost the letter
Aymwell sent me, if we should be
Discovered, we are quite undone, whats that in thy hand,
A letter.
Whence.
I know not t'was left here, and Brains having some business to dispatch requested me to deliver it.
Let me see it. To the right worshipful Sir George Richly, I see him coming, loose no time, employ thy diligence to search for mine, I will deliver this.
I shall Mistress.
My father presses me to marry Treadle
Short time's allowed for the prevention
My good angel assist me, here's a letter Sir.
Whence.
I know not, your servant Brains received it.
What's here  daughter doe not you know whence this letter came?
Not I Sir.
You cannot bee so ignorant.
What means my father?
You are familiar with the Contents.
I beseech you Sir have no suspicion. 
I'll read it to you, Mr. Aymwell; I received your letla, and praise your apprehension, upon the first view of your person, I conceived opinion of your merit, the flame is now too great to bee suppressed, it is no time to protract your hopes nor dishonour in me to yield upon noble conditions at the first summon, I accept your love, and require your industry to prevent my fathers purpose, my seruant Sensible you may trust, I will use some invention to delay my expected marriage, farewell.
My harsh fate.
De'e know this character, whore's my man Brains.
Your man devil.
Did your worship call?
Oh my best servant.
Does not thy very soul blush to deceive me.
What's the matter Mistress.
Here me I beseech you.
In the height and puzze of my care to make
Thee, happy? to conspire thy overthrow
I wo'not hear.
Good Sir.
This was your work you can read.
And write too the superscription of a Letter or so.
Whore's Sensible
For your good service to your Mistress housewife
Pack up your trinkets, I here discharge you.
I hope you are Sensible.
Oh wench my father hath my letter.
Yours?
And I mistaking sealed and returned Aymwell that which he sent.
How came he by it.
Talk not of that, Oh for some art to help vs.
Let me council you not to express any violence in your passions, least you mar the possibility of reclayming her, it seems Aymwell he's mist the intelligence, where shame is enforced too much upon the delinquent, it begets rather an audacious defence of the sin, then ripentance, soft rain slides to the root, and nourishes, where great storms make a noise, wet but the skin a'th earth, and run away in a channel.
A most rare project.
It will appear the same, both made together
Which since my sisters death I have worn.
Which of my cares reward'st thou with this folly.
Sir can you pardon?
I love you but too well, go to your chamber.
But must wee part.
Dispute it not.
Bu'y sweet Mistress Sensible, I hope wee shall meet again as merry as we part.
It is very violent, but wee obey your pleasure, I have only apparel and some few trifles.
Take 'em all with and be gone.
Beside my own misfortune, I have cause to pity thine, my father is displeased, and not unjustly, happy genius. 
So, things must be managed wisely, I will hasten the marriage.
By all means let it be sudden.
Within two days  to morrow.
I wo'not sleep, till she be married, but carry things smooth, let not the Knight suspect you're troubled, your daughter will be fetc'ht about with a bias again.
How thou deserve me, let vs in.
Hereafter for my sake, and subtle pains
Who ere is wise, let the world call him Brains.
CAn this be true?
As I have faith to heaven.
Take this and this for thy sweet story, thou
Hast entranced me with thy language; laden
With my despairs, like a distressed bark
I gave my self up lost in the imagined
Tempest but at point of striking
Upon a rock, what a celestial gale
Makes my sails swell with comfort, and enforcing
My ship into the channel, I doe feel it
Bound on the waives, discretion at the helm
Which passion made forsaken, I now bless
The Minute I weighed Anchor; oh my destiny
Dwell longer on this thread and make it firm,
Upon it hangs the weight of such a fortune
That if it crack, will swifter then Ioues flaming
Arrow, dig my grave in the earths center
Forgive me sacred sex of women that
In thought or syllable I ha declaimed
Against your goodness, I will redeem it
With such religious honouring your names
That when I dye some near thought stained Virgin
Shall make a relic of my dust, and throw
My ashes like a charm upon those men,
Whose faiths they hold suspected, to what pitch
Of blessedness are my thoughts mounted.
Sir,
This is an opportunity for action
Time will run fast upon the minute.
Pardon
The trespass of my joy it makes me wild
I am too well rewarded for thy suffering
Promise thy self a noble recompense.
Come ha you finished your discourse yet.
You're my friends,
I was deceived in my Violetta
She loves, sh'as sent me proof, but a mistake
Sent back my letter, and detained her answer
Which was betrayed to her father, but keep your wonder
To honour her rare wit, which if the stars
Show themselves not malicious, will assure
All my desires in her, a divine project
She is the master engine, you must work too,
Will you not friends?
You know you may command vs.
Then spread your bosoms, you shall straight procure
A carriage be ready a'th backside a'my lodging,
Doe not loose time in questioning, my fate
Depends upon your hast.
Promise it done.
You shall disguise your self I must employ you in rougher action.
I refuse no office
To advance your hopes.
My certaintie's, in thee,
The frame of our whole building leanes, come on
Move slowly time until our work be done.
I was not blind to your deserts.
Nor can be so ungrateful now, as not
To give encouragement to your affection
My father may command my person, never
My love to marry Treadle.
Hoe's an ass I made his best verses for 'em.
I thought his fancy would not reach 'em.
His sconce is drier then a Pumice.
There be ways to prevent marriage for I'm already changed.
You're wise, lets run away together.
But how shall I be sure your love is firm.
Try me and trust me after.
And I will, for shall it be a hard task Isle impose on you, dare you fight?
If I like my enemy.
It is a poor old fellow.
Then I'll kill him, his name?
My fathers servant Brains.
Hoe's dead.
By this time.
Stay, there is a circumstance
To be observed, by some means I'll procure
He waits on me to the Strand this afternoon.
Sir Nicholas? your ear for the rest.
He will suspect nothing by our privacy,
He bad me take occasion to urge
His good parts to you, should hee ask I'd swear
I did but press his commendations.
Is thy name Whible.
Yes, and't please your worship.
I like thee the better for that my name's Treadle.
I thank your worship.
Hast done hooking a me.
Every eye hath his object already.
A witty knave, what place dost thou occupy under thy Master.
I am commonly his journey-man Sir.
How?
I look to his Horses sir.
Wo't serve me when I'm married.
Alas, I have no good parts to commend men.
No good parts, and thou hast but skill in Horses and Dogs, you are fit for any Gentleman in England.
Just at that place assault him.
By your fair hand I will.
My Delight, how fare you.
I'm studying some witty Poesy for thy wedding Ring, let me see 
Trouble not your head, Whible entreat my Father hithere.
No matter, I will send to the University.
Were you ever of any College?
College, I have had a head in most ath' Butteres of Cambridge, and 't has been sconc'd to purpose. I know what belongs to Sizing and have answered to my Que in my days, I'm free of the whole University, I commenced with no worse then his Majesties footmen.
And ever since you have had a running wit, you were better consult our wits at home, wee have excellent Poets in the Town they say.
In the Town? What makes so many Scholars then come from Oxford and Cambridge, like Market women with Dorsers full of lamentable Tragedies, and ridiculous Comedies which they might here vent to the Players, but they will take no money for 'em.
Oh my dearest! How happy shall I bee when I'm married.
Look, they are engendering at the lip.
I like it well.
Why are our joys deferred?
But till to morrow.
It is an age me thinks.
Kind worm.
This cannot be deceit.
I want some trifles the Exchange will furnish me, Let it be your motion to my Father.
Father and Uncle you will excuse our falie conversation; I vow Isle bee honest till I be married, nor as
touch of my flesh within the walls, only the suburbs of her lips or hands, or so, and when, and when is to morerow the day, the day of coupling and so forth, have you got a licence.
It shall be my next work:
Pray doe, weel'e bee married here, but keep our wedding at my own house at Croidon, we'll ha the City Waits down with vs, and a noise of Trumpets, we can have Drums in the Country, and the Traine-Band, and then let the Spaniards come and they dare, dost hear; heere's twenty pieces you shall fribble i'm away at the Exchange presently.
How Sir?
By this gold she shall Father, lay it out in Toothpicks, I'll wear 'em out in my hat; come I'll with you for the license.
Who shall with her?
I must attend a project of my daughters.
Brains.
Sir.
Waite on my daughter to the Exchange, observe her carefully.
point me a minute to return with her, if I fail put my brains into'th pot, and let 'em be served up with a Calves head, to morrow dinner.
It succeeds to my wish.
Violetta, look you lay out my gold at the Exchange in Bartholomew Fairings, farewell Violetta.
Come Mistress will you walk, I would fine see any mortal wit cousin me a my charge now, I will live to be the shame of Politicians, and when I am dead, be clapped up into the Chronicles.
Ah the desire of unlawful flesh, what a conjuring dost thou keep within vs to lay this little spirit of conscience, the world and the devil, are tame and sprightlesse
temptations, poor traffic to this staple commodity of Whooring: this is the place where I must take shipping for the Summer Islands, if she keep touch, I will call them fortunate, and once a Week make a Love voyage to them. Ha! are we entertained with Music?
Back, back again, fond man forbear,
Buy not a Minutes play too dear:
Come with Holy flame and bee
Welcome to Virtue and to me.
Come with Holy flame and bee, welcome to Virtue and to me? Flame? I bring none wo' me, and I should be sorry to meet any fire works here, for those hereafter I look on 'em a far off, and apprehend them with less fear, again?
Love a thousand sweets distilling,
And with Nectar bosoms filling,
Charm all eyes that none may find vs,
Be above, before, behind vs;
And while wee thy pleasures taste
Enforce Time it self to stay,
And by fore-locke hold him fast
Least occasion slip away.
I marry, this is another manner of invitement, I'll to her but 
Here comes the squire of her Mistresses body, how does my little taper of Virgin wax, thou hast been in some damp thou burnst blew me thinks.
Noble Sir.
What, a cold.
A great cold, I ha lost my voice.
And thou hast not lost thy Maidenhead it is no matla, have a little care of thy Frank Tenement, and thy tongue will come time enough to it self Isle warrant thee, what place has she chosen for the Encounter?
Her chamber.
Her chamber?
It is all dark.
Is it all dark, I commend her policy the better, then the room, and the deed that must bee done in it will be of one complexion, so she be light I care not, prithee convey me to her.
Follow me.
As thy shadow woe bee to some a the dear sex when a Chambermaid is Usher to a Gentleman.
It shall be a harmless trial Sir.
Go too, I know thou art virtuous, put in execution thy purpose, I'll be within the reach of thy voice.
It shall be my security,
What ill star, ruled at my Nativity,
That I should be so miserable to love
A man, whose glory is his vice, whose study
Is but to ruin virtue.
Mistress?
Here Winifrid.
The Gamester waits his entrance jocund as a Bridgegroome, hee has forgot his Fever.
Away you know your charge, be ready where are you Sir, Mr. Fowler She speaks hoarse.
Hell, if darkness will carry it, yet hell cannot be so black.
There are too many flames in it, thy hand, what Monks hole hast thou brought me to, whore's thy Mistress.
This is the way.
Is this the way? it is a very blind one, the Devil can hardly know me if hee meet me here that's my comfort, yet if hee did, he loves the sin too well to interrupt so precious a meeting, prithee Child of darkness conduct me to the handsome Fairy I must dance withal.
It seems your Fever hath left you.
My Fever, I forget my self, I should have counterfeited sick all this while, but no matter and thy Mistress know it not, thou art skilful in secrets, and I will deserve it: two or 3. is when I am in her presence, will make her keep her
promise, wo'me about the cure, for that she thinks I was so, prithee doe thy office and bring me to her, I hope she is not within hearing.
Fear not.
So about it then.
There's a fee belongs to my place first:
A fee belonging to your place, as I hope for a limb of thy Mistress I had forgot it, there's gold I can feel it by this darkness: for thou see I have no light to swear by it is weight, quick periwincle to thy mistress now.
This is not enough.
There's more, take silver and all.
This is nothing.
Is it nothing? by this hand wo'd I could see it, tic all I have, wo't search me?
There is another Fee belongs to vs.
Another Fee belongs to us? what's that? I must kiss her, th'hast a down lip, and dost twang it handsomely, now to the business.
This is not all I look for:
She wo'not tempt me to come aloft will she?
If you could see me I doe blush;
What does my daughter mean?
If I could see her she does blush she; fayes tic so: oh the insatiable desires of Chamber-maydes! they were wont to look no higher then the Groom or Seruingman and be thankful, or if the Master would be pleased to let 'em show him this lobby to'ther withdrawing chamber, or the turret in summer, and take occasion to comend the situation and so forth, it was after the Lady had been served, out of his own mere motion and favour, and it was taken as an endearement for ever of their service and secrecy, now they must be tasters to'em in the sweet sin, Fees of the Court must be payed, or no suit comminced with iniquity, O Venus, what will this world come to?
Hear me.
Yes, I cannot see thee.
Wash thy polluted soul.
I like this well
And find her noble aim.
Be man again;
For yet thou art a Monster, and this act
Published will make thee appear so black and
Horrid, that even beasts will be ashamed
Of thy society, my goodness in hope of
Your conversion makes me chides you so,
Ha Winifryd dost thou observe him, oh my heart
Is full of fear, I tremble to look on him:
See of a sudden what a paleness has
Possessed his face doe not his eyes retire
Into their hollow chambers, Sir how doe you?
Well.
What new proiect's this?
A sudden change.
Sure heaven is just unto thy late imposture,
And thou art punished now indeed with sickness
For mocking heaven I fear, oh dost thou see.
What?
Death sits upon his forehead, I ne'er saw
The horror of a dying countenance,
But in this Gentleman, Winifryd to my closet,
Fetch me the Cordial,
What de'e mean Gentlewomen,
I doe not feel any such dangerous sickness.
What a hollow voice he has, oh my misfortune
If he should die here, fetch me some strong waters.
No no, I can walk for 'em my self if need be.
He talks wildly:
I may suspect him, if you've so much strength
To walk, go home, call your Physician,
And friends, dispose of your estate, and settle
Your peace for heaven I doe beseech you Sir.
My prayers shall beg a mercy on your soul:
For I have no encouragement to hope
Your glass hath many sands, farewell Sir, cherish
Pare holy thoughts, that if your life soon end,
Your better part may to you Court ascend, come to my Father.
What's the meaning a this sick and dying, I feel no pain, I have heard of some dyed with conceit, if it should kill me, I were a precious cockscomb, was ever poor Gentleman brought into such a foolish paradise prepared for a race, and mounting into the saddle, I must go home and dye, well, if I live I'll quit your cunning, and for the more centainty, my revenge may prosper, I wo'not say my prayers till it take effect.
This is the place where I must exercise my valour upon Brains, I was ne'er given to fight, but I'm engaged for such a prize as I would challenge all the Noble scionces in my own defence.
I cannot spy 'em, yet, pray heaven no
Disaster cross our project,
What thing's that walks about the door?
One practising I
Think, the postures of a Fencer.
Things occur worthy consideration:
Were I best to speak before I strike him, or give him blows, and tell him reason afterwards. I doe not like expostulations, they proclaim our anger, and give the enemy warning to defend himself, I'll strike him valiantly and in silence.
What does he mutter?
What business stays him here, some treachery.
Being resolved to strike before I speak.
It is worth my judgment, whether Fist or Sword
Shall first salute him, I'll be generous,
And give him first two or three wholesome buffets,
Which well laid on, may happily so maze him,
My weapon may be useless, for I fear
Should I begin with steel, her very face
Would force me make too deep incision,
And so there may be work for Sessions,
I like not that as valiant as I am,
Killing is common.
Clare, they are in sight, down, down, oh my rauisht soul, what bliss is in this object?
Ha they are coming, it is she and the old Ruffian he has but a scurvy countenance, I ha th'advantage in the first blow, and I should be very sorry, he should beat me in the conclusion.
Why does this fellow stay?
I must on, she has spied me through her mask,
I see her smile already, and command
A present Battery.
Will this fellow prevent my office, he goes towart him with a quarrelling face, ha, I'll not engage my self, then it is so: withdraws
Help, help.
Mistress stay, Fear nothing, alas good Gentlewoman, you black Magot death, I'd tread him into the kennel amongst his kindred.
Hold, help, murder,
We shall have the whole street about's presently
let's on our journey, who 's this Mole-catcher?
And ye had not been wo'me, I would have cut
Him into more pieces then a Taylors cushin,
Sir Nicholas you shall know on it too.
They are gone together, Pox a this toughness,
Has made an Ass of me, next him doe I hate the Law
Most abominably, for if I might kill and not be hanged:
For him 'two'd never trouble me, shall I loose my reputetion, So I'll venture an other pounding, but I'll be reveng'd on him.
My Mistress is grown very thtisty of her voice a'the sudden, I have asked her 2. or three questions, and she answers me with holding out her hand, as the post at St. Albaines that points the way to London, either she is
grown sullen, or the fright she was in late like a Wolf that sees a man first, hath taken away her voice,I'll make her speak to meHe stays, she puts him forward with her hand.Said you forsoothwe will not doe, what a blessed comfort shall he enjoy if she continue speechless, the Persians did worship a God under the name of Silence, and sure Christians may have an excuse for their Idolatry, if they can find a woman whom nature hath posted into the world with a tongue, but no ability to make use of that miserable Organ, what doe you think it is a clock? two not stroke, ha? how now Mrs. treading a toside, this is your way to the Exchange.
My way you saucy Clown, take that,
You are bountiful, it is more then I looked for.
What ha you to say to me Sir, cannot a Gentlewoma
Ha ah my Brains melt, I am undone, I am undone, you Succubus where is my Mistress? Proserpine speak.
That's he, your office.
We arrest you Sir.
Me you Toads?
Howe's this?
Away with him to Prison, it is no slight action, at your perils Sergeantsmy fairest Mistress.
MistressI'll honour this plot for the mirth sake.
Sir Tadpoole what dee' mean, I owe him not a penny by this flesh, he has a conspiracy upon me, I charge ye in the Kings name unbind me.
We charge you in the Kings name obey vs,
May you live to be arrested ath' Pox, and dye in a Dungeon, nay Innes a Court Gentleman, at next trimming shave your ears and noses off, and then duck you in their own boggards.
SO, now we have got a License, I would see who dares marry your daughter besides my self, is she come from the Exchange yet?
Not yet Sir.
Your servant Brains remembers his duty in this Paper.
Letters!
Letters, let me read em.
Your patience Sir.
I doubt all is not well, what if some misfortune should now befall your Mistress, I hope you have Armour of Patience?
I and of Proof too at home, as much as my Hall can hold, the Story of the Prodigal can hardly be seen for it; I have Pikes and Guns, enough for me and my Predeceasesors, a whole Wardrobe of Swords and Bucklers, when you come home you shall see 'em.
A Conspiracy.
Oh Treason.
My man Brains is arrested by your Tutor, a plot to take away my daughter, she is gone.
I did prophecy too soon.
My Tutor read travel to me, and run away.
With my Wench  a very Peripatetike  what shall I doe then, and some had arrested and clapped her up too  we should have known where to find her  dee hear, I did not mean to marry with a License.
How Sir?
No Sir, I did mean to marry with your daughter Am I a Gull?
Have Patience.
I will have no patience, I will have Violetta, why does not Brains appear?
His heals are not at liberty, he's in Prison.
In Prison, why and he had been hanged, he might have brought us word.
I'm rent with vexation, Sir go you with me to the Prison.
What will you doe?
Isle geld my Tutor.
You were best find him first.
Nay I will find him, and find him again and I can light on him, let me alone, Isle take half a dozen wo'mee and about it instantly.
I wish thee well Niece, but a better husband.
Who's yonder, it is Master Fowler, at an excellent opportunity.
I doe walk still, by all circumstance I am alive, not sick in any part but my head, which has only the pangs of invention, and is in travel of some precious revenge, for my worse then Masculine affront, what if I report abroad shoe's dishonest, I cannot doe'em a worse turn then to say so: some of our Gallants take a pride to belie poor Gentlewomen a'that fashion, and think the discourse an honor to 'em; confidently boast the fruition of this or that Lady, whose hand they never kissed with the Glove off: and why may not I make it my revenge, to blur their fems a little for abusing me.
Well met friend, what? thou look sad.
You will excuse me, and bear a part, when I tell the cause.
What's the News?
Our Friend Master Fowler's dead.
Fowler! Ha?
Mr. Iohn Fowler.
That's I, that's I, ha?
The same.
Dead, am I dead?
It cannot be, I saw him but this morning
Lusty and pleasant, how dyed hee?
Suddenly.
Where?
At Master Worthies house.
Dead!
Too true Sir.
I wo'd not believe my self sick, belike I am dead, it is more then I know yet.
He was a Suitor to Master Worthies daughter.
Mistress Penelope, right.
By all circumstance they mean me, these Gentlemen know me too, how long is it since I departed? Some mistake 
How poor a thing is life, that we cannot
Promise a Minutes certainty, in the height
And strength of youth, falling to dust again.
Ha, ha, Gentlemen, what do ye think a'the dead man?
It is the last Office I can doe him, now to waite on him to the Earth.
Coxcombs do ye not know me, I'm alive, dee not see me?
He was a noble Fellow, and deserves
A memory, if my brain have not lost
All his Poetic juice, it shall go hard
But Isle squeeze out an Elegy.
For whom my furious Poet, ha, not know me, doe I walk invisible, or am I my own Ghost, and you wo not see me, you shall feel me, you have a nimble pate, I may chance strike out some flash of wit  no 
Here comes another, save you Master Worthy.
Sir I heard ill news, Master Fowlers dead.
He is indeed Sir.
Indeed you lye Sir.
I saw his eyes sealed up by death, and him
Rapt in his last sheet.
Whore's his body?
At my sad house Sir.
Is my body at your house?
I did hope Gentlemen, we should ha found
My house his Bridal Chamber, not his Coffin.
But Heaven must be obeyed, my daughter loved him,
And much laments his loss.
Very good, then I am dead, am I not?
You both were in the number of his friends,
I hope you'll add your presence to the rest, a'the Funeral.
Whose Funeral, you man of Bedlam.
Cry mercy Sir, pray keep your way.
It is a duty which without invitement
We are both prompt to discharge.
Master Worthy, Gentlemen do ye hear.
Is it possible, not know me, not see me, I am so thin, and aerie, I ha slipped out a'the world it seems, and did not know on it  if I be dead, what place am I in, where am I? This is not Hell, sure I feel no torment, and there is too little company, no it is not Hell  and I ha not lived afla the rate of going to Heaven; yet beside, I met just now a Usurer, that only deals upon ounces, and carries his Scales at his Girdle, with which he uses to weigh, not men's necessities, but the Plate he is to lend money upon, can this fellow come to Heaven? Here a poor fellow is put in the stocks for being drunk, and the Constable himself reeling home, charges others in the Kings name to aid him. There's a spruce Captain, newly crept out of a Gentleman Usher, and shuffled into a Buff Iurkin with gold Lace, that never saw service beyond Finsbury or the Artillery Garden, marches waving a desperate Feather in his Ladies beaver, while a poor Soldier, bred up in the School of War all his life, yet never commenced any degree of Comander, wants a piece of Brass, to discharge a wheaten Bullet to his? belly no  this is not Heaven I know by the people that traffic in it, where am I then? Vmh Isle to Worthies before they bury me, and inform my self better what's become a me, if I find not my self there in a Coffin, there's hope I may revive again, if I be dead, I am in a world very like the other, I will get me a female spirit to converse withal and kiss, and be merry, and imagine my self alive again.
Come follow me, and be valiant my Masters.
Remember your self Sir, this is your Worships Footman, and for mine own part, though I be not cut
2 pages missing
Will be your honour, and the deed it self
Reward us in his benefit, he was ever wilde
Assured your ends are noble, we are happy in'.
Master Fowler.
Is he come already?
Remove the hearse into this Chamber
In your nobleness, I desire you will
Interpret fairly what I am to personate
And by the Story you will find I have
Some cause of passion.
This is the room I sickened in, and by report dyed in, umh I have heard of spirits walking with aerial bodies, and ha been wondered at by others, but I must only wonder at my self, for if they be not mad, I'm come to my own burial, certain these clothes are substantial, I owe my Taylor for 'em to this hour, if the Devil bee not my Taylor, and hath furnished me with another suit very like it  This is no magical noise, essential gold and silver? What doe I with it if I be dead? Here are no reckonings to be paid with it, no Tavern Bills, no midnight Revels, with the costly Tribe of amorous she sinners, now I cannot spend it, would the poor had it, by their prayers I might hope to get out of this new pitiful Purgatory, or at least know which way I came in to it  Here they are in mourning, what a Devil doe they mean to doe with me  not too many tears Lady, you will but spoil your eyes, and draw upon 'em the misery of Spectacles, doe not you know me neither?
Oh Master Fowler.
Ha, out wa't, nay and the woman but acknowledge me alive, there's some hope a me.
I loved thee living with a holy flame to purge the errors of thy wanton youth.
I'm dead again.
This made thy soul sue out so hasty a Divorce.
And flee to aerie dwellings, hath
Left vs thy cold pale figure, which wee have
Commission but to chamber up in
Melancholy dust, where thy own worms
Like the false servants of some great man shall
devour thee first.
I am worms meat,
We must all dye.
Wooed some of you would do it quickly, that I might ha company,
But were thou now to live again with vs
And that by miracle thy soul should with thy
Body have second marriage, I believe
Thou woo'dst study to keep it a chaste Temple, holy
Thoughts like Fumes of sacred incense hovering
About this heart, then thou wo'dst learn to be
Above thy frailties, and resist the flatteries of
Smooth-fac'd lust.
This is my Funeral sermon.
The burden of which sin, my fears persuade me, both hastened and accompanied thy death.
This sorrow is unfruitful.
I ha done,
May this prayer profit him, wooed his soul were
As sure to gain heaven as his bodie's, here,
We must hope the best, he was an inconstant young man frequenting of some companies, had corrupted his nature, and a little debauched him.
In all this sermon I have heard little commendations of our dear brother departed, rich men doe not go to th'pithole without Complement of Christian burial, it seems if I had lived to ha made a will, and bequeathed so much legacy as would purchase some Preacher a neat Cassock, I should ha dyed in as good estate and assurance for my soul as the best Gentleman in the Parish, had my Monumeant in a conspicuous place of the Church, where I should ha been cut in a form of prayer, as if I had been called
away at my devotion, and so for hast to be in heaven, went thither with my book and spectaclesdo'e hear Lady and Gentlemen, is it your pleasure to see me, though not know me? and to inform a walking business when this so much lamented brother of yours departed out of this world, in his life I had some relation to him, what disease dyed he of pray? who is his heir yet at Comon Law, for he was warm in the possession of Lands, thank his kind fathere, who having been in a consumption sixteen years, one day aboue all the rest having nothing else to doe, dyed, that the young man might be a Landlord, according to the custom of his ancestors:
I doubt the project.
You should be his heir or executor at least by your dry eyes, Sir I commend thee, what a miserable folly it is to weep for one that's dead, and has no sense of our lamentation, Wherefore were Blacks invented? to save our eyes their tedious distillations, it is enough to be sad in our habits, they have cause to weep that have no mourning Cloth, it is a sign they get little by the dead, and that's the greatest sorrow now adays, you loved him Lady, to say truth you had little cause, a wild young man yet and hee were alive again, as that's in vain to wish you know, he may perchance be more sensible, &amp; reward you with better service, so you would not proclaim his weakness,faith speak well a'th dead hereafter and bury all his faults with him, will ye, what are these all the guests? ha? what papers? some Elegy or Epitaph? who subscribes? oh this is your Poetry.
How he dyed some doe suppose
How he ended the Parish knows,
Whether he's gone to heaven or hell,
Ask not me I cannot tell.
Very well, would the Gentleman your friend were alive to give you thanks for 'em.
What have we more?
Underneath, the fair not wise,
Too self loved Narcissus lies,
Yet his sad destruction came
From no Fountain but a flame,
Then youth Quench your hot desires,
Purge your thoughts with chaster fires,
Least with him it be too late,
And death triumph in your fate
Hither all you Virgins come,
Strew your tears upon this Tomb.
Perhaps a timely weeping may
So dispose his scorched clay,
That a chaste and snowy flower
May reward your gentle shower.
Very well done upon so dead a subject, by the Virgin that's in it, you should owe this parcel of Poetry Lady.
A women's muse sir,
Oh now you can answer me, am I dead still?
Yes:
Then you talk to a dead man.
I doe.
Where am I dead?
Here, every where.
You're dead to virtue, to all noble thoughts,
And till the proof of your conversion
To piety win my faith, you are to me
Without all life, and charity to my self,
Bids me endeavour with this ceremony
To give you burial if hereafter I
Let in my memory to my thoughts, or see you.
You shall but represent his ghost or shadow
Which never shall have power to fright my innocence.
Or make my cheek look pale, my ends are compased,
And here in sight of heaven.
Stay,
Tha'rt a Noble girl, and dost deserve
To marry with an Emperor, remove
This sad thing from vs, you doe know me Gentlemen
Witness my death to vanity, quitting all
Unchaste desires, revive me in thy thoughts,
And I will love as thou hast taught me nobly
And like a husband, by this kiss the seal
That I doe shake my wanton slamber off,
And wake to virtue.
Meet it daughter.
Now you begin to live:
I will grow old in the study of my honour, this last conflict hath quite ore'come me, make me happy in the stile of your son.
My blessings multiply.
We congratulate this event.
See my brother.
Let not your rage be so high Sir, I ha more cause to be mad,
Thou?
I.
I have lost my daughter.
But I have lost my credit, that had nothing else to live. I was more proud of that then you could be of twentie daughters,
Have you found 'em?
Not, not, and yet this old Ruffian will not let me vex for it, he says the greatest loss is his.
And I'll maintain it, it was my boast that I was never cozened in my life, have I betrayed so many plots, discovered letters, deciphered Characters, stripped knavery to the skin, and laid open the very soul of Conspiracy, deserved for my cunning to bee called Brains both Town and Country over, and now to forfeit 'em, to see 'em drenched in a muddy stratagem, cheated by a woman, and a pedancieall lousy Woodmonger, it is abhominable; patience I abhor thee, I desire him that bids me go hang my self, which is the way to Surgeons Hall Ile beg to ha my skull cut, I have a supspition my brains are filched, and my head has been late stuffed with Woodcocks
Feathers.
Be not mad.
I will in spite of any man here, who shall hinder me if I have a mind too't.
Your happiness removes my affliction, ha!
Where is Sir Nicholas? we have brought the Gentleman.
Are you there  this was the Champion that justled me, shall I fetch a Dog-whip, or let me cut him up he will make excellent meat for the Devils Trencher, Isle carve him Sir.
Forbear, where is my daughter? villain confess.
Alas Sir, I was waiting upon her home, Sir Nicholas met me, and took her from me.
Sir Nicholas!
Yes Sir Nicholas, hath Mistress Violetta, I am a witness.
Why did he jostle me, there began the treachery, ask him that?
I pray y' sir let it be forgotten, I ha bin kicked for it.
Here she is, no there she is.
Sir Nicholas:
I am amazed:
Stay which is my wife?
Here's my daughter.
Mistress!
Fine juggling. Frank whence comes?
From the Priest, if you have any joy for me,
We are married.
Are there not two Sir Nicholasses, pray what do ye call this Gentlewoman?
Her name's Violetta.
Father your pardon.
This is fine in faith, well may a woman mistake her
husband, when a man that is the wiser Vessel cannot know his own wife.
Married to Aymwell!
We are Witnesses.
A good jest in faith, hark you, were you ever Catechised? What is your name forsooth?
Faith Sir guess.
All passion will be fruitless but of joy.
Sensible? Came I from Croydon for a Chambermaid?
Do ye hear every body I ha married Sensible!
We are witnesses of that too.
No no, this is my wife.
Touch her not with a rude hand.
Why, I know she meant to be my wife, and only I ha married her, as folks go to Law, by Attorney, she is but her Deputy, for the more state I married her by proxy.
Doe not deceive your self Sir, though Princes depute men to marry their wives, women doe not use to be Ciphers, she is your wife in law, let me counsel you sir to prevent laughter, some body hath been cozened, I name no body, since it was your fortune to marry this wench, which cannot now be undone, seem not to be sorry for it, they doe purpose to ieere you out of your skin else.
Say thou so?
Be confident and laugh at them first, that they are so simple to think that you are gulled, commend your choice, and say it was a trick of yours to deceive their expectation.
Come hither Madam Treadle, Gentlemen, you think now, I have but an ill match on it, and that as they say I am cheated, doe not believe it  a Lady is a Lady, a bargain is a bargain, and I'm a Knight &amp; no Gentleman, so much for that  I grant I married her, in her Mistresses name, and though (as great men, that use to choose wives for their favourites or Servants, when they have done with 'em) I could put her off to my Footman or my Tutor here, I wo'not, I will maintain her my wife and publish her, do ye see, publish her to any man that shall laugh at it, my own Ladybird, and Madam Treadle.
You are happy Sir, in being deceived, he is a noble Gentleman.
Sir Nicholas has releast her,
Let your consent be free then.
You have won it
Be my loved children, and I wish a joy
Flow in all Bosoms. Brains we are reconciled.
Tutor we pardon.
You may Sir, he was my engine, now,
What says my factious servant, nay, wee're friends,
The greatest Politician may bee
Deceived sometimes, wit without brains ye see.
And brains without wit too.
Frank thou art married, and Sir Nicholas has made a Lady, I ha lived loose a great while, and doe purpose to be made fast to this Gentlewoman.
To whose act I owe my true Conversion.
When all things have their trial, you shall find.
Nothing is constant but a virtuous mind.

My Lord y're sad.
I am thinking, Alberto,
Of many things, have I not cause?
You may
Think on em with less trouble.
But of all
What dost imagine most afflicts me? isle
Prevent thy answer, I am not troubled
With the present threatenings of the Enemy,
With all his preparations to invade us.
You have more confidence in Vittori, sent
To meet the insulting King, he has been fortunate
In many wars.
The wars consume Vittori,
He has been too fortunate.
Your wishes ere
Against the common peace, if he prove not
A happy Admiral we are lost.
Be thou
And all thy name lost, and may no age
Find it again: how dare you interrupt us?
When we do want your Council, wel'e call for you.
I am gone sir.
My Iulio welcome,
What speaks Cassandra yet?
Nothing to encourage you, the same obstinate thing
Victory has her heart, she much condemns
The roughness which you mixed with your last courtship,
She says your Father may command her life,
But you must be a stranger to her bosom.
I was too rude at my last visit.
Rather sir too tame.
Have I for this drawn war upon my country,
Neglected Sicilies Daughter, left a stain
Upon his Court, and paid his Entertainment
With wounding one he loved?
His favourite
You had been less sir, then your self to have suffered
His insolence, nor was it an act becoming
His Master, to send hither to negotiate
A marriage for his Daughter, and when you
So far engaged your self upon a visit,
To permit any of his gaudy upstarts
Affront your person.
I acquit the King,
It was no state quarrel, high with wine he did
Throw some disgrace on our Italian Ladies,
Whilst he would magnify some beauties there,
This he did second with a pride, and rudeness,
My patience was not tame enough to suffer,
And careless of all danger I did punish him.
It was home and handsome.
I must owe to fortune.
For your return, she did but do her duty,
To make it swift and happy.
I confess the princess used me nobly, though my fancy
Was not surprised, for here I kept the image
Of fair Cassandra, whose divine beauty
Doth scorn all competition.
Did you love Cassandra before you went to Sicily?
Yes but with too much silence, and that love
Did make me apprehend more fiercely the
Occasion to break off all foreign treaty,
Horatio's fall, and my quitting the Country,
Upon it the king interprets a disgrace
To his daughter and himself, and in revenge
Hath added this new tempest to the Sea,
Meaned to our ruin Iulio.
All their fury
May soon be interrupted, if Vittory
Manage his business well.
That's all my trouble.
What?
Vittory ther's the devil on it, he may
Be fortunate and overcome.
Can there
Be ill in that?
Ill? thou art shallow, I
Made him not Admiral, but to engage
His youth and spirit, apt to fly on dangers,
To perish in his hot pursuit of honour,
If he come home with victory, my Father
And his wise state must give him thanks, the people
Giddily run, to meet the Conqueror,
And owe their lives, and safety to his triumph.
But where am I? what peace brings it to me?
What blessing i'st to hear the general voice
Shoot their wild joys to heaven, and I in torment
Certain to lose my hopes in fair Cassandra?
There may be ways at home to remove him,
And plant you in your wishes.
It would be
Most happiness to hear his death.
That may
Ruin a Kingdom.
Ruin twenty more,
So I enjoy her first, nothing can be
Too precious to forfeit, I am mad,
And my desires by opposition grow
More violent.
I thought your masculine soul
Less capable of vexation, shall a subject
Whom with your breath you may blow out o'th'world
Raise su h a storm within you?
No he sha'not,
I ha found my self again, come isle be merry,
But I will have Cassandra spite of fate?
Resolve and have her.
Stay, it were convenient
We did know how to doe this Iulio.
You're in the right sir, it were first indeed
Convenient to know how.
Thou know his Father.
Sighnior Alphonso.
A bold and daring Gentleman, all flame
When he is moved, and careless of a danger
To vindicate his honour.
What of this?
He shall bear the foundation of a plot,
To make me Lord of my desires.
Heel rather
Meet torture?????? then consent, his arm is not
Yet withered, and while he can lift a sword,
He will employ it to revenge Vittori.
Thou art no Politician Iulio.
How now? what news with you?
And please your grace
An humble creature of yours, proud of the least
Occasion to express how faithfully
My heart is fixed to serve you.
Whats your business?
I have business of some consequence,
I had not been so bold else to disturb
Your Princely conference, for I durst never
Assume that impudent garb, that other courtiers
Are known by, my devotion has been still
To appear in modest services.
To'th point.
It were a point of deep neglect to keep
Your ????????? in expectation, yet delays
Make joys the sweeter, arrows that fly compass,
Arrive with as much happiness to the mark,
As those are shot pointblanke?
This Courtier loves
To hear himself talk, be not so impertinent,
We know your care.
And cost my Lord sometimes,
For they that hold intelligence abroad
To benefit their country, must not make
Idols of their estates, and tic a happiness
To sell their fortunes for their Princes smile,
Which I am confident you will vouchsafe,
When you have heard my news.
Would you would vouchsafe
To let us hear?
Vouchsafe my Lord, alas!
You may command my tongue, my hands, my feet,
My head, I should account that limb superfluous
That would not be cut off to do you service.
I do command thee silence, dost hear, silence,
It is a verture my good Lord I know,
But where the tongue has something to deliver,
That may delight a Princes care, and so forth.
Now theres some hope, he's come to his, and so forth.
The news concerns the Admiral Vittori.
What of him, is he slain?
The stars forbid, he is returned my Lord,
Triumphant, brave, and glorious???
Be dumb.
Another syllable, ??????le ha thy tongue out,
And leave no root, lest there grow out another,
Was all your circumstance for this?
My Lord!
You are too open breasted, let this fellow
See into your heart, wisemen disguise their counsels
Till things are ripe.
Begone, pox o'your legs
And the curse haven't been before, yet stay,
Give order that no man go forth to meet him
Until our pleasure further known, command
The Governor oath City place a guard
About the gates, let no mans face appear
Without the walls, the King our father means
To salute him first in person, dee stand.
Give order that no man go forth to meet him,
I shall my Lord.
He shall be entertained,
I feel new armies in my breast,
His father 
Thine care Iulio.
I shall attend you straight
My honourable Lord.
Your servant Iulio
Where is the Prince? I beg your graces pardon.
Oh my good Lord, your son I heare's returned
With honour, has defeated the Sicilian
Bravely.
He has and please your highness, heaven
Has smiled upon his undertaking, it
renews my youth to hear it.
He had good soldiers,
But all their valour still conspires to make
The general a garland, he must wear
The conquering baize, whose blood soever poi's for it.
My Lord.
Nay, nay I envy not his victory.
You envy him, it was your cause he fought,
And for his Country.
Right, and tic the cause
That often prospers, that without his valour
Would ha defen??????'d it self.
If all virtue
Were left to her own protection, my Lord,
Unarmed with strength and policy, best states
Would find shrewed innovations.
You had best
Tell me I lie.
I dare not think so foully.
You're a traitor, 
Lay hands on him.
He that shall dare to say Alphonso is
A traitor, let his veins partake no blood
Of yours, and he shall curse he had a tongue.
Disarm the rebel, and to prison with him.
Ungrateful Prince.
Isle tame your ruffian spirit.
So, so, isle now acquaint my father Iulio,
Who must allow my act, diseases that
Are desperate require a rugged handling,
This is for thee Cassandra!
Stand.
1. Stand. 2 Stand. 3 Stand.
The King received intelligence!
Our ships
Must needs report that loud enough.
Tic strange,
Is it not possible we have mistook
The shore, transported with our naval victory,
Speak gentlemen! or doe we dream?
Those walls
Are certainly the same, and that the City
Peopled when we launched forth, and full of prayers
For our success.
It may be they reserve
Their welcome till we march into the City.
They may have some conceit.
A general silence
Like night dwells round about us, and no sign
That men inhabit, have we won at Sea
To lose our selves upon the Land? or in
Our absence hath some monster landed here
And made it desolate, devoured the Natives,
And made em creep into the earth again?
They might salute us with one piece of ordnance.
They cannot take us for their enemies,
Captain enquire the cause, let none else move;
Yet stay, unless it be some strange mortality,
And yet that cannot be, have we brought home
Their safety purchased through so many horrors,
And is this all the payment for our conquest?
To shut the gates upon us.
Force them open
With the Canon, shake their walls about their ears,
They are asleep.
For such another rashness
Thy head shall be the bullet of that Canon,
And shot into the town; go to! be temperate,
As I grudge none the merit of their valour,
I must hear none so bold.
I ha done sir.
Subjects are bound to fight for princes, they
Not bound to the reward of every service,
I look upon thee now fighting at sea,
And have forgot this error, give no breath
To such a thought hereafter??? Honour pays
Double where Kings neglect, and he is valiant
Truly that dares forget to be rewarded.
This is but cold comfort for a knapsack man.
And yet tic strange the King should thus neglect us,
This is cheap entertainment for a conqueror
First not Mauritio? misery of Soldiers
When they have sweat blood for their Countries honour,
They stand at others mercy.
They have slept since
And dream't not of our sufferings.
Is the Prince
Alive, to whom we owe our Countries quarrel
The difference of both Kingdoms?
Our war and fortunes justify his act
Can he be guilty of this shame? no more,
There's something would fine mutiny within me,
Strangle the snakes betime Vittori???so
This was a way to forfeit all our fems;
Fold up your Ensigns throw off all the pride
That may express a triumph, well march on
As we had over bought our victory.
The gates are opend now, and we discover
A woman by her veil, in mourning habit,
Coming this way
Alone? more strange and fatal,
It may be tic my genius come to give
A melancholy warning of my death,
As Brutus had from his, Isle stand my destiny,
Yet bearing the resemblance of a woman
It will less terrify, who should this be?
Lady your garment speaks you a sad woman,
Griefs should salute no nearer, if it were
In poor Vittories power to dispossess you
Of any sorrow.
Oh my dear Vittori??????
My wishes aim at none beside.
Cassandra?
We are rewarded, had Vittori taken
Into his body a thousand wounds, this kiss
Had made me well again, or but one drop
Of this rich balsam, for I know thy tears
Are joy to see Vittori safe, the King
With all the glories of his Province cannot
Doe half this honour to his Admiral,
I have a place above all happiness,
And meet a greater empire in thy love
Then fame or victory hath ever boasted,
My own my best Cassandra!
Call again
That temper, which hath made Vittori honoured
And if my tears which carry something more
Then joy to welcome home, my best loved Lord
Affect you with no sadness, which I wish not,
Yet look upon this mourning not put on
To counterfeit a grief, and that will tell you
There is necessity for you to know
Somewhat to check the current of your triumph.
What prodigies are these?
I was too careless
Of this sad habit, joy to see thy face
Made me distinguish nothing else, proceed
And punish my too prodigal embraces,
It is not fit I be in one thought blessed
And thou in such a Livery.
When you say
You have strength enough to entertain the knowledge
Of such an injury.
If it only point
At me, speak it at once, I am collected,
Shat see I will be conqueror at home,
If it concern thy self, let it not flow
Too fast, but rather let my ear receive it
By such degrees as may not kill too soon,
But leave me some life only to revenge it.
The Prince whose cause engaged your war abroad,
Hath ill rewarded you at home.
He cannot!
Sir in your absence I have suffered for you,
Hourly solicited to my dishonour.
Ha!
For though he called it love; I might suspect it,
His personal visits, messengers, rich presents
Left me not quiet to enjoy my self.
I told him I had given my faith already,
Contracted yours, impatient of my answers,
He urged his greatness, swear he would enjoy me,
Or be no Prince in Naples, I am yet
Preserved, and welcome home my dearest safety.
The Prince doe this!
This is but half the story,
By his command none dare salute your victory,
Or power their glad hearts forth at your return,
To these he hath newly added the dishonour of
Your father, whom he hath commanded close
Prisoner ith Castle, upon some pretence
Of treason, in my eyes you may behold
How people shed their sorrow, as the guard
Led him to prison, none so bold to ask
The cause that made him suffer in his misery.
Will the King suffer this?
Alas his age
Hath made him tame, a too indulgent father
To such a son, whose will is all the law,
Controlling what he pleases in this fall
Of justice; which way will Vittori take?
Mauricio did hear this? we must ask
Forgiveness that we have been valiant,
Repent our duties, and that victory
We bought so dear, we shut have dyed at sea,
And then perhaps been talked on in the crowd
Of honest men, for giving up our lives,
Which for our service they may now take from us,
We are not yet i???th snare, and we have power
To stis??????e their designs, and prevent our
Dishonourable fall.
The soldiers hearts
Are yours.
No Mauricio let em be the Kings,
If such as they forget their office, we
Must keep our thoughts unstained, isle to the King,
But without any train.
In this you do not
Consult your safety.
Safety is a lecture
To be read to Children, I doe always carry
My own security within, Mauricio,
Yet doe not think I am desperate, isle take
No knowledge of the Princes action
But give account of my engagement, thats
Not much amiss, the King I know is gracious
And the Prince too, how ever passion play
This rebel in our soul.
You shannot need sir,
The King is coming hither,
And the Prince,
Lets all look smooth, the King is come himself
To gratulate our success. 
You too much honour
The poor Vittori, who at your feet lays
His heart and victory, and that which gave
Him power to doe you service.
We receive it,
And here discharge your soldiers, who shall taste
Of our particular bounty.
Heaven preserve the King.
Sir did not I give strict charge
That none should pass the gates, how came she hither?
No man and like your grace, I did remember
And durst not prevaricate in one syllable
Of my Commission, she is a Lady sir.
You wood be an officious hangman I perceive,
Isle find you understanding.
Let me prostrate
My duty to your highness, and be honoured
To kiss your hand.
Vittori isle not flatter
I have no grace for him, whose father durst
Attempt an insolence upon my person,
Which the son may be guilty of in his blood.
My father insolent, and I guilty sir,
Because I share his blood? oh that I knew
In what part of my veins to find those drops,
That I might sacrifice to your anger???
And expiate my Fathers sin!
I came not to expostulate.
Is this all my reward?
Your valour has
Been paid in the success, what you have done
Was duty, if you have not mixed our cause
With private and particular revenge.
You speak not this to me sir.
Yes to you,
We doe not fear the bugbears in your forehead,
You will hear more.
Sir you have mercy in you.
You have displeased our son Vittori.
I? witness the Angels.
I must tell you too,
Your father has transgressed beyond example.
Good heaven forgive him, is this all,
All my reward?
What would you ask.
Ask???why???I ask my father.
Your father?
Goodness leave me not the wonder
Of all mankind; gentlemen all gone.
Alas Vittori.
I that commanded thousands
This morning am not owner of one servant.
Dost thou stay with me?
My prophetic soul
Knew this before.
The King returns, Cassandra.
We ha thought upon it Vittori, and without
The Council of our son, will condescend
To your Fathers liberty, he is yours upon
Condition, you and he, and this your Mistress
Go into present banishment.
How ?????? banishment?
I run my sons distaste
There is no time for study, he affects
That Lady, if you stay something may follow,
To ???th general repentance, troth I pity thee,
Here take our signet, time and absence may
Correct all.
Oh embrace it dear Vittori,
We shall meet safely every where but here,
Enlarge your Father, and we cannot miss
A happier fate.
Can my Cassandra think so?
That word shall???make me live a little longer,
But these are strange turns Madam, Naples hath
No dwellings for us, when we are quit of these,
We'll with our grief make tame some wilderness.
Whats to be done?
Done, you're undone all,
Betrayed the Crown you wear, I see it tremble
Upon your head, give such a licence to
A Rebel, trust him abroad to gather
Strength to the Kingdoms ruin.
What can such
A naked man attempt to make us fear?
He carries with him a whole army sir
The peoples love, who want no giddiness
Had they but opportunity, and such
A master Rebel as Vittori, to
Make spoil of all, who concealed him to this.
Not I and please your grace, I wish it heartily
Undone.
You wish it sir, are wishes now
The remedy for such a mischief, you
When the state bleeds, will wish it well again;
You're fine court Surgeons, had you staide his Father
It might have checked his treason, or Cassandra.
That's his torment.
We had been secure,
Exasperated now with his affront,
As never traitor wanted impudence
To blanch ore his rebellion, he may inflame
The Neighbour Princes, to conspire some war
For his revenge.
his grace says right, there may
Be a consequence of much danger, and Vittori
Has fame abroad.
I did it for the best,
By his absence thinking to remo?????? his anger,
I could have been content, to have honoured him,
For to say truth, his services did challenge
More friendly payment.
To say truth, he was
A noble valiant gentleman, and deserved
What deserved he?
A halter, and shall please
Your Highness, I did wonder at your patience
He was not put to death.
I must acknowledge,
Vittori has deserved for many services,
The love and honour of his country, fought
Their battles, and brought conquest home, made tame
The Seas that threatened us, secured the Land,
And Rome allowed some Consuls for less Victories,
Triumphs, and Statues.
Most excellent Prince
How just he is.
But when opinion.
Of their own merit swells em into pride,
Which sets a price of that, which modesty
Should count an act of their obedience,
They forfeit the reward of thanks and honour,
And betray poor and most vaine-glorious souls,
Scipio, and Antony, and other Romans,
Deserved well of the Senate, and were honoured,
But when they ran to faction, and pursued
Ambitious ends to undo their Countries peace,
They were no longer Patriots, but declared
Romes poison, and like gangrenes on the state
To bee cut off, lest they corrupt the body.
Was ever Prince so wise!
But son, son, how
Can these staines reach Vittori? he hath given
No argument to suspect his fall from Loyalty.
I do not sir accuse him, nor did I
More then became the spirit of a Prince,
Show I was sensible of his Fathers impudence,
If you remember, when I urged what trespass
His Father had committed, he urged aloud,
Was this all his reward, as if his service
Were obligation to make us suffer,
And justify their affronts, but I waste breath
Since you are so well pleased, my duty sir
Shall speak me still your Son, but let me take
Boldness to prophecy their insolence
Struck at my person first, but you will find
Their pride reach higher, I am but a branch
Superfluous, and may be pruned away,
You have you say no argument to suspect
His fall from Loyalty, if whats done to me
Be dead within you, yet remember now
You have disengaged by exile his relation
And tie of subject, he owes now no faith to you,
What that, and his disgrace and opportunity
Abroad may frame him to, I leave, to imagine.
Nay prithee come back, thou hast awaked me,
I find my rashness, I did never think
There had been so much danger, we will study
Timely prevention, let em be called back,
Fly after em, and in our name command.
You shanot need.
How shanot need?
Your pardon,
In hope your wisdom would allow it, after
I have made that my act, Iulio is gone
With strict commission for that purpose.
Iulio?
I thank thy care.
I was most divinely thought on, most maturely.
Now all your jealousies are laid.
I shall
Compose my self at his return, to wear
What countenance you will direct.
Cassandra
You've sent for too.
By any means, she is
So precious to Vittori, had she sinned
Alone to merit banishment, hee would follow her
Through all the world.
Women are strangely attractive,
Fame speaks her virtuous too.
Some virtue she has??? 
Julio has prospered,
Tha'st done good service,
Alphonso though your late affront to us
Be foul in its own nature, and may encourage
Others by your impunity, yet we have
With the remembrance of your former actions
Lost your offence, Vittori too shall find
The honour he deserves.
How's this?
Where is he?
He does not scorn our mercy; Iulio,
Where is Cassandra?
Shipped with Vittori, thank Alphonso fort
Whom you have pardoned, they are both at Sea.
Whirl, winds pursue em.
Whore's your son Alphonso?
Embarked with his fair Mistress, I observe
My Lord which way your anger moves, in vain
You vex your soul for them, the Sea's no part
Of your command, the winds are masters there,
Which cannot raise a storm so black and ominons,
As their own country.
By what means escaped they?
Take it from me, and after cut my head off,
I charged him as his heart wished to enjoy
A Fathers blessing, as he loved the honour
Of his Cassandra, fearing some new plot
To hire a Bark, and quickly put to Sea,
Whilst I made some stay to dispose affairs,
That might befriend us in another country,
He did obey and had my prayers, the winds
Conveyed him swiftly from the shore, and had
Your creature Iulio not made such haste,
I had dispatched, and in another vessel
Followed his ship, but heaven determined I
Should be again your prisoner, use your power
But look to give account for every hair
Of this old head, now withered in your service.
To the Castle with him.
I, there's the King,
Let me use one word more Royal sir, to you.
You'll hear him.
Fear not Prince, my solo's not fallen
So low to beg compassion.
Speak Alphonso?
My duty still preserved, I would advise
Your age to quit the trouble of your Kingdom,
And ask the Princes leave to turn a Capuchin,
Why should you stops with burden of such a state,
And have a son so active, turn Fryer, my Lord,
And make the young man King.
I must endure.
Away with him.
Isle see him safe my Lord.
What hasty news with you.
To Arms great sir for your defence, there are
New dangers from the Sea.
Another Fleet?
And sailing this way, we suspect they are
Sicilians.
Vittori gave ablow to their design.
Dee but suspect it vilaine?
It may bee
Some scattered ships.
Has not Vittori mocked us,
And plaide the vilaine with your trust.
They could not be reinforcd so soon, what number?
They cover sir the seas.
Gather up forces to
Prevent the landing.
Tic impossible?
They touch our shore by this time.
Then make safe
The City.
It may be another ??????loot, meant to relieve
The first, and came not forth so soon.
Now we want Vittori.
All the diseases Naples ever groaned with
Ore take Vittori, but Alphonso shall
Pay dee??????ely for this mischief.
Be not sir
Dejected, tic more easy to defend
At home, then thrive in foreign war, these men
Will find as proud resistance.
Can thou think
I do look pale for this ??? no Iulio,
Although the sudden news might move me somewhat
I have a heart above all fear, and can
Know no distraction but Cassandra's absence,
That makes me look so wild, and tears my brain
With the imagination.
But the state
We are in requires you should be active sir.
Ah Iulio, the armies which I fear
Are not abroad, they have made entrenchment here.
Though Naples do not bid you welcome sir
A shore, the joys and duties of your subjects???
Cannot be silent.
We do thank you all,
The seas were kind, and the winds kissed our sails.
All things conspired to our revenge.
Your Justice
Our very enemies acknowledge it,
And conscious of their injury, are afraid
To look upon us.
Marshall of the field
Give present order for entrenchments.
Weal quarter here, you shall make good that part
With your horse troupes, and plant Canons on that hill,
To play upon the town, Naples shall find
We did not venture all upon one stake,
That petty loss at sea which made them triumph,
And perhaps careless of more opposition
Shall dearly be accounted for, beside
Dishonouring our Daughter, and our Court
By such a rude departure.
As they had
Scorned your alliance.
Thy particular???
Sufferings Horatio, and wounds are put
Into the scale.
They are not worthy sir,
Had his sword reached my heart, my death had been??????
No sin compared to that affront he threw,
Upon your self and Daughter, I was bound
To engage that blood was given me to serve you,
And I doe love those drops that in a cause
So just made haste to show their duty to you
Better than those that dwell within my heart.
We are confident of thy loyalty.
The Princess.
Alas Rosinda thou were not bred to these
Tumults and noise of war, has not the sea
Impaired thy health, I was too rash to allow
Thy travail, and expose thy tenderness
To this rude voyage.
It appears to me
A pleasant change of ayre, I have heard men talk
Of many horrors that attend the seas
Of tempests, and of dangers, I have seen
Nothing to fright me, if the waves put on
No other shape, I could exchange me thinks
My dwelling on the land.
We owe this happiness
To you fair Princess, for whose safer passage??
The breath of heaven did gently swell our sails,
The waves were proud to bear so rich a lading,
And danced to the music of the winds.
You show
Your complement my Lord, call you this Naples?
The kingdom of our enemy which shall groan for the inhabitants. Are all our forces. Landed?
Safe to your wishes, and expect
What they shall be commanded.
We must first
Secure the ground we have, being defenced
With works, we may prevent their sallies, and
Assault to our best advantage, still preserve
Thy courage my Rosinda, tic for thee
We have adventurd hither.
And you have
Been kind to the petition of your daughter,
Who can in duty waite upon your fortune
At home, I should have withered in your absence,
I shall grow valiant here.
My dearest child,
Whose very eyes doe kindle flames of courage
In every soldier, be still safe, and promise
Thy self a brave revenge.
What will become of us Madam?
We must take our fortunes, I am sorry
For thee???
You have some reason for your self, if any danger foal???low I know where to place the cause, but I dare suffer with your grace,
Passerello Madam, and the Page
Hoe's come in good time to relieve our thoughts.
Madam.
Come pluck up a good heart.
Tic coming out as fast as it can, sweet Didimo hold my head.
Come, tic but a little sea sickness.
Seasick quoth???a vengeance of all drunken voyages,
I can doe nothing but???
How now Pazzorello?
Oh Madam, never did man cast up so much, and had so little skill in Arithmetic, nothing grieves me, but I have not drunk for it. I have a perpetual motion in my belly, the four winds are together by the ears in my small guts, would I had never known the Sea, little did I think???oh???
Thou art a fresh water soldier.
Fresh water? I know not, be judge by the whole ship,
If I was not in a sweet pickle.
The worst is past; this is but physic.
If I had thought the sea would have given me so many vomits, I would have seen it burned, ere I would ha ventu???red so far, I ha purged both ways, and the enemy had met us before we landed, I should have scoured some on em.
How doe you now?
The fit is not so violent altogether, a shipboard I run
a tilt, howsoever I beseech your grace, that I may go home again.
There is no way by land.
And a little more jogging at sea???
The very word Sea, boils in my stomach, and will make my mouth run over presently???ho it comes, it comes.
Madam I have a great desire to attend him,
I have cast a plot to make your, highness merry.
You'll play the wag with him, we'll trust you to pursue it
I humbly thank your grace.
Flavia does not the day look black of the sudden,
It has not the same complexion, I hear
A noise too.
From the sea it grows loud.
Tic well we are a shore, oh me I tremble
To think what would be come on's, and we had
Not been before this tempest, I thank providence
I was upon the Sea once in a storm,
But they use to clap the women under hatches,
I never prayed so in my life; the King!
I know not what to think, no sooner Landed,
But such a storm pursue us, does not this
Affright Rosinda into paleness? dost
Not feel an ague?
I have rather cause
Sir to rejoice, it overtook us not
Upon the sea, the fury of it there
Might have been fatal.
Be not troubled sir,
My soul doth from this omen prophecy
The victory you wish upon this kingdom,
Nor is it superstition to believe???
That heaven doth point us out the scourge to Naples,
By seconding our coming with a tempest;
The waves were proud to entertain our Navy:
The fish in amorous courtship-dane'd about
Our ship, and no rude gale from any coast
Was sent to hang upon our linen wings,
To interrupt our wishes, not a ???star
Muffled his brightness in a sullen cloud,
Till we arrived, and t en observe how heaven
Threatens the fall of this proud enemy,
By this prodigious tempest, which but gives
Them warning of a greater.
We are confident
Thou hast happily expounded, what lightning
Darts from those angry exhalations.
It speaks the flame of our revenge.
What thunder?
The loudness of our canon, let their fears
Apply it, and run mad with apprehension.
Our ships must needs fall foul on one another,
Riding ith haven.
Let em crack their ribs,
We have the more necessity to tug for it.
Yet would thou were at home.
Fear not for me sir,
Your absence would present my imagination
With more affliction, I suffer less
In knowledge??? and shall rise by brave examples,
Valiant above my sex, these horrors fright
Not me.
This fire will quicken the whole army. 
What mutiny is here?
Base villains, to take part
With all the malice of the world against me.
What are you?
I am a Gentleman, and dare
Rather than??? suffer a rude hand divorce
This burden from my arms, defy you all.
Alas she will be gone, oh my Cassandra
Thy ??????whole shannot forsake thee thus, isle take it
In with a kiss.
Some whom the wrack has cast
Upon the shore.
Pity the gentlewoman.
Come not too near, the man that first attempts
This Lady, had better rip his mothers womb.
Whence are you?
You are strangers I perceive,
Then I presume to tell you, I have more justice,
To tread upon this earth, then you, or any
The proudest, it once gave us birth, and fate
Ungentle fate, hath sent us back to dye here,
But I will not outlive my dear Cassandra.
Doe you delight in wounds, resign that Lady.
Not while my hand can manage this, the blood
You take, will make us walk on even pace
To death, and when my soul can stay no longer,
Isle leave a curse to blast you, but if you
Bear hearts of flesh about you, and will promise
A pity to this poor departing Spirit
I will not use a sword, but give my life
To be commanded from me at your pleasure,
Your care will come too late.
I promise by
The word and honour of a King, she shall
Be carefully attended.
Though that name
Breed wonder in me, it secures all thoughts
That may concern her safety.
See Rosinda
With as much diligence to this Ladies health,
As you'd preserve your own.
An excellent creature!
My faith is past,
Now if you please you may acquaint us with
Your name and quality,
Something on the sudden
Weighs my hart lower, I ha not power to thank him.
Already you have expressed your self this Country man,
Be more particular.
My name's Vittori.
The Admiral of Naples?
It was a title!
I had too late, and lost it for my service;
I cannot conjure up the dead to witness,
There be some living that remember me,
It was my chance to have the best at sea,
Against the bold Sicilian.
A chance say?
Few victories can boast mo??????e, all is but
The dye of War, which valour must obey,
My lot was to bring peace, and triumph home,
And my reward was banishment, the sea
Held me a sinful burden to the waves,
Or else the blood I shed to mix with em,
In anger and revenge conspired to throw
Our Bark, with the distressed lading back??????
Upon this flinty bosom of your Country,
You have at full my misery, be just
To that poor Lady, whatsoever I suffer.
Your fame was with us earlier, entertain him, 
You are welcome man, there's cause we should
Be kind to you.
Will a King stain his honour?
Know miserable man, thy destinies
Have made thee his, that will exact severe
Account for many lives, most happy storm,
Thy master too shall find a punishment
Great as his pride, how fortunate we are!
I ask no mercy for my self, be kind
To that poor Lady, as you're a Prince, and I
Will kiss my fate.
We violate no promise made to her,
Though torment make thee curse thy self, blessed heavens?
You shall pay dear for all.
Oh my Cassandra,
When at the expense of all my blood, I have bought
Thy precious life from these hard hearted men,
Shed one tear on me; and I am paid again.
You should have thought of this before.
I did think, and think on it again, but there was nec???city of going with the princess, or losing my place at court, when she came back, prithee sweet Didimo council me, I shall ne'er endure these bouncing of guns, happy are they that can destroy gunpowder, without offence in their must???rings, soldiers may talk, but there's neither wit nor honesty in making so many cripples, yet I would give one of my legs to have the tother secured, I care not which, cowards are com???monly creatures of understanding, would I had purged away my soul at sea, there had been peace among the Had???docks.
Come, I have a trick to save thee harmless, thou shat entreat to be gentleman of a company.
Shall I? whats that?
A singular privilege I can tell you, oh the right hand file, doe not you know it.
A right handed file.
There's no honour like it, Isle not give a rush to be an officer, your Gentleman of a company marches in the vanne.
Vanne what's that?
The bullets first salute him, he goes up to the mouth of a Canon, he lies perdue.
Perdue?
More glory than to command an army, to lye two hours upon his belly in the field, and dig a hole for his chin, when the bullets whisper in both his ears, whizz; to be trod upon by horses, and scorn to reveal himself, sometimes to be snatched up by a party of firelockes, or if he fight to bee cut into honourable collups, or his limbs strewed about the field,
which found by a subtlers wife, is sod for the knapsack men, and goes currant for camp mutton, my father was a Captain, and I have heard him tell brave stories of these gentlemen of companies.
And thou wodst ha me one of these gentlemen.
By any means.
Have the bullets first salute me lye perdue as you call it, and be cut into honourable collups, or have my haunches sod by a subtlers wife, and pass for Camp mutton, this is the pre???ferment you wish me to M. Didimo.
You shall be in no danger, I have but told you what fortunes other men have met withal, you shall be secure and march in the vanne.
and come up to the mouth of a Canon.
Tic my meaning.
Which if I doe, Isle give the Canon leave to eat me.
Dost thou think I would advise thee any thing for thy hurt.
Hurt, no no, these are but ??????leabitings, to have my limbs strewed about the field, or so.
Come, I love thee, and will give thee proof, thou hast got money in thy service, put thy body in equipage, and beg of the princess to be one of these brave fellows, I will put thee into a way, to get everlasting fame, and not a hair of thy head shall be the worse fort, thou shat come off.
My head shall come off.
Thy whole body triumphant, my Rosiecleere, and live to make Nations stand a tiptoe to hear thy brave adventures, thy head shall be enchanted and have a proof beyond the mu???sty murrian, did never hear of men that have been sick and shot free, with bodies no bullets could pierce.
Thats by witchcraft.
Tha'st hit the nail boy, I will procure this feat done for thee, fear nothing, but be very secret, thy head shall be an anvil, and break all the swords that light upon it??? and for the shot, thy breath shall damp a Canoe??????, it shall fall off like one of thy buttons.
If this could be compased, I should love witch??????s the
better while I live.
Here's my hand, something shall be done, but put on a brave outside of resolution for the credit on it, that the world may believe tic thy valour puts thee upon desperate actions from which a charm shall bring thee off, or the devil shall nay to some body, here's the Princess.
Look high and let me hear how you'll deserve the benefit.
Madam I know not in what language to
Express those humble thanks my soul is full of,
It shall be justice, you command this life
You have preserve???d.
We should have forfeited
Humanity, not to have relieve???d you
In such distress.
Shall I not trespass madam
Beyond your mercy, by this bold
Intrusion?
My Lord you're welcome.
Your grace honours me, but to you lady
I am directed.
To me noble sir.
We shall be rusty here for want of use,
Oh for an action of battery, I long
To fight pell mell with some body.
Pazzor??????llo.
He???s grown most strangely valiant.
How he looks?
Madam I have an humble suit to your highness.
To me? yare like to prosper in it.
I beseech you I may not bee a Common Soldier, I would cross the seas for something, let me be gentleman of a company, and let the bull??????ets fly as fast as they can.
I must confess you ask a place of honour, but of danger.
Danger's an Ass, oh that I were to fight
With the General now for two crowns!
A mighty wager!
He means both th?????? kingdoms.
I would desire no more then my finger against his mus???ket. If we make no assault presently against the walls, I shall go near to mutiny, and kill two or three of our own Cap???taines.
This he that was sea-sicke?
Oh there is no honour, like to marching in the vanne! Isle not give a rush for a man that wonot lie Perdue half a year together, and come up to the teeth of a Canon.
To the Canons mouth, I speak by a figure.
Now you talk of the mouth; ?????? will eat every day this leaguer four and twenty Canon bullets butterd, and as many Spanish Pikes for sparagrasse: their steel points will fortify my stomach; I will kill my hundred men an hour for a twelve???month together.
You'll not have m??????n enough to conquer.
When the men are all dead in the town, heel lie with all the women, and get as many more, rather then want en???mies.
Oh how I could demolish man woman and child now!
I see your spirit, and must cherish it; isle speak to my Lord; you may have your desire, but be not seen in it for your honour.
Hoe's here indeed, Didimo when shall I be bewitched, and the devil do not put me in good security?
Trust me for that, lets leave em about it.
??????an you be cruel Lady to that man,
That offers you his heart?
Alas my Lord
You ask mine in exchange, and I have made it
A gift already to Vittori, while
He lives he must possess it, as you're noble
Prosecute this no further.
I have done,
Vittori then must die.
Horatio,
Command your prisoner be brought to us presently.
I shall sir.
As you are a King, I beg your mercy
To poor Vittori.
I petition too
For her desires.
Unless he will be cruel to himself,
His fate smiles on him, does he love you Lady.
Great sir, we are one soul, life cannot be
So precious as our loves.
You shall preserve him, Rosinda.
I obey.
Leave, as thy health
Is but a prologue to his blessing, that
Paper speaks our intention, you shall
Present it, if he be wise his judgement
Will meet our purpose, what we lost at sea,
We enable him to satisfy by a second
Proof of his courage, and propound not only
Life, and his liberty, but so great an honour
As next our title, there is left no glory
To equal it.
You're all bounty.
There are some
Conditions, if you find him cool, you may
Apply what argument you find to warm
His resolutions, here he is, I leave you.
I waite sir your command.
She will instruct you
Enjoys my best Cassandra perfect health,
The King is just, and I have not enough
With this poor life to satisfy.
Vittori
Wee now begin our happiness, the King
Has been so gracious.
All that's good reward him,
To see thee safe and smile, I writ my ambition.
When you peruse that paper, you will find
How much we owe to providence, it was
The Kings command I should deliver it,
The words were of s??????ch comfort that came with it,
I must be confident you'll thank him for it.
What should this be?
Sure I have lost my understanding ha?
Does it not bid me to fight against my Country?
I prithee read Cassandra, and repent,
Thou hast thought him merciful.
Wee have pledge for this trust in Cassandra, whose head shall be the price of your disobedience.
The language is too clear.
It carries more
Darkness then ever the night was guilty of,
And I look black already to have read it,
Does he call treason justice, such a treason
As heathens blush at, Nature, and Religion
Tremble to hear, to fight against my country,
Tic a less sin to kill my Father, there,
Or stab my own heart, these are private mischiefs,
And may in time be wept for, but the least
Would I can fasten on my Country makes
A Nation bleed, and my self too, blasts all
The memory of former actions,
And kills the name we live by, oh Cassand??????a
Thou did not well to praise the King for this.
His words did sound more comfort.
Prithee tell me?
How can thou hope I should preserve my faith
Unstained to thee, and break to all the world?
Naples has been injurious, and we made
No solemn vow to love what hath betrayed us.
Take heed, and do not greeve the Saints to hear thee,
If Naples have forgot Vittories service,
I must not make a desperate shipwreck of
My piety, what greater vow? It was
Articled in the creation of my soul
I should obey, and serve my Country with it
Above my self, death is a brave excuse for it,
No he shall see, I am a Soldier
And dare be just, say he should torture me,
Shall wickedness be strong in punishment,
And we not be as valiant in our suffering?
Can then Vittori be content to leave his
Cassandra to the misery of life
Alone? for in the number of mankind
I ne'er shall find, another in whose love
I can place any comfort.
Do not say so?
Princes will court thee then, and at thy feet
Humble their Crowns, and purchase smiles with Provinces,
When I am dead the world shall dote on thee
And pay thy beauty tribute, I am thy
Affliction, and when thou art discharged
From loving me, thy eyes shall be at peace,
A Sun more glorious shall draw up thy tears
Which gracing heaven in some new form, shall make
The Constellations blush, and envy em;
Or if thy love of me be so great, that when I am sacrificed
Thou wot think of me, let this comfort thee,
I die my Countries Martyr, and ascend
Rich in my scarlet robe of blood, my name
Shall stain no Chronicle, and my Tomb be blessed
With such a garland time shall never wither:
Thou with a troupe of Wives as chaste as thee,
Shall visit my cold Sepulchre, and glory
To say, this doth enclose Vittories dust,
That died true to his honour, and his country,
Methinkes I am taking of my leave already,
And kissing the wet sorrows from thy cheek,
Bid thee rejoice, Vittori is a conqueror,
And death his way to triumph.
This is all,
A new disguise for grief, to make it show well.
To make it show indeed, I have talked idly,
And miserably forgot my self, I am ch??????ck'd,
This tells me another tale, if I refuse
To obey the Kings directions, he is not
So kind to take the forfeit of my life,
But he will make the price of my neglect,
Cassandra's innocent blood, if I obey not
To do an act injurious to virtue,
Thy soul must be divorced.
Sir I have read it,
And were not worthy of Vittories love
To value this poor life above his honour,
Keep your high thoughts, p??????eserve all peace within you,
You shall not buy my breath with your own shame,
Isle die with that de??????otion, I ha pried for you,
Which trust me was most heartily, and isle shed
No tears for my own funeral, if any
Unruly drop break forth, when we are parting,
Tic more to leave Vittori then the world,
Yet if thou wot give me leave, Isle confess to the??????
Before my head fall from this other piece,
I would deceive the hangman, for ere thou
Go from me, with a sigh into thy bosom,
I would convey my spirit, and leave him
But a pale ghost, to mock his execution.
I cannot hold, this conflict is more fierce
Then many thousand battles, can thou die?
If you will have it so, you have taught me
To be in love with noble thoughts, I shall
Have some weep ore my hearse, and when Im'e gone
Sealed by my blood, a Martyr for thy love,
The world shall praise me for it, and the Virgins
And Wives, if I obtain no other monument,
Build me a tomb within their hearts, and pay
Their yearly songs and garlands, to my memory,
That died, to save Vittories life and honour.
How should Cassandra die to save Vittori?
Allow it
So you be happy, and although my wishes
Are rather for the punishment of Naples,
More cruel then our enemies, yet if you
Think it dishonour to oppose that country,
I have a heart most willing to preserve
By any death your fame, lose not a scruple
Of your self for me, I carry thy love with me,
And prophecy my story shall throw more
Disgrace on Naples, then all thy revolt
Can bring upon thy name.
I am in a tempest
And know not how to steer, destruction dwells
On both sides.
Come, resolve.
I must???to let
Thee live, I will take arms, forgive me then
Great Genius of my Country, that to save
Her life, I bring my honour to the grave.
I know not what to say to these garboils, there???s a hot Naples toward, and the Prince is so humorous a tother side, I dare not come near him, Captain Mauricio.
Signior Fabio you dishonour your body, by straining so much Complement.
Your humble servant Captain.
A court instrument, and so deep a base, you forget your self, have the Wars made this alteration? keep your garb and be staunch Signior, a Captain is a thing too course for your acquantance, you wonot know Soldiers in peace.
Alas sir, the necessity of my affairs at Court, and place so devours my attendance, that I cannot give that respect which is due to a Gentleman of your quality, no neglect I beseech you Sir.
I am glad tic come about, what do you think now of a Musket bullet next your heart, tic very provocative, come b?????? not sad, thou moist live a day or two longer.
I hope Captain the state of the City is not so desperate.
We expect a battle every hour, &amp; the walls to fly about
Our ears, if they should be patient, we ha not provision to en???dure a siege, what will become of your pumps signior, your wrought shirts, and rich nightcaps, I say nothing of your wardrobe, jewels and other trinkets.
I stand not upon them, my life is more precious to me then all these.
What pity it is so profound a gentleman should dye by gunpowder, what would you give to be saved now?
How dee mean Captain?
For your soul let it ??????heft, I think thou hast little care on it thy self, the??????e be many would give all their estate to out???live these combustions.
I would I were sure on it, condition I lost half my land.
A match??? my life against half your land to secure you, And make an indifferent bargain presently.
Your life? how are you sure to live?
If I dye, you have half your land by it, if you live, tic worthy dividing transitory fortunes, I shall ha the worst match on it.
But how will you assure me Captain?
Thou art not senseless, why your venture is but land a???against my life, which is more precious I hope than thousand acres, is this to be considered??? clap hands, and we will have are???ticles drawn for mutual assurances, I doe not this to every man, but I hope to have good on thee hereafter; the King!
And Prince.
Lets withdraw then, and conclude tic a safe bargain for you sir, if you fail, what would all your estate doe you good, and then I forfeit my life, if you scope, I have but half your land.
I understand, and thank you noble Captain.
Alphonso must be sent for out of prison,
He's an experienced soldier.
To betray us.
Now we are punished for Vittories banishment.
Your fear will make us cowards.
Shall we make A sally forth?
Alberto.
Weal expect more
Advantage first, they have ??????inisht their redoubt,
Is our river guarded with a sconce?
On that part
No enemy can endanger us.
What if you
Tasted Alphonso, he has been ever faithful,
And we too rash.
Keep prudent watches Iulio,
Something ith evening may be attempted,
Death is the worst, and better fall with honour
Then owe our life to fears, I would Cassandra
Were in their Camp, oh Iulio.
It were better
She were at home in your possession.
A Herald sir.
Admit him.
Alberto, Iulio.
Whats the complement now.
Thus Naples is saluted from my Master,
Provoked by injuries above the patience
Of kings to suffer, without thirst of blood
Or pride of conquest, he is come in arms
To ask a satisfaction, if you would
Not know the fury of a war, which acts,
Such horrid ruins against men and nature, that
Repentance cannot easily absolve
The guilt in them that cause it, meet conditions,
And deserve timely my great masters friendship,
With mercy on your selves.
Mercy!
Be temperate.
Remember wounds are made more easily
Then curd, and now arrived within your country,
Revenge may spread a wild destruction,
Let mothers still enjoy their sleep, and dwell
Within their husbands bosom, let their children
Live to requite the parents groan, and prosper,
Let old men pay their debt only to nature,
And virgins dedicate their yet chaste womb
To Hymens holy use, or at their quires
With freedom of their souls, sing holy prayers
For the sweet peace you lend em, to serve heaven.
This fellow's sent to mock us in my heart
I repent all the tie of arms and nations.
That gives such saucy freedom to a Herald.
I claim my privilege, and dare say more.
What more?
Vittori is our general.
Vittori? dares that traitor.
When Kings leave
Their justice, and throw shame upon deservers,
Patience so wounded turns a fury.
How dares Scicily trust him?
Yes he has good pledge;
Too great a pawn.
This, this v??????xation
I did expect, but we must not be frighted,
Tell your insulting master, he shall find
Men that both dare, and can resist this fury;
Conditions we despise, nor let him magnify
His purchase in that rebel, every soldier
With us hath equal courage to Vittori,
But a soul far more honest.
Honest?
So sir,
This, war shall justify upon his heart.
I dare not stay to hear more; least my passions
Betray me, what a fire this language has
Shot through my blood, the poor old king says nothing,
But fills a place like a state cipher.
Herald.
Return this to that Giant of your war,
Vittori, in his absence, we shall find
A punishment for his treason, and to cool
His hot veins, say the first attempt he makes
Against us, shall as valiantly be answered
With his fathers head.
Ha?
By thy masters soul
It shall, and this is all our answer, see
Him safe without the walls.
Thunder has struck me,
I feel new sty??????gs about my heart, my father?
Was ever man ??????o miserably thrown
Upon despair, if I refuse their war
I lose my wife Cassandra, if I fight
My father bleeds, some divine arm sustain??????
My feeble soul, instruct it how I should
Distinguish sorrow, and which blessing rath??????r
I should now part with, a dear wife, or father.
But did the Prince affect thee so Cassandra?
I have told you Madam every circumstance,
I should but flatter my own misery
To speak it less, misfortune had not made me
Your prisoner now, if he had been more temperate.
But did thy heart allow him no affection?
Thou were much unkind.
He had my duty Madam,
Which still I owe him, as my prince, but I
Had but one faith, and that was given Vittori,
I fear I have displeased you.
No thou hast not,
Dost think he loves thee still?
I know not Madam, but I hope not.
Would I could hope so too;
Thou hast deserved my confidence, and although
Thou can not help me, I must tell thee all,
I love that Prince, loved when I first saw him,
And when he courted me, I thought it was necessary
To show I had a soft heart, but he flattered
And took too soon occasion of his absence,
The wounds he left upon Horatio
Were not so deep as mine, which howsoever
I have disguised yet from my fathers eye,
Can find no cure without his surgery
That left them in my bosom, to this end
I urged my father to this war, and begged
With many prayers to witness his revenge??????.
That was a desperate remedy, how if
Your father be overcome, and you made prisoners.
We shall find death or ransom, the first would
Conclude my sufferings, the other not much harm us,
Perhaps advance my ends, but if the victory
Should crown our army, I should interpose
To make conditions for the Prince, fate must
Decide one of these ways.
Madam I pity you,
Sure if the Prince knew with what constancy
Your love breathes after him, he would find a passion
To meet your Noble flame.
I know not whether
To pray for victory, or to be conquered,
For till the wars conclude, I must despair
To see whom my desires pursue.
Tic possible
That you may see him Madam.
When?
This night,
And speak with him, without exposing your
Person to any danger.
Prithee doe not
Mock me sweet friend.
You were compassionate
Of me, and tic but duty I should answer it
With my desires to serve you, not to hold
Your thoughts in expectation, is there any
Gentleman near, whom you dare trust?
With what?
With carriage of a paper, I shall run
Some hazard, but there's nothing can weigh down
That goodness you have showed me, being a stranger,
Isle frame a letter Madam in my name,
And by some charm of love invite him to
Your tent, if he retain part of that flame
Which did so command in him, be assured
The Prince will come.
Thou were create to make
Me blessed, but with what safety can he reach
Thus far and not be known.
He to whose trust
You give this secret, shall remove that fear.
There is a Captain.
Best of all.
Fabrichio.
Send for him strait, if you allow this device
Isle presently dispatch the amorous summons.
Isle call thee sister.
Call me servant Madam,
In that I am honoured
Are you ready Madam?
For what?
To laugh, I am turned enchantress, and now tic upon the minute, Pazzorella by the boys directions comes for his magical armour.
I have something of more consequence to finish,
But I may be at the end of your mirth.
Prosper in all your wishes.
Flavia That's excellent, Herald never
Looked so dreadfully, whore's the Princess?
She commanded not to expect her, but she le not be long absent, whore's t??????e gamest??????r?
Almost within reach of your voice, you'll remember the circumstance, that he may be capable of the charm, hoe's mad to be enchanted.
I warrant you, I have some furies to assist me too. Conduct him hither, if the fool after this conceiving himself bewitched, should grow valiant, and doe wonders, who can help it? if he have but the wit to keep his own counsel, let him take his course, but he approaches.
That is she.
That old hag.
Good words, she has come two hundred mile to day up???on a distaff, salute her, she expects it.
Would you have me kiss the devil?
Doe I say???This is the gentleman my loving Aunt,
For whom I doe beseech your powerful spells.
To make him slick, and shot free.
Right dear Aunt,
He is a precious friend of mine, and one
That will be ready servant to your pleasures
At midnight, or what hour you please to call him.
Thou wodst not ha me lye with the old witch, what a generation of hobgoblins should we have together.
Nor for this benefit, shall you find him only
Obedient to your self, ??????ut very dutiful
To any devil you have.
He is welcome child.
What a salt peeter breath she has.
Where is Mephestophiles.
No more devils if you love me.
I must have some to search him.
Search me? where? for what?
How much was I overseen not to give you warning,
Be not afraid what have you about you?
About me where in my breeches, what doe you mean
I shall be cut for the stone.
Have you any money about you!
Yes I have money of all complexions in my pocket.
Away with it, as you love your self, not for your right hand, have one piece of gold or silver about you, no charms can fasten on you then, her spells can have no power, if you doe not throw it away instantly???give me???t, isle keep it from her knowledge, this were a trick indeed???have you no goldfinches in your fob?
I defy him that has any thing in the likeness of coin.
This is all money in your pocket; and come to be made shot free.
What must I doe now?
Kneel down, and expect with obedience and admi???ration what will become on you???Great Aunt the gentleman is clear and ready, you are sure you have no more impediment of this nature, if you dissemble, and be kilt afterword, thank your self.
Where be my spirits?
He humbly desires you would finish him as privately as might be, he does not know the constitution of every devil, and to make too many acquainted, if he could be finished other???wise, your Art may di??????pence.
He must cut off his little finger then.
How cut off my finger!
What did you mean? here's a ring, a diamond.
I had forgot it.
No more, off wee't, if you love your hand, here???s a jest to
fool away your life quickly, not for the world, present it to her, great Lady of the Laplanders, this gentleman implores his mercy to his joints, and offering this trifle, humbly prays, you would honour him to wear it for his sake.
Comes it freely off.
It came off very hard, but I beseech your learned bell???damship, to accept it as a token of my duty.
I doe and thus prepared, delay
My charms no longer, come away
You spirits that attend upon,
This powerful incantation,
Have you brought that sacred juice,
Which at such a time we use;
Distill it gently I command,
Holding his ears with other hand.
Oh my ears.
The more pain she puts you to now, the less you'll feel hereafter sir.
Now rub his temples, forehead eke,
Give his nose a gentle tweak.
Strike of paleness, and bestow
On either cheek a lusty blow;
Take him by the hair and pull it,
Now his heads free from sword and bullet.
What will they doe with the rest of my body?
Gre??????pe his neck till he groan twice,
Oh, oh.
Enough, now let the young man rise;
Thus on his shoulders I dispense
My wand to keep all bullets thence;
And other weapons that would harm,
Pinch him now on either arm, fairy-like.
Oh, pox other devil oh,
On his breast give him a thumpe,
And two kicks upon the rump.
No circumstance must be forgot,
To make him free from stick and shot;
And now my potent charms are done,
This man is free from sword and gun.
Bounce, You're made for ever.
Farewell to both, for now must I
On my winged Gannet fly.
Suckle and Hoppo fetch long strides,
By your mistress as she rides.
Whether is she gone now?
Home to a witches upsetting, she's there
By this time.
Where?
In Lapland, she will cross the sea in an eggeshell, and upon land hath a thousand ways to convey her self in a mi???nut, I did but whistle and she came to me.
She knows your whistle belike, well art thou sure I am enchanted now?
It concerns you to be sure on???t, and I must tell you one thing, if you make the least doubt on it, you'll endanger all, charms in this kind are nothing without the imagination, be???leeve it, and if any sword or bullet have power to hurt you, ne'er trust your granam again.
Nay nay, I doe believe it, and will bee valiant accor???dingly, they pinched and kicked me devilishly for all that.
Y???are the better proof fort, you cannot be pinched or kicked too much in such a cause, what to be made slick and shot???free? now doe I foresee you'll be Captain within these three days, you cannot avoid it sir, who will not honour that man whom the bullets are afraid of? The Princess.
Repent your grace thought me a gentleman,
If I fail in this duty.
Not a syllable
Of me.
I am charmed.
Happy success attend you.
Your highness has much honoured me, and Lady
I kiss your fair ??????and.
Captain, Captain, a word.
I am in haste now.
Sure the Captain's afraid of me, he knows by instinct
What I am.
Your grace mist excellent mirth.
Tic done then, bid him follow us.
The Princess desires to speak with you
Desires to speak with me!???you have not told her?
Dee think I would betray you.
Would somebody would challenge me to fight before her, if the Ladies knew I were stick free they would
tear me in pieces for my company.
You do not know, what you may get by your body that way, I attend you.
Knives, daggers, swords, pikes, guns both great &amp; small
Now Pazzarello doth defy you all.
You tell me wonders, my son General
Of all the enemies Forces, can Vittori
Lay such a stain upon our family,
Speak it my Lord no more, no private injury
Can so corrupt his nature; come, I know
He dares not fight their cause!
I think so too;
The Prince hath cooled his resolution
By this time.
Ha? you are mystical.
He has sent
Him word, the first attempt he makes against
The town your head must answer it, and I cannot
Believe how ere particular wrongs inflame him
To a revenge, but he retains that piety
Which nature printed in him toward a Father.
Is obligation to a parent more
Then that we owe our Country, oh Vittori,
My life were profitably spent to save
Thy honour, which is great in the worlds eye,
Time shall be grieved to have preserved thy name
So long, and when this blot shall be observed
Upon the last leaf of thy Chronicle,
It shall unsettle quite the readers faith
To all the former story.
Iulio.
My Lord?
It was the Kings command I should deliver.
What?
What must displease you,
You must prepare for death.
Has my son put
Rebellion into act already? that
Will save my executioner a labour,
He has, I read it, look into the tombs
Of all our ancestors, and see their ashes
Look paler then before, the Marble sweates,
The Eboine pillars that so many years
Sustained our titles shake, and sink beneath em,
The Genius of our house groans at this treason,
I will not live for any man to tell me
I am Vittories Father.
Here the Prince!
Forgive me sir my passions, I have guilt
Enough without em to deserve your anger,
He was my son, and that must needs condemn me;
But I will loose him from my blood, and cut
His name from that fair list, that numbers up
Our family, but I forget my self,
I have no minutes at command, my life
Is at the last sand, and I cannot stay,
Be just, and purge Vittories sin with his
Old Fathers blood, I do obey your doom.
What doom? you talk as you were destined
To some black execution, I have
Been too unkind already, and must ask
Your gentle pardon fort, by goodness self
I mock not, I bring life Alphonso to thee,
And but prepared by Iulio, thy heart
With sorrow, to meet honour with more taste.
Good my Lord distract me not, let me die
In my right wits.
Alphonso you may trust
The Prince, my message was but counterfeit.
You are a brave man, and can not be provoked
I see to wound thy honest fame, so just
To virtue, that thou dare prefer her cause
To thy own life, and rather violate
The laws of nature to thy son, then leave 
The privilege of honour undefenc'd,
Thus we embrace thee, do not kneel Alphonso
Unless You'll bring us lower, thus as a friend
We circle thee, and next as a Soldier
Able in spite of age, and active still
We give these arms, this sword, the best in all,
My Fathers armoury, and used to conquest,
Take from thy Prince, and fight, fight for thy Country,
And purchase new wreathes to thy honoured brows,
Before the old be withered, I do see thee
Already mounted as a challenger,
The proud steed taking fire and mettle from
the rider, all bedewed with his white foam,
Flying to meet thy son, whose (once fair) plume
Is stained with blood of his own countrymen.
I reach your sense in part my Lord, but cannot
Gather your words into a sum, beside
The honour is so great I dare not with
The safety of my understanding, think
One so unworthy as Alphonso.
What?
Dares fight against a Traitor, for his Country?
Against all the world I dare.
Be valiant;
And breath defiance against one.
A glory I
My solo's ambitious of.
Vittori Is
That traitor whose offence, whom dost become
More nobly to chastise then his own Father,
Which title if you should forget to encourage you,
Think whose defence you undertake, for Whom
You punish, and what consequence of fame
Waits on this pious action.
My Lord
A Captain of the other side hath boldly offered
Himself a prisoner, and desires access
To your highness, to whom only he must impart
Something he says, that will be acceptable,
We have searched him, and find nothing but a letter
Directed to your self.
To me? admit him,
Mean time you may consider,
Is it with us, Captain.
Please you peruse this paper.
Ha? from Cassandra?
Oh Alberto I
Could wish Vittori dead, but two not satisfy
Unless we murder one another too,
And I must challenge him, he is my son
Although he be a Rebel.
Iulio,
Thy bosom is my own? Captain a word.
I am astonished, ha? I like not this???my Lord.
The Prince is troubled, something like
Excess of joy transports him.
Th???art a fool.
This may be a plot, how dare you trust yourself upon this invitation.
Not on this, be coward then for ever.
Are you sure, this is her character.
Perfectly, beside she has confirmed me by this Ring,
Vittori gave it her, I know it and wood her
Once to exchange.
Yet think upon the danger.
I would run through flames to meet her, use no argumets,
I can be at the worst a prisoner,
And shall be ransomed, keep you council sir,
Captain???the word????Enough,
Kiss her white hand, and say,
I come this night, waite on him to the gates,
Let his return be safe, Alphonso how
Stands your resolve? dare you be Naples Champion
Against the enemy proposd?
My son???
Will both the Kings trust to our swords their cause?
I cannot promise that?
What profit brings
My valour then if I overcome.
Addition
To your own fame, to have cut off a Rebel.
So I must kill my son, or he must be
A Parricide.
Nay if you be so scrupulous,
I looked you have thanked me, and have run too???t.
Except Vittori sir, and I dare challenge
The proudest in their Army.
You are afraid
Of him belike, tic such a kill-cowe gentleman,
But I court you to nothing, you may think on???t,
Yare, now no more a prisoner ??????ulio.
I am worse?
I had some room before, now l'me confined
To such a strait, my heart must of necessity
Contract it self, my own thoughts stifle me,
Vittori is lost already, I must go
Another way to find out my own ruin.
Lady you think not what I am, how near
The bosom of a King.
You cannot be
So near as I am to Vittori sir,
And you increase my wonder, that you can
Nourish the least'hope, that I should forget
My own tie, by remenbring what relation
You have to any other, if the King
Did know this, he would chide you.
Come I see
You must be courted otherwise, with action.
How sir?
And if you will not be so civil.
To change one kindness for another, I
Have skill to prompt you thus.
You are not noble.
Tush this is nothing, I have been too tame,
And howsoever you wittily compose
Your countenance, you cannot choose but laugh at me,
That I have been so modest all this while;
Come, I have another inside, and do know
You are a woman, and should know your self
And to what end we love you, what are you
The worse by private favours to a gentleman,
That have at home been sued too, with petitions
And great ones of both sexes, to accept
Wives, Daughters, any thing, and think themselves
Honoured to take the first fruits, I could have
The virgins of whole families entaild
Upon me, and be brought as duly to
My bed, as they grow ripe, and fit for coupling,
As men whose'lands are mortgaged would observe
Their covenants and the day.
Isle hear no more.
So peremptory Lady? take your course,
The time may come you will repent this forcivenes. 
Whither in haste Fabrichio?
My good Lord
I have brought news, where the Princess sir?
Thou art almost out of breath, what news I prithee?
News, that will please my Lord.
You ask for the Princess, will they please my Lady.
Yes, and the tother Lady too, Cassandra.
Will it spread joy no farther?
Yes it will please you,
And please the King, and the whole army.
Strange, you may impart it then.
My duty sir, did aim it first to you, I was engaged
To deliver a letter in Cassandra's name
To the Prince of Naples, to invite his person
Privately this night.
Whither?
To the Princesses tent.
And hast thou don't?
Don't, and bring back his word to visit 'em.
Art sure the Prince?
As sure as I am your creature,
This will bee welcome to the Ladies, what use
You are to make of this, becomes not my
Instruction, if it be of any consequence,
To make his person sure, when he arrives.
This service will be grateful, Isle acquaint
The King, return the Ladies to expect him.
I have directed him how he shall pass.
And make it good, away, this makes thee happy,
The King shall know it instantly, thei'r here,
Isle give you scope.
He is returned.
What answer?
To your desires.
Whore's Pazzorello now.
He's quarrelling with some body, he is so confident
And domineers, ha? tic he,
He Bleeds too.
A pox a your enchantments, I had like to have my brains beaten out, what will become of me???
Why this is nothing sir.
Nothing sir, would thou had it.
Let me ask you a question, what weapon did it?
I gave but the lye to an old soldier, as we were drin???king together, and he presently claps me ore the pate with the rest of his musket.
That may be, but no sword or gun shall endanger you, as for truncheon, baton, and such wooden batteries you must fortify your self as well as you can against em, beside sir, there is no breach of conditions in losing a little blood, you may have you head broken in twenty places, nay you may bee beaten, and bruised in every part of your body, but all this while you are slick and shot free, your life is your own, and then what need you care sir?
This is some satisfaction.
Should you challenge him at rapier, you should quick???lie find who will have the worst on it.
This service shall be otherwise rewarded,
Isle trust your secrecy, he will be a fit man to engage, beside ti??????
His desire.
You may command me.
Waite upon
This gentleman Pazzorello, he
Will use you nobly for my sake.
Must I
Be a perdue now? Madam I humbly thank you.
The night comes fast upon us.
It cannot come
Too swiftly, that brings so much happiness.
But tic an argument of much love to thee,
That can at such a time invite him hither.
I hope you feed no jealonsie of me,
I did all for your service, and shall then
Think I am happy, when he knows your love
And values it.
I have no fears of thee?
Have none at all.
Flavia?
Madam.
You must keep watch to night.
My duty Madam.
Come let us tell some stories, to pass over
The tedious hours.
I waite your pleasure.
Come Didino, we shall have your tale too?
Mines short and sweet, still at a Ladies service.
Follow me close, I hope you have made your Will.
My Will? why Sergeant I am not sick.
For all that you may be a dead man ere morning, whizz.
What's that?
These bullets will keep you waking, here lie down close, within two hours you shall be relieved.
Dost hear Sergeant, whizz???do the enemies shoot any
Sugar plummes?
Be not too loud in your mirth, I see another give fire, farewell Signior Perdue.
So, now I am a Perdue, this will bee news when I come home again, the poor fellows will fall down and worcester???ship me, I always wondered, why wee had so many brave Soldiers, and quarrelling spirits, if they be shot free, I cannot blame em to roar so much in Taverns???whizz???again, I would fine have one of these bullets hit me, that I might know certainly the toughness of my new constitution, and yet I shall hardly bee sensible of it, ah my conscience if I were crammed into a Canon, and shot into the town, like a Cat I should light upon my legs, and run home again.
Love be propitious still, and guide my steps,
Thou hast engaged me thus far.
Vh, uh.
Whose that?
There's somebody, now I begin for all this to be afraid, flesh will be flesh, and tremble in spite of the devil, what were I best to doe?
Tic some perdue.
Though I be stick and shotfree, I may be beaten, and bruised as I remember, more, I may be taken prisoner by the enemy, and be hanged afterword, and then what am I the bet???la for my enchantment, what a dull rogue was I not to except the gallows in my conditions, but it may be there is but one, queen vala???the word.
Rosinda.
Oh are you there, tic my Lady the Princesses name.
Thy Lady, pre??????hee show me the way to her tent.
I had almost forgot, such a gentleman is expected,
Here is gold prithee make haste.
Now by your favour you shall first go to my Captain
His Name.
Fabrichio.
The same, withal my heart, here is more gold.
I will make the more haste.
Thy news does take me infinitely, if he
Keep touch we may propound what Articles
We please.
Fabrichio is confident heel come.
He will deserve our favour, keep at distance,
Sent for in Cassandras name? belike
He loves that Lady, let him, tic a strange
Adventure, sure my daughter is of counsel
With her, she had some bend that way, till he
Became ungrateful to us.
When you have
Him in possession, you may throw off
Vittori, one whose honesty I fear,
Under your princely favour, you have built
Too much, but heaven has sent the young Prince hither
To disengage your trust, he that dares prove
A rebel to his Country, dares be guilty
Of any other treason.
What shall we
Doe with Cassandra?
Keep her still to waite
Upon the Princess, and expect the first
Opportunity for your kingdom, Naples will
Attend your leisure then, and court your mercy.
Be silent.
Lose no time.
For this embrace, I dare again neglect my life???villains
We are betrayed, my father.
Oh misfortune.
What will become of me?
You're welcome prince of Naples.
Am I betrayed? false woman.
And please your majesty I am innocent, I brought him hither I confess.
Reward him.
??????ome hither sir.
Howe's this? are you in earnest? my Lord aword???but is this the Prince of Naples?
The very same sir.
Take your gold again, I will have more for taking a
Prince, I crave the law of arms, I will have his ransom.
Away with the fool.
Give me my prisoner again then.
Sir hear me.
Another time Rosinda???by thy duty???
Hear me great sir.
Weal hear and thank thee at more leisure too, attend our daughter???
Oh my Lord, be you
But master of so much charity.
Away,
Never was such a black and fatal hour,
As that when I first saw thy cozening face.
The Prince? I dare not trust my senses, ha?
How came he hither? wonder circles me,
Cassandra busy with him too? she courts him,
The Basilisk is not more killing than
This object.
Strumpet hence.
Ha?
My Lord Vittori?
What name was that the Prince bestowed upon you,
Yet doe not answer me, away, new tortures.
Vittori, ha, ha, ha!
Your grace is mighty merry, I could wish
You had more cause.
Vittori I see trouble in thy face,
Perhaps tic wonder, upon what invitation
I am a guest here.
Are you not a prisoner?
You are no stranger to the plot, it seem??es,
Base villain to betray thy Prince.
My Lord
You are too rash in censure, I betray you?
I am so far from the conspiracy
That yet I cannot reach it in my thought,
Much less with guilty knowledge, I dare tell you
The Devil shannot tempt me too't, nor more
Wrongs then your hate can throw upon me.
Juggling!
Can he that dares take arms against his Country,
Make conscience to betray a part of it,
His Prince, degenerate rebel!
Heaven and this King
Know upon what severe necessity
I am engaged to war.
As things fall out
Your valour may be useless, we acknowledge
This happiness, from Cassandra, though she meant
Other success.
Cassandra?
Yes that piece
Of frailety, rather impudence, by the witchcraft
Of her letter tempted me thus far, a curse
Upon her lust.
Indeed you called her strumpet,
She may deserve it by this story, tic
Her character, my eyes, take in new horror. 
And all this while I live, and have my senses,
O woman?????? woman! sir if you remember
It was your conclusion, if I refused
To be your General against my Country,
Cassandras head should off, be constant King,
I wonot.
What?
Not fight, nor for your Kingdom,
She cannot bleed too much, as for you sir.
What of me?
You're still my Prince, thank heaven for that,
Did you else grasp an Empire, and your person
Guarded with thunder, I would reach and kill you,
By my just rage I would, stay I will fight.
With whom?
With you or all the world, that dare maintain
There is a woman virtuous.
Neglect him.
How he breaks out at forehead, this is some
Revenge yet.
Come my Lord, you must with us,
Here your command determines, we shall have
No further use of your great valour sir.
You may with as much ease, discharge me of
A life too, your breath does it, for I dare
Not kill my self, in that I am a Coward.
Oh my hearts grief, preserve my right wits heaven;
The wickedness of other women could
But shame themselves, which like wild branches, being
Cut off, the tree is beautiful again,
But this spreads an infection, and all
The sex is wounded in Cassandr'as fall:
Away, your mirth displeases.
Madam I hope
I have not offended.
Let the boy begone.
Good Madam laugh a little, tic my duty
To drive away your sadness, tic all the
Use, Ladies have for Pages, now and then
To purge their melancholy.
Doe not tempt my anger.
Then isle go seek out Pazzorello
Hoe's better company, and will make me laugh,
If his fit of immortality hold, my duty Madam.
Oh Flavia I am undone.
Not so dear Madam.
Though I be innocent, I want the courage
To tell the Prince Cesario, I love,
Were I allowed access, he must imagine
Me guilty of his dishonour, nor can I
Be happy while he thinks himself so miserable,
Art thou so wise to counsel me? Vittori.
Madam I have an humble suite to you.
To me Vittori, for Cassandra's sake
I must deny you nothing.
For her sake I beg it.
Pray be plain.
That you would speak to the King.
For what?
To cut my head off.
How?
With sword or axe, or by what other engine
He please, I know you'll easily obtain it,
Tic for Cassandra's sake, I would be fine
Despatch'd, sheele thank you too, and then the prince
And she may revel.
I doe find his jealousy,
Alas poor gentleman! but I hope
You doe not mean so desperately.
As you
Love virtue doe this favour???if you make
Scruple, there is a King a little further
Will take my life away at the first word,
For I am resolved to die.
Shall I obtain
A small request from you.
These are delays.
If you be weary of your life, you'll meet it,
For there is danger in it.
And thank you too,
Isle do it by your fair self, now, now, you bless me?
Without exception, Isle obey you Madam.
Tic this.
Doe you not mock me.
No suspicion.
Instantly.
This minute weal begin it, and Isle promise
Something beside that you will thank me for,
But things are not yet ripe, will you doe me
This honour.
Come I waite you, but tic strange
Why you should thus engage your self?
When you know,
You will allow my reasons.
I attend you, now farewell false Cassandra.
The Prince not to be found.
I did suspect
That letter might betray him, now Alberto,
How is the King?
Imagine how a father
Can apprehend the absence of a son
He loved so dearly, but hoe's justly punished
For his indulgence, though we dare not say so.
Tic very strange.
He was merry the last night.
What letter wast Iulio, the Captain brought?
I could distinguish it did strangely move him.
Letter?
Can you forget it.
Pox upon the witch
That sent, now shall I be examined, and
If he return not, lose my head, that letter
Was a discovery of some plot, the enemy
Purposed that very night.
Perhaps this mischief,
Why was it not prevented?
I shall make fine work,
I know not how to shadow it, would he had
Lain with my sister, rather than engaged
Himself so far for Venison.
Peace, the King.
And old Alphonso! I am glad to see
His change of fortune.
The King ever loved him.
Sir have comfort,
Your sorrow will discourage all.
Dost think
He is not taken by the enemy,
And put to death?
They dare not, tic against
The rules of war.
What dare not men that hate us,
And yet conceal the murder?
Whore's the king.
Here, what portends thy haste, and busy countenance?
Oh great sir.
Has thy intelligence brought us knowledge of Our son?
The news I bring my gracious Lord
Concerns the Prince, and how my heart flows over,
That I am pointed out by heaven the first
And happy messenger.
Proceed, and weal reward thee.
All my ambition aims but at your favour,
My soul was never mercenary, tic
My duty to wear out my life in services
For you, and the whole state, whereof although
I am no able member, yet???
Hoe's mad.
It is with joy then, my good Lord Alphonso,
And by the way I must congratulate
Your present favour with the king, I knew
The noble faculties of your soul, at last
Would find their merit.
Villain ?????? what dost rack
My expectation? speak, what of my son?
Answer me without circumstance, where is
The Prince? be brief or???
I know not my good Lord.
Traitor, did not prepare me to expect
News of my son, pronouncing thy self happy
In being the messenger? is he in health?
Answer to that.
I know not my good Lord.
Cut off his head, I shall become the scorn
Of my own subject.
Mercy Royal sir,
And isle discharge my knowledge.
Tell me then,
And isle have patience for the rest, but be not
Tedious, is my son alive or dead?
Alas I know not my good Lord.
Confusion!
But with your Royal licence, I am able
To produce those can satisfy you in every
Particular.
Where? whom? and quickly save thy life.
They waite sir.
This fellow was made for court dispatch,
An Elephant will sooner be delivered
Than his head when tic stuffed with any business.
A Lady.
And a fair one, what's the mystery.
Shoe's not of Naples sure.
Fabio what is she?
Sir, you may justly wonder that a woman,
A stranger, and an enemy, although
My sex present you with no fears, should thus
Adventure to your presence, had I doubted
My self first, since suspicion of another
Defect, ??????oath rise from our own want of goodness,
I had not used this boldness, but safe here
And armed with innocence, I gave up my freedom,
And dare not feed one jealousy, my honour
Can suffer with a king.
An excellent presence.
Her bearing is above the common sp??????rit.
Fair Lady, make me more acquainted with
Your purpose, nothing can proceed from you,
That will not charm us to attention.
Your son great sir.
Where? speak, you do not look
As you delighted to report a Tragedy,
Lives my Cesario?
He does live my Lord.
Support me good Alphonso, I shall faint
Under my joy.
But lives a prisoner
To his enemy, the King of Cicily,
Who wished no greater triumph, then to boast
His person Captive, how he means to deal with him,
May admit some fear, Kings that prescribe to others
In peace, have great prerogatives, but in war
Allow no Laws, above what anger dictates
To their revenge, which blood doth often satisfy.
He dares not be so cruel.
I conclude not,
But yet tic worth some fear, when he that was
The root of all this war, stands at their mercy
That could not wish his safety, and their own
Together, I have told you sir the worst.
Alas, thou hast undone me.
Sir, my Lord?
Lady you were too-blame???my Lord.
Your son
Shall live, and bless your age, to see him live,
If you will be so kind to allow your self
But eyes to witness it.
Flatter not my soul,
That is already weary of her burden,
And would begone to rest.
Gather your spirits.
What hopes?
Assurance sir, if you but please
To entertain it, I came hither on
No empty motive, but to offer you
A pledge for young Cesario.
Where? what pledge?
A pledge of as full value to the owner,
As your sons life to you.
Such security were welcome.
Make me blessed.
Receive me then your prisoner, and you make your bal???lance even,
Lose not your thought in wonder, when you know
The price of what I have presented you;
Your reason shanot think him undervalued,
I am Rosinda, Daughter to that King,
Whose Soldiers threaten Naples, equally
As precious to my Father, and a Kingdom
And to your power, thus I expose my self,
If young Cesario meet unkind conditions,
'Ith same proportion let Rosinda suffer,
Erect a Scaffold quickly ore the walls,
And fright their jealous eyes, when they behold
Who is prepared for death, to equal their
Revenge upon Cesario, whom thei'le threaten
To make you stoop, but lose no part of honour,
As you are a King, their trembling hangman
Shall think himself mocked, and let fall his sword,
Or both our heads take their farewell together.
Alphonso first a woman?
And a brave one!
I admire her nobleness.
You are slow to ask
The cause that hath engaged me to all this,
And yet you cannot choose but read it plainly,
In my guilty blushes, I do love the Prince
Perhaps tic more then he imagines, and
Since I first saw him in my Fathers court,
Without dishonour, I dare justify
My heart was his, and to this love you owe
The sorrow of his absence, for Cssaandra
That noble Lady, to whose breast I gave
My secret'st thought, for my sake by a letter
In her own name, by tie of former love
To her, engaged his meeting at my tent,
Whither no sooner privately arrived,
But by a vilaine that deceive our trust,
My Father was brought in, and he made prisoner,
You have the story, and my resolution
To be companion of his fate.
Again.
Those words dear Lady, that concerned Cassandra.
Alp. Vittori!
All your pardon I must hear this first.
Cassandra is innocent, and but framed that letter
To bring us two acquainted, the earth has not
A purer chastity.
You have kept your word, &amp; heaven reward your soul for it,
My duty sir to you, and to my Father.
He hath deserved his welcome for my sake.
We thus confirm it.
My poor son Vittori!
But tears of joy salute thee, best of Ladies!
Alphonso she is fair, well shaped, my son
Gave her deformed, with what eyes could he look
Upon this beauty, and not love it.
This beauty is her least perfection,
It speaks her woman, but her soul an Angel,
But I forget Cassandra all this while.
Welcome again fair Princess, my Cesario
Is here supplied??????Alphonso.
This may bring the peace about.
May it so? what think you of half your Land?
Do not your acres melt apace?
Away???
Never did Lady such an act of Nobleness,
And what we cannot reach in honouring thee,
Ages to come shall pay thy memory.
S. May I believe Rosinda loves the Prince,
And yet so cunningly disguise it from me?
It was my plot I must confess, but her
Affection bid me too't, I did expect
Another consequence.
Isle to my Daughter.
The Prince now in your power, I hope great sir.
You'll look more gently on Vittori.
We shall think on him. The Prince, excuse my absence.
Can those deceiving eyes look still upon me?
Is not thy soul ashamed, have I for thee
Neglected my own Fortune and my Father,
All the delights that waite upon a Kingdom,
For thy sake drawn this war upon my Country,
And done such things, I did forget I was
A Prince in the acting, and is all my love
Rewarded thus, no devil to betray me
But she to whom I durst have given my soul,
Degenerate woman.
Sir throw of your passion,
And when you have heard me speak but a few minutes,
You'll change opinion, and if you do not
Accuse your self, you will at least acquit
Me from the guilt of your dishonour.
Did not
The magic of your letter bring me hither?
I must not sir deny, I used what motive???
I could to gain your presence, but no magic.
It was worse, and shows more black for thy intention???
Hast thou a Conscience? and can deny
Thou did not mean this treachery.
May heaven
Then shoot his anger at me, I sent for you,
But as I have a life not to betray you.
What could induce thee then?
Love, love my Lord.
Ha? pardon my rashness and my error,
Do I hear thee pronounce, it was love sent for me,
What streams of joy run through me, I am free,
Have suffered nothing, nothing worthy of
So rich a satisfaction, I forget
Naples with as much ease as I can kiss thee,
Have you no more vexation? Oh my stars I
Your influence is too merciful.
Mistake not,
It was love I must confess, but not that love
Your wild imagination prompts you too,
And yet it was my love to wish you happy.
You are in Paradoxes Lady, it was love, &amp; it was not???
Love with another Lady
In birth; and all thats good above Cassandra,
Had toward your person, did command my service
In that rude letter, my ambition
Reached at no greater honour, then to bring
Her passions to your knowledge, think my Lord
Ypon Rosinda.
Ha?
And prison all
Your wanton thoughts, Rosinda was by heaven
Designed for you, as I was for Vittori.
Tic treason to be ignorant, search every where,
Isle hang ye all, unless you find my Daughter,
Prince wheres Rosinda? I will have her, or
Your head shall off.
My head?
I cannot take
Too great revenge, no punishment can fall
Severe enough upon his head was guilty
Of all these tumults.
Is the Princess lost?
Not without some conspiracy, ya're all
Traitors, if I recover not my Child,
I will sacrifice the lives of my whole army.
How ill this violence sits upon a King???Alphonso.
What are you sir?
One from the King of Naples.
Isle hear nothing unless Rosinda be concerned ith message???
She is.
Ha, where?
Safe in the City sir.
A prisoner.
Guarded with love and honour, which he hopes
Is not here wanting to Cesario.
How came she thither?
With Vittori sir.
Ha Vittori?
That double renegade, where is Cassandra?
Off with her head, and his.???
My humblest duty.???
Take council to your action???Rosinda
is in the same condition, my Lord
Vouchsafe me hearing.
Sir, if I were worthy
To advise you, let your passions cool, you but
Provoke their fury to your Daughter, by threatening the prince.
You're now on even terms,
What if you met and parleyed?
Every praise
Thou givst her makes me see my own deformity,
Madam you first awaked me.
Please you sir,
The King would have some further conference.
Direct their counsels heaven.
Thy pardon dear Cassandra,
When I have leave, Isle ask Vittori's too,
And all the worlds.
For further pledge on both sides,
Horatio weal exchange to invite Naples
To give us meeting.
Tic desired already.
We follow, come my Lord old men have passions.
They were not men else.
My sons life Cassandra.
But this is strange news Didimo, is my Lady and mistress a Prisoner? I took the Prince.
It was valiantly done.
Why may not I with my armour of magic bustle a???mong the enemies, and get honour now?
It were your only time, get but a brave horse???
That would carry double, and I might bring home the Princess behind me to the Camp; Say no more; stay, th??????u art sure I am sufficiently enchanted.
No infidelity, as sure as you had no money in your pockets.
Well remembered, if it be so sure my little Didimo you shall now give me account of all that gold and silver.
Such another word, and my Aunt shall take off her ??????urse again.
There's it, this urchin has me oath hip, beside in my con???science, my granam has given thee a spell too, so that wee might fight our ??????earts out, before we kill one another.
You my be sure of that.
Prithee let me try, for my own satisfaction, whether my sword will run thee through or no.
It has been attempted a hundred times, you may as soon prick me with the pummel; but if thou hast any doubt thy own body is not steel proof, my rapier shall demon???state.
Wo't? now tha'rt honest.
Tic to no purpose.
For my satisfaction, if thou love me.
Come on your way??????.
Stay, tic pointed???I have a great mind, but if???but if???I should???I am enchanted; doot, stay, I wonot see it: now???
Never fear.
Oh!
He has run me through body and soul,
hum ?????? I see no point, nor blood, nor pain, ha?
Tic so, god a mercy Didimo, I am right, I see it.
I will dispatch these wars presently.
Your charm will last no longer.
Tell not me, I will then go seek adventures,
We'll wander to relieve distressed damsels,
Through woods with monsters, and with Giants haunted,
And kill the Devil like a knight enchanted.
Lets hear our daughter speak.
First with an humbleness
Thus low, I beg your pardon, and beseech
You would interpret no defect of duty,
That I forsook my tent, and your protection
There is another, stronger tie than natures
Love, whose impulsion you have felt, or I
Had never been your daughter, moved my flight
Love of that excellent prince, whom in your power
I had no way to gain but by this loss.
And if you had been cruel to Cesario,
I should have gloried under these to suffer.
No more, there's virtue in that excellent Princess
To stock two Kingdoms, pardon fair Rosinda,
Thou hast made me fit to know thee, taught by thy
Obedience, I return a son to Naples
Thus, but desire no life without possession
Of that religious treasure, as you're kings???
A chain of hands and hearts.
Oh my Cassandra.
Joy in all bosoms.
Thus our kingdoms knit.
Horatio we are friends too.
Own me your servant sir, I beg your pardon.
I cannot ask forgiveness oft enough
For injuries to thee noble Vittori,
Alphonso and Cassandra.
All your creatures.
Justice my Lord.
Mercy my Lord.
Whats this?
A deed of half his land, if he survived
These war??????, which are now happily determined,
My life was his security, which will
Be merrier with the moity of his Acres.
How if he had dyed?
His Land had gone to the ??????axed heir, thats all
His ghost would hardly call upon my forfeit;
If I had dyed, his land had been discharged,
But we both living must part stakes, he has
Enough for two on s.
??????heated by a soldade.
He must confirm his act.
But in such cases sir ????????? ????????? ????????? estates???
Are too much sir, ????????? ????????? ????????? ????????? ????????? impertinent,
Go to, yare well.
But half well, and like your ????????????
Tic very well.
Our City spreads to entertain such guests.
Never was music of so many parts,
As friends to Naples now, we all jovne hearts.

TEll me of his expenses? Which of you
Stands bound for a gazette? he spends his own;
And you impertinent Fools, or Knaves, make choice
Of either title, which your Signiorships please,
To meddle in it.
Your age gives privilege to this harsh language.
My age! do not use
That word again; if you do, I shall grow young,
And swinge you soundly: I would have you know,
Though I write fifty odd, I do not carry
An Almanac in my bones to predeclare
What weather we shall have; nor do I kneel
In adoration at the Spring and Fall
Before my Doctor, for a dose or two
Of his Restoratives, which are things I take it
You are familiar with.
This is from the purpose.
I cannot cut a caper, or groan like vou
When I have done, nor run away so nimbly
Out of the field. But bring me to a Fence-school,
And crack a blade or two for exercise,
Ride a barbed horse, or take a leap after me
Following my hounds or hawks, (and by your leave
At a gamesom Mistress) and you shall confess
I am in the May of my abilities,
And you in your December.
We are glad you bear your years so well.
My years! No more of years; if you do, at your peril.
We desire not
To prove your valour.
It is your safest course.
But as friends to your fame and reputation,
Come to instruct you: Your too much indulgence
To the exorbitant waste of young Caldoro
Your Nephew and your Ward, hath rendered you
But a bad report among wise men in Naples.
Wise men? in your opinion; but to me
That understand my self and them, they are
Hide-bounded mony-mongers: they would have me
Train up my Ward a hopeful youth, to keep
A Merchants book, or at the plough, and clothe him
In Canvas or course Cotton; while I fell
His Woods, grant Leases, which he must make good
When he comes to age, or be compelled to marry
With a cast whore and three bastards: Let him know
No more then how to cipher well, or do
His tricks by the square root; grant him no pleasure
But Coyts and Nine-pins; suffer him to converse
With none but Clowns and Cobblers, as the Turk says:
Poverty, old age, and aches of all seasons
Light on such heathenish Guardians:
You do worse
To the ruin of his state, under your favour,
In feeding his loose riots.
Riots! what riots?
He wears rich clothes, I do so; keeps horses, games, and wenches;
It is not amiss, so it be done with decorum:
In an Heir it is ten times more excusable
Then to be over-thrifty. Is there ought else
That you can charge him with?
With what we grieve for,
And you will not approve.
Out with it, man:
His rash endeavour, without your consent,
To match himself into a Family
Not gracious with the times.
It is still the better;
By this means he shall scope Court-visitants,
And not be eaten out of house and home
In a Summer-progress. But does he mean to marry?
Yes sir, to marry.
In a beardless chin
It is ten times worse then winching. Family! whose family?
Signior Severnio's.
How? not he that killed
The brother of his wife (as it is rumoured)
Then fled upon it; since proscribed, and chosen
Captain of the Banditi; the Kings pardon
On no suit to be granted?
The same, sir.
This touches near: How is his love returned
By the Saint he worships?
She affects him not, but dotes upon another.
Worse and worse.
You know him, young Adorio.
A brave Gentleman! what proof of this?
I dogged him to the Church;
Where he, not for devotion, as I guess,
But to make his approaches to his Mistress,
Is often seen.
And would you stand concealed
Among these trees, for he must pass this green,
The Matins ended, as she returns home,
You may observe the passages.
I thank you; this torrent must be stopped.
They come.
Stand close.
I know I wrong my modesty.
And wrong me,
In being so importunate for that
I neither can nor must grant.
A hard sentence! and to increase my misery, by you
Whom fond affection hath made my Judge,
Pronounced without compassion. Alas sir,
Did I approach you with unchaste desires,
A sullid reputation; were deformed,
As it may be I am, though many affirm
I am something more then handsome.
I dare swear it.
Or if I were no Gentlewoman, but bred coursely,
You might with some pretence of reason slight
What you should sue for.
Were he not an Eunuch,
He would, and sue again; I am sure I should.
Pray look in my collar, a flea troubles me:
Hey-day! there are a legion of young Cupids
At barley-break in my breeches.
Hear me sir; though you continue, nay increase your scorn,
Only vouchsafe to let me understand
What my defects are; of which once convinced,
I will hereafter silence my harsh plea;
And spare your further trouble.
I'll tell you, and bluntly, as my usual man???ner is,
Though I were a Woman-hater, which I am not,
But love the sex, for my ends; take me with you:
If in my thought I found one taint or blemish
In the whole fabric of your outward features,
I would give my self the lye. You are a Virgin
Possessed of all your mother could wish in you:
Your father Severino's dire disaster
In killing of your Uncle, which I grieve for,
In no part taking from you. I repeat it;
A noble Virgin, for whose grace and favours
The Italian Princes might contend as Rivals;
Yet unto me a thing far, far beneath you.
A noted Libertine I profess my self:
In your mind there does appear one fault so gross,
Nay, I might say unpardonable at your years,
If justly you consider it, that I cannot
As you desire, affect you.
Make me know it, I'll soon reform it.
Would you would keep your word.
Put me to the test.
I will. You are too honest,
And like your mother, too strict and religious,
And talk too soon of marriage: I shall break,
If at that rate I purchase you. Can I part with
My uncurbed liberty, and on my neck
Wear such a heavy yoke? hazard my fortunes,
With all th'expected joys my life can yield me,
For one commodity before I prove it?
Venus forbid on both sides; let crooked hams,
Bald heads, declining shoulders, furrowed cheeks
Be awed by ceremonies: If you love me
In the way young people should, I'll fly to meet it,
And we'll meet merrily.
It is strange such a man can use such language.
In my tongue my heart
Speaks freely, fair one! Think upon it, a close friend
Or private Mistress, is Court-rhetorick;
A Wife, mere rustic Solecism. So good morrow.
How like you this?
A well-bred Gentleman!
I am now thinking if ere in the dark,
Or drunk I met his mother? He must have
Some drops of my blood in him; for at his years
I was much of his religion.
Out upon you!
The Colts tooth still in your mouth?
What means this whispering?
You may perceive I seek not to displant you,
Where you desire to grow: For further thanks,
It is needless complement.
There are some natures
Which blush to owe a benefit, if not
Received in corners; holding it an impairing
To their own worth, should they acknowledge it.
I am made of other clay, and therefore must
Trench so far on your leisure, as to win you
To lend a patient ear, while I profess
Before my glory, though your scorn, Calist'e,
How much I am your servant.
My designs are not so urgent, but they can dispense
With so much time.
Pray you now observe your Nephew.
How he looks! like a School-boy that had plaid the Truant,
And went to be breached.
Madam!
A new affliction:
Your suit offends as much as his repulse,
It being not to be granted.
Hear him Madam,
His sorrow is not personated; he deserves
Your pity, not contempt.
He has made the Maid his;
And as the Master of the Art of Love
Wisely affirms, it is a kind of passage
To the Mistress favour.
I come not to urge
My merit to deserve you, since you are,
Weighed truly to your worth, above all value:
Much less to argue you of want of judgment
For following one that with winged feet flies from you;
While I, at all parts (without boast) his equal,
In vain pursue you; bringing those flames with me,
Those lawful flames, (for Madam know, with other
I never shall approach you) which Adorio
In scorn of Hymen and religious rites
With atheistical impudence contemns,
And in his loose attempt to undermine
The fortress of your honour, seeks to ruin
All holy Altars by clear minds erected
To Virgin-honor.
My Nephew is an ass,
What a devil hath he to do with Virgin-honor,
Altars, or lawful flames? when he should tell her
They are superstitious nothings, and speak to the purpose,
Of the delight to meet in the old dance
Between a pair of sheets; my Grandam called it
The peopling of the world.
How, gentle sir? to vindicate my honour, that is needless;
I dare not fear the worst aspersion malice
Can throw upon it.
Your sweet patience, Lady, and more then
Dove-like innocence renders you
Insensible of an injury, for which
I deeply suffer. Can you undergo
The scorn of being refused? I must confess
It makes for my ends; for had he embraced
Your gracious offers tendered him, I had been
In my own hopes forsaken; and if yet
There can breathe any air of comfort in me,
To his contempt I owe it: but his ill
No more shall make way for my good intents,
Then virtue powerful in her self, can need
The aids of vice. 
You take that licence, sir, which yet I never granted.
I'll force more, nor will I for mine own ends undertake it,
As I will make apparent) but to do
A justice to your sex, with mine own wrong
And irrecoverable loss. To thee I turn,
Thou goatish Ribaud, in whom lust is grown
Defensible, the last descent to hell,
Which gapes wide for thee: Look upon this Lady,
And on her fame, (if it were possible
Fairer then she is) and if base desires
And beastly appetite will give thee leave,
Consider how she sought thee, how this Lady
In a noble way desired thee: Was she fashioned
In an inimitable mould, (which nature broke,
The great work perfected) to be made a slave
To thy libidinous twines, and when commanded
To be used as physic after drunken surfeits?
Mankind should rise against thee: What even now
I heard with horror, showed like blasphemy,
And as such I will punish it.
He strikes Adorio, the rest make in, they all draw.
Murder!
Help!
After a whining Prologue, who would have looked for 
Such a rough Catastophre? Nay, come on, fear nothing:
Never till now my Nephew. And do you hear sir,
(And yet I love thee too) if you take the wench now
I'll have it posted first, then chronicled,
Thou were beaten to it.
You think you have shown
A memorable masterpiece of valour
In doing this in public; and it may
Perhaps deserve her shoo-string for a favour:
Wear it without my envy; but expect
For this affront, when time serves, I shall call you
To a strict account.
Hook on, follow him Harpies,
You may feed upon this business for a month,
If you manage it handsomely: when two heirs quarrel,
The sword-men of the City shortly after
Appear in Plush, for their grave consultations
In taking up the difference;
Some I know make a set living on it. Nay, let him go,
Thou art master of the field; enjoy thy fortune
With moderation: For a flying foe,
Discreet and provident Conquerors build up
A bridge of gold. To thy mistress, boy! if I were
I'thy shirt, how I could nick it!
You stand, Madam, as you were rooted, and I more then fear
My passion hath offended: I perceive
The roses frighted from your cheeks, and paleness
T'usurp their room; yet you may please to ascribe it
To my excess of love, and boundless ardor
To do you right; for my self I have done nothing.
I will not curse my stars, howere assured
To me you are lost for ever: For suppose
Adorio slain, and by my hand, my life
Is forfeited to the law; which I contemn,
So with a tear or two you would remember
I was your martyr, and died in your service.
Alas, you weep! and in my just com???passion
Of what you suffer, I were more then marble,
Should I not keep you company: You have sought
My favours nobly, and I am justly punished
In wild Adorio's contempt and scorn
For my ingratitude, it is no better,
To your deservings: Yet such is my fate,
Though I would, I cannot help it. O Caldoro!
In our misplaced affection I prove
Too soon, and with dear bought experience, Cupped
Is blind indeed, and hath mistook his arrows.
If it be possible, learn to forget:
And yet that punishment is too light; to hate
A thankless Virgin, practise it; and may
Your due consideration that I am so,
In your imagination disperse
Loathsome deformity upon this face
That hath bewitched you. More I cannot say,
But that I truly pity you, and wish you
A better choice, which in my prayers (Caldoro)
I ever will remember.
It is a sweet rogue: why how now? thunderstruck?
I am not so happy: Oh that I were but master of my self,
You soon should see me nothing.
What would you do?
With one stab give a fatal period
To my woes and life together.
For a Woman! better the kind were lost, and generation maintained a new way.
Pray you sir forbear this profane language.
Pray you be you a man,
And whimper not like a girl: All shall be well,
As I live it shall; this is no Hectic fever,
But a Love-sick ague easy to be cured,
And I'll be your Physician, so you subscribe
To my directions. First you must change
This City whorish air, for'tis infected,
And my potions will not work here, I must have you
To my Country-villa: Rise before the sun,
Then make a breakfast of the morning-dew
Served up by nature on some grassy hill;
You'll find it Nectar, and far more cordial
Then Cullises, Cock-broth, or your distillations
Of a hundred crowns a quart.
You talk of nothing.
This tan as a preparative to strengthen
Your queasy stomach, vault into your saddle;
With all this flesh I can do it without a stirrup:
My hounds uncoupled, and my huntsmen ready,
You shall hear such music from their tunable mouths
That you will say the Viol, Harp, Theorbo,
Ne'er made such ravishing harmony, from the groves
And neighboring Woods, with frequent iterations,
Enamoured of the cry, a thousand eccho's
Repeating it.
What's this to me?
It shall be, and you give thanks for it. In the afternoon
(For we will have variety of delights)
We'll to the field again, no game shall rise
But we'll be ready for it; if a Hare, my Greyhounds
Shall make a course; for the Pie or Jay, a Sparhawk
Flies from the Fist; the Crow so near pursued,
Shall be compelled to seek protection under
Our Horses bellies; a Heron put from her siege,
And a Pistol shot off in her breech, shall mount
So high, that to your view she'll seem to soar
Above the middle Region of the Air.
A cast of Haggard Falcons, by me manned,
Eyeing the prey at first, appear as if
They did turn tail, but with their laboring wings
Getting above her, with a thought their pinions
Cleaving the purer Element, make in,
And by turns bind with her; the frighted Fowl,
Lying at her defence upon her back,
With her dreadful Beak, a while defers her death,
But by degrees forced down, we part the fray
And feast upon her.
This cannot be, I grant, but pretty pastime,
Pretty pastime, Nephew!
It is royal sport, then for an Evening flight
A Tercel gentle, which I call my Masters,
As he were sent a Messenger to the Moon,
In such a place flies, as he seems to say,
See me, or see me not, the Partridge sprung,
He makes his stoop; but wanting breath, is forced
To cancellior, then with such speed, as if
He carried Lightning in his Wings, he strikes
The trembling Bird; who even in death appears
Proud to be made his quarry.
Yet all this, is nothing to Caliste.
Thou shalt find twenty Calistes there, for every night
A fresh, and lusty one; I'll give thee a Ticket,
In which my name, Durazzo's name subscribed,
My Tenants Nutbrown daughters, wholesome Girls,
At midnight shall contend to do thee service.
I have bred them up to it; should their Fathers mur???mure,
Their Leases are void; for that is a main point
In my Indentures: And when we make our progress
There is no entertainment perfect, if
This last dish be not offered.
You make me smile. 
I'll make thee laugh outright. My horses, knaves!
It is but six short hours riding: yet ere night
Thou shalt be an altered man.
I wish I may, sir.
I had spies upon you Minion; the relation
Of your behavionr was at home before you:
My daughter to hold parley, from the Church too,
With noted Libertines? her fame and favours
The quarrel of their swords?
It was not in me to help it, Madam.
No? how have I lived?
My neighbour knows my manners have been such,
That I presume I may affirm, and boldly,
In no particular action of my life
I can be justly censured.
Censured, Madam? what Lord or Lady lives, worthy to sit
A competent Judge on you?
Yet black detraction will find faults where they are not.
Her foul mouth
Is stopped, you being the object: Give me leave
To speak my thoughts, yet still under correction;
And if my young Lady and her woman here,
With reverence they may be edified.
You are my gracious Patroness and supportress,
And I your poor observer, nay your creature
Fed by your bounties; and but that I know
Your Honour detests flattery, I might say
(And with an emphasis) You are the Lady
Admired and envied at, far, far above
All imitation of the best of women
That are or ever shall be. This is truth:
I dare not be obsequious; and it would ill
Become my gravity, and wisdom gleaned
From your oraculous Ladyship, to act
The part of a she-parasite
If you do, I never shall acknowledge you
Admirable! this is no flattery.
'Do not interrupt her:
It is such a pleasing itch to your Lady-mother,
That she may peradventure forget us,
To feed on her own praises.
I am not so far in debt to age, but if I would
Listen to men's bewitching sorceries,
I could be courted.
Rest secure of that; all the Braveries of the City run mad for you,
And yet your virtue's such, not one attempts you.
I keep no mankind servant in my house,
In fear my chastity may be suspected:
How is that voiced in Naples?
With loud applause, I assure your Honour.
It confirms I can command my sensual ap???petites.
As vassals to your more then masculine reason that commands 'em:
Your palace styled a Nunnery of pureness,
In which not one lascivious thought dares enter,
Your clear soul standing Sentinel.
Well said, Echo.
Yet I have tasted those delights which women
So greedily long for, know their titillations;
And when with danger of his head thy father
Comes to give comfort to my widowed sheets,
As soon as his desires are satisfied,
I can with ease forget 'em.
Observe that,
It being indeed remarkable: it is nothing
For a simple Maid that never had her hand
In the hony-pot of pleasure, to forbear it;
But such as have licked there, and licked there often,
And felt the sweetness of't. ???
How her mouth runs over with rank ima???gination!
If such can,
As I urged before, the kickshaw being offered
Refuse to take it, like my matchless Madam,
They may be Sainted.
I'll lose no more breath
In fruitless reprehension; look to it,
I'll have thee wear this habit of my mind,
As of my body.
Seek no other president:
In all the books of Amadis de Gaul,
The Palmerins, and that true Spanish story
The Mirror of Knighthood, which I have read often,
Read feelingly, nay more, I do believe in it
My Lady has no parallel.
Do not provoke me.
If from this minute, thou ere stir abroad,
Write Letter or receive one, or presume
To look upon a man, though from a Window,
I'll chain thee like a slave in some dark corner;
Proscribe thy daily labour: Which omitted,
Expect the usage of a Fury from me,
Not an indulgent Mothers, Come Calypso.
Your Ladyships injunctions are so easy,
That I dare pawn my credit, my young Lady
And her woman shall obey'em.
You shall fry first
For a rotten piece of dry Touchwood, and give fire
To the great Fiends Nostrils, when he smokes To???basso.
Note the injustice Madam; they would have us
Being young and hungry, keep a perpetual Lent,
And the whole year to them a Carnival.
Easy injunctions, with a mischief to you:
Suffer this, and suffer all.
Not stir abroad!
The use and pleasure of our eyes denied us?
Insufferable.
Nor write, nor yet receive an amorous Letter!
Not to be endured.
Nor look upon a man out of a Window.
Flat tyranny, insupportable tyranny
To a Lady of your Blood.
She is my Mother, &amp; how I should decline it?
Run away from it, take any course,
But without means Mirtilla, how shall we live?
What a question's that; as if
A buxom Lady could want maintenance
In any place in the World, where there are Men,
Wine, Meat, or Money stirring.
Be you more modest,
Or seek some other Mistress: Rather then
In a thought or dream, I will consent to ought
That may take from my honour, I'll endure
More then my Mother can impose upon me.
I grant your honour is a specious dressing,
But without conversation of men,
A kind of nothing; I will not persuade you
To disobedience: Yet my Confessor told me
(And he you know is held a learned Clerk)
When Parents do enjoin unnatural things,
Wise Children may evade 'em. She may as well
Command when you are hungry, not to eat,
Or drink, or sleep; and yet all these are easy
Compared with the not seeing of a man,
As I persuade no farther, but to you
There is no such necessity; you have means
To shun your Mothers rigour.
Lawful means?
Lawful, and pleasing too, I will not urge
Caldoro's loyal love, you being averse to it,
Make trial of Adorio.
And give up my honour to his lust.
There's no such thing
Intended, Madam; in few words write to him
What slavish hours you spend under your Mother,
That you desire not present marriage from him,
But as a noble Gentleman to redeem you
From the tyranny you suffer. With your Letter
Present him some rich Jewel; you have one,
In which the Rape of Proserpine, in little
Is to the life expressed. I'll be the Messenger
With any hazard, and at my return,
Yield you a good account of't.
It is a business to be considered of.
Consideration, when the converse of your
Lover is in question,
Is of no moment: If she would allow you
A Dancer in the morning to well breathe you,
A Songster in the afternoon, a Servant
To air you in the evening; give you leave
To see the Theater twice a week, to mark
How the old Actors decay, the young sprout up,
A fitting observation, you might bear it;
But not to see, or talk, or touch a man,
Abominable!
Do not my blushes speak
How willingly I would assent?
Sweet Lady,
Do something to deserve 'em, and blush after.
ANd are these French-men, as you say, such Gallants?
Gallant and active; their free breeding knows not
The Spanish and Italian preciseness
Practised among us. What we call immodest,
With them is styled bold Courtship: they dare fight
Under a Veivet-Ensign at fourteen.
A Petticoat you mean.
You are in the right;
Let a Mistress wear it under an armour of proof,
They are not to be beaten off.
You are merry Neighbor.
I fool to make you so, pray you observe 'em.
They are the forwardest Monsieurs; born Physicians
For the malady of young Wenches, and ne'er miss,
I ow my life to one of 'em, when I was
A raw young thing, not worth the ground I trod on;
And longed to dip my Bread in Tar, my Lips
As blue as Salt-water, he came up roundly to me,
And cured me in an instant, Venus be praised for it.
They come, leave prating.
I am dumb, an'c like your honour.
We will not break the league confirmed be???tween us,
And your great Master; the passage of his Army
Through all our Territories, lies open to him;
Only we grieve that your design for Rome
Commands such haste, as it denies us means
To entertain you, as your worth deserves,
And we would gladly tender.
Royal Alphonso, the King my Master, your confederate,
Will pay the debt he owes, in Fact, which I
Want words t'express; I must remove to night,
And yet, that your intended favours may not
Be lost, I leave this Gentleman behind me,
To whom you may vouchsafe 'em; I dare say
Without Repentance. I for bear to give
Your Majesty his character; in France
He was a President for Arts and Arms
Alphonso receives Monteclaro
Without a rival, &amp; may prove in Naples
Worthy thy imitation,
Is he not Madam
A Monsieur in print? What a garb was there? O rare!
Then how he wears his clothes, and the fashion of 'em.
A main assurance that he is within
All excellent: By this, wise Ladies ever
Make their conjectures.
Peace, I have observed him
From head to foot.
Eye him again, all over.
It cannot royal Sir, but argue me
Of much presumption, if not impudence,
To be a suitor to your Majesty,
Before I have deserved a gracious grant,
By some employment prosperously archiev'd.
But pardon gracious Sir: when I left France
I made a vow to a bosom Friend of mine
(Which my Lord General, if he please, can witness)
With such humility, as well becomes
A poor Petitioner to desire a Boon 
From your magnificence.
With what punctual form he does deliver it.
I have eyes; no more.
For Severino's pardon, you must excuse me,
I dare not pardon murder:
His fact Sir, ever submitting to your abler judgment,
Merits a fairer name: He was provoked,
As by unanswerable proofs it is confirmed,
By Monteclaro's rashness; who ripening
That Severino, without his consent,
Had married Jolante his sole sister
(It being concleal'd almost for thirteen years)
Though the Gentleman, at all parts, was his equal,
First challenged him, and that declined, he gave him
A blow in public.
Not to be endured, but by a slave.
This, great Sir, justly weighed,
You may a little, if you please, take from
The rigour of your Justice, and express
An act of mercy.
I can hear no more,
This opens an old wound, and makes a new one.
Would it were cicatriz'd, waite me.
As your shadow.
We grant you these are glorious pretences,
Revenge appearing in the shape of valour,
Which wise Kings must distinguish. The defence
Of Reputation, now made a Bawd
To murder; every trifle falsely styled
An injury, and not to be determined
But by a bloody Duel; though this vice
Hath taken root and growth beyond the Mountains
(As France, and in strange fashions her Ape
England can dearly witness, with the loss
Of more brave spirits, then would have stood the shock
Of the Turks army) while Alphonso lives
It shall not here be planted: Move me no further
In this. In what else suiting you to ask,
And me to give, expect a gracious answer,
How ever welcome to our Court, Lord General,
I'll bring you out of the Ports, and then betake you
To your good fortune.
Your Grace overwhelms me.
You are bound to favour him: Mark you how he pleaded
For my Lords pardon.
That's indeed a tie; but I have a stronger on me.
Say you love
His person, be not ashamed of't, he's a man;
For whose embraces though Endimion
Lay sleeping by, Cynthia would leave her orb,
And exchange kisses with him.
Do not Fan
A fire that burns already to hot in me,
I am in my honour sick, sick to the death,
Never to be recovered.
What a coyl's here
For loving a man? It is no Africa wonder,
If like Pasiphae you doted on a Bull,
Indeed't were monstrous: but in this you have
A thousand thousand presidents to excuse you.
A Sea-mans wife may ask relief of her Neighbor
When her husbands bound to the Indies, and not blamed for it;
And many more besides of higher calling,
Though I forbear to name'em: You have a husband,
But as the case stands with my Lord, he is
A kind of no husband; and your Ladyship
As free as a widow can be. I confess
If Ladies should seek change, that have their husbands
At Board and Bed, to pay their marriage duties,
The surest bond of concord, it were a fault,
Indeed it were: But for your honour that
Do lie alone so often, Body of me,
I am zealous in your cause; let me take breath
I apprehend what thou would say: I want all
As means to quench the spurious fire that burns here.
Want means while I your Creature live?
I dare not
Be so unthankful.
Wilt thou undertake it,
And as an earnest of much more to come
Receive this Jewel, and Purse cramn'd full of Crowns,
How dearly I am forced to buy dishonour.
I would do it gratis, but it would ill become
My breeding to refuse your honours bounty,
Nay, say no more, all Rhetoric in this
Is comprehended; let me alone to work him,
He shall be yours; that's poor, he is already
At your devotion I will not boast
My faculties this way, but suppose he were
Coy as Atones, or Hippolitus,
And your desires more hot then Citherea's,
Or wanton Phedras, I will bring him chained
To your embraces, glorying in his Fetters. I have said it.
Go and prosper, and imagine a salary beyond thy hopes.
Sleep you
Secure on either ear, the burdens yours
To entertain him, mine to bring him hither.
Your wrong's beyond a challenge, and you deal
To fairly with him, if you take that way
To right your self.
The least that you can do
In the terms of honour is, when next you neet him
To give him the bastinado.
And that done,
Draw out his Sword to cut your own throat. No,
Be ruled by me, show your self an Italian,
And having received one injury, do not put off
Your Hat for a second; there are fellows that
For a few crowns will make him sure, and so
With your revenge, you prevent future misthief.
I thank you Gentlemen for your studied care
In what concerns my honour; but in that
I'll steer mine own course, yet that you may know
You are still my Cabinet Counsellors, my bosom
Lies open to you. I begin to feel
A weariness, nay, satiety of looseness,
And something tells me here, I should repent
My harshneis to Caliste.
When you please, you may remove that scruple.
I shall think on it.
Sir, Sir, are you ready?
To do what? I am sure it is not yet dinner time.
True; but I usher
Such an unexpected dainty bit for breakfast,
As yet I never cooked? it is not Potargo,
Fride Frogs, Potato's Marrowed, Caviar,
Carps Tongues, the Pith of an English Chine of Beef,
Nor our Italian delicate Oiled Mushrooms,
And yet a drawer on too; and if you show not
An appetite, and a strong one; I'll not say
To eat it, but devour it, without grace too,
For it will not stay a Preface. I am shamed,
And all my past provocatives will be jeered at.
Art thou in thy wits? what new found rarity
Hast thou discovered?
No such matter Sir; it grows in our own
Country.
Serve it up,
I feel a kind of stomach.
I could feed too.
Not a bit upon a march; there's other Lattice
For your course Lips; this is peculiar only
For my Masters palate, I would give my whole years wages
With all my veils, and fees due to the Kitchen,
But to be his Carver.
Leave your fooling Sirrah, and bring in your dainty.
I will bring in it self,
It has life and spirit in it, and for proof,
Behold: Now fall to boldly, my life on it
It comes to be tasted.
Ha! Calistes Woman.
A handsome one by Venus.
Pray you for bear,
You are welcome fair one.
How that blush becomes her.
Aim your designs at me?
I'em trusted Sir
With a business of near consequence, which I would
To your private ear deliver:
I told you so.
Give her audience on your Couch, it is fit state
To a she Ambassador.
Pray you Gentlemen
For a while dispose of your selves, I'll strait attend you.
Dispatch her first for your honour, the quick???lie doing,
You know what follows.
Will you please to vanish
Now pretty one, your pleasure; you shall find me
Ready to serve you, if you'll put me to
My Oath, I'll take it on this Book.
O Sir, the favour is too great, and far above
My poor ambition, I must kiss your hand
In sign of humble thankfulness.
So mo dest.
It well becomes a Maid, Sir, spare those blessings
For my noble Mistress, upon whom with Justice,
And with your good allowance, I might add
With a due gratitude: you may confer 'em,
But this will better speak her chaste desires 
Then I can fancy what they are, much less
With moving language to their fair deserts
Aptly express 'em. Pray you read, but with
Compassion, I beseech you: if you find
The Paper blurred with tears fallen from her eyes,
While she endeavoured to set down that truth
Her Soul did dictate to her, it must challenge
A gracious answer.
O the powerful charms!
By that fair hand writ down here; not like those
Which dreadfully pronounced by Circa, changed
Ulysses followers into Beasts; these have
An opposite working, I already feel
But reading 'em, their saving operations,
And all those sensual, loose, and base desires
Which have too long usurped, and tyrannised
Over my Reason, of themselves fall of
Most happy Metamorphosis! in which
The film of Error that did blind my Judgment
And seduced Understanding, is removed:
What Sacrifice of Thanks can I return
Her pious Charity, that not alone
Redeems me from the worst of slavery,
The tyranny of my beastly appetites;
To which, I long obsequiously have bowed,
But adds a marchless favour to receive
A benefit from me, nay, puts her Goodness
In my protection.
Transformed? it is 
A blessed Metamorphosis, and works
I know not how on me:
My joys are boundless,
Curbed with no limits; for her sake, Mirtilla,
Instruct me how I presently may seal
To those strong bonds of loyal love, and service
Which never shall be cancelled.
She'll become your debtor Sir, if you vouch???safe to answer
Her pure affection.
Answer it Mirtilla; with more then ado???ration I kneel to it.
Tell her I'll rather die a thousand deaths,
Then fail with punctuality to perform
All her commands.
I am lost on this assurance,
(Which if it were made to me, I should have faith in it, 
As in an Oracle. Ah me) she presents you
This Jewel, her dead Grandsirs gift, in which,
As by a true Egyptian Herogliphick,
(For so I think she called it) you may be
Instructed what her suit is, you should do,
And she with joy will suffer.
Heaven be pleased to qualify this excess of happiness
With some disafter, or I shall expire
With a surfeit of Felicity, with what art
The cunning Lapidary hath here expressed
The rape of Proserpine, I apprehend
Her purpose, and obey it, yet not as
A helping Friend, but a Husband, I will meet
Her chaste desires with lawful heat, and warm
Our Hymeneal sheets with such delights
As leave no sting behind 'em.
I despair then. 
At the time appointed, say wench, I'll at???tend her,
And guard her from the fury of her Mother,
And all that dare disturb her.
You speak well, and I believe you.
Would you ought else.
I would carry some love sign to her; and now I think on it,
The kind salute you offered at my entrance,
Hold it not impudence that I desire it,
I'll faithfully deliver it.
O a kiss, you must excuse me, I was then mine own,
Now wholly hers: The touch of other Lips
I do abjure for ever; but there's Gold
To bind thee still my advocate.
Not a kiss? I was coy when it was offered, and now justly
When I beg one am denied, what scorching fires
My loose hopes kindle in me? Shall I be
False to my Ladies trust? and from a servant
Rise up her rival? His words have bewitched me,
And something I must do, but what? it is yet
An embrion, and how to give it form
Alas I know not, pardon me, Caliste,
I am nearest to my self, and time will teach me
To perfect that which yet is undetermined.
You are Master of your self, yet if I may
As a tried Friend in my love and affection,
And a servant in my duty speak my thoughts,
Without offence? in the way of counsel to you,
I could allege, and truly that your purpose
For Naples covered with a thin disguise
Is full of danger.
Danger Claudio?
It is here, and every where our forced companion,
The rising and the setting Sun, beholds us
Environed with it; our whole life a journey
Ending in certain ruin.
Yet we should not, howev'r besieged, deli???ver up our Fort
Of life, till it be forced.
It is so indeed by wisest men concluded, which we should
Obey as Christians; but when I consider
How different the progress of our actions
Are from Religion, nay, Morality,
I cannot find in Reason, why we should
Be scrupulous that way only, or like Meteors
Blaze forth prodigious terrors, till our stuff
Be utterly consumed, which once put out,
Would bring security unto our selves,
And safety unto those we prey upon.
O Claudio: since by this fatal hand
The brother of my wife, bold Monteclaro,
Was left dead in the field, and I proscribed
After my flight, by the justice of the King,
My being hath been but a living death
With a continued torture.
Yet in that you do delude their bloody violence
That do pursue your life.
While I by ripens live terrible to others as my self,
What one hour can we challenge as our own
(Unhappy as we are) yielding a beam
Of comfort to us? Quiet night that brings
Rest to the labourer, is the Outlaws day,
In which he rises early to do wrong,
And when his work is ended, dares not sleep:
Our time is spent in watches to entrap
Such as would shun us, and to hide our selves
From the Ministers of Justice, that would brihg us
To the correction of the Law. O Claudio,
Is this a life to be preserved? and at
So dear a rate? But why hold I discourse
On this sad subject? since it is a burden
We are marked to bear, and not to be shook off
But with our humane frailty. In the change
Of dangers there is some delight, and therefore
I am resolved for Naples.
May you meet there
All comforts that so fair and chaste a wife
(As fame proclaims her without parallel)
Can yield to ease your sorrows.
I much thank you;
Yet you may spare those wishes, which with joy
I have proved certainties, and from their want
Her excellencies take lustre.
Ere you go yet,
Some charge unto your Squires not to fly out
Beyond their bounds, were not impertinent:
For though that with a look you can command 'em,
In your absence they'll be headstrong
It is well thought on,
I'll touch my horn, they know my call, 
And will, as soon as heard, make in to it from all quarters,
As the flock to the shepherds whistle.
1: What's your will?
2. Hail Sovereign of these Woods.
3. We lay our lives at your Highness feet.
4. And will confess no King,
Nor Laws, but what come from your mouth; and those
We gladly will subscribe to:
Make this good
In my absence to my substitute, to whom
Pay all obedience as to my self:
The breach of this in one particular
I will severely punish; on your lives
Remember upon whom with our allowance
You may securely prey, with such as are
Exempted from your fury.
It were not amiss,
If you please, to help their memory; besides,
Here are some newly initiated.
To these read you the Articles: I must be gone;
Claudio, farewell,
May your return be speedy.
1. Silence; out with your Table-books.
2. And observe.
The Cormorant that lives in expectation
Of a long wished for dearth, and smiling grinds
The faces of the poor, you may make spoil of;
Even theft to such is Justice.
3. He's in my Tables.
The grand Incloser of the Commons, for
His private profit, or delight, withal
His Herds that graze upon it are lawful prize,
4. And we will bring'em in, although the devil
Stood roaring by, to guard'em.
If a Usurer,
Greedy at his own price, to make a purchase,
Taking advantage upon Bond, or Mortgage,
From a Prodigal, pass through our Territories,
In the way of custom, or of tribute to us,
You may ease him of his burden.
2. Wholesome doctrine.
Claud Builders of Iron Mills, that grub up Forests,
With Timber Trees for shipping.
1. May we not have a touch at Lawyers:
By no means; they may
To soon have a gripe at us; they are angry Hornets,
Not to be jested with.
3. This is not so well:
The owners of dark shops that vent their wares
With Perjuries; cheating Vintners not contented
With half in half in their reckonings, yet cry out
When they find their ghosts want coin, it is late, and Bed-time;
These ransack at your pleasures.
3. How shall we know'em.
If they walk on foot by their Rat-colour'd stockings,
And shining shoes. If Horsemen by short Boots,
And riding furniture of several Counties.
2. Not one of the List escapes us.
But for Scholars,
Whose wealth lies in their heads, &amp; not their pockets,
Soldiers that have bled in their Countries service,
The Rent-rack'd Farmer, needy Market folks,
The sweaty Laborer; Carriers that transport
The goods of other men, are privileged;
But above all, let none presume to offer
Violence to women, for our King hath sworn,
Who that way's a Delinquent; without mercy
Hangs for it by Marshal law.
Long live Severino.
And perish all such cullions as rapine at his new Mo???narchy.
About your business,
That he may find at his return good cause
To praise your care and discipline.
We'll not fail Sir.
Thou art sure mistaken, it is not possible
That I can be the man thou art employed too.
Not you the man? you are the man of men,
And such another in my Ladies eye,
Never to be discovered.
A mere stranger newly arrived?
Still the more probable,
Since Ladies, as you know, affect strange dainties,
And brought far to 'em. This is not an age
In which Saints live; but women, knowing women,
That understand their Summum bonum, is
Variety of pleasures in the touch,
Derived from several Nations; and if men
Would be wise by their example.
As most are. It is a coupling age!
Why sir, do Gallants travel?
Answer that question; but at their return
With wonder to the hearers, to discourse of
The garb and difference in foreign Females.
As the lusty Girl of France, the sober German,
The plump Dutch Fro, the stately Dame of Spain,
The Roman Libertine, and spriteful Tuscan,
The merry Greek, Venetian Courtesan,
The English fair Companion, that learns something
From every Nation, and will fly at all.
I say again the difference betwixt these
And their own Country Gamesters.
Aptly urged.
Some make that their main end; but may I ask
Without offence to your gravity, By what title
Your Lady that invites me to her favours,
Is known in the City.
If you were a true born Monsieur,
You would do the business first, and ask that after.
If you only truck with her title, I shall hardly
Deserve thanks for my travel; she is Sir
No single Duccat trader, nor a Beldam
So frozen up, that a Fever cannot thaw her.
No Lioness by her breath.
Leave these impertinencies, and come to the matter.
Would you wooed be as forward
When you draw for the upshot, she is Sir a Lady,
A rich, fair, well-complexioned, and what is
Not frequent among Venus Votaries,
Upon my credit, which good men have trusted;
A sound and wholedom Lady, and her name is
Madonna Jolante.
Jolante. I have heard of her, for chastity, and beauty;
The wonder of the age.
Pray you not too much,
Of chastity, fair, and free I do subscribe too,
And so you'll find her.
Come you're a base Creature,
And covering your foul ends with her fair name,
Give me just reason, to suspect you have
A plot upon my life.
A plot! Very fine!
Nay, it is a dangerous one, pray you beware of't,
It is cunningly contrived, I plot to bring you
A foot with the travel of some forty paces,
To those delights, which a man not made of Snow,
Would ride a thousand miles for. You shall be
Received at a Postern door, if you be not cautious,
By one whose touch would make old Nestor young,
And cure his Hernia? A terrible plot!
A kiss then ravished from you by such Lips
As flow with Nectar, a Juicy-palm more precious
Then the famed Sibilla's Bough to guide you safe
Through Mists of perfumes to a glorious room,
Where Jove might feast his Juno, a dire plot,
A Banquet I'll not mention, that is common;
But I must not forget to make the plot
More horrid to you. The retiring bower
So furnished, as might force the Persians envy,
The Silver bathing Tub, the Cambric rubbers,
Th'embroider'd Quilt, a Bed of Gossamer,
And Damask Roses, a mere Powder plot
To blow you up; and last, a Bed-fellow,
To whose rare entertainment all these are
But foils, and settings off.
No more, her breath would warm an
Euenuch.
I knew I should heat you; now he begins to glow.
I am flesh and blood,
And I were not man, if I should not run the hazard,
Had I no other ends in it, I have considered
Your motion, Matron.
My Plot Sir on your life,
For which, I am deservedly suspected
For a base and dangerous woman. Fare you well Sir,
I'll be bold to take my leave.
I will along too.
Come pardon my suspicion, I confess
My Error; and eyeing you better, I perceive
There's nothing that is ill that can flow from you.
I am serious, and for proof of it I'll purchase
Your good opinion.
I am gently natured,
And can forget a greater wrong upon
Such terms of satisfaction.
What's the hour.
Twelve.
I'll not miss a minute.
I shall find you at your lodging?
Certainly, return my service,
And for me kiss your Ladies hands.
At twelve, I'll be your convoy.
I desire no better.
WAlk the Horses down the Hill, I have a little
To speak in private.
Good Sir, no more anger.
Love do you call it? Madness, wilful Madness;
And since I cannot cure it, I would have you
Exactly mad. You are a lover already,
Be a drunkard too, and after turn small Poet,
And then you are mad Katexikene, the Madman.
Such as are safe on shore, may smile at tem???pests,
But I that am embarked, and every minute
Expect a shipwreck, relish not your mirth;
To me it is unseasonable.
Pleasing Viands, are made sharp by sick palats. I affect
A handsome Mistress in my grey Beard, as well
As any Boy of you all; and on good terms
Will venture as far in the fire, so she be willing
To entertain me; but ere I would dote
As you do, where there is no flattering hope
Ever t'enjoy her, I would forswear Wine,
And kill this lecherous Itch with drinking Water,
Or live like a Carthusian on Poor-John,
Then bathe my self, night by night, in marble dew,
And use no Soap but Camphir-Balls.
You may (and I must suffer it) like a rough Surgeon,
Apply these burning costicks to my wounds
Already gangrened, when soft unguents would
Better express an Uncle, with some feeling
Of his Nephews torments.
I shall melt, and cannot
Hold out if he whimper. O that this young fellow,
Who on my knowledge is able to beat a man,
Should be baffel'd by this blind imagin'd-Boy,
Or fear his Bird-bolts.
You've put your self already
To too much trouble in bringing me thus far:
Now if you please, with your good wishes leave me
To my hard fortunes.
I'll forsake my self first.
Leave thee? I cannot, will not; thou shalt have
No cause to be weary of my company,
For I'll be useful, and ere I see thee perish,
Dispensing with my dignity and candor,
I will do something for thee, though it savour
Of the old Squire of Troy. As we ride, we will
Consult of the means: Bear up.
I cannot sink,
Having your noble aids to buoy me up;
There was never such such a Guardian.
How's this? stale complements to me? when my work's done,
Commend th'artificer, and then be thankful.
How doest thou like my gown?
It is rich and Courtlike.
The dressings too are suitable?
I must say so, or you might blame my want of care.
My mother
Little dreams of my intended flight, or that
These are my nuptial ornaments.
I hope so.
How dully thou reply! thou dost not envy
Adorio's noble change, or the good fortune
That it brings to me?
My endeavours that way can answer for me.
True, you have discharged
A faithful Servants duty, and it is
By me rewarded like a liberal Mistress:
I speak it not to upbraid you with my bounties,
Though they deserve more thanks and ceremony
Then you have yet expressed.
The miseries which from your happiness I am sure to suffer,
Restrain my forward tongue; and gentle Madam,
Excuse my weakness, though I do appear
A little daunted with the heavy burden
I am to undergo: when you are safe,
My dangers like to roaring torrents will
Gush in upon me; yet I would endure
Your mothers cruelty; but how to bear
Your absence, in the very thought confounds me:
Since we were children, I have loved and served you;
I willingly learned to obey, as you
Grew up to knowledge, that you might command me;
And now to be divorced from all my comforts,
Can this be borne with patience?
The necessity of my strange fate commands it; but I vow
By my Adorio's love, I pity thee.
Pity me, Madam! a cold charity;
You must do more, and help me.
Ha! what said you?
I must? is this fit language for a servant? 
For one that would continue your poor servant,
And cannot live that day in which she is
Denied to be so: Can Mirtilla sit
Mourning alone, imagining those pleasures
Which you this blessed Hymeneal night
Enjoy in the embraces of your Lord,
And my Lord too in being yours, (already
As such I love and honour him) shall a stranger
Sew you in a sheet to guard that maidenhead
You must pretend to keep, (and twill become you.)
Shall another do those bridal offices
Which time will not permit me to remember,
And I pine here with envy? Pardon me,
I must and will be pardoned, for my passions
Are in extremes, and use some speedy means
That I may go along with you, and share
In those delights, but with becoming distance;
Or by his life, which as a Saint you swear by,
I will discover all.
Thou can not be
So treacherous and cruel, in destroying
The building thou hast raised,
Pray you do not tempt me, for it is re???solved.
I know not what to think of't.
In the discovery of my secrets to her,
I have made my slave my Mistress, I must sooth her,
There's no evasion else. Prithee Mirtilla,
Be not so violent, I am strangely taken
With thy affection to me, it was my purpose
To have thee sent for.
When?
This very night, and I vow deeply I shall be no sooner
In the desired possession of my Lord;
But by some of his servants I will have thee
Conveyed unto us.
Should you break?
I dare not:
Come, clear thy looks, for instantly we'll prepare
For our departure.
Pray you forgive my boldness,
Growing from my excess of zeal to serve you.
I thank thee for it.
You'll keep your word.
Still doubtful?
It was this I aimed at, and leave the rest to Fortune.
Haste you unto my Villa, and take all
Provision along with you; and for use,
And ornament, the shortness of the time
Can furnish you; let my best Plate be set out,
And costliest Hangings, and if it be possible
With a merry dance to entertain the Bride,
Provide an Epithaiamium.
Trust me for belly timber, and for a song I have
A Paper blurrer; who on all occasions,
For all times, and all seasons, hath such trinkets
Ready in the deck. It is but altering
The names, and they will serve for any Bride,
Or Bridegroom in the Kingdom.
But for the dance?
I will make one my self, and foot it finely,
And summoning your Tenants at my Dresser,
Which is indeed my Drum. Make a rare choice
Of th'able youth, such as shall sweat sufficiently,
And smell too, but not of Amber, which you know is
The grace of the Country-hall.
About it Cario, and look you be careful.
For mine own credit Sir.
Now noble friends confirm your loves, and think not
Of the penalty of the Law, that does forbid
The stealing away an Heir. I will secure you,
And pay the breach of't.
Tell us what we shall do, we'll talk of that hereafter.
Pray you be careful
To keep the West-gate of the City open,
That our passage may be free, and bribe the Watch
With any sum; this is all.
A dangerous business. 
I'll make the Constable, Watch, and Porter drunk, Under a Crown.
And then you may pass while they snore.
Though you had done a murder.
Get but your Mistress,
And leave the rest to us.
You much engage me,
But I forget my self:
Pray you in what, Sir?
Yielding too much to my affection,
Though lawful now; my wounded reputation
And honour suffer: The disgrace in taking
A blow in public from Caldoro, branded
With the infamous mark of Coward, in delaying
To right my self, upon my cheek grows fresher,
That's first to be considered
If you dare
Trust my opinion, (yet I have had
Some practice and experience in duels)
You are too tender that way: Can you answer
The debt you owe your honour, till you meet
Your Enemy from whom you may exact it?
Hath he not left the City, and in fear
Concealed himself, for ought I can imagine?
What would you more?
I should do.
Never think on'
Till fitter time and place invite you to it.
I have read Caranza, and find not in his Grammar
Of Quarrels, that the injured man is bound
To seek for reparation at an hour;
But may, and without loss, till he hath settled
More serious occasions that import him,
For a day or two defer it.
You'll subscribe
Your hand to this?
And justifie't with my life,
Presume upon it.
On then, you shall overrule me.
I'll give thee a golden tongue, and have it hung up
Ore thy tomb for a monument.
I am not prepared yet
To leave the world; there are many good pranks
I must dispatch in this kind before I die:
And I had rather, if your Honour please,
Have the crowns in my purse.
Take that.
Magnificent Lady!
May you live long, and every Moon love change,
That I may have fresh employment, You know what
Remains to be done.
Yes, yes, I will command
My daughter and Mirtilla to their chamber:
And lock'em up: Such liquorish Kitlings are not
To be trusted with our cream. Ere I go, I'll help you 
To set forth the banquet, and place the candid Erin???go's
Where he may be sure to taste 'em. Then undress you, 
For these things are cumbersome, when you should be active:
A thine night mantle to hide part of your Smock,
With your Pearl embroidered Pantophles on your Feet,
And then you are armed for service; nay, no tri???fling,
We are alone, and you know it is a point of folly
To be coy to eat, when meat is set before you.
It is eleveu by my Watch, the hour ap???pointed.
Listen at the door; hearsed thou any stirring?
No Sir, ell's silent here.
Some cursed business keeps
Her mother up. I'll walk a little circle,
And show where you shall wait us with the horses,
And then return. This short delay afflicts me,
And I presume, to her it is not pleasing.
What's now to be done? prithee let's to Bed, I am sleep.
And here's my hand on it without more ado,
By fair or foul play, we'll have her to morrow
In thy possession.
Good Sir give me leave
To taste a little comfort in beholding
The place by her sweet presence sanctified.
She may perhaps to take air, op the Casement,
And looking out, a new Star to be gazed on
By me with adoration, bless these eyes.
Ne'er happy but when she is made the Object.
Is not here fine fooling.
Thou great Queen of Love,
Or real or imagined, be propitious
To me thy faithful Votary; and I vow
T'erect a statue to thee, equal to
Thy picture by Apelles skilful hand
Left as the great example of his art;
And on thy thigh I'll hang a golden Cupped,
His torches flaming, and his quiver full,
For further honour.
End this waking dream, and let's away
Mirtilla!
It is her voice.
You heard the horses footing.
Certainly.
Speak low, my Lord Adorio:
I am dumb.
The darkness friend us too, most honoured
Madam,
Adorio your servant.
As you are so, I do command your silence till we are
Further removed; and let this kiss assure you,
(I thank the sable night that hides my blushes)
I am wholly yours.
Forward you micher.
Madam, think on Mirtilla.
I'll not now enquire
The mystery of this, but bless kind Fortune
Favouring us beyond our hopes: yet now I think on it,
I had ever a lucky hand in such smock night-work.
This slowness does amaze me; she's not altered
In her late resolution.
 Get you to bed,
And stir not on your life, till I command you.
Her mothers voice! listen.
Here comes the daughter.
Whither shall I fly for succour?
To these arms, your castle of defence, im???pregnable,
And not to be blown up. How your heart beats!
Take comfort, dear Caliste, you are now
In his protection that will ne'er forsake you,
Your changed Adorio swears
By your best self, an oath he dares not break,
He loves you, loves you in a noble way,
His constancy firm as the poles of heaven.
I will urge no reply, silence becomes you,
And I'll defer the music of your voice
Till we are in a place of safety.
O blessed error!
It is midnight: how my fears of certain death
Being surprised, combat with my strong hopes
Raised on my chaste wives goodness! I am grown
A stranger in this City, and no wonder,
I have too long been so unto my self:
Grant me a little truce, my troubled soul,
I hear some footing, ha?
That is the house,
And there's the key; you'll find my Lady ready
To entertain you: it is not fit I should 
Stand gaping by while you bill: I have brought you on,
Charge home, and come off with honour.
It makes this way.
I am much troubled, and know not what to think
Of this design.
It still comes on.
The Watch! I am betrayed.
Should I now appear fearful,
It would discover me; there is no retiring,
My confidence must protect me, I'll appear
As if I walked the round. Stand.
I: am lost.
The word?
Pray you forbear; I am a stranger,
And missing this dark stormy night my way
To my lodging, you shall do a courteous office
To guide me to it. 
Do you think I stand here for a page or a porter?
Good sir grow not so high,
I can justify my being abroad; I am
No pilfering vagabond, and what you are
Stands yet in supposition; and I charge you
If you are an Officer, bring me before your Captain;
For if you do assault me, though not in fear
Of what you can do alone, I will cry murder
And raise the streets.
Before my Captain, ha? 
And bring my head to the block. Would we were parted,
I have greater cause to fear the Watch then he.
Will you do your duty?
I must close with him:
Truth sir, whiter you are, (yet by your language
I guess you a Gentleman) I'll not use the rigour
Of my place upon you; only quit this street,
For your stay here will be dangerous, and good night.
The like to you sir; I'll grope out my way
As well as I can. O damned Bawd! fare you well sir.
I am glad he's gone; there is a secret passage
Unknown to my wife, through which this key will guide me
To her desired embraces, which must be,
My presence being beyond her hopes, most welcome.
I am full of perplexed thoughts: Imperious Blood,
Thou only art a tyrant; Judgment, Reason,
To whatsoever thy Edicts proclaim,
With vassal fear subscribe against themselves,
I am yet safe in the port, and see before me,
If I put off, a rough tempestuous sea,
The raging winds of infamy from all quarters
Assuring my destruction; yet my lust
Swelling the wanton sails, (my understanding
(Stowed under hatches) like a desperate Pilot
Commands me to urge on: My pride, my pride,
Self-love, and over-value of my self
Are justly punished: I that did deny
My daughters youth allowed and lawful pleasures,
And would not suffer in her those desires
She sucked in with my milk, now in my waning
Am scorched and burnt up with libidinous fire
That must consume my fame; yet still I throw
More fuel on it.
It is her voice, poor Turtle;
She's now at her devotions praying for
Her banished Mate: alas, that for my guilt
Her innocence should suffer! But I do
Commit a second sin in my deferring
The ecstasy of joy that will transport her
Beyond herself, when she flies to my lips,
And seals my welcome. Jolante!
Ha? good Angels guard me.
What do I behold?
Some sudden flash of lightning strike me blind,
Or cleave the center of the earth, that I
May living find a sepulchre to swallow
Me and my shame together.
Guilt and horror
Confound me in one instant; thus surprised,
The subtlety of all Wantons, though abstracted,
Can show no seeming colour of excuse
To plead in my defence.
Is this her mourning?
O killing object! the imprisoned vapours
Of rage and sorrow make an earthquake in me;
This little world, like to a tottering tower,
Not to be underpropp'd; yet in my fall
I'll crush thee with my ruins.
Good sir, hold:
For, my defence unheard, you wrong your justice,
If you proceed to execution,
And will too late repent it.
Thy defence? To move it, adds (could it receive addition)
Ugliness to the loathsome leprosy
That in thy being a Strumpet hath already
Infected every vein, and spreads it self
Over this carrion, which would poison
Vultures and dogs, should they devour it. Yet to stamp
The seal of Reprobation on thy soul,
I'll hear thy impudent lies borrowed from hell
And prompted by the Devil thy tutor, Whore,
Then send thee to him. Speak.
Your Gorgon looks
Turn me to stone, and a dead palsy seizes
My silenced tongue.
O fate, that the disease
Were general in women; what a calm
Should wretched men enjoy! Speak, and be brief,
Or thou shalt suddenly feel me.
Be appeased sir,
Until I have delivered reasons for
This solemn preparation.
On, I hear thee.
With patience ask your memory; twill in???struck you,
This very day of the month 17 years since
You married me.
Grant it, what can thou urge from this?
That day since your proscription sir,
In the rembrance of it annually,
The garments of my sorrow laid aside,
I have with pomp observed.
Alone! 
The thoughts of my felicity then, my misery now,
Were the invited guests; Imagination
Teaching me to believe that you were present
And a partner in it.
Rare! this real banquet
To feast your fancy: Fiend, could Fancy drink off
These flagons to my health? or th'idol Thought
Like Baal devour-these delicates? the room
Perfumed to take his nostrils? this loose habit
Which Mescaline would not wear, put on
To fire his lustful eyes? Wretch, am I grown
So weak in thy opinion, that it can
Flatter credulity that these gross tricks
May be foisted on me? Whore's my daughter? where
The Bawd your woman? answer me, Caliste,
Mirtilla! they are disposed of, if not murdered,
To make all sure; and yet methinks your neighbour,
Your whistle, agent, parasite Calypso,
Should be within: Call when you hem to usher in
The close Adulterer.
What will you do?
Not kill thee, do not hope it, I am not
So near to reconcilement. Ha! this scarf
Th'intended favour to your Stallion, now
Is useful: do not strive; thus bound expect
All studied tortures, my assurance, not
My jealousy thou art false, can pour upon thee.
In darkness howl thy mischiefs; and if rankness
Of thy imagination can conjure
The Ribaud, glut thy self with him:
I will cry aim, and in another room
Determine of my vengeance. Oh my heart-strings!
Most miserable woman! and yet sitting
A Judge in mine own cause upon my self,
I could not mitigate the heavy doom
My incensed husband must pronounce upon me.
In my intents I am guilty, and for them
Must suffer the same punishment, as if
I had in fact offended.
Bore my eyes out
If you prove me faulty: I'll but tell my Lady
What cause your stay, and instantly present you.
How's this? no lights? what new device? will she play
At Blind man buff Madam?
Upon thy life speak in a lower key:
The mystery
Of this sweet Lady; where are you?
Here fast bound.
By whom?
I'll whisper that into thine ear, and then fare???well for ever.
How? my Lord,
I am in a fever: Horns upon horns grow on him.
Could he pick no hour but this to break a bargain
Almost made up?
What shall we do?
Betray him: I'll instantly raise the Watch.
And so make me for ever infamous.
The Gentleman, the rarest Gentleman is at the door,
Shall he lose his labour? since that you must perish,
'T will show a women's spleen in you to fall
Deservedly: give him his answer, Madam.
I have on the sudden in my head a strange whimsy,
But I will first unbind you.
Now what follows?
I will supply your place; and bound, give me
Your mantle, take my night-gown, send away
The Gentleman satisfied. I know my Lord
Wants power to hurt you: I perhaps may get
A kiss by the bargain, and all this may prove
But some neat love-trick: If he should grow furious
And question me, I am resolved to put on
An obstinate silence. Pray you dispatch the Gent.
His courage may cool.
I'll speak with him; but if
To any base or lustful end, may mercy
At my last gasp forsake me.
I was too rash,
And have done what I wish undone: say he should kill me.
I have run my head in a fine noose, and I smell
The pickle I am in: alas how I shudder
Still more and more! would I were a she Priapus.
Stuck up in a garden to fright away the Crows,
So I were out of the house; she's at her pleasure
Whiter she said, and I must endure the torture.
He comes; I cannot pray, my fear will kill me.
It is a deed of darkness, and I need
No light to guide me: there is something tells me
I am too slow paced in my wreak, and trifle
In my revenge. All hushed? no sigh nor groan
To witness her compunction? can guilt sleep,
And innocence be open-ey'd? Even now
Perhaps she dreams of the Adulterer,
And in her fancy hugs him: Wake thou strumpet,
And instantly give up unto my vengeance
The villain that defiles my bed; discover
Both what and where he is, and suddenly
That I may bind you face to face, then sew you
Into one sack, and from some steep rock hurl you
Into the sea together: Do not play with
The lightning of my rage; break stubborn silence.
And answer my demands, will it not be?
I'll talk no longer; thus I mark thee for
A common strumpet.
Oh!
Thus stab these arms
That have stretched out themselves to grasp a stranger.
Oh!
This is but an induction; I'll draw
The curtains of the Tragedy hereafter:
Howl on, it is music to me.
He is gone,
A kiss and love-tricks; he hath villainous teeth,
May sublimed Mercury draw 'em. If all dealers
In my profession were paid thus, there would be
A dearth of Cuckolds. Oh my nose! I had one,
My arms, my arms! I dare not cry for fear:
Cursed desire of gold, how art thou punished?
Till now I never truly knew my self,
Nor by all principles and lectures read
In Chastities cold school was so instructed
As by her contrary. How base and deformed
Loose appetite is! as in a few short minutes
This stranger hath, and feelingly, delivered.
Oh that I could recall my bad intentions,
And be as I was yesterday untainted
In my desires, as I am still in fact
(I thank his temperance) I could look undaunted
Upon my husbands rage, and smile at it;
So strong the guards, and sure defences are
Of armed Innocence; but I will endure
The penance of my sin, the only means,
Is left to purge it. The day breaks, Calypso.
Here Madam, here:
Hath my Lord visited thee?
Hell take such visits; these stabbed arms, and loss
Of my nose, you left fast on, may give you a relish
What a night I have had of't, and what you had suffered,
Had I not supplied your place.
I truly grieve for it; did not my husband speak to thee?
Yes, I heard him
And felt him ass signum, with a mischief.
But he knew not me; like a true bred Spartan Fox
With silence I endured it, he could not get
One syllable from me.
Something may be fashioned
From this invention: Help me, I must be sudden,
Thou art free, exchange, quick, quick, now bind me sure,
And leave me to my fortune.
Pray you consider,
The loss of my nose; had I been but carted for you,
Though washed with Mire and Chamberly, I had
Examples to excuse me; but my nose, my nose dear
Lady.
Get off, I'll send to thee.
If so, it may take; if it fail, I must
Suffer what ever follows.
I have searched
In every corner of the house, yet find not
My daughter, nor her Maid, nor any print
Of a mans footing, which this wet night would
Be easily discerned, the ground being soft,
At his coming in or going out.
It is he, and I am within hearing; Heaven forgive this feigning,
I being forced to it to preserve my life,
To be better spent hereafter.
I begin to stagger, and my love if it knew how,
Her piety heretofore, and same remembered,
Would plead in her excuse.
You blessed Guardians
Of matrimonial faith, and just revengers
Of such as do in fact offend against
Your sacred rites and ceremonies; by all titles
And holy attributes you do vouchsafe
To be invoked, look down with saving pity
Upon my matchless sufferings.
At her devotions, affliction makes her re???pent.
Look down upon a wretched woman; and as I
Have kept the knot of wedlock, in the Temple
By the Priest fastened firm, (though in loose wishes
I yield I have offended) to strike blind
The eyes of Jealousy that see a crime
I never yet committed, and to free me
From the unjust suspicion of my Lord,
Restore my martyred face and wounded arms
To their late strength and beauty.
Does she hope to be cured by miracle?
This minute I
Perceive with joy my orisons heard and granted:
You ministers of mercy, who unseen,
And by a supernatural means have done
This work of heavenly charity, be ever canonised for it.
I did not dream, I heard her,
And I have eyes too, they cannot deceive me.
If I have no belief in their assurance,
I must turn sceptic. Ha? this is the hand?
And this the fatal instrument? these drops
Of blood, that gushed forth from her face and arms,
Still fresh upon the floor: This is something more
Then wonder or amazement, I profess I am a???astonished:
Be incredulous still,
And go on in your barbarous rage, led to it
By your false guide Suspicion, have no faith
In my so long tried loyalty, nor believe
That which you see; and for your satisfaction,
My doubted innocence cleared by miracle,
Proceed, these Veins have now new blood, if you
Resolve to let it out.
I would not be fooled
With easiness of belief, and faintly give 
Credit to this strange wonder? it is now thought on
In a fitter place and time, I'll sound this fur???there. 
How can I expect my sin? or hope,
Though now I write my self thy slave, the service
Of my whole life can win thee to pronounce
Despaired of pardon? shall I kneel? that's poor,
Thy mercy must urge more in my defence,
Then I can fancy; will it thou have revenge?
My heart lies open to thee.
This is needless to me, who in the duty of a wife,
Know I must suffer.
Thou art made up of goodness,
And from my confidence that I am alone,
The object of thy pleasures, until death
Divorce us, we will know no separation
Without inquiring why (as sure thou wilt not,
Such is thy meek obedience) thy Jewels
And choicest ornaments packed up, thou shalt
Along with me; and as a Queen be honoured.
By such a stile me Sovereign, already
My banishment is repealed, thou being present:
The Neapolitan Court a place of exile
When thou art absent; my stay here is mortal
Of which thou art to sensible, I perceive it.
Come dearest Jolante, with this breath
All jealousy is blown away:
Be constant.
HEll take the stumbling Jade.
Heaven help the Lady.
The Horse hath broke his neck.
Would thine were cracked too
So the Lady had no harm. Give her fresh air,
It is but a swoon.
It is more, she's dead:
Examine
Her limbs if they be whole: not too high, not too high
You Ferrit, this is no Cunniborough for you.
How do you find her?
No breath of comfort sir, too cruel fate!
Had I still pined away, and lingered under
The modesty of just and honest hopes
After a long consumption, sleep and death,
To me had been the same, but now as it were
Possessed of all my wishes, in a moment
To have 'em ravished from me? suffer shipwreck
In view of the Port? and like a half starved beggar,
No sooner in compassion clothed, but coffined?
Malevolent destinies, too cunning in
Wretched Caldoro's tortures. O Caliste,
If thy immortal part hath not already
Left this fair palace, let a beam of light
Dawn from thine eye, in this Cimmerian darkness,
To guide my shaking hand to touch the anchor
Of hope in thy recovery.
Oh.
She lives, disturb her not, she is no right bred woman
If she die with one fall; some of my acquaintance
Have took a thousand merrily, and are still
Excellent wrestlers at the close hug.
Good Sir.
Prithee be not angry, I should speak thus if
My Mother were in her place.
But had you heard
The music of the language which she used
To me, believed Adorio, as she rode
Behind me; little thinking that she did
Embrace Caldoro.
Ah Adorio!
Leave talking, I conceive it.
Are you safe?
And raised like you from death to life to hear you.
Hear my defence then, ere I take my vail off.
A simple maids defence, which looking on you,
I faintly could deliver; willingly
I am become your prize, and therefore use
Your victory nobly; Heavens bright eye, the Sun,
Draws up the grossest vapors, and I hope
I ne'er shall prove an envious cloud to darken
The splendour of your merits. I could urge
With what disdain, nay scorn, I have declined
The shadows of insinuating pleasures
Tendered by all men else, you only being
The object of my hopes: That cruel Prince
To whom the Olive branch of Peace is offered,
Is not a conqueror, but a bloody tyrant,
If he refuse it; nor should you wish a triumph,
Because Caliste's humble; I have said
And now expect your sentence.
What a throng
Of Clients would be in the Court of Love,
Were there many such she Advocates: Art thou dumb?
Can thou say nothing for thy self.
Dear Lady open your eyes, and look upon the man,
The man you have elected for your Judge,
Kneeling to you for mercy.
I should know this voice, and something more then fear I am
Deceived, but now I look upon his face,
I am assured I am wretched.
Why good Lady?
Hold her up, she'll fall again, before her time else,
The youth's a well timbered youth, look on his ma???king;
His Hair curled naturally, he's whole chested too,
And will do his work as well, and go through stitch with it,
As any Adorio in the world; my slate on it,
A Chicken of the right kind; and if he prove not
A Cock of the Game, cuckold him first, and after
Make a Capon of him.
I'll cry out a Rape,
If thou unhand me not; would I had died
In my late trance, and never lived to know
I am betrayed.
To a young and active husband,
Call you that treachery; there are a shoal of
Young wenches in the City, would vow a pilgrimage
Beyond Jerusalem, to be so cheated.
To her again you milk-sop, violent storms
Are soon blown over.
How coldest thou Caldoro
With such a frontless impudence, arm thy hopes
So far, as to believe I might consent
To this lewd practise? have I not often told thee
How, ere I pitied thy misplaced affection,
I could not answer it? and that there was
A strong antipathy between our Passions,
Not to be reconciled.
Vouchsafe to hear me
With an impartial ear, and it will take from
The rigour of your censure. Man was marked
A friend in his Creation to himself,
And may with fit ambition conceive
The greatest blessings, and the highest honours
Appointed for him, if he can atchieve'em
The right and noble way: I grant you were
The end of my design, but still pursued
With a becoming modesty, Heaven at length
Being pleased, and not my arts to further it.
Now he comes to her: On boy.
I have served you
With a religious zeal, and borne the burden
Of your neglect (if I may call it so)
Beyond the patience of a man, to prove this.
I have seen those eyes with pleasant glances play
Upon Adorio's, like Phoebe's shine
Guilding a Crystal River, and your Lip
Rise up in civil courtship to meet his,
While I bit mine with envy: Yet these favours
(How ere my passions raged) could not provoke me
To one act of rebellion against
My loyalty to you; the sovereign
To whom I ow obedience.
My blushes confefs this for a truth.
A flag of truce is
Hung out in this acknowledgment.
I could add,
But that you may interpret what I speak,
The malice of a rival, rather then
My due respect to your deserts. How faintly
Adorio hath returned thanks to the bounty
Of your affection, ascribing it
As a tribute to his worth, and not in you
An act of mercy: Could he else invited
(As by your words I understood) to take you
To his protection, grossly neglect
So gracious an offer? or give power
To fate it self to cross him? O dear Madam,
We are all the Balls of time, tossed to and fro,
From the Plough unto the Throne, and back again,
Under the swinge of destiny mankind suffers;
And it appears by an unchanged decree
You were appointed mine; wise nature always
Aiming at due proportion, and if so,
I may believe with confidence, Heaven in pity
Of my sincere affection, and long patience,
Directed you by a most blessed error
To your vowed servants bosom.
By my holidame Tickling-Philosophy.
I am Sir, too weak
To argue with you; but my Stars have better
(I hope) provided for me.
If there be
Disparity between us, it is in your
Compassion to level it.
Give fire to the Mine, and blow her up.
I am sensible
Of what you have endured, but on the sudden,
With my unusual travel, and late bruise,
I am exceeding weary; in you grove,
While I repose my self, be you my guard:
My spirits with some little rest revived,
We will consider further: For my part
You shall receive modest and gentle answers
To your demands, though short perhaps to make you
Full satisfaction.
I am exalted in the employment, sleep se???cure, I'll be
Your vigilant Sentinel.
But I command you,
And as you hope for future grace obey me,
Presume not with one stolen kiss to disturb
The quiet of my slumbers; let your temperance
And not your lust, watch over me.
My desires
Are frozen, till your pity shall dissolve'em.
Frozen! think not of Frost fool in the Dog-days,
Remember the old adage, and make use of't,
Occasion's bald behind.
Is this your Uncle?
And Guardian, Madam; at your better leisure,
When I have deserved it, you may give him thanks
For his many favours to me.
He appears a pleasant Gentleman.
You should find me so,
But that I do hate incest. I grow heavy,
Sir provide fresh horses; I'll seek out
Some hollow tree, and dream till you return,
Which I charge you to hasten.
With all care sir.
Let your eyes be riveted to my heels, and miss not
A hairs breadth of my footing; our Dance has
A most melodious note, and I command you
To have ears like hares this night for my Lords honour,
And something for my Worship: your reward is
To be drunk blind like Moles in the Wine-cellar,
And though you ne'er see after, it is the better, 
You were born for this nights service: And do you hear,
Wire-string and Cats-guts men, and strong-breath'd Hoboys,
For the credit of your calling, have not your Instru???mints
To tune, when you should strike up; but twang sit perfectly,
As you would read your Neckverse; and you Warbler
Keep your Wind-pipe moist, that you may not spit and hem,
When you should make division. How I sweat!
Authority is troublesome. ??? They are come,
I know it by the Cornet that I placed
On the hill to give me notice: Marshal your selves
In the Rear, the Van is yours. Now chant it sprightly.
A well-penn'd Ditty. 
Not ill sung.
What follows?
Use your eyes; if ever, now your master???piece 
It is well performed, take that, but not from me,
It is your new Ladies bounty, thank her for it, 
All that I have is hers.
I must have three shares
For my pains and properties, the rest shall be
Divided equally.
My real fears
Begin, and soon my painted comforts vanish
In my discovery.
Welcome to your own:
You have (a wonder in a woman) kept
Three long hours silence; and the greater, holding
Your own choice in your arms, a blessing for which
I will be thankful to you, nay unmask
And let mine eye and ears together feast,
Too long by you kept empty: Oh you want
Your women's help, I'll do her office for you.
 Mirtilla!
It is she, and wears the habit
In which Caliste three days since appeared
As she came from the Temple.
All this trouble for a poor Waiting-maid?
We are grossly gulled. 
Thou child of impudence, answer me, and truly,
Or though the tongues of Angels pleaded mercy,
Tortures shall force it from thee.
Innocence is free and open. breasted; of what crime
Stand I accused, my Lord?
What crime? no language
Can speak it to the height, I shall become
Discourse for fools, and drunkards. How was this
Contrived? who helped thee in the plot? discover.
Were not Caliste's aids in it?
No on my life; nor am I faulty.
No: what may games this.
Did thou treat with me for thy Mistress favours,
To make sale of thine own?
With her and you
I have dealt faithfully: you had her Letter
With the Jewel I presented; she received
Your courteous answer, and prepared herself
To be removed by you: And howsoever
You take delight to hear what you have done,
From my simplicity, and make my weakness
The subject of your mirth, as it suits well
With my condition, I know you have her
In your possession.
How! has she left her mothers house?
You drive this nail too far;
Indeed she deeply vowed at her departure
To send some of your Lordships servants for me,
(Though you were pleased to take the pains your self)
That I might still be near her, as a shadow
To follow her the substance.
She is gone then?
This is too much; but good my Lord for???give me,
I come a Virgin hither to attend
My noble Mistress, though I must confess
I look with sore eyes upon her good fortune,
And wish it were mine own:
Then as it seems you do yourself affect me?
Should she hear me,
And in her sudden fury kill me for it,
I durst not, Sir, deny it; since you are
A man so formed, that not poor I alone,
But all our sex like me I think stand bound
To be enamoured of you.
O my fate! how justly am I punished? in thee punished
For my defended wantonness? I that scorned
The Mistress when she sought me, now I would
Upon my knees receive her, am become
A prey unto her Bondwoman,
My honour too neglected for this purchase.
Art thou one of those
Ambitious Serving-women, who contemning
Th'embraces of their Equals, aim to be
The wrong way Ladifi'd by a Lord? was there
No sorward Page or Footman in the City
To do the feat, that in thy lust I am chosen
To be the executioner? dare thou hope
I can descend so low?
Great Lords sometimes
For change leave calvert Sammon, and eat Sprats,
In modesty I dare speak no more.
If it were a Fish-day, though you like it not,
I could say
I have a stomach, and would content my self
With this pretty Whiting-mop.
Discover yet how thou came to my hands.
My Lady gone,
Fear of her mothers rage, she being found absent,
Moved me to fly; and quitting of the house,
You were pleased unasked to comfort me, I used
No sorceries to bewitch you; then vouchsafed
(Thanks ever to the darkness of the night)
To hug me in your arms, and I had wronged
My breeding near the Court, had I refused it.
This is still more bitter; can thou guess to whom
Thy Lady did commit herself?
They were horsemen, as you are.
In the name of wonder,
How could they pass the Port, where you expected
My coming?
Now I think upon it, there came
Three mounted by, and behind one a woman
Embracing fast the man that rode before her.
I knew the men, but she was veiled.
What were they?
The first the Lord Durazzo, and the second
Your rival young Caldoro; it was he
That carried the wench behind him.
The last a servant that spurred fast after 'em
Worse and worse! it was she!
Too much assurance of her love undid me;
Why did you not stay 'em?
We had no such commission.
Or say we had? who durst lay fingers on
The angry old Russian.
For my part I had rather
Take a baited Bull by the Horns.
You are sure friends for a man to build on.
They are not far off,
Their horses appeared spent too; lets take fresh ones
And coast the Country, ten to one we find 'em.
I will not eat nor sleep, until I have 'em.
Moppet you shall along too.
So you please, I may keep my place be???hind you;
I'll sit fast, and ride with you all the world over.
A good Girl.
Her husband Severino?
You may see
His handy-work by my flat face; no bridge
Left to support my Organ. If I had one,
The comfort is I am now secure from the Grincomes,
I can loose nothing that way.
Doest thou not know what became of the
Lady?
A nose was enough to part with
I think, in the service; I durst stay no longer,
But I am full assured the house is empty,
Neither poor Lady, daughter, servant left there:
I only guess he hath fore'd 'em to go with him
To the dangerous Forest where he lives like a King
Among the Banditi, and how there he hath used them,
Is more then to be feared.
I have plaid the fool,
And kept my self too long concealed, sans question
With the danger of her life. Leave me ???
The King!
The Surgeon must be paid.
Take that.
I thank you,
I have got enough by my trade, and I will build
An Hospital only for noseless Bawds,
Twill speak my charity, and be my self
The Governess of the Sisterhood.
I may forget this in your vigilance hereafter;
But as I am a King, if you provoke me
The second time with negligence of this kind,
You shall deeply smart for it.
The King's moved.
To suffer a murderer by us proscribed, at his pleasure
To pass and repast through our guards?
Your pardon
For this, my gracious Lord, binds me to be
More circumspect hereafter.
Look you be so:
Monsieur Level, you were a suitor to me
For Severino's pardon.
I was so, my good Lord.
You might have met him here to have thanked
You for it, as now I understand.
So it is rumoured;
And hearing in the City of his boldness,
(I would not say contempt of your Decrees)
As then I pleaded mercy, (under pardon)
I now as much admire the slowness of
Your justice (though it force you to some trouble)
In fetching him in.
I have considered it.
He hath of late, as it is suspected, done
An outrage on his wife forgetting nature
To his own daughter, in whom sir I have
Some nearer interest then I stand bound to
In my humanity, which I gladly would
Make known unto your Highness.
Go along, you shall have opportunity as we walk:
See you what I committed to your charge,
In readiness, and without noise.
I shall sir.
HEre, as a Queen, share in my sove???raignty:
The iron toils pitched by the Law to take
The forfeiture of my life, I have broke through,
And secure in the guards of these few subjects
Smile at Alphonsus fury, though I grieve for
The fatal cause in your good brothers loss
That does compel me to his course.
Revive not
A sorrow long since dead, and so diminish
The full fruition of those joys, which now
I stand possessed of: Womanish fear of danger
That may pursue us, I shake off, and with
A masculine spirit.
It is well said.
In you sir I live; and when, or by the course of nature,
Or violence you must fall, the end of my
Devotions is, that one and the same hour
May make us fit for heaven.
I join with you
In my votes that way: But how, Jolante,
You that have spent your past days slembring in
The down of quiet, can endure the hardness
And rough condition of our present being,
Does much disturb me.
These woods, Severino,
Shall more then seem to me a populous City;
You being present, here are no allurements
To tempt my frailty, nor the conversation
Of such, whose choice behaviour or discourse
May nourish jealous thoughts.
True, Jolante,
Nor shall suspected chastity stand in need here
To be cleared by miracle.
Still on that string? it yields harsh discord.
I had forgot my self,
And wish I might no more remember it.
The day wears, sirs, without one prize brought in
As tribute to your Queen. Claudio, divide
Our Squadron in small parties, let 'em watch
All passages, that none escape without
The payment of our Customs
Shall we bring in the persons with the pillage?
By all means,
Without reply about it, we'll retire 
Into my Cave, and there at large dis???course
Our fortunes past, and study some apt means
To find our daughter; since she well disposed of,
Our happiness were perfect.
We must wait with patience Heavens plea???sure.
It is my purpose.
Let the horses graze, they are spent,
I am sure I am sleepy,
And nodded as I rode: here was a jaunt
In the dark through thick and thin, and all to no pur???pose:
What a dullness grows upon me.
I can hardly
Hold op mine eyes to say so. How did we lose A???dorio?
He, Donato, and the Wench
That cleaves to him like bird-lime, took the right hand,
But this place is our rendezvous.
No matter, we'll talk of that anon, ??? heigh ho.
He's fast already, Lentuio; I'll take a nap too.
Was ever man so crossed?
So blessed. This is the finest Wild-goose chase.
What's that you mutter?
A short prayer, that you may find
Your wished for love, though I am lost for ever.
Pretty fool, who have we here?
This is Camillo.
This Signior Lentulo
Wake 'em.
They'll not stir,
Their eye-lids are glued, and mine too; by your favour,
I'll follow their example.
Are you not weary?
I know not what the word means, while I travel
To do you service.
Y ue ect to reap
The harvest of your flattery; but your hopes
Will be blasted, I assure you.
So you give leave
To sow it as in me a sign of duty,
Though you deny your beams of gracious favour
To ripen it with patience I shall suffer.
No more; my resolution to find
Caliste, by what accident lost, I know not,
Binds me not to deny my self what nature
Exacted from me. To walk alone a foot
(For my Horse is tired) were madness, I must sleep;
You could lie down too.
Willingly; so you please to use me.
Use thee?
As your pillow Sir,
I dare presume no forever, noble Sir.
Do not too much condemn me; generous feet,
Spurn not a fawning Spaniel.
Well! sit down.
I am ready Sir.
So nimble?
Love is active;
Nor would I be a slow thing: Rest secure Sir
On my maiden-head, I'll not ravish you.
For once, so far I'll trust you.
All the joys of rest
Dwell on your eye-lids; let no dream disturb
Your soft and gentle slumbers I cannot sing,
But I'll talk you asleep: And I beseech you
Be not offended, though I glory in
My being thus employed; a happiness
That stands for more then ample satisfaction
For all I have, or can endure. He snores,
And does not hear me; would his sense of feeling
Were bound up too: I should ??? I am all fire.
Such heaps of treasure offered as a prey,
Would tempt a modest thief; I can no longer
Forbear. I'll gently touch his Lips, and leave
Kisses him.
No print of mine. Ah! I have heard of Nectar;
But till now never tasted it: These Rubies
Are not clouded by my breath. If once again
I steal, from such a full Exchequer, trifles
Kisses again.
Will not be missed, I am entranced: our fancy
Some say in sleep works stronger, I will prove
How far my ??? 
My bones ache, I am exceeding cold too, I must seek out
A more convenient Truckle-bed. Ha! Do I dream?
No, no, I wake, Camillo, Lentulo,
Donato this; and as I live, Adorio
In a handsome wenches lap, a whoreson; you are
The best accommodated, I will call
My Nephew, and his Mistress to this Pageant.
The object may perhaps do more upon her,
Then all Caldoro's rhetoric. With what
Security they sleep! sure Mercury
Hath travelled this way with his charming rod.
Nephew, Caliste. Madam.
Here Sir, is your man returned with
Horses.
No Boy, no; but here are some you thought not of.
Adorio.
The Idol that you worshipped.
This Mirtilla? I am made a stale:
I knew it would take.
False man;
But much more treacherous woman, it is apparent,
They jointly did conspire against my weakness,
And credulous simplicity, and have
Prevailed against it.
I'll not kill 'em sleeping;
But if you please, I'll wake 'em first, and after
Offer them as a fatal sacrifice, to your just anger.
You are a fool, reserve your blood for bet???la uses.
My fond love, is changed to an extremity of hate,
His very sight is odious.
I have thought of
A pretty punishment for him, and his Comrades,
Then leave him to his harlotry: If she prove not
Torture enough, hold me an Ass Their horses
Are not far off, I'll cut the Girts and Bridles,
Then turn 'em into the Wood; if they can run
Let 'em follow us as footmen. Wilt thou fight
For what's thine own already?
In his Hat
He wears a Jewel, which this faithless Strumpet
As a salary of her Lust, deceived me of,
He shall not keep't to my disgrace, nor will I
Stir till I have it.
I am not good at niming;
And yet that shall not hinder us, by your leave Sir,
It is restitution, pray you all bear witness
I do not steal it; here it is.
Take it not
As a Mistress favour, but a strong assurance
I am your wife.
O Heaven.
Pray in the Church.
Let us away, Nephew a word: have you not
Been billing in the brakes? Ha, and so deserved
This unexpected favour.
You are pleasant.
As thou art a Gentle???man, kill me not basely,
Starts up; the rest wake.
Give me leave to draw my Sword.
Ha? what's the matter?
He talked of's Sword.
I see no enemy near us,
That threatens danger.
Sure it was but a dream.
A fearful one. Me thought Caldoro's sword
Was at my throat, Caliste frowning by,
Commanding him, as he desired her favour,
To strike my head off.
Mere imagination of a disturbed fancy:
Here's your Hat Sir.
But where my Jewel?
By all likelihood lost, this troublesome night.
I saw it when we came unto this place.
I looked upon it my self, when you re???posed.
What is become of it?
Restore it, for thou hast it, do not put me
To the trouble to search you.
Search me?
You have been
Before your Lady gave you entertainment,
A night-walker in the streets.
How, my good Lord?
Traded in picking pockets, when tame gulls
Charmed with your prostituted flatteries,
Deigned to embrace you.
Love give place to anger.
Charge me with theft, and prostituted baseness?
Were you a Judge, nay more, the King; thus urged,
To your teeth I would say, It is false.
This will not do.
Deliver it in private.
You shall be
In public hanged first, and the whole gang of you.
I steal what I presented.
Do not strive.
Though thou hast swallowed it, I'll rip thy entrail,
But I'll recover it.
Help, help.
A new plot.
Forbear, libidinous Monsters; if you offer
The least resistance, you are dead: if one
But lay his hand upon his sword, shoot all.
Let us fight for what we have, and if you can
Win it, enjoy it.
We come not to try
Your valour, but for your money; throw down your sword,
Or I'll begin with you: So if you will
Walk quietly without bonds, you may, if not
We'll force you; thou shalt have no wrong,
But justice against these.
We'll teach your Sir
To meddle with wenches in our walks.
It being against our Canons.
Whether will you lead us?
You shall know that hereafter: Guard 'em sure.
Are all the passages stopped?
And strongly manned,
They must use wings, and fly, if they escape us.
But why, great Sir, you should expose your person
To such apparent danger, when you may
Have'em brought bound before you; is beyond
My apprehension.
I am better armed
Then you suppose: besides it is confirmed
By all that have been robbed, since Severino
Commanded these Banditi; though it be
Unusual in Italy, imitating
The courteous English Thieves, for so they call 'em,
They have not done one murder: I must add too,
That from a strange relation I have heard
Of Severino's Justice, in disposing
The preys brought in, I would be an eye-witness
Of what I take up now but on report:
And therefore it is my pleasure that we should
As soon as they encounter us, without
A show of opposition yield.
Your will is not to be disputed.
You have placed
Your ambush so, that if there be occasion
They suddenly may break in.
My life upon it.
We cannot travail far, but we shall meet
With some of these good fellows; and be sure
You do as I command you.
Without fear, sir.
It is true, I did command Caliste should not
Without my knowledge and consent, assisted
By your advice, be married: but your
Restraint, as you deliver it, denying
A grown up Maid the modest conversation
Of Men, and warrantable pleasures, relished
Of too much rigour, which no doubt hath driven her
To take some desperate course:
What then I did, was in my care thought best.
I so conceive it;
But where was your discretion to forbid
Access and fit approaches, when you knew
Her Suitors noble, either of which I would
Have wished my son in law? Adorio,
However wild, a young man of good parts,
But better fortunes: his Competitor
Caldoro, for his sweetness of behaviour,
Staidness and temperance, holding the first place
Among the Gallants most observed in Naples;
His own revenues of a large extent,
But in the expectation of his Uncles
And Guardians entrata's, by the course
Of nature to descend on him, a Match
For the best Subjects blood, I except none
Of eminence in Italy.
Your wishes,
However a while delayed, are not I hope
Impossibilities.
Though it prove so,
Yet it is not good to give a check to Fortune
When she comes smiling to us.???
Hark, this Cornet
Assures us of a prize; there sit in state,
It is thy first tribute.
Would we might enjoy our own as Subjects:
What's got by the sword,
Is better then inheritance: All those Kingdoms
Subdued by Alexander, were by force extorted,
Though gilded ore with glorious stiles of conquest;
His victories but royal robberies,
And his true definition a Thief;
When circled with huge Navies to the terror
Of such as ploughed the Ocean, as the Pirate
Who from a narrow Creek puts off for prey
In a small Pinnace, from a second place
New spoil brought in, ??? from a third party, brave!
This shall be registered a day of triumph
Designed by fate to honour thee.???
??? Welcome Claudio;
Good booty, ha?
Their outsides promise so,
But yet they have not made discovery
Of what they stand possessed of.
Welcome all
Good boys; you have done bravely, if no blood
Be shed in the service.
On our lives no drop sir.
It is to my wish.
My Lord!
No more, I know 'em:
My daughter and her woman too!
Conceal your joys.
Fallen in the Devils mouth.
My father,
And mother! to what fate am I reserved?
Continue masked; or grant that you be known,
From whom can you expect a gentle sentence,
If you despair a Fathers?
Now I perceive which way I lost my Jewel.
I rejoice
I am cleared from theft; you have done me wrong,
But I unasked forgive you.
It is some comfort yet
The rivals, men and women, friends and foes, are
Together in one toil.
You all look pale,
And by your private whisperings and soft murmurs
Express a general fear: pray you shake it off;
For understand you are not fallen into
The hands of a Busiris or a Cacus,
Delighted more in blood then spoil; but given up
To the power of an unfortunate Gentleman,
Not born to these low courses, howsoever
My fate, and just displeasure of the King
Designed me to it: you need not to doubt
A sad captivity here, and much less fear
For profit to be sold for slaves, then shipped
Into another Country; in a word,
You know the proscribed Severino, he
Not unacquainted, but familiar with
The most of you: Want in my self I know not,
But for the pay of these my Squires, who eat
Their bread with danger purchased, and must be
With others fleeces clothed, or live exposed
To the summers scorching heat and winters cold;
To these before you be compelled, (a word
I speak with much unwillingness) deliver
Such coin as you are furnished with.
A fine method!
This is neither begging, borrowing, nor robbery,
Yet it hath a twang of all of them. But one word Sir.
Your pleasure.
When we have thrown down our Muck, what follows?
Liberty, with a safe convoy, to any place you choose.
By this hand you are
A fair fraternity; for once I'll be
The first example to relieve your Covent.
There's a thousand crowns, my Vintage, Harvest, Profits
Arising from my Herds, bound in one Bag,
Share it among you.
You are still the jovial, and good Durazzo.
To the Offering, nay,
No hanging an arse, this is their wedding day.
What you must do spite of your hearts, do freely
For your own sakes.
There's mine.
Mine.
All that I have.
This to preserve my Jewel.
Which I challenge;
Let me have justice, for my coin I care not;
I will not weep for mine.
Would it were more.
Nay you are privileged; but why old father
Art thou so slow? thou hast one foot in the grave;
And if desire of gold do not increase
With thy expiring lease of life, thou should
Be forwardest.
In what concerns my self,
I do acknowledge it, and I should lie,
(A vice I have detested from my youth)
If I denied my present store, since what
I have about me now, weighs down in value
Almost a hundred sold, what ever these
Have laid before you, see I do groan under
Throws down three bags.
The burden of my treasure; nay it is Gold,
And if your hunger of it be not sated
With what already I have shown unto you,
Here's that shall glut it. In this Casket are
Inestimable Jewels, Diamonds
Of such a piercing lustre, as struck blind
The amazed Lapidary, while he laboured
To honour his own art in setting 'em.
Opens the Casket.
Some orient Pearls too, which the Queen of Spain
Might wear as Earings, in remembrance of
The day that she was crowned.
The spoils I think of both the Indies.
The great Sultans poor,
If paralleled with this Craessus.
Why dost thou weep?
From a most fit consideration of
My poverty, this though restored, will not
Serve my occasions.
Impossible.
May be he would buy his passport up to Heaven,
And then this too little, though in the journey
It were a good Viaticum.
I would make it
A means to help me thither; not to wrong you
With tedious expectation, I'll discover
What my wants are, and yield my reasons for 'em:
I have two sons, twins, the true images
Of what I was at their years; never father
Had fairer, or more promising hopes in his
Posterity: But alas, these sons ambitious
Of glittering honour, and an after-name
Achieved by glorious, and yet pious actions,
(For such were their intentions) put to sea:
They had a well rigged Bottom, fully manned,
An old experienced Master, lusty Sailors, 
Stout Land-men, and what's something more then rare,
They did agree, had one design, and that was
In charity to redeem the Christian slaves
Chained to the Turkish servitude.
A brave aim.
A most heroic enterprise; I languish
To hear how they succeeded.
Prosperously
At first, and to their wishes: divers Galleys
They boarded, and some strong Forts near the shore
They suddenly surprised, a thousand Captives
Redeemed from th'oar, paid their glad vows &amp; prayers
For their deliverance, their ends acquired;
And making homeward in triumphant manner,
(For sure the cause deserved it.)
Pray you end here,
The best I fear is told, and that which follows
Must conclude ill.
Your fears are true, and yet
I must with grief relate it; prodigal fame
In every place with her loud trump proclaiming
The greatness of the action; the Pirates
Of Tunis and Argiers laid wait for 'em
At their return: To tell you what resistance
They made, and how my poor sons fought, would but
Increase my sorrow, and perhaps grieve you
To hear it passionately described unto you
In brief they were taken, and for the great loss
The enemy did sustain their victory,
Being with much blood bought, they do endure
The heaviest captivity, wretched men
Did ever suffer, O my sons? my sons?
To me for ever lost, lost, lost for ever.
Will not these heaps of Gold added to thine,
Suffice for ransom?
For my sons it would,
But they refuse their liberty, if all
That were engaged with them, have not their Irons
With theirs struck off, and set at liberty with them,
Which these heaps cannot purchase.
Ha? the toughness
Of my heart melts? be comforted old Father
I have some hidden treasure, and if all,
I and my Squires, these three years have laid up,
Can make the sum up, freely take it.
I'll sell my self to my shirt, lands, move???ables, and thou
Shalt part with thine too Nephew, rather then
Such brave men shall live slaves.
We will not yield to it:
Nor loose our parts.
How's this?
You are fitter far
To be a Churchman, then to have command over good-fellows.
Thus I ever use
Such saucy Rascals, second me Claudio.
Rebellious? do you grumble? I'll not leave
One rouge of 'em alive.
Hold, give the sign
The King.
Then I am lost.
The Woods are full of armed men.
No hope of your escape
Can flatter you.
Mercy dread Sir.
Thy carriage in this unlawful course ap???pears so noble,
Especially in this last trial, which
I put upon you, that I wish the mercy
You kneel in vain for, might fall gently on you.
But when the holy Oil was poured upon
My head, and I anointed King, I swore
Never to pardon murder, I could wink at
Your robberies, though our Laws call 'em death;
But to dispense with Monteclaro's blood
Would ill become a King, in him I lost
A worthy subject, and must take from you
A strict account of't; it is in vain to move,
My doom's irrevocable.
Not dread Sir, if Monteclaro live.
If? good Level.
He lives in him Sir, that you though
Level.
Three years have not so altered me, but you may
Remember Monteclaro.
How.
My Brother.
Uncle.
Give me leave, I was
Left dead in the field, but by the Duke Montpensier,
Now General at Millain, taken up,
And with much care recovered.
Why lived you so long concealed?
Confounded with the wrong
I did my Brother, in provoking him
To fight. I spent the time in France that I
Was absent from the Court, making my exise
The punishment imposed upon my self
For my offence.
Now Sir, I dare confess all
This was the guest invited to the Banquet,
That drew on your suspicion.
Your intent,
Though it was ill in you, I do forgive,
The rest I'll hear at leisure, Sir, your sentence.
It is a general pardon unto all
Upon my hopes, in your fair lives hereafter
You will deserve it.
Claud. &amp;c. Long live great Alphonso.
Your mercy shown in this, now if you please
Decide these lovers difference
That is easy.
I'll put it to the women's choice, the men
Consenting to it.
Here I fix them, never to be removed.
It is my nil ultra Sir.
O that I had the happiness to say
So much to you, I dare maintain my love
Is equal to my Ladies.
But my mind
A pitch above yours. Marry with a servant
Of no descent or fortune:
You are deceived,
How ere she has been trained up as a servant,
She is the daughter of a noble Captain,
Who in his voyage to the Persian Gulf,
Perished by shipwreck, one I dearly loved.
He to my care entrusted her, having taken
My word, if he returned not like himself,
I never should discover what she was,
But it being for her good, I will dispense with it.
So much Sir for her blood, now for her portion.
So dear I hold the memory of my friend,
It shall rank with my daughters:
This made good
I will not be perverse.
With a kiss confirm it.
I sign all concord here, but must to you
Sir
For reparation of my wounded honour,
The justice of the King consenting to it,
Denounce a lawful war.
This in our presence:
The cause dread Sir commands it, though your Edicts
Call private Combats, Murders, rather then
Sit down with a disgrace, arising from
A blow; the Bonds of my obedience shook of,
Ill right my self.
I do confess the wrong,
Forgetting the occasion, and desire
Remission from you, and upon such terms
As by his sacred Majesty shall be judged
Equal on both parts.
I desire no more.
All then are pleased, it is the glory of
A King to make, and keep his subjects happy;
For us we do approve the Roman Maxim,
To save one Citizen is a greater prize,
Then to have killed in War ten Enemies.
Jam left to enquire, then to relate
To the still doubtful Author, at what rate
His merchandise are valued. If they prove
Staple Commodities in your Grace and love,
To this last birth of his Minerva, he
Vows, and we do believe him seriously,
Sloth cast of, and all pleasures else declined,
He'll search with his best care, until he find
New ways, and make good in some laboured Song,
Though he grow old, Apollo still is young.
Cherish his good intentions, and declare
By any sign of favour, that you are
Well pleased, and with a general consent,
And he desires no more encouragement.


welcome gallants, welcome honoured bloods; the reason that we have unclothed us of our princely government in Arcadia, and have to doe with this private retiremeant here in this desert Isle, you shall find in that shedule, only thus much for public satisfaction: Tic not strange to you, that the choicest treasure Nature endowed us with, is mined up in the veins of my two daughters: how much their quiet, and the smooth stream of our government in Arcadia, was troubled by the impetuous concourse of untruely suitors, is familiar with your knowledge; this to avoid, I have for my Image there in my absence appointed my brother, and undertook this private retirement.
Why my Lord, are you so covetous of your daughters beauties, that their perfections shall bee a means to hinder their prefermeant?
Rather to further it fair Queen: they are the only pearls of our age, and to see them well set in honourable and well-befitting Marriage, is our wishes happiness.
To which effect we have sent a general challenge
To all the youthful bloods of Africa,
That whosoever (borne of princely stem)
Dares foot the bosom of this desert Isle,
(The stage where Isle perform this lovers prize)
And by his wit and active policy,
Woo, win, entice, or any way defeat
Me of my charge, my daughters of their hearts,
Shall with their loves wear my imperial crown
Wreath of their conquest.
A prize, a prize, rare work for Fencers.
What coward would not venture a cracked crown for such a booty?
To that intent our Island is fenc't in
By sea and land, and at each corner built
A Castle for defence, which like great men,
Doe over-looke Arcadia: over which,
Wee have appointed Captains. More to desire,
Is more then we are willing to discover.
Well then sister, I see we must to hap-hazard for husbands.
God send me one with a good face and I care not.
Love an't be thy will, send me one with a fair table in his forehead, like Time.
Nay, and his face be good, let me alone to trick his forehead, a countrey-gentlewoman taught me how: But father I wonder how you dare undertake such a peremptory challenge against all comers, considering you have been so long troubled with  Ague.
An ague? what ague?
Why your quotidian, Demotes the Court surfeit, hee that dwells in your eye, like a disease in your blood.
And the Presence were not exceeding empty-stomackt, it would never digest such Almes-basket-scraps, the very fall and garbidge of gentry; fie upon him, hee becomes the great chamber worse then a Gentleman-usher with wry legs.
He is the most misshapen suit of gentility that ever the Court wore.
Had hee not been of my fathers own making, I should have condemned his taylor for an exceeding botcher.
If you retain the love of children, or the duty of subjests, express it in your obedience, we know Demotes loves us
As Captains and Courtiers doe old widows, for profit and preferment.
In sign whereof wee make him.
Nay, you have bestowed too much of the making of him up already.
The very making of him up, has stood you in more then the whole outside's worth.
In my free thoughts you wrong him, therefore to express our love, and to give the world public note of his loyalty, we create him your Guardian.
How father, my Guardian?
I minion, yours.
Doe you hear father, bid him bespeak spectacles, for my fingers have vowed to have a blind match with his eyes.
Well said Haggart, Isle make your proud heart stoop to the lure of obedience. But come, by this time our challenge is publisht,
and our gallants wits sweating in the field of Invention, and it behooves us not to rest unexercised.
So to our lodge, in the mean time be it known,
Our breath has power to raise, or cast men down.
Now Captain Observation, times bawd, thou that hast kept the Ages door, whilst up-start baseness crept into the bed of greatness, what doest thou think of this change?
That it pleased the Duke, and becomes not subjects to examine his actions.
Thats no part of my meaning, yet would I gladly bee better instructed why the Duke broke up his Court in Arcadia, and removed it into this Island.
I am not Secretary to his thoughts, but the general rumour is, that out of the freeness of his spirit, he hath sent a challenge to all his neighbour Princes, that whosoever (within a twelve month) can defeat him of his daughters, shall with their loves enjoy his Dukedom, the garland proposed for the victors.
Your words throw sense into me, and thats the cause the Island is so surely guarded with Watch-towers, over which our selves and other Captains have the charge.
And to the end that not affection, but desert may prove victor, are the two Ladies so narrowly observed, the one never out a the eye of her Father, the other continually in the lodge of Dametas, the Dukes chief director.
If inquisitiveness be not too bold a guest, what do you think of Demotes?
As of a little hillock, made great with others ruins.
Your comparison holds, for by report, his avarice has unmade many to make him up.
How did he first stumble on the Princes favour?
As some doe upon offices, by fortune and flattery, or as truth says, the Prince having one day lost his way, wandering in the woods, found this Demotes, affected his discourse, took him along to the Court, and like great men in love with their own doings, countenanc't his defects, gave him offices, titles, and all the additionce that go to the making up of a man worshipful.
I cannot commend the Duke for raising him, nor yet
praise him, that hee proportions not his carriage answerable to his fortunes.
Your thoughts and mine are twins in that: but I hear the warning bell, some strangers are arrived.
Lets to our office then, and conduct them to Demotes, whose custom is to spit and hem, whilst his Scribe Major takes their Examinations.
Manasses, how doest like my play at Tennis?
You play well, but you lose still.
Policy Manasses, policy; for when any man upbraids me with my gettings at Court, I may swear truly, I have lost more then I have got by it.
By the Tennis-court I think you have.
If by any Court, tic enough to save mine oath. But what doe our spruce-witted gallants say of my bounty?
Faith sir, according to the proportion of it, little or nothing, they say tic a banckrout, and dares not show his head.
Then let em leave jesting at me, though it please the Duke for some few good parts that hee sees in me, to make me his familiar, I scorn to be public, or every Courtiers companion: but who comes here?
The Captains of the watch-towers? what news with you?
A couple of petitioners, ant like your worship.
Had I best take their Petitions, Manasses?
O in any case, though you never peruse em, tic the only course in request.
Fellows, deliver your petitions to my Scribe Major, and dost hear? put em up Manasses, they may be wrongs to us.
And they bee, I hope they be not the first wrongs I have put up for your worship.
That fellows pocket is like a Tailors hell, it eats up part of every mans due: tic an Executioner, and makes away more innocent petitions in one year, then a red-headed hangman cuts ropes in an age.
Now, what are you sir?
A poor soldier, ant like your Worship.
Poor soldiers doe not like my worship, they are bad members.
Then if they had a woman to their Judge, they should be sure to be cut off, for they cannot endure bad members in a Common-wealth.
What are you?
A poor scholar, ant like your Worship.
Poor scholars do not like our worship neither, they rail against rich Cormorants, they are bad members too.
Cut them off both sir, and make the land an Eunuch.
Isle take order with em I warrant thee; and I may have my will, isle neither ha poor scholar nor soldier about the Court.
The next way to make it the Isle of fools.
Whats he talks of fools there? why how now sir, know you to whom you speak?
Cry your worship mercy, I had forgot your authority.
But I remember well enough I warrant you; I command you in my name and the Dukes, to attend your guard, and you reguard me no more then a careless Lawyer doth an undone client, but isle inform: the Duke shall know, out, pack.
Command your slaves sir, we are gentlemen.
Why so I hope are we sir, and of the best and last edition, of the Dukes own making.
Cry your authority mercy, will you discharge us of these passengers?
You are discharged, about your business.
Bad fate, that wrong should set his foot on right, And true borne Eagles stoop to this base Kite.
What an excellent trade it is to be an officer maker, isle have more officers, and one shall be to keep scholars and soldiers out of the Court, for they dare not come in the great Chamber already, for want of good clothes. But gods me Manasses, go tell the Duke I must speak with him.
Presently sir, Isle go fetch the head to give the foot a posit: and my master had wit to his villainy, he would make an excellent dish for the hang-man.
Right vvorshipfull.
I sir, I know my place is vvorshipfull; I tell thee Knave, I
could hang thee by my patent, if it were granted once, isle tell thee how it runs, it allows me 24. knaves, 6 knights, 10. fools, 13. felllons, and 14. traitors by the year, take them how, why, when, and where I please.
I doe not think the Duke will ever grant it.
Why not grant it? why should you think hee will not grant it? Such another word and isle send you to Limbo instantly.
We thank you good Demotes. Discover themselves.
I hope you'll take reasonable bail for our forth coming.
The case is altered with you since you came out of Arcadia.
My honourable friends, Iulio and Aminter, my self and the best ability of my power, lies at your service.
You see how confidently wee presume upon your Letters promise, in furthering us to attain the lovers prize.
The Dukes daughters are your own, and in a word thus shall you attain them, some 3 days hence I will appoint a hunting, to which I will invite the Duke &amp; both his daughters: in this hunt will I upon some sudden occasion divide the train, and having singled out the two Does, I hope you have wit enough to strike.
To strike, how mean you?
As headsmen doe, off with their maiden-heads, or if the Duke offer resistance, off with his crown too.
That were violence, and clean opposite to the intent of the challenge.
Come ye are shallow, to it vi &amp; arms, to it, Isle bee your second, think of the Crown, have my Letters travaild for you, my wit wrought for you, and my invention sweat for you, to possess you of your loves, and seat you in the Dukedom, and come you now with tic violence, and against the intent of the challenge? I am ashamed to hear you.
Nay Demotes, and your resolution bee so forward, ours shall over-take you, wee doubted least the preferments your Lord hath heaped upon you, had smothered your affection to usward.
That was the father that begot the doubt in us, you will appoint the hunt.
Sever the Duke, divide the train, and then
We have your meaning.
Put it in execution then, but first entertain some new
disguise, as at our next meeting Isle inform you. Adieu, I shall think long till I see you again.
As a Lawyer doth for his Client for a second fee. Here's no Iudas?
Yes, and a damned one too, for he would betray and sell his Master.
Tic common in such base fellows, such Court-spiders, that weave their webs of flattery in the ears of greatness, if they can once entangle them in their quaint-treachery, they poison them straight.
They are like unnecessary worms, whom the sun of greatness creates of the gross and slimy multitude, as soon as they recover strength, they eat into the credit of true borne gentry, undermine and work out the true nobility, to inroote and establish themselves.
And in the end, like Esops starved snake, having lapped the sweet milk of greatness, made themselves strong in authority and friends, they turn their stings of envy into their preservers bosom.
The example lives in this Demotes, who notwithstanding the Duke hath raised him to that height that he looks equal with himself, yet for the base hope of uncertain government, he offers him to sale; but let his treason live to the last minute.
For my part Isle make that use of him that Physicians doe of poison, use as much of him as serves for mine honest intent, and cast down the rest, as unfit for any necessary employment.
Let our carriage in this attempt put on no show of violence, either to the Duke, or his daughters.
And let our discourse go so smoothly apparelled, that it move not the patience of the most tender ear.
About it then, though his intent be base,
Our enterprise shall wear a noble face.
Arcadia, thou heaven, within whose sphere
The star that guides my motion is fixed,
I court thy gracious bosom with a kiss
For this admittance: in thine amorous arms,
Fair Violetta, fairer then the flower
That christened her, and graced her with that name,
Do's play the wanton:
Only her Father like a covetous churl,
Owner of that vnvalewed Diamond,
Hath made this desert Isle th'unwilling chest
In which he lockes her. But the fair advantage
Of this large Challenge, and my stars to friend,
Aided by this disguise, I shall break op
His iron Casket, and enlarge my hope.
This way she went sir, this way.
But I say this way, I would thou should know, we old Courtiers can hunt a Cony, and put her to the squeak, and make her cry out like a young married wife of the first night.
For more help, as some of them have done: But there she is.
Isle upon her presently: dost hear me sir? thou vessel of infirmity, woman, and by thy out-side little better then one of the wicked, come hither and show thy self before us, show thy self before Demotes.
Demotes? Lisander then dissemble,
For hoe's the man must work thy entrance.
What art thou? speak.
My mother is the Queen of Amazons,
My self a Virgin, married unto Arms,
And bold achievements, who have paced the world
In quest of fair Antioste my sister:
And turning homeward, the inconstant winds,
And wrathful Neptune cast me on this shore.
And what's your business now you are landed?
My business is in private with the Duke.
The Duke is busy, and shall speak with no body.
I beseech you sir.
Tic no beseeching matter I assure you.
No, never beseech for the matter, for except you could beseech with the tongue of Angels, tic to no purpose with him.
Tic strange, I have heard thy master is a very good man where hee takes.
True, where he takes he is, but he takes nothing of you, and therefore look for no kindness from him.
Good, and dost thou take after thy Master?
No Madam, I take commonly before my Master, for where he takes, he takes all, and leaves nothing for me to take.
Oh, I feel your meaning.
Let my master have some feeling of yours, and heel prefar your suit.
Tic not the Dukes pleasure Petitioners should buy their access.
Ell's one, tic my masters pleasure, and usual fashion.
And I must maintain the fashion. Worshipful Demotes, my late shipwreck as you see, hath made a defeat both of my friends and treasure; notwithstanding, Fortune hath referv'd me one jewel, which if I might request your Worship in love to accept, and be a means to work my admittance to the Duke, I should become a true debtor to your love.
Well Madam, tho I hate nothing more then a man that takes bribes, yet pressed by your importunity, and that you tender it in love, lest I might seem too nice to withstand a Ladies favour, Isle wear it for your sake, and if the Duke be not too busily employed, work your access.
So doing, you shall perform the office of a deare-bought friend.
How quickly the tide's turned! but doe you hear Madam? though I take neither before nor after my Master, yet take my counsel, and do not trust my master: if you have a suit to the Duke, keep it to your self, for if you trust my master with it, heel prefar it for you, but heel beg't for himself.
Thats plain cozenage.
Fie no, tic cunning in him, marry twould be thought little better then cozenage in a country gentleman: but he returns.
Madam, I have been earnest, very earnest with the Duke for your admittance.
And have you wrought it?
I have, marry you must think I bestowed much labour in it.
'Tmay be you did.
'Tmay be you did: and look a scance like a Apothecaries wife pounding Colliquintida; have my brains sweat for this?
Why the jewel is right Demotes, had I but an Ass that would sweat me such pearl.
An Ass? and sweat such pearl? Isle bar her admittance, here take your jewel, the Duke will allow no admittance, and I will keep you back.
Keep me back? thou could doe no more and I were a poor mans petitioner.
And Isle doe so much being a rich petitioner.
You cannot sit, you Court spaniel, you unnecessary mushrump, that in one night art sprung out of the root of greatness, I have bought my admittance, and Isle have it in despetto del fato.
I must admit her, these Ladies are so inward with our tricks, there's no good to be done upon them: well Madam, your admittance is open, will you follow?
With all my heart sir, Isle be the blind man and poor petitioner, and thou shalt play the Court-spaniell with the silver bell, and lead me into the Presence.
Court-spaniell? mum: Isle bosom what I think, Old Gib's not blind, I see, although I wink.
BOy, how dost like me in this attire?
As the Audience doth a bad play, scurvily.
Is it not strange a Prince should be thus metamorphosed?
Not so strange as the Metamorphosis of Ajax, an't like your Grace.
Grace you Aggot, hast not forgot that yet?
No, and yet tic a wonder I ha not, grace being so seldom used, I'm sure they say none at some Ordinaries, for at sitting down they cannot intend it for hunger, and at rising up, they are either drunk, or have such mind a dice, they never remember, my Lord then.
No more Lord, sirrah.
Indeed there are too many already, but is not this strange, that rich men should forsake their titles? master then.
Your will sir.
You have left many Countries behind you in seeking your friend Lisander, and yet you cannot find him.
True sir.
I have seen much gold lying upon Lombards stals, and could never finger penny of it.
Very well.
Nay, it was not well sir.
What conclude you then?
That you were best sit down, and see what you have got by your journey.
I have seen a face as beautiful as heaven.
Thats nothing, a prisoner sees the face of heaven it self, when hee looks but out at the prison-gate, isle stand to it, a man were as good be hanged, so a meet a handsome hangman, &amp; a strong rope, as be in love.
Your reason for that.
Mary this sir, hanging is end of all troubles, and love the beginning: Nay further, I think a Lover cannot be saved, for hee is of all religions.
Your proof for that.
This; hee thinks with the Atheist there's no God but his Mistress, with the Infidel no heaven but her smiles, with the Papist no Purgatory but her frowns, and with the family of love, holds it lawful to lie with her, though she be another mans wife.
So sir, what follows?
Serving-men sir, the Master goes in before his wife, and the Serving-man follows his master.
Sir forbear, I must meditate.
As the Usurer before hee parts with money, meditates upon the assurance.
If Violettaes presence haven't quenched
The memory of all things but her self,
I should be more familiar with that face.
I have left my country to seek my friend.
And I my country and my friend for love.
And in the search of him have lost my self
In the strange Region of a women's eye.
In love, and in Arcadia.
As much as heaven transcends the humble earth,
So towers her praise her face differs as far
From others, as a glo-worme from a star.
She is a Princess that my soul affects.
And rich.
Half heir unto this Dukedom.
And she were whole heir to the four moral virtues,
it were nothing: when shall I see the time that men will love for virtue, or a rich heir marry a poor wench without a portion? nover I think.
Had not my friend Lisander.
What of me?
Left me in Thrice.
We had never met in love,
His syllables betray him. I arrest you.
At whose suit?
Not at his Tailors in any case, for there's no greater stitch to a younger brothers conscience, then to pay for a suit of apparel when tic worn out.
Lisander or his ghost?
Demetrius,
Or some illusiue tenant in his shape?
Unkind, why did thou lean my company?
For that which made the amorous Gods leave heaven, or love: but why is Demetrius thus disguised?
For that which would make a Iackanapes a Monkey, and he could get it: a tail.
Peace rogue.
Why wag, is thy master in love?
Faith sit he hath entered his action in Cutids Court, and mean to proceed in the suit it should seem.
Why did not take my counsel in thy choice?
Because I feared a chiding, for doubting their honourble thoughts would not have not have consented to my effeminate attempts, I stole this secret course, and manner of disguise, as best helping to access, which it hath begot, now what access will bring forth, I commit to unborn industry.
It cannot but be prosperous: only the strict observance of our loves hinders the passage of our hopes.
Indeed that's not the least hinderance, yet the Duke himself, and my quaint disguise hath removed it out of my way, who not only takes me for a woman, but hath allowed me for my loves companion.
Fortune deals kindly with thee, I am as far from access to my love, as when I was in Thrice.
Demotes is the oystershell that holds thy pearl, our wits must fish for him.
Will the Cods head bite?
Like an old Usurer at a young heirs inheritance, and I
have it ready hooked for him: and here he comes, my plot is to prefar thee to his service.
Prithee doe, and isle serve him in his right kind.
Demotes, my love is yours.
Which madam I am as proud of
As a malecontent of a change, or an old Lady of a new fashion.
To be round, I have a suit to you in the behalf of this woodman
To me sweet blossom, though I be somewhat strict in mine office, I cannot be stony to Ladies. Fellow is thy petition drawn?
Petition?
Your only way to move a fut by: Humbly complayning to your good worship, O tic most pathetic, &amp; indeed, without money, can doe just nothing with authority.
Come hither stripling, whose son were thou?
I am not so wise a child as you take me for, I never knew my father.
Did not know thy father?
A common fault, his betters forget themselves when they grow rich, then blame not him to forget his father.
What was his name?
If I may give credit to my mother, they called him Menalchas, who on his death-bed made me his heir, with this charge, to seek your worships service, and gave me this gold as a remembronco to purchase your favour.
Gold? hem.
Now doth my Master long more to singer there gold, then a young girl, married to an old man, doth to run her husband ashore at Cuckolds haven.
Well, I could doe for this fatherless youth.
As many Executors and Overseers have done, cheat him of his portion, and then turn him out of doors a begging.
But for I have the Gardian-ship of the Princess, I dare doe nothing without the consent of the Duke.
Come, come sir, your worship shall not refuse him.
Well then I woo not, but tic for your sake I assure you.
Meaning the gold.
What shall I call thy name?
Dorus an't like your worship.
Ah, good Dorus, be an honest youth Dorus, reverence your Master, and love your self: bee sure to get under me, and you shall loose nothing in my service. Madam, the Duke and Duchess expect you at the hunt, and await your coming at Dianaes oak.
e attend them presently, be a good servant Dorus.
Twill be his own another day Madam.
In the mean time let it be yours to lead the way.
My service doth attend you.
As the Pursevant doth the prisoner for a double fee.
Welcome slave to a slave, a fair presage,
The hope of love sweetens loves vass lage.
Now and Demotes bee the mettle hee was stamped for, a right villain.
And he be not, hang him.
Nay he deserves hanging too if he be: but will you trust him?
Yes as far as I see him, and he that trusts him further, my trust is he will be deceived.
Indeed, he that will prove false to his maker, will be true to no man.
Yes, for the present time, like a bawd to him that gives most
Thats not for love.
Yes of the money: he that looks for other love in this ageThis is the place his Letter speaks of, and here he comes himself.
Why so lo: now is the web of my hopes upon the Loombe of perfection, and in this quech of lashes Aminter &amp; Iulio,
See and see not, all mum, you know your cue,
The game's your own, if you can hunt it true.
Demotes, were thine cares ever at a more musical banquet? how the hounds mouths like bells are tuned one under another like a slothfulness, the speed of the cry out-ran my sense of hearing.
Cross over the Forest to Dianaes oak my liege, &amp; there your grace advantaged by the height of the ground, shall not only at pleasure hear, but be eye-witnesse of their musical contention.
Thanks good Demotes, bee thy directions our wives convoy.
Where is his highness Demotes?
At Atones bower Madam, where he expects your presense, to see the fleshing of a couple of Spartan hounds, in the wasting blood of the spent Dear.
Thanks good Demotes, mine eyes would not be good friends with my feet, should they not bring 'em to that kingly sport.
Sweet Ladies, to save you the expense of much breath, which must be laid out in the purchase of the game, I have proveded you this stand, from whence your eyes may be commanders of the sport: such sport as you little dream of.
We are your loves debtors kind Demotes.
As I love virtue I pity these poor beasts,
These Sylan commoners, to see what tasks
Our covetous Foresters impose upon them,
Who not content with imposed of their breath,
(Poor hearts) pursue them smiling to their death.
It was the end of their creation Madam.
So was the end of ours to live in peace,
And not to tyrannise on harmless beasts,
But Foresters, like Images set forth
The tyranny of greatness without pity,
As they the Dear, so covetous wealth pursues
The trembling state of their inferiors,
And to clasp up the volume of their sins,
They drink their blood, and cloth them with their skins:
Then cease to press poor beasts with tyranny,
You love your lives, think they are loath to dye.
You are too tender-hearted to bee a good huntswoman Lady.
And some of you too hard-hearted, but leaving this discourse of hunting, have all our gallantry of Lacedemon and Greece, spent the vigour of their wits, that not one dares venture.
For our loves sister, you may see, the properer women, the worse luck.
Tush you shall have suitors, fear not Madam.
No at any hand sister, for with a fear it comes.
Then isle fear of purpose, because I would have 'em come.
And they doe not, they are notable cowards.
Then let them keep away still, for I have vowed my mydenhead
shall never doe homage to the bed of a coward.
Sweet Ladies, will you beguile a minute or two with this discourse, till I step up to the top of the hill and make discovery of the game.
Let your return be speedy good Demotes.
Isle put on wings and fly.
Out of the Court, and the whole Country shall have a good riddance.
So, he hath put'em fair to the stand, lets issue &amp; surprise them.
Be resolute and sudden.
Aminter and Iulio issue out, and bear them away.
Murder, treason, rescue, help.
Yes much reskue, much help, much Demotes: why so, this jest was drawn home close to the head, it cannot choose but cleave the very white of our hopes, the Dukes wit: to thy tackle good wit, some sudden sea room, or our stratagem is run a ground.
Tell me Demotes, was not the Dear a prodigal? did hee not spend his breath freely amongst us?
And his blood too my liege, but did you observe how the hounds like politicians nosed out the game?
True: and coming to the loss, Melampus, but where are our daughters?
Did you observe that my liege, that Melampus as a true hound is ever horse cheerd or hollow, yet he kept time too.
Certain Demotes, but where are our daughters man?
Busy my Lord under a brake bush, disputing of the virtue of sweet water, and ground Ivy.
What cry of treason's that Demotes?
Pray God no danger sets upon my daughters,
Seek out our wife, isle haste unto their reskue.
And my sword un-employd? allegiance says nay to that my ige, I am for the adventure my self, if they be surprised (I am a mad man) your grace shall hear more: if not (I am the more sorry) your grace shall hear more too: make peace with your thoughts till my return, and doubt not their recovery.
Speak, whore's the Duke?
Here my Gynetia.
What mean these weapons, are our daughters afe?
As a thief in a mill father, we thank our redeemers
The more my grief, were you surprised then madam?
Yes faith Demotes.
And how sweet Ladies, and how were you rescued?
Being surprised, this gallant Amazon
Pressed to their recue, had you seen what worth
She and this woodman spent in our defence,
Wonder would have bereft you of all sense,
She rai'd her sword with such a manly grace,
As had not her mild sex controlled my thoughts,
I could have fallen in love with her high worth.
You over-prise us madam, not our desert,
But the weak spirits of our opposites,
Gave luster to the dimness of our worth.
It pleases your modesty to lesson it,
But it shall still live great in our regard. What woodman's that?
My follower, my liege.
What ere he be, he hath deserved our love,
Fellow be near us, and for this desert,
Performed against those Traitors to our blood,
Under thy master we give thee an attendant,
To guard the life and safety of our daughter.
Thank you good father, who ever loose by the bargain,
I have got me a servant by the match: woo't serve me fellow?
In the best I can.
In heart your fellow, though in show your man.
Isle try your duteous service: I command
Your knee to kie the ground, your lip my hand.
Pardon me Madam.
Here's hot love no doubt,
I may command my man, and go without.
Truce to this airy war, these paper bullets
Better become a Closet then a Park,
The Forest music is to hear the hounds
Rend the thin ayre, and with a lusty cry
Awake the drowsy Echo, and confound
Their perfect language in a mingled sound,
Then to the Court, our Forest sport being done,
A second chase of lovelier sports begun.
If fortune cross not what our hopes pursue,
Our fears have met their deaths, our loves their due.
Crossed in my hopes, the Ladies rescued, and the Princes like ravens beat out of the game-place, my invention must turn traveller for more stratagems: what &amp; I should discover their plot to the Duke, attach em for traitors, and beg their lands for my labore, though they be my friends, it were a pretty parcel of policy.
All things are lawful that doe profit bring,
A wise mans bow goes with a two-fold string.
Did ever two Princes meet such strange changes in their loves? now we have wrought our admittance, and in a manner got em into our possessions, our hopes like false fires having brought us within ken, vanish, and leave us out of all comfort.
That the Duke should dote upon thee for a woman, makes for our purpose, but that the Duchess should be enamourd on thee for a man, is preposterous.
Whether my valour shown in the reskue of the Ladies, or the ardent glances her daughters beauty steals from my eyes, give her thoughts encouragement, I know not, but her hopes stand confident I am a man, and for that cause am I barred from access.
I weigh thy combrances by my own, for though by the dukes allowance I am her privileged attendant, yet such is the devilishnes of Demotes, that I cannot joy so much access as to confer with her.
I can compare my lord &amp; his friend to nothing in the world so fitly, as to a couple of water buckets, for whilst hope winds the one up, despair plunges the other down, whilst I, like a Harlakene in an Italian Comoedy, stand making faces at both their follies.
Well, since the shape of our proceeding grows so monstrous, lets cast our inventions in a new mold, and having so firm a foundation as this disguise to build upon, lets draw the model, and raise the whole frame of our attempts anew.
Indeed, lovers should be conditioned like tyrants, who haavenge the aim of a crown in their eye once, run violently over all lets that intervened their course, and so must we.
And so will we, my resolution is already bent, and if I shoot not, the next level I take, Love I beseech thee break thy bow about mine ears, and strike thy horns in my forehead, for married
men to hang their cap on.
I have met a means fit for my purpose already: Mopsa Demotes only daughter is overshooes in love with me, &amp; to her le feign extreme ardor of affection, and make her the shadow under which Isle court the true substance of my divine Hippolita.
About it then, Isle sweat my invention to death but Isle overtake thee; but here comes one of my Burs I must bear his importunity, for no reasonable denial will brush him off.
Zelmane.
My Liege.
My thoughts come like a sail before the wind, swollen big with news, and thine ears the midwife must deliver me of this burden: my Duchess is sick, heart-sicke for thee Zelmane.
For me? why my Lord, I am no Rosa solis, nor Aqua mirabilis to recover sick folks.
Shall I be short with thee? My Laddie's in love with thee.
With me my Lord?
With thee my Lady: her amorous glances are her accusers, her very looks write Sonnets in thy commendations, she carves thee at board, and cannot sleep for dreaming on thee in bed, shoe's turned sunne-riser, haunts private walks, and like a disgraced Courtier, studies the Art of melancholy.
Now alas good Lady.
Nay never pity her, she deserves none, rather lets bend our endeavours to entangle her more. To see the kindness of fortune, who fearing we should be acquainted with solitude in this our 12 month retirement, hath begot a domestic merriment, and made our own thoughts Actors in it, and as bad a Poet as I am, Isle ha one scene in it of my own invention.
Demotes will storm at that, for hee cannot abide Poetry should be countenanced; but how is it my Liege?
Tic ready plotted already, and that the Duchess may not find thee unprovided when she comes to court thee.
Court me, court a woman my Liege?
Why that's the very happiness of the jest, but in any case confess thy self a man.
A man my Liege? I ha no colour for it.
Tush, Isle furnish thee, say thou art a Prince, no matter who, and hast to doe with this disguise of purpose to court my daughter Violetta.
Is this scene of your own inventing my Liege?
Mine own in faith, and to confirm't the rather, use more oft and private conference with my daughter, interchange discourse &amp; amorous dalliance, oh twill set my Duchess affections afire, to think her rivalld by her daughter, and give us smooth passage to our love.
How occasion plays the wanton with me. Well my liege, do but you work my admittance to your daughter, and le bestow al the art I am worth in courting her; and see, as if Fortune had a hand in our Comoedy, she hath entered the Duchess just at her cue, shadow your self in your Arc, and leave me to give her entertainment.
Forget not to personate some Prince in any case.
I warrant you, Isle play the Prince with much art.
This way he went, on this sweet violet bed
Still dwells the print of his enamoured tread,
The depressed flowers have strengthened their sweet
By stealing amorous kisses from his feet.
Absolute Poet. Penelope was a ballad-maker to her.
Oh doe not fly my presence, gentle wanton stay,
What have I found you, faith you run-away
Isle tie a chain about your wast for this,
And make you buy your freedom with a kiss.
Fie Madam, this courtesy is more then needs.
Be not so coy, let not a loving Dame
Find thee less kind then senseless elements,
Thou never walk, but the enamoured air
Like an officious lover bears thy train,
Whilst the cool wind doth with his velvet wing
Fan the thin ayre upon thy sweaty cheek,
Stealing sweet kisses from thy silken lip.
Shield this vain breath, beat at some Ladies ear.
But you are none, you are not, come you are not.
Your valour, looks, and gesture show you are not,
Your manly brow, and your commanding eye,
Where war and fortune dwell in majesty,
Your private walks, and varied passions,
Your glances to my daughter, sure you are not,
And my firm love is confident you are not.
There's a lover of a right temper, she'll out-face the name of her sex instantly.
Well Madam, sith your observation hath discovered me, upon promise of your secrecy, I confess my self a man.
Good, excellent, how truly she takes my directions.
I knew my judgement could not be deceived,
Nor durst proud love have done me so much wrong
To cast my thoughts unto a women's eye.
Love durst not, good, good, excellent, what next?
But Madam, now I am known to you, what further request you?
Exchange of looks, and freedom of thy bed,
Thy presence, thy embraces, thy kind love,
For which my amorous thoughts have long lain sick.
Thank you good wife; nay, and a Duchess long to give her husband the horning, let it never grieve Butchers to doe homage at Cuckolds haven.
Well Madam, to give content to your affections, and in a strong hope you will mediate my suit to your daughter, sort out but fit time and opportunity, and master your desires.
And he were a man now I might be rarely tupt.
Give me thy hand then, with this amorous kiss I seal thee mine.
And I confirm't with this.
Rare, rare, rare, shoe's his, sealed and delivered in the presense of her husband.
Now lest my husband should suspect our love.
Now, what for that now?
Hear a good jest, persuade him thou art a woman.
That's not to doe now Madam, for he as confidently believes and ardently courts me for a woman as you for a man.
Good, excellent, maintain that humour still,
Seem coy, look nice, and as we women use,
Be mild, and proud, embrace, and yet refuse.
Excellent virtues in a woman.
I prithee doe, twill be a scene of mirth
For me to quote his passions and his smiles,
His amorous haviour, and how his eye
Will beget strange variety of looks,
And shoot em into thine; but the chief sport's this,
To see an old man with a young man kiss.
To see an old Duchess a young Lady kiss.
Now the plot packs, the scene's all comical,
I cannot speak for laughter, to see these women,
That would be counted wonders for their wit,
Lay plots to gull themselves, silly conceit.
To take me for a man.
And arm her self
To laugh at me, make jests and scoffs at me,
But sooth her humour, the revenge she would throw
Upon my head, shall fall on her own brow.
Upon you both, so, so, so, how greedily their inventions like bugles follow the sent of their own gullery, yet these are no fools, God forbid, not they: but to the drift, mirth in my warm blood sits Laughing at this division of their wits.
Woo't believe me sister? I never eat a cherry, but it puts me in mind of a husband, it kisses my lips with such a harmless prettiness.
Now in good deed lo I love em a lise too, I think I shall never ha my belly full on em.
Of what, not of husbands Violetta?
No, of cherries Hippolita, but take heed of em, they bee a very filling meat, and dangerous things for us Maids I can tell you, we may surfeit after em presently.
Surfeit after what, a husband?
I, and after cherries too Hippolita.
I warrant you sister, an old Lady in Lacedemon taught me a preservative against that.
For the love of cherries what?
Marry this it was, still said she, betwixt every cherry said she, be sure to crack a stone said she.
Then let me alone, Isle crack a couple of stones betwixt every cherry, rather then surfeit on them.
You must take heed you crack not too many too, for you may surfeit of the stone as well as of the cherry.
Nay and they be such dangerous things, I ha done with em.
So have I too for this time, but sister, is it not a strange kind of servile liberty that we live in here in Arcadia?
For all the world as Englishmen keep their felons, and Italians their wives, we never stir abroad without our laylors.
And for what cause forsooth? only to keep us from marriage.
Sure it is either some high content, or extreme discommoditie,
that our father debars us of it.
By this stone, me thinks I long like a woman with child, till I know the difference betwixt a Maid and a wife.
Well, god a mercy of all cursen souls, I was near the knowledge on it last night I can tell you.
O that I had bin with thee I might ha been so too: for the love of marriage how?
Why thus: As I lay slumbering in my bed,
No creature with me but my mayden-head.
Is that a creature?
Some maintain it is,
Got in the eye, conceived in a kiss;
Others, whose speech seems near akin to truth,
Say tic a passion, bred in the heat of youth,
Some call it a sigh, and some an amorous groan,
All differ in the definition:
But in th'allow'd opinion of most,
Tic never truly had till it be lost.
But lying thus alone, as Maids doe use,
Me thought I dreamt, as Maids can hardly choose,
And in my dream me thought it was too much wrong
A pretty Maid should lye alone so long;
With that a gallant comes, gallants can doe
Much with young Maids.
And with old women too.
He courted me once, and again, and thrice,
Tic virtue to say nay, to bee too nice
Agrees not with my humour, yet some say,
We Maids wish things, to which we answer nay;
Briefly, me thought he stood so long a wooing,
I rather could ha wished he had been doing
Some other business, yet at last we'greed,
It were strange if earnest futers should not speed.
In what agreed you?
In our Wedding-ring,
Time, place, and hour, indeed in every thing;
The day appointed, and each thing in frame,
I thought each hour an age until it came,
Well, come it is, the morning once in sight,
I thought it ten times longer till it was night.
At dinner time me thought I swelled with pride
To be drunk to by name of Mistress bride,
Music spake loud, no delicates were scant,
Yet still me thought another thing did want,
For sure thought I, there's something in a man
That wives love well, hope brides may wish it than.
Long looked for comes at last, to bed we go.
Would I had dreamt I might have done so too.
My bed-mate turned, and as he would have spoke,
I sweat with fear, and in that fear I woke,
But seeing my kind bed-fellow was gone,
Lord how it chaft me that I waked so soon,
One minutes dreaming longer, I had tried,
The difference twixt a virgin and a bride.
Otwould have vexed a Saint, my blood would burn
To be so near, and miss so good a turn.
And so did mine too I warrant you, nay though I bee but a little pot, I shall be as soon hot as another.
You should not be my sister else.
Nor my mothers daughter neither.
And in good earnest wee are not fathr  amiss.
Are you avis'd of that, and In faith tell what think you of your servant Dorus.
As of a sweet Almond in a rugged shell, the Sun in a cloud, or a wealthy Diamond in a rock, indeed clean contrary to the world, hee wears the worst side outward, and is much better then he seems: but what think you of your manly Amazon??
Nay the sport is I know not what to think, Zelmanes huemore would afford project for a pretty Court Comoedy, my father courts her for a woman, and as I fear she is, my mother dotes upon her for a man, and as I wish he were, and that with such an ardor of affection, that I could find in my heart to turn my mother out of the company, and play the lovers part my self.
How ever man or woman, the jest holds currant in one.
I know not what knavish motion hath had to doe with my thought, but my mind tells me that your servant Dorus and my Amason, are other then they seem: and here he comes.
Why how now madam, Ladies gadding, is this the obedience of your fathers charge.
Pardon Mistress Miso, it was my doing and the Dukes.
But the Duchess will like neither the Dukes doings nor yours, neither in this case I can tell you. The Duke stays your comming, and yet the Duchess is very desirous on it, my husband is in the next Arbour to man you. For you Lady, my presence be your privilege.
Miso should be either a hang man or a Hetold, for she never comes amongst us, but she quarters our company and arms.
Excellent beauty, &amp; therefore more excellent, because situate in so fair a creature.
You are a merry man Dorus, but all this cannot make me love me, how say you mother doth he?
Mary let him choose daughter, when I was as thou art
You were as she is? but faith madam Mopsa, I perceive my servant Dorus bears a months mind to you, bee not so straight laced to him.
Straight laced? sgod mend me I am not laced at all, am I Dorus? no in sooth, I go wide op wensday, I never lace my self but on sundays, &amp; that for fear I should burst with cating of plum-porridge.
I mean let fall some comfortble looks on your suitor.
Sgod mend me, isle let fall or take up any thing I have to doe him good.
Why that's kindlie said, and Dorus your love is very ambitious, to climb so high as the beautiful Mopsa.
O are you avis'd of that, it would make a horse break his bridle to hear how the youth of the vilelage will commend me, oh the pretty little pincking niece of Mopsa says one, oh the fine flat lips of Mopsa says another, and then doe I bridle my head like a malt-horse thus, set mine arms a kembo thus, wreath my neck and my body thus, wink with one eye thus, and spread my peacocks tay le as broad as the proudest minx of em all.
These extraordinary graces must not want admiretion, but whore's your mother?
Speak softly in the Lobby there, for waking my Ladies foisting hound.
Godsme, my mother's stealing of a nap.
Nay, she cannot bee said to steal a nap, for the noise she makes herself would discover her theft: but Dorus sith your fortunes are poor, you should study to ennoble your deserts, and beget effects worthy to court and win your Ladies acceptance.
Lass madam, I choose no better moderator then your self,
betwixt me &amp; my unworthy services, suppose your self though but a Cuckoo compared with this sweet singing Nitingale, should be sued to by a Prince like me, I mean like me in love, for love in Princes &amp; peasants admits comparison: suppose Demetrius should in like disguise court you as I doe, Mopsa, sigh for you, as I doe, for Mopsa, kneel to you thus, as I doe, to Mopsa, lay down his life to you, as I doe, to Mopsa, prefer your good before his own, as I protest I do, Mopsaes, suppose he should show you the known mark of his neck, to assure you he were Demetrius, as I doe this to Mopsa, to witness I am the son of Menalchas, could your disdain stand out like Mopsaes?
What a keens necessity sets upon the edge of invention, trust me Mopsa your servant speaks well, and if hee can prove himself the man he speaks of, and my wishes well hope, Demetrius, you have no reason to think scorn of him.
Why what should I doe Madam? my mother tells me I must not say as I think.
I am no counsellor, but should Demetrius in like disguise court me, thus would I embrace him, thus seal my affections with a kiss, and thus argue: think not Demetrius that the clouds of baseness could so musfle thee, but that the Sun of valour shined through them long since, and in regard of thy serviceable duty in concealing, and unprevented policy in thus making known thy love, sort but out fit opportunity, and in despite of al guardians strict observance, go where thou wilt, the worth of Demetrius shall draw Hippolita, this would I vow, and this will I perform.
And were I Demetrius and you Hippolita, I would deceive Demotes, outreach Miso, forswear Mopsa, and forsake Arcadia, to share the fortunes of divine Hippolita.
And what should I doe then?
I doe but speak in the person of Demetrius, and under Hippolita shadow what I intend to the rare, and never enough wondred at Mopsa, the black swan of beauty, and madg-howlet of admiration.
Doe not you flout me Dorus? and you doe not, provide a Priest and isle marry you, and my father and mother shall never know on it.
Manasses is the man.
And isle bee the woman, whosoever say nay to it, little dreams my mother of what we have done.
T'may be she did, for she sighed &amp; groaned much in her sleep.
Tic well she was so quiet, for she eat pease-poridge to breakfast, and they'll make mebreake wind in my sleep like a horse,
and see as the devil will have it she wakes, and here comes my father, no words and ye love me.
Why God a mercy Dorus, this diligence becomes the servant of Demotes, and isle prefer thee for it.
You were worse then the devil else, for they say hee helps his servants, then you may doe little and you cannot help yours.
Will you break your jests against the bars of your chamber window, and clear the greene? the Duke is coming to bowls, and I would not for half mine office you should be a rub in the way of his patience: daughter and wife, conduct her to the Lodge, Exit. And Dorus, make you haste about your business.
I warrant you Sir: be my hopes rightly placed, You will condemn me for my too much haste.
Why so: this tic to be in authority: Inferior persons, I and the Princes themselves, fly from my presence, like the chirping Birds from the sight of the Falcon: my very breath like a mighty wind blows away inferior Officers (the Court rubbish) out of my way, and gives me a smooth passage: I am the morning star, I am seldom seen but about the rising of the Sun: indeed I am never out of the Dukes eye; and here he comes.
Doth our match hold?
Yes, whose part will you take?
Zelmanes.
Soft, that match is yet to make.
Lets cast a choice, the nearest two take one.
My choice is cast, help sweet occasion.
Come, here's agood.
Well, bettered.
Best of all.
The Duke and I.
The weakest go to the wall.
Isle lead.
Isle follow.
We have both one mind.
In what?
In leaving the old folk behind.
Well jested daughter, and you lead not fair,
The hindmost hound, though old, may catch the hare.
Your last bowl, come.
By the faith a me, well lead.
Would I might lead you.
Whither?
To my bed.
I am sure you would not.
By this air I would.
I hope you would not hurt me, and you should.
I'd love you sweet.
Sour, so I heard you say.
A cept it then.
Of what acquaintance pray?
Of loves and mine.
Daughter, your bowl wins one.
None of my Maidenhead father, I am gone,
The Amazon hath won one.
Yield to that.
The cast I doe.
Your self?
Nay scrape out that.
Whose is it yet?
The Dukes: play smooth and fine.
The smallest help that is will make you mine.
Me yours?
You mine, for though the cast I lose,
I ha won your love.
Much: in my tother hose.
Come, the last mark; this cast is worth all the rest,
The leader as the follower.
Bad's the best.
I win her for ten Crowns, and there they be.
I take your lay.
A match twixt you and me.
Isle be your half.
That were unkindly done.
Pardon me mother, Isle bear all or none.
I ha won you Madam.
Me?
I mean your bet.
Then take your winnings, Isle not die in debt.
Madam believe me, I am, as I protest, a Prince, my name Lisander.
Look to the Dukes standing Madam.
So I will I warrant you, and to your falling.
Thus clouded as you see for your love, my soul speaks in my tongue; I appointed this match at Bowls a purpose to acquaint you with it.
Bar stealing Father; yet and all hit right,
Here's one would steal a piece of flesh to night.
Dear Madam.
No more words, I have perceived as much in your eye, as you can express with your tongue, and as far as my mothers jealousy would give me leave, answered it with kind looks: your bias stands wrong mother.
Why? it stands toward Zelmanes.
Hath it stood so long?
All the game through.
Then all your game's bowld wrong: furnish you with nosessaries befitting an escape, and my will shall be as ready to take wing as yours: put in a cast now mother, or the game is gone indeed.
Whose is the throw?
Ours, till the last bowl came;
But that hath won't em clear, both cast and game.
Our winnings, come, a kiss and bate the rest.
What, doe you kiss in eanest or in jest?
In earnest in good truth.
Troth kindly sed,
Take heed you kiss not out your Mayden-head.
In jest?
In earnest.
Tic the fashion,
Much in request among our nation.
To kiss away their Maiden-heads?
Now and then,
And being gone, to kiss it back again:
For lovers indentures ne'er are fairly drawn,
Until the Maiden-head be left in pawn,
As earnest of the match, so mothers sed,
And so will daughters doe when moms be dead.
What pawn their Maidenheads?
Yes, and lose em too.
And you' maintain that fashion?
Signeor No.
Lay by this home-bred mirth, and prepare your ears to entertaine strangers.
Strangers? why father strangers are as welcome to me, as mine own Country-men, if they bring good manners and civil huemanity in their company; otherwise, they are like foul weather, come before they be sent for.
Demotes? nay then we shall have news enough, for he nover comes into the presence, but he brings a whole sack full of lies, of news I should say.
Welcome Demotes: what officious fellow is that?
A pure well willer of your Majesties, and a follower of mine.
O tic Manasses, and he could make arms as well as he mares legs, hee would grow in great request for Heraldry: What's your news?
These Lacedaemonians, subjects to your Majesty, having a message to deliver to your Majesties instruments of hearing, commonly eclip'd ears.
How, hath any one here clipped ears?
Sweet Feminine, clip off the tail of thy discourse with the Scissors of attention, as I say, these Lacedaemonians have chosen me their tongue.
Of a long tongue thou speak very little.
That proves me no woman, for they speak over much.
What grievances oppress them? briefly speak.
Merchandise (my Liege) through the avarice of purchasing Officers, is wrecked with such unmerciful imposed, that the very name of Traffic grows odious even to the professor.
Towns so oppressed for want of wonted and natural libertie, as that the native Inhabitanus feeme Slaves, and the Foreigners free Denizens.
Offices so bought and sold, that before the purchaser can be said to be placed in his office, he is again by his covetous Patron displaced.
Common Riots, Rapes, and wilful Homicide in great men's followers, not only not punished, but in a manner countenanced and applauded.
Indeed since your Majesty left the Land, the whole body of the Common-wealth runs clean against the bias of true and pristine government.
And your honourable Brother, like a ship tossed upon the violent billows of this insurrection, by us entreats your Majesties Letters of speedy reformation, for fear the whole Kingdom suffer inevitable shipwreck.
Which after short deliberation with our Council, your self shall return. Demotes reward their travels with two hundred Crowns: in the mean time, let them taste the best entertainmeant of our Court.
Proud Rebels, they shall see that a Dukes frown,
Can at his pleasure, turn Rebellion down:
See them rewarded.
Manasses, see the fellows entertained; I must attend of the Duke.
Boy, see the fellows entertained; I must waite of my Lord.
Fellows, be as merry as you may, I must follow my M.
So, here's Petitioners attendance right; good words, and short Commons: But tic not their entertainment wee come for. I made a simple shift to get entertainment into the Court.
Well Cupped, pray for our lives, for and wee were gone, I know not where thou would have two such states-men again.
His Common-wealth could not stand without us; and that his Mother knows well enough: and hee sends no better successe then we had at our hunting, he looses a friend of me.
Twill not sink in my thought yet, but that old musty slave Demotes played the slave with us.
Would I could prove it once: but since wee are again admitted our Realm, shall wee be idle? somewhat weal doe, though they'll give us but small thanks for our labour.
The Duke shall not say his Daughters are so ill beloved, but vveele change a thrust or two with his intent for'em.
T'vvould put the poor Wenches out of conceit with themselves, and there should not be some contending for them.
We are in the way to catch the old one, and then our aim .
We are in faith: Invention could not weave, , Suspicion to deceive.
Come, pass off this grovelling imitation; a Lovers  must bee ambitious, and like the Eagle, scorning the base  where Kites and Crows lie flagging: mount the clear sky of , and overpeere all hindrances:
The Ladies themselves are willing.
Ready to embark upon the next tide of occasion whatsoever.
Let me alone to work it then But here comes my Boy.
It were more for your credit Sir, and you could say your man: but men and war were worn out of fashion both in a Summer.
I am of thy belief in that Boy.
Would my Lord were so too sir.
Suppose I were Sir, what then?
I should (as many upstarts have done) prove rich: for I beleeue you would make me your heir.
Is that part of your belief?
A principal point sir.
Renounce it then, for I believe you'll never be saved by it.
I am sure I cannot loose by it. I believe further, that many Knights, and some Ladies, were never of Gods making.
Of whose then, wag?
Isle tell you: the Mentors coin Gold, Gold makes Heralds, Heralds makes Knights, and Knights stamp Ladies.
And what doe Ladies?
They live not idle neither; they make some Knights, and mar many Gentlemen.
Ladies are good workwoman too, then?
Far better then any Taylor: they'll make you an end of a suite, especially a Court suite, when all the Taylors in a Country know not how to set a stitch in it
I am of the belief you are a knave, sir.
I had no faith, should I say you were not?
Well, what a Knave?
In a Knaves belief sir.
Because in yours?
Doe you say it, and isle swear it, my Lord.
No more Boy, I am weary of your jests.
That confirms them to be good sir.
Your reason for that, sir?
Because travellers and lovers, are soon weary of goodness.
Goodly ones indeed: but leaving this high-way of circumstance; I sent you for Manasses.
The learned Scribe attends you.
Will you fall off sir?
Like an Apple at Michaelmas, without shaking.
Welcome Manasses: I have present employment for thee, in which I must borrow
Pardon me Madam, I learned of my Lord, to lend nothing without security and pawns.
It is not money (Manasses) but counsel and furtherance that we desire.
Good counsel is worth good money Madam.
Thou shalt bee well considered; there's twenty Crowns in earnest.
Nay Madam, this hand is like a fellow that takes every thing in jest; if you be in earnest, let me feel it here: So Lady, now betwixt earnest and jest, if your Will be ready drawn, before your friend delivered as your deed, and put me in trust to execute it.
Take it this, in a word honest Shepherd, and thy Lords daughter Madam Mopsa, are man and wife.
Man, and woman perhaps, but not man and wife: for though most women have a will to bee Ladies, like my Lords wife; yet every Lady hath not wit to bee a wife, as my Lords Daughter. But what good can I doe in this?
Ovary much: for though they bee man and wife by oath and protestation, the chiefest ceremony of all; namely Marriage is yet unperformed, and hearing that you have an orders.
That I have: I have tan order for the making away of a hundred Maidenheads in my time, and not so few: but I am in the mind of you now, these two beagles, Dorus and Mopsa, have run themselves breathless in the chase of love, you would have me couple them up in the leases of Matrimony.
We are in the way to catch the old one, and then our aim deceives not.
We are in faith: Invention could not weave,
A quainter web, Suspicion to deceive.
Come, pass off this grovelling imitation; a Lovers thoughts must bee ambitious, and like the Eagle, scorning the base ayre where Kites and Crows lie flagging: mount the clear sky of Invention, and overpeere all hindrances:
The Ladies themselves are willing.
Ready to embark upon the next tide of occasion whatsoever.
Let me alone to work it then, But here comes my Boy.
It were more for your credit Sir, and you could say your man: but men and war were worn out of fashion both in a Summer.
I am of thy belief in that Boy.
Would my Lord were so too sir.
Suppose I were Sir, what then?
I should (as many upstarts have done) prove rich: for I beleeue you would make me your heir.
Is that part of your belief?
A principal point sir.
Renounce it then, for I believe you'll never be saved by it.
I am sure I cannot loose by it. I believe further, that many Knights, and some Ladies, were never of Gods making.
Of whose then, wag?
Isle tell you: the Mentors coin Gold, Gold makes Heralds, Heralds makes Knights, and Knights stamp Ladies.
And what doe Ladies?
They live not idle neither; they make some Knights, and mar many Gentlemen.
Ladies are good workwoman too, then?
Far better then any Taylor: they'll make you an end of a suite, especially a Court suite, when all the Taylors in a Country know not how to set a stitch in it.
I am of the belief you are a knave, sir.
I had no faith, should I say you were not?
Well, what a Knave?
In a Knaves belief sir.
Because in yours?
Doe you say it, and isle swear it, my Lord.
No more Boy, I am weary of your jests.
That confirms them to be good sir.
Your reason for that, sir?
Because travellers and lovers, are soon weary of goodness.
Goodly ones indeed: but leaving this high-way of circumstance; I sent you for Manasses.
The learned Scribe attends you.
Will you fall off sir?
Like an Apple at Michaelmas, without shaking. Exit.
Welcome Manasses: I have present employment for thee, in which I must borrow
Pardon me Madam, I learned of my Lord, to lend nothing without security and pawns.
It is not money (Manasses) but counsel and furtherance that we desire.
Good counsel is worth good money Madam.
Thou shalt bee well considered; there's twenty Crowns in earnest.
Nay Madam, this hand is like a fellow that takes every thing in jest; if you be in earnest, let me feel it here: So Lady, now betwixt earnest and jest, if your Will be ready drawn, before your friend delivered as your deed, and put me in trust to execute it.
Take it this, in a word honest Shepherd, and thy Lords daughter Madam Mopsa, are man and wife.
Man, and woman perhaps, but not man and wife: for though most women have a will to bee Ladies, like my Lords wife; yet every Lady hath not wit to bee a wife, as my Lords Daughter. But what good can I doe in this?
O very much: for though they bee man and wife by oath and protestation, the chiefest ceremony of all; namely Marriage is yet unperformed, and hearing that you have an orders.
That I have: I have tan order for the making away of a hundred Maidenheads in my time, and not so few: but I am in the mind of you now, these two beagles, Dorus and Mopsa, have run themselves breathless in the chase of love, you would have me couple them up in the leases of Matrimony.
You are in the right.
And you in the wrong, isle keep your jest, but in any case take back again your earnest: isle not purchase my Lords displeasure with your gold.
Thy Lord shall never know it.
Oh sir! though my Mhath but bad eyes, hee hath exceeding long ears: and though a Foreigner may play with a Citizens wooden Dagger, I would not wish any to jest with a Courtiers steeld Sword; tic seldom drawn but it draws blood.
Tush man, be not so timorous, my credit shall countenance thee: bee not an Ass, make use of thy time: thy masters service is no heritage; the world knows hee gets under the Duke, thou art a fool, and thou wilt loose under him: there's a hundred Crowns for thee; tush man, thy betters will strain courtesy with aleagence for a bribe
Madam, could you to every one of these Crowns give me a Kingdom?
What then?
I should have more ground then half the Kings in Christendome: here's my hand, isle do it: my M. is my M. and I love him; but my gold's my God, and I honour it: isle do it; the time and place?
Soon in the evening at Atones Chapel. Art resolute?
As your Adamant: think you it was fear made me keep out? no it was hope of these flattering sweet leapt dabc. I fear to marry my Ladies daughter? no nor to go to bed with her neither, Why, I have counterfeited his hand and seal. Hee has been content with me, to come nearer to him, at his entertainment of the last Ambassador, when hee was heate with drinking of healths. As I led him to his Chamber, I nimdhis Chain, and drew his Purse, and next morning persuaded him he lot it in the great Chamber at the Revels. Hee puts me in trust with his whole estate: he buys Maners, I purchase Farms: he builds houses, I pluck down Churches: he gets of the Duke, and I of the Commons: he beggars the Court, and I beggar the whole Country.
These are notable knavish courses. What breeding hast had?
Very good breeding sir: My great Grandfather was a Rat-catcher, my Grandsier a Hangman, my father a Promooter, and my self an Informer.
Thou were a knave by inheritance.
And by education too: but bawdy Informations growing stale, I gave up my cloak to a Broker, and crept into credit for a Gown, and of Manasses a penurious Informer, I turned Copy, and became Manasses, a most precise and illiterate expositor.
Were you a Reader then?
And a Writer too Bullie, I set some of my Parishioners wives such copies, as their husbands might cast their caps at it, but could never come near.
But and you used such a high and elevate stile, your auditories low and humble understandings should never crall over't.
Tush, I could fashion the body of my discourse fit to the ear of my auditory: for to cast Eloquence amongst a company of Stinkards, is all one as if a man should scatter pearl amongst the hoggish animals ecliped Swine: no, I had paraphrasticall admonitions of all sorts; Some against covetous Land-lords, and that would I squirt amongst beggarly Tenants; Some against Usurers, and that would I throw in at Prison Grates amongst prodigal Bankroutes; Some against the pride of the Court, and that hones the ear of the Citizen; Some against the fraud of the city, and that's cake and cheese to the Country; Some against Protestants, and that plumps the lasy Catholic; against Papist and Protestant, and that fattens the ranke-witted Puritan; against Papist, Puritan, and Protestant, and that tickles the ear of the luxurious Atheist.
Why you never light upon any Atheists, doe you?
Oh very many.
In the country perhaps, and the out-skirts of the City.
In the very bosom of the City, and by your leave, here and there one in the Court too: But wee fit em all; for indeed wee wandering Lights have (as other Trades-men have) Commodities of all sorts and prices.
How doe they come by them?
As many doe by Offices, steal into them ere the Duke be aware of em. Some buy em at Booke-sellers stalls, but the best they bespeak of Poets.
Me thinks Poets of all men should not edify, they are so envious.
One to another, to nobody else: a Proud Poet is for all the world like a Puncke in request, covetous of many Clients, when she
hath more then she can handsomely play off: You shall have some Poet (Apolloes Vicar especially) write you a Comical, Pastoral, Tragicall, Musical history in Prose, will make the Auditors eyes run a water like so many water-spouts; I had one of them my self, and your ears bee in case, Isle give you a taste on it; his argument was fet out of the Poem called, The lost sheep, and thus it is.
Prithee be brief.
Nay peace, and it were in place where you might wake the best men in the parish, for commonly they sleep the beginning, because they love not division: but to the lost Sheep. Beloved, you must imagine this Sheep was a Sheep, a lost Sheep, a Sheep out a the way; but my dear Flock and loving Sheep, whom like a careful Shepherd I have gathered together, with the whistle or pipe, as it were of mine Eloquence, into this Fold of peaceful Community, doe not you stray, doe not you fly out, doe not you wander, doe not you loose your selves; but like kind Sheep and valiant Rams, I speak to you the better part and head of my Flock: As I say, you shall see the valiant Rams turn all their horns together, and oppose themselves against the Wolf, the hungry Wolf, the greedy Wolf, the Lambes-devouring Wolf, the Wolf of all Wolfs, to defend their Eawes and young ones. Durst you lay all your heads together, and with the horns of your Manhood defend your Families, your own Wives, and your neighbours children: Was not this stinging gear?
A good Sheepish admonition.
The fitter for my audience; while you live have a care to fit your audience.
Thou speak like a Christian, prithee what Religion art of?
How many soever I make use of, Isle answer with Peeveno Orlotto the Italian; I profess the Dukes only.
What's his reason for that?
A very sound reason: for says hee, I came raw into the world, and I would not willingly go roasted out: so close up the stomach of your discourse with that dry answer, and every man about his business.
You'll be mindful of tomorrow night?
As your Lawyer of the Term, or your Landlord of the Quarter-day.
Why so: the mettle I must forge my plot on, lies a warming in the furnace of my brain; and I must fashion it instantly, for fear it burst with heat. Give my conceit way, for here comes one must help to proportion it.
How now Demetrius, what wind hath blown up this storm of melancholy? thy countenance was not wont to bee thus cloudy; Whence proceeds this sudden alteration?
From mine own hard fortune my Lord, that my ill-stard nativity should continue thus opposite.
Art crossed in a suit at Court? or what's the matter? speak.
Isle acquaint your Honour: I hope no other ear overhears us. Under Dianaes Oak I found an inscription upon a stone, which told me, that wealthy Aristomones sometimes brought into Arcadia, had there under hid a massy sum of treasure.
Under Dianaes Oak? Dorus shall have my daughter Mopsa: no more words on it, and thou love me Dorus: smother thy golden hopes a day or two; thou shalt have Mopsa, but le have all the Gold, then marry my daughter to some great man, though he be poor, tic the fashion: Isle bee nobly allied what ere it cost me: shalt bee my Son in law Dorus. have an eye to the Princess, fall close to my daughter Mopsa,
Court her and spare not: now begins the sport,
Kiss her, doe, kiss her; thou shalt pay sweetly for it:
I can gull you, know what fair words can doe,
I'm an old Knave, and a young Courtier too.
So, so; how violently hee devours his bane, and steals himself into the order of Gullerie: me thinks I see how betwixt hope and fear he sweats in his practice, and like a foolish dreamer, casts how to lay out his wealth before it comes in So much for him: Now to my Lady Beauty his wife; and as the Devil would hat, here she comes.
Dorus, how now Dorus? What time a day is it with you?
What time a day soever it bee with me, tic sleeping time with my Lord, I am sure of that.
Sleeping time Dorus, what dost thou mean by that?
Nay nothing, hee is troubled with a kind of malady called Insurrectio corns.
How, a dish of Crevices? nay and that be the worst, good enough; I am glad a falls to Fish, for hee was given to Flesh a late too too bad.
Mass I thought as much, for I saw him go a angling.
I hold my Ladyship, to some struet.
Life a jealousy, I think you are a witch, it was so indeed.
Nay I thought as much; he was wont to kiss me, and doe all indnesse a man could doe, till he came to the Court, and now he will not lye with me for sooth, and why? tic the Court fashion: he will not love me, and why? tic the Court fashion: I must not come near him at his downe-ing, nor his up-rising, &amp;c. And this bee the Court fashion, would I were an honest woman of the Country again, be Courtiers who list: I, I, Dorus, I tell thee in tears, hee hath not dealt by me as a husband should doe.
Tic nothing to me, I cannot doe withal Madam, would I could.
Yes marry may thou Dorus; thou may, and shalt doe withal too and thou wilt: but as thou look to enjoy my daughla Mopsa, acquaint me with the old Foxes starting hole.
That's past my cunning, the old Fox has more holes then one to hide's head in: But not to go long about the bush with you.
No good Dorus, I doe not love a man should go long about my Bush: what is she for a woman?
I know not what she is for a womenn, marry I fear shoe's little better then a whore for your husband; hark in your ear, shoe's Manasses wife.
Manasses wife? marry fire master gunner, a Puritan turned Punk: Gods my precious. Isle slit her nose, as I am a Lady will I; is she the party you wot on?
Yes faith Madam, she is the Mare the man rid on.
Isle spoil their sport, saddle my Mule there, have an eye to the Princess; shield my daughter, an't be but to spite him withal, faith Fox Isle ha you out of your hole, or Isle fire you out.
Nay that will doe no good, but for your own good Madam, take heed you doe not scold.
Why, may not a Lady scold Dorus?
Scold? O in no case, twill mar a Ladies beauty clean, and make her look as hard-favoured as any ordinary woman.
Godamercy for that Dorus, Isle not lose my beauty for twenty on em: saddle my Mule, bring me my chopping-knife, Isle geld the lecherous Goat, and mince his Trull as small as herbs to the pot. This is not scolding Dorus, is it?
No this is tolerable.
Nay then I care not, saddle my Mule I say, let her pray God her feeling be good, for as I am a Lady, Isle not leave her an eye to see withal, and yet I will not scold neither.
Oh take heed of that at any hand. So, so, so; now it begins to quicken, me thinks I see already how she runs atilt at the wenches eyes, calls the Maid Bawd, the woman whore, and her husband Lecher; and when all comes to all, like an Irish wolf, she barks at her own shadow; but committing her and her Ass to their wild-goose chase, now to my sweet-heart Mopsa, for shoe's all the blocke's last in my eye to stumble on; and God bless my wits, for the fool haunts me.
Dorus, whore's my Father Dorus?
Your father? O my dear Mopsa.
Nay now you flowt me.
Flout you? Oh the fair heavens! but this it is for a man to cast away himself in violence of passion, and extremity of sighs, on a piece of beauty that cares not for him, but it is the tricks of you all.
Tricks? no as God mend me; and I should not have a husband till I got him with tricks, I should lead Apes in hell: but faith tell me, dost thou love me Dorus?
Doe I love you quoth ye? It cuts my very heart-strings, doe I love you? why tic the only mark my endeavours shoot at.
If thou dost not hit the mark then, thou art a very bungler: but where is my father?
Why I have sent him and your mother out of the way of purpose, and appointed Manasses to meet us this evening at Adonis Chapel, in the Amazons apparel, to marry us; I think these are signs I love you.
I but you jest, I doubt you will not marry me.
Will you meet me there?
As I am a virgin I will.
And come with an intent to marry me?
As I hope to be a wife I will.
You must take heed you keep our purpose close.
As I did the loss of my Maidenhead.
Why have you lost it then?
Many a dear day ago, yet I told no body on it but my Mother and our Horse-keeper, and they say I am ne'er the worse maid for that, and I can keep my own counsel, as I hope I shall; but will you meet me soon?
Just in the mid-way, as Tilters doe.
Isle go before and stay, but doe not deceive me, and you doe, isle show my Fathers Horse-keeper all as God mend me.
So tria sequuntur tria, now am I rid of a triumuirie of fools, and by their absence have won a free access to an escape.
If my Lisanders hope prove like to this,
This night shall crown us Monarchs of our bliss.
No more of these delays sweet Madam, your love hath broken day oft with my expectance, I dare give it trust no longer.
I confess it my Liege, and like a spent Dear, not able to maintain longer flight, I cast my self down breathless at your loves mercy: yet I beseech your Majesty, let not your eager desires practise any present violence upon my yielding chastity: it was only possession of my love you had in chase, which with convenient time and place purchased, I put your grace in full possession of.
Although thy breath bee never but musical, yet it never roughed the string of true happiness till now: and to approve thy heart sets hand to thy word, appoint the time.
Then this present evening (and yet my Virgin blood is ashamed to consent to the betraying of my modesty) meet me at Atones bower, where isle make tender of subdued chastity to your high Majesty, as my first and most victorious conqueror.
By my Imperial Globe, and hope of those joys, thy presense shall bring to enrich me with, Isle meet thee, and make thee Queen over the most submiss Captive that ever love took prisooner.
If you deceive me
Not except warm life,
Deceive my veins of their innatiue heat.
Then haste slow time, exchange thy leaden feet
For Harms wings till I my fair hopes meet.
But locked once in the arms of my delight,
Cloth all the world in an eternal night.
And steed of morning when the Sun should rise,
They shall see two in my Zelmanes eyes.
So farewell thought I, I have prepared you a Zelmanes answerable to your expectation.
Then triumph in thy will, and let thy thoughts
Proclaim a Jubilee: my teeming hopes
Are now delivered of a gracious birth,
Which I have christened, opportunity,
Unto whose shrine in honour of this day,
My thoughts shall hold a monthly sacrifice.
Love grant Demetrius meet the like success,
Our pains are crowned with double happiness.
Only our disguises hold firm, but all other attempts meet untimely deaths, even in their cradles.
What and we should acquaint the Ladies with our intents?
It would argue a kind of cowardice in our wits, that have such suspectles admittance to their presence, as this disguise hath purchased us, wee should not have that ability of inventure to entangle them in their own security.
Well howsoever, wee must not dwell long determining for the liberty of stay with Demotes, who out of his covetous disposition in detaining our reward allowed us, the eldest day of our licenc't abode at Court, is run out.
Tic very true, and for my part, Isle rather go home with a private repulse, then managing any unlikely attempt, become sufferer under a public disgrace.
That's my very thought, yet that our second arrival bee not altogether empty of employment, lets practise something upon Demotes, and acquaint the world with his coward baseness; in which, hee not only detracts from his masters bounty, but look how as a Conduit head or master-spring that is poisoned, doth his
best, to infect the whole body of the Court, with the leprosy of his covetousness.
There's no action of his begetting can be said to bee truly honourable.
How can they when their Father is a mongrel? the Duke out of his honourable bounty commanded him to reward our traveals with 00. Crowns: and now after two months attendance, and enforced delays, In which time an ordinary Petitioner might have spent the value of the reward, hee packs us off with fifty Crowns, his excuse being that his master hath forgot us, and what he doth, is of his own bounty, as if the Moon should brag she gave the world light, when all the luster she hath, comes from the heat of the Sun.
Should his villainies be suffered to prosper, they would grow to such height, as the Dukes authority should have much trouble to prune them.
To prevent which, his Majesty shall have private note of it, knew we in whose trust to conduct it.
Tic an office very few dare undertake, he is so riveted to the Dukes good opinion.
Lies there no jar twixt none of the Nobility and him, what say you of Zelmane?
The gallant Amazon: you could not have cast your choice fitter, for her honourable mind maintains deadly feud against his base proceedings; and here she comes, attended by Dameta's servant, lets waite on opportunity.
Lisander.
Demetrius.
Lisander and Demetrius? stand close, of my life wee are come to the birth of some notable knavery.
How blows the winds of our hopes?
Fair to the point of our expectation, I have made away the Duke and the Duchess.
How made away them? poisoned them?
With a confection of love, which I have so tempered with fair promises, as their minds are in loves haven already, Videlicet in Atones bower, where this evening I have given them my word
to meet them; but I have so cast it, that Manasses shall meet them in my steed.
Twill be a rare Scene of mirth, to hear what costly discourse they'll bestow upon the fool in thy outside.
Doe you hear that?
Yes, thank love and my ears, but list the conclusion.
I have cleared the way to Violetta, but what order hast thou an with thy burbolts, Demotes, Miso, and amorous Mopsa?
Shot them away, at three several marks, yet so conveyed it, that in the end they shall all meet at Atones Chapel.
This project cannot but bring forth some notable deceit.
My hopes should want of their will, and it doe not
Now we have made a smooth passage to our escape, how shall we convey our loves out of the Island?
I have determined of that sir, and better to effect, my boy this time hath cast such a bait of knavery to the two Captains, Calendar and Philanax, as we may pass without suspicion.
But how for transportation.
I am furnished of that too, you remember the two Lacedmon intelligencers.
Now what of us?
Hold my life, we shall be put in this Scene of Gullery.
Oh in any case.
For the love of Cupped doe, inquiry is past, lets take our entrance, and pass over the stage like mutes, to furnish out a show.
And see occasion like a kind wench presents them in the very instant, my honest friend welcome, have you not your dispatch with a letter to Lacedemon.
Madam we have, and stay only to take our leaves of your Ladyship, and know what service your honour will command.
You have my thanks, for the truth is, I must commit business of much import unto your trust, and to prevent much circumstances take my word, your are not ignorant of the Kings generall challenge.
About his daughters.
You understand me, with these few crowns receive my mind, which is to convey the two Ladies, whom we in these disguises have won to Lacedemon.
Were we but confirmed of your estates.
We'll give you sufficient assurance of that, and the Princesses themselves shall confirm it.
Wee crave no better Madam, but shall we not have your honours company?
No: having brought them aboard, we'll make return to the Duke, to let him understand we stole not our prizes but won them manfully at the point of wit.
A noble resolution.
His foil will appear the more palpable, and your conquest the more applausible, where shall we receive the Ladies?
Be that our care, but on your lives be heedful of their safeties.
More then of our own my Lord.
Enough, whilst you attend weal to the Duke, and play all Gulls or none.
All Gulls indeed since you had follies whip,
No Gulls, to all Gulls, fools love fellowship.
Look well to mine Ass there, Lord how I sweat with anger; this sames the house sure, and now like a wise Lady let me count my hurts, and see how I shall be revenged: it shall be so, isle have them both carted, and Manasses shall go before like a whifer, and make way with his horns: where be these whores? open the door, where bee these panders? O that I were not a Lady, I could scold like a butter-vvhore.
Whose there a Gods name? Lord for his mercy is the woman mad?
Yes I thank ye foe't horn mad, vvhere's your companion, vvhere's the old lecherous Goat my husband? open the door I say.
Iesus for thy mercy sake, Madam what doe you want?
What do I want? the chief implement a woman should have; I want that as a woman cannot be without, I mean my husband I want.
Your husband? I saw him not as I am an honest woman.
Not as you are an honest, so I think, but as you are an arerant vvhore you did, you must have your Crevishes with a pox, cannot City Maunchet and fresh God serve your turn, but you must have Court Cake-bread and Crevishes with a vengeance? but come give me my husband, or Isle have him ou of the flesh on thee, and yet I will not scold neither.
Pray madam have patience: what should your husband doe here?
That which he should doe at home with his wife, and he
were worth his ears.
Lady I protect I doe not know him.
Not know him? thou least in every vee in the heart, thou lie thou know him, and as Adam knew Eve thou know him, he hath been as in ward with thee, as ever he was with me, he hath, by his own confession he hath, and thou deny it, thou least in thy throat like a Puritanical whore as thou art, O that I were a butter whoe for an hour I might scold a little.
Madam they are no honest men that bring these tales to you.
Men bring tales to me? I deie thee in thy guts, I defy thee. men bring tales to me? thou take me to bee one of thine own Church dost? they are no honest men that bring tales to thee and have wives of their own, &amp; my husbands one of them, go thy ways now.
I beseech you Madam doe but hear me.
Hear thee? I have heard too much of thee, too too much, too much, whore's my husband? bring forth my husband, isle teach him to put a difference betwixt Join and my Lady I hold him ten pound on it, and yet I will not scold neither, and I had been an old hag past teaming, as his whore is a puritan, it had bin somewhat, but being a woman of Gods making, &amp; a Lady of his own, and wearing mine own hair which is much in a Lady of my standing I can tell you, to use me thus, flesh and blood cannot endure it, let me come in, open the door let me come in, O that I were any vile thing in the world but a Lady that I might scold a little.
So, so, so, take your places, for this same bald pated oak is the stage, where ye shall see the part of a doting fool performed by an old man and a young wench.
Who worshipful Demotes?
The same man.
Hath he no fellow Acters in his most lamentable, comical, historical, tragical, musical, pastoi'll?
None that require any mouthing but his Ass and himself, marry then he has Signior Mattock, a very sharpe satirical humorist, and Monsieur le spade, but he goes somewhat more bluntly to his business, yet heel serve for mutes, and as good as the best to furnish out the stage.
But dares Dorus being but Demotes servant so abuse his mad master thus grossly.
O Lord Sir, there have been serving men have done their Masters far greater abuse, yet had their wives concealed it, their ears should never have been acquainted with it.
Is that a fashion in request?
Altogether isle assure you, but obedience, Gentlemen the Scene begins.
Pray God it be good he stays so long, Ridiculous enough, and good enough.
So, stand Ass, stand gentle Ass.
What Countrey-man is his Ass, he speaks so familiarly to him?
A'th City breed, marry hee picks up his living ath burs and nettles that grow about the Court gate.
Be in readiness good mattock, play thy part sweet spade, let me see; Dianaes oak? I held Dianaes oak divine, true pure gold, honest Dorus, fortunate Demotes.
An excellent comoedian, what life he puts into his part.
So, by thy leave stone, by thy patience honest stone, the very gravel savours of treasure, this semi's the bed-chamber of my Lady Pecuin, and see, see some of her golden hairs, more, more, more yet divine tree, pure gold, honest Dorus, fortunate Demetrius, softly, softly, not too fast, let me not devour my content too gredeli, lest like a cormorant I take a surfeit on it.
Oh take heed of that master in any case.
Pure mettle, excellent gold: but let me see now, I shall by computation have some three millions of 'em,  some three or four milions, how shall I employ them to make the most profit of them
That would be known indeed.
Isle put out one million to use, after the rate of seven score to the hundredth: and yet I wont, no fie, for then you will have my humour brought ath stage for a usurer; to prevent with scandalous report, isle put it into my Scribe-majors hand, &amp; he shall deae for me.
There's a simple cloak to cover his villainy.
Tic a very short one: and passing slte to hide his knavery.
It cannot choose but be seen through.
An other million isle lay to beslow in Offices. I will have wealth, or isle rake it out ath kennels else, chimneys have smoked for it already, and now isle deal upon sea-cole and salt, now, now, now, it comes, sweet gold, honest Dorus, fortunate Demetrius, divine gold, how, how shall I adore thee? O let me doe the homage of my knees: now, now, for the tongue of a Poet, though I hate poetry worse then ny of the seven deadly sins, I could wish my self a Poet for some
hour, to write a Poem in the praise of my divine mistress; and see he very bed wherein her divinity is lodged: happy, happy, thrice happy Demotes, now like an o'er joyd lover, let me open the sheets of my heavenly mistress with reverence, so with humble reverence, and like a blushing lover that puts out the light ere he presumes to touch the bed of his love, so let me darken the candles of my body, mine eyes, and first bless my hands with touching, next enrich mine ears with hearing, and lastly make happy my eyes with seeing, and let them convey the joy down into the bosom of my thoughts by degrees, softly by degrees.
Did you ever see Ass make such a ceremonious preparation?
Be not offended sweet mitress that I presume to touch.
A fools head of your own.
Has a been at any cost of all this invoke for a coxcomb and a bell.
Beshrow my judgement but he deserves it.
And his desert were ne'er so much, he could but bear away the bell, and so you say he doth.
A coxcomb and a bell, oh indignity: damnable oak, vile and evil accursed Dorus, unfortunate Demotes; Diana I tell thee thou art no honest goddess to use a Gentleman thus. Whats here a writing, your help good spectacles, lend me your help good spectacles, some comfortable news good spectacles:
Who hath his hire, hath well his labours placed,
Earth thou did seek, and store of earth thou hast.
He that vain hopes pursues for love of pelf,
Shall loose his vvits and likely find himself.
Then think thy pains rewarded well,
Thou broughst the fool, bear back the bell:
Of other matters what ensues,
Atones bovver shall tell thee news,
Villainous poetry, I am made a flat fool by poetry; But though I can doe them no further disgrace, my fatal curse, A wronged gentleman's fatal curse dwell ever upon them: Diana here me, and let my words find gracious acceptance.
Hide your heads, the terrible curse comes like a stone upon you.
Rancor, spite, malice, hate, and all disasters,
Strengthen my faith against all poetastors.
May their intents though pure as crystal glasses,
Be counted falte and capital Trespasses,
O may their lines and laboured industry,
Though worthy of Apollo's plaudit,
The clearest thought in loyalty excelling,
Be by some Dor presented for libelling;
When they have writ a Scene, in which their brains
Have dropped their dearest sweets, and their swollen veins
Emptied the Conduit of their purest spirit,
As they stand gaping to receive their merit,
In stead of Plaudities, their chiefest blisses,
Let their deserts be crowned with mews and hisses:
Behind each post, and at the Gallery corners,
Sit empty gulls, slight fools, and false Informers;
Let some sly Fox out of discretions embers,
Term them the Lands unnecessary members;
And like the Dear, when they have spent their breath
To make Kings sport, let them be torn to death,
Even by their friends; it would set my thoughts a twanging,
Might I but e one of them go to hanging.
A passing strange curse, and no question he has travelled far for some of the times.
He must travel further that finds any reason in it.
No matter for reason, there's rime enough if that be good.
Some of it is no better then it should bee, or my judgemeant deceives me.
Sure hee had some reason to make this rime, and a man could pick it out.
Rather then Isle bee counted inquisitive, mine ears shall content themselves with the rimes only, and leave the reason to the scanning of Poets, whom it more nearly concerns.
But whore's the wag that invited us to this banquet of mirth, shrunk in the wetting?
I were a rare jest now, if whilst the Boy keeps us here in expectation of Demotes gullery, his Master has made an escape with the Dukes daughters.
That, or some knavery else upon my life: I had the boy in shrewd suspicion at the first.
And this his sudden and stolen departure confirms it currant.
Then we are sped, for in suspicions face
I see some subtle stratagem in chase.
Will your Ladyship believe me now? nay and I say it your worship may swear it, though I have but a (poor as to say) hole of mine own, I hope the spirits have more denomination over me, then to make it a common Slaughter-house of carnality, where everye Jack may command flesh for his money.
No more words sweet woman, I confess I was in the wrong, this is not the hole the Fox hides his head in, and therefore for the love of woman-hood conceal mine errors; for howsoever I complained, tic thy forehead aches, thy temples have the terrible blow as they say, thy husband is a bad man.
My husband?
I, I, good woman, thy husband; hee is, as I say, a fleshly member, and I fear he has overcome the foolish thing my daughter.
Your daughter? Isle slit her nose by this light, and she were ten Ladies, it was not for nothing my husband said hee should meet her this Evening at Atones Chapel: but and I come to the Godspeed on it, Isle tell em on it soundly.
I doe good woman, tell em on it and spare not, but in any case doe not scold.
Why, may not a Gentlewoman scold in a good case?
I know not what a Gentlewoman may doe in a good case, but a Lady must not in any case.
Though I may not scold, I may tell em roundly on it I hope.
That you may doe law.
And Isle not bee mealy mouthed I warrant em: will you bear me company to the Chapel Madam?
With all my heart Mistress: What Dorus hath given me, Isle give my friend, No fool to company.
FArewell bright Sun, thou lightener of all eyes,
Thou fall to give a brighter beam to rise.
Each tree and shrub wear trammels of thy hair,
But these are wiers for none but Kings to wear,
And my rude tongue, striving to blaze her forth,
Like a bad Arts-man, does disgrace her worth:
But here's the place, upon this Crystal stream,
Where Citharea did unyoake her team
Of silver Doves to interchange a kiss
With young Atones, shall I meet my bliss?
The gentle minutes crowned with crystal flowers,
Losing their youths, are grown up perfect hours,
To hasten my delight: The bashful Moon,
That since her dalliance with Endymion
Durst never walk by day, is under sail,
In stead of sheets has spread her silver veil,
Each gliding Brooke and every bushy tree,
Being tipped with silver, wear her livery;
And the dim night, to grace our amorous wars,
Hath stuck nine Spheres full of immortal stars,
In stead of pearls; the way on which she treads
Is strewed with crystal dew and silver beads:
She comes, her feet make music with the ground,
And the chaste air is ravished with the sound,
My soul flies forth to meet her: hell, my wife,
Her presence like a murderer drives the life
Out of my pleasures breast, her jealous eye
Envies the heaven of my felicity.
Zelmane, or my husband? life, or hate?
What makes old Autumn out a bed so late?
That snow should go a wooing to the Sun,
When one warm kiss works her confusion!
I have the jest, suspicion that keeps
Court in my husbands thoughts, seeing my Love
Elect this walk, hath brought him after him.
She dogs her sure, and she to shake her off
Hath tan some other walk, Isle place mine care
In distance of her will.
Could I but hear the innocent delivery of his breath,
It would be a second Jubilee of mirth.
Here comes my Love.
Your Love? Alas poor Duke,
Your forward hopes will meet a barren spring,
My Sun appears.
Fie, your love speaks too loud,
Your Sunne's eclipsed, you dote upon a cloud.
See how his arms, like precious Phoenix wings, Spread to embrace me.
Now the Cuckoo sings;
Those amorous arms doe make a golden space
To hug a Duke.
But Isle fill up the place.
Those fingers tipped with curious Porphery,
Staining Pigmalions matchless imag'ry,
Like amorcus twins all of one mother urst,
Contend in courtesy who should touch me first.
Should touch me first; their strife is undertook,
To twine a young Bay, not a stooping Oak.
Young Bay? stale jest, that a dry sapless rind
Should hold young thoughts, and a licentious mind:
Were she but gone now.
Were the Duke away,
My hopes had got the better of the day.
This is Atones Chapel, I wonder they come not; though I bear but a little learning about me, and a few good clothes, I would not wish em to make Balams Ass of me: for though many fools take no felicity but in wearing good clothes (though they bee none of their own) I have a further reach in me.
I could ban my stars.
 my fate.
That cross me thus.
Makes me unfortunate.
Alas good Lady, how her pretty feet
Labour to find me.
Such black events.
Darken her self.
That in the bosom of some foggy cloud
I might embrace my love.
That my hopes should meet
O would the friendly night
Would the Moon lose her light,
But night is purblind,
To make a Duke a slave.
To make e Duchess
Wrestle with amorous passions.
Life a spleen,
Could my rough breath like a temptstuous wind,
Blow out heavens candles, leave the world stark blind,
That it might either have no eyes to see,
Or use those eyes it hath to pleasure me.
Or use those eyes it hath to pleasure me?
Who would have thought the cold had been so good a musician? how it plays upon my chaps? and makes my teeth skip up and down my mouth like a company of virginal Jacks, but I find small music in it, and Mopsa should come now I could doe her little good, yet and she were here, she and I would have about at cob-nut or at chery-pit, or some what to keep our selves from idleness, though she be but a fool, the bible's good enough to make sport withal in the dark, and that very word hath started her.
Whose there Manasses?
Yes Mopsa.
Plain Mopsa, I might bee Madam Mopsa in your mouth, goodmanwhore's Dorus?
Why? because he will not be said to make too much haste to a bad bargain, he is not come yet.
Not come? a peascod on him, but al's one, I thought at first he would make but a fool on me.
Would you have him mend Gods workmanship?
But choose him, since he hath build me with an vrchin, isle go fetch Raph our Horse-keeper; let him that got the calfe keep the cow in a knaves name and he will, have you your book here?
No matter wench, I can do it well enough without book.
Nay and ye can do it well enough your self, I care for neither of them both, but indeed I love to have a thing well done, for says my mother, a thing once well done, is twice done, and I am in her mind for that up and down.
Whose with my Lord the Duke? it cannot be,
Mine eye would not conceal such treachery.
Tic not the Duchess sure, no it is amorous Jove,
That seeing Zelmane passionate for love,
Descends to comfort her; Jove if there be
A powerful Phoebus God of poetry,
In dear remembrance of fair Daphnes rape,
To win my love, lend me some stranger shape,
Such as your selves have worn, that when your same
Is sung by Poets, they may quote my name.
Sure tic my daughter.
Daughter? how her eye
Cut out new forms, new shapes of jealousy?
As sure as death tic she, for see they stand
Like amorous twins, in twisted hand in hand,
Breast against breast, and that no joy be missing,
To hear discourse, their lips keep time with kissing,
Isle not endure't, impatience grow strong,
And though a Prince, tell him he doth thee wrong.
Doe, prithee doe, this sweetens all the rest,
But here would be the elixir of the jest,
If whilst we keep each other at a bay,
A third should come, and bear the hare away.
Villainous poetry, unchristian-like poetry, I am consent of my gold by poetry, robed of my charge by poetry, made an apparent fool by poetry, villainous Ok, accursed Dorus, unfortunate Demotes: whose there my daughter and with Zelmane? a wel-willer to Dorus, a favourite to poetry, and therefore enemy to Demotes, come hithere Mopsa, a thy fathers blessing come not near her: what Mopsa.
Yes, whose there? Dorus.
Confusion a Dorus, I am thy miserable father, did not see Hippolita?
No by my troth not. Did ye not see Dorus?
Pox of Dorus, I am undone Madam and thou telft me not of Hippolita.
Pox a Hippolita, I am a dumb woman and you can tell me news of Dorus.
I had rather see ten Dorusses hanged, then loose Hippolita.
I had rather see ten fathers damned, then loose my sweet Dorus.
I shall run mad and I find not Hippolita.
I shall run frantic and I find not Dorus.
Whats here? I shall run mad for Hippolita.
And I shall run frantic and I find not Doras, I hold my life we have some Comoedy in hand, wee shall have a full Scene, for here comes more Actors.
As sure as I am a sinner to God Madam, that sames he.
What with a brace of wenches, in faith old broke, have I no you in the manner, is this the fruits of your lying alone, is this your Court custom with a wannion? lend me thy knife, though I had neither house nor land to give em, Isle bestow a whores mark betwixt you, and yet I will not scold neither.
What a goodyer ail you mother, are you frampall, know you not your own daughter?
Mopsa? O insufferable wrong, make thine own naturall child thy Bawd?
Here's an excellent pattern for wives to learn to scold by.
What Mistress Amazon? ha you such a cocking spirit, honest women cannot keep their husbands at home for you? tic not for nothing now I see, that the Duchess looks yellow on you, but Isle tear that painted whores face of yours, (by this light) and yet I will not scold neither.
Madam.
Isle mad you with a vengeance.
Touch not the Prince.
On your allegiance forbear, what means this outrage, cannot our private walks be privileged from your wild contentions?
How fares the Prince?
How cheers my good Zelmane?
Zelmane? No Gods my judge my jig  am Manasses, miserable Manasses your husbands Scribe-major Madam.
Manasses?
A fool.
My mn.
And my dear hda sweet love, what make th here?
My work for the Hang-man, and the Duke bee not the more merciful.
There's some deceit in this: Demotes, whore's Hippolita?
I, I, there's some knavery in this: Mopsa, whore's Hippolita?
Doubtless there some villainy in this: Mopsa, wher's Hipolita?
There's no plain dealing in this, Manasses, whore's Dorus?
Answer directly, whore's Hippolita?
Alas Madam I know not, whilst I almost meled my self with digging of gold in Diana's Ok, I left her in my wives charge.
And whilst I ran to Manasses, thinking to take my husband and his wife in the manner, I left Hippolita in my daughters chamber.
And whilst  came to Atones chapel, to be tossed in my mariage blankets with Dorus, I left my little dog Pearl picking daisies.
Who sent you to Diana's Oak to dig gold?
Who sent you to take your husband in Manasses house?
Dorus.
Who sent you to Atones Chapel?
Dorus.
And who turned you into this shape?
They that I fear have made Gulls of us all, Zelmane and Dorus.
We are all simply gulled, and see where the Sn scarce half ready, skips from his Eastern bed, smiling at our gullery.
Come whore's this lusty wit-master?
The Keeper of this Love-lotterie.
This gallant Iuventus of fourscore, that like my Lady of the Lake, displays against all comers.
May a couple of plaine-witted Princes have a sight of your prizes?
Where be these Ladies, ha? ha your wits had such a skir meshing, that the two Maids have lost their heads in the conflict?
Heads? I and bodies too my Lord, and all at one shot, and which is worse, our wits are so scattered with the terrible blow, that, to be plain, we are scarce our own men again.
Then you had some knocking.
So it appears by the story my Lord.
How say you my Lady, what Whole sings out of that Ivy-bush?
Was your wit Knighted in this last action?
I am not such a fool, I love my Lord, I am no Knight, I am Manasses, they made a plain fool.
The only wear, for the guarded fool is out of request: but faith my Liege, how did your opposites behave themselves, did they win the wenches fair at the point?
At the very push of invention, and went off clear untouched.
And could you draw no blood of their wits?
Not a drop.
Nor Demotes neither, nor Manasses?
Neither, to our disgrace be it spoken, the carriage of this stratagem deserves applause, and I hold it a credit to rest captive to such valiant conquerors.
Why so be, I like a man that will confess his error.
It merits commiseration Madam and my Liege, not to detract from our worth: your ear, we two are the parties you wot on.
Were you the man?
No he was the man, marry I was the woman in the Moon, that made you walk all this last night like the man in the mist, I could say somewhat to you Madam, as for Demotes and his man, let them stand like fools as they are.
Can it be possible?
No, no, we are Gulls, innocent sots, but lante tanta, the girls are ours we have won them away to Dargison.
Come we have won the conquest, and that's sufficient.
You are a Manasses tic not sufficient: aha not Hercules for Iole, Jove for Dane, Apollo for Daphne, Pan for Sirne; nay the whole pack of their piperly godheads could a discharged a stratagem with more spirit of all merit; an ambling nag and a down a down we have borne her away to Dargison.
It was the most rarest, divinest, Metaphysicalst piece of invention, thatwhat say you my liege?
I give your deserts their full merit, you have gotten equality.
All the wenches gave you.
Alas hat spirits under the Moon could have detained her, but know that her cherry red lip, a down, a down.
Trust me but you have deserved high commendation.
Your merit stood of the upper stair of admiration.
Why thou hast a pretty relish of wit now, that can see the broad eye of my desert at a little hole of demonstration.
Your desert save me free, you have done a most (to use your own phrase) Metaphysical piece of service, but you had some help in it questionless.
I doe not think but the Ladies had some handin't.
A finger, I confess a finger by the hope of perseverance, a very little finger.
I thought as much by making of the jest.
I cannot detract from the Ladies worth, for I know them for excellent workwoman.
Workwoman fit to make Taylors men.
I by my faith doe I, nay your best taylors are arrant boatchers to them, you shall have a Lady make an end of a suit, a Court
suit, especially when all the Taylors in a country know not how to set a stitch in it.
Some ordinary suit perhaps.
Your best Court suits that are, are finished by Ladies, I have known a suite my self lien a making and mring , , and five year together, and then a Lady hath dispatcht it in a month with a wet finger, such a finger might the Ladies have in your plot.
Never wet a finger by this Sun.
Then she helped you with one dry jest or another, but and we may be so bold: faith whereare the Ladies?
Sure enough I warrant you, some fools now would have kept them here, and have bin gulled on them again, and laughed at age, but to prevent all danger, we have shipped them home for Lacedemon.
To Lacedemon? your sun of wit shines but dimly in that me thinks, to whose charge have you trusted them?
To them we durst, nay you must think we are no fools,
Fools? nay deep wit, and policy forbid.
We had no sooner their surprise, but we had disguise readie, a ship ready, a couple of lusty friends ready, the Lacedemon Intelligencers.
Durst you trust such precious jewels in such rusty caskets?
Durst? our health, our lives, why they were my tenants; nay you must think we sifted them, we are no fools in that neither.
If in any thing your wits deserve the babble tic in that.
None but fools would have committed such inestimable peers to a couple of strangers.
And in a ship too.
And under sail too.
And unfurnished of friends too.
And without shipping to follow them too.
You were no fools in any thing but that, and in that not to flatter, you express the true shape of folly, and merely merit the name of fools.
What will you say now when these fellows surrender us our loves?
Weal discharge you and set their names down for Gulls in your steed.
You know the Proverb, when the sky sals we shall have Larks.
And when you can bring proof that we are consent of our Wenches vveele be the Woodcocks.
Why then we have once spring'd a couple of woodcocks.
Doe you know these? who are the fools now?
Hippolita?
My Violetta?
What a strange change is here
Yes saith Gallants, you have very strange carding and you knew all, but I hope you'll offer up your cards, and yield the set lost.
Gulls?
And abused? Isle lose my life before Isle lose my honour.
Honour and life before Isle lose my love.
Nay Gentlemen, wee bar all violence; the liberty of our challenge was to all alike equally free, and since these by fair play have won em, it stands with our honour to see them peaceably possest of em, then surely take em, for though you wear the breeches, give us leave to stand a little.
Why father, is it not time that we were sped?
Tic a great charge to keep a Maid-head,
Lose it we must, and to prevent ill course,
Better to gived, then have it tan perforce,
If you be pleased let envy doe her worst,
Spit out her poison, or contain it and burst.
Welcome to all, to all a kind good-night,
They truly live, that live in scorn of spite.

