〈8 lines〉
〈10 lines〉
〈6 lines〉
〈6 lines〉
〈12 lines〉
〈17 lines〉
〈6 lines〉
〈14 lines〉
HOw 〈◊◊◊◊◊〉?
Or else how 〈◊◊◊◊〉first
Into an 〈◊〉? W•y 〈◊◊◊〉〈◊〉,
Of 〈◊〉▪ 〈◊◊◊〉〈◊〉?
I 〈◊〉a 〈◊◊◊◊◊〉,
Beyond the 〈◊〉; 〈◊◊〉〈◊〉
Me thought was formy 〈◊〉•ll •oo 〈◊〉;
Therefore, I 〈◊◊〉I 〈◊〉〈◊〉:
That knowing man who 〈◊◊◊〉〈◊〉▪
But pries into 〈◊◊◊〉〈◊〉
Further then leave; 〈◊◊〉〈◊〉
Cease to be a ma• and 〈◊〉〈◊〉▪
And 〈◊〉I 〈◊〉▪ 〈◊◊◊◊◊〉
That calls •ll 〈◊◊◊〉〈◊〉,
Am once more to my 〈◊◊〉〈◊〉,
With whom my lost soul 〈◊◊◊〉〈◊〉,
Knowing, of them thou 〈◊◊◊〉least;
But first Isle show a 〈◊〉of 〈◊〉〈◊〉,
Of Cupids love to 〈◊〉, 〈◊◊〉〈◊〉▪
Isle make thee then 〈◊〉〈◊〉▪
Thy treason 〈◊◊〉〈◊〉 〈◊〉▪
Withal, not only 〈◊〉〈◊〉,
But all true 〈◊◊〉are 〈◊〉▪
Thou hast 〈◊〉with 〈◊〉, by Pan Isle stay;
But take 〈◊〉Poet that your 〈◊◊〉sound,
Else with thine 〈◊◊◊〉thou 〈◊〉be 〈◊〉.
〈◊〉two 〈◊〉▪ 〈◊〉〈◊〉, there 〈◊〉:
Bee you the 〈◊〉, 〈◊◊〉you 〈◊〉
Unto this 〈◊〉〈◊〉▪
You 〈◊◊◊〉to 〈◊〉〈◊〉 〈◊〉▪
Wee have past the greatest part of our 〈◊〉;
Listen, oh listen, for these 〈◊◊〉〈◊〉▪
The aires light 〈◊◊◊◊◊◊〉
Immortal tunes; tell 〈◊◊◊〉〈◊〉
At 〈◊〉〈◊〉; see the 〈◊◊〉〈◊〉
〈1 line〉
〈1 line〉
〈1 line〉
〈1 line〉
Oh 〈◊◊◊〉with a most 〈◊〉〈◊〉
To kiss this hallowed earth.
Ladies kneel down.
And sir relate to 〈◊〉〈◊〉 〈◊〉
Why this religious voyage was 〈◊〉.
Daughters I shall:
Sacred Apollo, god of Archery,
Of Arts, of Physic, and of 〈◊〉▪
〈1 line〉
Like 〈◊〉flames, 〈◊〉a most divine
And dazzling splendour on these lesser 〈◊〉,
Which from 〈◊〉guilt 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉thy 〈◊〉retires,
Kindle those tapers that 〈◊◊〉to night▪
Oh thou that art the 〈◊〉of all light▪
Bridegroom to 〈◊〉, days 〈◊〉King▪
To whom Nine Muses in a sacred ring,
In dances spherical, trip hand in hand,
Whilst thy well-stringed 〈◊〉their feet command;
Great Delphian Priest, wee to 〈◊〉thy 〈◊〉
Have burnt fat thighs of 〈◊◊◊〉〈◊〉,
Whose savor wrapped in clouds of smoke 〈◊〉〈◊〉,
To thy Starre-spangled 〈◊◊〉〈◊〉;
Tell us who shall 〈◊〉the 〈◊〉〈◊〉
Of the white-handed 〈◊〉 〈◊〉〈◊〉
Of three most 〈◊〉▪ it most 〈◊〉,
All love, but none 〈◊〉love will 〈◊〉
With nuptial rights; what must of 〈◊〉〈◊〉
Dread 〈◊〉 tell, to whom shall 〈◊〉〈◊〉.
Cloth 〈◊〉 in a 〈◊〉〈◊〉,
Then lead and 〈◊◊〉on 〈◊〉hill,
Where 〈◊〉 〈◊〉their 〈◊◊〉〈◊〉▪
Her husband not of Humane race;
But one, whose flaming sight doth kill,
And yet wants eyes; his serpents face
If she behold, she must see hell;
And yet by some notorious deed,
Obtain a Patent from that place
Never to die: Psyche farewell,
Much joyed, much greev'd; 〈◊〉that spell.
Much grieved, and yet much joyed, poor girl, I fear
The scale of grief will weigh down that of cheer.
She must see hell; and yet she near shall die;
True, for hells torments live eternally.
But father, no tongue shall her joys express.
Phebus, thy words leave us all comfortless.
I must espouse a •rpent, that's my hell.
But since you never shall behold his face,
Your torments cannot bee too horrible.
Is it possible, by deeds impossible
To attain the Crow•e of im•ortality:
It cannot bee; Th• mocking Ph•bus leaves us,
Always in clouds of darkness to deceive us.
Stay thy profane 〈◊〉, least 〈◊〉wrath
Strike thee with 〈◊〉from his 〈◊〉〈◊〉:
Thou must be clothed in mourning, so 〈◊〉〈◊〉▪
A mourning habit, and a thought〈◊〉heart;
Thou must be left alone on Ven• hill;
The destinies 〈◊〉, wee 〈◊〉fulfil:
Thy husband must 〈◊〉sight▪ and yet have eyes
That flame, and kill; oh leave these mysteries
Until the Gods 〈◊〉them; come, let's hence:
Change your Arcadian tunes to 〈◊〉 sounds,
Sad 〈◊〉are sweetest, where deep woe confounds.
Cupped my son, whore's hee?
Anon-forsooth.
Isle gather rods of roses, if yo• m•ck 〈◊〉
With your anon-forsooth.
Anon-forsooth.
Shall I be still thus vexed? still wh•n my blood
Boils in the fire of anger, then this ape
With purpose frets me.—Boy.
Anon-forsooth.
Will Iuno come, or C•res? 〈◊〉
Iuno lay lolling in my Uncles lapp.
Which Uncle?
Uncle 〈◊〉: I laughed out-right
To see how (want on-like) with both her 〈◊〉
She clung about his n•cke; gave him ten kisses,
Toyed with his locks, looked babies in his eyes,
And 〈◊〉she would not watch him when hee went
Amongst his wenches, if he would turn• away
His saucy page, the smooth-fac'd 〈◊〉;
The boy by chance upon her fan had spilt
A cup of Nectar; oh how Iuno swore:
I told my Aunt I'd give her a new 〈◊〉,
To let •oves page be Cupids serving-man.
What's this to Venus message, what said 〈◊〉?
I asked her when she would come, and in good sooth,
she answered nothing but anon-forsooth.
And where was Ceres, what did she reply?
Ceres was binding garlands for God Pan,
Of Blew-••••ies, and yellow Pi•••beds
That grew amongst the Wheat, with which she crowned
His forked brows, and wood him with his horn
To rouse the •kipping Satires, to go hunt
A heard of swine that rooted up her come:
I asked her wh•• she would come, and in good sooth
She sent me packing with anon forsooth.
I sent for Pan, and for Apollo too,
What news from them?
They said they would bee here immediately.
Why in such haste hath Venus sent for us?
I sent for Iuno, and for Ceres too,
But they'll not come.
Well, what's the news with you?
Have you not heard how Venus is contemned?
Her Temples gazed at, but not trow•d upon,
Her stately hangings, and her pillows torn;
Those rosie garlands that her •••••es crowned,
Are withered, or else trampled on the ground;
Those troops that flocked to Paphos to adore me,
Shun Paphos now, and scornfully abhor me.
That's strange, for all 〈◊〉up to 〈◊〉in love▪
Boys without beards get boys, 〈◊◊◊〉〈◊〉,
Fine little rattle-babies, 〈◊〉thus high,
Are now called wives; If long this hot 〈◊〉〈◊〉,
Wee shall have all the earth turn 〈◊〉.
All honour Love, but none adore Loves Queen.
The injury i• 〈◊〉; but 〈◊◊◊〉it?
From Psyche daughter to 〈◊〉〈◊〉 King;
They call her Queen of Love, will 〈◊◊〉other,
And swear my Son shall 〈◊〉and call her mother.
But Cupped swears to make the jacks forsworn.
Will 〈◊〉 swallow this disgrace?
What shall Pan doe in this?
Lend me your aids:
If you meet 〈◊〉, charge young 〈◊〉
To send me to her, or Impri•on her
Till you have sent 〈◊〉word.
If this be all, 〈◊〉 shall 〈◊〉her wish.
Pan by his upright horns and beard doth swear
To hunt out 〈◊〉; but if I doe this,
What will sweet Venus give 〈◊〉?
A sweet kiss;
And Phebus shall have one, 〈◊〉 another,
Upon condition they will right those 〈◊〉
Which Psyche in her great pride throws oh 〈◊〉:
Draw from thy quiver a dull 〈◊〉〈◊〉,
And struck it through her 〈◊〉to her heart;
Make her in Love, but let her proud eyes dote
On some ill-shapen 〈◊〉, some ugly 〈◊〉:
Doe this; Isle weave for thee a 〈◊〉
Of Roses, mixed with 〈◊〉hair;
And give thee my best 〈◊〉, and my Doves
To hunt with on the earth; or in the ayre;
Wilt thou doe this my boy?
I will forsooth.
Nay doe not mock me, wilt thou?
Yes indeed, Indeed I will forsooth.
Sweet lad 〈◊〉then▪
Apollo, Pan, revenge poor Venus 〈◊〉,
While st I 〈◊〉my silver coloured team,
To wanton on the bosom of yo• stream.
Now she hath •all'd me down unto the earth,
Isle try what pastimes dwell amongst the swains.
And with my Satires I will have some sport
Here in the 〈◊〉 vaslyes.
Shall Psiches beauteous eyes gaze on base love?
No, let my Mother storm, and 〈◊〉and lower,
She shall be none but Cupids Paramour:
Ho Zephirus,—how now thou puffing slave,
Art thou grown proud, thou swell so? Gentle wind,
Clap on thy smoothest feathers, 〈◊〉wings,
And mount thee to the top of yonder rock,
There shalt thou find anon, a forlorn 〈◊〉,
Convey her gently down into the veil
That borders on my bower; 〈◊〉this performed,
And I will cloth thee in a grafse-greene robe,
Spotted with Daisies, Pincks, and Marigolds;
Isle play the thief in 〈◊〉 treasury,
To 〈◊〉all eyes in love with Zephirus;
〈◊〉hence, doe this, and henceforth be thou King
Of all the W•ndes, and father of the Spring.
Behold the foot of that unhappy rock,
Upon whose frozen top, by Phebus 〈◊〉,
Thou must abide thy most sinister hap.
Dear sister 〈◊〉.
Peace Astioche,
Petrea, Father: you should all have mourned
When the mad spirits of the multitude
Kneeled down, and called me 〈◊〉, then have wept,
When Cithareas Altars were left bare▪
And I was called a goddess; when these tears,
Whose 〈◊〉makes my funeral lights burn dim,
Might have quenched Venus wrath; but leave me now
To fight with death, or 〈◊〉worse misery.
But lurks that serpent in this 〈◊〉rock?
So said Apollo.
Then Menetius,
Wee will conduct fair Psyche• to the cave,
And rip the monsters entrails with our sword•.
Forbear all force, I will ascend aloe•e▪
Phebus will be displeased; Alone said hee,
Distressed Psyche shall climb up yon hill.
The way is dangerous, thou wilt loose thy self
Without a guide.
If thus I talk to them,—Who fills this wine,
And tempts my eye with it? as who should say,
Drink Psyche.
Drink P•iche. 2. Drink Psyche. 3. Drink Psyche,
Isle taste no drop of this enchanted wine:
Fine from this magic 〈◊〉would I rise,
Y• dare not; oh let Psyche see your eyes,
Or rid me hence, and set my fears in peace.
Peace. 2. Peace. 3. Peace.
How lovely is my Psyche; earth's too base
To be possessed of her Celestial form:
My Mother hates her; for the gods I fear
Would banish her from earth, my Love being there;
And therefore shall she live in C•pids Bower,
For she 〈◊〉to bee Loves Paramour:
Oh how my fair eyes wound me; by this kiss,
And this white hand.
Oh me! what voice is this
I 〈◊〉? besides, soft fingers, and a ring.
Long white fingers; soft white hand,
Ring and all at thy command.
Is this my husband then?
Ho Zephirus,
Remove hence these Ambrosian dishes straight.
My father much mist•ke the Oracle;
To this sweet voice, could I enjoy the sight,
I should my self then stile Queen of delight.
Pleasure shall bee thy lackey; wilt thou hunt,
Then in an aerie chariot drawn by birds,
On the winds downy back my love shall ride;
Mild Zephirus shall be thy Waggoner;
Who if the heate offend, his 〈◊〉wings
Shall fan cool ayre upon thee, yet my love,
If thou commit one sin, thou art not mine.
Name it, and Isle avoid it for your sake.
Thy mourning sisters shortly will return,
And seek thee on the rock from whence thou came,
But shun their sight and speech; Psyche doe this,
Thou rob'st me else of Love, thy self of bliss.
Not speak nor see my sisters; oh what pleasure
Can Psyche take, locked in a golden Jail?
Run not unto thy ruin gentle love;
Yet if thou needs wilt see and 〈◊〉with them,
Command my 〈◊〉Zephirus to bring them
From top of yonder rock into this veil;
But if they make inquiry who I am,
Fill both their laps with gold, and send them gon▪
Besides I woe thee by this nuptial 〈◊〉,
Doe not persuade me to disclose my shape,
Attempting that, thou loosest this high state;
I then must leave thee, thou live desolate.
In all these things, I will obey my love.
Then Psyche, in thine un•en husbands hand
Clasp thy white fingers; Isle now 〈◊〉thy bed
With the sweet spoils of thy lost Maiden-head. 
I like him best.
That Midas, is thy brother,
A piece of moving earth, illiterate, dull;
Who having in himself nought commendable,
Envies what's good in others; and yet dare
In his own impudence, with Arts compare:
A block, a stone, yet learning he will revile,
And a dull Ignorant Ass wee will him stile.
But whore's your Poet Ass among all these?
Ther's no such creature.
Then what call thou those
That let not men lie quiet in their graves,
But hant their ghosts with ballatts, and baled rimes?
Doe they not teach the very fiends in hill
Speak in blank verse; doe wee not daily see
Every dull-witted Ass spit Poetry:
And for thy Scene; thou bring here on the stage
A young greene-sicknesse baggage to run after
A little ape-fac'd boy thou tearm'st a god;
Is not this most absurd?
Mis-understanding fool, thus much conceive,
Psyche is Enema, Psyche is the Soul,
The Soul a Virgin, longs to be a bride,
The solo's Immortal, whom then can she woo
But Heaven? whom wed, but Immortality:
Oh blame not Psyche then, if mad with rage,
She long for this so divine marriage.
But tell me then, why should Apollo say,
All love her, and yet none will marry her.
All love fair Psyche, all cast amorous eyes
On the souls beauty, but who is it will wed her?
None with the sou'e will lead so strict a life
As heaven enjoins, with such a blessed wife.
Thou promp'st my understanding pretty well;
But why should Venus being Queen of Love,
Wish her son Cupped to enamour her
On some base groom misshapen, and deformed?
By Venus here, is meant intemperate lust;
Lust woes her son Desire, to inflame the soul
With some base groom, that's to some ugly sin;
Desire is good and ill; the evil swear•s
To obey his mother Venus, and vex Psyche:
But Cupped representing true desire,
Dotes on the Souls sweet beauty, sends his scruant
Zephirus; In whom, Celestial pleasur's meant,
To entice his love, the Soul, to his chaste bed,
Giving her heaven for her lo•t maiden-head.
Only one riddle more, and I have done;
Why did the poor girl Psyche take such pains?
What scrambling shift she made to climb the mountain,
And crawl through brakes and briers to get a husband.
This shows how many strong adversities,
Crosses, Pricks, Thorns, and stings of conscience,
Would throw the ambitious soul affecting heaven,
Into despair, and fainting diffidence,
Which Psyche must pass through; the Soul must 〈◊〉
Through thousand letts, to 〈◊〉eternity.
Thou hast made this somewhat plain.
Kind Gentlemen,
Long flaxen curled tresses crown his head.
Come, come, you shall not be enamoured
On my fair husband; this for all suffice,
Hoe's young and rich.
Oh how my blood doth ri•
In envy of her high felicity; speak, what's his name?
Home, Home; more music there, I must to r•st:
Ho Zephirus, come forth, and bring me brim-full bags of gold:
Hold up your lips; tho'them you cannot see
That bring this gold, this larges take from me;
Adieu, adieu: my duty to the King,
I needs must stop mine ears when Sirens sing.
Astioche.
Petrea, oh, I am mad to note her pride;
Her husband is no serpent as it was said,
And false Apollo sung; hee is some god,
And this his Temple, for no mortal hand
Hath laid these Crystal pavements, clothed these meads
In never-faiding liveries of greene;
Flora you see clothes all the ground with flowers,
Flora is Psiches hand-maid; Zephirus
Is but her foote-boy, lackeys at her beck.
Yet shoe's our sister, and it doth me good
To see rich worth in any of our blood.
Thou art a fool Petrea, for I hate
That any's fortune should transcend my state;
She sends us hence in scorn, but we'll return,
And never cease, till by some treachery,
Her pride wee make a slave to misery.
Patience great sir, you have not lost them all,
Doubtless the two last live.
Sir though they be your daughters, they are our wives,
And wee are in no such despair of them.
Admit you were one for Astioche,
And that another for Petrea wept,
You two, but for two wives shed husbands tears;
For you and them, I sorrow all: your fears
Divided betwixt you; on me alone,
Lies like a mountain, and thus casts down
Admetus wretched body, with his crown;
They followed Psyche and her 〈◊〉,
•ath given them death, us living misery.
Rise Royal Sir, your Daughters are returned.
Oh where, which way; are my two daughters come?
Yes sir, and both their lips are filled with gold.
Welcome to both in one; oh can you tell
What fate your sister hath?
Psyche is well.
So among mortals, it is often sed,
Children and friends are well, when they are dead.
But Psyche lives, and on her breath attends.
Delights that far surmount all earthly joy;
Music, sweet voices, and Ambrosian fare,
Winds, and the light-wing'd creatures of the ayre;
Clear channel'd rivers, springs, and flowery meads,
Are proud when 〈◊〉 wa•tons on their streams,
When Psyche on their rich Embroidery treads,
When Psyche guilds their Crystal with her beams;
Wee have but seen our sister; and behold
She sends us with our lips full brimmed with gold.
Oh, you amaze me Daughters.
Let joy banish amazement from your Kingly though•
Psyche is wedded to some 〈◊〉,
And prays withal, our 〈◊〉return again.
VVee grant it; wee with you and these, will go
To Psiches bower; desire inflames my mind,
To sit on the bright wings of that blessed wind.
Oh but the god that governs Psiches thoughts;
For sure hee is Immortal; charged my sister
To talk with none but us.
Yet by the 〈◊〉of our tongues we'll try
If wee can win you so much liberty.
〈◊〉my Astioche, but come again
To comfort him that must thy want complain;
Go with my love Petrea, but return
With winged speed, whilst 〈◊〉your absence morn;
Go with my blessing; blessed those sisters bee,
That live like you in bonds of unity:
Give Psyche this; give her thou this Petrea,
Tell her she is my self, my souls Idea,
And say, whilst she is spotless, lovely white, 
〈◊〉shall bee my 〈…〉
〈…〉 with 〈…〉
And what might you call that young gentleman, that rules and reigns, 〈…〉 of
〈…〉 from your ••ocks and leaves you 〈…〉 in your heads then in
your sheepe-hookes? What might you call this gallant?
〈4 lines〉
〈1 line〉
Cupped Coxcomb: your Satyrs are all sots, your Fawns fools, and your Pan a 〈…〉; had I
〈…〉 I know not what I 〈…〉 I would 〈1 line〉
They 〈…〉
〈…〉 and how lies hee?whore's his guard? what's his play? Can any of you 〈◊〉〈◊〉
me his 〈◊〉title
Not I 〈…〉
Then harken oh you 〈…〉 oh you 〈◊〉whilst I give you his 〈…〉 Hee is King of cares,
〈1 line〉 Prince of 〈…〉 Duke of disasters, dissemblers, 〈…〉
and mad-folkes▪ grand 〈◊〉of griefs, and groans; Lord of lamentations, Hero of hi•-〈◊◊〉of 〈◊〉
and Monsieur of mutton-lac'd.
Heere's a stile I shall never bee able to get over.
And who doe yo• think maintains this princox in his 〈◊〉?
Nay, it 〈◊〉my 〈◊〉▪
A company of 〈◊◊◊〉〈◊〉▪ did you never hear of one Homer, and 〈◊〉the Tale of Tree•y, and of a te• years 〈◊〉, and many 〈◊〉〈◊〉.
〈◊〉, and many 〈◊◊◊〉〈◊〉.
But hear 〈◊〉, 〈◊◊◊◊◊〉▪ This Troy was a 〈◊◊〉•ome 〈◊〉〈◊〉; and 〈◊〉, as silly a fellow as I 〈◊〉, 〈◊◊〉loving to play the good fell∣low, h•e had a great many bowsing 〈◊〉; whom 〈◊〉called sons.
As 〈◊〉have 〈◊〉〈◊〉.
Just the same; by this Troy •anne a 〈◊〉〈◊〉, that one might stride over; on the other 〈◊◊〉〈◊〉 a Far∣mer, who had a light wench to his Wife called Helen, that kept his sheep, whom Paris, one of 〈◊〉 mad lads, s•e∣ing and liking, ticeth over the brooke, and lies with her i• despite of her husbands teeth; for which wrong, 〈◊◊〉for one 〈◊〉 his 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉was then high 〈◊〉of the hundred, and complains to him: hee sends to one Vlisses, a fair spoken fellow, and Towne-clarke, and to di∣verse others, amongst whom was one 〈◊〉fellow called A∣jax, a Butcher, who upon a Holy-day, brings a pair of 〈◊〉, and lays them down in the midst, where the
Two Hundred• were 〈◊〉〈◊〉, 〈◊〉〈◊〉 a 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉bold lad of the other side 〈◊〉, steps 〈◊〉, and takes them up; these two had a bout or two 〈◊〉a broken pate; And here was all the circumstance of the Trojan Wars.
To see what these Poets can doe.
But listen to them, and they will fill your heads with a thousand 〈◊〉; observe one thing, there's none of you all sooner in 〈◊〉, 〈◊◊〉is troubled with their itch, for hee will bee in his Amorets, and his Canzonets, his Pastorals, and his Madrigals, to his Phillis, and his A∣morillis.
Oh beauteous 〈◊〉.
And what's Amorillis think thou?
A fair and lovely creature.
Isle show thee the contrary by her own name, Amor is love, illis, is ill; is ill, cannot bee good; Ergo 〈◊〉 is stark nought; let one or two examples serve for more, there's one of our fairest Nymphs called Suzanne; what is Suzanne, but Suss and 〈◊〉, which is 〈◊〉plain Arcadia, Nan is a Sow.
Well, you have taught us more then •ver I under∣stood before, concerning Poetry.
Come to me but one hour in a morning, and Isle read deeper Philosiophie to you; good-morrow Neighbours; Poets, quoth a; What's Titule tu patule, but Titles and Pages; What's Propria que maribu•, but a Proper man loves Mary-bons, or Feminno generi 〈◊〉, but the Femi∣nine Gender is troublesome; what's Ovid, but quasi avoid; now should I be in love, with whom? with Doll, what's that but
〈◊◊〉〈◊〉, 〈◊◊◊〉〈◊〉, 〈◊◊◊◊〉black-pot, or what's 〈◊◊〉for 〈◊◊◊◊◊〉 post: no Cupped▪ 〈◊◊◊〉and all thy 〈◊〉.
What's hee that •o 〈◊〉our 〈◊〉?
And scorns that power which all the gods adore;
To whom Jove some-times bends, and Neptune kneels,
Mars homageth, and Phebus will submit,
Sly Mercury obey, and Vulcan bow too;
And all the rural gods and goddesses,
Saytirs and Nymphs, allow their sovereign;
Hee shall not scope unpunished.
If I could but find one of these fantastical Poet•, or light upon that little god their Patron, I would so tickle• them.
This hobinall, this rustic, this base clown;
I find him of a dull and braine-lesse eye,
Such as I know a golden-headed shaft
Will never enter; of a skin so thick,
As pointed silver hath no power to pierce:
For such gross fools, I have a bolt in store,
Which though it cannot wound, shall give a blow,
To startle all within him.
Oh me, hey-hoe.
Lie there base Midas bastard, that refuses
All-honour'd love, and rail against the Muses.
Oh coward, whatsoere thou art, to come behind a man
and strikehim before, 〈◊〉I saw nobody—to 〈◊〉▪ 〈◊〉never give a man warning, oh coward, I am paid, I am p•p∣per'd; the case is altered, for any one may 〈◊〉•y th• huge∣ness of the blow, that I 〈◊〉in love; ay—me, that any wench were here, whose name is 〈◊◊◊〉I be in love with any madge, though she were an Howlet, 〈◊〉with any maid, though she looked like a Malkin; Oh Poetry, I find that I am poisoned with thee too; for me-thinks I could 〈◊〉my prayers in blanke-verse, nay let me see, I think I 〈◊〉rime for a need;
Cupped I 〈◊〉, since so I know thy 〈◊〉,
And Isle go 〈◊〉me out so•e 〈◊〉▪
There's at this time a combat in my soul,
Whether to trust my well-known sisters better,
Or my yet unseen husband; I have asked,
Demanded, and enquired of all my 〈◊〉,
This fairy-traine that hourly 〈◊〉on me,
Yet none of them will tell me what hee is▪
Besides, this solitude to be alone,
Begins to grow most tedious, and my •ears
Doe every way distract me.
Why how now Psyche?
Oh let Mercies eyes
Shine on my fault.
Are these thy heaven-bound vows?
Are all thy protestations gilded ayre?
Hast thou no more regard to my command,
Or thine own safety?
Dear love pardon me.
Once more I doe; and still must pardon thee,
And thou must still offend, still torture me;
Yet once again Isle try thy constancy:
Thy •esters are at hand.
But gentle Love,
Shall I not speak to them?
Yes, but I woe thee
To send them quickly hence, or they'll undo thee;
They n•w are at the Rock, bid the cool wind
To pl•as thee, bring them to the place assigned.
Ho Zephirus,
Tell •e the cause of your so quick return?
Psyche wee come with danger of our lives,
To save our sister from ensuing harm.
What harm? What danger?
Danger eminent,
Once you refused our Counsel, and denied
To let us know your husband, or his name.
Come, let's see him.
Oh, what shall I doe?
Escape the danger you are fallen in•.
You cannot see him.
Give us then his shape?
His shape, why hoe's a man whose •owe head
Bows on his 〈◊〉, through the 〈◊〉of age.
That cannot bee; you 〈◊〉hee was a youth
Of comely stature, with long 〈◊〉〈◊〉.
I am entr•p'd.
Speak, did you ever see your husband?
Why doe you ask, pray trouble me no more;
Leave me, and I will fill your lips with gold.
Once thy gold •empted us to leave this 〈◊〉,
And to betray thy life to misery,
It shall not now; did not Appollo doom
Thy fatal marriage to some hiddeous beast;
How just is Phebus in his aug•ies;
Last night, when wee went 〈◊〉laden with gold,
Wee spied a serpent gliding on the mead,
Who at the sight of us, writhing his head
Proudly into the ayre, first hist at heaven,
Because it did not shade him from our eyes.
How did that serpent vanish from your sight?
In at these gates hee rolled, Psyche be wise,
For though a while hee dally with thy beauty,
Dulling thy taste with sweets, thy eyes with shows,
Thy ears with music, and sweet lullabies▪
Hee will in time devour thee.
Miserable wretch,
How shall I fly the fate that follows me?
Whose help shall I invoke?
Tell us the truth,
And we'll devise some means to succour thee.
You are my sisters, I confess to you,
I never saw his 〈◊〉, know not his 〈◊〉▪
Yet have I 〈◊◊〉〈◊〉, 〈◊◊〉his 〈◊〉
Oft have I 〈◊◊◊◊〉oft 〈◊〉〈◊〉▪
Eyes, hands, lips, 〈◊◊◊◊◊〉 touch,
That I have sworn, save his, there were none such,
Yet your strange• story makes me to suspect
That hoe's some 〈◊〉, for hee tells me still,
To see his glorious shape, will 〈◊〉me▪
Besides 〈◊〉bids 〈◊◊〉your 〈◊〉,
Eise you will breed my sorrow; this is that
Which troubles me.
Hear then my counsel; Instantly provide
A keene-edg'd raysor, and a 〈◊〉〈◊〉▪
At night, when 〈◊◊〉on 〈◊◊〉eyes,
Steal from his speckled side, 〈◊〉to 〈◊〉light,
And without fear behold his horrid shape,
And with the raysor cut his 〈◊〉throat;
And so by death gain life, and hee being dead,
Psyche shall 〈◊〉some King be m•rried.
How doth our sister relish this devise?
I doe embrace your council, and this night
Isle put the same in execution;
Come, you have made me resolute and bold,
And now receive your lips ore-swell'd with gold.
Swell in thy pride, until thou break thy heart,
Yet come, we'll take her larges ere wee part.
Poet no more; I have enough of Psyche;
Her sisters and the serpent, all of them
Most villainous 〈◊〉, Isle 〈◊〉〈◊〉, 〈◊〉〈◊〉
To please my self, and keep 〈◊◊◊〉〈◊〉,
Thou'lt let me show thee 〈◊〉of our 〈◊〉sport,
Such as wee use here in Arcadia,
I will endure no longer.
Well, I am pleased.
Isle show thee in a 〈◊〉.
Art some-times must give way to 〈◊〉.
Was not this sport indeed?
My modesty gives thee no reprehension,
For I am well pleased with your P•oral mirth,
But as thou had a power over mine eyes,
To sit it out with patience; so lend me
Thy attentive •ates.
〈◊〉clear thy obsurdities,
Nay, gross ones too; here Psyche lies abominably,
And says she has two husbands, the one young,
The other old: How 〈◊〉thou answer this?
Though thy vain doubts be most familiar
To these Judicious hearers, well experenc'd,
As well in matters Moral as Divine;
To thee Isle make it plain.
I prithee doe.
Did Psyche lie to say she had two loves?
How like art thou to Psyche, she to thee.
To me, I s•orne her likeness.
In this point thou art,
For rath•r then thy sisters shall grow angry,
To make earths drossy pleasures stay for thee,
Thou wilt exclaim with Psyche, Cupids young;
The joys of heaven are all too young, too little
To be believed or looked at; if that fail,
Thou with the soul will it say, my love is old,
Divine delights are crooked like old age,
Who will not vow, speak, nay swear any thing,
To have their vain delights served like a king.
It is pretty, but your Echoes pleased me best;
Oh if a man had seen them.
With a mortal eye none can; in them is hid this mystery;
Celestial raptures, that to allure the sight,
Are seen no more then voices being on high,
Subject unto no weak, and fleshly eye.
But why did Cupped hide himself from Psyche?
Oh who dares pry into those mysteries,
That heaven would have concealed; for this shoe's charged
Not to see Cupids face, to shun her sisters.
Those gadding girls, what did'ft thou mean by them?
The restless sins that travel night and day,
Envying her bliss, the sweet soul to betray.
Well, by this little I conceive the rest,
I care not greatly if I stay it out,
But if not liked, Isle either sleep or flout.
So will not these I hop•, before they view
What whore•d dangers Cupids bride purfue.
TImes eldest daughter Night, mother of 〈◊〉,
Thou gentle nurse, that with sweet lulabies,
Care-waking hearts to gentle sl•mber charm'st;
Thou smooth-cheek t negro night, the black-ey'd Queen,
That rid'st about the world on the soft backs
Of downy Ravens sleek and sable plumes,
And from thy Chariot, silent darkness •lings;
In which man, beast, and bird, enveloped,
Takes their repose and rest; Psyche entreats thee,
No Jar nor sound betray her bold attempt:
Soft silken veil that curtains in my doubt,
Give way to these white hands, these jealous eyes,
Sharpe knife prepared for a red sacrifice;
Bright lamp conduct me to my love or hate,
Make me this night blessed, or unfortunate:
Wondrous amazement! what doe I behold?
A Bow and quiver, these shafts tipped with gold,
With silver this; this sluggish arrows head,
Is like my heavy heart, composed of lead;
Such weapons 〈◊〉 〈◊〉doth 〈◊〉▪
Psyche were happy if this Cupped were;
Malicious sisters, I your envy sec,
This is no serpent, but a Deity:
What pretty loves, like silken slumbers lie,
Closing the covers of each Crystal eye;
Hence thou prepared instrument of death,
Whilst Psyche sucks new life from his sweet breath:
Churl beauty, beautions niggard, thus 〈◊〉,
Why did thou from mine eyes this glory hide?
Ah me, thou envious light, what hast thou done?
Immortal powers, oh succour Venus Son;
What hellish hag hath dropped this scalding oil
On Loves Celestial shape?
It was Psiches hand.
How durst thou violate my dread command?
Venus my Mother, bid me make thee dote
On some base groom; and I left her and heaven,
And with mine own darts wounded mine own breast;
For i'll these favours, would thou murder me?
Let my weak sex plead for my great offence.
No, for thy sake, this plague pursue thy sex;
You shall have appetites, and hot desires,
Which though supplied, shall ne'er be satisfied;
You shall be still rebellious, like the Sea,
And like the winds inconstant; things forbid
You most shall covet, loath what you should like;
You shall be wise in wishes, but enjoying,
Shall venture heavens loss for a little toying:
Ho Ze•hirus.
What will my dear love doe?
Hence, touch me not, Isle be no more thy love:
Discharge my servants from this fairy veil,
Resign thy office to the boisterous North,
Bid famine ride upon his frozen wings,
Till they be blasted with his poisonous breath;
Music, be turned to horror, smiles to tears,
Pleasures to shrieks, felicity to fears.
Why doe you plague the place for my offence?
Why for thy sisters sake sought thou my hate?
But I will bee revenged on them and thee,
On them, for thy sake, on thy self, for me.
For pity hear poor Psyche.
No, away?
I have no way but yours; which way you fly,
Isle hang upon your wings, or fall, and die.
Cup. Soon shalt thou leave thy hold; run Zephirus,
Fetch Boreus—Art thou come my Aquilon:
Boreus, I charge thee by Orithias lo•e,
Lay waste and barren this fair flowery grove,
And make this Paradise a den of snakes;
For I will have it uglier then hell,
And none but ghastly scrietch-owles here shall dwell;
Breath winters storms upon the blushing cheeks
Of beauteous Psyche; with thy boisterous breath,
Rend off her silks, and clothe her in torn rags;
H•ng on her loathed locks base deformity,
And bear her to her father, leave her there,
Barren of comfort, great with child of fear;
Psyche farewell, whilst thou with woes art crowned,
I must go gather helps to cure my wound.
With woes indeed; those wretches live in woe,
Whom love forsakes, and Psyche must doe so.
Doe you hear the news, you animals?
Is it worth the hearing?
A qvestion well asked, for it is musical news, and there∣fore worth your ears: Apollo being called by Venus from hey∣ven, hath ever since kept Admetus his sheep, with whom Pan meeting, they fell in contention, whether his Pipe or A∣pollos Harp could yield the better Music, and which withal could sing the best; come then my sweet Amarillis, and take thy place amongst the rest, for this is the day of the trial, and amongst others, I heard my father Midas say, that all other business set a part, he would be at it; but there is one mischief late happened.
What's that I prithee?
Pan hath got a could, is hoarse, and hath lost his voice, and therefore hath chose me to sing in his place; and Phoe•s, because hee will take no advantage, hath picked o•t one of his Pages to doe the like for him; therefore come, make a lane, for by this time they are upon their entrance.
But is it possible, that Pans Pipe dare con∣tend with Apolloes Harp?
Yes that it is possible, blind harper, and that my wind∣pipe shall prove; make room, and get you all out of the lists save I, that am to be one of the combatants
Who shall be Judge?
Admetus.
Sacred Apollo, great Pan pardon me;
It is a cunning much beyond my skill,
The•fore I humbly crave to be excuse•d.
Admetus, for thy hospitality,
Phoe•us will be thy f•iend, and gives thee leave
In this to use thy pleasure.
What thinks Phoebus
Of Midas, once of men, now King of beasts.
No better man, so please him undertake it.
Yes Phoebus, Midas will, and though poo• Mercies,
For striving with thee had his skin pulled off,
Yet have wee Swains, and some too not •are off,
I could have said, some near to me in blood,
Can tickle you for a tone.
Meaning me, and I will set out a throat.
Is this thy champion?
Yes, and who's for thee?
One of my minutes, hours, days, weeks, or months,
Or years, or seasons, that still waite on us,
And have done ever 〈◊〉the first of time;
Not one can come amiss.
Who shall begin?
Most voices.
Apollo, Apollo.
No matter though his Champiaon begin, lot me alone to come up with the Catastrophe.
Silence, Silence.
Phoebus unto thee 〈◊〉sing,
Oh thou great 〈◊〉 king:
Thou the God of Physic art,
Of Poetry, and Archery;
Wee sing unto thee with a heart,
Devoted to thy deity:
All bright glory cro• thy 〈◊〉,
〈◊◊◊〉•ll Piety,
Whose golden be•es and rays are shed
As well upon the poor as rich▪
For thou alike regardest each;
Phoebus unto thee wee sing,
Oh thou great Italian king.
I 〈◊〉, this was some-what to th purpose;
I needs must say it was pretty, but god Pa•,
Now let us hear your Champion?
Come stand forth?
Thou that art called the bright Hiperion,
Were it thou more strong then Spanish Gerion,
That had three heads upon one man,
Compare not with our great god Pan:
They call thee Son of bright Latona,
But girt thee in thy torrid 〈◊〉,
Sweat, baste, and broil, as best thou can,
Thou art not like our Dripping Pan.
What cares hee for the great god Neptune,
With all the br•ath that hee is kept in;
Vulcan or Jove hee scorns to bow to,
To Harms, or the infernal Pluto.
Then thou that art the heavens bright eye,
Or burn, or scorch, or boyle, or fry,
Bee thou god, or bee thou man,
Thou art not like our •rying Pan.
They call thee Phoebus, god of day,
Years months, weeks hours, of March and May;
Bring up thy 〈◊〉in the 〈◊〉▪
We'll meet thee with our •ding Pan.
Thy self in thy bright Chariot settle,
With Skillet armed, Brasse-pot, or Kettle,
With Jug, Black-pot, with •lass, or Can,
No talking to our Warming Pan.
Thou hast thy beams, thy brows to deck,
Thou hast thy Daphne at thy beck;
Pan hath his horns, Sirnjx, and Phillis,
And I Pans Swain, my Amarillis.
You Midas have heard both; these only waite
Your just and upright 〈◊〉.
Is Phoe• pleased.
Pleased.
And is Pan content.
Content.
Now if my father can but c•sure as well as I sing, the towne's ours.
Yes Son, I can, and that most learnedly:
Thy 〈◊〉to Pans Pipe, yield god Phoebns,
For it is not now as in Diebus
Illis, Pan all the year wee follow,
But semel in anno ridet Apollo,
Thy chorister cannot come 〈◊〉
The voice of this our Chanticleer▪
Then leave off these thy burning rays,
And give to Pan the Prick and praise,
Thy colour change, look pale and wan,
In honour of the great god Pan.
A sentence, a sentence, a Pan, a Pan.
Henceforth be all your •urall music such,
Made out of Tinkers, Pans, and Kettle-drummes;
And never henceforth may your fields bee graced
With the sweet music of Apollos lyre:
Midas for thee, may thy •ares longer grow,
As shorter still thy judgement, dullness, and dotage,
Bee only governed with those reverend hairs;
Let all like thee, that as they grow in time,
Decay in knowledge, have that old manscurse,
To be twice Children: for thy squeaking son,
May all thy state thou leave him at thy death,
Bee to sing Ballets through Areadia,
And them to the like tunes; fare-well Admetus,
My music lives unquestioned, what's amiss
Is not in us, but in their ignorance;
Thus undisparadg'd, Phoebus leaves the place,
And with them to succession, my disgrace.
Phoebus is gone displeased.
Still may he be so.
Midas I'm sure has judged with equity.
But see father, see god Pan, 〈◊〉revenge, he hath not sent a blustering wind to blow us all hence; it is Bores, it is Bores.
Come Midas, come Swains, till this storm be past, Let us away to shelter.
Where art thou Psyche•, how art thou deformed?
What ayre affords thee breath? what men be these?
Where shall I hid me; let no humane eye
Which now attends thee?
Cupped, my dear lord,
Pardon my gilt, have pity on my sorrow?
I cannot, no I dare not, heaven, and earth,
The destinies, and all the Immortal powers,
Have with the iron pen of Fate, writ down
Thy certain pain; did I not give thee charge,
To taste the pleasures of Immortal love,
But not to wade too deep in mystery?
Could not my heavenly company suffice
To cheer the soul? but thou with earthly eyes
Must see my face; and view my real beauty,
Again• my charge, thy love, and humane duty.
I d• entreat.
Arise, kneel not to me;
But thank thy sisters, they apparelled thee
In that distractfull shape; Psyche farewell,
Isle morn in heaven, to see thy pains in hell.
Poor miserable child; in stead of tears,
My heart weeps blood; I am confounded quite:
I have three daughters, thou of all the rest,
Had in my true conceptions greatest share,
For which, I called thee Psyche, that's the soul,
For as my soul I loved thee; now I abjure
All interest in thy birth; 〈◊〉from my Court?
My hand shall ne'er lay blessing on thy head,
Nor my tongue grace thee with a daughters name,
Thou art not mine, but the base birth of shame.
Oh whether shall a wretch convert her eyes,
When her own father shall her tears despise?
Attend Arcadians,
The Paoclamation of the Paphian Queen.
When Harms speaks, wee are bound to all attendance.
Oh yes, If any can bring Psyche unto Venus—
Psyche whom you are sent to seek, stands there.
Then here ends Mercuries Commission:
Psyche, in Venus name, I do• arrest thee,
For wrongs to her and Cupped.
I obey
Your high arrest, and with an humble suite,
Prostrate my self to •rias wrath;
Whore's angry Venus?
Frantic in this grove,
Mourning Atones death,—and here she coms.
Accursed bow, why did thou not defend him?
Hee shall not die, Atones still shall live;
Apollo, gentle Phoebus mount thy Chariot,
And in his co•d breast breath Celestial fire,
For all earths simples cannot cure his wound;
Or if hee must expire, command the Muses
To give my love Immortal memory:
Hast thou found Psyche? oh that in this rage,
I could but now forget her.
See where she stands,
With downe-cast eyes, and weak up-heaved h•nds.
Just of my height, my state, and proportion;
And were her pristine beauty lent her back,
Might in the rabbles judgement rival me:
Strumpet, profaner of our sacred rights,
How hast thou wronged me, and abused my son?
By aiming at my honour, and his life.
Dread Paphian Queen, for lovely Cupids sake,
And this rich burden in my wretched wombo,
Pity poor Psyche.
Hast thou plaid the strumpet,
And for thy sins sake must I pardon thee?
No, that alone hath made me merciless.
Help me dear Father, sisters, Mercury.
I dare not speak for thee.
Nor I.
Nor I.
Poor Psyche, borne unto adversity.
Bee not so bitter Madam, for his sake,
By whom you are made a grandam.
I prove • grandam to a strumpets brat;
Go Mercury, and from some Garner 〈◊〉
Five measures of five several sorts of grain;
Dispatch it Harms.
What will Venus doe?
Thou shalt know better when thou back return:
You are young Venus, and the Queen of Lo•,
That had th'ambition to be Cupids wife,
And marry with a god; Ho Boreus,
Since Mercury is slack in his return,
Wind her enticing locks about thy arm,
And tossing her loose carcass in the ayre,
Fling it into the bosom of some storm,
And grind her bones to powder in the fall.
Pity me Venus, Father plead for me.
It is well done Harms, hast thou brought the grain?
Madam I have.
Then minion, heere's your task,
Look on all these; see, thus I mingle them.
And what must miserable Psyche doe?
To several hey•es, with thine own hands divide
Each several seed ere the Sun kiss the West,
Or look for death; go, and when that is done,
Isle ride to Paphos and enlarge my son,
Whom yet I keep close P•sooner in my closet.
Psyche adieu, none can reverse thy doom.
Not I.
Nor wee.
I wish the earth my tomb.
Take patience Psyche, and be comforted.
Comfort, alas what comfort can she find,
Whose father and dear friends prove so unkind.
For Cupids sake, who for thy love, now 〈◊〉
A pair of golden shackles on his heals:
This Mercury will doe, fly hence to Phaphos,
And fetch him from his late imprisonment,
Then tell him of his mothers tyranny,
That done, wee two will teach thee without pain,
In several heaps how to divide this grain.
And where have I been think thou Apulejus?
Did thou not miss me?
Yes, I did not sleep, as thou did in thy judgement.
Then I perc•iv,
Thou know how I maintained our rural music,
Preferring it before Apollos harp.
Yes, and by that infer, thou art all earthy,
Nothing Celestial in thee.
Ell's one for that; now for your moral.
Will it thou stay it out?
No, it is too dull,
Unless thou'lt quicken me with some conceit,
Thy Psiches sadness hath made me so heavy,
That Morpheus steals upon me.
What would thou see?
Thy little Cupped I like pretty well,
And would see some-thing else what hee can doe,
More then belongs to Psyche.
Well, to keep the awake,
Isle show thee now Loves Contrarieties,
Which was more then my promise.
I marry, this was somewhat like indeed;
Heere's young and old; heere's fat and lean; the beggar and the King;
Love hath power over all.
But to your moral now; why comes your Psyche
With a sharpe Raysor, and a burning Lamp,
To murder Cupped; then hee wakes and chafes,
And flings thou• ont at windows, was it not so?
Isle tell thee; she charmed by her sisters tongues,
Thinks her fair love a serpent, and grown mad,
Would murder Cupped, tear even Jove from heaven;
Yet note the greatness of Celestial mercy;
One glimpse, one lamp, one spark, one divine thought
Plucks back her are•e, and more inflames her breast
With amorous raptures; but because poor soul,
She aimed to search forbidden mysteries,
Her eyes are blasted, Cupped loathes her sight,
Hee leaves her ugly, and his blessed bower
Is rent in pieces; For heaven seems to fall
When our poor souls turn diabolical.
For that twixt Pan and Phoebus, I know best,
For I was there an umpire; but resolve me;
Why left he Psyche when she lost his love,
Yet mourned when she was left of all her friends.
All bid the wretched soul run to despair,
When leprous sin deforms her, but even then,
When the gods hate her? when shoe's scorned of m•n?
Cupped hangs in the ayre; his divine eyes
Shed tears for her, comforts her miseries.
Yet hee forsook her too.
Till Psyche bee made fair and angel-white,
Shoe's not to stand in Cupids glorious fight.
Well, I am answered.
And for thy part Midas,
Laugh, sleep, or flout, nay snarl, and cavell too;
Which none of these here met I hope will doe.
WIthin there, ho Pirackmon, when you knave?
Take in •donis quiver, and his bow,
And hang them up in Venus armoury,
By Mars his gantlet, and Achilles sword:
Ha ha ha, I laugh until my sides be sore,
For joy that my Wives dandiprat is dead;
And my now Ciclops lay it on lustily;
There's half a hundred Thunder-boults bespoake,
Which argues that the World is full of sin;
Neptune hath broke his Mace, and Iunos Coach
Must bee new mended, and the hind-most wheels
Must have two spoakes 〈◊〉in; 〈◊〉 fore-horse
Must have two new shoes, 〈◊〉, and one remove;
Pans Sheepe-hooke must be mended shortly too,
Ply it of all hands, wee have much to doe.
Master, heere's one of Ceres husband-men
Would have a Plough-share, and a Sith new ground.
New ground, new haltered, hee shall stay his t•rne;
Wee shall deceive the gods and goddesses,
For a plow-jogging hind.
Heere's Mercury to have his 〈◊〉mended.
Hee shall stay.
Here 〈◊〉Ganimed,
To have his masters hunting-nagge new shod;
And Mars his lackey, with a broken gorget.
And heere's a clown for hob-nailes.
Heere's the devil and all;
What would they have me doe? I •oil and moil•
Worse then a mill-horse, scarce have slept a minute
This fortnight, and odd days; I have not time
To sit and eat, but Isle give over all,
And live upon my wife, as others doe;
They say she hath good takings, ere Isle endure it,
I will doe any thing; when I was made a Smith,
Would I had been a Bare-ward.
What shall wee doe first?
Why first go hang your selves:
I keep a dozen Iourney-men at least,
Besides my Ciclops and my Prentices,
Of all these evils had assaulted thee;
And till my mothers anger bee appeased,
I dare doe nothing; Yet for our first loves sake,
Make me acquainted with thy second task,
And as I may be sure, Isle further it.
Let my lips kiss this earth whereon you tread,
In low submission; for her late injunction,
Transcends all humane possibility:
This Viol I must fill at that spring-head,
From whence Cocitus flows, that fearful stream,
Which feeds the river Styx.
Be advised by me,
Not far from Tenerus, whose barren top
Is crowned with clouds of smoke, there lies a mead,
Ore-growne with Osiers, Briars, and Sicamors,
In this Ioves Eagle (on whose dusky wings,
Ganimed flew to heaven) obscures himself
From Jealous Iunoes wrath▪ enquire him out,
Tell him thy grief, and that thou came from me,
From this hard task hee will deliver thee.
Thanks glorious deity, upon my knees
Pressed down with this rich burden of thy love,
I beg that you will mediate twixt my errors,
And your sterne mothers wrath.
Well get the gone,
It is I will front her indignation.
This way he ran with shackles on his heals,
And said hee would to Vulcan: oh but see
Where hee stands cogging with him.
Now you run-away,
You disobedient, thou unhappy wagg,
Where be the golden-fetters I left you bound in?
True, for my good behaviour, but you 〈◊〉
My bands are cancelled, and your son 〈◊〉free.
Isle whip you for it with 〈◊◊〉in wine.
So you'll nettle 〈◊〉, and I must smart for it;
But when your own 〈◊〉burn, and you desire
With him, or him, to glut your appetite,
Then gentle Cupped, then, my pretty son,
My love, my dear, my darling, and what not,
Till you have had your will.
With his 〈◊〉〈◊〉,
Hee still prevents my anger: but for thee,
As crooked in thy manners as thy shape;
I thought, great fool, you durst not harbour him.
No more I did, 〈◊〉wife.
Sweet mother Queen, bus my black 〈◊〉for all that hee hath done.
Was love to you, and kindness to your son.
Speak for me Pan, as ere thou hop'st to have
Thy broken hoke well mended.
When, can tell?
I tell thee, I must first have besides that,
A dozen of Branding-jrons to mark my flock,
(The time draws near, sheepe-shearing is at hand)
Besides, two of my Satires falling out
About a Lamb, one of them burst his horn,
It must be tipped too; thou art well acquainted
With tipping horns.
Ha, horns, with horns, how's that?
Nay, ask your Wife, I cannot speak of horns,
But still you take the last word to your self,
For Venus makes, and Vulcan wears,
And Vulcan takes, and Venus bears.
Vulcan wear horns?
No sweet-heart, you mistake,
Pan is the forked god, with horns was borne,
And ever since, his tongue runs of the horn.
Speak shall I have my Sheepe-hooke, and those Irons?
Yes Pan, you shall,
But ye• those horns have •rusk deep to my heart.
Take h•ede they grow not upward to your head,
And tipping horns, your brow•s wear horns indeed:
But who comes here? Vulcan is this your wench?
T'hadst best look to him Venus.
Like your obedient servant, that lays down
Her life and labour at her Mistress feet,
So comes poor Psyche, held between the arms
Of fear and duty; fear• dishartning me,
Would pluck me back, but duty being more strong,
Bids me go foreword, bending my weak knee
Before the Shrine of sacred Majesty;
Accept my service, who to gain your grace,
Would yield my self to ashy death's embrace.
Is this that water of the Infernal lake?
This is that water, whose infectio•s torrent
Runs from Co•itus, into Flegiton,
Infernal Styx, and the black Ach•ron,
Dear goddess.
Art thou not a fawning counterfeit?
First I employed thee to divide my grain,
A task impossible for mortal hands,
This second as more hard, and yet it is done;
Thou work by sorcery; but no damned spell
Shall keep me from my wrath, thy soul from hell.
Venus, sweet mouse, nay prithee doe not chide,
Forgive, as I forgive thee.
Polt-foote, peace.
Sweet Mother, let your ire be mollified,
Since for her fault she ho endured this pain,
Banish all hate, and make her blessed again.
Again I charge thee not to speak for her:
Once more Isle try thee further, since thy heart
Is wedded to such hellish sorcery;
Hye to Proserpina, the black-brow'd Queen,
Isle send thee on my embassy to hell,
Tell her that sickness, with her ashy hand,
Hath swept away the beauty from my cheeks,
And I desire her send me some ofhers;
Fetch me a box of beauty then from hell,
That's thy last labour, urge not a reply,
Doe my command and live, refuse, and die.
For my sake, my best Mother, pity her.
For thee I hate her, and for her hate thee.
Nay gentle Venus, be more merciful,
For her great-bellies sake.
For that alone,
Isle hate you all, till she be fled and gone.
Then go I must, and going, ne'er return;
Oh Cupped, my inconstancy to thee,
Is cause of this my endless misery.
With-draw thee Psyche till the rest be gone,
Anon Isle speak with thee.
Venus, Vulcan, Cupped, and god Pan,
I summon you to appeareat Ceres plain,
To entertain the fair Proserpina,
For whom I now am sent, I must to hell
About Ioves embassy, Venus farewell.
Harms farewell, we'll me•e at Ceres plenteous Court:
Come Cupped, follow me.
Vulcan cannot go.
Yes, but it is best to keep behind a shrew.
Then put her in before, on Venus, go.
Psyche apro•ch, but doe not come too near,
That pride thou hast already bought too dear.
Oh pity Psyche, she is sent to hell.
It is the sound of hell wakes pities eye,
Else I had left thee to more misery;
My loves not done, though thou art quite undone,
Unless I arm thee against the darts of death,
Which hell aims at thee.
Let thy sacred breath—
Wound me no more with words, for they but grieve me▪
Now mark what on thy Journey must relieve thee:
First, high thee to the banks of Acheron,
Thou can not miss the way, it is broad, and worn
With trampling of Ten thousand passengers,
There shall thou find hells churlish Ferry-man,
His name is Charon, ther's to pay his hire,
Take heed thou loose it not, for doing so,
He will beat, and leave thee on the shore of woe;
Being ferried over, thou shalt spy hell gates,
Thou need not knock, they are open night and day,
Give Cerberus a sop, and pass away.
And what's that Cerberus.
Porter of hell,
Who must at thy return be b•bed again;
My great desire to help thee, hinders thee,
I should have told thee when in Charo•s bardge,
Thou art wafting ore the dreadful waves of S•ix,
An aged man, with a pale countenance,
His name's Oblivion, swimming in the flood,
Will heave his withered arms, and cry, help, help,
Save me from drowning; stretch not forth thy hand,
For if thou dost, thou ne'er return to shore,
Thou will it forget my love, see me no more.
Isle stop mine ears against Obe•rvious cry.
Being landed, thou shalt see old wrinkled hags,
Spinning black threads, whilst folly reels them up;
Hee will let fall his reel, and pray the• reach it,
But stoop not; they will likewise beckon thee
To sit down by them; but to spin a thread
Take heed, doing so, from me thou art banished.
Isle shun their baltes.
Being entered Plutoes Court,
They all will tice thee with a thousand trains,
Shun all, and neither sit, nor eat with them,
Only deliver what thou art enjoined,
Receive the box of beauty and be gon,
Which still keep shut, let not thy daring eye
Behold the wealth that in the box doth lie.
Dread Cupped—
Now fare-well, had thou but obeyed me,
Thy face had still bin lovely, and mine eye
Doted on thee with heavenly Jealousy.
And what dost thou think of Cupped now?
Doe not think I am so stupid,
But to think well of great god Cupped.
And what of Poets.
As Poets, as of Potentates, for since I plaid the last prize against Phoebus, in which I may say of my self, veni, vidi vici; I have been so troubled with a Poetical itch, that I can scratch you out Rimes, and Ballats, Songs, and Sonnetts, Oats, and Madrigals, till they bleed again.
Then thou art reconciled to Homer.
Homer was Honourable, Hesiod Herolcall, Virgil a Vice∣gerent, Naso Notorious, Martial a Provost, Iuvinall a Ioviall lad, and Persius a Paramount; what doc I think of Poetry? of which my self am a professed member.
And may be very well spared, and yet the body no∣ver the worse, but thou may see what becomes of railing a∣against Cupped, what a sweet Mistress hee hath put upon thee?
Who, my Amarillis.
Yes, the veriest dowdy in all Arcadia, even Mopsa compared with her, shows like a Madam; first she's old—
It was very well said, to say first, because she was before us, and for being old, is not age reverend? and therefore in mine eyes shoe's honourable.
And wrinkled.
Is it not the fashion; doe not our Gentiles wear their hair crisped, the Nymphs their gowns pleated, and the Fawns their stockings, for the more grace, wrinkled; doth not the earth show well when it is ploughed, and the land best when it lies in furrwes.
Besides, she hath a horrible long nose.
That's to defend her lips, but thou sinner to sense, and renegade to reason, dost thou blame length in any thing? dost thou not wish thy life long, and know thou not that Truth comes out at length; When all our joys are gone and past, doth not Long looked for, come at last; If any of our Nymphs be wronged, will she not say, it is Long of me, it is Long of thee, or Long of him; If they buy any commodity by the yard, doe they not wish it long; your Advocate wishes to have a law suite hang Long; And the poor client, bee his cloak never so short, and thread-bare, yet would be glad to wear it longer.
No married man, but doth his wife much wrong,
Though hee himself be short, to have nothing long.
The short and the long o•t is, shoe's an ugly cry∣ture, make of her what thou can.
Make of her what I can; oh that all, or any of you could li•e me, look upon her with the eyes of Poetry, I would then let you know what I have made of her.
Prithee let's hear't.
Then listen hither, oh you Imps of ignorance;
Oh tell me, have you ever seen,
Since you were borne unto this day,
Which is long since, a wit so greene,
And covered with a head so gray.
To praise her still, my Muses will is,
Although therein I have no cunning,
Yet is the nose of Amarillis
Like to a Cock, long, and still running.
Her eyes, though dim, to seem clear,
And they of Rheum can well dispose,
The one doth blink, the other blear,
In Pearle-drops striving with her nose.
Her breast are like two beds of bliss,
Or rather like two leane-cowes udders,
Which shows that she no Change ling is,
Because they say, such were her mothers.
Those few teeth left her in her head,
Now stand like hedge-stakes in her gumms,
Full of white Dandruff is her head,
She puts the Cobbler down for thumbs.
Her sides be long, her belly lank,
And of her legs what should I say,
But that she feels well in the stank,
And both her feet, themselves display.
All the Homers in Asia could never have come so near the business.
From head to foot, for her stature and years, pattorne h•r in all Arcadia; say she bee a foul beast in your eyes, yet she is my Hyren; and showing foul to others, and fair to me, I shall live the happier, and she the honester, but I have a remedy against all this in spite of Cupped.
What's that?
I hear Psyche his Mistress, is sent to hell for a box of beauty, it is but way-laying of her, and taking it from her, then Amarillis shall compare with any other she that dare.
This last I liked, and had it all been such,
Only a mere discourse twixt swains and clowns,
It then had pleased me; now some quaint device,
Some kick-shaw or other to keep me waking.
Then by the leave of these spectators here,
Isle suite me to thy low capacity;
Letting him know, this day Latonas Son
Enters the first house of his Zodiake,
And with his guilt beams welcomes in the Spring;
This day the Virgins of Sicilia,
Old Wives, young Children, Soldiers, Citizens,
Princes and Prelates, on Cissephus banks,
Are gathered in well-order'd multitudes,
Dancing in Choruses, singing mirth-full lays,
Such as Iamb, Megamiraes maid,
Sung, when she mourned her Daughters ravishment:
This day hath Ceres called a Sessions,
Where Proserpine must bee; but ere she leave
The black Imperial Throne of this low world,
Pische the Daughter to the Arcadian King,
Must doe a message to her deity.
Wee know the Intent of that great influence,
With all the purpose of the Paphian Queen,
She means proud Psyche never shall return,
And wee will keep her; Charon fetch her ore.
Shoe's come already.
Then conduct her in.
Hell's full enough of shrews; if she be fair,
I know shoe's cursed, pray let her tarry there,
A cursed queens tongue, the very fiends still fear.
Fetch her I say, Venus shall be revenged.
Go Charo•, waite upon him Cerberus.
If she perform the customs of our Court,
Being sent on message from supernal powers,
Wee can then with no justice keep her here.
True Minos, it is the law of hell and Fate;
Yet Cerberus and Charon, get you gone,
Tell Psyche that hells King, and Proserpine,
With Minos benched, Oecus and Rad•mant,
Upon their black Tribunals, sends for her;
You Furies with your •nuious eyes attend,
Least Psyche against our •ustomes shall offend.
Come Cerberus, come hags, fetch Psyche in.
Yes, and for all her stains, and leprosy,
Me-thinks I now could eat her.
Psyche is well instructed Rhadamant,
Her husband Cupped gave her certain rules,
For her uncertain journey.
Here she comes.
My sop, hast thou thy naulum Ferry-man?
I have.
Psyche stand forth, nay poor soul, tremble not.
How came this woman over Acheron?
Reached she not hand to help Oblivion?
No, yet the wretch made many a piteous cry,
Yet she looked on him with a scornful eye.
How did she pass the hags, that spun the 〈◊〉
Of Idle-folly, in the path of hell?
They all desired her help, but she denied
To set a finger unto follies thread.
She hath done well, why kneel'st thou on the ground?
I kneel to Proserpine, for I am sent
By sacred Venus for a box of beauty.
At her return from hell it should be done.
Here Harms, take my Queen Proserpina,
Return her when the sister of the Sun
Hath six times compassed her silver sphere;
Commend me to my mother, great Ioves wife,
My sister Pallas, and to all the gods,
So fare-well Plutoes joy, all hell shall morn
With hiddious cries, till my fair love return.
Many a long look have my watchful eyes
Sent out to meet with Psyche, here she comes, 
And in her hand the box, Cupped stand close,
And over-heare the sum of her discourse.
This is she, I know her by her martyred face; Venus did well to send her for beauty, for poor soul, she hath need on it, I have dogged her, to see if I could find her at any advantage, to steal away her box; I have already got love from Cupped; I have got Poetry from Apollo, and if I could now get beauty from Psyche, Phaon the fair Ferry-man, was never so famous in Sicillia, as I Coridon shall be in Arcadia.
You traitorous thoughts, no more assault me thus,
My lovely Cupped charged me not to see
What Proserpine sent Venus in this box,
The like command did hells Queen lay on me,
Oh heaven, yet I shall die except I do it.
I Psyche, what still in your longing 〈◊〉?
That's it, nay I shall know it, if I 〈◊〉't again.
It's beauty Psyche, and 〈◊〉,
And thou art ugly, this will make thee shine,
And change this ea•thy form to shape divine;
Open it boldly, but I shall offend,
Why say I doe, it is but the breach of 〈◊〉,
And who'le not venture to get •evenly beauty,
Rich beauty, ever fresh, never decaying,
Which lies entombed in this heavenly shrine;
Nor in this bold attempt think •ee profane,
Striving thus spotted, to be free from 〈◊〉.
Nay I thought I should take you •apping,
And thou shalt go with me; for it is my duty, 
My Mistress being a blowse, to find her bea•tie.
To make thee lovely in thy Mistress eyes,
Make use of that, and boast of thy rich prize.
But foolish girl; alas why blame I th•e,
When all thy Sex is guilty of like pride,
And ever was? but whore's this beau•y now?
Turned into slumbers, and like watery pearls
Of honey-tasting dew hangs on 〈◊〉lids:
She wakes again; I have swept off the slumber
That hung so heavy on 〈◊◊〉〈◊〉,
Which 〈◊◊〉in, the 〈◊〉of all true 〈◊〉▪
Where am I now? Dread Cupped 〈◊〉me.
Come rise, and wipe away these fruitless tears;
Like thee, Id rather see thee hanged; dost thou think wee mean to wear Visors.
This it is to be 〈◊〉mortals, and have no addition of learning or travel; their dull eyes cannot judge of Celestial beauty: but whore's my 〈◊〉, and the god of marriage Hymen?
They both stay for thee in Venus Temple; but I hope thou wilt not be married to her in this pickle?
Will I not, yes, and dazzle all their eyes that shall look on me, especially my 〈◊〉, and she must needs have some part of my theft, all is not gone, something for her is left:
Lead on, lead on, this day you shall be my men,
And thus in pomp will wee go meet with Hymen:
And Dick•n, if anon thou wilt be sinful
To drink with me, I will give thee thy skin-full:
If any here, I speak it out of duty,
〈◊〉Complexion from my box of beauty,
This might I am busy, let him come to morrow,
They shall have store, if they will buy, or borrow.
By this I know, that Minks is come from hell,
And here she harbours; but Arcadian King▪
Deliver 〈◊〉, or by our dreadful frown,
Isle spoil• thy Courts, and cast thy Temples down;
〈◊〉her longer, not the gods 〈◊〉
Shall guard her from the death, my rage intends.
Dread Qu•no of 〈◊〉, she remains not here,
Nor think that I abet her, though my child,
Against your wrath, or power; Nay, did she •journe
In any place where I have free command,
Id cause her to be fetched thence instantly,
And as your slave and vassal tender her.
If she be safe return• from 〈◊〉,
She must be pardoned, and become divine,
But to conceal her being, and keep back
Her present sight, aims at her future wrack.
If ever in fair Venus I had power,
Or graced her summer 〈◊〉with my 〈◊〉,
At length with a commiserating eye,
Look on distressed Psyche.
Doe good wife,
Use her with all the favour thou can think,
Conive at her, as I at thy faults wink.
And Pan protests by 〈◊〉 〈◊〉browne 〈◊〉
The fairest Nymph, since 〈◊〉, 〈◊◊〉〈◊〉
Be friends with her, my 〈◊〉 all shall play,
And I with them make this a holy-day.
To all these gods, to Venus, and this 〈◊〉,
Health from the Son of Saturn, and Q•even Ceres.
Welcome, what would the messenger of •ova
To us, or these?
Pan, Vulcan, and your self,
With Phoebus, and the great Arcadian King,
Must bee this day at Ceres sowing-feast,
Unto which Annual meeting, see fair Proserpine
Is come from Plutoes Court.
Welcome fair Queen.
Welcome fair sister, from the vaults below,
Wee two are Twins, of 〈◊〉Latona borne,
And were together 〈◊〉in 〈◊〉 Isle;
You guide the night, as I direct the day,
Darkness and light, betwixt us wee divide,
Nor square, but in our mutual Orbs agree,
Unless you move just twixt the earth and me,
For then you eclispe my lustre.
Cousin Queen,
I am even moone-sicke, and half merry mad,
For joy of thy arrival.
By our Crests
Wee should bee cousins, for wee both are horned,
And 〈◊〉 of our ki• too; but sue•e goddess,
Now I bethink me of the Arcadian Nymphs,
I am bound to thee for many a pretty sight,
And much good sport I have had by thy moone-light.
To give you meeting, I am come from hell.
Saw you not Psyche there?
Lov•s Queen I did,
Hither she comes with Cupped, hand in hand,
Her leprosy, through labour, is made clear,
And beautions in your eye, she'll now appear,
Celaestiall Sea-borne Queen, I here present you
My Psyche, who hath satisfied your will:
Deliver her, Fair Love, from Proserpine,
The box of beauty, endless, and divine.
Gvided by Love, Lord of my life and hope,
I come undaunted to your gracious sight,
Hoping my sufferance hath out-worne his wrath?
She hath escaped hell, and now the task is done,
And I still crossed by a disobedient Son;
But tell me how this Leoper came thus fair?
At my entreat it was,
Amongst all the gods I claimed her for my Wife,
Who taking a joint pity of her wrongs,
Gave their consent, and then Great •ova himself
Called for a cup of Immortality,
Drank part to her, and Psyche qua•t't the rest,
At which, deformity forsook her quite,
And she made fair, and then proclaimed my bride,
Jove vowing, she• should now be 〈◊〉.
I see I cannot conquer Destiny,
By Fate she first was thine, I give her thee.
Now Psyche, you must see your sisters judged,
Unstaid Petrea, and unkind 〈◊〉,
Admetus, you must be their sentencer.
Husband, your knees.
My dear Lord plead for us.
Will• neither; yet Father.
Wretches peace,
Psyche by you was torn from her del•light,
A•d rudely rent from Cupids Paradise;
It was you that robbed her of a Fathers love;
By your allurements she was sent to hell,
And had not divine aid 〈◊〉her thence,
Poor soul for ever sh ▪had •in there detained,
For which, to endless durance I adjudge you;
For merits silver gates are always barred
To hearts Impenitent, and wilful hard.
Have pity on them Father, gentle husband,
Remember not their fraw'd in tempting me:
You gods, and goddesses, with Psyche join
To beg their pardons, all you Arcadians kneel;
For had they not my happiness envied,
My Love and Patience had not so bin tried.
Wee all will mediate for them.
Then Daughters, give your sis•er Psyche thanks,
And to her virtues be a 〈◊〉still,
As having made atonement for your ill.
We'll hence-forth be her hand-maids.
They shall attend her unto Plenties bower,
Where Ceres, Queen of all Fertility,
Invites us with the other gods to feast.
There Jove and 〈◊〉 shall lead Cupids Queen,
To the bright Palace of Eternity;
Bacchus shall give us Wine, and Ganimed
Shall crown our full cupps with the grapes pure blood;
Ceres shall yield us all earth's delicates,
The Graces shall bring Balm▪ the Muses sing
In Cupids honour, Loves Immortal King.
Vulcan will dance, and sing, and skip, and 〈◊〉,
And with his smokey jeasts make 〈◊〉 laugh.
Such as love me, make me their president,
See, thus I take fair Psyche by the hand,
Mercury doe you the like to Proserpine,
My Mother Venus cannot want a mate;
In honour of our marriage, match your selves,
And with a measure grace our nuptials,
But such as doe not love to bee in motion,
view as 〈◊〉, how our joy appears,
Dancing to the sweet music •e of the spheres.
Now circle Psyche in a fayrie ring,
Whilst I and Venus grace her with this Crown;
This done, to feast with C•res, and the gods
And next unto the Palace of the Sun,
To end those sacred writes wee have begun.
Is this your moral? This your Poetry?
What hast thou done, what spoke, what represented,
Which I with all these cannot justly tax?
Yes, all like thee the obtuse and stupid minds,
But there's an understanding that hath depth
Beyond thy shallow non-sence; there's a wit,
A brain which thou want, I to that submit.
And ever in that thou fool'st thy self.
Nay then,
I by the favour of these Gentlemen,
Will arbitrate this strife; one seeks to advance
His Art, the other stands for igno•ance;
Both hope, and both shall have their merits full,
Heere's mead for either, both the apt, and dull,
Pleased or displeased, this censure I allow;
Keep thou the Asses ears▪ the Laurel thou:
If you, judicious, this my doom commend,
Psyche by you shall doubly Crowned ascend;
And then this Legacy I leave behind,
Where ere you love, prove of one faith, one mind.
The Spring comes on, and Cupped doth divine,
Each shall enjoy his best loved Valentine,
Which when you have, may you like us agree,
And at your best retirements think on me.

COrrantoes sailing, and no foot post l•…te
Possessing us with New; of foreign State,
No accidents abroad worthy Relation
Arriving here, we are forced from our own Nation
To ground the Scene that's now in agitation.
The Project unto many here well known;
Those Witches the fat Jailer brought to Town,
An Argument so thin, persons so low
Can neither yield much matter, nor great show.
Expect no more than can from such be raised,
So may the Scene pass pardon•…d, though•… not praised.
WAs ever sport of expectation,
Thus crossed in th▪ height.
Tush these are accidents, all game is (subject to.
So you may call them
Chances, or cross•…es, or what else you please,
But for my part, Isle hold them prodigies,
As things transcending Nature.
O you speak this,
Because a Hare hath crossed you.
A Hare? a Witch, or rather a Devil I think▪
For tell me Gentlemen, was it possible
In such a fair course, and no covert near,
We in pursuit, and she in constant view,
Our eyes not wandering but all bent that way,
The Dogs in chase, she ready to be ceased,
And at the instant, when I durst have laid
My life to gage, my Dog had pinched her, then
To vanish into nothing!
Somewhat strange, but not as you enforce it,
Make it plain
That I am in an error, sure I am
That I about me have no borrowed eyes.
They are mine own, and Matches.
She might find some Muse as •…hen not visible to us,
And escape that way.
Perhaps some Fox had earthed there,
And though it be not common, for I seldom
Have known or heard the like, there squat her self,
And so her scope appear but Natural,
Which you proclaim a Wonder.
Well well Gentlemen, be y•…u of your own faith, but (what I see
And is to me apparent, being in sense,
My wits about me, no way tossed nor troubled,
•…o that will I give credit.
Come, come, all men
Were never of one mind, nor I of yours.
To leave this argument, are you resolved
Where we shall dine to day?
Yes where we purposed.
That was with Master Generous.
True, the same.
And where a loving welcome is presumed,
Whose liberal Table's never unprepared,
Nor he of guests unfurnished, of his means,
There's none can bear it with a braver port,
And keep his state unshaken, one who sells not
Nor covets he to purchase, holds his own
Without oppressing others, always pressed
To indeere to him any known Gentleman
In whom he finds good parts.
A Character not common in this age.
I cannot wind him up
Unto the least part of his noble worth.
Tic far above my strength.
See who comes yonder,
A fourth, to make us a full Mess of guests
At Master Generous Table.
Tush let him pass,
He is not worth our luring, a mere Coxcomb,
It is a way to call our 〈◊〉 its in question,
To have him seen amongst us.
He hath spied us, there is no way to evade him.
That's my grief; a most notorious liar, out upō him.
Let's set the best face on it.
What Gentlemen? all mine old acquaintance?
A whole triplicity of friends together? nay then
It is three to one we shall not soon part Company.
Swcet Mr. Whetstone.
Dainty Mr. Whetstone.
D•…licit Master Whetstone.
You say right, Mr. Whetstone I have bin, Mr. Whet∣stone I am, and Mr. Whetstone I shall be, and those that know me, know withal that I have not my name for nothing, I am hee whom all the brave Blades of the Country use to whet their wits upon; sweet Mr. Shakton, dainty Mr. Bantham, and dainty Mr. Arthur, and how, and how, what all lustick, all froligozone? I know, you are going to my Uncles to dinner, and •…o am I too, What shall we all make one rendezvous there,
You need not doubt of your welcome.
No doubt at all kind Mr. Whetstone; but we have not seen you of late, you are grown a great stranger amongst us, I desire sometimes to give you a visit; I pray where do you lye?
Where doe I lye? why sometimes in one place, and then again in another, I love to shift lodgings; but most con∣stantly, wheresoever I dine or sup, there doe I lye?
I never heard that word proceed from him
I durst call truth till now.
But where so ever I lye it is no matter for that,
I pray you say, and say truth, are •…ot you three now
Going to dinner to my Uncles?
I think you are a Witch Master Whetstone.
•…ow? A Witch Gentlemen? I hope you doe not mean to abuse me, though at this time (if report be true there are too many of them here in our Country) but I am sure I look like no such ugly Creature.
It seems then you are of opinion that there are Wit∣ches, for mine own part, I can hardly be induced to think there 〈◊〉 any such kind of people.
No such kind of people! I pray you tell me Gentle∣men, did never any one of you know my Mother?
Why was your Mother a Witch?
I doe not say as Witches go now a days, for they for the most part are ugly old Belda•…s, but she was a lusty young Lass, and by her own report, by her beauty and fair looks bewitched my Father.
It seems then your Mother was rather a young wan∣ton wench, than an old withered witch.
You say right, and know withal I come of two an∣cient Families, for as I am a Whetstone by the Mother-side, so I am a By-blow by the Fathers.
It appears then by your discourse, that you came in at the window.
I would have you think I scorn like my Granams
Cat to leap over the Hatch.
He hath confessed himself to be a Bastard.
And I believe it as a notorious truth.
Howsoever I was begot, here you see I am,
And if my Parents went to it without fear or wit,
What can I help it.
Very probable, for as he was got without fear,
So it is apparent he was borne without wit.
Gentlemen, it seems you have some private business amongst your selves, which I am not willing to interrupt, I know not how the day goes with you, but for mine own part, my stomach is now much upon 12. You know what hour my Uncle keeeps, and I love ever to bee set before the first grace, I am going before, speak, shall I acquaint him with your coming after?
We mean this day to see what fare he keeps.
And you know it is his custom to fare well,
And in that respect I think I may be his kinsman,
And so farewell Gentlemen, Isle be your fore-runner,
To give him notice of your visit.
And so entire us to you.
Sweet Mr. Whetstone.
Kind Mr. Bible•…w.
I see you are perfect both in my name &amp; surname; I have 〈◊〉 ever bound unto you, for which I will at this time be your
Noverint, and give him notice that you Universe will bee with him per praesentes, and that I take to be presently.
Farewell As in present.
It seems hoe's piece of a Scholar.
What because he hath read a little Scriveners Latin, hee n•…ver proceeded farther in his Accidence than to Mentiri non est meum; and that was such a hard Lesson to learn, that he stuck at meant•…ri; and cu'd never reach to non est meum: since, a mere Ignaro, and not worth acknowledgement.
Are these then the best parts he can boast of?
As you see him now, so shall you find him ever: all in one strain, there is one only thing which I wonder he left our.
And what might that be:
Of the same affinity with the rest.
At every second word, he his commonly boasting
either of his Aunt or his Uncle.
You name him in good time, see where he comes.
Gentlemen, Welcome, it is a word I use,
From me expect no further complement:
Nor do I name it often at one meeting,
Once spoke (to those that understand me best,
And know I always purpose as I speak)
Hath ever yet sufficed: so jet it you;
Nor doe I love that common phrase of guests,
As we make bold, or we are troublesome,
Wee take you unprovided, and the like;
I know you understanding Gentlemen,
And knowing me, cannot persuade your selves
With me you shall be troublesome or bold,
But still provided for my worthy friends,
Amongst whom you are lifted.
Noble sir, you generously instruct us, and to expr•…sse
We can be your apt scholars: in a word
Wee come to dine with you.
And Gentlemen, such plainness doth best please me, I had notice
Of so much by my kinsman, and to show
How lovingly I took it, instantly
Rose from my chair to meet you at the gate.
And be my self your usher; nor shall you find
Being set to meat, that i'll excuse your fare,
Or say, I am sorry it falls out so poor;
And had I known your coming weed have had
Such things and such, nor blame my Cooke, to say
This dish or that hath not bin sauc'st with care:
Words, fitting best a common Hostess mouth,
When ther's perhaps some just cause of dislike
But not the table of a Gentleman;
Nor is it my wives custom; in a word, take what you find, &amp; so
Sir without flattery
You may be called the sole surviving son
Of long since banished Hospitality.
In that you please me not: But Gentlemen
I hope to be beholden unto you all,
Which if I prove, Isle be a grateful debtor.
Wherein good sir.
I ever studied plainene•…e, and truth withal.
I pray express your self.
In few I shall. I know this youth to whom my wife is Aunt
Is (as you needs must find him) weak and shallow:
Dull, as his name, and what for kindred sake
We note not, or at least, are loath to see,
Is unto such well-knowing Gentlemen
Most grossly visible: If for my sake
You will but seem to wink at these his wants,
At least at table before us his friends,
I shall receive it as a curtsy
No•… soon to be forgot.
Presume it sir.
Now when you please pray Enter Gentlemen.
Would these my friends prepare the way before,
To be resolved of one thing before dinner
Would something add unto mine appetite,
Shall I entreat you so much.
O sir you may command us.
In the mean time
Prepare your stomachs with a bowl of Sack.
My Cellar can afford it; now Mr. Arthur
Pray freely speak your thoughts.
I come not sir
To press a promise from you, tak't not so,
Rather to prompt your memory in a motion
Made to you not long since.
Wast not about
A Manor, the best part of your estate,
Mortgaged to one slips no advantages
Which you would have redeemed.
True sir the same.
And as I •…think, I promised at that time
To become bound with you, or if the usurer
(A base, yet the best title I can give him)
Perhaps should question that security,
To have the money ready. Wast not so?
It was to that purpose wee discoursed.
Provided, to have the Writings in my custody.
Else how should I secure mine own es•…e.
To deny that I shoe•…d appear •…of the World
Stupid, and of no brain.
Your monie's ready,
And I remain a man obliged to you.
Beyond all utterance.
Make then your word good
By speaking it no further, only 〈◊〉▪
It seems your Uncle you trusted in so far
Hath failed your expectation.
Sir he hath, not that he is unwilling or unable.
B•…t at 〈◊〉 time •…fit to be so•…cited;
For to the Co•…ries wonder and my sor•…ow,
•…ee is much to be pitied.
Why I entreat you.
Because hoe's late become the sole discourse
Of all the country; for of a man respected
For his discretion and known gravity,
As master of a governed Family,
The house (as if the ridge were fixed below,
And groundfils lifted up to make the roof)
All now turned topsy turvy,
Strange, but how?
In such a retrograde &amp; preposterous way
As seldom hath hen heard of. I think never.
Can you discourse the manner?
The good man, in all obedience kneels unto his son,
Hee with an austere brow commands his father.
The wife presumes not in the daughters sight
Without a prepared curtsy. The girl, she
Expects it as a duty; chides her mother
Who quakes and trembles at each word she speaks,
And what's as strange, the Maid she domineers
O'er her young mistress, who is awed by her.
The son to whom the Father creeps and bends,
Stands in as much fear of the groom his man.
All in such rare disorder, that in some
As it breeds pity, and in others wonder;
So in the most part laughter▪
How think you might this come.
It is thought by Witchcraft.
They that think so dream,
For my belief is, no such thing can be,
A madness you may call it: Dinner stays;
That done, the best part of the afternoon
We'll spend about your business.
Nay but understand me neighbor Doughty.
Good master Seely I do understand you, and over and over understand you so much, that I could e'ene blush at your fondness; and had I a son to serve me so, I would con∣ur a devil out of him.
Alas he is my child.
No, you are his child to live in fear of him, indeed they say old men become children again, but before I would become my childes child, and make my foot my head, I would stand upon my head, and kick my heels at the sides.
You do not know what an only son is, O see, he comes now if you can appease his anger toward me, you shall doe an act of timely charity.
It is an office that I am but weakly versed in,
To plead to a son in the fathers behalf,
Bless me what looks the devilish young Rascal
Frights the poor man withal!
I wonder at your confidence, and how you dare ap∣pear before me.
A brave beginning.
O son be patient.
It is right reverend council, I thank you for it, I shall study patience shall I, while you practice ways to beggar me, shall I?
Very handsome.
If ever I trangresse in the like again—
I have taken your word too often sir and neither can nor will forbear you longer.
What not your Father Mr. Gregory?
Whats that to you sir?
Pray tell me then sir, how many years has hee to serve you.
What do you bring your spokesman now, your advocate,
What fee goes out of my estate now, for his Oratory?
Come I must tell you, you forget your self,
And in this foul unnatural strife wherein
You trample on your father. You are fallen
Below humanity. You're so beneath
The title of a son, you cannot claim
To be a man, and let me tell you were you mine
Thou should not eat but on thy knees before me.
O this is not the way.
This is to raise Impatience into fury.
I do not seek his quiet for my ease,
I can bear all his chidings and his threats,
And take them well, very exceeding well,
And find they do me good on my own part,
Indeed they do reclaim me from those errors
That might impeach his fortunes, but I fear
Thunquiet strife within him hurts himself,
And wastes or weakens Nature, by the breach
Of moderate sleep and diet; and I can
No less than grieve to find my weaknesses
To be the cause of his affliction,
And see the danger of his health and being.
Alas poor man? Can you stand open eyed
Or dry eyed either at this now in a Father?
Why, if it grieve you, you may look of ont,
I have seen more than this twice twenty times,
And have as often •…in deceived by his dissimulations
I can see nothing mended.
He is a happy •…re that has brought up his son to this.
All shall be mended son content your self,
But this time forget but this last fault.
Yes, for a new one to morrow.
Pray Mr. Gregory forget it, you see how
Submissive your poor penitent is, forget it,
Forget it, put it out o'your head, knock it
Out of your brains. I protest, if my Father,
Nay if my fathers dog should have said
As much to me, I should have embraced him.
What was the trespass? It c'ud not be so heinous.
Well Sir, you now shall be a Judge for all your jeering.
Was it a fatherly part think you having a son
To offer to enter in bonds for his nephew, so to endanger
My estate to redeem his mortgage.
But I did it not son?
I know it very well, but your dotage had done it,
If my careh•…d not prevented it.
Is that the business: why if he had done it, had hee not
bin sufficiently secured in having the mortgage made over to himself.
He does nothing but practice ways to undo himself, and me: a very spendthrift, a prodigal sire, hee was at the Ale but tother day, and spent a foure-penny club.
It is gone and past son.
Can you hold your peace sir? And not long ag•… at the
Wine he spent his tester, and two pence to the piper,
That was brave was it not?
Truly we were civilly merry. But I have left it.
Your civility have you not? For no longer ago than last holiday evening he gamed away eight double ringed tokens on a rubbers at bowls with the Curate, and some of his idle companions.
Fie Mr. Gregory Seely is this seemly in a son.
You'll have a rod for the child your father shortly I fear.
Alas did hee make it cry? Give me a stroke and Isle beat him,
Bless me, they make me almost as mad as themselves.
'Tw•…re good you would meddle with your own mat∣ters •…ir.
Son, son.
Sir, Sir, as I am not beholden to you for house or Land, for it has stood in the name of my ancestry the Seelyes above two hundred years, so will I look you leave all as you found it.
What is the matter con yeow tell?
O Lawrence, welcome, Thou wilt make al well I am sure.
Yie whick way con yeow tell, but what the foul evil done ye, here is sick an a din.
Art thou his man fellow ha? that talk thus to him?
Yie sir, and what ma' yoew o'that, he maintains me to rule him, and i'll deu't, or ma'the heart weary of the weambe on him.
This is quite upside down, the son controls the fa∣there, and the man overcrowes his masters coxscombe, sure they are all bewitched.
It was but so, truly Lawrence; the peevish old man vex't me, for which I did my duty, in telling him his own, and
Doughty here maintains him against me.
I forbodden yeow to meddle with the old carl, and let me alone with him, yet yeow still be at him, hee served yeow but weell to bast ye for it, ant he were stronk enough, but an I few foul with ye an I swaddle ye not savorly may my girts burst.
Prithee good Lawrence be gentle and do not fright thy Master so.
Yie, at your command anon.
Enough good Lawrence, you have said enough.
How trow yeou that? A fine World when a man can∣not be whyet at home for busy brained neighpors.
I know not what to say to any thing here,
This cannot be but witchcraft.
I cannot endure it nor I will not endure it.
Hey day! the daughter upon the mother too.
One of us two, choose you which, must leave the house, wee are not to live together I see that, but I will know, if there be Law in Lancashire for it, which is fit first to depart the house or the World, the mother or the daughter.
Daughter I say.
Do you say the daughter, for that word I say the mother, unless you can prove me the eldest, as my discretion almost war∣rant it, I say the mother shall out of the house or take such cour∣ses in it as shall sort with such a house and such a daughter.
Daughter I say, I will take any course so thou wilt leave thy piston; indeed it hurts thee child, I'll sing and be merry, wear as fine clothes, and as delicate dressings as thou wilt have me, so thou wilt pacify thy self, and be at peace with me.
O will yo•… so, in so doing I may chance to look upon you. Is this a fit habit for a handsome young Gentlewo∣mans mother, as I hope to be a Lady, you look like one of the Scottish wayward sisters, O my hart has got the hickup, and all
look 〈◊〉 greene about 〈◊〉; a merry song now mother, and thou shalt be my white girl.
Ha, ha, ha! she's overcome with joy at my conversion.
She is most evidently bewitched.
There was a deft Lad and a Lass fell in love,
with a fa la la, fa la la, Langtidowne dilly;
With kissing and toying this Ma•…den did prove,
with a fa la la, fa la la, Langtidowne dilly;
So wide •…' th wast, and her Belly so high,
That unto her mother the Maiden did cry,
O Langtidowne dilly, O Langtidowne dilly,
fa la la Langtidowne, Lang•…idowne dilly.
Thus wooden yeou done and I were dead, but while I live yoeu fadge not on it, is this awe the work yeou con •…in?
Now comes the Maid to set her Mis•…sses to work.
Nay p•…i'thee sweet Parnell, I was but chiding the old wife for her unhandsomnes•…e, and would have been at my work presently, she tells me now she will wear fine things, and I shall dress her head as I list.
Here's a house well governed?
Dress me no dressings, lessen I dress yeou beth, and learn a new lesson with a wainon right now, han I bin a ser∣vant here this half dozen o'yeares, and con I fee yeou idler then my self!
Nay pritheesweet Parnell content, &amp; hark thee—
I have known this, and till very lately, as well go∣vern'd a Family as the Country yields, and now what a nest of several humours it is grown, and all devilish ones, sure all the VVitches in the Country, have their hands in this home-spun medley; and there be no few it is thought.
Yie, yie, ye shall ye shall, another time, but not naw I thonke yeou, yeou shall as soon peace and paddle in it, as •…lap me in the mouth with an old Petticoat, or a new pair 〈◊〉
shoine, to be whyet, I cannot be whyet, no•… I wonnot be why∣et, to see sicky doings I.
Hold thy prattle Parnell, aw's comed about as wean a had it, wotst thou what Parnell? wotst thou what? o dear, wo•…st thou what?
VVhat's the fond waxen wailed trow I.
We han bin in love these three years, and ever wee had not enough, now is it comed about that our love shall be at an end for ever, and a day, for wee mun wed may honey, we mun wed.
What the Deowl ails the lymmer lowne, bin thy brains broke louse trow I.
Sick a wooden was there never in Loncoshire as when couple at on Monday newsed.
Awa avow, sayn yeou this sickerly, or done you but jam me?
I jam thee not nor flame thee not, '•…is all as true as book, here's both our Masters have consented and concloyded, and our Mistresses mun yield toyed, to put awe house and land and awe they have into our hands.
Awa, avow.
And we mun marry and be master and dame of awe.
Awa, avow.
And theyn be our Sijourners, because they are weary of the world, to live in frendiblenesse, and see what will come on it.
Awa, avow, agony.
Nay it is true Parnell, here's both our hands on it, and give you joy.
And ours too, and twill be fine Ifackins.
Whew, whew, whew, whew!
Here's a mad business towards.
I will bespeak the Guests.
And I the meat:
I'll dress the dinner, though I drip my sweat.
My care shall sumptuous parrelments provide.
And my best art shall trickly trim the Bride.
VVhaw, whew, whew, whew.
Isle get choice music for the merriment.
And I will waite with wonder the event.
VVhaw, whew, whew, whew.
HOe! well met, well met.
Meg. What new devise, what dainty strain
More for our mirth now then our gain,
Shall we in practice put.
Nay dame,
Before we play another game.
We must a little laugh and thank
Our feat familiars for the prank
They played us last.
Or they will miss
Vs in our next plot, if for this
They find not their reward.
It is right.
Therefore sing Mewed, and call each spright.
Come away, and take thy duggy,
Come my Mamilion like a Puggy,
And come my puckling take thy teat,
Your travels have deserved your meat.
Now upon the Churls ground
On which we're met, lets dance a round;
That Cocle, Darnel, Poppy wild,
May choke his grain, and fill the field.
Now spirits fly about the task,
That we projected in our Mask.
Now let us laugh to think upon
The feat which we have so lately done,
In the distraction we have set
In Seelyes house; which shall beget
Wonder and sorrow amongst our foe•…s,
While•…t we make laughter of their woes.
Ha, ha, ha!
I can but laugh now to foresee,
The fruits of their perplexity.
Of •…eely's family?
I, I, I, the Father to the Son doth cry,
The Son rebukes the Father old;
The Daughter at the mother Scold,
The wife the husband check and chide,
But that's no wonder, through the wide
World it is common.
But to be short,
The w•…dding must bring on the sport
Betwixt the hare-brayn'd man and maid,
Master and dame that over-sway'd.
Ha, ha, ha!
Enough, enough,
Our sides are charmed, or else this stuff
Would laughter-cracke them; let's away
About the Jig. we dance to day,
To spoil the Hunters sport.
I that, be now the subject of our chat.
Then list ye well, the Hunters are
This day by vow to kill a Hare,
Or else the sport they will forswear;
And hang their Dogs up.
Stay, but where
Must the long threatened hare be found?
They'll search in yonder Meadow ground.
There will Ibe, and like a wily What,
Until they put me up; isle squat.
I and my puckling will a brace
Of Greyhounds be, fit for the race;
And linger where we may be tan
Up for the course in the by-lane;
Then will we lead th•…ir Dogs a course,
And every man and every horse;
Until they break their necks, and say—
The Devil on Dun is rid this way. Ha. ha, ha, ha.
All the doubt can be but this,
That if by chance of me they miss,
And start another Hare.
Then we'll not run
But find some way how to be gone.
I shall know thee Peg, by thy grissel'd gut,
And I you Gilian by your gaunt thin gut.
But where will Mewed bestow her self today?
Of the Steeple top; Isle sit &amp; see you play.
At meeting, and at parting Gentlemen,
I only make use of that general word,
So frequent at all feasts, and that but once; you're welcome.
You are so, all of you, and I entreat you
Take notice of that special business,
Betwixt this Gentleman my friend, and I.
About the Mortgage, to which writings drawn,
Your hands are witness.
We acknowledge it.
My hand is there too, for a man cannot set to his Mark, but it may be called his hand; I am a Gentleman both ways, and it hath been held that it is the part of a Gentleman, to write a scurvy hand.
You write Sir like your self.
Pray take no notice of his ignorance,
You know what I foretold you.
It is confessed, but for that word by you so seldom spoke
By us so freely on your part performed,
We hold us much engaged.
I pray, no complement,
It is a thing I doe not use my self,
Nor doe I love 't in others.
For my part, could I at once dissolve my self to words
And after turn them into matter; such
And of that strength, as to attract the attention
Of all the curious, and most itching ears
Of this our Critic age; it could not make
A theme amounting to your noble worth:
You seem to me to super-arrogate,
Supplying the defects of all your kindred
To innob le your own name: I now have done Sir.
Hey day, this Gentleman speaks likes a Country
Parson that had took his text out of Ovids Metamorphosis.
Sir, you Hyperbolize;
And I cooed chide you for it, but whilst you connive
At this my Kinsman, I shall wink at you;
'Twil prove an equal match.
Your name proclaims
To be such as it speaks, you, Generous.
Still in that strain!
Sir, sir, whilst you persevere to be good
I must contiuue grateful.
Gentlemen, the gr•…attest part of this day you see is spent
In reading deeds, conveyances, and bonds,
With sealing and subscribing; will you now
Take part of a bad Supper.
We are like travellers
And where such bait, they doe not use to Inn.
Our love and service to you.
The first I accept,
The Last I entertain not, farewell Gentlemen.
VVe'l try if we can find in our way home
When Hares come from their coverts, to reliffe,
A course or too.
Say you so Gentlemen, nay then I am for your comp∣ny still, it is said Hares are like Hermophrodites, one while Male, and another Female, and that which begets this year, brings young ones the next; which some think to be the reason that witches take their shapes so oft: Nay if I lye Pliny lies too, but come, now I have light upon you, I cannot so lightly leave you farewell Uncle.
Cozen I wish you would consort your self,
With such men ever, and make them your President,
For a more Gentile carriage.
Good Master Generous—
Robin.
Sir.
Go call your Mistress hither.
My Mistress Sir, I doe call her Mistress, as I do•… call you Master, but if you would have me call my Mistress to my Master, I may call loud enough before she can hear me.
Why she's not deaf I hope, I am sure since Dinn•…r
She had her hearing perfect.
And so she may have at Supper too for ought I know, but I can assure you she is not now within my call.
Sirrah you trifle, give me the Key of the Stable,
I will go see my Gelding; in the mean time
Go seek her out, say she shall find me there.
To tell you true sir, I shall neither find my Mistress here, nor you your Gelding there.
Ha! how comes that to pass?
Whilst you were busy about your writings, she came and commanded me to saddle your Beast, and said she would ride abroad to take the ayre.
Which of your fellows did she take along to wait on her?
None sir.
None! hath she used it often?
Oftner I am sure then she goes to Church, and leave out Wednesdays and Fridays.
And still alone?
If you call that alone, when no body rides in her company.
But what times hath she sorted for these journeys?
Commonly when you are abroad, and sometimes when you are full of business at home.
To ride out often and alone, what saith she
When she takes horse, and at her back return?
Only conjures me that I shall keep it from you, then clappes me in the fist with some small piece of silver, and then a
Fish cannot be more silent then I.
I know her a good woman and well bred,
Of an unquestioned carriage, well reputed
Amongst her neighbours, reckoned with the best
And ore me most indulgent; though in many
Such things might breed a doubt and jealousy,
Yet I hatch no such frenzy. Yet to prevent
The smallest jar that might betwixt us happen;
Give her no notice that I know thus much.
Besides I charge thee, when she craves him next
He be denied: if she be vexed or moved
Doe not thou fear, Isle interpose my self
Betwixt thee and her anger, as you tender
Your duty and my service, see this done.
Now you have expressed your mind, I know what I have to doe; first, not to tell her what I have told you &amp;, next to keep her side-saddle from coming upon your Gueldings back; but how soever it is like to hinder me of many a round tester.
As oft as thou deny her, so oft claim
That tester from me, 't shall be roundly paid.
You say well in that sir, I dare take your word, you are an honest Gentleman, and my Master; and now •…ache mine as I am your true servant, before she shall back your Guelding a∣gain in your absence, while I have the charge of his keeping; she shall ride me, or Isle ri•…e her.
So much for that. Sirrah my Butler tells me
My Seller is drunk dry, I mean those Bottles
Of Sack and Claret, are all empty grown
And I have guests to morrow, my choice friends.
Take the gray Nag in the stable, and those Bottles
Fill at Lancaster,
There where you use to fetch it.
Good news for me, I shall sir.
O Robin, it comes short of that pure liquor
We drunk last Term in London at the Mitre
In Fleet-street, thou remember it; me thought
It was the very spirit of the Grape,
Mere quintessence of Wine.
Yes sir, I so remember it, that most certain it is I no∣ver shall forget it, my mouth waters ever since when I but think on it, whilst you w•…re at supper above, the drawer had me down into the Cellar below, I know the way in again if I see it, but at that time to find the way out again, I had the help of more eyes than mine own: is the taste of that Ipsitate s•…il in your pal∣lat sir?
What then? But vain are wishes, take those bottles
And see them filed where I command you sir.
I shall: never c'ud I have met with such a fair oppor∣tunitie: for just in the mid way lies my sweet-heart, as lovely a lass as any is in Lancashire, and kisses as sweetly 〈◊〉 see her go∣ing or coming, i'll have one smouch at thy lips, and bee with thee to bring Mal Spencer.
Go hasten your return, what he hath told me
Touching my wife is somewhat strange, no matter
Be it as it will, it shall not trouble me.
She hath not lain so long so near my side,
That now I should be jealous.
You seem sir a Gentleman of quality, and no doubt but in your youth have been acquainted with affairs military, in your very looks there appears bounty, and in your person hue∣manity. Please you to vouchsafe the tender of some small cour∣tesie to help to bear a soldier into his country.
Though I could tax you friend, &amp; justly too
For begging against the Statute in that name,
Yet I have ever bin of that compassion,
Where I see want, rather to pity it
Than to use power. Where hast thou served?
With the Russian against the Polack, a heavy war, and hath brought me to this hard fate. I was took prisoner by the Pole, &amp; after some few weeks of durance, got both my freedom and pass. I have it about me to show, please you to vou•…as the perusal.
It shall not need. What Countryman.
Yorkshire sir. Many a sharp battle by land, and ma∣ny a sharpe storm at sea, many a long mile, and many a short meal, I have travelled and suffered ere I c'ud reach thus far, I 〈◊〉 you sir take my poor &amp; wretched case into your worcester∣ships noble consideration.
Perhaps thou love this wandering life
To be an idle loitering beggar, than
To eat of thine own labour.
I sir! Loitering I defy sir, I hate laziness as I do lepro∣sie: It is the next way to breed the scurvy, put me to hedge, ditch, plow, thresh, dig, delve, any thing: your worship shall find that •… love nothing less than •…oitering.
Friend thou speak well.
Your Mill quoth he, if ever you take me in your mill again, i'll give you leave to cast my flesh to the dogs, and grind my flesh to powder, betwixt the Milstones. Cats do you call them, for their hugeness they might bee cat a mountains, and for their claws, I think I have it here in red and white to sh•…w, •… pray look here sir, a murrain take them, isle be sworn they have 〈◊〉, where I am •…ur it itched not.
How came thou in this pickle?
Yoiu see sir, and what you see, I have felt, &amp; am come to give you to unde•…stand i'll not endure such another night if you would give me your mill for nothing, they say we Millers are thieves: but I c'ud as soon bee hanged as steal one piece of a •…ap all the night long, good Landlord provide your self of a new tenant, the noise of such caterwauling, &amp; such scratching and clawing, before I would endure again, i'll bee tied to the •…ail when the wind blows sharpest, and they fly swiftest, till I be torn into as many fitters as I have toes and fingers.
I was a Miller my self before I was a soldier. What one of my own trade should be so poorly spirited frighted with cats?
Sir trust me with the Mill that he forsakes.
H•…re is a blade that hangs upon this belt
〈◊〉 spite of all these Rats, Cats, Weasels, Witches
Or Dogs, or Devils, Shall so conjure them
I'll quiet my possession.
Well spoke Soldier.
I like thy resolution▪ Fellow, you then
Have given the Mill quite over.
Over and over, here I utterly renounce it; nor would I stay in it longer, if you would give me your whole estate; nay if I say it, you may take my word Landlord.
I pray sir dare you trust your mill with me.
I dare, but I am loath, my reasons these.
For many •…oneths, scarce any one hath lien there
But have bin strangely frighted in his sleep,
Or from his warm bed drawn into the floor,
Or clawd and scratched, as thou see this poor man,
So much, that it stood long untenanted,
Till he late undertook it, now thine eyes
Witness how he hath sped.
Give me the keys, isle stand it all danger.
It is a match: deliver them.
Mary withal my heart, and I am glad, I am so rid of em.
Now I have gathered Bullies, and filled my belly pretty well, i'll go see some sport. There are gentlemen coursing in the meadow hard by; and it is a game that I love better than go∣ing to School ten to one.
What have we here a brace of Greyhounds broke loose from their masters: it must needs be so, for they have both their Col∣lers and slips about their necks. Now I look better upon them, me thinks I should know them, and so I do: these are Mr. Robinsons dogs, that dwells some two miles off, i'll take them up, &amp; lead them home to their master; it may be something in my way, for he is as liberal a gentleman, as any is in our country, Come Hector, come. Now if I c'ud but start a Hare by the way, •…ill her, and carry her home to my supper, I should think •… had
made a better afternooones work of it than gathering of bu•…∣lies. Come poor cures along with me.
My Dog as yours.
For what?
A piece.
It is done.
I say the pied dog shall outstrip the browne.
And isle take the brown dogs partagainst the pied
Yes when hoe's at his lap •…whole take his part.
Bantam forbear him prithee.
He talks so like an Ass I have not patience to endure his non sense.
The browne dog for two pieces.
Of what?
Of what you dare; name them from the last
〈◊〉 with the double rings, to the late
Coy'nd 〈◊〉 which they say are all counterfeit.
Well sir, I take 〈◊〉: will •…ou cover these, give them in∣to the hands of either of those two gentlemen.
What needs that? doe you think my word and my money is not all one?
And weigh alike: both many grains too light.
Enough of that, I presume Mr. Whetstone, you are not 〈◊〉 what belongs to the sport of hunting.
I think I have reason, for I have bin at the death of more 〈◊〉.
More then you shed the last fall of the leaf.
More then any man here I am sure. I should be loath at these years to be ignorant of hairing or whoring. I kn•…w a hare close hunred, clime a tree.
To find out birds 〈◊〉
Another 〈◊〉 into a river, nothing appearing above water, save only the tip of her nose to take breath.
Nay that's very likely, for no man can fish with an 〈◊〉 but his Line must be made of hare.
You say right, I kn•…w another, who to escape the
Dogs hath taken a house, and leapt in at a window.
It is thought you came into the World that way.
How mean you that?
Because you are a bastard.
Bastard! O base.
And thou art base all over.
Needs must I now condemn your indiscretion,
To set your wit against his.
Bastard? that shall be tried; well Gentlemen con∣corning Hare-hunting you might have hard more, if he had had the grace to have said less, but for the word Bastard, if I do not tell my Uncle, I and my Aunt too, either when I would speak ought or go of the s•…ore for any thing, let me never be trusted, they are older than I, and what know I, but they might bee by when I was begot; but if thou Bantam dost not hear of this with both thine ears, if thou hast them still, and not lost them by scribbling, instead of Whet-stone call me Grind•…-stone, and for Bible•…w, Bulfinch. Gentlemen, for two of you your company is fair and honest; but for you Bantam, remember and take no∣tice also, that I am a bastard, and so much i'll testify to my Aunt and Uncle.
What have you done, twill gre•…ve the good old Gen∣tleman, to hear him baffled thus.
I was in a cold sweat ready to faint
The time he staid amongst us.
But come, now the Hare is found and started▪
She shall have Law, so to our sport.
A Hare, a Hare, hall•…e, halloe, the Devil take these cures, will they not stir, halloe, halloe, there, there, there, what are they grown so lither and so lazy? Are Mr. 〈◊〉 dogs turned tykes with a wanion? the Hare is yet in sigh•…, halloe, halloe, mary hang you •…or a couple of 〈◊〉 (i•… you were worth hā∣ging, &amp; have you served me thus? 〈◊◊◊〉 •…erve you with the like sauce, you shall to the next bush, there will I 〈◊〉 you, and use you like a couple of curs as you are, &amp; tho•…gh not lash you, yet
lash you whilst my switch will hold, nay since you have left your speed, isle see if I can put spirit into you, and put you in re∣membrance what halloe, halloe means.
Now bless me heaven, one of the Greyhounds turned into a woman, the other into a boy! The lad I never saw before, but her I know well; it is my gimmal Dickison.
Sirah, you have served me well to swindge me thus.
You young rogue, you have used me like a dog.
When you had put your selfinto a dogs skin, I pray how c'ud I help it; but gimmal are not you a Witch? if you bee, I beg upon my knees you will not hurt me.
Stand up my boy, for thou shalt have no harm,
Be silent, speak of nothing thou hast seen.
And here's a shilling for thee.
Isle have none of your money gimmal, because you are a Witch: and now she is out of her four legged shape, isle see if with my two legs I can out-run her.
Nay sir, though you be young, and I old, you are not so nimble, nor I so lame, but I can overtake you.
But Gimmal what do you mean to do with me
Now you have me?
To hug thee, stroke thee, and embrace thee thus,
And teach thee twenty thousand pretty things.
So thou tell no tales; and boy this night
Thou must along with me to a brave feast.
Not I gimmal indeedla, I dare not stay ont late, My father is a fell man, and if I bee out long, will both chide and beat me.
Not sir, then perforce thou shalt along,
This bridle helps me still at need,
And shall provide us of a steed.
Now sir, take your shape and be
Prepared to hurry him and me.
Now look and tell me wher's the lad become.
The boy is vanished, and I can see nothing in his stead
But a white horse ready saddled and bridled.
And thats the horse we must bestride,
On which both tho•… and I must ride,
Thou boy before and I behind,
The earth we tread not, but the wind,
For we must progress through the air,
And I will bring thee to such fare
As thou ne'er saw, up and away,
For now no longer we can stay.
Help, help.
Thanks my sweet Mall for thy courteous entertainment, thy cream, thy cheese-cakes, and every good thing, this, this, &amp; this for all.
But why in such hast good Robin?
I confess my stay with thee is sweet to me, but I must spur Cut the faster for it, to be at home in the morning, I have yet to Lancaster to ride to night, and this my 〈◊〉 of bottles, to fill to night, and then half a score mile to ride by cur∣rie-combe time, in the morning, or the old man chides Mal.
Hee shall not chide thee, fear it not.
Pray Bacchus I may please him with his wine, which will be the hardest thing to do; for since hee was last at London and tasted the Divinity of the▪ Meter, scarce any liquor in Lan∣cashier will go down with him, sure, sure he will never be a Pu∣ritane, he holds so well with the Meter.
Well Robert, I find your love by your haste from me, isle undertake you shall be at Lancaster, &amp; twice as far, &amp; yet at home time enough, and be ruled by me.
Thou art a witty rogue, and think to make me believe any thing, because I saw thee make thy broom sweep the house without hands t'other day.
You shall see more than that presently, because you shall believe me; you know the house is all a bed here: and I dare not be mist in the morning. Besides, I must be at the wed∣ding of Lawrence and Parnell to morrow.
I your old sweet heart Lawrence? Old love will not be forgotten
I care not for the loss of him, but if I 〈◊〉 him not hang me: but to the point, if I go with you to night, and help you to as good wine as your master desires, and you keep your time with him, you will give me a pint for my company.
Thy belly full wench.
I'll but take up my milk pail and leave it in the field, till our coming back in the morning, and we'll away.
Go fetch it quickly then.
No Robert, rather than leave your company so long, it shall come to me.
I would but see that.
Look yonder, what do you think on it.
Light, it comes; and I do think there is so much of the Devil in it as will turn all the milk shall come in it these seven years, and make it burn too, till it stink worse than the Pro∣verb of the Bishops foot.
Look you sir, here I have it, will you get up and a∣way.
My horse is gone, nay prithee Mal. thou hast set him a∣wa•…, leave thy Roguery.
Look again.
There stands a black long-sided jade: mine was a trussed gray.
Yours was too short to carry double such a journey.
Get up I say, •…ou shall have your own again in the morning.
Nay but, nay but.
Nay, and you stand butting now, i'll leave you to look your horse. Pail on before to the field, and stay till I come.
Come away then, hey for Lancaster: stand up▪
COme away wife, come away, and let us be rea∣die to break the 〈◊〉 over the Brides head at her entrance; we will have the honour of it, we that have played the Steward and Cooke at home, though we lost Church by it, and saw not Parson Knit-knot do•… his office, but wee •…hall see all the house rites performed; and. 〈◊〉 what a day of jowl∣lity and tranquillity is here towards?
You are so frolic and so crank now, upon the truce is taken amongst us, because our wrangling shall not wrong the Wedding, but take heed (you were best) how ye behave your self, lest a day to come may pay for all.
I fear nothing, and I hope to dye in this humour.
Oh how hot am I •… rather then I would dress such a∣another dinner this twelve month, I would wish Wedding quite out of this years Almanac▪
Isle fetch a Cup of Sack Wife—
How brag he is of his liberty, but the holy day carries it.
Here, here sweet-heart, they are•… lóng me thinks a com∣ming, the Bells have rung out this half hour, hark now the wind brings the sound of them swe•…tly again.
They ring backwards me thinks.
I fack they doe, sure the greatest fire in the Parish is in our Kitchen, and there's no harm done yet, no 〈◊〉 some merry conceit of the stretch▪ ropes the Ringers, now they have done, and now the Wedding comes, hark, the Fiddlers and all, now have I lived to see a day▪ come, take 〈◊〉 stand, and be ready for the Bride-cake, which we will so crack and crumble upon her crown: o they come, they come.
Joy, health; and children to the married pair.
&amp; Porn. We thank you all.
So pray come in and fare.
As well as we and taste of every cate:
With bon•…y Bridegroom and his lov•… mate.
This begins bravely.
They agree better then the Bells even now, 'slid they •…ung tunably till we were all out of the Church, and then they clattered as the devil had been in the Bell•…rye: on in the name of Wedlock, Fiddlers on.
On with your melody.
Enter the Gates with joy,
And as you enter play the sack of Troy.
Welcome Bride •…arnell.
Brideg•…ome 〈◊〉 〈◊〉,
In you before, for we this cake must break.
Over the Bride—
Forgi' me- what's become
Of the Cake wife!
It 〈◊〉 out of my hand, and is 〈◊〉 into 〈◊〉 I think.
〈◊〉? the devil of crum is here, but bran; no∣thing but bran, what prodigy 〈◊〉 this?
Is my best Brides Cake come to this! o wea warth it.
How daintily the Brides hair is powdered with it.
My 〈◊〉 stands 〈◊◊〉 to see it.
And mine.
I was never so amazed!
What 〈◊〉 mean?
Pox, I think 〈◊◊◊〉 but some of m•… Father and Mothers •…oguery, this is a Law-day with 'em, to 〈◊〉 what they list.
I never fear any thing, so long as my 〈◊◊〉 but •…idden me think of her, and 〈◊◊〉 me.
Well Gentlemen, let's follow the 〈◊〉 in, and fear no∣thing yet, the house smells well of good 〈◊〉.
Gentlemen, will it please you draw near, the guests are now all come, and the house almost full, meat's taken up.
We were now coming.
But son•…e Greg•…, Nephew Arthur, and the rest of the young Gentlemen, I shall take it for a favour if you will (it is an office which very good Gentlemen doe in this Country) ac∣company the Bridegroom in serving the meat.
With all our hearts.
Nay neighbor Doughty, your years shall excuse you.
Peugh, I am not so old but I can carry more meat then I can eat, if the young 〈◊〉 coo•…d carry their drink as well, the Country would be quieter—
Well fare your hearts,—the dresser calls in Gentlemen,
It is a busy time, yet will I review the Bill of fare, for this days dinner—(Reads) for 40▪ people of the best quality, 4. messes of meat; viz. a leg of Mutton in plum-broth, a dis•… of Marrow∣bones, a 〈◊〉 white-broth, a Surlovne of beef, a Pig, a Goose, a Turk•…, and two Pies: for the second course, to every mess 4. Chickens in a dish, a couple of Rabbits, Custard, Flown, Florentines, and stewed pruines,—all very good Country fare, and for my credit,—
The service enters, O well said 〈◊〉, play up the meat to the Table till all be served in, •…e see it pass in answer to my bill.
Hold up your head Mr. Bridegroom.
On before Fiddlers, my 〈◊◊〉 in my honds.
Inprim•…, a leg of Mutton in plum-broth,—how now Mr. Bridegroom, what carry you?
It were hot •…no now, but now it's cawed as a steane.
A stone, it is horn man.
Awe—
It was Mutton, but now it is the horns 〈◊〉.
Awe whore's my Bride—
'Zookes, I brought as good a Sirloin of Beef from the Dresser as Knife cooed be put to, and see—Isle stay in this house no longer.
And if this were not a Capon in white broth, I am one in the Coop.
All, ell's transformed, look you what I have!
And I.
And I! Yet I fear nothing thank my Aunt.
I had a Pie that is not opened yet, Isle see what'•… in that—live Birds as true as I live, look where they fly!
Witches, live Witches, the house is full of witches, if we love our lives let's out on it.
O husband, O guests, O son, O Gentlemen, such a chance in a Kitchen was never heard of, all the meat is flown out of the chimney top I think, and nothing instead of it, but Snakes, Bat•…s, Frogs, Beetles, Hornets, and Humble-bees; all the Sallets are turned to Iewes-eares, Mushromes, and Puck fists; and all the Custards into Cow sheards!
What shall we doe, dare we stay any longer?
Dare we! why not, I defy all VVitches, and all their works; their power on our meat, cannot reach our persons.
I say so too, and so my Aunt ever told me, so long I will fear nothing; be not afraid Mr. Doughty.
Zookes, I fear nothing living that I can see more then you, and that's nothing at all, but to think of these invisi∣ble mischiefs, troubles me I confess.
Sir I will not go about to over-rule your reason, but
but for my part I will not out of a house on a Bridal day, till I see the last man borne.
Zookes thou art so brave a fellow that I will stick to thee, and if we come off handsomely, I am an old Bachelor thou know, and must have an heir, I like thy spirit, whore's the Bride? whore's the Bridegroom? whore's the Music? where be the Lasses? have you any wine in the house, though we make no dinner▪ lets try if we can make an afternoon.
Nay sir if you please to stay, now that the many are frighted away, I have some good cold meates, and half a dozen bottles of Wine.
And I will bid you welcome.
Say you me so, but will not your son be angry, and your daughter chide you.
Fear not you that sir, for look you I obey my Father.
And I my Mother.
And we are all at this instant as well and as sensible of our former errors, as you can wish us to be.
Na, if the Witches have but robed of your meat, and restored your reason, here has been no hurt done to day, but this is strange, and as great a wonder as the rest to me.
It seems though these Hags had power to make the Wedding cheer a Deceptio visus, the former store has escaped 'em.
I am glad on it, but the devil good 'hem with my Sirloin, I thought to have set that by mine own Trencher—But you have cold meat you say?
Yes Sir.
And Wine you say?
Yes sir.
I hope the Country wenches and the Fiddlers are not gone.
They are all here, and one the merriest Wench; that makes all the rest so laugh and tickle.
Gentlemen will you in?
Agreed on all parts.
If not a Wedding we will make a Wake on it, and away with the Witch; I fear nothing now you have your wits again: but look you, hold 'em while you have 'em.
I confess thou hast done a Wonder in fetching me so good Wine, but my good Servant Robert, go not about to put a Miracle upon me, I will rather believe that Laneaster affords this Wine, which I thought impossible till I tasted it, then that thou coo'dst in one night fetch it from London.
I have known when you have held me for an honest fellow, and would have believed me.
The art a Knave to wish me to believe this, forgi'me, I would have sworn if thou had stayed but time answerable for the journey (to his that flew to Paris and back to London in a day) it had been the same Wine, but it can never fall within the compass of a Christians belief, that thou could ride above three hundred miles in 8. hours: You were no longer out, and upon one Horse too, and in the Night too!
And carry a Wench behind me too, and did something else too, but I must not speak of her lest I be divell-torne.
And fill thy bottles too, and come home half drunk too, for so thou art, thou would never a had such a fancy else!
I am sorry I have said so much, and not let Lancaster have the credit of the Wine.
O are you so! and why have you abused me and your self then all this while, to glorify the Mitre in Fleet-street?
I could say sir, that you might have the better opinion of the Wine, for there are a great many palates in the Kingdom that can relish no Wine, unless 〈◊〉 be of such a Tavern, and drawn by such a Drawer—
I said, and I say again, if I were within ten mile of London, I durst swear that this was Mitre Wine, and drawn by honest Jack Pain.
Nay then sir I swore, and I swear again•…, honest Jack Pain drew it.
Ha, ha, ha, if I cooed believe there were such a thing as Witchcraft, I should think this slave were bewitched now with an opinion.
Much good doe you sir, your Wine and your mirth, and my place for your next Groom, I desire not to stay to be laughed out of my opinion.
Nay be not angry Robin, we must not part so, and how does my honest Drawer? ha, ha, ha; and what news at Lone∣don, Robin? ha, ha, ha; but your stay was so short I think you cooed hear none, and such your haste home that you cooed make none: is it not so Robin? ha, ha, ha, what a strange fancy has good Wine begot in his head?
Now will I push him over and over with a piece of paper: Yes sir, I have brought you something from London.
Come on, now let me hear.
Your honest Drawer sir, considering that you consi∣der'd him well for his good wine—
What shall we hear now?
Was very careful to keep or convey this paper to you, which it seems you dropped in the room there.
Bless me! this paper belongs to me indeed, it is an ac∣quittance, and all I have to show for the payment of one hun∣dred pound, I took great care for it, and cooed not imagine where or how I might loose it, but why may not this bee a trick? this Knave may find it when I lost it, and conceal it till now to come over me withal. I will not trouble my thoughts with it further at this time, well Robin look to your business, and have a care of my Guelding.
Yes Sir. I think I have nettled him now, but not as I was nettled last night, three hundred Miles a Night upon a Rawboned Devil, as in my heart it was a Devil, and then a Wench that shared more of my back then the said Devil did of my Bum, this is rank riding my Masters: but why had I such an itch to tell my Master of it, and that he should believe it; I doe now wish that I had not told, and that hee will not be∣leeve it, for I dare not tell him the means: 'Sfoot my Wench and her friends the Fiends, will tear me to pieces if I discover her; a notable rogue, she's at the VVedding now, for as good a Maid as the best o'em—O my Mistress.
Robin.
I Mistress.
Quickly good Robin, the gray Guelding.
What other horse you please Mistress.
And why not that?
Truly Mistress pray pardon me, I must be plain with you, I dare not deliver him you; my master has tan notice of the ill case you have brought him home in divers times.
O is it so, and must he be made acquainted with my actions by you, and must I then be controlled by him, and now by you; you are a sawey Groom.
You may say your pleasure.
No sir, Isle doe my pleasure.
Awe.
Horse, horse, see thou be,
And where I point thee carry me.
Was there ever such a medley of mirth, madness, and drunkenness, shuffled together.
Thy Uncle and Aunt, old Mr. Seely and his wife, doe nothing but kiss and play together like Monkeys.
Yes, they doe over-love one another now.
And young Gregory and his sister doe as much over∣doe their obedience now to their Parents.
And their Parents as much over-doat upon them, they are all as far beyond their wits now in loving one another, as they were wide of them before in crossing.
Yet this is the better madness.
But the married couple that are both so daintily whit∣led, that now they are both mad to be a bed before Supper∣time, and by and by he will, and she wo' not; straight she will and he wo' not, the next minute they both forget they are mar∣ried, and defy one another.
My •…ides even ache with laughter.
But the best sport of all is, the old Bachelor Master
Doughty, that was so cautious, &amp; feat'd every thing to be witeh∣craft, is now wound up to such a confidence that there is no such thing, that hee dares the Devil do•… his worst, and will not out of the house by all persuasion, and all for the love of the husband∣mans daughter within, Mal Spencer.
There I am in some danger, he put me into half a be∣lief I shall be his heir, pray love she be not a witch to charm his love from me. Of what condition is that wench dost thou know her?
A little, but Whetstone knows her better.
Hang him rogue, he'll belie her, and speak better than she deserves, for he's is love with her too. I saw old Doughty give him a box of the ear for kissing her, and hee turned about as he did by thee yesterday, and swore his Aunt should know it.
Who would ha'thought that impudent rogue•… would have come among us after such a baffle.
He told me, hee had complained to his Aunt on us, and that she would speak with us.
Wee will all to her to patch up the business, for the respect I bear her husband, noble Generous.
Here he comes.
Hark you Mr. Byblow do you know the lass within?
What do you call her, Mal Spencer?
Sir, what I know i'll keep to my self, a good c•…vile merry harmless to•…e she is, and comes to my Aunt often, and thats all I know by her.
You doe well to keep it to your self sir.
And you may do well to question her if you dare. For the testy old coxcomb that will not let her go out of his hand.
Take heed, he's at your heels.
Come away Wenches, where are you Gentlemen?
Play Fiddlers: lets have a dance▪ ha my little rogue.
Zookes what ails thy nose.
My nose! Nothing sir.— — Yet me thought a fly touched it. Did you see any thing?
No, no, yet I would almost ha'sworn, I would not have sprite or goblin blast thy face, for all their kingdom. But hangt there is no such thing: Fiddlers will you play?
Gentlemen will you dance?
With all our hearts.
But stay wheres this household?
This Family of love? Let's have them into the revels.
Hold a little then.
Here they come all
In a True-love knot.
O Father twenty times a day is too little to ask you blessing.
Go too you are a rascal: and you housewife teach your daughter better manners: i'll ship you all for new England else.
The knot's untied, and this is another change.
Yes I will teach her manners, or put her out to spin two penny tow: so you dear husband will but take me into favour: i'll talk with you dame when the strangers are gone.
Dear Father.
Dear Mother.
Dear Father and Mother pardon us but this time.
Never, and therefore hold your peace.
Nay thats unreasonable.
Oh!— 
But for your sake i'll forbear them, and bear with any thing this day.
Doe you note this? Now they are all worse then e∣ver they were, in a contrary vain: What think you of Witch∣craft now?
They are all natural fools man, I find it now.
Art thou mad to dream of Witchcraft?
He's as much changed and bewitched as they I fear.
Hey day! Here comes the pair of boiled Lovers in Sorrel •ops.
Nay dear honey, nay honey, but eance, eance.
Na, na, I han' sworn, I han' sworn, not a bit before bed, and look yeou it's but now dancing time.
Come away Bridegroom, we'll stay your stomach with a dance. Now masters play a good: come my Lass we'll show them how it is
Whether now, hoe?
Hey day! why you rogues.
What do's the Devil ride of your Fiddlesticks.
You drunken rogues, hold, hold, I say, and begin again soberly the beginning of the World
Ha, ha, ha, How's this?
Every one a several tune
This is something towards it. I bad them play the be∣ginning of the World, and they play, I know not what.
No it is running of the country several ways.
But what do you think on it.
Think! I think they are drunk Prithee doe not thou think of Witchcraft; for my part, I shall as soon think this maid one, as that theres any in Lancashire.
Ha, ha ha.
Why dost thou laugh?
To think this Bridegroom should once ha'bin mine, but he shall rue it, isle hold him this point on it, and thats all I care for him.
A witty Rogue.
I tell you sir, they say she made a pail follow her t'other day up two pair of stayres.
You lying Rascal.
O sir forget your anger.
Look you Mr. Bridegroom, what my care provides for you
What, a point?
Yes put it in your pocket it may stand you instead a∣non, when all your points be tan away, to truss up your trin∣kits, I mean your slopes withal.
Mal for old acquaintance I will ma'thy point a point of preferment. It shan bee the Foreman of a haell Iewrie o'points, and right here will I wear it.
Wy'a, wy'a, old love wo no be forgotten, but ay's no∣ver be jealous the mare for that.
Play fiddlers any thing.
I, and lets see your faces, that you play fairly with us.
We do sir, as loud as we can possibly.
Play out that we may hear you.
So we do sir, as loud as we can possibly.
Doe you hear any thing?
Nothing not we sir.
It is so, the rogues are bribed to cross me,
And their Fiddles shall suffer, I will break em as small as the
Bride cake was to day.
Look you sir, they'll save you a labour, they are doing it themselves.
Oh brave Fiddlers, there was never better scuffling for the Tudberry Bu•…t.
This is mother Iohnson and Gooddy Dickisons rogue∣rye, I find it but I cannot help it, yet I will have music: sir theres a Piper without, would be glad to earn money.
She has spoke to purpose, &amp; whether this were witch∣craft or not: I have heard my Aunt say twenty times, that no Witchcraft can take hold of a Lancashire Bag-pipe, for it self is able to charm the Devil, isle fetch him.
Well said, a good boy nów; come bride and bride∣groom, leave your kissing and fooling, and prepare to come in∣to the dance. We'll have a Horne-pipe, and then a posit and
to bed when you please. Welcome Piper, blow till thy bag crack again, a lusty Horne-pipe, and all into the dance, nay young and old.
Bravely performed.
Stay, wheres my lass?
Vanished, she and the Piper both vanished, no body knows how.
Now do I plainly perceive again, here has bin nothing but witchery all this day; •…herfore into your posit, &amp; agree a∣mong your selves as you can, isle out of the house. And Gentle∣men, if you love me or your selves, follow me.
I, I, Away, away.
Now good son, wife, and daughter, let me entreat you be not angry.
O you are a trim mother are you not?
Indeed child, isle do so no more.
Now sir, i'll talk with you, your champions are al gon.
Weell sir, and what wun yeou deow than?
Whey, whey, whats here to doe? Come avow, and whickly, and see us into our Brayd Chamber, &amp; delicately ludgd together, or we'll whip you out o'dores ith morn to sijourne in the common, come away.
Wee follow ye.
KNow you this jingling bridle, if you see it again? I wanted but a pair of jingling spurs to make you mend your pace, and put you into a sweat.
Yes, I have reason to know it after my
hard journey, they say there be light women, but for your own part, though you be merry. Yet I may be sorry for your heavi∣ness.
I see thou art not quite tired by shaking of thy self, it is a sign that as thou hast brought me hither, so thou art able to bear me back, and so you are like good Robert. You will not let me have your masters gelding, you will not. Well fir, as you like this journey, so deny him to me hereafter.
You say well mistress, you have jaded me (a pox take you for a jade.) Now I bethink my self how damnably did I ride last night, and how devilishly have I bin rid now.
Doe you grumble you groom? Now the bridl's of, I turn thee to grazing gramercy my good horse, I have no bet∣la provender for thee at this time, thou had best like Aesops Ass to feed upon Thistles, of which this place will afford thee plenty. I am bid to a better banquet, which done, isle take thee up from grass, spur •…utt, and •…ache a short cut home. Farewell.
A pox upon your tail.
The Lady of the feast is come, welcome, welcome.
Is all the cheer that was prepared to grace the wed∣ding feast, yet come?
part of it's here.
The other we must pull for. But whats hee?
My horse, my horse, ha, ha, ha.
Ha, ha, ha.
My horse, my horse, I would I were now some country Major, and in authority, to see if I would not venture to rowze your Satanicall sisterhood: Horse, horse, see thou be, &amp; where •… point thee, ca•…y me: is that the trick on it? the devil himself shall be her carrier next if I can shun her: &amp; yet my Mr. will not be∣leeve theres any witches: theres no rue•…ning away; for I neither know how nor whether, besides to my thinking, theres a deep di•…ch, &amp; a hye quick-set about me, how shall I pass the time? What place is this? it looks like an old barn: isle peep in at some cranny or other, and try if I can see what they are doing. Such a bevy of beldams did I never behold; and 〈◊〉.
like so many Cormorants: Marry choke you with a mis∣chief.
Whoop, whurre, here is a stir, never a cat, never a cur, but that we must have this demur.
A second course.
Pull, and pull hard
For all that hath lately bin prepared
For the great wedding feast.
As chief.
Of Doughtyes Sirloin of roast Beef.
Ha, ha, ha.
It is come, it is come.
Where hath it all this while been?
Some
Delay hath kept it, now it is here,
For bottles next of wine and beer,
The Merchants cellars they shall pay foe•…'t.
Well,
What sod or roast meat more, pray tell.
Pull for the Poultry, Foul, &amp; Fish,
For empty shall not be a dish.
A pox take them, must only they feed upon hot meat, and I upon nothing but cold salads
This meat is tedious, now some Farie,
Fetch what belongs unto the Dairy.
Thats Butter, Milk, Whey, Curds and Cheese,
Wee nothing by the bargain leese.
Ha, ha, ha.
Boy, theres meat for you.
Thank you.
And drink too.
What Beast was by thee hither rid?
A Badger nab.
And I bestride
A Porcupine that never pricked.
The dull sides of a Bear I kicked.
I know how you rid Lady Nan,
Ha, ha, ha, upon the knave my man.
A murrain take you, I am sure my hooves paid for it.
Meat lie there, for thou hast no taste, and drink there, for thou hast no relish, for in neither of them is there either salt or savour.
Pull for the posit, pull.
The brides posit on my life, nay if they come to their spoon meat once, I hope theil break up their feast presently.
So those that are our waiters ne'er,
Take hence this Wedding cheer.
We will be lively all, and make this barn our hall.
You our Familiars, come.
In speech let all be dumb,
And to close up our Feast,
To welcome every gest
A merry round let's dance.
Some Music then 〈◊〉 air
Whilst thus by pair and pair,
We nimbly foot it; strike.
We are obeyed.
And we hells ministers shall lend our aid.
Now whilst they are in their jollity, and do not mind me, isle steal away, and shift for my self, though I lose my life for it.
Enough, enough, now patt,
To see the brides vexed heart,
The bridegrooms too and all,
That vomit up their gall
For lack of the wedding chere.
But stay, wheres the Boy, look out, i•…he e∣scope us, we are all betrayed.
No following further, yonder horsemen come,
In vain is our pursuit, let's break up court.
Where shall we next met?
At Mil•…▪
But when▪
At Night.
To horse, to horse.
2. VVhere's my Mamilian.
1. And my Mamilian.
3. My Tiger to bestri'd.
My Puggie.
My horse.
The night we have Feasted, now comes on the day.
Away, away,
Come sirrah, stoop your head like a tame jade,
Whilst I put on your Bridle.
I pray Mistress ride me as you would be rid.
That's at full speed,
Nay then •…e try Conclusions.
Mare Mare, see thou be,
And where I point thee carry me.
I see what Man is loath to entertain,
Offers it self to him most frequently,
And that which we most covet to embrace,
Doth seldom court us, and proves most averse;
For I, that never cooed conceive a thought
Of this my woman worthy a rebuke,
(As one that in her youth bore her so fairly
That she was taken for a seeming Saint)
To render me such just occasion,
That I should now distrust her in her age;
Distrust! I cannot, that would bring me in
The poor aspersion of fond jealousy;
Which even from our first meeting I abhorred.
The Gentile fashion so 〈◊〉 we observe
To sunder beds; but most in these hot months
June, July August, so we did last night.
Now •… (as ever tender of her health)
And therefore rising early as I use,
Entering her Chamber to bestow on her
A customed Vi•…ite; find the Pillow swelled,
Unbruised with any weight, the sheets unruffled,
The Curtains neither drawn, nor bed laid down;
Which shows, she slept not in my house to night.
Should there be any contract betwixt her
And this my Groom, to abuse my honest trust;
I should not take it well, but for all this
Yet cannot I be jealous. Robin•…
Is my horse safe, lusty, and in good plight?
What, feeds he well?
Yes sir, he's broad buttocked and full flanck'd, he doth not bate an ace of his flesh.
When was he rid last?
Not sir since you backed him.
•…irrah, take heed I find you not a Knave,
Have you not lent him to your Mistress late?
So late as this last Night?
Who I sir, may I dye sir, if you find me in a lye sir.
Then I shall find him where I left him last.
No doubt Sir.
Give me the Key of the Stable.
There Sir.
Sirrah, your Mistress was abroad all night,
Nor is she yet come home, if there I find him not,
I shall find thee, what to this present hour
I never did suspect; and I must tell thee
Will not be to thy profit.
Well sir, find what you can, him you shall find, and what you find else; it may before that, instead of Gramercy horse, you may say Gramercy Robin; you will believe there are no Witches! had I not been late bridled, I cooed have said more, but I hope she is tied to the rack that will confess some∣thing, and though not so much as I know, yet no more then I dare justify—
Have you found your Gelding sir?
Yes, I have.
I hope not spurred, nor put into a sweat, you may see by his plump belly and fleak legs he hath not bin sore travailed.
You're asawcy Groom to receive horses
Into my Stable, and not ask me leave.
Is it for my profit to buy Hay and Oats
For every strangers jades?
I hope sir you find•… none feeding there but your own, if there be any you suspect, they have nothing to champion, but the Bridle.
Sirrah, whose jade is that tied to the Rack?
The Mare you mean sir?
Yes, that old Mare.
Old doe you call her? You shall find the mark still in her mouth, when the Bridle is out of it? I can assure you it is your own Beast.
A beast thou art to tell me so, hath the wine
Not yet left working? not the Mitre wine?
That made thee to believe VVitchera•…t?
Prithee persuade me,
To be a d unken Sot like to thy self;
And not to know mine own.
Isle not persuade you to any thing, you will believe nothing but what you see, I say the Beast is your own, and you have most right to keep her, she hath cost you more the currying, then all the Combs in your Stable are worth. You have paid for her Provender this twenty years and upwards, and furnished her with all the 〈◊〉 that she hath worn, of my Knowledge, and because she hath been ridden hard the last Night, doe you renounce her now?
Sirrah, I fear some stolen jade of your own
That you would have me keep.
I am sure I •…and her no •…ade the l•…st time I rid her, she carried me the best part of a hundred Miles in less then a quar∣la of an hour.
The devil she did!
Yes so I say, •…ether the d•…ell or she did; an't please you 〈◊〉 in and take off her 〈◊〉, and then tell me who hath more right to her, you or •….
Well Robert, for this once Isle play the Groom,
And doe your office for you.
I pray doe Sir, but take heed lest when the Bridle is out of her mouth, she put it not into yours; if she doe, you are a gone man: if she but say once▪ Horse, horse, see thou be. Be you rid (if you please) for me.
My blood is turned to Ice, and my all vitals
Have ceased their working! dull stupidity
Surprises me at once, and hath arrested
That vigorous agitation; Which till now
Expressed a life within me: I me thinks
Am a mere Marble statue, and no man;
Vnweave my age O time, to my first thread;
Let me loose fifty years in ignorance spent:
That being made an infant once again,
I may begin to know, what? or where am I
To be thus lost in wonder.
Sir.
Amazement still pursues me, how am I changed
Or brought ere I can understand my self,
Into this new World.
You will believe no VVitches?
This makes me believe all, I any thing;
And that my self am nothing: prithee Robin
Lay me to my 〈◊〉 open, what art thou,
Or this new transformed Creature?
I am Robin, and this your wife, my Mrs.
Tell me the Earth
Shall leave it's seat, and mount to kiss the Moon;
Or that the Moon enamoured of the Earth,
Shall leave her sphere, to stoop to us thus low.
What? what's this in my hand, that at an instant
Can from a four legged Creature, make a thing
So like a wife?
A Bridle, •… •…ugling Bridle Sir.
A Bridle, hence enchantment,
A Viper were more safe within my hand
Then this charmed Engine
Take heed Sir what you do, if you cast it hence, and she catch it up, we that are here now, may be rid as far as the Indies within these few hours, Mistress down of your Mares bones, or your Mary-bones whether you please, and confess your self to be what you are; and that's in plain English a Witch, a grand notorious Witch.
A Witch! my wife a Witch!
So it appears by the story.
The more I strive to unwind
My self from this Meander, I the more
Therein am intricated; prithee woman
Art thou a Witch?
It cannot be denied, I am such a cursed Creature.
Keep aloof, and doe not come too near me, O my trust;
Have •… since first I understood my self,
Bin of my soul so chary, still to study
What best was for it's health, to renounce all
The works of that black Fiend with my best force
And hath that Serpent twined me so about,
That I must lye so often and so long
With a Devil in my bosom!
Pardon sir.
Pardon! Can such a thing as that be hoped?
Lift up thine eyes (lost woman) to yo•… Hills;
It must be thence expected: look not down
Unto that horrid dwelling, which thou hast sought
At such dear rate to purchase, prithee tell me,
(For now I can believe) art thou a Witch?
I am.
With that word I am thunderstrooke,
And know not what to answer, yet resolve me
Hast thou mad•… any contract with that Fiend
The Enemy of Mankind?
O I have.
What? and how far?
I have promised him my soul.
Ten thousand times better thy Body had
Bin promised to the Stake, I and mine too,
To have suffered with thee in a hedge of flames:
Then such a compact •…ver had bin made. Oh—
What you•…e sir, show your self a man, though she ap∣pear'd so late a Beast; Mistress confess all, better here than in a worse place, out with it.
Resolve me, how far doth that contract stretch?
What inter•…st in this Soul, my self cooed claim
I freely gave him, but his part that made it
I still reserve, not being mine to give.
O cunning Devil, foolish woman know
Where he can claim but the least little part,
He will usurp the whole; th•… art a lost woman.
I hope not so.
Why hast thou any hope?
Yes Sir I have.
Make it appear to me.
I hope I never bargained for that fire,
Further then penitent tears have power to quench.
I would see some of them.
You behold them now.
(If you look on me with charitable eyes)
Tinctured in blood, blood issuing from the heart,
Sir I am sorry; when I look towards Heaven
I beg a gracious Pardon; when on you
Me thinks your Native goodness should not be
Less pitiful than they: against both I have erred,
From both I beg atonement.
May I presum't?
I kneel to both your Mercies.
Know thou what a Witch is?
Alas, None better,
Or after mature recollection can be
More sad to think on it.
Tell me, are those tears
As full of true hearted penitence,
As mine of sorrow, to behold what state
What desperate state you are fallen in.
Sir they are.
Rise, and as I doe, so heaven pardon me;
We all offend, but from such falling off,
Defend us. Well, I doe remember wife,
When I first took thee, it was for good and bad;
O change thy bad to good, that I may keep thee,
As th•…n we past our faiths, till Death us sever.
I will not aggravate thy grief too much,
By Needles iteration: Robin hereafter
Forget thou hast a tongue, if the least Syllable
Of what hath past be rumoured, you loose me;
But if I find you faithful, you gain me ever.
A match sir, you shall find me as mute as if I had the
Bridle still in my mouth.
O woman thou had need to weep thy self
Into a fountain, such a penitent spring
As may have power to quench invisible flames
In which my eyes shall aid•…; too little all,
If not too little, ell's forgiven, forgot;
Only thus much remember, thou had extermin'd
Thy self out of the blessed society
Of Saints and Angels, but on thy repentance
I take thee to my Bosom, once again,
My wife, sister, and daughter: saddle my Gelding,
Some business that may hold me for two days
Calls me aside.
I shall Sir, well now my Mistress hath promised to give over her Witchery, I hope though I still continue her man, yet she will make me no more her journey-man; to prevent which the first thing I doe shall be to burn the Bridle, and then a∣way with the Witch.
Sir you have done a right noble curtsy, which de∣serves a memory, as long as the name of friendship can bear mention.
What I have done, I ha'done, if it be well, it is well, J doe not like the bouncing of good Offices, if the little care I have taken shall doe these poor people good, I have my end in it, and so my reward.
Now Gentlemen, you seem very serious.
It is true we are so, but you are welcome to the know∣ledge of our affairs.
How does thine Uncle and Aunt, Gregory and his si∣ster, the Families of Seelyes agree yet, can you tell?
That is the business, the Seely household is divided now.
How so I pray?
You know, and cannot but with pity know
Their miserable condition, how
The good old couple were abused, and how
The young abut'd themselves; if we may say
That any of hem are their selves at all
Which sure we cannot, nor approve them fit
To be their own disposers, that would give
The governance of such a house and living
Into their Vassailes hands, to thrust them out on it
Without or Law or order, this considered
This Gentleman and my self have taken home
By fair entreaty, the old folks to his house,
The •…young to mine, until some wholesome order
By the judicious of the Common-wealth,
Shall for their persons and estate be taken.
But what becomes of Lawrénce and his Parnell?
The lusty couple, what doe they now?
•…as poor folks, they are as far to seek of how they doe, or what they doe, or what they should doe, as any of the rest, they are all grown Idiots, and till some of these dam∣noble jades, with their devilish devises bee found out, tod s∣charm them, no remedy can be found, I mean to lay the Coun∣try for their Hagships, and if J can anticipate the purpose, of their grand Mr. Devil to confound'em before their lease be out, be sure isle do 't▪
A Skimington, a Skimmington, a Skimington.
Whats the matter now, is Hell broke loose?
Tom Shakstone, how now, can tell the news?
The news, ye hear it up in the air, do you not?
A Skimington, a Skimington, a Skimington.
Hark ye, do you not hear it? theres a Skimington, to∣wards gentlemen.
Ware Wedlock hoe.
At whose suit I prithee is Don Skimington come to town.
Isle tell you gentlemen, since you have taken home old Seely and his wife to your house, and you their son and daugh∣la to •…ours, the house-keepers Lawrence, and his late bride Parnell are fallen out by themselves.
How prithee?
The quarrel began they say upon the wedding night, and in the bride bed.
For want of bedstaves?
No but a better implement it seems the bridegroom was unprovided of, a homely tale to tell.
Now out upon her she has a greedy worm in her, I have heard the fellow complained on, for an over mickle m•…n a∣mong the maids.
Is his haste to go to bed at afternoon come to this now?
Witchery, witcher•…, more witchery still flat and plain witchery. Now do I think upon the codpeece point the young jade gave him at the wedding: she is a witch, and th•… was a charm, if there be any in the World.
A ligatory point.
Alas poor Lawrence.
He's coming to make his moan to you about it, and sh•… too, since you have taken their masters &amp; mistresses to your care, you must do them right too.
Marry but isle not undertake her at these years, if lusty Lawrence cannot do it.
But has she beaten him?
Grievously broke his head in I know not how many places: of which the hoydens have taken notice, and will have a Ski•…mington on horse-backe presently. Look ye, here comes both plaintiff and defendant.
How now Lawrence, what has thy wedlock brought thee already to thy night-cap?
Yie gadwat sir, I ware wadded but awe to seun.
Han yeou reason to complain or ay trow yeou gaffer Downought? Wa warth the day that ever I wadded a Dow∣nought.
Nay hold Parnel hold.
We have heard enough of your valour already, was know you have beaten him, let that suffice.
Ware ever poor maiden betrayed as a•… ware unto a swagbellied Carl that cannot awe waw that cannot.
What says she?
I know not, she catterwawles I think. Parnel be patient good Parnell, and a little modest too, it is not amiss, wee know not the relifh of every ear that hears vs, lets talk within our selves. Whats the defect? Whats the impediment? Lawrence has had a lusty name among the Batch•…llors.
What he ware when he ware a Bachelor, I know bet∣la than the best maid ith tawne. I wad I had not.
Peace Parnell.
It were that, that cossen'd me, he has not now as he had than?
Peace good Parnell.
For then he could, •…ned now he connote, he connote.
Fie Parnel fie.
I say again and again, hee connote, he connote.
Alas poor •…arnel.
I am not a bit the be•…la for him sin wye ware wad. Cries
Here is good stuff•… for a jury of women to pass upon.
But Parnel, why have you beaten him so grievously?
What would you have him doe in this case?
He's out of a doing case it seems.
Marry sir, and beat him will •… into his grave, or back to the Priest, and be unwaddded agony, for I wonot bee baund to leg with him and live with him the life of an honest woman for awe the layves good i'Loncoshire.
An honest woman: thats a good mind Parnel What say you to this Lawrence?
Keep her of o'me, and I shan teln •…jove, and she be by I am no body: But keep her off and search me, let me be searched as never witch was searched, and find any thing more or lass upon me than a sufficient mon should have, and let me be hon•… by it.
Do you hear this Parnell?
Ah leer, leer, deal tack the leer, troist ye and hong ye.
Alas it is too plain, the poor fellow is bewitched.
Here is a plain Maleficium versus hanc now.
And so is she bewitched too into this immodesty.
She would never talk so else
I prayn yeow give me the lere o'that Latin sir.
The meaning is, you must get half a dozen bastards Within this twelvemoneth, and that will mend your next ma∣riage.
And I thought it would ma' Parnel, love me i'd be sure on it, and gang about it now right.
You're soon provided it seems for such a journey.
Best tarry till thy head be whole Lawrence.
Nay, nay, ay's white cast away ent I be unwedded again•…
And then in undertack to find 3 better husbands in a bean cod.
Hear•…e gentlemen•…, the show is coming.
What shall we stay &amp; see it.
O by all means Gent.
It is best to have these away first.
Nay mary shan jove not sir, I hear yeou well e•…ogh, &amp; I con the meaning of the show well enogh, &amp; I stay not the show &amp; see not the show, &amp; •…a'one in the show, let me be honckt up for a show isle ware them to mel or ma with a woman that mels or mae's with a testril a lunge, a dow little losel that connote, &amp; if I skim not their skimingtons cockskeam for it, ma that warplin boggle me a week lonker, &amp; thats a curse eno'for any wife I trow.
from the board, and yet for ought I can see I am never a whit the nearer What not one kiss at parting 〈◊〉?
Well Cozen this is all you have to do:
Retire the Gallants to some private room,
Where call for wine, and junckets what you please,
Th•…n thou shalt need to do no •…there thing
Than what this note directs thee, observe that
An trouble me no farther.
Very good, I like this beginning well: for where they slighted me before, they shall find me a man of note.
Of this the meaning
Marry Lass
To bring a new conceit to pass.
Thy Spirit must borrow more,
To fill the number three or four;
Whom we will use to no great harm,
Only assist me with thy charm.
This night we'll celebrate to 〈◊〉:
It is all for mirth, we mean no hurt.
My Spirit and my self command;
Mamillion, &amp; the rest at hand, shall all assist.
Withdraw then, quick,
Now gallants, ther's for you a 〈◊〉.
Heir's a more private room gentlemen, free from the noise of the Hall. Here we may •…alke, and throw the chamber out of the casements. Some wine and a short banquet.
So now leave us.
VVee are much bound to you ma•…er Whetstone.
For this great entertainment: I see you command
The house in the absence of your uncle.
Yes, I thank my A•…ned; for though I be but a daily guest yet I can be w•…lcome to her at midnight.
How shall we pass the time?
In some discourse.
But no such discourse as we had last, 〈◊〉 each you.
Now master Whetstone you reflect on me.
It is true, at our last meeting some few words
Then 〈◊〉 my lips, which I could wis•… forgot:
I think I called you Bastard.
I think so too; but whats that amongst friends, for I would fine know which amongst you all knows his own fa∣there.
You are merry with your friends, good master •…∣Blow, and wee are guests here in your Uncles house, and there∣fore privileged.
I presume you had no more privilege in your getting than 〈◊〉. But tell me gentlemen, is there any man here amongst you, that hath a mind to see his father?
Why, who shall show him?
Thats all one; if any man here desire it, let him but speak the word, and it is sufficient.
Why, I would see my father.
Strike.
Doe you know him that looks so full in your face;
Yes well, a pedant in my fathers house.
Who being young, taught me my A, B, C.
In his house, that goes for your father you would say: For know one morning, 〈◊〉 your mothers husband rid early to have a Nisi prius tried at Lancaster Syzes, hee crept into his warm place, lay close by her side, and then were you got. Then come, your heals and tail 〈◊〉, and kneel 〈◊〉 your own dear father.
Ha, ha, ha.
I am abused.
Why laugh you Gentlemen? It may be more men's cases than his or mine. Bant. To be thus 〈◊〉.
Come, take it as a jest
For presume it was meant no otherwise.
Would either of you two now see his father in earnest
Yes, can thou show me mine?
〈◊〉.
Hee looks on you speak, doe you know him?
Yes, he was my mothers Taylor, I remember him e∣ver since I was a child.
Who when hee came to take measure of her upper parts had more mind to the lower, whilst the good man was in the fields hunting, he was at home 〈◊〉.
Then, since no better comfort 〈◊〉 be had,
Come down, come down, ask blessing of your dad.
Ha, ha, ha
This cannot be endured.
It is plain Witchcraft.
Nay since we all are bid unto one feast,
Lets fare alike, come show me mine too.
Strike.
He points at you.
What then?
You know him.
Yes, Robin 〈◊〉 groom belonging to this house.
And never served your father?
In's youth I think he did.
Who when your supposed father had business at the Lord Presidents Court in York, stood for his Attorney at home, &amp; so it seems you were got by deputy: what all a mort? if
you will have but a little patience, stay &amp; you shall see mine too:
And know I show you him the rather,
To find who hath the best man to his Father.
〈◊〉—
Now Gentlemen make me your President, learn your duties, and 〈◊◊〉 I doe—A blessing Dad.
Come, come, let's home, we will find 〈◊〉 other time,
When to dispute of these things—
: Nay Gent. no 〈◊〉 in 〈◊◊◊◊〉 begun in 〈◊〉, let's not end in 〈◊〉; you see 〈◊〉 are more By-blowes than bear the 〈◊〉; It is grown a great kindred in the Kingdom. Come, come, all friends; Let's into the Cellar and conclude our Revels in a lusty health.
I fine would strike, but cannot.
Some strange fate holds me.
Here then all anger end,
Let none be mad at what they cannot mend.
Now say what's next?
In the Mill there lies
A Soldier yet with unscratcht eyes,
Summon the Sister-hood together
For we with all our Spirits will thither;
And such a Caterwauling •…up,
That 〈◊〉 in vai•…e shall think to sleep.
Call Meg, and Doll, 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 Jug,
Let none appear without her Pug.
We will try our utmost Art and skill.
To fright the stout Knave in the 〈◊〉.
THou art a brave Boy, the honour of thy Coun try; thy Statue shall be set up in brass upon the Market Cross in Lancaster, I bless the time that I answered at the 〈◊◊〉 thee: •…oaks did I ever thin•… that a Godson of min•… should have •…ought hand to fist with the Devil!
He was ever an unhappy Boy Sir, and like enough to grow acquainted with him; and friends may fall out sometimes.
Thou art a dogged Sire, and doestnot know the virtue of my Godson, my son now; he shall be thy son no longer: he and I will worry all the Witches in Lance∣shire.
You were best take heed though.
I care not, though we leave not above three untain∣ted women in the Parish, we'll doe it.
Doe what you please Sir, there's the Boy stout enough to justify any thing he has said. Now it is out, he should be my Son still by that: Though he was at Death's 〈◊〉 before he would reveal any thing, 〈◊〉 •…noble jades had so threatened him, and as soon as ever he had told he men•…ed.
It is well he did so, we will so swing them in two∣penny halters Boy.
For my part I have no reason to hinder any thing that may root them all out; I have tasted enough of their mischief, witness my usage in th Mill, which could be nothing but their Roguery. One night in my sleep they set me a stride stark na∣ked a top of my Mill, a bitter cold night too; it was day light be∣fore I w eked, and I durst never speak of it to this hour, because I thought it impossible to be believed.
Villainous H•…gs
And all last Summer, my Wise could not make a bit of butter.
It would not come, 〈◊〉 it?
No Sir, we could not make it come, though she and I both together, churned almost our 〈◊〉 out, and nothing would come, but all ran into thin waterish gear: the Pigs would not drink 〈◊〉.
Is it possible▪
None but one, and he ran out of his wits upon it, till we bound his head, and laid him a sleep, but he has had a wry mouth ever since.
That the Devil should put in their hearts to delight in such Villainies! I have sought 〈◊〉 these two days, and he•… of a 〈◊◊◊◊〉, though none more∣tall, but could not find whom to mistrust for a Witch till now this boy, this happy boy informs me.
And they should near have been sought for me if their af∣frightments and dive•… devices, had not brought my Boy in∣to such a sickness; Whereupon indeed I thought good to ac∣quaint your worship, and bring the Boy unto you being his Godfather, and as you now stick not to say his Father.
After you I thank yo•… Gossip. But my Boy thou ha•… 〈◊〉 fied me in their names, and thy knowledge of the wo∣men, their turning into shapes, their dog-trickes, and their horse tricks, and their great Feast in the Barn (a pox take them with my Sirloin, I say still.) But a little more of thy combat with the Devil, I prithee; he came to thee like a Boy thou say∣est, about thine own bigness?
Yes Sir, and he asked me where I dwelt, and what my name was.
Ah Rogue!
But it was in a quarrelsome way; Whereupon I was as stout, and asked him who made him an examiner?
Ah good Boy.
In that he was my Son.
He told me he would know or beat it out of me,
And I told him he should not, and bid him doe his worst;
And to it we went.
In that he was my son again, ha boy; I see him at it now.
We fought a quarter of an hour, till his sharpe nails made my ears bleed.
O the grand Devil pare 'em.
I wondered to find him so strong in my hands, see∣ming but of mine own age and bigness, till I looking down, perceived he had clubbed cloven feet like Ox feet; but his face was as young as mine.
A pox, but by his feet, he may be the Club-footed Horse-coursers father, for all his young looks.
But I was afraid of his feet, and ran from him towards a light that I saw, and when I came to it, it was one of the Wit∣ches in white upon a Bridge, that scared me back again, and then met me the Boy again, and he struck me and laid me for dead.
Till I wondering at his stay, went out and found him in the Trance; since which time, he has been haunted and frigh∣ted with Goblins, 40. times, and never durst tell any thing (as I said) because the Hags had so threatened him till in his sickness he revealed it to his mother.
And she told no body but folks on it. Well Gossip Gritty, as thou art a Miller, and a close thief, now let us keep it as close as we may till we take 'hem, and see them handsome∣lie hanged of the way: Ha my little Cu••e-divell, thou art a made man. Come, away with me.
These two nights I have slept well and heard no noise
Of Cats, or Rats; most sure the fellow dream't,
And scratched himself in 's sleep. I have traveld' Deserts,
Beheld Wolves, Bears, and Lyons: Indeed what not?
Of horrid shape; And shall I be afraid
Of Cats in mine own Country? I can never
Grow so Mouse-hearted. It is now a Calm
And no wind stirring, I can bear no sail;
Then best lye down to sleep. Nay rest by me
Good Morglay, my Comrague and Bedfellow
That never failed me yet; I know thou did not.
If I be waked, see thou be stirring too;
Then come a Gibe as big as Ascapart
VVe'l make him play at Leap-frog. A brave Soldiers lodging,
The floor my Bed, a Millstone for my Pillow,
The Sails for Curtains. So good night.
Is Nab come?
Yes.
Whore's Jug?
On horseback yet,
Now lighting from her Broome-staffe.
But whore's Peg?
Entered the Mill already.
Is he fast?
As senseless as a Dormouse.
Then to work, to work my pretty Laplands
Pinch, here, scratch,
Doe that within, without we will keep the watch.
Am I in Hell, then have amongst you devils;
This side, and that side, what behind, before?
Isle keep my face unscratch'd despite you all:
What, doe you pinch in private, claws I feel
But can see nothing, nothing pinch me thus?
Have at you then, I and have at you still;
And still have at you.
One of them I have paid
In leaping out of the hole a foot or ear
Or something I have light on. What all gone?
All quiet? not a Cat that's heard to mew?
Nay then Isle try to take another nap,
Though I sleep with mine eyes open.
Robin, the last night that I lodged at home
My Wife (if thou remember) lay abroad,
But no words of that.
You have taught me silence.
I rose thus early much before my hour,
To take her in her bed▪ It is yet not five:
The Sun scarce up. Those horses take and lead'em
Into the Stable, see them rubbed and dressed,
We have rid hard. Now in the interim I
Will step and see how my new Miller fares,
Or whether he slept better in his charge,
Than those which did precede him.
Sir I shall.
But one thing more—
Now from the last nights witchcraft we are freed,
And I that had not power to clear my self
From base aspersion, am at liberty
For •…owed revenge: I cannot be at peace
(The night-spell being took of) till I have met
With noble Mr. Generous: in whose search
The best part of this morning I have spent,
His wife now I suspect.
By your le•…ve Sir.
O you're well met, pray tell me how long is it
Since you were first my Father?
Be patient I beseech you, what doe you mean Sir?
But that I honour
Thy Master, to whose goodness I am bound,
And still must remain thankful, I should prove
VVorse th•…n a Murderer, a mere Parricide
By killing thee my Father.
I your Father? he was a man I always loved
And honoured. He bred me.
And you begot me? oh you used me finely last night?
Pray what's the matter Sir?
My worthy friend, but that I honour you
As one to whom I am so much obligd,
This Villain could not stir a foot from hence
Till perished by my sword.
How hath he wronged you?
Be of a milder temper I entreat,
Relate what and when done?
You may command me,
If ask me what wrongs, know this Groom pretends
He hath strumpe•… my mother, if when, blazed
Last night at midnight. If you ask me further
Where, in your own house; when he pointed to me
As had I been his Bastard.
I doe this? I am a horse again if I got you, Master, why Master.
I know you Mr. Arthur, for a Gentleman
Of fair endowments, a most solid brain,
And settled understanding. Why this fellow
These two days was scarce sundried from my side,
And for the last night I am most assured
He slept within my Chamber, 12. miles off,
We have ne'er parted since.
You tell me wonders.
Since all your words to me are Oracles,
And such as I most constantly believe.
But Sir, shall I be bold and plain withal,
I am suspicious ell's not well at home;
I dare proceed no farther without leave,
Yet there is something lodged within my breast
Which I am loath to utter.
Keep it there,
I pray doe a season (O my fears)
In my Uncles absence who but I should comfort my Aunt,
Am I not of the Blood, am not I next of Kin?
Why Aunt?
Good Nephew leave me.
The Devil shall leave you ere isle forsake you, Aunt, you know, •…ic is So, and being so sick doe you think isle leave you, what know I but this Bed may prove your death-bed, and and then I hope you will remember me, that is, remember me in your Will.
Who's that knocks with such authority. Ten to one my Uncles come to town.
If it be so, excuse my weakness to him, say I can speak with none.
I will, and scope him if I can; by this accident all must come out, and here's no stay for me
Again, stay you here with your Aunt, and isle go let in your Uncle.
Doe good Mal, and how, and how sweet Aunt?
You're well met here, I am told you oft frequent
This house as my Wives choice companion,
Yet have I s•…ldome seen you.
Pray, by your leave Sir,
Your wife is taken with a sudden qualm
She hath sent me for a Doctor.
But that labour isle save you, Soldier take her to your charge.
And now whore's this sick woman.
O Uncle you come in good time, my Aunt is so sud∣dainly taken as if she were ready to give up the spirit.
It is almost time she did, speak how is it wife
My Nephew tells me you were took last night
With a shrewd sickness, which this Maid confirms.
Yes sir, but now desire no company.
Noise troubles me, and I would gladly sleep.
In company there's comfort, prithee wife
Lend me thy hand, and let me feel thy pulse,
Perhaps some Fever, by their beating I
May guess at thy disease.
My hand, it is there.
A dangerous sickness, and I fear t death,
It is odds you will not scope it. Take that back
And let me prove the t'other, if perhaps
I there can find more comfort.
I pray excuse me.
I must not be denied,
Sick folks are peevish, and must be ore-rul'd, and so shall you.
Alas I have not strength to lift it up.
If not thy hand Wife, show me but thy wrist,
And see how this will match it, here's a Testate
That cannot be out-fac'd.
I am undone.
Hath my Aunt bin playing at handee dandee, nay then if the game go this way I fear she'll have the worst han•… on it.
It is now apparent
How all the last nights business came about,
In this my late suspicion, is confirmed.
My heart hath bled more for thy cursed relapse
Than drops hath issued from thy wounded arm.
But wherefore should I preach to one past hope?
Or where the devil himself claims right in all,
Seek the least part or interest? Leave your Bed,
Up, make you ready; I must deliver you
Into the hand of Justice. O dear friend
It is in vain to guess at this my grief
It is so inundant. Soldier take away that young
But old in mischief.
And being of these Apostat's rid so well,
Isle see my house no more be made a Hell.
Away with the•….
Isle out of the Country, and as soon live in Lapland as Lancashire hereafter.
What for a false illusive apparition? I hope the devil i•… not able to persuade thee thou art a Bastard.
No, but I am afflicted to think that the devil should have power to put such a trick upon us, to countenance a Rascal, that is one.
J hope Arthur has taken a course with his Vnclc about him by this time, who would have thought such a fool as hee could have been a Witch?
Why doe you think there's any wise folks of the qua∣lity; Can any but fools be drawn into a Covenant with the greatest enemy of mankind? yet J cannot think that VVhet∣stone is the Witch? The young Queen that was at the Wed∣ding was in the house ye know.
See Lawrence and Parnell civilly accorded again it seems, and accoutred as they were wont to be when they had their wits.
Blessed be the hour I say may honey, may sweet Pall, that Ay's becomed thaine agony, and thou's becomed maine a∣gone, and may this ea kiss ma us tway become both eane for e∣ver and a day.
Yie marry Loll, and thus shadden it be, there is nought gotten by fawing out, we mun few in or we get nought.
The world's well mended here; we cannot but re∣joyce to see this, Lawrence.
And you been welcome to it Gentlemen.
And we been glad we han it for you.
And I protest I am glad to see it.
And thus shan yeou see it till our deeing hour.
When eon love now for a life time, the Dewle shonot ha the poor to put us to pieces agony.
Why now ell's right and straight and as it should be.
Yie marry that is it, the good hour be blessed for it, that put the wit into may head, to have a mistrust of that pesti∣lent Codpeece-point, that the witched worch Mal Spencer go
me, ah woe worth her, that were it that made awe so nought.
Is it possible?
Yie marry it were an Enchantment, and about an hour since it come intill our hearts to doe, what yeou think, and we did it.
What Parnell?
Marry we take the point, and we cast the point in∣to the fire, and the point spitter'd and spattered in the fire, like an it were (love bless us) a laive thing in the fair; and it hopet and skippet, and riggled, and frisket in the fair, and crept about leek a worm in the fair, that it were work enough for us both with all the Chimney tools to keep it into the fair, and it stinket in the fair, worsen than any brimstone in the fair.
This is wonderful as all the rest.
It wolld ha scared any that hidden their wits till a seen't, and we wern mad eoht it were done.
And this were not above an hour sine, and you con∣not devaise how we han loved t'on t'other by now, yeou would •…en bliss your seln to see it.
Yie an han pit on our working gear, to swinke and serve our Master and Mistress like intill painful servants a∣gone, as we shudden.
It is wondrous well.
And are they well again?
Yie and weel's leek heane bliss them, they are awas weel becomed as none ill had ever been aneast'hem; Lo ye, lo ye, as they come.
Sir, if a contrite heart struck through with sense
Of it's sharpe errors, bleeding with remorse
The black polluted stain it had conceived
Of foul unnatural disobedience
May yet by your fair mercy find Remission;
You shall upraise a Son out of the gulf
Of horror and despair, unto a bliss
That shall for ever crown your goodness, and
Instructive in my after life to serve you,
In all the duties that be fit a son.
Enough, enough, good boy, it is most apparent
We all have had our •…rrors, and as plainly
It now appears, our judgments, yea our reason
Was poisoned by some violent infection,
Quite contrary to Nature.
This sounds well.
I fear it was by Witchcraft: for I now
(Blessed be the power that wrought the happy means
Of my delivery) remember that
Some 3. months since I crossed a way ward woman
(One that I now suspect) for bearing with
A most unseemly disobedience,
In an untoward ill-bred son of hers,
When with an ill look and an hollow voice
She muttered out these words. Perhaps erelong
Thy self shalt be obedient to thy son.
She has played her prank it seems.
Sir I have heard, that Witches apprehended under hands of lawful authority, doe loose their power; And all their spells are instantly dissolved.
If it be so, then at this happy hour,
The Witch is tan that over us had power.
Enough Child, thou art mine and all is well.
Long may you live the well-spring of my bliss,
And may my duty and my fruitful Prayers,
Draw a perpetual stream of blessings from you.
Gentlemen welcome to my best friends house,
You know the unhappy cause that drew me hither.
And cannot but rejoice to see the remedy so no•…e at •…and.
Come Gossip, come Boy—Gentlemen you are come to the bravest discovery—Mr. Seely and the rest, how is it with you? you look reasonable well me thinks.
Sir, we doe find that we have reason enough to thank you for your Neighbourly and pious care of us.
Is all so well with you already? go to, will you know a reason for it Gentlemen: I have caught a whole Kennel of Witches. It seems their Witch is one of 'hem, and so they are discharm'd, they are all in Officers hands, and they will touch here with two or three of them for a little private parley, be∣fore they go to the Justices. Master Generous is coming hi∣there too, with a supply that you dream not of, and your No∣phew Arthur.
You are beholden Sir to Master Generous in behalf of your Nephew for saving his land from forfeiture in time of your distraction.
I will acknowledge it most thankfully.
See he comes.
O Mr. Generous, the noble favour you have showed
My Nephew for ever binds me to you.
I pitied then your misery, and now
Have nothing left but to bewail mine own
In this unhappy woman.
Good Mistress Generous—
Make a full stop there Sir, sides, sides, make sides, You know her not as I doe, stand aloof there Mistress with your darling Witch, your Nephew too if you please, because though he be no witch, he is a wel-willer to the infernal science.
I utterly discard him in her blood
And all the good that I intended him
I will confer upon this virtuous Gentleman.
Well Sir, though you be no Uncle, yet mine Aunt's mine Aunt, and shall be to her dying day.
And that will be about a day after next Sizes I take it,
O here comes more o'your Naunts, Naunt Dickinson &amp; Naunt
Hargrave, odds fish and your Granny Johnson too; we want but a good fire to entertain 'em.
See how they lay their heads together?
No succour.
No relief.
No comfort!
Mousy, my Mousy, gentle Mousy come,
Come my sweet Puckling.
My Mamilion.
What doe they say?
They call their Spirits I think.
Now a shame take you for a farthel offooles, have you known so many of the Devils tricks, and can be ignorant of that common feat of the old Juggler; that is, to leave you all to the Law, when you are once seized on by the talons of Au∣thority? Isle undertake this little Demigorgon Constable with these Common-wealth Characters upon his staff here, is able inspire of all your bugs-words, to stave off the grand Devil for doing any of you good till you come to his Kingdom to him, and there take what you can find.
But Gentlemen, shall we try if we can by examination get from them something that may abbreviate the cause unto the wiser in Commission for the peace before wee carry them before 'em.
Let it be so.
Well say, stand out Boy, stand out Miller, stand out Robin, stand out Soldier, and lay your accusation upon 'em.
Speak Boy doe you know•… these Creatures, women I dare not call 'em?
Yes Sir, and saw them all in the Barn together, and ma∣ny more at their Feast and Witchery.
And so did I, by a Devilish token, I was rid thither, though I rid home again as fast without switch or spur.
I was ill handled by them in the Mill.
And I sliced off a Cats foot there, that is since a hand, who ever wants it.
How I and all my family have suffered you all know.
And how I were betwitched my Pall. here knows.
Yie Loll, and the Witch I know, an I prayen yeou go
me but leave to scrat her well-favorely.
Hold Parnell.
Yeou can blame no honest woman, I trow, to scrat for the thing she leoves.
Ha, ha, ha.
Doe •…ou laugh Gentlewoman? what say you to all these matters?
I will say nothing, but what you know you know,
And as the law shall find me let it take me.
And so say I.
And I.
And I, other confession you get none from us.
What say you Granny?
Mamilion, ho Mamilion, Mamilion.
Who's that you call?
My friend, my Sweet-heart, my Mamilion.
You are not mad?
Ah ha, that's her Devil, her Incubus I warrant; take her off from the rest they'll hurt her. Come hither poor old woman. Isle dandle a Witch a little, thou wilt speak, and tell the truth, and shalt have favour doubt not. Say art not thou a Witch?
It is folly to dissemble yie sir, I am one.
And that Mamilion which thou call upon
Is thy familiar Devil is it not? Nay prithee speak.
Yes Sir.
That's a good woman, how long hast had's acquain∣tance, ha?
A matter of six years Sir.
A pretty matter. What was he like a man?
Yes when I pleased.
And then he lay with thee, did he not sometimes?
Tic folly to dissemble; twice a Week he never failed me.
Humh—and how? and how a little? was he a good Bedfellow?
Tic folly to speak worse of him than he is.
I trust me is it. Give the Devil his due.
He pleased me well Sir, like a proper man.
There was sweet coupling.
Only his flesh felt cold.
He wanted his great fires about him that he has at home.
Peace, and did he wear good clothes?
Gentleman like, but black black points and all.
I, very like his points were black enough. But come we will trifle w'yee no longer. Now shall you all to the Justices, and let them take order with you till the Sizes, and then let Law take his course, and Uivat Rex. Mr. Generous I am sorry for your cause of sorrow, we shall not have your company?
No sir, my Prayers for her souls recovery.
Shall not be wanting to her, but mine eyes
Must never see her more.
Mal, adieu sweet Mal, ride your next journey with the company you have there.
Well Rogue I may live to ride in a Coach before I come to the Gallows yet.
And Mrs. the horse that stays for you rides better with a Halter than your jingling bridle.
Mr. Seely I rejoice for your families atonement.
And I praise heaven for you that were the means to it.
On before Drovers with your untoward Cattle.
Why doe not you follow Mr. By-blow. I thank your
Aunt for the trick she would have fathered us withal.
Well Sir, mine Aunt's mine Aunt, and for that trick I will not leave her till I see her doe a worse.
You're a kind Kinsman.
NOw while the Witches must expect their due
By lawful Justice, we appeal to you
For favourable censure; what their crime
May bring upon'em, ripens yet of time
Ha•… not revealed. Perhaps great Mercy may
After just con•…mnation give them day
Of long•…r life. We represent as much
As they have done, before Laws hand did touch
Upon their guilt; But dare not hold it fit,
That we for Justices and I•…dges sit.
And personate their grave wisdoms on the Stage
Whom we are bound to honour; No, the Age
Allows it not. Therefore unto the Laws
We can but bring the Witches and their cause,
And there w•… leave'em, as their Devils did,
Should we go further with'em? Wit forbid;
What of their story, further shall ensue,
We must refer to time, our selves to you.

AT the lower end of the Banquetting-house, op∣posit
to the State, was a Stage of six foot high,
and on that was raised an Ornament of a new
Invention agreeable to the Subject; consisting of Indian
Trophies: on the one side upon a basement sate a na∣ked
Indian on a whitish Elephant, his legs shortening
towards the neck of the beast, his tire and bases of se∣viral
coloured feathers, representing the Indian Mo∣narchy:
On the other side an Asiatique in the habit of
an Indian borderer, riding on a Camel; his Turban and
Coat differing from that of the Turks, figured for the
Asian Monarchy: over these hung shield like Compare∣timents:
In that over the Indian was painted a Sun
rising, and in the other an half Moon; these had for
finishing the Capital of a great pilaster, which served
as a ground to stick them of, and bore up a large freeze
or border with a Coronice. In this over the Indian
lay the figure of an old man, with a long white hair
and beard, representing the flood Tigris; on his head a
wreath of Canes and Siege, and leaning upon a great
Urn, out of which run water, by him in an extrava∣gent
posture stood a Tiger.
At the other end of this freeze lay another naked
man, representing Meander, the famous River of Asia,
who likewise had a great silver urn, and by him lay an
Unicorn.
In the midst of this border was fixed a rich Comport∣meant,
behind which was a crimson Drapery part of it
borne up by naked Children tacked up in several pleats,
and the rest was at each end of the Freeze tied with a
great knot, and from thence hung down in folds to
the bottom of the pedestals: In the midst of this
Compartment in an Oval was written TEMPLVM¦AMORIS:
all these figures were in their natural co∣lours
bigger than the life, and the Compartiments of
Gold.
A Curtain flying up the first Scene was discovered,
in which appeared a spacious grove of shady trees; and
a far off on a mount with a winding way to the top
was seated a pleasant bower environed with young
trees, and in the lower part walks planted with Cy∣press,
representing the place where the Souls of the
Ancient Poets are fained to reside: the delight of this
prospect was quickly diverted to the fight of a more
strange apparition; for, out of the heaven by little and
little broke forth a great Cloud of a Rosie Colour,
which being come down some little way began to
open, and in it was seen sitting a beautiful woman; her
garment was Sky-colour set all with Stars of gold,
her head was crowned with Laurel, with a spangled
veil hanging down behind, and her hair in artificial
curls graciously dressed, representing Divine Poesy, and
by her a milk white Swan, as she descends singing
out of those venerable shades came forth a company of
ancient Greek Poets, as Demodicus, Foemius, Homer, He∣siod,
Terpander, and Sapho a Poetesse in habits varied and
of several colours, with laurel wreaths on their heads.
Divine Poesy sung this:
AS cheerful as the Mornings light,
Comes Indamora from above,
To guide those Lovers that want sight,
To see and know what they should love.
Her beams into each breast will steal,
And search what every Heart doth mean,
The sadly wounded she will heal,
And make the foully tainted clean.
Rise you, from your dark shades below,
That first gave words an harmony,
And made false Love in Numbers flow,
'Till vice became a mystery.
And when I've purified that Ayre
To which Death turned you long ago,
Help with your voices to declare
What Indamora comes to show.
Soul of our Science! how inspired we come?
By thee restored to voices that lay dumb,
Old lost in many a forgotten Tomb.
You're spirits all; and have so long
From flesh, and frailty absent bin,
That sure though Love should fill your song,
It could not relish now of sin.
Vex not our sad remembrance with our shame!
We have bin punished for ill-gotten fame,
For each loose verse, tormented with a flame.
Descend then, and become with me,
The happy Organs to make known
In an harmonious Embassy,
Our great affair to yonder Throne.
She being descended to the ground in a Majestic
pace, goes up to the State, attended by the fore-named
Poets; and the Cloud that brought her down, closes
as it ascends.
Thou Monarch of men's hearts rejoice!
So much thou art beloved in heaven,
That Fate hath made thy reign her choice,
In which Love's blessings shall be given.
Truth shall appear, and rule 'till she resists
Those subtle charms, and melts those darker mists,
In which Love's Temple's hid from Exorcists.
(Whom forsooth Divine Poesy they stile)
This morn proclaimed it from a falling Cloud.
 Who? Divine Poesy?
 I know her well.
Shoe's one that makes the holy Jigges,
And sacred Catches for the gods, when they
Are merry with mis-takes of men, and laugh
To see us careless of their punishment.
 But who shall bring this mischief to our Art?
 Indamora, the delight of Destiny!
She, and the beauties of her Train: who sure
Though they discover Summer in their looks,
Still carry frozen Winter in their blood.
They raise strange doctrines, and new sects of Love:
Which must not woo or court the Person, but
The Mind; and practise generation not
Of Bodies but of Souls.
 Believe me, my Magical friends,
They must bring bodies with 'em that worship
In our pleasant Temple: I have an odd
Fantastic faith persuades me there will be
Little pastime upon earth without Bodies.
Your Spirit's a cold Companion at midnight.
 Have we so long misse-led and entertained
The youthful of the world, (I mean their bodies)
And now doe they betake themselves unto
The dull imaginary pleasures of
Their souls? This humour cannot last.
 If it should, we may rid our Temple
Of all our Persian Quilts, embroidered Couches,
And our standing Beds; these (I take it) are
Bodily implements; our souls need 'em not.
But where shall this new Sect be planted first?
 In a dull Northern Isle, they call Britain.
 Indeed it is a cold Northerly opinion;
And I'll lay my life begot since their late
Great Frosts. It will be long enough ever it
Shall spread, and prosper in the South! Or if
The Spaniard or Italian ever be
Persuaded out of the use of their bodies,
I'll give mine to a Raven for his Supper.
 The Miracle is more increased, in that
It first takes birth and nourishment in Court.
 But my good damned friend tell me? Is there not
One Courtier will resent the cause, and give
Some countenance to the affairs of the body?
 Certain young Lords at first disliked the Philosophy
As most uncomfortable, sad, and new;
But soon inclined to a superior vote,
And are grown as good Platonicall Lovers
As are to be found in an Hermitage, where he
That was borne last, reckons above fourscore.
To these come forth in hast another Magician, in
shape and habit differing from the other, and spake as
follows.
 Here comes a brother of our misticke Tribe!
 He knows th'occasion of our grief, and by
His hast imports discoveries more strange!
 News! news! my sad companions of the shade!
There's lately landed on our fatal shore
Nine Persian youths, their habit and their looks
So smooth, that from the pleasures in the Elision fields
Each female ghost will come, and enter in
Their flesh again, to make embraces warm.
 I hope these are no Platonicall Lovers,
No such Carthusian Poets as doe write
Madrigals to the mind? more of thy news!
 The rest infers small joy, and little hope:
For though at first their youth and eager thoughts
Directed them where our gay Altar stood,
And they were ready too for sacrifice,
I cannot tell what luckless light informed
Their eyes, but Loves true Temple straight they spied
Through the ascending mists, and would have entered it
To read grave frosty Homilies,
And Antique •awes of Chastity, but that
(As my swift Spirit brought me word) a voice
Sent from within bad them with reverence
Desist till Indamora did appear, for then
The gates would open, and the mists dry up
That thus concealed it from the general view,
Which now their expectation doth attend.
 It is time to wake our drowsy Art, and try
If we have power to hinder Destiny.
Mount! mount! our charms! fetch me, whilst you aspire,
A Spirit of the Element of fire!
 Me one of Ayre! 
 The water me supplies!
 Mine from the center of the earth shall rise!
 These shall infuse their several qualities
In men; if not t'uphold the faction of
The flesh, yet to infect the queasy age
With blacker sins: If we (now we have joined
The force of all the Elements t'assist
The horror of our will) shall not prevail
Against this hum'rous virtue of the Time,
Nature, our weakness must be thought thy crime.
From Persian Princes too, and each as fierce
A Lover, as did ever sigh in verse!
Give audience then, you Ladies of this Isle!
Lord how you lift your fans up now, and smile!
To think (forsooth) they are so fond to take
So long a journey for your beauties sake!
For know, they are come! but sure, ever they return,
Will give your femallships some cause to morn!
For I must tell you, that about them all
There's not one grain, but what's Platonicall!
So bashful that I think they might be drawn
(Like you) to wear close Hoods, or veils of Lawn.
My Master is the chief that doth protect,
Or (as some say) misse-lead this precise sect:
One heretofore that wisely could confute
A Lady at her window with his Lute.
There devoutly in a cold morning stand
Two hours, praising the snow of her white hand,
So long, till's words were frozen 'tweene his lips,
And's Lute-strings learnt their quivering from his hips.
And when he could not rule her to's intent,
Like Tarquin he would proffer ravishment.
But now, no fear of Rapes, until he find
A maidenhead belonging to the mind.
The rest are all so modest too, and pure,
So virginly, so coy, and so demure,
That they retreat at kissing, and but name
Hymen, or Love, they blush for very shame!
Ladies! I must needs laugh! you'll give me leave
I hope; and it is to think how you deceive
Your selves with all this precious art, and care
Tan in your glass to dress your looks, and hair!
When (in good faith!) they heed no outward merit,
But fervently resolve to woo the Spirit!
Ho! doe you all look melancholy vow?
And cast a Cloud of anger o'er the brow?
It is time to fly, and my best swiftness use,
Lest killed with pins, and Bodkins for my news.
The Page retires, and the Noble Persian youths
make their entry, apparelled in Asian Coats of Sea-greene
embroidered that reached down above
their knees, with buttons and loops before and cut
up square to their hips, and returned down with two
short skirts; the sleeves of this Coat were large with∣out
seam, and cut short to the bending of the Arm, and
hanging down long behind, trimmed with buttons as
those of the breast; out of this came a sleeve of white
Satin embroidered, and the Basis answerable to the
sleeve, hung down in gathering underneath the shortest
part of their Coat; on their heads they wore Persian
Turbans silvered underneath, and wound about with
white Cypress, and one fall of a white feather before.
Their Dance ended, the mist and Clouds at an in∣stant
disappear, and the Scene is all changed into a
Sea somewhat calm, where the billows moving
sometimes whole, and sometimes breaking, beat gent∣lie
on the land, which represented a new and strange
prospect; the nearest part was broken grounds and
Rocks, with a mountainous Country, but of a plea∣sant
Aspect, in which were trees of strange form and
Colour, and here and there were placed in the boat•ome
several Arbors like Cottages, and strange beasts and
birds, far unlike the Country of these parts, express∣sing
an Indian Landscape▪ In the Sea were several I-
〈2 pages missing〉
Indamora Queen of Narsinga sate enthroned in the
highest part of this Chariot, in a rich seat, the back of
which was a great Skallop Shell. The habit of the
Masquers was of Isabella Colour, and Watchet, with
Bases in large pains cut through, all over richly em∣embroidered
with silver, and the dressing of their heads
was of silver, with small falls of white feathers tipped
with Watchet. This sight thus moving on the water,
was accompanied with the music and voices of the
Chorus.
SHe comes! each Princess in her train hath all
That wise enamoured Poets, beauty call!
So fit and ready to subdue:
That had they not kind hearts which take a care
To free, and counsel, whom their eyes ensuare,
Poor Lovers would have cause to rue.
More welcome than the wandering Sea-mans star,
When in the Night the VVinds make causeless war,
Until his Bark so long is tossed,
That's sails toragges are blown, the Maine-yard bears
Not sheet enough to wipe, and dry those tears
He shed to see his Rudder lost.
The Song ended, all the fore-part of the Sea was in an
instant turned to dry land, and Indamora with her Con∣tributary
Ladies descended into the room, and made
their entry. Then for enter medium the Music began
again, and sung this Song.
THe Planets though they move so fast,
Have power to make their swiftness last,
But see, your strength is quickly gone!
Yet move by sense and rules of Art,
And each hath an immortal part,
Which cannot tire, but they have none▪
Let then your soft, and nimble feet
Lead and in various figures meet
Those stranger Knights, who though they came
Seduced at first by false desire,
You'll kindle in their breasts a fire
Shall keep Love warm, yet not inflame.
At first they were your beauties prize,
Now offer willing sacrifice
Unto the Virtues of the mind,
And each shall wear when they depart,
A lawful though a loving heart,
And wish you still both strict and kind.
The Masquers having a while reposed, danced their
second Dance, which ended, and the Queen being sea∣ted
under the State by the King, the Scene was champion∣general
into the true Temple of Chaste Love; this Temple
instead of Columns had terms of young Satyrs bea∣ring
up the returns of Architrane Freeze and Coro∣nice,
all enriched of Gold-smiths work, the further
part of the Temple running far from the eye was de∣signed
of another kind of Architecture, with Pilasters,
Neeches, and Statues; and in the midst a stately gate a∣dorn'd
with Colomns and their Ornaments, and a Fron∣tispice
on the top, all which seemed to bee of burnished
gold. Into this Temple enters Sunesis and Thalami; Su∣nesis
a man of a noble Aspect, and richly attired; his
garment of Cloth of gold reaching down below his
knees, and girt with a tucke at the wast, with wide sleeves
turned up; his mantle of Watchet fastened on both should∣ders,
and hanging down long behind, a garland of
Sinope on his head, with a flame of fire issuing out of it,
his Buskins were yellow, wrought with gold. Thalami
a young woman in a Robe of changeable silk girt
with several tuckes, under her breast, and be∣neath
her wast, and great leaves of silver about her
shoulders hanging down to the midst of her Arm;
upon her head a garland of great Marigolds, and puffs
of silvered Lawn between. And at her shoulders were
Angels wings, these sung this Dialogue, assisted by the
Chori.
COme melt thy soul in mine, that when unite,
We may become one virtuous appetite.
First breath thine into me, thine is the part
More heavenly, and doth more adorn the heart.
Thus mixed, our love will ever be discreet,
And all our thoughts and actions pure,
When perfect Will, and strengthened Reason meet,
Then Love's created to endure.
Were Heaven more distant from us, we would strive
To reached with Prayers to make this Union thrive.
Whilst this Song continued, there came softly down
from the highest part of the heaven a bright and trance∣parent
Cloud, which being come to the middle part of
the Ayre it opened, and out of it came Amianteros, or
Chaste Love flying down, clad all in Carnation and
White, and two garlands of Laurel in one hand, and
crowned with another of the same; whilst he descended
the Cloud closes again and returns upwards, and is
hidden in the heavens; Chaste Love being come down
to the earth, was accompanied by Sunesis and Thalami,
Divine Poesy, Orpheus, and the rest of the Poets up to the
State, the great Chorus following at a distance, where
they sung this Song.
whilst by a mixture thus made one,
You're the Emblem of my Deity,
And now you may in yonder Throne,
The pattern of your Union see.
Softly as fruitful showers I fall,
And th'undiscern'd increase I bring,
Is of more precious worth than all
A plenteous Summer pays a Spring.
The benefit it doth impart,
Will not the barren earth improve,
But fructify each barren heart,
And give eternal▪ growth to Love.
To CHARLES the mightiest and the best,
And to the Darling of his breast,
(Who rule be example as by power)
May youthful blessings still increase,
And in their Off-spring never cease,
Till Time's too old to last an hour.
These wishes are so well deserved by thee,
And thought so modest too by Destiny,
That heaven hath sealed the grant as a Decree.
After which they all retire to the Scene, and Inda∣mora
and her Ladies begin the Revels with the King
and the Lords, which continue the most part of the
night. Thus ended this Masque which for the newness
of the invention, variety of Scenes, Apparitions, and
richness of habits was generally approved to be one of
the most magnificent that hath been done in England.

GIve us what no man here is master of,
(Breath) leave us pray, my father Cardinal
Can by the Physic of Philosophy
et al again in order. Leave us, pray. exeunt
How is it with you, Sir?
As with a Ship
Now beat with storms, now safe, the storms are vanished,
And having you my Pilot, I not only
See shore, but harbour; I, to you will open
The book of a black sin, deepe-printed in me:
Oh father! my disease lies in my soul.
The old wound, Sir?
Yes that, it festers inward:
For though I have a beauty to my bed
That even Creation envies at, as wanting
Stuff to make such another, yet on her pillow
I lye by her, but an Adulterer,
And she as an Adulteress, Shoe's my Queen
And wife, yet but my strumpet, tho the Church
Set on the seal of Marriage; good Onaelia,
Niece to our Lord high Constable of Spain,
Was precontracted mine.
Yet when I stung
Your Conscience with remembrance of the Act,
Your ears were deaf to counsel.
I confess it.
Now to untie the knot with your new Queen
Would shake your Crown half from your head.
Even Troy
(Tho she hath wept her eyes out) wud find tears
To whale my kingdoms ruins.
What will you doe then?
She has that Contract written, sealed by you,
And other Churchmen (witnesses untoo't)
A kingdom should be given for that paper.
I wud not, for what lies beneath the Moon,
Be made a wicked Engine to break in pieces
That holy Contract.
It is my souls aim to tie it
Upon a faster knot.
I doe not see
How you can with safe conscience get it from her.
Oh! I know
I wrestle with a Lioness: to imprison her,
And force her too't, I dare not: death! what King
Did ever say I dare not? I must have it:
A Bastard have I by her, and that Cock
Will have (I fear) sharpe spurs, if he crow after
Him that trod for him: something must be done
Both to the Hen and Chicken; haste you therefore
To sad Onaelia, tell her I'm resolved
To give my new Hawk bells, and let her fly:
My Queen I'm weary of, and her will marry:
To this our Text add you what gloss you please,
The secret drifts of Kings are depthlesse Seas.
Oh sorrow, sorrow, say where dost thou dwell?
In the lowest room of Hell.
Art thou borne of Humane Race?
No, no, I have a furrier face.
Art thou in City, Town or Court?
I to every place resort.
Oh why into the world is sorrow sent?
Men afflicted, best repent.
What d•st thou feed on?
Broken sleep.
What take thou pleasure in?
To weep,
To sigh, to sob, to pine, to groan,
To wring my hands, to sit alone.
Oh when? oh when shall sorrow quiet have?
Never, never, never, never,
Never till she finds a Grave.
No lesson, Madam, but Lacrymae's? if you had buri∣ed
nine husbands, so much water as you might squeeze out of
an Onion had been tears enough to cast away upon fellows
that cannot thank you, come be Ioviall.
Sorrow becomes me best.
A suit of laugh and lye down would wear better.
What should I doe to be merry, Cornego?
Be not sad.
But what's the best mirth in the world?
Marry this, to see much, say little, doe little, get
little, spend little, and want nothing.
Oh but there is a mirth beyond all these:
This Picture has so vexed me, I'm half mad,
To spite it therefore I'll sing any song
Thy self shalt tune; say then what mirth is best?
Why then, Madam, what I knock out now is the
very Maribone of mirth, and this it is.
Say on.
The best mirth for a Lawyer is to have fools to
his Clients: for Citizens, to have Noblemen pay their
debts: for Taylors to have store of Satin brought in, for
then how little soar their houses are, they'll bee sure to
have large yards: the best mirth for bawds is to have fresh
handsome whores, and for whores to have rich gulls come
aboard their pinnaces, for then they are sure to build Gally-Asles.
These to such souls are mirth, but to mine none:
Away.
Peace to you, Lady.
I will not sin so much as hope for peace,
And tic a mock ill suits your gravity.
I come to knit the nerves of your lost strength,
To build your ruins up, to set you free
From this your voluntary banishment,
And give new being to your murdered same.
What Aeseulapius can doe this?
The King—tic from the King I come?
A name I hate;
Oh I am deaf now to your Embassy.
Hear what I speak.
Your language breathed from him
Is deaths sad doom upon a wretch condemned.
Is it such poison?
Yes, and were you crystal,
What the King fills you with, wud make you break:
You should (my Lord) be like these robes you we are,
(Pure as the Dye) and like that reverend shape;
Nurse thoughts as full of honour, zeal, and purity;
You should be the Court-Diall, and direct
The King with constant motion, be ever beating
(Like to Clocke-Hammers) on his Iron heart
To make it sound clear, and to feel remorse
You should unlock his soul, wake his dead conscience,
Which like a drowsy Sentinel gives leave
For sins vast army to beleaguer him;
His ruins will be asked for at your hands.
I have raised up a scaffolding to save
Both him and you from falling, doe but hear me.
Be dumb for ever.
Let your fears thus dye:
By all the sacred relics of the Church,
And by my holy Orders, what I minister
Is even the spirit of health.
I'll drink it down into my soul at once.
You shall.
But swear.
What Conjurations can more bind mine oath?
But did you swear in earnest?
Come, you trifle.
No marvel, for my hopes have bin so drowned,
I still despair: Say on.
The King repents.
Pray •hat again, my Lord.
The King repents.
His wrongs to me?
His wrongs to you: the sense
Of sin has pierced his soul.
Blessed penitence!
'Has turned his joys into his leprous bosom,
And like a King vows execution
On all his traitorous passions.
God-like Justice!
Intends in person presently to beg
Forgiveness for his Acts of heaven and you.
Heaven pardon him, I shall.
Will marry you.
Vmh! marry me? will he turn Bigamist?
When, when?
Before the morrow Sun hath rode
Half his days journey; will send home his Queen
As one that staines his bed, and can produce
Nothing but bastard Issue to his Crown:
Why how now? lost in wonder and amazement?
I am so stored with joy that I can now
Strongly wear out more years of misery
Then I have lived.
You need not: here's the King.
Leave us.
With pardon, Sir, I will prevent you,
And charge upon you first.
It is granted, doe:
But stay, what mean these Emblems of distress?
My Picture so defaced! opposed against
A holy Cross! room hung in black! and you
Dressed like ch•efe Mourner at a Funeral?
Look back upon your guilt (dear Sir) and then
The cause that now seems strange, explains it self:
This, and the Image of my living wrongs
Is still confronted by me to beget
Grief like my shame, whose length may outlive Time:
This Cross, the object of my wounded soul,
To which I pray to keep me from despair;
That ever as the sight of one throws up
Mountains of sorrows on my accursed head:
Turning to that, Mercy may check despair,
And bind my hands from wilful violence.
But who hath plaid the Tyrant with me thus?
And with such dangerous spite abused my picture?
The guilt of that lays claim, Sir, to your self,
For being by you ransacked of all my fame,
Robed of mine honour, and dear chastity,
Made by you act the shame of all my house,
The hate of good men, and the scorn of bad,
The song of Broome-men, and the murdering vulgar,
And left alone to bear up all these ills
By you begun, my breast was filled with fire,
And wrapped in just disdain, and like a woman
On that dumb picture wreaked I my passions.
And wished it had been I.
Pardon me, Sir,
My wrongs were great, and my revenge swelled high.
I will descend, and cease to be a King,
To leave my judging part, freely confessing
Thou can not give thy wrongs too ill a name.
And here to make thy apprehension full,
And seat thy reason in a sound belief,
I vow to morrow (ever the rising Sun
Begin his journey) with all Ceremonies
Due to the Church, to seal our nuptials,
To prive thy son with full consent of State,
Spaines heir Apparent, borne in wedlock vows.
And will you swear to this?
By this I swear.
Oh you have sworn false oaths upon that book.
Why then by this.
Take heed you print it deeply:
How for your Concubine (Bride I cannot say)
She staines your bed with black Adultery:
And though her fame masks in a fairer shape
Then mine to the worlds eye, yet (King) you know
Mine honour is less strumpeted than hers,
How-ever butchered in opinion.
This way for her, the Contract which thou hast
By best advice of all our Cardinals,
To day shall be enlarged, till it be made
Past all dissolving: then to our Counsell-Table
Shall she be called, that read aloud, she told
The Church commands her quick return for Florenee,
With such a dower as Spain received with her,
And that they will not hazard heavens dire curse
To yield to a match unlawful, which shall taint,
The issue of the King with Bastardy:
This done, in state Majestic come you forth
(Our new crowned Queen) in sight of all our Peers:
Are you resolved?
To doubt of this were Treason,
Because the King has sworn it.
And will keep it:
Deliver up the Contract then, that I
May make this day end with thy misery.
Here, as the dearest Jewel of my fame,
Locked I this parchment from all viewing eyes,
This your Indenture held alone the life
Of my supposed dead honour; yet (behold)
Into your hands I redeliver it.
Oh keep it, Sir, as you should keep that vow,
To which (being signed by heaven) even Angels bow.
Tic in the Lions paw, and who dares snatch it?
Now to your Beads and Crucifix again.
Defend me heaven!
Pray there may come Ambassadors from France,
Their followers are good Customers.
Save me from madness!
Twill raise the price, being the Kings Mistress.
You doe but counterfeit to mock my joys.
Away bold strumpet.
Are there eyes in heaven to see this?
Call and try, here's a whores curse,
To fall in that belief which her sins nurse.
How now? what quarter of the Moon has she cut out
now? my Lord puts me into a wise office, to be a mad wo∣mans
keeper: why madam!
Ha! where is the King, thou slave?
Let go your hold, or I'll fall upon you as I am a man.
Thou treacherous caitiff, whore's the King?
Hoe's gone, but not so far gone as you are.
Crack all in sunder, oh you Battlements,
And grind me into powder.
What powder? come, what powder? when did
you ever see a woman grinded into powder? I am sure some
of your sex powder men and pepper 'em too.
Is there a vengegnce
Yet lacking to my ruin? let it fall,
Now let it fall upon me?
No, there has too much fallen upon you already.
Thou villain, leave thy hold, I'll follow him:
Like a raised ghost I'll haunt him, break his sleep,
Fright him as hoe's embracing his new Lemon,
Till want of rest bids him run mad and dye,
For making oaths Bawds to his perjury.
Pray be more seasoned, if he made any Bawds he did
ill, for there is enough of that flye-blowne flesh already.
I'm now left naked quite:
Ell's gone, all, all.
No Madam, not all, for you cannot be rid of me:
Here comes your Uncle.
Attired in robes of veneeance, Are you, Uncle?
More horrors yet?
It was never full till now;
And in this torrent all my hopes lye drowned.
Instruct me in the cause.
The King, the Contract!
There's cud enough for you to chew upon.
What's this? a riddle! how? the King, the Contract!
The mischief I divine, which proving true,
Shall kindle fires in Spain to melt his Crown
Even from his head: here's the decree of Fate,
A black deed must a black deed expiate.
THou god of good Apparel, what strange fellows
Are bound to doe thee honour! Mercers books
Show men's devotions to thee; heaven cannot hold
A Saint so stately: Doe not my Dons know me
Because I'm poor in clothes? stood my beaten Taylor
Plaiting my rich hose, my silk stocking-man
Drawing upon my Lordships Courtly calfe
Pairs of Embroidered things, whose golden clocks
Strike deeper to the faithful shop-keepers heart
Than into mine to pay him.—Had my Harbour
Perfumed my lousy thatch here, and poked out
Me Tusks more stiff than are a Cats moustaches,
These pide-wing'd Butterflies had known me then•
Another flye-boat 〈◊〉 thee, Illustrious Don.
Sir is the King at leisure to speak Spanish
With a poor Sculdier?
No.
No, sirrah, you, no!
You Don with th'oaker face, I wish to ha thee
But on a Breach, stifling with smoke and fire,
And for thy No, but whiffing Gunpowder
Out ofan Iron pipe, I wooed but ask thee
If thou wood'st on, and if thou did cry No,
Thou shudst read Canon-Law, I'd make thee roar,
And wear cut-beaten-sattyn; I wooed pay thee
Though thou poised not thy Mercer: mere Spanish Ienne•s,
Signeor is the King at leisure?
To doe what?
To hear a Soldier speak.
I am no eare-picker
To sound his hearing that way.
Are you of Court, Sir?
Yes, the Kings Barber.
That's his eare-picker: your name, I pray.
Don Cockadilio:
If, Soldier, thou hast suits to beg at Court,
I shall descend so low as to betray
Thy paper to the hand Royal.
I beg, you whoreson muscod! my petition
Is written on my bosom in red wounds.
I am no Barbar-Surgeon.
You yellow hammer, why shaver:
That such poor things as these, only made up
Of Taylors shreds and Merchants silken rags,
And Apothecary drugs to lend their breath
Sophisticated smells, when their rank guts
Stink worse than cowards in the heat of battle;
Such whalebond-doublet-rascals, that owe more
To Laundresses and Sempsters for laced Linen
Then all their race from their great grand-father
To this their reign, in clothes were ever worth:
These excrements of Silke-wormes! oh that such flies
Doe buzz about the beams of Majesty!
Like earwigs, tickling a Kings yielding ear
With that Court-Organ (Flattery) when a soldier
Must not come near the Court gates twenty score,
But stand for want of clothes, (tho he win Towns)
Amongst the Almesbasket-men! his best reward
Being scorned to be a fellow to the black guard:
Why shut a Soldier (being the worlds right arm)
Be cut thus by the left? (a Courtier?)
Is the world all Ruff and Feather, and nothing else? shall
I never see a Taylor give his coat with a disterence from a
Gentleman?
My Baltazar!
Let us make haste to meet thee: how art thou altered?
Doe you not know him?
Yes, Sir, the brave Soldier
Employed against the Moors.
Half turned Moore!
I'll honour thee, reach him a chair, that Table,
And now Aenaeas-like let thine own Trumpet
Sound forth thy battle with those slavish Moors.
My music is a Canon; a pitch• field my stage;
Furies the Actors, blood and vengeance the scene; death
the story; a sword imbrued with blood, the pen that writes,
and the Poet a terrible buskind Tragical fellow, with a
wreath about his head of burning match instead of Baize.
On to the Battle.
It is here without bloud-shed: This our maine
Battalion, that the Van, this the Vow, these the wings, here
we fight, there they fly, here they insconco, and here ou•
sconces lay 17 Moons on the cold earth.
This satisfies mine eye, but now mine ear
Must have his music too; describe the battle.
The Battle? Am I come from doing to talking?
The hardest part for a Soldier to play is to prate well; our
Tongues are Fifes, Drums, Petronels, Muskets, Culverin
and Canon, these are our Roarers; the Clocks whieh wee
go by, are our hands; thus wee reckon ten, our swords
strike eleven, and when steel targets of proof clatter one
against another, then it is noon, that's the height and the
heat of the day of battle.
So.
To that heat we came, our Drums beat, Pikes were
shaken and shivered, swords and Targets clash'd and clat∣ter'd,
Maskets rattled, Canons roared, men dyed groaning.
brave laced Ierkings and Feathers looked pale, tottered ras∣calls
fought pell mell; here fell a wing, there heads were
•oct like foot-balls; legs and arms quarrelled in the ayre,
and yet lay quietly on the earth; horses trampled upon
heaps of Carkafles, Troops of Carbines tumbled wounded
from their horses; we besiege Moors, and famine us, Mu∣tinies
bluster and are calm; I vowed not to doff mine Are∣more,
tho my flesh were frozen too't and turned into Iron,
nor to cut head nor beard till they yielded; my hairs and
oath are of one length, for (with Caesar) thus write I mine
own story, Veni, vidi, vici.
A pitched field quickly fought: our hand is thine;
And because thou shalt not murmur that thy blood
Was lavished forth for an ungrateful man,
Demand what we can give thee, and it is thine.
Only your love.
It is thine, rise, Soldiers best accord
When wounds of wrongs are healed up by the sword.
Let me come in, I'll kill that treacherous King
The murderer of mine honour, let me come in.
What women's voice is that?
Medina's Niece.
Bar out that fiend.
I'll tea•e him with my nails,
Let me come in, let me come in, help, help me.
Keep her from following me; a guard.
They are ready, Sir.
Let a quick summons call our Lords together;
This disease kills me.
Sir I would be private with you.
Forbear us, but see the doors well guarded.
Will you, Sir, promise to give me freedom of
speech?
Yes I will, take it, speak any thing, it is pardoned.
You are a whore master; doe you send me to win
Towns for you abroad, and you lose a kingdom at home?
What kingdom?
The fairest in the world, the kingdom of your fame,
Your honour.
Wherein?
I'll be plain with you; much mischief is done by
the mouth of a Canon, but the fire begins at a little touch∣hole;
you heard what Nightingale sung to you even now.
Ha, ha, ha.
Angels erred but once and fell, but you, Sir, spit in
heavens face every minute, and laugh at it: laugh still; foal∣low
your courses; doe; let your vices run like your Ken∣nils
of hounds yelping after you, till they pluck down the
fairest head in the heard, everlasting blisle.
Any more?
Take sin as the English snuffed Tobacco, and scorn∣fully
blew the smoke in the eyes of heaven, the vapour
flies up in clouds of bravery; but when it is out, the coal is
black (your conscience,) and the pipe stinks; a sea of
Rose-water cannot sweeten your corrupted bosom.
Nay, spit thy venom.
It is Aqua Coelestis, no venom; for when you shall
clasp up those two books, never to be opened again, when
by letting fall that Anchor, which can never more bee
weighed up, your mortal Navigation ends: then there's no
playing at spurne-point with thunderbolts. A Vintner then
for unconscionable reckoning, or a Taylor for unmeasura∣ble
Items shall not answer in half that fear you must.
No more.
I will follow Truth at the heals, tho her foot beat
my gums in pieces.
The Barber that draws out a Lions tooth
Curses his Trade; and so shalt thou.
I care not.
Because you have beaten a few base-borne Moors,
Me think thou to chastise? what's past I pardon,
Because I made the key to unlock thy railing;
But if thou dare once more be so untuned,
I'll send thee to the Galleys, who are without there:
How now?
In danger, Sir?
Y•s, yes, I am; but it is no point of weapon
Can rescue me; go presently and summon
All our chief Grandoes, Cardinals, and Lords
Of Spain to meet in Counsel instantly:
We called you forth to execute a business
Of another strain,—but it is no matter now
Thou die, when next thou furrowest up our brow•
So: dye!
I find my Sceptre shaken by enchantments
Charactred in this parchment, which to unloose,
I'll practise only counter-charmes of fire,
And blow the ipel•s of lightning into smoke:
Fetch burning Tapers.
Give me Audience, Sir;
My apprehension opens me a way
To a close fatal mischief, worse then this
You strive to murder; O this Act of yours
Alone shall give your dangers life, which else
Can never grow to height; doe, Sir, but read
A book here clasped up, which too late you opened,
Now blotted by you with foul marginal notes.
Art frantic?
You are so, Sir.
If I be,
Then here's my first mad fit.
For Honours sake,
For love you bear to conscience.—
Reach the flames:
Grandoes and Lords of Spain be witness all
What here I cancel; read, doe you know this bond?
Our hands are too't.
It is your confirmed Contract
With my sad kinswoman: but wherefore, Sir,
Now is your rage on fire, in such a presence
To have it more•e in Ashes?
Marquess Daenia,
We'll lend That tongue, when this no more can speak.
Dear Sir!
I am deaf,
Played the full consort of the Spheres unto me
Upon their loudest strings—so burn that witch
Who would dry up the tree of all Spaines Glories,
But that I purge her sorceries by fire:
Troy lies in Cinders; let your Oracles
Now laugh at me if I have been dcceiv'd
By their ridiculous riddles: why (good father)
(Now you may freely chide) why was your zeal
Ready to burst in showers to quench our fury?
Fury indeed, you give it proper name:
What have you done? closed up a festering wound
Which rots the heart: like a bad Surgeon,
Labouring to pluck out from your eye a moat,
You thrust the eye clean out.
You are mad ex tempore:
What eye? which is that wound?
That Scroll, which now
You make the black Indenture of your lust,
Although eat up in flames, is printed here,
In me, in him, in these, in all that saw it,
In all that ever did but hear it was yours:
That scold of the whole world (Fame) will anon
Rai•e with her thousand tongues at this poor shift
Which gives your sin a flame greater than that
You lent the paper; you to quench a wild fire,
Cast oil upon it.
Oil to blood shall turn,
I'll lose a limb before the heart shall morn.
Hoe's mad with rage or joy.
With both; with rage
To see his follies checked, with fruitless joy
Because he hopes his Co•tract is cut off
Which Divine lustice more exemplifies.
Whore's the King?
Wrapped up in clouds of linghtning?
What has he done? saw you the Contract 〈◊〉
As I did hear a minion swear he threatened.
He tore it not, but burnt it.
Openly!
And heaven with us to witness.
Well, that fire
Will prove a catching flame to burn his kingdom.
Meet and consult.
No more, trust not the ayre
With our projections, let us all revenge
Wrongs done to our most hoble kinswoman;
Action is honours language, swords are tongues,
Which both speak best, and best do right our wrongs.
Madam, theres a bear without to speak with you.
A Bear.
Its a Man all hairy, and thats as bad.
Who first?
Tic one Master Captain Baltazar.
I doe not know that Baltazar.
He desires to see you: and if you love a water-•pa∣eel
before he be shorn, see him.
Let him come in.
Hist; a duck, a duck; there she is, Sir.
A Soldiers good wish bless you Lady.
Good wishes are most welcome (Sir) to me▪
So many bad ones blast me.
Doe you not know me?
I scarce know my self.
I ha been at Tennis, Madam, with the King: I
gave him 15 and all his faults, which is much, and now I
come to toffe a ball with you.
I am bandved too much up and down a•ready.
Yes, she has been struck under line, master Soul∣d•.
I conceit you, dare you trust your self alone with me?
I have been laden with such weights of wrong,
That heavier cannot press me: hence Cornego.
Hence Cornego? stay Captain: when man and wo∣man
are put together, some egg of villainy is sure to be sate
upon.
What would you say to him should kill this man
That hath you so dishonoured?
Oh I wooed crown him
With thanks, praise, gold, and tender of my life.
Shall I bee that Germane Fencer, and beat all the
knocking boys before me? shall I kill him?
There's music in the tongue that dares but speak it.
That Fiddle then is in me, this arm can do it, by
poniard, poison, or pistol: but shall I do it indeed?
One step to humane bliss is sweet revenge.
Stay; what made you love him?
His most goodly shape,
Married to royal virtues of his mind.
Yet now you would divorce all that goodness; and
why? For a little lechery of revenge? it's a lye: the Bur
that sticks in your throat is a throne; let him out of his
mess of kingdoms; cut out but one, and lay Sicilia, Arra∣gon,
Naples, or any else upon your trencher, and you'll
praise Bastard for the sweetest wine in the world, and call
for another quart of it: It is not because the man has left
you, but because you are •ot the woman you would be, that
mads you: A shee-cuckold is an untameable monster.
Monster of men thou art; thou bloody villain,
Traitor to him who never injured thee;
Dost thou profess Arms? and art bound in honour
To stand up like a brazen wall to guard
Thy King and Country, and wood'st thou ruin both?
You spur me on too't.
True;
Worse am I then the horridest fiend in hell
To murder him whom once I loved too well:
For tho I could run mad, and tear my hair,
And kill that godless man that turned me vile,
Though I am cheated by a perjurous Prince
Who has done wickedness, at which even heaven
Shakes when the Sun beholds it, O yet I'd rather
Ten thousand poyton'd poniards stabbed my breast
Than one should touch his: bloody slave! I'll play
My self the H•nginan, and will Butcher thee
If thou but prick••t his finger.
•jest thou •no so! give me thy goll, thou art a noble
girl; I did play the Devils part, and roar in a feigned
voy•e, but I am the honestest Devil that ever spent fire: I
would not drin•e that inf•rnall draught of a Kings blood,
to go recling to damnation, for the weight of the world in
Diamonds.
Art thou not counterfeit?
Now by my skarres I am not.
•'le call thee honest Soldier then, and woo thee
To be an often Visitant.
Your servant;
Yet must I be aston• upon a hill,
For tho I doe no good, I'll not lye still.
WHen first you came from Florence, wud the world
Had with an universal dire eclipse
Bin over whelmed, no more to gaze on day,
That you to Spain had never found the way,
Here to be lost for ever.
We from one Climate
Drew inspiration: as thou then hast eyes
To read my wrongs, ••be thy head an Engine
To raise up ponderous mischief to the height,
And then thy hands the Executioners:
A true Italian spirit is a ball
Of Wild-fire, hurting most when it seems spent;
Great ships on small rocks beating oft, are rent;
And so let Spain by us: but (Malateste)
Why from the Presence did you single me
Into this Gallery?
To show you, Madam,
The picture of your self, but so defaced,
And mangled by proud Spaniards, it wooed whet
A sword to arm the poorest Florentine
In your just wrongs.
As how? let's see that picture.
Here it is then: Time is not scarce four days old.
Since I, and certain Dons (sharp-witted fellows,
And of good rank) •ere with two Iesuits
(Grave profound Scholars) in deep argument
Of various propositions; at the last,
Question was move•d touching your marriage,
And the •ings pre-contract.
So; and what followed?
Whether it were a question moved by chance•
Or spitefully of purpose (I being there,
And your own Country-man) I cannot tell,
But when much tossing
Had bandied both the King and you, as pleased
Those that took up the Rackets; in conclusion,
The Father Iesuits (to whose subtle Music
Every care there was tied) stood with their lives
In stiff defence of this opinion—
Oh pardon me if I must speak their language.
Say on.
That the most Catholic King in marrying you,
Keeps you but as his whore.
Are we their Theames?
And that Medina's Niece (Onaelia)
Is his true wife: her bastard son they said
(The King being dead) should claim and wear the Crown;
And whatsoever children you shall bear,
To be but bastards in the highest degree,
As being begotten in Adultery.
We will not grieve at this, but with hot vengeance
Beat down this armed mischief: Malateste!
What whirlewinds can we raise to blow this storm
Back in their faces who thus shoot at me?
If I were fit to be your Counsellor,
Thus would I speak: Feign that you are with child;
The mother of the Maids, and some worn Ladies,
Who oft have guilty been to court great be llies,
May, tho it be not so, get you with child
With swearing that it is true.
Say it is believed,
Or that it so doth prove?
The joy thereof,
Together with these earth-quakes, wh•ch will shake
All• pain, if they their Prince doe dis-inherit,
So borne, of such a Queen; being only da•ghter
To such a brave spirit as the Duke of Florence,
All this buzz•d into the King, he cannot choose
But charge that all the Bells in Spain echo up
T••is Joy to heaven; that Bone-fires change the night
To a high Noon, with beams of sparkling flames;
And that in Churches, Organs (charmed with prayers)
Speak loud for your most safe delivery.
What fruits grow out of these?
These; you must stick
(As here and there spring weeds in banks of flowers)
Spies amongst the people, who shall lay their ears
To every mouth, and steal to you their whisperings.
So.
It is a plummet to sound Spanish hearts
How deeply they are yours: besides, a guess
Is hereby made of any faction
That shall combed against you; which the King seeing,
If then he will not rouse him like a Dragon
To guard his golden fleece, and rid his Harlot
And her base bastard hence, either by death,
Or in some traps of state, ensnare them both,
Let his own ruins crush him.
This goes to trial:
Be thou my Magic book, which reading o'er
Their counterspels wee•ll break; or if the King
Will not by strong hand fix me in his Throne,
But that I must be held Spaines blazing Star,
Be it an ominous charm to call up war.
Here s•a parcel of mans flesh has been hanging up
and down all this morning to speak with you.
Is it not some executioner?
I see nothing about him to hang in butt's garters.
Sent from the King to warn me of my death:
I prethe bid him welcome.
He says he is a Poet.
Then bid him better welcome:
Belike he's come to write my Epitaph,
Some scurvy thing I warrant; welcome Sir.
Madam, my love presents this book unto you.
To me? I am not worthy of a line,
Unless at that line hang some hook to choke me:
To the Most honoured Lady—Onaelia.
Fellow thou lie, I'm most dishonoured:
Thou should have writ to the most wronged Lady.
The Title of this book is not to me,
I tear it therefore as mine Honour's torn.
Your Verses are lamed in some of their fact, Ma∣ster
Poet.
What does it treat of?
Of the soilemne Triumphs
Set forth at Coronation of the Queen.
Hi•ing (the Poets whir•e-wind) blast thy lines.
Come thou to mock my Tortures with her Triumphs?
Alas Madam!
When her funerals are past,
Crown thou a Dedieation to my joys,
And thou shalt swear each line a golden verse:
Cornego, burn this Idol.
Your book shall come to light, Sir.
I have read legends of disastrous Dames;
Will none set pen to paper for poor me?
Can write a bitter Satire? brainless people
Doe call'em Libels: dare thou write a Libel?
I dare mix gall and poison with my Ink.
Doe it then for me.
And every line must be
A whip to draw blood.
Better.
And to dare
The stab from him it touches: he that writes
Such Libels (as you call'em) must launch wide
The fores of men's corruptions, and even search
To'th quick for dead flesh, or for rotten cores:
A Poets Ink can better cure some sores
Then Surgeons Balsum.
Undertake that Cure,
And crown thy verse with Baize.
Madam I le do it:
But I must have the parties Character.
The King.
I doe not love to pluck the quills
With which I make pens, out of a Lions claw:
The King! shoo'd I be bitter against the King,
I shall have scurvy ballads made of me,
Sung to the Hanging Tune. I dare not, Madam.
This baseness follows your profession:
You are like common Beadles, apt to lash
Almost to death poor wretches not worth striking,
But fawn with flavish flattery on damned vices,
So great men act them: you clap hands at those,
Where the true Poet indeed doth scorn to guild
A gaudy Tomb with glory of his Verse,
Which cos•ins stinking Carrion: no, his lines
Are free as his Invention; no base fear
Can shake his pen to Temporise even with Kings,
The blacker are their crimes, he louder sings.
Go, go, thou can not write: it is but my calling
The Muses help, that I may be inspired:
Cannot a woman be a Poet, Sir?
Yes, Madam, best of all; for Poesy
Is but a feigning, feigning is to lye,
And women practise lying more than men.
Nay, but if I shoo'd write, I wooed tell truth:
How might I reach a lofty strain?
Thus, Madam:
Books, Music, Wine, brave Company, and good Cheer,
Make Poets to soar high, and sing most clear.
Are they borne Po•ts?
Yes.
Dye they?
Oh never dye.
My misery is then a Poet sure,
For Time has given it an Eternity:
What sorts of Poets are there?
Two sorts, Lady:
The great Poets, and the small Poets.
Great and small!
Which doe you call the great? the fat ones?
No: but such as have great heads, which emptied forth▪
Fill all the world with wonder at their lines;
Fellows which swell big with the wind of praise:
The small ones are but shrimps of Poesy.
Which in the kingdom now is the best Poet?
Emulation.
Which the next?
Necessity.
And which the worst?
Selfe-love.
Say I turn Poet, what should I get?
Opinion.
Alas I have got too much of that already;
Opinion is my Evidence, Judge, and Jury;
Mine own guilt, and opinion, now condemn me;
I'll therefore be no Poet; no, nor make
Ten Muses of your nine; I swear for this;
Verses, tho freely borne, like slaves are sold,
I Crown thy lines with Baize, thy love with gold:
So fare thou well.
Our pen shall honour you.
The Poets book, Madam, has got the Inflammati∣on
of the Livor, it dyed of a burning F•aver.
What shall I doe, Cornego? for this Poet
Has filled me with a fury: I could write
Strange Satyrs now against Adulterers,
And Marriage-breakers.
I believe you, Madam;—but here comes your
Uncle.
Whore's our Niece?
Turn your brains round, and recollect your spirits,
And see your Noble friends and kinsmen ready
To pay r•avenge his due.
That word Revenge
Startles my sleepy Soul, now thoroughly wakend
By the fresh Object of my haplesse child,
Whose wrongs reach beyond mine.
How doth my sweet mother?
How doth my prettiest boy?
Wrongs, like great whirlewinds,
Shake highest Battlements; few for heaven wooed care.
Shoo'd they be ever happy: they are half gods
Who both in good days, and good fortune share.
I have no part in either.
You shall in both,
Can Swords but cut the way.
I care not much, so you but gently strike him,
And that my Child escape the lightning.
For that our Nerves are knit; is there not here
A promising face of manly princely virtues,
And shall so sweet a plant be rooted out
By him that ought to fix it fast in the ground?
Sebastian, what will you doe to him that hurts your mother?
The King my father shall kill him I trow.
But, sweet Cousin, the King loves not your mother.
•le make him love her when I am a King.
La you, there's in him a Kings heart already:
As therefore we before together vowed,
Lay all your warlike hands upon my Sword,
And swear.
Will you swear to kill me, Uncle?
Oh not for twenty worlds.
Nay then draw and spare not, for I love fighting.
Stand in the midst (sweet Cousin) we are your guard•
These Hammers shall for thee beat out a Crown
If all hit right; swear therefore (Noble friends)
By your high bloods, by true Nobility,
By what you owe Religion, owe to your Country,
Owe to the raising your posterity,
By love you bear to virtue, and to Arms,
(The shield of Innocence) swear not to sheath
Your Swords, when once drawn forth.
Oh not to kill him
For twenty thousand worlds.
(Will you be quiet?)
Your Swords when once drawn forth, till they ha forced
Yo• godless, perjurous, per•idious man,—
Pray rail not at him so.
Art mad? you're idle:—till they ha forced him
To cancel his late lawless bond he sealed
At the high Altar to his Florentine Strumpet,
And in his bed lay this his troth-plight wife.
I, I, that's well; pray swear.
To this we swear.
Uncle, I swear too.
Our forces let's unite, be bold and secret,
And Lion-like with open eyes let's sleep,
Streams smooth and slowly running, are most deep.
The Presence door be guarded; let none enter
On forfeit of your lives, without our knowledge:
Oh you are false Physicians all unto me,
You bring me poison, but no Antidote•s.
Your self that poison brews.
Prethe no more.
I will, I must speak more.
Thunder aloud.
My child, yet newly quickened in my womb,
Is blasted with the fires of Bastardy.
Who! who dares once but think so in his dream?
Medina's faction preached it openly.
Be cursed he and his Faction: oh how I labour
For these preventions! but so cross is Fate,
My ills are ne'er hid from me, but their Cures:
What's to be done?
That which being left undone,
Your life lies at the stake: let 'em be breathless
Both brat and mother.
Ha!
She plays true Music, Sir:
The mischiefs you are drench•d in are so full,
You need not fear to add to 'em; since now
No way is left to guard thy rest secure,
But by a means like this.
All Spain rings forth
Medina's nun, and his Confederates.
All his All yes and friends rush into troops
l•eke raging Torrents.
And loud Trumpet forth
Your perjuries: seducing the wild people,
And with rebellious faces threatening all.
I shall be massacred in this their spleen,
Ever I have time to guard my self; I feel
The fire already falling: whore's our guard?
Planted at Garden gate, with a strict charge
That none shall enter but by your command.
Let 'em be doubled: I am full of thoughts,
A thousand wheels tassel my uncertain fears,
There is a storm in my hot boiling brains,
Which rises without wind, a horrid one:
What clamor's that?
Some treason: guard the King.
Not in?
One of your guard's slain, keep off the murderer.
I am none, Sir.
There's a man dropped down by thee.
Thou desperate follow, thus press in upon us!
Is murder all the story we shall read?
What • ing can stand, when thus his Subjects bleed?
What hast thou done?
No hurt.
Plaid even the Wolf,
And from a fold committed to my charge,
Stolen and devoured one of the flock.
You've sheep enough for all that, Sir; I have killed
none tho; or if I have, mine own blood shed in your quar∣rels,
may beg my pardon; my business was in haste to
you.
I wooed not have thy sin scoar'd on my head
For all the Indian Treasury: I prethe tell me,
Suppose thou had our pardon, O can that cure
Thy wounded conscience, can there my pardon help thee
Yet having deserved well both of Spain and us,
We will not pay thy worth with loss of life,
But banish thee for ever.
For a Grooms death?
No more: we banish thee our Court and kingdom:
A King that fosters men so dipped in blood,
May be called merciful, but never good:
Be gone upon thy life.
Well: farewell.
The fellow is not dead but wounded, Sir.
After him, Malateste; in our lodging
Stay that rough fellow, hoe's the man shall do it:
Haste, or my hopes are lost.
Why are you sad, Sir?
For thee, Pauline, swell my troubled thoughts,
Like billows beaten by too warring winds.
Be you but ruled by me, I'll make a calm
Smooth as the breast of heaven.
Instruct me how.
You (as your fortunes tie you) are inclined
To have the blow given.
Whore's the Instrument?
It is •and in Baltazar.
Hoe's banished.
True,
But staid by me for this.
His spirit is hot
And rugged, but so honest, that his soul
Will ne'er turn devil to doe it.
Put it to trial:
Retire a little, hither I'll send for him,
Offer repeal and favours if he doe it;
But if deny, you have no finger in it,
And then his doom of banishment stands good.
Be happy in thy workings; I obey.
Stay Lopes.
Madam.
Step to our Lodging (Lopes)
And instantly bid Malateste bring
The banished Baltazar to us.
I shall.
Thrive my black plots, the mischiefs I have set
Must not so dye; Ills must new Ills beget.
Now! what hot poisoned Custard must I put my
Spoon into now?
None, for mine honour now is thy protection.
Which, Noble Soldier, she will pawn for thee,
But never forfeit.
It is a •air gage, keep it.
Oh Baltazar! I am thy friend, and marked thee;
When the King sentenced thee to banishment
Fire sparkled from thine eyes of rage and grief;
Rage to be doomed so for a Groom so base,
And grief to lose thy County: thou hast killed none,
The Milke-sop is but wounded, thou art not banished.
If I were, I lose nothing, I can make any Country
mine: I have a private Coat for Italian Ste•l•tto's, I can
be treacherous with the Wallowne, drunk with the Dutch,
a Chimney-sweeper with the Irish, a Gentleman with the
Welsh, and turn arrant thief with the English, what then
is my Country to me?
The King (who raped with fury) banished thee,
Shall give thee favours, yield but to destroy
What him distempers.
So: And what's the dish I must dress?
Only the cutting off a pair of lives.
I love no Red-wine healths.
The King commands it, you are but Executioner.
The Hang-man? An office that will hold so long as
hemp lasts, why doe not you beg the office, Sir?
Thy victories in field did never crown thee
As this one Act shall.
Prove but that, it is done.
Follow him close, hoe's yielding.
Thou shalt be called thy Countries Patriot,
For quenching out a fire now newly kindling
In factious bosoms, and shalt thereby save
More Noble Spaniards lives, than thou slew Moors.
Art thou not yet converted?
No point.
Read me then:
Medina's Niece (by a Contract from the King)
Lays claim to all that's mine, my Crown, my bed;
A son she has by him must fill the Throne,
If her great faction can but work that wonder:
Now hear me—
I doe with gaping ears.
I swell with hopeful issue to the King.
A brave Don call you mother.
Of this danger
The fear afflicts the King.
Cannot much blame him.
If therefore by the riddance of this Dame—
Riddance? oh! the meaning on it is murder.
Stab her, or so, that's all.
That Spain be free from frights, the King •
And I, now held his Infamy, be called Queen,
The Treasure of the kingdom shall lye open
To pay thy Noble darings.
Come, I le do it, provided I hear Jove call 〈◊〉
tho he rores; I must have the Kings hand to this war•
else I dare not serve it upon my Conscience
Be firm then; behold the King is come.
Acquaint him.
I found the mettle hard, but with oft beating
Hee s now so softened, he shall take impression
From any seal you give him.
Baltazar, come hither, listen; whatsoever our Queen
Has importuned thee to touching Onaelia,
Niece to the Constable, and her young son,
My voice shall second it, and sign her promise.
Their riddance?
That.
What way? by poison?
So.
Starving? or strangling, stabbing, smothoring?
Good.
Any way so it is done.
But I will have, Sir,
This under your own hand, that you desire it,
You plot it, set me on too't.
Pen, Ink, and paper.
And then as large a pardon as law and wit
Can engross for me.
Thou shalt ha my pardon.
A word more, Sir, pray will you tell me one thing?
Yes any thing, dear Baltazar.
Suppose
I have your strongest pardon, can that cure
My wounded Conscience? can there your pardon help me?
you not only knock the Ewe a'th head, but cut the Inno∣cent
Lambs throat too, yet you are no Butcher.
Is this thy promised yielding to an Act
So wholesome for thy Country?
Chide him not.
I wooed not have this sin scored on my head
For all the Indaean Treasury.
That song no more:
Doe this and I will make thee a great man.
Is there no farther trick in it, but my blow, your
purse, and my pardon?
No nets upon my life to entrap thee.
Then trust me: these knuckles work it.
Farewell, be confident and sudden.
Yes:
Subjects may stumble, when Kings walk astray;
Thine Acts shall be a new Apocrypha.
YOu meet a Hydra; see, if one head fails
Another with a sulphurous beak stands yawning
What hath raised up this Devil?
A great mans vices, that can raise all hell.
What wooed you call that man, who under-saile,
In a most goodly ship, wherein hee ventures
His life, fortunes, and honours, yet in a fury
Should hew the Mast down, cast Sails overboard,
Fire all the Tacklings, and to crown this maduesse,
Shoe•'d blow up all the Decks, burn th'oaken ribs,
And in that Combat twixt two Elements
Leap desperately, and drown himself in the Seas,
What were so brave a fellow?
A brave black villain.
That's I; all that brave black villain dwells in me,
If I be that black villain; but I am not,
A Nobler Character prints out my brow,
Which you may thus read, I was banished Spain
For emptying a Court-Hogshead, but repealed,
So I wooed (ever my reeking Iron was cold)
Promise to give it a deep crimson dye
In—none hear,—stay—no, none hear.
Whom then?
Basely to stab a woman, your wronged Niece,
And her most innocent son Sebastian.
The Boar now foams with whetting.
What has blunted
Thy weapons point at these?
My honesty;
A sign at which few dwell: (pure honesty!)
I am a vaslaile to Medina's house,
He taught me first the A, B, C, of war:
Ere I was Truncheon-high, I had the stile
Of beardless Captain, writing then but boy,
And shall I now turn slave to him that fed me
With Cannon-bullets' and taught me, Estridge-like,
To digest Iron and Steel! no: yet I yielded
With willow-bendings to commanding breaths.
Of whom?
Of King and Queen: with supple Hams,
And an ill-boading look, I vowed to do it:
Yet, lest some choake-peare of State-policy
Shoo'd stop my throat, and spoil my drinking-pipe,
See (like his cloak) I hung at the Kings elbow,
Till I had got his hand to sign my life.
Shall we see this and sleep?
No, whilst these wake.
It is the Kings hand.
Think you me a quoyner?
No, no, thou art thy self still, Noble Baltazar,
• ever knew thee honest, and the mark
Stands still upon thy fore-head.
Else flea the skin off.
I ever knew thee valiant, and to scorn
All acts of bas•ness: I have seen this man
Write in the field such stories with his sword,
That cur best Chiefetaines swore there was in him
As it were a new Philosophy of fighting,
His deeds were so Puntillious: In one battle,
When death so nearly mist my ribs, he struck
Three horses stone-dead under me: This man,
Three times that day (even through the jaws of danger)
Redeem d me up, and (I shall print it ever)
Stood o'er my body with Colossus thighs,
Whilst all the Thunder-bolts which war could throw,
Fell on his head: And Baltazar, thou can not
Be now but honest still, and valiant still,
Not to kill boys and women.
My bitter here, cats no such meat.
Go fetch the mark'd-out Lamb for flaughter hither,
Good fellow-souldier aid him,—and stay—mark,
Give this false fire to the believing King,
That the child's sent to heaven, but that the mother
Stands rocked so strong with friends, ten thousand billows
Cannot once shake her.
This I'dle doe.
Away:
Yet one word more; your Counsel, Noble friends;
Hark Baltazar, because nor eyes nor tongues,
Shall by loud Larums, that the poor boy lives,
Question thy false report, the child shall closely
Mantled in darkness, forthwith be conveyed
To the Moans•ery of Saint Paul.
Good.
Dispatch then, be quick.
As Lightning.
This fellow is some Angel dropped from heaven
To preserve Innocence.
He is a wheel
Of swift and turbulent motion; I have trusted him,
Yet will not hang on him too many plummets,
Lest with a headlong Cyre he ruins all:
In these State-consternations, when a kingdom
Stands tottering at the C•nter, out of suspicion
Safety grows often; let us suspect this fellow,
And that albeit he show us the Kings hand,
It may be but a Trick.
Your Lordship hits
A poisoned nail in the head: this waxen fellow
(By the Kings hand so bribing him with gold) is set on skrews,
Perhaps is made his Creature,
To turn round •very way.
Out of that fear
Will I beget truth: for my self in person
Will sound the Kings breast.
How your self in person?
That's half the prize he gapcs for.
I'll venture it,
And come off well I warrant you, and rip up
His very entrails, cut in two his heart,
And search each corner in it, yet shall not he
Know who it is cuts up the Anatomy.
It is an exploit worth wonder.
Put the worst,
Say some Infernal voice shoo'd roar from hell,
The Infant's cloistering up.
It is not our danger,
Nor the imprisoned Prince's, for what Thief
Dares by base sacrilege rob the Church of him?
At worst none can be lost but this slight fellow?
All build on this as on a stable Cube;
If we our footing keep, we fetch him forth,
And Crown him King; if up we fly in the ayre,
We for his souls health a broad way prepare.
They come.
Thou know where
To bestow him, Baltazar.
Come Moble Boy.
Hide him from being discovered.
Discovered? wooed there stood a troop of Moors
Thrusting the paws of hungry Lions forth,
To seize this prey, and this but in my hand,
I should doe something.
Must I go with this black fellow, Uncle?
Yes, pretty Cos, hence with him, Baltazar.
Sweet child, within few minutes I'll change thy fate
And take thee hence, but set thee at heavens gate.
Some keep aloof and watch this Soldier.
I'll do it.
What's to be done now?
First to plant strong guard
About the mother, then into some snare
To hunt this spotted Panther, and there kill him.
What snares have we can hold him?
Be that care mine;
Dangers (like Stars) in dark attempts best shine.
The Lady Onaelia dresses the stead of her come∣dations
in the most Courtly Attire that words can be clothed
with, from her self to you, by me.
So Sir; and what disease troubles her now?
The Kings Evil; and here she hath sent something
to you wrapped up in a white sheet, you need not fear to o∣pen
it, tic no coarse.
What's here? a letter min•'d into five morsels?
What was she doing when thou came from her?
At her pricke-song.
Some thinks, for here•s nothing but sol-Re-me-fa-mi.
What Crochet fills her head now, can tell?
No Crochets, it is only the Cliff has made her
m•d.
What Instrument played she upon?
A wind instrum•ned, she did nothing but sigh.
Sol, Re, me, Fa, Mi.
My wit has always had a singing head, I have found
out her Note Captain.
The tune? come.
Sol, my foul; re, is all rent and torn like a ragga∣mu••in;
me, mend it good Captain; fa, fa, whats fa Cap∣taine?
Fa, why farewell and be hanged.
M•, Captain, with all my heart; have I tickled my
Ladies Fiddle well?
Oh but your stick wants Rosin to make the strings
sound clearly: no, this double Virginal, being cunningly
touched, another manner of Jack leaps up then is now in
mine eye: Sol, Re, me, fa, mi, I have it now, Sol•s Rex me
〈◊〉 m•seram: Alas poor Lady, tell her no Apothecary in
Spain has any of that Assafetida she writes for.
Assafetida? what s that?
A thing to be taken in a glister-pipe.
Why what ails my Lady?
What ails she? why when she cries out, Solves Rex
me facet m•seram, she says in the Hypocronicall language,
that she is so miserably tormented with the wind-Chollicke
that it rackes her very soul.
I said somewhat cut her soul in pieces.
But go to her, and say the Oven is heating.
And what shall be back d in t?
Carpe pies: and besides, tell her the hole in her
Coat shall be mended: and tell her if the Dial of good
days go true, why then bounce Buckrum.
The Devil lies sick of the Mulligrubs.
Or the Cony is dub d, and three sheepskins
With the wrong side outward
Shall make the Fox a Night-cap.
So the Goose talks French to the Buzzard.
But, Sir, •f evil days justly our prognostication to
the wall, then say there's a fire in a Whore-masters Cod∣piece.
And a poisoned Bagge-pudding in Tom Thumbs
belly.
The first cut be thine: farewell.
Is this all?
Woo't not trust an Almanac?
Nor a Coranta neither, tho it were s•al'd with But∣la,
and yet I know where they both lye passing well.
The King sends round about the Court to seek you.
Away Otterhound.
Dancing Bear, I'm gone.
A private room,
Is it done? hast drawn thy two-edg'd sword out yet?
No, I was striking at the two Iron Bars that hen∣der
your passage, and see Sir.
What meanst thou?
The edge abated, feel.
No, no, I see it.
As blunt as Ignorance.
How? put up—So—how?
I saw by chance hanging in Cardinal Alvarez Gal∣lery
a picture of hell.
So, what of that?
There lay upon burnt straw ten thousand brave fell∣lowes
all stark naked, some leaning upon Crowns, some
on Meters, some on bags of gold: Glory in another Corner
lay like a feather beaten in the rain; Beauty was turned in∣to
a watching Candle, that went out stinking: Ambition
went upon a huge high pair of stilts, but horribly rotten;
some in another nook were killing Kings, and some ha∣avenge
their elbows shov'd forward by Kings to murder o∣theirs;
I was (me thought) half in hell my self whilst I
sto•d to view this piece.
Was this all?
Was it not enough to see that a man is more health∣full
that eats dirty puddings, than he that feeds on a corrup∣ted
Conscience.
Conscience! what's that? a Conjuring book ne'er opened
Without the readers danger: it is indeed
A scare-crow set •'th world to fright weak fools:
Hast thou seen fields paved o'er with carcasses,
Now to be tender-footed, not to tread
On a boys mangled quarters, and a women's!
Nay, Sir, I have searched the records of the Low-Count•ies,
and find• that by your pardon I need not care a
pin for Goblins, and therefore I will do it Sir. I did but re∣coil
because I was double charged.
No more, here comes a Satire with sharpe horns.
Sir here's a Frenchman charged with some strange
Which to your close ear only he will deliver, (business
Or else to none.
A Frenchman?
We Mounsire.
Cannot he speak the Spanish?
Si Signior, ur Poco:—Monsir Acontez in de
Corner, me come for offer to your Bon grace mi trezhumbla
service, by gar no Iohn fidleco shall put into your near
braver Melody dan dis un p•tight pipe shall play upon to your
great bon Grace.
What is the tune you'll strike up, touch the staing.
Dis; me ha run up and down mane Country, and
learn many fine ting, and mush knavery, now more and all
dis, me know you ha jumble de fine vench and fill her belly
wid a Garsoone, her name is le Madame—
Only.
She by gar: Now Monsire, dis Madam send for
me to help her Malady, being very nought of her corpse
(her body) me know you no point love a dis vensh; but
royal Monsire donne Moi ten thousand French Croownes
she shall kick up her tail by gar, and beshide lye dead as
dog in de shannell.
Speak low.
As de bagge-pipe when de wind is puff, Gar
beigh.
Thou nam'st ten thousand Crowns, I'll treble them
Rid me but of this l•prosie: thy name?
Monsire Do•tor Devil.
Shall • a second wheel add to this mischief
To set it faster going? If one break,
The other may keep his motion.
Eslelent fort boon.
Baltazar,
To give thy Sword an edge again, this French-man
Shall whet the• on, that if thy pistol fail,
Or poniard, this can send the poison home.
Brother Cain we'll shake hands.
In de bowl of de bloody busher: tic very fine
whole•some.
And more to arm your resolution,
I'll tune this Churchman so, that he shall chime
In sounds harmonious, Merit to that man
Whose hand has but a finger in that act.
That music were worth hearing.
Holy Father,
You must give pardon to me in unlocking
A Cave stu•t full with Serpents, which my State
Threaten to poison, and it lies in you
To break their bed with thunder of your voice.
How Princely son?
Suppose an univrsall
Hot Pestilence beat her mortiferous wings
O re all my kingdom, am not I bound in soul
To empty all our Academies of Doctors,
And Ae•culapian spirits to charm this plague?
You are.
Or had the Canon made a breach
Into our rich Escuriall, down to beat it
About our ears, shoo'd I to stop this breach
Spare even our richest Ornaments, nay, our Crown,
Could it keep bullets off.
No Sir, you should not.
This Linstocke gives you fire: shall then that strumpet
And bastard breathe quick vengeance in my face;
Making my kingdom reel, my subjects stagger
In their obedience, and yet live?
How? live!
Shed not their bloods to gain a kingdom greater
Thenten times this.
Pishe, not mattera how Red-cap and his wit run.
As I am Catholic King, I'll have their hearts,
Panting in these two hands.
Dare you turn Hang-man?
Is this Religion Catholic to kill
What even bruit beasts abhor to doe, (your own!)
To cut in sunder wedlockes sacred knot
Tied by heavens fingers! to make Spain a Bonfire,
To quench which must a second Deluge rain
In showers of blood, no water; If you doe this,
There is an Arm Armipotent that can fling you
Into a base grave, and your Palaces
With Lightning strike, and of their Ruins make
A Tomb for you (unpitied, and abhorred)
Bear witness all you Lamps Celestial
I wash my hands of this.
Rise my good Angel,
Who•e holy tunes beat from me that evil spirit
Which jogs mine Elbow, hence thou dog of hell.
Bow waugh.
Bark out no more thou Mastiff, get you all gone,
And let my soul sleep: there's gold, peace, see it done.
Sir, you Salfa-Perilla Rascal, Toads-guts, you
whoreson pockey French Spawn of a bursten-bellyed Spy∣der,
doe you hear, Monsire.
Why doe you bark and snap at my Narcissus, as
if I were de French doag?
You Cur of •erberus litter
You'll poison the honest Lady? doe but once toot into her
Chamber-pot, and I'll make thee look worse then a witch
does upon a close-stoole.
You shall not dare to touch him, stood he here
Single before thee.
I'll cut the Rat into Anchovies.
I'll make thee kiss his hand, imbraee him, love him
And call him—
The perfection of all Spaniards. Mars in little, the
best book of the art of War pr•nted in these Times: as a
French Do•tor I wooed have given you pellets for pills, but
as my noblest Lord, rip my heart out in your service.
Thou art the truest Clock
That ever to time paidst tribute, (honest Soldier)
I lost mine own shape, and put on a French,
Only to try thy truth, and the Kings falsehood,
Both which I find: now this great Spanish volume
Is opened to me, I read him o'er and o'er,
Oh what black Characters are printed in him.
Nothing but certain ruin threat your Niece.
Without prevention: well, this plot was laid
In such disguise to sound him, they that know
How to meet dangers, are the less afraid;
Yet let me counsel you not to text down
These wrongs in red lines.
No, I will not, father;
Now that I have Anatomized his thoughts,
I'll read a lecture on •em that shall save
Many men's lives, and to the kingdom minister
Most wholesome Surgery; here s our Aphorism;
These letters from us in our Nieces name,
You know treat of a marriage.
There's the strong Anchor
To stay all in this tempest.
Holy Sir,
With these work you the King, and so prevail,
That all these mischiefs Hull with Flagging sail,
My best in this I'll doe.
Soldier, thy breast
I must locke better things in.
It is your chest,
With 3 good keys to keep it from opening, an honest hart,
a daring hand, and a pocket which scorns money.
COmmend us to Medina, say his letters
Right pleasing are, and that (except himself)
Nothing could be more welcome: counsel him
(To blot the opinion out of factious numbers)
Only to have his ordinary train
Waiting upon him: for, to quit all fears
Upon his side of us, our very Court
Shall even but, dimly shine with some few Dons,
Freely to prove our longings great to peace.
The Constable expects some pawn from you.
That in this Fairy circle shall rise up
No Fury to confound his Niece nor him.
A Kings word is engaged.
It shall be taken.
Valasco, call the Captain of our Guard,
Bid him attend us instantly.
I shall
Lopes come hither: see
Letters from Duke Medina, both in the name
Of him and all his Fa•tion, offering peace,
And our old love (his Niece) Onaeli•
In marriage with her free and fair consent
To Cockadillia, a Don of Spain.
Will you refuse this?
My Crown as soon: they feel their sinewy plots
Belike to shrink in the joints; and fearing Ruin,
Have found this Cement out to piece up all,
Which more endangers all.
How Sir endangers!
Lyons may hunted be into the snare,
But if they once break loose, woe be to him
That first seized on 'em. A poor prisoner scorns
To kiss his Jailer; and shall a King be choked
With sweet-meats, by false Traitors! no, I will fawn
On them, as they stroke me, till they are fast
But in this paw: And then.
A brave revenge.
The Captain of your Guard.
Upon thy life
Double our Guard this day: let every man
Bear a charged Pistol, hid; and at a watch-word
Given by a Musket, when our self sees Time,
Rush in; and if Medina's Faction wrestle
Against your forces, kill; but if yield, save:
Be secret.
I am charmed, Sir.
Watch, Valasco,
If any wear a Cross, Feather, or Glove,
Or such prodigious signs of a knit Faction,
Table their names up: at our Court-gate plant
Good strength to bar them out, if once they swarm:
Doe this upon thy life.
Not death shall fright me.
It is done, Sir.
Death! what's done?
Young Cub's flayd,
But the shee-Fox shifting her hole is fled;
The little Iackanapes the boy's brained.
Sebastian?
He shall ne'er speak more Spanish.
Thou teach me to curse thee.
For a bargain you set your hand to.
Half my Crown I'd lose, were it undone.
But half a Crown! that's nothing:
His brains stick in my conscience more than yours.
How lost I the French Doctor?
As French-men lose their hair: here was too hot
staying for him.
Get thou too from my sight, the Queen wu'd see thee.
Your gold, Sir.
Go with Iudas and repent.
So men hate whores after lusts heat is spent:
I'm gone, Sir.
Tell me true, is he dead?
Dead.
No matter; tic but morning of revenge,
The Sun-set shall be red and Tragical.
Sin is a Raven creaking her own fall.
Keep locked the door, and let none enter to us
But who shar•s in our fortunes.
Locke the doors.
What •entertainment did the King bestow
Upon your letters and the Cardinals?
With a devouring eye he read'em o'er,
Swallowing our offers into his empty bosom,
As gladly as the parched earth drinks healths
Out of the cup of heaven.
Little suspecting
What dangers closely lye enambushed.
Let not us trust to that; there's in his bre•t
Both Fox and Lion, and both those beasts can bite:
We must not now behold the narrowest lcope-hole,
But presently suspect a winged bullet
Flies whizzing by our ears.
For when I let
The plummet fall to sound his very soul
In his close-chamber, being French-Doctor like,
He to the Cardinals ear sung sorceress notes,
The burden of his song, to mine, was death,
Onaelia's murder, and Sebastians;
And think you his voice alters now? it is strange,
To see how brave this Tyrant shows in Court,
Throan'd like a god: great men are petty stars,
Where his rays shine, wonder fills up all eyes
By sight of him, let him but once check sin,
About him round all cry, oh excellent King!
Oh Saint-like man! but let this King retire
Into his Closet to put off his robes,
He like a Player leaves his part off too;
Open his breast, and with a Sunne-beame search it,
There's no such man; this King of gilded clay,
Within is ugliness, lust, treachery,
And a base soul, tho r•art Collossus-high.
None till he speaks, and that we know his voice:
Who are you?
An honest house-keeper in Rosemary-lane too,
If you dwell in the same parish.
Oh tic our honest Soldier, give him entrance.
Men show like coerces, for I meet few but are stuck
with Rosemary: every one asked me who was married to
day, and I told 'em Adultery and Repentance, and that
shame and a Ha•gman followed'em to Church.
There's but two parts to play, shame has done hers,
But execution must close up the Scane,
And for that cause these sprigs are worn by all,
Badges of Marriage, now of Funeral,
For death this day turns Courtier
Who must dance with him?
The King, and all that are our opposites:
That dartor This must fly into the Court
Either to shoot this blazing star from Spain,
Or else so long to wrap him up in clouds,
Till all the fatal fires in him burn out,
Leaving his State and conscience clear from doubt
Of following uprores.
Kill not, but surprise him.
Thats my voice still.
Thine, Soldier.
Oh this Colic of a kingdom, when the wind of
treason gets amongst the small guts, what a rumbling and a
roaring it keeps: and yet make the best of it you can, it goes
out stinking: kill a King?
Why?
If men should pull the Sun out of heaven every time
tic •cclips'd, not all the Wax nor Tallow in Spain wooed
serve to make us Candles for one year.
No way to purge the sick State, but by opening
a vain.
Is that your French Physic? if every one of us
shoo'd be whipped according to our faults, to be lashed at a carts
tail would be held but a •ea-biting.
What are you? come you from the King?
No.
No? more no's? I know him, let him enter.
••gneor, I thank your kind Intelligence,
The news long since was sent •nto our ears.
Yet we embrace your love, so fare you well.
Will you smell to a sprig of Rosemary?
No.
Will you be hanged?
No.
This is either Signeor No, or no Signeor.
He makes his love to us a warning-peece
To arm our selves against we come to Court,
Because the guard is doubled.
Tush, we care not.
If any here arms his hand to cut off the head, le•
him first pluck out my throat: in any Noble Act I le wade
chin-deepe with you: but to kill a King?
No, hear me—
You were better, my Lord, sail 500 times to Bantom
in the West-Indies, than once to Barathrum in the Low-Countries:
It's hot going under the line there, the Callen∣ture
of the soul is a most miserable madness.
Turn then this wheel of Fate from shedding blood
Till with her own hand Justice ways all.
Good.
Must then his Trul be once more sphered in Court
To triumph in my spoils, in my ecclipses?
And I like moaping Iuno sit, whilst Jove
Varies his lust into five hundred shapes
Tostcale to his whores bed! no, Malateste,
Italian fires of Jealousy burn my marrow;
For to delude my hopes, the lecherous King
Cuts out this robe of cunning marriage,
To cover his Incontinence, which flames
Hot (as my fury) in his black desires:
I am swollen big with child of vengeance now,
And till delivered, feel the throws of hell.
Just is your Indignation, high, and Noble,
And the brave heat of a true Florentine;
For Spain Trumpets abroad her Interest
In the Kings heart, and with a black cole draws
On every wall your scoffed at injuries,
As one that has the refuse of her sheets,
And the sick Autumn of the weakened King,
Where she drunk pleasures up in the full spring.
That (Malateste) That, That Torrent wrecks me•
But Hymens Torch (held downward) shall drop out,
And for it, the mad Furies swing their brands
About the Bride-chamber.
The Priest that joins them,
Our Twin-borne malediction.
Loud may it speak.
The herbs and flowers to strew the wedding way,
Be Cypresle, Yew, cold Colliquintida.
Henbane and Poppy, and that magical we•d
Which Hags at midnight watch to catch the seed.
To these our execrations, and what mischief
Hell can but hatch in a distracted brain,
I le be the Executioner, tho it look
So harrid it can fright even murder back.
Poison his whore e to day, for thou shalt wait
On the Kings Cup, and when heated with wine
He calls to drink the Brides health, Marry her
A live to a gaping grave.
At board?
At board.
When she being guarded round about with friends,
Like a fair Island, hemmed with Rocks and Seas,
What rescue shall I find?
Mine arms: dost faint?
Stood all the Pyrenoean hills that part
Spain and our Country, on each others shoulders,
Burning with Aetnean flame, yet thou should on,
As being my steel of resolution,
First striking sparkles from my f•inti breast:
Were thou to catch the horses of the Sun
Fast by their bridles, and to turn back day,
Woodst thou not do it (base coward) to make way
To the Italians second blis•e (revenge.)
Were my bones threatened to the wheel of torture
I'll do it.
A Ravens voice, and it likes me well.
The King expects your presence.
So, so, we come
To turn this Brides day to a day of doom.
For half Spaines weight in Ingots I'd not lose
This little man to day.
Nor for so much
Twice told, Sir, would I miss your kingly presence;
Mine eyes have lost th'acquaintance of your face
So long, and I so (little) late read o'er
That Index of the royal book your mind,
That scarce (without your Comment) can I tell
When in those leaves you turn o'er smiles or frowns.
It is dimneste of your sight, no fault in the letter:
Medina, you shall find that free from Errata's:
And for a proof,
If I could breath my heart in welcomes forth,
This Hall should ring nought else; welcome Medina,
Good Marquess Deny, Dons of Spain all welcome:
My dearest love and Queen, be it your place
To entertain the Bride, and doe her grace.
With all the love I can, whose fire is such,
To give her heat, I cannot burue too much.
Contracted Bride, and Bridegroom sit,
Sweet flowers not plucked in season, lose their scent,
So will our pleasures; Father Card•all,
Me thinks this morning new-begins our reign.
Peace had her Sabbath ne'er till now in Spain.
Where is our Noble Soldier Baltazar?
So close in conference with that Signior?
No.
What think•st thou of this great day, Baltazar?
Of this day? why as of a new play, if it ends well,
ell's well; all men are but Actors, now if you being the
King, should be out of your part, or the Queen out of hers,
or your Dons out of theirs, here's No will never be out of his▪
No.
It were a lamentable piece of stuff to see great
Statesmen have vile Exits; but I hope there are nothing but
plaudities in all your eyes.
Mine I protest are free.
And mine by heaven.
Free from one good look till the blow be given.
Wine; a full Cup crowned to Medina's health.
Your Highness this day so much honours me,
That I to pay you what I truly owe,
My life shall venture for it.
So shall mine.
Onaelia, you are sad: why frowns your brow?
A foolish memory of my past ills
Folds up my look in furrows of old care,
But my heart's merry, Sir.
Which mirth to heighten,
Your Bridegroom and your self first pledge this health
Which we begin to our high Constable.
Is t speeding?
As all our Spanish figs are.
Here's to Medina's heart with all my heart.
My hart shall pledge your hart in the deepest draught
That ever Spaniard drank.
Medina mocks me,
Because I wrong her with the largest Bowl:
I'll change with thee, On••lia.
Sir you shall not.
Fear you I cannot fetch it off!
Malate•te!
This is your scorn to her, because I am doing
This poorest honour to her: Music sound,
It goes were it ten fadoms to the ground.
Fate strikes with the wrong weapon.
Sweet royal Sir no more, it is too deep.
Twill hurt your health sir.
Interrupt me in my drink: tic off.
Alas •ir;
You have drunk your last, that poisoned bowl I filled
Not to be put into your hand, but hers.
Poisoned?
Descend black speckled soul to hell.
The Queen has sent me thither.
What new fury shakes now her snakes locks.
I, I, tic I;
Whose soul is torn in pieces, till I send
This Hatlot home.
More murders! save the Lady.
Rampant? let the Constable make a mittimus.
Keep 'em asunder.
How is it, royal son?
I feel no poison yet, only mine eyes
Are putting out their lights: me thinks I feel
Deaths Icy fingers stroking down my face; and now
I'm in a mortal cold sweat.
Dear my Lord.
Hence, call in my Physicians.
Thy Physician, Tyrant,
Dwells yonder, call on him or none.
Bloody Medina, stab thou Brutus too?
As hee is, so are we all.
I burn,
My brains boyle in a Cauldron, O one drop
Of water now to cool me.
Oh let him have Physicians.
Keep her backo.
Physicians for my soul, I need none else;
You'll not deny me those: oh holy Father,
Is there no mercy hovering in a cloud
For me a miserable King so drenched
In perjury and murder?
Oh Sir great store.
Come down, come quickly do•ue.
I'll forthwith send
For a grave Fryer to be your Confessor.
Doe, doe.
And he shall cure your wounded soul:
F•tch him good Sovldier.
So good a work I'll hasten.
Onaelia! oh shoe's drowned in tears! Onaelia,
Let me not dye unpardoned at thy hands.
Here comes a better Surgeon.
Hail my good Son,
I come to be thy ghostly Father.
Ha? my child •tic my Sebastian, or some spirit
Sent in his shape to fright me.
It is no gobbling, i•, feel; your own flesh and blood,
and much younger than you tho he be bald, and calls you son;
had I bin as ready to ha cut his sheeps throat, as you were to
send him to the shambles, he had bleated no more; there's
less chalk upon you score of sins by these round o'es.
Oh my dull soul look up, thou art somewhat lighter,
Noble Medina, see Seb•stian lives:
Onaelia cease to weep, Sebastian livea;
Fetch me my Crown: my sweetest pretty Fryer,
Can my hands d•o't, I le raise thee one step higher
You have been in heavens house all this while sweet boy.
I had but course cheer.
Thou could ne'er fare better:
Religious houses are those hyves, where Bees
Make honey for men's souls: I tell thee, Boy,
A Fryery is a Cube, which stiongly stands,
Fashioned by men, supported by heavens hands:
Orders of holy Priest-hood are as high
In the eyes of Angels, as a Kings dignity:
Both these unto a Crown give the hill weight,
And both are thine: you that our Contract know,
See how I seal it with this Marriage;
My blessing and Spaines kingdom both be thine.
Long live Sebastian.
Doff that Fryers course gray;
And since hoe's crown•d a King, clothe him like one.
Oh no: those are right •overaigne Ornaments;
Had I been clothed so, I had never 〈◊〉
〈…〉
My work is almost finished: whore's my Queen?
Here peece-meale torn by Furies.
Onaelia!
Your hand Pauline too, Onaelia yours:
This hand (the pledge of my twice broken faith)
By you usurped is her Inheritance;
My love is turned, see as my fate is turned,
Thus they to day laugh, yesterday which mourned:
I pardon thee my death; let her be 〈◊〉
Back into Florence with a trebled dowry;
Death comes: oh now I see what late I feared!
A Country•t broke, tho pieced up no•re so well,
Heaven sees, earth suffe•s, but it ends in hell.
Oh I could dye with him.
Since the bright sphere
I moved in falls, alas what make I here?
The hammers of black mischief now cease beating,
Yet some Irons still are heating: you, Sir Bridegroom,
(Set all this while up as a mark to shoot at)
We here discharge you of your bed-fellow,
She loves no Barbers washing.
My Balls are saved then.
Be it your charge, so please you reverend Sir,
To see the late Queen safely sent to Florence:
My Niece O•aelia, and that trusty Soldier,
We doe appoint to guarp the Infant King:
Other distractions, Time must reconcile;
The State is poisoned like a Crocodile.

TWill be a great Assize, how things will hit
For us appearing at this bar of wit.
Is most uncertain, we have named our Play
The Example, and for ought we know it may
Be made one, for at no time did the laws
However understood, more fright the cause
Of unbefriended posy, since the praise
Of wit, and judgement is not now adays
Owing to them that write, but hee that can
Talk loud, and high, is held the witty man,
And censures finely, rules the Box, and strikes
With his court nod consent to what hee likes;
But this must bee, nor first our parts to grudge
Any that by their place should bee a judge;
Nay, hee that in the Parish never was
Thought fit to bee of the jury, has a place
Here, on the Bench for six pence, and dares sit,
And boast himself commissioner of wit,
Which though he want he can condemn with oaths,
As much as they that we are the purple clothes,
Robes I should say, or whom in the Roman state
Some ill-look'd stage-keepers, like Lictors waite
With Pipes for fasces, while another bears
Three-footed stools in stead of Juory chairs,
This is a destiny, to which wee bow,
For all are innocent but the Poets now,
Who suffer for their guilt of truth, and arts,
And we for only speaking of their parts.
But be it so, be judges all, and bee
With our consent, but thus far take• me w'ee
If any meet here, as some men in the age
Who understand no sense, but from one stage,
And over partial will entail like land
Upon heirs male all action, and command
Of voice and gesture, upon whom they love,
These, though called Judges, may delinquent's prove.
But few such wee hope here, to'th rest wee say
Hear patiently ere you condemn the Play.
Tic not the authors Confidence, to dare
Your judgements, but your calm ears to prepare,
That if for mercy you can find no room,
Hee prays that mildly, you pronounce his doom.
Dormant, why Dormant, thou eternal sleeper!
Who would be troubled with these lethargies about him?
Dormant, are you come Dreamer.
Would I were so happy, ther's less noise
in a Steeple upon a Coronation, ohsleepe, sleep, though it were
a dead one, would be comfortable; your worship might please
to let my fellow Oldrat watch, as well as I.
Oldrat? that fellow is a drone.
Hee has slept this half hour, on the Iron Chest, would
I were in my grave to take an nap, Death would doe me a
curtsy, I should be at rest, and hear no noise of Dormant.
Ha? Whats the matter?
Nothing but a yawn sir, I doe all that I can to keep
my self waking.
Tic done considerately, this heavy dullness,
Is the disease of souls, sleep in the night,?
Shall I wake my fellow Oldrat, he is refreshed
Doe, but return you with him, I have business with both.
To hear us join in our opinion, of what's a clock, they
talk of Endimion, now could I sleep three lives.
When other men measure the hours with sleep,
Careless of what they are, and whom they trust,
Exposing their condition to danger
Of plots, I wake, and wisely think prevention,
Night was not made to snore in, but so calm
For our imaginations, to be stirring
About the world, this subtle world, this world
Of plots, and close conspiracy, there is
No faith in man, nor woman, wher's this Dormant?
Here is the sleepy vermin.
Oh come hither; surra, wher's your Lady?
Out all this night at play sir,
All night, ther's some plot, but I am safe
At home, your gaming Ladies are strange Whirligigs,
But while she plays, and revels with the gallants,
Here I am cabled up, above their shot,
And see in my imagination all there plots,
Nay, we are the quietest couple, never meet,
No▪ not a bed, there may be plots in that,
This part of the house is mine, and here I walk
And see the soul, the very soul of the world.
It has bin Day this two hours.
Then tic time for me to go to bed.
Would my hour were come once.
Keep out day light, and set up a fresh taper,
By that time we have dined, he'll have slept his first sleep.
And after supper call for his breake-fast.
Yo're sure it is morning?
As sure as I am sleepy—
And that your Ladies not come in?
As sure as I have the Key.
Is my Niece ready?
Two hours ago sir.
So earlié? there may bee a plot in that, say
Her uncle would speak with her, I use every morning,
Before I go to bed, to give her counsel,
In her husbands absence, she is young, and handsome,
And there be plottsith world. Dormant, come hither.
What Gentlemen doe frequently come hither?
Who does visit her most?
My Lady sir?
My Niece In•intha sir, for my wife
I will let her alone of purpose yet,
To mind her game, shuffle, and cut, and dice,
And dance the brawls, they cannot cousin me.
Say my intelligence, who does visit most
My Kins-woman?
The gay Lords often with her.
Who?
He that comes every morning like S. George.
Ha!
I do not say to mount her, the Lord—
Fitzaverice.
The same, sir hoe's the most bountiful Gentleman and
makes us all so pray for him.
More plots, he has a vast estate, and though
Fame speak him noble, I suspect he loves her.
He has my Nephews Land is mortgage too.
A mere device, I •atom it, come hither,
Let not the arras hear us, say what prank
Of mischief, has he done, he should be bountiful
To thee? on what suspicion can deserve it?
Come be ingenious, and confess.
Who I be ingenious? alas you are deceived.
Be free, this grome conspires.
Doe I look like one that would be ingenjous?
What noise is tha•? more plots, let me enter,
They are saucy with my doors, tic well they are
All hart of Oak, and sound to endure the Knocking.
I hear my Ladies foot-man call the Porter.
I'll keep no Gate that will be knocked o'this fashion
I think it were a special policy
To have a kind of a wheel; or turning Engine
Advanced before my door, and admit none
Without a Ticket.
My Lady is come sir,
Is she alone?
The Gentleman that complements with my Lady,
And is here half an hour before my Lord still—
Master Confident?
The same, he manns her Ladyship, and she is coming
this way through the Gallery.
Was ever such an impudence? she wonot carry
Him to her Chamber? new Plots, obscure me hangings.
I shall report how much his Lordship owes
For this most noble favour,
Hee deserves,
By many bounties ever to command me,
And I must thank your pains, but in my Chamber,
We may discourse more freely.
You much honour me.
Bounty, and Lordships, and discourse in Chambers?
This fellow is a rascal, new new Plots,
If your worship mean to lie with her Ladyship—
By no means.
How happy am I, that we keep several quarters,
Some husband would torment himself with watching,
Screw his Nose in at a Key-hole, or in some cranny
Wedge his long ear, let'em alone, it makes,
It makes, and my lascivious Gamester find his plots discovered,
All his wit, gleand from Italian Sonnets? and loose times;
His bouncing, and his braves shall not disguise
His hart from me, I see it, I see it already,
And laugh that I am alone, and have my humour.
Oh, tic my Niece, away and dress my Pillow.
Good morrow sir.
Morrow? it is now my bed time.
You were pleas•d.
To send for me.
I did dear Niece.
Before I go to sleep, I must commend
Advises to thee, it is part of my devotion,
In brief, because the Day comes fast upon me,
Have a great care you be not seen too public,
Your Chamber's spacious enough to walk in,
Ther's danger in society, and the World
Is full of plots,
What plots?
I know not, but
Be solitary as I am, and be safe.
Your husbands debt's have made him quit his Country,
He was an unthrift, nay I spare him not
Although he were my kins-man, it was ill done,
Whose plot so ere it were, to loose your Jointure,
Times are necessitous, but while he drills
His men abroad, take heed you meet not hotter
Service at home, there be fine Lords ith World,
And Gentlemen that run, and carry messages,
And Pages, that bring Jewels, and can whisper
The bawdy poesies, and soe-forth.
You are not; Jealous of me
Nor of my wife, I lie
Alone discreetly, let my Madam play,
Sit up a nights and gambol,
And dee love her?
At distance, as becomes a politic man,
That would not sell his state to buy an heir,
Our looks so seldom doe converse, that if
We should engender at the eyes, she wot
Not teem so often as an Elephant, fools diet with
There wives and be in danger of provocatives
To frisk, and mount the table, precious pastime!
Come thou art happy; that thy husbands absence
Hath given thee occasion to be solitary,
Trust not the ai•e abroad by my example.
Take heed of plots, and so good-night.
Good morrow.
I thank you for your counsel but it needs not,
I pity the condition of this Gentleman,
That makes his life a penance to seem wise,
He talks of plots, and is the greatest enemy
To himself with his vain fears, but why do I
Discourse of misery without my self,
That carry in my bosom every minute,
All that can make a woman miserable?
Thought of my husband wounds me, yet I cannot
Be suffered to enjoy it, like a Dear
I am chased by foreign Hunters, and not left
To think what cruelty at home pursues me.
You might have known my pleasure, in good manners,
Ere you admitted any.
Tic but a Page Madam, the poor child
Wants years to offend.
He serves the Lord Fitzamorous
Beshrew your diligence.
Who commends to your
Fair hand these Jewels Madam.
I prithee carry 'em back, their insid's poison,
I would not be corrupted with the one,
To betray tother so, they cannot fright
When you examine, if you knew his Lordship
So well, as I would wish, you would accept
And cherish these presentiments, you're the first
Lady within my observation,
That has took time, to ask her conscience
The meaning of a Jewel, sent by a Lord,
A young and handsome Lord too; it is a thing
At Court, is not in fashion, and it were pity
One with so good a face, should be the presedent,
Of such superfluous modesty.
Does your Lord
Instruct you thus?
We take it of our selves,
Pages and waiting women are apt by nature
To understand their office, you may be confident,
My Lord means honourably, and as becomes
A Gentleman of high blood, he will visit
Your Lady-ship.
I shall not need, return him then my thanks,
By messenger.
I apprehend,
And wish you a morning fair as your own beauty,
My humblest duty.
How black sin doth scatter
Her seed betimes, and every ground is fruitful.
Has she the Paper?
And the jewel too.
I know sheele chide me, but his Lordships
Bounty commands I should bee serviceable.
Away, and wantonness inspire me, Lady.
More rude intrusions?
Patience noble Madam,
The message that I bring, is more calm and gentle
Then the cool wind, that breathes upon the Flowers
Soft kisses in the Spring, the woollen feet
Of time doe move with a less noise, then mine
Beneath this happy Roof, vouchsafe your ear,
And words shall meet your sense, and Court it with
Swifter delight then apprehension
Knows how to reach, and when I have let fall
Love, which doth make all language rich, and told you
His name that gives his life up in my breath,
To be made blessed by being yours, you'll wish
I were all voice, and to that harmony,
Chain your own soul for ever.
What doe you mean
By this strange language? pray bee clearer, sir,
If you direct it to my understanding.
What is your business?
I have tol'd you, Madam.
Love.
What love I beseech you sir?
A love that doth include in his own flame
What Poets made but fiction in the gods,
When Earthly beauties tempted them from Heaven,
A fire which from the bosom of loves priest
Shoots up religion and a sacrifice
To what his soul adores, a glorious love,
And love of you.
Of me? it will concern
That I should know him.
Had his person bin
A stranger, so much worth, and fame preferrs him
To every noble knowledge, that you cannot
Be ignorant, what wonder of mankind
I point at, hath report brought to your ear
In the stack of men, one that hath had the praise
Of wit, of valour, bounty, a fair presence,
A tongue to enchant heaven? these waite one him,
As he, to be your servant: he is a man
(What pity it is I cannot call him more)
The pride, and darling both of war, and peace,
The Lord of many Worlds.
How sir! He may be bountiful indeed then.
With your pardon,
Shall we allow to every common man
A little world, and not think him worth many,
Who hath the price of thousands in himself?
What miracle is this?
He is a man
So full of all, that thought, or love can be
Ambitious of, that nothing can deserve him,
But she alone that hath in her own frame
Of woman, all that ever praised the sex,
And these are all your own, make him so too,
And from your loves, the decayed world shall hope
To see a race of Demi-gods.
I find not
By all these marks of honour and of goodness
What person you commend thus
Can there be any beside my Lord?
Your Lord may be
Besides himself after so great a Character.
The Lord Fitzavarice.
Cry mercy sir,
I know him, and you might with half the expense
Of so much wit in blank verse, have expressed
His purpose, and himself, I thank him heartily,
But am not so much worth, pray tell him so.
Lady, I doe not use to thrive so ill
In my love-undertakings.
I'st your Trade?
It seems so, by your prompt and elegant way,
Are you solicitor general for other's,
In love, ti'd by your place, never to move
Conditions for your self? he is but a Lord
Whose fame you have advanced thus.
You're right, Lady.
And I was never taught, that wit or handsomeness
are assured by patent, dee think this Lord
May not find his peers?
No question, Madam.
This would well be a double Knave.
There may be Gentlemen,
That owe no high and mighty titles, Madam.
As gracious with a Lady;
And as active;
With wit, with valour, bounty, a fair presence,
And tongue to enchant heaven.
As I would wish,
I only was ambitious to enjoy her
After my Lord, if once she were corrupted?
Venus send me good luck, and I be
His taster, but hoe's here.
Trust me an other time.
Hast prevailed?
I have taken off the impossibility,
Or she deceives me much: To her your self,
I•le take my opportunity.
Still Melancholy?
What dee mean Lady?
I have kept a Jewel for your Lordship.
Will she come too't already?
And because
I would not be held guilty of ingratitude,
Not furnished with a gift worth your acceptance,
I must present your own again.
Why this
I sent you, Madam, doe not so dishonour me,
I have plenty of these trifles shall it have more,
Richer and brighter to attend thy beauty,
Here they will shine in their own place.
I dare not accept of any, they are dangerous.
They are not poisoned.
Yes more killing then
The teeth of Serpents, or the Vipers blood,
Without a charm, they had ere this undone me.
Pray make your sense familiar to me.
Can you seem ignorant, by whose direction
They were sent hither, oh my Lord, but think,
What honour you can gain out of my ruins.
Why doe you still pursue me with this heate
Of sensual f•am, and send these tempters to me,
After so many vows, to keep my faith,
And name unstained?
Still in these foolish humours?
What did you marry for?
To enjoy my husband.
Enjoy him in his absence then by proxy.
When he is absent from my hart, may
Consent to be as black, as you would make me;
But while he hath a constant dwelling here,
I must loose both at once, if I forsake him.
Oh think upon your self my Lord, and make
Your title good, and justify, that honour
By our selves acquired, is richer, then what blood,
And birth can throw upon us, send no more
Agents to plead your shame, their errand is
So foul, it must infect 'em, to be false,
Even to your self, my husband is abroad
To far from home.
Hoe's fighting in the low-Countries,
By his example you may Skirmish here,
A little, if you please, I doe not wish him
Returned, although I have his land in mortgage,
If you would bee less cruel, you may pay
His debt in other property, and cancel
The payment in due time.
I'll hear no more.
You have a stained soul.
I doe love this Lady,
As Gentlemen now call love, and that extremely.
She is all nuns flesh about her, but has the Devil•
No trick to thaw her chastity? I must have
Some way to enjoy her body for my credit,
The world takes notice I have courted her,
And if I mount her not, I loose my honour.
So, so, now wee are furnished.
Our acts and deeds are to show for it.
Sigillatum et deliberatum in praesentia not ari•.
Public. I thank you Gentlemen.
In the presence of the notorious Publican.
But dee hear, who shall pay back the money?
What money?
The money wee ha taken up to go a wooing to
This Kick-shaw.
Share and share like, how ever, the security
Is good, and the Scrivener satisfied.
I have 〈◊〉 great mind—
To pay it all, shat have my voice.
Upon condition the Lady would seal to
Covenants, you should find me reasonable.
For that we must take our fates, one of
Vs is sure to carry her against the World.
He that has least wit, has five hundred
Pound a year, if that, good clothes, and a
Handsome man with appurtenances, cannot
Tempt an elder sister, would she were sent
To a Nunnery, le•ts loose no time, but advance to her instantly,
Stay I have it, and no unhappy invention,
A divice, if the worst come to the worst,
You will thank me sort.
What first?
Mercury himself be the Doctor Mid-wife, and
Deliver thee.
The gentlewoman we aim at, has a great
Estate, a fortune for a Lord.
All this I know.
She has many Suitors,
So much the worse, proceed.
But none in grace, makes her self merry with'em,
And jeeres'em mainly, cannot love.
What comfort is this for us?
Now I come too't, wee two doe love this Lady,
No matter for that, toth'poynt
Wee come a wooing to her.
Tic not possible
Wee should both draw the prise, but one can bee
Her husband.
Of us two, right.
And yet in our particular,
Ther's none of us can say, he shall prevail,
And be the man, the man, that must be Lord
Of the estate, justly the noble-Men. And domineer.
What of all this?
Now mark me,
He that shall conquer this Virginian Island
And write himself Lord of the Golden-mines,
Will have a very fine time on it.
Very likely, what's the conclusion?
Nay tell me first, what will
Become of him that must
Sit down with a willow Garland, that has sealed
For a thousand pound; with what dear appetite
Shall hee discharge the Scrivener?
One on's must loose, unless we could divide her.
Then I have thought a way to make us both
Gayners, in some proportion.
That were a trick worth our learning.
Play your Cards wisely, and it is done.
As how prethy?
Why thus
Hee that shall marry her of us two,
As one of us must speed, shall enter Bond
It's marriage, to give the other a thousand pound,
This composition may be allowed and sealed to,
If you consider, something will be requisite,
For them, that go without the maiden-head,
Debts and devises will grow due, and Sack
Will not be unnecessary, to forget her health in,
What think you on it? and who ever obtains the Lady
Will have no cause to grumble at this motion,
Is not this equal and a certainty for both?
Let the Articles be drawn, it is a safe bargain,
Hee•'s my hand too't.
A match, the writings,
Will quickly bee prepared, for things must carry
Formality and law, we doe but talk else,
Va Withal my hart, subscribe to night, who's this?
Tic Confident.
My two ingenious sparks, my Landed wits,
And therefore more miraculous, what makes
Your looks exalted, as if Venus were
Propitious now?
Thart right we are in love.
I know it, I read thy Character in your brow,
I see the desperate Archer in each eye,
Prepared with golden Shafts to wound your mistresses,
Their harts must bleed, no destiny will help it,
You two are Cupids darlings, and hoe's bound
To bring you all the Ladies you can wish for,
Humble and suppliant for the Game.
Dost think wee shall prevail then?
Have I ambition
To be your honorer, and of the nuptial night
Light up my epi•halamy, to inflame
Your bosoms, and instruct your wanton limbs
The activity of love beyond fierce Aretine.
But dost hear! we are both suitors to one Lady;
Which dost think shall carry her?
To the same Lady!
Thou know her,
Jacintha, Lady Peregrines sister.
The glory of her sex, yau'e placed your thoughts,
With a discreet ambition.
Who shall have her dost think?
Speak thy opinion.
You, sir.
shall I?
Can you appear doubtful?
Be not so much ingrate to natures bounty,
Each part about you in silent oratory
May plead toth Queen of Love, yau'e to much excellence,
Were all your other graces worn in Clouds,
That eye, that very eye, would charm a Lucrece,
And by the golden unresisted Chains
Draw up her soul, and melt it in your bosom,
Your presence is a volume of inchantements,
But move, and every beauty falls before you,
But if you speak, which needs not to obtain,
You give a louder notice to the World,
Then when you list, you conquer, and create
One accent of your tongue, able to make
A Nyobe return from her cold Marble,
And spring more soft and active then the Air
To court your amorous breath.
Hum no more, if thou loust me, we are upon
A composition, hee that wins the Lady
Shall give the other a thousand pound:
If you make him confident to bee preferrd,
He will never sign to'th' Covenant.
How preferred?
Under what misconstruction have I suffered?
Although I name it justice, he should challenge
The mistress of his thoughts, can you want merit
Who live the example of all wit, to boast
A victory in your love? were I a woman
(As nature only huddles into the world
When she sends forth a man) give me licence
To express my thoughts, and had all that invention
And truth could add, to advance me to opinion,
I should bee hono'rd to be writ your servant,
And call obedience to you, greater triumph,
Then to be Empress of an other world,
You have so rich a wit, that dotage may
Bee justified upon it, and nothing but
A soul purged from all dreggs, and quited from
Mortality, can lay a worthy claim to•'t.
Yau'e put a question would afflict an Oracle
To understand, and answer, which of you
Should triumph o'er a Lady, I am mad
When I consider the necessity
Of fate, that one of you must be accepted,
And both so bounteoussie deserving. Then,
If I pronounce again that both must have her,
You'll pardon my ambition, Gentlemen,
Which levels with your wishes.
Could I speak thus,
I would not thank the Lady should run mad for me.
Jack prethe let's fancy him,
Hee has spoke home and handsomely.
Let it be five pieces, oh wit of wits!
You have, Gentlemen.
A care to enlarge my Library, I translate
These into books, whose title-page shall own
Your name in shining Capitalls.
Drink, drink Sack.
And divine the world with thine own wit, t'will sell,
Hang other books, wooed never switch a Play up?
Las the Comedians have no soul to speak.
Nay doe not leave us.
We are going to this Lady, she randevou's
To day at Lady Plots, we shall have music, and dancing
You'll meet my Lord there
I am his creature, and your humble servant.
Nay no distinction.
What brains some men have?
I would change all my acres for his Poetry.
Still peevish!
Most invinciblie, no temptation
Can fasten on her, wood I had ne'er laid siege to her,
The taking of her province, will not be
So much advantage to me, as the bare
Removing of my siege will loose me credit.
I would she were recoverable by Law,
There were some hope by vexing my estate,
And tiring Westminster, within few Terms
A gentleman might come to issue with her,
If all were of her mind, what would become on's?
Lent, everlasting lent would mortify
Our masculine concupiscence, and not leave
The strongest body worth an egg at Easter.
I am glad your Lordship yet is pleasant with
Her stubbornness, and were I worthy to
Advise you, it should never trouble your thoughts;
I know your Lordship is not barren of acquaintance.
There be more Ladies in the World,
And of the Game.
The Game my Lord? I hope,
You point not this at me, because I use
To pass the hours at play with Ladies, and gentlemen.
At Dice and Cards? you have more charity,
Then to think I accuse your Ladyship,
Though there be some have dared to venture both ways
Upon record, yet seem stanch to the world,
I and are thought to pray sometimes, I wod-not
For the Indies tempt your Ladyship, I know
You are deaf to all leaud accents.
Tic your goodness—
Never to try thee, tic fit only such
As your cold kins-woman, wenches that have
No spirit should be tempted to those sports;
Nor is she otherwise considerable
To me, more then my charity may restore her,
I pity a handsome woman should eat chalk,
And die in the fullens, if she might be comforted, and cured.
With a Warm bed-fellow?
You're right, Madam,
But shees here, and her elder sister.
There is an other Lady I would not touch now,
I mean in the leaud way, she has life and fire,
And moves without an Engine, give me a wench,
That I must mould into a wanton shape,
And quicken her to air by my own Art,
A wench that must be purged, sublimed, calcined,
By the chemistry of Love, till she become
A glorified spirit, and acknowledge
She took her exaltation from me;
In that I glory more, then to have perfected
The Magisterium, and boast the Elixir.
But I waste time.
This I cannot help,
He wonot understand.
Can you work, Lady,
No cure upon your sister by the example
Of your free hart?
My Lord I chide her for it,
Tell her what folly it is, to wast her health
With feeding so much melancholy, I wish
She had my constitution; to laugh
At all the World.
You are satirical.
No matter what men think of me: my Lord,
I am no great admirer of their virtues.
You doe not hate us, Lady?
But with pardon
Of your Lordship, it is possible, I may never
Run mad for Love.
You doe converse with us.
Because I have
As yet, no resolution to bee cloistred:
Sometimes men stir my pity, but most commonly
My laughter.
Y• are a strange conditioned Gentlewoman.
I would be so my Lord, to all that love me,
And love my self the better, for that humour.
You'll never marry?
Certainly, not while I have any wit,
And can buy folly at a cheaper rate.
My sister has taught me; that Lady has
A precious husband too, shall I, my Lord,
Bee bold to ask you, but one question,
What are men good for?
Pray, Lady, doe not fear I come a wooing.
Your Lordships mirth offends not me in this.
Yet if I could love, I would marry thee
Of all women alive.
Your Lordship should
Have little cause, I hope, to wish so ill to me.
What says my Lady April here, all showrs?
My Lord is a great honorer of your sister.
Tic his fault in my conscience, but I hope
She'll have a care, poor soul.
Let me prepare you,
And when you see me close with Madam Plot,
You may advance.
Bee brief.
Most noble Lady.
I have no time to enlarge my self; your fat's
In danger, if discretion sit not at
The Helm, with love; the Gentlemen, that next
Present themselves, are not to bee admitted
Guests to your bosom, in the yet dark book
Of destiny, there is a name reserved,
To make you happy, your Stars guide you to
A husband, worthy of this blood, and beauty:
Think on the Prophet.
Now wee may come in.
Bright Lady, make your humble servants proud
To kiss your white hand.
Not to fast, Gentlemen,
You doe not mean to marry me; some air,
Or i'll go tak't abroad: two to one woman?
The lot gave me priority, you know,
Therefore obey your chance, I must first court her.
These are the guests hee talked on sure.
What shall I doe now?
Fall in with the chamber-woman, that is a way
To know the ebb, and flowing of her Mistress,
Sail by that wind I say.
The truth is, Lady,
I love you in the noble way of Marriage.
I am sorry for it.
Why my pretty Mistress?
I cannot love that way.
Are you in earnest?
Doe you take me for a Jester?
Doe but name
The way you have the most mind to bee loved in;
The high way, or the by way, any way,
I am at your service.
What is that Gentleman?
One that would be in love too,
If he had an apprehension
You'd favour him, a thing has neither wit
Nor honesty, he would needs come along,
I could not shake him off, without a quarrel,
You'll quickly find his barrenness, and dismiss him:
He has bin practising this fortnight, how
To make a leg, that learned Gentleman
Knows the inside of his soul, for my own part—
Methinks he is a very handsome man.
Should he but hear you, Lady, he would think
You jeered him fearfully.
And he may have a generous mind. What's his estate?
How's this?
If you doe love me, give him opportunity
To-tell me his poor mind alitlle.
I obey.
Shees taken with him, and the worst come
To the worst, there will be a thousand pound good yet.
So resolute?
That man must have a powerful tongue must charm her,
Into consent of marriage, her estate
Is worth ten thousand pound.
A glorious sum,
Able to whet ambition, now the others
Turn is, to show himself ridiculous.
I tell you in three syllables, I love you.
That gentleman professes the same language,
Your friend.
My friend? hoe's none of mine, true wee have bin
Acquainted, met, fell into conference of you,
And came together, Lady, he is no man
Of that clear fame, to engage my serious friend-ship,
A very puff-fist.
What's that I pray?
A Phantom, a mere Phantom.
Phantom, what's that?
A mental Tiphon, a windy capruch, I doe grace him,
Or so, but he is the impudent'st fellow—
Hee speaks well
Of you, gave you a worthy Character.
Hee cannot choose.
He knows me well enough, and all the world,
Besides I have a temper must not bee
Provoked with calumnies, tic true hee has some
Pretty parts, is held an excellent scholar, can sing,
And dance, and manage a Horse well,
Hoe's borne of a good family, can speak,
When hee lists, to purpose too, I confess it,
But what's all this when a man will bee a rascal?
What blessed pair of customers have I got?
These would make excellent husbands, and love me
To'th purpose.
Well, remember, you have promised,
Upon condition, I dismiss you now,
To give me an other answer.
My good Lord,
I have an humble suite to you, I should ask
First how your hopes thrive in that sullen Lady.
I must expect, but what's your business, to me?
In brief, to advance my service to
That Lady, by your Honours testimony
Of what I may deserve, I am confident
I shall reward it, by securing her
Fair sister to your wishes, shees your own,
Or if she prove too honest, I shall make
A recompense by offering to your pleasure,
The other, who by authority of your breath,
May make me Lord of her, and her full fortune,
You understand, my gracious Lord.
I doe so.
Va. Your Lordships humble creatures.
I am your servant.
What shall wee doe, Ladies? but I forget,
I have something more to say to you.
To me, my Lord?
Your clients increase, Lady,
That gentleman tells me, he does love you, and would marry you.
Because I have observed his nature, I'll
Give him in brief, he is a fellow will
Undo thee in a fortnight, though not in
Thy estate, yet in thy mind, a greater mischief.
If thou dost marry him, it will be policy,
To turn witch betime, ere he sell thee o'er to shame,
And so much poverty, the Devil wonot
Trust thee with a familiar, now believe him,
Wee droop methinks—
So, so, here are an other couple, who shall trust
Mankind? it will be a miracle to find
One honest man i th bundle, sir, you are
Bound to my Lord.
His least favours to me
Are more then my whole life can satisfy,
Oh Lady, if you knew him but as I doe,
You would be lost in wonder of his goodness.
Bove all, he is adorer of chaste truth,
And speaks religiously of any man.
Hee will not trust obscure traditions,
Or faith implicit, but concluds of things
Within his own clear knowledge what hee says,
You may believe, and pawn your soul uppon't.
Vouchsafe me kiss your fair hand, whose least touch
Consented to though I were old and dying,
Would quicken me into a Spring.
You forget, my Lord, the music was prepared
To dance, and warm her blood.
Each take his Lady
Falstasse I will believe thee,
There is no faith in villainous man.
Begin there.
Follow her, my Lord, she is stolen to her chamber: thy• will
Give you admittance through my Lodgings, I'll excuse
Your absence, there bee more ways to'th wood, try all.
How much you bless me, she shall want no trial,
This opportunity is worth an Empire.
What shall I say? consent, dear Lady, to
Be mine, and thou shat taste more happiness,
Then women's fierce ambition can pursue;
Shift more delights, then the warme-spring can boast
Variety of leaves, or wealthy harvest
Grain from the teeming earth. Joy shall dry all
Thy tears, and take his throne up, in thy eyes,
Where it shall sit, and bless what ever they shine on.
The night shall Sow her pleasures in thy bosom,
And morning shall rise only to salute thee.
Enough, too much. My Lord, I hoped when last
Your importunity enforced my promise
Of other answer, I should never see you,
If being a sad prisoner to my chamber,
Might have prevented your access: but since
I am betrayed to this discourse, receive
What the necessity of fate compels to.
Another answer?
Yes, but such an one
As must at least challenge affinity
With what I said before: not your estate,
Though multiplied to Kingdoms, and those wasted
With your invention, to serve my pleasures,
Have power to bribe my life away from him,
To whose use I am bid to wear it; be yet just,
And seek no further to pollute the stream
Of my chaste thoughts, Isle rather choose to die
Poor wife to Peregrine, then live a Kings
Inglorious strumpet, can you think my Lord,
Should I give up my freedom to your bend,
And for the pride of wealth, sell woman in me,
(For she must loose that name, that once turns whore)
Could I arrive at impudence enough
To come abroad, and not be moved to hear
My shame from every tongue, but scorn my infamy,
(As tic the nature of this sin to strengthen
It self still with a greater) could you think,
If no religion can correct your wildness,
Another price, or pleasure, would not buy me
Even from your arms? there is no faith in lust,
And she that dares be false to one she loves,
Will twine with all the world, and never blush for it,
Kiss, and betray as often. Think on this,
And call your self home,
Lady, I have heard you,
And doe allow the excuse, I doe not urge,
Although your husbands absence may plead for it,
You should be generally at my dispose,
Disclaim all place, and person, but what's mine,
I am not so ambitious, my desires
Are humble, and beg only so much favour
To admit me to one service, (you know what
To understand by it) and if you like not
My activity handsomely, discharge me again.
Worse then infection, how dare you speak
This blasphemy to honour, or I hear it?
I'ts not to be avoided, I have secured
Your Chamber, Lady.
Innocence defend me.
Once more, and nature work,
You say you love your husband, and account
His absence the misfortune, that doth sit
Most heavy on your soul, this is increased
By the despair of his return; since all
Hop's f•ed, to satisfy his deep engagements,
Which threaten ruin here, I have a mortgage
Of his, for sums lent by my thriving father,
Your jointure, (but releast by you, I take it)
I am so much a servant to thy beauty,
The first night I embrace thy delicate body,
The Lands thy own again, a round encouragement.
What doe I hear?
If Lords should pay so dear for every capering,
T'wou'd try the back of their estate: but mark me,
I ha not done, sum up his other debts,
They swell to thousands, be but fair conditioned,
For every time thou admitst me after, to thy
Pillow, I'll strike of an hundred pound,
Till all the debts be unravelled: In the mean time
Thy husband shall return, and walk the Town,
Free as an Alder-man, and be mace-proofe,
Shall live, and lie with thee, and love thee too,
And praise thee for this noble composition,
What say? I find thy wisdom coming to thee.
Should it be known, who'le think the worse of thee?
Alas, good soul, it was pure love to thy husband,
They must imagine, wrought with thee. What woman
But would to save a husbands life, and fortune,
Venture a trifle? nay they shall commend
Thy act, and read the story to their children▪
And envy the example was not theirs,
I shall have all the blame, but i'll endured
For thy sake, all the tyranny will be mine,
But to secure thy peace, and doe thy husband
A courtesy, I'll run a thousand hazards.
Doe I appear now?
Yes, a glorious monster.
Good Heaven!
Once more, will you consent?
Neveroh, never: let me tell you, sir,
You have so little prevailed upon my Love,
That almost I forget my charity
You're a bad man: I'll sooner meet a basilisk, and be one.
Nay then.—Hee draws his Poynard.
What doe you mean?
If soft entreaties
With all that man can promise, move you not
To the delight, I'll snatch it from your bosom,
Nay never shake, I'll change that modest paleness
Into a blush, shall speak thy blood as hot
As mine, or leave thy veins dry as the face
Of earth, when winter hath deflowered her cheek,
And sealed up all her beauties in a frost.
Ha, Madam, dead, help: I did but try thee,
My Lady Plot, a curse upon your Plots.
Jacintha, Ladies, I am undone, no help?
Peace you'll wake my master.
Help here, the Lady Peregrine is dead.
If she be dead, she wonot make a noise,
Would al in the house were dead, we should be at quiet.
Carry your self civilly an i'll send somebody.
I shall be in for murder, oh my fate!
Alas my sister, what ha you done, my Lord?
I know not the extent of my offence,
But trust me, i le not fly past the next Chamber.
Show your best charity, oh my soul is wounded.
She returns, give her more ayre.
Oh my poor sister, welcome to life again.
I know you both, is no body else with you?
No Madam.
Not my Lord?
I'll carry him the news of her recovery.
Pray let me see him.
Hoe's here too soon.
Plo. Cheer up your spirit my Lord, and speak to her,
She is alive, and likely.
You may come
A little nearer, if there be no change
In mind, there is in countenance, my Lord,
I have had a short, but pleasing vision,
My thought from a steep precipice, as you were falling
Into the Sea, an arm chained to a Cloud,
Caught hold, and drew you up to Heaven.
If you dare hear me speak
Again, I dare say more, but to your ear.
I feel a new, and secure confidence.
Will you vouchsafe us favour?
We'll not bee
At to much distance.
Can there bee a hope,
After so great a wrong, to find a mercy?
You must bee more then woman, and you are so.
It was the error of my soul that drew
The heavy mist upon my eyes, they now
See, and admire your innocence, oh Madam,
I have two mighty passions within me;
Two, that are welcome, yet extremes, a Joy,
To see you live, and sorrow for my trespass
Against so bright a chastity, to which,
I kneel within my hart, and ask forgiveness.
If this be earnest, it is a heavenly language.
I feel a holy flame disperse rich heate,
About me, the corruption of my blood
Is fallen away, and of that virtue, which
A devil in me would have betrayed, I rise
A servant, and admirer, live, oh live,
Thou best of wives, and practise still new wonders
Upon the hart of lust transformed men,
Until time boast, the example of thy faith
Hath purged the world, and taught us how to count
Our hours by thy miracles: I am
In love now with thy goodness, by thy self
I am, and by some rare, and unknown act,
Must make a recompense to that fair honour,
I would ha blasted, once again forgive me,
And hide the shame, my soul does blush to think on.
This is an noble change, and speaks his nature
Not barren, when good seeds are trusted with it.
Hoe's gone.
And did not mind us.
I am sorry,
I could have chained my ears to his discourse,
And willingly ha grown old to have heard him:
Madam, the Character of praise you gave him,
Is short of that true nobleness I find.
And yet you were not willing to believe it.
I think I know a man.
How is this sister?
I hope you're not in earnest, though hee bee
A Lord, as who can help, in my judgement
There are no mountains of such nobleness
As you commend his talk, if he speak not:
Another language to the ear, could never.
Ravish my understanding, though I must
Confess it is wild enough, I doe begin
To fear you, sister.
Bee more charitable,
I apprehend your trouble, and shall give you
A fair account of his, and my own honour,
I could bee merry now.
Here are Gentlemen.
My customers.
Where is my Lord?
Hoe's gone, sir.
I am sure hee has left a hart behind with you,
Most excellent of beauties, in whose trust,
It is safer, and more warm, then in his bosom,
Doe you not find him a brave Gentleman?
He has but one fault Lady, hoe's to modest:
But your discretion must help• hat.
I honour him.
Tic well and wisely done.
Pray tell me, sir,
I have heard a little trial of your wit,
Are you honest too?
Honest too?
I never did suspect your Ladyships
Breeding, and yet this question in public,
Would stagger the opinion.
But you having a leading voice.
I ha not art to help you,
Though I confess, I might orerule some wits
Of the lower class, are you honest too?
Besides the freedom of my birth, and wealth
Of blood, I boast no over-swelling fortunes,
As to what purpose, should my wits bee clogged
With heavy acres, when the Town's Exchequer
Is mine, and every Mercer is my Tenant,
If he pretend to wit, and hope to justify
His shop-booke, and orthography of his bills:
I would not have the scandal on my name,
To be called honest, in the strict sense I mean,
And as it ties my blood up, for a Duke-dome:
But you are for my Lord, and I allow it.
How thrive my gallants here?
They cannot choose
But prosper, sir, and much the better for
Your commendations.
You may take his opinion Lady, tic authentic.
But a little of your patience: if I found
Within me, that strong appetite to marry,
Who shall protect me from the statute gentlemen?
If it be felony to have two husbands,
I will not marry above one for certain.
She s right for that, it is dangerous.
Cast lots.
And tie my love to chance, forbid discretion.
Choose whom you love best.
That's to bee resolved
By your demonstration, who loves me best,
For if there be, mark what I tell you, Gentlemen,
But the hundred part of a grain difference,
In your affections, beshrew me, if
I choose the lightest.
How's this?
Wisdom Gentlemen,
And must bee allowed.
Let him bee the judge,
Hee knows us both to a scruple.
Excuse me Gentlemen,
It is fit the Lady satisfy her judgment▪
Although I hate partiality, it becomes not
I should bee here definitive, to perplex
The freedom of her choice..
What think you to agree among our selves?
Sure hee that dares
Doe most for my sake will deserve me best.
Dee hear that resolution, bee ruled
I'll open such a path to your ambition—
No more.
At our next visit, you shall know us Lady,
Nay Gentlemen letts to gleek.
Command us Madam.
You and my Cozen may
To the same exercise.
I would bee excused
For some few minuets.
If it please you Lady,
Weal pass that time at sant: did you not find
My Character true of those rotten glo-wormes?
You did a high favour.
you consult
Your honour in the acknowledgment, I waite you.
When will you open, sir, the book of destiny
And read the name you talk on? I am confident,
He must be master of an active soul
Whom you prefer, if I mislike his person,
I'll marry his wit, but we loose time, you'll follow.
Methinkes I feel some new access of comfort,
Something that tells me, I am near a blessing,
Or else my poor hart flattets me.
My Lord commanded me present you his best service,
And with it, these: he bad me say, they are
Prologue to that reward hee hath designed
Your virtue, I was glad to hear him say so,
And never went more nimbly on his message.
The mortgage? this confirms me, he is noble,
A wealthy Carkanet; though I cannot merit
This bounty from him, I am rich in thank's.
But prithee tell me boy, did not thou bring
Letters, and other Jewels to me?
Yes.
If I remember, you did speak an other
Meaning, then what you now deliver.
Madam,
Although the narrow tie of duty bind me,
To the discharge of his commands, which it
Becomes no servant to dispute, I meet
Honest employments with more cheerfulness.
Thou hast a modest countenance, here's to buy the
Garters, and Roses.
When I go upon
Lascivious errands, Madam, I take money,
There is no other benefit belongs to 'em,
But good ones pay themselves, I am rewarded,
I shall have cause to thank you for my Lord,
If he preserve this temper.
A good boy: this is not the religion of all Pages.
They are a present worth acceptance,
The piety came with 'em more then doubles
Their value, if vice blush not at rewards,
There is no shame for virtue to receive them▪
But What's all this to me, that am poor still
Without my Peregrine? who all this while
Treads the uneven path of war, and danger,
This very minute, for ought I can tell,
Wounded upon some service, or engaged,
To stand the murdering Cannon, oh, my blood
Grows pale within me to imagine, what
Horror attends the Soldier
Madam, Madam.
Ha, my hart trembles.
Sir Walter Peregrine.
Thy looks speak comfort, what of him?
Hee is returned.
Landed?
Hoe's marching up the stairs, with another soldade
Tough as his Jerkin, he has a tilting feather,
And looks so desperately, I fear they have
Brought home two regiments that wonot bee
Cashiered without a shift.
They are here already.
Oh! let me fly into his arms, my Peregrine.
My best of life!
Let tears of joy salute thee,
Welcome, ten thousand welcomes.
I embrace
Millions of bliss in thee, but let not our
Joy make us unmannerly, bestow
One welcome on my friend.
Your pardon, sir,
If after many years of absence, I
Dwell long upon a husbands entertainment,
And if you think I have expressed a truth
Of joy to see him, you will easily
Believe the man, whom hee calls friend, is welcome.
Madam, you honour me, it were a sin
Not to bee confident.
And are wee met?
Never I hope to part again, it is time
Wee now should grow together.
You'll dispense
With me for some hours, I have friends expect
At my return a visit.
I shall not
Desire you to let fall no mention
Of me, the little stay I purpose here,
You may imagine, carries danger with it.
I Hope you know me better.
Noblest friend.
I heard some words sound most unkindly from you,
You named a little stay, have I scarce seen
My happiness, and must be sad again
To think it will so soon be ravished from me?
Alas my poor Bellamia, I have made
No purchase but of wounds, since my departure.
I have paid some debts of war, but cannot promise
To cancel one, that threatens me at home;
What wee have more then to supply our wants,
Consumes on the Drum head, I was ambitious
To see thee, and this gentleman returning
With expectation to levy men
Gave me the opportunity, but I dare
Promise my self no dwelling here, scarce own
My face before a sun-beame, I must walk
In the dark to all the world but thee, Bellamia:
But trust me, when my body is called hence
By misery of my fate, it takes not all
The soul it brought, much stays to waite on thee:
I know it would afflict thee more, to see me
A prisoner, chained to heavy debts, and shame.
Thy state is not so lost, and miserable,
As it is presented in thy fears, look here,
And thank a providence, that smiles upon us,
This is recovered, wee have some Land
Again, by whose revenue wee may live,
And expect better fortunes, I have Jewels too,
Bright ones, and rich.
You have indeed.
Possess
What I enjoy, and let us live together.
It cannot, cannot be, alas Bellamia,
How flattering imagination would cozen us,
I am beyond sea still, in my cold Tent,
Where, though my sleeps be broken with the noise
Of war, I now securely dream of thee,
And of my coming home, and talking to thee,
That thou art rich in land again and Jewels,
Shadows, mere shadows: I am weary of
This dream, some charitable cannon wake me.
Sir you may trust your eyes, these are no forms, in aerie
apprehension, but the truth of things, that call you to be∣leeve,
and use them as timely benefits: yet I may allow you
to wonder, there's a story will deserve it.
I know not what I fear, dee think it is true then?
I will have reason for this faith, pray tell me,
How came you by this wealth, certainly I left
No sums to purchase these, more my injustice
To thee, whose plentiful estate I ruined.
A friend, a noble friend.
That died, and gave thee
A swelling legacy, and thou hast made
This use on it to release thy desperate land,
Buy thee a Carkanet, and this proud blaze
Of other Jewels.
If you please to hear me,
I must declare, these are the bounty of
A living friend.
Living?
A Gentleman—
A Gentleman? forbear I am not well.
One you are bound to honour.
Tha'st undone me,
Doe not, do not name him,
I know, and feel too much.
Believe me, sir,
My storie's full of innocence, and when
You have more knowledge of this friend, you'll quit
Your fears, and call him to your hart.
My hart▪
Is very busy, yet you may tell me
His name, to whose strange bounty I am so obliged.
More to his virtue, though his title
Carry the shine of honour, he has a soul
More glorious; have patience but to hear me,
You will confess it, and reward his piety
With praise above a man, and be in love
With him your self.
In Love—
The Lord Fitzavarice.
Ha? the wanton Lord Fitzavarice.
Thou most undone of women, did my absence
So forfit me, or ebb of wealth corrupt
Thy giddy soul, thou could imagine, I
Would thank thy lust to piece up my wild ruins?
Transform me gentle Heaven,
For if I be a man, and hold the knowledge
Of this dishonour, I shall doe an act
Equal to this, and murder this false woman.
Have I thought life not tedious for thy sake,
And in my poverty summed up wealth enough
But in my hopes to see thee, were my winters
Not cold, when I but thought I had Bellamia,
Were all the toils, and troubles of my spring,
Not valued for this harvest? curse upon
Thy Salary, were it a price to buy
All Kingdoms, that the Sun ever shed a beam on,
Earned from thy bodies infamy, I'd choose
To live in the galley first, and chained to'th oar,
Give up my breath through torture. I'll to prison,
And welcome all the stings, that want of liberty,
Disease, and famine, can let fall upon me,
And call thee yet more killing then all they,
Till my hard Creditors forgive me in pity,
And curse thee into all I have suffered,
Wives shall accuse thy perjury, whose act
Is able to make all the truth suspected,
And Virgins frighted at thy name, resolve
Never to marry, while the race of men
Curse thee, for whom they ne'er shall spring again.
But I let passion fool me, and my tameness
May prompt thee to more sin, I'll bee revenged;
But first on him, that grafted shame upon me:
It shall bee thy first punishment, to see
Him bleeding, where is he? come what fine conveyances
To keep your Goat close, till time play the baud,
And secure all your ruttings? I must find him,
Appear then stain to honour, Lordly devil:
Where art? Fitzavarice? Fitzavarice!
Whose reeking squire are you sir, ha my Lords?
Show me strait where this Fox doth Earth himself,
Or I'll—
I know not where my Lord is, but ther's one a Bed.
A Bed, expecting her, where?
But hoe's asleep, you'll wake him.
Show me villain quickly.
Oh, this way, sir.
Has misery a name beyond my suffering?
Hath love, and fortune both conspired to drop
Their stings into my bosom?
Help Dormant.
A plot, a plot to murder me, hold, what art?
My Nephew; ha!
It is not he, Uncle you must
Excuse my complement, he shall not fly me.
Who goes about to fly? he did not wound me,
A naked man is soon undone, it is wisdom
To sleep hereafter in a shirt of Maile,
When came he hither, from the nether-lands?
Hee is sent upon some murdering design;
But why with his sword drawn, why not a knife?
Some great man is in danger; ha! my Niece weeping,
I'll sift her, Bellamia?
Oh my husband, sir.
Nay, then there is a plot, whom would he kill?
The Lord Fitzavarice.
I knew it was some great man mus• be visited
Beneath the ribs, men of such vast estates
Are not long lived.
I know not what to do, sir,
Hoe's in the conspiracy, reveal the plot to me.
My fellow Oldrat met him, sir.
Ha, more traitors.
I did suspect that fools simplicity,
What man is to be trusted? if these men
Thrive in their first attempt, the stat's in danger.
This Oldrat is a politician.
I'll stand upon my guard, entrench, and dare
The Ghost of Telly.
It is not very warm, sir.
Your cold considerations are best.
But I'll to bed again.
They are here, oh!
Away.
Shall wee bee never free from plots?
Has he been gone this hour say?
Yes, and please your worship,
Would I were well gon too.
Yet will you hear me, sir.
And trust the language of your tears? they're false,
Your gamester shall weep blood: here we untwist
Our harts, set up of the trade, the youth will join.
Thou majesty be still Bellamia, but not mine.
Ell's paid, and ye are welcome gentlemen.
So; so, this Tavern was well thought upon:
In my opinion, it is a great deal better
Then to have trusted your own passion
In such a cause, which easily might engage you
To danger, when your rage grew high, and loud.
I have obeyed your counsel: you will carry this?
I have promised you.
And yet you must acknowledge
The wrong is greater then to bee contained
Within this narrow leaf, and till I have
Revenged, it swells each minute to a volume.
My Lord is noble this way, and be confident,
Will render you an account, worthy his person,
Though I am sorry to salute him first,
With a defiance.
Shall it not for all the World
Doe thy self prejudice in his favour, i'll
Disengage thee again.
Now you dishonour me, though he has bin pleased
To use me nobly when we met at Bergen,
That must not bar the office of a gentleman
To his friend: he has been a Soldier himself,
And must grant this an act of my profession.
You are certain he has done the injury?
For 't is not safe to trust suspicion,
In things of this high nature; Life and Honour
Must not bee questioned upon naked fears,
And windy suppositions, pardon me
This plainness, you imagine I dare fight.
Shall I believe it is day, when I behold
The Sun disperse his beams about the World?
Doe I know cold, or heate, or when I thirst?
Shall I be confident we talk together?
My cause will ask the same degree of faith,
As built on equal certainty.
I urge it
No father:
Is not that hee?
It is the same.
With-draw, be careful of your self, I'll meet you
At your Uncles house, and give you an account
Of this employment.
She is an excellent woman,
If it be no wrong to her goodness that I spend
My childish character.
You are right, she is
Indeed boy, and shows fairer for that goodness,
I have done nothing yet to cherish her
Rare piety, or to deserve my pardon.
I'll study both.
My Lord, an humble servant—
Captain you honour me,
Welcome to England, how doe all our friends
In the low-Countries?
Happy in being your servants,
When Landed you?
But this morning, I am fortunate
In this opportunity, my Lord, to speak with you,
And to present—
Some letters, you oblige me,
How does sir Walter Peregrine?
Well,
If please you command your boy more distance:
This paper comes from him. My Lord, I should
Be guilty of much sin to your own honour,
Not to assure my self noble construction
From you, I had no thought within this hour,
To have brought more then my humble service
To your Lordship, which shall still be fairly yours.
I doe not like this soldads• Embassage:
A challenge! some young Gentlemen that have
Strong purses and faint souls, do use to fine for it,
As Citizens doe for Sheriffs: the Town swash-Bucklers
Practise these feats, and live by it; but my Lord
Hath beaten that opinion out of some,
It should appear, all are not yet converted.
How's this?
He appears noble, and not moved.
Are you acquainted with his discontents?
He has imparted some, but I have no
Commission to expostulate.
I thank you,
You show your self a Gentleman, and his friend.
He shall hear from me, I had ambition
To enjoy you longer: but the terms of honour
Threaten on both sides, know me for your servant.
Pray heaven he injure not the innocent Lady.
He has directed where to send to him,
And so again I thank you noble Captain.
Your Lordships honorer.
This came unlooked for, but I must not wave it,
Of the sudden whom shall I employ? I cannot
Want friends ambitious of these engagements:
The next I meet.
Hee has professed his soul was mine,
I'll try him for his body in this action.
Yet he that is not honest, dares not fight sure.
My honourable Lord.
Oh Master Confident,
Your hopes thrive in your mistress?
Your Lordship
Was pleased to advance 'em, she affects my wit,
And bold discourse, I turn and wind her soul,
She loves me infinitely.
I hope not, hark.
Be not too forward, I'm acquainted with
Her disposition, doe not flatter her,
Nor seem to dote, she'll triumph then: if you
Would make all sure, be ruled by me, and slight her,
And she will court you, it is the trick of Ladies,
If you abuse her, it were not much amiss.
I would not have the wench undo her self
Upon this fellow. I advise the best
And speediest way, for I expect your promise,
When she is yours, to bring us more acquainted.
Be confident my Lord, good manners will
Instruct me to allow you the first fruits,
It was the fashion of our northern Princes:
And challenge it from your poor Homager.
I shall be as warm the first night with her Land,
And monie's. Then it seems you have no hope
To spring her sister.
Since our last salute,
Icicles hang upon my lip.
My wife, for I
Dare speak her so, with smiles shall chase
That winter▪ and shoot spring throughout your blood;
You shall not only from her lip taste Cherries,
But she shall plant 'em with her amorous kiss
Upon your own, and they shall grow from thence
To tempt the Queen of Love to Atones garden:
It shall bee happiness enough for me, to watch
The Hesperides, but in no Dragons shape,
That you may rifle with security
The golden Orchard, I shall boast enough
By having an Elysium to serve you;
Her eyes are wealth enough to me, above
A rock of Diamonds, her breath rich gummes
Sweeter then those the Phoenix makes her Altar,
When she is her own sacrifice, and fans
The glowing Pile with her gray wings; her voice
Enough for me, whose harmony would build
Up Thaebes again, and make it after move,
And follow her; one touch of her soft palm
Is health enough to me, and were I old
As Icon, would restore my active nerves,
And state my youth at thirty: I can gather
Warm Snow from her fair brow, her chin, her neck,
And at my eyes drink enough immortality:
Sated with these, I'll find new appetite,
And come a wanton strawberying to her cheeks.
No more, you have expressed in this your faith
To me, which I am bound in honour to
Acknowledge, and without more study, have
A fit occasion to requite, and show
How near I place your love, there is a difference
Between another gentleman, and my self,
Grown to a challenge, I must answer it,
You that are so well read in books, cannot
Be ignorant of man, I'll trust my life
And honour with no second, but your self.
My Lord I see you know me, and am blessed
The chosen man to serve you, from a troupe
Of lives at your command, I should have envied
His fate, on whom else you had thrown this honour.
Soresolute? you have not seen sir Walter Peregrine,
Hoe's returned.
I hear some whisper—
I have named my enemy, the defiance comes from him.
Hoe's jealous of his wife, good gentleman,
And wot be a cuckold upon record.
Call on me
An hour hence, I'll be at home, and use
Your friendship for the burden of an answer.
I shall think Time hath lost his wings till then.
He put me to it cunningly, but his
Discovery relieved me, though I make
A noise in the Town, and am admired for bouncing,
I am cool enough in the dogge-days: my Lords Scrivener.
Fortune presents him to my with, the man
Of all World most useful to my purpose.
Master Confident, Rapture your most humble servant—
When saw you the squires Vayne-man, and Pumicestone?
Not since I procured 'em a thousand pound,
Now you put me in mind of debts, has not
Sir Walter Peregrine a name within
Some list of yours? has he no creditors
By your acquaintance?
I beseech you doe not
Vex me with his remembrance. I have paid
Some monies for him, he has other friends
That would be glad to embrace him.
Sure hee would not
Be such a traitor not to secure thee.
Would I could reach him.
Why hee is returned,
Within this four and twenty hours, you may
Salute him too. Alas, a sum may bee
The ruin of thy fortunes, could he have
So little charity?
I would show
As much to him, if I could set my fangs on him.
I have ever wished thee well, and if thou dare
Be secret, I'll direct thee to recover him,
I cannot say the deb't; may be, the Knight
Is poor still.
Hang him, Master Confident,
It will refresh my hart to be revenged;
Some say men's blood, I say their bones are sweetest.
I'd make him an example, I'll not tell
My shirt on it, how honest Master Confident?
Fate dotes upon thee, he, the very hee,
Be art-full, j'le salute him, and delay
His pace with some discourse, whilst you
Fetch shoulder-clappers, noble Sir Walter Peregrine,
I feel a spring-tide in my hart of joy,
Swell to congratulate your safe return,
The Town has droup'd for your society.
You are still the eligant time wit, I am happy
To witness both your brain, and body flourish.
What news abroad? all expectation
Is fixed upon this summers war, wee breath
Nothing but German air, although the chance
Of war be uncertain, you can tell which hand
Is fortunate, how ha the Dice run hitherto?
Ther's not much won, or lost.
No Towns of note
Taken? no convoys of provision
Cut off?
Sir you are inquisitive, as if
You would turn Gallobelgicus, I am
On some affairs now, that importune their
Dispatch, my stay being short I must attend them.
Nay prithee Knight be courteous, it is an age
Since we conversed, i'st true what loved fame scatters
Of the great Generals revolt?
Wee have
But the relation.
He is slain for certain.
There was an execution.
And what treasure
Was taken by the enemy? they talk
Of Millions.
Enough to keep the Eagle
In a good diet. I beseech you pardon me,
We shall hereafter meet, and ha more freedom
To enlarge our selves, &amp; when you have my particulars,
I will be bold to inquire in the Exchange
Your news at home.
I observe trouble in you,
I hope you're in no danger.
If you'll give me
The liberty of a subject, and allow me
The Kings high way, I shall have less suspicion,
You wonot pay my debts.
I beg your pardon,
Pray doe not wound my service to you with
A jealous thought, I wonot for the World
Engage you another minute.
Now for the blood-hounds.
Sir, we arrest you
Is the mischief fallen?
Your sword shall keep the peace.
It is at my suite.
Thine?
I doe but lead the dance to twenty more.
Hear me, what's your demand? let me not go
To prison.
An action of a thousand pound more,
For the Lord Fitzavarice.
Ha? then I am betrayed, that Lord's a villain,
That I could reach his hart; release my body
But for two hours, my soul be forfeited
For ever, if I render not my self
Your honest Prisoner.
That were a pretty jest.
Look to your charge.
Here is a duel taken up discreetly.
Black Jew, base Lord, damned villain.
They can tame you.
Why look you gentlemen, I'll not puzzle you
To find out dangers, famine, fire, and sword,
Or desperate things.
Trifles for thy sweet sake.
I would not wish you, upon easy terms.
To prevent these, I have thought a way my self,
And with less cost, to try you, I have made
A vow I wonot marry these six months,
During which time, if you dare for my sake
Visit me every day, and never speak to me,
Nor in my company to any other—
How Lady?
Shall I not answer any gentleman
Or Lady, that shall put a question to me?
By no means.
You will give me leave to answer you,
If you should ask me any thing.
Not a syllable,
Though I desired to know what a clock it is,
Ther's your obeydience, at six months end
I may reward your silence.
She'll make him the dumb Knight.
I wonot engage you to be a mute
So long, you shall be allowed to speak, and see me.
You are noble Lady.
But with this condition,
That whatsoever I entreat you say
Or doe, you put in act the contrary
The very contrary, you understand me.
How's this? if you command me to affect you,
What can I doe?
I wonot bee so cruel.
If these conditions please, you may proceed.
But hark you Lady, I may laugh before you,
And in your absence have the liberty
To use my tongue.
What else, sir.
And when must I begin to mum.
I'll tell you.
Another word,
If we be just to your commands, dear Lady,
At six months end, how shall we both be satisfied?
You have forgot the statute.
Hee that shall
Express most care to doe his penance for me,
Must be the man, I say no more, imagine.
My Lord Fizavarice.
Now beginn's your trial.
How fares your virtuous sister Lady Peregrine?
That Gentleman can tell you.
He tell me?
Yes, he had a message to deliver you.
Sir you much honour me.
Nay, let him know it, here have been turns my Lord,
Since you were here.
Is she in health; you doe not mock me?
If you love me, tell him the whole story, prithee,
For my sake.
How she Jeers him.
Pox on your subtle shoulders, are you drunk?
If I shall think you Jeer me, be still silent,
I'll make you speak.
Ha, ha.
Ha, ha.
What doe you laugh at?
At his folly my noble Lord.
It is well you doe, sir, what's your meaning Lady?
You shall know presently, if you entreat
That Gentleman to stay.
He is not going.
But your commands upon him will make sure.
Let me entreat you not to leave me, sir.
I leave you my noble Lord? if every sand
Within my glass, were a long life, I should
Employ 'em all in waiting on your Lordship.
And think the time were poor, and short to serve you
I leave you my good Lord? i'm not about it.
Pray, sir, stay.
Your Lordships humble servant, some affairs
Press my departure.
You'll not mock me, sir?
You shall stay.
Lady I am gone, my Lord, I must beseech
Your pardon, for the world, I dare not slip
A minute:
Then go, you may go.
Not for a Kingdom Lady, I will stay,
And grow here for your service.
How came these gentlemen by these strange humours?
I'll tell you, sir.
Sir Solitary Plot, your husband and my worthy Lord
and Master, commends his service to your Lordship, and prays
you would please to accommodate him, with your Coach.
This fellow's infected too with serious folly.
Towards midnight hee does purpose to take the air,
And make some visits.
Visits and air at midnight? pray return
My Lord ambassador to sir Solitary,
I will give order when I go to Bed,
To have the Coach made ready for his progress.
Stay, I have a great desire to see his worship,
Has he the same complexion still? I prithee
Leave of thy gravity, and answer me,
Is he in Bed?
No Madam, a most strange
Disaster broke his sleep, and we shall be
At counsel presently, do not I talk
Already like a states-man?
It shall be so, come nearer.
This your device: tic pleasant and pursue it,
Your sister—
Bee you sure, and secure, Jacintha you must
with me.
Whether?
To my husbands Chamber.
Madam, your husband is returned I hear.
I hope you have not met.
Why noble Madam?
Wee shall be friends if you have mercy, to
Forgive what's past, my soul shall not deserve
His ill opinion, I hope all is well between you two.
No harts did ever meet
More loving lie, until he saw—
What, Madam?
The presents that you sent me.
It was my fear.
Servant.
Madam.
My dumb Knight too, we shall have the more mirth.
Would I had been poor still, although you bring
All innocent thoughts. My Lord, I must beseech you,
Never to see me again, oh never, sir,
It will be dangerous to express your virtue,
And every minute you stay here, is fatal,
Alas I fear hoe's come.
My Lord, I have been active,
And all my bodies in a bath to find you.
Walter Peregrine is arrested.
How?
Oh misery of miseries!
Look to your mistress.
Her Ladyships pardon, I observed not her
So near. it is very certain.
I suspect
This knave, alas poor gentleman, and yet
Tic no mis-fortune to me, things considered:
Now he is safe, and I may walk securely;
In Prison let him lie and cool his valour.
I shall bee in charity with the tribe of varlets,
For this good turn, this taking him in the nick,
And owe the wretch a sum, for being so fortunate
To set the Mastives on him, I owe thee too,
For thy good news, come Confident.
To my ambition.
Dee hear my Lord, the good news is not all
You owe me for, I knew it would be grateful;
You owe me for the act, it was my wit
Betri'd him to the arrest, held him in prate
Whilst the honest Knave your Scrivener fetched the vultures
With fangs keen as the Devils.
How •am bound to thee?
I knew t'was necessary. Every man
That vows his service, has not that extent
Of brain to bring about these fine things for you.
What think you of the mamoseile, his wife now?
You have no opportunity, no power
To humble her proud body, while her husband
Sets up a frippery with his gay wardrobe;
Grows into new acquaintance with diseases,
And comfortable vermin; breaks stone walls
To show the proverb, and his hunger mighty;
Curses his Stars, and learns to cant, and praise
The steam of ale, with an unchristian tossed in it;
Doth reverence Barmudas, and the ghost
Of cheese, with the Egyptian Idol Onyous,
And crusts to break an Elephants tooth. All this
I ha done for you, my good Lord,
For which
I must pronounce thee a rascal; sordid wretch,
Was this your act for me? curse on thy soul for it,
My honour bleeds to death, see me no more.
My Lord.
You are come in a good time, sir.
Are you so cunning my young Lord, I must make my Lady
Sure, ere hee talk, and tell her this; it is not'
The constitution of every Lord
To take unkindly when a man compounds
A duel for him, if I bee driven too't
I can forswear it again. Let valiant fools
Brag of their souls no matter what they say,
A coward dares in ill, do more then they.
Tic all the favour I could show him, sir,
To make my house his Prison.
Tic but hell, one story higher.
You must arm your self
With noble fortitude, passion but unmans us,
And makes us less for bearing.
Dost think friend,
The sense of all my debts could shake me thus?
I knew it would come, and in my fears examined
The mischief they present, it is not their weight
Affrights me, let the vultures whet their Talons,
And creditors, with harts more stubborn, then
The mettle they adore, double their malice,
Had I a pile of debts upon me, more
Heavy then all the World, it could, but with
The pressure keep this piece of earth beneath 'em,
My soul would be at large, and feel no burden;
That which I count my torture, exceeds all
That yet has been in mention. At a time,
Almost the very minute, when my hopes
Were ripe to punish him, and revenge had mounted
Her steely arm whose fall had crushed the soul
Of my fems ravisher, to be snatched up
By a wirle-wind thus, disarmed of all my hopes,
My hands bound up, not able to relieve
My bleeding honour: this, this murders me.
And that all this should be his cursed plot,
That gave me my first wound.
Dee think my Lord
Can show himself so dishonourable?
Can Lords
Be cowards? dost not appear, when I am pursued
By his own blood-hounds? has he not laid on me
(And what may not by this example follow
To sink me to a dungeon) all the debts
I owe him? nay is it not clear, hee practises
Intelligence abroad, provoking others
To lay their sums upon me, that I may
Consume a Prisoner, and assure his lust
More scope to revel with my adulterous Madam,
My wife whose name is torment to my hart,
Bove all the engines meant to wound mankind▪
Oh woman, that hast forfeited the glory▪
Of thy creation, and become mans ruin.
This is a circumstance I confess, but yet
Cannot make me conclude my Lord so ignoble:
I know he had a wanton pile of flesh,
But a more noble soul, then to betray
His enemy so basely.
First not mischief
Enough to feel the cruelty of a prisoner,
But that black fiend must prosecute my eye-sight
Th'adopted son of Lucifer?
I have a letter from a noble friend of yours.
Carry it to hell.
Correct your passion,
And leave your understanding free, to know
Your happiness, this man how ever your rage
Let fly at him, will deserve better Character,
When he appears the means of your enlargement.
How Master Sheriff?
He means of my enlargement?
Take heed how you do mock me, sir.
Your Sword—
You're free again, each particle of a deb't discharged.
By whom?
Not a fee left unsatisfied.
I am in a Wilderness.
You may come out when you please, if your worship
Will be at leisure to peruse this paper,
There is his name, hath been at all this charge,
Who has commanded me to ask your pardon,
And on my knees I beg it, I am undone else,
For ever with his Lordship.
Lord Fitzavarice?
It was without his knowledge, Master Confident
Charmed me into it, the devil did assist.
The devil?
Yes, we three, I am sorry for it,
And if your worship have occasion
To use a hundred pieces more, I have'em
Ready at your service, pray entreat him to
Accept it, I expect no scribbling for it,
Nor use, nor principal, nor his word; but to
My Lord, that I may be the driver still of all his monies.
I was confident, and long since cleared his Lordship
In my thoughts.
Was there ever such a thing in nature?
You must take the mans benevolence,
He is undone else, come there is no harm in it.
If they be not weight, I'll change 'em.
No, no.
I humbly thank your worship.
I am all wonder.
You must pronounce him innocent, had he
Been coward, as you thought him, at les•e charge
He might ha saved his honour, and secured your absence.
I begin to be a shamed,
And my suspicion cowardly falls off;
Yet certainly all this proceeds not from
Devotion to me, it is a bounty
He looks my wife should thank him for, ha?
Now I see all are your empty jealousies,
But think and be convinced, were his thoughts foul
As you imagine to your Lady, it
Had been ridiculous to set you at liberty,
The only bar to his design, lust is not
So tame, and foolish, common policy
would have instructed him to have let you rather
Languish, and rot in Prison, be collected,
And think whom your false fears have injured,
A noble wife and friend.
I am too blame,
This act hath made me understand two souls.
I'll take 'em both to mine, and ask forgiveness.
Your Lady.
Forgive me my Bellamia,
Thou appearst white again, and only I
Black with my false suspicions of thy goodness,
My Lord has given me a satisfaction
Large as his virtue, welcome to my bosom,
My best, my chaste Bellamia.
This is joy
Able to drown my poor hart, but is all
This peace concluded?
Thus again confirmed.
Just heaven hath heard my prayers, happy Bellamia.
What riches I embrace, what worlds of treasures,
In every kiss, how many lives I take
From those sweet smiles?
Who could suspect this Lady?
But I am lost again, in what place am I?
I'st not a Prison? oh that sad thought shoots
A trembling through me.
All is cured again.
I am free too, out of debt,
Nay I did wonder at it.
You amaze me.
Wast not a brave Physician, that could cure
Two such distempers, when my soul, and fortune
Lay gasping, to recover both? it is done,
Done by thy friend, and mine, that honest Lord
Hath paid all, to the scruple of a fee,
What thanks shall we both pay him my Bellamia?
Can he hath done this miracle, allow
A place for lust within him? it is impossible.
But he is coming hither, stay not thou,
It will require more leisure to express
Thy gratitude, return, and tell thy friends
The wonder first, that when I shall present
His person next, they may have spacious souls,
To admire and entertain him.
I obey you,
Doe not allay this unexpected joy
With a sad change good heaven.
You will expect him.
Religiously, an age I'll wait for him,
I prithee stay, and witness with what cheerfulness
I'll ask his pardon.
He is come.
My Lord,
As you have made me object of your mercy,
By such an act of bounty, as no times
Have gloried in, and in that shown the clearness
Of your brave soul, incapable of stain,
Still let it shine with charity, and make
Me confident of pardon, for an injury
I blush, and dare bleed for, to show repentance.
Are you then satisfied?
I am my Lord.
I was bold, but with no purpose to disparage
Your credit, to discharge some trifling debts.
They were great, my Lord, and must enlarge my ac∣knowledgment,
you have obliged two lives to pray for you.
And the whole age to admire.
You would encourage me.
One word, your honor's safe again.
And happy.
Mine suffers, it is but young and growing on me,
It bleeds by your suspicion, I was bound
To this expense, it is a malicious World,
And men are apt to imagine, I was glad
You were in prison, to preserve my skin
with some excuse, this brand must not come near
My forehead, though your sea be calm, I would not
Have my fame lost in the tempest of men's tongues,
I have made no reply, in point of man,
To your challenge, and the noise may be dispersed,
Nor will what you are pleased to accept, render
Me less unquestioned, but beget men's fears
At a high rate I have bribed your patience
Basely, perhaps, their impudence will reach
To say, I have bought my passage to your Lady,
And your consent to'th shame,
I will proclaim you
Noble to all the World, and my preserver.
Ther's nothing but your sword can doe me right,
We shall not trouble seconds, if you please
The Captain stand for both, he is a gentleman
Known truly valiant, which implies he cannot
Deceive where he is trusted, I'll expect,
You'll follow as you are a Gentlemen.
He seems troubled. What's the matter?
Did think it possible so fair a Sky
Should be delivered of a tempest?
How?
I'll tell thee as we walk, thou must not leave us.
That man is miserably compelled, that must,
To save his fame, be to himself unjust.
The Coach will be made ready.
So, so, let's think and talk of something else:
Tim's precious, let's talk wisely, twill concern us,
My brain is not in tune about my nephew,
Who knows upon what plot he is sent hither,
The Duch are grand projectors, letts examine
Where he is gon now.
My opinion is, to kill some body, or other.
That would be known, and yet I heard a buzz,
Some noble Man was aimed at, we were best
Say nothing, and discover him to the state,
We may be else in danger, and made accessories
To the parricide, which is not as the vulgar
Interpret, killing of a father, but
Parem cedendo, killing of a Peer,
A Peer of the land, mark that.
I understand a Procedendo
Well enough, but who shall serve the writ?
Under your pardon, how can
You prove he is a murderer, let him first kill
Some body, no matter who it be, and then you may
Discover him with a safe conscience.
Laughs.
What's the matter.
I am of an opinion under correction that if wee
Should discover him, wee should not carry it so
Privately, but it would be known, and then we shall
Be in as much danger of the tother side for concealing it.
Laughs—
Who's that?
Now I think better on it, it cannot be concealed
Under your favour fellow Oldrat, for if we do not
Discover, the state will not be so wise, as we are,
And then it were pity o'their lives, besides
If he go on to kill whom he list, and no body hear on it
He may undo the Town by degrees in a moment,
And neither we nor any that is hurt, the wiser for it.
Laughs again.
Who is it laughs?
Not I, sir, ha, ha.
Nor I, sir, ha, ha.
Stand both before me, is there not some spirit
In the room? has not some conjurer a plot upon me?
Cato was wise, and never laughed, but when
Out of his casement, he beheld an Ass
Eat Thistles, wher's the may-game? will none answer?
Sure they did laugh at me, but I'll prevent 'em,
And vex their spleens, away. I wonot trust
A laughing vizard, ther's a killing face
Behind it, oh the juggling of the World!
Am I ridiculous at home? there is
Some plot in agitation. I smell a Rat.
If please you, sir, there is a dumb Ambassador desires to
Speak with you.
A dumb Ambassador?
When does he look for audience? of what nation?
Where in the Map is dumbe-land? I should much
Affect that Country, let him have access.
I understand you are a dumb Ambassador;
Your business pray with me: you are no Lawyer,
Nor no divine I take it, are there no women
Non Magpies in your Country?
This fellow must have a rare understanding,
For nature recompenseth the defects
Of one part, with redoundance in another:
Blind men have excellent memories, and the tongue
Thus indisposed, ther's treasure in the intellect:
Yet there may be a plot, hoe's sent to observe me,
A state spy, but I'll cozen his intelligence,
And be as dumb as he.
What are you, sir?
I am his interpreter.
Oh then first answer me, how came he dumb?
With me lancholie, sir, he has a strange
Humour to cross the method of the World.
As how, sir? pray be plain.
Why; sir, to make
The night his time for study, talk, or business,
And never go to bed but in the morning.
But keep this to your self, for it is a secret.
Study? what did he study pray of the nights?
Why plots, nothing but plots: he did suspect
All mankind, nay their shadows in the hangings,
If they but laid their heads together, were
Dangerous, and talked treason, such a fool,
A serious fool was never before extant.
How does my Solitary Uncle?
Ha Cozen, forbear, we are engaged upon
Affairs of weight, that's an Ambassador.
What language does he speak?
None, none; but this is his interpreter.
Interpreter, and yet he speaks no language.
He will over-heare you, it is a dumb Ambassador.
I pray be gone, you are a woman, go.
And can you get no other company
Then dumb and mad-folkes?
Who is mad?
That Gentleman.
Be you but master of some sense a while,
I'll maked appear he has none. Come forward, sir,
Doe you observe his motion? I entreat
He should come forward, and he plays the crab.
Stand still, sir, I beseech you.
With your pardon
I must be in action, it does stir my blood,
Which would congeal through cold else in my veins.
If it be beneficial to your body
Practise this motion still.
It is very strange;
He now appears a statue:
Are they not both mad? doe you think Jacintha
They have no plot in this, how came they thus distracted?
This grew mad with catching cold
A bed, and lying from his wife.
Cold causes are very dangerous.
You are something guilty on it.
What if my husband be asleep?
We'll wake him.
Good Madam be not troublesome, doe not you know
who I am? I charge you to resist us, come your ways, where;
where be these traitors? let me see, where is sir Solitary? I
thought he would ha shown more wit then to concele traitors
in his house.
Traitors?
Traitors, we look for, and traitors we will have,
And they be above ground.
I saw two suspicious persons come into the house with my
Own eyes, and they must out, there they are, I'll take
My oath Master Constable.
Master Vaineman, and Master Pumicestone you two suspected
For traitors, oh the rotten harts of men!
Reprehend them.
Your good Knight must go too, go cheerfully twill be the
better for you, if you discharge an honest conscience, you may
have the favour to hang tell you be dead.
Did ever any man was sure of the gallows, shake so?
This fright may work some good effect upon him,
Many men have been frighted from their wits,
Having none left, why first not possible
He should be frighted back again into 'em?
One word I beseech you, it is time to speak.
I hope you did not mean this for his cure,
I am not so weary cozen of my freedom.
He that's full master of his reason, may
Be master of his wife too, which I like not.
My Uncle, sister, Madam. Sir Ha more plots?
What's the news sister? you look pleasantly.
Your face is full of sunshine Madam.
bless me, but what are these?
We are subjects of command, she'll discover us.
Men? apprehended? what new fears invade me?
What shall we doe now?
Even what you please.
Why this is Dormant your servant Uncle.
Who would ha thought it?
And your name Oldrat, what's the matter gentlemen?
Ha you an interlude?
If they be no officers, we can be no traitors.
It was Mistress Jacintahs plot, we did but act it.
I was desirous of a scene of mirth,
How far wee should ha driven it, I know not,
Just so ridiculous are all your plots Uncle, ha, ha.
You had your parts my brace of learned gentlemen,
Whom I doe discharge from fear and further penance.
Make not your self the general derision,
Your drudges mirth.
Nay, let him have his humour.
If you have still ambition to be laughed at,
And think it possible I can love such motleys,
Come thus a wooing every day, I shall find
Some trick at last to make your worships famous.
What think you o'this?
One of us is sure to carry her, what think you of the de∣vice,
and the worst come to the worst, for the thousand pound?
We must agree, pay it, and be revenged.
Doe not you think you have undone us now,
And that we shall despair, and drown our selves,
Or slip out of the World in a clean halter?
No, we will live to vex thee, for my part
Because thou gave me liberty to speak,
To show I scorn to obey thee, and in malice
To thy injunction, I will never speak
Again, to any woman, in revenge,
I'll be more dumb then he was.
And because.
Thou did enjoin me silence, from henceforth
I'll practise talk to weary all thy sex.
I will be all, the everlasting talker,
And rail upon all women, till I have worn
My tongue to`th root, I'll study presently
A satire that shall eat thee through the bones,
And send thee first to an Hospital.
I see I am a fool, a melancholy
Suspicious fool, and all my plots are nothing.
Let's follow, and either make him mad outright,
Or bring it to a cure, your part's not done yet.
This will undo me, now must I to Prison.
What dost thou think they mean Oldrat?
I think? I hope they mean well.
And lovingly, and let us like honest servants
Into the cellar and pray for'em.
A match.
Then nothing will prevail but we must fight?
And no place more convenient, draw sir Walter,
And Captain, now indifferent friend to both,
For I have no suspicion thou can slain
Thy self by partiality, witness with
The hart I bring, I have no thought so black,
As murder, or revenge, but to preserve
My honour, which no balm can cure, if once
But the suspect of coward fall upon it.
I am not so unjust my Lord to doubt your courage.
you have given proof my Lord abroad,
That you dare fight.
Though I affect no glory
From actions of this nature, yet the World
At home must be convinced, our fame is lost else:
Had Peregrine been coward, or not known
For valour, I had run less hazard of
My fame, by being silent, but as I am
Beneath him in opinion, a young man
Circled with expectation of something,
That must declare me worthy of a name,
And love of men, I must attempt this danger:
But let me tell thee this, which perhaps may
Render thy sword more fatal to me, I
Did love thy Lady with a sinful purpose,
Pursued ever persecuted her chaste soul,
To satisfy my wantonness, but found
An innocence so rich in her, as may
Alone excuse the ill of all her sex,
Nor has the goodness only the effect
To preserve her, but it returned my eyes
With so much shame upon my self, that I
Threw off my lust, and doted on her virtue,
Heaven shut his mercy up if I dissemble,
This injust obligation to cherish,
I did reward with trifles, which perhaps
Gave fuel to your jealousy, but know
I have designed a larger recompense,
Which your sword may confirm to her in few minutes,
For if I chance fall by it, she is declared
The heir to my estate, and she deserves it,
Which sheele employ no question to assure
Your peace, and pardon for my death, come on, sir.
I am more lost then ever, let my wonder
Be past, or you will fight against a man
Whose soul's a great way off. Did hear this Captain?
With pardon of your Lordship, since you have
Declared so freely, what I think wins credit
With him too, your intentions to his Lady:
There is no cause, you should engage your bloods, To any loss
You are my preserver, sir,
Make me not so ungrateful to advance
My sword against your life, that gave me all
The benefit of mine, I have assurance
Enough of you, and my wives honour.
Ther's
A purse of gold is troublesome, it may
Be useful to'th survivor, come, sir, fight
By thy own Ladies virtue, I shall else provoke you rudely.
For her sake my Lord, we should bee friends.
That wonot help my fame,
Nor yours, if you regard what threatens it,
I must not live upon the charity
Of peoples tongues, their justice shall acknowledge
I doe not fear to bleed, let it be argument
To inflame thee, that thou majest be happier
Upon my loss, since my last minute gives
Thy wife possession of all my fortune.
That rather charms me from each violence.
This must compel you then, till now I never
Thought thee ungrateful, by thy fame I charge thee,
By thy Bellamias love, fight not with pity,
Let me bee worthy at least to fall with honour,
Fight so, as howsoever fate determine,
I may get honour, though in death, and not
Suffer without a wound.
So her's some blood yet.
I did but imitate my Lord your Character,
Blood of both sides, nay then I interpose,
As you are gentlemen, for other titles
Weigh nothing here, be just to both your honours,
You have done well, exceeding well, unless
I shall conclude ther's malice on one side,
Be your selves now, and on such noble terms
Be reconciled again, sir Walter is
No enemy at hart, and the World must
Be satisfied my Lord, in your just valour,
Think what blessed providence has marked you both
For noble ends.
I'll trust him with my sword,
Which rather shall make next impression here,
Then be his danger.
I am overcome, take me thy Captive.
My most honoured friend.
So, so, it is fair on both sides, but my Lord,
You bleed much, can you spare it.
Well enough, I'll wait upon you home.
First have a Surgeon.
What for a serath? let me present thee safe,
To thy Bellamia, she but with a smile
Can cure all wounds, come Captain.
Wee both waite on you.
You tell me wonders.
I shall much repent
My discourse to thee, if it did not raise
Thy admiration, it is a noble Lord,
Thou art bound to make him restitution.
Of what?
Of fame, you were jealous of our honours.
I have read the Chronicles, but never met
With a young Lord has done the like.
To what
Virtue in time will he grow to Jacintha?
Virtue? ther's another thing, not usual
In men of his rank, I allow a Gentleman
To pay his own debts, but another mans,
Wont's a record, besides all this, to love
Another mans wife, a handsome woman too,
And be at cost to keep her honest? miracles.
What joys flow in my hart. Thou art sad fester.
No sadness, but I have another passion, that troubles me.
You'll bee in time converted,
And leave your wild invectives against men,
Tic possible you may marry, if you could
Find such another man to be your husband.
No, I wood not.
What?
Find such another man to be my husband.
Thou woodst have him, how now my witty sister?
It cannot be concealed.
Has little Cupped
Been practising with his bird-bolt, if thou be not,
I'll wish thee heartily in love, to punish
Thy want of charity against all men
And marriage, it is but justice, nay be not melancholy;
He will be here presently.
He shall be welcome.
He shall.
Be very welcome hither, he once said
If I remember well, could he but love,
He would marry me of all women alive.
My fortun's not to bee despised, however
My hart is rich enough, but it shall languish
To death, ere I will tell him so.
But dost love him
Indeed? now but for pity I could laugh.
You may triumph sister, you have cause.
And thou can have no argument to despair,
Come shall I tell my Lord?
What?
That thou love him.
Doe him not so much injury, my passion
Can still walk in disguise, though I confess
Since your relation, it is become more troublesome
To be confined, oh love! I never thought
To have felt thy sting, I dare not stay to see him;
I shall betray my self with many blushes:
Farewell my Lord Fitzavarice.
Not so
He will rather meet a welcome to his bosomo,
Repent not Lady, you're but lovingly
Betrayed, and it is my happiness, I should
Have pleaded at this bar, in this prevention
I am doubly blessed, be constant, and divide
With me both hart, and fortunes: thou must needs
Be excellently good in being her sister.
I must confess my Lord, I honour you.
But not for any titles, although some
Woman may be allowed the ambition,
But for your noble nature.
I am confirmed.
But all is well again, and must exalt
Thy truer joys by finding us both live,
And knit into a peace no time can violate,
Let me salute The Example of chaste honour;
Sister I now must call thee, and shall glory
To own that title by Jacinthas love.
All blessings crown your wishes.
I have a hart to wish you joys.
They will bee all a debt
To your noble care of us, Master Confident.
One of my servants but not yet discharged.
You come to turn and wind this Ladies fancy
With your wit now, but your devices fadge not,
It is three minutes since she was disposed of,
And though my stock of brain will not reach, to
Make a large jointure of so many hundred
Sonnets per annum, and rare Elegies,
Some fresh, and some that ha •lain 7. years pickled,
In other languages: yet she•le be content
With a less witty fortune, my estate sir.
Tic happiness enough for me
To snuff your marriage Taper, whose bright shine
Shall put out the Worlds eye.
Spare, spare your fancies.
But I'll not now arraign you, if you mean
To have me, know me again, chafer some wit
Away for honesty, I conceal your shame,
Ther's hope then of your pardon, when I rise
From what has iustiie forfeited my name,
To show the World your childing is not lost,
Your Lordship will not be ashamed again
To own me for your servant.
I shall be a glad witness and admirer.
Wilt please you gentlemen to have a Song.
Sir Solitary, and my Lady are at it, he is grown
The most Jovial gentleman—hark.
Welcome welcome, again to thy wits.
This is a holy day.
I'll have no plots, nor melancholy fits
But merrily pass the time away:
They are mad, that are sad.
Bee ruled by me;
And none shall bee so merry as wee.
The kitchen shall catch cold no more.
I'll have no Key to the buttery door,
The Fiddlers shall sing,
The House shall ring,
And the World shall see.
What a merry couple.
Merry couple.
Couple, couple,
wee will bee.
Wee are new married Gentlemen, I must
Invite your Lordship for my guest. Your Tunes
Are melancholy. Welcome home my wandering nephew;
You shall bee welcome too, sir.
I'm your servant.
When shall we dance Jacintha?
Sure this humour
Is very young, pray Madam is he serious?
Is there no plot in this?
Beyond my hope
He is recovered sir, and I must stand too't,
And turn a miracle, a Lady huswife.
No more, least with the joy I run into
A madness worse, then melancholy, you tell
Me wonders: bless my senses. And shall we dance?
I am for any mirth, the day requires it,
In which love too long blind hath found his eyes,
And leads the way to his own Paradise.
PRaise a fair day at night the Proverb says,
And it is the evening that must crown all Plays.
For although writers may bee first allow•d,
To speak themselves, their judgements are too proud
That waving all authority beside
Think it is enough when they are satisfied,
Wee must appeal to you, unless you smile
Wee have but cherished vain hopes all this while,
But if you like, by this we shall best prove it,
You'll follow The Example, if you love it.

EXpect me an hour hence, my friend and I
Will walk and see the City, make it your
Caroto get Supper ready.
If I doe not
I know who's like to fare the worse.
And be not
Drunk Sir at our return.
Yes I doe use
To be drunk before you often.
About your business:
And how dost like the town, and situation.
Trouble me not to answer▪ such dull questions,
I see ne'er a handsome girl yet, not a piece
Of a bonaroba; and the Duchess hold
But the complexion of those we ha seen,
I wonot be corrupted with the palace
To be her bed-fellow.
You'll change opinion;
Perhaps we ha seen none but the rubbish, yet
There may be beauties signior will tempt
Your most fastidious appetite, I fear
I shall have much ado to stave thee from 'em,
To quit that fear le•…s leave the City instantly;
The meal wonot digest women, I eat int.
Not stave me from em?
We are for the wars;
This town will turn my blood, I wonot give
A I•…leo for my courage i•… twelve hours,
Unless they tie their women •…p.
Thou hast,
A mind to show thou can be satire, patience
But till to morrow and we'll hence.
Sir, let my heart present your welcome home,
You've been too long a stranger, I am happy
To embrace you again.
Me, meaning me, dee know me?
I hope you are not jealous of my friendship,
I thought our familiarity before
The sad misfortune came that made you banish
Your self from Urbin had possessed you thoroughly,
How firm I dare be to you.
Doe you know him?
Dost thou know him? I ne'er saw his eyes before
To my best memory, are you not mistaken.
Perhaps in your affection which no art
Hath ever made me guilty to deserve,
I never did betray my friend to make you
Affect these clouds, but be it so.
There is
But one half hour added to our ages
Since first we saw the City.
In good time.
I will be bold to acquaint some bawd else
In whom you have more faith.
What Riddle's this.
Is not the Gentleman of the to sides on•… wits?
What did he call you.
Nay I know not, he
Said we had been familiar, in his dream sure,
For waking I ne'er saw him.
You should have asked his name.
To what purpose prithee. 
Why does that Gentleman stare upon us so.
Are you returned, this is confidence
You may repent.
Save you signior.
And you too.
Dee mean both on•…?
One has some need, yo're welcome Signior to Urbin.
Thank you, what's your name I pray.
If you ha forgot mine, I remember Borgia.
A friend of yours, desires but to renew
Acquaintance with.
What friend.
You will hear more.
Jigs, shall I after him and knock
Him o'er the pate.
For what.
For looking on's
So scurvily.
That may be dangerous,
Did he not name Borgia.
But whether
He meant himself or you I understand not.
He might as well ha called me B•…thlem Gabor;
Lets walk on still.
Ha Borgia, tic he, my noble friend returned,
Welcome, a thousand welcomes in thy bosom;
Why doe you wear this strangeness in your face,
Can a few years render me lost to Borgia.
Sure he does call me Borgia.
Thou were
Unkind in thy departure, with what devotion
Could I have been a partner in thy travel
And have unequal fortune, being absent
Why was not I summoned to wait upon thee
In any part of the world, but again welcome,
When arrived ye.
I am very likesome body,
They all mistake me thus, we ha seen no friends since.
Is this Gentleman.
One dear in my acquaintance.
I am your servant, thy unexpected sight
Will glad Mercutios heart, your noble father
Who hath long mourned your absence.
Good old man,
He will rejoice to see him here no doubt on it.
Remember my fathers name.
You have lost an Uncle, but all his estate
Your Father is possessed of.
Dead!
His age
Was fit for heaven, his wealth is added to
Your fathers to make yours the greater fortune.
Take it upon you.
Pardon noble friend,
I was persuaded time and absence had
Wrought such a change upon my face, that no man
Would know me again, but tho I may to some
Appear a stranger, I must stand discovered
To a friends penetrating eye, again
Possessed your faithful servant, whats my name.
Dear Borgia.
Borgia I must remember you.
Shall I waite on you to your father Sir.
What were I best to doe.
Your sisters grown a gallant gentlewoman,
The only beauty of Urbin, and waits on
The Duchess, her soft lips will seal your welcome.
A handsome gentlewoman, go.
He does but jest, they are all witches here.
No more Ieeres▪
Go or be lame for ever.
Is she grown
Worthy that hour you express, and has
The Duchess taken her to grace.
Tic more then whispered,
The favourite loves her.
Who.
He that was cause
Of your remove Ursini.
Cry you mercy,
I know him well enough; but does he love her?
Tic rumord so ith court.
You will be tripping,
Your own heals up.
I hope my sisters honest.
Who Cornelia.
Remember that name too.
Let me alone
To remember her, Cornelia for more
Security, Isle put her in my table book.
There is no Lady in the preserves
A clearer fame, as modest as shees fair,
And so ingenious.
I would excuse
Her modesty, but she may be converted
In time; tho sturdy Oak we know, and so forth
You speak a welcome Character.
Your father
It seems his willing ear hath caught the news
Of your arrive.
Kneel down.
See if he first knows me,
Tic a wise father now knows his own child.
My dearest Borgia, comfort of my age.
My joy of soul, a fatherr prayers and blessing
Make thee a happy man, my eyes must speak
Part of my joy in tears, welcome from Naples.
Your pardon Sir
That thus I steal upon you, I wot hope
My sister—
Cornelia.
Cornelia is in health.
And will be a glad soul to embrace her brother
Your pardon Sir that I seemed strange to you.
It is recompense now that you please to own me.
Iulio an honest gentleman, and one
That loves us Borgia.
I •…ear my Uncle
Has left us—
A good estate, ther's the less cause
To morn for him.
We must all tread that path,
Here is a friend of mine to whose trust and favour
I have been much engaged.
Sir what I want
In language, Isle supply with other welcome,
Please you to honour my poor wife.
The service
Of my unworthy life is yours, command it,
I wot you had another handsome daughter.
I presume you were presented a glad object
To Lucio, your affections grew from children.
To Lucio we carry but one heart.
Doe not forget his name now.
But my son
We dwell to long thus public, let us perfect 
Our ceremony at home, Pietro
One of the favorits creatures.
Tic the Duchess,
Command Mercutio you waite upon her
Presently at Court, and bring young Borgia
Along wee to expect her graces pleasure.
We must obey.
What makes your countenance change Sir.
My fears poor Borgia for thee.
For me.
Howes that? his fears?
While my aged arms are in,
A loving contention to embrace thee,
I wish thee from hence this ground betrayed thee,
Embark again, the Seas have used thee kindly,
Trust them again, or any land but this:
This will undo us both, the joy of seeing thee
Made me forget thy danger.
Danger Sir,
What have I done, to call these fears upon you?
Take heed, be wise, I know not what to think on it
What ha•…t done say, nothing to dishonour thee,
Thou kildst him fairly.
Kilt I think; you were best
Be Aurelio again, and leave your sister
But Isle fish out the circumstance, walk melancholy.
Prithee doe.
Although your son has pleased
To call me friend, I find he has reserved
Something he wot not credit to my bosom;
I have observed his trouble, but unwilling
By moving questions to renew his sufferings:
If my particular knowledge of his fate
May be no prejudice, tho it be without
My verge to serve him, I can willingly
Share in their grief that love him.
You speak nobly,
It was his misfortune Sir provoked to kill
A Gentleman, brother to Vrsini, who
Was favourite to the Duke deceased, and now
Graced by the Duchess, by whose power he may
Command him dead, these summons I suspect;
But take my counsel Borgia, and deceive
His expectation of revenge, once more
He bids thee fly; would slay thee in his heart,
Let me run their displeasure.
Not for me Sir,
I am resolved, it is better dye at home,
Then wast my life an exile, Isle to Court with•….
You're not mad▪
Thou art a fool, cannot I cast
Borgies skin off when I please, I must
See my fair sister at a minutes warning,
Thou art evidence for me; father I waite you,
My sisters there you say, doe not doubt me;
At worst, Isle have a trick to keep my head on:
Come friend and Gentlemen.
We attend.
You have prevailed Vrsini: yet we thought
Of all men living you would least have been
A suitor for his pardon, but tic signed
He owes you for his life.
Your mercy rather,
I have considered madam I did lose
A brother, whose repair I shall not find
Now in another blood, the Gentleman
Hath suffered, though not what the Laws determine▪
Many years penance, so severe, perhaps
That he is come by offering himself now
A sacrifice to your justice, to prevent
A death more killing, still to live a stranger
To his own friends and country.
If your charity
Extend so far, the rest we have dispensed with,
He is returned for certain? he is either
Weary of life, or master of a confidence
That might have been his ruin.
This will make
Your art of mercy shine the brighter Madam.
It will, but let me ask you good my Lord,
Does this proceed out of a clear forgiveness:
Time I allow may qualify the thought
Of our revenge, and something else of pity
May so take off the roughness of our soul
That we may have a noble charity
To our enemy, but has your end no mixture
Of something else, that may advance a hope
To satisfy desire some other way?
No turn to profit or delight? be plain;
For I must know your breast.
You shall see through me,
I dare not wear a thought less than transparent,
I love his sister Madam, fair Cornelia
With those intents become me, in that flame
I sacrifice all thoughts that wound her brother
And wish no happier satisfaction,
And by that charm of her consent to love
My brother is redevivd in Borgia.
You're brief, yet plain; how point Cornelias
Affections.
I have wooed her but in complement,
And tho there may be sons to admit
My services, I find she is all obedience
To her father, whom the apprehension
Of his sons fortune may have indisposd
To a present reconcilement.
This one act
Will make him kind, and form him to your wishes.
If they might have the happiness to be
Propounded by your highness to Mercutio,
I prophecy success, pardon great Madam,
If after all your princely favours I
Beg this with many blushes, love is graced
By dwelling on your breath.
Ursini since
The Duke dyed you have found no loss in out
Esteem, to his ashes I have paid that duty
To grace whom he affected, and be confident
We shall not deny this, is he not come yet?
He will attend your grace—who waite.
Signior Mercutio
Expects your graces pleasure, with him his son
Borgia
My brother.
Tho we pardon him
We must put on a brow of some displeasure
And chide his fault, he may be encouraged else
To a second insolence.
Gently I beseech you,
There may be a punishment within your eye
To kill him, and so make the benefit
Is meant him, of no virtue, or to himself,
Or my design.
How is the name of gentleman
Dishonoured by such desperate undertakings;
That more then guilty of humane blood, doe kill
Even Charity.
They are admitted.
Is that he?
We sent for you Mercutio to tell you
How much you owe to good Ursinis love,
At whose earnest solicit we have signed
Young Borgias pardon, if you examine well;
You will have cause to place him in the first
Rank of your friends.
Shall I believe my eyes,
My nnderstanding? how is Mercutio blessed?
Look boy the pardon, heaven reward thy charities;
My Lord for saving one, command the lives
Of all our family, thou soul of honour;
Look Borgia.
What de'e mean
Kneel to the Duchess and acknowledge.
What.
A pardon for your life.
I am lost here
Pisauro, an excellent creature.
You'll spoil all,
Shoe's yet your sister, I doe like her too;
Kneel for your pardon, and you may choose your gallows
In time, wood I were hanged on no worse piece
Of timber, how nimbly would I climb the Ladder,
Ha you no sense? humble your knees to thank
Her highness and that gentleman.
Why does
That fellow kneel Ursini.
It is Signior Borgia,
His heart is full of thanks.
I look not for em,
What doe I feel? command him rise.
Dear Madam.
Look calm upon him.
She'll reverse the pardon.
Are you my brother Sir?
As sure as you are my sister; do you doubt me?
How now Cornelia, pray excuse me brother,
My joy to see you safe doth half transport me.
Mercutio.
I am converted now,
And doe believe there are some handsome women;
Young Gentleman, not too much, too much at once,
Remember you're her brother, he is taken.
Your grace is pleased to enlarge my happiness;
My daughter is much honoured, but I must
Beseech your Lordship to allow we may
In such a cause as this, enquire her judgement,
And since by the bounty of your highness, I
Have a son now, whose joy may be concerned in it;
I would not willingly conclude her marriage
Without his voice too.
I am confident
To incline his favour, since she has declared
Herself no enemy.
Cornelia.
Sir I have a suite to you.
You have deserved
My life, which ought to waste it self in service.
I am an honorer of your fair sister,
It rests in you to perfect my ambition.
And make her mine.
How do you mean my Lord.
Now hoe's put toot, she is Ursinis mistress.
As he is Borgia, he can have no
Pretence to oppose him, if he discover
And be Aurelio again, he destroys all
Hope for himself, for I perceive hoe's taken with her,
I know by the motion of his nose, which pants
Like the Bellows of an Organ.
Sir your fathers
Voice speaks in yours, you now command my destiny
If you will make me happy.
Noble Sir,
I am sorry where such infinite merits plead
I have no power to serve your noble wishes,
And keep the honour of a gentleman.
Your family I take it can receive
No stain by my alliance.
It were a blessing.
How will he come off?
Mistake not I beseech you,
I have already engaged my self to a Gentleman
Of a noble house in Millan, one Aurelio
Andreozzi.
Thats himself.
Who on the fight of
Her picture which I gave him, courted me
To woo the substance for him, promising
To follow me in person, being one
To whom I had many obligations
In the Millan Court, I paund the credit
Of a gentleman, to assist his fair desires,
If in few days he come to Urbin; but
I am confident his young affections
Which had no other life but what a dead
Representation could infuse, will soon
Vanish again, and leave▪ me to be serviceable
In what you will command me, and be sure
I will not rack your patience to much length;
If in few days he appear not, I will think
My promise disobliged, and direct all
My abilities to make your wishes prosper:
It will become my gratitude.
You speak nobly.
The pleasures of the Court will so abate
His thoughts this way, that I presume your Lordship
Will soon be master of that amorous province
You aim at, and much honour your poor servant.
Let this confirm, I am yours.
So so, this was indifferently well carried, I was jealous
Of a more lame come off.
Add this one
To your other princely favours Madam, and
Admit this gentleman to kiss your hand.
Without much suite my heart would have conveyed
That to my lip, a very handsome gentleman.
What said the Duchess? doe not her eyes fix
Upon my brother? how now Cornelia,
I am his sister; yet I had
No acquaintance with this turbulent passions
When I last saw him.
What does her highness mean,
She speaks to Ursini, but her eye directs
Some language this way, Borgia dost observe?
And wonder, but I see nothing in her eyes
To be afraid of.
If the Duchess should be in love with him
Here were a purchase, I doe verily
Believe here will be an end of all our wars,
If he have but the grace to march upon
This service and charge home: smiles, smiles upon him;
Well Aurelio Andreozzi, tic very possible
You may meet with your match if he mount her,
Isle bring a Ladder to his sisters fort
And then the town's our own, she calls him to her.
Cornelia, can thou interpret this?
Her grace is very pleasant, good good heart
Bē patient.
She pleases with him, good, better,
I, is your spirit up my nimble Duchess?
Would I had the conjuring of it down▪ Vrsini
Looks like a whelp had lost his tail already.
I was jealous she would chide and frown upon him, pried her be gentle, and look calm, First come To this?
Vrsini, I have thought how to supply
That place of Secretary that is vacant, see
That Borgia be sworn, we apprehend
His fitness.
Madam.
I hope this will please you
Vrsini, we can grace whom you present▪
He is more gentleman than to forget
How for your sake we honour him; I shall
Betray too much of women, Borgia
Attend us; come Cornelia, Vrsini,
Mercutio, make the Court not so much stranger.
Isle follow: what dost think of this Pisauro.
I think the Dutćhesse loves thee, and make use on it,
Lose no applications, that't her Secretary▪
A degree to more inward indeerements,
If she doe love thee, and—
What prithee?
She knows best
What appetite she has, let mē counsel thee,
Be not modest, we are made.
What?
Thy father a Count, thou a Duke, Vrsini
A Coxcomb, I a fine gentleman, and one
That would be glad of the worst of your
New female acquaintances.
There are no faces here.
B•… not you a Tyrant, Isle doe penance
In a white sheet with thy sister for it.
NO Signior Aurelio come yet? No master to be heard on, he is a fine Gentleman to use his Squire of this fashion; where should he be, hee commanded me not to bee drunk, he is drunk; and drunk and dead drunk, hee would have had the grace to reel home to his lodging before this time of night else: let me see, what if the flesh have led him a to side? He is fallen into some brake, some wench has tied him by the legs, and nothing else can excuse him to me; yet now I think on it, he does forget Pimponio, he was not wont to be his own purveyor, my art for the choice of his Pullin, has been allowed if he doe get and so forth an excuse for Physic, and come home founderd, the disease was none of my choo∣sing, it came not through my office; stay, what if my Signior be dead? umph? dead? my heart misgives, they may be kilt, my master has the spirit of fighting in him, and his companion is the Devil at it, an aglet hole or two in their hearts, and in a strange place, my Signiors, are never mist, tic so, if he bee dead—bring forth the portmanteau.
Sir?
Bring forth my Portmanteau my diminutive knave, and tell thy father I would speak with him, he is dead, he would not have trusted me so long with his money else, now will I make my self his heir, defy the world and Aurelios Ghost; but first of all I must ourface mine host, so let me examine; very good linings, bag and baggage, you are mine own,
Thy father call him hither.
He is coming Sir, tic very late.
Never too late to tell money, fetch me a brace of gen∣nets I will mount em, a Covey of Courtesans; stay Pimponio, be not mad before thy time, who shall I say I am? a Prince at least, I have it;
Here comes mine Host.
What would this fellow have, no news of your master?
Speak that word no more on thy allegiance, here go to bed and rise with a clean shirt.
This is gold, what does the fellow mean?
No fellows neither, tic time to show my self, where is thy boy?
Here Signior.
Kneel down and ask me blessing.
This does look a blessing, shall I ask another?
Ask any thing but what I am.
You are—
Stay there, it is dangerous to pronounce me yet, I will be still disguised, my men are absent.
Your men.
Thou art wise, thine ear, I am a Prince.
How Signior.
The reason of my shape thou shat know hereafter, thus Jove has been disguised.
Is not your name Pimponio?
It was my pleasure they should call me so, I have not found 'em trusty;
How fares the Duchess?
What doe I hear?
This boy shall waite on me, Isle have ye all.
Whether?
What Country shall I choose? to be a Prince of Ita∣lie is too well known, Spain stands convenient, and far enough, where I have been too, Isle have you all to Spain.
What to doe Signior?
For your preferments, when thou hast got a chapman for this tub thou liv'st in, let me know it.
Boy this a Spanish Prince.
A Prince of Oranges, he a Spanish Prince?
They wonnot travel thither to disprove me, to tell the truth, I suspect my two Grooms have betrayed me; I come hi∣there to be a suitor to your Duchess.
In these clothes?
You doe not know my plot, these Gentlemen my ser∣vents should cunningly have preferred me to be the Duchess Fool.
Her Fool? tic very likely.
But for a time, there's mystery in that
By this means I resolved to try her nature
And disposition ere I married her,
For I can have at this present four Kings daughters, the eldest of 'em is but seven years old, which shows the parents dote upon me, and wot make sure of me betimes.
I doe believe your grace.
Grace, umph, thou must be advanced, let me see, what office, oh, thou shalt have a place at my return in the Galleys, dost hear, a yerking preferment.
And what shall I bee?
Thou shalt be—a Picaro, in your language a Page, my chief Picaro; by degrees you may send for all your generation, I will see them mounted.
Whore's Pimponio.
A pox Pimp you, they are alive again, now am I a dead man.
There is a certain moveable ecclip'd a Portmanteau.
Wot your tongue had been clip'd.
Wherein there are some golden friends of ours.
All your friends are well.
Let me see their complexions, where are they? look for the Signior your master a month hence?
His master, de'e observe?
Does hee not carry it handsomely, hee knows not I have discovered my self to you.
With your pardon Sir, is not this Signior a Prince dis∣guest▪
A Prince of Puppets, who Pimponio?
And you one of his servants, to whom with
Your other fellow called Signior Aurelio,
His person stands discovered, he came hither
To court our Duchess, he has promised us
At his return to Spain to make us Grandees.
Has he betrayed himself, nay then my duty
If please your excellence.
Away, away.
A Prince cannot be hid tho under mountains,
But my dear Prince, the bags must go with me
While you keep state ith Inn.
Who shall maintain.
If I did think thou would carry it handsomely▪
Well, Isle excuse thee to thy master, here
When thou hast domineered away this bag
Thou moist hear more; keep thine own counsel, and
Thy master shannot own thee, if thou hast
Any fegary, drink, and indulge thy Genius;
Isle see thee again before thy reign be out,
No words but be a prince, and scorn to know us
And so I take leave of your excellence.
I shannot know my self, am not I a Prince
Indeed, that have been long concealed? this is a bag
And full of golden friends, umph, however I will
Spend it like an Emperor, these are not robes
Fit for a Prince I take it, Grutti, boy
I entertain you both my Groom and Page, and
Say unto you, Snakes go cast your coats▪
Here's earnest for new skins, when things are ripe
We will to Court.
What thinks your grace of going to bed
I am too sober, let the whole house be drunk first▪ twill please us well to see the servants gambol, we purpose
To be drunk our selves in state too:
Let me have fifty strumpets.
Fifty trumpets.
Strumpets I say, they'll make the greater noise.
Your grace will be a Hercules.
I will, and thou shalt be Captain of the Pigmies under me, this roome's too narrow, beat down the walls on both sides, advance your lights and call the Country in, if there be a Taylor amongst 'em he shall first take measure of my highness, for I must not longer walk in Cuerpo.
We attend your excellence.
I'm lost in the wonder Iulio.
A strange turn
From that could temper we imagined
In her Highness.
I have heard of charms and philters.
If travel have these glorious effects
Isle abroad too.
He has a handsome person.
And discourses grant it.
Is master of a noble soul.
Soul, nay let that alone, Ladies doe not look
After the soul so much, the body will serve their
Turn, so it be nimble, and at their devotion,
If you observe, he is graced by all the Ladies
As if he were their general minion,
I doe not like his sisters eyes upon him,
They whirl too much and seemed to shoot an envy
Upon the Duchess favours.
I am confident
Thou hast no murmer in thy thoughts against him.
I but express my wonder,
In that I think the whole Court had a share:
He knows I love him, twill become his fear
How to secure Ursini.
He preferred him
First to her highness.
Not with expectation
To be supplanted, I make question
If the humour hold, whether she may not marry him,
That's a round higher then her favourite:
Had hope to climb.
Although I honour Borgia
And wish him heartily advanced, I wot not
Kneel to him, my voice is for Ferrari
He is a Prince, I wot not for my state
This shod break off his treaty.
Thy Ambassador
〈◊〉 his master, he is scarce minded.
Come she cannot,
Fall so low, the passion is too violent 
To last—who are these?
The Ambassador and Ursini, whats the matter?
I fear some discontent.
My Lord let me
Prevail so far, I hope you imagine I
Am firm to you, I have more cause to be
Impatient, my whole strength at Court's concerned,
But have more noble thoughts then to suspect
You can be flighted, think tic but a dream
In justice to your cause, and royal master
Put on no face of discontent, return
And see how things will close
It is an affront
Bove satisfaction, but the disgrace
Reflects beyond my person.
Had she studied
Honours to his ambition, it had
Not wronged her prudence, to have shown you more
Respect.
But I was not considerable;
The•… young Gentleman had taken up her eyes,
Her tongue, her feet, her understanding too,
I might have witherd in my seat, no beam,
No discourse this way, but that once she was pleased
To ask me how I liked the gallants dancing,
Isle not disturb her revels.
Yet my Lord
Have so much fortitude, twill be a means
If you return, to make her find her error
To your person, were she not my Princess
I should profess my self ashamed, out come
Let me beseech you to go back, leave not
The presence so, for your own honour Sir
Observe a little more, I hope you shannot
Repent my counsel.
I wot ye wot excuse me,
I shall but vex my eyes.
Expect a change.
You have power with me my Lord.
You honour me.
What will become o this, what think you now?
They doe resent it, and for ought I hear
Have little hope to mend it.
Can she be
In love so soon, well Borgia, if this
Hold, Isle applaud thy fate.
For after this
Allowance, he will be Duke of Urbin tomorrow,
Give thee joy bully, let me see if he
Turn Prince, tic best for us turn beggars.
Beggars?
Court beggars, He will deny us nothing,
Now for some witty knave to find out suits,
I must keep some in pension for that purpose,
They are profitable vermin, 
His companion.
Save you Gentlemen, what de'e mean?
Why stand ye bare?
In being Borgias friend
It will become us.
He knows no title yet,
But chief secretary to her highness, what honours
Are in her breast laid▪up for him, we know not
He has a mounting fate, and in his we
Pronounce you happy.
We shall all be Princes
In time▪ but Gentlemen lets be more familiar
We think so well of things, does he preserve
The Duchess smile, or does she use to make
At some time of the Moon sport with her subjects.
You are wide all the heaven Sir, had you come
A little sooner you had heard discourse. 
To clear your doubt, hoe's here himself.
Pisauro,
What will become on's, tic as thou say?
What prithee?
The Duchess is mad▪
How!
Why she is certainly in love, shat in and see
How I am used, and yet I now come forth
To recover breath, I ha danced my self to a jellie,
The Ladies ha no mercy; but the Duchess
What prithee.
Is as I told thee mad, I prithee counsel me
Although her grace be pleased to show me favours
It were boldness to believe, and thank her.
How?
I hope thou art not mad.
I know not whether
The fit will last, I may hold some proportion
With Cornelia, my supposed sister, she
Poor wretch does cast such speaking eyes upon me
As she were Jealous of the Duchess too,
And wrings me by the hand when I dance with her.
The Duchess Sir calls for you.
I attend;
What were I best to doe?
Dost make a question
Lose not the fortune that's presented in
The Duchess love, thy stars ordained thee for her;
Isle make a shift with Cornelia, look high
And prosper, when you are a Duke, I say no more
What shall's doe with Pimponio? that fool
May betray all.
He is a Prince before you
I ha made him sure, and swollen him into a pride,
He shall not know you, but of that hereafter,
Away and please the Duchess.
Your our graces pardon?
It is late, good night my Lord Ambassador.
It is well I am bid goodnight, yet all my hopes
Vanish in mists, what think you now cousin?
I know not what to think, let me waite on you
To your lodgings.
They join to the Court▪
It is the less service▪
To morrow morning if I may be honoured
With your presence, I will impart a secret to you,
And be happy in your Counsel.
I obey
Any commands.
For this time give me pardon, goodnight my Lord.
A happy night to your Lordship,
After so many years spent in the Court,
I am to learn the trick on it, these are actions
Against my first rules, I am ignorant▪
Of this new Court philosophy, what should
The Duchess mean, so prodigal of her graces
To one she searse remembers, with such open
Neglect to the Dukes' Ambassador? I was careful
She wot not use him kindly enough, were not
Affection to his sister, lies up my
Revenge, Id drop it on his heart, but I
Must work with art, and by a Counter magic
Dissolve his spell, or form him to my purpose. 
You have been waiting on the Duchess Ladies?
She dismised us.
With what circumstance?
Is she still pleasant?
Strangely altered
Since young Borgia took his leave and melancholy:
Well, I suspect—
What Madam?
Sheele scarce sleep
To night, for dreaming of the Gentleman.
He is gone then?
Yes, we saw his departure my Lord,
He kissed us both, but we put forward first,
He is the hansomst Gentleman; dee think
He wears his own hair?
I was about
To ask him once, but thought he was modest
And wot ha blushed, I wot I had his picture.
His substance Madam, but take heed, the Datchesse
Must have no rival, how dee affect his talk?
That was not my part to observe, we did divide
Our Provinces, each Lady took a member
To examine, when we have conferd our notes
Isle tell ye what the body of Ladies think on him.
Nay we'll take him a pieces ever we ha done.
And who shall set him together again? my Ladies
I waite on you.
Your Lordship will too much honour us.
It is the way to my own lodging.
If it were not the way my Lord, your Lordship
Could not be destitute of a lodging at Court.
Your Charity would relieve me, use my service.
There is no such affliction to the soul
As that which should preserve it, love, a passion
That with consent betrays our understanding,
And leaves man but a heap of flame and ruins;
I was safe till I had seen her, busy fame
Took but possession of my ear, my own
Rashness and vanity engagd my person
To see what was commended, and I suffer for it,
Leave me.
Tic dark my Lord.
Thou lie, tic light
And by these fires I see too much, away,
I shall soon reach my lodgings, night and I
Shall agree well together, if my stay
Be long, remember that you left me under
The palace windows, leave to be officious
And obey me—till this night she gave me fair 
Respect, and seemed to allow the loving treaty,
I was dull not to uncloud me all this while
The knowledge of my person had engagd her
Beside my act of love, and so much confidence
Past all retreat, and yet she is a woman,
Whose nature is unsteady as the waves,
Upon which foolish man runs desperate
To me a ruin.
Fortune thou smilst too much, I shall suspect
Thy giddiness, take eyes to thee and see
To what a flattering height thou hast exalted
A credulous man.
What voice is that, it had
A sound of melancholy, darkness secure me.
But why make I ridiculous application
To fortune? love is only active here;
The tyrant love, more blind then chance, I am
Full of distraction, there's a labyrinth
Within, and more I tread, the more I am lost
Betwixt the Duchess and Cornelia
My soul divids, I must not be a fool,
And for the fable of amorous love
Leave state that courts me with a glorious title,
And yet Cornelia is fury, and looks
Withal the charms of love upon her brow,
What will she doe when she believes I am
No brother?
Tic the new ague Borgia
That shakes the court, how confidently he talks
To himself, a light strikes from the Duchess window
And mucsike; Isle observe, the gallant may
Have some appointment.
Alas poor love-sicke Lady, what if I
Attempted farther, the excuse will fall
More easy on a stranger, Lady, hist.
Whoe's that?
One that does wish the happiness
To see your face, you have blessed my ears already.
What are you?
My name's Borgia, if you be
A fair one of the court, time is not old
Since I was a guest there.
It is he, Isle not lose
This opportunity, Sir your boldness
Speaks you a stranger, and in part excuses
You are alone.
I am.
I expect not
Upon so small acquaintance you should know
My voice again, I am the Duchess Sir.
Your graces humble creature, may I hope
You'll pardon this attempt.
Upon condition
You will forget the freedom of our nature
And not grow insolent upon our favours,
We were late pleased to show you, it was not love
But mirth, we meant our court the wantonness
Of revelling nights, which we upon retirements
Know how to check and punish too in men,
That dare licentiously apply to our
Dishonour: if your service in that place
Of secretary we have named you for
Be diligent and faithful, we repent not
That choice, but on your life feed no ambition
Higher, it will be a degree next treason
To us, and the honour of Ferrara's Duke,
With whom because you are our secretary
We let you know our thoughts are fixed to marry,
What blessing hath my ear took in? she is
Resolved to my desires.
Are you gone Sit?
Sleep wisely if you can, we shall expect
Your attendance in the morning, but no thought
On forfeit of your life bay and whats duty.
I have enough to morrow I resolve
To be my self, and with a state becoming
Ferraras Duke, challenge this happiness,
Forgive dear Princess I suspected thee.
The Duchess she'll spoil all.
I heard your voice more loud then usual,
Whom spake you to?
Heir's no body and please your grace.
You hold some dialogue at the window then,
Isle know.
My brother Borgia Madam.
Borgia, leave us.
I hope hoe's gone.
I must confess you are my Princess Madam,
To whose least command I owe my blood and fortune.
He speaks to me, how does he know I am here?
And doe not think I can be lost so much
In duty to interpret there was any thing
In me, that could deserve more then your pastime;
And let me fall and dye beneath your anger,
When I transgress so far, as to sorget
My humble fate which only can be blessed
With my obedience to you, I had not
One saucy application of your favours,
My heart shall bleed to death ere it shall sinde
One thought of so much impudence.
Howes this?
Since Cornelia has usurped my name
And frighted him, what should make her officious
He is her brother, I must hear no more
Of this—you are mistaken all this while,
I am Cornelia your sister.
Is the Duchess gone?
You well distinguish voices, yet shoe's gone.
My joy of soul, dearest Cornelia.
Tic she that I must trust to.
I'st even so?
Dear brother, leaving all your studied complements
I doe not like your dilatory reasons
To Ursini, I may hear you as a brother,
But must not trouble you to choose my husband;
It is the Duchess pleasure, I should marry
Ursini, an advancement more then I
Can hope, from your election of a stranger
And set your heart at rest, how ere I seemed
Inclining, destiny is not more fixed,
Then the affection I owe Ursini,
Him I resolve to marry, and before
The next days light is wasted.
I am undone
A 'both sides, hear me yet but speak.
What would you say brother?
I am not thy brother.
How, not Borgia.
Not Borgia, the whole towne's mistaken
My name is Aurelio Andreozzi,
I was borne in Millan, with my friend designed
To see some service in the German wars;
At the first sight I must confess I loved thee:
To enjoy thy conversation more freely,
I was content to seem what men would call me
You tell me wonders.
I can give thee proof,
But to no purpose now, and tell thee too
Enough to make thee think I may be worthy,
But since it is so, I am glad you have discovered
Your resolution so soon, good night to,
Isle make no noise to morrow, when I take
My journey.
Stay, he must not be foe lost,
This is a strange discovery, if you can
Bring testimony that you are not Borgia,
You shall not Sir repent your coming hither,
Nor yet despair of any noble ways
That may reward your good opinion,
Tic late; a lovers dream charm all your senses,
And waking find your wishes, if you please
Until I ask a further satisfaction,
Be still concealed.
There may be hope, although
My first love I confess reflect on this,
The Duchess yet, had not been much amiss,
why, I shall hardly take thee for my own natu∣rall child.
Let me alone with my •…on, if I do not fit him, let me never find the way into my own breeches again, I would be loath to die in a wrong case and bee mistaken in another world; is the music ready, and the wine father? can the fellows doe their dance handsomely, in stead of a mask to entertain his highness, I am sorry my legs are out of tune, I have a great mind to be capering.
My own wit, my own natural wit to a hair.
Not too much hair of your own, and wit together, fa∣there, tic not the fashion: de' hear, whatsoever I say, be you drunk time enough to justify it, the bills shall be discharged without scrupulous examination, sows in wine and give him Sea room, if his head leake we will pump his breeches, he shall not sink with all his ballast I warrant him.
A witty crack, and my own boy still.
Your own boy? take heed what you say, lest you bee driven to justify it, you have no mind to wake my mother from her grave, tic enough I ask you blessing, I doe long to be metamorphosd, and pursue his princely humour out of breath—Music, tic well, his grace is upon entrance.
Dispatch boy.
I know my cue to enter.
And how, and how doe things become? We were in clouds but now.
Your highness is broken out.
Broken out, where?
Out of the clouds and please you.
There is no infidel among you then,
You all believe I am a Prince, de'e hear,
At all adventures let it go no further,
There are no traitors I hope amongst ye▪
Traitors, we will cut off any mans neck that dares but think so.
Doe and I will justify it, hang necks among friends, although I am pleased to reveal the majesty of my person to you, it is not fit every one should know so much, you are 〈…〉∣gers, and therefore I dare trust you, but the Duchess must not hear on it upon your lives; she and I must be better acquainted when I see my time; Isle tell you, 〈◊〉 •…oy may take me in the head to look like a fool again, it may, greatness is given to humours, and giddiness will run in a blood, if it doe, doe not know me.
For what?
For any other then I seem.
Not a fool.
Thou art an ass, a Prince may play the fool within his own dominions, or any other; provided they bee of his own allies and confederates: I know where I am, but we are not merr•…y reach me a chair and a bottle of wine, every one take his charge.
Will not your highness have the dance first?
They will dance the better when they are three quar∣ters drunk.
We do not observe men of your nation to be so jovial.
Not subjects I grant you that, but we  have privilege musique, and give fire at once—so, but me thinks it were necessary there were some difference in our drinkings; all are not Princes, reach me a bigger bottle,  I will preserve my state, this is a Princely draught—  so—Why have we not a Concubine?
Brave Prince, with what a majesty he drinks.
Now let em frisk the dance you have prepared, I am ready to accept it.
And it shall please your grace, 
There is a high German desires to speak with you.
The high German that was at Court, hoe's a man of mighty parts and known to all the Princes in Christendom, what comes he for?
I fear you are betrayed Sir, and that the Duchess has sent for you.
For me, I wonnot come yet.
Doe not affront him Sir, for your own sake, this high German has beaten all the Fencers in Europe.
Let him beat all the world, whats that to me? shall he ma•• a prize of me?
But if he come Ambassador from the Duchess.
That's another matter, give me the tother bottle—
Now let all the Cantons of Swiss come. 
Which is the high German? let me see him.
That Sir.
Hoe's one of the lowest high Germans that ever I looked upon.
I kiss thy highness hand.
And we embrace this lowness: de'e hear Sir, are you a high German?
I was so at the beginning of the wars, what wee are beaten to you may discern.
Are you beaten to that? you'll be a very little nation and the wars continue.
I have a message to deliver you,
The fair Duchess of Urbin, whom I waite on,
Hearing a person of your blood and quality
So meanly lodged, by me desires you would
Accept an entertainment in her Court.
We give the Duchess thanks, how knew she I was here?
It was impossible
You should stay undiscovered many hours.
Princes have strange intelligence, and you may
As soon tie up the Sun beams in a net
As keep your self unknown; for my own part
I am honoured in the embassy, and shall
Be proud to write my self your pensioner
As I am to all the royal blood in Christendom.
O Pensioner, tic the least honour we intend thee, I am a natural Prince as sure as I live; here wear this gold, there's more to drink our health, wee are pleased no man be sober at our return, as he will answer it, you may be all my subjects▪ if I marry the Duchess Isle hang you all.
How?
In chains of preferment, drink I say, and drink to purpose, what will become of me now? stay, a word with you high German, what will the Duchess doe with me doe you think?
It were sin to say she'll honour you, for you
Are above all addition but her love;
Your wit, your blood, your person, doe not lose
The opportunity, yet I prophecy
You will be affronted.
No matter, I ha been affronted a hundred times, but by whom?
Questionless by some great ones,
And perhaps beaten.
I have been beaten too upon good occasion,
And will again to save my honour; beaten?
I can take the strappado, beside in this part
I am insensible, a kick is cast away.
If you be valiant and endure, it will
Engage her love the more, but I know
Your breeding will afford you impudence
To overcome their envies, and secure
This Dukedom to your self, go on boldly,
My counsel shall attend.
I will go on, and fear no beating, well
I cannot knight thee, yet prove but a witch
Isle make thee one of my privy counsellors.
No more, my duty will not let me hear it.
How not your duty Sir?
You are not angry?
You are his friends, I should not else be pleased.
We have said nothing to afflict you thus,
We did expect this wot have made you merry.
A sons preferment was not wont to be
Such discord to a father, a loving father,
For so we took your constitution.
Preferment? tic too poor a word.
You were best tell me too he may be Duke.
He is in the rode, I know not how he will miss it.
This is three quarters treason, tho I love
My son, I must not cherish this ambition.
But it will be more then three quarters treason
If you presume to check the Duchess pleasure,
And murmur thus if she resolve to marry,
And make your son a Duke, you'll not turn rebel.
Defend allegiance, Gentlemen mistake not
Although I love my son, Isle not be guilty
Of any thought to cross her, but I should
Be sorry he should cast away himself.
How de'e mean?
As men doe use when they
Doe hang or drown themselves.
Have you sense
And talk thus wildly.
The riddles you have told me.
Yes and understand
Doe you count
Your son lost by the Duchess loving him?
Go find your wits again, and use 'em better,
Can you be so ridiculous to think,
So wise, so modest, so religious
A Lady can forget her state and honour
To place affection on my son.
There have been
Presidents to make it seem no wonder.
She had better taine his head off, there had ended
My cares, the boy t'runne mad, and what can follow
Think ye? go to, Isle to her highness presently.
What to doe?
To pray her leave him to a natural death,
And choose some other to undo with pride
Of her large favours; gentlemen examine
But your selves, could either of you two promise
To keep your wits, if such a grace were offered
To you? would it not tempt you to be mad,
To think of being a Duke? speak honestly,
I'st fit indeed you should be less than mad?
There be some men in the world have lost their senses
When they but chewd the Cud of a bare Lordship,
I have known a knighthood has turned some men's wits,
The very noise of the spurs; then doe not blame me
If I desire my son sober and sensible,
And now I think on it Isle first seek him out.
I think the old mans mad indeed,
Dear Madam Laura,
Sweet Sir I cannot stay.
Then I can walk and waite on you.
You have the same haste too,
Thou art a piece of the Duchess Cabinet,
I must hear some news.
Alas the Court is barren.
I know a trick to make thee fruitful yet,
Nay I can mend my pace Lady an you put me toot.
Good Sir the reason why you wonder at me
Above all other women, what in me
Appears so full of prodigy.
Isle tell you,
You're young and handsome.
Should I grant I were,
This were no miracle.
Withal this youth and hansomnesse you're a maid
And live at Court too, this I hope's not ordinary.
What wonder will your fancy create next.
You're sound too, or your physiognomy deceives me.
The privilege of my brothers friend must not
Engage me to a mockery.
I was
About to say you're patient too, I see
Something wud make you angry, but return
To your first temper, and I'll soon acquaint you
With all my purpose Lady, to all these
Commendations, which meet not in all women,
You have birth and fortune, and the favour of
The Duchess.
All these carry no such wonder
If I have understanding.
No, no, you
Are all the wonder Madam that with these
Advantages a your side to draw up men's
Affections, yet as you despair to have
A Husband to the discredit of your sex,
Who article at twelve to be dissemblers;
You are in love.
In love, is that a sin?
Nay, nay, you court a Gentleman with eyes
That are not lawful.
How Sir, be not rude.
I can say more.
Is it your mirth or madness.
No, no, you are mad, worse, Isle prove it,
You dote upon your brother, come tic impious,
Purge, purge betime, your blood is foul, Ime plain
There's some ont in your face now that would blush
I see through your hearts, a little more
Had spoiled him quite, he had forgot all laws
Of nature and religion, and been fond
To both your shames; a brother, and a sister
Tempt one another, good heaven where is conscience
And modesty become? preserve your self
You have yet a good name, keep it and drink Juleps,
You'll find the benefit in your veins.
You have
Been very bold upon my constitution.
I know it better then your Doctor, Come
Doe not deny it, I make no proclamation;
What i'st to me more then my Christian care
You should not hurt your souls, he is my friend
Betray him not, tic no good sisters part
I can assure you, if you be not dull
Or blind with giddy passion, you may see
Another star shoot influence on him;
Be wise and envy not the Duchess favours,
Your vessel may be rigged, and trimmed, and launched
Into a calmer Sea, and return fraught
With lawful prise hereafter, I ha stirred her,
But must not be too hasty.
I shall show
My self too full of guilt.
You are troubled at it,
A sign of grace; how ere you think of me
Now in the heate of Counsel I'm your friend,
You'll find it so, I kiss your hand, farewell.
De'e hear? but two words more, if you doe find
As being acquainted best with your own body,
No disposition to hold out longer,
I have that will cure you, and Isle justify it
Before the college—Take me,
De'e mark, that does it, I kiss your hand,
Again farewell, and have a conscience,
Isle tell you more next time, this way may work.
This Gentleman's discourse though somewhat wild
And without method shakes me, I am lost
If I obey, I know not what within me
Too Prompts me to a love so irreligious;
He is my brother, holy thoughts possess me,
And when a furious passion seeks to invade
My will, destroy it heaven—hoe's here I dare 
Not stay to tempt my frailty, let them move
With joy, I am not in my sphere of love.
But tell me signior, nay we are pleased
You should be free, upon what confidence
Knowing your guilt, and danger to reward it
Durst you return to Urbin.
I was more fortunate
Then I have reason for, and yet my country
And friends were precious madam, nor could life
In such a wilderness abroad, where none
Durst own me, be a benefit; there was
A bessing in my fate to meet your mercy
That gave me boldness.
Cunningly dissembled,
You met no Lady then in all your travel,
I mean none whom you called mistress, with
Her loving magic to lay charms upon you
And forced your stay.
None Madam, I was not
Worth any Ladies thought, none were so lost
To their own Judgements to imagine me
More then a walking shadow, or if any
Had cherished better thought of me a stranger,
They quickly found, they had not placed it right,
On so much barrenness which left their charity
To pay it self.
You doe not promise such
A hard and horrid composition,
But love may find a shift to enter more
Then skin deep in your bosom, but perhaps
You left your heart at home, and could not then
Dispense with new engagements, it was so,
And for her sake you willingly forgot
Your danger to return, nay be not troubled,
Confession will not injure you, I like
You should prefer the beauties of your country.
It Cannot be thought flattery, if I
Acknowledge with the narrowest observation
My eyes could take, no place hath been more fruitful
In beauty then your own, and it doth hold
Proportion with your excellence, all should
Be fair and imitate your first example.
I see you can be when you lift a Courtier,
But this confirms your love is planted here;
And since we are fallen by accident upon
This subject, we'll pursui't a little further;
Come I must know your Mistress, doe not doubt
I shall disturb the progress of your loves.
What answer shall I frame, things are not ripe
Yet for discovery, so please your highness
You would be modest, and excuse, be wiser
And apprehend my meaning to advance
Your wishes, tic within my power to effect
As much as your ambition can aim at:
Who is it if her heart be stubborn, we
Can make it soft; if great above your fortune,
We can raise you to her equality,
Or bring her down to your level, since we have promised
In hope not to repent: either declare
The mistress of your thoughts, and find them prosper,
We are not used to express such bounteous language,
But be the proudest, greatest in our Duchy▪
Without all limitation, she shall carry
No birth or state here, to despise the service
You fairly mean her▪ if we fail in this,
We will not think our strength worth the preserving
If I have any wit.
Madam the Duke.
What Duke?
The Duke of Ferrari with a glorious train
Is come to Court, and as the loud voice is
Given out by himself, to claim you for his wife,
For which he has your promise.
How our promise?
Can Princes be so insolent, beshrew
His haste, but we shall lose much of our honour
To give no ceremony to his person?
How ever our thoughts point, we will entertain him
And dress our face in smiles.
His looks renew
My sufferings, I have not power to manage
My wilde affection, my heart will not
Be denied but by a secret destiny.
Ha, Cornelia
I hope you are not courting Borgia,
He is your brother, know your place within
Our train.
Shoe's jealous, jealous, stars I thank you,
Tic clear as light she does affect me now:
Did she not put me too't, to name my mistress,
Yet in a shadow pointed at her self?
Be she the proudest, greatest in our Duchy
Without all limitation, I marked that
And had my sense—if great above your fortune
We can raise you to her equality:
Fine morals, poor Cornelia loves me too,
But I must give her no encouragement:
Her grace is much the better woman—ha, 
She appeared discontent when first Cornelia
Brought her the news, yet they march lovingly
Together, but that ceremony must
Be allowed at Court, where shift of face and tongue
Are wisely to be practised—my good Lord.
Your servant Borgia.
Tic her graces pleasure every gentleman
That has relation to the Duke, taste all
The bounties of her Court.
How's this?
None dare
To affront a Groom on forfeit of his place,
Let all the offices of entertainment
Be free and open.
I shall signify
These her commands.
And they that of her own
Court are ambitious to express their duties
Let it appear in keeping this day solemn
To wine and mirth, that every brow may speak
A joy and welcome to the Duke.
I shall.
Here's like to be a triumph, with your Lordships
Pardon; was that the Duke of Ferrari
Yes of Urbin shortly, when their marriage
Is perfect, every subjects heart prays for it,
And sent their acclamations to heaven
To see her highness lovingly salute him,
Hoe's a brave Prince.
A good round gentleman,
He did not fly hither; I heard talk of an
Ambassador.
A cloud for his own person
Till his affairs came to maturity.
He stood concealed to the Duchess, but last night
He gained her princely word to marry him,
And is this morning bright in his own glories.
Last night.
Isle build more faith upon his honour
Fast as a contract.
To what painted Paradise
Would she have led me? wood I had my sister now.
With this joy
I had forgot my own, Borgia; Brother
Let not the sound be unwelcome, tic the Duchesses
Pleasure to honour her unworthy creature
Ursini, by appointment of our marriage
To Waite on hers.
What marriage?
With your sister,
Isle not suspect your love, since fair Cornelia
Is not displeased to be directed by
Her highness, and be confident my love
Shall make the memory of it welcome to you;
You will excuse me if I take my leave,
These hours are full of business, and I have
Many commands upon me.
In good time,
I am in a good state again, I was an ass
To think the Duchess meant me any thing
But mockery, she told me so before
To make more sport, I have lost my sister too,
Shees for Ursinis carving, I could curse
My self to Millan, but tic not impossible
I may retrive Cornelia, by giving her
A timely satisfaction, I am not
Her brother Borgia:
Ther's all the hope is left, I shall be loath
To hunt two hares, and after lose them both.
Son you're well met.
Your pleasure Sir.
No great pleasure, I am almost hoarse with
Enquiring for you, I must ask you a question,
First let me examine your countenance.
Your meaning Sir?
I have no skill in Metaposcopie,
De'e know me?
I am not discovered sure,
What crotchet's this?
Hoe's proud, he wonnot know me:
It is so, hoe's lost, he is undone, nay, nay,
It will become me to stand bare to you Sir,
And teach my hams the officious cringe; be covered.
I know not how to interpret Sir your language;
Yet I would hope you mock me not, although
It was the Duchess pleasure to create
Mirth from this barren heap, and counterfeit
Favours to try my duty, join not you
With others to enlarge my scorn, I am not
So tame of soul, but I have sense of all
Their Ieeres.
Their Ieeres? whom doe you point upon?
I dare not name the Duchess; I am all
Obedience to her person, yet she might
Have placed her giddy humour somewhere else
It swells not me with expectation,
I was not made for state.
Doe not you then
Think to be Duke.
Should any but your self
Name such a title to me, I should answer
His question with a frown, and something else
To waite upon it, tho I engaged my life
To a fresh danger, but I am instructed
By nature and religion to be calm
At what you say.
On this condition
Isle give thee leave to beat me, it was my fear
Thou hadstan easy faith, and were transported
Indeed out of thy wits, but since I see
Thou art not mad, I will commend a wife to the•…
To me, I thank you Sir, not yet,
I shall be mad indeed then, I will marry
None but my sister, take my word.
Thy sister?
I cannot rail upon the Duchess safely;
A wife, my mother's dead.
Thoud'st not have her?
I think you wot not have her out of heaven.
It were little Charity, and the whole sex
Were in a dead sleep were it not finn to wake 'em;
A wife, Isle seek my sister.
Stay and take
My keys▪ this opens to my gould, go home
And take out ten bags.
What to doe Sir?
To spend 'em, ell's thine own, leave something for
Cornelia, because perhaps she'll marry,
And I am satisfied, a prudent boy,
How am I bound to heaven that hoe's not proud,
Nor taken in the subtle toils of women?
He will never marry, how shall I consume
My estate? Dost hear, a little portion
Will serve Vrsini with thy sister▪
Must
He marry her?
I let him, we shall please
The Duchess too, and when she is disposed
The rest is ours to revel with.
Isle think ont.
Did you not meet my son?
Yes somewhat melancholy.
You are deceived, hoe's choleric, and let
Me advise you gentlemen, although I know
He loves you, doe not mock him, hoe's no fool;
No bladder to be swollen with breath of praise
And Ladies Jigs, he is sensible he is,
And will not be the hateful stock of pastime
To Grooms and Pages.
What doe you mean my Lord?
Call him not Duke, I counsel you.
We doe not.
Nor do'e not think it possible it may be
Have patience, and we doe not, we have altered
Our opinions, and are clear of your side now.
As the wheels move we doe think nothing less,
Your son shall not be Duke, there is no fear on it
Whilst Ferrari lives.
He shall not.
So we say, sleep quietly.
He shall not, very peremptory,
You are no Oracles, would I were Duchess
For half an hour, he shut be Duke, de'e hear now;
No matter who repented: I thought you
Had been his friend, he shannot be a Duke?
How ere I thought on it, it becomes not you
To circumscribe his fortune, he can number
Descents of noble blood, and had his breeding;
Has none of the worst faces, heads, nor hearts,
How ere you value him and discharge your bolts
At random thus, he shannot.
Hear us Sir.
He shall not be a Duke.
Did not I say he was mad?
That was dissembled,
He has cause now to see a turn in the stream,
And Ferrari only hopeful with the Duchess, 
What thing is that?
Is he so confident?
He will lay about like a Prince, de'e think
We may present him safely? if you say
The word Isle wind him up to an Emperor.
Keep thy shape boy, we wonnot lose the sport,
And happily I will acquaint these gentlemen.
If I
Should be whipped heartily for my conceit,
The little high German wud not take it kindly,
It may be the court largess; but no matter,
I have some gold and dare venture the last
At any time for coin of this complexion.
Are you in earnest.
Twill be excellent,
And please her highness, she has commanded
All liberty of mirth, Isle undertake
To prepare her.
About it then, Isle have
My part in the interlude, lose no time boy,
Thou shalt be Prince of Pigmieland for this:
The Duchess, Isle withdraw.
My Lord, you make me wonder, challenge me
Of promises? tho I acknowledge it,
No act that could reflect with a dishonour
Upon our person, yet we must not be
So jested into marriage, you are a Prince
Of an unquestiond merit, take not these
Imaginary ways to advance your hopes
In us, we are yet free as you my Lord,
And shall not in a dream give up our self,
Were we disposed to marry or contract
Our self, the day shall witness it without
A blush, let guilty souls call night to cover
Their promises, we are innocent.
Good Madam
Render me not so lost to my own senses,
To the honour of a Prince basely to coin
A language for my purpose, though you may
Repent the last nights freedom, and correct
Your judgement of me, make me not so miserable
To let the Court think I invented this
As destitute of nobler ways to move you,
But I presume this is to try my patience
And make my joys at last more precious
By this delay; I know you are all virtue
And cannot stain your self by a denial
Of any syllable you speak.
With pardon
Of your grace, I shall laugh if you persist thus:
You had a pleasant dream, but lovers
Are flatterd in their sleep, I speak to you.
Then Madam I take leave, to tell you tic not
Done like a Princess of that character
We have received, and if I had no witness
I see what mirth we are prepared for.
Witness
There is too much at stake my Lord already,
To rack this argument for your own fame,
Proceed not to enlarge it, we would rather
Confess some guilt against our self, then let
You honour be exposed to such strait censure
For loving us, yet if you would be silent
In this we shall be proud, in other things
To have denied you nothing, and be ashamed
You took our Court so unprepard to honour you.
Was ever such a mockery, I see
I must produce more testimony, you see
Can justify if you please, I have affirmed
Nothing but truth, although my willing ear
Caught up the voice, she spake it to you signior.
What my good Lord?
That she resolved to marry us.
Your excellence
Must pardon me, I heard her highness speak
No language to that purpose.
We honour
You Borgia for acquitting us.
Tic truth her highness never spake so, but I did
Whom supposed the Duchess, and this must
Sound hope in him to be so negative.
It seems you have concluded, Madam, I
Must be the general mirth.
I find Cornelias
Cunning in this and must apply some complement
For our own honour, good my Lord your privacy.
How ever her grace be a little impudent
I had been mad to justify the Duke
In such a cause, she has no mind to marry him,
And perhaps talked to me last night to try
My strength of wit, women are subtle creatures,
No matter tho Usini court my sister,
My ambitions fair a tother side again.
Tic strange the Duchess should so mistake.
Upon
My conscience she heard the words.
Yet She denies.
I must believe her too:
You speak a riddle Madam.
Will you my Lord
Admit of so much mirth.
You shall command me.
Remit 'em then, the rest Isle clear hereafter
To your satisfactition.
De'e hear, what Prince de'e mean to call your self?
Why any Prince in Spain.
No Isle advise you
You shall be an Italian Prince in Spanish habit,
Now I think better on it, tic quaint, and will
Be grateful for the witty novelty:
Every common Prince goes in his countries fashion
Such as you are not ordinary, be bold.
Why did bring him hither.
Peace I may doe you a courtesy,
Keep your own counsel and be ignorant
Of this strange Creature, say you are—
The Duke of—thus disguised for reasons
Known to your self.
Duke of—let me alone.
And be not beaten out of't.
I wonnot, let the high German first present me in a speech,
Is that the Duchess? so, so.
I warrant you.
My master or his ghost?
You wonnot be a fool and lose your self,
And heaven knows what scorn to take notice on him,
Remember who you are.
Vmph, umph, stand by fellow.
Duchess of Urbin never was your Court
Graced with the presence of so brave a Prince
As this the darling and delight of Christendom.
He seems no less.
What pageants have we got.
And cousin not your selves he is no Spaniard.
But of Italian sprightly breed, a man
Famous in Arts and Arms, as shall appear
If any man dares question him, should your grace
But see him at some royal exercise
You wud think him more then mortal, he shall pitch
The Bar with any of your Guard, or drink with 'em;
Wrestle with both the West and North Olympicks,
Sings like the Arabian Bird, and can out-dance.
The nimble Elephant, so rarely skil'd
In music, that he has a great ambition
To go to hell to challenge Orpheus
To play with him on any Instrument
From the Organ to the Iewes-trumpe.
Miracles!
These are the outside of his qualities,
But look within him, and your grace shall find
Enough to ravish you.
Tell how I love her.
With all these virtues and advantages
Of blood and state he comes to court your highness.
We are infinitely honoured, and wud thank him,
But that we know not yet this Princes name.
Duke of Ferrari Madam is his title.
How sirrah?
That is the Duke of Ferrari, what de'e mean?
Stand too't and say he is a counterfeit
A mere impostor, be not beaten out on it.
Are you Duke of Ferrari sirrah, ha.
I am Duke of all the world, what's that to thee?
High German stand close to me.
A true Prince needs no buckler.
Sirrah dare usurp my name?
Tic mine, thou art a counterfeit,
I hope your grace will know me another time.
A base affront my Lord, and suspect
A plot of Borgias to dishonour you▪
He durst not stay to face it.
Isle hive's hear,
As for this wretch.
Doe, doe, I looked for this, a true Prince can bear.
Madam you have not used me well.
I say no more.
Let him go madam, Isle call him to account hereafter.
We are displeased, hence with that fool and whip him.
Whats the matter?
You must be whipped and stripped my scurvy Don.
Whip a Prince? what de'e mean?
You must be Duke of Ferrari.
Duke of a Fiddle-sticke, you doe not mean, to let me
Catch an Ague Gentlemen?
The lash when the fit comes will keep you warm, doe you know one Pimponis, he was a footman, you will be in case to overtake him presently, hee has the heals on you, and you cannot give him so much weight, now you are light, stay but a little we'll send you a whip.
How am I transformed, Duke of Ferrari quoth, wud I were any thing, I know not what I am as they have handled me.
Is the Duke gone?
Yes Madam.
Isle have the fool hanged then▪
That's I.
Alas poor fellow, ha, ha, ha, what art thou?
Nothing, I hope she does not know me again, I must deny my self.
Come hither Sirrah,
Whose devise was it to bid you say you were
Duke of Ferrari?
Alas not I Madam, he is gone.
Who is gone?
The insolent fellow that made a fool of your high∣ness.
Whether is he gone?
To obey your grace and be whipped.
Why doe you shake so?
I'm very warm and please your grace.
Where be your clothes?
My clothes? I never wore any more in my life, I sweat with these.
He has punishment enough, who waits?
Bid Borgia attend us.
I shall Madam.
How now sirrah, what are you?
A Tumbler, doe you know me?
I know thee?
What not Pimp. honest Pimponio.
Signior Borgia her grace calls for you.
I attend.
How signior Borgia? then I am not I, and there is no Staying here to find my self, as I remember some friends of mine, did promise me a comfortable whip, Isle rather venture a cold then stay fort, I must be Dukified, be persuaded into kicks—they'll return, I wonnot tempt my destiny, she pro∣mist to hang me, and I can doe that for my self when I have a mind toot.
Kick that fellow out of the Court.
You are mistaken Sir, he means some body else, I have been kicked already.
Madam you let fall.
Let it re ward your pains.
Observed you that.
Convey this to Mercutio, it creates him
Controller of our household, this I hope
Will merit more of his acquaintance with
Our Court.
You honour your poor creatures.
Leave us, 
You may stay Sir, what suite, what that you named?
Suite Madam?
Did not you say you had a suite to us,
I hope your modesty will teach you how
To limb it your request, that it may be
Such as may both become our grant and your
Acceptance, speak what i'st
My suite Madam?
But in the confidence of your discretion
Name and enjoy what you desire.
This bounty
Of language is beyond all my ambition.
Well Sir to'th purpose, I would have you speak
To purpose now.
To purpose, would I durst,
This exceeds all the rest, shall I be mad
And lose this opportunity.
We are prepared
Better? my happiness flows upon me
My suite is Madam, you would be pleased to—
What shall I say, she looks so keen and tempting,
I have a great mind to kiss her.
Not resolved yet?
Long since, my humble suite is to you Madam, that—
What?
I may be numbered still among your creatures
And keep a blessing in your gracious smiles
Upon my humble service.
A smile and humblest service, is this all?
You wonnot purchase much by being a Courtier.
The greatest rise by favour, I ha lost
An opportunity.
Is there nothing else?
She Asks again, now Isle put her toot,
We are private, I have another suite Madam.
A courtier should have many, what i'st made on?
Of love.
A pretty winter wearing, and keeps well
In fashion.
May I presume to as ask your grace.
A question? yes Sir.
Doe you love me Madam?
How Sir?
Does your grace love me?
Audacious Groom, how dares thy soul imagine
So great an impudence, almost treason to us,
Are all our favours thought so cheap? and we
Considered in the crowd of other women
Fit for your mixture, to be stained with loose
And desperate proffers of your wanton service?
Have we no more distinction in our birth
And titles? Or de'e hope we are disarmed
Of strength to punish such an insolence?
Had smiles tan such possession of our brow
Thou could expect no killing frown for this?
Was our eye grown so tame nothing could quicken it
Into a flame, into a consuming lightning,
When such an object durst appear to vex it?
Thus we could spurn thy saucy head off—but
We pardon it, de'e hear? we freely pardon it,
To show mercy is above all fault,
And that we are at home Queen of our passions,
Nor shall you suffer under the remembrance,
Tic now as it had never been, and you keep
The first place in our thoughts.
Have?
Wisely preserve'em
And rather chide your timorous understanding
Then think us angry, had your sin been greater
We should have met it charitably, come,
You are our Secretary, write as we shall dictate.
Did ever Sunne-shine break so suddenly
From such a black and most prodigious cloud?
I would have sold my body for a bean stalk
Within two minutes, sh'as an excellent wit
And cunningly she reins it, whats your pleasure
I shall write Madam?
A letter, a love letter, are you ready,
Write as I bid upon your life,—I love you.
I am perpar'd.
Write I love you Sir, de'e not understand me?
She'll make me mad, I ha'done, I love you.
How Sir?
There wanted Sir, I love you Sir.
And if you be not short of apprehension.
And if, &amp;c.
You'll wisely entertain it.
You'll wisely, &amp;c.
All errors be forgot, meet me this evening
All errors, &amp;c.
In the privy Garden, and receive more testimony.
In the privy garden, &amp;c.
Mean time here is my hand, that in the morning I'll marry you.
Mean time, &amp;c▪—What a devil does she mean?
I have done, it wants your confirmation—so.
To whom shall I direct it?
You will be trusty, there's danger else.
To whom?
To him that loves me best,
Deceive me not farewell.
I love you Sir, &amp;c. tic a letter, and I wrote it,
To whom, to him that loves her best, if none love her better,
Tic to my self? Why am I so scrupulous?
She has made me Chancellor in the cause,
There's no particular named, yet she was angry,
Yet she was pleased again, and had my crime
Been greater, she had met it charitably.
Come I perceive the whole device as sure
As I have any sense, she does affect me,
And tries me at the last weapon of wit
How Isle behave my self, are you there Duchess;
She is my own, and this invites me to▪
The close of all my happiness, if I
Forfeit this opportunity, let Midas
Transplant his goodly ears to this dull head,
And let all women laugh at me, my stars
I bow to you, and kiss your influence,
I am exalted to your sphere already,
Where, with the Duchess I will sit and shine
A constellation.
You're well met Sir,
Borgia I take it.
You may change that name
And call me servant.
You have prostrate language,
But carry treason in your heart, you know me?
Duke of Ferrari.
So, was it your plot to bring
That puppet to affront me before the Duchess?
Was there no other name to be usurped,
Dishonoured, and profaned by hounds and monkeys
But mine?
I understand you not, your anger
Is not directed right my Lord, I am not
Guilty in thought.
Your fears shall not excuse.
You are abused.
I know I am Sir, and
Will print revenge upon your heart, 'tshall carry
The character of a villain.
I must tell you Duke.
What Sir?
Were you master of the world,
Could you shoot death beyond a Basilisk,
Or had you mischief in your breath above
The Lernean vapours, or the killing steam
Of the hot lake that poisons innocent Birds
But daring to fly over, I would rise
With as much confidence to scorn this calumny
As I would quench my thirst, or chide my Groom
The drudges for me, Duke I am no villain,
And tho my blood runs not so deépe a purple
There's no corruption in the chapest vein
My Liver feeds, it is clear and honest sir,
In thy own Court Isle meet and tell thee so
Maugre thy guards, and gaudy Butter-flies,
I dare, by innocence, I dare.
You think
The place protects you now.
Were it in a Church
No drop of mine could stain it, Duke I cannot
Fear and be master of a sword, that needs
No valour in a cause so just as mine
To stir the point, by all my hopes.
Thy hopes,
Of what reversion? what Grooms place is vacant?
Come tic not done becommingly
To insult because you have a privilege
Of Duke above you, I am here a servant
To a most gracious Princess.
At that name I drew
New flame, and should I credit thy soul free
From this dishonour, thou hast sin enough
In thy ambition to pull ruin on thee,
Are we too fit to be in competition Sir?
Hast thou a thought so proud, so daring in thee
To be my rival? Have I courted her
To her own height, a Prince? and shall her vassal
Look on her with an eye, less then serves
The Altar with, because she is pleased some time
To laugh, and seem indulgent to your services
For her own sake, can you have brain to think
Such treason to her judgement, that she loves you?
Or can she be so lost to truth and honour
Not to make good her promises to me
Religious as a contract, has she not
Declared me worthy of her, and my love
The best of all the world.
How was that Sir?
The best of all the world, tic not that I
Can be so poor in my esteem of her
Whose mention is sacred, or my self
That I have any jealousy thou can
Inherit possibly the hundredth part
Of any thought that points upon affection
Hast thou no soul to apprehend thy scorn?
Nay did she not, fearing thou might grow insolent
Upon her favours late declare herself,
It was not love but mirth and wantonness
Of revelling nights, commanding on thy life
Thou feed no ambition higher, or feed a thought
To her, beyond what waited upon duty
You may remember this.
Tic clear, this none
Could tell him but her self, I find too plain
Who is the may-game of the Court, this last
Convinces me, your pardon mighty Sir
You love the Duchess.
Best she will acknowledge
Of all mankind.
I have a letter to you,
I will not doubt my pardon when you read it,
Tic to you Sir if there can bee a joy beyond what's there con∣tain'd▪
Ha? I am blessed,
Borgia let me embrace thee my best friend
Dwell in my heart, divide with me Ferrari
Or Urbin, any thing but the Duchess, say
Isle meet her in the Garden were it walld
With flaming Dragons, I have not a soul
Spacious enough to entertain this happiness
Beyond my hope, above my life dear Borgia.
Beyond his hope? it seems this joy was not
Expected umph, and I had no commission
To give it him, after all this if she
Meant it not this way, I ha'made fine work,
She might ha'namd him, wud I had the paper▪
Again, now doe I prophecy I have
Undone my self, and only her grace meant
That I should meet her, curse upon my easiness;
I have lost an opportunity, no fate
Flatterd a mortal with the like, dull brains,
There's yet prevention, genius I thank thee,
Tic possible I may secure the Garden
And boldly meet her first, if any destiny
Owe me this blessing with this art I may
Redeem my folly, never man but I
Wud lose so rich an opportunity.
MAdam I know not what to say, my heart
Is full of hearty zeal to obey you, but the place
You have conferred upon my years, is much
Above my strength to satisfy, yet I thank you.
You have deserved we should encourage you
For what is past, your son is full of hope
And may grow up a statesman.
He owes all
To your infinite favours Madam, a young man,
And would be active upon your commands.
Leave us, stay my Lord we must employ you.
I have not life enough to serve you Madam,
My age is now a burden, that I could
Shake off a score of winters.
There's no such
Necessity of youth to execute
The service you design, you love your son.
Above my own health Madam, and let me
Be bold to tell your grace, I love him better
For your sake.
For our sake.
That he can carry
Himself so handsomely to deserve your good
Opinion, every Courtier that's advanced
To a warm place, does not behave himself
Always to purpose.
To what purpose Signior?
To please his Mistress, and I am, I must
Confess proud of his expectations,
It makes my blood dance Madam.
You are very merry▪
I hope to have more cause▪
Well Sir, while we▪
Retire into the Garden, be it your care
We be not interrupted, give access
To none but Borgia, we have some privacy▪
Only concern his knowledge.
My son Borgia.
Your son, if you doe call him Borgia.
Shall I go for him?
He will be so officious
Perhaps to spare that trouble, if he come
Be diligent and admit him.
I shall Madam;
Shoe's gone into the Garden, and commands
I give access to none but Borgia;
If he come, she has given me another office
To keep the door, it has been a preferment.
I will do it now in spite of my own humour,
Ha boy! something will come on it, if he have
The grace to nick this opportunity.
The evening wastes a pace, I cannot be
Too soon at my desires, whose that?
Hoe's come;
Already Borgia.
One stands Sentinel,
Is that the word? who names Borgia.
My son.
The same.
This evening make thee happy, enter, no ceremony
I am not now against thy being a Duke,
Prove fortunate my boy, and bless thy father. 
So, so, if it were noon, and the Sun looked
With his broad brightest eye upon's, there are
Convenient cozening Arbors, cost bestowed
On pretty mazes, •…a•…y 〈…〉ths of love,
You might be there secure, and entertain
Sweet time, most tall and fashionable hedges
In whose enclosures, Ladies that are willing
May lose themselves, and the next walk no wiser▪
Now I think ont, this Cloister with the help
Of such an evening might be dark enough
For such a turn; many a gentle woman
Has been content to embrace upon worse terms
Oh the Court lobbies, but I tell no tales, 
Another moving this way, by his favour
The Gardens taken up.
Tic the best way
To say I am the Duke, that if he follow
He may prevent his own access.
Vmph, umph.
That name will make the gates fly open to me
And I pass undiscoverd.
What are you?
Here doe thy office, I am the Duke.
The Duke
Your grace must pardon me, I am commanded
To admit none, her highness will enjoy
The garden privately.
Lord Mercutio.
Your servant, but in this my duty must
Aim at another pleasure, if you be
The Duke I cannot help it, I am but
Greene in my honours, and I would not forfeit 'em
With my own head to boot in her first service.
Then Isle discover I am Borgia
Your son, your happy Borgia, be not you
The enemy, an̄d bar my glorious fortune,
The Duchess has commanded me this evening
To meet her in the Garden, I can tell
Thee wonders old Mercutio, she loves me,
More I have an assurance from her hand
She'll make me Duke old lad.
Be not transported
For if you be my son doe you observe
You are yet but Borgia, and I your father
Old Mercutio, and old lad.
Your pardon Sir,
My joy of such a bliss allows no bound,
Why are you slow to make your son the happiest
Of all mankind, the evenings big with glory
The winds doe whisper gently whose I am,
The birds with Music waite to entertain me
Into Loves Bower, the Trees bow to my entrance▪
And she that is the Mistress of all these
Will bid me welcome.
Are you Borgia.
There's death in these delays, doe not you know me?
Or dare you not believe what I affirm
Touching the Duchess.
I believe you are
Borgia to my grief, and doe believe
What you have said; her grace did appoint me
To waite here, and commanded I should give
Access to none but Borgia, de'e mark?
She was pleased to tell me, she had business only
Concerned your knowledge I dispute not what,
But it is some excellent affair I am confident,
She was so merry about the lips and eyes
And praisd you to my face.
If this have faith w'ee
Why am not I admitted▪
All in good time.
The gates should spread themselves.
They shall not need, Isle reach them with less trouble▪
But first I have a suite to you.
To me,
Speak and command it.
Tic within mans remembrance
That you did want a pardon, now beg mine,
And make what other conditions with the Duchess
You please.
Your pardon?
Yes I am parcel Traitor
Against my will, and too much care about
My office made me abuse it, I admitted
Another gentleman, that deceived me with
Your name, and how her grace may punish me
Is in my fears, unless you mediate for me.
Did any take my name.
Yes, and at first
Sound I discharged my duty the wrong way
And let him in.
In? whether?
Into the Duchess.
I am undone, this minute, I am blasted;
It was the Duke upon my life.
The Duke, it may be so, although it were duskish
Me thought he carried more compass with him;
But why should he take your name?
Lost for ever.
You found I had no zeal to his, how ever
Lose no more time; your power with her grace
May set all straight▪ and purchase me a pardon.
Be rather loft as I am in thy dotage,
Thou hast deprived me of the wealthiest harvest
That ever Sunne-beames shined on
Does he thou me?
How would he domineer and he were Duke?
My fortune bleeds to death, tic now too late
That paper ruins all my hope, and were
We equal, the would scorn my want of confidence
And laugh me out of the world.
Hoe's very passionate.
But there's no dwelling in this Wilderness,
Things past are past sorrow, there is yet
A way to bind my wound up and secure
My health, though not a life with so much state
As was expected, instantly Isle to
Cornelia, I know she loves me still,
At worst a little passion bestowed
On her, with clearing I am another brother
Makes her my own, and keeps me from the Pasquill;
I shall be jeered to dust else, there's my rest,
He that loves more then one is seldom blessed.
Hoe's gone and I am like to suffer for it,
By your highness favour I will waite no longer
To be chastised, but when your grace is weary,
You shall not need to strike me at the door;
Tic open and I vanish in the dark;
Stay and Isle send some others to attend you,
You will want light, my son shall be no Duke
I perceive now, nor will I be a Courtier;
Put me to keep the door?
Did she dismiss you then?
It was not her pleasure
We should attend.
We left my Lord Mercutio
Your father with her.
Went she towards the Garden?
Yes, whore's your brother Borgia?
I know not.
He is infinitely beholding to her grace,
She never mentions him without a flourish:
I know not, but if I have any skill
In looks or language, there is something more
Then common in her highness breast meant toward him
She may be in love.
In love with whom?
Your brother.
I blush to hear your weakness, I hope he
Hath more wit then to build vain hopes on that;
Eagles stoop not to flies.
But the Wren
Couched underneath the aspiring Eagles wings.
Quickly advance it self when to'thers mounted
And glories in her hight, tic but a step
And the small thing is King of birds, the fable
Has pretty morals in it.
I am not sure
A rebel in my nature to his fortune,
But dare not pawn my own discretion
To take up your opinions.
Signior Pisauro your brothers friend desires
To speak with you.
We'll leave you Madam, by this time her grace
May want our duties.
Did I fright you Ladies, look better on me.
We have seen you round Sir.
But doe not know what's in me.
We desire
To die in that pretions ignorance.
This Lady I hope's not of your mind.
Your pleasure
My servant says you would speak with me?
If you
Remember Lady I was bold to urge
A little counsel on you, how it fastens
I come to understand.
What counsel Sir.
About your brother Signior Borgia.
Please you assist my memory.
Why it was
But this, I had a kind of fear you lovd
This brother Madam.
Would you have me be
So impious not to affect my brother.
But you loved him the wrong way▪ de'e hear lustily
You understand, with the desire of coupling:
There lies no dispensation for that locke,
Tic impious and abominable, you had better
In the state you are in keep a Pensioner
To give you heats, a fellow that will venture
His body at all hours; then to offend once
With so much sin to nature.
Doe you think
Jam a Monster Signior?
Better marry
An honest man and make one a great deal:
Your husband may be excusdi'th progress Lady,
Besides he may have faults, a negligence
In's visits, or mistaking of his times,
When you are invited by another Lord
To a banquet, or take physic, or the air
Appointed by your Doctor, there are reasons
To excuse an active Lady that is married
But to affect your brother so, inexpiable.
You have invention enough to furnish
The Court with vice, how ever you seem to have
Care of my soul, pray give me pardon Sir,
Doe you ever mean to marry?
Marry? oh yes.
Not a Court Lady sure.
One of that tribe to choose.
Without the fear
Of being such a monster made by her
Whose wantonness you wittily have charactred.
I'ha read my destiny, she that I shall marry
Will be very honest, exceeding chaste as I
Shall be to her, I did but tell you what
Whirligigs are in the world, and that it were better
And safer for your conscience to be one
Of Venus order, and keep tame a Groom
A stallian Dormant then embrace a brother.
What should incline you
To imagine me so lost to modesty?
What have you read in me to make you think
I love my brother so?
My charity.
There's little charity in those suspicions▪
Have you no other argument.
Your brother
Told me himself you loved him strangely.
So, so.
Nay, nay he was in the same pickle.
He told
You that himself too.
Yes, yes, till I tampered with him
And sacrificed his flesh with ghostly counsel,
Read Law and Lectures, I will tell you Madam
He was once so overgrown with love, he had
Resolved to tell you he was not your brother,
And rather then be frustrate of his hopes
Vowed to forswear it, and suborn testimony
He was no kin to you, borne I know not where,
And never saw the town before, whose people
Had all this while consent themselves, with an
Opinion he was Borgia; here's a youth now,
Did he ne'er deal with you to such a purpose.
Never, he wud not be so wicked sure.
Did you ever hear the like? you know it now,
Thank heaven and a good friend that told you this;
A friend that wud not see this pretty vessel
Lost in the quick-sands, when both goods and it
May be his own another day: I love you
And none shall doe you wrong.
I should be ungrateful
Not to acknowledge Sir this noble office
Meant to preserve me.
That was my pure meaning,
You may requite it if you please.
With love.
It is the reward my ambition first aims at.
I love my brother now in his own place,
And being his bosom friend I will not question,
But to enlarge my knowledge of your worth
And take me nearer to me for his Character,
And free consent.
Vmph, now you bless me Lady,
If his hopes thrive in the Duchess as I doubt not
I am made, Isle seek him out, I wish no better
Testimony, he shall not go•…t you unders hand.
No haste.
He knows me to a thought, nay, nay
He shall do it presently, if I can light on him.
To morrow Signior, I suspect it not.
It does concern my honour, tic done instantly,
She may be cold ever morning, Isle not lose
This opportunity, I am made for ever.
He has an odd way of Courtship, sure my brother,
Unless he know him better then this wildness
Can promise, will be sparing to contract
Our hearts too fast, he has but a rough outside,
But my strange thoughts within me are corrected,
And I possess my self again thank providence,
Ursini.
Madam I am bold to press
On your retirement, but when you remember
I bring no mutinous thoughts, but such as are
Devoted to your service, you will think it
A trespass that may soon invite a pardon.
You must first practise to offend my Lord,
This is favour to me.
Still such goodness
Flows from your language to me at the first
Encounter; but when I take▪ boldness to
Have some assurance from you alone,
Which I have hoped and served for, with the truth
Of your best honorer, you decline the subject,
Or fly the sweet conclusion.
My Lord,
That you have loved, at least professed so much,
May easily be granted, but let me
Beseech you Sir, did you upon the first
Motion that wrought upon your mind to think
Me worthy of your love acquaint me with it.
No Madam,
I long cherished the soft fire
That tried the pureness of it, and the object
That shot so bright a flame into my bosom,
And had suppressed it still, but that your virtue
Grew up too powerful against it, then
I took leave to express how much I wished
To be your votary.
Give me equal licence
My Lord in the same cause to try my self,
I have thoughts too would be composed of something
In you to be examined.
I submit,
And shall obey your censure, life and death
Hang on your lip, I come to be determined
Your servant or your sacrifice, for to languish
At distance thus.
Then you expect an answer
Presently, I much fear my Lord I shannot,
In that particular, satisfy your Lordship.
You want no knowledge of me, there is nothing
In my past fate but may appear to you,
My nature needs no gloss, my blood, my fortune
Clear to your view, my person not much witherd;
If these together want a charm, I can
Deserve you may love, for I know best
The extent of my devotions, and the heart
That tho you should despise it must still serve you.
But good my Lord what answer you to this?
Is it becoming the discretion
Of a noble servant to pursue his mistress
By unruly ways, and interpose commands
And power of great ones to enforce the heart
Of any Lady: though I must confess
Her grace may challenge my obedience
To her law and person, it has been yet a rule,
And love and religion cannot be compelled
You doe not conclude me, if I obtained
A favour from the Duchess to propound
My wishes, and plead for me, I know well
The soul is not her subject, could her power
Bestow your body on me, and that I
Could boast my self Lord of beauteous frame
Without your mind, I were more tyrant to
Accept then she to force, and answer for
A crime more fatal then the ravishers.
Your brother Madam.
If I have any power
My Lord you must not leave me, yet I would
Entreat your small retreat behind the hangings
For a few minutes.
Your comment's a favour.
Oh Cornelia.
What's the matter brother.
Are you alone.
You see my company.
De'e love me.
Love you brother, what have I
Done to beget your doubt.
But doe you love me
More then a sister? if I were not Borgia,
Remove from us the common tie of blood
Which is not love, but forced of nature in us,
Could you affect me then, then if I answered
This honour with a true and noble flame
Upon such brave conditions, Cornelia
Could our hearts meet and marry?
This were strange,
But not so strange that we should love.
Then pardon
Fairest Cornelia, and make him blessed
Whose very soul dotes on thee, I have but
Usurped the name of Borgia, I can give
Thee proof.
It is come about.
Pisauro welcome
The man of all mankind, most wished for welcome:
Madam this gentleman can witness I am
None of your brother, we were bred together,
Both borne in Millan, and my name is
Aurelio Androzzi son to Paulo
Androzzi major domo to the Dukedom,
My friend too of a noble family.
Did not I tell you this.
Weary of home
We both engaged our selves to try our fortune
Abroad, and for the wars had last designed
Our selves, we took but Urbin in the way,
Where some good stars detained us, and I taken
For Borgia pursued thus far the story.
Ha, ha, ha.
De'e laugh at me, Pisauro shoe's incredulous.
Speak and convince her with thy testimony.
I have told enough already.
She wants faith.
That gentleman prepared me for this history▪
Doe you not blush brother? Sir I thank you.
I am sorry for his impudence.
Cornelia,
Pisauro Why art thou silent.
I tell you I did speak to her.
It is time I then dispose my self.
Now my happiness.
My Lord I pray come forth.
 You Gentlemen by your own confessions
Are strangers to me, and although I doe not
Distrust heavens providence, I shall not sin
To give my freedom up where I am known;
My Lord if you accept Cornelia
Shoe's thus confirmed your own.
With greater joy
Then I would take an Empire, this drops peace
Upon my brothers ashes, and unites
For ever our two families.
Whore's the Duchess?
I prithee doe not vex me.
Doe not vex
Thy self, come wee're at large, our constitution
Would ha'beene troubled with a wife, we have
The world before us, store of game is necessary▪
The Duchess.
You now possess us freely, the next morning
Shall spread thls joy through Urbin.
We are happy
And every heart congratulates.
We thank you
Signior Ursini, you have been faithful to us.
Is your name Borgia?
No Madam,
Whore's our letter?
We did not think y'ad been so apprehensive,
You see it now confirmed, we hope you had
No thought we meant it otherwise, be prudent
And careful in your province, heaven I see
Wud have it thus, and rectify our folly.
Your pardon gracious Madam.
Signior,
We thank your diligencē, possess our favour.
And know the Duke.
I am one of the worst keepers of a door,
No more, ell's well.
I'm glad ont.
Sir your blessing.
Madam your smiles upon us and we cannot
Despair of happiness.
But whore's Borgia?
I know not Sir.
Rise ever fortunate.
Oyes, oyes.
What's the matter?
A fool has lost his master, and thus cries him
About the Court▪
Pimponio a•…my conscience.
Oyes;
If any man there be
In town or in country
Can tell me of a wight
Was lost but yester night,
His name was I know
Signior Aurelio,
By these marks he is known,
He had a bush of his own,
Two eyes in their place
And a nose on his face,
His beard is very thin
But no hair on his chin,
Bring word to the crier
His desolate squire,
And for this fine feat
Take what you can get;
And heaven bless Pimponio, for no body knownes me
And I know no body else to pray for.
Hoe's not my brother indeed then.
Nor my son.
It is too true Madam, here, here's thy master
No, no, that's Signior Borgia, doe not deceive your self
We are both deceived Pimponio shall I hope
Of your free pardon Madam for all trespasses?
My Lord your breath is powerful.
Rise Aurelio.
And be dear to us.
I hope the pardon's firm.
Irrevocable.
I▪le dispatch letters then to Naples, thence
He did salute me last, how were we consent!
But Sir I thank you for my Borgias pardon.
Although it be clear now you're not my brother
Pray take my poor acknowledgement, I shall
Be proud for your sake, to preserve your friendship.
May your hopes prosper in him; now we two
With licence of your excellence may
Prosecute our design again for the war•….
If nothing else at Court invite your stay
We lay commands upon you as our servant
That you see all our ceremonies finished,
To celebrate this happy union
You must be both our guests.
Doe let us feast
And fortify our selves, we shall have
Our bellies full of fighting time enough.
Thinks your grace so?
Subjects may love as their rude sense imparts,
But heaven doth only govern Princes hearts.

THe first thing that presented it self to the sight, was a rich Ornament, that enclosed the Scene; in the upper part of which, were great branches of Foliage growing out of leaves and husks, with a Coronice at the top; and in the midst was ply∣ced a large compartment composed of Groteske work, wherein were Harpies with wings and Lions claws, and their hinder parts converted into leaves and branches: over all was a broken Frontispiece, wrought with scrolls and masque heads of Children; and within this a Table adorned with a lesser Compartment, with this Inscrip∣tion, COELVM BRITANNICVM. The two sides of this Ornament were thus ordered: First, from the ground arose a square Basement, and on the Plinth stood a great vaze of gold, richly enchased, and beauti∣fied with Sculptures of great Releine, with frutages hanging from the upper part: At the foot of this sate two youths naked, in their natural colours; each of these with one arm supported the Vaze; on the cover of which stood two young women in Draperies, arm in arm; the one figuring the glory of Princes, and the o∣there Mansuetude: their other arms bore up an Oval, in which, to the Kings Majesty was this Imprese, A Lion with an Imperial Crown on his head; the word, Animum sub pectore forti: On the other side was the like Composition, but the design of the Figures varied; and in the Oval on the top, being borne up by Nobility and Fecundity, was this Imprese to the Queens Maje∣sty
A Lily growing with branches and leaves, and three lesser Lilies springing out of the Stem; the word, Semper inclit a Virtus: All this Ornament was heightened with Gold, and for the Invention and various compose∣tion was the newest and most gracious that hath been done in this place.
The Curtain was watchet and a pale yellow in pains, which flying up on the sudden, discovered the Scene, re∣presenting old Arches, old Palaces, decayed walls, parts of Temples, Theaters, Basilita's and Therme, with confu∣sed heaps of broken Columns, Bases, Coronices and Sty∣tues, lying as underground, and altogether resembling the ruins of some great City of the ancient Romans, or civ∣liz'd Britains. This strange prospect detained the eyes of the Spectators some time, when to a loud Music Mer∣cury descends; on the upper part of his Chariot stands a Cock in action of crowing: his habit was a Coat of flame colour girt to him, and a white mantle trimmed with gold and silver; upon his head a wreath with small falls of white Feathers, a Caduceus in his hand, and wings at his heals: being come to the ground he dismounts and goes up to the State,
FRom the high Senate of the gods, to You
Bright glorious Twins of Love and Majesty,
Before whose Throne three warlike Nations bend
Their willing knees, on whose Imperial brows
The Regal Circle prints no awful frowns
To fright your Subjects, but whose calmer eyes
Shed joy and safety on their melting hearts
That flow with cheerful loyal reverence,
Come I Cyllenius, Ioves Ambassador:
Not, as of old, to whisper amorous tales
Of wanton love, into the glowing ear
Of some choice beauty in this numerous train;
Those days are fled, the rebel flame is quenched
In heavenly breasts, the gods have sworn by Styx
Never to tempt yielding mortality
To loose embraces. Your exemplar life
Hath not alone transfused a zealous heat
Of imitation through your virtuous Court,
By whose bright blaze your Palace is become
The envied pattern of this underworld,
But the aspiring flame hath kindled heaven;
The immortal bosoms burn with emulous fires,
Jove rivals your great virtues, Royal Sir,
And Iuno, Madam, your attractive graces;
He his wild lusts, her raging jealousies
She lays aside, and through the Olympique hall,
As yours doth here, their great Example spreads.
And though of old, when youthful blood conspired
With his new Empire, prone to heats of lust,
He acted incests, rapes, adulteries
On earthly beauties, which his raging Queen,
Swollen with revengeful fury, turned to beasts,
And in despite he retransform'd to Stars,
Till he had filled the crowded Firmament
With his loose Strumpets, and their spurious race,
Where the eternal records of his shame
Shine to the world in flaming Characters;
When in the Crystal mirror of your reign
He viewed himself, he found his loathsome staines;
And now, to expiate the infectious guilt
Of those detested luxuries, he will chase
The infamous lights from their usurped Sphere,
And drown in the Lethae an flood, their cursed
Both names and memories. In whose vacant rooms
First you succeed, and of the wheeling Orb
In the most eminent and conspicuous point,
With dazzling beams, and spreading magnitude,
Shine the bright Pole-starre of this Hemisphere.
Next, by your side, in a triumphant Chair,
And crowned with Ariadnes Diadem,
Sits the fair Consort of your heart, and Throne;
Diffused about you, with that share of light
As they of virtue have derived from you,
He will fix this Noble train, of either sex;
So to the British Stars this lower Globe
Shall owe its light, and they alone dispense
To'th' world a pure refined influence.
BY your leave, Mortals. Goodden Cozen Harms; your pardon good my Lord Ambassador: I found the ta∣bless of your Arms and Titles, in every Inn betwixt this and Olympus, where your present expedition is registered, your nine thousandth nine hundred ninety ninth Legation. I cannot reach the policy why your Master breeds so few Statesmen, it suits not with his dignity that in the whole Empyraeum there should not be a god fit to send on these honourable errands but your self, who are not yet so care∣full of his honour as your own, as might become your quality, when you are itinerant: the Hosts upon the high∣way cry out with open month upon you for supporting pile∣fery in your train; which, though as you are the god of petty Larcinry, you might protect, yet you know it is di∣rectly against the new orders, and opposes the Reformati∣on in Diameter.
Peace Rayler, bridle your licentious tongue,
And let this Presence teach you modesty.
Let it if it can; in the mean time I will acquaint it with my condition. Know (gay people) that though your Poets who enjoy by Patent a particular privilege to draw ••••no any of the Deities from Twelfnight till Shrove∣tuesday,
at what time there is annually a most familiar en∣la course between the two Courts, have as yet never in∣vited me to these Solemnities, yet it shall appear by my intrusion this night, that I am a very considerable Person upon these occasions, and may most properly assist at such entertainments. My name is Momus-ap-Somnus-ap-Ere∣bus-ap-Chaos-up-Demogorgon-ap-Eternity. My Offices and Titles are, The Supreme Theomastix, Hupercrittique of manners, Protonotarie of abuses, Arch-Informer, Di∣litter General, Universal Calumniator, Eternal Plaintiff, and perpetual Foreman of the Grand Inquest. My privy∣leges are an ubiquitary, circumambulatory, speculatory, in∣terrogatory, redargutory immunity over all the privy lodgings, behind hangings, doors, curtains, through key∣holes, chinks, windows, about all Venereal Lobbies, Skonces or Redoubts, though it bee to the surprise of a perdu Page or Chambermaid, in, and at all Courts of civil and criminal judicature, all Counsels, Consultations, and Parlamentary Assemblies, where though I am but a Wool∣sack god, and have no vote in the sanction of new laws, I have yet a Prerogative of wresting the old to any what∣soever interpretation, whether it be to the behoof, or pre∣judice, of Iupiter his Crown and Dignity, for, or against the Rights of either house of Patrician or Plebeian gods. My natural qualities are to make Jove frown, Iuno pout, Mars chafe, Venus blush, Vulcan glow, Saturn quake, Cynthia pale, Phoebus hide his face, and Mercury here take his heals. My recreations are witty mischiefs, as when Saturn guelt his father; the Smith caught his wife and her Bravo in a net of Cobweb-Iron; and Hebe through the lubricity of the pavement tumbling over the Halfpace, pre∣scented the Emblem of the forked tree, and discovered to the tanned Ethiops the snowy cliffs of Culabria with the Grotta of Puteolum. But that you may arrive at the per∣fact knowledge of me by the familiar illustration of a Bird of mine own feather, old Peter Aretine, who reduced all the Scepters and Myters of that Age tributary to his wit,
was my Parallel; and Frank Rublais sucked much of my milk too; but your modern French Hospital of O∣ratory, is mere counterfeit, an arrant Mountebank, for though fearing no other tortures than his Sciatica, he dis∣course of Kings and Queens with as little reverence as of Grooms and Chambermaids, yet hee wants their fang∣teeth, and Scorpions tail; I mean that fellow, who to add to his stature thinks it a greater grace to dance on his tiptoes like a Dog in a doublet, than to walk like other men on the soles of his feet.
No more impertinent Trifeler, you disturb
The great Affair with your rude scurrilous chat:
What doth the knowledge of your abject state
Concern Joves solemn Message?
Sir, by your favour, though you have a more espe∣ciall Commission of employment from Iupiter, and a lar∣ger entertainment from his Exchequer, yet as a freeborne god I have the liberty to travel at mine own charges, without your pass or countenance Legacine; and that it may appear a sedulous acute observer, may know as much as a dull phlegmatic Ambassador, and wears a treble key to unlock the mysterious Ciphers of your dark secrecies, I will discourse the politic state of heaven to this trim Audience.—
— You shall understand, that Iupiter upon the inspe∣ction of I know not what virtuous Presidents extant (as they say) here in this Court, but as I more probably ghesle out of the consideration of the decay of his natural abilities,
hath before a frequent cōvocation of the Superlunary Peers in a solemn Oration recanted, disclaimed, and utterly re∣nounced all the lascivious extravagances, and riotous en∣ormities of his forepast licentious life, and taken his oath on Junos Breviary, religiously kissing the two-leav'd book, never to stretch his limbs more betwixt adulterous sheets, and hath with pathetic remonstrances exhorted, and under strict penalties enjoined a respective conformity in the several subordinate Deities; and because the Liber∣tines of Antiquity, the Ribald Poets, to perpetuate the memory and example of their triumphs over chastity, to all future imitation, have in their immortal songs celebra∣ted the martyrdom of those Strumpets under the perse∣cution of the wives, and devolved to Posterity the Pedi∣grees of their whores bawds, and bastards; it is therefore by the authority aforesaid enacted, that this whole Army of Constellations be immediately disbanded and cashiered, so to remove all imputation of impiety from the Coelesti∣all Spirits, and all lustful influences upon terrestrial by∣dies; and consequently that there be an Inquisition erected to exspunge in the Ancient, and suppress in the modern and succeeding Poems and Pamphlets, all past, present, and future mention of those abjured heresies, and to take par∣ticular notice of all ensuing incontinences, and punish them in their high Commission Court. Am not I in elect∣on to be a tall Statesman think you, that can repeat a pas∣sage at a Counsell-table thus punctually?
I shun in vain the importunity
With which this Snarler vexes all the gods,
Jove cannot scope him: well, what else from heaven?
Heaven! Heaven is no more the place it was; a cloister of Carthusians, a Monastery of converted gods, Jove is grown old and fearful, apprehends a subversion of his Empire, and doubts lest Fate should introduce a le∣gall succession in the legitimate heir, by repossessing the Titanian line, and hence springs all this innovation. Wee have had new orders read in the Presence Chamber, by
the Vi-President of Pernassies, too strict to bee observed long. Monopolies are called in, sophistication of wares punished, and rates imposed on Commodities. Injunctions are gone out to the Nectar Brewers, for the purging of the heavenly Beverage of a narcotique weed which hath rendered the Idaeacs confused in the Divine intellects, and reducing it to the composition used in Saturnes Reign. Edicts are made for the restoring of decayed housekeeping, prohibiting the repairs of Families to the Metropolis, but this did endanger an Amazonian mutiny, till the females put on a more masculine resolution of soliciting businesses in their own persons, and leaving their husbands at home for stallions of hospitality. Baccus hath commanded all Taverns to be shut, and no liquor drawn after ten at night. Cupped must go no more so scandalously naked, but is enjoined to make him breeches though of his mothers petticotes. Ganimede is forbidden the Bedchamber, and must only minister in public. The gods must keep no Pages, nor Grooms of their Chamber under the age of 25. and those provided of a competent stock of beard. Pan may not pipe, nor Proteus juggle, but by especial permission. Ʋulcan was brought to an Oretenus and fined, for driving in a plate of Iron into one of the Suns Chariot-wheeles and frost-nailing his horses upon the fifth of November last, for breach of a penal Statute prohibiting work upon Ho∣lydayes, that being the annual celebration of the Gygan∣tomachy. In brief, the whole state of the Hierarchy suf∣fers a total reformation, especially in the point of reci∣procation of conjugal affection. Venus hath confessed all her adulteries, and is received to grace by her husband, who conscious of the great disparity betwixt her perfections and his deformities, allows those levities as an equal counterpoise; but it is the prettiest spectacle to see her stroking with her Ivory hand his collied cheeks, and with her sinewy fingers combing his sooty beard. Iupiter too begins to learn to lead his own wife, I left him practising in the milky way; and there is no doubt of an u∣niversall
obedience, where the Lawgiver himself in his own person observes his decrees so punctually; who be∣sides to eternize the memory of that great example of Ma∣trimoniall union which he derives from hence, hath on his bed chamber door, and seeling, fretted with stars in capital letters, engraven the Inscription of CARLO∣MARIA. This is as much I am sure as either your knowledge or Instructions can direct you to, which I having in a blunt round tale, without State-formality, po∣litique inferences, or suspected Rhetorical elegancies, al∣ready delivered, you may now dexterously proceed to the second part of your charge, which is the raking of yon heavenly sparks up in the Embers, or reducing the Aethe∣real lights to their primitive opacity, and gross dark sub∣sistance; they are all unrivited from the Sphere, and hang loose in their sockets, where they but attend the waving of your Caduce, and immediately they reinvest their pri∣stine shapes, and appear before you in their own natu∣rall deformities.
Momus thou shalt prevail, for since thy bold
Intrusion hath inverted my resolves,
I must obey necessity, and thus turn
My face, to breath the Thundrers just decree
Against this adulterate Sphere, which first I purge
Of loathsome Monsters, and misshapen forms:
Down from her azure concave, thus I charm
The Lyrnean Hydra, the rough unlicked Bear,
The watchful Dragon, the storme-boading Whale,
The Centaur, the horned Goatfish Capricorn,
The Snake-heard Gorgon, and fierce Sagittar:
Divested of your gorgeous starry robes,
Fall from the circling Orb, and ever you suck
Fresh venom in, measure this happy earth,
Then to the Fens, Caves, Forests, Deserts, Seas,
Fly, and resume your native qualities.
Are not these fine companions, trim playfellowes for the Deities? yet these and their fellows have made up all our conversation for some thousands of years. Doe not you fair Ladies acknowledge your selves deeply en∣gaged now to those Poets your servants, that in the height of commendation have raised your beauties to a parallel with such exact prpportions, or at least ranked you in their spruce society. Hath not the consideration of these Inha∣bitants rather frighted your thoughts utterly from the con∣templation of the place? but now that those heavenly Mansions are to be void, you that shall hereafter be found unlodged will become inexcusable; especially since Ver∣tu alone shall be sufficient title, fine, and rent: yet if there be a Lady not competently stocked that way, she shall not on the instant utterly despair, if she carry a sufficient pawn of handsomeness; for however the letter of the Law runs, Jupiter notwithstanding his Age and present austerity, will never refuse to stamp beauty, and make it currant with his own Impression; but to such as are desti∣tute of both, I can afford but small encouragement. Pro∣ceed Cozen Mercury, what follows?
Look up, and mark where the bright Zodiac
Hangs like a Belt about the breast of heaven;
On the right shoulder, like a flaming Jewel,
His shell, with nine rich Topazes adorned,
Lord of this Tropic, sits the scalding Crab:
He, when the Sun gallops in full career
His annual race; his ghastly claws uprear'd,
Frights at the confines of the torrid Zone,
The fiery team, and proudly stops their course,
Making a solstice, till the fierce Steeds learn
His backward paces, and so retrograde
Post downe-hill to the opposed Capricorn.
Thus I depose him from his laughty Throne;
Drop from the Sky, into the briny flood,
There teach thy motion to the ebbing Sea,
But let those fires that beautified thy shell
Take humane shapes, and the disorder show
Of thy regressive paces here below.
This Crab, I confess, did ill become the heavens; but there is another that more infests the Earth, and makes such a solstice in the politer Arts and Sciences, as they have not been observed for many Ages to have made any sen∣sible advance: could you but lead the learned squadrous with a masculine resolution past this point of retrogradati∣on, it were a benefit to mankind worthy the power of a god, and to be payed with Altars; but that not being the work of this night, you may pursue your purposes: what now succeeds?
Vice, that unbodied, in the Appetite
Erects his Throne, hath yet, in bestial shapes,
Branded, by Nature, with the Character
And distinct stamp of some peculiar Ill,
Mounted the Sky, and fixed his Trophies there:
As fawning flattery in the little Dog;
In the bigger, churlish Murmur; Cowardice
In the timorous Hare: Ambition in the Eagle;
Rapine and Avarice in the adventurous Ship
That sailed to Colchos for the golden fleece;
Drunken distemper in the Goblet flows;
In the Dart and Scorpion, biting Calumny;
In Hercules and the Lion, furious rage;
Vain Ostentation in Cassiope:
All these I to eternal exile doom,
But to this place their emblem'd Vices summon,
Clad in those proper Figures, by which best
Their incorporeal nature is expressed.
From henceforth it shall be no more said in the Proverb, when you would express a riotous Assembly, That hell, but heaven is broke loose: this was an arrant Goale-delivery, all the prisons of your great Cities could not have vomited more corrupt marter: but Cozen Cyl∣leneus, in my judgement it is not safe that these infectious persons should wander here to the hazard of this Island, they threatened less danger when they were nailed to the Firmament: I should conceive it a very discreet course since they are provided of a tall vessel of their own ready rigged, to embark them all together in that good Ship call•d the Ergo, and send them to the plantation in New-England, which hath purged more virulent humours from the politic body, then Guacum and all the West-Indian druggs have from the natural bodies of this king∣dome: Can you devise how to dispose them better?
They cannot breath this pure and temperate Air
Where Virtue lives, but will with hasty flight,
Amongst fogs and vapours, seek unsound abodes.
Fly after them, from your usurped seats,
You foul remainders of that viperous brood:
Let not a Star of the luxurious race
With his loose blaze stain the skies crystal face.
Here is a total Eclipse of the eighth Sphere, which neither Booker, Allestre, nor any of your Progno∣sticators, no nor their great Master Tico were aware of; bur yet in my opinion there were some innocent, and some generous Constellations, that might have been reserved for Noble uses: as the Skales and Sword to adorn the
statue of Justice, since she resides here on Earth only in Picture and Effigy. The Eagle had been a fit present for the Germans, in regard their Bird hath mewed most of her feathers lately. The Dolphin too had been most well∣come to the French, and then had you but clapped Perseus on his Pegasus, brandishing his Sword, the Dragon yaw∣ning on his back under the horses feet, with Pytheus dart through his throat, there had been a Divine St. George for this Nation: but since you have improvidently shuffled them altogether, it now rests only that wee provide an immediate succession, and to that purpose I will instantly proclaim a free Election,
Whereas we having observed a very commendable pra∣ctice taken into frequent use by the Princes of these latter Ages, of perpetuating the memory of their famous enter∣prizes, sieges, battles, victories, in Picture, Sculpture, Ta∣pistry, Embroideries, and other manifactures, wherewith they have embellished their public Palaces, and taken into Our more distinct and serious consideration, the parti∣cular Christmas hangings of the Guard-Chamber of this Court, wherein the Naval Victory of 88. is to the eternal glory of this Nation exactly delineated: and whereas We likewise out of a prophetical imitation of this so laudable custom, did for many thousand years before, adorn and beautify the eighth room of Our celestial Mansion, com∣monly called the Starre-Chamber, with the military ad∣ventures, stratagems, archievements, feats and defeats, performed in Our Own person, whilst yet Our Stan∣dard was erected, and We a Combatant in the Amorous Warfare. It hath notwithstanding, after mature delibera∣tion, and long debate, held first in our own inscrutable bosom, and afterwards communicated with Our Privy
Counsel, seemed meet to Our Omnipotence, for causes to Our self best known, to unfurnish and dis-array Our foresaid Starre-Chamber of all those Ancient Constellati∣once which have for so many Ages been sufficiently noto∣rios, and to admit into their vacant places, such Persons only as shall be qualified with exemplar Virtue and emi∣nent Desert, there to shine in indelible Characters of glo∣rye to all Posterity. It is therefore Our divine will and plea∣sure, voluntarily, and out of Our own free and proper motion, mere grace and special favour, by these presents to specify and declare to all Our loving People, that it shall be lawful for any Person whatsoever, that conceives him or her self to be really endued with any Heroical Virtue or transcendent Merit, worthy so high a calling and digni∣tie, to bring their several pleas and pretences before Our Right trusty and Welbeloved Cozen, and Counsellor, Don Mercury, and god Momus, &amp;c. Our peculiar Delegates for that affair, upon whom We have transferred an absolute power to conclude, and determine without Appeal or Revelation, accordingly as to their wisdoms it shall in such cases appear behoovefull and expedient. Given at Our Palace in Olympus the first day of the first month, in the first year of the Reformation.
Who's this appears?
This is subterraucan Fiend, Plutus, in this Dia∣lect termed Riches, or the god of gold; a Poison, hid by Providence in the bottom of Seas, and Navill of the Earth, from mans discovery, where if the seeds begun to sprout above-ground, the excrescence was carefully guarded by Dragons, yet at last by humane curiosity brought
to light, to their own destruction; this being the true Pandora's box, whence issued all those mischiefs that now fill the Universe.
That I prevent the message of the gods
Thus with my haste, and not attend their summons,
Which ought in Justice call me to the place
I now require of Right, is not alone
To show the just precedence that I hold
Before all earthly, next the immortal Powers;
But to exclude the hope of partial Grace
In all Pretenders, who, since I descend
To equal trial, must by my example,
Waving your favour, claim by sole Desert.
If Virtue must inherit, shoe's my slave;
I lead her captive in a golden chain,
About the world: She takes her Form and Being
From my creation; and those barren seeds
That drop from Heaven, if I not cherish them
With my distilling dews, and fotive heat,
They know no vegetation; but exposed
To blasting winds of freezing Poverty,
Or not shoot forth at all, or budding, wither:
Should I proclaim the daily sacrifice
Brought to my Temples by the toiling rout,
Not of the fat and gore of abject Beasts,
But human sweat, and blood powered on my Altars,
I might provoke the envy of the gods.
Turn but your eyes and mark the busy world,
Climbing steep Mountains for the sparkling stone,
Piereing the Center for the shining Ore,
And the Oceans bosom to rake pearly sands,
Crossing the torrid and the frozen Zones,
Amidst Rocks and swallowing Gulfs, for gainful trade,
And though opposing swords, fire, murdering Canon,
Scaling the walled Town for precious spoils:
Plant in the passage to your heavenly seats,
These horrid dangers, and then see who dares
Advance his desperate foot; yet am I sought,
And oft in vain, through these, and greater hazards;
I could discover how your Deities
Are for my sake slighted, despised, abused,
Your Temples, Shrines, Altars, and Images
Uncovered, rifled, robed, and disarrayed
By sacrilegious hands: yet is this treasure
To the golden Mountain, where I sit adored
With superstitious solemn rights convay'd,
And becomes sacred there, the sordid wretch
Not daring touch the consecrated Ore,
Or with profane hands lessen the bright heap;
But this might draw your anger down on mortals
For rendering me the homage due to you:
Yet what is said may well express my power
Too great for Earth, and only fit for Heaven.
Now, for you pastime, view the naked root,
Which in the dirty earth, and base mould drowned,
Sends forth this precious Plant, and golden fruit.
You lusty Swains, that to your grazing flocks
Pipe amorous Roundelays; you toiling Hinds,
That barb the fields, and to your merry Teames
Whistle your passions; and you mining Moles,
That in the bowels of your mother-Earth
Dwell the eternal burden of her womb,
Cease from your labours, when Wealth bids you play,
Sing, dance, and keep a cheerful holiday.
Plutus, the gods know and confess your power
Which feeble Virtue seldom can resist;
Stronger then Towers of brass, or Chastity;
Jove knew you when he courted Dane,
And Cupped wears you on that Arrows head
That still prevails. But the gods keep their Thrones
To enstall Virtue, not her Enemies.
They dread thy force, which even themselves have felt,
Witness Mount-Ida, where the Martial Maid,
And frowning Iuno, did to mortal eyes
Naked, for gold, their sacred bodies show,
Therefore for ever be from heaven banished.
But since with toil from undiscovered Worlds
Thou aret brought hither, where thou first did breathe
The thirst of Empire, into Regal breasts,
And frightedst quiet Peace from her meek Throne,
Filling the World with tumult, blood, and war,
Follow the Camps of the contentious earth,
And be the Conquerors slave, but he that can
Or conquer thee, or give thee Virtues stamp,
Shall shine in heaven a pure immortal Lamp.
Nay stay, and take my benediction along with you. I could, being here a Co-Iudge, like others in my place, now that you are condemned, either rail at you, or break jests upon you, but I rather choose to loose a word of good counsel, and entreat you to bee more careful in your choice of company, for you are always found either with Misers, that not use you at all; or with fools, that know not how to use you well: be not hereafter so reserved and coy to men of worth and parts, and so you shall gain such credit, as at the next Sessions you may be heard with better success. But till you are thus reformed, I pronounce this positive sentence, That wheresoever you shall choose to abide, your society shall add no credit or reputation to the party, nor your discontinuance, or total absence, be matter of disparagement to any man; and whosoever shall hold a contrary estimation of you, shall be condemned to wear perpetual Motley, unless hee recant his opinion. Now you may void the Court.
What Creature's this?
The Antipodes to the other, they move like two Buckets, or as two nails drive out one another; if Riches depart, Poverty will enter.
I nothing doubt (Great and Immortal Powers)
But that the place, your wisdom hath denied
My foe, your Instice will confer on me;
Since that which renders him incapable,
Proves a strong plea for me. I could pretend,
Even in these rags, a larger Sovereignty
Then gaudy Wealth in all his pomp can boast;
For mark how few they are that share the World;
The numerous Armies, and the swarming Ants
That fight and toil for them, are all my Subjects,
They take my wages, wear my Livery:
Invention too and Wit, are both my creatures,
And the whole race of Virtue is my Off-spring;
As many mischiefs issue from my womb,
And those as mighty, as proceed from gold.
Oft o'er his Throne I wave my awful Sceprer,
And in the bowels of his state command,
When' midst his heaps of coin, and hills of gold,
I pine, and starve the avaricious Fool.
But I decline those titles, and lay claim
To heaven, by right of Divine contemplation;
She is my Darling, I, in my soft lap,
Free from disturbing cares, bargains, accounts,
Leases, Rents, Stewards, and the fear of thieves,
That vex the rich, nurse her in calm repose,
And with her, all the Virtues speculative,
Which, but with me, find no secure retreat.
For entertainment of this hour, I'll call
A race of people to this place, that live
At Natures charge, and not importune heaven
To chain the winds up, or keep back the storms,
To stay the thunder, or forbid the hail
To thresh the unreap'd ear; but to all weathers,
Both chilling frost, and scalding Sun, expose
Their equal face, Come forth, my swarthy train,
In this fair cireled dance, and as you move,
Mark, and foretell happy events of Love.
I cannot but wonder that your perpetual con∣versation with Poets and Philosophers hath furnished you with no more Logic, or that you should think to im∣pose upon us so gross an inference, as because Plutus and you are contrary, therefore whatsoever is denied of the one, must be true of the other; as if it should follow of no∣cessity, because he is not Iupiter, you are. No, I give you to know, I am better versed in cavils with the gods, then to swallow such a fallacy, for though you two cannot bee together in one place, yet there are many places that may be without you both, and such is heaven, where neither of you are likely to arrive: therefore let me advise you to marry your self to Content, and beget sage Apophthegms, and goodly moral Sentences in dispraise of Riches, and contempt of the world.
Thou dost presume too much, poor needy wretch,
To claim a station in the Firmament,
Because thy humble Cottage, or thy Tub
Nurses some lazy or Pedantique virtue
In the cheap Sun-shine, or by shady springs
With roots and pot-hearbs; where thy rigid hand,
Tearing those humane passions from the mind,
Upon whose stocks fair blooming virtues flourish,
Degradeth Nature, and benumbed sense,
And Gorgon-like, turns active men to stone.
We not require the dull society
Of your necessitated Temperance,
Or that unnatural stupidity
That knows nor joy nor sorrow; nor your forced
Falsely exalted passive Fortitude
Above the active: This low abject brood,
That fix their seats in mediocrity,
Become your servile minds; but we advance
Such virtues only as admit excess,
Brave bounteous Acts, Regal Magnificence,
All-seeing Prudence, Magnanimity
That knows no bound, and that Heroic virtue
For which Antiquity hath left no name,
But patterns only, such as Hercules,
Achilles, Theseus. Back, to thy loathed cell,
And when thou see the new enlightened Sphere,
Study to know but what those Worthies were.
Tech, enters, whore head bald behind, and one great locke before, wings at her shoulders, and in her hand a wheel, her appear parts naked, and the skirt of her gar∣meant wrought all over with Crowns, Scepters, Books, and such other things as express both her greatest and smallest gifts.
See where Dame Fortune comes, you may know her by her wheel, and that veil over eyes, with which she hopes like a seel'd Pigeon to mount above the Clouds, and perch in the eighth Sphere: listen, she begins.
I come not here (you gods) to plead the Right
By which Antiquity assigned my Deity,
Though no peculiarstation' amongst the Stars,
Yet general power to rule their influence,
Or boast the Title of Omnipotent,
Ascribed me then, by which I rivaled Jove,
Since you have cancelled all those old records;
But confident in my good cause and merit,
Claim a succession in the vacant Orb.
For since Astray fled to heaven, I sit
Her Deputy on Earth, I hold her skales
And weigh men's Fates out, who have made me blind,
Because themselves want eyes to fee my causes,
Call me inconstant, cause my works surpass
The shallow fathom of their human reason;
Yet here, like blinded Justice, I dispense
With nay impartial hands, their constant lots,
And if desertlesse, impious men engross
My best rewards, the fault is yours, you gods,
That scant your graces to mortality,
And niggards of your good, scarce spare the world
One virtuous, for a thousand wicked men.
It is no error to confer dignity,
But to bestow it on a vicious man;
I gave the dignity, but you made the vice,
Make you men good, and I'll make good men happy
That Plutus is refused, dismays me not,
He is my Drudge, and the external pomp,
In which he decks the World, proceeds from me,
Not him; like Harmony, that not resides
In strings, or notes, but in the hand and voice.
The revolutions of Empires, States,
Scepters, and Crowns, are but my game and sport,
Which as they hang on the events of War,
So those depend upon my turning wheel.
You warlike Squadrons, who in battles joined,
Dispute the Right of Kings, which I decide,
Present the model of that martial frame,
By which, when Crowns are staked, I rule the game.
Madam, I should censure you, pro falso clamour•, for preferring a scandalous cros-bill of recrimination a∣against the gods, but your blindness shall excuse you. Alas! what would it advantage you, if virtue were as universal as vice is? it would only follow, that as the world now exclaims upon you for exalting the vicious, it would then rail as fast at you for depressing the virtuous; so they would still keep their tune, though you changed their ditty.
The mists, in which future events are wrapped,
That oft succeed beside the purposes
Of him that works, his dull eyes not discerning
The first great cause, offered thy clouded shape
To his enquiring search; so in the dark
The groping world first found thy Deity,
And gave thee rule over contingencies,
Which, to the piercing eye of Providence,
Being fixed and certain, where past and to come,
Are always present, thou dost disappear,
Lose thy being, and art not all.
Be thou then only a deluding Phantom,
At best a blind guide, leading blinder fools;
Who, would they but survey their mutual wants,
And help each other, there were left no room
For thy vain aid. Wisdom, whose strong-built plots
Leave nought to hazard, mocks thy futile power.
Industrious labour drags thee by the lockes.
Bound to his toiling Car, and not attending
Till thou dispense, reaches his own reward.
Only the lazy sluggard yawning lies
Before thy threshold, gaping for thy dole,
And lickes the easy hand that feeds his sloth.
The shallow, rash, and unadvised man
Makes thee his stale, disburdens all the follies
Of his mis-guided actions, on thy shoulders.
Vanish from hence, and seek those Idiots out
That thy fantastic god-head hath allowed,
And rule that giddy superstitious crowd.
Hedone, Pleasure, a young woman with a smiling face, in a light lascivious habit, adorned with silver and gold, her Temples crowned with a garland of Roses, and over that a Rainbow eireling her head down to her shoulders.
What wanton's this?
This is the sprightly Lady Hedone, a merry game∣ster, this people call her Pleasure.
The reasons (equal Judges) here alleged
By the dismissed Pretenders, all concur
To strengthen my just title to the Sphere.
Honour, or Wealth, or the contempt of both,
Have in themselves no simple real good,
But as they are the means to purchase Pleasure;
The paths that lead to my delicious Palace;
They for my sake, I for mine own am prized.
Beyond me nothing is, I am the Gole,
The journeys end, to which the sweating world,
And wearied Nature travels. For this, the best
And wisest sect of all Philosophers,
Made me the seat of supreme happiness.
And though some, more anstere, upon my ruins,
Did to the prejudice of Nature, raise
Some petty low-built virtues, it was because
They wanted wings to reach my soaring pitch.
Had they been Prinees borne, themselves had proved
Of all mankind the most luxurious.
For those delights, which to their low condition
Were obvious, they with greedy appetite
Sucked and devoured: from offices of State,
From cares of family, children, wife, hopes, fears,
Retired, the churlish Cynic in his Tub
Enjoyed those pleasures which his tongue defamed.
Nor am I ranked amongst the supersluous goods;
My necessary offices preserve
Each single man, and propogate the kind.
Then am I universal as the light,
Or common Ayre we breathe; and since I am
The general desire of all mankind,
Civil Felicity must reside in me.
Tell me what rate my choicest pleasures bear,
When for the short delight of a poor draught
Of cheap cold water, great Lysimachus
Rendered himself slave to the Scythians.
Should I the curious structure of my seats,
The art and beauty of my several objects,
Rehearse at large, your bounties would reserve
For every sense a proper constellation;
But I present their Persons to your eyes.
Come forth my subtle Organs of delight,
With changing figures please the curious eye,
And charm the ear with moving Harmony.
Bewitching Siren, gilded rottenness,
Thou hast with cunning artifice displayed
The enamelled outside, and the honied verge
Of the fair cup, where deadly poison lurks.
Within, a thousand sorrows dance the round;
And like a shell, Pain circles thee without,
Grief is the shadow waiting on thy steps,
Which, as thy joyes' gin tow'rds their West decline,
Doth to a Giants spreading form extend
Thy Dwarfish stature. Thou thy self art Pain,
Greedy, intense Desire, and the keen edge
Of thy fierce Appetite, oft strangles thee,
And cuts thy slender thread; but still the terror
And apprehension of thy hasty end,
Mingles with Gall thy most refined sweets;
Yet thy Circean charms transform the world.
Captains, that have resisted war and death,
Nations, that over Fortune have triumphed,
Are by thy Magic made effeminate.
Empires, that knew no limits but the Poles,
Have in thy wanton lap melted away.
Thou were the Author of the first excess
That drew this reformation on the gods.
Can thou then dream, those Powers, that from heaven have
Banished the effect, will there enthrone the cause?
To thy voluptuous Den, fly Witch, from henee,
There dwell, for ever drowned in brutish sense.
I concur, and am grown so weary of these te∣dious pleadings, as I'll pack up too and be gone: Besides, I see a crowd of other suitors pressing hither, I'll stop' em, take their petitions and prefer 'em above; and as I came in bluntly without knocking, and no body bid me welcome; so I'll depart as abruptly without taking leave, and bid no body fare well.
These, with forced reasons, and strained arguments,
Urge vain pretences, whilst your Actions plead,
And with a silent importunity
Awake the drowsy Justice of the gods
To Crown your deeds with immortality.
The growing Titles of your Ancestors,
These Nations glorious Acts, joined to the stock
Of your own Royal virtues, and the clear
Reflex they take from th'imitation
Of your famed Court, make Honours story full,
And have to that secure fixed state advanced
Both you and them, to which the labouring world,
Wading through streams of blood, sweats to aspire.
Those ancient Worthies of these famous Isles,
That long have slept, in fresh and lively shapes
Shall straight appear, where you shall see your self
Circled with modern Heroes, who shall be
In Act, what-ever elder times can boast,
Noble, or Great; as they in Prophecy
Were all but what you are. Then shall you see
The sacred hand of bright Eternity
Mould you to Stars, and six you in the Sphere.
To you, your Royal half, to them she'll join
Such of this train, as with industrious steps
In the fair prints your virtuous feet have made,
Though with unequal paces, follow you.
This is decreed by Jove, which my return
Shall see performed; but first behold the rude
And old Abiders here, and in them view
The point from which your full perfections grew.
You naked, ancient wild Inhabitants,
That breathed this Ayre, and pressed this flowery Earth,
Come from those shades where dwells eternal night,
And see what wonders Time hath brought to light.
RAise from these rocky cliffs, your heads,
Brave Sons, and see where Glory spreads
Her glittering wings, where Majesty
Crowned with sweet smiles, shoots from her eye
Diffusive joy, where Good and Fair,
United sit in Honours chair.
Call forth your aged Priests, and crystal streams,
Towarme their hearts, and waves in these bright beam.
1. From your consecrated woods,
Holy Druids. 2. Silver floods,
From your channels fringed with flowers,
3. Hither move; for sake your hours
1. Strewed with hallowed Oaken leaves,
Decked with flags and fedgie sheaves,
And behold a wonder. 3. Say,
What doe your duller eyes survey?
We see at once in dead of night
A Sun appear, and yet a bright
Nooneday, springing from Starre-light.
Look up, and see the darkened Sphere
Deprived of light, her eyes shine there;
These are more sparkling then those were.
1. These shed a nob ler influence,
2. These by a pure intelligence
Of more transcendent Virtue move,
3. These first feel, then kindle love.
1.2. From the bosoms they inspire,
These receive a mutual fire;
1.2.3. And where their flames impure return,
These can quench as well as burn.
Here the fair victorious eyes.
Make Worth only Beauties prize,
Here the hand of Ʋertue ties
About the heart loves amorous chain,
Captives triumph, Vassals reign,
And none live here but the slain.
These are the Hesperian bowers, whose fair trees bear
Rich golden fruit, and yet no Dragon near.
Then, from your impris'ning womb,
Which is the cradle and the tomb
Of British Worthies (fair sons) send
A troop of Heroes, that may lend
Their hands to case this laden grove,
And gather the ripe fruits of love.
1.2.3. Open thy stony entrails wide,
And break old Atlas, that the pride
Of three famed kingdoms may be spied.
Pace forth thou mighty British Hercules,
With thy choice band, for only thou, and these,
May revel here, in Loves Hesperides.
1. HEre are shapes formed fit for heaven,
2. These move gracefully and even,
3. Here the Ayre and paces meet
So just, as if the skilful feet
Had struck the Vials. 1.2.3. So the Ear
Might the tune full footing hear.
And had the Music silent been,
The eye a moving tune had seen.
These must in the unpeopled sky
Succeed, and govern Destiny,
Jove is temp'ring purer fire,
And will with brighter flames attire
These glorious lights. I must ascend
And help the Work.
1. We cannot lend
Heaven so much treasure. 2. Nor that pay,
But rendering what it takes away.
3. Why should they that here can move
So well, be ever-fix'd above?
Or be to one eternal posture tied,
That can into such various figures slide.
Jove shall not, to enrich the Sky,
Beggar the Earth, their Fame shall fly
From hence alone, and in the Sphere
Kindle new Stars, whilst they rest here.
1.2.3. How can the shaft stay in the quiver,
Yet hit the mark?
Did not the River
Eridanus, the grace acquire
In Heaven and Earth to flow,
Above in streams of golden fire,
In silver waves below?
1.2.3. But shall not wee, now thou art gone
Who were our Nature, wither,
Or break that triple Union
Which thy soul held together?
In Consorts purse immortal spring
I will my force renew,
And a more active Virtue bring
At my return. Adieu.
whilst thus the darlings of the Gods
From Honours Temple, to the Shrine
Of Beauty, and these sweet abodes
Of Love, we guide, let thy Divine
Aspects (Bright Deity) with fair
And, Halcyon beams, becalme the Ayre.
We bring Prinoe Arthur, or the brave
St. George himself (great Queen) to you,
You'll soon discern him; and we have
A Guy, a Beeves, or some true
Round-Table Knight, as ever fought
For Lady, to each Beauty brought.
Plant in their Martial hands, Warr's seat,
Your peace full pledges of warm snow,
And, if a speaking touch, repeat
In Loves known langvage, tales of woe;
Say, in soft whispers of the Palm,
As Eyes shoot darts, so Lips shed Balm.
For though you seem like Captives, lid
In triumph by the Foe away,
Yet on the Conquerors neck you tread,
And the fierce Victor proves your prey.
What heart is then secure from you,
That can, though vanquished, yet subdue?
BE fixed you rapid Orbs, that bear
The changing seasons of the year
On your swife wings, and see the old
Decrepit Sphere grown dark and cold;
Nor did Jove quench her fires, these bright
Flames, have eclipse d her fullen light:
This Royal Pair, for whom Fate will
Make Motion cease, and Time stand still;
Since Good is here so perfect, as no Worth
Is left for After-Ages to bring forth.
Mortality cannot with more
Religious zeal, the gods adore.
My Truths, from human eyes concealed,
Are naked to their sight revealed.
Nor doe their Actions, from the guide
Of my exactest precepts slide.
And as their own pure Souls entwined,
So are their Subjects hearts combined.
So just, so gentle is their sway,
As it seems Empire to obey.
And their fair Fame, like incense hurled
On Altars, hath pefum'd the world.
Wisdom.
Truth.
Pure Adoration.
Concord.
Rule.
Clear Reputation,
Crown this King, this Queen, this Nation.
Wisdom, Truth, &amp;c.
Brave Spirits, whose adventurous feet
Have to the Mountains top aspired,
Where fair Desert, and Honour meet,
Here, from the toiling Press retired,
Secure from all disturbing Evil,
For ever in my Temple revel.
With wreathes of Stars circled about,
Guild all the spacious Firmament,
And smiling on the panting Routs
That labour in the steep ascent,
With your resistless influence guide
Of human change the uncertain tide
But oh you Royal Turtles, shed,
When you from Earth remove,
On the ripe fruits of your chaste bed,
Those sacred seeds of Love.
Which no Power can but yours dispense,
Since you the pattern bear from hence.
Then from your fruitful race shall flow
Endless Succession,
Scepters shall bud, and Laurels blow
About their Immortal Throne.
Propitious Stars shall crown each birth,
Whilst you rule them, and they the Earth.

AT Elie and Hatton-Houses, the Gentle∣men and their Assistants met, and in this manner prepared for the Court. The Antimasquers were ushered by a Hornepipe, and a Shalme, riding in Coats and Caps of yellow Taffeta, spotted with Silver, their Feathers red, their Horses led by men in coats of blew Taffeta, their wings red, and part of their sleeves yellow, Caps and Feathers: all the torch-bearers in the same habit appointed to attend, and give plentiful light to the whole train.
Fancy, in a suit of several coloured Feathers hoo∣ded. A pair of Bats-wings on his shoulders, riding alone as sole presenter of the Antimasques.
After him rode Opinion and Confidence together, Opinion in an old fashioned Doublet of black Velvet, and trunk Hose, a short Cloak of the same with an antique Cape, a black Velvet cap pinched up, with a white fall, a Staff in his hand.
Confidence in a slashed Doublet parti-coloured Bree∣ches suitable with points at knees, favours upon his breast, and arm: a broad brimmed Hat, tied upon one side, banded with a Feather, a long Locke of Hair, trimmed with several coloured Ribbons, wide Boots, and great Spurs with Bells for rowels.
Next rode Jollity and Laughter. Jollity in a flame-coloured Suite, but tricked like a Morise-dancer, with Scarfs and Napkins, his Hat fashioned like a Cone, with a little fall.
Laughter in a long side Coat of several colours, laughing Visards on his breast and back, a Cap with two grinning faces, and Feathers between.
Then followed variety of Antique music after which rode six Proiectors, one after another, their horses led by Torch-bearers.
The first a Jockey with a Bonnet on his head upon the top of it a whip, he seeming much to observe and affect a bridle which he had in his hand.
The second a Country fellow in a Leather Dou∣bled and gray trunk Hose, a wheel with a per∣petuall motion on his head, and in his hand a flail.
The third, a grimm Philosopicall faced fellow in his gown furred, and girdled about him, a furnace upon his head, and in his hand a lamp.
The fourth in a case of black Leather vast to the middle, and round on the top, with glass eyes, and bellows under each arm.
The fist a Physician, on his head a Hat with a bunch of Carrots, a Capon perched upon his fist.
The sixth like a Seaman, A Ship upon his head and holding a Line and Plummet in his hand.
Here variety of other Antique music counterfei∣ting the voices of Birds, and after these rode, a Magpie, a Crow, a Iay, and a Kite, in a quadran∣gular figure, and in the midst an Owl, these were followed by three Satires, two a breast, and one single, sided with torch-bearers. Then three Dotte∣rels in the same manner and attendance.
After these a Windmill, against which a phanta∣stick Knight with his Lance, and his Squire armed seemed to make their attempts.
These moving forward in ridiculous show and postures, a Drummer follows on Horseback, in a Crimson taffeta coat, a white Hat and Feather, tipped with crimson, beating two kettle Drums.
Then 14. Trumpetors, in crimson Satin coats, white Hats and Feathers, and rich Banners.
The Marshall followed these bravely mounted. attended with forty foot, in Cotes and Hose of Scarlet trimmed with Silver-lace, white Hats and Fea∣theirs, their Truncheons tipped with Silver: these upon every occasion moving to and fro, to preserve the order of their march, and restrain the rude∣ness of people, that in such triumphs, are wont to be insolent, and tumultuary.
After these an hundred Gentlemen, gloriously furnished and gallantly mounted, riding two and two a breast, every Gentleman having his two Pa∣ges richly attired, and a groom to attend him.
Next after these a Chariot drawn by four horses, two and two together, richly furnished and adorned with Gold and Silver, the Charioteer in a Polonian coat of greene cloth of Silver. In this were ad∣vanced Musicians like Priests and Sybills, sons and daughters of Harmony, some with Coronets, o∣there with wreathes of Laurel and Myrtle, play∣ing upon their Lutes, three Foote-men on each side in blew Satin wrought with Silver, and every one a Flambeaux in his hand.
In the next Chariot of equal glory, were placed on the lowest stairs four in skie-coloured Taffeta Robes seeded with stars, Mantles ash coloured, adom'd with Fringe, and Silver-lace, Coronets with Stars upon their heads. In a seat a little more eel∣vate sate Geniu, and Amphiluchs.
On the highest seat of this Chariot, sate the three Hours, or Heavenly sisters, Irene, Dich, and Euno∣mia. All whose habits shall be described in their proper places: this Chariot attended as the for∣mer.
After these came the four Triumphals or Magnificent Chariots, in which were mounted the grand Masquers, one of the four Houses in every Chariot, seated within an half Oval, with a glory∣os Canopy over their heads, all bordered with silver Fringe, and beautified with Plumes of Feathers on the top.
All after the Roman form, adorned with much embossed and carved works, and each of them wrought with Silver, and his several colour, they were mounted on carriages, the Spring trees, Pole and Axle-trees, the Charioters seat, and standers, wheels, with the fellyes, spokes, and naves all wrought with Silver, and their several colour.
They were all drawn with four Horses a front after the magnificent Roman Triumphs, their fur∣niture, Harness, Headstall, Bits, Rains, and Traces, Shaferon, Cronet, Petronell, and Barb of rich cloth of Silver, of several works, and colours answerable to the linings of the Chariots.
The Charioters in Polony-coates of the same co∣lore of the Chariots, their Caps Feathers, and Bus∣kings answerable.
The two out Horses of every Chariot led by two men in habits wrought with Silver, and con∣formable to the colour of the other furniture, four foot-men on either side of every Chariot, in rich habits also wrought with Silver answerable to the rest, every one carrying a Flambeaux in his hand.
Between every of these Chariots four Musiti∣ans in their Robes and Garlands, were mounted; riding two a breast, attended with Torch-bea∣rears.
The Habit of the Masquers gave infinite splendour to this solemnity; which more aptly shall be ex∣pressed in his Place.
TThis Masque was presented in the Banquet∣ting-house. At white Hall before the King and Queens Majesties and a great Assembly of Lords and Ladies, and other persons of quality, whose aspect setting on the degrees prepared for that pur∣pose gave a great grace to this spectacle, especially being all richly attired.
At the lower end of the room opposite to the state was raised a Stage with a descent of stairs in two branches landing into the room. This Base∣meant was painted in rustic work.
The border of the front and sides that enclosed all the Scene had first a ground of Arber-worke en∣termixt with loose branches and leaves, and in this was two Niches, and in them two great figures standing in easy postures in their natural colours, and much bigger then the life, the one attired after the Grecian manner held in one hand a Sceptre, and in the other a Scroll, and a picked antique crown on his head, his curasse was of Gold richly en∣chased, his robe blue and Silver, his arms and thighs bare with buskings enriched with ornaments of Gold, his browne locks long and curled, his Beard thick but not long, and his face was of a grave and ioviall aspect, this figure stood on a round pedestal fained of white Marble, enriched with se∣viral caruings; above this in a compartment of Gold was written MINOS. The figure on the other side was in a Roman habit, holding a Table
in one hand, and a Pen in the other, and a white Bend or Diadem about his head, his Robe was crimson and Gold, his Mantle yellow and Silver, his Buskins watchet trimmed with Silver, his hair and Beard long and white with a uenerable aspect, stan∣ding likewise on a round Pedestal answerable to the other. And in the compartment over him was writ∣ten NVMA. Above all this in a proportionate distance hung two great Festons of fruits in colours which served for finishing to these sides. The upper part in manner of a large Freeze was adorned with several compartiments with draperies hanging down, and the ends tied up in knots, with trow∣phies proper to feasts and triumphs, composed of Masking Vizards and torches. In one of the lesser compartiments was figured a sharpe sited eye, and in the other a Golden-yoke, in the midst was a more great and rich compartment on the sides of which sate naked Children in their natural colours with Silver wings in action of sounding Golden Trum∣pets, and in this was figured a Caduceus with an O∣liue-branch all which are Hieroglyphics of Peace Justice and Law.
A Curtain being suddenly drawn up the Scene was discovered representing a large street with Sumptuous Palaces Lodges Portico's, and o∣there noble pieces of Architecture with pleasant Trees and grounds, this going far from the eye opens it self into a spacious place adorned with public and private buildings seen a far of, repre∣scenting the Forum or Piazza of Peace. Over all was a
clear Sky with transparent Clouds which enlight∣ned all the Scene.
The Spectators having entertained their eyes a while with the beavty and variety of this Scene from one of the sides of the streets enters Opinion, &amp;c.
MOst grave Opinion!
Confidence most welcome,
Is Fancy come to Court?
Breaking his way
Thorough the Guard.
So violent?
With jeafts Which they are less able to resist,
He will crack a Halberd with his wit,
A most
Strong Fancy, yet we have known a little Engine
Break an ingenious Head piece. But your Master—
Companion sir. Fancy will keep no Servants,
And Confidence scorns to waite.
Cry mercy sir,
But is this Gentleman, this Signior Fancy
So rare a thing, so subtle as men speak him.
He's a great Prince of the Ayre, believe it sir,
And yet a Bird of night.
A Bird!
Between
An Owl and Bat, a quaint Hermophrodite,
Begot of Mercury and Venus Wit and Love.
He's worth your entertainment.
I am most
Ambitious to see him, he is not
So nimble as I wish him, whore's my Wife,
My Lady Novelty?
Your Wife? you might
Have framed a newer word, they can but call,
Vs so in the Country.
No exception
Dear Madam Novelty, I must prepare you,
To entertain a Gentleman, whore's Admiration,
Our Daughter?
Here sir, what gay man is this?
Please you honour us, and bring in your friend sir.
Isle do it but he prevents me.
Sir I am ignorant
By what titles to salute you, but you're welcome to Court.
Save your self sir, your name's Opinion.
And yours Fancy.
Right.
Mine Jollity.
Mine Laughter, ha, ha, ha.
Here's a strange shape.
I never saw the like.
I come to doe you honour with my friends here
And help the Masque.
You'll doe a special favour.
How many Antimasquesha they? Of what nature?
For these are Fancies that take most, your dull
And phlegmatic inventions are exploded,
Give me a nimble Antimasque.
They have none sir.
No Antimasque? id laugh at that i'faith.
What make wee here? No Jollity.
No Antimasque.
Bid'em down with the Scene, and sell the Timber,
Send Iupiter to grass, and bid Apollo
Keep Cowes again, take all their gods and goddesses,
For these must farse up this nights entertainment,
And pray the Court may have some mercy on 'em,
They will bee jeerd to death else for their ignorance,
The soul of wit moves here, yet there be some
If my intelligence fail not, mean to show
Themselves jeer Majors, some tall Critics have
Planted Artillery and wit murderers.
No Antimasque? Let 'em look too't.
I have heard sir;
Confidence made them trust, you'd furnish 'em,
I fear they should have made their address earlier
To your invention, but your braine's nimble,
Pray, for the expectation that's upon 'em
Lend them some witty fancies, set some engines
In motion, that may conduce to the design.
I am their friend against the Crowd that envy 'em
And since they come with pure devotions
To sacrifice the in duties to the King
And Queen, I wish em prosper.
You have charmed me,
Isle be their friend tonight, I have a Fancy
Already.
Let it be ridiculous.
And Confident.
And Jolly.
The first Antimasque
We will present our selves in our own persons,
What think you on it? most grave Opinion
You shall doe well to lead tho dance, and give it
Authority with your face, your lady may
Admire what she finds new.
I shall applaud.
The Novelties.
And I admire.
They tumble,
My skull's too narrow.
Now his Fancies caper.
Confidence, waite you upon Opinion,
Here Admiration, there Novelty,
This is a place for Jollity and Laughter
Fancy will dance himself too.
How like you this device?
Tic handsome—but
Opinion will like nothing.
It seems new.
It was bold.
It was Jocund.
Did not I doe the fool well?
Most Admirably.
Nay, and the Ladies doe but take
My part, and Laugh at me, I am made, ha, ha.
I could wish something sir, of other nature
To satisfy the present expectation.
I imagine, nay, I'm not ignorant of proprieties
And persons, tic a time of peace, isle fit you.
And instantly make you a representation
Of the effect.
Of peace? I like that well.
And since in nothing, they are more expressed
Then in good fellowship, isle present you with a Tavern.
A spick and span new Tavern.
Wonderful, here was none within two minutes.
No such wonder Lady, Taverns are quickly
up, it is but hanging out a Bush at a Nobleman's door,
or an Aldermans gate, and tic made instantly.
Will it please you Ladies to except the wine?
Well said Considence.
It will bee new for Ladies
To go to the Tavern, but it may be a fashion,
Follow me Admiration.
And the fool,
I may supply the absence of your Fiddlers.
If wee can, lets leave Opinion behind us,
Fancy will make him drunk,
Another Antimasque of the Master of the Tavern, His Wife, and Servants. after these—
A Maquerelle.
Two Wenches.
Two wanton Gamsters.
These having danced and ex∣pressed their natures go into the Tavern. then—
A Gentleman.
Beggars 4.
The Gentleman first dances alone: to him the Beggars, he bestows his charity, the Cripples upon his going off, throw away their legs, and dance.
I am glad they are off, are these effects of peace?
Corruption rather.
Oh the Beggars show
The benefit of peace.
Their very breath
Hath stifled all the Candles, poisoned the
Perfumes, Beggars a fit presentment? how
They cleave still to my nosthrill, I must tell you,
I doe not like such base, and sordide persons,
And they become not here.
I apprehend,
If these distaste you, I can fit you with
Persons more cleanly,
What think you of Proiectors?
How Proiectors!
Here's one already.
This is a Jockey,
He is to advance a rare, and cunning bridle
Made hollow in the Iron part, wherein
A vapor subtly conveyed, shall so
Cool and refresh a horse, he shall ne'er tire
And now he false to his pace.
This other?
His habit speaks him
A Country fellow, that has sold his acres
To purchase him a flail, which by the motion
Of a quaint wheel, shall without help of hands,
Thresh Corn all day, and now he lays about him.
This with a face Philosophical and beard,
Hath with the study of twenty years, found out
A lamp, which placed beneath a furnace, shall
Boyle Beef so thoroughly, that the very steam
Of the first Vessel, shall alone be able
To make another Pot aboue sees over.
A most Scholastic project; his feet follow
The motions of his brain.
But what thing's this?
A Chimera out of Rablais?
A new project,
A Case to walk you all day under water.
So vast for the necessity of ayre,
Which, with an artificial bellows cooled
Under each arm, is kept still from corruption,
with those glass eyes, he sees, and can fetch up
Gold, or what ever Jewels have been lost,
In any River of the World.
Strange Water-Rat!
This grave man, some years past was a Physician,
A Galenist, and parcel Paracelsus,
Thrin'd by diseases, but quite lost his practice,
To study a new way to fatten Poultry
With scrapings of a Carrot, a great benefit
To the Commonwealth.
He will deserve a monument.
This is a kind of Seagull too, that will
Compose a ship to sail against the winds.
He will undertake to build a most strong castle
On Goodwin sands, to melt huge Rocks to jelley,
And cut 'em out like sweetmeats with his keel,
And thus he sails.
All the Proiectors dance after their Antimasque, The
Maquerelle.
Wenches.
Gentlemen.
Return, as from the Tavern, they dance together, The Gallants, are cheated, and left to dance in with a drunken ripen∣tance.
I know not sir, how this may satisfy,
But might we be beholding to your fancy
For some more quaint variety, some other
Then humane shapes, would happily delight,
And reach the expectation, I ha seen
Dainty devices in this kind, Baboons
In Quellios, and so forth.
I can furnish you.
Fancy will much obliege us.
If these objects
Please not, Fancy can present a change,
What see you now?
The Scene becomes a woody Landscape with low grounds proper for hunting, the furthest part more desert, with bushes and by ways representing a place fit for purse-taking.
In the furthest part of the Scene is seen an Ivy-bush, out of which comes an Owl.
A Wood, a broad-fac'd Owl,
An Ivy-bush, and other Birds about her.
These can imagination create,
Silence, observe.
An Owl.
A Crow.
A Kite.
A Iay.
A Magpie.
The Birds dance and wonder at the Owl. When these are gone, enter
A Merchant, a Horse-backe, with his Portmanteau. Two Thieves set
upon him and rob him: these by A Constable, and Officersare apprehended and carried off. Then Four Nymphs enter dancing with their Javelins. Three Satires spy them and attempt their persons, one of the Nymphs escapes, a noise of Hunters and their horns within, as at the fall of a Dear, then Enter Four Huntsmen and One Nymph. These drive away the Satires, and having rescued the Nymphs, dance with them.
This all you will present?
You speak as if
Fancy could be exhaust, Invention flows
From an immortal spring, you shall taste other
Variety, nimble as thought. We change the Scene.
What are these?
Dotterells, be patient, and expect.
After the Dotterells are caught by several imitations, enters A Windwill. A phantastique Knight. and His Squire armed. The phantastique Aduentu∣rer, with his lance makes at∣tempts upon the Windmill, his Squire imitates: to them Enter A Country Gentleman, and his Servant. Bowlers, 4. These are assavlted by the Knight and his Squire, but are sent off lame for their folly.
Madam accuse your absence,
We know
All your devices sir.
Ha, what's the matter,
Confidence, Jollity, Laughter, Admiration,
And Madam Novelty, and drunk! these are
extremes indeed.
Admirable Opinion.
Be confident.
And foolish.
I am as light now.
Let 'em enjoy their Fancies.
What new change
Is this? these strains are heavenly.
The Antimasquers being gone there appears in the highest and foremost part of the heaven by little and little to break forth a whitish Cloud bearing a Cha∣riot fained of Goldsmiths-worke, and in it fate Irene, or Peace in a flowery vesture like the spring, a Gar∣land of Olives on her head a branch of Palm in her hand, Buskins of greene Taffeta, great puffs about her neck and shoulders.
Hence ye profane far hence away,
Time hath sick feathers, while you stay,
Is this delight
For such a glorious night,
Wherein two skies
are to be seen,
One starry, but an aged sphere
another here,
Created new and brighter from the Eyes
of King and Queen?
Hence ye profane, far hence away,
Time hath sick feathers while you stay.
Wherefore doe my sisters stay
Appear, appear Eunomia,
It is Irene calls to thee,
Irene calls;
Like dew that falls
Into a stream,
I'm lost with them,
That know not how to order me.
See there she shines, oh see
In her celestial gaiety
Cround with a wreath of Stars to show
The Evenings glory in her brow.
Here out of the highest part of the opposite side came softly descending another Cloud, of an orient colour, bearing a silver Chariot curiously wrought, and differing in all things from the first, in which sate Eunomia or Law, in a purple Satin Robe, adorned with golden Starts, a mantle of carnation Laced, and Fringed with Gold, a Coronet of light upon her head, Buskins of Purple, drawn out with Yellow.
Thinks not I could absent my self this night,
But Peace is gentle, and doth still invite
Eunomia, yet should thou silent be
The Rose and Lily which thou strowest
All the cheerful way thou goosed
Would direct to follow thee.
Thou dost beautify increase,
And chain security with peace.
Irene fair, and first divine,
All my blessings spring from thine,
I am but wilde without thee, thou abhorrest
What is rude, or apt to wound,
Can throw proud trees to the ground,
And make a Temple of a Forest.
No more, no more, but join
Thy voice, and Lute with mine.
The world shall give prerogative to neither
We cannot flourish but together.
Irene enters like a perfumed spring,
Eunomia ripens every thing,
And in the golden harvest leaves
To every sickle his own sheaves.
At this a third Cloud of a various color from the other two, begins to descend toward the mid∣dl of the Scene with somewhat a more swif∣la motion, and in it sate a Person representing Dich or Justice in the midst in a white Robe and mantle of Satin, a fair long home circled with a Coronet of Silver Pikes, white Wings and Buskins, a Crown imperial in her hand.
Swifly, oh swiftly, I doe move to slow,
What holds my wing from making hast
When every Cloud sails by so fast?
I heard my sisters voice, and know
They have forsaken Heavens bright gate,
To attend another State,
of gods below.
Irene chaste Evnomia.
Wee
Dich, have stayed expecting thee,
Thou giu'st perfection to our glory,
And seal to this nights story.
Astrea shake the cold dew from thy wing.
Descend.
Descend.
Descend, and help vs sing,
The Triumph of Ioves upper Court abated
And all the Deities translated.
The Triumph of Ioves upper Court abated
And all the Deities translated.
Now gaze, and when thy wonder will allow,
Tell what thou hast beheld.
Never, till now,
Was poor Astrea blind, oh strange surprise,
That too much sight should take away my eyes,
Am I in Earth or Heaven?
What Throne is that,
On which so many Stars do waite?
My Eyes are blessed again, and now I see
The Parents of vs three.
It is Jove and Themis forward move,
And sing to Themis, and to Jove.
Then the whole train of Musicians move in a comely figure toward the King and Queen, and bowing to their State, this following Ode is sung.
To you great King and Queen, whose smile.
Doth scatter blessings through this Isle,
To make it best
And wonder of the rest,
We pay the duty of our birth,
Proud to waite upon that Earth
Where on you move,
Which shall be named
And by your chaste embraces famed
The Paradise of love.
Irene plant thy Olives here,
Thus warmed, at once, theile bloom and bear,
Eunomia pay thy light,
While Dich, covetous to stay,
Shall throw her silver Wings away,
To dwell within your sight.
The Scene is changed, and the Masquers appear
setting on the ascent of an Hill, cut out like the degrees of a Theater, and over them a delicious Arbor with terms of young Men their Arms con∣verted into Scrolls, and under their wastes a foliage with other caruings to cover the joining of the term from the naked, all fained of Silver, these bore up an Architraue, from which was raised a light covering arched, and interwoven with Branches through which the Sky beyond was seen.
The Masquers were sixteen in number, the sons of Peace Law and Justice, who setting in a gracious but not set form, every part of the seats made a various Composition, but all together tending to a Piramidall figure.
Their habits was mixed, between the ancient and modern, their bodies Carnation, the shoulders trimd with Knots of pure silver, and scallops of White and Carnation, under them the Labels of the same, the under-sleeves white, and a puffed sleeve full of gathe∣ring, falling down to the elbow, about their waste was a small scallop, and a slender Girdle, their under Bases were Carnation and White, with Labels as at their shoulders, and all this in every part was rich∣lie Embroidered with pure silver: their Hats Carna∣tion low croun'd, the brim double, and cut into several quarters lined with white, and all over richly Embroidered, as the rest, about their Hats were wreathes of Olive, and plumes of white Feathers, with several falls, the longest toward the back; their long stockings were white, with white shoes and Roses.
Beneath these a Genius or Angelical person, with Wings of several coloured Feathers, a Carnation Robe tucked up, yellow long hair bound with a silver Coronet, a small white Rod in his hand, white Buskins, who descended to the Stage, speaks,
No foreign persons I make known,
But here present you with your own,
The Children of your Reign, not blood
Of age, when they are understood.
Not seen by faction or Owls sight,
Whose trouble is the clearest light,
But treasures to their eye, and ear,
That love good for it self, not fear.
Oh smile on what your selves have made,
These have no form, no sun, no shade,
But what your virtue doth create,
Exalted by your glorious fate,
Thei'le tower to heaven, next which, they know,
And wish no blessedness but you.
That very look into each eye
Hath shot a soul, I saw it fly.
Descend, move nimbly, and advance,
Your joyful tribute in a dance.
Here with loud Music, the Masquers descend and dance their entry to the Violins, which ended, they retire to the Scene, and then the Hours and Chori again move toward the State and sing.
They that were never happy Hours
Till now, return to thank the Powers
that made them so
The Island doth rejoice,
And all her waves are Echo to our voice,
Which in on ages past, hath known
such treasures of her own.
Live Royal pair, &amp; when Your sands are spent
with Heavens and Your consent,
Though late, from Your high Bowers,
Look down on what was Yours,
For till old time his Glass hath hurled
And lost it, in the ashes of the world,
We Prophecy, You shall be read, and seen,
In every Branch, a King or Queen.
The song ended, and the Musicians returned, the Masquers dance their maine dance, after which they again retire to the Seen, at which they no so∣ner arrive, but there is heard a great noise, and confu∣zion of voices within, some crying, they will come in, others knocke'em down, call the rest of the Guard: then a crack is heard in the works, as if there were some danger by some piece of the Machines falling, this continued a little time, there rush in
A Carpenter.
A Painter.
One of the Black-guard.
A Taylor.
The Taylors Wife.
An Embroderers Wife.
A Feather-makers Wife.
A property-mans Wife.
Do ye think to keep vs out?
Knock her down.
Knock down my Wife, I'd see the tallest Beefe-eater on you all, but hold up his Halberd in the way of knocking my Wife down, and isle bring him a button-hole lower.
Nay, let 'em, let 'em Husband, at their per∣rill.
Complain to my Lord Chamberlain.
My husband is somewhere in the works; I'm sure I helped to make him an Owl and a Hobbihorse, and I see no reason but his Wife may bee admitted in Form paperis, to see as good a Mask as this.
I never saw one before, I am one of the Guard, though of another complexion, and I will see it now I am here, though I be turned out of the Kitchen to morrow for it.
I, come, be resolute, we know the worst, and let us challenge a privilege, those stairs were of my pain∣ting.
And that Timber I set up: some body is my witness.
I am sure my husband sold 'em most of the Feathers; some body promised me a fall too if I came to Court, but let that pass.
And mine embroidered two of the best habits, what though we be no Ladies, we are Christians in these clothes, and the Kings subjects God bless us.
Nay, now I am in, I will see a dance, though my shop-windowes be shut up for it, tell us? — hum? dee hear? doo not they laugh at us? what were wee best to doe, the Masquers will doe no feats as long
we are here, be ruled by me, hark every one, it is our best course to dance a fegary our selves, and then they'll think it a piece of the Plot, and we may go off again with the more credit, we may else kiss the Porters-lodge for it, let's put a trick upon 'em in re∣nenge, twill seem a new device too.
Content.
And the Musicians knew but our mind now▪
Hark they are at it, now for a lively frisk.
now, let vs go off cleanly, and some body will think, this was meant for an Antimasque.
They being gone, the Masquers are encouraged by a Song, to their Revels with the Ladies.
Why doe you dwell so long in clouds
And smother your best graces,
It is time to cast away those shrouds
And clear your manly faces.
Doe not behave your selves like Spies,
Upon the Ladies here,
On even terms got meet their eyes,
Beauty and love shine there.
You tread dull measures thus alone,
Not satisfy delight,
Go kiss their hands, and make your own
With every touch more white.
The Revels being past, the Scene is changed in∣to a plain Champion Country which terminates with the Horizon, and above a darkish Sky, with dusky clouds, through which appeared the new Moon, but with a faint light by the approach of the morning; from the furthest part of this ground, arose by little and little a great vapour which being come a bout the middle of the Scene, it slackens its mote∣on, and begins to fall downward to the earth from whence it came: and out of this rose another cloud of a strange shape, and colour, on which sate a young Maid, with a dim Torch in her hand, her face was an Olive colour, so was her arms and breast, on her head a curious dressing, and about her neck a string of great Pearl, her garment was transparent, the ground dark Blue, and sprinkled with silver Spangles, her Buskins white, trimmed with Gold: by these marks she was known to be the forerunner of the morning, called by the Ancients Amphiluche, and is that glimpse of light, which is seen when the night is past, and the day not yet appearing.
In envy to the night,
That keeps such Revels here,
With my unwelcome light,
Thus I invade her sphere.
Proclaiming mars
To Cynthia, and all her Stars,
That like provd Spangles dress her azure Tress.
Because I cannot be a guest, I rise
To shame the Moon, and put out all her eyes.
Amphiluche ascending, the Masquers are called from their Revels by other voices.
Come away, away, away
See the dawning of the day,
Risen from the murmuring streams,
Some stars show with sickly beams,
What stock of flame they are allowed,
Each retiring to a Cloud,
Bid your active sports adieu,
The morning else will blush for you.
Ye featherd-footed hours run
To dress the Chariot of the Sun,
Harness the Steeds, it quickly will
Be time to mount the Eastern hill.
The lights grow pale with modest fears,
Least you offend their sacred ears,
And eyes, that lent you all this grace,
Retire, retire to your own place.
And as you move from that blessed Pair,
Let each heart kneel, and think a prayer,
That all, that can make up the glory,
Of good, and great, may fill their story.
Amphiluche hidden in the Heavens, and the Masquers retired. 
And thus concluded this Masque, which was, for the variety of the Shows, and richness of the Ha∣bits, the most magnificent that hath been brought to Court in our time.
THe Scene and Ornament, was the act of Inigo Iones Esquire, Surveyor of his Majesties works.
The Composition of the Music, was performed by Mr. William Laws, and Mr. Simon Eves, whose Art gave an Harmonious soul to the otherwise langui∣shing Numbers.

