DOe, doe, be wilful, desperate, it is manly,
Build on your reputation, such a Fortune
May furnish out your Tables, trim your liveries,
Enrich your heirs, with purchase of a Patrimony
Which shall hold out beyond the waste of riot,
Stick Honours on your Heraldry, with titles
As swelling and as numerous, as may likely
Grow to a pretty volume, here's eternity,
All this can reputation, marry can it,
Indeed what not?
Such language from a Gentleman
So noble in his quality as you are
Deserves in my weak Judgment rather pity
Then a contempt.
Coldest thou consider Livio
The fashion of the times, their study, practice,
Nay, their ambitions, thou would soon distinguish
Betwixt the abject lowness of a poverty,
And the applauded triumph of abundance,
Though compassed by the meanest service, wherein
Shall you betray your guilt to common censure,
Waiving the private charge of your opinion
By rising up to greatness, or at least
To plenty which now buys it.
Troylo-Savelli,
Plays merrily on my wants,
Troylo-Savelli.
Speaks to the friend he loves, to his own Livio,
Look prithee through the great Dukes Court in Florence,
Number his favourites, and then examine
By what steps some chief Officers in state
Have reached the heigh they stand in.
By their merits.
Right, by their merits, well he merited
Th'Intendments o'er the Galleys at Ligorne,
Made grand collector of the customs there,
Who led the Prince unto his Wives chastebed,
And stood himself by, in his night gown, fearing
The jest might be discovered: waste not handsome?
The Lady knows not yet on it.
Most impossible.
He merited well to wear a robe of Chamlet,
Who trained his Brothers daughter (scarce a girl)
Into the Arms of Mont-Angentorato,
Whiles the young Lord of Telaxton her husband.
Was packetted to France, to study courtship,
Underforsooth a colour of employment,
Employment, yea of honour,
You're well read
In mysteries of state,
Here in Sienna.
Bold Iulio de Varana Lord of Camerine.
Held it no blemish to his blood and greatness,
From a plain Merchant with a thousand Ducats
To buy his wife, nay justify the purchase,
Procured it by a dispensation
From Rome, allowed and warranted: it was thought
By his Physicians, that she was a creature,
Agreed best with the cure of the disease,
His present new infirmity then laboured in.
Yet these are things in prospect of the world,
Advanced employed, and eminent.
at best It is but a goodly panderism.
Shrewd business.
Thou child in thrist, thou fool of honesty,
I'st a disparagement for gentlemen,
For friends of lower rank to doe the offices
Of necessary kindness without see,
For one another, courtesies of course,
Mirthes of society, when petty mushrooms,
Transplanted from their dunghills spread on mountains.
And pass for Cedars by their servile flatteries
On great men's vices?—P ander—you are deceived,
The word includes preferment, tic a title
Of dignity, I could add somewhat more else,
Add any thing of reason.
Castamela.
Thy beauteous sister like a precious Tissue,
Not shaped into a garment fit for wearing,
Wants the adornments of the Workman's cunning
To set the richness of the piece at view,
Though in her self all wonder. Come Isle tell thee,
Away there may be (know I love thee Livio)
To fix this Jewel in a Ring of gold,
Yet lodge it in a Cabinet of Ivory,
White pure, unspotted Ivory, put case
Livio himself shall keep the key on it?
Oh Sir,
Create me what you please of yours, doe this,
You are another Nature,
Be then pliable.
Be then pliable
To my first rules of your advancement—See,
Octavio my good Uncle, the great Marquess
Of our Seen comes as we could wish
In private—Noble Sir
My bosoms Secretary,
My dearest, best loved Nephew.
We have been thirsty
In our pursuit—Sir her's a gentleman
Desertfull of your knowledge, and as covetous
Of entertainment from it, you shall honour
Your judgment, to entrust him to your favours,
His merits will commend it.
Gladly welcome.
Your own worth is a herald to proclaim it:
For taste of your preferment, we admit you
The chief provisor of our Horse.
Your bounty
Stiles me your ever servant.
Hoe's our own,
Surely, nay most perswadedly—my thanks Sir
Owes to this just engagement.
Slack no time
To enter on your fortunes—thou art careful
My Troylo in the study of a duty,
His name is Livio!
Livio my good Lord.
Again you're welcome to us, be as speedy
Dear Nephew as you are constant—men of parts,
Fit parts and sound are rarely to be met with,
But being met with, therefore to be cherished,
With love and with supportance, while I stand,
Livio can no way fall—
Yet once more welcome.
An honourable liberality,
Timely disposed without delay or question,
Commands a gratitude, is not this better
Then waiting three or four months at livory,
With cup and knee unto this chair of state,
And to their painted Arras for a need
From Goodman Usher, or the formal Secretary
Especially the Juggler with the purse,
That pays some shares, in all a younger brother
Sometimes an elder, not well trimmed in the head-piece,
May spend what his friends left in expectation,
Of being turned out of service for attendance
Or marry a waiting woman, and be dimbed for it
To open laughter, (and what's worth) old beggary,
What thinks my Livio of this rise at first?
Is it not miraculous.
It seems the bargain,
Was driven before between ye.
It was, and nothing
Could void it, but the peevish resolution
Of your dissent from goodness, as you call it,
A Thin, a threadbare honesty, a virtue
Without a living to it.
I must resolve
To turn my sister whore, speak a homeword,
For my old Bachelor—Lord, so, i'st not so?
A trifle in respect of present means,
Here's all—
Be yet more confident, the flaverie
Of such an abject office, shall not tempt
The freedom of my spirit, stand ingenious
To thine own fate, and we will practise wisely
Without the charge of scandal.
May it prove so.
Admirable incomparably admirable! to be the mi∣neon,
the darling, the delight of love, it is a very tickling to
the marrow, a kissing in the blood, a bosoming the ecstasy, the
rapture of virginity, soul and paradise of perfection—ah—pity
of generation Secco, there are no more such men.
O yes, if any man, woman, or beast, have found,
stolen, or taken up a fine, very fine male Barber, of the age
of above or under eighteen more or less.
Spadone, hold, what's the noise?
Umh—pay the crier, I have bin almost Iost
my self in seeking you, heere's a letter from—
Whom, whom my dear Spadoue, whom?
Soft and fair, and you be so brief, I'll return it
whence it came, or look out a new owner, O yes.
Low, low, what dost mean, i'st from the glory of
beauty, Morose the fairest fair, be gentle to me, here's a
duccat, peak lowe prethe.
Give me one, and take t'other, it is from tho party,
Golden news believe it.
Honest Spadone divine Morose.
Fairest fair, quoth a, so is an old rotten Coddled
mongrel, parcel Bawd, parcel midwife, all the marks
are quite out of her mouth, not the stump of a tooth left in
her head, to mumble the curd of a Posit—Seignior it is
as I told ye, ell's right,
Right, just as thou told me, ell's right,
To a very hair Seignior mio.
For which Sirrah Spadone, I will make thee a man,
a man, dost hear? I say a man.
You are a prickeard foist, a citterne headed gew,
gaw, a knack, a snipper-snapper, twit me with the decree∣mints
of my pendants, though I am made a gelding, and
like a tame Buck have lost my Dowsets, more a monster then
a Cuckold with his horns seen, yet I scorn to be jeered by
any checker, approved Barbarian of ye all, make me a man,
I defy thee.
How now fellow, how now, roaring ripe indeed?
Indeed? You are worse, a dry shaver, a copper ba∣sand-suds-monger.
Nay, nay, by my Mistress fair eyes I meant no
such thing.
Eyes in thy belly, the reverend Madam shall know
how I have been used, I will blow my nose in thy casting
bottle, break the teeth of thy combs, poison thy camphor
Balls, slice out thy towels with thine own razor, betallow
thy tweezes, and urine in thy basin, make me a man?
Hold take another Duccat, as I love new clothe;
Or cast old ones.
Yes or cast old ones, I intended no injury.
Good, we are pieced again, reputation, Seignior, is
precious.
I know it is.
Old sores would not be rubbed.
For me never.
The Lady guardianesse, the mother of the Fancies,
is resolved to draw with ye, in the wholesome of matrimo∣ny,
suddenly.
She writes as much, and Spadone, when wee are
married.
You will to bed no doubt.
We will revel in such variety of delights.
Doe miracles and get Babies.
Liveso sumptuously.
In feather and old furs.
Feed so deliciously.
On Pap and Bulbeese.
Enjoy the sweetness of our years.
Eighteen and threescore with advantage,
Tumble and wallow in abundance.
The pure crystal puddle of pleasures.
That all the world should wonder.
A pox on them that envy ye.
How doe the beauties (my dainty knave) live, wish,
think, and dream, sirrah ha.
Fumble one with an other, on the gambos of image∣nation
between their legs, eat they doe, and sleep, game,
laugh, and lye down, as beauties ought to doe, there's
all.
Commend me to my choicest, and tell her, the mi∣nut
of her appointment shall be waited on, say to her, she
shall find me a man at all points.
Why, there's another quarrel, man, once more in
spite of my nose.
Away Secco away, my Lord calls, a' he's a loose
hair started from his fellows, a clip of your art is com∣manded.
I fly Nitido, Spadone remember me.
Trudging between an old moil, and a young
Calfe, my numble intelligeneer,
what, thou fatten'st apace on Capon still?
Yes, crimp, it is a gallant life to bee an old Lords
pimp whiskin, but beware of the porters lodge, for carrying
tales out of the school.
What a terrible sight to a lib'd breech is a sow gel∣der?
Not so terrible as a cross tree that never grows, to
a wag-halter-Page.
Good! witty rascal, you are a Satire I protest, but
that the Nymphs need not fear the evidence of thy morta∣lity,
go put on a clean bib, and spin amongst the Nuns,
sing'em a bawdy song, all the children thou ge'tst, shall bee
christened in wassail bowls, and turned into a college of
men Midwives, farewell night-mare.
Very, very well, if I dye in thy debt for this crack∣rope)
let me be buried in a cole-sacke, I'll fit ye, (apes face)
look for it.
And still the Vrchin would, but could not doe.
Mark the end on it, and laugh at last.
Tell me you cannot love me,
You importune
Too strict a resolution, as a gentleman
Of commendable parts, and fair deserts,
In every sweet condition that becomes
A hopeful expectation, I doe honour
Th'example of your youth, but Sir our fortunes
Concluded on both sides in narrow bands,
Move you to construe gently my forbearance,
In argument of fit consideration.
Why Castamela, I have shaped thy virtues
(Even from our childish years) into a dowry
Of richer estimation, then thy portion,
Doubled an hundred times, can equal: now
I clearly find, thy current of affection
Labours to fall into the guilt of riot,
Not the free ocean of a soft content.
You'd marry pomp and plenty, it is the Idol
(I must confess) that creatures of the time,
Bend their devotions to, But I have fashioned
Thoughts much more excellent of you.
Enjoy your own prosperity, I am resolved,
Never by any charge with me, to force
A poverty upon ye, want of love.
It is rarely cherished with the love of want.
Isle not be your undoing.
Sure some dotage
Of living stately, richly, lend a cunning
To Eloquence. How is this piece of goodness
Changed to ambition? oh you are most miserable
In your desires, the female curse he's caught ye.
Fie, fie, how il this suits.
A Devil of pride,
Ranges in airy thoughts to catch a star,
Whiles ye grasp mole-hils.
Worse and worse I vow.
But that some remnant of an honest sense,
Ebbes a full tide of blood to shame, all women
Would prostitute al honour to the luxury of ease and titles.
Romanello, know
You have forgot the nobleness of truth,
And sixth on scandal now.
A Dog, a Parrot,
A Monkey, a Carriage, a guarded lackey,
A waiting woman with her lips sealed up,
Are pretty toys to please my Mistress wonton:
So is a fiddle too, twill make it dance,
Or else be sick and whine.
This is uncivil.
I am not Sir your charge.
My grief you are,
For all my services are lost and ruined.
So is my chief opinion of your worthiness,
When such distractions tempt ye, you would prove
A cruel Lord, who dare, being yet a servant,
As you profess, to bait my best respects
Of duty to your welfare, it is madness
I have not oft observed, possess your freedom.
You have no right in me, let this suffice:
I wish your joys much comfort.
Sister, look ye,
How by a new creation off my Taylors,
I've shook off old mortality, the rags
Of home spun Gentry (prithee sister mark it)
Are cast by, and I now appear in fashion
Unto men, and received, observe me sister,
The consequence concerns you.
True good Brother,
For my well doing must consist in yours.
Heere's Romanello, a fine tempered gallant,
Of decent carriage, of indifferent means,
Considering that his sister, new hoist up,
From a lost merchants warehouse, to the titles
Of a great Lords-bed, may supply his wants
Not sunk in his acquaintance, for a scholar
Able enough, and one who may subsist
Without the help of friends, provided always,
He fly not upon wedlock without certainty
Of an advancement, else a bachelor
May thrive by observation on a little.
As single life's no burden, but to draw
In yokes is chargeable, and will require
A double maintenance, why I can live
Without a wife, and purchase.
I'st a mystery?
You've lately found out Livio, or a cunning
Concealed, till now for wonder?
Pish, believe it,
Endeavours and an active brain, are better
Then patrimonies left by parents. Prove it,
One thrives by cheating; shallow fools and unthrifts,
Are game knaves only sly at: then a fellow
Presumes on his hair, and that his back can toil
For fodder from the City, lies: another
Reputed valiant, lives by the sword, and takes up
Quarrels or braves them, as the novice likes,
To guild his reputation, most improbable.
A wor'd of desperate undertakings, possibly,
Procures some hungry meals, some tavern surfeits,
Some frippery to hide nakedness: perhaps
The scambling half a duccat now and then
To roar and noise it with the tattling hostess,
For a weeks lodging: these are pretty shifts,
Souls bankerupt of their royalty submit to.
Give me a man, whose practice and experience,
Conceives not barely the Philosophers stone,
But indeed he's it, one whose wit's his Indies.
The poor is most ridiculous.
You're pleasant
In new discoveries of fortune; use them
With moderation, Livio.
Such wilde language
Was wont to be a stranger to your custom;
How ever, Brother, you are pleased to vent it,
I hope for recreation.
Name and honour.
What are they? a mere sound without supportance,
A begging chastity, youth, beauty, hansomnesse,
Discourse, behaviour which might charm attention,
And curse the gazers eyes into amazement;
Are Natures common bounties. So are Diamonds
Uncut, so flowers unworne, so silke-wormes webs
Unwrought, gold unrefined, then all those glories
are of esteem, when used and set at price,
There's no dark sense in this.
I understand not
The dressed on it, nor how meant, nor yet to whom.
Pray Brother be more plain.
First Romanello,
This for your satisfaction: if you waste
More hours in courtship to this maid, my sister,
Weighing her competency with your own,
You go about to build without foundation;
So that care will prove void.
A sure acquittance,
If I must be discharged.
Next Castamela,
To thee (my own loved Sister) let me say
I have not been so bountiful, in showing
To Fame, the treasure, which this age hath opened,
As thy true value merits.
You are merry.
My jealousy of thy fresh blooming years,
Prompted a fear of husbanding too charily
Thy growth to such perfection, as no flattery
Of are can perish now.
Here's talk in riddles.
Brother, th'exposition?
I'll no longer
Chamber thy freedom, we have been already
Thrifty enough in our lowe fortunes, henceforth
Command thy liberty, with that thy pleasures.
Is it come to this?
You're wondrous full of courtesy.
Ladies of birth an I quality are suitors
For being known t'ee, I have promised, sister,
They shall partake your company.
What Lady es,
Where, when, how, who?
A day, a week, a month
Sported amongst such beauties, is a gain
On time, they are young, wife, noble, fair, and chaste.
Chaste?
Castamela chaste, I would not hazard
My hopes, my joys of thee, on dangerous trial.
Yet if (as it may chance) a neat clothed merriment
Pass without blush in tattling to the words,
Fall not too broad, it is but a pastime smiled at
Amongst your selves in counsel, but beware
Of being over-heard.
This is pretty.
I doubt I know not what yet must be silent.
They come as soon as spoke of—sweetest faire-ones
My sister cannot but conceive this honour
Particular in your respects: Dear sir
You grace us in your favours.
Virtuous Lady.
We are your servants.
Your sure friends.
Society,
May fix us in a league.
All fitly welcome.
I find not reason (gentle Ladies) whereon
To cast this debt of mine, but my acknowledgement
Shall study to pay thankfulness.
Sweet beauty,
Your Brother hath indeed been too much churl
In this concealment from us all, who love him,
Of such desired a presence.
Please to enrich us
With your wished amity.
Our coach attends;
We cannot be denied:
Command it Nitido.
Ladies, I shall, now for a lusty harvest.
Twill prove a cheap year, should these barnes be filed once,
Brother one word in private.
Phew—anon
I shall instruct at large.—we are prepared
And easily entreated; it is good manners
Not to be troublesome.
Thou art perfect Livio.
Whether—but—hoe's my brother.
Fair, your arm.
I am your Usher Lady.
As you please sir.
I waite you to your coach,
Some two hours hence.
I shall return again.
Troylo-Savelli,
Next heir unto the marquess? and the Page too?
The Marquesses own page, Livio transformed
Into a sudden bravery, and altered
In Nature, or I dream? amongst the Ladies,
I not remember I have seen one face.
There's cunning in these changes, I am resolute,
Or to pursue the trick on it, or lose labour.
Not yet returned.
Madam.
The Lord our husband,
We mean, unkind! four hours are almost past,
(But twelve short minutes wanting by the glass)
Since we broke company, was never (gentlemen)
Poor Princess used so?
With your gracious favour,
Peers great in rank and place, ought of necessity
To attend on state employments.
For such duties,
Are all their toil and labour, but their pleasures
Flow in the beauties they enjoy, which conquers
All sense of other travail.
Trimly spoken.
When we were common, mortal, and a subject,
As other creatures of heavens making are,
(the more the pity) bless us! how we waited
For the huge play day when the Pageants fluttered
About the City, for we then were certain,
The Madam courtiers, would vouchsafe to visit us,
And call us by our names, and eat our viands:
Nay give us leave to sit at the upper end
of our own Tables, telling us how welcome
They'd make us, when we came to Court: full little
Dream't I at that time of the wind that blew me
Up to the Weathercock of th'honours, now
Are thrust upon me, but we bear the burden,
Were it twice as much as it is, the next great feast,
We'll grace the City wives (poor souls) and see
How they'll behave themselves, before our presence.
You two shall wait on us.
With best observance,
And glory in our service.
Wee are creatures
Made proud in your commands.
Believe it you are so
And you shall find Vs readier in your pleasures,
Then you in your obedience, fie methinks
I have an excellent humour to be pettish;
A little toysome, it is a pretty sign
Of breeding, i'st not fit? I 〈◊〉 indeed 〈◊〉
Long for some strange good things now.
Such news, Madam.
Would over-joy my Lord your husband.
Cause
Bonfires and bell ringings
I must be with child then,
And't be but for the public Jollity,
Or lose my longings, which were mighty pity.
Sweet fates forbid it.
Noblest Lady—
rudeness
Keep off, or I shall—saucy groom, learn manners,
Go swab amongst your Goblins.
Let him stay,
The fellow I have seen, and now remember
His name, Fabricio.
Your poor Creature Lady;
Out of your gentleness, please you to consider
The brief of this petition, which contains
All hope of my last fortunes.
Give it from him.
Here Madam—mark Vespuci, how the
Wittol stares on his sometime wife! sure he imagines
To be a cuckold, by consent, is purchase
Of appprobation in a state.
Good reason.
The gain reprieved him from bankerours statute,
And filed him in the charter of his freedom.
She had seen the fellow, did observe.
Most punctually.
Could calhim by his name too, why it is possible,
She he's not yet forgot a' was her husband.
That were strange, oh it is a precious trincket.
Was ever puppet so slipped up?
The tale
Of Venus Cat (man) changed into a woman,
Was emblem but to this, she turns.
He stands just like Action in the painted cloth
No more.
Friend we have read, and weighed the sum
Of what your Scrivener, which in effect
Is meant your counsel learned, he's drawn for ye:
It is a fair hand insooth, but the contents
Somewhat unseasonable, for let us tell ye,
You've been a spender, a vain spender, wasted
Your stock of credit, and of Wares unthristily.
You are a faulty man, and should we urge
Our Lord as often for supplies, as shame,
Or wants drive you to ask, it might be construed
An impudence, which we desie, an Impudence,
Base in base Women, but in Noble sinful.
Are ye not ashamed yet of your self?
Great Lady,
Of my misfortunes I am ashamed.
So, so,
This jeer twangs roundly, doe's it not Vespuci?
Why heere's a Lady worshipful.
Pray gentlemen,
Retire awhile; this fellow shall resolve
Some doubts that stick about me.
As you please.
To thee Fabricto, oh the change is cruel
Since I find some small leisure, I must justify,
Thou art unworthy of the name of man.
These holy vows, which we by bonds of Faith,
Recorded in the register of Truth,
Were kept by me unbroken, no assaults
Of guests of courtship from the great and wanton,
No threats, nor sense of poverty (to which
Thy riots had betrayed me) could betray
My warrantable thoughts, to impure folly.
Why would thou force me miserable?
The scorn
Of rumour, is reward enough, to brand
My lewder actions, it was I thought impossible,
A beauty fresh as was your youth, could brooke
The last of my decays,
Did I complain?
My sleeps between thine arms, were even as sound,
My dreams as harmless, my contents as free,
As when the best of plenty crowned our bride bed.
Amongst some of a mean, but quiet fortune,
Distrust of what they call their own, or Jealousy
Of those whom in their bosoms they possess
Without control, begets a self unworthiness;
For which fear, or what is worst desire,
Or paltry gain, they practise art, and labour to
Pander their own wives: those wives whose innocence
Stranger to language, spoke obedience only,
And such a wife was Flavia to Fabritio.
My loss is irrecoverable.
Call not
Thy wickedness thy loss; without my knowledge
Thou souldst me, and in open court protestodst
A pre-contract unto another, falsely
To justify a separation, wherein
Could I offend to be believed thy Strumpet,
In best sense an Adulteress? so conceived
In all opinions, that I am shook off,
Even from mine own blood, which although I boast
Not Noble, yet it was not mean, for Romanello
Mine only brother, shuns me, and abhors
To own me for his sister.
It is confessed,
I am the shame of mankind.
I live happy
In this great Lords love, now, but could his cunning
Have trained me to dishonour, we had never
Been sundered by the temptation of his purchase.
In truth Fabritio, I am little proud of
My unsought honours, and so far from triumph,
That I am not more fool, to such as honour me,
Then to my self, who hate this antique carriage!
You are an Angel rather to be worshipped,
Then grossly to be talked with.
Keep those Duccats;
I shall provide you better: it were a bravery,
Could you forget the place wherein you've rendered
Your name for ever hateful.
I will do it,
Do it excellentest goodness, and conclude
My days in silent goodness.
You may prosper
In Spain, in France, or elsewhere, as in Italy.
Besides, you are a scholar bred, however
You interrupted study with commerce,
Isle think of your supplies, mean time, pray, storm not
At my behaviour t'ee, I have forgot acquaintance
With mine own—keep your first distance—
What, Our Ladies cast familiar.
Oh my stomach
Wambles at fight of—sick, sick, I am sick—
I saint at heart—kiss me, nay prithee quickly,
Or I shall sown—you've staid a sweet while from me.
And this companion to—beshrew him.
Dearest,
Thou art my health, my blessing—turn the banque∣rout
out of my doors—sirrah, Isle have thee whipped.
If thou come here again.
Hence, hence you vermin.
How i'st my best of joys?
Prettily mended.
Now we have our own Lord here: I shall never
Endure to spare you long out of my sight.
See what the thing presented.
A petition,
Belike for some new charity.
We must not
Be troubled with his needs, a wanting creature
Is monstrous, is as ominous—fie, upon it.
Dispatch the silly Mushroom once for all,
And send him with some pittance out of the country,
Where we may hear no more of him.
Thy will shall stand a law, my Flavia,
You have been
In private with our fellow Peers now: shanot we
Know how the business stands, sure in some country,
Ladies are privy Counsellors, I warrant ye:
Are they not think ye? there the land is (doubtless)
Most politically governed; all the women
We are swords and Breeches, I have heard most certainly,
Such sights were exc'lent.
You are a matchless pleasure:
No life is sweet without thee, in my heart
Reign Empress, and be styled thy Iulio's Sovereign.
My only, precious dear:
VVee'l prove no less t'ee.
Sea sick a shore still? thou could rarely scope
A Calenture in a long voyage, Livio,
Who in a short one, and at home art subject
To such faint stomach qualms, no cordials comfort
The business of thy thoughts, for ought I see:
What ails thee (man) be merry, hang up Jealousies.
Who, I, I jealous? no, no, heere's no cause
In this place it is a nunnery, a retirement
For meditation, all the difference extant
But puzzles, only bar belief, not grounds it,
Rich services in place! soft and fair lodgings,
Varieties of recreations, exercise
Of musique in all changes? neat attendance?
Princely, nay royal furniture of garments?
Society of gardens, orchards, water works,
Pictures so ravishing, that ranging eyes,
Might dwell upon a dotage of conceit,
Without a single wish for livelier substance?
The great world in a little world of Fancy,
Is here abstracted: no temptation proffered
But such as fools and mad folks can invite to?
And yet—
And yet your reason cannot answer
The objections of your fears, which argue danger.
Danger? dishonour, Troylo: were my sister
In safety from those charms, I must confess
I could live here for ever.
But you could not.
I can assure ye, for it were then scarce possible,
A door might opent'ee, hardly a loope-hole,
My presence then is usher to her ruin,
And loss of her, the fruit of my preferment.
Briefly partake a secret, but be sure
To lodge it in the inmost of thy bosom,
Where memory may not find it for discovery;
By our firm truth of friendship, I require thee.
By our firm truth of friendship, I subscribe
To just conditions.
Our great Uncle Marquess,
Disabled from his Cradle, by an impotence
In nature first, that impotence, since seconded
And rendered more infirm, by a fatal breach
Received in fight against the Turkish Galleys
Is made incapable of any faculty,
Of active manhood, more then what affections
Proper unto his Sex, must else distinguish:
So that no helps of art can warrant life,
Should he transcend the bounds his weakness limits.
On, I attend with eagerness.
It is strange,
Such natural defects at no time checks
A full and free sufficiency of spirit;
Which flows, both in so clear and fixed a strength,
That to confirm belief (it seems) where nature
Is in the body lame, she is supplied
In fine proportion of the mind, a word
Concludes all; to a man his enemy,
He is a dangerous threatening: but to women,
How ever pleasurable, no way cunning
To show abilities of friendship, other
Then what his outward senses can delight in,
Or charge and bounty court with.
Good, good—Troylo,
Oh that I had a lusty Faith to credit it,
Though none of all this wonder should be possible.
As I love honour, and an honest name,
I falter not (my Livio) in one syllable,
News admirable, it is, it is so—pish I know it,
Yet he has a kind heart of his own to girls,
Young, handsome Girls; yes, yes, so a' may,
Tic granted—a' wot now and then be piddling,
And play the wanton, like a fly that dallies
About a candles flame: then scorch his wings,
Drop down, and creep away, ha?
Hardly that too;
To look upon fresh beauties, to discourse
In an unblushing merriment of words,
To hear them play or sing, and see them dance,
To pass the time in pretty amorous questions,
Read a chaste verse, of love, or prattle riddles,
Is the height of his temptations.
Send him joy on it.
His choices are not of the courtly train;
Nor Cities practice; but the countries innocence,
Such as are gentle-borne, not meanly; such,
To whom both gaudiness and apelike fashions
Are monstrous; such as cleanelinesse and decency,
Prompt to a virtuous envy, such as study
A knowledge of no danger, but themselves.
Well, I have lived in ignorance: the ancients,
Who chatted of the golden age, feigned trisles.
Had they dream't this, they would have truth'd it heaven.
I mean an earthly heaven, less it is not.
Yet is this Bachelor miracle not free
From the epidemical head-ach.
The Yellows.
Huge jealous fits, admitting none to enter
But me, his page, and Barber, with an Eunuch,
And an old guardianesse, it is a favour
Not common, that the licence of your visits,
To your own sister, now and then is wink't at.
But why are you his instrument, his Nephew?
Tic ominous in nature.
Not in policy.
Being his heir, I may take truce a little,
With mine own fortunes.
Knowing how things stand too.
At certain seasons, as the humour takes him,
A set of music are permitted peaceably,
To cheer their solitariness, provided
Tu'are strangers, not acquainted near the city,
But never the same twice, pardon him that;
Nor must their stay exceed an hour, or two
At farthest; as at this wise wedding, wherefore
His Barber is the master to instruct
The lasses both in Song and Dance, by him
Trained up in either quality.
A caution happily studied.
Farther to prevent
Suspicion, a'has married his young Barber
To the old Matron, and withal is pleased,
Report should mutter him a mighty man
For th'game, to take off all suspicion
Of insufficiency, and this strict company
A'cals his bower of Fancies.
Yes and properly,
Since all his recreations are in Fancy.
I'm infinitely taken—sister? marry
Would I had sisters in a plenty, Troylo,
So to bestow them all, and turn them Fancies.
Fancies? Why it is a pretty name methinks.
Something remains, which in conclusion shortly.
Shall take thee fuller—Hark, the wedding jollity!
With a Bride-cake on my life, to grace the nuptials!
Perhaps the Ladies will turn Songsters.
Silence.
Passing neat and exquisite, I protest fair creatures;
These honours to our solemnity, are liberal and uncommon;
my spouse and my self with our posterity, shall prostitute
our services, to your bounties, shells not duckling?
Yes honey suckle, and doe as much for them one
day, if things stand right as they should stand, Bill, Pigeon
doe; thou'st be my Cattamountaine, and I thy sweet brier,
Honey, we'll lead you to kind examples (pretty ones) believe
it, and you shall find us, one in one, whiles hearts doe
last.
Ever mine own, and ever.
Well said old Touch hole.
All happiness, all joy.
A plenteous issue,
A fruitful womb—Thou hast a blessing Secco.
Indeed a' he's Sir, if ye know all, as I conceive
you know enough, if not the whole: for you have (I may
say) tried me to the quick, through and through, and most
of my carriage, from time to time.
It would wind-break a moil, or a ringed mare, to
vie burdens with her.
What's that you mumble, Gelding, shy.
Nothing forsooth, but that you're bouncing couple
well met, and it were pity to part ye, though you hung to∣gether
in a smokey chimney.
It were even pity indeed, Spadone, nay tha'st a
foolish loving nature of thine own, and widest well to plain
dealings of my conscience.
Thank your Brideship—your Bawdship.
Our sister is not merry.
Sadness cannot
Become a Bridal harmony.
At a wedding, free spirits are required.
You should dispense
With serious thoughts, now Lady.
Well said Gentlefolks.
Fie Castamela sie,
A dance, a dance.
By any means, the day is not complete else.
Indeed He be excused,
By no means, Lady.
We are all suitors.
With your pardons, spare me
For this time, grant me licence to look on.
Command your pleasures, Lady,—every one hand
Your Partner—nay, Spadone, must make one.
These merriments are free.
With all my heart, I'm sure I am not the heaviest
In the company.
Strike up for the honour of the Bride and Bridegroom.
So, so, here's art in motion: on all parts,
Ye have bestirred ye nimbly,
I could dance now,
Acne till I dropped again; but want of practice
Denies the scope of breath or so, yet sirrah,
My Cattamountaine, doe not I trip quickly,
And with a grace too, sirrah.
Light as a feather.
Sure you are not without a stick of Licorice in your
pocket forsooth; you have I believe stout lungs of your own,
you swim about so roundly without rubs; it is a tickling sight
to be young still.
Madam Morose?
Child.
To you in secret.
That eare-wig scatters the troop now, Isle go near
to fit'em.
My Lord upon my life.
Then we must sever.
Ladies and gentlemen, your ears.
Oh it was ever a wanton monkey—a' will wriggle
into a starting hole so cleanly—and it had bin on my wed∣ding
day,—I know what I know.
Say so Spadone?
Nothing, nothing, I prate sometimes beside the pur∣pose,
whoreson lecherous weasel?
Look, look, look how officious the little knave
is—but—
Why? there's the business, Buts on ones fore∣head,
are but scurvy Buts.
Spadone, discharge the fiddlers instantly.
Yes, I know my postures-oh monstrous Buts.
Attend within, Sweating,—your pardons
Gentlemen; to your recreations dear virgins:
Page have a care,
My duty reverend Madam.
Livio away—sweet beauties.
Brother.
Suddenly I shall return, 'now for a round tempta∣tion.
One gentle word in private with your Ladyship. I shall
Not hold you long.
What means this huddle
Of flying several ways thus? who he's frighted 'em?
They live not at devotion here, or pension!
Pray quit me of distrust.
May it please your Goodness,
You'll find him even in every point as honourable,
As flesh and blood can vouch him:
Ha, him? whom?
What him?
He will not press beyond his bounds.
He will but chat and toy, and feel your—
Guard me,
A powerful Genius! feel—
Your hands to kiss them.
Your fair, pure, white hands, what strange business is it?
These melting twins of Ivory, but softer
Then down of Turtles, shall but feed the appetite—
A rape upon my ears.
The appetite
Of his poor ravished eye; should he swell higher
In his desires, and soar upon ambition
Of rising in humility, by degrees;
Perhaps a' might crave leave to clap—
Fond woman,
In thy grave sinful,
Clap or pat the dimples,
Where Loves tomb stands erected on your cheeks.
Else pardon those slight exercises, pretty one,
His Lordship is as harmless a weak implement,
As ere young Lady trembled under.
Lordship!
(Stead me my modest anger) it is belike then
Religious matron) some great mans prison,
Where Virgins honours suffer Martyrdom.
And you are their tormentor; let's lay down
Our ruined names to the insulter mercy!
Let's sport and smile on scandal (rare calamity,
What hast thou toiled me in?) you named his Lordship,
Some gallant youth and fiery?
No, no deed la.
A very grave stale Bachelor (my dainty one)
There's the conceit: Hoe's none of your hot rovers,
Who ruffle at first dash, and so disfigure
Your Dresses, and your sets of blush at once.
Hoe's wise in years, and of a temperate warmth;
Mighty in means and power: and withal liberal.
A wanton in his wishes, but else, farther,
A' cannot—cause—a' cannot.
Cannot, prithee,
Be plainer: I begin to like thee strangely.
What cannot?
You urge timely, and to purpose,
A' cannot doe—the truth is truth—doe, any thing,
(As one should say) that's any thing, put case
(I doe but put the case forsooth) a' find ye.
My stars I thank ye, for being ignorant,
Of what this old in mischief can intend.
And so we might be merry, bravely merry.
You hit it—what else—she is cunning—look ye,
Pray lend your hand forsooth.
Why prithee take it.
You have a delicate moist palm—umh—can ye
relish that tickle? there.
And laugh if need were.
And laugh, why now you have it, what hurt pray
Perceive ye? there's all, all, go to, you want tutoring,
Are an apt scholar, Isle neglect no pains
For your instruction.
Doe not, but his Lordship,
What may his Lordship be?
No worse man
Then marquess of Seen, the great Master
Of this small family, your master found him,
A bounteous benefactor, has advanced him,
The gentleman of the horse, in a shot time
He means to visit you himself in person,
As kind, as loving, an old man.
We'll meet him
With a full flame of welcome, i'st the Marquess?
No worse?
No worse I can assure your Ladyship,
The only free maintainer of the Fancies.
Fancies? How mean ye that.
The pretty souls
Who are companions in the house, all daughters
To honest virtuous parents, and right worshipful.
A kind of chaste collapsed Ladies.
Chaste too, and yet collapsed?
Only in their fortunes.
Sure I must be a Fancy in the number.
A Fancy principal, I hope you'll fashion
Your entertainment, when the Marquess courts you,
As that I may stand blameless.
Free suspicion. My Brothers rayser?
Merely.
My supporter?
Undoubtedly.
An old man and a lover?
True, there's the Music, the content, the harmony.
And I my self a Fancy?
You are pregnant.
The chance is thrown, I now am fortunes minion,
I will be bold and resolute.
Blessing on thee.
Prosper me now my fate; some better genius
Then such a one, as waits on troubled passions,
Direct my courses to a noble issue.
My thoughts have wandered in a labyrinth,
But if the clew I have laid hold on, fail not,
I shall tred out the toil of these dark paths
In spite of politic reaches—I am punished
In mine own hopes, by her unlucky fortunes,
Whose same is ruined; Flavia, my lost sister!
Lost to report, by her unworthy husband,
Though heightened by a greatness, in whose mixtures,
I hate to claim a part—Oh welcome, welcome,
Dear boy! thou keep time with my expectations
As justly, as the promise of my bounties
Shall reckon with thy service.
I have fashioned the means of your admittance.
Precious Nitido.
More, have bethought me of a shape, a quaint one,
You may appear in, safe and unsuspected.
You are an ingenious boy.
Beyond all this;
Have so contrived the feat, that at first sight,
Troylo himself shall court your entertainment:
Nay, force you to vouchsafe it.
You have out done all counsel, and all cunning.
True, I have sir
Fadg'd nimbly in my practises: but surely,
There are some certain clogs, some roguish staggers,
Somewhat shall I call em in the business?
Nitido,
What faint now? dear heart bear up, what staggers,
What clogs? let me romove 'em.
Am I honest
In this discovery?
Honest, pish is that all?
By this rich purse, and by the twenty ducats
Which line it, I will answer for thy honesty,
Against all Italy, and prove it perfect,
Besides, remember, I am bound to secrefie.
Thou't not betray thy self.
All fears are cleared then.
But if—
If what? out with it.
If w'are discovered,
You'll answer I am honest still?
Dost doubt it?
Not much; I have your purse in pawn fort.
Now to the shape, and know the wits in Florence,
Who in the great Dukes court, buffoons his complement,
According to the change of meates in season,
At every free Lords table,
Or free meetings
In Taverns, there a' sits at the upper end,
And eats, and prates, a' cares not how nor what.
The very quaik of fashions, the very hee that
Wears a Stiletto on his chin.
You have him.
Like such a thing must you appear, and study
Amongst the Ladies in a formal soppery,
To vent some curiosity of language,
Above their appehensions, or your own,
Indeed beyond sense, you are the more the person.
Now amorous, then scurvy, sometimes bawdy,
The same man still, but evermore fantastical,
As being the suppositor to laughter:
It hath saved charge in physic.
When occasion
Offers it self (forwhere it do's or not,
I will be bold to take it) I may turn
To some one in the company; and changing
My Method talk of state, and rail against
Th'imployment of the time, mislike the carriage
Of places, and mislike that men of parts,
Of merit, such as my self am, are not
Thrust into public action: twill set off
A privilege I challenge from opinion,
With a more lively current.
On my Modesty,
You are some kin to him—Seignior Prugnioli!
Seignior Mushrumpo!
Leap but into his antique garb, and trust me
You'll fit it to a thought.
The time?
As suddenly
As you can be transformed,—for the event,
It is pregnant.
Yet my pretty knave, thou hast not
Discovered where fair Castamela lives;
Nor how, nor amongst whom.
Pish, it more Quires,?
Till your own eyes inform, be silent, else
Take back your earnest, what, turn woman? fie;
Be idle and inquisitive?
No more.
I shall be speedily provided, ask for
A note at mine own lodging.
Isle not fail ye,
Assuredly, I will not fail you Seignior;
My fine in amorato—twenty duccats?
They are half his quarters incombe—love, oh love,
What a pure madness art thou? I shall fit him,
Fit, quit and split him too—most bounteous sir.
Boy, thou art quick and trusty,
Be withal close and silent, and thy pains
Shall meet a liberal addition.
Though sir,
I'm but a child, yet you shall find me—
man
In the contrivements; I will speak for thee.
Well 'adoes relish the disguise!
Most greedily
Swallows it with a licourish delight:
Will instantly be shaped in it instantly,
And on my conscience, sir, the supposition
Strengthened by supposition, will trance form him
Into the beast it self he do's resemble.
Spend that, and look for more boy.
Sir, it needs not:
I have already twenty Ducats pursed
In a gay case, alas sir, to you, my service
Is but my duty.
Modesty in Pages
Shows not a virtue, boy, when it exceeds
Good manners. Where must we meet?
Sir it's lodging,
Or near about: he will make haste believe it.
Waite th'opportunity, and give me notice.
I shall attend.
If I miss my part, hang me.
Come you are caught Camillo.
Away, away,
That were a jest indeed; I caught?
The Lady
Does scatter glances, wheels her round, and smiles;
Steals an occasion to ask how the minutes
Each hour have run in progress; then, thou kissest
All thy four fingers, crowchest and sighst faintly:
Dear beauty, if my watch keep fair decorum,
Three quarters have near past the figure X.
Or as the time of day goes—
So Vespuci,
This will not doe, I read it on thy forehead,
The grain of thy complexion is quite altered.
Once it was a comely browne, it is now of late
A perfect greene and yellow; sure prognosticates
Of th'over flux of the gall, and melancholy,
Symptoms of love and jealousy, poor soul.
Quoth she, the she, why hang thy looks like bel-ropes
Out of the wheels? thou flinging down thy eyes
Low at her feet, replid'st, because, oh Sovereign
The great bell of my heart is cracked, and never
Can ring in tune again, till't be new cast
By one only skilful Foundresse.—hereat
She turned aside, winked, thou stood'st still and stard'st
I did observ't, be plain, what hope?
She loves thee;
Dotes on thee: in my hearing told her Lord
Camillo was the Piramus and Thisbe
Of Courtship, and of complement: ah ha!
She nicked it there. I envy not thy fortunes;
For to say truth, you are handsome, and deserve her,
Were she as great again as she is.
I handsome?
Alas, alas, a creature of heavens making,
Ther's all! but sirrah, prithee let's be sociable;
I doe confess, I think the goodee-madame
May possibly be compassed; I resolve too,
To put in for a share; come what can come on it.
A pretty toy it is, since you are open breasted,
Camillo I presume she is wanton,
And therefore mean to give the sows, when ever
I find the game on wing.
Let us consider,
Shoe's but a merchants leavings.
Hatched in the country,
And fledged in the City.
It is a common custom
Amongst friends (they are not friends else) chiefly gallants,
To trade by turns in such like frail commodities.
The one is but reversioner to tother.
Why it is the fashion man.
Most free and proper,
One Surgeon, one apothecary.
Thus then;
When I am absent, use the gentlest memory
Of my endowments, my unblemish't services
To Ladies favours: with what Faith and secrecy.
I live in her commands, whose special courtesies,
Oblige me to particular engagements.
Isle doe as much for thee.
With this addition
Camillo (best of fairs) a man so bashful,
So simply harmless, and withal so constant,
Yet resolute in all! true rights of honour;
That to deliver him in perfect character,
Wereto detract from such a solid virtue
As reigns not in another soul—he is
The thing a Mistress ought to wish her servant;
Are we agreed?
Most readily on tother side,
Unto the Lord her husband, talk as coursely
Of one another as we can.
I like it, so shall we sift her love, and his opinion.
Be thankful (fellow) to a noble Mistress;
Two hundred ducats are no trifling sum,
Nor common alms.
You must not loiter lazily,
And speak about the town my friend in taverns,
In gaming houses, nor sneak after dinner
To public shows, to interludes, in riot,
To some lewd painted baggage, trick't up gaudily,
Like one of us; oh fie upon 'em giblets!
I have bin told they ride in coaches, flaunt it
In brave ries, so rich, that it is scarce possible
How to distinguish one of these vile naughty packs,
From true and arrant Ladies—they'll inveigle
Your substance and your body, think on that,
I say your body, look to it,
Is it not sound counsel?
It is more, it is heavenly.
What hope Camillo now if this tune hold?
Hope fair enough, Vespuci, now as ever:
Why any Woman in her husbands presence
Can say no less.
Tic true, and she hath leave here.
Madam, your care and charity at once,
Have so new moulded my resolves,
That henceforth when ever my mention
False into report,
It shall requite this bounty, I am travelling
To a new world.
I like your undertakings.
New world, whore's that I pray? good, if you light on
A Parrot or a Monkey that has qualities
Of a new fashion, think on me.
Yes, Lady
I, I shall think on you; and my devotions
Tendered where they are due in single meekness,
With purer flames will mount with free increase
Of plenty, honours, full contents, full blessings,
Truth and affection twixt your Lord and you.
So with my humblest best leave, I turn from you,
Never as now I am to appear before ye.
All joys dwell here and lasting.
Prithee sweetest
Hark in your ear—beshrew't, the brim of your hat
Struck in mine eye—Dissemble honest tears
The griefs my heart does labour in—smarts
Immeasurably.
A chance, a chance, twill off;
Suddenly off, forbear, this handkercher
But makes it worse.
Wink madam with that eye.
The pain will quickly pass.
Immediately,
I know it by experience.
Yes, I find it.
Spare us a little Gentlemen: speak freely.
What were it thou saying dearest?
Doe you love me?
Answer in sober sadness, I'm your wife now;
I know my place and power.
What's this riddle?
Thou hast thy self replied to thine own question,
In being married to me, a sure argument
Of more then protestation.
Such it should be
Were you as other husbands: it is granted,
A woman of my state may like good clothes,
Choice diet, many servants, change of merriments,
All these I doe enjoy; and wherefore not?
Great Ladies should command their own delights,
And yet for all this, I am used but homely,
But I am served even well enough.
My Flavia
I understand not what thou would
Pray pardon me;
I doe confess I'm foolish, very foolish;
Trust me indeed I am, for I could cry
Mine eyes out, being in the weeping humour:
You know I have a Brother.
Romanello,
An unkind Brother.
Right, right, since you bosomed
My latter youth, he never would vouchsafe
As much as to come near me. Oh, it mads me,
Being but two, that we should live at distance;
As if I were a Cast-away, and you
For your part take no care on it nor attempted
To draw him hither.
Say the man be peevish,
Must I petition him?
Yea marry must ye,
Or else you love not me; not see my Brother?
Yes I will see him, so I will, will see him.
You hear't,—oh my good Lord, dear gentle, prithee,
You shall not be angry; alas I know poor Gentleman,
A bears a troubled mind: but let us meet
And talk a little, we perhaps may chide
At first, shed some few tears, and then be quiet;
There's all.
Write to him, and invite him hither,
Or go to him thy self. Come, no more sadness,
Isle doe what thou can wish.
And in requital,
Believe I shall say something that may settle
A constancy of peace, for which thoul't thank me.
The rarest fellow, Spadone, so full of gambols, a
talks so humorously, does a not, so carelessly? Oh rich!
ô, my hope of posterity! I could be in love with him.
His tongue troules like a Mill-clack: a tow∣zes
the Lady sisters, as a tumbling Dog does young Rabets;
hey here, dab there, your Madonna; a has a catch at her too:
There's a trick in the business; I am a dunce, else I say a
shrewd one.
Jump with me, I smell a trick too, if I could tell
what.
Who brought him in? that would be known?
That did signior Troylo; I saw the Page part at the
door; some trick still, go to Wife, I must and I will have
an eye to this gear.
A plain case, Roguery, Brokage and Roguery, or
call me Bulchin. Fancies, quoth a? rather Frenzies. We shall
all roar shortly: turn madcaps, lie open to what comes
first I may stand to it. That boy Page, is a naughty boy Page;
let me feel your forehead, ha, oh, hum,—yes—there,—there
again; I'm sorry for ye, a hand-saw cannot cure ye, mon∣strous
and apparent.
What, what, what, what, what Spadone?
What what what what, nothing but Velvet tips
you are of the first head yet: have a good hart man, a Cuc∣kold
though a be a Beast, wears invisible horns; else we
might know a City Bull from a Country Calfe,—vile∣lanous
Boy still.
My Razer shall be my weapon, my Razer.
Why? hoe's not come to the honour of a Beard
yet, he needs no shaving.
I will trim him and tram him.
Nay she may doe well enoughs for one.
One, ten, a hundred, a thousand; ten thousand: doe
beyond Arithmetic Spadone, I speak it with some pas∣zion,
I am a notorious Cuckold.
Gross and ridiculous,—look ye, point blank
I dare not swear that this same Mountbancking new∣come
foist, is at least a procurer in the business; if not a
pretender himself: but I think what I think.
Hee, Troylo, Livio, the Page, that hole-creeping
Page; all horn me sirrah; Isle forgive thee from my heart:
Dost not thou drive a trade too in my bottom.
A likely matter, alas I'm Metamorphosed I, be pa∣tient
you'll mar all else.
Ha ha ha ha.
Now, now, now, now, the games rampant, rampant.
Leave your wild figures, and learn to be a tame
Antic, or Isle observe no longer.
Ha ha ha ha.
You are extremely busy signior.
Courtly,
Without a fellow.
Have a stabbing wit.
But are you always, whenyou press on Ladies
Of mild and easy nature, so much satire;
So tart and keen as we doe taste ye now?
It argues a lean brain.
Gip to your beauties,
You would be fair forsooth, you would be Monsters;
Fair Women are such, Monsters to bee seen
Are rare, and so are they.
Bear with him Ladies.
He is a foule-mouth'd man.
Whore, bitch—Fox, treadle—fa la la la—
How's that my Cat a Mountain?
Hold her there Boy.
Were you ere in love fine Signior?
Yes for sports sake;
But soon forgot it. He that rides a gallop
Is quickly weary. I esteem of Love
As of a man in some huge place; it puzzles
Reason, distracts the freedom of the soul;
Renders a wise man fool, and a fool wise
In's own conceit, not else it yields effects
Of pleasure travail, bitter, sweet; war, peace;
Thorns, roses; prayers, curses; longings, surfeits;
Despair, and then a rope: oh my trim lover,
Yes, I have loved a score at once.
Out stallion, as I am a man and no man, the Baboon
lies I dare swear abominably.
Inhumanly,—keep your bow close, vixen.
Beshrew your fingers if you be in earnest:
You pinch too hard, go to, Isle pare your nails for it.
She means your horns, there's a bob for you.
Spruice Signior, if a man may love so many,
Why may not a fair Lady have like privilege
Of several servants?
Answer that, the reason
Holds the same weight.
Marry and so it does,
Tho he would spit his gall out.
Mark that Secc0.
De'e pump for a reply?
The learned differ
In that point; grand and famous Scholars often
Have argued pro and con, and left it doubtful;
Volumes have been writ on it. If then great Clerks
Suspend their resolutions, it is a modesty
For me to silence mine.
Dull and phlegmatic.
Yet Women sure in such a case are ever
More secret then men are.
Yea and talk less.
That is a truth much fabled, never found
You secret? when your Dresses blab your vanities;
Carnation for your Points? there's a gross babbler:
Tawny, hey ho, the pretty heart is wounded.
A knot of Willow Ribbons she's forsaken?
Another rides the Cock-horse, green and azure,
Wince and cry wee hee like a Colt unbroken:
But desperate black puts em in mind of fish days;
When Lent spurs on Devotion, there's a famine:
Yet love and judgement may help all this putter.
Where are they? not in females?
In all sorts of men no doubt.
Else they were sots to choose.
To swear and flatter, sometimes lie for profit.
Not so forsooth, should love and judgement meet,
The old, the fool; the ugly and deformed
Could never be beloved; for example,
Behold these two; this Madam and this shaver.
I doe defy thee; am I old or ugly?
Tricks, knacks, devices, now it troules about.
Troule let it stripling, thou hast yet firm footing
And need not fear the Cuckolds livory.
There's good Philosophy fort, take this for comfort,
No horned Beasts have teeth in either gummes:
But thou art toothed on both sides, tho she fail in it.
He's not jealous Sirrah.
That's his Fortune,
Women indeed more jealous are then Men;
But men have more cause.
There a rubbed your forehead, it was a tough blow.
It smarts.
Pox on him, let him
Putt's finger into any Gums of mine,
He shall find I have teeth about me, sound ones.
You are a scurvy fellow, and I am made a Cokes,
an Ass; and this same filthy Cron's a flirt. Whope do me
no harm good Woman.
Now now he's in, I must not leave him so.
Morose, what means this?
I know not I,
He pinched me, called me names, most filthy names.
Will ye part hence Sir, I will set ye packing.
You were indeed too broad, too violent.
Here's nothing meant but mirth.
The Gentleman
Hath been a little pleasant.
Somewhat bitter
Against our sex.
For which I promise him
A ne'er proves choice of mine.
Not I your choice.
So she protested Signior.
Indeed.
Why you are moved Sir?
Hence, there enters
A civiller companion for fair Ladies
Then such a sloven.
Beauties.
Time prevents us,
Love and sweet thoughts accompany this presence.
Enough, slip off, and on your life be secret.
A lovely day, young creatures. To you Floria;
To you Clarella, Silvia, to all service:
But who is this fair stranger?
Castamela,
My Sister, noble Lord.
Let ignorance
Of what you were, plead my neglect of manners,
And this soft touch excuse it, you've enriched
This little family (most excellent Virgin)
With th'honour of your company.
I find them
Worthily graceful Sir.
Are ye so taken?
Here are no public sights nor Courtly visitants,
Which youth and active blood might stray in thought for:
The companies are few, the pleasures single,
And rarely to be brooked, perhaps by any;
Not perfectly acquainted with this custom,
Are they not lovely one?
Sir, I dare answer
My sisters resolution. Free converse
Amongst so many of her Sex, so virtuous,
She ever hath preferred before the surquedry
Of protestation, or the vainer giddiness
Of popular attendants.
Well played Brother.
The meaning of this Music.
Please your Lordship,
It is the Ladies hour for exercise
In Song and Dance.
I dare not be the Author
Of trewanting the time then, neither will I.
Walk on dear Ladies.
It is a task of pleasure.
Be now my Sister, stand a trial bravely:
Remember my instructions, or—
With pardon.
You are not of the number I presume yet,
To be enjoined to hours. If you please,
We for a little while may sit as Judges
Of their proficiency, pray vouchsafe the favour.
I am Sir in a place to be commanded,
As now the present urges.
No compulsion,
That were too hard a word; where you are Sovereign
Your yea and nay is Law: I have a suit tee.
For what Sir?
For your love.
To whom? I am not
So weary of th'authority I hold
Over mine own contents in sleeps and wakings;
That Id resign my liberty to any
Who should control it.
Neither I intend so,
Grant me an entertainment.
Of what nature?
To aknowledge me your creature.
Oh my Lord.
You are too wise in years, too full of counsel
For my greene inexperience.
Love dear Maid,
Is but desire of beauty, and it is proper
For beauty to desire to be beloved.
I am not free from passion, tho the current
Of a more lively heate runs slowly through me,
My heart is gentle, and believe fresh Girl:
Thou shalt not wish for any full addition,
Which may adorn thy rarities to boast em;
That bounty can, withhold this Academy.
Of silent pleasures is maintained, but only
To such a constant use.
You have belike then
A Patent for concealing Virgins, otherwise
Make plainer your intentions.
To be pleasant
In practise of some outward senses only
No more.
No, worse you dare not to imagine;
Where such an awful Innocence, as mine is,
Out-faces every wickedness, your dotage
Has lul'd you in. I scent your cruel mercies,
Your factresse hath been tampering for my misery;
Your old temptation; your shee-Devill—bear with
A language which this place, and none but this, hath
Infected my tongue with. The time will come too,
When he (unhappy man) whom your advancement
Hath ruined by being Spannell to your fortunes,
Will curse a trained me hither—Livio,
I must not call him Brother; this one act
Hath rent him off the ancestry he sprung from.
The proffer of a noble curtsy
Is checked it seems.
A curtsy? a bondage;
You are a great man vicious, much more vicious,
Because you hold a seeming league with charity
Of pestilent nature, keeping hospitality
For sensualists in your own Sepulchre,
Even by your life time: yet are dead already.
How's this, come be more mild.
You chide me soberly,
Then Sir I tune my voice to other Musique;
You are an eminent statist, be a Father
To such unfriended Virgins, as your bounty
Hath drawn into a scandal, you are powerful
In means. A Bachelor, freed from the jelousies
Of wants, convert this privacy of maintenance
Into your own Court: let this (as you call it)
Your Academy have a residence there;
And there survey your charity your self:
That when you shall bestow on worthy husbands
With fitting portions, such as you know worthy;
You may yield to the present age example,
And to posterity a glorious Chronicle:
There were a work of piety: the other is
A scorn upon your Tombe-stone; where the Reader
Will but expound, that when you lived you pander'd
Your own purse and your same. I am too bold Sir,
Some anger and some pity hath directed
A wandering trouble.
Be not known what passages
The time hath lent, for once I can bear with ye.
Isle countenance the hazard of suspicion.
And be your guest a while.
Be—but hereafter—
I know not what—Livio.
My Lord.
Indeed Sir
I cannot part with yet.
Well then thou shalt not,
My precious Castamela—thou hast a Sister,
A prefect Sister Livio.
All is inck'd here
Good soul indeed.
Id speak with you anon.
It may be so.
Come fair one.
Oh I am cheated.
PRithee be serious.
Prithee interupt not
The Paradise of my becharming thoughts,
Which mount my knowledge to the sphere I move in,
Above this useless tattle.
Tattle? Sister,
Dee know to whom you talk this?
To the Gentleman
Of my Lords Horse, new stepped into the Office:
It is a good place Sir, if you can be thankful.
Demean your carriage in it, so that negligence
Or pride of your preferment oversway not
The grace you hold in his esteem. Such fortunes
Drop not down every day; observe the favour
That raised you to this fortune.
Thou mistake sure
What person thou holdst speech with.
Strange and idle.
First possible? why? you are turned a Mistress,
A Mistress of the trim; beshrew me Lady
You keep a stately Port, but it becomes you not:
Our Fathers Daughter, if I err not rarely,
Delighted in a softer humbler sweetness:
Not in a hey-de-gay of scurvy Gallantry.
You do not brave it like a thing of the fashion;
You Ape the humour faintly.
Love dear Maid
Is but desire of beauty, and it is proper
For beauty to desire to be beloved.
Fine sport, you mind not me; will you yet hear me Madam?
Thou shalt not wish for any full addition,
Which may adorn thy rarities to boast em:
That bounty can withhold—I know I shall not.
And so you clapped the bargain, the conceit on it
Tickles your contemplation. It is come out now,
A Women's tongue I see, some time or other
Will prove her Traitor: This was all I sifted,
And here have found thee wretched.
We shall flourish.
Feed high henceforth, man, and no more be streightend
Within the limits of an empty patience:
Nor tire our feeble eyes with gazing only
On greatness, which enjoys the swindge of pleasures.
But be our selves the object of their envy,
To whom a service would have seemed ambition.
It was thy cunning Livio, I applaud it,
Fear nothing; Isle be thrifty in thy projects:
Want misery? may all such want as think on it;
Our footing shall stand firm.
You are much witty.
Why Caestamcla, this to me? you counterfeit
Most palpablie. I am too well acquainted
With thy condition Sister; if the Marquess
Hath uttered one unchaste, one wanton syllable,
Provoking thy contempt: not all the flatteries
Of his assurance to our hopes of rising,
Can or shall slave our souls.
Indeed not so Sir,
You are beside the point, most gentle Signior,
Isle be no more your ward, no longer chambered,
Nor mewed up to the lure of your Devotion:
Trust me, I must not, will not, dare not; surely
I cannot for my promise past; and sufferance
Of former trials hath too strongly armed me:
You may take this for answer.
In such earnest?
Hath goodness left thee quite? fool thou art wandering
In dangerous fogs, which will corrupt the purity
Of every noble virtue dwelt within thee.
Come home again, home Castamela Sister;
Home to thine own simplicity, and rather
Then yield thy memory up to the Witch-craft
Of an abused confidence; be courted
For Romanello.
Romanello.
Scornst thou
The name? thy thoughts I find then are changed rebels
To all that's honest, that's to truth and honour.
So Sir, and in good time.
Thou art fallen suddenly
Into a pleurisy of faithless impudence;
A whorish itch infects thy blood; a leprosy
Of raging lust, and thou art mad to prostitute
The glory of thy Virgin dower basely
For common sale. This foulness must be purged,
Or thy disease will ranckle to a pestilence,
Which can even taint the very ayre about thee:
But I shall study Physic.
Learn good manners:
I take it you are saucy.
Saucy? strumpet
In thy desires: it is in my power to cut off
The twist thy life is spun by.
Phew, you rave now:
But if you have not perished all your reason,
Know I will use my freedom; you (forsooth)
For change of fresh apparel, and the pocketing
Of some well looking Duccats, were contented,
Passinglie pleased, yes marry were you (mark it)
To expose me to the danger now you rail at.
Brought me, nay forced me hither, without question
Of what might follow, here you find the issue:
And I distrust not but it was the appointment
Of some succeeding fate that more concerned me
Then widowed virginity.
You are a gallant
One of my old Lord Fancies. Peevish girl
Was it ever heard that youth could dote on sickness,
A gray beard, wrinkled face, a dried up marrow,
A toothless head,—a—this is but a merriment,
Merely but trial. Romanello loves thee,
Has not abundance, true, yet cannot want.
Return with me, and I will leave these fortunes,
Good Maid, of gentle nature.
By my hopes,
I never placed affection on that Gentleman,
Tho a deserved well; I have told him often
My resolution.
Will you hence, and trust to
My care of settling you a peace.
No surely,
Such treaty may break off.
Off be it broken,
Isle doe what thou shalt rue.
You cannot Livio.
So confident? young Mistress mine, Isle do it.
Incomparable Maid.
You have been Counsellor
To a strange Dialogue.
If there be constancy
In protestation of a virtuous nature;
You are secure, as the effects shall witness.
Be noble, I am credulous, my language
Hath prejudiced my heart; I and my Brother
Ne'er parted at such distance; yet I glory
In the fair race he runs: but fear the violence
Of his disorder.
Little time shall quit him.
The young Whelp is mad, I must slice the worm
out of his breech: I have noosed his neck in the Collar;
and I will once turn Dog-leech. Stand from about me, or
you'll find me terrible and furious.
Ladies good Ladies, dear Madam Morose.
Honest Secco.
What was the cause? what wrong has hee done
to thee?
Why dost thou fright us so, and art so peremptory
where wee are present fellow?
Honey-bird, Spouse, Catamountaine; ah the Child,
the pretty poor Child; the sweet faced Child.
That very word halters the eare-wig.
Off I say, or I shall lay bare all the naked truth to
your faces: his foreparts have been so lusty, and his po∣sterions
must do penance for it: Untruss Whiskin untrusse;
away burs, out Mare-hagge moil; avaunt, thy turn
comes next, avaunt thy turn comes next; avaunt the Horns
of my rage are advanced; hence or I shall gore ye.
Lash him soundly, let the little Ape show tricks.
Help, or I shall be throttled.
Yes, I will help thee pretty heart, if my tongue
cannot prevail; my nails shall. Barbarous minded man, let
go, or I shall use my talons.
Well played Dog, well played Bear, sa, sa, sa; to it to it.
Fury, whore, baud, my Wife and the Devil.
Tospot, stinckard, pander, my husband &amp; a rascal.
Scold Coxcomb, baggage, Cuckold.
Cravat Age and Youth
Cannot jump together:
One is like good luck,
T'other like foul weather.
Let us fall in now: What uncivil rudeness
Dares offer a disturbance to this company.
Peace and delights dwell here, not brawls and outrage:
Sirrah be sure you show some reasons why
You so forget your duty? quickly show it,
Or I shall tame your choler; what's the ground on it?
Humh how's that? how's that? is he there with
a Wanion? Then doe I begin to dwindle,—O oh, the
fit, the fit; the fits upon me now, now now now.
It shall out. First then know all Christian people
Jaws and Infidels, hes and shees, by these presents, that
I am a beast; see what I say, I say a very beast.
It is granted.
Go to then, a horned beast: a goodly tall horned
beast in pure verity a Cuckold: nay I will tickle their
Trangdidoes.
Ah thou base fellow! would thou confess it
and it were so: but it is not so, and thou lie and loudly.
Patience Morose, you are you say a Cuckold.
He justify my words; I scorn to eat em: this suck∣ing
Ferret hath been wrigling in my old Coney borough.
The Boy, the Babe, the Infant; I spit at thee.
Fie Secco fie.
Appear Spadone, my proofs are pregnant and
gross: truth is the truth; I must and I will be divorced.
speak Spadone and exalt thy voice.
Who I speak, alas I cannot speak I.
As I hope to live to be a man.
Dambe the prick of thy weason Pipe: where but
two lie in a bed you must be Bodkin bitch-baby must ye.
Spadone, am I a Cuckold or no Cuckold?
Why? you know I an ignorant unable trifle in
such business; an Oaf, a simple Alcatote; an Innocent.
Nay nay nay, no matter for that; this Ramkin hath
tup'd my old rotten carrion Mutton.
Rotten in thy maw, thy guts and garbage.
Spadone speak aloud what I am.
I do not know.
What hast thou seen em doing together? doing.
Nothing.
Are thy mad brains in thy mazar now, thou
jealous Bedlam?
Did not thou from time to time tell me as much?
Never.
Hoyday, Ladies and Signior I am abused, they are
agreed to scorn jeer and run me out of my wits; by
consent this gelded hoboed a hoy is a corrupted Pander:
the page a milk liverd Dildo; my Wife a Whore confessed;
and I my self a Cuckold arrant.
Truly Secco for the ancient good Woman; I dare
swear point-blanck; and the Boy surely, I ever said was
to any mans thinking, a very Chrisome in the thing you
wot, that's my opinion clearly.
What a wise goose-cap hast thou showed thy self?
Here in my fore-head it sticks, and stick it shall.
law I will have; I will never more tumble in sheets with
thee; I will father no misbegotten of thine; the Court
shall trounce thee, the City cashier thee, diseases de∣voure
thee, and the Spittle confound thee.
The man he's dreamed himself into a lunacy.
Alas poor Nitido.
Truly I am innocent.
Marry art thou, so thou art; the World says how
virtuously I have carried my good name in every part a∣bout
me, these threescore years and odd; and at last
to slip with a child; there are men, men enough, tough
and lusty (I hope) if one would give their mind to the
iniquity of the flesh, but this is the life I ha'led with him
a while since when a lies by me as cold as a dry stone.
This only (Ladies) is a fit of novelty,
All will be reconciled, I doubt, Spadone;
Here is your hand in this how ere denied.
Faithfully in truth forsooth.
Well, well enough—Morose, be less troubled;
This little jar is argument of love,
It will prove lasting; Beauties, I attend ye.
Youngling, a word youngling: have not you
escaped the lash handsomely? thank me for it
I fear thy roguery, and I shall find it.
First possible, give me thy little fist, we are friends;
have a care henceforth, remember this whilst you live.
Pretty knave, and so forth: Come, truce on all hands.
Beshrew your fools head; this was jest in
earnest.
I will converse with beasts; there is in mankind
No sound society, but in woman (bless me)
Nor faith nor reason: I may justly wonder
What trust was in my Mother.
A Caroch, sir,
Stand at the Gate.
Stand let it still, and freeze there:
Make sure the socks.
Too late, you are prevented.
Brother, I come—
Unlooked for;—I but sojourn
My self; I keep nor house, nor entertainments,
French Cooks composed, Italian Collations;
Rich Persian surfeits, with a train of services,
Befitting exquisite Ladies, such as you are,
Perfume not our low Roofs;—the way lies open
That there.—Good day, great Madam.
Why do ye slight me?
For what one act of mine, even from my Childhood,
Which may deliver my deserts inferior
Or to our Births or Family; is Nature
Become, in your contempt of me, a Monster?
What's this Camillo!
Not the strain in ordinary.
I'm out of tune to chop discourses—however,
You are a Woman.
Pensive and unfortunate,
Wanting a Brothers bosom to dis-burthen
More griefs, then female weakness can keep league with;
Let worst of malice, voye'd in loud report,
Spit what le dares invent against my actions;
And it shall never find a power to blemish
My mention, other then beseems a patient:
I not rapine at lownesses; and the Fortunes
Which I attend on now, are as I value them,
No new creation to a looser liberty:
Your strangeness only may beget a change
In wild opinion.
Heere's another tang of sense, Vespuci.
Listen and observe,
Are not you pray ye, (nay, we'll be contented
In presence of your Ushers, once to prattle.
Some idle minutes) are you not inthroan'd
The Lady Regent, by whose special influence
July the Count of Camerine is ordered?
His Wife it is known I am; and in that title,
Obedient to a service; else, of greatness
The quiet of my wish was ne'er ambitious.
Hee loves you?
As worthily, as dearly.
And it is believed how practice quickly fashioned
A port of humorous anticknesse in carriage,
Discourse, demeanour, gestures.
Put home roundly.
A ward for that blow.
Safety, of mine Honour,
Instructed such deceit.
Your Honour?
Witness
This brace of sprightly Gallants, whose confederacy
Presumed to plot a siege.
Ves. Wee, Madam I
On, on,
Some leisure serves us now.
Still as Lord Iulio
Pursued his Contract with the man (oh pardon
If I forget to name him) by whose poverty
Of honest truth, I was renounced in Marriage.
These two, entrusted for a secret 〈◊〉,
By tokens, letters, message, in their 〈◊〉,
Proffered their own devotions, as they 〈◊〉 them,
Almost unto an impudence; regardless
Of him, on whose supportance they 〈◊〉.
Dare not for both your lives to interrupt her.
Baited thus to vexation, I assumed
A dullness of simplicity; till afterwards
Lost to my City, Freedom, and now entered
Into this present state of my Condition;
(Concluding henceforth absolute security
From their lascivious Villainies) I continued
My former custom of ridiculous lightness,
As they did their pursuit; t'acquaint my Lord, were
To have ruined their best certainty of living:
But that might yield suspicion in my nature;
And woman may be virtuous without mischief,
To such as tempt them.
You are much to blame sirs,
Should all be truth is utterd.
For that Justice
I did command them hither, for a privacy
In conference twixt Flavia and her brother
Needed no Secretaries such as these are:
Now Romanello, thou art every refuge
I sly for right to; if I be thy Sister,
And not a Bastard, answer their confession,
Or threaten vengeance, with perpetual silence.
My follies are acknowledged; you're a Lady
Who have outdone example: when I trespass
In ought but duty, and respects of service,
May hopes of joys forsake me.
To like penance
I join a constant votary.
Peace then
Is ratified,—my Sister thou hast wakened
Entranced affection from its steep to knowledge
Of once more who thou art; no jealous frenzy
Shall hazard a distrust: reign in thy sweetness,
Thou only worthy Woman; these two Converts
Record our hearty union, I have shook off
My thraldom, Lady, and have made discoveries
Of famous Novels; but of those hereafter;
Thus wee seal love, you shall know all and wonder.
Health and his hearts desire to Romanello;
My welcome I bring with me; noblest Lady,
Excuse an ignorance of your fair presence;
This may be bold intrusion.
Not by me, Sir.
You are not frequent here as I remember;
But since you bring your welcome with you, Livio,
Be bold to use it; to the point.
This Lady,
With both these Gentlemen, in happy hour
May be partakers of the long lived amity,
Our souls must liuke in.
So belike the Marquess
Stores some new grace, some special close employment,
For whom your kind commends by deputation
Please think on to oblige, and Livio's charity
Descends on Romanello liberally, above my means to thank.
Seen sometimes
Has been informed how gladly there did pass
A treaty of chaste loves with Castamela;
From this good heart, it was in me an error
Wilful and causeless, it is confessed, that hindered
Such honourable prosecution,
Even and equal; better thoughts consider,
How much I wronged the gentle course which led ye
To vows of true affection; us of friendship.
Sits the wind there boy; leaving formal circum∣stance,
proceed; you dally yet.
Then without plea,
For countenancing what has been injurious
On my part, I am come to tender really
My Sister a loved Wife t'yee; freely take her
Right honest man, and as ye live together,
May your increase of years prove but one spring,
One lasting flourishing youth; she is your own,
My hands shall perfect what's required to ceremony.
Brother, this day was meant a holiday,
For feast on every side.
The new-turn'd Courtier
Proffers most frankly; but withal leaves out
A due consideration of the narrowness
Our short estate is bounded in, some Politics
As they rise up (like Livio) to perfection
In their own competencies, gather also
Grave supplement of providence and wisdom;
Yet he abates in his—you use a triumph
In your advantages, it smells of state:
We know you are no fool.
Sooth I believe him.
Else it were imposture.
Folly rank, and sense less.
Enjoin an oath at large.
Since you mean earnest,
Receive in satisfaction; I am resolved
For single life; there was a time (was Livio)
When indiscretion blinded forecast in me;
But recollection, with your rules of thriftiness,
Prevailed against all passion.
You'd be courted,
Courtship's the child of coyness Romanello;
And for the Rules it is possible to name them.
A single life's no burden; but to draw
In yokes is chargeable, and doth require
A double maintenance; Livios very words,
For he can live without a wife and purchase,
By'r Lady so you doe Sir, send you joy on it;
These rules you see are possible, and answered.
Full,—answer was late mate to this already,
My Sister's only thine.
Where lives the Creature
Your pity stoops to pin upon your servant?
Not in a Nunn'ry for a years probation?
Fie on such coldness, there are BOVVRDS OF FANCIES
Ravished from troops of Fairy Nymphs, and Virgins
Cul'd from the downy breasts of Queens their Mothers,
In the Titanian Empire, far from Mortals:
But these are tales; troth I have quite abandoned
All loving humour.
Here is scorn in Riddles,
Were there another Marquess in Sienna
More potent then the same who is vice-gerent
To the great Duke of Florence, our grand Master:
Were the great Duke himself here, and would lift up
My head to fellow pomp amongst his Nobles,
By falsehood to the honour of a Sister,
Urging me instrument in his Seraglio;
Id tear the Wardrobe of an outside from him
Rather then live a Pander to his bribery.
So would the hee you talk to, Romanello,
Without a noise that's singular.
Shees a Countess
Flavia, she; but she has an Earl her Husband,
Though far from our procurement.
Castamela
Is refused then.
Never designed my Choice,
You know and I know (Livio) more I tell thee,
A noble honesty ought to give allowance,
When reason intercedes; by all that's manly,
I range not in derision but compassion.
Intelligence flies swiftly.
Pretty swiftly;
We have compared the Copy with the Original,
And find no disagreement.
So my Sister
Can be no wife for Romanello?
No, no,
One no once more and ever;—this your curtsy
Foiled me a second;—Sir, you brought a welcome,
You must not part without it; scan with pity
My plainness, I intend nor gall, nor quarrel.
Far be it from me to press a blame, great Lady;
I kiss your noble hands, and to these Gentlemen
Present a civil parting; Romanello,
By the next foot-Post thou wilt hear some news
Of alteration; if I send, come to me.
Questionless, yea.
My thanks may quit the favour.
Brother his intercourse of conference,
Appears at once perplexed, but withal sensible.
Doubts easily resolved; upon your virtues
The whole foundation of my peace is grounded:
Isle guard ye to your home, lost in one comfort
Here I have found another.
Goodness prosper it.
NO more of these complaints and clamours;
Have we nor enemies abroad,
Nor waking Sycophants,
Who peering through our actions, wait occasion
By which they watch to lay advantage open
To vulgar descant, but amongst our selves
Some whom we call our own must practise scandal
(Out of a liberty of ease and fullness)
Against our honour, we shall quickly order
Strange reformation Sirs, and you will find it.
When Servants servants, slaves, once relish license
Of good opinion from a noble nature,
They take upon them boldness to abuse
Such interest, and Lord it ore their fellows,
As if they were exempt from that condition.
He is unfit to manage public matters
Who knows not how to rule at home his hoshould;
You must be jealous (puppy) of a Boy too;
Raise uprores, (bandy noise) amongst young Maidens;
Keep revels in your madness, use authority
Of giving punishment; a fool must fool ye;
And this is all but pastime, as you think it.
With your good Lordships favour, since, Spadone
Confessed it was a gullery put on Secco,
For some revenge meant me.
He vowed it truth
Before the Ladies in my hearing.
Sirrah,
Isle turn you to your shop again and trinkets,
Your suds and pan of small-cole; take your damsel
The grand old rag, of beauty; your deaths head;
Try then what custom reverence can trade in;
Fiddle, and play your pranks amongst your neighbours;
That all the town may roar ye; now ye simper
And look like a shaved skull.
This comes of prating.
I am my Lord a worm, pray my Lord tread on
me, I will not turn again; alas I shall never venture
To hang my Pole out; on my knees I begs it,
My bare knees, I will down unto my wife
And doe what she will have me, all I can doe;
Nay more, (if she will have it) ask forgiveness,
Be an obedient Husband; never cross her,
Unless sometimes in kindness: Seignior Troylo,
Speak one sweet word; Isle swear it was in my madness,
I said I knew not what, and that no creature
Was brought by you amongst the Ladies, Nitido
Isle forswear thee too.
Wait a while our pleasure;
You shall know more anon.
Remember me now.
Troylo, thou art my brothers son, and nereest
In blood to me; thou hast been next in counsels.
Those ties of nature (if thou can consider
How much they doe engage) work by instinct
In every worthy or ignoble mention
Which can concern me.
Sir, they have and shall
As long as I bear life.
Henceforth the Stewardship
My carefulness, for the honour of our Family
Has undertook, must yield the world account,
And make clear reckonings; yet we stand suspected
In our even courses.
But when time shall wonder
How much it was mistaken in the issue
Of honourable, and secure contrivements.
Your wisdom crowned with laurels of a Justice
Deserving approbation will quite foil
The ignorance of popular opinion.
Report is merry with my feats; my dotage
Undoubtedly the Vulgar voice doth carol it.
True Sir, but Romanello's late admission
Warrants that giddy confidence of rumour
Without all contradiction; now it is Oracle,
And so received; I am confirmed, the Lady
By this time proves his scorn as well as laughter.
And we with her his table-talke—she stands not
In any firm affection to him.
None Sir,
More then her wonted Nobleness afforded
Out of a civil custom.
We are resolute
In our determination, meaning quickly
To cause these clouds fly off; the ordering of it
Nephew is thine.
Your care and love commands me.
I come, my Lord, a Suitor.
Honest Livio,
Perfectly honest, reallie; no fallacies
No flaws are in thy truth: I shall promote thee
To place more eminent.
Livio deserves it.
What suit? speak boldly.
Pray discharge my office,
My mastership; it were better live a yeoman
And live with men, then over-eye your houses,
Whiles I my self am ridden like a jade.
Such breath sounds but ill manners; know young man,
Old as we are, our Soul retains a fire
Active and quick in motion, which shall equal
The daringst boys ambition of true manhood
That wears a pride to brave us.
He is my friend, Sir.
You are weary of our service, and may leave it.
We can court no mans duty.
Without passion,
My Lord, do ye think your Nephew here, your Troylo
Parts in your spirit as freely as your blood;
It is no rude question.
Had you known his Mother
You might have sworn her honest; let him justify
Himself not base borne: for thy Sisters sake
I doe conceive the like of thee; be wiser,
But prate to me no more thus;—if the gallant
Resolve on my attendance, ere he leave me,
Acquaint him with the present service, Nephew,
I meant to employ him in.
Fie Livio, wherefore
Turned wild upon the sudden.
Pretty Gentleman,
How modestly you move your doubts? how tamely?
Ask Romanello, he hath without leave
Surveigh'd your Bowers of FANCIES, hath discovered
The mystery of those pure Nuns; those chaste ones,
Untouched forsooth; the holy Academy:
Hath found a Mothers daughter there of mine too,
And one who called my Father Father, talks out,
Ruffles in mirth on it; baffel'd to my face
The glory of her greatness by it.
Truly.
Death to my sufferance, can thou hear this misery,
And answer't with a truly? it was thy wickedness
False as thine own heart tempted my credulity,
That, her to ruin; she was once an innocent,
As free from spot, as the blew face of heaven
Without a cloud in it; she is now as fully'd
As is that Canopy, when mists and vapours
Divide it from our sight, and threaten pestilence.
Says he so, Livio.
Yes, and't like your nobleness;
He truly does so say; your breach of friendship
With me, must borrow courage from your Uncle,
Whiles your sword talks an answer; theres no remedy,
I will have satisfaction, though thy life
Come short of such demand.
Then satisfaction
Much worthier then your sword can force, you shall have,
Yet mine shall keep the peace; I can be angry
And brave allowed in my reply; but honour
Schools me to fitter grounds, this as a gentleman
I promise ere the minutes of the night
Warn us to rest, such satisfaction (hear me
And credit it) as more you cannot wish for,
So much not think of.
Not? the time is short,
Before our sleeping hour: you vow.
I doe,
Before we ought to sleep.
So I intend to,
On confidence of which, what left the Marquess
In charge for me? Isle do it.
Invite Count Iulio
His Lady, and her brother, with their company
To my Lords Court at Supper.
Easy business,
And then.—
And then soon after, the performance
Of my past vow waits on ye, but be certain
You bring them with y'e.
Yet your servant.
Nearer my friend, you'll find no less.
It is strange, is it possible.
You have discoursed to me a lovely story,
My heart doth dance to the musique; it were a sin
Should I in any tittle stand distrustful
Where such a people such as you are, innocent
Even by the Patent of your years and language,
Inform a truth; O talk it ore again;
Ye are ye say three daughters of one mother,
That Mother only Sister to the Marquess,
Whose charge hath since her death (being left a widow)
Here in this place preferred your education:
Is it so?
It is even so, and howsoever
Report may wander loosely in some scandal
Against our privacies; yet we have wanted
No graceful means fit for our births and qualities,
To train us up into a virtuous knowledge
Of what, and who we ought to be.
Our Uncle
Hath often told us, how it more concerned him
Before he showed us to the world, to render
Our youths and our demeanours in each action
Approved by his experience, then too early
Adventure on the follies of the age,
By prone temptations fatal.
In good deed la,
We mean no harm.
Deceit must want a shelter
Under a roof, that's covering to souls
So white as breaths beneath it, such as these are;
My happiness shares largely in this blessing,
And I must thank direction of the providence
Which led me hither.
Aptly have you styled it,
A providence for ever in chaste loves,
Such majesty hath power,—our Kinsman Troylo
Was herein his own factor; he will prove,
Believe him Lady, every way as constant,
As noble, we can bail him from the cruelty
Of misconstruction.
You will find his tongue
But a just Secretary to his heart.
The Guardianesse
(Dear Creatures) now and then, it seems
Makes bold to talk.
Sh'as waited on us
From all our Cradles, will prate sometimes oddly,
However means but sport; I am unwilling
Our household should break up, but must obey
His wisdom, under whose command we live:
Sever our companies I'm sure we shall not;
Yet it is a pretty life this and a quiet.
Chuck, duckling, honey, mouse, monkey all and every
thing; I am thine ever and only, will never offend again,
as I hope to shave clean and get honour by it, heartily I
ask forgiveness; bee gracious to thine own flesh and
blood,
and kiss me home.
Look you provoke us no more, for this time
you shall find mercy;—was it that hedgehog set thy
brains a crowing? bee quits with him, but doe not hurt
the great male-baby.
Enough, I am wise, and will be merry,—hast Beau∣ties,
the Caroches will sudden receive ye; a night of
pleasure is toward, pray for good husbands a piece, that
may trim you featly, (dainty ones) and let me alone to
trim them.
Loving hearts be quick as soon as ye can, time
runs apace; what you must doe, doe nimbly, and give
your minds to it; young bloods stand fumbling? fie a∣way,
be ready for shame before-hand; hisband, stand to
thy tackling hisband, like a man of mettle: go, go, go.
Will ye come away loiterers? shall I wait all day?
Am I at livery do ye think.
Here and ready; what a mouthing thou keep,
I have but scoured my hands, and curried my head to save
time, honest Secco, neat Secco, precious barbarian, now
thou look like a worshipful Tooth-drawer, would I
might see thee on horseback, in the pomp once.
A Chair, a Chair, quick, quick.
Here's a chair, a chair politic, my fine boy,
sit thee down in triumph, and rise one of the nine Worcester∣this;
thou'lt be a sweet youth anon sirrah.
So, to work with a grace now, I cannot but high∣lie
be in love with the fashion of Gentry, which is never
complete, till the snip snap of dexterity, hath mow'd off
the excrements of slovenry.
Very commodiously delivered I protest.
Nay, the thing under your fingers is a whelp of
the wits I can assure you.
I a whelp of the wits? no, no, I cannot bark
impudently, and ignorantly enough;—oh, and a man of
this Art had now and then Sovereignty over fair Ladies,
you would tickle their upper and their lower lips, you'd so
smouch and belaver their chopps.
We light on some offices for Ladies too, as occa∣zion
serves.
Yes, frizzle or powder their hair, plane their
eye-browes, set a nap on their cheeks, keep secrets,
and tell news; that's all.
Wink fast with both your eyes, the ingredients
to the composition of this ball, are most odorous Cam∣phire,
pure soap of Venice, oil of sweet Almonds, with
the spirit of Allome; they will search and smart shrewd∣lie,
if you keep not the shop-windowes of your head close.
News? well remembered, that's part of your trade
too (prithee doe not rub so roughly) and how goes the
tattle of the town? what novelties stirring, ha?
Strange, and scarce to be credited; a gelding was
lately seen to leap an old Mare; and an old man of one
hundred and twelve stood in a white sheet for getting a
wench of fifteen with child, here hard by, most admi∣rabble
and portentous.
Isle never believe it, it is impossible.
Most certain, some Doctor Farriers are of opine∣on
that the Mare may cast a Foal, which the Master of
their Hall conclude in spite of all lockies and their fami∣liars,
will carry every race before him, without spur or
switch.
O rare, a man might venture ten or twenty to one
safely then, and ne'er be in danger of the cheat;—this
water me thinks is none of the sweetest; Camphor and
soap of Venice say ye.
With a little grecum album for mundification.
Grecum album is a kind of white persum'd po∣der,
which plain Country people, I believe, call dog-muske.
Dog-muske, pox of the dog-muske, what dost
mean to bleach my nose, thou give such twitches to it?
set me at liberty as soon as thou can, gentle Secco
Only pare off a little superfluous down from
your chin, and ell's done.
Pish, no matter for that; dispatch, I entreat thee.
Have patience man, it is for his credit to be neat.
What's that so cold at my throat; and scrubs
so hard?
A kind of steel instrument yelped a Razor, a
sharp tool and a keen, it has a certain virtue of cut∣ting
a throat, if a man please to give his mind to it;—hold
up your muzzle Signior,—when did you talk baudily
to my wife last? tell me for your own good (Signior) I
advise you.
I talk baudily to thy wife? hang bawdry; good
now mind thy business, lest thy hand slip.
Give him kind words you were best, for a toy
that I know.
Confess, or I shall mar your grace in whizzing
Tobacco or squirting of sweet wines down your gullet;
—you have been offering to play the gelding we told
ye of I suppose;—speak truth, (move the semicircle of
your countenance to my left hand file) out with the truth;
would you have had a leap.
Spadone, thou art in a lamentable pickle, have a
good heart and pray if thou can, I pity thee.
I protest and vow friend Secco, I know no leaps, I.
Let cherously goatish and an Eunuch? this cut,
and then—
Confound thee, thy leaps and thy cuts, I am no
Eunuch, you finical ass, I am no Eunuch; but at all
points as well provided, as any he in Italy, and that thy
Wife could have told thee: this your conspiracy, to
thrust my head into a brazen tub of Kitchin-see, hut∣wink
mine eyes in mud-soape, and then offer to cut my
throat in the dark like a Coward? I may live to be re∣veng'd
on both of ye.
Oh scurvy! thou art angry, feel man whether thy
weason be not cracked first.
You must fiddle my brains into a jealousy, rub my
temples with saffron, and burnish my forehead with the
juice of yellows: have I fitted ye now sir?
Ell's whole yet I hope?
Yes, sirrah; all is whole yet; but if ever thou
dost speak treason against my sweating and me once more,
thoul't find a roguy bargain on it; dear, this was hand∣led
like one of spirit and discretion: Nitido has pag'd it
trimly too; no wording, but make ready and attend
at Court.
Now we know thou art a man; we forget what hath
past, and are fellows and friends again.
Wipe your face clean; and take heed of a Razor.
The fear put me into a sweat; I cannot help it; I am glad I have my throat mine own, and must laugh for Company, or be laughed at.
You find Sir, I have proved a ready servant,
And brought th'expected guests, amidst these feastings,
These costly entertainments; you must pardon
My incivility that here sequesters
Your ears from choice of musique, or discourse
To a less pleasant parley; night draws on,
And quickly will grow old; it were unmanly
For any Gentleman, who loves his honour,
To put it on the rack; here is small comfort
Of such a satisfaction as was promised,
Though certainly it must be had; pray tell me
What can appear about me to be used thus?
My soul is free from injuries.
My tongue from serious untruths, I never wronged you,
Love you too well to mean it now.
Not wronged me?
(Blessed Heaven!) this is the bandy of a patience
Beyond all sufferance.
If your own acknowledgement
Quit me not fairly ere the hours of rest
Shall shut our eyes up, say I made a forfeit
Of what no length of years can once redeem.
Fine whirls in tame imagination; on sir,
It is scarce mannerly at such a season,
Such a solemnity (the place and presence
Considered) with delights, to mix combustions.
Prepare for free contents, and give em welcome.
I dare not study words, or hold a complement
For this particular; this special favour.
Your bounty and your love, my Lord, must justly
Engage a thankfulness.
Indeed
Varieties of entertainment here
Have so exceeded all account of plenty,
That you have left (great Sir) no rarities
Except an equal welcome which may purchase
Opinion of a common Hospitality.
But for this grace (Madam) I will lay open
Before your judgements which I know can rate 'em
A Cabinet of Jewels, rich and lively,
The world can show none goodlier; those I prize
Dear as my life—Nephew—
Sir, I obey you.—
Jewels, my Lord.
No strangers eye ere viewed them,
Unless your Brother Romanello happily
Was wo'd unto a sight for his approvement:
No more.
Not I, I doe protest; I hope Sir
You cannot think I am a lapidary;
I skill in Jewels?
It is a proper quality
For any Gentleman; your other friends
May be are not so coy.
Who they, they know not
A Topaz from an Opal.
We are ignorant
In gems which are not common.
But his Lordship
Is pleased (it seems) to try our ignorance.
For passage of the time, till they are brought,
Pray look upon a Letter lately sent me,
Lord Iulio, (Madam) Romanello, read
A novelty; it is written from Bonony
Fabricio once a Merchant in this City
Is entered into orders, and received
Amongst the Capuchins a fellow, news
Which ought not any way to be unpleasant,
Certain I can assure it.
He at last has
Bestowed himself upon a glorious service.
Most happy man, I now forgive the injuries
Thy former life exposed thee to.
Turn Capuchin,
Hee, whiles I stand a Cipher and fill up
Only an useless sum to be laid out
In an unthristy lewdness, that must buy
Both name and riot; Oh my sickle destiny!
Sister, you cannot taste this course but bravely,
But thankfully.
Hoe's now dead to the world
And lives to heaven, a Saints reward him;
My only loved Lord, all your fears are henceforth
Confined unto a sweet and happy penance.
Behold, I keep my word, these are the Jewels
Deserve a treasury; I can be prodigal
Amongst my friends; examine well their lustre
Do's it not sparkle? wherefore dwells your silence
In such amazement?
Patience keep within me,
Leap not yet rudely into scorn of anger.
Beauties incomparable.
Romanello,
I have been only Steward to your pleasures;
You loved this Lady once, what say you now to her?
I must not court you Sir.
By no means fair one,
Enjoy your life of greatness; sure the spring
Is past, the BOVVERS OF FANCIES is quite withes'd
And offered like a lottery to be drawn;
I dare not venture for a blank, excuse me,—
Exquisite Jewels.
Hark ye Troylo.
Spare me.
You then renounce all right in Castamela,
Say Romanello.
Gladly.
Then I must not;
Thus I embrace mine own, my wife; confirm it.
Thus when I fail (my dearest) to deserve thee
Comforts and life shall fail me.
Like vow I, for my part.
Livio, now my Brother, justly
I have given satisfaction.
Oh excuse
Our secrecy, I have been—
Much more worthy
A better Brother, he a better Friend
Then my dull brains could fashion.
Am I cozened.
You are not Romanello; we examined
On what conditions your affections fixed,
And found them merely Courtship; but my Nephew
Loved with a faith resolved, and used his policy
To draw the Lady into this society,
More freely to discover his sincerity
Even without Livio's knowledge, thus succeeded
And prospered, he's my heir and she deserved him.
Storm not at what is past.
A fate as happy
May crown you with a full content.
What ever
Report hath talked of me abroad, and these
Know they are all my nieces, are the daughters
To my dead only Sister, this their Guardianesse
Since they first saw the World; indeed my Mistresses
They are, I have none other; how brought up
Their qualities may speak; now Romanello,
And Gentlemen, for such I know ye all,
Portions they shall not want both sit and worthy;
Nor will I look on fortune, if you like
Court them and win them, here is free access,
In mine own Court henceforth; only for thee
I wish Clarella were allotted.
Most noble Lord, I am struck silent.
Brother, heere's noble choice.
Frenzy, how did thou seize me!
We knew you Sir, in Prugniolo's posture.
Were merry at the sight.
And gave you welcome.
Indeed forsooth, and so we did an't like ye.
Enough, enough; now to shut up the night,
Some menial servants of mine own are ready
For to present a merriment; they intend
Acording to th'occasion of the meeting,
In several shapes to show how love oreswayes
All men of several conditions; Soldier,
Gentry, fool, scholar, Merchant man, and Clown:
A harmless recreation; take your places.—
Your duties are performed henceforth, Spadone,
Cast off thy borrowed title: Nephew Troylo,
His Mother gave thee suck; esteem him honestly.
Lights for the Lodgings, it is high time for rest;
Great men may be mistook when they mean best.
A while suspected (Gentlemen) I look
For no new Law, being quited by the Book.
Our harmless pleasure's, free in every sort
Actions of scandal; may they free report.
Distrust is base, presumption urges wrongs;
But noble thoughts must prompt as noble tongues.
Fancy and Judgment are a Plays full matter:
If we have er'd in one, right you the latter.

THe Roman and Athenian Drammaes far
Differ from us, And those that frequent are
In Italy and France, even in these days,
Compared with ours, are rather jiggs than Plays:
Like of the Spanish may be said, and Dutch,
None versed in language, but confess them such.
They doe not build their projects on that ground,
Nor have their phrases half the weight and sound
Our laboured Scenes have had; (and yet our Nation,
Already too much taxed for imitation,
In seeking to Ape others) cannot quit
Some of our Poets, who have sinned in it.
For where before great Patriots, Dukes and Kings
Presented for some hie facinorious things,
Were the Stage-Subiect; now we strive to fly
In their low pitch, who never could soar hie:
For now the common argument entreats,
Of puling Lovers, crafty Bawds or cheats.
Nor blame I their quick fancies, who can fit
These queasy Times, with Humours fleshed in wit,
Whose Art I both encourage and commend;
I only wish that they would sometimes bend
To memorise the valour• of such men,
Whose svery names might dignify the Pen,
And that our (once applauded) Roscian strain,
In acting such might be revived again:
Which you to countenance, would the Stage make proud,
And Poets strive to key their strings more loud,
THe united blood of Spain and Portugal,
Now meets in us; the Hereditary hopes,
That were but in Conception, now have birth,
And what was but Idea, till this day,
Hath put on essence.
Joy to the Prince and Princess.
This Hail• from you, wee count a blessing to us,
And more then common greeting, as from Gentlemen,
Crowned both in blood, and virtue.
These perhaps,
See with judicial eyes unto th•se joys
You gain by enjoying us.
Wee find them great.
But great? wee looked for a superlative,
And if there be a fit, and known degree,
Above compare; to have bin marked with th••
Wee would not have a thought conceived of 〈◊〉
But should be mixed with rapture, and what you
Term joy, transported into ecstasy,
But great?
Mee-thinkes addition great enough
For any mortal Woman.
To such goodness,
Your highness might have lent an attribute
Of far more weight, and splendour.
Teach us that?
I shall, who would be weighed unto my worth,
And yet in all my poise not loose a dram,
Put you the proudest Lady in one scale,
And me into another.
You shall mount her—If pride will do it.
This Beauty, Virtue, Birth,
Shall unto mine own Center sink my self,
And lift her, unto nought save smoke and Ayre.
Nay, that upon my knowledge.
Fair Isabella,
Instruct me modestly in what I err,
And if I shall but scant you in the least,
Isle make you large amends.
Why even in that,
In terming me but fair, fair Isabella?
It is a Milke-maides title, every Swain
Bestows it on his Mistress, ne'er so mean,
Your City damsel scorns the word, because
It is common in the Country; and shall we•
Bred in the Courts rich glory, intertain't?
What's great and fair? wee would be termed divine.
Such as would give us our full character,
Must search for Epithets, and study phrase.
Examine but plain Mantuan, and he will tell you, what
woman is.
Great Prince of Portugal,
Observe in me thine happiness, thank not Heaven
So much that thou were borne, nor borne a Prince,
But that thou injoy'st us: For that great blessing
Give thy 〈◊〉 thanks.
So he well may.
Behold I here expose me to all eyes,
To universal censure. Lives a Lady
Greater in Blood? if any that gainsay
Spain shall maintain it by her potency;
Search Italy and all these Climes beyond,
Come by the Alps back, and view France throughout,
Produce me the most excellent German Fro,
Examine England, which some say breeds beauties
Beyond all these, and Prince; your Portugal
To equal this; this? doe I boast of those
That a•e no• mine? say wee ascribe our birth
Only to Fortune, and to nature form,
Count both these accidental, there's a third
Virtue remains: and even in that wee dare
With any Princess of the World contest.
Come, your free censures Lords.
Madam I hold you
In least of these not to be paralleled.
In my opinion, Madam you so far
Exceed all these that yet mine eyes have seen
Nay heard, or read of.
O base flattery!
That unto those beforetime wondered at,
You in our age appear a miracle,
And never to be matched.
We observe in you,
A kind of enforced silence mixed with scorns,
Your tongue hath been so back-ward to pronounce
So definitive a sentence.
Know then Madam,
I must confess (although a women's son)
Yet cannot I dissemble, neither would I,
Should I be racked and tortured, then with pardon
Unto the Prince and you, thus much I think,
I not deny, but you by birth are royal.
Beauteous, or else I should condemn mine eyes,
And say they wore false lights; for your known virtues,
Traitor he were, that should but question them,
I make this attestation, yet sweet Prin• esse,
These praises you con•err upon your self
Though they be just and true from your own Tongue
Loose part of their great luster, in these, or me,
They would have had more sweetness, better sound,
But from a Tuskan tongue, or Porteguise,
English or French, or any Strangers mouth,
Much more harmonious relish; I have held it
Still as a Maxim, my best Judging days,
Such doubt their words are for••d themselves to praise.
Who fitter to speak truth, then Trueth's own tongue?
Yet arrogance in Truth may blemish it.
Of Atrogance us?
Call'• if you please, Selfe-love:
Besides in man or woman, since the first
Nature hath ye• ded none so absolute,
To whom she made no fellow. First for beauty,
If Greece afforded a fair Helen, Troy
Her paralleled with a Polyxena:
For Wisdom, Rome presented a Cornelia,
And Lidia a S•sipatra: Chastity?
Lucrece▪ of whom the Romans so much boast:
Did not the self same City breed a Portia,
Who when she heard ber husband Brutus slain,
Kept from all other Engines, swallowed fire,
And by that means to meet with him in death,
Of such I could produce yet Infinite;
And Madam though I must confess you rare,
And most completely perf•ct in all these,
Yet not sochoice a piece, but the wide world
May yield you a competitor.
As you are, Prince,
And over hope to have the sweet fruition
Of those pure gifts, that man so much disdains;
Grant me one free demand.
Speak and obtain▪
His banishment from Spain and Portugal,
Never hereafter to bee capable
Of Honour, of Renown, place, or office,
Till hee can find, produce, and set before vs,
Our match in Face and bosom, birth wee set by,
But be she woman, and can balance us,
In both, or either, he redeems his exile
Without such, to return, forfeits his head,
Deny this Prince, you banish us your bed.
Most unpeer'd Lady, that, not for ten Worlds,
For if an husband can a vassal bee,
To such approved virtues; I am hee:
Lord Bonavid••, you have from her tongue
An express doom, that cannot bee revok't;
Tic like the Persian seal unalterable:
And come my divine Princess; Hee shall know,
In his Just doom, what zeal to you wee owe.
Is this Trueth's merit? Can the Court find place
For none but flatterers, and must I be made
The first example of her Tyranny?
Shall I be made a president through Spain,
To deter men from speaking in the Court
What's Just and honest? Nay, wee term this law,
Or mere oppression. What an Infinite task
Am I confined too? One as virtuous
No Cloister scarce but could supply me with,
And never travel further; but the doubt is,
Whether it harbour in so smooth a skin;
As fair a face, I might with ease produce,
But Whore's the Virtue then? since few there are
That wear both these ascriptions, Chaste, and fair:
In all his twelve great labours, Hercules
Was not thus tasked by Iuno.
Ill news flies apace, and hath pluck't me by the ears
already, well, whosoever pronounced that sentence; I hope no
body hears me: I would his Portugal skin were ta•n'd in∣to
Spanish Leather, and either cut into some flovenly Boot, to
be dabled in the dirt without a Galoach, or snip'd into a Saint
Martines Jerkin, that never came within the sent of a perfumers
shop.
Had she proposed to find her match for pride,
There had bin then no help, no hope at all;
For that had bin the harder task of two.
In stead of confined had his doom been to have been
coffined, there had been some comfort, he might have still kept
his Country, but in plain Portenguise and Spanish, both banished
I am sure thou hear the news.
How can I choose, being in the mouth of every Diego,
which I no sooner heard, but I so sought that I might find you,
and so find you never hereafter to lose you, for without you
this is no place for me, and without me no Country can bee a
Country for you. And so a Fig for Spain, and a Prune for
Portugal.
I both accept and will reward thy love,
If ere my Fate be to revisit home.
First these, then several Countries we will try,
To find out this choice piece.
That's you and I.
Why how! mistress daughter, have you conquered the
West Indies, that you wear a gold Mine on your back, this
wearing will make your fathers revenues shrink.
Isle be so bold as stretch them on the tenters and they do
Y•are a good Jewel the whilst.
And Jewels must be set in gold father, Isle not lose the
least dram of my lustre.
You will not, and to what end suits all this bravery pray?
To a good end if my Aim bee steady. Hear you the
News at Court.
Of Valladauraes fight at Sea; is this golden bait for him?
Alas poor Sea-calfe: it is not his love I angle for, I fish
deeper streams and for a richer draught, have you not heard of
Bonavida's fortunes?
To parallel the Queen in beauty and virtue? which he
can never doe.
Which he may easily doe, her Prerogative of birth set
apart what blemish doe you see in me that I may not bee the
woman?
Thou foolish girl: then compare a Glowworm
with a Star, a Star with the Sun.
And the Sun with a Burning glass: Come, come,
you're dim-sighted Father, could you see with my eyes, and
judge with my understanding, your comparison would hold
é contrario I assure you: thy hasty news?
A Noble Gentleman—
Would speak with me; (Bonavide in my Conscience)
Is it not so fellow?
I am not familiar with his name: He is of a noble aspect.
It can be none but hee, give me fresh ornaments, see
your error now father, Cupped and Venus, rich and new attires:
Bonavide come? live in my cheek sweet beauty: Eloquen•e at∣tend
my tongue, and perfection my behaviour: Came hee on
horseback or Caroach't.
Neither of either. He is new come from Sea.
Certainly he having lost his labour in foreign search
he meets his hopes at home, the more my honour still: fly and
admit him. Your Counsel father, shall I seem strange of fami∣liar,
wanton or serious, affable or peevish, I am as full of humours
as an April day of variety, how shall I bear my self?
En in the midst mean, daughter, or let me see and thou
wilt be ruled by me, bear thy self—Even how thou wilt, prove∣ded
it be to thine own profit, and my further honour: Noble
Bonavide has Valladaur a Daughter? do you know this gallant?
Valladaura I hate, this gentleman acquainted with my
beauty, reveled it to Bonavide: Sir you have bound me to you,
and comes to usher him to my presence.
Marry and welcome, my further honour still.
We stay his coming, pray Sir so return him.
Whose coming?
His, your Masters Bonavide's.
You speak Riddles to me.
Be your own O Edipus and dissolve them then.
Come not you Nuntius from Bonavida Sir?
I am mine own Nuntius and my Errand's love.
I hear no hurt, my further honour still.
Which I am come in person to deliver
To this rare beauty.
Honour upon honour.
My fortunes fly of to strong a wing, to stoop so low
a pitch, is not Bonavida come yet?
As much as ere he will I think, Valladaura•s a pretty
piece of flesh cease him: play not Esops cur, lose not the substance
in expectation of the shadow: it is a dog trick many Ladies have
practised: bosom him, doe.
What, this mean creature?
And he were meaner, so thou get profit, and thy father
honour by it▪
Are all my hopes repaid with scorn?
He begins to recoil, clap him close to thy breast, hoe's
gone else.
Nay, Valladaura.
Have I laid out more breath
In sacrificing vows, and fruitless Sonnets
Unto that be autious shrine, than ere man did?
Come, be not passionate, though I know both my worth
and beauty, and understand what Orb they move into▪ I am
not so much infected with that same Court-sicknesse Philantia,
or selfe-love, to scorn the service of any generous Spirit.
How, neither for thy profit, nor thy fathers honour?
In sober conference then, what bounded service, have you
ever done my beauty, that may challenge the least interest in
my love?
As many as man can, I writ my self
(And truly) lover ere I could write man,
Passing my service as a star, where she
The blessed Idea ofthy glorious feature,
Drawn by the curious working of my thoughts,
Gave me the better, I put out to Sea,
And there—
What did you?
For thy honour now; what did at Sea?
As much as any man—
That did no more than thou did, thy further honour still.
Somewhat I did: but what, let these deep wounds
Undressed and unbound up deliver.
They are tonguetide, and cannot speak for blushing, pret∣tie
ornaments for a soldier, how came you by them 〈◊〉? honestly
As noble Hector did by his, but by
An enemy far more valiant than his.
I like that well, thy further honour still.
At Sea I met with a bold man of war,
And somewhat more, an Englishman: Oh had
Your eye (but fate denied that blessedness)
Witnessed our bearing, and how far the thought
Of you and your rare beauty carried me
Above my strength.
I should have said what you are forced to acknowledge
that my beauty had been the better man.
I am proud of that, my further honour still.
All this while you are beholding to my beauty, &amp; I nothing
in debt to your valour, which for ought I gather, is nothing at all
Nothing? to enter, and hold single combat
With such a daring opposite, nothing, to take
These dangerous wounds, and bring •em home undressed?
It was I confess somewhat to takethese wounds, yet in
my mind he that gives the cognisance has more reason to boast
of it, than hee that wears it: show me the man that gave you
these wounds and I'll commend his valour.
For giving of 'em? Knight there's small honour in ta∣king
of 'em though in my judgement, but what was he?
A man whose noble valour I must speak.
Good reason, he has paid you soundly for it before hand.
In love and honour I shall ever serve him.
So I thought, for you wear a livery of his, cut to the skin
and lin∣d
with Crimson: had you gin't him, I should have cane
you for the Master. But pardon me, I foare too high for a serving∣man,
your ear, I am modest, away, hie to the subur•es, bribe
some honest Barbarsurgeon to wash off your dishonour and hey•e
your intamy.
That done once, learn this tenet of the war,
The honour's more to give than wear a scar.
Each coward may doe that.
It is not my fate but mine own imperfection,
That makes the act in it self good and laudable,
Ill and distasteful, were my services
Done by some other, they must needs become
And grace the owner, were my words deliv'rd
From any tongue but mine, they could not choose
But win attention: Had my love been bred
In any breast but mine, it could not thus
Be scorned and bafled. I of all the world
Am most unfortunate, neither act, word, or love
Can please your audience, or compassion move.
AFter our tedious travels wee at length
Are safe arrived in England, speak what use
Hast made of our long Voyage?
Such as Travellers use, for by long practise I am now at
length grown perfect, and the truth is I can lie in any language.
But in our quest of this rare piece of beauty
And Vertne mixed, to rival the great Princess,
What think thou of our trial made in Spain?
I think of it as I ever did, that's as of a bottle of hay,
and the Creature you talk of, a Needle 〈◊〉 Spanish Needle,
which I fear you will never live to hit full in the eye: Spain! there
are so many Mores int, that I know you would hope of nothing
less: besides the most beauties of Spain have been oft in Civil.
What then of Portugal?
Worse then the tother: the Women there are for the
most part like their Orindges, the fairer the outside the rotten∣ner
within, and the founder at the heart, the rougher the skin;
the Country is too hot, too hot.
What of the Russian then?
As of a Country too cold, and in cold countries I know
we should have but cold comfort, besides the women go wrapped
in so much fur, that of necessity they must have more ha•re then
wit, besides they cannot be wise they have so much ado to keep
themselves warm, and more than that, what might the Prince
and Princess think, if after all our long travels, wee should
come home, and present them with a rush?
Which only taking her great title of
Is worth more than her self, of Italy
Then give me thy true censure.
The clean contrary way, oh, my Lord, there are so
many Italian Locks, that I know it was unpossible your own
key should open them all. Moreover these that are naturally
jealous of their women, it is probable their women naturally give
them cause.
For France.
What the pox should we speak of that, knowing what
is bred in the bone, will hardly out of the flesh?
The women of high Germany?
A place that I should highly stand for, if the Princess
had imposed on us a challenge for drinking.
Of the Low-Countries then.
In Flushing, there is good riding, but not without dan∣ger.
For many at a high tide, have been like to have been cast
away in the road. At Middleborough, night or day you could
scarce find the Exchange empty. At Bristles, if you remember
you were used but roughly: At Sluice we were both well washed,
Nimmingham bid you look to your Sk•nce: and Ostend, be∣ware
the Cat. Don-hague is full of Witches, and had wee but
tutcht at Rot or Dam, ten to one we had never come off sound
men. Much ado wee had to find New-Port: Therefore if
ever you come to Bergen, see you make it wisely.
And now, there's hope I shall, this Albion
That fitly bears name of his chalky cliffs,
Breeds wondrous choice of Beauties, wise, and lovely,
Scarce to be matched in all the world besides,
Amongst which I have took particular view of one,
Whom had the Trojan Ravisher beheld,
Troy had still stood, the Queen of Love disgrac't,
And she alone had gained the golden prize,
For which the three celestial beauties strove.
I grant you the face, but if she should prove rotten at
the heart, there's the question.
I think none to be made. First for her birth,
I have inquired her noble: For her breeding,
It hath been amongst her equals, and so far
From least taxation, to the sail of tongues,
It merits imitation; of her chastity
Some proofs I have made, and found it like the Diamond,
Save by a Diamond never to be wrought.
Could opportunity have moved, words tempted,
Persuasions took effect, or gifts prevailed,
Beneath my much importance she had fallen:
But like a promontory rock she stands,
At all the curled Oceans wrath unmoved,
Telling the gusts, and bearing every storm,
Yet on such virtues are her bases fixed,
She is not to be shaken, then in her
My travels take their period.
Then I would shes and you were agreed, that you
might come to a full point: and here she comes, now or no∣ver
make a full conclusion, and write Finis.
Daughter,
What think you of this stranger?
As a stranger.
Of his carriage and complement.
As things for which he hath travelled, it is easy
For him that hath the liberty of many
Grounds to pick himself a choice Nosegay,
And hee that hath travelled so many Countries,
Out of every one peculiarizing what's best;
With what small difficulty may such a one
Appear complemental?
His proffers to you were large.
And the performance may perhaps prove like
His journey, long.
What think you of his person?
That there's many one cannot pray so well as
He, that is better benefic't.
But say hee had power to perform all that hee hath
promised.
Only this, that I have power in my self to say
More then I have yet either promised him, or
You to utter.
Did you not hear her talk of utter, for shame Sir,
either utte• your mind now to the full, or else utterly give
it over.
Madam, What say you to my suit?
I needs must say Sir, it becomes you well,
Graces your person, and your person it:
I like both Stuff and fashion.
Oh, sweet Lady,
It is good to play with such as use to sport,
But with the staid be serious.
Now whilst they are in talk, will I hold some dis∣course
or other with the old Gentlewoman: because she shall
not interrupt them.
May it please your old Ladyship—
Out of this fellow, I may find perhaps
That which his Master would have loath reveled,
I'll join with him in conference.
Since you tax me of jest, I charge you Sir
Henceforth to speak all earnest, or stand mute,
I vow it by my greatest bliss on earth,
(My hopes I have in you.)
Ilettry your faith,
Have you in all the countries you have travelled
Never made proof of Lady?
Yes, in all,
And in each clime, of many.
Nay, I thought what I should find you, trust a stran∣gers
love as gold to court the wind. If then such numbers,
Why, after all these trials make you me
The last of all your t'sales?
Last of my hopes,
Or period of my wishes, had you said,
I should have answered then, only because
Of all you are most perfect.
Now you flatter.
A Lord said st thou?
I, and I assure your Ladyship, allied to the best
Grandoes of Spain, nay more then so,—
As I confess you perfect, I entreat
Let not my merited praises make you proud,
And vie your own worth; I shall wonder then:
Know Madam, that I left my Country Spain,
And there my many honours, not of pleasure,
But by compulsive force, unwillingly,
My voyage purposely to find out you,
Which ere I could, I have travelled Kingdoms through,
Searched Courts, examined Cities, nay even Villages.
For me?
For you; for the chief Paragon
Of Beauty matched with Virtue; therefore you
For one to rival the great Spanish Princess,
Matchless in both, through half the world, save you,
Indeed I flatter not, you are that Mine,
(Oh Lady, might I truly say that Mine:)
No India yields, save this, but thine; the sun.
To out-shine that candle, none but this clear splendour,
Dimmes her imperfect glories; You by this
Shall win your self a name through all the world,
And purchase admiration: me that so
Have prys'd you, and esteemed you, marking you
Amongst thousands, for a piece unparalleled:
Before all things, my Country, Honours, Friends,
That else like a poor exile forfeit all,
And Lady, you the cause on it: If my Love,
Grounded upon such strong opinion
Merit repulse; if you will loose your self,
And hazard me, that have my head engaged
To make this good: I only shall report
The strangest thing in my long search I find,
Beauty with Virtue mixed, proved both unkind.
Which should I be?—pray give 〈…〉
And then expect my answer.
And hath hee chose her out amongst so many?
Yes, and means to make her a great Lady, to possess
her of all his fortunes, to put down all the prime Ladies of
Spain: and for Beauty and Virtue, to bee preferred before the
great Princess her self.
To this, should she not willingly assent,
She were no more my daughter.
Now, your answer.
Should this be true, that you prefer this face
Before the beauties of so many climes:
And that your life and means soly depend,
There to expose it freely, I should much
Digress from honour, to neglect such love,
And should I not in unseen Virtue strive
To equal that seen beauty you so praise,
I should then much wrong that great character
You have bestowed upon me.
Which you shall not;
Daughter, I say you shall not; Sir, shoe's yours,
Or I disclaim her ever.
Pray good mother,
A little pardon me; how shall I know
What here you promise, you can there make good.
If you distrust his word, cake mine, which will pass
in Spain for more Myravids, then the best Squires in England
for Farthing-tokens.
That you may know it is not lust, but love,
And the true speculation I have tan,
In both these adjuncts, that proclaim you rare,
That it is to have you denison'd in Spain,
Be instated in my liberal fortunes there,
To appear in Court a foreign miracle,
And not to make you here my Prostitute;
I only beg your promise, that, being granted,
Isle back into my Country, tell the Princess,
What here in England I have seen and found,
My peace being made, I will return thus far,
To fix you in that 〈◊〉 a splendent star,
And this is all I crave•
It is just, and honest,
In this can be no fallacy at all.
As truth then I accept it, and am yours.
And Lady, I your creature: For by you
I am new made; as Mistress of this contract.
Accept this Ring, which never part withal,
But to my self in person.
Not in death,
T'shall with me to my grave.
To prove your constancy,
One Imposition more; there may be trains
Laid to entrap our love, to injure you,
And forfeit me, therefore till my return,
Which shall be with what suddenness I can:
Be shown unto no stranger.
These I vow,
And pray you keep this token with that care
That I shall your commands, on this presume.
Of which, through all Hesperia you may boast,
Though my face please, yet shall my virtue most.
Thou hast lost Isabella; and I gained
Me an Empire by my travel: I by you
Am new created, being lost and gone,
With this most sweet addition, two in one.
A good hearing, and I and the old Gentlewoman are
both witnesses to the bargen.
Approve no act, tho ne'er so well becoming
Part, so well beautified, phrase aptly languag'd,
To the very Tone and Accent of the Time,
But seems in me de•am'd and rustical•;
None can endure my sight, all things I doe
Are construed to the worst; I walk the streets,
Satute I all I meet, none resaluteth me,
But look askue, and point, and laugh at me,
As who should say; See Petro••llaes Scorn,
And that which wounds me deeper then death can,
The more I strive to make me worth her love,
So much the more unworthy she reputes me.
And faith what think of Bonavidaes undertaking?
As of the man himself, most frivolous and idle;
He parallel the Queen? ha, ha, ha.
They speak of me, and seal it with a smile:
That I could sink, and hide me in the Center.
Bold Valladaura, well returned from Sea: wee hear—
Of my disgrace, what a swift wing has Rumour?
You met a bold and noble opposite.
Have you heard that too?
But beauteous Petrocella—
She has told all: I shall be Ballated,
Sung up and down by Minstrels? Gentlemen,
Tho my success fell short of my intent,
Let it meet fair construction.
It deserves no less.
Your noble bearing, has given our modern gallants
Plaine-song to descant on.
They scoff me palpably: but noble friends,
Such I have ever reckoned you, Let's change
Discourse a while in private.
Of all the Christians this arm ever tried,
You come the nearest men: What Country?
England.
You're Nobly Spirited: Have you got your ransoms?
None but our lives.
Them thus wee tender.
They are Jewels:
We rather wish to wear, than part withal,
But need commands us to make instant sale;
To the Male-Market with 'em, each man carries
His price upon his shoulder, go go, try the Market,
Our self will stay, and answer customers.
You've given both me and my fears satisfaction,
I shall report you noble, and esteem my credit
Much richer than I did: As I said, my opposer
Had man enough in him, and indeed more
Then I have known in many.
The Land breeds few other: what's here, a Market of
Slaves?
Manly proportions? Ha! Mont. Ferrers?
Death!
My mortal foe? how is my poor life hunted?
You doe not know me?
I must give you •no lie, to say I doe.
It is surely hee, yet if it be, mischance
Has made him much unlike himself, when he
And I vied valour on the purple deck,
He wot a look more manly; I'll try further.
Were you ne'er Captain of a Ship at Sea?
I had ne'er been slave unto a Turk, a shore else.
Of England? your name Ferr••s?
Rather than deny—
My name and Country, I'll acknowledge any
Thing base or deadly: I confess you know me,
You shall know me too, ere we part.
I shall?
Unto some cost you shall, trust tot.
If Fate
Has writ my name in her black book: and this
The hind-most minute of my hours, I scorn
To bribe the Beldam to wipe't out again.
You know the Gentleman conferred with you?
For a bold Foe, and a proud Spaniard.
You may have cause to say so: rh'as sent you Ransom.
My ransom? Why? Why should he ransom me?
Nay rather, why should I ask that? I saw
Inveterate hate flame in his burning eye,
He frees me from slight bondage of the Turk
To slave me to himself, and exercise
New tyranny: he meets a living grave
That's vassal unto him, was once his slave;
That fate o'retakes me: I will not accept it.
Your reason?
Not that I desire to live
Slave to a turk, or fear the bloody usage
Of an ambitious Spaniard: Death is but death
What shape so ere he comes in.
Why are ye so loath to meet him then?
Though you cannot enforce so much, Isle tell you,
See you this man? One that with me hath fronted
The wrath, and utmost violence of Fate,
Should mine own Countrymen, nay, natural mother,
Or my kind Sister, whose fair eyes I honour,
Should the best Lord of th•se have sent my ransom,
Had it come single without his, as this,
I would have spu••'d, and sent it back.
You would Sir? We shall return so much.
And be persuaded to find usage answerable to your
Contempt.
Why for my sake doe you neglect your freedom?
Because for mine, thou hast not loved thy life,
But throwneit upon dangers more than common:
Because for me, thou left'st thy native land,
Father and Friends, and to make me a fortune
Unmade thine own; give both thy self and fate
Wholly to me; think me not so unjust
To lose a Jewel made o'er to me in trust.
But they return.
Here's both their Ransoms,
And theres both the slaves,
A better peny-worth of flesh and blood
Turk never sold.
Nor Christian but a Spaniard
Would ere have bought.
Oh yes, your English Jaws, they' le buy and sell their fa∣theirs,
prostrate their wives, and make money of their own i will∣drone,
the male stews can witness that: come on Sir, you must
along.
How, must?
And shall, prating you English slave?
You know me now?
Yes truly, for a Tyrant,
And bloody hangman: had I knownethee half so well.
When on the Deck I had thee at my mercy,
I would have ground my sword upon thy bones,
And writ my freedom in thy blood.
I live,
To doe the like by thee—
And I breathe yet,
To dare thee to thy utmost: and may win
More honour of thee, by my manly suffering,
Than thou, by base inflicting: My friend and I
Like two chaine-bullets, side by side, will fly▪
Thorough the jaws of death.
A strong resolve,
But I shall quickly weaken, sunder them,
With hen there—quick, that Paper will point out
Diet and lodging for him.
Sunder them? that word
Falls colder on me than the Rheum of Death.
Then you'll not fly like bullets in the jaws
Of Death and danger?
Hear me Valladaura,
Since thou wilt needs ta•e up the attribute
And name of Tyrant, study thy trade perfect,
Soil it not in per•ormance, like a true Artist,
Degree thy tortures, like an angry tempest,
Rise calmly first, and keep thy worst rage last,
Torment us jointly: sunder us at first,
A plague so deadly, that what ever follows
Will seem but as a Cordial: would have devised
After a thousand tortures, one to mad
My manly patience, or to split my heart,
It had been done in this one accent, part.
Divide'em so.
Mezentius. cruelty,
Comes short of yours, he joined, but you divide
A living man in two.
Right spanish Pride.
I used not you so though: but noble Sir,
How well thou hast merited living?
So I'll die,
Thy thought's an Antidote against tyranny.
Borne on that confidence, lose not one tear,
Nor spend a sigh, let guilty cowards fear.
You'll find a change.
Your churlsh—nor can we look to find
Usage more gentle. Revenge is unconfined.
And so shall mine be: what the art of man
Knows of tormentings, mine shall inflict, and can.
This parting of you is the least and first,
Of infinite to come.
I dare the worst.
Most divine Lady, in the late exile
Of your depraver Bonavid•; how
Doe you applaud my justice?
Why, as Justice.
To have done less, should have disgraced 〈◊〉 more
Then all your worth could merit.
Who doubts that,
Hee were not worthy to be styled a Prince,
Or to partake that goodness got in you,
That should have let slip such proud arrogance,
Without severest rigour.
Troth I wonder
In what remote climb the poor exile tree•ds,
Or in what place he hopes to find that piece
His impudence durst boast of?
Hoe's perhaps
Travelled to Arabia Felix, and from thenc•
To bring the Phoenix hither.
He should then
Have kept his Country, if a Phoenix live,
You make Spain blessed Arabia.
I remember,
There lived a Spanish Princess of our name,
An Isabella too, and not long since;
Who from her Palace windows, steadfastly,
Gazing upon the Sun, her heir took fire,
Some Augurs held it as a prodigy,
I rather think she was Latona's brood,
And that Apollo courted her bright hair,
Else envying, that her tresses put down his,
He scorched them off in envy, not dare I
From her derived, expose me to his beams,
Least, as he burns the Phoenix in her nest
Made of the sweetest aromatic wood;
Either in love or envy, he agree
To use the like combustion upon me.
A thing much to bee feared.
Then royal Lady,
Might I advise you, keep out of the Sun
And walk still in the shade, by pro•fe we see
Such Meteors oft take fir•.
Alas poor Lord:
To see what thy bold rashness brings thee to
That thou art forced to wander through the world,
To find out a black Swan to rival us?
Thou seek a thing that is not: and thy rashness
Hath justly forced thine exile.
Fairest of Creatures,
I bring you news, Lord Bonavids returned,
And new arrived at Court,
Art sure it is so?
Most certain Royal Princess.
To his death: If he come empty handed.
But if sped,
Then hee redeems his exile.
Blind, and dull,
Hath plenty bred a surfett in you then?
Or have you tan possession of that treasure,
You know not how to value to the worth,
But though you cannot, wee can rate our self:
Perhaps, despair hath brought him back to offer
His desperate life; Which if with submission,
Repentance, and some due acknowledgement,
May in our grace find pardon; Go, admit him.
Now let's prepare our eyes; For, hee no question
Hath brought o'er some rare creature.
Take your stands, let's have of her full view.
All the delights of earth, and joys above,
For ever crown your Temples.
Welcome Bonavida;
How speed you in your voyage?
That success,
I had in expectation, Royal sir,
I am now possessed of, really.
Wee have found her.
Ho, whom?
The pride of Nature, and of Love;
Beauty and Virtue in most high contention
Which should exceed each other.
Why, I can assure you, wee have her to show,
And such a p•ec—
Peace you; What Country?
England.
What place there?
Of their chief Cities, the Metropolis,
London.
I, and the fairest there, one so fair, that all
Bartholmew-fayre could not match her again.
Wee have no tongue for thee—
But wee have a Tale for you, if you will give
us the hearing.
What name?
Helena.
Of what descent or Parentage?
Noble by birth, yet not so hie degreed,
As her great virtues merit: nor her means,
To counterpoise her beauty.
Yet wee have her, and weight and measure
with her, to put down all the black-browd wenches
in Spain, for a face, and Phisi•gnome.
That praetor, Peace there.
I hope, when travellers have light upon a
rich Purchase, It is lawful for them to brag of their
commodity.
Wee may imagine one most beautiful;
But how to rank with us?
With any Lady,
Europe or Asia yields, them pardon, Lady,
I hope without the least offence to you.
Perhaps shoe's fair, what Instance can you
give, that shoe's of such prove•d virtue.
Passing thousands;
I will insist in one: At my departure,
Only one Ring I left with her in change,
Which if she living part with, lend, or give
Till my return, Isle hold my self disgraced,
Her ever-more disparaged: In exchange,
She did bestow on me this Carcanett,
Which I as long shall keep.
Pray let me see it.
Madam, I dare expose to you my life,
Then much more this.
It is a most costly Jewel,
Worthy a Princess wearing.
I can assure you Lady, there was a Ring, and
a thing exchanged upon the bargen.
But whore's this rare one? come produce her
straight, To make her the courts wonder.
Pardon Lady:
Shoe's yet in her own Country; But that Careanet
Can quickly fetch her over.
Pardon? villain, and base Imposture, lived
there such a creature, would not thy pride have brought
her to full view?
But this Illusion seconding the first,
Doubles thy punishment; Hence with him to prison,
More worthy of the block: Abuse us first,
And then deride us after; Royal sir,
If suffer me to swallow this disgrace,
You vnderprise me doubly.
Thou hast spoke it, and it shall stand.
Yet hear me Royal sir.
Away with him.
Then hear me Noble Lady.
Shall wee be still tormented?
If you deny me freedom, grant me that
Which I more prise, my precious Ca•canet,
That which you with no Justice can detain.
Into some loathsome dungeon hurry him,
Unworthy the days comfort: bear this scorn?
Yo'have sentenced justly.
Please you sir, a little
To leave me to my private solitude:
I shall not be long from you.
Take your pleasure;
For your content is ours.
Centella and Pineda.
Royal Madam.
I have a project for you, which if you effect,
You shall indeere me ever.
What's in men,
Shall not in us be skanted.
You have heard
The Country, and the place of her abode;
Thither Isle furnish you: Spare for no cost,
Our Treasure ••es op to you; get that Ring
By any slight or craft: be it possible
That gold will do it, corrupt her; Use all means,
All friends, devices, plots, and stratagems,
To bri•g some token of her falseness back:
Further instructions you shall have with you;
Meane-time prepare for travel.
And, or die,
Or bring you news of her inchastitie.
Enough, you are ours: part with this Carkane•?
Not for a World: I have project too in that:
Bee rivaled by a petty English Dame?
Knew I the large earth did my equal give,
Rather then brooke her sight, Id cease to live.
SIr from a bond-man, you have cast me into a free mould,
almost new made me, yet what your purpose is, I can∣not
gather, I am still yours; Is it your intention to prank me
up, to make me fit for death, or feed me till I be in some good
plight, the better to fat your own revenge?
What I purpose to my self, I still keep in my self,
What you have found hitherto, speak, and when you
Find your self pinched, then freely complain.
The face of your kind visage yet looks smooth,
I spy in it no wrinkle; But my friend,
How have you dealt by him?
As hee deserves, no further, pray inquire him.
If hee perish,
I am swept from off the earth too, with my sister,
Hee next my heart sits unmovable: pray what service
Will you command me now?
None: yet some love
I shall entreat, withal, a grace from you,
I have a Mistress, unto whom I purpose
A friendly visitation, to which duty,
I entreat you as a witness.
I am yours.
I hear say Bonavidaes returned:
And intends to visit thee, for having failed in all his
Foreign purposes: hee means, upon those thy pillars, as Hercu∣les
did upon his, to write Nonultra, think thou not so girl?
my further honour still.
To see what a virtue lives in this Spanish continent,
especially amongst yellow-hayr'd wenches; Iason, when hee
went in quest of the Golden-Fleece, found it in Spain, there's a
Moral in that, and that great Hercules, so talked on amongst
the Greeks, after all his travels through Asia, Africa, and Eu∣rope,
coming to this Country, into the Island called Calis; hee
that, unless Poets lie, lay with Fifty Ladies in one night, and
got Nine and forty Boys, marry I must tell you, the last was a
Girl; was there so tyred with one woman; that hee gave over
all his travels, retired home to his Country, like a man taken
down, and in memory of his adventure: where hee reated
his pillar, writ that most methodical Motto you speak of;
No further.
My daughter is an apt, and witty lass:
I know her apprehensive, and well-brayn'd:
My further honour still.
Noble Madam,
I have brought a stranger, and an English-man,
To give you visitation.
A worthy stranger, a bold villain too,
My further honour still.
To whom, Petrocella?
As to a Gentleman to me Intyr'd,
I beg from you all the best complement,
Du• unto my long service.
Why, what's hee?
This man, doe you mean?
Yes hee, that fellow there.
Fellow, to whom; he hath not his in Spain,
Nay, I might have took a larger bound,
And not have past my limitt; fellow, villain?
Yes, or commpanion.
Paint me out a worthy—
Else hee is such to none: This was the man
I met at sea, and fought with; our Encounter
Was all in smoke and fire, so hotly fought,
That in that fog, wee had no further light,
Then what our Lint-staves gave: our Decks flowed blood,
Which through the Port-holes run, and dyed the Sea
Into a deep vermilion, yet still fought.
But never with a braver opposite
Did English-man t•ie with fire.
Hee speaks well.
Both to their honours still.
When Powder, and Bullet,
And men, with all grew scant; for scarce was any
Left to the present purpose, serviceable,
Both bottoms ready through the violent leaks
To split, and founder; wee then hauled, hung flags,
And grew to composition.
Which I begged.
Sir, it came first from me; And this proposed,
That both our ships, goods, lives, and people, might not
Bee in the Sea engraved, and swallowed up,
Both from mans tongue and thought: that such rich Prises
Might be to one Survivor; the two Captains
To try it out by Combat.
Honour still.
This nobly hee accepted; Faiths new pawned,
Hostages given, two worthy seconds chose;
Lots cast, whose Decks should bee the appointed lists;
To mine it fell: Hee boarded me to fight,
From whom I came apparelled thus in wounds—
It seems then hoe's a cutter.
Whose scars still mark me his.
Wear I not yours?
Though not so many, yet more deeply •arv'd,
With greater danger, and expense of blood,
Then ever dropped from these.
Short tale to make;
Vanquished I was, Hee victor; and when all,
Lading and lives were his; Nay even mine too
Lay prostrate at his mercy, with a magnificence
Equal to any Prince, hee should at—
All this wee know, nor doe wee desire to hear over
again, what was before related; but had you spoke more in his
praise, then you have done, which it may be is your purpose; I
find nothing, but may well come within the compass of his
merit, and my belief.
Lady, I am glad you are so possessed of him;
And doe you think him such?
I think you would gladly sell whom you have so late∣lie
bought, else you would never have spoke him thus: If you
have any such purpose; It may be, there be those that, but surren∣der
up your bargen, would be glad to help you to your money.
I came but with one give upon my leg,
Fastened upon me in his courtesy,
But since I looked upon your Ladies eyes,
Now I am doubly fettered.
It is neglect,
A palpable neglect, she loves me not:
It shall be so, I will be borish and sullen.
Sir, you this day have brought me to a fight
That more contents me than the wealth of Spain:
This matchless Lady.
My Mistress,
Whom if thou wilt court for me,
And win unto my wishes.
I Sir do it?
Yes, by the love thou owe me; doe you pause?
If ever I deserved the name of friend,
Or hope hereafter I may merit off thee,
Make it thy sole endeavours
Doubly captived:
Honour should still proceed love: Sir, I will,
Though I to cure another, my self kill.
How long is it since those Gentlemen of Spain arrived
here?
Three days since, Lady.
Came there no letters along with 'em from Spain? some
note there?
Not to my hands.
Has Bonavid. that name me thinks revives me, I dare not
tax him of neglect, and yet I am very pleasant this morning,
lets have a song R•sara: I would have the subject love, and yet
modest to, and yet a little wanton, yet chaste and innocent as
dreams of coals, and hearst thou? where Bonavida's name vouch∣safes
to grace the ditty, there let music speak in its smoothest
phrase, and most courtly singing, stay, thou art a jewel to pre∣tious
to •e washed with, thou were given to dear purpose: ho∣nour'd
with this, lye there.
The ditties done.
And I have done, a dryer.
How am I blessed: occasion I thank thee,
Thy absence Bonavid, makes each minute seem an hour
and thy delay, makes infant time look old, and were it not for this
pledge of thy affection—Rosara, Maid.
Your pleasure madam?
Reach me my Ring.
What Ring, Lady?
Dost ask that question? that of the basin?
Trust me madam, I saw none.
Speak not again upon thy life, where is the water?
Thrown out Madam, and with it I fear the Ring, but
Isle—
Find it again, or lose thy self, inconsiderate girl, how
are my hopes betrayed through thy rash negligence, was myblood
pleasant for this? my thoughts, Joyful for this?—how now,
hast found it?
Nor ever shall I fear Madam.
How, never?
Then lose thy self, my hopes are lost for ever, torches and lights
there, find it again, or never see me more.
Your will's a law, which I intend not suddenly to
infringe, and have I got thee my best happiness? now to my
Don of Spain, the next news you hear of me, is a Ladyship
at least; but fie on this idleness, I stand on thorns till I be in
action.
You find her pliant?
As a thing of wax, never was thri•tie trader more willing
to put of a sulk commodity, than she was to truck for her may∣denhead,
I admire her forwardness.
Call of the animal, she takes her entrance just at her q•step
you aside for fear of suspicion.
Oh, master Oracle, sweet master Oracle!
How thrives your project? works it into fashion?
Beyond hope or expectation, was there not a Don of
Spain here, to speak with me?
Not I assure you? you have met him then?
Yes, and so met him, sweet M. Oracle, I am bound to
you for ever.
This by my direction is the place▪ the labour in vain,
and here spite of delay, she has prevented myhast, you see I keep
my word sue••te.
And that's somewhat strange, in a gallant of your 〈◊〉.
But usual in a lover, may wee presume upon the trust of
this gentleman?
Why, doe not you know him? Oh strange! why it is
M. Oracle man; trust him? and I had a Maiden-head to spare, I
durst trust it naked in bed with him.
Sir, though both strangers, yet fates past, and fortunes to
come, are better known to me, than your selves: have you got
the Ring?
Have I? have I not? the handsomest way I had •or•t.
Sweet, I am come to make tender of my promise.
The like purpose bring we Sir.
You have my heart already.
For which take mine, and that Ring to boot: and M.
Welcome as health to the house of sickness: and now, where
how, what, when?
How is it Sir? I see a sudden sign of alto∣ration
in you.
And can you blame me, my blood chils, my nerves faint. I
am abused, my attendant Daemon prompts me, I am abused.
Where?
Or by whom?
Here, and by thee, by both a false imposture and a common
Strumpet.
Doe you mistrust my honesty?
Or my Art?
Both, they are both dissembled, and my noble purpose
frustrate, this is not the Ring.
Not the Ring?
And you the woman my fate points at; how simple in∣nocence
may be plaid upon?
How, not the Ring? return it back then.
No, I will keep it to witness and evidence against you,
for instantly expect the severest punishment law can inflict upon
Impostures of this kind.
Disparagement to my Art, have you brought a false Ring?
The right on my faith, as I hoped to be a Lady, the right.
I am proud of that, this trial was not amiss though.
But Oh master Oracle, how have you deceived me?
I was deceived my self, I see my error now; only a
mistake in the sign, I sought for Mercury in one house, and hee
logd'd in the next, I must change my lodging, the City stones
will grow too hot for me, I must go cool my feet in the suburbs.
The all and only mistake was in the sign.
The Labour in vain, a fire on the sign, and you too;
my Donna turned to this? my preferment to this? a Lady in the
Morning, and a beggar before noon? here's quick work indeed;
a cunning man? a cunning Rogue If ere it be my luck to see thee
preach through a pill•rye, as one of the cast limbs of your cursed
crew did not long since, the hangman sh•l have you by the ears
for this: but I'll back and lay my case open to my Lady.
Your only curses, and now aboard for Spain,
Her shame's our honour, and her loss our gain.
The Spanyard's noble, beyond thought or expectation
noble, instead of a Dungeon, hee has furnished me with means,
and sent me home with a letter of his purposed friendship to my
friend. And now, though freed both from Turk and Spaniard. I
live slave to a more cruel nation than both, my own country∣men▪
for suretyship and debt, (diseases that many a gallant lies
sick to death on) have tan hold on me, and though I know it
improbable, and partly ridiculous, that a false beard, and a fanta∣sticall
habit, should mar my creation &amp; make me a new creature,
it has past currant with some in this place, and I may the by•der
venture on it. First then to my friends Sister, the young Lady Fer∣rars,
I think her virtuous, but withal know her for a woman,
and dare not trust my liberty in so weak a stomach: in this
disguise then, I'll address me to her presently.
Thou tell me wonders, cheated of my Ring, by a cun∣ning
man, and a crafty Spaniard? the cosenage was premeditate:
a Spaniard was he?
Some D•• or Nobleman at least, he wore very good
clothes.
So may a cheat, or a pickpurse; the better body, the ply∣ner
the habit, paint•• clothes were devised for ruined •ealing, and
fluttish walls, It's the Apparel of the mind, crowns thee with∣n
Noble.
Then was hee a very beggar to cheat for so poor a tri∣fl
as a Ring.
It was not so much for the value of the thing, As to
improverish the oath of the wearer; some crafty sunner had a hand
in it: or it might be Bonavidaes plot, to try my loyalty: and
yet it relishes too much baseness to come from so noble an au∣thour;
how ever, shall I see this, turn coward, and like a falling
Tower, bury my beauty in my own Ruin•s? no, rather like the
glorious Sun, desolve, and scatter these clouds of Infamy. It is re∣solved,
Isle after em to Spain: Your purpose Rosara.
To give you my best attendance to th• last minute,
please you Ladyship accept it.
And freely pardon thee; receive a few directions for
our voyage.
Yes, this disguise will do it; and for my friend, her no∣ble
brothers sake, Isle make the first tender of my service to her;
save you Lady.
You're welcome sir; would you any thing with us?
Impart a secret to you.
To a Woman? by no means, wee want discretion to
keep our own.
Strange! Had I a secret concerned my life, Id trust it
in a Women's bosom to choose, and think I said it up safe too.
Your reason Sir?
Because no wise-man will over look for any matter of
Worth in such a weak building.
A fellow of a bold aspect, and such a one, were I issue∣red
of his carriage, as would much avail me in my voyage; Art
willing to serve?
Mine own turn with all my heart: This fashions to
my wishes; what if your Ladyship doe want a servant? I am
your man, your first man too, and such a man as know the
World.
And such a man doe I want;
You have been in Spain then?
Did hear no talk of an English-man there,
One Farrers—
And one Manhurst his friend, they are both prisoners,
and lie—only for ransom.
My brother Prisoner? This news wings me for my
voyage.
Are you for any adventures Lady?
Thy bad news enforces me; Isle make that my co∣lore,
at least that Gentleman is my brother; and cost it the last
penny of my Dower, I will not see him want; Isle furnish our
voyage Instantly.
As generous, as he is valiant, it were cowardice in me
to disharten her, wee must be gallant; what habit were I best to
travel in, l•t me see, a Spanish slop, good easy wear, but that
like Chambermaids, they are loose, and somewhat too open
below.
Me-thinks your Dutch Cassock is a comely wear.
It hath bin, but now adays it grows shorter and
shorter, like your Court allowance: their Taylors are good hus∣bands,
though they make little or no waste at all, and that makes
your Gallants stand so much upon Points: your button-hose is
a good wear for Courtiers.
Why for Courtiers?
Cause they are full of large promises outward, but lined
with narrow and scant-performance wit•••.
'Tas been a good fashion, but it is old.
So is all goodness else, wee have nothing new, but
oaths and diseases.
No, for my money, give me your substantial, English
hose, to •nd and somewhat full before.
Now they are mee-thinks a little too great.
The more the discretion of the Landlord that builds
them the makes room enough for his Tenant to stand upright
in, he may walk in and out at ease without stooping: but of all
the rest, I am clean out of love with your Irish trowfes; they
are for all the world like a Jealous wife, always close at a mans
tail: out of all these will I cut and fashion that shall 〈…〉
and Imitable: will you follow?
Even where fate leads me, wee are all her slaves
And have no dwellings of our own.
Yes, Graves.
I Never heard a fellow since my years, taught me how
to distinguish I• from good, to talk in this strange Key;
how English this? What are thou in thy Country?
The•e, a man.
What here?
No better then you see a slave.
Whose?
His that hath redeemed me.
Valladauraes?
Yes, I proclaim 't; I that was once mine own,
Am now become his creature.
I perceive,
Your coming is to make me think you noble,
Would you persuade me deem your friend a God?
For only such make men, are you a gentleman?
Not here, for I am all dejectedness▪
Captive to fortune, and a slave to want;
I can not call these e•oaths I wear mine own,
I doe not eat, but at another cost,
This ayre I breathe, is borrowed; ne'er was man
So po•re and abject. I have not so much,
In all this universe, as a thing to leave▪
Or a Country I can freely boast is mine:
In all the world, I had but one true friend,
And hee is ravished from me;
My essen•e, and my being, is another:
What should I say? I am not any thing,
And I possess as little.
Tell me that?
Come, come, I know you to be no such man,
You are a Soldier, valiant, and renownd,
Your carriage tried by land, and proved at Sea,
Of which, I have heard such full expression
No contradiction can persuade you less,
And in this faith I am constant.
A mere worm
Trod on by every Fate.
Raised by your merit
To be a common argument through Spain.
And speech at Princes Tables, for your worth
Your presence when you please to expos•'t abroad,
Attracts all eyes, and draw them after you
And these that understand you call their friends,
And pointing through the streets, say, this is he,
This that brave and noble Englishman,
Whom Soldiers strive to make their president,
And other men their wonder.
This your scorn.
Makes me appear more abject to my self
Then all diseases I have tasted yet
Had power to asperse upon me, and yet Lady
I could say something durst •.
Speak't at once.
And yet—
Nay, but we'll admit no pause.
I know not how my phrase may relish you,
And loath I were to offend, even in what's past
I must confess, I was too bold,—Farewell,
I shall no more distaste you.
Sir, you doe not,
I doe proclaimed you doe not, stay, I charge you,
Or as you say, you have been fortunes scorn•,
So ever prove to woman.
You charge deeply,
And yet now, I bethink me.
As you are a Soldier,
And Englishman, have hope to bee redeemd
From this your scorned bondage you sustain,
Have comfort in your Mother, and fair Sister,
Renown so blazed in the ears of Spain,
Hope to re-breathe that ayre you tasted first.
So tell me—
What?
Your apprehension caught
And almost was in sheaf.
Lady I shall.
And in a word?
I will.
Pronounce it then.
I love you.
Ha, ha, ha.
Still it is my misery
Thus to bee mocked in all things.
Pretty faith.
I looked thus to be laughed at, my estate
And fortunes I confess, deserves no less;
That made me so unwilling to denounce
Mine own de•sions, but alas I find
No Nation, sex, complexion, birth, degree.
But jest at want, and mock at misery.
Love me?
I doe, I doe, and maugre Fate,
And spite of all sinister evil shall.
And now I charge you, by that filias• zeal
You owe your father, by the memory
Of your dear mother, by the joys you hope
In blessed marriage, by the fortunate issue
Stored in your womb, by these and all things else,
That you can stile with goodness: instantly,
Without evasion, trick, or circumstance,
Nay, least premeditation, answer me.
Affect you me, or no?
How speak you that?
Without 〈◊〉 or pause.
Give me but 〈◊〉
To sleep upon it.
I pardon you •o minute, not so much
As to apparel the least phrase you speak,
Speak in the shortest sentence.
You have vanquished me
At mine own weapon: noble sir, I love you:
And what my heart dur•t never tell my tongue
Least it should blab my thoughts, at last I speak
And iterate, I love you.
Oh, my happiness••
What wilt thou feel me still? art thou not weary
Of making me thy May-game to possess me
Of such a treasures mighty Magozin,
Not suffer me to inioy't, tan with this hand,
With that to get another.
You are sad Sir,
Be so no more, it you have been dejected
It lies in me to mount you to that height,
You could not aim at greater, I am yours.
These lips that only witness it in air
Now with this truth confirm it.
I was borne to 't,
And it shall out at once.
Sir, you seem passionate,
As if my answer pleased not.
Now my death,
For mine own tongue must kill me, noble Lady.
You have endeared me to you, but my vow
Was ne'ere to match with any of what state
Or birth soever, till before the contract,
Some one thing I impose her.
Sh•e to do it?
Or if she fail me in my first demand
I to abjure her ever.
I am she.
That beg to be implied so, name a danger
Whose very face would fright all womanhood,
And manhood put in trance, nay whose aspect
Would ague such, as should but hear it told:
But to the sad beholder, prove like those
That gazed upon Medusaes snaky lockes,
And turned them into Marble: Th•se and more
Should you but speak't I'd doe.
And swear to this?
I v•w it by my honour, my best hopes
And all that I wish gracious, na••e it then,
For I am in a longing in my soul,
To show my loves expression.
You shall then,
I'll do it as I am a Virgin.
Lye it within mortality, I'll do it.
You shall?
I will: that which appears in you
So terrible to speak, I'll joy to act,
And take pride in performance.
Then you shall.
What? Soldier, What?
Love noble Vallada•ra,
And at his soonest appointment marry him.
Unkind man, thou hast killed me.
And my salfe with the same stroke.
Oh, Noble Englishman,
Thou now appear'st a mirror.
But in this,
Pray Sir can you be serious?
As I would in death unto my Confessor.
Then I am l•st,
Now ba••r than this fellow termed himself,
To him that was on earth most miserable:
I am now become a Vassal, Nay, despised, •
I that but once to day, thought my self rival,
For face and virtue, to the peerclesse Queen•,
Both these have prostituted to a slave,
To be more •lave than hee, but shall he thus
Behold in me this passion to usurp
Triumph in my disgrace, and boast abroad
Of this so poor a conquest? No Peirocella recollect thy self,
Preserve thy honour, though against thy spirit,
And where thy heart is sick, complain thy heel,
Let not thy seen grief please him.
Home and retire, Why should you strive thus
to undo one that's already conquered?
Poor exile! oh, with what slight attribute
Shall I devise to give thee expression?
Thou all that ba•enesse thou hast termed thy self,
Thou look•t now I should whine and p•le and weep
Hang about thy neck, submit, and kneel for grace,
As if thou were that brave man so reported!
Know I am no such Creature, neither think I
There can be ought good in thee, saving this
Which was the last, that thou hast plighted me,
To one more worthy one, whose very shadow
I prize, above thy being, one whose actions
Were never taxed in any thing save this
To ransom such a—what thou know thy self
Him I'll both love and marry, hence, depart:
Oh heaven, how far my tongue speaks from my heart!
I would it were but a dream, then there were hope
I might be once a wake and so see day,
But night is lodged with•n me, night perpetual
Darker than the Ci••orion, all my lights
Have only been mere flashes that precede
Tempestuous cracks of thunder.
Now'tis time
To rowze him from his slumber, worthy friend
How have you sped this day in my behalf?
As you would wish.
You need not speak't again.
You aver no more then what my ears have witnessed,
In which you have used such fidelity,
I needs most freely must acquit all debts
Twixt you and me, and there Ingeniously
Confess my self in reradge.
Oh I still,
And ever-more, must owe you.
But If you,
Would add a second to this courtesy,
I should report you for the constantst friend
That ever strived to exceed in gratitude.
Name it I pray you, having one thing done,
I now am in at all things.
Upon your honour.
That which you have bought,
And paid for, with your money.
That no more,
I charge you by our love.
Why, I have done:
What I shall ever rue, may give it motion,
I being new all for action.
Only this,
For some occasions to my self best known,
And which I now entreat you not inquire,
But prosecute, that Priest shall marry us:
For your disguise, and all things fitting too't,
Leave it to my discretion to contrive,
And this is all I enjoin.
And this Isle doe.
And bind me to you ever.
I am in,
Past half already, why not up to the chin?
Centella and Pineda, Wee have long
Mournd for your absence, had not our bright Queen
Made us acquainted with the intent the•eof,
Wee had not took it of you subject-like,
You so unfriendly, left us without leave,
But you are nobly welcome.
As the men,
Have crowned us with a wreathe, of rar•r worth,
Then can the united births of Spain and Portugal
Maintain to us: they make us still supreme,
And wee by them find no Competitor,
The token that confirms infallibly,
That beauty stands corrupted.
Sacred Empress,
Behold the Ring: the manner how she fell,
How easily, and with what facility,
She yielded almost at the first demand,
Wee shall relate at full.
Forbear Centella, for to vex him more,
It shall be in his hearing; one of you
Release him from the torment of his Prison,
To endure a greater here: And might Prince,
Give me but leave, since hee so proudly durst
Deprave our worth to spite, nor all his grief,
And triumph in his wilful misery.
You speak but what is just and necessary,
In others to deter the like presumption,
I pray sir reprehend him, you cannot bee too bitter
In his Just reprehension.
See, hoe's come.
Wee have sent to prove your Mistress.
And her constancy
Hath purchased my release, Is it not so Madam?
Wee are put down; I feared if any climb
Could yield rarety to equal ours,
It would be found in England.
So I said,
And Royal Mistress, had you seen that face,
And made such proof, as I did of her heart,
You would esteem it no disgrace at all,
To honour her, that's your sol• pa•agon,
Impudent slave—
But we'll contain our spleen; but it is my grief
To be excelled in both; to have failed in one,
Had bin the less vexation.
Oh, my fair Helena!
Thou hast filed my soul with rapture, and releast me
From melancholy durance; Madam what were they
That made this happy trial, and informd you
That truth, to make her this acknowledgement?
Behold them: these are the witnesses
Of my disgrace through Spain.
They're noble Lords,
By whose approved censures, you have made,
Here highness to confess•e mine injuries.
At you return, in what plight did you leave
The unequalled Lady?
Faith, in health of body.
Be proud my genius on it.
And lusty wondrous lusty.
Was she seen?
yes seen, and felt, and heard, and understood,
We found her a Now•e Substantive.
Oh, my blood! why fliest thou from my hear•?
yet she stood,
And by her self too, when she was alone,
But lighting upon company she looked,
Poor prostitute, she fell.
Unriddle me, and let me know thy meaning.
Then in plain—your Mistress is a Whore.
Centalla spak't.
And will maked good, More Bonavida, mine,
My prostitute, most base and mercenary,
Bowing her lust beneath the price of gold,
For a few Spanish Ryalls.
Oh, my rage!
Whether wilt thou transport me? Villain, Dog,
False and unworthy and noble style,
Scarce the attribute of man,
Oh, Sir, anon I hope you' I have more patience,
Patience Devil?
Let it fl•e to the Antipodes, and we
Wraste in wrath and fury, that base lie
I'll ••ab with my steelet to down thy throat,
And make thee swallow both.
you are now heated: a little pause will cool you.
King, it is false,
Believe him not great Princess, it is injust;
Unless an Angel should descend and speak't,
And for an instance straight produce that Ring.
It wins with me no credence.
Know you that?
Ha, this—I doe, and therewithal dare swear
That there's no faith in woman.
Ha, ha, ha: what thinks he great censorious carper now?
That there's not one (give my allegiance leave)
I durst suspect even you, since she is fallen.
Ha; what of us?
That I have callumnis'd,
Your fame and virtue, that I merit death,
That I am now professed Antagonist,
(Saving your majesty) to all your sex,
That I am weary now the ayre I bre•th,
And should you grant it Madam, would not live,
That I no batter than a Traitor am,
And in the highest degree, have injured these,
Buy most, your sacred self: if for all these
You doe not mount me on the public seaffold,
I will lay violent hands upon my se••e:
I beg my merited doom, my sentence crave,
Which with severest rigour let me have.
We limit thee two days for thy repentance,
The third's thy death.
My Helena prove base?
Mount thoughts towards heaven, you have on earth no place.
He hath but what he merits.
And great prince,
Now boast your self 'bove Brutus, Collatine.
Or those most famous for their constant wives,
And I my self unequalled and unpeer'd
May on the earth a blazing Comet shine,
Seeming amongst others terren sole divine.
Our trusty friends and subjects henceforth live
In our highest grace, and trust: how we will right
You that for zeal to us have injured been
In our apparent justice shall bee seen.
You sent for me.
I did, to tell thee a word of which no ear is worthy
but thine own, I love thee.
Possible, vexation should take new shapes to haunt me,
you love me, come, this jest might pass upon one of Cupids sa∣shions,
but I being a found Sophister in the art, am too familiar
with our fallacies, to credit them or you.
Let not your tomming betray your folly, though it be
common with Ladies, twould show very ••lin a Courtier. I con∣fesse
I seemed strange to you, till I was acquainted with your
worth.
How grew that acquaintance, it was without my knowledge?
Not to dissemble, some impulsive Nuntio's have wrought
very strangely for you but examine not particulars: suffice, I say
I love you and you dare not take my word, I can put you in no
better security.
I des•te none, only, but silence, you have vouehsasfd me
a happiness, beyond merit or expectation.
You're the more beholding to me, and courtesy that comes
from a woman freely, is worth twenty pleasures infor•t, neither
would I have you tax my love of immodesty: nor think I pur∣pose
to make you pay for the nursery of another mans pleasure,
though it be common with some at Court; I have a kind of thing
within me called conscience, only I love you, and out of a com∣passionate
charity purpose to marry you.
He has don't to purpose, I know not how to take you Lady.
En as you find me, that's with more faults than virtues•
but see, my father and some of my best friends, to whom I have
read the story of my love, come in person to dispatch the
Nuptials.
Then I presume you're earnest, s•r I must call you father.
And never miscall me, if she be thy wife as I think she
will be.
With your consent.
Get hers, it's not a straw matter for mine, and yet to
make her no worse than she is, I must needs say she will doe
any thing she list her self in spite of my beard, my further Ho∣nor
still: but take her to thee, I thought so, as soon as
ever I saw thee smack, I knew it would prove a match and now
tic out, my further honour still.
Out before it is thoroughly lighted? such matches were ner•
kindled at Hymens altar, have you sufficient certificate of my
love now?
Yes sweet, and now my resolutions wings
File with some Feathers: thou the man must join us?
Yes, and divide my self from happiness, this hand
Must forth my bosom pluck a blessedness
And place it in another,—are you ready?
To shake thine Honour, which gins faint already,
We are, set on, let musickespeake aloud,
At such chaste Unions Jove himself is proud.
Awake? or in a dream? I hope the last,
The god of marriage would not see his shrine.
So much abused, the hallowed lights burn out
Themselves in anger, and the Covenant Book
Dropped down for shame, my hand shook, and my tongue
Like a false evidence before a judge
Faltred, and gave it self the lie, and yet
My treach•rous heart agreed 〈◊〉, and this habit,
Oh, •old I throw my grief as easily from me,
As I do thee, ne'er did religious sha•s,
Count nonce or shelter such a horrid act.
Friend Ferrers—
Ha? that very accent, friend,
Go•es my faint fears the he, and writes my act
Nob•e and lawful: had I given him my life
'•was but his own.
Will not this Marble weep?
Nor shed a tear yet? Not? he quite outdares me,
In nob • e courtesies, all my attempts
Like curses shall against the wind fly back
In mi•e own face and soil it. Nob • e Ferrers
Thy manly undertakings half persuade me
Th• art more than man.
Mine? alas, I have done nothing.
Worthy your least good thought: if you (or half)
Can find a service to enjoin your slavs
Mo • e hard (or damnable) that may become
(The Devil to will) a servant to effect,
Urge one more trial.
And with that Isle claim thee
King of thy self and thy affections.
And thusit is, for reasons yet concealed
And strangely working in my mutinous thoughts,
I would, and yet tic a request nor fitting
Me to enjoin, nor thee to practise.
Name it.
And if I do it not—
I am ashamed to own it,
Tic so uncomely and beyond the strength
Of man to act: yet in a word, this night
Thou shalt (denie't not) under my name and habit,
Sleep in my marriage sleets and with my wife.
Sleep with your wife? and is that all?
Yes, all
That I allow, if after I shall prove,
〈…〉, so much as in a kiss,
All thy past worth i• blemished, never demand
The reason on it, that's buried.
I will do it; sleep with your wife? Isle do I,
No Eunuchs like me.
Shoe's now gone to her Chamber.
Ladies and all have left her, under this cloud,
Go shrow'd thy self.
It is done,
How ere I 〈◊〉, Isle rise bright honours son
WHat disturbs Valladaura?
What means my son?
To run, and roar, and bellow.
You are not mad?
As the great beast called Bull; Oh the cramp, the
cramp!
Where?
Here, there, every where, in my Cry, my Mouth, my
tongue, pull, and you love me pull.
Where?
In the middle there.
What doe you mean?
Show you a true Emblem of my self, I am married.
True, to my daughter.
Yes, to a strumpet, to a lascivious strumpet, not possi∣ble
to draw on my wedding shoes without a h•rne.
You are too dark.
And your daughter too light.
Speak your griefs fully.
As patience, not suffer me this piece
Of frailty, cut out of the heart of beauty,
Where I so loved, as it was doubtful whether
She or my life were dearer to me; she
Whom by me married, is this night
Clasped with a stranger: makes her fathers house
The wedding chamber, and her nuptial sheets
Reeke to adulterate pleasure—
Little to my honour▪ and this be true;
Would, oh my lost life, I could prove it false,
Fates not so merciful; late up at revels;
I will not say some of her sect of late
Plied me with wine, to give her purpose food,
But healths flew round, and with full wing, and still
I was their aim:
They mist their aim tho; and yet but a fairer
As soon as opportunity served me:
Unseen I lest 'em, and by a private key,
Went to my Chamber, where I said, Isle dare call her'
Neither my wife, nor Bride; your lustful danghter.
Doing no hurt, I hope she has more care of him then so.
Wearied with pleasure, she lies fast asleep,
Laid in a strangers arms, sh'as stayed my speech,
'Tas dim'd mine eyes from sight, and patience,
Restrian'd my head from fury: what hee is, or whence,
I neither know nor question.
I commend ye, my daughter a whore, make my house
a stews, and her father a pander; is this all the honour she doth me?
Dishonoured above sufferance.
Wine, and a strumpet, were there no hope of generate∣on,
but in her only, this hand should be her hang-man: a whore
on her wedding night, There's more modesty contem'd in a
Gore, strumpet, whore, I will not call her daughter, Isle loose
her, Will you lead the way?
Your pardon, I am so mildly tempered, the expense
Of one cheap tear, would buy her pardon; had her fault
stroke at my life; If you intend revenge,
Do it in my absence.
You are a chicken, leave us, tho'a fathers name, Isle bear
a lyons heart, break op the doors, strumpet, why Impudence,
break op• the door—
Whom doe you seek?
A strumpet, thee, a—I can't devise a name bad e∣nough
for thee.
Isle give my self one, call me Murderess;
A Name I am proud of.
Ha?
She has •au'd us a labour; what means this bloody punyard▪
Read in my brow, doe you not see his name
Writ intent letters?
I see none: whose? what name?
Base Vallad•uraes—
Thy Husband?
Hee was never mine: for though you joined our hands,
My heart ne'•e 〈◊〉 a man to 't; and how ever duty
Lives at command, Love cannot be infore'd,
And rather then live bound to one I love not,
I have bought my freedom with his life.
False woman?
Alive again! blessed star—
I no•e was dead,
But thou has• killed a man, whom to have saved,
Had I a thousand lives, Id loose them all:
O valiant Ferrers, a more Noble Gentleman
Never drewaire.
The English man?
The wonder,
And abstract of all virtues: did you but know
What bold and noble Passages of honour,
He for my sake, with danger hazarded,
You would have thought there were more deity,
Then man within him—
Choked in my revenge,
This Joys me yet, that tho'l mist thy life,
I reached thy friends.
My friend indeed: and one,
That did but know how ardently he loved
Thee Tiger, thee, his c•••ell m••dere,
You would 〈◊〉 thy hand, and hate thy bloody self,
For thy •o•loving him.
If hee were so loving to her, and honourable to you
what business had hee in your Chamber?
Much, and far more then ever was in man,
But passing many unmatched cu•tesies,
In honours duel, when I all hope had lost,
Ever to win the—
That slave wooed me for you, so much the sweeter by
that, The thought of my revenge.
To try him further, In a church-mans habit,
Although hee loved thee dearer then his life,
At my entreat hee married us.
White-liver'd peasant,
I have given him a due recompense.
But last,
And it may stand, writ in the Roll of time,
A daring challenge to all Ages.
You sent him to bed to your wife.
Which though I hated him, I must acknowledge
Him noble that way.
Every way; the World
Has lost a sewell, not to be regained
By loss of twenty Worlds.
But to what purpose did you send him to your wives
bed?
My purpose was, having once past that trial,
To have made you man and wife.
How could that bee, when you were married before?
She was never mine, the marriage was not lawful,
Done by a Lay-man; But mans fate, it is thrown
Above his reach, our hopes are not our own.
Ha, ha, ha.
Dost laugh at sorrow?
Would you have me turn Crocodile, and weep, Fer∣rears,
Mont Ferrers, prithee come help me to laugh a little.
Ferrers! my friend alive?
By this blood of a Turtle, and that's a chaste oath, hee
never did.
Hast failed thy promise, and abused my trust?
Doe but name the word, abuse by love, and Isle kill him
indeed; what should hee doe? He came to bed, and for his eyes
take, slept with me, yet ne'er so much as kissed me, but I con∣fesse,
I gave him twenty.
To quittance with him thus, I give him thy hand.
I ask no more, I have her heart already.
Have heart and faith, Noble Mont Ferrers.
My daughter chaste, my house honest, and noble Fer∣rears
my Son-in-law; this happens to my further honour indeed.
Noble of all sides, and so for joy of your friendly agree∣meant,
the Amorous sun is come to give you a hunts-up.
Aurora looks red at that, but with the new light, new
business meets us, Bonavidaes Execution.
Ten a clock, is the last hour his life has to reckon.
Please you take patt of a short breakfast, wee will ac∣company
you.
Come Ferrers, now all Trials are confirmed
In this Embrace.
You have been ever noble.
This then is Spain, into which continent
You promised to conduct me.
Yes, it is.
And what this Cities name?
Civil, the chief of Spain; where I presume
You never were till now.
As I remember: I never was in Civil, but being here,
How shall wee best dispose us?
Doubt not me: Isle fit you with a lodging;
Heere's a Spaniard, Isle sound him to that purpose.
Trust a Woman? trust thy mortgage to an Usurer, thy
shoulder to the Mace, or thy bare back to the Beadle, thou
wilt bee whipped on all sides; a Woman?
This fellow, as I recollect my self,
Was servant to the noble Bonavida.
I know him, it is the same.
Why are they called fair, but that they are like a Fair
where every one sets up shop, and any man may buy for his mo∣ny?
why lovely, but to denote unto us, they lie when they tell
a man they love him? why chaste? unless from Coast to coun∣trey,
and from Constable to Constable: Why Virgin? but that
they are merely gins and snares to entangle poor men in: why,
when a man courts them; doe they cry, away, away? but only
to tell a man that there is a way, if he have the wit to find it.
Oh, Women, Women, foemineo gentry tribuuntur Propria quae
Maribus.
This fellow I perceive's a Satyrist
Against the Feminine Sex Save thee, my friend.
From Women and I care not, for there's against them
no standi•g.
 Is there in them such danger?
Danger, I find but a little in that face, and tic a face able
to out-face the best face in Spain. A face that I have been face
to face with, before now, but it is so long since I cannot tell when
and we have travelled so many Countries I cannot guess where,
Are you a stranger fair Lady?
Yes, and a traveller.
I love you the better for that, for indeed I my self have
seen Countries, and I see no reason, but that if both parties
were agreed we two might lie together by Authority.
Why I have travelled too—
Alas, poor fellow, thou look not with the face, but
if thou can give me but the true fashions and descriptions
of Countries, or my friend, with me you can purchase no
Credit. Man. I shall and thus in brief too.
THe Spaniard loves his ancient Slop.
A Lombard the Venetian:
And some like breech-lesse women go,
The Rush, Turk, Jew, and Grecian.
The thrifty Frenchman wears small waste,
The Dutch his belly boasts,
The English-man is for the •s all,
And for each fashion coast.
The Turk in Linen wraps his head.
The Persian his in Lawn toe,
The Rush with sables furs his Cap
And change will not be drawn to.
The Spanyard's co•stant to his block,
The French inconsta•t ever,
But of all Felts that may be felt,
Give me your English Beaver.
The German loves his Coony-Wooll,
The Irish-man his shag too,
The Welch his Mo•-mouth lovesto wear,
And of the same will brag too.
Some love the rough and some the smooth,
Some great and others small thy•gs,
But O your lickarish English man,
〈◊〉 loves to deal in all things.
The Rush drinks quasse, Dutch Lubecks beer,
And that is strong and mighty,
The Britain he Mesheglen quaffs,
The Iris• Aqua-vitae.
The French affects the Orleans grape,
The Spaniard sips his Sherry,
The English none of these can scope,
But hee with all makes merry.
The Italian in her high Chopeene,
Scotch lass, and lovely Fro too,
The Spanish Donna, French Madam,
He doth net fear to go to.
Nothing so full of hazard, dread,
Nought lives above the Center,
No health, no fashion, wine or wench,
On which he dare not venture.
God-a-mercy for this in faith, and were it not that
the grief, for my Noble Masters death, and that to more∣row
too—
Why, hast thou a master to suffer?
Yes, and about a face too that would have served the
turn, if the heart had been correspondent. If you have a mind
to see the pitiful spectacle, I'll help you to a place, where you
shall have room to see, leisure to lament, and time to shed
tears.
Strange, most strange, I will inquire this further,
In the mean time, can help us to a lodging?
Yes, especially for such a face. If you desire a strong
one, to a prison. If you would lie cheap and save charges, it is
but speaking treaion, and I'll help you to be billeted, at the
Kings castle.
The Queen plays with my death,
And bids me act a bold Tragedians part,
To which, such moving action I will give,
That it shall glaze this Theater round with tears,
And all that shall behold me on this stage,
Pitying my fate: shall tax her cruelty,
And to the Spanish Chronicles let this a • de,
That he whose tongue hath justified their sex,
Whose fword hath coapt brave Champions for their fame
Whose travels have been to maintain their honours,
And of their virtues to give large approof,
That he, whose labour was their praise t'uphold,
Should by a woman fall; a fair false woman:
And be it not the least stain to that Country,
That she was bred in England.
The character you have given that noble stranger,
His valour, faith, and friendship Valladaura,
So deeply hath impressed us: that we are pleased,
To see him matched into a noble house,
And wee from henceforth shall account him ours.
Fair Petrocella, we commend your choice,
For if renown bath blazomd him aright.
Spain it could scaree have bettered: we have stored
Favours for you, and high respect for him,
Which leisure shall make known: but to the Prisoner,
That's now our present business: Seat you Lords,
Pineda, you next us.
Queen here's your sport,
And this the mark you aim at: yet in this
Deal gently with me, doe not mock my death,
And Isle expose my life as willingly,
As in my ripest joys and best of pleasures.
In love which most I wish to have preserved,
Nor trouble me with vain intergatories
To turn my soul (in the high rode to heaven
Into some dangerous by-path) grant but this,
My death I freely pardon.
Those small minutes
You have to spend, are at your own desires,
No tongue shall interrupt you.
Now you are kind:
I now with what prepared speed I can
Will come to kiss my Fate.
Come Lady, if we press not through the throng
Wee shall not get to th'hearing.
Amongst all these Courtiers, point me our the man?
That Pioke-devant that elbows next the Queen.
Enough, no more.
Now farewell Royal Sovereign and great Queen,
Unto whose high and sacred Majesty
My forfeit head thus stoops: and best loved Peers,
I only wish this blood you shall see drawn
Had dropped before the common enemy,
The barbarous Turk: in some just Christian cause
Not in this feminine quarrel. I had then
Died a crowa'd Martyr: that offender like
Now bow to the Axe of Justice: fare-well to
Thee, for whose love I undergo this shame,
May thy repentance for thy guilt beg pardon,
That wee may meet in blessed Eliz••m,
There our o•les kiss together: Farewell world,
Grown so corru•t, thou wilt not suffer Virtue
And Beauty roof together▪ may thy charity
Guide me to yon safe harbonr. Thus I fall
Beneath my offences, and take leave of—
Stay.
Who interrupts our Justice?
As you are Royal,
And worthy of those honours a•ch your head,
Defer that bloody business now in hand,
To right an injured woman.
What meares this?
A lovely and sweet presence.
That app•rition transports me into wonder.
A rare aspect; had she a suiting virtue,
Pineda, I should half ••spect my challenge,
And willingly compound.
Most Divine Princess,
Should they mere here, I should not blame your fears,
Since th'one appears to bee in•omparable.
What seek you from this throne?
That in which Ki•gs
Resemble most the Gods: Justice.
Against whom?
Against a Felon, robber▪ a base thiese.
Harbourd in this your Court.
If su•h live here,
As wee are King, wee banish him our patronage.
And yield him up to sentence: first, fa•e creature,
Go•os your name, your birth, and quality.
My Nation foreign: birth, not high degree'd,
No•e e•y way ignoble: for my quality,
Some that resume to know me, c•ll me Libertine,
Wanton and w•lt wench; nay, a Courtesan:
But were I looser then ere Lais was,
It should not bar me justice.
Thou shalt ha'te.
That word quaked all the blood within my veins,
And agues all my nerves.
You keep your own yet madam.
And of that,
Pineda, I am proud, infinite proud,
I ne'er was pleased with anies, finn till now;
It makes me still unpeer'd.
Speak, what's your wrong?
See you this pantofle?
It was a rich pair, till the base felony,
Of one of this your Court divided them;
For being lodged, and nobly entertained,
Was not alone content to vitiate
Both fame and body, and to take full surfeit
Of that my prostitution, but unworthy
The title of a noble Gentleman,
Hee stole the slipper there, that fellows this,
Valued at no less then a Thousand Crowns.
And cheaply rated too, find out the man,
And bee hee one Enthroned in our highest grace,
Hee shall be thine to censure.
Take surveigh,
Make strict inquiry, single men by men:
For mine own part, so much I grieve thy loss,
And his base theft abhor, that were it the man
Upon whose shoulder wee did use to lean,
Severity should judge him.
You are all gracious,
And Isle make bold to use the benefit
Of this your Clemency.
Oh that some whirlwind would but snatch me up,
And bear me to a desert wilderness,
Where never man was known, to sunder me
So far, If not much further, from my shame.
Pray sir, why should this beauty trouble you.
If one of your acquaintance.
I hope Lady, you are not Jealous, are you?
Sir look up: you are no whit like the man.
But she the woman,
For whom the sword thus thirsts: is this a vision?
Or else some waking dream.
And have I found thee villain? Think thou Maje∣sty
can be protection for a common thief?
This is that base felonious impudent,
Shame to his Nation, scandal to his birth,
And a disgrace unto that Royal Court,
In which hee seems protected.
Ha, who I?
Pineda guilty; shall wee bolster theft,
And patronage dishonour.
Justice Queen,
Justice great sir, let not this hie tribunal.
So famous by that Virgin, sent from heaven,
That bears the sword and balance, now be taxed
Of favour, or connivance.
As wee hope,
To be held worthy of the Crown wee wear,
Thou shalt not find us partial.
Hence from us,
For till thou can approve thine Innocence,
And clear this black aspersion thrown on thee,
Wee here abandon thee, to the •averitie
Of the Laws rigorous censure.
You amaze me,
Nor know I what this means.
I challenge then this man for stealing from me
The fellow to this slipper.
Of which crime,
I here protest me clear: Name the time where.
That night, when I became thy Paramore,
breasted thee, in these arms received th•e
Into my free Embraces, and imparted
The lavish store of such voluptuous sweets,
I lent with all profuseness
I doe this!
Madam, by all my favours stored in you,
I never looked upon that face till now;
Nor doe I know what this Imposture means▪
What saith my Page to this?
That it is most false,
And what my Lady here protests for true,
That, noble fit, I'm witness, as a man
To all his unjust actions accessory.
Produce me as a party? May this presence,
And awful Throne, before which I stand accused,
Pronounce me as a man forsook and lost,
If in the least of what these two suggest,
I have the smallest knowledge.
Both ways strange.
Bring me in censure? by that royalty,
Beneath whose grace I breathe, she is to me
As foreign as an Indian: and her cause
As far from my acquintance: by my life,
Which ne'er before a more Royal Court,
Could have bin called in question: what she is,
I know not: of what Nation, birth, degree;
How, or from whence derived, what continent,
Or from what place shoe's come; she may be Turk,
But More she cannot bee, she is so fair,
Shoe's strange to me, yet somewhat should I say;
To breast with her, I might as well have done it
With a Bear, or Lioness: Madam with her
I vow I never did.
Give me thy oath of that.
I can, and dare.
And I as willingly,
That I was never second to a man,
In any such false business.
Let them swear.
They shall.
Wee will.
This is a conflict worse.
Then in the sad Duell'tweene death and life,
When neither's certain, both in difficulty,
As it is now with me I pray ha done
That I were posted to your Country, there
To finish all my Travels.
Both have sworn:
And Princes, as you hope to crown your heads
With that perpetual wreath, which shall last ever,
Cast on a poor dejected innocent Virgin
Your eyes, of grace and pity: what sin is it?
Or who can be the patron to such evil?
That a poor innocent Maid, spotless in thought,
And pure in heart, borne without spleen and gall:
That never injured creature: never had heart
To think of wrong, or ponder injury;
That such a one in her white innocence,
Striving to live peculiar in the compass
Of her own virtues, Notwithstanding these
Should be sought out by strangers, persacured
Made infamous, even there where she was made
For imitation, hist at in her Country,
Abandoned of her mother, kindred, friends:
Depraved in foreign Climes, scorned every where,
And even in Princes Courts, reputed vile:
O pity, pity this.
Thou speak Enigma's woman, and hast need
To find a Sphinx to explain them.
Then behold.
The strangest calling imposed on me
That ere was laid on Virgin; I am she
For whom this noble Sir hath undertook.
And wrongly stands convicted, this that body
So stained and fullied by these barbarous tongues,
That even in scolding lies justice, for heaven
Hath forced them to swear truth, they never saw me,
How am I then polluted gracious Queen?
How can such find competitors in virtue,
That will not give it countenance: had those murdered me,
As they have kilt my same and havock't that,
A pitied and crowned martyr I had dyed,
That am in censure now, a condemned heretic,
And mere Apostate to all woman-hood;
And what I ever made my President,
Sincerity and goodness: Villeines blush,
And Sir, out gaze their falsehood, Queen bee just;
Least in the Occan of that prize you steal,
You shipwreck all your glories.
It is most strange:
We know you not,
Give us some lively instance, you're the woman.
How should I know that Ring to be the same
Of which my credulous maid was by these two
Cheated and robed, most treacherously betrayed;
That Carkanet you wear, peruse it well,
Hath both my name and picture. Marks sufficient
To prove me no impostor. Doth your guilt.
Bow you so low already? let your penitence
There stay you, least your sins weight cleave the earth,
And sink you down to hell.
What prostrates them
Mounts me to expectations: my blessed choice,
Now I have seen thy apparent innocence,
Queen I shall die contented.
Oh, till now,
I never thought to bee vanquished.
Pox on that slipper.
Stand you all mute? then give me leave to speak.
Sir, what doth this concern you?
Woman, peace.
Oh sit, you are my brother.
Strumpet hence,
Would I had never known thee, thou hast made me
A foreign scorn, and where I aim at honour
Most infamous and loathed, this vitiated beauty
Even by her own confession late deflower•d
I beg from this most sacred Majesty,
To see severely chastised: being English
To have that English shame and punishment,
Due to the like offenders.
She stands eel•red
By her accusers silence.
This may be
A mere confederacy, but to my fears
At all no satisfaction, her own tongue
Hath published her a mechall prostitute,
And that is my first truth.
I pray Sir,
What is this matchless beauty unto you,
Being already in your self engaged
To this fair Creature, that this Strangers case
Should any way be yours.
Spaines admiration.
And wonder of a friend, I dare to you
Be plain and serious: to all others ears I
Wish my words locked in silence: Oh, with shame
And infamy I speak it, deferring heaven
'T might be my last of speech, this thing, polluted
This (would I had ought else to stile her by)
But needs out, out it must, she is my—my Sister.
Flesh and blood?
The same, Oh me, the same, my natural Sister.
Father and mother?
So.
You are not honest,
And now no more my friend: I doe begin
To doubt you, nay most heinously suspect you,
I scarce can think you a true moral man,
Much less Religious: Ferrers before these,
This Royal bench, either confess thee mad,
Des • erate, and quite given o'er to calumny
Or in behalf of this (I know not who)
I challenge thee the combat.
Oh, you are mine
And I vowed ever yours.
Come, no such thing.
Either pronounce this Lady innocent,
Or I denounce thee miscreant.
Though I have stood
In silence all this while, yet in this cause
I, I my self am taxed: and to approve
This Ladies Beauty, virtue, chastity
I'll be this Spanyard's second.
I am wronged.
And thou hast don't, try both, I should be first,
But be thou what thou can be, he or thou,
So freely hath this Lady showed her self
Mine, so I now dare term her, that in spite
Of spleen or envie's opposition;
It is a thing I doe desire to embrace
And meet in violent lightnings: and then
I speak it, she is mine: and this encounter
Concerns me, only me; who intercepts me
Is guilty of my challenge, his own death,
Her injury, and my most just revenge.
Pray lets talk mildly:
And first to you, to whom my solo's engaged,
Why should you hazard such a precious life
For one by her own language stands condemned.
Because she is thy Sister; and so well
I love thy merit that no new impression
Can sink in me, that any of thy Line,
Can ever stand polluted: I have found thee
In all thy deeds so noble—
Oh you have moulded her
In me anew: and friend your confirmation,
I doe receive her perfect as the woman,
Whose acts are laws, whose saying's Oracles,
And she was never truly mine, till now, so I receive her
from you. But I pray,
What might you be of whom I have deserved
So ill to make you my Antagonist?
Or why to me, to bee so dear a friend
As to become my second, since your face.
I never saw till now.
Not Manhurst?
Friend!
Oh sir, you were my 〈◊〉.
I am wrapped:
Spain show thy Justice; now, where, or from whence
Can thou desire so rare a president:
Would thou see Beauty? Look upon that face:
Or Virtue? here, see thy true Innocence,
Valour in him, true nobleness in them all,
And happy them, that naked of all these,
Hath sent thee hither foreign presidents,
For instruction, and example.
Now I yield:
And till now never; hence base sycophants,
I shall abjure you ever, Flat•ing glasses,
That gave me a false face, but in this Crystal,
I now behold me truly, you are she
By whom Isle henceforth dress me, and not wear
No hurt, of which you are not president;
Bee ever mine: next her, you that have travelled
To fetch me o'er this Mirror, which Isle casket,
As my best jewel: I now find my self,
That to my self, was till this day unknown,
I have transgressed in that I sought to fleece
So pure a Diamond.
Come, we'll end all this:
First, Lady we'll acquit your Jealousy,
She is his sift: Ferrers, wee shall rank you
In as high grace, as you are in his love;
Nor have you Manhurst, least expressed your self,
In gratitude to him, friendship to both;
You Bonavida wee restore, you stand
In the eye of our preferrement: you wee admire:
And thus conclude: Two Nations have contended
For breast and face, in you both these are ended.
IN battles, some men fall, others again,
Come off with honoured scars, wounded, not slain,
In ship-wrack's, some sink, and are seen no more,
Others on Masts, and Planks, attain the shore;
It is so twixt 〈◊〉 and you; your Smile or Frown,
Can save, or spill; to make us swim, or drown.

AFter many a loving greeting,
Mars and Venus point a meeting;
And that Vulcan might not have
Least note thereof, they choose a Cave
Obscure and dark, to which they trust,
Intending there to sate their lust.
But when themselves most safe they think,
The rising Sun pries through a chink,
Sees all, and what hee sees discovers
To Vulcan, touching these two Lovers.
The enraged Smith taking foul scorn
To be affronted with the horn,
Provides for them a subtle 〈◊〉,
In hope to take them both therein.
His plot prevailed, and now being fiery
In just revenge, by strict inquiry,
To find where these by custom met,
He by his art contrives a Net,
More fine than is the Spiders thread,
And yet of wire; which he so spread
About the place, all things compact
So well, he took them in the act:
And then doth all the gods invite,
Who came at once to view that sight.
Some jeered, some pitied their disgrace,
One wished himself in Mars his place.
Tet for all this, the churlish Sir
So kept them that they could not stir.
Mars chafes and threats, and struggling keeps:
But Venus blushes first, then weeps.
And when tho gods could laugh no more,
Then Vulcan freed them, not before.
Now Venus knowing all this done
Was first discovered by the Sun;
Against him open war proclaims,
And at him her revenge she aims:
Cupped she uses as her instrument.
And that's of our Scoene the sole argument.
WHy lovely Daphne, will you lose yo• Youth,
And let your best hours pass yo• Well you know,
Beauty's a Flower, which not being cropped in time,
Soon withers on the stalk, and then (alas)
Will neither serve for use nor ornament.
You owe me sweet grand-children, pretty babes,
Even for your birth you do: it is a debt
That I would see discharged: I to my parents
Paid it in thee; it is a Bond stands firm,
'till concealed in thy sweet posterity.
See, I have brought thee Suitors, choice ones too,
Two noble Rivers, both residing near,
Amphrisus, and still-flowing Appidans,
Young, and of means, both active and of strength
To wrestle against barrenness, and give
The hug the foil. Being dead, I live in thee:
Live thou too in thine issue; so successively
Our Line and memory shall never perish,
But last as long as Time.
Your father (Daphne)
Counsels with judgment, and this argument
I could by many reasons amplify.
As, That without succession (one age past)
Mankind should cease to be. O what a punishment
Deserve they from the gods, that would destroy
•o glorious a creation, and to leave
•o wonderful a fabric as the world is,
To no admirers?
Save the Plants and Beasts;
And what can they distinguish?
Therefore, Daughter
Make use of time: a season being past,
Can never be recalled, no, not a month.
A month? no day, no hour, no minute can:
•herefore make use of opportunity
Which throws it self upon thee: but being straightened,
Will after prove a stranger; the least instant
•y long repentance cannot be redeemed.
To you I bow in duty, as to a father;
And these affront in noble curtsy,
Not wronging him, to show my breeding base,
•coffing your proffered love with womanish scorn.
•is counsels, your persuasions, I commend,
•nowing both fitting, were they seasonable.
•hat Maids should love men I am not ignorant,
•• that the breeding world should still increase;
•hat Progeny should reach from age to age,
•nd that the gods maked a necessity,
•o have all their miraculous works admired:
••l this I know; but
I'll proceed: But what
Can you produce against this?
Hear me out:
But when I in my best considerate thoughts
Ponder my youth, and what it is to love;
That vows are ties not easy to be loosed,
And that the smallest finger can pluck on
What not the hand and arm can well put off:
That Marriage is a Maze, which entered in,
The line is snatched thence which should guide us out.
Ere hazard then that unknown labyrinth,
Much blame me not to pause.
What need thou fear?
Fond timorous Girl, did not thy mother this
Long time before thee?
Nay, hereafter too
May not your daughter do so?
I'll resolve you
That, when I have a daughter of my years,
And tutored by her mother.
Excellent Nymph,
These are evasions mere unnecessary;
We know you to be ripe, and our selves grown,
Betwixt us is equality in state,
And parity in years: nor is our course
Irregular or indirect, we come
Admitted by your father, as a way
Plain, and not interdicted: nor is our suit
So far with cradle it may childish seem;
Nor so old, to appear decrepit: we are two
Rivals, yet friends; so you choose one of either,
Even he that is despised rests satisfied,
Nor is our love divided.
I commend you:
There is of you less danger, and least fear
That you should die of love; when both of you
Come with like premeditation to digest
A rigorous answer.
Pray what should we do?
Our service we have offered equally:
The world is wide, and if we speed not here,
We must provide us elsewhere.
Worthy friends.
To be most plain, to me most pleasing is:
Then take as plain an answer; I confess me
Weak as I am) unworthy of your love.
And yet not so low prised, but have bin courted
Both by as great and good. Nor can you blame me,
If I in adding to your words, shall spare
From mine, in the least kind to derogate.
To you then, as my equals, I entreat;
Or if you shall deny me, Daphne then
Proclaims it as her will. I must retire me
For some few months, in them to meditate
What marriage is, and truly study man,
(A book in which I yet have truanted.)
Now, if I in my more maturity,
And after some cessation of your suits,
Can ground this Maxim, Man is worthy us,
And we of him; we'll breviate your long motions
Within a few short terms.
You speak but reason:
And so long we'll attend you.
Most fit, that such as bargain for their lives,
•hold read us o'er and o'er, before they set
Their hands to that Indenture. We are pleased.
And I that you are so. Nor can my father
At this be discontented.
Not I, Child;
I would not hurry on my joys too fast,
Having such hope of them. And yet, sweet Daphne,
The more thou hastes their harvest, the ripe crop
Shall be to them more welcome. For this time
It is best to leave her to her privacy:
More leisure that she hath to meditate,
Less time you have in which to be resolved,
Twill shorten expectation.
May these hours
That add unto your years, still as you grow,
Increase toward us your love.
Friend you pray well,
And in that hope I take a loving leave,
By kissing your fair hand.
You understand a courtesy as well,
Once being done, as she that knows to do it.
Farewell. Where be my maids?
My Lady, at hand.
Daph. Doth either of you know what this love is,
That men so much affect it?
Trust me, not I: I never looked so far into man
and most sure I am, man never yet entered so far in••
me, that I should know how to define it. But can y••
tell the reason why this little god is still portrait like
child?
I think, because that dotage which he breeds
Only belongs to children. 1 Nymph. But why naked
Either to affright the Modest; or to such
As vow to him, to express their impudence.
But why with bow and arrows?
That denotes
Inconstancy, because the shafts of love
Are ever shot at random.
Wherefore hood winked?
However his shafts are aimed, it shows his kind
Because they strike the eyes of Reason blind.
Then am I with Love quite out of love, base••
at these years I should be loath to have one to lead ••
Yet do I love the beauty of the spring,
To listen to the birds, with various lays
To welcome in his coming. I affect
The pride and warmth of Summer, to behold
Abundant Autumn pour his harvest forth
In plenteous sheafs; to see the presses bleed
A flowing vintage. But I most admire
The glory of the Sun who comforts these:
For without him, what were the earth? what heaven?
If all were darkness, who should then discern
The lustre of the one or of the other,
The fresh fertility proudly adorned
With choice and change of all discoloured flowers?
More than a cased up Jewel, what were Beauty,
Without the Sun to give a brightness to 't?
What's ornament, without the Sun to judge it?
What to be fair or foul, without the Sun,
To censure and distinguish which is best?
The Sun's the deity which I adore.
Here then upon this verdure cast your selves,
And rest a while; not long it is ever he will
In all his glory mount the Eastern hill.
Here on the top of the mount Ericine
Ambush thy self, (a place sacred to me)
Where thou may boldly front the god of Light,
Who hath by this already chased hence night.
I'll leave thee now: strike, but strike home, my son,
I'll in these shades absent me whilst it is done.
He mocks my bow, but Phoebus soon shall find
Cupped hath power to strike the Sun-god blind.
The stars are frighted from the firmament,
And at the sight of our illustrious beams
Darkness unto the black  fled.
Now to our daily progress through the Signs.
But stay, what's he that with our honours, armed,
(The Bow and quiver, proper sole to us)
Braves us upon high ?
I know him now, it is Paphian Venus son,
To whom some fools have vowed a deity.
I'll know the reason why the bastard brat
Dares thus assume my trophies. Morrow Cupped.
As much to Phoebus.
Weak brat resolve me,
By whose enticement thou hast bin so bold
To take to thee the emblem of my power?
Is it not sufficient, thou with brain-sicke toys
Can fill the heads of mad men and of fools,
Who'ascribe to thee a god-head, merely usurped?
But thou must wear my due Impress insculpt,
And (about thy shoulders) those known ornaments,
Apollinis insignia? (Apollo's Ensigns)
And why thine?
Because I am styled the god of Archery;
And where I aim I hit, my prey or enemy,
Kill near or far. The monstrous serpent 
(Whose bulk being slain, an hundred acres spread)
Had from this bow his wounds, and I my honours:
And shall a child boast eminence with me?
Phoebus, thy bow hath monsters struck to ground,
But mine hath power the gods themselves to wound,
Of which thou art not least. Mother he's sped, He shoot
I have pierced him home with my shafts golden head.
Thou art mine own sweet boy, thy darts ne'er fail•
And now Apollo languish and look pale,
More wan than did thy sister Moon once prove,
When for  she was sick of love,
Whilst I laugh and rejoice. Now make all sure,
And strike fair Daphne whilst she sleeps secure,
But with contempt and hate.
My arrow flies,
And as it hits, sick of disdain she lies.
Now mother let's away.
Phoebus, I divine,
Thou'It say his shafts can wound as deep as thine.
What alteration's this I feel? a heate
Beyond mine own fire, kindled at mine eye.
All sleep is still in darkness, yet our souls
See when our eyes are shut. My brest's in uproar;
And yet a dream tells me, the morning gray
Says the Sun's up, I shame to look on day.
What Beauty's this on earth, transpiercing more,
Than can the beams from my celestial Orb?
The Sun is up; Awake: What, shame you not
That he should find you sleeping?
Sweet Nymph stay.
The shades best please me, I in them will play;
The Sun's too hot and sultry.
I am hee
That measures out the year; and shun you me
Fairest of thy sex, behold the Suns bright eye,
That all things sees, by whom you all things spy.
Will you in everlasting darkness dwell?
Light is heavens emblem, and becomes it well:
Where I appear, I comfort and make glad;
Be comforted in me, why are you sad?
Would you in blindness live? these rays of mine
Give that reflect by which your Beauties shine,
For what are artificial lights? when I
Appear in fullness they soon faint and die.
They only put on counterfeits: my rays
False colours find, and give the true the praise.
If yours be such, then prove them by my light,
The world will censure they are pure and right.
His piercing beams I never shall endure,
They sick me of a fatal Calenture.
What are you better to be lovely born,
If not beheld? What's state, if not observed?
Or wherefore before Cottages do we
Prefer the stately Palace, and the sumptuous roof?
What virtue were in jewels without me?
Else should they be with pebbles equal prised.
Wherefore did Nature make you with bright eyes,
Which profit not in night without my beams?
Why should the Rose be red? the Lily white?
The Violet purple? and the Holly greene?
All rheas my creatures. But when I decline,
And night usurps upon the Universe,
Their tincture's not discerned: but white and red
Which in your peerless cheeks exceed all flowers,
What lustre bear they? When my beams are gone,
The fair and foul in darkness seem all one.
That darkness doth best please me: let's away,
My beauty will be sun burnt if I stay,
He will blast me like an Ethiope.
Dost thou fly me?
Love bids me follow, and I must pursue:
No vault, no cave or cavern so obscure,
Through which I will not pierce, to find thee out,
The Antipodes for ever want my rays:
To gaze on her, I'll this Meridian keep,
And till attain the saint that I adore,
Here ever shine, where night shall be no more.
Laugh Cupped, laugh, for I am half revenged,
And shall ever long be fully, when this Blab
Shall in his course, or too much lag or speed
Post sometimes, and again run retrograde.
Where by his too long presence the earth is scorched,
Or by his absence the other world shall freeze:
And all that lies beneath the Moon complain:
And that the gods at mans request shall call
Disorder into question. What can then
Both heaven and earth conclude when this is done,
But this thou did to avenge me of the Sun.
Will not Mars thank me for it?
And kiss thee too.
O still by his example punish those
That shall our sweet adulterate sports disclose.
Why flies my Daphne, knowing it is in vain:
Love makes me swifter than thy fear can thee.
O me, I am so tortured with the Sun,
I hate my very shadow.
I pursue not
As Eagles, Doves do; or the Lions, Harts;
Or Wolves, the Lamb. Love is my cause of hast:
Run not so fast, lest thou should trip perhaps,
And do thy self some damage: the ground's rough,
Should thou but slide, and I the Author on it,
How much would it offend me? To prevent which,
Stay but thy hast, and I will slack my speed.
I am almost breathless.
See, I am no Satire,
Shepherd, or such as live by grazing herds,
Delphos is mine, Pharos, and Tenedos:
Thou know not who thou fly'st, I am Apollo,
The only god that speaks by Oracle:
Jove is my father, and the Muses nine
Are all my daughters: I am Patron held
Of Numbers, Raptures, and sweet Poesy.
My shafts are ever certain where they aim,
(Yet one more certain, which hath pierced me deep)
Physic is mine, I first devised that Art,
And could it help me, I were then assured:
But Love is by no Simples to be cured.
O now I am quite spent; help, goddess Iuno,
(Queen of chaste marriage) bright Diana, help
One of thy true vowed Virgins: change my shape,
That I this hot adulterous Sun may scope.
Thanks, ô ye Powers divine: the Spheres assent
To my chaste prayer: your heavenly dooms are just.
Here grow I fixed against all powers of lust.
Strange prodigy! Less hope is in her stay,
Than in her speed: her bodie's round encompassed
With a rough rind, in which her warm heart beats.
Her hair is all grown upward into boughs,
Here milk white fingers and her arms advanced
To great and lesser branches: her fair feet
But late so swift, fast rooted in the earth:
And I, whom Love late blinded, now may see
My Daphne turned into a Laurel tree.
Her life still struggles in the churlish bark,
And from her lips I feel her breath still flow.
One blessed kiss at parting, but in vain,
The very tree shrinks from me in disdain.
And yet in lasting memory of thee
And of my love, thou shalt be ever mine:
In all ovatious triumphs and rich shows
The Laurel shall ingirt the Conquerors brows.
All eminence shall think it graced in thee.
Poets, the Muses darlings, shall from thee
Receive their honour, and the best esteemed
Be crowned Laureate, and no excellence
But have it's noble estimate from hence.
Emperors shall prise thy leaves above pure gold:
For thou shalt ever wait on victory;
And as my youthful and still unshorn hairs
(Vnchanging) of this golden hew are seen,
So shall the boughs and branches still be greene,
And arm against Ioves lightning. And all these
Shall be for our sake by the gods approved,
In memory that Daphne we once loved.
How comes it, fair Aurora, we the Hours
Are thus disturbed?
One halts, whilst the other runs;
Sometimes made longer by a many minutes,
Sometimes not full three quarters?
Am not I
As much distempered, being forced to rise
So oft before my time? which makes my husband
Old Tython jealous (for he bed-rid lies)
I have light on some new Love.
Ell's out of order.
How comes this strange confusion rise of late?
My spring to grow so forward by the Sun?
Summer complains that I usurp on her.
As much as I on thee, Autumn on me,
And saith, that in my ripening I include
His harvest, and so rob him of his due.
Have I not cause? when thou not only claimst
The honour of my crop: But frozen Winter,
Hee keeps a coil too, swearing, I intrude
Into his bounded limits.
This I am sure
I am curtaild of my right; my snow is melted,
And hath not time to cloth the mountain tops:
September is like May, January as June:
And all my bright and precious Icicles
Melting to nothing: What's the reason trow we?
It is the Suns slackness, or his too much speed,
That breeds all this distraction.
The Sun, say you?
Break he, or not directly keep his day,
Seasons and Hours all out of order stray.
Behold her whom you speak of, Day, whence come ye?
I parted now with Night, who had bin here,
But that both must not in one place appear.
And what saith she?
Like you, rails on the Sun,
And saith he doth her wrong: nor blame her, when
Being full twelve hours, he scarce affords her ten.
Day, you are the Suns mistress, hath he not
Reveled the cause to you?
No, his known brightness
Hath unto me been only dark in that.
Nor am I of his counsel.
Fine world grown,
When every drunken Sexton hath the skill
To make his giddy clock go truer far
Than can the best Sun dial.
What are you
That murmur thus against our Deity?
Are you not all our creatures? though we give you
Full sails on earth, do not we steer the helm?
Disposing you both where and how we please;
And dare you thus rebel?
The god of Light
Is our great Lord and Sovereign.
This submission
Hath somewhat calmed us: had you still stood out,
Disorder, we had to Confusion turned,
And so you all been ruined. But henceforth
Morning shall keep her hour, Hours measure day,
In a true scope the Day proportion Weeks,
Weeks, Months; Months, seasons; to sum up the year.
And wee our course in that, perfecting time:
That nothing in this concordance appear
Either preposterous or unseasonable.
For which our grace, where-ever you shall find
This new sprung Laurel, you Aurora I charge,
With your moist tears bathe her green tender boughs:
From whence I will exhale them with my beams.
Hours, do you wait upon her gentle growth.
Day comfort her: Ver cheer her with thy spring.
Thou Summer give her warmth: and Autumn, thou
Dare not to spoil her of her plenteous leaves:
Nor Winter thou with thy robustuous gusts,
To blait her lasting verdure. These observed,
Still flourish under us. And that this unity
May last amongst you many fortunate years,
End in a Hymn tuned to the chiming Spheres.
HOwsoe're the Minutes go,
Run the hours or swift or slow:
Seem the Months or short or long,
Pass the seasons right or wrong:
All we sing that Phoebus follow,
Semel in anno ridet Apollo.
Early fall the Spring or not,
Prove the Summer cold or hot:
Autumn be it fair or foul,
Let the Winter smile or skowle:
Still we sing, that Phoebus follow,
Semel in anno ridet Apollo.

THe innocence, truth, and simplicity
Of country Damsels: What felicity
They arrive to in their low estate;
What freedoms they participate,
What joy, what solace, what content
To their innocuous life is lent.
The humble shed and cottage held
More safe than gorgeous houses, swelled
With pomp and wealth. It likewise proves
More simple truth in their chaste loves,
Than greater Ladies, tympany' de
With much more honour, state, and pride.
Here's of the Willow wreath dispute,
How, and why worn. What best doth suit
Forsaken Virgins, read and find
Their characters who prove unkind.
GOod morrow.
So to you, fair Shepherdess.
What news in our Arcadia?
I know none:
For well you wot it is no news with us,
That men should prove inconstant.
Think you so?
Thought's free.
I pray can you define me Thought?
Let me bethink my self, I think I can:
For I have thought of many things ever now.
But can you guess what I think?
I (perhaps)
May jump with your conceit, come neere't at least.
Of colours there are none so opposite
As white and black: and of the Elements
Than fire and water none more contrary:
Nor is there ought so antipathy' de in men,
As what they think and speak.
Now let me help you:
Men's thoughts like Courtiers cloaks are often shifted,
And change as oft as they are truly sifted.
This then hath been the cause of women's sorrow;
Men think to day ill, to do worse to morrow:
Witness Amphrisa's servant.
Pity it is,
•o fair a body, and so sweet a soul
•hold be so foully dealt with. Her false Lover
•nkindely hath forsook her.
That's the reason
•hoe's grown into so deep a melancholy.
• wonder any woman dare trust man,
•nce, like as the Chameleons change themselves
•nto all perfect colours saving white;
• they can to all humours frame their speech,
•e only to prove honest.
You say well.
•t as no worms breed where they feel no warmth,
•o Vultures watch where they can find no prey;
•o Pirate roves but where he hopes for spoil:
• none of these false servants wait, but where
•hey find a yielding Mistress.
Indeed light minds are caught with little things,
•nd Fancy smells to Fennel.
But Amphrisa
Is held to be the wisest shepherdess
That lives in our Arcadia.
But I have heard,
Late wit and cheated wisdom to be counted
Next neighbours unto folly. Shepherds now,
The holier that they seem in outward show,
The hollower are their hearts. By subtle sophistry
(As I have heard) the best Philosophy
May be perverted. And men's flatteries
Are just like Circes riches, which can turn
Vain glorious fools to Asses, credulous Fools
To Woodcocks, pretty wanton Fools to Apes,
And proud Fools into Peacocks.
But amongst these,
Amphrisa had no place.
See, here she comes
That for her self can answer.
But it were sin
In us, not to be answered, thus to suffer her
To pale the cheerful blood in her far cheeks,
Through wilful passion. Which I'll not endure.
Then rouse her from these dumps.
You're sad, Amphrisa:
Sweet may we know the cause?
Amphrisa. You have prevented
A strange conceit which somewhat troubled me;
But by your interruption almost lost.
Nay recollect your self, pray let us hear't.
I was thinking, why Parrasius, drawing Youth,
Made Love to tickle one side with a feather,
To move a smile; and with the other hand
To sting it with a Scorpion.
You're stung then.
But I was thinking on Praxiteles,
Who drew his mistress thus: Look on her one way,
She laughed upon him: Strait before, she wept:
But change the side, and cast your eye adverse,
And then she appeared sleeping. And so you,
Fit but your fancies unto such a face,
You'll ne'er complain of servant.
Then it seems,
My storie's told aforehand.
Yes, and rumor'd
Through all Arcadia.
And none pity me?
There's none so marble breasted, but doth melt
To hear of your disaster.
Is there one,
To whom the cause of my disease is known,
That can prescribe me cure for it?
Without feeling
Your pulse, I know the nature of your grief:
You have an heate, on which a coldness waits,
A pain that is endured with pleasantness,
And makes those sweets you eat have bitter taste:
•• puts eyes in your thoughts, ears in your heart:
•It was by desire first bred, by delight nursed,
And hath of late been weaned by jealousy.
But how can these disgusts be remedied,
Which Reason never yet could comprehend?
By patience.
That's a physic all prescribe,
But few or none doth follow. Pray what is it?
It is the best receipt that can be took
Both against love and fortune (Crossed in both.)
To wish the best, to think upon the worst,
And all contingents brooke with patience.
•s a most sovereign medicine.
And moreover;
What cannot be redressed with peevishness,
Ought to bee borne with patience.
Patience?
•he is so like to Fortitude herself,
That by her sweet aspect she appears to be
Her sister or her daughter.
The only remedy for injuries, is
By patience to forget them. And more noble
It is to yield your self in triumph to it
Then to be drawn by force.
You have prevailed,
For I am now your Patient; and entreat you,
Like skilled Physicians, study for my health.
From their Doctors
The sick expect more art then eloquence:
And therefore what defect you find in words,
Expect in our Prescriptions.
I never was with pastime better pleased;
So clear a morning, and such temperate ayre;
The Sun so bright, yet sparing of his heat,
Made all the toil we took (to chase the Stag)
To seem no labour, but an exercise.
The wily beast to shun our swift pursuit,
Forsook the Plains, to take the mountain tops.
Yet maugre the opposure of the Rocks
And clefts depending to molest our speed
Our well-tride Nymphs, like wild Kids climbed those hills
And thrild their arrow Javelins after him:
Nor left the chase, till all those golden heads
Were new stained in his blood.
It proved, great Queen
Your active Nymphs were better breathed than he,
For whom we could not overtake, we tired:
That done, we touched our Beagles, and so made
Both hills and valleys echo to his death.
He stood so long, and made us stray so far,
Amongst the Swains and lovely Shepherdesses,
That use to graze their Flocks upon these downs;
The Sun must needs pass the Meridian,
Ever we can reach the Lodge.
The Arcadian Girls
Are of no common beauty; as their habits
Much grace the fields; so many of those features
Mine eye by chance hath glanc't on in the Chase,
In mine opinion would become the Court.
They say, these virgins are acute in wit,
And fluent in conceit, to speak or sing;
As having oft drunk from the Muses spring.
See, Royal Queen, where three (not of the mea∣nest
Or least to be respected) are retired.
Be not too loud, These bows will shelter us;
Let's l•sten how they fashion their discourse,
And how far short the Folds and Cottages
Come of the Court or City.
Nay pray prescribe. It is said of all Physicians
What good comes by their Physic, the Sun sees:
But in their art, if they have bad success,
That the earth covers. Howsoe're I suffer,
You blameless are.
All those that are unskilful
Will flatter grief 'till it grow desperate.
But though you know the use of Physic sweet,
To taste it is unsavoury.
Howsoever I am prepared.
Imagine first, You never had a servant.
Not so: for who can know the sweet of ease,
That never was in pain?
Or say she had,
Think that he ne'er played false.
A mere relapse,
Before the first be cured, to think him faithful,
Were but to enter her disease anew,
To make her grief more violent.
But one speak:
The medicine that's proposed of contraries,
Can ne'er breed peace of mind.
All, solid sense.)
For I perceive, those that are sound themselves,
Have still more will to help, than skill to cure.
Well, Mistress Doctor I'll give way to you.
Think then you had a servant, and he false;
For whose sake never more trust per jur'd man.
And though some say Jove winks at Dovers Oaths,
It is (after) with broad eyes to punish them.
Words should not credit men, but men their words:
For he that breaks his promise lies to heaven;
And whom Heaven hates, who but would fear to love
Most cursed it is to flatter and forswear;
And dearth of oaths is blessed barrenness.
You're sick at heart: the only help for that
Is, Let your heart abhor his treachery,
And him, for it. You're pained too in the head,
For that here's balm made or a willow wreath.
Let this charmed c•• eel but impale your brows,
It is present help for both.
Make this apparent.
Thus: All the Arcadian Swains &amp; Nymphs that ••
Your brows ingirt with this for saken wreath
Will take note of his falsehood, and your faith;
Your innocence, and his inconstancy:
And those that wear tears in their eyes for you,
Of love and pity, to be thus abused,
Will steep their tongues in wormwood and in gall,
To brand him for his open perjury;
Their pity, with your patience joined,
(With this to boot) will prove an absolute cure.
Some ease I find already, crown me then.
May, wheresoever your head you softly pillow,
Be ne'er more troubled, whilst thus wreathed in willow
Nor shall it, Elope, for from this hour,
Hearts grief nor heads pain shall of me have power.
I now have chased hence sorrow.
This conceit
Hath took me highly; and great pity it is,
That such choice wits should find no other ears
Than those that Swains, and flocks, and fowls have. Wit
So spent, is only treasured in the air.
The earth hath least part on it. Virgins, Good day.
Nay, do not fall too low.
You are our Queen.
And Lady of our fortunes.
By that title
I do command you then to spare your knees.
Nay rise.
It is only by your Grace and goodness
We breathe and live.
It is enough to me,
That you present us such acknowledgement.
And as for you, fair Virgin, I could wish
Your Willow were a Laurel. Nay, so it is:
Because all such may be styled Conquerors,
That can subdue the ir passions.
Our fear is,
That if our rude discourse have touched your ear,
The coursenesse might offend you.
Pleased us highly:
Which that you may perceive in mee's vnfeignd,
I charge you, as I am your Soveraignesse,
All coyness and evasion set apart,
To be most free in language.
Imposition
That comes from you is unto us a Law,
Which ought to be kept sacred.
I'll as freely
Command then, as you willing are to obey,
For were I not a Queen, I'd wish to be
As one of you, a witty Shepherdess.
Pray sing me something of your country life,
To make me more in love with it.
Tic our fear; A life that is so mean, so ill expressed
As needs it must bee, (if imposed on us)
May make you rather loath it.
I had thought
Courts only had been filled with complement,
Of which I see, the cottage is not clear.
Give not our simple truth, and fear to offend,
A character we know not (gracious Queen)
But howsoever, if you make us faulty,
You have the power to pardon.
And presume
That's granted, ever the offence be.
Then thus, Madam.
We that have known no greater state
Than this we live in, praise our fate:
For Courtly silks in cares are spent,
When Countries russet breeds content.
The power of Scepters we admire;
But sheep-bookes for our use desire.
Simple and low is our condition;
For here with us is no ambition.
We with the Sun our flocks unfold,
Whose rising makes their fleeces gold.
"Our music from the birds we borrow;
"They bidding us, we them, good morrow.
Nay, fair ones, what you have begun in song,
Continue in discourse: Wee would hear more
Of your pleased life.
Your highness may command.
Our habits are but course and plain,
Yet they defend from wind and rain.
As warm too, in an equal eye
As those be, stained in Scarlet dye.
Those that have plenty wear (we see)
But one at once; and so doe we.
The Shepherd with his home-spun Lass
As many merry hours doth pass,
As Courtiers with their costly Girls,
Though richly decked in gold and pearls:
And though but plain, to purpose woo,
Nay oft-times with less danger too.
Those that delight in dainties store,
One stomach feed at once, no more.
And when with homely fare we feast,
With us it doth as well digest:
And many times wee better speed;
For our wild fruits no surfeits breed,
If we sometimes the Willow wear,
By subtle Swains that dare forswear.
We wonder whence it comes, and fear,
The have been at Court, and learned it there.
If any Lady then shall please,
Whose cheek looks pale through my disease,
By any faithless servant, or false friend,
(Being cured myself) this I can give or lend.
Believe it, a sweet conclusion: for oft-times
Such things fall out. But we have further heard
(Besides what now our ears are witness to)
That as your words keep time, your voices tune;
So hath the curious motion of your feet
Been taught to know true measure. You can dance?
Yes royal Princess, as we sing and speak,
After such rural fashion.
If no worse,
It may become a Theatre of eyes,
Yet wrest no blushes from you. Will you then,
Since that we parallel in number thus,
Help us to fill a measure?
So wee thought
There might no jarring discords grow from us,
To spoil your better music.
No such fear.
Come then, such music as the place will yield,
We'll instantly make use of.
Complete in all: You have made us now Eie-witnes
Of what, Relation sparingly hath spoke.
To encourage which, and that so great a merit
Pass not without some meed, receive these favours,
And wear them for our sake.
Time bids us part.
Greater than these we have for you in store,
And mean hereafter to employ you more.

HOw now Prologue! is your mind so much on your part, that you must run over men as you go?
The fault was yours sir, that would so carelessly sit in his way, that was to doe his part by you; tho we hope to run over some before we have ended; and yet without any Cyni∣call observation, especially of the wise.
Why for Iuvenal's sake? what has thy new tuned Poetry vented? will you rail? will you be satirical, and bite? and rub the City with salt?
Faith sir you must know, that the giddy looseness of vicious humours, does so rankle in most parts of our time's im∣posthum'd gallantry, that tic a hard thing Satyram non scribe∣re: and therefore we are desirous to lance it a little, and give the sore an issue, that vanity seeing the foulness of the mat∣la which made it swell to such a seeming greatness, may loathe it self, and seek a cure for the disease.
Doe yo hear Prologue! your Author is a fool: is he desirous to buy Fame at such a rate, that he will smart for it? will not examples move him? can he not live private, but he must be meddling with Tigillinus? Did he never hear of the Proverb, that it's better railing at Hercules then at a Clown to his face? I prithee tell him of it, and let him know, tic bet∣la live still private and unknown, then have our smarts to every ear be blown.
Troth it is true sir, Isle put him in mind of it.
I prithee doe, and tell him withal, that so choice an Audience desires not to glut their ears with others infamy, nor ever wished their mirth should feed upon the rank distemperature of other men's vices; but come to behold a Scene merry and harmless, as free from sower invectives, as fulsome bawdery: as for those whose dull palats can relish
nothing, unless it be sawced with the verjuice of a tart pen, be hostile enemies to their pishes and meawings, and scorn to beg or buy a reconciling; their defects make them des∣pirate, and their envy cannot blast an unbeholding wit: to the candor of the rest, any mirth will be more pleasing than rail∣ing: some harmless and innocent humour, that may pass with allowance of the times, will be welcomer to them, and safer to you.
Sir in our Authors name I thank you: and would you but please to speak with him your self—
I will presently, and dissuade his intention, and yet I doubt not but to give sufficient contentation to his Auditors, whose patience I fear I have wronged by interrupting their Prologue.
I should have opened the Argument of our Play, but stumbling on this stranger, makes me doubtful what wee shall have — howsoever —
The self distrust that guides his bashful pen
Wills him entreat your patience, and if then
This slight work please you, time more purely spent
Shall once more sweat to better your content:
Lighter defects a serious Muse amends;
And slight beginnings have some perfect ends.
SIgnior Antonio, pray how did you like the Mask wee had here to night, for my Lord Lucilio's ben venuto?
Well of a wooden one, set forth by a Dancer and an Architect, as the fashion is.
Alas Signior, there must bee something to prolong and strengthen these devices, when Poëts, in favour of the ignorant, are fine to leave 'hem so short winded, and al∣most speechless.
So sir; But now tell me Rigazzo, what have you learned all this time you have been with your Lord at the Uni∣varsity?
More than I can reckon Signior, and yet I have the Art of memory to help me.
As what sir?
I can name you all the Alehouses and Taverns in A∣thens, and most part of the Bawdy-houses; marry to know them all, only Night, that has been some scores of years acquainted with 'hem, and the Devil that gathers their rents, could teach me: and indeed I was too young to be their scholar, else I might have been a better proficient in them too.
I think sir your time was spent in such studies.
No, not all Signior, I can steal as desperately as a Pursi∣vant; fiddle the Geese, Ducks, Hens, Lambs, and Calves, five mile
round by book; and cover the matter as smoothly as your City∣zen does his perjury, and your Stoic his Lechery: for I had most sober Graduates for my Tutors in all.
It was pity your Rogueship had not proceeded Master of Art in the faculty of thieving.
It's no matter Signior for thieves to proceed Masters of Art, when so many Masters of Art doe proceed thieves, and that's the least conversion, you know Signior.
Are you so nimble at your Logic sir?
As a hungry Scholar at a Henroost.
Take heed you labour not your self out o'breath, your learning's but short winded.
Long enough to run with a Stoic, Signior. I may bee able to read morality, get me some night-geere, and a red Nose, and then I am most illustriously complete.
Away, the Duke.
Thus hath our cost and best invention sweat
To seal your welcome from the Athenian Schools:
And trust me son, your thanks are much in debt
Unto these Ladies, whose too prodigal loves
Have searched for jewels, thus to doe you grace.
My Lord, I doe acknowledge it a debt
As to their loves: Only your Princely care
To grace our new return hath so surpassed
The former expectation we conceived,
That I am forced now to confess I live
A desperate bankrupt to your royal favours.
Your good deserts may soon requite our love,
But tell us, How does learning flourish now
In Athens?
Just as Virtue at the Court;
For with the times affecting ignorance
'T has banished true industrious labour thence;
And vicious looseness finding none resist,
Has so engrossed the most refined wits,
And by the terrors of her sensual threats,
Bred such deluding Crocodiles in their brains,
That like the thirsty swift Egyptian dogs,
They scarcely taste of those fair seven-fold streams,
Into whose depth their industry should dive:
And having only got a seeming face
Of superficial knowledge, amongst the gross
And beast-like sense-conceiving multitude,
They most ambitiously seek and pursue
Vulgar applause for their poor out-side skill,
"And by such mutual stayres doe often rise
"Up to the top of abused dignities.
How can deserving virtue flourish then,
If sacred learning be so slightly sought?
As twinn-borne sisters, both doe share alike
Their equal portions in the worlds esteem,
For in those hallowed places, which a true
And careful liberality did consecrate
As pure religious shrines to god like Skill,
Where Virtue richly invested with her best
And precious ornaments, might give a full
And glorious lustre like a noone-tide Sun;
There ugly Vice, even in the basest forms,
Climbing by steps of Art up to the height
Of horror, stands in a praecipit•,
And thrust but one step farther, with her fall
Will crush her self, and overwhelm the world.
To grieve at this, were in these senseless times
To become monstrous; and to feel no grief,
Were to be senseless with the times themselves.
Observe him good my Lord, and let your eye
Be jealous now —
Have patience good Adrasta,
We strive in vain to bandy with loves power
And unresisted Charter of the gods,
Which time and absence ne'er could violate.
— As is your soul.
O be prodigious then!
And in despite of custom let the world
See that it's possible a women's mind
Can rest in one: you must be valiant too,
And dare th'affrighting dangers that we meet,
I fear we have swelling passages to wade,
"For we must feel amidst a world of evils,
"A women's Spleen, worse than the worst of devils.
Now Lady Iulia let this cōfirme your welcome,
And yours Althea: trust me I could wish
The season so disposed, since that our sons
Happy and safe return has made us glad,
That we might dedicate a longer time
To harmless mirth: but now the night grows old,
And we shall wrong your patience too too much.
Must it be so? Have all those lavish signs
Of undeserved favours heaped on you
By your too careful father, and our self,
Been spurs to your contempt? Or could the sweets
Of our affection prodigally cast,
Make you not relish what your duty owes?
Else did you think because they always ran
In such an unchecked current to your will,
That no ingratitude could make the ebb?
O impious times! wherein a parents care,
When she has combated the pangs of death
To give her children life; stood all her time
Like to a careful Sentinel for their youth,
And spent the nights in pensive watchfulness,
(Forcing soft nature to forbear her rest)
To plot their good; must all be frustrated?
And by a child's proud will see all things crossed?
Their Parents hopes, and their own fortunes lost?
How hath our love to thee? our wishes toiled
To build thy passage to a higher sphere,
And by some noble match to raise thy House,
And must thy base attempts look downward still?
Mongrel our blood? and set a lasting scarre
Upon our progeny, by fixing thus
Thy stubborn passions on base Iulia's child?
Madam, not to yield what Nature makes us owe,
Were to bee made less reas'nable than beasts;
And nothing's more against a generous mind,
And freeborne spirit, than foul Ingratitude:
Yet must your Grace remember that we take
Nor all from Parents: the hand of heaven and Fate
Does by the last infusion of the soul
Give the rich form, and by a secret tract,
And unavoyded path, leads us to what
Seems good to it; and though our minds be free
In this impulse, wee love by Destiny.
I must confess I love; nor was the flame
Of my affection, when it kindled first,
Like to a paper fire, that with a blaze
Of lust, begins and ends at once, and leaves
Nought but black infamy behind: nor can
The least dishonour stain our Dukedoms title
From her, whose Blood stands firm by long descents,
Even in the heart of unbought nobleness,
Whose Reputation's sound, Revenues fair,
Beauty able to enrich a Dukedom, and deserts
To be an Empress. Were then our fortunes raised
By those high steps to which I should aspire
To join with greatness, I must join with vice,
"For they are oft observed to join their hands,
"And he not stoops that stays where Virtue stands.
Has Athens taught you bee an Orator?
Degenerous boy, Isle cool your virtuous flame,
And make thee rue the baseness of thy choice.
How deep a conflict doe my thoughts endure
Twixt Love and Duty! Were not a mothers tongue
That wronged thy worth Althea, I would have torn it
From out th'injurious throat in thy revenge,
"And held it to their eyes, to let them see
"How it had wronged it self by wronging thee.
By my troth I am glad to see thee well my little
Gallow-clapper; how hast thou done this many a day? ha!
Faith prettily well Mistress Fraileware, as a man of my profession might; I had all the chief trades in the City to help me doe well.
What trades were they, thou were too young for any occupation yet.
Not above three years at most: but I earned something with working and waiting on my Lord, as Tankard-bearers, La∣borers, and Servingmen doe: I stole and cozened, as Taylors, Shopkeepers and Cutpurses doe; I let out my Lords books, and took money for the use of'hem, as the later ends of gouty Mer∣chants doe: and yet for all this I was forced (as many of you Ci∣tizens are) to go many times to bed with a hungry conscience.
You'll never leave your crockery, but tell me prithee sirrha, is Athens a fine Town? What be these Coll∣ge, like? did thou go to school there?
O, an excellent place for a woman that will use trading: You shall have the Scholars lie at your sweet Frailes night and day; they bee forced to sweeten their disputations with Grocers reasons: and custom could not but make your husband one of the head men of the City presently.
Now by my troth I think it were a very good place for a stale shopkeepers wife of the City to set up in: o'my conscience, a woman of our occupation might thrive there.
I, and she were down never so low, the scholars would doe it—and how does Master Damasippios the lecturing Stoic? When was he here?
Dost remember him? let me see—o'my hone∣sty, I never saw him since his last moral Lecture against the sins of the flesh—yes heaven forgive me to swear, now I remember me, the same day my husband went a duck-hunting; and then he came hither, and brought me many good things: wilt thou go to him again sometimes for me? Isle give thee some figs and Tobacco.
Yours to command; Isle smoke in your business then i'faith.
Prithee come to me when my husband is out of the shop.
Adieu the two desiring sins of the City. Avarice and Lechery: if I doe not meet with your moral venery, would I
might go lousy, and have but three pence to play with this month.
Come good Elector! be but secret now,
And I shall live endeared unto thy faith;
The matter much imports us; and in case
That my rewards should dye with me, the State
Will one day thank thee for it. I have his seal,
His hand and stile exactly counterfeit:
Then hear thy charge; Thou must this evening haste
Covertly to the Lady Iulia's house—
But can bee secret?
As your own thoughts Madam,
I can stick as close to any piece of villainy
As a Punk to a Farmers son new gentiliz'd;
And when besides so many good angels tempt,
They are enough—to make a woman keep counsel.
Well then; make means to speak there with Althea,
Tell her thou come from Lord Lucilio,
Who in important business has employed thee;
I know she'll take thy message privately:
Deliver her this letter; seem that Lucilio
Has none but thee on whom he can rely
In this so dangerous an enterprise:
She upon this will-bee more free and open
To the design: then mark her, good Elector!
Observe each word and gesture that she uses;
If thou can wring a look that may discover
But a consenting thought, it will suffice:
For when offending lives withstand our will,
Wee must seem good, though we determine ill.
Here's a villainous pitfall to stifle a poor wench in; who can bee a beggar, now, that's not afraid to bee damned? well, I can no more tell how to thrive without doing villainy, than greatness can without doing injury. Pretty piece of man's flesh I my heart will leap when I see thee come off the Rock like a Mag-Pie; and I shall wish, for thy sake, that nature had made women a little lighter, all of feathers, that they might have taken hurt by
no manner of falling: but pity is a thing clean out of fashion, and the high way to irreparable Beggary; Isle none of it.
Nay good my Lord yield not your self so much
To these unseasoned Passions, that doe sit
Like midnight on your thoughts; me thinks the ayre
Of Athens should have purged these humours quite:
In troth, my Lord, the world will condemn you,
Of what Antonio?
Why of melancholy.
Which some define is weakness in a Lord,
And in a Lady pride or fullennesse,
But in a wise man it is flatt foolery.
Prithee forbear Antonio; let me in silence
Vent out the cares that overwhelm my soul;
Thou know how deep an angry mothers spleen
Wounds the soft love that I am forced to bear
To my Altheas virtues. How can I choose
But weep away my youth, when I remember
The dreadful oppositions which my soul
Hath formerly sustained for her; the cares
That have out-runne my years, and like to corsives
Have eat into my flesh, there seized upon
All faculties of life, and spread their venom
Through every vein and sinew of my heart?
It is your own fault, that thus will spend your self
In such extremes of passion, that increase
The number of your griefs above your spirit;
Faith it is unmanly done; call you this love?
Antonio, thou mistake the name of love
In thy Lucilio, if thou conceiv'st it dull
And sprightlesse melancholy, whose corroding humour
Feeds on the faint dejection of a mind
That dares not meet an apprehensive thought
Of least misfortune, but it basely yields:
I have held up, thou know, against all plots
A women's wit could manage or invent,
Or cause the Duke my father countenance
To blow out the chaste flame of my affection,
Have laid my breast open to envy's spite,
And suffered even to banishment it self;
If I may tearm't a banishment from her
Who is all things to me, divine Althea,
Life, Country, fortune; all that this world calls happy.
Strange Symptoms of affection!
Say, Antonio,
Was it not Banishment? that even when Jove
Had licensed us in heaven, and meant to send
Himen to earth in white and Priestly robes
To join our hands, as Cupped had our hearts;
Then to be taken hoodwinked from my hopes,
And sent in haste from Court, just in the harvest
Of my desires, to combat with the Arts,
The air and clime of Athens, whilst the Sun
Trebled his course to the Celestial Ram.
Yet know my Lord that your indulgent Parents
Out of their Princely care intended it
But as a course of Physic, to recover
Your love-sick thoughts, hoping that Time &amp; Absence,
Joined with the precepts of Philosophy
Might purge you to a remissness of affection,
And by degrees conquer this mouldy passion.
All which supposed remedies dear friend,
Set the disease a working, much less cure it:
True love, Antonio, is immutable,
A divine Charter of affection
Confirmed in heaven, and can by no prescript
Of Art or Nature ever be restrained.
—Nullis amor est medicabilis herbs,
—Nec prosunt Arts.
Yet since in vain you strive
To bandy with a mother, me thinks Love
Tired in the depth of woe, should call your Reason
To a new choice fitting your Birth and Fortunes.
Call woes to woes, I am resolved to try
The worst of spleen: and since her virtuous thoughts
Have deigned to meet affection, that on wings
Of true borne faith hath raised it self, to clasp
With her deserts, the most austerest tempest
Envy can shower upon our innocent loves,
Shall ne'er dis-joyne us.
I have done my Lord.
Then prithee Antonio, let me in peace retire,
I feel some strange events lie at my heart
My thoughts cannot presage: I fear, my friend,
I have but dreamed as yet, but now mine eyes
Must wake to meet true solid miseries.
To see how strong love is, and the command
It has o'er humane hearts! Poor Lord, I know
Thy true-borne griefs are firm, and that chaste faith
Never conceived to wave with floating likeness;
Makes thee thus sink into the depth of sorrow.
Nay, good Signior follow him, put him out of the hue∣more, or else he will turn madman shortly.
Why sir?
Because he thats first a Scholar, next in love, the year after, is either an arrant fool or a stark madman.
How came your knavery by such experience?
As fools doe by news, some body told me so, and I be∣leeve it. But in good earnest I had forgot to tell my Lord of the message he sent me in.
Whither in the name of Mercury was that?
To see how the Lady Donna Fiozza did.
Oh! how does her beauteous Ladyship?
Sick, terrible sick.
Physic defend! prithee of what disease?
Yesterday her Monkey had a fall off the side table, and ever since she has had a strange fit of an ague.
How does her Lord?
Faith not well neither, and therefore he begins to be most sparingly virtuous.
The pox he does.
On my fidelity you are the foul mouth'dst gallant that ever wore Cloves in's Gummes: you say an Italian Count has the pox.
Your neater word good Galateo?
By this light you Courtiers bee the dullest creatures li∣avenge; you learn nothing but flattery and begging. You must know sir in a Nobleman it is abusive; no; in him the Sarpigo; in a Knight the Grincomes; in a Gentleman the Neopolitan scab; and in a Serving-man or Artificer the plain Pox: Just as your saying goes, that Noblemen bee never drunk, but take a surfeit; Scholars be ill at ease; and poor men only they are drunk, yet ell's but one disease: There's an old rime for you: adieu Signior, I must to my Lord.
Farewell hedge-pike.
Did my Lord so far impart the business to your self?
He did, and does intend to use my help alone in effecting of his project.
I prithee return him this answer, and bee silent.
Sweet villainy, thou art the thrivingst trade under heaven.
Warm blood assist me! how has wonder seized
The frozen passages that slowly guide
My shivering spirits up to the seat of life!
Murder the Duke! now innocence forbid,
And let our selves be as out loves, unstained.
Tyrannous affection! can thy transforming power
Enforce our passions thus beyond our selves?
Rob us of nature and the sense of man?
Seize all our actions? force us to forget
That we are children? and with loves finger blot
Clean from our thoughts the piety we owe
To them that gave us life? Carry us headlong
To such a gulf of sin? where we must drown
Our selves, our honour, and that secure content
A guiltless conscience brings to innocence!
Ah dear Lucilio! how are thy virtues dimmed
In my best thoughts, that like a Crystal mirror
Still held the shapes of thy deserving actions
Vnspottedly resembled! what spirit of night
Has mixed it self with those untainted vows
Thy never yet ambitious soul poured forth
To attend our loves? Some Angel, dear Lucilio,
Descend into thy fancy to persuade thee
By all the bands Love, Duty, Nature, Heaven,
Can bring to bind thee in a tender fear
Of roughly breathing on the softest ayre
That touches but his safety, to desist.
From this unnatural act of parricide.
Fatal experience speaks; and makes it good,
They stand not firm that rise by steps of blood.
Urge me no more: the white unspotted hand
Of never treacherous justice, shall not blush
By our imbrewing it in bleeding innocence.
Nor shall posterity in after times,
Seeking examples of black tyranny.
Find our names registered in the Catalogue
Of those whose deeds have given wide infamy
Life to attend their memory, and brand it
With shame, more durable than brass or marble.
Yet good my Lord respect your falling State,
Let not that watchful eye that never slept
In careful pursuit of your peoples good,
As now regardless of your houses Honour,
Be dazzled with imaginary fear
Of mere supposed injustice. Shall foul mouthed rumour.
Besprinkle our whole race with Iulia's blood,
And follow it into posterity
As a live witness of your loose neglect?
Methinkes those politic rules of government
Which you have studied, should at last inform
Your scrupulous conscience, making it to know,
What oft doth seem injustice, is not so.
Can there be more than shedding guiltless blood?
They highly offend that let their Countries good.
They let no good, that never did deny it.
It is guilt to live when as their deaths may buy it.
But it is not good that's bought at such a rate.
No price is great that makes Kings fortunate.
They be not fortunate that rise by vice.
Who stays till Virtue lifts will never rise;
And therefore dearest Lord by those chaste vows
Which first I brought unto your nuptial bed;
By that attractive beauty which mine eyes
Once gave your youthful thoughts to feed upon,
Prevent this mischief, let the strumpet die,
Whose baseness staines your ever princely blood,
By sitting sole Commandress in the thoughts
Of our degenerate son, the only hope
Just heaven and nature now has left your Throne.
Let not that god of fools, soft Conscience, then,
That seldom finds a name amongst perfect Statesmen,
Sway your experienced wisdom, but provide
Your honour live, when all your self have died.
Death to mine eyes, I must see thee kneel,
Thy words have charmed my soul, benumbed my thoughts
Against the stinging touch of sharpe remorse;
I will resolve her death, nor shall she live
That stands 'twixtfull content and thy desires.
But how shall swift winged fame, my dear Adrasta,
Be held from loud proclaming our disgrace?
Policy will's some seeming cause be had
To make that good which justice knows for bad.
Leave that to me; I have procured from her
A letter, whose points but changed transfer the sense,
This in the public Sessions being read,
And she acknowledging the hand and seal,
Will be a most sufficient testimony
Of traitorous attempts against your State
And person, which the gross multitude
Will never scan, but confidently, hold
Her condemnation just.
We'll then give order
For her attachment and imprisonment
Mean while your self may with persuasive words
Prepare Lucilio's mind to meet her death.
So's justice wronged, and innocence must die,
When they withstand a women's tyranny.
Isle ensure you it is true Mistress Abigail, my Husband was called from my side at midnight by the Dukes Pursivant at Arms, commanded to bring his weapon ready with him, because they would reprehend my Lady Iulia's daughter in her bed; nay, I am served so many times in the year; and if it were not for a little honour wee have by being the Constables wife of the Parish, or leave to build a new Pue in the Lecture house, or meeting at the Quest-house sometimes; wee had better never bee in authority, than have so many hewings and cryings, such pasportings; that the whole year while our Husbands be Magistrates, we be very widows, for any feeling we have of thē; and if we had not their company in the day sometimes, we should even forget wee were married: it is too true Mistress Abigail: but you have a happy turn.
Indeed Mistress Frailware our Husbands should not be troubled with common business; and Master Damasip∣pus does meditate and practise his Principles by my side till nine a Clock many times. But I pray, what did you hear was the cause of my Lady Iulia's daughters contamination?
O, why she was in love with my young Lord Lucilio, and would have, God bless us, stabb'd' the Duke with a panado, and then be married where the Duchess would or no.
Now Jove forsend it! How desperate be these princock Gentlewomen when they be in love! they'll venture up∣on any weapons: I marvel themselves be not afraid of stabbing: I warrant you she'll to the Rock for it.
I cannot tell that; but a Friend I have in the Court was here before break of day and told me all.
Lord Mistress Frailware have you any friends in the Court?
I these seven years, Mistress Abigail, have I had friends there, and acquaintance too, I thank my beauty, three years before I was married. Isle tell you Mistress Abigail, these Courtiers be the finest, sweetest smelling Gentlemen that be; they will have some friends in the City now and then, for varieties sake, but they'll pick and choose: and for mine own part Isle en∣sure you, that before I was married, of a browne-wench, mark what I say, to speak of a browne-wench, I was as sweet a cry∣ture as lived. There was a Nobleman here in Florence—I, there was a Knight too that would eat but little meat except—how ever it was my hap to fell figs in the City; Isle ensure you that my flesh was so tender, that if a fellow with a strong breath had kissed me, all my lips would have blistered. I wore my silk Stoc∣kins then, and my Bodkins of beaten Gold, I thank my own wit, and had Velvet Cloaks, and Velvet Coloches come to see me.
Doubtless you were one of the happiest living, to have such blessings: I would to heavens my husband, or I, might have an Office under these Courtiers, that I might have friends at Court too.
Isle ensure you Mistress Abigail, many of 'hem be able to doe a woman a good pleasure sometimes; and yet there be some again that promise more than all their strength can per∣form too, when they be put to it; for alas, Courtiers doe for so many, that they cannot doe for all: for mine own part, I have tried 'hem, and tried 'hem again; and some of 'hem have stood to me very sufficiently and friendly, when I have come to see the Masking and Bear-baiting there.
God's my pity, is there Bear-baiting at Court? doe the Ladies love Bear-baiting?
O, abomination: they'll so shift for corners and places to be at it, that their waiting gentlewomen can seldom come to the pastime. And how does your good husband Master Damasippus?
In good deed la not well: hee has been ill at ease ever since t'other night.
Ah sweet man! he does so labour, and labour to fill us with morality, that hoe's ee'n tired out in the City a∣amongst us.
Fie upon it: how heavy this authority sits up∣on us! ever since midnight in the Dukes business! but it stands us upō it; it is for the credit of the City: we must doe more than one bare Office, or wee cannot bee good subjects. Here take in my weapon.
I'faith it is a fine time o'day to come home at: Gods my precious, doe you think to leave me so still? from twelve a Clock till I rise I must he alone dreaming, and dreaming, sometimes that you are dead; sometimes that I am with child, and a lust for a thing that I cannot have; sometimes again that you have fallen down the Stayres, and broke your back; and such fear∣full dreams that I cannot rest an hour, because I can doe no∣thing but dream.
O, good wife! we be for this year Magistrates Officers of place, men of employment, the upholders of the City, the eyes of the Common-wealth: and therefore when matters of State call, wee must come with wisdom, and with severity an∣swer our Vocation.
Focation me no Vocation: for as true as I am married, if you put me in such frights by going away, and leaving me in the dark, Isle get me a bedfellow shall stick closer to me, so I will; cannot you have a Deputy as well as an Alderman? I hope you are in authority too.
O patience dear Mistress Frailware! patience with your Spouse: my husband told me that patience was one of the ten moral virtues.
I Mistress Abigail, if a woman had such a hus∣band as you have, that were able to put patience into a woman; she might easily be content and have mortal virtues enough too.
Nay prithee Duck be quiet: when the Sessions are past wee shall have more leisure; mean while lets in, and drink this fury over in a cup of Canary. Come Mistress Abigail.
Let it suffice Antonio that thy friend
Entreats thy silence; nor let thy curious love
Question our farther projects; leave to enquire
Till time and rumour shall disclose the Plot
Of my intentions, whose unexpected end
Shall stand beyond preventions murdering sight,
And turn the edge of spleen upon it self:
Thus much I will impart unto thy faith;
What fits thee not to know, leave to desire.
My Lord impute it not to curiousness
That I have urged your patience to unfold
What you intend; for by the hallowed name
Of zealous friendship, which my heart retains
Engraved by your deserts, it is only love
That makes me thus seem jealous of your good
However would your Grace but try my faith
By making it a partner in your else,
Till having passed these storms, and been approved
Inviolably firm, it may deserve
The name of friend to which't has long aspired,
Nay, now thou complement'st and dost afflict
The tender love thy faith hath bred in me.
I tell thee friend I must not trust the ayre
Twixt thee and me; the nights concealing shades
Shall never hear't disclosed: not that I fear
Thy friendly silence; but the barren plot
Of my invention, will admit but me
Into the doubtful scene; I must alone
Finish the Act my hopeless love began.
O my Antonio! could my sorrows pour
Into thy breast but half what I conceive,
What could the spleen of potent envy add
To the vast heaps of mischief, that doe lie
Upon my grovelling fortunes, now cast down
Beneath the base of misery and grief?
When I must stand like to a senseless marble
Frozen into a stone with strong respect
Of filial duty, and see Althea dye,
Thrown down by my ambitious love, that aimed
At her transcendent virtues. This wounds my heart,
And puts a fire to the cold melancholy
That hath so long possessed my chillied spirits,
And bids them seek revenge, that when fraud thinks
To seize upon the neck of innocence,
The repercussive flame that will result
From their abhorred deeds, shall singe their wings,
And make them fall as low as were their actions,
Where they shall lye and view the ugly shapes
Of all those mischiefs that attend oppression.
But now conceal me friend, and be no more
Inquisitive of the particulars,
Report will soon divulge the scope of all.
If absence cause inquiry after me.
Let fall some speeches that I am withdrawn
To a retired privatenesse awhile,
Until Althea's Tragedy be o'er,
Not able to affront my ruined hopes.
Nor stand Spectator at her guiltless death.
So fare thee well, and if we never meet
Remember that I lived and died thy friend.
Doe not torment my soul, but let me share
Those passages of danger, that oppose
Their hideous jaws against your innocent hopes;
For at no greater rate man sells his breath,
Then with a friend to buy a faithful death.
Thy words Antonio cannot add an Atom
To the full love that's harboured in my breast
Of thy true real worth: then be content.
And leave me, for it is impossible that more
Than my unhappy self can bee contained
Or have an Action within the narrow limits
Of my designs.
Then thus I take my leave
With as much feeling pain, as if my foul
Were by some violence shot from out my bowels,
Farewell my Lord, my vows and wishes guard you
From awkward Fate, whilst I twixt hope and fear
Attend the issue of these strange attempts.
So now Lucillo arm thy self for death,
That from thy blood she may regain a life
And freedom, whom thy weak affection sold
To undeserved slaughter and black infamy.
Immoved powers! we must not ask you why
And yet methinkes I could expostulate
The reason of this mixture in the frame
Of all our Universe! why every perfect good
Is girt with such a multitude of else?
Not the most sacred and puissant Throne
Of divine Justice (whose Majestic form
Bears a resemblance of that Power Supreme
That equals Kings and Slaves, by giving each
Deserved vengeance for their actions
Can stand secure, but all the brood of hell,
Bribes, Respects, Envy, and what ever perverts
The strictest line of virtuous equity,
Will press up to the Judgment Seat, and there
Transform the beauteous picture of the Godhood
Into the hateful shapes of tyranny,
Of blood and murder—But I forget my self,
And like en angry woman, chide the Heavens,
When I should doe. Fortune and stealth assist
My just adventures; and a friendly sleep
Seize all the eyes and ears that would pursue
Our harmless Stratagems. This is the window,
If my directions fail not, that does imprison her,
Whom Virtue, Nature, and the mild aspect
Of all the Constellations sweat to make
A free-borne Empress —
Whose that?
Lucilio.
O my dear Lord!
How fares my Althea?
As one that lives but in the arms of death,
And like a frost-kill'd worm is half revived
By your fair presence, whose desired sight
Makes a warm blood post through my trembling veins
To tell my heart this news, that ere I die
I once shall speak to you: But I must chide
You Grace my Lord, that would so stain your love
With soulest spots of blood.
Blood to their souls that thought it, for by
The ne'er appalled heart of innocence,
The new-borne babes first smiles were ne'er more chaste
Then was my breast frō thoughts of murder. O Althea!
What will a woman loath, that's all possessed
With wrath, and has the killing voice of Justice
Tuned to pronounce her merciless revenge?
The sword by her steeled conscience edged to slaughter,
And undefended lives to work upon?
It was your seal and hand that did persuade
Me to the murder, but my self returned
Disswasive arguments to beat you from it.
It was my seal, which by my mothers charge
It is thought the Page stole out, without suspect,
As I conceive, of mischief; all the rest
Was merely counterfeit. But bee advised,
And I will choke the hungry throat of Treason,
That gapes for blood, with such a working pill,
As it shall loath to swallow, and vomit up
Their bloody plots in sick repentance.
No my dearest Lord, let me in contentment die,
Since you are innocent, and in my Tomb
Bury your danger, that have thus long sate
A heavy burden to your happiness.
Long moist thou live until the gods, Althea,
Shall summon thee from hence to make a star,
And grant Commission to the winged Post
Of heaven, to steal away thy soul in sleep:
That Divine mould was not ordained to suffer
A painful shipwreck in thy lifes departure.
Twill sweeten much the bitterst throes of death
When I shall think my labouring soul does work
For my Lucilio's rest: then let my guiltless Ghost
Securely pass up to the fields of peace,
For I am weary and would gladly die.
Urge it no more, the very sound of death
Wished to thy innocence, comes like a clap
Of armed thunder to mine ears, and thou
Shalt live, though I should search the utmost tortures
Tyranny did ere invent, to find a death
Might ransom thee: and therefore if thy love
Does yet respect Lucîlios constancy,
Resolve and second me: Dispute no more,
But make some means to let me down a line,
That I may fasten this disguise unto it.
There draw it up, and put it on with speed,
Suspicions eye dogs every step I tread.
How strong is sad affliction on my State!
When I must steal a death, and think me blessed if none
Doe interrupt my passage to destruction.
Oh that the paths of Fate so strange and envious
Should lead us into life, and through a Maze
Of chances, bring us to such unpassable periods,
That we must leap the banks, and give our breath
To shun the ills that doe encounter us.
Come, have you yet dispatched?
I have my Lord; but what of this?
Then once more lend your line.
Fasten those Hooks to your window, and come down.
A more troublesome descent then from the Rock,
But your fall gentler. So: Now fly Althea,
And live as happy as my unhappy love
Had made thee miserable: time may bee
More friendly to thee, and beget some means
That thou moist one day sit amidst thy friends—
Nay, doe not weep Althea; thou shalt see
This will work both our freedoms; and if I die,
My silent Ghost shall in the pleasingest forms
At mid-noon days come oft to visit thee.
Farewell—
What means your Grace?
To out-runne treachery, and win a Goal
That shall enrich my name, make envy swell,
And drown her self in overflowing Gall.
Isle meet the ugliest shapes that ever Death
Appeared to Nature in, before Isle leave
Your Grace exposed to danger for my life.
No more, for I have vowed what I intend,
And if thou dost withstand it, to make this hour
The last of breathing to me: therefore be gone;
Isle lie at Stake my self, that you may steer
No interrupted course; and since the law
Gives Virgins leave to plead and die concealed,
I with this Scarf here will bee your Attorney:
Hasten your flight, least mischief find you slow,
Wee shall both fare the better. At the Parks end
By a Fount that rises from the Chalky Bank,
Camilla stays with your Viaticum:
She'll be thy partner in thy banishment.
Once more farewell; and, if I die, for ever.
And if you die I shall not long out-live you.
In what a sad dilemma stands my soul
In this divulsion between love and danger!
Yet bless mine eyes once more with sight of you.
Farewell Althea.
Dearest Lord farewell.
Again farewell Althea! all the favours
Of Guardian Angels, and mild'st influences
Propitious Heaven retains, waite on thy sufferings.
Come dispatch, the Duke's at hand.
I wonder he sits himself in judgement to day.
The matter in question is great.
Many think the poor Gentlewoman is innocent.
They be fools to say so.
Why, is it a folly to speak what they think?
I, as very a folly as to be virtuous indeed: Dost ima∣gin twill gain any thing but hate?
Yet many dare pawn their lives that she is guiltless.
None but such as were predestined never to bee great; they bee tender conscienc'd dunces: they never leatn'd Esops Fables.
Why for that?
Dost not remember the tale of the Lion that banished all horned beasts from Court?
That was a mad Lion i'faith—
That then the Fox went away as banished too, because if the Lion should say his pricked ears were Horns, what then?
But she was thought ever virtuous and modest.
She would not have been guilty so soon else: shall a swaggering wench that will take Tobacco eight and forty times in four and twenty hours; talk bawdy as familiar as an Oyster wife; retain seven servants with good backs, and a weak hus∣band to keep Dogs from door; have no privilege above su∣spected virtue?
Faith I remember when I went to School, my Master used to tell us a Verse or two out of a Poet— &amp; hic damnatus inane—Iudicio: I ha'forgot the Poëts name, but I remembered the Verse by another, where he instructs creatures of our faculty.
Why what does he teach us?
Nay nothing but tells us only, that if wee will thrive by service, we must be either close Panders, palpable flatterers, or cozening Villains.
A good Servingmans Tutor was that Poët I warrant him.
Give back there, and let the prisoner stand forth.
How did wee think, that when the storms of war
Were with our danger, care, and cost expelled
From out these confines, and the warmth of peace
Turned like a Spring to shine within your bounds,
We should have sate secure? Or after all
Those toils, that spent our strength, dried up our blood,
Hastened the hand of time to seize our hairs,
Before his date, and only in pursuit
Of your (loved people) safety and content;
Our own now fainting weariness of age
Should taste that freedom which our labours bought
In plenteous fullness for the poorest swain?
And we have closed the Evening of our age
Within a fearless slumber? But how weak
Are all the hopes that wretched Princes fine!
When in the calm of peace, while wee suppose
Our perils banished, and our selves ingirt
With such impenetrable love, as we
Embrace our people with, then stand our lives
Exposed to thickest dangers, which concealed
Doe strike the deeper, and are warded less.
Such is the misery that follows State,
That when we want abroad, we find at home
Foes to besiege our lives. The discontent
Of some aggrieved spirits, that think we stand
Twixt their desires and them; and which is worse,
The idle passions of unbridled youth,
Rather than miss those hopes inflamed lust
Has fired within their thoughts, will overturn
Whole States, and climb up to their aimed ends
By our heaped slaughters: Yet I least had thought
Such Tragic Acts had known a women's breast,
Nor if I could, Althea, would your life
(Strong to retort suspicion) once permit
Our least mistrust to stain your virtuous name:
And had we not by heavens appointment found
Under your hand and seal the firmest proofs
Of tempting our own blood to parricide;
Suspicions strongest proofs had ne'er induced
Our never lightly credulous belief
To harbour your dislike? But should we now
Neglect our safety, and our Countries good,
When all the Providence of Fate conspires
To bring those treacherous practises to light,
Which Heaven abhors; wee should contemn the Heavens,
Abuse that form of justice we sustain,
And stand as guilty of those wasteful ruins
Our cruel mildness gives your actions scope
To call upon your Country and our selves.
We therefore by the Laws denounce you guilty
Of Treason against our person and the State.
Were it for life my Lord I stood to speak,
I scarce would give the breath that I must spend
To save that life: But since your Grace does know
A women's prejudice has doomed our death,
For my names life Isle speak, and not for mine;
If infamy might die when we doe die,
I would be silent: for know my gracious Lord.
I scorn to beg a life, but come all armed
In such a complete innocence, as dares
Meet angry injustice in the jaws of death.
And without trembling stand his violence.
But that these Acts of blood, these horrid crimes
Of parricide, of lust, and hellish sin,
Which will out-live our Tombs, and make our names
Come hateful to posterities Records.
Should have a birth within a Virgins breast
That never yet was conscious of a wish,
Against your desired safety; I must take leave
To tell your Grace, that it was merely feigned
By the bloody hand of Envy, to cut off
That sacred band of love the Heavens have knit
Twixt your sons heart and my chaste innocence.
Nor doe I tax your justice for my death,
But doe impute it most to his fond love,
That by protests of virtue and desire,
Drew my believing soul to his affects;
For when my fears urged these ensuing else,
His uncontain'd affection breaking forth
In signs of extreme passion, so consumed
My powers, that had my thoughts been cold as Snow,
His zeal poured out in such inflaming vows
Would melt them.
We must check your impudence,
That swells beyond the bounds we did expect
Your modesty should have observed: you wrong
Our son, and in our son our selves; know you
This hand and seal?
I doe my honoured Lord,
Yet were that Hand and Seal never found guilty
Of conceived wrong against or your Son or you.
Twill speak it self, call it to witness then.
MY Lord the attempt is dangerous and foul, therefore desist not; to enjoy the sweets our present Nuptials would being could I endure your hand stained with such an A∣ction. More when wee meet: fear not; but—Heaven and Fate will second virtue. Be still your self, and I will rest
Had you a privilege to shroud the blush
Your conscious guilt casts against the eyes of Heaven
As from our sight you doe conceal the Die
That writes your Acts in shame upon your Cheeks,
You might deny these proofs, and swear them feigned;
But that all-seeing power that notes the wild
And secretest passages of mans conceit,
Detesting those foul crimes of lust and blood,
Reveals your Acts. Stand therefore, and from the Seat
Of Justice hear your doom; since your ambitious hopes
Soared up, and by our Blood did mean to climb
Into that Seat which Nature and our right
Had given to us: be therefore from the Rock
Thrown with your hopes, that your example teach
How low they fall, that climb above their reach.
And you Antonio we charge to see
The execution speedily performed.
As sweet as cooling dew comes to the breast
Of scorched Autumn, so Deaths slumber false
On oppressed innocence. And good Antonio,
Since it is your charge to see us dead, let me
Entreat this favour that my body be
Speedily interred: and pray you tell the Duke
That I request his Grace not grieve too much
Hereafter, for what I willingly now sought,
And he against his will made me to find.
Then that I may have a little space in private
To bid the world farewell; and this is all
A dying Virgin begs, and for your friend
Lucilio's sake you must not now deny it.
Wonder of womē! could my attempts but yield
Half what my heart conceives, these limbs should die,
As many several deaths as they contain
Conduits of life, to make your innocence live,
For your Lucilios sake, whose woes will swell
Poor Lord, like to a winde-driven Ocean,
When he shall hear you dead, and bear him down
To some disastrous end.
You are deceived,
Dear friend; Lucilio's woes end with my life.
Nor will a thought of grief, a tear or sigh
Trouble his peaceful sleeps when I am dead.
But I shall strain your patience too far, and give
The Duke a cause to blame your too much favour.
My little least of any thing, thou parcel of man, what's the news with thee?
News from the Fortunate Lands Master Damasippus: The very Elizium of your delight, and delicious Nectar of plea∣sure; Mistress Ambrosia Frailware commands half her self to your learned conceits, and the rest to the heate of your inferior Moralities.
O the odoriferous flower of Florence! How does she?
In able strength and strong appetite: and earnestly en∣treats this evening your presence at Supper: her Husband will bee forced by Oath business to be absent; and therefore you must feed her with the fruits of your company, and you shall bee fed with the strength of confirming meates that edify.
Thy reward shall overtake thee: I will first accompany this Lady to her death, and prepare and strengthen her according to morality, and then I will be ready to give all moral comfort to the sweet desires of our dear Paramour.
Isle meet your moral comfort with such a Physical counter-buffe, that Isle spoil your tilting for that night i'faith.
ANd as I told you sweet Lady, make your reconcilement with the world, that you bee not hindered from your death: if you owe any thing, you must forgive and forget it, that you may dye according to morality.
I thank your labour Master Damasippus,
I hope my peace with heaven and earth's confirmed,
And you shall need trouble your self no farther.
But you Antonio, whose deserving trust
Must be a witness of the latest gasp
Our fainting soul shall draw, tell to the world
How undivided was the tender love
Betwixt Althea and Lucilio's life:
And let me vow't into thy full belief,
That the soft Ayre faun'd with the cooling breath
Of a mild Summers Evening from the West
Was not less murderous than Althea's wish—
Nay weep not man, we cannot weep our selves,
We doe entreat this death to end our woes,
Not to increase them. Farewell Antonio;
And if in after times you hear our friends
Sigh for our haplesse death, bid them desist;
We did but quench the thirst envy had chased us into.
—Come honest friend
Discharge your Office, for sorrow gins to fit
Heavy upon our heart that fine would rest.
Madam, forgive me your death.
Which here I doe
As freely as I wish my wearied Ghost
May find a fearless passage through the strange
And uncouth shades that leads our souls to Rest
Where shall I run to meet, that, which beheld
Kills with a deadlier wound then doe the eyes
Or coldest poison of a Basilisk.
Althea stay—and let thy wretched Parent
Take the last farewell of her dying child.
Ah why did Nature make my unhappy womb
Fruitful by thee, and yet reserve mine age
To out-live the extremities of grief, and see
Thy dismal end by an untimely death?
Was I reserved for this? Or were the crimes
Of our black guilt so horrid in the eyes
Of Heaven, that nothing but the fatal scourge
Of severe justice in the woefull'st form
Could expiate our sin? How were I blessed
If the first instant that imparted life
To thy scarce featured self (joy to my womb)
Had been the last in which we both had breathed!
Madam! doe not afflict your self, nor let your cares
Live from our death; Althea cannot dye,
But with her innocence does buy a life
That shall extend her worth beyond the reach
Of Time and Envy. Therefore as you respect
Your daughters peaceful happiness, take truce
With sorrow but till we be dead, and Heaven
That still protects the innocent, will show
How just it is in plaguing those that strive
By treacherous plots to oppress innocent lives.
Can thou persuade the Ocean in a storm
To leave her swelling? Or a Bullet shot
To stop its passage? No Althea! no!
The lightest Arrow is not more powerful sent
Unto his Mark than we are thrown to death.
Therefore farewell, Isle haste to meet thee there,
Where no injustice nor oppressing tyranny
Shall sever our embraces; and let this kiss
Seal up that vow upon thy dying lips—
What's here? has sorrow so transformed thy shape?
Or dulled the wonted vigour of my sight,
That it sees nothing right proportioned?
Madam conceal me for Althea's love,
Who lives, but banished only for a while;
And let me die that she may freely live;
My Lord Lucilio, doe you mock my woes?
O whore's Althea? have you murdered her?
And come to upbraid the miseries we feel?
Is 't not enough that I must lose that stay
On which my aged widowhood relied;
But you must jest at anguish? Is not our blood
Enough to satisfy the thirst of Treason,
But you must swallow more? Isle not conceal
Your murdering plots, but lay these Actions op
To the wide worlds eyes; and leave the rest,
In hope that Heaven, who doth your treacheries view,
As you have dealt, so they may deal with you.
What means my Lord?
To dye as I am doomed,
Therefore let me go.
Antonio, lend your help
To save the Prince, whom you have brought to death.
My heart! force him to live, or by the Seat
Of Justice, you shall die as many deaths
As you have Arteries.
Then we must live to see those griefs alive
Which death would end, and life will but revive.
Post to the Duke before, and let him know
The strangeness of the accident.
Antonio: know that I ever held thy faith till now
True to thy friend, and thought thou would assist
His misery, which thou had richly done
If I had dyed.
O honoured Lord, be these
Your harmless attempts that you concealed
With such a nice reservedness from your friend?
Come good my Lord, let us repair to Court
That now stands wondering at this strange report.
My Head's in labour with a jest Master Constable, and I have a warrant to your authority to see me well delivered on it.
I can drink Sack, and talk bawdy for a need, if it come within the compass of my Office.
Why there be two ingredients then to the composition of a Midwife, and if you'll be ruled in the Action, wee shall laugh and lie down, and have an excellent banquet at the delivery.
Gi'me thy warrant then, and Isle serve it as greedily as a beggarly Vndersherife does an Action of slander: But what is it? what is it boy?
Faith sir, the common danger that haunts men of your place, fills Theaters, and gives many of your Landless Gallants their gilt Spurs, and their feathers.
Vnshale it, unshale it,
Why Sir, in sober City Italian, that man of little wit, less learning, and no honesty M. Damasippus the Stoic means this Evening with pure morality to—
What sir?
Cuckold you sir.
Body o'mee! that emblem of hypocrisy; hee looks as cold and mortified as a Capon of a weeks killing.
Hang him Lobster, hoe's as hot as a Cocksparrow, and as irreligious as as a Low-Countrey Lombard: Hoe's good for no∣thing but that which men keep old Stallions for: he would have done rarely well after Deucalions flood, or five hundred of 'hem
now for the new plantation—But i'faith I would bee revenged on him.
Revenged? I'll give up my shop to be revenged on him, turn Summer to plague him with Citations—
And then out-bribe him, that hee shall find no mercy in the Bumme-Court.
Or else I will be sterne in my authority, set him in the Stocks, and set the Stocks at mine own door—
Or else I would hire some Jew to make him factious, And then get him banished to Amsterdam to saw Brazil.
Or hire a Witch to take away his Instrument of lust, and then he'll hang himself in his own girdle.
Or get some body to promise him some Books and a new Gown to deny the plurality of the gods, then inform a∣against him, and go drunk to see him burnt.
Else Isle get him Carted, and lye with his wife the while.
I, and send him word of it when he is in the Cart.
Some dreadful vengeance or other my offended Au∣thority shall take on him. I protest I never mistrusted it.
Alas no; I knew you were a true Cuckold innocent.
A Cuckold innocent: what's that?
One of the eight Tribes into which your livery is dive∣ded—Nay, nay, nay sober Master Constable, be not dejected; let not your head sink before it has full lading: for look you, I'll show you the dignity of your estate: your Cuckoldhood sir is more worshipful than the best of all the four and twenty Companies; Because in some ages you have had some of the best of all those Companies Fellows of the Livery. Secondly, you have had all states and ranks belonging to it. Sylla, Domitian and Claudius, great Emperors of the world, never cared to be free of the Gold∣smiths or Merchant-Taylors Hall, yet they were huge Cuckolds. Thirdly, you have your wit in choosing approved, which must of necessity show you to have been wise men, and therefore most commonly you are in Offices. Fourthly you have sometimes bet∣la men to be your followers than your self, for they be glad to follow and come after, where you have been before. Fiftly, you have others to work for the propagation of your name, while you be idle, and reap the fruits of their labours. And lastly, it
makes your way to heaven Master Constable, infallible for if you die quickly, you die an innocent—But let me be your Pilot, and if I doe not learn you a course to pay this Puffin, this all Priapus, this Goat rampant in's own kind, let my wit bee for ever cracked.
If thou could doe it in some bitter manner.
Trust me not else—for look you Sir, if it were a Cour∣tier of a good perfume, and rich Garter; or a Gallant of the new fashion, with fresh insides; nay, an it were a barren Alderman that would visit his Wench secretly, and were in the way to authority, why, it were something tolerable. But to be horned by a Sir, that's no Knight, one that will lie as fast as an Alminack-maker, a thred-bare-grogran-worsted-lack-Latin! it is insufferable.
O it is, I know it is.
Your only revenging remedy, then, is prevention in the same kind, which you shall most dexterously achieve me du∣ce, id esh, si ego dux fuero, little Master Constable.
How sweet boy, how?
Doe you but invite Mistress Abigail to Supper this eve∣ning, who knows nothing of her husbands being there, and leave the rest to my providence.
Isle doe it Boy i'faith, I will, I will indeed Boy.
About it then, Isle meet you at your coming back and give directions for the rest.
Your Grace hath been exceeding patient
To undergo these pains, and come to us.
Good Micale I was unfortunate
I had not known thy skill and used it sooner;
For since Heavens power denies me just revenge
And means, to work my will, Isle search the depth
Of hells dark'st Angels, but I will dissolve
That firm linked band of love: and to that end
Shrouded in this disguise I came to thee
That thou moist let some nimble spirit slip
From out the powerful Circle after her;
And with thy spells pursue her unto death.
Madam, It shall be speedily performed
Please you a while retire into this room
And waite the ceremonious hour, while wee
Prepare us for the sacrifice, and provide
Those powerful ingredients which we use
In the confection of our charms,
I will.
Mic. Sarvia! Sar. Mother! Mic. Take thy flight
While the Moon affords thee light,
While the Dog-Starre shines downright
On the powerful Aconite,
And the Herbs appear in sight.
Sar. Away and wash your body white
In the spring, and cleanse you quite,
For Isle soon the Shepherd fright,
And bring home to mend the right
A female Lamb as black as night.
Mic. Haste then, quick retune thee home.
Doe not tho forget the stone
In the Toad, nor Serpents bone,
Nor the Mandrake though he groan,
Pull him up, he is our own.
Sar. Isle steal besides (let me alone)
The great black Cat from jumping Jon,
And make the Nurse and Mother moan
When their fatlings throat is shown:
Mic. Haste then, quick return thee home.
Where be we now Antonio! is not this life
On the far side of death, and sinks beyond
A non existence? Had thou not made thy friend
Blessed in thy faith, if thou had yielded way
To my desires, and I had clearly leapt
From the maine top of mischief, and fallen short
Of these calamities? Oh the gross oversight
Of our mistaking nature, that is so base
To buy a draught of ayre with seas of ills!
Or think we benefit a friend, when wee
Doe turn his houre-glasse to make life run;
Though every minute hails down mis-fortune thick
As it doth Sand into the empty receptacle.
Nay, give me leave to tell your Grace my Lord,
This strong desire of death, that hath possessed
Your will thus far, does not express the signs
Of that true valour your spirit seems to bear;
For it is not courage, when the darts of chance
Are thrown against our State, to turn our backs,
And basely run to death; as if the hand
Of Heaven and Nature had lent nothing else
To oppose against mishap, but loss of life,
Which is to fly and not to conquer it.
For know it were true valours part, my Lord,
That when the hand of chance had crushed our States,
Ruined all that our fairest hopes had built,
And thrown't in heaps of desolation;
Then by those ruins for our thoughts to climb
Up, till they dared blind fortune to the face,
And urged her anger to increase those heaps,
That we might rise with them, and make her know
Wee were above, and all her power below.
Why this my Lord would prove us men indeed.
But when affliction thunders o'er our Roof,
To hide our heads, and run into our graves
Shows us no men, but makes us fortunes slaves.
Antonio, thou would turn Philosopher
To doe thy friend a kindness; but it is not words
Our business asks, we must have action now.
Thou see my fathers anger for this freeing
Althea from her death, swells like a tide
Half flown, that labours against an adverse wind,
And does command us leave the Court awhile,
And pass for Greece (as if our travail could
Be Bawd unto the chastity of faith
That's vowed to virtue) when my long wearied mind,
Already's toiling in a pilgrimage
Up to the shrine of Natures rich perfections:
Therefore Antonio thou must take the shape
Of all (save misery) that I contain:
And for I know my fathers jealousy
Will entertain all rumours that are left
Where ere my name pass; thou must bee Lucilio:
And so my name travail alone with thee
It will suffice; for fame doth sometimes gull
The best intelligence. Then shape thy course
Farthest from Athens, to those parts of Greece
Where I am least known.
Pardon me my Lord
If I consent not: for should your safety call
To leap the Tyrrhene Cliffs into the maine,
Stand in the face of a fired Canon,
Or hale a sleeping Lyon from the way
Where you must pass, my love would force me run
Against the edge of danger for your life.
But this is only a pretended show
To win our absence, that none may interrupt
Your torrent of impatience, that posts
Like melted Snow from off the Apenine
Down to destruction.
Thou art curious still
With our intentions, and mistake me much.
Believe it Antonio if I might have dyed
When the vast flood of spleen was at the full,
And thought to overflow whole worlds of love:
When Envy stood a tip-toe to catch hold,
And pull down innocence to trample on it,
And sweet Revenge was at her on to speak
From my bruised bones; then death had been a heaven:
But now my head's turned brass, &amp; speaks times past,
And hardened is against the worst of else,
Though every frown my angry mother gives
Should come like hammers against my forehead,
May I believe it my Lord,
By Heaven I will,
And so resolve: yet for thy farther trust,
I will bee open to thee; my meaning is
To put off name and habit for a while,
Till I have found Althea, and knit that knot
Which hell it self shall never violate;
And therefore carry rumour still with thee,
That it may have no leisure to descry
What I embrace. Farewell Antonio!
And prithee let this evening bee the last
Of thy delay: Heaven will be my friend,
And send content, or give my woes an end.
Soft, Isle not leave you to go seek that end: your name shall travail, but Isle not carry it. Though you have vowed not to procure your death; you are in love—manet.
D'sfoote Sir, your speeches be peremptory.
Why Sir, I said it, and I say it again, that the Dukes Son was a fool, and a mad-man, to venture his life for ere a women's love in Italy.
I yield Sir, it was a mad part to venture a painful death for a woman, when a woman will venture nothing, but she'll have pleasure at one end of it, for the life of a man; yet the Dukes Son was not a madman for it.
I say he was.
I say you lie
D'foote Sir, you will not strike me?
Yes, and whip thee with Birch in the Nose.
Bravely performed Elector, it is politiquely done, bee noble and doe not strike.
Why sir, this is not mine own sword.
And therefore thou had no authority to use it: Come I have other business for thee, that shall gain thee gold.
I thank you sir, for indeed I had a suit to you before.
It is the better trade of the two by half: I know thou can beg valiantly: but to the business. Thou know my Lord Lucilio goes away in disgrace twixt banishment and travail: he is not well, and therefore would stay behind a while un∣known: only thou must go before and put on his name, that the world may take notice of his passage, and hold rumour busy, till hee comes privately and overtakes thee—But come to my lodging, where Isle dispose of farther particulars, and furnish thee with apparel and crowns for thy journey.
I attend you sir.
Why Debora I say! why Debora.
Anon forsooth. —
Come bring away the Napkins quickly, and make ready here, (these heavy Arced wenches are so slow) and doe you hear, bid one of the Boys fetch me a Pint of Oligant, Bulls Blood, and a quart of Canary; and look that the white Broth with Eringoes and Marrow be not over-boyl'd; I know M. Da∣masippus loves it well.
Joy and peace of mind be to my dear Pupil, let me give thee a moral kiss.
In pure morality M. Damasippus, you are most heartily welcome— Would this wench would come away that wee had Supper once.
That word hath eternized thee my sweet Ambrosia;
and thy name is written in Elizium among Ioves paramours: Wherefore let the beloved of Jove feast and banquet according to morality.
You are so full of learned sayings still: I have studied too a great while, would I could read once.
Soul of the world! thou shalt bee illuminated without reading, for I will infuse knowledge into thee, and thou shalt bee replete.
Can you doe so M. Damasippus?
I can my Summum bonum: and thou shalt have the Mandragoras for thy fecundity; and I will free thee from the vici∣os note of sterility.
O the blessings of these Philosophers! Come sweet M. Damasippus, sit, and lets sup quickly.
Content.
O Mistress! my Master and Mistress Abigail are coming up the street together.
Thunder from heaven confound 'hem, and the fire of Aetna consume their steps.
Charitable M. Damasippus, get in here till I can shift 'hem—so, it is well,
Good Mistress Abigail, I was sure before hee was not here. How now wife! at high Supper! and Wine! and Junkets! and knacks! and all alone! this feast would have beseemed thy friends and Neighbours, the worshipful of the Parish, our fellow Magistrates: but I thank thee for it, I have a stomach now as sharp—as if I would eat for anger. I would not for a pound I were to beguile any one of his Supper to night, Come sit Mistress Abigail.
Mistress Frailware will you sit by your husband?
No forsooth, my stomach does so wamble: when Supper was dressing methought I could eat such a deal;
and now the sight of—the meat does so fill me: I pray Husband bring Mistress Abigal into my Chamber, I think I shall be very ill.
By and by duck, we follow thee—so, sit as close to me now as mine Office, and here's a health in Canary to the formal Cuckold thy Husband.
Fie M. Frailware that you'll have such a fearful word in your mouth.
Hang him, hoe's a Goat, and thou hast, and shalt make him deserve it.
I must confess hee has a stinking breathe indeed; &amp; that I have traversed the paths of goodfellowship for your sake.
I, and wilt doe still, though thy Husband heard thee say so.
I and will doe it though my husband heard me.
Why now thou speak like a sister of the Lecture, and according to moralitiy.
Nay I have been forward enough to you M. Frailware, ever since my first marriage: for in good earnest I did marry M. Da∣masippus, only because I saw the Philosophers wives go with the first of the Parish, and so forth—but my heart—
Let the City have it wench, and let my fine pure formal piece of Stoicity wear out six grogran Elbows with pleading moralities, and counterfeit railing against the sins of the flesh; spend all hee can flatter from women to play the Epicure; and then make ragged Lectures and exercises in Cellars and Gravel Pits for a collection of seven pence, ere thou give him so much as a good wish.
Nay so hee shall; for truly he is grown a very Pharao, a hard-hearted Mirmidon to me of late.
A ficus for him whoreson Crab; hee plays the Goat rampant abroad I hear.
It even makes me many times wish him in his grave, that he might sleep and I were free.
Thou art free now my sweet Ab: come, gi'me a threave of kisses—who would live tied to such a Bull of Basin.
Will please you have any Music?
Music! most opportunely welcome; we'll make a night on it now: strike up Tigellius.
Away with him profane Tavern-Leech.
Nay prithee Mistress Abigail have patience.
I will not hear it.
By this kiss you must—play on sirrha— Music is a noble Science.
Well this fit would cost me an exercise if my Husband knew it: but I can endure any thing for your sake sweet M. Frailware.
God a mercy—
What an earthquake! more Devils in the Vault? are you fired, and will blow us up? who have we here?
The very'st Cuckold of a dozen.
Neighbour Damasippus! now by my authority welcome into the Livery: we'll have a company shortly.
O, my husband! I will go to an exercise presently, that the gods may appease your wrath.
I see our wives will bring us to all the venerable degrees of the City, before they have done.
Frailware, I will curse thee from the Temple of Diana; and thou shalt be excarnify'd by dogs.
We are Actions both: let us knock heads.
Step before him and shut the door, I have a plot against his Beard. ha ha ha—
Now tell us Micale
What Sacrifice was that held you so long,
And would not admit our presence?
Madam, I must disclose more than the secrecy
Of our ruled Discipline will well permit,
If I reveal each Act particular,
And form that that dread Sacrifice includes.
But what I may without the prejudice
Of our strict and inviolable Canons,
Your Grace shall know, Just at the depth of night,
(Which time is Ceremonious) I went down
To a clear Fountain, where I bathed and cleansed me
From head to foot? Then took a female Lamb
Black as the night, and digging first a hole
That might receive the sacrificed blood,
I opened all the Veins that traversed
The neck, until I left the carcass dry:
Then with a hallowed Knife I separate
The head, and splatted it. That done, I heaped
A pile of consecrated fire, whereon
Now burns the body of the Holocaust.
Then took I Infants fat, and luke-warme blood
Drawn from it's throat, mingled with Viper Wine,
And distilled Hemlock, with the Mandrakes root,
Night-shade, Moonwort, and dreadful Aconite,
Which to the flame I powered with Milk and Honey,
A holy banquet to great Hecate
Whom we invoke; and leave the sacred fire.
Soon as our backs are turned, we hear a noise
In hideous shapes, that would affright and shake
The constant'st force of Natures best Male courage:
Yet must we not look back whence they proceed,
For then ell's frustrate; but as the fire consumes
The offerings imposed, the groanings cease,
And then appear the Spirits which wee implore,
And which will ne'er appear unless first pleased
With some oblation.
How doe you point the forms which they assume?
Each hath his private Charm, peculiar for the shape which pleases most, and is least fearful.
Mother the noise is done,
The flames grow pale and dim, and in dark shows
Speak the approaching horror which they feel.
Be gone and leave us then—Now Madam sit,
And in this glass behold what Magic feature
There rises from the earth to doe you service.
What Spirit is this?
This is a common spirit of much practise; it goes in the form of a young Gentlewoman worn out of service, and keeps her residence in the Suburbs, till she has engrossed all the diseases of the City, which she delivers by whole sale to her customers: From sixteen to four and twenty; she is for none but Beaver Hats, Gold Lace, and Taffeta Linings: Before thirty she false to Roaring Boys, Sharks, Servingmen and Artificers: from thence to Porters and Skavingers; till freed by all degrees, she becomes a Nurse of the Trade by five and forty; then many times a six penny Witch, and so back again to an everlasting Devil.
What is this?
This is a Spirit Madam that takes many times the habit of an old Gentlewoman, gets into Ladies familiarities, &amp; teaches the tempers of Complexion; the composition of meats that strengthen and provoke luxury: the use of quelque chooses and Dildoes: has Aretine at her fingers ends. It was she that first invented double Locks, and a suit of Keys to every Office: She exalted the horn of the Buttery, &amp; made the Silver Bole neglect the company of the black Jack: and preferred a Bill against eating Breakfasts and sit∣ting up late, to the prejudice of Tallow-Chandlers. In fine, she sets Families together by the ears, and flattering her self into great men's expenses, becomes the bane of Hospitality.
It is a familiar Spitit, methinkes I could bee acquainted with her—But who is this?
O this is a Devil of many shapes, and indeed Madam sell∣dome at leisure, that wee can have any use of him. He fawns him into services of place, and persuades men, otherwise morally civil, from the chaste Sheets of their beautiful and virtuous marriages: becomes an Intelligencer, and panders them to Milk-maids, Kit∣chin-wenches,
and Oyster-wives. Hee refuses no deed that hey∣ven abhors, and Hell trembles at, so his Lord sin with him. He is a very chained slave to his Masters vices, and leaves him in nothing but Actions of honour and virtue. An other time hee is a concea∣led Druggist or Apothecary, puts on the name of a great Traveller, poisons at an hour, and is in great request.
Speak to him good Micale, and let him know our bu∣sinesse.
Stay then thou Spirit of night, and by the power
The chief commander of your shades hath lent,
I doe adjure thee tell where lives Althea?
He tells me Madam, in the Mountains far from hence.
But how shall we procure her death?
By poison! gi'mee something then that kills
Past Cure, and speedily—it is sufficient.
I have a nimble Spirit at command
That by an ointment which we doe apply
To parts of our marked bodies, is at hand,
Who posts us through the regions of the ayre,
When oft wee meet at solemn festivals,
Or doe admit a novice to the oath
Of our abstruse and powerful discipline:
Leave it to us, and ere to morrows Sun
Touch but three Points of West beyond Mid-noone,
My self will see Althea dead.
Thanks gentle Micale, for thou hast eased me much,
Isle not forget thy pains, nor leave thy skill
Without regard, for wee have much to know.
It is a curious age Madam, and we are full
Of business now, so many come to know
Who shall survive, their Husbands or themselves;
And then how long; whom they shall marry next:
What place and opportunity must meet
To raise their titles; with a million more
Of women's questions—But the day begins
To look upon us.
I must hasten then
Least some mis-fortune doe discover me:
Farewell Micale, hell prosper our design.
Fear it not Madam, I will not sleep nor eat,
Till by Althea's death I jointly free
Your Son and House from Cupids Tyranny.
THe day grows hot, and with the climbing Sun
That mounts to th'height of noon, our cares doe fly
Drawn on by fear and grief, to deep despair.
Lets rest under this shade until the singeing Ray a little hath with∣drawn it self.
And gladly too, for I am as weary of travel, as I am of a Shepherds life.
I Camilla, the desire of being public is the disease of our Sex: we think the Countries free breathing spaciousness a pri∣son, where the loss of liberty is the want of company. But if there were one of us, whose contents were not without her, she would shun that common concurs of eyes, as she does the opine∣on of deformity; and perceive that the best perfectiō had no gre∣la enemy than public aspects.
This is forced now, and savours not of your temper and women's seasoning, to hold Paradoxes against nature, and opinions opposite to our own feelings. 'Sprecious Madam, if Nature framed us to please, how can we please whore's none to be pleased but Beasts and Birds, whose apprehension was ne'er made capable of proportion, and therefore regard it not.
And therefore condemn us of unnaturalness, that when beauty was equally shared twixt them and us, they respect it as it is; whilst wee, blinded by reasonable sense, conceive it the richest gift Heaven could give, study it above the soul, and equal to life, tho it merely touch our outsides, as clothes doe.
Nay dear Mistress, let's talk a little now like our selves like women; and tell me whether an excellent Quality forced from operation, or a rare piece of work held from sight, bee not a wrong to the Author, as well as the thing? O they were foully deceived that sought perfection in a Nunnery!
Thats the error of our ambition, that while wee take our aim at admiration, by publikenesse and common flattery, we miss that repute among the wisest, which our beauties not pro∣stituted would infallibly merit; because every thing, though less perfect, yet less common, is more admired, as we see in the Sun and a Comet.
You are Bookish still: and Isle stand to it yet, there's no woman but loves them both: and therefore being natural to our Sex, why should it bee termed unnaturalness in us, to cherish beauty, or wish the perfection of civil men's amiable society, when that ever begets love, and love is ever secōded with flattery. I like a Wench that's pure mettle, and spirit, and the very foul of her kind; that when a Lord wantons her, will forsake her home, give off her father and competent means to the poor of the Parish; stick to the City, like a Prodigal to the Counter, that cannot be drawn out by all the friends, he has; lives clearly by her wits, yet reasonable honest too and all to be flattered.
Such Camilla be the disgrace of their Sex: whose appe∣tites change with variety; and taint the general name of women with the vicious note of inconstancy.
That's the folly of men, to term inconstancy vicious in us, for were they not so prone to wrong us, they would ne'er expect it, but know that to bee too constant to them, were to bee too disloyal to our selves, which I hope ne'er came nigh a women's wit.
Yet it is the perfection of virtue to lose by the exercise.
By the pleasures of change, I swear this constancy is a mortal sin, and not a virtue in any of us.
A sin! and mortal!
A sin, and most mortal, because most against nature, and brings many of us to lead Apes in Hell. To lose the sweets of youth, the very Nectar of Nature, and frustrate the end of our Creation; can this be less than a mortal sin?
It is a work of merit, and they be Saints worthy to have their names written upon the Altar of Chastity. It is beloved of Heaven, and sometimes fortunately rewarded here.
As for example—
My self you mean.
I am no Divine, spite of the time I must speak my thoughts.
Why then it is I,
Why then it is you: would any woman breathing, that had her 5 senses, and no red head, no blew lips nor raw Nose, no desperate fortunes, nor cracked reputatiō, but walked upright in the face of the world, and in the April of her age, so devote her self to one, that she must undergo these miseries, when by renouncing him, she may underlie so many commodities? To turn Savage here, and hold conference with none but hills and sheep, when she might have variety of fashions, wits, and breathes to Court her at home. I protest I would love over a whole Play-house of Gallants first.
I could be angry with thee Camilla, for Isle first be trea∣cherous to my own soul, ere buy content or kingdoms with perfidiousness.
God reward you, for man will never.
Virtue is rich, and rewards it self: and if my wrongs merit Lucilios safety, Heaven redouble 'hem.
Now Micale thou hast the sight of them,
And art already spied; cast out the bait.
What is she? Sure some voluntary occasion has dri∣ven her this way.
It is some Chameleon perhaps, that lives upon the breath of news, and comes to intelligence us here.
What, no salute! methinkes the furious heate
Should make 'hem soon inquisitive to know
What I came laden with into these Mountains,
Which yield no other juice but Crystal Springs:
I have a Liquor here to quench their thirst,
Physic to purge them from their loving humours,
And that aspiring mind that does invest
Altheas hopes within a Duchess stile.
Faith Mistress my stomach takes this for an invitation, I have a great appetite to be acquainted with the honest Shepher∣desse, for I am dry at heart, though my teeth water.
Yet be not impudent, invite not thy self.
Why no, I shall doe as custom and fashion forces us in wooing, forbear and be coy, look to be invited and prayed, when we be ready to starve: Isle to her &amp; dine, that's past resolving— Come will you go?
Not I.
Your reason?
Because I have none to go.
Nor I to stay—Shepherdess proface: I think your feast be neither gluttonous nor miserable, that thus you make it in the sight of heaven.
It is the Countries privilege fair Shepherdess to shun both: will it please you sit and eat?
Your kindness makes me presume, yet I fear to be o∣ver bold.
Command and try, these Hill-Inhabitants dissemble not.
I have a melancholy friend here by, whom discontent makes scarce sociable: yet perhaps company &amp; your Bottle would infuse a little spirit, and make a Sunshine on her thoughts.
You are too blame if you left her then, solenesse feeds me∣lancholy: please you we go and sit with her?
That were to trouble your kindness.
Nay you mistake me then, methinks Shepherds should not know these Court complements, more then that does the Countries honesty.
Come, rouse your self, and meet a banquet that comes freely to you.
I cannot eat.
Why then you cannot live.
And therefore I cannot eat, because I cannot live.
Yet strengthen Nature, and out-live sorrow.
It were Tytius plague, to renew strength for grief to feed on.
And to let sorrow keep you fasting were to starve with Tantalus.
A hard choice for me the while.
Virtuous constancy; thou art beloved of Heaven, and fortunately rewarded.
Peace good Echo.
Come Nymph, you must bee jovial, these love griefs avail you nothing: men perhaps laugh at 'hem.
Why true: here's a health and wisdom to you
Both to your self, I am not sick.
Pledge her fair Nymph.
See what a company of religious fools wee maids bee, to sigh and hang the head for ere a rough-hewne-stubble cheek on 'hem all, when a Crab-fac'd Cynic, that has neither land nor hansomnesse, will scoff at affection, and say hee knows four Wenches, who if they were stamped and strained, so, that he might draw out the virtue of one, the beauty of another, the witty good nature of a third, and the Portion of a fourth; he could make a rea∣sonable good Wife for ere a younger brother in the land.
By Pan but such a wife would right well fit a Worship∣full Heir.
Nay that were pity faith, then fools should trouble two houses. Come will you take your Liquor?
good Spirit leave thy tempting: my heart grows cold and pants, as if it did presage some fatal ill stood nigh me.
These be the dreams of love: here take a draught, and waken imagination, fancy is strong with you.
I think so too; pray heaven it be no more.
Great Brimo, shall our labour be frustrate!
Isle frame a lye shall make her hang her self
For grief, since poison fails— yet taste a little,
The City yields no better Cordial to banish fears.
I cannot drink—were you in the City late?
I was, and saw a heavy spectacle,
The Dukes sole Heir, who taking the disguise
Of a condemned Lady, that stood tainted
Of Treason, was thrown down from off the Rock,
And, by the privilege of Law that gives
Our Virgins leave to plead and dye concealed,
Until his Funeral, was still unknown.
Since when, the Duke to satisfy the wrath
His ignorance had bred by such a loss
Unto the State, has burnt the guiltless mother
Of that young Lady, persecutes her Kin,
Raced their ancient House, and vows the death
Of her, who yet is fled, and none knows where.
Oh—
Are you poisoned with a lie?—What ails you Lass?
What fainting?
I am not well; good Shepherdess
Leave us a while; I thank thee for her meat,
But the Sauce comes worse than poison to my breast.
Then fare you well: I am sorry to have bin the Messenger of that afflicts you—and kills not presently,
Although I hope this lie proves to thy heart,
Poison more rank then ere was used by Art.
O we have lived too long Camilla, and
Out-slept the hour in which wee should have dyed,
Plagues, guilt and mischief have o'rtaken us,
Because we slacked, and would not quit the world
To rest in pure white Tombs of innocence,
I fear some of us shall recompense our sloth too soon, for I am wondrous ill.
Poor wench, these news have wounded thee.
Not to dissemble, no: but from the Wine
I tasted of the Bottle, went a cold
Through every vein, that settling at my heart,
Shuts up the passages of life, and fills
The Organs of my powers with such a frost
As kills the spirits that should harbour it.
Does Hell conspire with envy then to persecute
Our misery? and sent some fiend to take
That shape, that ne'er till now did shrow'd so foul a sin.
My soul grows faint and weary of her house,
And Death claims right in all my Vital parts:
Help me Althea! help me Mistress!
Or bury me at least, and close mine eyes,
Death is the best—
Of all lifes miseries.
Dead— stark dead—
It is not much I ask the Angry heavens,
Lend but my wits to die, I crave no more:
Or if you have a further punishment
Reserved, be mild, and hurl it quickly on me
With its full weight— Poor wench, I have no tools
To break the earth, nor means to bury thee:
Thou hast not killed a Mother, nor a Prince,
Nor been the ruin of thy Family;
Is it such a guilt to bear me company,
That thou must dye, and want what Homicides,
And Malefactors find? —a grave! Here take
This Scarf, Lucilio was wont to wear it;
Tell him thou hast it for thy Shroud, and I
Am gone to meet him, and have only begged
A truce with fatal mischief, whilst I hie,
That where hee dyed, there I may likewise die.
Poor soul farewell.
Come, hands to work, it is the Festival
Of our Silvanus, we must round entrench
The place fittest for dancing.
And strew the banks
On which the Summer Lord and Lady sit
To see the sports, with these rich spoils of May.
Our Shepherds will be frolic then, and lose
No Ceremony of their ancient mirth.
I like 'hem well: the curious preciseness
And all-pretended gravities of those
That sought these ancient harmless sports to banish,
Have thrust away much ancient honesty.
I doe believe you: it is the exercise
Of such, only to seem, and to be thought,
What they are not, holy. They keep the feast
Of our great Pan, with more than needful strictness,
And take upon 'hem to bee great oath-haters,
When all is but dissembling, and their Devotions
Like Witches charms, disguised with seeming good
To bear out wickedness.
Then they have reason, for they that live by shows must paint fair.
Alas, what's here? a Shepherdess asleep!
Sweet benefit of our life, to whom a Turf gives a more secure sleep, than a Palace doth a Monarch.
But this is death, not sleep.
Why then shoe's absolutely blessed: Nature has given her an acquitance from the reckonings of fortune and misery.
We must in charity bury her.
To your Tools then, we can doe no less: though it bee scarce in fashion now to be charitable.
Fashion is a Traveller, and Shepherds cannot follow it.
I Laurinda, it travels into all Nations the world o'er.
And therefore should go round.
And therefore does go round, blindfold, like a Mill-Horse, who thinks he goes forward, yet keeps his course circu∣lar. But now Laurinda what further Ceremony can you devise for this Funeral? poor haplesse Coarse!
To morn for we know not whom, and when perad∣venture death was the beginning of her happiness, were to a∣buse our selves, and be sorry she could be no longer miserable.
Isle strew my flowers on her Virgin Hearse,
And rob another Meadow for the sports,
The place affords no other Ceremony.
Yes, wee must have a Country Song for her farewell from the earth, and welcome to the earth.
Isle doe my best, though it bee unseasonable to sing at burials.
Poor Wench, even in the flower of her age! although I knew thee not, yet for thy memory Isle change with thee—
Your hand Arminio.
Lour. Die, die, ah die!
Wee all must die:
It is Fates decree,
Then ask not why.
When we were framed the Fates consultedly
Did make this law, That all things borne should die.
Yet Nature strove
And did deny
We should be slaves
To Destiny:
At which they heap
Such misery
That Natures self
Did wish to die:
And thanked their goodness that they would foresee
To end our cares with such a mild Decree.
—Farewell and sleep for ever.
It is too late, I have missed him, and all my labour's lost. Speed you shepherds and your work.
Sir, you are welcome, but our sad work is sped alrea∣die, and so are they for whom we work.
Why is it sad then if both be sure of speeding?
Because Sir the bestspeed our labour can have, is the sad end of their life for whom we work. We have buried the dead.
It is well that Charity is not run the Country then. But whom have you buried?
One doubtless as unfortunate as unknown, a stran∣ger sure in these parts, and as she seemed, a maid: further parti∣culars we know not: but pitying she should want a burial, as we came by and saw her dead, we gave her that which earth denies to no misfortune, a poor grave.
And took from off her face this Scarf, blessed with the last kiss her dying lips could give.
O my apprehensive soul!
What mean you Sir? doe you know it?
I too too well. Poor Lord that wont'st to wear
this Relic, which is now left for an Index
To turn thee to thy woes. Good Shepherd
Grant me thus much and bestow it on me.
Faith Sir since I perceive you long for it, you shall pre∣veil: and if she were of your acquaintance, keep it as a monu∣meant of her untimely death. So fare you well Sir.
Too timeless death that killed two hearts in one!
And now Lucilio, where ere thou liv'st,
Here we may jointly finish both our labours,
Since here lies buried all thy hopes and fears.
Too virtuous maid Althea! could the earth
Yield thee no better place to enshrine thee in:
Yet can its baseness never dim thy name,
That shall be sung into posterity
By a whole race of Virgins, and thy Fame
Shall be a Tomb more durable to thee
Then Brass or Marble. So farewell Althea!
Isle straight return this news to thy sad mother,
That she may give with some solemnities
Thy unhappy death its latest exequies.
Slave to affliction, that must still pursue
The shadows of my hopes, clasping the winds
To feed the hunger of my discontent,
And set aloft by greatness, stand exposed
To every clap of Fortunes thundering,
Still banished from the sight of sweet content
That sits below me. Had my birth but bin
As free from height as from ambition:
I might have slept under a silent roof,
And eat securely of a Country Feast,
Bound to no Ceremonious paths of State,
Nor forced to torture mine affections,
Or chain them till they starve to some deformed
Remedy of love, and change our lives content
For a bare title, that forsooth must come
To edge a line of words, and make our names swell
To fill th'ambitious thirst of greedy age—
How easily could I forget my self
By looking still upon thee, honest habit!
And could I find her, whom the tyranny
Of love hath made me seek, I would not tread
So many weary steps back for a Dukedom.
Now Master Constable, how like you this project? Doe I not draw all things to the life?
Excellent Boy! for a searching brain thou might have made a Head-borrough.
What an ambidextrous shaver have I got to doe the feat?
Can he draw teeth I wonder?
I, who doubts it? it is the semi-sphere of his Profes∣zion: why doe you ask?
because I would have this hateful Stoiks two rows of teeth drawn, for trespassing at my Table.
You'll save nothing by that, for the want of teeth will make him come the oftner to your wives White-broth, her Mar∣row, and Eringoes, who will likewise cram him up with Potatoes, Oysters, metamorphis'd Mushromes, and such like self-swallowing provocatives, that will run down his throat as glibbie, as your pills of Butter, and make as much haste into his Belly, as they will make out again into hers.
How thou doest charge my head with scruples!
No; the way to destroy all fundamental reference be∣tweene him and your wife hereafter, and to spoil him for ever giving fresh sap unto your horns, let his offensive member be now lopped off, before the Sun enters the Ram.
And what then Boy?
Why when we have reduced him to this impotent state, we will straight divest him, and truss him up naked in a Wheele-barrow, and send him home in the posture of an innocent, with his hands cleaving to the outsides of his knees, and his nose be∣tweene his two Thumbs.
Content; and we'll go pawn his clothes the while, and be drunk with the money.
Stay, this is a little two Tragical, now I think on it: we'll spare his wives night-peece for her sake, till the next con∣junction—
Hark—our Checkerman has him by the Poll already: now Master Constable stand close to your revenge, dissemble a fear a while, wee shall be summoned straight.
Come out you unpoll'd Stoic, it is time you had the cur∣tesie of my Razer.
Good sir, I need it not.
I'll force it on you sir: as I am Pluto's Barber in Ordinary I will trim you, come, I long to doe it, therefore sit down, and make your Beard ready for dissection—wee must have help I see; Constable come hither, come I say, and fear not, but doe your
Office, force him to fit, if your Authority bee strong enough: you trembling slave come help.
I come, I come sir.
Damasippus I command you to sit in the devils name.
So, hold him there. Now Damasippus before my mortal Razer seize your moral Beard, what can you say to save it?
Oh sir, it is an Ornament and special gravity belonging to our Sect.
Impossible that hair should argue wit; I rather think it does eclipse a good disputative face, and makes you look more like a Travelling Greek, then an Italian Stoic.
Yet for Antiquitie-sake spare me these hairs that never yet were cut.
How! Nunquam tondenti Barb cadebat?
Never since it was a Beard sir, it is yet tipped with the Down, the relics of my youth, and in a primitive state.
Why then sir the antiquity of this your primitive Beard shows you to have been a rank enemy to our Profession.
Why sir, I kept it for that end that Nature gave it, as a garment to clothe the face of age in winter.
Yet know Damasippus, tho it keep your face lukewarm, then; it breeds a frost in your Liver, devours the radical humour of your body, and endangers you to a Consumption: But in Sum∣mer, especially the Dog-dayes, such a Dung-mix of hair, and vast foregrowne Beard as this, were enough to keep your Chin sue∣ting, nine days together, and turn every hair of these to Snakes.
Most devilishly argued.
Now Saturn, Vertumnus, and the god of Sheep-sheare guide my hand—
Oh, oh—
Hold, I have almost done.
Shave him close.
And wash him too in Lethe-wa∣la, that he may forget his way to my house.
So, let him rise.
Why this was quickly done.
And valiantly suffered.
Now Damasippus, in hope that you'll hereafter bee a
reformed man, Isle bee no more a Devil.
Nor Fiddler I.
Would I could cast my head too.
O you damned Villains! have you betrayed me thus to shame and horror!
Be not angry Damasippus: now the Antependium of your face is off, you have a more Sibiline aspect a great deal.
True, hee looks now just like a Goose returned out of an enchanted hole without her feathers.
Just Nemesis inspire me with revenge
That these unlectur'd miscreants may drink
Of the like Cup.
Wee have already Damasippus, our wives have min∣gled it.
And you have both tasted of the horn of abundance—
That your heads may be exalted like a brace of Bucks—
According to morality virtuous Damasippus.
Thou art dearly welcome good Assassino:
Now cease to wonder why I sent for thee;
I had a daughter once, Assassino,
A comfort to mine age, life to my veins,
A living Image of her fathers virtues,
Fair, modest, and which is half monstrous
In these polluted times, inwardly chaste:
I doe remember such a one I had.
And have still Madam, for rumour says she lives.
No, no, poor Girl, rumour has oft belied her.
See thou this Scarf?
I Madam, what of that?
And dost not see the letters writ in blood,
That tell me she is dead, murdered, and on
The Mountains buried in obscure contempt?
Madam not I,
Why no, I thought as much.
But look Assassino, if thou had felt
The gripes of woe that have through pierced my soul,
Seen an appalling sight would make thee tremble,
Or through the spectacles of love did view
A loss as dear as heaven, thou would discern
These bloody Characters, and meet her pale Ghost
In every slumber, begging with silent shows
And deep fetched groans a mothers slow revenge.
Good Madam, I am sorry for it—
Then to recount the wrongs, the infamy
Heaped on her youth, when by most treacherous plots
She was attained of murder, and became
The mark for every vulgar tongue to spit
Slander and treason on her fair report;
And last her undeserved imprisonment—
By heavens it was a foul abuse; what were it best to doe?
And now to force her fly her dearest Country,
Friends, hopes, contents, twixt opposite love and hate,
To live in obscure exile, poor, forlorn,
Suspicious still of death, and flying that,
To wade each hour deep into misery,
To meet another death before her, and sink
Under the double hand of murder, not
Into a Tomb, but a poor Mountain grave,
No rites nor obsequies at her interment,
Buried without a tear, unpitied, unrespected.
Before Heaven Madam I would revenge it.
My soul Assassino labours for revenge;
Yet I'm a woman, and can sprinkle them
But with a few salt tears, and curse, and pray,
Which is a weak foundation for my revenge
To climb and over-looke them.
You have friends: call in the enemy, &amp; mutiny.
That's full of hazard, for a peace being sworn,
The enterprise may make them happier,
Vs still more miserable: But if my grief
Were armed with such a hand, as would o'rturne
The frame of all those hopes for which they sweat,
And spurn that in the dust, which they would raise
With hateful deeds, up to the point of state:
That I might see them grieve, and wail the loss
Which now afflicts my careful widowhood,
Know what it were to lose a child, sole comfort
Of their declining years, and send their a-
General Coerces to the grave, hopeless of issue.
To make away the Prince; it is that you mean,
Thou art within me already?
And mark Assassino how easy it is,
Since time, occasion, travail, and his solenesse,
Thy self not known, gives advantageous means
To second thine attempt: doe but resolve
And Fate will straight resolve to second thee
In such a righteous and just revenge.
Madam the enterprise is dangerous,
And though I have a daring spirit that bids
Me undertake the deep'st attempts of blood
For your revenge, and in so just a quarrel,
Yet must you think the danger I shall pass
Cannot but highly merit recompense.
Vow't; &amp; propose the sum; my House, my Purse,
My Means, and whatsoever is mine is thine:
Be bold and faithful, Isle ever hold thee dear,
Call thee our Houses Champion, and the hand
Of heaven's justice marked to punish sin,
And plague the guilty thoughts of tyranny.
But Madam the report of his passage is so obscure,
That I can hardly learn which way hee took.
I have dogged the rumour of his journey, and can
Exactly inform thee, come take directions,
And gold to furnish thee.
Then I resolv't;
And he shall die.
Now thou dost power fresh youth
Upon my hairs, newly reviv'st my soul,
Put spirits to my heart dried up with sighs,
And make fresh blood traverse my empty veins,
For the sweetest heaven the spleens of women find
Is full revenge to our aggrieved mind.
It's strange I hear not from the Prince, nor Antonio, who promised to meet me here, where I have now stayed three days in expectance, and had the wind bin fair, must have passed for Greece—Before Heaven it's a gallant thing to be a Lord, if but in name, you shall be so applauded in every vanity, scurrill jest, and impious action: A Satin Thersites that stalks among the Peasants like the Stork that Iupiter sent among the frogs, will so bend and bow to your little Toe, fawn and protest your excel∣lencies; Si been ructavit—Sirectum minxit— I would I had the faith that some have, I would never be unlorded again. Before Heaven I must begin to fawn, and get my self created: This service done for the Prince is a good step to it.
Now Captain, the winde's inconstant still, every where save where to steed us.
Womanish my Lord, womanish.
Indeed their levity has gotten them now that Simile appropriated.
But they showed other Cards before they won it, too.
Nay, that's enough i'faith.
Yet they had more.
As what!
Why their tongues, which fill houses, as the bustling of Winds doe Climates: they overturn Families, and States, as winds doe Trees, Towers, Ships. And for your diversity of winds you have your diversity of women: for your whirlewindes that clasp and carry a thing in the ayre, till it fall dashed to pieces; you have of your Females that will clasp and bear you, till at your next fall you will think one piece will scarce hang by another. For your freezing winds, you have them that will breed such a frost in your bones, that change of weather will make 'hem as rotten as the ground after a sudden thaw: And for your blitting and burning winds, you have of them too, that will blast and scorch
most ambidextrously. Only the difference is, that there bee but sixteen points in the Card, where the wind can be unprofitable to a man: but a woman has for the most part, the whole compass of her Card unprofitable, which contains two and thirty points at least.
Then the Grāmarians methinkes did ill to make Ventus of the Masculine Gender.
The Grāmarians my Lord were mere Scholars, &amp; mere Scholars be mere fools, and mere fools are easily deceived in matter of Gendring.
Impossible sir, they couple Genders by Book.
Right my Lord: so they all study Riders Dictionary, and therefore become excellent Horsemen.
News from Court to your Grace; a stiff robustious Letter-Carrier makes much inquiry where he may be delivered of some matters he has been in travail withal.
Cozenage and dissimulation help me, it's impossible to scope discovering. D'sfoote I must walk stately, look scornfully, talk simply, and be Noble at all points now. But it false out some∣thing fortunately to be in the Evening: let him have entrance.
Health to your Grace.
As much to them that bring it: how fare our friends at Court?
As wanting no part of welfare but your wished presence.
Have you ought to impart that concerns us?
I have my Lord, and must have private conference with your Grace.
Attend us then on the Litto, where Isle presently meet you, and take this soft Evening breath.
Heaven, Ayre, Place, Time, and all will fit thy death.
By Jove methinks I begin to be my Craftes-Master and Lord it handsomely. If it were as easy for a Villain to be a Lord, as a Lord to be a villain, I would write noble instantly: get me a Herald for seven shillings, or a frown to forswear himself, and draw my Pedigree as deep as Romulus. Captain, as the wind serves, either on the Litto, or at my Lodging.
Wee will attend your Grace.
It is strange that such a personage should thus obscurely travel.
Tush Navarchus, our common-wealth is among fishes, and our policy with the winds, and therefore no marvel if Courtiers tricks savour not on our palats.
Yet fearing disgrace above damnation, and loving a popular esteem more then heaven; methinkes obscurity should fright 'hem.
Faith no; for you shall have a Courtier of the first Velvet head, when the tide runs low, and in a place unknown, will fa∣miliarly turn you to his old trade, accoutre his palfrey most neat∣lie, and thank obscurity for drowning the unfit honour hee had lately slipped on and off.
It is a disease indeed they have, to feel no touch of few∣ture honour, nor taste any thing more than what lies before 'hem.
Tut, they be wise in that, for their conception being pre∣cipitate, and their births rash, they knew their glories birth would bee like the flies I have seen by a River in Egypt, that begin to live in the morning, are at full age by noon, and die before Sun set: and therefore their honour feeds like moths upon apparel, and objects merely present—flashes—flashes.
But such an imputation cannot stain his honour, whose grain taken in the die of a Dukes blood, stands immaculate spite of all fortunes.
It is true, and therefore peradventure parsimony invites him to this obscurity, for Isle assure you, that to be miserable, and not fight, are grown to be two right honourable qualities,—
Captain, you stand talking here of a Cock and a Bull, while our rich fare is gone another way.
Who? my Lord the Prince?
I your Lord the Prince.
Which way, for profits sake?
That way that many Lords doe for profits sake: down∣wards, downwards.
Prithee speak not in enigmas; be understood.
In plain Dagger terms the Prince is slain.
D'foot it is sharp news.
By whom?
Why, that answered Rutter that brought the message from Court, delivered it in such keen terms, that it went to his heart: &amp; when he had done, tumbled him off the Litto into the water to catch Whitings. But two Merchants spying it, raised the people and took him, and now the Governor is gone a fishing after the Body.
This amazes me, done so suddenly.
Death's a quick Carver when he comes in that shape.
Who set him on says he?
Some valiant Squire or other, who is yet unknown, nor will the Governor urge the knowledge, but sends him back to Court, that the Duke may take notice of all.
Come, lets to the the Litto, and set our helps to find the Body.
Content.
But have you found the body?
Wee have my Lord
With long laborious search, it was three Tides
Locked in the arms of Neptune, who at length
Enforced by maine constraint resigned it up,
But all the face so mangled and deformed,
That but his clothes, nought could have made it known,
The which embalmed we straight closed up in Lead,
And with the murderer brought it to your Grace,
That after his due exequies performed,
You might quench sorrow in revenge, and draw
His blood, whose hand hath spilt best part of yours.
Thou art deceived, good friend, it was not his hand,
But the just hand of Heaven that whips my sins,
And through my Veins powers out the innocent blood
Which I had spilt before; the hand that holds
The equal Balance to discern the weight
Twixt Princes justice and their tyranny,
Measures their blessings and their plagues, alike,
To their fair virtues or black infamies,
And makes the horrid acts of murderous minds
But instruments of plague to punish guilt;
And pay us in the coin with which we hoped
To buy our gluttonous surfeits. Such is the state
Of Princes privilege, that we may run
Into the depth of sin, and uncontrolled
Pull vengeance on our heads, while the smooth hand
Of pestilent flattery claps us on the back,
And gives us edge to villainy, till they see
Misery and desolation close us round;
Then they fly back, and gaze, as on a place
Stricken with furious thunder in a storm:
When every vulgar hand has laws, and fear
Of prying authority to hold him back,
And friendly enemies to upbraid him with
His faults, and keep him in the bounds of mercy,
Only our height bereaves us of these helps,
And wee are soothed in vices, till we run
Beyond the reach of grace, and stand within
The shot of heaviest vengeance, which seldom comes
Short of our merits—O my son! my son!
I shall grow mad with grief: my frighted conscience
Opens the Book, where I doe view my sins,
And feel the furies with their wounding whips
Lashing my guilty soul to penitence.
I was unhappy
To bee the messenger of this ill news.
Who's this? Fioretta the Lady Iulia's woman? My heart! what means her habit?
Come Lovers bring your cares,
Bring sigh-perfumed sweets,
Bedew the grave with tears,
Where death and virtue meets:
Sigh for the haplesse hour
That knit two hearts in one,
And only gave love power
To die when it was begun.
Saving your mirth fair Lady, what preparation's this?
a Bridal sir; true love and greatness be divorced, and now they bee both going to be married to misfortune.
It was a marriage long since, my self was at the wedding: But be a little plainer, &amp; tell me who it is to be married?
Indeed Sir, Beauty, Virtue, and too much faith for a wo∣man, are going to the cold arms of a sullen Churl, one that consumes ere hee lets go: yet hee is better than your other husbands are; he forsakes them not, leaves them not in misery, hee woos them not with flatteries, and poisons with unkind∣ness: hee never swears, and lies, but continues faithful till Doomsday. Who be you?
A stranger in your City, a poor Husbandman.
A poor Husband? then thou art a poor dissembler, a poor murderer: O you husbands kill more than scurvy Physiti∣ans, or a plaguy Summer. But art a stranger?
A very stranger here.
Why that's all one, thou can not bee a stranger to her fame, if thou hast lived but a month in the world. Poor innocent Althea makes her last marriage, and I am one of her Bridesmaids.
To whom for loves sake?
To her grave for love's sake, an honest Husband: tic better then the Dukes son, that sent her from the City, to dye in the Mountains? Ah it was unkindly done, not to go nor send after her! yet poor Lord hee is killed, dead too now, and has met her Hearse here—
So those two souls that ne'er were borne to have
A Nuptial Bed, have found a Nuptial Grave.
Beauty and Virtue strove
Who should adorn her most,
Till faith conspired with love,
And all their labours crossed.
Antonio killed! Althea buried!
Then thou hast lived Lucilio to behold
The height of mischief, and the worst of chance,
And thou moist dare thy angry Stars to inflict
What ere they can effect, that's worse than this.
Murderd thy friends! ruined their ancient names!
Hateful to thy Parents, loathsome to thy self!
O it is high time to die, and I doe wrong
Althea's constancy to breath an hour
After I know she has prevented me.
Methinkes I hear love chide my backwardness.
And tell me how unworthy I am grown,
To have two friends so firmly virtuous,
Constant and loyal, and outlive them both,
Yea be their Murderer, and stand alive
Spectator at their funeral, as I would bid
The rest weep on, whilst I give aim to tears,
And mark who grieves most deep at my foul actions.
So then, let Fortune make a period here,
Since we are met just in the midst of woe,
And stand upon the Center of mishap.
Whence we may see the full circumference
Of all that Sphere, that bounds the power of Fate.
Come Madam we will mix our tears a while,
Dropping them jointly on the Marble Tombs
Of our dead Issue, till the stones receive
Large Characters of grief, carved by the drops
That ceaseless flow from our too late laments.
Great Lord, if woes with woes may be compared,
Or to the measure of our cause of grief
Wee might in sad contention drop our tears,
Shower for your drop, Pound for your dram of woe
My breast and eyes would yield, which now are grown
A boundless harbour for the depth of care.
For though wee meet in this, that both have lost
The dearest treasures of desired life,
Yet hath your Grace a partner in distress
A comfort to the residue of your years,
And therefore hope that Heaven may yet restore
This ruin of your House. Besides you have
The body of your son, on whose dead Coarse
You may bestow your tears, and honour him
With fitting place and Royal exequies:
When Heaven hath shut those comforts from my heart,
Left me a widow to sustain the weight
Of all this burden, and no partner else
To bring mine aged hairs unto the grave
But still ripening grief: and am denied
The ashes of my child, on whose cold Hearse
Mine eyes might pay those tributary tears
Which her misfortune, and my woes exact,
And only can embrace an empty shrine.
Yet my good Lord, I oft forget my cares
To grieve at yours, and wish Althea's death
Might have sufficed the anger of the Fates,
Without Lucilio's blood, whose guiltless fall
Hath struck a sadness through th'appalled looks
Of all your subjects, made them stand amazed,
And wonder there should live upon the earth
Envy enough to blast such graceful hopes.
Let me be open Madam to your love,
It is but the doom of Justice I sustain;
I know I wronged your daughters innocence,
And only know it now, for plagues make known
That, oft, for sin, which once we thought was none.
No my good Lord, she was not innocent,
In that she bounded not her loosest thoughts
Within our element but would admit
The dangerous fires, of ambitious love
Into her Virgin breast, that's safelyest knit
Where all proportion justly equals it.
Wrong not her worth good Madam, the power of death
Is weak to stain her name, and we were blessed.
If such perfection, joined unto our Blood,
Had with our son succeeded in the Throne
Of this unhappy and dejected State.
Believe me Madam I did ever love
Althea's Virtues, and was inly glad
When by that Stratagem my son had freed
Her innocence (as I protest I thought)
And wished her scope as safe from that injustice
As could my heart desire.
Alas good Madam, I have felt your Grace
Still loving to my daughters poor deserts,
And nothing did increase my sorrows more
Then that I wanted means how to requite
Your Graces love.
Come, we forget our selves in Ceremonies,
And waste the time, whose every instant yields
Scarce space enough for that large task of grief
Sorrow exacts each instant from our hearts,
Good Madam wee will consecrate one Tomb
To both their Memories; and since in life
Their hearts were so united by Loves hand,
In death their Graves shall join: so will ourselves
Bequeath the remnant of our days from hence,
You to sad cares, and we to penitence.
You to sad cares, and wee to poenitence—
Why then you'll feed upon the bitter fruits
Of your ambition, and by experience find,
Virtue, not Honour is heaven unto the mind.
Dear Father, I conceive your grief, as true
As is my love, and feel methinkes a sting,
That spurs me onward to prevent the plagues
My loss will bring upon your hoary age,
And makes me think I hear the frequent voice
Of potent Nature whisper to mine ear
The duty that I owe, and bids me meet
Those mischiefs quickly, by discovering me:
But the persuasion's weak when I must owe
More then a duty, or all Natures self
To the chaste merits of Althea's love,
Who was the first I murdered; then the name
Of holy friendship, which my request abused
In loved Antonio, whom I murdered next:
My debt's above a life, which though I give,
My ghost must be a slave to pay the rest,
And their deserts stand yet unsatisfied.
But ô ye Spirits of truth! whose constant faiths
Merit perhaps to hear these last laments
My dying soul powers forth; be pleased to take
The poor oblation of a loathsome life,
Which I as gladly vow unto your loves,
As misery would turn it self to bliss.
And since I was a murderer to your words,
Isle choose that death that murderers doe pass;
And thou had lived Antonio, if thy love
Had not before with-held me from the fall,
And saving only me hath murdered all.
Madam,
My love to you and to that virtuous Lord
Could doe no less: I doe assure your Ladyship
The murderer has confessed, in hope of life,
The circumstances, means, and opportunity
Which you so fitly urged, and hath incensed
The Duke so violently against your self,
That he has vowed your death, &amp; doth intend
A sharp revenge to all your family.
And but I know Lucilio yet does live,
Believe me Madam I should hate the fact,
And be the first should feed my thirsty eyes
With their best blood, that spilt least part of his.
Alas Antonio, what would you have me doe,
When I beheld my daughter murdered thus
Twixt love and hate, and I no means of help
To take revenge, or comfort to my grief?
Well Madam let's not stand to expostulate
The cause; the act was foul, and (but the hand
Of Heaven turned it from him against whō you meant it)
Hateful, and worthy of the deep'st revenge.
Your way is now to shun the furious wrath
The Duke's inflamed with, and for a while
Lie close in some disguise, till the lost Prince
Make his return, who doubtless will ere long
Give notice to my self where he remains:
And for your farther assurance Lady, Isle take
Some strange attire with you, and we will both
Be present at the Execution.
Where you shall hear perhaps the latest words
The murderer will speak against your self,
And in the presence of the Duke avouch
Your guiltiness.
Thanks good Antonio, There the gift is free,
When it is bestowed on deepest misery.
Lie there thou gentle weed, that hast prolonged
A weary life, thou whose dissembling shape
Has helped me reach the place which drew that life
As an attractive Load-stone to it's end.
Some friendly Passenger will for this reward
Bestow perhaps a burial on my Coarse;
And be my death as freely exempt from sight.
As is my grief, that never innocent eyes
May bee infected with those fumes of guilt
My latest gasp breathes forth, reserved till now
To bee unfortunate in all save this,
That I shall sacrifice my dearest blood
Upon that Altar where Lucilio dyed,
And let one air receive our joined spirits
And sacrifices to Faiths Deity.
And witness now you zealous thoughts of love,
Witness the vows my affection held so dear,
My soul comes unconstrained to you dear Lord,
And parts as freely from a gladsome heart,
As ere it wished to enjoy the lively sight
Of your desired presence—
— Awake my fancy, doe mine eyes conspire
To aggravate my grief, or does the strong
Imagination of my loss present the shape
Of his dead person to my troubled sense?
What strange confused passions 'gin to raise
A stormy combat twixt my mind and death!
Though safely now arrived within the Port
Where for exchange of breath I shall regain
The long desired presence of her soul
That hovers in expectation of my coming.
Methinkes I sleep, that, thus illusive shows
Doe mock my apprehension: or is it decreed
That even in death I must endure affliction?
And die in height of woe? How like his pace,
His gesture, shape, and countenance! true constant spirit!
(That would not be unless thou might be true)
Did not my greedy sight distract my thoughts
To feed upon thy shadow, and make me forget
My business next in hand: I should have flown
To be a shadow, and have walked with dead
Lucilio—
Lucilio! was it my fond conceit? or else
Her ghost, that looks each minute for my approach,
Thinks my stay long, and calls upon my name?
I come Althea, swift as break the winds
From out the Eolian Caves, give me but space
To take my flight from off that —
Bright Angel! Goddess! whatsoever thou art
That hast assumed that shape to adorn thy state,
And give a better lustre to thy Deity;
Doe not delude my woes, nor make my death
More miserable then my self have done.
It does invite me speak, and with his silent looks
Seems to entreat a word, yet my faint heart
Throbbing with fear, denies to second speech.
Be what thou wilt; I know no spirit of night
Durst to attempt that form, that ne'er was made
But to invest a soul more fair and pure
Then are the Spheres. Ghost! Angel! Goddess! Nymph!
Speak, deign a word to tell me what thou art,
That thus appearst in such a glorious shape
To intercept my death? Art thou an Angel
That thus would show the world what they have lost
By seeing her heavenly form? Or art thou else
Some spirit of Diviner excellence
That hast put on that shadow, thine own nature
To beautify? Or does Althea's ghost
Come thus to meet and chide my slothfulness?
Or has thy worth chaste Nymph, deserved to scope
The hand of death, and made thy perfect self
All soul, immortal, and an unmixed spirit,
That those rich virtues which great nature heaped
In thy creation, might by envious death
Ne'er be dissolved, nor the cold senseless earth
Embrace and taint thy pure delicious beauty,
For which the Stars grew envious to the world?
What ere thou art, if thou hast sense of grief
But correspondent to the shape thou bear,
Add not more torment to the depth of woe
That does accompany my death, and urge
No more the sight and memory of her
Whom I have wronged; envy has left me nought
But life to yield in satisfaction,
Which here I come to tender as thy due:
Or if thou doubt the payment, and did come
To take a view how willingly I dyed;
Then be my witness that the chased Stag
Flies not more swiftly to the cooling streams
Then I to death —
Stay.
Speak.
O stay dear love!
Speak, speak thou heavenly spirit,
And tell me since thy self art made Divine,
What makes thee come in confines of the wretched,
And mix thy self with us whose earthly loads
Detain us yet in life and misery?
Why, I doe live.
I know thou dost, thou were not framed to die,
Nor at thy birth, when Heaven and Nature joined
To give thee those rich Dowries thou enjoy'st,
Did they intend to make such excellence
Mortal and subject to the stroke of death.
But where deficient Nature could extend
Her force no farther to preserve thy life,
Heaven would supply the want, and turn thy state
To immortality, yet why should thou,
When I have seen thy Funerals performed,
Come to afflict me, and augment my grief?
Sweet love, if you doe live, as fear and hope
Twixt adverse passions make me doubtful yet,
Know that I live as when we parted last,
Nor ere was yet interred.
No, no, the earth grew feeling of her loss,
And grieving to be robbed of such a gem,
Refused to shut that treasure in her womb
Where foul corruption must have tainted it:
Or did my fortunes yet beyond thy death
Pursue thee farther, and bereaving first
Thy innocent life, in some forsaken wood
Leave thee unburied, and thy restless ghost
Comes now to seek a Sepulchre of me?
Great Lord, recall your self, and give me leave
To speak what will resolve this doubtful maze
In which your senses wander, and can find
No passage out. Since I last left your Grace
Travelling in that disguise, I lost indeed
Camilla, poor Companion of my cares:
But hearing that your self in shape of me
Was by your Fathers doom thrown off this Rock,
Knowing my sufferance guilty of your death,
I came to end my life where you had dyed,
And expiate the murder with my blood
Where it was committed on your guiltless self,
Reserved by Heavens mild hand to this blessed hour
Wherein our innocent loves might once more meet
In spite of envy.
Lives my Althea then?
Then live Althea still! But speak no more
Lest the vast Tide of joy o'rwhelme my soul,
And kill as quick as grief: Or my sad heart
Unable to sustain this burden of wonder,
Sink and yield vanquished. I have much to ask,
But let it rest: yet tell me how thou far'dst
In this long banishment?—stay, who comes yonder?
Now the wind's turned, and fortunes lavish hand
Powers down content beyond expectation.
Come thou inhumane murderer of my son,
Traitor unto thy Countries state and safety,
And now before the stroke of Justice seize
Thy hateful life, resolve the wondering world
Why the slight motives of a women's words
Should win thee to so foul and horrid crimes?
What I have said your self are witness to,
Nor needs it be renewed; nor can I add
One word or syllable to make it more.
Then let the Execution proceed,
That wee may doe this latest Exequie
To his wronged ghost, which is to see his blood
Revenged with blood of those that murdered him,
As we have vowed to doe, and not to leave
These weeds of sorrow, till we have consumed
The race and name of them that did conspire
In this abhorred Action: And would it might
Suffice the injuries we did his life,
Thus to revenge his too untimely death;
And from that height—
Am I awake, or dream I? Is it my fancy
Breeds this delusive show in my weak brain?
Or doe their souls come to condemn our guilt,
More cōscious of their death, then whō we have brought
To die for it? See, doe thy dazzled eyes
Perceive that object which my self beholds:
Or is it some shadow that abuses me?
And none but me?
My son my Lord, my son!
More known by's ghost, then if his living form
Had met mine eyes: ô speak to him my Lord!
If thou be such as is thy semblance,
By all that duty that thy life did owe
Unto a Parent; by the Bands once due,
Of Love and Nature, that unites the souls
Of children and their careful nourishers,
I doe adjure thee tell, why in this midst
Of day you come thus to renew our grief?
What has there wanted to your Funerals,
When we have wept us dry, and spent our tears
More thick than winter showers upon your Hearse?
Done all the Rites and Exequies were due
To your interring? And have vowed revenge
To all that did conspire in that foul Act
Of thy too guiltless murder
Know that wee are returned
From out those Seats of Bliss where we were placed
By your unjust proceedings, to make known
That what you did was against the will of Fate.
For see, what you denied upon the earth,
The power of Heaven does grant, and has confirmed
Our long-borne loves with an Eternal peace:
Where our two souls in sweetest union knit,
Enjoy their Nuptials out of Envies reach.
Yet know there are some punishments reserved
For the vile Treasons practised in pursuit
Of our unmerited wrongs; and that their sin
Is marked for plagues, that seek by force to break
The League that Love and Faith doe jointly knit.
Then let 'hem fall, wee are prepared for woes
Though shot as thick as Hail from out the Clouds,
Our guilt is greater than those punishments,
Or all our future plagues can expiate.
Yet on our bended knees thus low to earth
As we did both conspire in that foul plot
We here entreat your pardons, and withal
Wish the offended Heavens would bee appeased
With Vows and Orisons; and would your ghosts
Forget those injuries wee did your loves
And rest in peace with us, and with the world.
Father we will, but should we live again,
You would not yet relent, and yield our loves
The sufferance you see the Heavens have done.
By Heavens I would; nor should the potent'st hand
Of earth resist your present Nuptials.
Then we'll be ghosts no more, but ever sue
For your mild sufferance of our happiness.
Wonder and amazement do not oppress me!
O we are blessed beyond desert!
Yet is my joy but small amidst your many,
Since you have burnt my innocent Mother,
And razd our Family.
No my dear daughter, see I safely live
Ne'er blessed till now, and now o'r-joyd with bliss,
Then joys would be complete had I not lost
By thy vile murderous hand so dear a friend.
Your friend still lives, and never felt his life
Sweet till this instant, when I may behold
These joys combined.
Why then there nothing wants
But celebration of your Nuptials,
Which we will doe with greater signs of joy,
Then we had grief in your supposed Funerals.
But whose death is this murderer guilty of?
Only Electors, a fellow as wicked as himself.
We give him then his life, but banish him
From our Dominions: and for this strange event
We will expect a farther leisure
To hear the whole discovery of the chance,
And leave the rest to mirth, that shall command
In all our Feasts, and whom we'll Crown as King,
To be chief Lord in all our Banqueting.
IVdging Spectators all, for this wee know,
That either you are such, or should be so,
Now to your censures lowly as his mind
Our Author all submits, and hopes to find
In such a fair assembly no such eyes
As scout at Theaters, and come like flies
To taint the innocent'st labours with their tongues,
Raising their richest gains from others wrongs:
If such an envious Canker hap to lurk
Here, and hath only sate to tax the work
With curious scanning; let that envy know
He scorns his censure only, and can show
Against all such laboured hisses, Perseus Shield,
In such a fearless Pen as ne'er shall yield,
'Till his cold merits doe his worth bewray,
Or make himself a mewing Statue.
Nor is he of those self-admiring Apes
That think none's features fair, whose birth escapes
Their labouring brains; hee hears and sees, and knows,
And yields all reverence to the worth of those
Whom solid Art extols, and unto such
Hee humbly veils his Scene, that for the touch
Of unaffecting censures hither came;
Hee sought your mirth more than a Poets name.


Like a lightning from the sky,
or an arrow shot by Love,
Or a Bird of his let fly;
Be it a Sparrow, or a Dove:
With that winged hast, come I,
loosed from the Sphere of Jove,
To wish good-night
to your delight.
Oh, oh!
In Saturn's name, the Father of my Lord!
What overcharged peace of Melancholy
Is this, breaks in between my wishes thus,
With bombing sighs?
No! no Intelligence!
Not yet! and all my vows now nine days old!
Blindness of fate! Puppies had seen by this time:
But I see nothing! that I should! or would see!
What mean the Brethren of the Rosie-Crosse
So to desert their votary!
O! tic one
Hath vowed himself unto that aërie order,
And now is gaping for the fly they promised him.
I'll mix a little with him for my sport.
Have I both in my lodging, and my diet,
My clothes, and every other solemn charge
Observed 'hem! made the naked bords my bed!
A faggot for my pillow! hungered sore!
And thirsted after'hem!
To look gaunt, and lean!
Which will not be.
(Who's that?) yes, and outwatcht,
Yea, and out-walked any Ghost alive
In solitary circle, worn my boots,
Knees, arms, and elbows out!
Ran on the score!
That have I (who suggests that?) and for more
Then I will speak of, to abate this flesh,
And have not gained the sight;
Nay scarce the sense,
(Voice, thou art right) of any thing but a cold
Wind in my stomach.
And a kind of whimsy.
Here in my head, that puts me to the staggers,
Whether there be that Brotherhood, or no.
Believe frail man, they be: And thou shalt see.
What shall I see?
Me.
Thee? Where?
Here. If you
Be Mr. Mere-Foole.
Sir, our name is Mery-Foole.
But by contraction Mere-Foole.
Then are you
The wight I seek: and Sr. my name is Iohphiel,
Intelligence to the Sphere of Iupiter,
An aëry iocular spirit, employed to you
From Father OVTIS.
OVTIS? who is hee?
Know ye not OVTIS? Then know Nobody:
The good old Hermit, that was said to dwell
Here in the forest without trees, that built
The Castle in the air, where all the Brethren
Rhodostaurotick live. It flies with wings,
And runs on wheels: where Iulian de Camps
Holds out the brandished blade.
Is it possible
They think on me?
Rise, be not lost in wonder,
But hear me, and be faithful. All the Brethren
Have heard your vows, salute you, and expect you,
By me, this next return. But the good Father
Has bin content to die for you.
For me?
For you. Last New-years day, which some give out
Because it was his Birth-day, and began
The year of Jubilee, he would rest upon it,
Being his hundred five and twentieth year:
But the truth is, having observed your Genesis,
He would not live, because he might leave all
He had to you.
What had hee?
Had? An office,
Two, three, or four.
Where?
In the upper Region:
And that you'll find. The Farm of the great Customs,
Through all the Ports of the Aires Intelligences;
Then Constable of the Castle Rosy-Crosse:
Which you must be, and Keeper of the Keys
Of the whole Kaball, with the Seals; you shall be
Principal Secretary to the Stars;
Know all their signatures, and combinations,
The divine rods, and consecrated roots.
What not? Would you turn trees up like the wind,
To show your strength? march over heads of armies,
Or points of pikes, to show your lightness? force
All doors of arts, with the peter, of your wit?
Read at one view all books? speak all the languages
Of several creatures? master all the learnings
Were, are, or shall be? or, to show your wealth,
Open all treasures, hid by nature, from
The rock of Diamond, to the mine of Sea-coale?
Sir, you shall doe it.
But how?
Why, by his skill,
Of which he has left you the inheritance,
Here in a pot: this little gally pot,
Of tincture, high rose tincture. Ther's your  Order,
You will have your Collar sent you, er't be long.
I looked Sr. for a halter, I was desperate.
Reach forth your hand:
O Sr. a broken sleeve
Keeps the arm back as'tis in the proverb.
Nay,
For that I doe commend you: you must be poor
With al your wealth, &amp; learning. Whē you ha'made
Your glasses, gardens in the depth of winter,
Where you will walk invisible to Mankind,
Talked with all birds &amp; beasts in their own language,
When you have penetrated hills like ayre,
Dived to the bottom of the Sea, like lead,
And riss'againe like cork, walked in the fire
An it were a Salamander, passed through all
The winding orbs, like an Intelligence,
Up to the Empyreum, when you have made
The World your gallery, can dispatch a business
In some three minutes, with the Antipodes,
And in five more, negotiate the Globe over;
You must be poor still.
By my place, I know it.
Where would you wish to be now? or what to see?
Without the fortunate purse to bear your charges,
Or wishing hat? I will but touch your temples,
The corners of your eyes, and tinct the tip,
The very tip of your nose, with this Collyrium
And you shall see in the air all the Ideas,
Spirits, and Atoms, Flies, that buzz about
This way, and that way, and are rather admirable,
Then any way intelligible.
O, come, tinct me,
Tinct me: I long, save this great belly, I long.
But shall I only see?
See, and command
As they were all your valets, or your foot-boyes:
But first you must declare, (your Greatness must,
For that is now your stile) what you would see,
Or whom.
Is that my stile? My Greatness, then,
Would see King Zoroastres.
Why you shall:
Or any one beside. Think whom you please?
Your thousand, Your ten thousand, to a million:
Ell's one to me, if you could name a myriad.
I have named him.
You'haue reason.
I, I have reason.
Because he's said to be the Father of conjurers,
And a cunning man in the stars.
I, that's it troubles vs.
A little for the present: For, at this time
He is confuting a French Almanac,
But he will straight have don, Have you but patience;
Or think but any other in mean time,
Any hard name.
Then, Harms Trismegistus.
O, 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Why, you shall see him,
A fine hard name. Or him, or whom you will,
As I said to you before. Or what do you think
Of Howle-glasse, in stead of him?
No, him
I have a mind to.
Of, but Vlen-spiegle
Were such a name! but you shall have your longing.
What luck is this, he should be busy to?
He is weighing water, but to fill three houreglasses,
And mark the day in pen'orths like a cheese,
And he has done. Tic strange you should name him
Of all the rest! there being Iamblicus,
Or Porphyry, or Proclus, any name
That is not busy.
Let me see Pythagoras.
Good.
or Plato,
Plato, is framing some Idea's,
Are now bespoken, at a great a dozen,
Three gross at least: And, for Pythagoras,
He 'has rashly run himself on an employment,
Of keeping Asses from a field of beans;
And cannot be stau'd off.
Then, Archimedes.
Yes, Archimedes!
I, or Aesope.
Nay,
Hold your first man, a good man, Archimedes,
And worthy to be seen; but he is now
Inventing a rare Mouse-trap with Owls wings
And a Catts-foote, to catch the Mise alone:
And Aesop, he is filing a Fox tongue,
For a new fable he has made of Court;
But you shall see 'hem all, stay but your time
And ask in season; Things asked out of season
A man denies himself. At such a time
As Christmas, when disguising is of foot,
To ask of the inventions, and the men,
The wits, and the engines that move those Orbs!
Me thinks, you should enquire now, after Skeleton,
Or Mr. Scogan.
Scogan? what was he?
Of a fine gentleman, and a Master of Arts,
Of Henry the ford's times, that made disguises
For the Kings sons, and writ in ballad-royall
Daintily well.
But, wrote he like a Gentleman?
In rime! fine tinkling rime! and flowand verse!
With now &amp; then some sense! &amp; he was paid for it,
Regarded, and rewarded: which few Poets
Are now adays.
And why.
Because every Dabler
In rime is thought the same. But you shall see him.
Hold up your nose.
I had rather see a Brathman,
Or a Gymnosophist yet.
You shall see him, Sir.
Is worth them both. And with him Domino Skeleton,
The worshipful Poet Laureate to K. Harry
And Tytire tu of those times. Advance quick Scogan,
And quicker Skeleton, show your crafty heads,
Before this Heir of arts, this Lord of learning,
This Master of all knowledge in reversion.
Seems wee are called of a moral intent
If the words, that are spoken, as well now be meant.
That Mr. Scogan I dare you ensure.
Then, Son, our acquaintance is like to endure.
A pretty game! like Crambe. Mr. Scogan,
Give me thy hand. Thou'art very lean, me thinks.
Is it living by thy wits?
If it had bin that,
My worshipful Son, thou had ne'er bin so fat.
He tells you true Sr. Here's a gentleman
(My pair of crafty Clerks) of that high care,
As hardly hath the age produced his like.
Who not content with the wit of his own times,
Is curious to know yours, and what hath bin,
Or is, or shall be.
Note his Latitude!
O, fire amplissimus!
(Vt schools dicimus)
Et gentilissimus!
The question-issimus
Is, should he ask a sight now, for his life;
I mean, a person, he would have restored,
To memory of these times, for a Play-fellow,
Whether you would present him, with an Harms,
Or, with an Howle-glas?
An Howleglasse
To come, to pass
On his Fathers Ass;
There never was,
By day, nor night,
A finer sight.
With feathers upright
In his horned cap,
And crooked shape,
Much like an Ape.
With Owl on sist,
And Glass at his wrist.
Except the sour Knaves entertained for the guards,
Of the Kings, &amp; ye Queens that triumph in ye cards.
I, that were a sight and a half, I confess,
To see 'hem come skipping in, all at a mess!
With Elinor Rumming.
To make up the mumming;
That comely Gill,
That dwelt on a hill,
But she is not grill:
Her face all bowsy,
Droopie, and drowsy,
Scurvy, and lousy,
Comely crinkled,
Wondersly wrinkled,
Like a roast pigs ear,
Bristled with hair.
Or, what do you say to Ruffian Fitz-Ale?
An excellent sight, if he be not too stale.
But then, we can mix him with modern Vapors,
The Child of Tobacco, his pipes, and his papers.
You talked of Elinor Rumming, I had rather
See Ellen of Troy.
Her you shall see.
But credit me,
That Marie Ambree
(Who marched so free.
To the siege of Gaunt,
And death could not daunt,
As the Ballad doth vaunt)
Were a braver wight,
And a better sight.
Or Westmister Meg,
With her long leg,
As long as a Crane;
And feet like a plane:
With a pair of heals,
As broad as two wheels;
To drive down the dew,
As she goes to the stew:
And turns home metry,
By Lambeth ferry.
Or you may have come
In, Thomas Thumb,
In a pudding fat
With Doctor Ratt.
I, that! that! that!
We'll haue'em all,
To fill the Hall.
What! are they vanished! where is skipping Skeleton?
Or moral Scogan? I doe like their show
And would have thankt'hem, being the first grace
The Company of the Rosie-Crosse hath done me.
The company of the Rosie-crosse! you wigeon,
The company of Players. Go, you are,
And will be still your self, a Mere-foole, In;
And take your pot of honey here, and hogs grease,
See, who has gulled you, and make one. Great King,
Your pardon, if desire to please have trespassed.
This fool should have bin sent to Antycira,
(The Isle of Ellebore,) there to have purged,
Not hoped a happy seat within your waters.
Hear now the message of the Fates, and Jove,
On whom those Fates depend, to you, as Neptune
The great Commander of the Seas, and Isles.
That point of Revolution being come
When all the Fortunate Islands should be joined,
MACARIA, one, and thought a Principal,
That hitherto hath floted, as uncertain
Where she would fix her blessings, is to night
Instructed to adhere to your BRITANNIA:
That where the happy spirits live, hereafter
Might be no question made, by the most curious,
Since the Macarij come to doe you homage,
And join their cradle to your continent.
Look forth the Shepherd of the Seas,
And of the Ports that keep the keys,
And to your Neptune tell,
MACARIA, Prince of all the Isles,
Wherein there nothing grows, but smiles,
Doth here put in, to dwell.
The winds are sweet, and gently blow,
But Zephirus, no breath they know,
The Father of the flowers:
By him the virgin violets live,
And every plant doth odours give,
As new, as are the hours.
Then, think it not a common cause,
That to it so much wonder draws,
And all the heavens consent,
With Harmony to tune their notes,
In answer to the public votes,
That for it up were sent.
I, now, the heights of Neptunes honours shine,
And all the glories of his greater stile
Are read, reflected in this happiest Isle.
How both the air, the soil, the seat combine
To speak it blessed!
These are the true groves,
Where joys are borne,
Where longings,
and where loves!
That live!
That last!
No intermitted wind
Blows here, but what leaves flowers, or fruit behind
Tic odour all, that comes!
And every tree doth give his gummes.
There is no sickness, nor no old age known
To man, nor any grief that he dares own.
There is no hunger there, nor envy of state.
Nor least ambition in the Magistrate.
But all are euen-harted, open, free,
And what one is, another strives to be.
Here all the day, they feast, they sport, and spring;
Now dance the Graces Hay, now Venus Ring:
To which the old Musicians play, and sing.
There is ORION, tuning his bold Harp,
from flat to sharpe.
And light Anacreon,
He still is one!
Stesichorus there, too,
That Linus, and old Orpheus doth out-doe
To wonder.
And Amphion! he is there.
Nor is Apollo dainty to appear
In such a quire, although the trees be thick,
He will look in, and see the aires be quick,
And that the times be true.
Then, chanting,
Then,
Up, with their notes, they raise the Prince of Men.
And sing the present Prophecy that goes
Of joining the bright LILLY, and the ROSE.
See! all the flowers
That spring the banks along,
Do move their heads unto that vnder-song.
SARON, PORTVNVS, PROTEVS, help to bring
Our Primrose in, the glory of the spring!
And tell the Daffodil, against that day,
That we prepare new Gyrlands fresh as May.
And enterweaue the Myrtle, and the Bay.
Spring all the Graces of the age,
And all the Loves of time;
Bring all the pleasures of the stage,
And relishes of rime:
Add all the softnesses of Courts,
The looks, the laughters, and the sports.
And mingle all their sweets, and salts,
Thai none may say, the Triumph halts.
Behold the Palace of Oceanus!
Hail Reverend structure! Boast no more to vs
Thy being able, all the Gods to feast;
We saw enough: when ALBION was thy guest.
Now turn; and view the wonders of the deep,
Where Proteus herds, &amp; Neptunes Orkes do keep,
Where all is ploughed, yet still the pastures greene
New ways are found, and yet no paths are seen.
Come noble Nymphs, and doe not hide
The joys, for which you so provide:
If not to mingle with the Men,
What do you here? Go home again.
Your dressings doe confess,
By what wee see, so curious parts
Of Pallas, and Arachnes arts,
That you could mean no less.
Why do you wear the silke-wormes toils.
Or glory in the shell-fish spoils;
Or strive to show the grains of Ore
That you have gathered on the shore,
whereof to make a stock
To graft the greener Emerald on,
Or any better watered stone,
Or Ruby of the rock?
Why do you smell of Ambergris,
Of which was formed Neptunes Niece,
The Queen of Love: unless you can
Like Sea-borne Venus love a Man?
Try, put your selves vnto't.
Your looks, your smiles, and thoughts that meet.
Ambrosian hands, and silver feet,
Do promise you will do it.
Tic time, your eyes should be refreshed at length
With something new, a patt of NEPTVNES strength,
See, yond', his Fleet, ready to go or come,
Or fetch the riches of the Ocean home,
So to secure him, both in peace, and wars,
Till not one ship alone, but all be stars.
Although we wish the glory still might last
Of such a night, and for the causes past:
Yet now, great Lord of waters, and of Isles,
Give Proteus leave to turn unto his wiles.
And, whilst young ALBION doth thy labours ease,
Dispatch Portunus to thy Ports,
And Saron to thy Seas:
To meet old Nereus, with his fifty girls,
From aged Induce laden home with pearls,
And Orient gummes, to burn unto thy name.
And may thy subjects hearts be all one flame.
Whilst thou dost keep the earth in firm estate,
And amongst the winds, dost suffer no debate,
But both at Sea, and Land, our powers increase,
With health, and all the golden gifts of Peace.

A Curtain being drawn, there is discovered a Fron∣tispice, whereon the Image of Minerva is seen sitting upon a stone, placed be∣tvveene two Returns of a broken Arch, supported by two Brass sty∣tues of Mars, and Mercury, standing in no∣ches of Corinthian Work: Under, within
a Prospective is seen, a paved Gallery envy∣roned on either side and terminated with Dorike Columns, which flying away, Minerva presents her self attired in her pro∣per Habit.
Over the Entrance in a Square was Written
Corona Minervae.
WHat rare unvaliew'd Jewels are here sent,
As if the Gods themselves strived to present
Minerva with their choicest Gems, &amp; Grace
Her cabinet, as yet too mean a place
To hold such Deities, who more adorn
This presence, than the rosie fingered Morn
(Guiding the East for the uprising Sun)
Doth beautify his Carre, ready to run
His daily Circle round. It hath been said,
The Friends and Servants of the Iove-borne Maid
Are poor, except those, whom Bellonas hand
Enrols for Soldiers of Mars warlike band,
Who sometimes want their pay too: But now see
A treasure here deposited with me,
Out-valuing all the Riches of the Earth;
Three Pledges of sweet Peace, whose happy Birth
Blesses this present Age, and Crown's it so,
That former Ages past, could they but know
How fortunate this is, they all would morn
They past so soon, or else would back return,
To see an Age, wherein both Arms and Arts
Flourish at height, and both share equal parts.
Great Mistress of both Arms and Arts, it is true,
Your exploration of their praises due,
They are the Blessings, which the Ages past
Fell ignorant, and unworthy-of to taste.
And I old Time, that of those Ages saw
The first, and last, till now could never draw
Ayre, that so pleased me, as in this blessed Clime,
That Crown's with Youth the old-old head of Time.
All breath's Panchaian here: nay only this
Is the clear Western that Favonian is,
Perpetual Spring creating. Gods here
Your two-fold Discipline, in which you were
So late distracted by the world's neglect,
Shall re-assume it's ancient fair respect.
Time, you speak comfort to me.
And no more
Than my glad Daughter Truth is spreading o'er
This happy Monarchy, whose supreme head
(In highest Heaven his name is registered)
By Power and Wisdom, will the use advance
Of Arms and Arts, above despite and chance.
Time, thou hast made me happy.
No, it is hee
That hath felicitated you and me,
Who hath already by defensive Arms,
Beat back the boasts, that were intended harms,
Which Industry is crowned with a peace,
That daily will bring forth the Arts increase;
You may observe the assurance of it here
In these, who he is pleased (to grace your Sphere)
Should leave their own; each an illustrious gem,
Proper to his Imperial Diadem;
I could with Joy and wonder dwell an age
Under their smiles; from an old man, turn Page
To waite upon their persons: break my Glass,
And pick up sand by sand, ere I would pass
From their divine aspects; use all delay
Had not the Fates decreed Time must away.
But not so fast, good Time, your haste may make
Their Graces leave me too.
Isle undertake,
Sacred Minerva, they will not, but grace
You and your Arts, whilst there is time and place,
Yet ere I go, for I must stay a while
In this fair presence, and my haste beguile
With a report of an unlooked for crew,
Coming to see your Princely guests and you.
Time, what are they?
The seasons of the year
Having discovered the convention here,
All equally possessed with an ambition,
To see and to be seen without commission
From me, or from the Months, or powerful Sol,
That wont is to enfranchise, or control
Them at his pleasure, now are altogether
Broke loose, and filled with gladness, posting hither.
Cold Winter stretching out his cramped up nerves,
Strives to out-strip the Jolly Spring, who serves
Summer the like, and with her nimble feet
Runs through her heat, till they with Autumn meet;
At last, they all conjoined come on their way,
Like the whole year contracted in this day,
Each season hath a several present too,
In which they strive each other to out-do,
As if by general warrant from their Fate,
They all were always to attend this State.
It is welcome news.
Hark, they are all at hand,
And all their Heralds, both by ayre and land,
The Birds and Beasts of every season met,
In a most singular discord; hark how they set
Throat against throat; the Wren and Red-brest swell
To be above the Lark and Philomell.
The Cuckoo with the Howlet strives, and now
The bleating Lamb joys against the lowing Cow,
All in confusion, and so shall you see,
Will the contention of the Seasons be,
Till I be stickler. See they come, standby.
Winter, keep back, I claim priority.
No wanton Girl, I must have first access,
My age and honour can require no less.
I claim it from you both.
Why, Summer you?
The place to Autumn properly is due.
How can that be? Look into every race,
Doe you not find, that Youth takes the first place.
Was not the whole world young before it was old?
And what of that, proud girl? thy reason's cold,
Colder than is my Frost. Did not the Spring
Of the old world rise from an elder thing,
What else was Chaos? ho?
I mind not that.
Fond Lass, thou mind'st, say, dost, thou know not what.
I doe: for Summers strength is at full growth,
Like middle age in man.
I would be loath
To give the knowledge of declining Age
Which Autumn shadows, for the Summers rage.
You're all against me, and yet it doth appear,
None is another Friend.
Yet to the year
Wee all doe grateful Service, thou dost none.
I would hear that.
In me the Spring, it is known,
The Grass, the Grain, the Leaf, the Flower, the Fruit,
The Birds that sing, the Beasts, the Fishes mute
Take their beginnings.
Make no tedious tale,
You begin well, I ripe and perfect all.
In that you wrong me Summer: For you doe
Out of my hands take Work and Credit too.
I wrong not you so much as Autumn me;
For hee gets all the Crop from me and thee.
But all the store I gather for the year,
Winter devours, or spoils.
Pray Sirs forbear,
You increase all, you ripen all you say,
You gather all, I spend all, and best may.
I am the careful Husband of the Earth,
That gives her comforts after every Birth,
In which you wear her out, or bring her low
Past hope, that from her teeming womb should grow
Ever more timely Fruits: I kindly then
(That she may live and propagate again)
Quench her feint thirst with plenteous showrs of rain
Wherewith I fill her veins, and drown her pain.
Then having made her bed as soft below,
I cover her with Swan down, you call Snow,
Which keeps her warm, so lay I her to rest:
And for her lying-in make many a Feast
Of her late store, for mortals that doe pray
To see her blithe again another day.
Which day would never come, were it not with me.
Nor thou with it, did not I set her free.
This strife will grow unto an endless fit.
Would wee had Time here to determine it.
Time is at hand, who gives an instant charge
Distinctly, that each one of you enlarge
Himself by practise, show what you can doe,
Before the Presence you aspire unto.
What Presents, or what Pastimes you have brought
To please these Glories, whom all you have sought
T'endeere your service to.
I have the best.
Nay one at once, for whilst you all contest
Each to be first, you but confusion make;
Let Time then govern you, for order sake:
Seasons, I promise you both first and last,
And all shall equally their favours taste.
Wee all obey.
Then thus I order ye,
Out of your discord to raise harmony,
Presents you've brought I see of fruits, and flowers,
Leave them with me; whilst from their Caves and Bowers,
Each season summon forth &amp; here advance
A pair of his attendance in a dance,
To move delight.
Immediately it is done.
First Spring lead you the way, then every one
In order follow, let your Heralds sound
Each to his season, as the year goes round:
The Spring begins her part already, hark!
The evening Lamb, and morning early Lark
Lead her her way, the merry Cuckoo too
Busy in's office; Summer, now go you,
Now mark the Joy the Fawn &amp; Swallow takes,
Of which there's more then one a Summer makes,
To welcome her; now Autumn take your turn,
Lest Summers too long reign your Harvest burn:
The Thrush now chants her notes at his approach,
And the glad Bore-pig having escaped the broach
At the last Fair, runs wild about to taste
The scattered grain, and the sweet fatting mast.
Now follow Winter whilst your Robin sings,
Over the half dead earth, to wake the Springs,
In her cold veins, hark how the hoarse grown Cow
Low's for her fodder, and to whit to whow
Madge Howlet cries, for cold she'as in her feet,
But other music now for Dancers meet.
Creatures be gone, and let your Muses meet
With fluent numbers, and harmonious sweet
Voices, to sing, of all their presents here
The worth and rarity, and let the near
Adjoining Woods, Rocks, Valleys, Caves, and Hills
Resound their echoing helps to grace their skils,
While I their several presents over-view,
The Spring brings here all that is rare, and new,
Of early flowers and fruits, such as to name
In other seasons might beget a blame,
For longing Ladies sakes. The Summer brings
Gifts no less dainty, for her offerings;
So Autumn, and so Winter, so all bear
At once, the rarities of all the year.
Yet let not my dull talk attempt to wrong,
T'anticipate the Subject of their Song,
But let the woods, rocks, &amp;c.
Those Flowers your Infancy did crown,
Spring doth again to you resign,
Which now are yours, no more her own,
The Prim-rose, and sweet Eglantine,
The Daisy, Pink, and Violet blew,
All which received their scents from you.
May Blossoms now shall never fade,
You have May everlasting made.
All hearts rejoice, which now behold
Again the happy Age of Gold.
For Time to us hath brought far more
True joys, then feigned were heretofore.
Three Royal Blossoms to us hee doth bring,
Whose looks and sweetness, make eternal Spring.
May Cherries plasht up to the wall,
The Dew-berries, that in valleys grows,
Kept in your lips, shall never fall,
The Lady Grass, and the Musk Rose,
Which were your Mantle swathing band
You make yet flourish freshly, and
Sweet Fennel, for Court flatterers fit
Lives under you, you above it.
All hearts rejoice, &amp;c.
To keep the Summers heat away,
Which Earth from the young Sun receives.
The Elm, the Siccamore, and Bay
Still shade you with their lasting Leaves.
The Lilies, and the Damask Rose,
The sheets and bed, when you repose,
More white, more sweet, more soft have bin
Since they did touch your whiter skin.
To sleep when your fair eyes incline,
Hiding from Men their dearest light,
Let hearts ease, Flowers of Iessamine,
And Rose-marie your couches dight.
The holy Thistle down shall fill
Your Pillows, Bolsters, and until
You rise like Gemini, arm in arm,
Lavender cotton keep you warm.
All hearts rejoice, &amp;c.
Rising from Beds of July flowers
With Hyacinthus, and Narcissus spread
Into your lap Autumnus powers,
The Mulberries, and Raspis red,
Pomona in her Basket bears
Apricots, and Bon Christian Pears.
And Bacchus forth his hand will reach
To pluck the Damson, Fig, and Peach.
And for digestion, Condition wines
Will skinke out of his Indian gourd
Mellecottones, and Nectarines
Hee brings you from his mellow hoard,
That you shall wish, while you them taste,
Autumn and Spring may ever last:
Or, that, except them two, there were
No other Seasons of the year.
All hearts rejoice, &amp;c.
Cold Winter brings to crown your Age
Many happy years are told.
The Myrtle, Savoury, and Sage,
The semper viva, never old,
To Crown your high victorious brows
Greene laurel Garlands, Arbute boughs
With Palms, and Olives, whose increase
Are emblems of your lasting peace.
Nor is cold winter yet at all
Less frolic, then the wanton Spring:
The Robin red Breast in the Hall
Picking up crumbs at Christmas sing
When winds blow cold, and ways be foul
In Barnes, and sheep coats sits the Owl,
Whose note the husbandman delights
When as she h•ots in frosty nights.
All harts, &amp;c.
SEasons I thank you, that have all so well
Strived by your loves each others to excel
In honour of these Princes. Now by you,
Time, let my service be presented too.
TIme takes your charge, and swiftly will declare
What the devotions of Minerva are.
To you great Prince, and to each blessed Bud
Of the same Royal Stock, and linked in blood
With you, Minerva gratefully imparts
Full knowledge, and true use of Arms, Arts,
And that she, bound unto this gratitude
I by fems Trumpet will make understood
Her reason through the World, for thus she says,
Whereas of old she was sole patronise
Of Arms, and Arts, and former ages through
Had reverence, and adoration due
To her divinity; she by blind chance
Hath been of late, and blinder ignorance
Rudely opposed, oppressed, and lastly thrown
By violence from her proper mansion
Altars, and Temples, that were dedicate
To her of old, are now laid ruinate,
And she forlorn to give the World a view
Was all to seek of house, and patron too,
Labouring with that distress, unto this Isle
More gracious made by the most gracious smile
Of its most royal Sovereign, then the day
In other Lands, by Phoebus brightest ray,
She bent her course, and here she was received
By the most gracious, bounteous King relieved,
Planted, and raised to a magnificke State,
Above the reach of her malignant Fate:
For which unequal grace, she can no less
Then yield her self to be his votaress,
Of all her gifts devoting the renown
A due addition to his fourefold Crown.
In pledge whereof, first branch of that fair stem,
High Prince, here is a Royal diadem
Brought from her old, here to her Athens new
By your propitious Fate reserved for you
Upon Minerva's Altar, it is no slight
Or fabulous thing that Time shall now recite;
Tic found in my records' amongst ancient rules
That were observed in Minervas Schools
That those of Physic were not held the least
But rather most Divine of all the rest,
And that of old Physicians had relation
Amongst Princes, and the gods, and adoration
Given to their person, and their memories.
Then shined Minerva's Altar, when her wise
Athenians there, to add his renown,
Gave Hercules an Aesculapian Crown:
And after him, when by the same decree
Great skil'd Hippocrates upon his knee
Received the like, and was sent crowned thence
Physicians, and Philosophers, high Prince,
This Crown still reserves in store
Great Sir, to add unto your future four.
To this, as to the rest, you're Princely heir
Prince of Physicians borne your titles fair
And I find it (Time shall doe no wrong)
In rendering truth, though his discourse be long.
In Florence the first Dukes to crown the name
Of Cosmus, who most piously became
Patron of christian cures successively,
Were (the Physicians art to dignify)
Through many reigns called Cosmus, latter days
Have crow'nd the Medici with flourishing Bays,
All of them still employing, that they are
Patrons of all Physicians regular:
And from the illustrious Florence Medici
You draw a line from France to Brittany
It was first the honour of the Florence Crown
To take its fair denomination
From physics Art, and that but rational
In France to physic supernatural.
That titles linked, and both in one brought ore
Met the miraculous cure was here before
In the thrice happy England, so you are
By virtue of descent apparent heir
To the Physicians crown, who both inherit
Of rational, and miraculous cures the spirit.
For which, and for the favours done to her
Minerva must on you this Crown confer.
TIme while you strive to show my gratitude
I fear you are thought tedious if not rude
To press so far. But hark this Music says
Each Nation, that subjectingly obeys
Their Majesties, and you are come to show
With nimble feet the duty, that they owe
All in their kind t'expresse their skill in dance.
Glad England first, blithe Scotland, sprightly France
And civilised Ireland shall in order trace
And doe their best to gain a greater grace.
NOw Princely ones may it please you to advance
And your aspects on fresher objects glance
Of Arms, and Arts.
Pray you be pleased to walk
and pardon Time, old folks are full of talk.
GReat Britains Prince, since that your innate love
To learning doth so soon your highness move
To view Minerva's mansion, and to be
Admitted one of hers. Behold, and see
How I begin (out of a tender care
Complying with your years) books to prepare
Fit for your studies, now from which by sense
You may extract the sweetest quintessence
 Had by allusion to each Authors name
To sweeten learnings root so as the same
To others bitter might prove sweet to you
Then freely taste, and tasting cast your view
Upon each Authors name, whereby you may
Be more acquainted with them day by day.
And, as your better part shall shine more clear
I'll from themselves still make you better cheer.
HOw now, what mystery is this?
How dare you use the Prince thus, schoolmistress?
Are th'armes, and arts you promised to his view
To be picked out of books? This is a new
And a course way of entertainment too.
A banquet had ben fitter.
Such is this
TIme, if you knew but what sweet learning is
Composed in these plain books, your self would say
Both for delight, and health his Highness may
Not only taste, but as his meat devour them,
And so become a Helluo librorum.
YEt by your learned leave, Minerva, let
Before his taster here the books be set
What Author's this? pray let us here begin
Suetonius says his out side: but within
All sweet meats. Oh sweet Suetonius!
What's his next neighbour? Aulus Gellius,
All gellies, as I am true Time. What lurks
Here in this volume? Tic Friar Basins works
Most sweetly interlarded. And here's Cato
In biscuit cakes, and sugar plates in Plato.
Erasmus full of preserved Raspices,
Delicate Authors all. Now what are these
Damesins in Damascenus, and preserved
Lemons here in Levinus Lemnius served.
Apples in Apuleius. Ell's good cheer.
But stay Minerva, what good drink ha'ye here
To wash it down? oh here I see are brought
Nine Amphora's of glass; in each a draught
Of several waters, sent from several wells
And fountains, where the sacred Muses dwells,
As their nine names, which are inscribed thereon
Doe plainly show. See first from Helicon
Clio a clear immortal liquor sends,
Vrania Eridanus commends,
Thalia of Ionian pleasant streams
A drink hath sent. The ancient Poets Theames
Bacchus Minervas botle-man did bring
This sweetest Nectar from the Thespian spring,
A present from Erato: this pure clean
Fresh water seems to come from Hippocrene
Euterpe's gift: and here, and please you, sip ye
Of the clear brooke, that runs from Aganippe,
Sent by Melpomene, so of the rest,
Whose liquors come to dignify the feast,
So may you eat, and drink, and carry more
Of learning hence then Pallas keeps in store.
NOw (royal Prince) with thanks let Pallas say;
Sh'has by your brightness had a glorious day:
But you declining your Phoebean light
Will leave her shrouded in perpetual night,
Unless to show• you're pleased you leave for grace
A smile, which may illuminate the place.
So shall Minerva give a glad adieu
Withal her Atmes, and Arts to wait on you.
MY title is Suetonius, but within
A history of sweet meates doth begin,
Which so may please (Illustrious Prince) your taste
As your life may all Caesars Acts out last.
LEt the lamp wasting student, who delights
In reading Aulus Gellius Attike nights,
Make himself pale: here for a Courtiers wit
Is nourishing strong gelly much more fit.
Friar Basins works my inside well may be
Now Conjured into Collops: and yet see
There is no Puritan but would desire
Like to the devil to devour this Friar.
See Lucius Florus from his history
Renders you nothing but a Prophecy
Upon your flower deluces, which he says
Shall grace your crown bove all his Emperors baize.
IF for Levinus Lemnius you doe find
Dried canded Lemons, or a Citron rind,
Here soon read over: for at once you look
On all the hidden secrets of his book.
NOt Apuleius golden Asses story
(Glory of Princes) here is set before ye:
But golden apples of the Hesperides
Are brought your taste, as well as sight to please.
MY outside's Quinius Curtius (gracious Princes)
But see within my leaves are curious Quinces
This transposition well excused may be:
Books and their titles doe not still agree.
IF (curious reader) you desire to know,
Why the inside and the title differ so:
As Origin and Orange, make no doubt,
The Anagram's within of what's without.
OLd Damascenus says you are to young,
Sweet Prince, to read or taste of Physic strong:
Therefore which better may your palate suite,
Praescribes you damsons your liege Country fruit.
when with Erasmus you hereafter meet,
You'll find him like this Raspis sharpe &amp; sweet
Sweet like Almond butter, which ne'er came
From any butter box of Rotterdam.
CAto from Sugar Cakes not differs far,
Since into distickes both divided are.
VOuch safe of Platoes works to taste a piece,
Though not of Greek, yet full of Ambergreece.
AMongst so many books tic not ore slip't,
That you have here a Manuscript.
You may well see by what you doe find in it,
It was done by hand and never yet in Print.
OF Hermolaus Barbarus the sense
Is harmless; barberries, like Eloquence:
Which though it is sweet, hath tartness mix't among
Witness each wanton witty women's tongue.
Cardanus works these are, as some doe say,
But it seems rather that they were his play.
HEre Littleton is set before your eyes,
Because law's common, little shall suffice:
Yet is that little much to be regarded,
Because an old Coke hath it interlarded.

TO this fair Company I am to say,
You're Welcome all, to a well meaning play,
For such our Author made it, with intent
To defame none. His Muse is innocent,
A Virgin yet, that has not found the ways
Out of foul crimes to raise her self a praise;
And therefore She desires, you would excuse
All bitter strains, that suite a Satyr Muse:
And that which so much takes the Vulgar Ear,
Looseness of speech, which they for jests do hear;
She hopes none such are here, therefore she dares
Venture this story, purged from lighter airs:
A piece entire, without or patch, or maim,
Round in it self, and every where the same.
And if there be not in it, what they call wit,
There might have bin, had it bin thought so fit.
A Shepherds Muse gently of love does sing,
And with it mingles no impurer thing.
Such she presents unto your ears, and eyes,
And yet your Christian freedom not denies
Of liking, or disliking what you will,
You may say this is well, or that is ill,
Without dispute; for why should you that pay
For what you have, be taught what you should say,
Or made to judge by any square, or rule,
As if you came not to a Stage, but School?
No, he that made it, says, if you will eat,
He will not force your stomachs, there's your meat,
Which if you like tic well, if not, ell's one,
There must be difference in opinion:
Besides, he's sure what ever hee could wish,
Your taste, and not his Art must praise the dish.
The Scene Arcady.
HEre in this Grove I left her, here amongst
These Poplars, Laurels, and these Sycamors,
Guilty of her sad loss: And yet behold
They doe appear as fresh and full of verdure,
As when my Love clothed in her clearest looks,
Did give them grace and lustre: Why do we
Poor silly men bred up in cares, and fear,
The Nurse of our Religion, stoop to Nature,
That only knows to form, not to preserve
What she has made, since careless of her work,
She leaves to giddy Fortune the whole power
Of ruling us: These senseless Trees stand still,
And flourish too, and in their pride upbraid
My loss to me; but my dear Sylvia being
Natures best piece, made to excuse the rest
Of all her vulgar forms, ay me! was left
To desolation, till some horrid Satyr
Bred in these Woods, and furious in his lusts
Made her his prey, and now has carried her
Into his dark retirings, or some Cave
Where her poor Thyrsis never more shall see her.
But I will be revenged, this Wood that now
Is so bedecked with leaves and fresh array,
Isle level with the ground, until it be
As desolate as I.
Alas poor shepherd!
It shall afford no shade to any thing
That hither used to come for its relief;
But henceforth be for ever infamous:
That when some gentle shepherd passes by,
And sees this ground rent with the crooked plough,
Here, he may say, here it was that Sylvia
Was lost, and then shall turn another way.
Good Thyrsis, do not make so much of grief,
You've fed it with too many tears already,
Take comfort now.
What has my present state
To doe with comfort? if you see the trees
Widowed of leaves, the earth grown hard, and spoiled
Of the greene mantles which she wont to wear,
You wonder not if winter then appear.
By these we know that season.
And must I,
When she is gone, whose Sun-like eyes did cherish
An everlasting Summer in my life,
Feel any spring of joy to comfort me?
No father, grief with me is best in season.
But whilst you morn thus, who looks to your flock?
All as the shepherd is, such be his flocks,
So pine and languish, they, as in despair
He pines and languishes, their fleecy locks
Let hang disordered, as their Masters hair,
Since she is gone that decked both him, and them.
And now what beauty can there be to live
When she is lost that did all beauty give?
But yet, me thinks, for one that is a stranger,
Scarce known to any here, but by her name,
These plaints are overmuch: besides there are
In fruitful Arcady as fair as she,
I'm sure more rich and wise, make out of them
A choice. Nerina is as fair as she,
Dorinda's flocks are more then Silvia's,
And carry on their backs more wool then hers.
Let such base Peasants, as the Gods, do hate,
Admire their wealth, and them, for what they have,
Their bodies, and their souls material
Alike, of drossy substance are compounded,
And can contemplate nothing but the earth.
No, Silvia, whom some better God (perhaps
For the reward of my well tuned pipe)
Sent down to me made up of ayre, and fire,
Though since, because I knew not how to use
With fair respect a gift so great as she,
Has justly reft her from me, is so much,
So great a part of me, that in her absence,
Amidst my grief I feel some little joy,
To see how much of me each minute wastes,
And gives me hope that when I shall dissolve
This earthly substance, and be pure as she
(For sure the Gods have taken her undefiled)
I may enjoy her looks, and though it be
Profane to touch a hallowed thing like her,
I may adore her yet, and recompense
With my religion the proud thoughts I had
once to enjoy her.
See how fond you are
To embrace a shadow, and to leave the substance.
The love of Hylas to Nerina has
More hopes then yours; though she be young and coy
Yet whilst Nerina is, and Hylas too,
One time or other, they may both have joy
May they prove happy in each others love,
And nothing please, but what each other do,
For so lived Thirsis and his Silvia,
Whilst Silvia was, and Thirsis was her love,
What ever Thirsis piped pleased Silvia,
Thirsis admired what ever Sylvia sung
And both their joys were equal, or but one,
Well I can now remember (and it is
Some comfort to remember what I moan)
That when our loves began, how first I gazed
On her,, and she was pleased that I should look
Till greedily I had devoured the hook.
Love gave me courage then to speak my thoughts,
And gave her pity to receive my words,
They linked our hearts together: from that time
When ere she saw me strike the furious Boar,
(Though then my case she rued, and sighed full oft)
Yet was she pleased to see my victory,
And I received my vigour from her eye.
Then would she make me Chaplets of the best
And choicest flowers to adorn my head:
Which when I wore, methought I then did grasp
The Empire of the world; but what of that?
The more I then enjoyed of heavenly bliss,
The more my present grief and passion is.
Well Thyrsis, since my words doe but renew
The story of your grief, I'll leave to use
Persuasions to you; for it is time I see,
And not my words, must cure your malady
That time must put a period to my life,
Or else it never will unto my grief:
Come Boy, and under this same hanging bow,
The note which thou attemperst to my words,
Sing, and be happier then thy Master, Boy.
SHall I because my Love is gon,
Accuse those golden darts
Which to a blessed union
Struck our two loving hearts,
Since Fortune, and not Love hath cause my moan?
No, her pure Image I shall prize,
Imprinted in my breast,
More then the fairest Mistress eyes
That ever Swain possessed,
Which in eternal bonds my fancy ties.
Come then you sharpest griefs, and try
If you can pierce my heart,
But use, if you would have me dye,
The best you can of Art,
To wound a breast so armed with constancy.
Enough: I'll sigh the rest out: Go my boy,
Be careful of thy tender Lambs, whilst I
Seek out some hidden place to pine and dye.
Believe Mirtillus, never any love
Was bought with other price then love alone,
Since nothing is more precious then it self.
It being the purest abstract of that fire,
Which wise Prometheus first endued us with;
And he must love that would be loved again.
Why? who can say Mirtillus does not love,
Mirtillus, he who has employed his youth
Ever in service of the fairest Nymphs.
Mirtillus cannot love.
No, gentle Hylas?
This Ribbon, and this hair you see me wear
Are they not ensigns of a lover? say
What shepherdess whom ever Swain thought fair,
Has not Mirtillus courted, and obtained
Some favour from? but you will think because
I do not fold my arms, and sigh, and spend
The days the Gods have given me to rejoice,
In whining passion, walking still alone,
Now proud with hopes, then cast down with despair,
Unequal to my self in every thing,
I cannot love. No, Hylas, know I love
Dorinda, Cloris, Amarillis, all
Whom ever love did to his Altars call:
And when this Mistress frowns, I am content
To take another, when that flame is spent
By time, or put out by a Rival, strait
A third supplies her place, perhaps more worthy,
If less, because she loves, Isle think her so.
Alas, Mirtillus, I doe pity thee,
Pity the error which thou wander in,
That think thou love, and know not what it is,
Why what is love say you, if mine be not?
I know Mirtillus, that no lover yet
Purchased a lasting pleasure without grief;
For love has gall in it, as well as honey,
And so compounded, that who so ere will taste
The sweets of it, must take the bitter too,
Out of both which is made our constancy,
You that embrace the false delights alone,
Are a feigned lover, or more truly none.
I know not what you mean by constancy,
I'm sure I love the fairest.
Still you err,
For if you loved the fairest, none had bin
The object of your choice but my Nerina,
Nerina, she the glory of these woods
The only subject of all shepherds song.
She has her share of beauty with the rest,
And I confess she's fit for love as any;
But why she only should take up your breast,
And shut out all that have a right as good,
Whose equal, or transcendent beauty pleads
As just a title to it, as hers can do,
I cannot reach the reason, but admire
Your faith, and what you praise, your constancy.
Mirtillus, though I know your stubborn heart
Could never entertain a lovers thought,
Yet did I think you would have bin more tender
How you profaned a name so sacred as
Nerina's is, whom never any Swain
Nor rural God, nor Satyr, though he be
Of savage kind would ever violate;
Nerina in whose form love ever dwells
Attended by the Graces, which do range
Themselves in order about her comely face,
Whose breasts without are hills of whitest snow,
Within the seat of blameless modesty,
Regard of honour, and pure chastity
Nor may a loose thought ever harbour there
To tempt such lovers as you seem to be.
Is it for that you slight her?
No, I love her
As I do others, with whom I compare her.
But you that love with such intemperance,
Make of your love a glass, wherein you see
Each thing much greater then indeed it is:
My loves too cold you say, but I am sure
Yours is too hot for any to endure:
A mean perhaps twixt these I might approve
You might, if there were any mean in love.
But whilst we talk thus, see, the flame has caught you,
your beauteous flame Nerina is at hand
Dorinda with her, dare you stay th'encounter.
No let's with draw, and watch her where she gos.
DOrinda, I have mist the chase to day,
Such is my chance, and he that lodged the dear,
Told me it was the fairest in these Woods.
The Gods doe love you sure, that have left
Your thoughts so free for sport; mine are not so.
Thou art in love, I warrant, art thou not?
That angry God pursues me in his fury,
And forces me to love where I am scorned.
Haplesse Dorinda, why should he despise thee?
Many a Swain, and many a rural God
Have sought thy favours, and have sought in vain,
Now thou art justly punished with disdain.
Trust me Sweet-heart, I cannot choose but wonder,
To think that one of such a comely grace
(I doe not flatter you) could sue to any
For love, who are much fitter to be loved:
Scorn him as much as he does thee, for men
Love us no more, when we love them again.
Ah good Nerina, you have spoken truth:
It may warn other Nymphs by my example
How they profess their loves to any man:
I'm past the cure, he that wounded me,
Has left me quite disarmed, and robbed me of
All those defensive arts which men will say
Are natural and proper to our sex:
I cannot change a face, or weep one tear,
Or laugh against my will, so violently
My Fate hath thrust me to this love, that all
My faculties confess their weakness, and
My flame is got so much above my reach,
????????? can not put it out, nor smother it.
Alas poor wench, tell me who is the man
Made up of so much rigid cruelty,
That I may shun him wheresoever I go.
Do not you know him?
No.
I hear he boasts
To every shepherd, and to every Nymph,
How much I love him.
Then it must be Daphnis.
Venus forgive me, if I do disclose him,
But he will do it himself: Tic he Nerina.
Daphnis, that woes my father to win me,
He is my daily suitor, now I know
How much he owes to pity, and to thee:
Until he pay that debt, I shall despise him.
Why, do not you love him as much as I?
Love him? I know no greater misery,
Then to love one that's not of humane race,
A Tiger rather, but a Tiger is
More mild then he.
For loves sake say not so.
He has a manly feature, and does show
As much of grace in his comportment, as
The best of shepherds can him Titan made
Of better clay, then he did other men:
Although his heart be flint, and hardest rock.
Yet is his heart so hard, or are my parts
Rather unequal to his high deserts?
For he can love I see, since you he loves,
And you deserve it: had he thought me worthy,
He would have loved me too; but as I am
Worthless Dorinda, I am made his scorn,
And I had rather be so, then Nerina
Should want a servant such as Daphnis is.
Prithee no more of him, I hate his name
As much, as I would do the loss of honour,
Which he injuriously would rob me off,
No, no, Dorinda, if by love I be
In???hrald to any, Daphnis is not he.
Why, is there any can deserve you more?
Yes many, that I could tell how to love
Rather then him: for why should I love him
Whilst Hylas lives and languishes for me?
Hylas who loved me in my infancy,
And being then a boy was never well
If I was absent, nor indeed was I
Content with any but his company.
Our flocks still fed together, I on him,
And he on me did feed his greedy eyes.
Since though his years have stilt him man, he has
Continued that first love with such respects,
So full of innocence and simple truth,
That howsoever my outward coyness is,
My heart within tells me, it is only his:
Ay me! my father! prithee let's away.
But Daphnis comes with him, for loves sake stay.
PAn be as cruel to his flocks and him,
As he has bin to me.
Go, leave your cursing,
And follow her, let me alone with him.
Ha! have I found you? Ho! Nerina, stay,
Your father calls you; was not that my daughter
That made away so fast?
Who, she thats gon?
???eleeve your eyes no more, they are false to you.
Could you take one for her, thats nothing like her.
It was Cloris went from us.
First possible?
Tic true.
I thought, that it had bin my love.
I durst have sworn that she had bin my daughter,
What made she here? Twill ne'er be otherwise;
Young women will be chatting with young men,
What ere their father say. It was not so
When I was young, a boy, as you are, shepherds.
Wee are not men with him, till after fifty.
We never durst keep company with women,
Nor they with us, each one did carefully
Attend his charge: And when the time was come
That we grew ripe in years, and were staid youths,
Our Fathers would provide us wives: we did not
Carve for our selves, as now a days they doe:
But now our children think themselves as wise,
Nay wiser then their Fathers, and will rule 'em:
They can no sooner peep out of the shell,
But they must love forsooth; I would fine know,
Whether it were fit a Maid should be in love,
(I speak now of that skittish girl my daughter
Before she ask her Fathers leave and liking?
Tic true Charinus, it were not fit indeed:
Who should bestow the daughter, but the Father?
But Shepherds did you never hear, that once
There was an Age, the nearest to the Gods:
An age we rather praise then imitate;
When no mans will, nor women's was enforced,
To any bent, but its own motion:
Each followed Natures laws, and by instinct
Did love the fairest, and enjoyed their wishes;
Love then not tied to any interest
Of blood or fortune, hastened to his end,
Without control, nor did the Shepherd number
Her sheep that was his choice, but every grace
That did adorn her beauteous mind or face;
Riches with love then were not valued,
Pure uncompounded love, that could despise
The whole worlds riches for a Mistress eyes.
Pray tell me Daphnis, you are young and handsome,
The lover of our fairest Nymph Nerina:
Would you for all that fruitful Sicilie
Can yield, or all the wealth of Persia,
Change one poor locke of your fair Mistress hair,
Whilst she is yours, and you her shepherd are.
Would she were mine, I'd ask no portion.
Spoke like a Lover of the ancient stamp.
Son, son, she shall be yours: why? am not I
Her Father, she my daughter; may not I
Bestow her where I please?
Yes if she like
The man, she will bestow her self, ne'er fear it.
What? she bestow herself without my leave?
No, no, Mirtillus, you mistake my daughter.
I cannot get her once to think of marriage,
And truly I do muse to see a wench,
That in all other things (although I say it)
Has wit at will, can pin her sheep in fold
As well as any, knows when to drive them home:
And there she can do twenty things as well:
Yet when I speak to her of marriage,
She turns the head, she'll be a Dryade, she
Or one of those fond Nymphs of Deans train.
Old man, believe her not, she means not so,
She loves to keep the thing for which she is
So much beloved, I mean her Maidenhead;
Which, whilst she has, she knows to play the Tyrant,
And make us slaves unto her scornful looks:
For beauty then it self most justifies,
When it is courted, if not loved, it dies.
Well, we will think of this: Come Daphnis, come,
I see you love my daughter, and you only
Shall have her, it is I that tell you so,
That am her Father.
Thank you good Charinus:
But I had rather she had told me so.
THis day the Sun shot forth his beams as fair
As ere he did, and through the trembling air
Cool Zephyrus with gentle murmuring
Breathed a new freshness on each Tree and Plant:
My Kids as game some too, as ere they were;
All show a face of gladness but my self.
And why not you as well by their example?
Not in this life, here joy would be untimely:
The Gods reserve for me their comforts in
The Elyzian fields, or else they mock my sorrows.
O say not so, they're just and pitiful.
They are, but Father, (so I still must call you)
When in the sadness of my soul I asked
Before the Altar of our great Apollo,
What should become of me, or where my love
Bright Silvia was, whether alive or dead,
Why should the Oracle reply, Go home,
Thou shalt enjoy thy Silvia?
What more could you
Desire to hear?
I, but when greedily
I asked the time, the answer was, That day
Thou art not Thirsis, nor she Silvia.
Then in this life I'm sure it must not be,
For I was Thyrsis ever called, and she
Known by no other name then Sylvia.
It may be for your importunity
You might deserve this answer, or else is it
Because the Gods speak not their mysteries
To be conceived by every vulgar sense?
I now remember what Acrisius,
The wise and virtuous Acrisius
Was wont to say.
Why? what said he?
Does it concern me ought?
It may do son,
He bid us fly all curiosity.
Seeking to know what future time may bring
To us, which only Gods above do know,
And if at any time they do impart
This knowledge unto us, it is inwrapt
In such a mist, as we shall near see through it:
Because, said he, we have enough to doe
With what is present: the celestial powers
Would not cut of our hopes, nor multiply
Our cares, by showing us our destiny.
Oh this discourse to a despairing lover,
What comfort does it bring? for heavens sake leave it,
And me; for I am best, I find, alone:
Yet stay, there's something that I fine would ask you:
You said this Circle here about my neck
Has so continued from my infancy,
When first you took me up.
Tic true, that Circle
Hung loosely then about your neck, which since
Is filled with it. I left it there, because
I saw some letters that were wrought about it.
And may they not be read?
I think they may:
But I could never find so great a Clerk,
As could tell how t'expound the meaning of them.
My life is nothing but a Mystery;
That which I was, and that which I shall be,
Is equally unknown. Now, if you'll leave me
Unto my thoughts, they'll keep me company.
I will, but here is one come to supply me.
I, let me alone.
HE that mourns for a Mistress,
When he knows not where she is,
Let him kiss her shadow fair,
Or engender with the ayre;
Or see if with his tears he can
Swell at an ebb the Ocean:
Then, if he had not rather die,
Let him love none, or all as I.
This is the doctrine that I ever taught you,
And yet you profit not; these scurvy passions
Hang on you still: You that are young and active,
That may have all our Nymphs at your devotion,
To live a whining kind of life as this,
How ill it does become you?
True Mirtillus.
And yet I doe not envy thee the pleasure,
Thou hast in thy dispersed affections.
You would, if your head were right once; but love,
Your love does make an Ass of all your reason.
Sure, a true lover is more rational
Then you, that love at random every where.
I doe not think so; all the reason love
Has left you, to employ in this discourse,
Will hardly bring me to confess it to you.
Why? all men's actions have some proper end,
Whereto their means and strict endeavours tend:
Else there would be nought but perplexity
In humane life, and all uncertainty.
Well, what will you infer on this?
That you,
Who know no end at all of wild desire,
Must in your wandering fancy see this way
Leads unto madness, when too late you find
That nothing satisfies a boundless mind.
I, but I do confine my self to two,
Or three at most; in this variety
I please my self, for what is wanting in
One, I may find it in another.
No.
Not in another, one is the only Centre
The line of love is drawn to, must have all
Perfections in her, all that's good and fair,
Or else her Lover must believe her so.
I, there's your error, that's the ground of all
Your tears, and sighs, your fruitless hopes and fears,
When she perhaps has not so much to adorn her
As the least grace your thoughts bestow upon her.
Well, be it so; and yet this fair Idea
Which I have framed unto my self, does argue
Virtue in me; so that if she be lost,
Or dead, (ay me! the sad remembrance of
My Sylvia causes this) yet I must love,
Because the Character is indelible,
Writ in my heart, and heaven is witness to it.
Well, I'll no more of this, I'll be converted,
Rather then call this grief to your remembrance.
Why? dost thou think I ever shall forget her?
Or that where ere I set my careful foot,
As in this place, will it not tell me, that
Here Sylvia and I walked hand in hand,
And here she plucked a flower, and anon
She gave it me; and then we kiss't, and here
We mutually did vow each others love?
Nay leave good Thyrsis, I did come to tell you,
This holy-day our Royal Prince Euarchus
Being removed to his house here near adjoining,
Sent to command us to attend his person,
With all our sports and wonted merriment,
Wherein you always bore the chiefest part.
And I have heard, (it is not to make you blush)
The Princess has commended your rare Art
And handsome graces, which you gave your Music.
Come, you must go with us, for Hylas is
So far engaged in love, and near his hopes,
He will not stir unless his Mistress go.
Alas Mirtillus, I have broke my Pipe,
My sighs are all the music which I now
Can make, and how unfit I am t'attend
So great an expectation, you may see.
Yet give me leave to think on it, at night
Perhaps Isle go with you.
Till then farewell.
The gentlest youth that ever plaid on Pipe:
But see, who's here? oh, it is my other Lover,
His Mistress with him, I will not disturb him.
Shepherd, I would you'd leave to follow me.
How can I sweetest, when my heart is with you?
With me? then tell me where, and see how soon
I shall restore it you.
Oh, this is fine.
It hangs upon your eyes, where being scorched
With their disdain, and dazzled with their lustre,
It flies for ease unto your rosie lips.
But beaten thence with many a harsh denial,
Fine would it come for better harbour here,
But here for ever it must be an Exile:
For pity then fair Nymph, receive it you;
And if you can, teach it the hardness of
Your own, and make it marble as yours is.
I see he is not such a Novice as
I took him for; he can tell how to speak.
Well, if my heart be such as you will make it,
I am so much the gladder; that it is
Of strength to be a fence unto my honour.
In vain a fence is made to guard the sheep,
Where no wolf ever came.
What if within
It keep a dog of prey, would they be safe?
For my part Isle not cherish in my breast,
The man that would undo my chastity.
Then cherish me, for you best know, I never
Attempted any thing to cast a spot
On that white Innocence, to which I am
A most religious votary.
More fool you;
It may be if you had, it needed not
Have come to this.
Yes, yes, you may remember,
I blush to tell it you, when first my thoughts
Were pure and simple, (as I hope they are
Still, and will so continue, whilst I fly
Such company as you) I thought you one
Whom never any flame impure had touched:
Then we conversed without suspect together.
And am I not so still? why do you now
Fly from me thus?
The cause I shall tell you,
Since you will not remember; though it be
Unfit for me to speak, yet you shall know
How just my anger is.
Ay me! most wretched!
What have I don?
When tending of my flocks
Under the shade of yonder Myrtle tree.
(Which bears the guilt of your soul misdemeanour)
My maid Corisca cried out for my help,
Because a bee had stung her in the face:
You heard me speak in pity of her smart,
A charm, my mother taught me, (that being said
Close to the place affected, takes away
The pain) which gave her ease, but you uncivil,
Turning my curtsy to your vile ends,
Feigned you were stung too, and cried out, your lips
Had from the same sharpe point received a wound;
Prayed me to say the same charm over there.
I charitably lent my help to you,
Mistrusting nothing of your purposes,
When with ungentle hands you held me fast,
And for my thanks gave me a lustful kiss,
Can thou remember this, and yet not blush?
O impudence!
You will excuse the heate
Of my desires; still I feel that sting
But dare not ask the cure, nor did I then
Do any hurt, but since you think it was
A fault, I do repent it, and am sorry
I did offend you so.
Better, and better
He'll cry anon, he has already asked
Forgiveness of her.
Well shepherd look
You never see me more, I cannot love
At all, or if at all, not you: let this
Settle your thoughts.
Oh, it distracts them more:
But since my presence is offensive to you,
I must obey, yet if I thought you would,
When I am dead, the Martyr of your beauty,
Shed one poor tear on my untimely grave,
And say that Hylas was unfortunate
To love, where he might not be loved again,
My ashes would find rest, and so farewell
The fairest, but the cruellest Nymph alive.
What will you leave her thus?
I prithee, come,
The sentence of my banishment is past,
Never to be recalled.
Are these the hopes
You fed upon? O what a thing in Nature
Is a coy woman! or how great a fool
The man is, that will give her leave to rule.
ALas my Hylas, my beloved soul,
Durst she, whom thou hast called cruel Nerina,
But speak her thoughts, thou would not think her so,
To thee she is not cruel, but to her self:
That law which Nature hath writ in my heart,
Taught me to love thee, Hylas, and obey
My father too; who says I must not love thee?
Oh disproportiond love and duty, how
Do you distract me? if I love my choice,
I must be disobedient; if obedient
I must be linked to one I cannot love.
Then either love give me my liberty,
Or nature from my duty set me free.
NErina, since nor tears nor prayers can move
Thy stubborn heart, Isle see what gifts can do:
They of my rank, whom most do deem unworthy
Of any virgins love, being rough, and bred
To manage the estates our fathers left us,
Unskild in those hid mysteries, which loves
Professors only know, have yet a way
To gain our wishes: first we get the father,
He knows our pleasures, and gives his consent:
The daughters eyes being blinded with our gifts
Cannot so soon spy our deformities,
But we may catch her to: This Alcon says,
A man whom age and observation taught
What I must learn; yet though most women be
Such as he has delivered, my Nerina
Seems not to have regard to what I give,
But holds me and my gifts both at one rate.
What can I hope then out of this poor present,
A looking-glasse, which though within our Plains
It is seldom seen; yet I have heard in Cities,
They are as common as a locke of wool:
However, if she take it, I am happy,
So Alcon tells me; and he knows full well,
(He gave it me) that whosoe're shall look
Her face in it, shall be at my dispose:
In confidence of this I will present it,
And see my Fortune; sure I must needs speed:
My friend, her father comes along with her.
But oh my Fate! is not that Nymph Dorinda
Which keeps them company? Yes, sure it is she;
A curse light on her importunity.
Her father urges something, and I hope
On my behalf; let me observe a little.
ANd as I oft have told you, I doe wish
To see you wise.
Is she not so Charinus?
Does she say any thing that's out of reason?
Do not tell me of reason; I would hear
Of her obedience, therefore I say, be wise,
And doe as I would have you.
What would you
Have her to doe? you see she answers not
To contradict you.
I will have her answer
To what I now demand, that is, to marry
Daphnis, and I will have her love him too.
Love him Charinus? that you cannot do.
Her body you may link in the rights of Hymen,
Her will she must bestow her self, not you.
Oh, she was borne to be a plague unto me.
Why should she wish or hope for any thing,
But what I'd have her wish or hope for only?
Come, to be short, answer me, and directly;
Are you content to marry Daphnis, say?
What is your pleasure Father?
You do not hear
It seems, but what you list; I ask you once
Again, if you will marry Daphnis, speak?
Sir, I would marry whom you please to give me:
I neither can, nor ought to make my choice,
I would refer that to you: But you know
My inclination never lay to marry.
I know you shall do that which I command.
Now heaven forbid, that I who have thus long
Vowed to Diana my Virginity,
To follow her a Huntress in these Woods,
Should yield my self to the impure delights
Of Hymen, and so violate my faith.
A fine devotion, is it not? to make
A vow, and never ask your Father leave;
The Laws will not permit it to be so.
The vow Charinus, is not made to men:
The Laws have not to doe with that which is
Sealed and recorded in the Court of Heaven.
Do not tell me of vows, I'll have her marry;
And marry Daphnis: Is he not rich and handsome?
Ay me! I would he were nor rich, nor handsome,
It may be then he would regard my sufferings.
No, Daughter, do not you believe, you can
Catch me with shifts and tricks: I see, I tell you,
Into your heart.
Alas, I would you did,
Then your discourse would tend another way.
Yes, you have made a vow I know, which is,
Whilst you are young, you will have all the Youth
To follow you with lies and flatteries.
Fool, they'll deceive you, when this colour fades,
Which will not always last, and you go crooked,
As if you sought your beauty lost in the ground:
Then they will laugh at you, and find some other
Fit for their love; where if you doe as I
Command you, I have one will make you happy.
Ay me most miserable!
Now I'll come in,
And see what I can doe with this my gift.
Look now, as if the Fates would have it so,
He comes just in the nick of my discourse:
Come, use him kindly now, and then you shall
Redeem what you have lost, my good opinion.
O most ungrateful chance! how I doe hate
The sight of him!
Were it to me he came,
How happy would this fair encounter be!
Daphnis, you're welcome, very welcome to me,
And to my Daughter: what is that you have there?
A present, which I mean to give my love.
See but how true a lover Daphnis is;
His hand is never empty when he comes:
Welcome him Daughter, look what he has for you.
O good Charinus, none must look in it,
But she herself to whom it is presented.
I am an old man, I, and therefore care not
To see my withered face, and hoary hair:
Give it that young thing, she knows what to doe with it.
Daughter, come hither, use him courteously,
And kindly too: (Be sure you take his gift.)
Daphnis, I'll leave you both together here;
My sheep are shearing, I can stay no longer.
Farewell old man; health to my dearest Mistress
And to you shepherd.
Daphnis am not I
Worthy to have a share in your salute?
How can I give thee part of that, whereof
I have no share my self?
If you would love
There, where you are beloved again, you might
Make your content such, as you would your self.
If you, Nerina, would vouchsafe to love
Him that loves you, and ever will, you might
Make your content such as you would your self.
Shepherd, I oft have wished you not to trouble
Me and your self with words: I cannot love you.
As oft Dorinda have I spoke to you,
To leave to trouble me: I cannot love you.
Will you then slight my love, because it is offered?
Will you then slight my love, because it is offered?
Some body else may love you, I cannot.
Some body else may love you, I cannot.
O cruel words; how they do pierce my heart!
O cruel words, how they do pierce my heart!
How can I help it, if your destiny
Lead you to love, where you may not obtain?
How can I help it, if your destiny
Lead you to love, where you may not obtain.
It is not destiny that injures me,
It is thy cruel will, and marble heart.
It is not destiny that injures me,
It is thy cruel will, and marble heart.
No Daphnis, it is not hardness of my heart,
Nor any cruelty that causes this.
Then it is disdain of me.
Nor is it that:
I do not see in Daphnis any thing
To cause disdain.
Why do you not reply
In those same words to me, malicious Echo?
Pray leave me, I have other business now
To trouble me; if you disdain me not,
Fair Nymph, as you pretend, receive my offer.
What's that?
My heart.
I will gentle Daphnis.
O importunity!
Give her thy heart,
She has deserved it, for she loves thee, Daphnis.
First I would tear it piecemeal here before you.
O me unfortunate! O cruel man!
Stay good Dorinda, I'll go with thee, stay.
Let her go where she will, behold sweet saint
This Mirror here, the faithful representer
Of that which I adore, your beauteous form,
When you do see in that how how lovely are
your looks, you will not blame my love.
If I refuse it,
My father will be angry, let me see it:
Here take thy glass again: what ails my head?
I know not where I am, it is so giddy:
And something like a drowsiness has seized
My vital spirits.
How do you love? not well?
Heavy of the sudden; Isle go home, &amp; sleep.
So, let her go, and let this work awhile.
She cast an eye upon me as she went,
That by its languishing did seem to say,
Daphnis I'm thine, thou hast overcome at last:
Alcon, th'hast made me happy by thy art.
Q. TEll me what you think on earth
The greatest bliss?
A. Riches, honour, and high birth.
Q. Ah, what is this?
If love be banished the heart,
The joy of Nature, not of Art?
What's honour worth, or high descent?
Or ample wealth,
If cares do breed us discontent,
Or want of health?
A. It is the order of the Fates,
That these should waite on highest states.
Cho. Love only does our souls refine,
And by his skill
Turns humane things into divine,
And guides our will.
Then let us of his praises sing,
Of love, that sweetens every thing.
Madam, you're overheard.
I care not Delia.
Although my liberty, and free discourse
Be here denied me, yet the Air is common:
To it then will I utter my complaints,
Or to thee, friend, to whom my love will dare
To show the secrets of my heart, for others
I do not care, nor fear; so thou be faithful.
Madam, I have no life, but what I wish
May be employed to do your beauties serice;
My tongue is ruled by yours: what you would have
It speak, it shall; else further then my thoughts
Nothing shall venture, that you leave to me:
And those my thoughts, Isle keep to such restraint,
As they shall never come within my dreams,
Lest they betray your counsels: this I vow
Religiously by???
Hold, I will not
Have thee to swear, nor would I thou should think,
That I so much suspect thee, as to urge
An Oath; I know thou hast too much of goodness
(That's bred within thee) to betray a trust:
And therefore without further circumstance,
I'll let thee know my fortunes, part of which
I'm sure the hast heard already.
Madam, I have,
And wished that they had sorted to your wishes.
I thank thee Delia, but my evil Genius,
That has pursued my innocence with hate,
Brought me from thence where I had set my heart,
Unto this cursed Court, which, though it be
My place of birth and breeding, I doe find
Nothing but torment, and affliction in it.
I guess the cause sweet Madam, but that's past
And now forgotten: if you clear your looks,
Your Father will enlarge you, and ne'er think
On what you did, but that you are his daughter.
Alas my Delia, thou dost mistake,
My liberty is of no worth to me,
Since that my love, I fear, will ne'er be free:
Nor doe I care what idle Ladies talk
Of my departure, or my strange disguise,
To colour my intents; I am above
Their envy or their malice:
But for the unlucky chance that sent to me
The over-curious eyes of him I hate,
Thou know the man.
Yes, you mean Cleander,
Son to Eubulus, who is now your keeper:
What Star directed him to find you out?
His love forsooth, for so he coloured his
Unseasoned boldness, told me, he was not able
To want my sight: and so, when every one
Had given o'er their strict enquiry of me,
He only with too much officiousness,
Observed me in the Woods, walking alone:
And when I would have shunned him (which perhaps
Had I not done, he had not so well known me)
He came, and uttered, as his manner was,
His tedious complaints; until at length
He brought me with him, making no resistance:
And to ingratiate himself the more,
He said he would convey me where my Father
Should have no knowledge of me: I refused it;
Willing however to be rid of him.
And now you know, it is a full Month since
I did return to Court, but left my heart
Behind me in those fields, wherein I joyed.
Madam, has not the Court more pleasure in it,
Then the dull Country, which can represent
Nothing, but what does taste of solitude?
It was something else that carried you away.
Tic true my Delia; for though thou were
Privy to my departure, yet the cause
Thou could not tell, which I will now unfold,
And think I trust my honour in thy hands,
And maiden modesty: it was love that did it.
Love Madam? sure it is impossible
You should find any thing there worth your love.
Thou know the shepherds, that do dwell about
This place (which for their entertainments only
The King my father built) did use to come,
As now they do, being sent for unto Court:
I ever liked their sports, their harmless mirth,
And their contentions, which were void of malice,
And wished I had bin borne just such a one.
Your state is better Madam as you are.
But I confess the rather, cause there was
One amongst them, of a more comely grace
(Though none of them did seem uncomely to me)
Called Thyrsis; and with him me thought I could
Draw out my life, rather then any other,
Such things my fancy then suggested to me:
So well he sung, so passionate his love
Showed in his verse, thereto so well expressed,
As any one would judge it natural:
Yet never felt he flame, till this of me:
Often he came, and oftner was desired
Of me, nor did I shame in public there
Before my father, to commend his graces;
Which when I did, the whole Court, as they use,
Consented with me, and did strive to make them
Greater then I, or any else could think them:
At last I was surprised, I could not help it;
My Fate with love consenting, so would have it.
Then did I leave the Court, I've told thee all.
Tic strange, but Madam, though in that disguise,
How could you hope, a stranger, to be loved
Of him you held so dear?
I feigned my self
Of Smyrna, and from thence some Goats I had,
And Sheep, with them a rich commodity.
Near him I bought me land to feed them; he
Seemed glad of it, and thinking me a stranger,
Used me with such civility and friendship,
As one would little look for of a shepherd;
And did defend me from the avarice
Of the old shepherds, which did think to make
A prey of what I had. At length I saw,
He did address himself with fear to me,
Still gazing on me: knowing my love to him,
I easily believed he loved me too:
For love, alas, is ever credulous.
And though I was resolved, having my end,
(Which was no more, then to discourse with him)
Nev???r to let him know what flame I felt:
Yet when I saw his tears, and heard his vows,
(Persuasive speakers for affection)
I could not choose but open to his view
My loving heart; yet with this caution,
That he should ever bear respect unto
My honour, and my virgin chastity:
Which then he vowed, and his ambition
Never was more then to attain a kiss,
Which yet he hardly got: thou see, sweet Delia,
How willingly I dwell upon this Theme.
But can thou help me now, that I have opened
My wound unto thee.
Alas, I would I could
Invent the way to cure you; I should soon
Apply my help: yet stay, this day it is
The shepherds come to Court.
It is true, they come;
But what is that to me, if Thyrsis come not?
Or if he come, how shall he know me his,
Or I enjoy his company?
Let me alone
To work out that.
Thou dreamst, thou can not do it.
Isle undertake it, but how shall I know him
Without inquiring, which must breed suspicion.
True, and beware thou ask; the Majesty
Which sits upon his brow, will say it is he,
Thyrsis my love; but yet perhaps at this time,
If I my self not flatter, thou shalt know him,
By his eyes cast down, and folding of his arms,
And often sighs, that interrupt his words.
For if his sorrow wears the liveries,
Which mine does for his absence, by these signs
Thou shalt descry him.
These are silent marks:
Yet will I not despair to find him out.
But when thou hast, what wilt thou say to him?
Give me but leave to use my mother wit,
You would be gone together, would you not?
Thou speak my thoughts: do this, and I will crown
Thy faith, thou shalt be Queen in steed of me.
If you could crown me with your virtues Madam,
I should be a Queen indeed; in the mean time,
As I am Delia, Isle do this business.
Do it, and when the hast don, the God of love
Reward thee with thine own desires for this.
Madam withdraw, I hear your keepers coming.
SIr you have put a bridle on my passions,
And given my soul the liberty it wished:
I now entreat your pardon, for beginning
A thing of so great consequence without
Leave and advice from you.
Tic well Cleander,
It will behove you then to be reserved,
And locke this secret up: for it is no jesting
With Kings that may command our lives and fortunes:
You now perceive her whom we call the Princess,
To be your sister, and the love you bear her,
Must be a brothers friendship, not a lovers
Passionate heate; but yet she must not know,
That I her father am, and you her brother:
And trust me son, had I not seen despair
Of life in you, which this love brought you too,
I should not have revealed, what now you know.
It was a comfort Sir, I doe confess,
That came in time to rescue me from death,
So great her scorn was, and my love so violent.
Now you're at peace, I hope.
I am: but if
I be too curious in asking where
The Kings son is, I shall desire your pardon:
For sure it were injustice to deprive
So great a Prince, of that which he was borne too.
You are too far inquisitive; yet because
I have engaged you in a secret of
As great importance, this I will not hide.
The King, I told you, when his wife grew near
The time of her delivery, sent to know
Of our great Oracle, whether the child should be
Female, or Male, and what should be their fortune.
What said the Oracle? have you the answer?
It only was imparted unto me,
And this it is which I have never shown
To any but the Queen: here take and read it.
If ere thy issue male thou live to see,
The child thou think is thine, thine shall not be,
His life shall be obscure: twice shall thy hate
Doom him to death. Yet shall he scope that Fate:
And thou shalt live to see that not long after,
Thy only son shall wed thy only daughter.
This Oracle is full of mystery.
It is; and yet the King would needs interpret
That should it prove a man-child, it was a Bastard:
And being loath that one not of his blood
(As he conceived by this) should be his heir,
Told me in private, that if it were Male,
He would not have it live, yet fearing most
To publish his dishonour, and his wives,
He charged me not reveal it unto any,
But take the child, and see it made away,
And make the world believe it was still borne.
And did you so?
No, for indeed I durst not
For any thing, become a murderer.
How did you then?
I went unto the Queen,
Showed her the state she was in, and besought her
To be as careful of me, as I was
Of her, and we would work a better end
Then she expected, so we both agreed;
That if the Child she then did labour with,
Proved to be Male, I should with care conceal
The birth of it, and put a female child
Instead of it, which I was to look out.
It fortuned that your Mother then was ready
To be delivered of your sister, and
Time and good fortune did conspire to save
The Kings child, and to make my daughter Princess.
But what did then become of the young Prince?
The Queen protesting to me, that it was
The Kings own Child, conjured me to preserve it,
Which as mine own I could not; for already
Many took notice that my child was female:
And therefore I was fine to publish her
As dead, and buried an empty coffin.
I rode forth with the child a full nights journey,
With purpose to deliver it to some
Plain honest man, that would be careful of it,
And not inquisitive to know whose child
It was, but give it breeding as his own:
When being frighted with the noise of Arms
Of some out-lawed thieves, that did infest
The place, I made all haste I could to scope 'em,
Considering my charge; for that I knew
If I were taken, though they spared my life,
The charge I had, must needs betray me to
The King, and then I could not hope for mercy:
I laid it down there covered closely o'er,
A circle about his neck, wherein was writ,
In characters known only to my self,
And to the King; in which I used to cloth
Secret dispatches, when I writ to him
From foreign States, and within the Circle
I graved the Kings less Seal, which then I kept.
Some Gold besides, and Jewels there I left,
That whosoe're should find him, might with that
Defray the charge of his education;
However, next day I purposed to return
With speed, and carry it to some abode.
But did the Queen know this?
She did not,
Till my return next day: then when I told her,
The child was thence removed where I had left him,
Belike those thieves had carried him away.
It is probable.
How could the Queen take this
So sad a story?
With such impatience,
That being weak before, she shortly died.
But yet sir, with your favour might you not
Have made inquiry after him?
I durst not,
For fear of being discovered; on your life
Take heed how you reveal this.
I am charmed.
Then let us watch my daughter, for I fear
The flight she made was for some other end,
Then for retirement which she does pretend.
Henceforth I shall obey her as my Princess,
And love her as my sister, not my Mistress.
You shall do well: Come, let us to the King.
IT was my dream, and I will send it to her;
Though I my self by her too cruel sentence,
Must never see her face.
What paper's that?
Love-verses, as I live; what's here, a Dream?
Nay, I will read 'em, therefore stand aside.
Sleep, thou be calmer of a troubled spr??te,
Which leadst my fancy to that sweet delight,
Wherein my soul found rest, when thou did show
Her shadow mine, whose substance is not so:
Wrap up mine eyes in an eternal night.
For since my day springs only from that light
Which she denies me; I account the best
Part of my life is that which gives me rest.
And thou more hard to be entreated, then
Sleep to the heated eyes of frantic men;
Thou that can make my joys essential,
Which are but shadows now, be liberal,
And out-doe sleep, let me not dream in vain,
??nlesse thou mean I ne'er shall sleep again.
Alas poor fool! will she not let thee sleep?
I knew I should be mock't, but I'll divert him;
What are these thou hast brought along with thee?
The Masquers, Hylas, these are they must trip it
Before the King: dost like their properties?
What Paris, and Oenone, the old story?
But newly made, and fashioned to my purpose;
Brought hither to make good my own positions
Against the company of puling lovers;
Which if I doe not, and with good effect,
Let me be one my self; and that's a torture
Worse then Apollo laid upon the Satyr,
When the rude villain durst contend with him:
Look this way Hylas, see Oenone here,
The fairest Nymph that ever Ida blessed,
Court her departing shepherd, who is now
Turning his love unto a fairer object;
And for his judgement in variety
See how the seaborne Goddess, and the Graces
Present their darling Helena to him.
Be happy in thy choice, and draw a war
On thee, and thine, rather then set thy heart
Upon a stale delight: Do, let her weep,
And say thou art inconstant. Be so still;
The Queen of love commands it: you that are
The old companions of your Paris here,
Move in a well paced measure, that may show
The Goddess, how you are content for her
Fair sake to leave the honour of your woods:
But first let her, and all the Graces sing
The Invitation to your offering.
COme lovely boy unto my Court,
And leave these uncouth woods, and all
That feed thy fancy with loves gall,
But keep away the honey, and the sport.
Cho. Come unto me,
And with variety
Thou shalt be fed, which Nature loves, and I.
There is no Musique in a voice,
That is but one, and still the same.
Inconstancy is but a name,
To fright poor lovers from a better choice.
Cho. Come then to me, &amp;c.
Orpheus, that on Euridice
Spent all his love, on others scorn,
Now on the banks of Heber torn,
Finds the reward of foolish constancy.
Cho. Come then to me, &amp;c.
And sigh no more for one love lost,
I have a thousand Cupids here,
Shall recompense with better cheer
Thy mis-spent labours, and thy bitter cost.
Cho. Come then to me, &amp;c.
Shepherds, if you have any pity, come,
And see a woeful spectacle.
What is it
That can be worth the breaking of our sports?
The gentle Nymph Nerina.
What of her?
The last of her I think, she lies a dying,
And calls to speak with you.
Curse of your follies;
Do I live here whilst she is dying there?
But shepherd, what disease is it that so soon
Could spend his force upon her? she was well
This morning, when she made poor Hylas sick.
I know not, I am sent unto the well
Of Aesculapius to fetch some water
For her recovery. I must be gone.
Shepherds here let us end. I think we are
Perfect in all the rest: This night the King
Must see it, resolve on that.
We are all ready.
Then lets away, and see what will betide
This gentle Nymph Nerina.
We will go with you.
HOld up thy head good child, see he is come;
Bring me the water quickly, whilst there is
Some life in her: now chafe her good Dorinda.
All is in vain, I cannot live; dear father
Farewell: what shepherd's that lies on the ground?
Is it not Hylas?
Yes, it is he, Nerina.
Alas poor shepherd, tic my greatest grief,
That I have grieved him, I would beg life
For nothing but to make him satisfaction.
Hylas, what on the ground? look up and speak
Alas, he's dead.
It cannot be: good father
Let me go to him, and but touch his ear,
It may be that my voice may have more virtue.
Do what thou wilt sweet heart: see my poor child
How charitable she is, being half dead
Her self, she pities others.
Mark her fineness,
Now at the brim of death: she kisses him:
And took this way to mock her simple father;
O fine invention! sure a women's wit,
Does never fail her.
Hylas, Hylas, speak,
Nerina calls thee; speak to thy Nerina.
What cannot love doe? It revives the dead,
He's come to himself again.
What God is it,
That has the power to return my soul
From the Elision fields?
It is no God,
A Goddess rather, Hylas. It is Nerina,
Look where she is.
Ah then I do not wonder
I cannot die, when my best soul comes to me:
Shall wee live ever thus?
How fine I would
Forthy sake, Hylas, but it cannot be:
I feel a heavy sleep sit on my head,
And my strength fails me, help me sweet Dorinda,
Farewell for ever: oh I die, I die.
And must I then be called to life again,
To see my life expire before my face?
You Fates, if you will take a ransom for her,
Then take my life: but you are sure of that
You'll say already: for in her one death
Two lives are forfeit: Nerina, gentle Nymph,
The cause why now I live, open these eyes
Once more, and I shall flourish like those plants
The sun gives life to: else I fall, and wither,
Leaving behind nought but a worthless stem:
Speak to thy Hylas, sweet Nerina, speak.
Ay me! my daughter, had thou lived, perhaps,
I might have seen thee married to Daphnis,
Now we must see thee buried: Ay me!
Hylas.
She lives, give me some more of that,
That water there, see now she comes again:
O gentle destinies, but spare this thread,
And cut a thousand courser, speak Nerina,
Give me some comfort, give thy father some,
Or else behold three lives fall in thy death.
You Fates, that keep the account of all our days,
Add but one minute to my life, that I
May quit my soul of those two heavy burdens
Which now oppress it: Dry your eyes good father,
Remember that the Gods doe send us nothing
But for our good; and if my journey be
Shorter then yours, the less will be my trouble:
Will you forgive me father, that I have not
Paid so much duty to you; as I owed you:
Take my good will, I pray, instead of it.
See her good Nature: I child, it is enough,
Thou always were obedient.
Shall I dare
To speak my thoughts, and so discharge my soul
Of one load yet?
I, doe my child, speak freely.
I've heard you say, that no sin was so heavy
As is ingratitude.
It is true, Nerina,
How she remembers what her father said!
Then be not angry, if I now must tell you,
That this poor shepherd, whose swollen eyes you see
Covered with tears, for many years now past
Has courted me: but still with such a love,
So full of truth and gentle services,
That should I not requite him with my love,
I should be guilty of ingratitude:
Therefore before I die, spray give leave
That he may have my dying heart, which living,
I still debarred him of. Hylas, thy hand.
O stay a little death: here, take thou mine,
And since I cannot live the wife of Hylas,
Yet let me die so: Sir, are you content?
I am, with any thing that pleases thee.
Tell me, are you so Hylas?
O my love,
Ask me if I would live amongst the Gods,
But ask not this: Sir, have we your consent?
You have, it is in vain now to deny it:
You see, Dorinda, what her vow's come to.
Then let me die, take me into thy Arms,
Sweet love, you'll see my coffin strewed with flowers,
And you Dorinda, will you make a garland?
I die a virgin, though I die his wife.
Alas, she's gon.
She's dead, and do I live?
Look to the shepherd there: oh my Nerina!
Vex not her soul, I pray, with often calling,
You see she's dead.
Then there is no hope left:
Pray help us shepherds now to bear her hence;
You'll come I hope to see her in her grave.
HEre I am come unto a place, where grief
They say has no abode. In Princes Courts,
I've heard there is no room for loves laments:
For either they enjoy, or else forget,
Thrice happy men, to whom love gives such leave:
It may be that this place, or people may
Work so with me, and melt this frozen heart:
Ah fool, that can believe the change of place,
Or ayre, can change thy mind; the love thou bear,
Is woven so within thy thoughts, that as
Out of this piece thy Sylvia wrought for thee,
Thou can not take her name forth, but withal
Thou must deface the whole: so Thyrsis think
The wind that here may rise, or heat, or rain
Thou moist avoid, thy love will still remain,
And when thou die, then may it die with thee;
Till then resolve to endure thy misery.
This is the garden, which I saw him go to,
And that is he, for all the marks she gave me
To know him by, he bears.
A heaviness
Weighs down my head, and would invite me to
Repose my self; Isle take the offer, here
Isle rest awhile, for I have need of it.
How if I be deceived, and this should prove
Another man: what then? I can excuse it;
He's laid already, and I fear, asleep,
Isle stay until he wake, but then suppose
That any body come, and take me here,
What will they think of me? Best wake him: shepherd:
It is a handsome youth, see what a grace
Shows it self in his feature, such a face
Might take the heart of any Lady living,
I, though she were a Princess: shepherd: what
Not yet? his sleeps are sound.
Ah Sylvia,
Preserve thy life, oh let me die; Alas
I do but dream; me thought I saw my self
Condemned to die, and Sylvia to save me,
Offered her self, and would needs die for me:
It was a sweet shadow, let me court this dream.
He must not sleep again: shepherd look up.
Who envies me this small repose, indeed
I do not often sleep; ha, who are you?
Sent to thee, from thy Sylvia, shepherd rise
And follow me.
Doe I dream still? what are you?
Came you from heaven where my Sylvia is,
And must I thither? whosoever ere you are,
An Angel, or a fiend, in such a name
You come, as I'm conjurd to follow you:
But I must die first: Here is to be with thee.
Stay, hold thy hand, I live, thy Sylvia lives
To make thee happy, if thou wilt go to her.
You're habitat like those I've seen at Court,
And courtesy they say is ever there,
Yet mingled with deceit: if you do mean
T'abuse me for your sport, this way will prove
Too sad to raise mirth out of. There's no ill
That I have done to you, or any else,
Unless my constancy be here a sin.
His griefs have made him wilde, I have no time
Left me to use persuasions, or to make
This truth apparent to you; on my word
You shall be safe, and if you dare believe me,
Isle bring you where your love is; follow me.
Why should I doubt, or fear to go with her?
Ill does he call for physic, whom the Law
Has doomed to die: There's no condition
Can prove worse to me then my present one.
Pray lead me where you please, I'm sure of this,
To one that's desperate, no way's amiss.
ALl leave the room. Eubulus, I'm resolved
To hold an easier hand over my daughter
Then I was wont: Therefore I sent Cleander
To bring her to my presence, though she have
Wronged her great birth and breeding by her follies,
Yet I consider that she is my daughter,
And this restraint cannot but harden her
In her fond resolutions: have you sought
By all the means you can to sift the cause
Of her departure?
Sir, I have tried,
By all the ways that fit a subject, to
Enquire a truth of one that is his Princess.
And what have you discovered?
Nothing more
Then what my son Cleander did before.
I have heard his relation: but I wonder
How for a whole months time, she should abide
Within our confines, when so great a search,
Through all our Countries, and loud proclamations
Were made for her recovery.
Tic true.
She herein was ingenuous, and confessed,
That she foresaw what search would be made for her,
Therefore with some about her she had plotted,
To hire a bark, that might convey her hence,
In a disguise to Smyrna, where she stayed,
Till time did fit her; that with safety
She might return in habit of a Nymph,
Unto the place, where then Cleander found her:
But why she left the Court, she will not tell.
I will not force her to it: some little time
Perhaps may make discovery of that secret:
But unto thee my faithful Counsellor.
(As unto one my heart hath still bin open)
I will discover what my purpose is,
In sending for these shepherds to my Court.
I should believe, they' resent for to delight
Your Majesty, as they were wont.
No Eubulus,
But for a greater end; I fear my daughter,
And therefore I have sent for her to see
These sports, with purpose to observe her looks,
For I suspect she loves some shepherd there.
It cannot be: she will not stain her birth
With such ignoble love; yet I confess,
Revolving all the causes of her strange
Departure, I could fix on none but that.
Well, if she do so, I will let her forth,
Forth of my blood, and whosoere he be
Whose fortune marked him out to be the object
Of this her love, shall find Ixions Fate,
He shall embrace a shadow; by my life
They both shall die.
O my gracious Lord,
Remember she's your daughter.
I, thou still
Dost plead for her, but yet am I her King
As well as father, private men respect
Their profits, and their private interests
Of kindred, but the actions of a King,
To honour, and renown must be directed:
Consider that, and then thou wilt forget her.
Cleander, welcome, how does Calligone?
Is she not glad to come unto our presence?
Why dost not answer? art thou frighted man?
I know not how to answer any thing,
Unless your Majesty will sign my pardon.
Why what's the matter, speak, and speak it freely
Then know great sovereign that when I went
As full of joy, as speed, with your glad message,
I found the Princess.
What, not dead, I hope?
Dead to her honour.
Ha!
In short my Lord,
I found her walking in the garden with
A shepherd, (more of him I cannot tell)
But she was habitat in that attire
She wore, when from the woods I brought her home,
I slipped away, not being seen by them,
And if you please to go, perhaps great Sir,
You still may find them there.
How now Eubulus,
Are my presages true? shall I then sleep
With this disgrace, and let my neighbour Princes
Mock at my humble fortunes, when they hear
The daughter of Euarchus matched her self
With a base shepherd? Go Eubulus quickly,
Here take my signet, let this be your warrant
To put them both to death.
How? both my Lord?
I, both.
Your daughter too?
Why do you question me?
Have I not said they both shall die: dispatch.
Let me not see thee, till they both be dead.
What hast thou done? thou rash inhumane boy?
Deprived thy father of a child, thy self
Of thine own sister, whom but now thou knew.
Well may the King take that dear life away,
Which he did never give: I will go tell him,
I am her father: but I loose my life
If I do that, as guilty of a treason.
Go Murderer, had thou no pity in thee?
Sir I do feel so much of grief within me,
For this my act, that if my blood will serve
To save her life, Isle make no price of it:
Yet could I not imagine, that the King
Would have bin so enraged; or if he would,
I had no time to think of it before.
No time? who bid thee hasten to the ruin
Of thy poor father, and thy family?
The messages which come to do us hurt,
Are speedy: but the good come slowly on,
But Sir, remember what a straight we're in:
It will concern us, to invent some way
To save my sister, though the shepherd die;
He will deserve it for his bold attempt.
Go take thy way, whither thou wilt thy self,
That way is best, which leads me to my grave.
What luck is this? This is more haste then speed:
I am resolved (though my life lie at stake)
To stand the fury of th'inraged King:
Who knows but he may be as sorry for
His sudden act, as I for mine. It is here
To save her, though it cost her lover dear.
NAy stay a little Thyrsis, we are safe,
My wary keepers now are with the King.
Madam, for my poor self I doe not fear,
But when I think on you, and how your name,
And state that is so eminent, must needs
Receive a certain scandal, and foul blot,
If we be seen together, blame me not,
Though I do fear or doubt: What cruel fate
Angry with men, that gave us hearts alike,
And fortunes so asunder; you're a Cedar,
I a poor shrub, that may look up unto you
With adoration, but ne'er reach your height.
But Thyrsis I do love you; love and death
Do not much differ, they make all things equal:
The Monuments of Kings may show for them
What they have bin, but look upon their dust,
The color, and the weight of theirs, and beggars,
You'll find the same: and if amongst living men
Nature has printed in the face of many,
The characters of nobleness and worth,
Whose fortune envies them a worthy place,
In birth, or honour. When the greatest men
Whom she has courted, bear the marks of slaves,
Love sure will look on those, and lay aside
The Accidents of wealth and noble blood,
And in our thoughts will equal them with Kings.
It is true divinest Lady, that the souls
Of all men are alike, of the same substance
By the same maker into all infused,
But yet the several matters which they work on,
How different they are I need not tell you:
And as these outward Organs give our souls
Or more, or less room, as they are contrived,
To show their lustre; so again comes fortune,
And darkens them, to whom the Gods have given
A soul divine, and body capable
Of that divinity, and excellence:
But it is the order of the Fates, whose causes
We must not look into: But you dear Madam,
Nature, and fortune have conspired to make
The happiest alive.
Ay me most wretched!
What pleasure can there be in highest state,
Which is so crossed in love, the greatest good,
The Gods can tell how to bestow on men?
Yet some do reckon it the greatest ill,
A passion of the mind, formed in the fancy,
And bred to be the worst disease of reason.
They that think so, are such as love excludes,
Men full of age, or foul deformity.
No Thyrsis, let not us profane that deity:
Love is divine, the seed of every thing,
The cause why now we live, and all the world.
Love is divine, for if religion
Binds us to love, the Gods who never yet
Reveled themselves in any thing to us
But their bright Images, the fairest creatures,
Who are our daily objects; loving them,
Wee exercise religion: let us not
Be scrupulous, or fear; the Gods have care
Of us, and of our piety.
But take heed,
We cannot be too wary: many things
Oppose our wills, yet if you think it fit,
And this nights silence will so favour us,
Weal go together: if we quit this Country,
It is no matter, all the world to me
Will be Arcadia, if I may enjoy
Thy company, my love.
No Sylvia,
(Pardon me dear, if still I call you so)
Enjoy your fortunes, think how much your honour
Must suffer in this act: For me I find,
It is enough that I have ever loved you:
Now let me at the light of your bright eye,
Burn like the bird whose fires renew her nest,
I shall leave you behind me to the world,
The Phoenix of true love and constancy:
Nor is that bird more glorious in her flames,
Then I shall be in mine, though they consume me.
It must not be, for know my dearest shepherd,
I shall not tell one minute after thee;
I find my soul so linked to thine, that death
Cannot divide us.
What then shall we do?
Shall we resolve to live thus, till we gaze
Our eyes out first, and then lose all our senses
In their succession? shall we strive to leave
Our souls breathed forth upon each others lips?
Come let us practise: this our envious Fates
Cannot deny us.
What a sight were this
To meet her father? This would make him mad
Indeed, and execute his rage himself.
Madam, your father's here.
Ha Delia!
Cleander, is it thou? then I'm betrayed
The second time, but must thy fortune make thee
The instrument of my undoing still?
Shepherd, I will not honour thee so much
As to enquire thy name) thou hast don that
Thou wilt pay dear for: And I hope thy death
Will take away the blot of this disgrace
Th'hast laid upon the Princess.
If you do this,
You'll make me happy, it was this I looked for,
My trivial acts of life, this of my death
Will recompense with glory; I shall die
To save my Princess, and whats more, to save
The life of her life, her unspotted honour.
Blessed Lady, though you are as innocent
And chaste as purest Virgins, that have yet
Seen nothing in a dream to warm their blood,
Yet the malicious world, the censuring people,
That haste to cast dirt on the fairest things,
Will hardly spare you, if it once be known
That we were here together: As for me,
My life is nothing but variety
Of grief and troubles, which with constancy
I have borne yet: tic time that now I die,
Before I do accuse the Gods that have
Brought me to this, and so pull on my death
A punishment. Will you be merciful,
And end me quickly?
Shepherd, know for this
Thy resolution, which in noble bloods
I scarce have found, I willingly would grant
What thou desire. But something must be known
Before that time either from you, or you.
I know Cleander, it is me you aim at:
I do confess this shepherd is my love;
For his sake I did leave the Court, and thee,
Unworthy as thou art, to be his Rival.
Madam, my duty bids me speak to you,
Not as a lover now; but as you are
My Princess, and the daughter of my King.
I would not for the world have those desires
Which I had then; for sure my bolder love
Would have transgressed the limits of all duty,
And would have dared to tell you, that this shepherd
Was not a match for great Arcadias heir,
Nor yet one fit for my Competitor.
It is not his outward feature, (which how fair
It is I do not question) that can make him
Noble, or wise: Whereas my birth, derived
From ancient Kings, and years not far unsuiting
Those of your own; to these my education
(To you well known,) perhaps might make me worthy
Of being your servant.
Can thou look on this,
This piece Cleander, and not blush to boast
Thy follies thus, seeking to take away
From his full virtue, if but this one act
Of his appear unto the world? (as know
It shall; for Isle not shame to publish him,
Though I die for it) will it not devour
Thy empty glories, and thy puffed up nothings,
And like a grave will bury all thy honours?
Do, take his life, and glory in that act,
But be thou sure, in him thou shalt kill two.
What mean you, madam?
Not to live a minute,
After his death.
That all the Gods forbid.
No, they command it rather, that have made
Our souls but one: Cleander, thou were wont
To be more courteous; and I do see
Some pity in thee: if not for pities sake,
Yet for thine own good spare this life, and take
Mine; for thou know, when I am dead, this kingdom
Thy father will inherit, or thy self.
Tic but the waiting of an old mans death,
Who cannot long out-live me: will you do it?
Sir, you are noble, I do see you are,
You loved this Lady once: by that dear love
(With me it was a conjuration
To draw my soul out, whilst I was so happy)
I do beseech you spare her noble life,
Her death will sit full heavy on your soul,
And in your height of Kingly dignities
Disturb that head, which crowns will give no rest to.
To take my life is justice.
Rather mine;
I have offended in first loving him,
And now betraying him unto his end.
Be not so cruel madam to your self
And me, to envy me a death so noble.
Sir, as you hope your love shall ever prosper,
Your great designs, your fights, (what ere they are)
As you do hope for peace in your last hour,
And that the earth may lightly cloth your ashes,
Dispatch me quickly, send me to my death.
A strange contention! Madam will you please
A little to retire: Tic your honour
That I do strive to save, as well as life:
Pray do not cross my purpose, I shall do
Something that you may thank me for.
Cleander,
Save but the shepherd, and Isle crown thy merit.
Will you be pleased to enter here?
But swear
That thou wilt save him.
I shall do my best,
I dare not swear, for tic not in my power
To do what you command.
But will you swear
To let me know of it before he die?
I will by heaven.
Then I take my leave.
And Thyrsis be thou sure, what ever Fate
Attends thy life, the same does govern mine:
One kiss I must not be denied.
Fie Madam,
How low is this in you?
Then thus we part,
To meet again, I hope.
Down stubborn heart,
Wilt thou not break yet? In my death I find
Nothing that's terrible, but this Farewell
Presents my soul with all the pains of hell.
I'm sorry that this business went not forward.
So am not I, we're rid of so much trouble.
Yet it is strange the King should send for us,
And when we were come, command us to return.
No, it is not strange, it was his will to do so:
But if you have an itch of dancing, friends,
Next holy-day we will have it amongst our selves,
And every man shall dance with his own sweetheart:
What say you shepherds, will it not be as well?
It will be very fine. But where is Thyrsis?
I, where is he! you went along with him,
Where did you leave him?
Walking in a garden,
Where when I came to call him, he was gon.
It seems he cares not for our company.
Neither for yours nor any mans besides.
He is much altered, since his love was lost;
Methinks he is nothing like the man he was.
Well then beware my friends how you engage
Your selves in love: He is a fair example,
And Hylas too, he's drooping for his mistress;
Daphnis is mad, they say; if you have a mind
To die, or to run mad, then be in love.
See where he comes, in what a fume he is.
I do not like his fumes: pray let's away.
HE will not now be found the Traitor: but
Where ever he be, nor heaven, nor hell shall save him
From my revenge. To take away the life
Of that sweet innocent, without whose sight
He knew I could not live, and to do this
Under the name of friendship: O you Gods,
What age can parallel so great a mischief?
This is his Magic glass, which had the virtue
To make her mine, but sent her to the Gods.
Blessed soul, I will revenge thy death, and then
Isle follow thee my self.
Daphnis, my love,
Whither so fast?
Now love deliver me;
And must you come to trouble me? Be gon;
I cannot stay to hear thy tedious follies.
Were all your vows then made but to abuse me?
Are there not pains to punish perjured men?
And will they not ore'take you?
Alas poor fool,
The Gods doe laugh at such slight perjuries
As come from lovers.
Yet it was no conquest
To deceive one that would be credulous,
A simple maid that loved you.
Then I see.
There is no end of women's reasoning;
Or else this might suffice thee, that I cannot
No nor I will not love thee.
Never?
Never.
Go cruel man, and if the God of love
Will hear my prayers, thou in thy love shalt thrive,
As I in mine: that when thou art forlorn,
Thou moist remember her thou now doest scorn.
IT was the cruel practise of my Fate,
That lifted me unto the height of bliss,
To make my fall the greater: for no sooner
Did I enjoy the love of my Nerina,
But in a moment she was taken from me:
A love so dearly bought with sighs and tears,
So many years spent in the gaining her,
And lost in one poor minute: It is better
Always to live a miserable life,
Then once to have bin happy: she is dead,
And I alive that cannot live without her:
Tic fit that I die too; but by what means?
By violence? No, that the Gods forbid.
A lingering grief, I need not fear, will kill me,
When every day I shall repair, as now,
Unto her tomb, and consecrate my tears,
And tearing sighs unto her blessed Ghost,
Some pitying God, when I'm disolved away
Upon her ashes, will congeal those tears,
That they may cloth her dust: whilst some kind shepherd
Passing this way does write this on her grave.
See here Nerina, that from Hylas eyes
Fed her fair flame, now in their dew she lies.
Thus I will have it, so the words shall run.
IT shall not serve thy turn, malicious shepherd,
Though thou hast tan my love away by tricks,
Yet all thy cunning, and thy practises
Shall not secure thee from my revenge.
Are these the thanks I have for that rich jewel
Which I bestowed on thee, ungrateful man?
Yes, for a poisoned glass, a precious jewel.
I do confess it was poisoned.
Do you so?
And to do me a curtsy, you kilt her.
Yet hear me, she is not dead; and if she be,
??????e pay my life for hers.
Be sure thou shalt:
But can thou hope for such a strong illusion
To mock my sense? did I not see her dead?
She did appear so: what you thought was death,
???s but a lethargy: though I profess not
To draw the Moon down from the sphere she is in,
Or make the sun look bloody by my Art,
Yet am I well informd in everything
This glass is made of, and I know th'effects
???t works, and can discourse 'em.
Let me hear them.
Have patience, and you shall; the Glass you see
Of this rare Mirror which I gave you, is
Made of a Memphian stone, that has the power
To bring a deadly sleep on all the senses:
With it, to make th'effects more strong, is mingled
The Quintessence, extracted in a Limbecke,
Of the Torpedo, which has such a quality,
That if the Fisher touch it with his hook,
A poison strait will creep through all his veins,
Till it benumme his senses: This compounded,
And made into a glassy metal, soon
Reflects upon the eyes of him that looks in it
A sleepy poison, which will stupefy
The vital parts. Yet, he that gave it me,
Taught me the Cordial water, which he used
To restore spirits and heate unto those vitals;
And I have brought it with me for our purpose.
What have I wronged you now? or is my present
Worthy the thanks you give me?
Yet you were
Too blame, that you'd not tell me this before
I gave it her.
In that I showed my love;
For I did fear your resolution,
Though I were certain of recovering her.
And what must now be done?
Here, where you found me,
????????? saw her laid, and buried in the clothes
??????e wont to wear, her father so would have it:
????????? waited on the funeral, with purpose
???o see the stone laid hollow on her grave,
???or fear of hurting her.
It was well don.
Here Isle apply my medicine; you shall see
Whether I lie or no.
Let's lose no time.
????????? long to see my love alive again.
Then help to lift this stone; see where she lies,
???he same Nerina?
She is dead, I see.
Love is still full of fears: give me the water.
Here, but take heed it do not spoil her face.
If she be dead, you need not fear the change
Of any color; what a child is love?
The Gods, I see, will not let beauty die:
???he breathes, she stirs, her eyes begin to open
As after sleep. O miracle!
How now?
???s she alive? will you believe your sense?
Now I have put her in your hands, be sure
You do not let her go, and lose no time.
If you give credit to her words, you're lost.
What cannot women's words and flatteries
Effect with simple lovers? think on that,
Be confident: Isle leave you to your Fate.
You Gods where am I now? what place is this?
What light is this I see? are the same things
Seen in this new world, as they are in the other?
Or in the grave do men see waters, trees,
As I do now, and all things as I lived?
But sure I live still: if I doe, why then
Was I here buried amongst these flowers?
Sure I am dead; but yet I walk and speak,
And I have heard that those who once are dead,
Can never use their voice, or action:
But who is this I see here? Daphnis, ha!
Are you dead too, as well as I?
No sweet,
I live to be the servant of Nerina.
I, so said Hylas, whilst I lived with him.
She thinks of Hylas still, what shall I do?
But tell me Daphnis, in what place am I?
In Daphnis heart you live, and ever did.
And so said Hylas, when we lived together.
O Gods again? Nerina think not on him,
You must love me.
Must they in this new world,
As they have changed their lives, so change their loves,
I never shall do that.
You are deceived.
You are not dead.
Not dead? how came I hither then?
By my device to keep me company.
But will you not declare, how I came hither?
Ask me not that, but go along with me.
Stay shepherd, whither would you have me go?
Where love and silence shall befriend us best.
But tell me Daphnis, was not I once dead?
You were, but I your servant changed that death ???nto a sleep.
I know not what you mean,
Can you change death into a sleep?
I can,
And did for love of you.
This is a riddle,
Pray let me know what you do mean by it.
Come with me, and you shall.
Nay, tell me first.
Then know fair shepherdess, that when I saw
My love, my services, my gifts, my vows,
Did all return to me without your love,
I had recourse unto this Artifice,
A pleasant one of loves Invention,
Which you may well remember.
What was that?
I did present you with a looking glass.
You did, but what of that?
Nothing at all.
Pray go this way with me.
But tell me first.
That cast you into this deep lethargy:
Such was the Magic of it.
To what purpose
Did you do this?
To make you mine.
Yours, Daphnis?
How could you hope that without my consent?
My services I thought would merit it,
Besides the world not dreaming but you were
Dead, and here buried, we two might live
Together without being known to any.
But could you practise tricks on those you love?
Now you are paid with your own Artifice:
For know, ther's none that can dispose of me
But Hylas, who has long preserved my heart,
And now my father, (whom I did resolve
For ever to obey) has made him mine,
By giving his consent, which had not bin
But for this trick of yours.
Why then it seems
You do not love me.
Love you? know I had
Rather embrace my death again, then thee.
Then it is no time to dally, come along,
Or I will force you.
Help me shepherds, help.
Fool, stop your mouth, no humane help shall save thee
This is the place where I am come to pay
My tears first sacrifice, upon this tomb
That glories in the spoils of all my wealth.
Hylas, come help me, see thou not that Daphnis
Will ravish me?
Ha, what doe I hear?
The voice of my Nerina? so she spake
When she did live; but now, alas, shoe's dead:
Some Devil mocks me with a vision,
And voice unto it.
Will you see me ravished
Before your face? O Hylas! oh my Love!
Tic she, it is no vision??? hold Ravisher,
My love thou can not take without my life.
What noise is this?
Some shriek much like a women's.
Oh help my love, Mirtillus.
Shepherd, hold,
Let go this Nymph.
Or death, or victory
Shall crown my enterprise.
Who makes this out-cry?
Sir, I shall cool you, if you be so hot.
My daughter here? was she not buried?
Away foul spirit, away; let's part these shepherds.
O father, do you think that I am dead,
I am alive, as you are; touch me, see.
She is alive indeed: how came thou hither?
Daphnis, whom you would have to be my husband,
Brought me to this supposed death and grave.
By what strange means, Nerina?
By the glass
You bid me I should take: he has confessed
To me that it was poisoned.
Can it be?
Can Daphnis doe this? he had little reason.
She was a fool to cry, I should have pleased her
Ere this perhaps.
Here Hylas, take my daughter,
For she is thine: you Daphnis, I did further
In all I could, till you would find a trick
To put your self beside her.
I forgive him:
For though it was ill meant, yet did it sort
By accident unto my good.
But will
Our Laws permit a Ravisher to live?
No, no Montanus: let him live, and envy
Our present happiness.
Cover, you Gods,
The world in public ruin, or else show me
A way to hide my shame.
What will he doe?
He will go hang himself: what plots hee had
To fool himself with!
They that practise tricks
Find them as jades, that throw 'em first, then kick 'em
As his has don.
Come shepherds, lets away,
And solemnise these nuptials.
Stay Montanus,
Did the King send for you?
He did.
And how?
The message came from Thyrsis.
I'll go with you:
It is strange the King should send for you: pray heaven
Thyrsis have done no mischief there, he's handsome,
Of a good grace, and moving eloquence:
Perhaps some Lady may have taken him
Up for her self, and he, Isle lay a wager,
Will be so squeamish, that if Sylvia
Come in his mind, he ne'er will do her reason,
And then her plot will be how to betray him:
Would I were in his place.
I would thou were,
So he were safe.
I would comply, ne'er fear it;
They live a heavenly life of love in Court,
To that which we do here; a Mistress there
Will satisfy the longings of her lover,
And never trouble Hymen for the matter:
Then if they like not, they may look else-where,
Thou wilt be punished one day for thy mischief.
The mischiefe's in my tongue, I ne'er do any.
No, I have heard that Stella was with child
By thee, and thou must father it.
Who, I?
Take me at that once, fathering of children,
And make me common father of them all:
A child's a pretty thing, and I should joy
To see one of mine own. Isle tell thee truth
Montanus, by this hand I never lay
With any woman in my life.
How then?
You' have courted all; who is it that Mirtillus
Has not professed to love?
I do confess it,
And that is all I could do; for before
I could get earnest of any ones love,
To whom I made address; even she would say,
You have another mistress, go to her,
I will not be her stale: and so by this means,
Nor this, nor that would do me any reason.
You had ill luck, it seems, it was not your fault.
No, for if they would believe me, I did swear
I had no other. Pray, Montanus, tell me,
For you have known the several ways of wooing,
Which is the best, and safest?
O Mirtillus,
Gray hairs have put the wilder thoughts of love
Out of my head; cold blood and frozen limbs,
Fright all those heats away, in place of which
Discretion and sobriety should come.
But I have heard, old men doe sometimes love.
They dote, Mirtillus, give it the right name;
In old men's bloods Cupped does quench his flames.
But as we go, Isle tell thee, not to love
At all is best; but if you needs must love,
Love one, and seek no further, thou wilt find
Enough of her, if once she prove unkind.
THere is no way to avoid the shame of this:
Each shepherds boy that sings unto his flock,
Will make me the scorned subject of his song.
Had you bin sudden as I counselled you,
You had not failed: but you young men doe never
Go through with any thing.
For heavens sake,
Call not that wicked deed to my remembrance.
I do repent me, that I ever began it:
I would not for a world have ended it:
Nerina's chaste, and fair, and I a villain.
Leave me, I pray, for something tells me, you
Did first advise me to this damned act.
Nay, if you prize my friendship at this rate,
I'll leave you to your penance.
This old man
Is full of malice, nothing troubles him;
The ills that he has done, fly from his thoughts,
And he rejoices that he did, them quaintly:
I have begun my youth, as if I meant
To have my age so punished as his is,
Who's this? Dorinda? I have done her wrong:
I sued for love to her first, which obtained,
I stuck disgraces on her; let me ask
Forgiveness now, for it were too much to hope,
That she should love one stained with such a deed
As I have done, so foul and impious.
Great love, if yet thou art not satisfied
With all the wrongs I have sustained for thee:
My blood, I hope thy anger will appease,
Which thou moist glut thy self with.
Gentle Nymph.
I've been too gentle, doe not mock me with it:
O Daphnis, is it you? this is not well,
To mock me thus; your looks when armed with frowns,
Gave not my heart so deep a wound as this.
I mean no scorn, I come to ask your pardon
For what I've done already, not to heap
More sins upon my head.
It is very strange.
But true Dorinda, will you spit upon me?
Take your revenge, for I have well deserved it.
But is this serious Daphnis? oh take heed,
Crack not my heart with such a load of grief
And scorn, so pressed as this is; if you doe,
The Gods will punish it: for though they have
Neglected me thus long, they will revenge
Such injuries as these.
My many ills
Discredit my repentance: if my words
Can find no faith with you, believe my tears,
Indeed they are not feigned.
Even so you looked
When first you stole my heart: but I forgive you,
What ere become of me; I still must love you.
Forgive me first, and then I will begin
By my endeavours and true services
To deserve something of you, if not love.
There is not that hard heartedness in man
Which I did think, for he repents I see:
O Daphnis, if thou mean not this as scorn,
Take me into thine arms, and I will be
Thy slave.
O say not so, let me
Rather be thine; it will be pride in me
To be ambitious of it.
Oh my heart!
What sudden joy thou strik'st into it now!
But yet methinkes I fear thou dost not love me.
Why should you fear? by Pan you are to me
What ere you can imagine; equal, above
All that I ere thought fair; and if you be
Content to hide my faults, and take me to
Your nuptial bed, (which yet I dare not hope)
But if you will, when ere that day shall come,
Th'embraces of my love and me, shall be
Such as the Cyprian boy from our abundance,
Shall take his fires to kindle other hearts,
Yet leave with us a flame, which we will cherish,
And keep alive unto eternity.
Women are ever credulous most then,
When knowledge of the truth would but afflict them:
I dare not now distrust you, though I knew,
What you have said, were false, it has a semblance
Of such a pleasing truth: Give me thy hand,
And take thou mine; whilst we walk thus entwined
I shall think Daphnis never was unkind.
WHat, are they dead? Is the Kings will obeyed?
No Sir, they live, and Hymen in his bands
Has tied them both; the happiest knot that ere
Knit two such equal hearts, and loves together:
Oh I am ravished with the news, my joy
Is greater now, then if sh'had been the daughter
Unto our King, and I had married her.
I am amazed; pray Jove thou be not mad.
Somewhat exalted, Sir, beyond my my self,
But yet not mad: Go, Sir, unto the King,
Tell him, Cleander lives to make him happy.
Sure thou wilt come unto thy self anon,
Prithee bethink thee.
Yes Sir, I doe think,
And know that I have news to make him live,
And you an age yet longer.
This is strange.
Tic true.
But what is true?
Tic true, my Sister
Shall be a Queen.
If she doe live, I think
She will; but yet you know we were commanded
To cut that life off.
But your hasty son,
That came so speedy with a fatal message,
Was not so forward now; they both doe live,
And both are married.
Jupiter forbid.
The Fates command it, it is their proper work???
The Shepherd is a Prince, your Prince, and mine,
And married to my Sister,
Ha! what's that?
Prithee digest thy troubled thoughts, and tell me
What Prince is this thou mean?
Archigenes.
Thou dream, it cannot be.
No, then come forth
You royal pair, and testify your selves.
Father, your blessing.
Ha!
Nay, I've told all.
She knows she is your daughter: look Sir here;
Here we must place our reverence.
Who's this?
Not yet? then look upon this Circle, that
You know for certain, though you know not him.
It is it, it is the same: Archigenes
Son of Euarchus and Eudora:
This is my character, and this my seal.
Sir, I have heard that by your piety,
My infant life was saved: now by the goodness
Derived from you, unto your son, I have
Not only found my life, but my content,
The sum of all my hopes, this Lady here,
Without whose love my life had bin a torment.
And I the happiest maid that ever was
Conducted by the power of simple love,
Have found in place of him I thought a shepherd,
A Princely lover.
Rise Calligone:
The Gods are just I see, that favouring
My innocence, have brought this match about.
But say Cleander, what Fate guided thee
To this discovery?
Sir, should I tell you,
How many ways I cast to save my sister
After the fatal message which I brought,
I should be tedious, and keep you from
What you do long to hear: In short I soon
Resolved to make away this royal shepherd.
And knowing that in this affair, to keep it
Secret, dispatch was needful, I commanded
A servant, of whose faith and courage I
Was well assured, to kill him in my presence.
It is strange, thou should be present at a murder.
It was a necessity was laid upon me,
Because I would be sure to see him dead,
I bad him choose his death, when manfully
He said, he cared not how, so he might die.
I knew to strangle him, was the readiest way,
Which death himself was ready to embrace:
This his so noble resolution,
Did stand me from mine; my servants hands
Trembled for fear,
Presaging what a sin they were to act:
He bad him be assured he would not start,
And often called him to dispatch him quickly.
What man could have a heart for such a deed,
And see his face.
The Prince, before he came
To put the fatal twist about his neck,
Besought me, as I ever hoped for peace,
I should preserve the Princess: this I promised,
And whatsoever else he would desire:
He answered, nothing now, but hasty death,
Then stripping off his doublet, I espied
With a quick eye this golden Circle here,
When hastily I bid my servant hold,
And let him go. He asked me why I staid,
I told him that about his neck was Sacred,
He would have rent it off, but I forbad it.
What did you then?
Sir, I did well remember
What I had heard of the Oracle and you,
Which with the computation of his years,
I found agreeing to make up a truth
Which you before assured me; then I asked him,
Whether he would be married to the Princess
Before he died; he thought that I had mocked him,
And said, I practised Tyranny upon him:
Then went I to my sister, and desired
The same of her; in fine, I saw them both
Join hands and hearts together, but the Prince
Thought this a dream of life, which certain death
Would wake him from, until I did assure him
Of his great State, and that his love, whom now
He thought to be the Princess, was my Sister,
All which I did refer unto your knowledge.
This day for ever let it holy be,
And you whom love has brought through deep despair,
Unto the haven of your happiness,
Enjoy each other freely. Of you brave shepherd,
(But now my Prince) I shall enquire anon
Where, and with whom you lived.
Sir, the shepherd,
???home I call father, stays without; Montanus
???s name is, by whose gentle hands, (as he
as often told me) I was rescued first
???om cold and death, since under his kind roof
???osterd, and bred as his.
Go call him in,
???o'er welcome both, you may applaud your fortune
???hat brought you such a Shepherd: stay all here,
Whilst I go to the King. This day will add
???ore years unto his life, when he shall say,
???o day shone brighter on Arcadia.
We are both come to doe our duties to you.
as being sent for, and Mirtillus with me,
???o celebrate your joys: within a while
???he Shepherds and the Nymphs will all be here.
My old companions shall be welcome all,
???s you are now; I never shall forget
???our curtsy, nor theirs.
Nor I the Nymphs
???nce my dear fellows; but you Mirtillus,
???hough you did scorn to love, yet could you sing
???ell, if you listed of it.
Can shepherds then
???espise that Deity which we adore?
Madam, I reverence it in you,
???he perfect'st pattern of a constant lover,
???nd in the honour of your Nuptials
????????? have a Song, which if your Grace will hear,
Twill entertain the time.
Let it be sung.
Hymen, God of marriage bed,
Be thou ever honoured:
Thou, whose torches purer light,
Deaths sad tapers did affright,
And instead of funeral fires,
Kindled lovers chaste desires:
May their love
Ever prove
True and constant: let not age
Know their youthful heate t'asswage.
Maids prepare the Genial bed,
Then come night, and hide that red
Which her cheeks, his heart does burn:
Till the envious day return,
And the lusty bridegroom say,
I have chased her fears away,
And instead
Of virgin head,
Given her a greater good,
Perfection, and womanhood.
Thanks good Mirtillus, this indeed was proper
Unto your subject.
Your thrice happy match,
???eing but now come to my knowledge, made me
???ontract my self into a straiter room,
???hen the large subject might afford.
The King.
Although I wonder, yet I doe believe thee,
???y faithful Councellor.
Your Majesty
???as found me always real, but this truth
???he Oracles accomplishment will prove,
???hat did foretell their match.
Read it, Eubulus,
???nce more; and then call in my son and daughter.
If ere thy Issue Male thou liv'st to see,
The child thou think is thine, thine shall not bee.
Calligone is not my child, proceed.
His life shall be obscure, twice shall thy hate
Doom him to death, yet shall he scope that Fate.
It is true, that twice I did command his death,
???erst thinking him a bastard, then a shepherd,
???or his offence; the Gods are just: Go on.
And thou shalt live to see that not long after
Thy only son shall wed thy only daughter.
This was a riddle ever till this day,
Their marriage has made it plain. Eubulus,
Call in Archigenes, and call thy daughter
The fair Calligone, that I may power
My blessings on them: And I long to see
Those characters, thou writst about his neck,
That I may call him mine.
See where they are.
Archigenes come nearer, for thou art
A stranger yet, although thou be my son:
The Character is plain, it is the same
Eubulus writ to me: you heavenly powers
Give me a heart that may be large enough
T'expresse my joy for these, and thanks to you.
My royal father, (for I am instructed
To call you so) If I have don amiss
In hasting to this match, I ask your pardon.
And I for daring to aspire so high
Without your leave.
Rise both, you have my blessing.
But who are these?
This is the shepherd Sir,
Who took me up first, whom till now I called
Father, and he deserved it for his care.
Eubulus, this is he, Montanus, first not?
He is delivered to me for the shepherd,
Of whom your Majesty may if you please
Be well informed of all those passages,
I left untold.
Some other time we will hear them.
Let him be well rewarded.
Sir, these shepherds
Are come to entertain your Majesty,
With their devices, as their custom is,
In which sometimes, until my fortune changed,
I bore apart.
Let them be feasted all,
And study something new to celebrate
These Nuptials, which I will have proclaimed
Throughout my kingdom: and Eubulus, see
That every thing be fitted for their honour.
Come let us to the Temple, that we may
With holy sacrifice appease the Gods,
Whose great decrees, though we did strive to hinder,
Yet are they now fulfilled. It is in vain,
T'oppose the Fates, whose laws do all constrain.
TO you most royal pair, whose lives have brought
Virtue in fashion, and the world have taught,
That chaste innocuous sports become the stage
No less then civil manners do the age:
We dedicate this Piece, but yet with fears,
To have displeased so chaste, so tender ears;
Which, if you free us from, we will call this play
No more the Shepherds, but our Holy-day.

SInce tic become the Title of our Play,
A woman once in a Coronation may
With pardon, speak the Prologue, give as free
A welcome to the Theater, as he
That with a little beard, a long black cloak•,
With a starched face, and supple leg hath spoke
Before the Plays the twelvemonth, let me the•▪
Present a welcome to these Gentlemen,
If you be kind, and noble, you will not
Think the worse of •e for my petticoat.
But to the Play, the Poet bad me tell
His fears first in the title, lest it swell
Some thoughts with expectation of a strain,
That but once could be seen in a Kings reign,
This Coronation, •e hopes you may
See often, while the 〈◊〉 of his Play,
Doth proph•sit the Conduits may run wine,
When the days triumph's ended, and divine
Brisk Nectar swell his temples to a rage,
With something of more price to invest the stage▪
There rests but to prepare you, that although
It b• a Coronation, there doth flow
No undermirth, such as doth lar'• the scene
For course delight, the language here is clear.
And confident our Poet bad me say,
Heel bate you but the folly of a Play.
For which although dull souls his pen despise,
Who thinks it yet too early to be wise.
The nobler will thank his muse, at least
Excuse him, cause his thought aimed at the best,
But we conclude not, it dost rest in you.
To c•nsure Poet, Play, and Prologue too.
But what have I omitted? is there not
A blush upon my cheeks that I forge•t
The Ladies, and a Female Prologue too?
Your pardon noble Gentlewomen, you
Were first within my thoughts, I know you sit
As free, and high Commissioners of wit,
Have clear, and active souls, nay though the men
Were lost in your eyes, they'll be found again,
You are the bright intelligences move,
And make a harmony this sphere of Love,
Be you propitious then, our Poet says,
Our wreath from you, is worth their grove of Baize:
MAke way for my Lord Protector.
Your graces servants.
I like your diligent waiting, whore's Li∣simachus?
I waite upon you sir.
The Queen looks pleasant
This morning, does she not?
I ever found
Her gracious smiles on me.
She does consult
Her safety in it, for I must tell thee boy,
But in the assurance of her love to thee,
I should advance thy hopes another way,
And use the power I have in Epire, to
Settle our own, and uncontrolled greatness;
But since she carries her self so fairly,
I am content to expect, and by her marriage
Secure thy fortune, that's all my ambition
Now, be still careful in thy applications
To her, I must attend other affairs,
Return, and use what art thou can to lay
More charms of love upon her.
I presume
She always speaks the language of her heart,
And I can be ambitious for no more
Happiness on earth then she encourages
Me to expect.
It was an act becoming
The wisdom of her Father to engage
A tie between our families, and she
Hath played her best discretion to allow it;
But we lose time in conference, waite on her,
And be what thou were borne for, King of Epire, 
I must away.
Success ever attend you.
Is not the Queen yet coming forth?
Your servant,
You may command our duties,
This is the Court star Philocles.
The star that we must sail by.
All must borrow
A light from him, the young Queen directs all
Her favours that way.
Hes a noble Gentleman
And worthy of his expectations:
Too good to be the son of such a Father.
Peace, remember he is Lord Protector.
We have more need of Heavens protection
In the mean time, I wonder the old King
Did in his life design him for the office.
He might suspect his faith, I have heard when
The King who was no Epirote advanced
His claim, Cassandra, our Protector now,
Young then, opposed him toughly with his faction,
But forced to yield had fair conditions,
And was declared by the whole state next heir
If the King wanted issue; our hopes only
Thrived in this daughter.
Whom but for her smiles
And hope of marriage with Lasimachus,
His Father by some cunning had removed
Ere this.
Take heed, the Arras may have ears
I should not weep much if his grace would hence
Remove to Heaven.
I prithee what should he do there?
Some Offices will fall.
And the sky too, ere I get one stair higher
While hee• in place.
Lisander, Philocles,
How looks the day upon us? whore's the Queen?
In her bed-chamber.
Who was with her?
None but the young Lord Lisimachus.
Tic no treason
If a man wish himself a Courtier
Of such a possibility: he has
The mounting fate.
I would his Father were
Mounted to the gallows.
He has a path fair enough,
If he survive by title of his Father.
The Queen will hasten his ascent.
Would I wore Queen.
Thou wot become rarely the petticoat,
What wot thou doe?
Why, I wot marry
My Gentleman usher, and trust all the strength
And burden of my state upon his legs,
Rather then be called wife by any son
Of such a Father.
Come lets leave this subject,
We may find more secure discourse; when saw
You young Arcadius, Lord Macarius Nephew?
Theres a spark, a youth moulded for a favourite,
The Queen might doe him honour.
Favourite, tic too cheap a name, there were a match
Now for her Virgin blood.
Must every man
That has a hansom• face or leg feed such
Ambition: I confess I honour him,
He has a nimble soul, and gives great hope
To be no woman-hater, dances handsomely,
Can court a Lady powerfully, but more goes
To the making of a Prince? hes here
Ands Uncle.
Save you Gentlemen, who can direct me
To find my Lord Protector?
He was here
Within this half hour, young Li•machus
His son is with the Queen.
There let him complement,
I have other business, ha? Arcadius!
Observed you with what eyes Arcadius
And he saluted, their two families
Will hardly reconcile.
Seleucus carries
Himself too roughly, with what pride and scorn
He past by em.
The tother with less show
Of anger carries pride enough in's soul,
I wish em all at peace, Macarius looks
Are without civil war, a good old man,
The old King loved him well, Seleucus Father
Was as dear to him, and maintained the character
Of an honest Lord through Epire: that two men
So loved of others, should be so unwell-come
To one another.
The Queen was not wont to send for me.
The reason's to her self,
It will become your duty to attend her.
Save you Gentlemen, what novelty
Does the Court breath to day?
None sir, the news
That took the last impression is, that you
Purpose to leave the Kingdom, and those men,
That honour you, take no delight to hear it.
I have ambition to see the difference
Of Courts, and this may spare; the delights
At home doe surfeit, and the mistress whom
We all doe serve is fixed upon one object,
Her beams are too much pointed, but no Country
Shall make me lose your memories.
Arcadius.
Your Lordship honoured me,
I have no blessing in his absence.
Tic done like a pious Uncle.
We must not
Give any licence.
If your Majesty
Would please.
We are not pleased, it had become your duty,
To have first acquainted us, ere you declared
Your resolution public, is our Court
Not worth your stay?
I humbly beg your pardon.
Whore's Lisimachus?
Your humble servant Madam.
We shall find
Employment at home for you, doe not lose us.
Madam I then write my self blessed on earth
When I may doe you service.
We would be private Macarius.
Madam you have blessed me,
Nothing but your command could interpose to
Stay him.
Lisimachus
You must not leave us.
Nothing but Lisimachus? has she not
Taine a philter?
Nay pray be covered, Ceremony from you.
Must be excused,
It will become my duty.
Not your love?
I know you would not have me look upon
Your person as a Courtier, not as favourite,
That title were too narrow to express
How we esteem you.
The least of all
These names from you Madam, is grace ēnough.
Yet here you wot not rest.
Not if you please?
To say there is a happiness beyond,
And teach my ambition how to make it mine,
Although the honours you already have
Let fall upon your servant, exceed all
My merit; I have a heart is studious
To reach it with desert, and make if possible
Your favours mine by justice, with your pardon.
We are confident this needs no pardon sir,
But a reward to cherish your opinion,
And that you may keep warm your passion,
Know we resolve for marriage, and if
I had another gift, beside my self,
Greater, in that you should discern, how much
My heart is fixed.
Let me digest my blessing.
But I cannot resolve when this shall be,
How Madam? doe not make me dream of Heaven
And wake me into misery, if your purpose
Be, to immortalise your humble servant,
Your power on earth's divine, Princes are here
The Copies of eternity, and create
When they but will our happiness.
I shall
Believe you mock me in this argument,
I have no power.
How no power.
Not as a Queen.
I understand you not.
I must obey, your Fathers my Protector.
How?
When I am absolute, Lisimachus,
Our power and titles meet, before, we are but
A shadow, and to give you that were nothing,
Excellent Queen,
My love took no original from state,
Or the desire of other greatness,
Above what my birth may challenge modestly,
I love your virtues; mercenary souls
Are taken with advancement, yo've an Empire
Within you, better then the worlds, to that
Looks my ambition.
Tother is not sit
To be despised, Cosmography allow•
Epire a place in the map, and know till I
Possess what I was borne to, and alone
Doe grasp the Kingdoms Sceptre, I account
My self divided, he that marries me
Shall take an absolute Queen to his warm bosom,
My temples yet are naked, until then
Our loves can be but complements, and wishes,
Yet very hearty ones.
I apprehend.
Your Father.
Madam, a Gentleman has an humble suit,
Tic in your power to grant, you are Protector,
I am not yet a Queen.
Hows this?
I shall expound her meaning.
Why kneel you sir?
Madam to reconcile two families
That may unite, both counsels and their blood
To serve your Crown.
Macarius, and Eubulus
That by are inveterate malice to each other.
It grew, as I have heard▪ upon the question
Which some of either family had made,
Which of their Fathers was the best commander:
If we believe our stories, they have both
Deserved well of our state, and yet this quarrel
Has cost too many lives, a severe faction.
But Isle propound a way to plant a quiet
And peace in both our houses, which are torn
With their dissentions, and lose th• glory
Of their great names, my blood speaks my relation
To Eubulus, and I wish my veins were emptied
To appease their war.
Thou hast a noble soul,
This is a charity above thy youth,
And it flows bravely from thee, name the way.
In such a desperate cause, a little stream
Of blood might purge the foulness of their hearts
If you'll prevent a deluge.
Be particular.
Let but your Majesty consent, that two
May with their personal valour undertake
The honour of their family, and determine
Their diff•rinse.
This rather will enlarge
Their hate, and be a means to call more blood
Into the stream.
Not if both families
Agree, and swear—
And who shall be the Champions.
I beg the honour, for Eubulus cause
To be engaged, if any for Macarius,
Worthy to wager heart with mine, accept it,
I am confident, Arcadius
For honour would direct 〈◊〉 to his sword,
Will not deny, to stake against my life
His own, if you vouchsafe us privilege.
You are thē expectation and toppē boughs
Of both your houses, it would seem injustice,
To allow a civil war to cut you off,
And your selves the instruments, besides
You appear a soldier, Arcadius
Hath no acquaintance yet with rugged war,
More fit to drill a Lady then expose
His body to such dangers: a small wound
In the head may spoil the method of his hair▪
Whose curiosity exacts more time
Than his devotion, and who knows but he
May lose his ribbon by it in his locke,
Dear as his Saint, with whom he would exchange
His head, for her gay colours; then his band
May be disordered, and transformed from Lace
To Cutworke, his rich clothes be discomplexioned
With blood, beside the infashionable slashes,
And at the next festival take physic,
Or put on bla•ke, and morn for his slain breeches:
His hands cased up in gloves all night, and sweat
Pomatum, the next day may be endangered
To blisters with a sword, how can he stand
Upon his guard, who hath fid•ers in his head,
To which, his feet must ever be a dancing.
Beside a fall••fie may spoil his cringe,
Or making of a leg, in which cons•sts
Much of his Court perfection.
Is this Character
Bestowed on him?
It something may concern the Gentleman,
Whom if you please to challenge
To dance, play on the Lute, or sing.
Some catch?
He shall not want those will maintain him
For any sum.
You are my Sovereign,
I dare not think, yet I must speak somewhat,
I shall burst else, I have no skill in jigges,
Nor 〈◊〉.
How sir?
Nor was I borne a Minstrel, and in this you have
So infinitely disgraced Arcadius,
But that I have heard another Character,
And with your royal licence doe believe it,
I should not think him worth my killing.
Your killing?
Does she not jeerē me;
I shall talk treason presently, I find it
At my tongues end already, this is an
Affront, Isle leave her.
Come back, doe you know Arcadius?
I ha changed but little breath with him, our persons
Admit no familiarity, we were
Borne to live both at distance, yet I ha seēne him
Fight, and fight bravely.
When the spirit of Wine
Made his brain valiant he fought bravely.
Although he be my enemy, should any
Of the gay flies that buzz about the Court,
Sit to catch trouts ith▪ summer, tell me so,
I durst in any presence but your own.
What?
Tell him he were not honest.
I see Seleucus thou art •esolute,
And I but wronged Arcadius, your first
Request is granted, you shall fight, and he
That conquers be rewarded to confirm
First place and honour to his family:
Is it not this you plead for?
You are gracious.
Lisimachus.
Madam.
She has granted then?
With much ado•.
I wish thy sword may open
His wanton veins, Macarius is too popular,
And has taught him to in•uate.
It shall
But haste the confirmation of our loves,
And ripen the delights of marriage, Seleucus.
As I guest,
It cannot be too soon.
To morrow then we crown her, and invest
My son with Majesty, tic to my wishes,
Beget a race of Princes my Lisimachus.
First let us marry sir.
Thy brow was made
To wear a golden circle, •'me transported,
Thou shalt rule her, and I will govern thee.
Although you be my Father, that will not
Concern my obedience, as I take it. 
Gentlemen,
Prepare your selves for a solemnity
Will turn the Kingdom into triumph, Epire
Look fresh to morrow, 〈◊〉 become your duties
In all your glory to attend the Queen
At her Coronation, she is pleased to make
The next day happy in our Calendar,
My Office doth expire, and my old blood
Renews with thought on it.
Hows this?
Crowned to morrow.
And he so jo•full to resign his regency,
There's some trick in it, I doe not like these hasty
Proceedings, and whirls of state, they have commonly
As strange and violent effect•; well, heaven▪ save the Queen.
Heaven save the Queen say I, and send her a sprightly
Bed-fellow for the Protector, let him pray for
Himself, he is like to have no benefit of my devotion.
But this doth quicken my old heart Lisimachus,
There is not any step into her throne,
But is the same degree of thy own state;
Come Gentlemen.
We attend your grace.
Lisimachus.
What heretofore could happen to mankind
Was with much pain to clime to heaven, but in
Sophias marriage of all Queens the best,
Heaven will come down to earth▪ to make me blessed.
Indeed you shall not go.
Whether?
To travel,
I know you see me, but to take your leave,
But I must never yield to such an absence.
I prithee leave thy fears, I am commanded
To the contrary, I wonot leave thee now.
Commanded? by whom?
The Queen.
I am very glad, for trust me, I could think
Of thy departure with no comfort, thou
Art all the joy I have, half of my soul;
But I must thank the Queen now for thy company,
I prithee what could make thee so desirous
To be abroad?
Only to get an appetite
To thee Polidora.
Then you must provoke it.
Nay, prithee doe not so mistake thy servant.
Perhaps you surfeit with my love.
Thy love?
Although I have no beauty to comparē
With the best faces, I have a heart above
All competition.
Thou art jealous now;
Come, let me take the kiss I gave thee last,
I am so confident of thee, no lip
Has ravished it from thine; I prithee come
To Court.
For what?
There is the throne for beauty.
Tic safer dwelling here.
Theres none will hurt,
Or dare but think an ill to Polidora,
The greatest will be proud to honour thēē.
Thy luster wants the admiration here:
There thou wot shine indeed, and strike a reverence
Into the gazer.
You can flatter too.
No praise of thee can be thought so, thy vērtue
Will deserve all, I must confess, we Courtiers
Doe oftentimes commend to show our art,
There is necessity sometimes to say,
This Madam breaths Arabian Gummes,
Amber and Cassia; though while we are praising,
We wish we had no nostrils to take in
The offensive steam of her corrupted lungs.
Nay, some will swear they love their Mistress,
Would hazard lives and fortunes, to preserve
One of her hairs brighter then Berinices;
Or young Apollos, and yet after this,
A favour from another toy would tempt him
To laugh, while the Officious hangman whips
Her head off.
Fine men.
I am none of these,
Nay, there are women Polidora too
That can doe pretty well at flatteries;
Make men believe they dote, will languish for em,
Can kiss a Jewel out of one, and dally
A carcanet of Diamonds from another,
Weep intoth' bosom of a third, and makē
Him drop as many pearls; they count it nothing
To talk a reasonable heir within ten days
Out of his whole estate, and make him mad
He has no more wealth to consume.
You'll teach me
To think I may be flattered in your promises,
Since you live where this art is most professed.
I dare not be so wicked Polidora,
The Infant errors of the Court I may
Be guilty off, but never to abuse
So rare a goodness, nor indeed did ever
Converse with any of those shames of Court,
To practise for base ends; be confident
My hēart is full of thine, and I so deeply
Carry the figure of my Polidora,
It is not in the power of time or distance▪
To cancel it, by all thats blessed I love thee:
Love thee above all women, dare invoke
A curse when I forsake thee.
Let it be some
Gentle one.
Teach me an oath I prithee,
One strong enough to bind, if thou dost find
Any suspicion of my faith, or else
Direct me in some horrid imprecation
When I forsake thee, for the love of other
Woman, may heaven reward my apostasy
To blast my greatest happiness on earth,
And make all joys abortive.
Revoke these hasty syllables, they carry
To great a penalty for breach of Love
To me, I am not worth thy suffering,
You doe not know what beauty may invite
Your change, what happiness may tempt your eye
And heart together.
Should all the graces of your sex conspire
In one, and she should court me, with a dower
Able to buy a Kingdom when I give
My heart from Polidora.
I suspect not,
And to requite thy constancy I swear.
It were sin to let thee waste thy breath
I have assurance of thy noble thoughts.
My Lord, your Uncle hath been every where
Ith Court inquiring for you, his looks speak
Some earnest cause.
I am more acquainted with
Thy virtue then to imagine thou wilt not
Excuse me now, one kiss dismisses him
Whose heart shall waite on Polidora, prithee
Let me not wish for thy return too often,
My Father.
I met Arcadius in strange haste, he told me
He had been with thee.
Some affair too soon
Ravished him hence, his Uncle sent for him
You came now from Court: how looks the Queenē
This golden morning?
Like a bride, her soul
Is all on mirth, her eyes have quickening fires,
Able to strike a spring into the earth
In Winter.
Then Lisimachus can havē
No frost in's blood, that lives so near her beams.
His politic Father, the Protector smiles too,
Resolve to see the Ceremony of the Queen
Twill be a day of state,
I am not well.
How▪ not well? retire then, I must return
My attendance is expected, Polidora,
Be careful of thy health.
It will concern mē.
You amaze me sir.
Dear Nephew, if thou respect thy safety,
My honour, or my age, remove thy self,
Thy lifes in danger.
Mine? who's my enemy?
Take horse, and instantly forsake the City,
Or else within some unsuspected dwelling,
Obscure thy self, stay not to know the reason.
Sir, I beseech your pardon, which ith▪ number
Of my offences unto any, should
Provoke this dishonourable flight?
I would when I petitioned for thy stay,
I had pleaded for thy banishment, thou know not
What threatens thee:
I would desire to know it,
I am in no conspiracy of treason,
Have ravished no mans Mistress, not so much
As given the lye to any, what should mean
Your strange and violent fears, I will not stir
Until you make me sensible I have lost
My innocence.
I must not live to see
Thy body full of wounds, it were less sinnē
To rip thy Fathers marble, and fetch from
The reverend vault his ashes, and disperse them
By some rude winds where none should ever find
The sacred dust, it was his legacy,
The breath he mingled with his prayers to Heaven
I should preserve Arcadius, whose fate
He prophesied in death, would need protection,
Thou wot disturb his ghost, and call it to
Aff•ight my dreams, if thou refuse to obey me.
You more inflame me to inquire the cause
Of your d•straction, and you'll arm me better
Then any coward flight by acquainting me
Whose malice aims to kill me, good sir tell me,
Then prayers and tears assist me.
Sir▪
Arcadius,
Thou art a rash young man, witness the spirit
Of him that trusted me so much, I bleed,
Till I prevent this mischief.
Ha, keep off.
What mean you sir?
We are your friends.
I know your faces, but
Am not secure, I would not be betrayed.
You wrong our hearts, who truly honour you.
They say I must be kilt.
By whom?
I know not, nor wot I part with life so tamely.
We dare engage ours in your quarrel, hide
Your sword, it may beget suspicion,
It's enough to question you.
I am confident,
Pray pardon me, come I despise all danger:
Yet a dear friend of mine, my Uncle told me
He would not see my body full of wounds.
Your Uncle •his is strange.
Yes, my honest Uncle,
If my unlucky stars have pointed me
So dire a fate.
There is some strange mistake in'•.
Arcadius, the Queen would speak with you,
You must make haste.
Though to my death, I fly
Upon her summons, I give up my breath
Then willingly, if she command it from me.
This does a little trouble me.
I know not
What to imagine, something is the ground
Of this perplexity, but I hope there is not
Any such danger as he apprehends.
We have already granted to Seleucus
And they shall try their valour if Arcadius
Have spirit in him to accept the challenge,
Our royal word is past.
This is strange.
Madam my sonnē knew not what he asked,
And you were cruel to consent so soon.
Wherein have I offended, to be robed
At once of all the wealth I have, Arcadius
Is part of me.
Seleucus life and mine
Are twisted on one three•d, both stand or fall
Together, hath the service for my Country
Deserved but this reward, to be sent weeping
To my eternal home? Wast not enough
When I was young, to lose my blood in wars,
But the poor remnant that is scarcely warm
And faintly creeping through my withered veins
Must be let out to make you sport.
How can
We that shall this morn seē the sacred oil
Fall on your virgin tresses▪ hope for any
Protection hereafter, when this day
You sacrifice the blood of them that pray for you.
Arcadius I prithee speak thy self,
It is for thee I plead.
Seleucus, kneel
And say thou haste repented thy rash suite;
If ere I see thee fight, I be thus wounded,
How will the least drop forced from thy veins,
Afflict my heart.
Why, that's good;
Arcadius speak to her; hear him Madam.
If you call back this honour you have done me
I shall repent I live, doe not persuade me
Seleucus thou art a noble enemy,
And I will love thy soul though I despair
Our bodies friendly conversation:
I would we were to tug upon some cliff,
Or like two prodigies ith ayre, our conflict
Might generally be gazed at, and our blood
Appease our grandsires ashes.
I am undone.
Madam, my father says I have offended,
If so, I beg your pardon, but beseech you
For your own glory call not back your word.
They are both mad.
No more, we have resolved,
And since their courage is so nobly flamed,
This morning weal behold the Champions
Within the list, be not afraid, their strife
Will stretch so far as death, so soon as we
Are Crowned prepare your selves, Sell•ucus.
I have received another life in this high favour,
And may lose what nature gave me.
Arcadius to encourage thy young valour,
We give thee our Fathers sword.
Command it from our Armoury; Lisimachus,
To our Coronation.
Isle forfeit
My hēad for a rebellion then suffer it.
I am circled with confusions Isle doē somewhat
My brains and friends assist me.
But doe you think they le fight indeed?
Perhaps
Her Majesty will see about or two.
And yet tic wondrous strange, such spectacles
Are rare in the Court, and they were to skirmish naked
Before her, then there might be some excuse.
There is some gimcrackes in it, the Queen is wise
Above her years.
Macarius is perplexed.
I cannot blame him, but my Lord 〈◊〉
Return•, they are both troubled, las good men,
But our duties are expected, we forget.
I must resolve, and yet things are not ripe,
My brains upon the torture.
This may quit
The hazard of his person, whose least drop
Of blood is worth more then our families.
My Lord Eubulus, I have thought a way
To stay the young men's desperate proceedings,
It is our cause they fight, let us beseech
The Queen, to grant us two the privilege
Of duel▪ rather then expose their lives
To eiders fury; it were pity they
Should run upon so black a destiny,
We are both old, and may be spared, a pair
Of fruitless trees, mossy and withered trunks,
That fill up too much room.
Most willingly,
And I will praise her charity to allow it;
I have not yet forgot to use a sword,
Lets lose no time, by this act, she will licence
Our souls to leave our bodies but a day,
Perhaps an hour the sooner; they may live
To doe her better service, and be friends
When we are dead, and yet I have no hope
This will be granted, curse upon our faction.
If she deny us—
What?
I wot doe somewhat—
There's something of the sudden struck upon
My imagination, that may secure us.
Name it, if no dishonour waite upon it
To preserve them, Isle accept any danger.
There is no other way, and yet my heart
Would be excuse▪d but tic to save his life.
Speak it Eubulus.
In your ear I shall,
It shanot make a noise if you refuse it.
Hum? though it stir my blood, Isle meet Arcadius,
If this preserve thee not, I must unseal
Another mystery.
We owe to all your loves and will deserve
At least by our endeavours that none may
This day repent their prayers, my Lord Protector.
Madam I have no
Such title now, and am blessed to lose
That name so happily, I was but trusted
With a glorious burden.
You have proved
Your self our faithful counsellor, and must still
Protect our growing state, a Kingdoms Sceptre
Weighs down a women's arm, this crown sits heavy
Upon my brow already, and we know
There's something more then mettle in this wreath,
Of shining glory, but your faith, and counsel,
That are familiar with mysteries,
And depths of state▪ have power to make us fit
For such a bearing, in which both you shall
Doe loyal service, and reward your duties.
Heaven preserve your Highness.
But yet my Lords and Gentlemen let nonē
Mistake me, that because I urge your wisdoms,
I shall grow careless, and impose on you
The managing of this great Province, no,
We will be active too, and as we are
In dignity above your persons, so,
The greatest portion of the difficulties
We call to us, you in your several places
Relieving us with your experience,
Observing in your best directions
All modesty, and distance, for although
We are but young, no action shall forfeit
Our royal privilege, or encourage any
Too unreverent boldness, as it will become
Our honour to consult, ēre we determine
Of the most necessary things of state,
So we are sensible of a check,
But in a brow, that saucily controls
Our action, presuming on our years
As few, or frailty of our sex, that head
Is not secure that dares our power or justice.
She has a brave spirit, look how the Protector
Grows pale already.
But I speak to you
Are perfect in obedience, and may sparē
This theme, yet it was no immaterial
Part of our character, since I desire
All should take notice, I have studied
The knowledge of my self, by which I shall
Better distinguish of your worth and persons
In your relations to us.
This language
Is but a threatening to some body
But we miss some, that use not to absent
Their duties from us, whore's Macarius?
Retired to grieve, your Majesty hath given▪
Consent Arcadius should enter List
To day with young Seleucus.
We purpose 
They shall proceed, whats he?
A Gentleman belonging to Seleucus, that givēs notice
He is prepared, and waits your royal pleasure,
He was composed for action, give notice
To Arcadius, and admit the challenger,
Let other Princes boast their gaudy tilting,
And mockery of battles, but our triumph
Is celebrated with true noble valour. 
Two young men spirited enough to have
Two Kingdoms staked upon their swords, Lisimachus
Doe not they excellently become their arms,
It were pity but they should doe something more
Then wave their plumes. 
What noise is that?
The peoples joy to know us reconcild,
Is added to the Jubilee of the day,
We have no more a faction but one heart,
Peace flow in every bosom.
Throw away
These instruments of death, and like two friends
Embrace by our example.
This unfeigned?
By our duties to your self dear Madam
Command them not advance, our houses from
This minute are incorporated, happy day
Our eyes at which before revenge look forth,
May clear suspicion, oh my Arcadius!
We have found a nearer way to friendship Madam,
Then by exposing them to fight for us.
If this be faithful our desires are blessed,
We had no thought to waste, but reconcile
Your blood this was and we did prophecy
This happy chance, spring into eiders bosom,
Arcadius and Seleucus, what can now
Be added to this days felicity;
Yes, there is something, is there not my Lord?
While we are Virgin Queen.
Ha, that string
Doth promise music.
I am yet my Lords
Your single joy, and when I look upon,
What I have took, to manage the great care
Of this most flourishing Kingdom, I incline
To think, I shall doe justice to my self,
If I chose one, whose strength and virtue may
Assist my undertaking, think you Lords,
A husband would not help?
No question Madam,
And he that you purpose to make so blessed
Must needs be worthy of our humblest duty,
It is the general vote.
We will not then
Trouble Ambassadors to treat with any
Princes abroad, within our own dominion,
Fruitful in honour, we shall make our choice;
And that we may not keep you over long
In the imagination, from this circle, we
Have purpose to elect one, whom I shall
Salute a King and Husband.
Now my Lord Lifimachus.
Nor shall we in this action be accused
Of rashness, since the man we shall declare
Deserving our affection, hath been early
In our opinion, which had reason first
To guide it, and his known nobility
Long married to our thoughts, will justify
Our fair election.
Lifimachus blushes.
Direct our duties Madam to pray for him.
Arcadius you see from whence we come,
Pray lead us back, you may ascend.
Hows this? o'er reached?
Madam be charitab•e to your humblest creature,
Doe not •award the heart, that falls in duty
Beneath your feet, with making me the burden
Of the Court mirth, a mockery for Pages,
It were treason in me but to think you mean thus.
Arcadius you must refuse my love,
Or shame this Kingdom.
Is the wind in that corner?
I shall run mad Lisimachus.
Sir, contain your self.
Is this to be believed?
What dream is this?
He kisses her, now by this day I am glad on it.
Mark the Protector.
Let him fret his heart strings.
Is the day cloudy on the sudden?
Gentlemen
It was not my ambition, I durst never
Aspire so high in thought, but since her Majesty
Hath pleased to call me to this honour, I
Will study to be worthy of her grace,
By whom I live.
The Church to morrow shall
Confirm our marriage, noble Lisimachus
Weal find out other ways to recompense
Your love to us, set forward, come Arcadius.
It must be so, and yet let me consider,
He insults already, policy assist me.
To break his neck.
Who would trust woman?
Lost in a pair of minutes, lost, how bright
A morning rose, but now, and now tic night?
Oh where shall Virgins look for faith hereafter?
If he prove false, after so many vows?
And yet if I consider, he was tempted
Above the strength of a young Lover, two
Such glorious courting his acceptance, were
Able to make disloyalty no sin,
At least not seem a fault, a Lady first,
Whose very looks would thaw a man more fro•
Then the Alps, quicken a soul more dead then Winter.
Add to her beauty and perfection,
That she's a Queen, and brings with her a Kingdom
Able to make a great mind forfeit heaven.
What could the frailety of Arcadius
Suggest to unspirit him so much, as not
To fly to her embraces, you were present
When she declared her self.
Yes Madam.
Tell me,
Did not he make a pause, when the fair Queen
A full temptation stood him?
Very little
My judgement could distinguish, she did no sooner
Propound, but he accepted.
That was ill,
He might with honour stand one or two minutes,
Me thinks it should have startled him a little,
To have rememberd me, I have deserved
At least a cold thought, well pray give it him.
I shall.
Instantly.
When?
Not so,
But take a time when his joy swells him most,
When his delights are high and ravishing,
When you perceive his soul dance in his eyes,
When she that must be his, hath dressed her beanty
With all her pride, and sends a thousand Cupids
To call him to the tasting of her lip;
Then give him this, and tell him while I live,
Isle pray for him.
I shall.
There is no way but death.
That's black and horrid,
Consider sir it was her sin, not his;
I cannot accuse him, what man could carry
A heart so frozen, not to melt at such
A glorious flame•? who could not fly to such
A happiness?
Have you ambition
To be a tame fool• fee so vast an injury
And not revenge it? 〈◊〉 me not suspect
Thy Mother for this sufferance, my Son.
Pray hear me sir▪
Hear a patient gull,
A property, thou hast no blood of mine,
If this affront provoke thee not, how can
Be charitable to thy self, and let him live
To glory in thy shame? Nor is he innocent;
He had before crept silly into her bosom
And practised thy dishonour.
You begin to 〈◊〉 me sir.
How else could she be guilty
Of such contempt of thee? and in the eye
Of all the Kingdom, they conspired this stain,
When they had cunning meetings, shall thy love
And blooming hopes be scattered thus, and Lisimachus
Stand idle gazer?
What sir will his death
Advantage us, if she be false to me?
So irreligious, and to touch her person—
Pause we may be observed.
It is the Protector
And his son.
Alas poor Gentleman, I pity
His neglect, but am not sorry for his Father.
Tic a strange turn.
The whirligigs of women.
Your graces servant.
I am yours Gentlemen,
And should be happy to deserve your loves.
Now he can flatter.
In it sir, to enlarge your sufferings, J have
A heart doth wish
The Queen had known better to reward
Your love and merit.
If you would express
Your love to me; pray doe not mention it,
I must obey my fate.
She will be married
To tother Gentleman for certain then?
I hope you'll wish em joy.
Indeed I will sir.
Your graces servant.
We are grown
Ridiculous, the pastime of the Court:
Here comes another.
Wheres your son my Lord?
Like a neglected servant of his Mistress.
I would ask him a question.
What?
Whether the Queen
As tic reported, loved him, he can tell
Whether she promised what they talk of, marriage,
I can resolve you that sir.
She did promise?
Yes.
Then shees a woman, and your son;
What?
Not worthy his blood, and expectation,
If he be calm.
Th•res no opposing destiny.
I would cut the throat.
Whose throat?
The destinies, that's all your pardon sir,
I am Seleucus still, a poor shadow
Of the world, a walking picture, it concerns
Not me, I am forgotten by my stars.
The Queen with more discretion might ha chosen
Thee.
Whom?
Thee Seleucus.
Me? I cannot dance, and fri•ke with due activity,
My body is le•d, I have too much phleame, what should
I doe with a Kingdom? no Arcadius
Becomes the cushion, and can please, yet setting
Aside the trick that Ladies of blood look at,
Another man might ma•e a shift to wear
Rich clothes, sit in the cha•re of state, and nod,
Dare venture on discourse, that does not trench
On complement, and think the study of arms
And arts, more commendable in a Gentleman
Than any galliard.
Arcadius,
And you were reconciled.
We? yes, oh yes,
But tic not manners now to say we are friends,
At our equality there had been reason,
But now, subjection is the word.
They are not
Yet married.
〈◊〉 make no oath upont,
My Lord Lisimachus,
A word. you•e not be angry if I love you,
May not a bachelor be made a cuckold?
How sir?
Lisimachus, this 〈◊〉
Is worth our embrace, hes spirited,
And may be useful.
Hark you, can you tell
Whore's the best Dancing-master? and you mean
To rise at Court, practise to caper, farewell
The noble science, that makes work for cutlers,
It will be out of fashion to wear swords,
Masques, and devices welcome, I salute you.
Is it not pity any division
Should be heard ou• of Music? Oh twill be
An excellent age of crotchets; and of Canters.
Buy Captains that like fools will spend your blood
Out of your Country, you will be of less
Use then your feathers, if you return unmanned
You shall be beaten soon to a new march,
When you shall think it a discretion
To sell your glorious buffs to buy fine pumps,
And pantables, this is I hope no treason.
Wot stay Lisimachus?
Yes sir,
And show a patience above her injury.
This honour is too much, Madam assume
Your place, and let Arcadius waite still:
Tic happiness enough to be your servant.
Now he dissembles.
Sir you must sit.
I am obedient.
This is not music
Sprightly enough, it feeds the soul with melancholy.
How says Arcadius?
Give me leave to think
There is no harmony but in your voice,
And not an accent of your heavenly tongue,
But strikes me into rapture, I incline
To think the tale of Orphe• no fable,
Tic possible he might enchant the Rocks,
And charm the Forest, soften hell, hell it self
With his commanding Lute, it is no miracle
To what you work, whose very breath conveys
The hearer into heaven, how at your lips,
Day winds gather perfumes, proudly glide away,
To disperse sweetness round about the world.
Fine stuff.
You cannot flatter.
Not if I should say
Nature had placed you here the creatures wonder,
And her own spring, from which all excellence
On earths derived, and copied forth, and when
The character of fair, and good in others
Is quite worn out, and lost, looking on you
It is supplied, and you alone made mortal
To feed and keep alive all beauty.
Ha, ha, can you endure it Gentlemen?
What doe you mean?
Nay ask him what he means, mine is a down
Right laugh.
Well sir proceed.
At such bright eyes the stars do light themselves,
At such a forehead Swans renew their white,
From such a lip the morning gathers blushes.
The morning is more modest then thy praises,
What a thing does he make her?
And when you fly to heaven &amp; leave this world
No longer maintenance of goodness from you,
Then Poetry shall lose all use with us,
And be no more, since nothing in your absence
Is left, that can be worthy of a Verse.
Ha, ha.
Whose that?
It was I Madam.
Seleucus?
Ha?
Yes sir, it was I that laughed.
At what?
At nothing.
Contain your self Seleucus.
Are you mad?
Have you ambition to be punished sir?
I need not, it was punishment
Enough to hear him make an Idol of you, he left
Out the commendation of your patience, I was a little
Moved in my nature to hear his codomontados, and
Make a monster of his Mistress, which I pitied first,
But seeing him proceed, I guest he brought you
Mirth with his inventions, and so made bold to laugh at it.
You are saucy,
Weal place you where you shannot be so merry,
Take him away.
Submit your self
Let me plead for his pardon.
I wot not owe my life so poorly, beg thy own
When you are King you cannot bribe your destiny.
Good Madam hear me, I fear he is distracted,
Brave boy, thou should be master of a soul
Like his: thy honours more concerned.
It is charity,
A way wo' me, boy Madam?
He has a daring spirit.
These and a thousand more affronts I must
Expect: your favours draw them all upon me;
In my first state I had no enemies,
I was secure while I did grow beneath
This expectation, humble valleys thrive with
Their bosoms full of flowers, when the hills melt
With lightning, and rough anger of the clouds,
Let me retire.
And can Arcadius
A• such a breath be moved, I had opinion
Your courage durst have stood a tempest for
Our love, can you for this incline to leave
What other Princes should in vain have sued for?
How many Lovers are in Epire now
Would throw themselves on danger, not expect
O•e enemy, but empty their own veins,
And think the loss of all their blood rewarded,
To have one smile of us when they are dying?
And shall this murmur shake you?
Not dear Madam,
My life is such a poor despised thing,
In value your least graces, that
To lose it were to make my self a victory,
It is not for my self I fear: the envy
Of others cannot fasten wound in me
Greater, then that your goodness should be checked
So daringly.
Let not those thoughts afflict thee
While we have power to correct the offences
Arcadius be mine, this shall confirm it.
I shall forget
And lose my way to heaven, that touch had been
Enough to have restored me, and infused
A spirit of a more celestial nature,
After the tedious absence of my soul,
Oh bless me not too much, one smile a day
Would stretch my life to mortality,
Poets that wrap divinity in tales,
Look here, and give your copies forth of angels,
What blessing can remain?
Our Marriage.
Place then some horrors in the way
For me, not you to pass, the journeys end
Holds out such glories to me, I should think
Hell but a poor degree of suffering for it,
Whats that some petition, a Letter to me. 
In the minute when my vessels new launched forth,
With all my pride and silken wings about me
I strike upon a Rock: what power can save me?
You had a Polidora; theres a name
Killed with grief I can so soon forget her
She did impose on me this service sir,
And while she lives she says sheele pray for you.
She lives
Thats well, and yet it were better, for my fame,
And honour she were dead, what fate hath placed me
Upon this fearful precipice?
Hes troubled.
I must resolve, my faith is violated
Already, yet poor loving Polidora
Will pray for me, she says, to think she can
Render me hated to my self, and every
Thought's a tormentor, let me then be just.
Arcadius.
That voice prevails again, oh Poledora,
Thou must forgive Arcadius, I dare not
Turn rebel to a Princess, I shall love
Thy virtue, but a Kingdom has a charm
To excuse our frailty, dearest Madam.
Now set forward.
To perfect all our joys.
Isle fright their glories.
By what means?
Observe.
Our good Uncle, welcome.
My Lord Macarius we did want your person,
There's something in our joys wherein you share.
This you intend your highness wedding day.
We are going.
Save you labour
I have brought a Priest to meet you.
Reverend Father.
Meet us, why?
To tell you that you must not marry.
Did thou hear that Lisimachus?
And wonder what will follow.
We must not marry.
Madam tic a rule
First made in heaven, and I muh needs declare
You and Arcadius must tie no knot
Of man and wife.
Is my Uncle mad?
Joy has transported him,
Or age has made him dote, Macarius
Provoke us not too much, you will presume
Above our mercy.
Isle discharge my duty,
Could your frown strike me dead, my Lord you know
Whose character this is.
It is Thedosius.
Your graces Father.
I am subscribed a witness.
Upon my life it is his.
Fear not, Isle cross this match.
Isle bless thee for it.
Uncle dee know what you doe, or what we are
Going to finish, you will not break the neck of my glorious
Fortune, now my foots in the stirrups and mounting,
Throw me over the saddle, I hope you'll let one
Be a King, Madam it is as you say,
My Uncle is something crazed, there is a worm
In's brain, but I beseech you pardon him, he is
Not the first of your counsel, that has talked
Idly, dee hear my Lord Bishop, I hope
You have more religion then to join with him
To undo me.
Not I sir, but I am commanded by oath,
And conscience to speak truth.
If your truth should doe me any harm, I shall never
Be in charity with a Crosiers staff, look too't.
My youngest Brother,
Worse and worse, my brains.
Deliver to me an Infant with this writing,
To which this reverend Father is a witness.
This he whom we so long thought dead, a child.
But what should make my father to trust him
To your concealment? give abroad his death, and bury
An empty coffin?
A jealousy he had
Upon Cassandra, whose ambitious brain
He feared would make no conscience to depose
His son, to make Lisimachus King of Epire.
He made no scruple to expose me then
To any danger?
He secured you Madam
By an early engagement of your affection
To Lisimachus, exempt this testimony,
Had he been Arcadius, and my Nephew
I needed not obtrude him on the state,
Your Love and marriage had made him King
Without my trouble, and saved that ambition
There was necessity to open now
His birth, and title.
Demetrius alive.
What riddles are these, whom do they talk of?
Congratulate your return to life, and honour,
And as becomes us, with one voice salute you
Demetrius King of Epire.
I am no Uncle, sir, this is your sister,
I should have suffered incest to have kept you
Longer in the dark, love, and be happy both,
My trust is now discharged.
And we rejoice.
But doe not mooke me Gentlemen,
May I be bold upon your words to say
I am Prince Thedosius son.
The King.
You'll justify it?
Sister I am very glad to see you.
I am to find a brother, and refigne my glory,
My triumph is my shame.
Thine ear Lisimachus.
Gentlemen I owe
Unto your loves, as large acknowledgement
As to my birth for this greed onour, and
My study shall be equal to be thought
Worthy of both.
Thou art turned Marble.
There will be the less charge for my monument.
This must not be, fit fast young King.
Your fester sir is gone.
My sister should have been my Bride, that name
〈◊〉 me in mind of Polidora, ha?
Lisander, Philocles, Gentlemen,
If you will have me think your hearts allow me
Thedosius son, oh quickly snatch some wings,
Express it in your haste to Polidora,
Tell her what title is new dropped from Heaven
To make her rich; only created for me,
Give her the ceremony of my Queen,
With all the state that may become our Bride
Attend her to this throne; are you not there?
Yet stay, tic too much pride to send for her,
Weal go our self, no honour is enough
For Polidora, to redeem our fault
Salute her gently from me, and upon
Your knee, present her with this Diadem,
Tic our first gift, tell her Demetrius follows
To be her guest, and give himself a servant
To her chaste bosom, bid her stretch her heart
To meet me, I am lost in joy and wonder.
VVHeres the Captain of the Castle?
Heel attend your honours presently.
Give him knowledge we expect him.
I shall my Lord.
He is my creature, fear not,
And shall run any c•urse that we propo•d.
My Lord, I like the substance of your plot,
Tic promising, but matters of this consequence
Are not so easily perfect, and it does
Concern our heads to build upon secure
Principles, though Sell•eus, I confess,
Carry a high, and daring spirit in him,
Tic hard to thrust upon the state new settled
Any impostor, and we know not yet
Whether heel undertake to play the Prince;
Or if he should accept it, with what cunning
He can behave himself.
My Lord, affairs
Of such a glorious nature, are half finished
When they begin with confidence.
Admit
He want no art, nor courage, it must rest
Upon the people to receive his title,
And with what danger their uncertain breath
May flatter ours, Demetrius scarcely warm
In the Kings seat, I may suspect.
That reason
Makes for our part, for if it be so probable,
That young Demetrius should be living, why
May not we work them to believe Leo•atus
The eldest son was by some trick preserved
And now would claim his own: there were two sons,
Who in their Fathers life we supposed dead,
May not we find a circumstance to make
This seem as clear as t'other, let the vulgar
Be once possessed, weal carry Epire from▪
Demetrius, and the world.
I could be pleased
To see my son a King. 
The Captaiues here.
I waite your Lordships pleasure.
We come to visit your late prisoner•▪
I will not doubt, but you entreat him fairly
He will deserve I• for himself, and you
Be fortunate in any occasion
To have expressed your service.
Sir, the knowledge
Of my honourable Lord his Father, will
Instruct me to behave my self with all
Respects becoming me, to such a son.
These things will least
Obleige you, but how bears he his restraint?
As one whose solo's above it.
Patiently?
With contempt rather of the great command
Which made him prisoner, he will talk sometimes
So strangely to himself.
Hoe's here.
Why was I borne to be a subject? it is
Soon answered, sure my Father was no Prince,
Thats all, the same ingredience use to make
A man, as active, though not royal blood
Went to my composition, and I
Was gotten with as good a will perhaps,
And my birth cost my mother as much sorrow,
As I had been borne an Emperor.
While I look
Upon him, something in his face presents
A King indeed.
He does resemble much
Thedosius too.
Whose son we would pretend him,
This will advance our plot,
Tic but a name,
And mere opinion, that prefers one man
Above another, Isle imagine th•n
I am a P rince, or some brave thing on earth,
And see what follows, but it must not be
My fingle voice will carry it, the name
Of King must be attended with a troop
Of acclamations, on whose airy Wings
He mounts, and once exalted threatens Heaven,
And all the stars: how to acquire this noise,
And be the thing I talk of, men have rise
From a more cheap nobility to Empires,
From dark originals, and sordid blood,
Nay some that had no fathers, sons of the earth,
And flying people, have aspired to Kingdoms,
Made nations tremble, any have practised frowns
To awe the world, their memory is glorious,
And I would hug them in their shades, but whats
All this to me; that am I know not what,
And less in expectation?
Are you serious?
Will you assist, and run a fate with us.
Command my life, I owe it to your favour.
Arcadius was once as far from being
As I, and had we not so cunningly
Been reconciled, or one, or both had gone
To seek our fortunes in another world;
What's the devi•e now? If my death be next,
The summons shall not make me once look pale.
Chide your too vain suspicions, we bring
A life, and liberty, with what else can make
Thy ambi•ion happy, you have a glorious flame
We come to advance it.
How?
Have but a will,
And be what thy own thoughts dare prompt thee to,
A King.
You doe not mo•ke me Gentlemen,
You are my father sir.
This minute •hall
Declare it my Sell•ucus, our hearts swel'd
With joy, with duty rather, oh my boy▪
What's the mystery?
You must be a King.
Sell•ucus, •tay thou art too incredulous,
Let not our faith, and study to exalt thee,
Be so rewarded.
I pronounce thee King
Unless thy spirit be turned coward, and
Thou faint to accept it.
King of what?
Of Epire.
Although the Queen since she sent me hither
Were gone to Heaven I know not how
That title could devolve to me.
We have
No Queen, since he that should have married her,
Is proved her youngest brother, and now King
In his own title.
Thank you Gentlemen,
There's hope for me.
Why, you dare fight with▪him
And need be, for the Kingdom.
With Arcadius,
If you'll make stakes, my life against his crown,
Isle fight with him, and you, and your fine son,
And all the Courtiers one after another.
'Twonot come to that.
I am of your Lordships mind, so fare you well
Yet stay and heare-
What? that you have betrayed me,
Doe, tell your King, my life is grown a burden,
And Isle confess, and make your souls look pale,
To see how nimble mine shall leap this battlement
Of flesh, and dying, laugh at your poor malice.
No more, long▪ live Leonatus King of Epire.
Leonatus, who's that?
Be bold and be a King, our brains have been
Working to raise you to this height, here are
None but friends, dare you but call your self
Leonatus, and but justify with considence
What weal proclaim you, if we doe not bring
The Crown to your head, we will forfeit ours.
The state is in distraction, Arcadiu•
Is proved a King, there was an elder brother,
If you dare but pronounce, you are the same,
Forget you are my son.
These are no trifles, sir, all is plotted
To assure your greatness, if you will be wise,
And take the fair occasion that's presented.
Arcadius, you say, is lawful King,
And now to depose him, you would make me
An elder brother, is it not so?
Most right.
Nay, right or wrong, if this be your true meaning.
Upon our lives.
Isle venture mine, but with your pardon,
Whose brain was this? from whom took this plot life?
My Lord Cassandra.
And you are of his mind? and you? and think
This may be done?
The destinies shall not cross us, if you have
Spirit to undertake it.
Undertake it?
I am not used to complement, Isle owe
My life to you, my fortunes to your Lordship,
Compose me as you please, and when you've made
Me what you promise, you shall both divide
Me equally, one word my Lord, I had rather
Live in the prison still, then be a propency
To advance his politic ends.
Have no suspicion.
So, so, I see Demetrius heals already
Tripped up, and Isle dispatch him out of the way,
Which gone, I can depose this at my leisure
Being an Impostor, then my son stands fair,
And may piece with the Princess, we lose time,
What think you, if we first surprise the Court,
While you command the Castle, we shall curb
All opposition.
Let's proclaim him first.
I have some faction, the people love me,
They gained to us, weal •all upon the Court.
Unless Demetrius yield himself he bleeds.
Who dares call treason sin, when it sueceeds?
Madam, you are too passionate, and lose
The greatness of your soul, with the expense
Of too much grief, sor that which providence
Hath eased you of, the burden of a state
Above your tender bearing.
Thar't a fool,
And can not reach the spirit of a Lady,
Borne great as I was, and made only less
By a too cruel destiny, above
Our tender bearing? what goes richer to
The composition of man, then ours?
Our soul as free, and spacious, our heart's
As great, our will as large, each thought as active,
And in this only man more proud then wee,
That would have us less capable of Empire,
But search the stories, and the name of Queen
Shines bright with glory, and some precedents
Above mans imitation.
I grant it
For the honour of our sex, nor have you, Madam,
By any weakness forfeited command,
He that succeeds, in justice, was before you,
And you have gained more in a royal brother
Then you could lose by your refigne of Epire.
This I allow Charilla, I ha done;
Tic not the thought I am deposd afflicts me,
At the same time I feel a joy to know
My Brother living: no, there is another
Wound in me above cure.
Virtue forbid.
Can find me out a Surgeon for that?
For what?
My bleeding fame.
Oh doe not injure
Your own clear innocence.
Doe not flatter me,
I have been guilty of an act, will make
All love in women questioned, is not that
A blot upon a Virgins name? my birth
Cannot extenuate my shame, I am
Become the stain of Epire.
Tic but
Your own opinion, Madam, which presents
Something •o fright your self, which cannot
Be in the same shape so horrid to our sense.
Thou wot but can not appear ignorant,
Did not the Court, nay, the whole Kingdom, take
Notice I loved Lisimachus?
True Madam.
No. I was false
Though counseld by my Father to affect him,
I had my politic ends upon Cassandra,
To be absolute Queen, flattering his son with hopes
Of love and marriage, when that very day
I blush to think I wronged Lisimachus,
That noble Gentleman, but heaven punished me;
For though to know Demetrius was a blessing,
Yet who will not impute it my dishonour.
Madam, you yet may recompense Lisimachus,
If you affect him now, you were not false
To him whom then you loved not, if you can
Find any gentle passion in your soul
To entertain his thought, no doubt his heart,
Though sad, retains a noble will to meet it,
His love was firm to you, and cannot be
Vnrooted with one storm.
He will not sure
Trust any language from her tongue that mocked him,
Although my soul doth weep for it, and is punished
To love him above the world.
Hes here
As fate would have him reconcild, be free,
And speak your thoughts.
If Madam I appear
Too bold, your charity will sign my pardon:
I heard you were not well, which made me haste
To pay the duty of an humble visit.
You doe not mock me sir.
I am confident
You think me not so lost to manners, in
The knowledge of your person, to bring with me
Such rudeness, I have nothing to present,
But a heart full of wishes for your health,
And what else may be added to your happiness.
I thought you had been sensible.
How Madam?
A man of understanding, can you spend
One prayer for me, remembering the dishonour
I have done Lisimachus?
Nothing can deface that part of my
Religion in me, not to pray for you.
It is not then impossible you may
Forgive me too, indeed I have a soul
Is full of penitence, and something else,
If blushing would allow to give it a name.
What Madam?
Love, a love that should redeem
My past offence, and make me white again.
I hope no sadness can possess your thoughts
For me, I am not worthy of this sorrow,
But if you mean it any satisfaction
For what your will hath made me suffer, it is
But a strange overflow of charity,
To keep me still alive, be your self Madam,
And let no cause of mine, be guilty of
This rape upon your eyes, my name's not worth
The least of all your tears.
You think em co•nterfeit.
Although I may
Suspect a women's smile hereafter, yet
I would believe their wet eyes, and if this
Be what you promise, for my sake, I have
But one reply.
I waite it.
I have now
Another Mistress.
Stay.
To whom I have made
Since your revolt from me, a new chaste vow,
Which not the second malice of my fate
Shall violate, and she deserves it Madam,
Even for that wherein you are excellent,
Beauty, in which she shines equal to you
Her virtue, if •he but maintain what now
She is Mistress of, beyond all competition,
So rich it cannot know to be improved,
At least in my esteem, I may offend,
But truth shall justify, I have not •latterd her,
I beg your pardon, and to leave my duty
Upon your hand, all that is good flow in you.
Did he not say Charilla, that he had
Another Mistress?
Such a sound me thought
Came from him.
Let's remove, here's too much ayre,
The sad note multiplies.
Take courage Madam,
And my advice, he has another Mistress,
If he have twenty, be you wise, and cross him
With entertaining twice as many servants,
And when he sees your humour heel return,
And sue for any Livery, grieve for this,
It must be she, it is Polidora has
Taken his heart, she live my rival,
How does the thought inflame me.
Polidora?
And yet she does but justly, and he too;
I would have robed her of Areadius heart,
And they will both have this revenge on me,
But something will rebel.
The house is desolate, none comes forth to meet us,
Shees slow to entertain us, Philocles,
I prithee tell me, did she wear no cloud
Upon her brow, wast freely that she said
We should be welcome.
To my apprehension,
Yet tic my wonder she appears not.
She nor any other,
Sure there's some conceit
To excuse it.
Stay, who's this? observe what follows?
Fortune? some mask to entertain you sir.
Not yet? what silence doth inhabit here?
No preparation to bid Fortune welcome!
Fortune the genius of the world, have we
Descended from our pride, and state to come
So far attended with our darlings, Youth
Pleasure, and Health, to be neglected thus?
Sure this is not the place? call hither Fame.
What would great Fortune?
Know,
Who dwells here.
Once more I report great Queen,
This is the house of Love.
It cannot be,
This place has too much shade, and looks as if
It had been quite forgotten of the Spring,
And sun beams Love, affect society
And heate, here all is cold as the hairs of Winter,
No harmony to catch the busy ear
Of passengers, no object of delight,
To take the wandering eyes, no song, no groan
Of Lovers, no complaint of Willow garlands,
Love has a Beacon upon his palace top
Of flaming hearts, to call the weary pilgrim
To rest, and dwell with him, I see no fire
To threaten, or to warm, can Love dwell here?
If there be noble love upon the world,
Trust Fame, and find it here.
Make good your boast
and bring him to us.
What does mean all this?
I told you sir we should have some device, 
There's Cupped now, that little Gentleman,
Has troubled every masque at Court this seven year.
No more.
Welcome to Love, how much you honour me!
It had become me, that upon your summons
I should have waited upon mighty Fortune,
But since you have vouchsafed to visit me;
All the delights Love can invent, shall flow
To entertain you, Music through the ayre
Shoot your enticing harmony.
We came to dance and revel with you
I am poor
In my ambition, and want thought to reach
How much you honour Love.
What intrusion's this?
Whom doe you seek here.
Tic Honour.
Have my servant.
Fortune is come to visit us.
And has
Corrupted Love, is this thy faith to her,
On whom we both waite, to betray her thus
To Fortunes triumph, take her giddy wheel,
And be no more companion to honour
I blush to know thee, whole believe there can
Be truth in Love hereafter?
I have found
My eyes, and see my shame, and with it, this
Proud sorceress, from whom, and all her charms,
I fly again to Honour, be my guard,
Without thee I am lost and cannot boast,
The merit of a name.
Despised? I shall
Remember this affront.
What morral's this?  
What melancholy object strikes a sudden
Chillness through all my veins, and turns me Ice?
It is the same I sent, the very same,
As the first pledge of her ensuing greatness,
Why in this mourning livery, if she live
To whom I sent it? ha, what shape of sorrow? 
It is not Polidora, she was fair
Enough, and wanted not the setting off
With such a black, if thou be Polidora,
Why mourns my love? it neither does become
Thy fortune nor my joys.
But it becomes
My griefs, this habit fits a funeral,
And it were sin, my Lord, not to lament
A fry ndnew dead.
And I yet living? can
A sorrow enter but upon thy garment,
Or discomplexion thy attire, whilst I
Enjoy a life for thee? who can deserve
Weighed with thy living comforts, but a peace
Of all this Ceremony? give him a name
He was Arcadius.
Arcadius?
A Gentleman that loved me dearly once,
And does compel these poor, and fruitless drops,
Which willingly would fall upon his hearse,
To embalm him twice.
And are you sure hes dead?
As sure as you're living sir, and yet
I did not close his eyes, but he is dead,
And I shall never see the same Arcadius,
He was a man so rich in all that's good,
At least J thought him so, so perfect in
The rules of honour, whom alone to imitate
Were glory in a Prince, Nature her self
Till his creation wrought imperfectly,
As she had made but trial of the rest,
To mould him excellent.
And is he dead?
Come, shame him not with praises, recollect
Thy scattered hopes, and let me tell my best,
And dearest •olidora, that he lives,
Still lives to honour thee.
Lives, where?
Look here.
Am not I worth your knowledge?
And my duty,
You are Demetrius King of Epire, sir.
I could not easily mistake him so,
To whom I gave my heart.
Mine is not changed,
But still hath fed upon thy memory,
These honours, and additions of state
Are lent me for thy sake, be not so strange,
Let me not lose my entertainment now
I am improved, a•d raised unto the height,
Beneath which, I did blush to ask thy love.
Give me your pardon sir, Arcadius,
At our last meeting without argument
To move him more then his affection to me,
Vowed he did love me; love me bove all women,
And to confirm his heart was truly mine,
He wished, I tremble to remember it,
When he forsook his Polidora's love,
That Heaven might kill his happiness on earth:
Was not this nobly said, did not this promise
A truth to shame the Turtles?
And his heart
Is still the same, and I thy constant Lover.
Give me your leave I pray, I would not say
Arcad•us was perjured, but the same day
Forgetting all his promises, and oaths,
While yet they hung upon his lips, for sooke me,
Dee not remember this too, gave his faith
From me, transported with the noise of greatness,
And would be married to a Kingdom.
But heaven permitted not I should dispose
What was ordained for thee.
It was not virtue
In him, for sure he found no check, no sting
In his own bosom, but gave freely all
The reins to blind ambition.
I am wounded,
The thought of thee in the throng of all my •yes,
Like poison powered in Nectar, turns me frantic,
Dear, if Arcadius have made a fault,
Let not Demetrius be punished for it,
He pleads that ever will be constant to thee.
Shall I believe mans flatteries again,
Lose my sweet rest, and peace of thought again,
Be drawn by you, from the straight paths of virtue
Into the maze of Love.
I see compassion in thy eye, that chides me
If I have either soul, but what's contained
Within these words▪ or if one syllable
Of their full force, •e not made good by me,
May all relenting thoughts in you take end,
And thy disdain be doubled, from thy pardon,
Isle count my Coronation, and that hour
Fix with a rubricke in my Calender,
As an auspicious time to entertain
Affairs of weight with Princes, think who now
Entreats thy mercy, come thou shall it be kind,
And divide titles with me
Hear me sir,
I loved you once for virtue, and havē not
A thought so much unguarded as to be won
From my truth, and innocence with any
Motives of state to affect you,
Your bright temptation mourns while it stays here
Nor can the triumph of glory, which made you
Forget me, so court my opinion back,
Were you no King, I should be sooner drawn
Again to love you, but tic now too late,
A low obedience shall become me best▪
May all the joys I want
Still waite on you, if time hereafter tell you
That sorrow for your fault hath struck me dead,
May one soft tear drop from your eye, in 〈…〉tie
Bedew my hearse, and I shall sleep secu•ely
I have but one word more for goodness sake,
For your own honour sir correct your passion
To her you shall love next, and I forgive you.
Her heart is frozen up, nor can warm prayers
Thaw it to any softness.
Isle fetch her sir again.
Persuade her not.
You give your passion too much leave to triumph.
Seek in another what she denies.
Whore's the King? oh sir, you are undone,
A dangerous treason is a foot.
What treason?
Cassandra, and Eubulus havē proclaimed
Another King, whom they pretend to be
Leonatus your elder brother, he that was,
But this morning prisoner in the Castle.
Ha?
The easy Epirotes
Gather in multitudes to advance his title,
They have seized upon the Court, secure your person
Whilst we raise power to curb this insurrection.
Lose no time then.
We will not arm one man,
Speak it again, have I a brother living?
And must be no King.
What means your grace?
This news doth speak me happy, it exalts
My heart, and makes me capable of more
Then twenty Kingdoms.
Will you not sir, stand
Upon your guard?
Isle stand upon my honour,
Mercy relieves me.
Will you lose the Kingdom?
The worlds too poor to bribe me, leave
Me all, lest you extenuate my fame, and I
Be thought to have redeemed it by your counsel,
You shall not share one scruple in the honour;
Titles may set a gloss upon our name,
But virtue only is the soul of Fame.
He's strangely possessed Gentlemen.
Here is a strange turn, Lisander.
Tic a Kingdom
Easily purchased, who will trust the faith
Of multitudes?
It was his fault, that would
So tamely give hi• title to their mercy,
Thē nēw King has possession.
And is like
To keep't, we are alone, what doft think of
This innovation? left not a fine lig?
A precious cunning in the late Protector
To shuffle a new Prince into the state.
I know not how they have shuffled, but my head on it
A false card is turned up trump, but fates look too't.
Does he not carry it bravely.
Excellently.
Philocles Lisander.
Your Lordships servants,
Are we not bound to heaven, for multiplying
These blessings on the Kingdom.
Heaven alone
Works miracles my Lord.
I think your Lordship
Had as little hope once, to see these Princes
Revive.
Here we must place our thanks,
Next providence, for preserving
So dear a pledge.
The King.
It is our pleasure
The number of our guard be doubled, give
A Largess to the Soldiers; but dismiss not
The troops till we command.
May it please.
It will not please us otherwise, my Lord,
We have tried your faith,
Does he not speakē with confidence?
My Lords, and Gentlemen, to whose faith we must
Owe next to heaven our fortune, and our safety,
After a tedious eclipse, the day
Is bright, and we invested in those honours,
Our blood, and birth did challenge.
May no time
Be registered in our annals, that shall mention
One that had life to oppose your sacred person,
Let them whose titles forged and flaw'd suspect
Their states security, our right to Epire,
Heaven is obliged to prosper, t•eason has
No face so black to fright it, all my cares
Level to this, that I may worthily
Manage the province, and advance the honour
Of our dear Country, and be confident,
If an expense of blood, may give addition
Of any happiness to you, I shall
Offer my heart the sacrifice, and rejo•e
To make my self a ghost, to have inscribed
Upon my marble, but whose cause I dyed for.
May Heaven avert such danger.
Excellent Prince,
In whom we see the Copy of his Father
None but the son of Theodosius,
Could have spoke thus.
You are pleased to interpret well,
Yet give me leave to say in my own justice,
I have but expressed the promptness of my soul
To serve you all, but tic not empty wishes
Can satisfy our mighty charge, a weight
Would make an Atlas double, a Kings name
Doth sound harmoniously to men at distance,
And those who cannot penetrate beyond
The bark, and outskinne of a common wealth,
Or state, have eyes but ravished with the Ceremony
That must attend a Prince, and understand not
What cares allay the glories of a Crown,
But good Kings find and feel the contrary,
You have tried, my Lord▪ the burden, and can tell
It would require a Pilot of more years
To steer this Kingdom, now imposed on me,
By justice of my birth.
I wish not life,
But to partake those happy days, which must
Succeed these fair proceedings, we are blessed,
But sir be sparing to your self, we shall
Hazard our joys in you too soon, the burden
Of statē affairs impose upon your counsel.
Tic fitter that we waste our lives then you,
Call age too soon upon you with the trouble,
And cares that threaten such an undertaking,
Preserve your youth.
And choose you our protector,
First that you would conclude my Lord? We will
Deserve our subjects faith for our own sake,
Not sit an idle gazer at the helm
How observed you that,
Mark how Cassander's planet struck.
He might have looked more calmly for all that
I begin to fear; but doe not yet seem troubled.
With what news travails his hast? I must secure
My self betimes, not be a King in jest,
And wear my crown a tenant to their breath.
Demetrius sir, your brother,
With other traitors that oppose your claims
Are fled to the Castle of Nestorius
And fortify.
I said not so my Lord.
Isle have it thought so, hence.
Plant forces to batter
The walls, and in their ruin bring us word
They live not.
Good sir hear me.
Let it work,
Were Demetrius dead, we easily might uncrowne
This swollen impostor, and my son be fair
To peace with young Sophia, who I hear
Repents her late affront.
Their lives may doe
You service, let not blood stain your beginnings
The people not yet warm in their allegiancē,
May think it worth their tumult to revenge it
With hazard of your self.
Who dares but think it?
Yet offer first our mercy, if they yield,
Demetrius must not live, my Lord your counsel,
What if he were in heaven?
You have my consent,
You shannot stay long after him.
Sophia is
Not my sister,
To prevent al that may endanger us, we'll marry her
That done no matter though we stand discovered,
For in her title then we are King of Epire,
Without dispute.
Hum? in my judgement sir,
That wonot doe so well.
Whats your opinion?
He countermines my plot: are you so cunning
Whats that you mutter sir?
I mutter sir?
Best say I am no King, but some impostor
Raised up to gull the state.
Very fine to have said within
Few hours you'd been no King, nor like to be,
Was not in the compass of high treason
I take it.
Restrain your anger, the Kings moved, speak not▪
I will speak louder, doe I not know him?
That self same hand that raised him to the throne
Shall plu ke him from it, is this my reward?
Our guard, to prison with him,
Me to prison?
Off with his head.
My head?
Vouchsafe to hear me, great sir.
How dares he be so insolent?
Jha wrought my self into a fine condition,
Dee know me Gentlemen?
Very well my Lord;
How are we bound to heaven for multiplying
These blessings on the Kingdom.
We allow it.
Counsel did never blast a Princes ēare.
Convey him to the sanctuary of rebels,
Nestorius house, where our proud brother has
Enscon•d himself, theyle entertain him lovingly,
He will be a good addition to the traitors,
Obey me or you dye for it, what are Kings
When subjects dare affrout em.
I shall vex
Thy soul for this.
Away with him, when Kings
Frown, let offenders tremble, this flows not
From any cruelty in my nature, but
The fate of an usurper, he that will
Be confirmed great without just title to it,
Must lose compassion, know whats good, not doe it.
Madam, the Princess Sophia.
I attend her highness. 
How much your grace honours your humble servant
I hope my brother's well.
I hope so too Madam.
Doe you but hope? he came to be your guest.
We are all his whilst he is pleased to honour
This poor roof with his royal presence Madam.
I came to ask your pardon Polidora,
You never Madam trespassed upon me,
Wrong not your goodness.
I can be but penitent,
Unless you point me out some other way
To satisfy.
Dear Madam doe not mock me.
there is no injury like that to love,
I find it now in my own sufferings,
But though I would have robed thee of Arcadius
Heaven knew a way to reconcile your hearts,
And punished me in those joys you have found,
I read the story of my loss of honour,
Yet can rejoice, and heartily, that you
Have met your own again.
Whom doe you mean?
My brother.
He is found to himself and honour,
He is my King, and though I must acknowledge
He was the glory of my thoughts, and I
Loved him as you did Madam, with desire
To be made his, reason, and duty since,
Formed me to other knowledge, and I now
Look on him without any wish of more
Then to be called his subject.
Has he made
Himself less capable by being King.
Of what?
Of your affection.
With your pardon Madam.
Love in that sense you mean, lest Polidora
When he forsook Arcadius, I disclaim
All ties between us, more then what a name
Of King must challenge from my obedience.
This does confirm my jealousy, my heart,
For my sake Madam, has h• lost his value?
Let me beseech your grace, I may have leave
To answer in some other cause, or person,
This argument but opens a sad wound
To make it bleed a fr•sh, we may change this
Discourse, I would elect some subject, whose
Praises may more delight your care then this
Can mine; let's talk of young Lisimachus.
Ha? my presaging fear•s.
How does you• grace?
Well, you were talking of Lisimachus,
Pray give me your opinion of him.
Mine?
It will be much short of his worth, J think him
A gentleman so perfect in all goodness,
That if there be one in the world deserves
The best of women, heaven created him,
To make her happy.
You have in a little, Madam,
Expressed a Volume of mankind, a miracle,
But all have not the same degree of faith,
He is but young.
What mistress would desire
Her servant old? he has both Spring to please
Her eye, and Summer to return a harvest.
He is black.
He sets a beauty off more rich,
And she thats fair will love him, faint complexions
Betray effeminate minds, and love of change,
Two beauties in a bed, compound few men,
He's not so fair to counterfeit a woman,
Nor yet so black, but blushes may betray
His modesty.
His proportion exceeds not.
That praises him, and well compacted frame
Speaks temper, and sweet flow of elements,
Vast buildings are more of• for show then use,
I would not have my eyes put to the travel
Of many acres, ere I could examine
A man from head to foot, he has no great,
But he may boast, an eligant composition.
Isle hear no more, you have so far outdone
My injuries to you, that I call back
My penitence, and must tell Polidora,
This revenge ill becomes her. Am I thought
So lost in soul to hear, and forgive this?
In what shade doe I live? or shall I think
I have not at the lowest enough merit,
Setting aside my birth, to poyze with yours,
Forgive my modest thoughts, if I rise up
My ownē defence, and tell this unjust Lady
So great a Winter hath not frozen yet
My cheek, but there is something nature planted,
That carries as much bloom, and spring upon it
As yours, what flame is in your eye, but may
Find competition here (forgive again
My Virgin honour,) what is in your lip,
To tice the enamoured soul, to dwell with more
Ambition then the yet unwithered blush
That speaks the innocence of mine. 
Oh brother?
Isle talk with you anon, my Polidora,
Allow thy patience till my breath recover
Which now comes lade• with the richest news
Thy ear was ever blessed with.
Both your looks,
And voice express some welcome accident.
Guess what in wish could make me fortunate
And heaven hath dropped that on Demetrius.
What means this ecstasy?
It were sin to busy
Thy thoughts upon it, Isle tell thee that I could
Retain some part, tic too wide a joy
To be expressed so soon, and yet it falls
In a few syllables, thou wot scarce believe me,
I am no King.
Hows that!
Good heaven forbid.
Forbid? Heaven has relieved me with a mercy
I knew not how to ask, I have they say
An elder brother living, crowned already,
I only keep my name Demetrius,
Without desire of more addition,
Then to return thy servant.
You amaze me,
Can you rejoice to be deposd:
It but
Translates me to a fairer and better Kingdom
In Polidora.
Me?
Did you not say,
Were I no King you could be drawn to love
Me again, that was consented to in Heaven,
A Kingdom first betrayed my ambitious soul
To forget thee, that, and the flattering glories,
How willingly Demetrius doe resign,
The Angels know, thus naked without titles
I throw me on thy charity, and shall
Boast greater Empire to be thine again, then
To wear the triumphs of the world upon me.
Be not so careless of your self, the people
Gather in multitudes, to your protection
Offering their lives, and fortunes, if they may
But see you sir, and hear you speak to em,
Accept their duties, and in time prevent
Your ruin.
Be not desperate, tic counsel.
You trouble me with noise, speak Polidora
For your own sake preserve your self,
My fears distract my reason.
Lord Lisimachus
With something that concerns your safety, is
Fled hither, and desires a present hearing.
His soul is honest, be not sir a mad man,
And for a Lady give up all our freedoms.
Isle say any thing here Lisimachus.
Dear brother hear him.
Sir, I come to yield
My self your prisoner, if my father have
Raised an Impostor to supplant your title
Which I suspect and inwardly doe bleed for.
I shall not only by the tender of
My self declare my innocence, but either
By my unworthy life secure your person,
Or by what death you shall impose, reward
The unexpected treason.
Brave young man,
Did you not hear him brother?
I am not minded.
Be witness Madam, I resign my heart
It never was another, you declare
Too great a satisfaction, I hope
This will destroy your jealousy,
Remember now your danger.
I despise it,
What fate dares injure me?
Yet hear me sir.
Forgive me Polidora, you are happy,
My hopes are removed farther, I had thought
Lisimachus had meant you for his mistress,
Tic misery to feed, and not know where
To place my jealousy.
Now tic too late,
You may be deaf, until the Cannon make,
You find your sense, we are shut up now by
A troupe of Horse, thank your self.
They will
Admit conditions.
And allow us q•artery.
We are all lost.
Be comforted.
News my Lord Cassandra sent by the new King.
To bear us company.
Not as prisoner?
It does appear no otherwise, the soldiers
Declare how much they love him, by their noise
Of scorn, and joy to see him so rewarded.
It cannot be.
You'll find it presently,
He curses the new King, talks treason against him
As nimble as he were in's shirt, he's here,
Oh let me beg until my knees take root
In the earth, sir, can you pardon me?
For what?
For Treason, desperate, most malicious treason
I have undone you sir▪
It does appear
You had a will.
Isle make you all the rēcompencē I can,
But ere you kill me hear me, know the man,
Whom I to serve my unjust ends, advanced
To your throne, is an impostor, a mere counter•eit,
Eubulus son.
It is not then our brother?
An insolent usurper, proud, and bloody
Seleucus, is no leprosy upon me?
There is not punishment enough in nature
To quit my horrid act, I have not in
My stock of blood to satisfy with weeping,
Nor could my soul though melted to a flood
Within me, gus• out tears to wash my stain off.
How? an Impostor, what will become on's now?
We are at his mercy.
Sir, the peoples hearts
Will come to their own dwelling, when they see
I dare accuse my self, and suffer for it,
Have courage then young King, thy •ate cannot
Be long compelled.
Rise, our misfortune
Carries this good, although it lose our hopes,
It makes you friend with virtue, weal expect
What providence will doe.
You are too merciful.
Our duties shall beg heaven still to prēserve you.
Our enemy desires some parley sir.
It is not amiss to hear their proposition.
Isle waite upon you.
Thou art my angel, and can best instruct me,
Boldly present our selves, you'll with Cassandra.
And in death be blessed 
To find your charity.
Lisimachus,
Madam.
They will not miss your presence, the small time
Is spent in asking of a question.
I waite your pleasure.
Sit I have a suite to you.
To me? it must be granted.
If you have
Cancelled your kind opinion of me,
Deny me not to know, who hath succeeded
Sophia in your heart. I beg the name
Of your new Mistress.
You shall know her Madam,
If but these tumults cease▪ and fate allow us
To see the Court again, I hope you'll bring
No mutiny against her, but this is
No time to talk of Love, let me attend you.
I must expect, till you are pleased to satisfy
My poor▪ request▪ conduct me at your pleasure▪
They are too slow, dispatch new messengers,
To entreatem fairly hither, I am extasied,
Were you witness for me too, is it possible
I am what this affirms▪ true Leonatus▪
And were you not my father, was I given
In trust to you an Infant?
Tic a truth,
Our solo's bound to acknowledge▪ you supplied
The absence and opinion of my son,
Who dyed but to make you my greater care
I know not of Demetrius, but supposed
Him dead indeed, as Epire thought you were,
Your Fathers character doth want no testimony,
Which but compared with what concerns Demetrius
Will prove it self King Theodosius act,
Your royal Father.
I am subscribed to both his Legacies
By oath obliged to secrecy, until
Thus fairly summoned to reveal the trust.
Cassandra had no thought you would prove thus.
To whose policy I gave this aim, although
He wrought you up to serve but as his engine
To batter young Demetrius, for it was
Your Fathers prudent jealousy, that made him
Give out your early deaths, as if his soul
Prophesied his own first, and feared to leave
Either of you to the unsafe protection,
Of one whose study would be to supplant
Your right, and make himself the King of Epire.
Your sister fair Sophia in your Fathers
Life, was designed to marry with Lisimachus
That guarded her, although she used some art
To quit her pupillage, and being abso'ute,
Declared love to Demetrius, which enforced
Macarius to discover first your brother.
No more, least you destroy again Leonatus▪
With wonder of his fate, are they not come yet?
Something it was, I felt within my envy
Of young Demetrius fortune, there were seeds
Scattered upon my heart, that made it swell
With thought of Empire, Princes I see cannot
Be totally eclipsed, but wherefore stays
Demetrius, and Sophia, at whose names
A gentle spirit walked upon my blood.
They are here,
Then thus I fly into their bosoms,
Nature has rectified in me Demetrius,
The wanderings of ambition, our dear sister
You are amazed, I did expect it, read
Assurance there, the day is big with wonder,
What means all this?
Lisimachus, be dear to us,
Cassandra, you are welcome too.
Not I,
I doe not look for it, all this shannot bribe
My conscience to your •action, and make
Me false again, Seleueus is no son
Of Theodosius, my dear Countrymen
Correct your erring duties, and to that,
Your lawful King, prostrate your selves, De•rius
Doth challenge all your knees.
All love and duty,
Flow from me to my royal King, and brother
I am confirmed.
You are too credulous,
What can betray your faith so much?
Sophia, you appear sad, as if your will
Gave no consent to this days happiness.
No joy exceeds Sophia's for your self.
With your pardon sir, I apprehend
A cause that makes her troubled, she desires
To know what other mistress since her late
Unkindness, I have chosen to direct
My faith and service.
Another Mistress.
Yes sir.
And does our sister love Lisimachus?
Here's something would confess.
He must not dare
To affront Sophia.
How my shame confounds me,
I beg your justice, without pity on
My age.
Your penance shall be, to be faithful
To our state hereafter.
May you live long and happy,
Leonatus King of Epire.
But whore's your other Mistress?
Even here sir.
Our sister? is this another Mistress sir?
It holds
To prove my thoughts were so when she began
Her sorrow for 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, that sweetness
Deserved I should est 〈◊〉 her another mistress,
Then when she cruelly forsook Lisimacus,
Your pardon Madam, and receive a heart
Proud with my first devotio• to serve you
In this I am crowned again, now mine for ever.
You have deceived her happily,
Joy to you both.
We are ripe for the same wishes,
Polidora's part of me.
He all my blessing.
Heaven power full joys upon you.
We are all blessed,
There wants but one to fill your arms.
My mistress,
And wife shall be my Country, to which I
Was in my birth contracted, your love since
Hath played the Priest to perfect what was Ceremony
Though Kingdoms, by just•tkes prove our own,
The subjects hearts doe 〈◊〉 secure a Crown.
THere is no Coronation to day.
Unless your gentle votes doe crown our Play,
If smiles appear within each Ladies eye,
Which are the leading stars in this fair sky,
Our solemn day sets glorious, for then
We hope by their soft influence, the men
Will grace what they first shined on, maked appear,
(Both) how we please, and bless our co•tous •are
With your applause, more welcome then the Bell•,
Upon a triumph, Bonfires, or what else
Can speak a Coronation. And though I
Were late disposed and spoiled of Majesty▪
By the kindayde of your hands, Gentlemen,
I quickly may be Crowned a Queen 〈◊〉▪

Be patient Madam, you may have your pleasure.
Tic that I came to town for, I wo'd not
Endure again the country conversation,
To be the Lady of six shires! the men
So near the Primitive making, they retain
A sense of nothing but the earth, their brains
And barren heads standing as much in want
Of plowing as their ground, to hear a fellow
Make himself merry and his horse with whisteling
Sellingers round, to observe with what solemnity
They keep their Wakes, and throw for pewter Candlesticks,
How they become the Morris, whi•• whose bells
They ring all into Whitson Ales, and sweat,
Through twenty Scarves and Napkins, till the Hobbyhorse
Tire, and the maid Marrian dissolved to a gelly,
Be kept for spoon meat.
These with your pardon are no Argument
To make the country life appear so hateful,
At least to your particular, who enjoyed
A blessing in that calm; would you be pleased
To think so, and the pleasure of a kingdom,
While your own will commanded what should move
Delights, your husbands love and power joined
To give your life more harmony▪ you lived there,
Secure, and innocent, beloved of all,
Praisd for your hospitality, and pried for▪
You might be envied, but malice knew
Not where you dwelt, I wo'd not prophecy
But leave to your own apprehension
What may succeed your change.
You doe imagine,
No doubt, you have talked wisely, and confuted,
London past all defence, your Master should
Doe well to send you back into the country,
With title of Supernitendent Bailey.
How Madam.
Even so sir.
I am a Gentleman though now your servant.
A country gentleman,
By your affection to converse with stable,
His tenants will advance you wit, and plump it so
With beef and bag-pudding.
You may say your pleasure,
It becomes not me dispute.
Complain to the Lord of the soil your master.
You're a woman of an ungoverned passion, and I pity you.
How how? Whats the matter?
Nothing Sir.
Angry sweet heart?
I am angry with my self,
To be so miserably restrained in things,
Wherein it doth concern your love and honour
To see me satisfied.
In what Aretina?
Dost thou accuse me? have I not obeyed
All thy desires, against mine own opinion,
Quited the country, and removed the hope
Of our return, by sale of that fair Lordship
We lived in, changed a calm and retire life
For this wild town, composed of noise and charge.
What charge more than is necessary,
For a Lady of my birth and education▪
I am not ignorant, how much Nobility
Flows in your blood, your kinsmen great and powerful,
It▪h State, but with this lose not your memory
Of being my wife, I shall be studious
Madam to give the dignity of your birth
All the best ornaments which become my fortune
But would not flatter it, to ruin both,
And be the fable of the town, to teach
Other men loss of wit by mine, employed
To serve your vast expenses.
Am I then
Brought in the balance? so Sir.
Though you weigh
Me in a partial scale my heart is honest,
And must take liberty to think you have
Obeyed no modest counsel to effect,
Nay study ways of pride and costly ceremony,
Your change of gaudy furniture and pictures
Of this Italian Master, and that Dutchmnas,
Your mighty looking-glasses like Artillery;
Brought whom on Engines, the superfluous plate,
Antique and novel, vanities of tires,
Fourscore pound suppers for my Lord your kinsman,
Banquets for tother Lady, aunt, and cozens,
And perfumes that exceed all train of servants,
To stifle us at home and show abroad
More motley than the French, or the Venetian▪
About your Coach whose rude Postilion
Must pester every narrow lane, till passengers
And tradsmen curse your choking up their stalls;
And common cries pursue your Ladyship,
For hindering o'their market.
Have you done sir.
I could accuse the gaiety of your wardrobe,
And prodigal embroderies under which
Rich Sattens, Plushes, cloth of Silver, dare
Not show their own complexions, your jewels
Able to burn out the Spectators eyes,
And show like Bonfires on you by the tapers,
Something might here be spared, which safely of
Your birth and honour, since the truest wealth,
Shines from the soul, and draws up just admirers,
I could urge something more:
Pray doe I like
Your homily of thrift.
I could wish Madam
You would not game so much.
A gamester too?
But are not come to that repentance yet,
Should teach you skill enough to raise your profit,
You look not through the subtlety of Cards,
And mysteries of Dice, nor can you save
Charge with the box, buy petticotes and purls,
And keep your family by the precious income,
Nor doe I wish you should, my poorest servant
Shall not upbraid my tables, nor his hire
Purchased beneath my honour, you make play
Not a Pastime but a tyranny, and vex
Your self and my estate by it.
Good, proceed.
Another game you have, which consumes more
Your fame than purse, you revels in the night,
Your meetings called the Ball, to which appear,
As to the Court of Pleasure, all your gallants,
And Ladies thither bound by a Subpena
Of Venus, and small Cupids high displeasure,
Tic but the family of love translated
Into more costly sin, there was a play on it,
And had the Poet not been bribed to a modest
Expression of your Antique gambols, in it,
Some darkes had been discovered, and the deeds too,
In time he may repent and make some blush.
To see the second part danced on the Stage;
My thoughts acquit you for dishonouring me
By any foul act, but the virtuous know,
Tic not enough to clear our selves, but the
Suspicions of our shame.
Have you concluded
Your lecture?
I ha done, and howsoever
My language my appear to you, it carries
No other than my fair and just intent
To your delights without curb to their modest,
And noble freedom.
Isle not be so tedious,
In my reply, but without art or elegance,
Assure you I keep still my first opinion,
And though you vay'le, your avatitious meaning
With handsome names of modesty, and thrift,
I find you would entrench and wound the liberty
I was borne with, were my desires unpriviledged
By example, while my judgement thought 'em fit,
You ought not to oppose, but when the practise
And tract of every honourable Lady,
Authorise me, I take it great injustice,
To have my pleasures circumscribed, and taught me,
A narrow minded husband is a thief
To his own fame, and his preferment too,
He shuts his parts and fortunes from the world,
While from the popular vote and knowledge men
Rise to employment in the state.
I have
No great ambition to buy preferment
At so dear rate.
Nor I to sell my honour,
By living poor and sparingly, I was not
Bred in that ebb of fortune, and my fate
Shall not compel me too't.
I know not Madam,
But you pursue these ways.
What ways?
In the strict sense of honesty I dare
Make oath, they are Innocent.
Do not divert,
By busy troubling of your brain, those thoughts
That should preserve em.
How was that?
Tic English.
But carries some unkind sense.
Good morrow my sweet Madam.
Decoy welcome, this visit is a favour.
Alas sweet Madam, I cannot stay, I came
But to present my service to your Ladyship;
I could not pass by your door, but I must take
The boldness to tender my respects.
You oblige me Madam, but I must
Not dispense so with your absence.
Alas, the Coach Madam stays for me at the door.
Thou shall it command mine, prithee sweet Decoy.
I would waite on you Madam, but I have many
Visits to make this morning I beseech.
So you will promise to dine with me.
I shall
Present a guest.
Why then good morrow Madam.
A happy day shine on your Ladyship.
Whats your news sir?
Madam two gentlemen.
What gentlemen? Have they no names.
They are
The gentleman with his own head of hair,
Whom you commended for his horsemanship
In Hide Park, and becoming the saddle
The tother day.
What circumstance is this,
To know him by.
His names at my tongues end,
He liked the fashion of your pearl chain Madam,
And borrowed it for his Jeweller to take
A copy by it.
What cheating gallants this?
That never walks without a Ladies buck,
And plays with fans Mr. Alexander Kickshaw,
I thought I should remember him.
Whats the other?
What an unlucky memory I have?
The gallant that still dances in the street,
And wears a gross of Ribbon in his hat,
That carries Oringado in his pocket,
And Suger-plumbs to sweeten his discourse,
That studies complement, defies all wit
On black, and censures plays that are not bawdy,
Mr. Iohn littleworth.
They are welcome, but
Pray entertain them a small time, lest I
Be unprovided.
Did they ask for me?
No sir.
It matters not, they must be welcome.
Fie, how's this hair disordered? here's a curl,
Straddle most impiously, I must to my closet.
Waite on em: my Lady will return again,
I have to such a height fulfil d her humour,
All applications dangerous, these gallants
Must be received or she will fall into
A tempest, and the house be shook with names
Of all her kindred, tic a servitude,
I may in time shake off.
Save you Sir Thomas.
Save you gentlemen.
I kiss your hand.
What day is it abroad?
The morning rises from your Ladies eye,
If she look clear, we take the happy omen
Of a fair day.
Sheele instantly appear,
To the discredit of your complement,
But you express your wit thus.
And you modesty,
Not to affect the praises of your own.
Leaving this subject, what games now on foot▪
What exercise carries the general vote?
Oath town now nothing moves without your knowledge,
The cocking now has all the noise, Isle have
A hundred pieces of one battle, Oh,
These birds of Mars!
Venus is Mars his bird too.
Why and the pretty Doves are Venuses,
To show that kisses draw the Chariot.
I am for that skirmish.
When shall wee have
More Booths and Bag-pipes upon Bansted downs,
No mighty race is expected, but my Lady returns.
Fair morning to you gentlemen,
You went not late to bed by your early visit,
You doe me honour.
It becomes our service.
What news abroad? you hold precious intelligence.
All tongues are so much busy with your praise,
They have not time to frame other discourse,
Will please you Madam? taste a Sugerplum.
What do's the Goldsmith think the Pearl is worth.
You borrowed of my Lady?
Tic a rich one.
She has many other toys whose fashion you,
Will like extremely, you have no intention
To buy any of her Jewels.
Understand me.
You had rather sell perhaps, but leaving this,
I hope you'll dine with us.
I came a purpose.
And where were you last night?
I Madam? where
I slept not, it had been sin where so much
Delight and beauty was to keep me waking,
There is a Lady Madam will be worth
Your free society, my conversation
Ne'er knew so elegant and brave a soul,
With most incomparable flesh and blood,
So spirited, so Courtly speaks the Languages,
Sings, Dances, plays of the Lute to admiration,
Is fair and paints not, games too, keeps a table,
And talks most witty Satire, has a wit
Of a clean Mercury.
Is she married?
No.
A Virgin?
Neither.
What a widow? some∣thing.
Of this wide commendation might have been
Excusd, this such a prodigy?
Repent
Before I name her, she did never see
Yet full sixteen, an age in the opinion
Of wise men not contemptible, she he's
Mourned out her year too for the honest Knight
That had compassion of her youth, and died
So timely, such a widow is not common,
And now she shines more fresh and tempting
Then any natural Virgin.
Whats her name?
She was Christened Celestina, by her husband
The Lady Bellamour, this Ring was hers.
You borrowed it to copy out the Posy.
Are they not pretty Rubies? it was a grace
She was pleased to show me, that I might have one
Made of the same fashion, for I love
All pretty forms.
And is she glorious?
She is full of Jewels Madam, but I am
Most taken with the bravery of her mind,
Although her garments have all grace and ornament.
You have been high in praises.
I come short,
No flattery can reach her.
Now my Lady
Is troubled as she feared to be eclipsed,
This news will cost me somewhat.
You deserve
Her favour for this noble character.
And I possess it by my stars benevolence.
You must bring us acquainted.
I pray doe sir.
I long to see her too, Madam I have
Thought upon it and corrected my opinion,
Pursue what ways of pleasure your desires
Incline you too, not only with my state,
But with my person I will follow you,
I see the folly of my thrift, and will
Repent in Sack and prodigality
To your own hearts content.
But doe not mock.
Take me to your embraces gentlemen
And tutor me.
And will you kiss the Ladies?
And sing and dance, I long to see this beauty,
I wood fine lose a hundred pounds at dice now,
Thou shall it have another gown and petticoat,
To morrow will you sell my running horses?
We have no Greek wine in the house I think,
Pray send one of our footmen to the Merchant,
And throw the hogsheads of March-beare into
The kenell, to make room for Sackes and Claret,
What think you to be drunk yet before dinner?
We will have constant music and maintain
Them and their Fiddles in fantastic liveries,
Isle tune my voice to catches, I must have
My dining room enlarged to invite Ambassadors,
Weal feast the parish in the fields, and teach
The Military men new discipline,
Who shall charge all their new Artillery
With Oringes and Lemonds, boy to play
All dinner upon our capons.
Hoe's exalted.
I will doe any thing to please my Lady,
Let that suffice and kiss oath same condition,
I am converted, doe not you dispute
But patiently allow the miracle.
I am glad to hear you sir in so good tune.
Madam the Painter.
I am to sit this morning.
Doe, while I give new directions to my Steward.
With your favour we will waite on you, sitting's but
A melancholy exercise without
Some company to discourse▪
It does conclude
A Ladies morning work, we rise, make fine,
Sit for our Picture, and tic time to dine.
Praying's forgot.
Tic out of fashion.
Fie, what an air this room has.
Tic persum'd.
With some cheap sluffe is it your wisdoms thrift
To infect my nostrils thus? Or i'st to favour
The Gout in your worships hand? You are afraid
To exercise your pen in your account Book?
Or doe you doubt my credit to discharge
Your bills.
Madam, I hope you have not found
My duty with the guilt of sloth or jealousy,
Unapt to your command.
You can extenuate
Your faults with language sir, but I expect
To be obeyed; What hangings have we here?
They are Arras Madam.
Impudence I know it,
I will have fresher and more rich, not wrought
With faces that may scandalise a Christian
With Jewish stories stuffed with Corn and Camels,
You had best wrap all my chambers in wild Irish,
And make a nursery of Monsters here,
To fright the Ladies comes to visit me.
Madam I hope.
I say I will have other,
Good Master Steward of a finer loom,
Some silk and silver if your worship please,
To let me be at so much cost Isle have
Stories to sit the seasons of the year,
And change as often as I please.
You shall Madam.
I am bound to your consent forsooth, and is
My coach brought home?
This morning I expect it.
The inside as I gave direction,
Of crimson plush.
Of crimson Camel plush.
Ten thousand moths consum't, shall I ride through
The streets in penance wrapped up round in hair cloth,
Sel't to an Alderman, twill serve his wife
To go a feasting to their country house,
Or fetch a Merchants Nurse child, and come home
Laden with fruit and Cheese cakes; I despise it.
The nails adorn it Madam, set in method
And pretty forms.
But single guilt I warrant.
No Madam:
Another Solecism, oh fie,
This fellow will bring me to a Consumption
With fretting at his ignorance, some Lady
Had rather never pray, than go to Church in it;
The nails not double guilt? to market wo't,
Twill hackny out to Mile-end, or convey
Your city tumblers to be drunk with Cream
And Prunes at Islington.
Good Madam hear me.
Isle rather be beholding to my Aunt
The Countess for her mourning coach, then be
Disparaged so, shall any juggling tradsman
Be at charge to shoe his running horse with gold,
And shall my coach nails be but single guilt?
How dare these knaves abuse me so?
Vouchsafe
To hear me speak.
Is my Sedan yet finished?
And liveries for my men-Mules according
As I gave charge.
Yes Madam it is finished,
But without tilting plumes at the four corners,
The scarlet's pure, but not embroidered.
What mischief were it to your conscience
Were my coach lined with tissue, and my harness
Covered with needlework? if my Sedan
Had all the story of the Prodigal,
Embroidered with pearl.
Alas good Madam,
I know tic your own cost, I am but your Steward,
And wot discharge my duty the best way,
You have been pleased to hear me, tic not for
My profit, that I manage your estate,
And save expense, but for your honour Madam.
How sir, my honour?
Though you hear it not
Men's tongues are liberal in your character,
Since you began to live thus high, I know
Your fame is precious to you.
I were best
Make you my governor; audacious Varlet,
How dare you interpose your doting counsel?
Mind your affairs with more obedience,
Or I shall ease you of an office sir,
Must I be limited to please your honour?
Or for the vulgar breath confine my pleasures,
I will pursue'em in what shapes I fancy,
Here, and abroad, my entertainments shall
Be oftner, and more rich, who shall control me?
I live in the strand, whether few Ladies come
To live, and purchase, more than fame, I will
Be hospitable then, and spare no cost
That may engage all generous report
To trumpet forth my bounty and my bravery,
Till the Court envy, and remove, Isle have
My house the Academy of wits, who shall
Exalt with rich Sack, and Sturgeon,
Write Panegyrics of my feasts, and praise
The method of my witty superfluities,
The horses shall be taught with frequent waiting
Upon my gates, to stop in their career
Toward Charing-crosse, spite of the Coachman's fury.
And not a tilter, but shall strike his plume,
When he fails by my window, my Balcony
Shall be the Courtiers Idol, and more gazed at,
Than all the Pageantry at Temple bar,
By country Clients.
Sure my Laddie's mad.
Take that for your ill manners.
Thank you Ma∣dam,
I would there were less quicksilver in your fingers.
There's more than simple honesty in a servant
Requi•d to his full duty, none should dare,
But with a look, much less a saucy language
Check at their Mistress pleasure, I'm resolved
To pay for some delight, my estate will bear it,
Isle reine it shorter when I please.
A gentleman
Desires to speak with your Ladyship.
His name?
He says you know him not, he seems to be
Of quality.
Admit him. Sir with me.
Madam I know not, how you may receive
This boldness from me, but my fair intents
Known, will incline you to be charitable.
No doubt sir.
He must live obscurely Madam,
That hath not heard what virtues you possess,
And I a poor admirer of your fame,
Am come to kiss your hand.
That all your business?
Though it were worth much travel, I have more
In my ambition.
Speak it freely sir.
You are a widow.
So.
And I a Bachelor.
You come a wooing sir, and would perhaps
Show me a way to reconcile these two.
And bless my stars for such a happiness.
I like you sir the better, that you doe not
Wander about, but shoot home to the meaning,
Tic a confidence will make a man
Know sooner what to trust to, but I never
Saw you before, and I believe you come not
With hope to find me desperate upon marriage,
If maids out of their ignorance of what
Men, are refuse these offers, widows may
Out of their knowledge be allowed some coyness,
And yet I know not how much happiness
A peremptory answer may deprive me of,
You may be some young Lord, and though I see not
Your footmen and your groom, they may not be
Far off in conference with your horse, please you
To instruct me with your title, against which
I would not willingly offend.
I am
A gentleman, my name is Hairecut madam.
Sweet Mr. Hairecut, are you a Courtier?
Yes
J did think so by your confidence,
Not to detain you sir with circumstance,
J was not so unhappy in my husband
But that tic possible J may be a wife
Again, but J must tell you, he that wins
My affection shall deserve me.
J will hope
If you can love, J shanot present Madam
An object to displease you in my person,
And when time, and your patience shall possess you
With further knowledge of me, and the truth
Of my devotion, you will not repent
The offer of my service.
You say well.
How long doe you imagine you can love sir?
Is it a Quotidian, or will it hold
But every other day?
You are pleasant Madam.
Dost take you with a burning at the first,
Or with a cold fit, for you gentlemen
Have both your Summer, and your Winter service.
J am ignorant what you mean, but J shall never
Be cold in my affection to such beauty.
And twill be somewhat long ere J be warm in it.
If you vouchsafe me so much honour Madam,
That J may waite on you sometimes, J shanot
Despair to see a change.
But now J know
Your mind, you shall not need to tell it, when
You come again, J shall remember it.
You make me fortunate.
Madam your kinswomen
The Lady Novice and her sister are
New lighted from their coach.
I did expect i'm,
They partly are my pupils, in attend i'm.
Madam I have been too great a trespasser
Upon your patience, isle take my leave,
You have affairs, and I have some employment
Calls me to Court, I shall present again
A servant to you.
Sir you may present,
But not give fire I hope, now to the Ladies
This recreation's past, the next must be
To read to them some Court Philosophy.
Tic a strange humour I have undertaken
To dance, and play, and spend as fast as she does,
But I am resolved, it may doe good upon her,
And fright her into thrift, nay isle endeavour
To make her jealous too, if this doe not
Allay her gamboling, shees's past a woman
And only a miracle must tame her.
Tic Mr. Frederick my Ladies nephew.
What of him?
Is come from the University.
By whose directions?
It seems my Ladies.
Let me speak with him
Before he see his Aunt, I doe not like it.
Mr. Frederick welcome I expected not
So soon your presence, what's the hasty cause?
These letters from my Tutor will acquaint you.
Welcome home sweet Mr. Frederick.
Whore's my Aunt?
Shoe's busy about her painting, in her closet,
The Outlandish man of Art, is copying out
Her countenance.
She is sitting for her picture.
Yes seer, and when tic drawn, she will be hanged
Next the French Cardinal in the dining room,
But when she hears you're come, she will dismiss
The Belgic gentleman to entertain
Your worship.
Change of air has made you witty.
Your Tutor gives you a handsome character
Frederick, and is sorry your Aunts pleasure
Commands you from your studies, but I hope
You have no quarrel to the liberal arts,
Learning is an addition beyond
Nobility of birth, honour of blood
Without the ornament of knowledge is
A glorious ignorance.
I never knew more sweet and happy hours
Than I employed upon my books, I heard
A part of my Philosophy, and was so
Delighted with the harmony of nature,
I could have wasted my whole life upon it.
Tic pity a rash indulgence should corrupt
So fair a Genius, shoe's here, isle observe.
My most loved Aunt.
Support me, J shall faint.
What ails your Ladyship?
Is that Frederick,
In black.
Yes Madam, but the doublets Satin.
The boy's undone.
Madam you appear trow∣bled.
Have J not cause? Was not J trusted with
Thy education boy, and have they sent thee
Home like a very scholar.
It was ill done
How ere they used him in the University,
To send him to his friends thus.
Why sir, black
(I or tic the colour that offends your eyesight)
Is not within my reading any blemish,
Sables are no disgrace in Heraldry.
Tic coming from the College thus, that makes it
Dishonourable, while you ware it for
Your father, it was commendable, or were
Your Aunt dead, you might morn and justify.
What luck J did not send him into France,
They would have given him generous education,
Taught him another garb to wear his locke,
And shape, as gaudy as the Summer, how
To dance, and wag his feather ala mode,
To complement, and cringe, to talk not modestly
Like J forsooth, and no forsooth, to blush
And look so like a Chaplain, there he might
Have learned a brazen confidence, and observed
So well the custom of the country, that
He might by this time have invented fashions
For us, and been a benefit to the Kingdom
Preserved our Tailors in their wits, and fav'd
The charge of sending into foreign Courts
For pride and antique fashions, observe,
In what a posture he does hold his hat now.
Madam with your pardon, you have practiced
Another dialect then was taught me when
I was commended to your care and breeding,
I understand not this, Latin or Greek
Are more familiar to my apprehension,
Logic was not so hard in my first lectures
As your strange language.
Some strong waters, oh!
Comfits will be as comfortable to your stomach Ma∣dam.
I fear hoe's spoiled forever, he did name
Logic, and may for ought I know be gone
So far to understand it, I did always
Suspect they would corrupt him in the College,
Will your Greek saws and sentences discharge
The Mercer, or is Latin a fit language
To court a mistress in? Mr. Alexander
If you have any charity, let me
Commend him to your breeding, I suspect
I must employ my Doctor first, to purge.
The University that lies in's head
It alters his complexion.
If you dare
Trust me to serve him.
Mr. Littleworth
Be you joined in commission.
I will teach him
Postures and rudiments.
I have no patience
To see him in this shape, it turns my stomach,
When he has cast his Academic skin
He shall be yours, I am bound in conscience
To see him bred, his own state shall maintain
The charge, while hoe's my Ward, come hither sir.
What does my Aunt mean to doe with me?
To make you a fine gentleman, and translate you
Out of your learned language sir, into
The present Goth and Vandal, which is French.
Into what mischief will this humour ebb?
She will undo the boy, I see him ruined,
My patience is not manly, but I must
Use stratagem to reduce her, open ways
Give me no hope.
You shall be obeyed Madam.
Mr. Steward, are you sure we doe not dream?
Was it not my Aunt you talked to.
One that loves you
Dear as her life, these clothes doe not become you,
You must have better sir.
These are not old.
More suitable to the town and time, we keep
No Lent here, nor is it my Ladies pleasure you
Should fast from any thing you have a mind to,
Unless it be your learning▪ which she would have you
Forget with all convenient speed that may be,
For the credit of your noble family,
The case is altered since we lived in the country,
We doe not invite the poor of the parish
To dinner, keep a table for the tenants,
Our kitchen does not smell of beef, the cellar
Defies the price of malt and hops, the footmen
And coachdrivers may be drunk like gentlemen
With wine, nor will three Fiddlers upon holidays
With aid of Bag pipes, that called in the country
To dance, and plough the hall up with their hobnails,
Now make my Lady merry, wee doe feed
Like princes, and feast nothing but princes,
And are these robes fit to be seen amongst i'm.
My Lady keeps a court then, is Sir Thomas
Affected with this state and cost.
He was not,
But is converted, and I hope you wo'not
Persist in heresy, but take a course
Of riot to content your friends, you shall
Want nothing, if you can be proud and spend it
For my Ladies honour, here are a hundred
Pieces, will serve you till you have new clothes,
I will present you with a nag of mine
Poor tender of my service, please you accept,
My Ladies smile more than rewards me for it,
I must provide fit servants to attend you,
Monsieures for horse and foot.
I shall submit
If this be my Aunts pleasure and be ruled
My eyes are opened with this purse already,
And Sack will help to inspire me, I must spend it,
What else sir?
Isle begin with you, to encourage
You, to have still a special care of me,
There is five pieces, not for your nag.
No sir, I hope it is not.
Buy a Beaver
For thy own block, I shall be ruled, who does
Command the wineseller?
Who command but you sir?
Isle try to drink a health or two, my Aunts
Or any bodies, and if that foundation
Stagger me not too much, I will commence
In all the arts of London.
If you find sir
The operation of the wine, exalt
Your blood to the desire of any female
Delight, I know your Aunt wonot deny
Any of her chambermaids to practise on,
She loves you but too well.
I know not how
I may be for that exercise, farewell Aristotle,
Prithee commend me to the Library
At Westminster, my bones I bequeath thither,
And to the learned worms that mean to visit 'em,
I will compose my self, I begin to think
I have lost time indeed, come to the wineseller.
But shall we not Madam expose our selves
To censure for this freedom.
Let them answer
That dare mistake us, shall we be so much
Cowards to be frighted from our pleasure,
Because men have malicious tongues, and show
What miserable souls they have, no cozen,
We hold our life and fortunes, upon no
Mans charity, if they dare show so little
Discretion to traduce our fems, we will
Be guilty of so much wit to laugh at em.
Tic a becoming fortitude.
My stars
Are yet kind to me, for in a happy minute
Be it spoke, I'm not in love, and men shall never.
Make my heart lean with sighing, nor with tears
Draw on my eyes the infamy of spectacles,
Tic the chief principle to keep your heart
Under your own obedience, jest, but love not,
I say my prayers yet, can wear good clothes,
And only satisfy my tailor for em.
I wonot lose my privilege.
And yet they say your entertainments are,
Give me your pardon Madam▪ to proclaim
Your self a widow, and to get a husband.
As if a Lady of my years, some beauty
Left by her husband rich, that had mourned for him
A twelve month too, could live so obscure in the town
That gallants would not know her, and invite
Themselves without her chargeable proclamations,
Then we are worse than Citizens, no widow
Left wealthy can be thoroughly warm in mourning,
But some one noble blood or lusty kindred
Claps in, with his gilt coach, and Flandrian trotters,
And hurries 〈◊〉 away to be a Countess.
Courtiers have ••ies, and great ones with lharge titles,
Cold in their ••no estates, would warm themselves
At a rich city ••nefire.
Most true Madam.
No matter for corruption of the blood,
Some undone Courtier made her husband rich,
And this new Lord receives it back again.
Admit it were my policy, and that
My entertainments pointed to acquaint me
With many suitors, that I might be safe,
And make the best election, could you blame me?
Madam tic wisdom.
But I should be
In my thoughts miserable to be fond
Of leaving the sweet freedom I possess,
And court my self into new marriage fetters,
I now observe men's several wits, and windings,
And can laugh at their follies.
You have given
A most ingenious satisfaction.
One thing isle tell you more, and this I give you
Worthy your imitation from my practise,
You see me merry, full of song and dancing,
Pleasant in language, apt to all delights
That crown a public meeting, but you cannot
Accuse me of being prodigal of my favours
To any of my guests, I doe not summon
By any wink, a gentleman to follow me,
To my withdrawing chamber, I hear all
Their pleaes in Court, nor can they boast abroad
And doe me justice, after a salute
They have much conversation with my lip,
I hold the kissing of my hand a curtsy,
And he that loves me, must upon the strength
Of that, expect till I renew his favour.
Some Ladies are so expensive in their graces,
To those that honour 'em, and so prodigal
That in a little time, they have nothing but
The naked sin left to reward their servants,
Whereas a thrift in our rewards, will keep
Men long in their devotion, and preserve
Our selves in stock, to encourage those that honour us.
This is an art worthy a Ladies practise.
It takes not from the freedom of our mirth,
But seems to advance it, when we can possess
Our pleasures with security of our honour,
And that preserved, I welcome all the joys
My fancy can let in. In this I have given
The copy of my mind, nor doe I blush,
You understand it.
You have honoured us.
Madam, Sir William Sentlove's come to waite on you.
There's one would be a client, make excuse
For a few minutes.
One that comes a wooing?
Such a thing he would seem, but in his guiltiness
Of little land, his expectation is not
So valiant as it might be, he wears clothes,
And feeds with noblemen, to some I hear
No better than a wanton emissary,
Or scout for Venus wild foul, which made tame,
He thinks no shame to stand court sentinel,
In hope of the reversion.
I have heard
That some of them are often my Lords tasters,
The first fruits they condition for, and will
Exact as fees for the promotion.
Let them agree, there's no account shall lie
For me among their traffic.
Mr. Hairecut Madam
Is new come in, to tender you his service.
Let him discourse a little with sir William.
What is this gentleman Mr. Hairecut Madam?
I note him very gallant, and much courted
By gentlemen of quality.
I know not
More than a trim gay man, he has some great office
Sure by his confident behaviour,
He would be entertained under the title
Of servant to me, and I must confess,
He is the sweetest of all men that visit me.
How mean you Madam?
He is full of powder,
He will save much in perfume for my chamber,
Were he but constant here; give i'm access.
Madam the humblest of your servants is
Exalted to a happiness, if you smile
Upon my visit.
I must beg your charity
Upon my rudeness Madam, I shall give
That day up lost to any happiness,
When I forget to tender you my service.
You practise Courtship gentlemen.
But cannot
Find where with more desert to exercise it,
What Laddie's this I pray?
A kinswoman
Of mine sir William.
I am more her servant,
You came from Court, now I presume.
Tic Ma∣dam
The sphere I move in, and my destiny
Was kind to place me there, where J enjoy
All blessings that a mortal can possess,
That lives not in your presence, and J should
Fix my ambition, when you would vouchsafe
Me so much honour, to accept from me
An humble entertainment there.
But by
What name shall I be known, in what degree
Shall J be of kindred to you.
How mean you Madam?
Perhaps you'll call me sister, I shall take it
A special preferment, or it may be
J may pass under title of your Mistress,
If I seem rich, and fair enough, to engage
Your confidence to own me.
J would hope.
But tic not come to that yet, you will sir
Excuse my mirth.
Sweet Madam.
Shall J take
Boldness to ask what place you hold in Court?
Tic an uncivil curiosity,
But you'll have mercy to a women's question.
My present condition Madam, carries
Honour and profit, though not to be named
With that employment J expect ith state
Which shall discharge the first maturity
Upon your knowledge, until then I beg
You allow a modest silence.
I am charmed sir,
And if you scope ambassador, you cannot
Reach a preferment, wherein I'm against you,
But whore's sir William Sentlove?
Give him leave
To follow his nose Madam, while he hunts
In view, he will soon be at a fault.
You know him.
Know Sentlove? not a page but can decipher him,
The waiting women know him to a scruple,
Hoe's called the Blistermaker of the town.
Whats that?
The laundry Ladies can resolve you,
And you may guess, an arrant Epicure
As this day lives, borne to a pretty wit,
A Knight but no gentleman, J must
Be plain to you, your Ladyship may have
Use of this knowledge, but conceal the author.
J kiss your fairest hand.
You make a difference,
Pray reconcile i'm to an equal whiteness.
You wound my meaning Lady.
Nay sir William
Has the art of complement.
Madam, you honour me
'Bove my desert of language.
Will you please
To enrich me with your knowledge of that gentleman.
Doe you not know him Madam.
What is he?
A Camphor ball, you shall know more hereafter
He shall tell you himself, and save my character,
Till then, you see hoe's proud.
One thing gentlemen
I observe in your behaviour, which is rare
In two that court one mistress, you preserve
A noble friendship, theres no gum within
Your hearts, you cannot fret, or show an envy
Of one another hope, some would not govern
Their passions with that temper.
The whole world
Shanot divorce our friendship. Mr Hairecut
Would I had lives to serve him, he is lost
To goodness does not honour him.
My knight I
This is right playing at Court Shuttlecock.
Madam, there is a gentleman desires
To speak w'ee, one sir Thomas Bornwell.
Bornewell?
He says he is a stranger to your Ladyship.
I know him.
Your neighbour Madam.
Husband to the Lady, that so revels in the strand.
He has good parts they say, but cannot help
His Ladies bias.
They have both much fame
'Ith town for several merits, pray admit him.
What comes he for?
Your pardon noble Lady, that I have
Presumed a stranger to your knowledge.
Sir,
Your worth was here before you, and your person
Cannot be here ungrateful.
Tic the bounty
Of your sweet disposition Madam, make me
Your servant Lady by her fair example,
To favour me — I never knew one turn
Her cheek to a gentleman that came to kiss her
But sha'd a stinking breath; your servant gentlemen,
Will Sent love how first?
I am sorry Cos
To accuse you, we in nothing more betray
Our selves to censure of ridiculous pride,
Then answering a fair salute too rudely,
Oh it shows ill upon a gentlewoman
Not to return the modest lip, if she
Would have the world believe, her breath is not
Offensive.
Madam, I have business
With you.
His looks are pleasant.
With me sir?
I hear you have an ex'lent wit Madam,
I see your fair
The first is but report,
And doe not trust your eyesight for the last,
Cause I presume you're mortal and may err.
He is very gamesome.
You've an ex'lent voice;
They say you catch it from a dying Swan,
Which joined to the sweet harmony of your lute,
You ravish all mankind.
Ravish mankind?
With their consent.
It were the stranger rape,
But there's the less indictment lies against it,
And there is hope; your little honesties
Cannot be much the worse, for men doe rather
Believe they had a maiden head, then put
Themselves to'th rack of memory, how long
Tic since they left the burden of their innocence.
Why you are bitter Madam.
So is physic,
I doe not know your constitution.
You shall if please you Madam.
You're too hasty,
I must examine what certificate
You have, first to prefer you.
Fine! certificate?
Under your Ladies hand, and seal.
Go to,
I see you are a wag.
But take heed, how
You trust too't.
I can love you in my wedlock,
As well as that young gallant, oath first hair,
Or the knight Bachelor, and can return
As amorous delight to thy soft bosom.
Your person and your language are both strangers.
But may be more familiar, I have those
That dare make affidavit for my body.
Do ye mean your Surgeon?
My Surgeon Madam▪
I know not how you value my abilities,
But I dare undertake, as much, to express
My service to your Ladyship, and with
As fierce ambition, fly to your commands,
As the most valiant of these, 'lay siege to you.
You dare not sir.
How Madam?
I will in∣stifi't.
You dare not marry me, and I imagine
Some here should I consent, would fetch a priest
Out of the fire.
I have a wife indeed,
And there's a statute not repeald I take it.
Yare in the right I must confess you've hit,
And bled me in a master vein.
You think
I took you on the advantage, use your best
Skill at defence, Isle come up to your valour
And show another work you dare not doe,
You dare not sir be virtuous.
I dare,
By this fair hand, I dare, and ask a pardon
If my rude words offend thy innocence,
Which in a form so beautiful, would shine
To force a blush in them suspected it,
And from the rest draw wonder.
I like not
Their secret parley, shall I interrupt em?
By no means sir.
Sir Thomas was not wont
To show so much a Courtier.
He cannot
Be prejudicial to you, suspect not
Your own deserts so much, hoe's married.
I have other business Madam, you keep music,
I came to try how you can dance.
You did? Isle try his humour out of breath▪
Although boast no cunning sir in revels,
If you desire to show your art that way,
I can waite on you.
You much honour me,
Nay all must join to make a harmony.
I have nothing now, Madam, but to beseech
After a pardon for my boldness, you
Would give occasion to pay my gratitude,
I have a house will be much honoured
If you vouchsafe your presence, and a wife
Desires to present her self your servant,
I Came with the ambition to invite you,
Deny me not, your person you shall trust
On fair security.
Sir, although I use not
This freedom with a stranger, you shall have
No cause to hold me obstinate.
You grace me
Sir William Sentlove—
I must take my leave,
You will excuse me Madam, Court attendances —
By any means.
Ladies you will vouchsafe
Your company.
We waite upon you sir.
What hour first?
Bout three'a clock my Lord.
Tic time to rise.
Your Lordship went but late
To bed last night.
It was early in the morning.
Expect a while, my Lord is busy?
Whats the matter?
Here is a Lady
Desires access to you upon some affairs
She says may specially concern your Lordship.
A Lady? What her name?
Madam Decoy.
Decoy? prithee admit her.
Have you business Madam
With me?
And such I hope as will not be
Offensive to your Lordship.
I pray speak it.
I would desire your Lordships ear more private.
Waite in the next chāber till I call, now Madam.
Although I am a stranger to your Lordship
I wo'd not lose a fair occasion offered.
To show how much I honour, and would serve you.
Please you to give me the particular
That I may know the extent of my engagement,
I am ignorant by what desert you should
Be encouragd to have care of me.
My Lord,
I will take boldness to be plain, beside
Your other excellent parts, you have much fame
For your sweet inclination to our sex.
How dee mean Madam?
I that way your Lordship
Hath honourably practiced upon some
Not to be named, your noble constancy
To a mistress hath deserved our general vote,
And I a part of woman kind have thought
How to express my duty.
In what Madam?
Be not so strange my Lord, I know the beauty
And pleasures of your eyes, that handsome creature
With whose fair life all your delight took leave,
And to whose memory you have paid too much▪
Sad tribute.
Whats all this?
This, if your Lord∣ship
Accept my service, in pure zeal to cure
Your melancholy, I could point where you might
Repair your loss.
Your Ladyship I conceive
Doth traffic in flesh merchandise.
To men.
Of honour like your self, I am well known
To some in court and come not with ambition
Now to supplant your officer.
What is
The Lady of pleasure you prefer.
A Lady
Of birth and fortune, one upon whose virtue
I may presume, the Lady Aretina▪
Wife to sir Thomas Bornwell?
The same sir▪
Have you prepared her?
Not for your Lordship, till I have found your pulse,
I am acquainted with her disposition
She has a very appliable nature.
And Madam when expect you to be whipped
For doing these fine favours.
How my Lord?
Your Lordship does but jest I hope; you make
A difference between a Lady that
Does honourable offices, and one
They call a bawd, your Lordship was not wont
To have such course opinion of our practise.
The Lady Aretina is my kinswoman.
What if she be my Lord? the nearer blood
The dearer sympathy.
Isle have thee carted.
Your Lordship wonot so much stain your honour
And education, to use a woman
Of my quality.—Lord.— Tic possible you may
Be sent off with an honourable convoy
Of Halberdeers.
Oh my good Lord!
Your Ladyship shall be no protection
If thou but stai'st three minutes.
I am gone,
When next you find rebellion in your blood,
May all within ten mile of the court turn honest.
I doe not find that proneness since the fair
Bella Maria died, my blood is cold,
Nor is there beauty enough surviving
To heighten me to wantonness, who waits?
And what said my Lady?
The silent language of her face my Lord
Was not so pleasant, as it showed upon
Her entrance.
Would any man that meets
This Lady take her for a bawd.
She does
The trade an honour, credit to the profession,
We may in time see baldness, quarter noses,
And rotten legs to take the wall of footclothes.
I ha thought better, call the Lady back,
I wonot lose this opportunity,
Bid her not fear, the favour is not common,
And isle reward it. I doe wonder much
Will Sentlove was not here to day.
I heard him say this morning, he would waite
Upon your Lordship.
She is returned sir.
Madam be confident my Lords not angry.
You return welcome Madam, you are better
Read in your art I hope then to be frighted
With any shape of anger, when you bring
Such news to gentlemen, Madam you shall
Soon understand how I accept the office.
You are the first Lord, since J studied carriage,
That showed such infidelity and fury
Upon so kind a message, every gentleman
Will show some breeding, but if one right honourable
Should not have noble blood.
You shall return
My complement in a letter to my Lady
Aretina, favour me with a little patience,
Show her that chamber.
Isle attend your Lordship.
Write. Madam where your honour is in danger,
My love must not be silent.
Sentlove and Kickshaw!
Your Lordship's busy.
Writing a letter, nay it shanot bar
Any discourse.
—Silent.
Though I be no Physician, I may prevent a fever in your blood.
And where have you spent the mornings conversation?
Where you would have given the best Barberry
In your stable to have met on honourable terms.
What new beauty? You acquaint your selves
With none but wonders.
Tic too low a miracle▪
Twill require a strong faith.
Your blood.
If you be innocent preserve your fame least this Decoy
Madam betray it to your repentance.
By what name is she known?
Ask Alexander, he knows her?
Whom?
The Lady Celestina.
He has a vast knowledge of Ladies, las poor Alexander!
When dost thou mean thy body shall lie fallow?
When there is mercy in a petticoat,
I must turn pilgrim for some breath.
I think
It were cooler travel if you examine it
Upon the hoof through Spain.
Through Ethiopia▪
Nay less laborious to serve a prentiship
In Peru, and dig gold out of the mine,
Though all the year were dogdayes.
To repentance,
In brief, this Lady, could you fall from virtue,
Within my knowledge will not blush to be a Bawd.
But hanged tic honourable journey work,
Thou art famous by it, and thy name's up.
So sir▪
Let me ask you a question my dear knight,
Which is less servile to bring up the Pheasant,
And waite, or sit at table uncontrolled
And carve to my own appetite?
No more,
You are witty, as I am—
A bawd.
How's that?
Oh you are famous by it, and your names up sir.
Be wise, and reward my caution, with
Timely care of your self, so I shall not repent
To be known your lovings kinsman and servant.
Gentlemen, the Lady Celestina.
Is she so rare a thing?
If you'll have my
Opinion my Lord, I never saw
So sweet, so fair, so rich a piece of nature.
Isle show thee a fairer presently, to shame
Thy eyes and judgement, look o'that. — So Isle subscribe
Seal it, isle excuse your pen for the direction.
Bella Marries picture; she was handsome.
But not to be compared.
Your patience gentlemen isle return instantly.
Whither is my Lord gone?
To a Lady in the next Chamber.
What is she?
You shall pardon me, I am his Secretary.
I was wont to be of his counsel, a new officer
And I'not know it? I am resolved to 'batter
All other with the praise of Celestina
I must retain him.
Has not that object
Convinced your erring judgements.
What this picture?
Were but your thoughts as capable as mine
Of her Idea, you would wish no thought
That were not active in her praise, above
All worth and memory of her sex.
She was fair
I must confess, but had your Lordship looked
With eyes more narrow and some less affection
Upon her face.
I doe not love the copies
Of any dead, they make me dream of goblins,
Give me a living mistress, with but half
The beauty of Celestina, come my Lord,
Tic pity that a Lord of so much flesh
Should waste upon a ghost, when they are living
Can give you a more honourable consumption.
Why doe you mean my Lord to live an Infidel?
Doe, and see what will come ont, observe still
And dote upon your vigils, build a chamber
Within a rock, a tomb, among the worms,
Not far off, where you may in proof apocryphal
Court em not devour the pretty pile.
Of flesh your mistress carried to the grave,
There are no women in the world, all eyes
And tongue and lips are buried in her coffin.
Why doe you think your selves competent Judges.
Of beauty gentlemen?
What should hinder us?
I have seen and tried as many as another
With a mortal bac•e.
Your eyes are bribed,
And your hearts chained to some desires, you cannot
Enjoy the freedom of a sense.
Your Lordship
Has a clear eyesight, and can judge and penetrate.
I can, and give a perfect censure of
Each line and point, distinguish beauty from
A thousand forms, which your corrupted optiks
Would pass for natural.
I desire no other
Judge should determine us, and if your Lordship
Dare venture but your eyes upon this Lady,
Isle stand their justice, and be confident
You shall give Celestin• victory,
And triumph ors all beauties past and living.
J date my Lord venture a suit of clothes,
You will be overcome.
You doe not know my fortitude
Nor frailty, you dare not trust you self to see her.
Think you so gentlemen, I dare see this creature
To make you know your errors▪ and the difference
Of her, whose memory is my Saint, not trust
My senses? J dare see and speak with her,
Which holds the best acquaintance to prepare
My visit to her.
I will do it my Lord.
She is a Lady free in entertainments.
I would give this advantage to your cause,
Bid him appear in all the ornaments
Did ever waite on beauty, all the riches
Pride can put on, and teach her face more charm
Then ever Poet dressed up Venus in,
Bid her be all the graces, and the queen
Of love in one, Isle see her Sentlove, and
Bring off my heart armed, but single thought
Of one that is dead, without a wound, and when
I have made your folly prisoner, isle laugh at you.
She shall expect you, trust to me for knowledge.
I'm for the present somewhere else engagd,
Let me hear from you.
So I am glad hoe's yet
So near conversion.
I am for Aretina.
No mention of my Lord.
Prepare his Lady,
Tic time he were reduced to the old sport,
One Lord like him more would undo the court.
He is the ornament of your blood Madam,
I am much bound to his Lordship.
He gives you
A noble character.
Tic his goodness Madam.
I wanted such an engine, my Lord has
Done me a courtesy to disclose her nature,
I now know one to trust, and will employ her.
Touching my Lord, for reasons, which I shall
Offer to your Ladyship hereafter, I
Desire you would be silent, but to show
How much I dare be confident in your secrecy,
I power my bosom forth, I love a gentleman
On whom there woo'not meet much conjuration
To meet—your ear▪ —
I apprehend you, and I shall
Be happy to be serviceable, I am sorry
Your Ladyship did not know me before now,
I have done offices, and not a few
Of the nobility, but have done feats
Within my house, which is so convenient
For situation, and artful chambers,
Such pretty pictures to provoke the fancy.
Madam all pleasures languish in your absence.
Your pardon a few minutes sir—you must
Contrive it thus.
I attend, and shall account it
Honour to waite on your return.
He may not
Have the least knowledge of my name, or person.
I have practiced that already for some great ones,
And dare again to satisfy you Madam;
I have a thousand ways to doe sweet offices.
If this Lady Aretina should be honest,
I ha lost time, shoe's free as air, J must
Have closer conference, and if I have art,
Make her affect me in revenge.
This evening
Leave me to manage things.
You will oblige me.
You shall commend my art, and thank me after.
I hope the revels are maintained within.
By sir Thomas and his Mistress.
How? his Mistress.
The Lady Celestina, I ne'er saw
Eyes shoot more amorous interchange.
First so?
He wears her favour with mere pride.
Her favour.
A feather that he ravished from her fan.
And is so full of courtship, which she smiles on.
Tic well.
And praises her beyond all poetry.
I'm glad he has so much wit.
Not jealous!
This secures me, what would make other Ladies pale
With jealousy, gives but a licence to my wanderings,
Let him now tax me if he dare—and yet
Her beauti's worth my envy, and I wish
Revenge upon it, not because he loves,
But that it shines above my own.
Dear Madam.
I have it, you two gentlemen profess
Much service to me, if I have a way
To employ your wit and secrecy.
You'll honour us.
You gave a high and worthy character
Of Celestina.
I remember Madam.
Doe either of you love her.
Nor I Madam.
I wot not if I might.
Shoe's now my guest,
And by a trick invited by my husband
To disgrace me, you gentlemen are held
Wits of the town, the Consuls that doe govern
The Senate here, whose jeers are all authentic,
The Taverns and the Ordinaries are
Made academies where you come, and all
Your sins and surfeits made times example,
Your very nods can quell a Theater,
No speech or Poem good without your seal,
You can protect scurrility, and publish
By your authority believed, no rapture
Ought to have honest meaning.
Leave our characters.
And name the employment.
You must exercise
The strength of both your wits upon this Lady,
And talk her into humbleness or anger
Both which are equal to my thought, if you
Dare undertake this slight thing for my sake,
My favour shall reward it, but be faithful,
And seem to let all spring from your own freedom.
This all? We can defame her, if you please
My friend shall call her whore or any thing,
And never be endangerd to a duel.
How's that?
He can endure a cudgelling, and no man
Will fight after so fair a satisfaction,
But leave us to our Art, and doe not limit us.
They are here, begin not till I whisper you.
Ie vous pry Madam d' excuser l'importunitè de mes affairs
Queen my ont feet offenser, par mon, absence, un dame de laquelle
I'ay receive tant d' obligation.
Pardonnez moi Madame; vous me faictez trop a honour.
C'est bien de la douceur de vostre natural que vous tenez
Ceste language; maize j'espere que mon mary na pas
Manquè de vous entretenir en mon absence.
En verity Monsieur nous a fort obligè
Il eut trop failly, s'il n'eust taschè de tout fon pouvoir à vous rendre toutes sorts de services.
Cest de sa bonté qu'il nous a tant favorisé.
De la vostre plustost Madame que vous feet donner
D'interpretation si benign à ses efforts.
Ie voy bien que la victoire fera toutsjours à Madame, &amp; de language, &amp; de la curtsy.
Vrayement Madame, que jamais personne a plus desire,
L'honneur de vostre compagnie, que moi.
Laissons en•je vous supplis, des compliments &amp; permiettoz à vostre servant de vous baiser les mains.
Vous m'obligez trop.
I have no more patience, lets be merry again
In our own language, Madam our mirth cools,
Our Nephew!
Passion of my brain.
Save you gentlemen, save you Ladies.
I am un∣done.
I must salute, no matter at which end I begin.
There's a complement.
Is this your nephew Madam?
Ie vous pry Madame d▪ execuser les habits, &amp; le rude
Comportement de mon cousin. Il est tout fraischement
Venue de l universitiè, ou on l'a tout gastè.
Excuses moi Madam, il est bien accomply.
This language should be French, by the motions
Of your heads, and the mirth of your faces.
I am disho∣nor'd.
Tic one of the finest tongues for Ladies to show their
Teeth in, If you'll Latin I am for you, or Greek it,
My tailor has not put me into French yet,
Mill basia, basia mill.
Ie no vous entende pas monsieur,
I understand you not sir.
Why so?
You and I then shall be in charity,
For though we should be abusive, we ha the benefit
Not to understand one another: whore's my Aunt?
I did hear music somewhere, and my brains
Tuned with a bottle of your capering claret
Made haste to show their dancing.
Please you Madam,
They are very comfortable.
Alas Madam
How would you have me help it, I did use
All means I could, after he heard the music,
To make him drunk in hope so to contain him,
But the wine made him lighter, and his head
Flew hi'ther, ere I mist his heals.
Nay he spoke Latin to the Lady.
Oh most unpardonable! get him off
Quickly, and discreetly, or if I live —
Tic not in my power he swears I am
An absurd sober fellow, and if you keep
A servant in his house to cross his humour,
When the rich sword and belt comes home, he will kill him.
What shall I doe? Try your skill, Master Littleworth.
He has ne'er a sword, sweet Mr. Frederick▪
Tic pity Madam such a syen should
Be lost, but you are clouded.
Not I sir,
I never found my self more clear at heart.
I could play with a feather, your fan Lady,
Gentlemen, Aretina, ta ra ra ra, come Madam.
Why my good tutor in election?
You might have been a scholar.
But I thank
My friends they brought me up a little better,
Give me the town wits, that deliver jeasts
Clean from the bow, that whistle in the air,
And cleave the pin at twelvescore, Ladies doe
But laugh at a gentleman that has any learning.
Tic sin enough to have your clothes suspected,
Leave us, and I will find a time to instruct you;
Come here are sugar plumbs, tic a good Frederick.
Why is not this my Aunts house in the strand?
The noble Rendezvous? Who laughs at me?
Go, I will root here▪ if I list, and talk
Of Retoricke, Logic, Latin, Greek, or any thing,
And understand 'em too, who says the contrary?
Yet in a fair way I contemn all learning,
And will be ignorant as he, or he,
Or any taffeta, satin, scarlet, plush,
Tissue, or cloth, a bodkin gentleman,
Whose manners are most gloriously infected;
Did you laugh at me Lady?
Not I sir?
But if I did show mirth upon your question,
I hope you wot not beat me little gentleman.
How little gentleman? you dare not say
These words to my new clothes, and fighting sword.
Nephew Frederick!
Little gentleman,
This an affront both to my blood and person,
I am a gentleman of as tall a birth
As any least nobility, though my clothes
Smell of the lamp, my coat is honourable,
Right honourable, full, of or, and argent,
A little gentleman!
Cos you must be patient,
My Lady meant you no dishonour, and
You must remember shoe's a woman.
Is she a woman, thats another matter,
Dee hear, my uncle tells me what you are.
So sir.
You called me little gentleman.
I did sir.
A little pink has made a lusty ship
Strike her topsaile, the Crow may beard the Elephant,
A whelp may tame the Tiger, spite of all
False decks and murderers, and a little gentleman
Be hard enough to grapple with your Ladyship
Top and top gallant; will you go drink uncle?
Tother enchanted bottle, you and I
Will tiple, and talk philosophy.
Come Nephew,
You will excuse a minutes absence Madam.
Waite you on us.
My duty sir.
Now gentlemen.
Madam I had rather you accuse my language
For speaking truth, then virtue suffer in
My further silence, and it is my wonder
That you, whose noble carriage hath deserved
All honour, and opinion should now
Be guilty of ill manners.
What was that
You told me sir?
Doe you not blush Madam?
To ask that question.
You amaze rather
My cheek to paleness, what you mean by this?
I am not troubled with the hickup gentlemen,
You should bestow this fright upon me.
Then
Pride and ill memory go together.
How sir?
The gentleman on whom you exercise
Your thin wit, was a nephew to the Lady
Whose guest you are, and though her modesty
Look calm on the abuse of one so near
Her blood, the affront was impious.
I am ashamed on it,
You an ingenious Lady and well mannerd?
Isle reach a Bear as much civility.
You may be master of the College sir
For ought I know.
What College? Of the Bears.
Have you a plot upon me? Dee possess
Your wits, or know me gentlemen.
How's this?
Know you? yes we doe know you to an atom.
Madam we know, what stuff your soul is made on.
But doe not bark so like a mastiff, pray,
Sure they are mad, let your brains stand awhile
And settle gentlemen, you know not me,
What am I?
Tha'rt a puppet, a thing made
Of clothes and painting, and not half so handsome
As that which plaid Suzanne in the fair.
I heard you visited those canvas tragedies,
One of their constant audience, and so taken
With Susan, that you wished your self a rival
With the two wicked elders.
You think this
Is wit now, come you are—
What I beseech you?
Your character will be full of salt and satire,
No doubt, what am I?
Why you are a woman.
And that's at least a bow wide of you knowledge.
Wo'd be thought handsome, and might pass in the country
Upon a market day, but miserably
Forfeit to pride and fashions, that if heaven
were a new gown, you'd not stay in it a fortnight.
It must be miserably out of fashion then,
Have I no sin but pride?
Hast any virtue?
Or but a good face to excuse that want?
You praised it yesterday.
That made you proud.
More pride?
You need not to close up the praise,
I have seen a better countenance in a Sibill.
When you wore spectacles of sack, mistook
The painted cloth, and kissed it for your mistress.
Let me ask you a question, how much
Have you consumed in expectation
That I would love you.
Why? I think as much
As you have paid a way in honest debts
This seven year, tic a pretty impudence,
But cannot make me angry.
Is there any
Man that will cast away his limbs upon her?
You doe not sing so well as I imagind,
Nor dance, you reel in your coranto, and pinch
Your petticoat too hard, y ave no good ear
To the music, and incline too much one shoulder,
As you were dancing on the rope, and falling,
You speak abominable French, and make
A courtsey like a Dairy maid, not mad?
Doe we not sting her handsomely
A conspiracy.
Your state is not so much as tic reported
When you confer notes, all your husbands debts
And your own reconcild— but thats not it
Will so much spoil your marriage.
As what sir?
Let me know all my faults.
Some men doe whisper
You are not over honest.
All this shall not
Move me to more than laughter, and some pity,
Because you have the shapes of gentlemen,
And though you have been insolent upon me,
I will engage no friend to kick or cudgel you
To spoil your living, and your limbs together,
I leave that to diseases that offend you,
And spare my curse, poor silken Vermin, and
Hereafter shall distinguish Men from Monkeys.
Brave soul, you brace of horseleaches, I have heard
Their barbarous language Madam, yare too merciful,
They shall be silent to your tongue, pray punish i'm.
They are things not worth my character, nor mention
Of any clean breath, so lost in honesty
They cannot satisfy for wrongs enough,
Though they should steal out of the world at Tiburne.
We are hanged already.
Yet I will talk a little to the pilchards,
You two that have not twixt you both the hundred
Part of a soul, course woollen wetted fellows,
Without a nap, with bodies made for burdens,
You that are only stuffings for apparel
As you were made but engines for your Taylors
To frame their clothes upon, and get them custom;
Until men see you move, yet, then you dare not
Out of your guilt of being the ignobler beast
But give a horse the wall, whom you excel
Only in dancing of the brawls, because
The horse was not taught the French way, your two faces,
One fat like Christmas, tother lean like Candlemas,
And Prologue to a Lent, both bound together
Would figure Ianus, and doe many cures
On Agues and the greene disease by frighting,
But neither can with all the characters
And conjuring circles charm a woman, though
Sha'd fourscore years upon her, and but one
Tooth in her head, to love or think well of you;
And I were miserable, to be at cost
To court such a complexion, as your malice
Did impudently insinuate, but I waste time
And stain my breath in talking to such tadpoles.
Go home and wash your tongues in Barley water
Drink clean Tobacco, be not hot in the mouth,
And you may scope the Beadle; so I leave you
To shame and your own garters, Sir I must
Entreat you for my honour doe not penance em▪
They are not worth your anger, how I shall
Acquit your Ladies silence.
Madam, I
Am sorry to suspect, and dare revenge
No▪ cause• 〈◊〉 mine.
It must become me to attend you home.
You are noble — — farewell Mushrooms.
Is she gone.
I think we peperd her▪
I am glad tic over▪
But I repent no service for you Madam.
To me? from whence a Jewel a good preface,
Be happy the conclusion.
Some love letter —
He has a hundred Mistresses, you may
Be charitable Madam I ha none,
He surfeits, and I fall away •th kidneys.
Isle meet,
Tic some great Lady questionless, that has
Taken notice, and would satisfy her appetite.
Now Mr. Alexander, you look bright of the sudden,
Another spirit's in your eye.
Not 〈◊〉 Madam▪
Only a 〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉 a friend.
What friend?
By this Jewel, I know her not▪
Tic a she friend▪ Isle follow gentlemen,
We may have a game 〈◊〉 before you go▪
I shall attend you 〈◊〉
Tic our duty.
I blush 〈…〉 my own thoughts,
Some strange face gove••• me, 〈…〉
The ways are east already and we thrive
When our sin fears no eye nor perspective.
I am not hurt, my patience to obey▪em
Not without fear to ha my throat cut else,
Did me a courtesy 〈◊〉 ha they brought me
Tic devilish dark, the bottom of a well
At midnight, with but two stars on the top,
Were broad day to this darkness, I but think
How like a whirlwind these rogues caught me up
And smoothered my eyesight, let me see,
These may be spirits, and for ought I know
Have brought me hither over twenty steeples,
Pray heaven they were not Bay•iefes; thats more worth
My fear, and this a prison, all my debts
Reeke in my nostril, and my bones begin
To ache with fear to be made dice, and yet
This is too calm and quiet for a prison;
What if the riddle prove I am robbed; and yet
I did not feel em search me? How now? music?
And a light? What beldam's this, I cannot pray;
What art?
A friend, fear not young man I am
No spirit.
Off. De. Despise me not for age,
Or this course outside, which I wear not out
Of poverty; thy eyes be witness, tic
No cave or beggars cell tha'rt brought too, let
That gold speak here's no want, which thou moist spend,
And find a spring to tire even prodigality
If thou be wise▪
The devil was a coiner
From the beginning, yet the gold looks currant.
Tha'rt still in wonder, know I am Mistress of
This house, and of a fortune that shall serve
And feed thee with delights, it was J sent for thee,
The jewel and the letter came from me▪
It was my art, thus to contrive our meeting,
Because J would not trust thee with my fame,
Until J found thee worth a women's honour.
Honour and fame? the devil means to have
A care on's credit, though she sent for me,
J hope, she has another customer
To doe the trick withal, J wot not turn
Familiar to a witch.
What say? Can thou
Dwell in my arms to night, shall we change kisses,
And entertain the silent hours with pleasure?
Such as old time shall be delighted with,
And blame the too swift motion of his wings
While we embrace.
Embrace? she has had no teeth
This twenty years, and the next violent cough
Brings up her tongue, it cannot possibly
Be sound at root, I doe not think but one
Strong sneeze upon her, and well meaned would make
Her quart•rs fall away, one kick would blow
Her up like gunpowder, and loose all her limbs;
She is so cold, an Incubus wot not heate her,
Her phlegm would quench a furnace, and her breath
Would damp a musket bullet.
Have you sir
Considerd.
What?
My proposition,
Can love?
I could have done, whom doe you mean?
I know you are pleased, but to make sport.
Thou art not
So dull of soul as thou appearst.
This is.
But some device, my granam has some trick in it:
Yes I can love.
But can thou affect me.
Although to reverence so grave a matron
Were an ambitious word in me, yet since
You give me boldness, I doe love you.
Then
Thou art my own.
Has she no cloven foot?
And I am thine, and all that I command
Thy servants, from this minute thou are happy,
And fate in thee will crown all my desires.
I grieved a proper man should be compelled
To bring his body to the common market,
My wealth shall make thee glorious, and the more
To encourage thee, how er• this form may fright
Thy youthful eyes, yet thou wo't find by light
Of thy own sense, for other light is banished
My chamber, when our arms tie lovers knots,
And kisses seal the welcome of our lips,
I shall not there af•right thee, nor seem old,
With riveld veins, my skin is smooth and soft
As Ermines, with a spirit to meet thine,
Active and equal to the queen of Loves
When she did court Atones.
This doth more
Confirm she is a devil, and I am
Within his own dominions, I must on,
Or else be torn a p••ces, I have heard
These Su•cube must not be crossed.
We trifle
Too precious time away, Isle show you a prospect
Of the next chamber, and then out the candle.
Have you no sack in the house, I would go armed
Upon this breach.
It shanot need.
One word
Mother, have not you been a Cat in your days?
I am glad you are so merry sir, you observe
That bed.
A very brave one.
When you are
Disrobed, you can come thither in the dark,
You shanot stay for me, come as you wish
For happiness.
I am preferred, if I
Be modest and obey, she cannot have
The heart to doe me harm, and she were Hecate
Herself, I will have a strong faith, and think,
I march upon a Mistress, the less evil,
If I scope fire now, I defy the devil.
And how dee like me now?
Most excellent.
Your opinion Mr. Littlewor.
Your French tailor
Has made you a perfect gentleman, I may
Converse now with you, and preserve my credit,
De'e find no alteration in your body
With these new clothes?
My body altered? No.
You are not yet in fashion then, that must
Have a new motion garb, and posture too,
Or all your pride is cast away, it is not
The cut of your apparel makes a gallant,
But the geometrical wearing of your clothes.
Mr. Littleworth tells you right, you wear your •a•:
Too like a citizen.
Tic like a Midwife,
Place it with best advantage of your hair,
Is half your feather molted? this does make
No show, it should spread over like a Canopy,
Your hot reind Monsieur wears it for a shade,
And cooler to his back, your doublet must
Be more unbuttoned hereabouts, you'll not
Be a sloven else, a foul shirt is no blemish,
You must be confident, and outface clean linen!
Your doublet and your breeches must be allowed
No private meeting here, your cloak's too long,
It reaches to your buttock, and doth smell
Too much of Spanish gravity, the fashion
Is to wear nothing but a Cape, a coat
May be allowed a covering for one elbow,
And some to avoid the trouble, choose to walk
In queen•po thus.
Your coat, and cloak's a brushing
In Long-lane Lumbard.
But what if it rain?
Your belt about your shoulder is sufficient
To keep off any storm, beside a reed
But wau'd discreetly, has so many pores,
It sucks up all the rain that falls about one,
With this defence▪ when other men have been
Wet to the skin through all their cloaks, I have
Defied a tempest and walked by the Taverns
Dry as a bone.
Because he had no money
To call for wine.
Why you doe walk enchanted,
Have you such pretty charms in town? But stay,
Who must I have to attend me?
Is not that
Yet thought upon.
I have laid out for servants.
They are every where.
I cannot yet be furnished
With such as I would put into his hands.
Of what condition must they be, and how
Many in number sir?
Beside your fencing,
Your singing, dancing, riding, and French-master,
Two may serve domestic to be constant waiters
Upon a gentleman a fool, a pimp.
For these two officers I have enquird,
And I am promised a convenient whiskin,
I could save charges, and employ the Pie wench
That carries her intelligence in whitepots,
Or tic but taking order with the woman
That holds the ballads, she could fit him with
A concubine to any tune, but I
Have a design to place a fellow with him
That has read all Sir Pandarus works, a Trojan
That lies concealed, and is acquainted with
Both city and sub•rbian fripperies
Can fetch em with a spell at midnight to him,
And warrant which are for his turn, can for
A need supply the Surgeon too.
I like
Thy providence, — such a one deserves a livery twice a year▪
It shanot need, a cast suite of your worships
Will serve, he'll find a cloak to cover it
Out of his share with those he brings to bed to you.
But must I call this fellow Pimp?
It is
Not necessary, or Jack, or Harry,
Or what hes known abroad by will sound better,
That men may think he is a Christian.
But hear you Mr. Littleworth, is there not
A method and degrees of title in
Men of this a•t.
According to the honour
Of men that do• employ em. An Emperor
May give this office to a Duke, A King
May have his Viceroy to negotiate for him,
A Duke may use a Lord, the Lord a Knight
A Knight may trust a gentleman, and when
They are abroad, and merry, gentlemen
May pimp to one another.
Good, good fellowship!
But for the fool now, that should waite on me,
And break me jeasts.
A fool is necessary.
By any means.
But which of these two servants
Must now take place.
That question Mr. Frederick
The school of Heraldry should conclude upon;
But if my judgement may be heard the fool
Is your firstman, and it is known a point
Of state to have a fool.
But sir the other
Is held the finer servant, his employments
Are full of trust, his person cleave, and nimble,
And none so soon can leap into preferment
Where fools are poor.
Not all, theres story for it,
Princes have been no wi•er than they should be,
Would any noble man, that were no fool
Spend all in hope of the Philosophers stone,
To buy new Lordships in another country,
Would Knights build Colleges, or gentlemen
Of good states, challenge the field and fight
Because a whore wo'not be honest, come,
Fools are a family over all the world;
We doe affect one naturally, indeed
The fool is Leiger with us.
Then the Pimp
Is extraordinary.
Doe not you fall out
About their places; here's my noble Aunt•
How doe you like your nephew Madam now?
Well, turn about Frederick, very well.
Am I not now a proper gentleman?
The virtue of rich clothes! now could I take
The wall of Iulius Caesar, affront
Great Pompeys upperlip, and defy the Senate,
Nay I can be as proud as your own heart Madam,
You may take that for your comfort; J put on
That virtue with my clothes, and J doubt not
But in little time, J shall be impudent
As any Page or Players boy, J am
Beholding to this gentleman's good discipline,
But J shall doe him credit in my practise,
Your Steward has some pretty notions too
In moral mischief.
Your desert in this
Exceeds all other service, and shall bind me
Both to acknowledge, and reward.
Sweet Madam!
Think me but worth your favour, J wo'd creep
Upon my knees to honour you, and for every
Minute you lend to my reward, isle pay
A year of serviceable tribute.
You
Can complement.
Thus still she puts me off,
Unless J speak the down right word, she'll never
Understand me, a man would think that creeping
Upon one's knees Were English to a Lady.
How first Jack? Pleasures attend you Madam,
How does my plant of honour?
Who is this?
Tic Alexander.
Rich and glorious!
Tic Alexander the great.
And my Bucephalus
Waits at the door.
Your case is altered sir.
J cannot help these things, the Fa•es will have it,
Tic not my land does this.
But thou hast a plough
That brings it ••
Now he looks brave and lovely.
Well 〈◊〉 my gallant Macedonian.
Madam you gave your Nephew for my pupil,
I rea'd but in a tavern, if you'll horror us,
The Bear at the bridge foot shall entertain you,
A drawer is my Ganim•d, he shall skinke•
Brisk Nectar to us, we will only have
A dozen Partridge in a dish, as many Pheasants,
Quails, Cocks and Godwits, shall come marching up
Like the trained band, a fort of Sturgeon
Shall give most bold defiance to an army,
And triumph ore the table.
Sir, it will
But dull the appetite to hear more, and mine
Must be excusd, another time I may
Be your guest.
Tic grown in fashion now with Ladies,
When you please isle attend you; Littleworth
Come Frederick.
Weal have music, I love noise,
We will out roar the Thames and shake the bridge boy.
Madam I kiss your hand, wot you wot think
Of your poor servant, flesh and blood is frail,
And trouble some to carry without help.
A coach will easily convey it, or
You may take water at strand bridge.
But I
Have taken fire.
The Thames will cool.
But never quench my heart, your charity
Can only doe that!
I will keep it cold
Of purpose,
Now you bless me, and I date
Be drunk in expectation.
I am confident
He knows me not, and I were worse than mad
To be my own betrayer, hre's my husband.
Why, how now Aretina? What alone?
The mystery of this solitude? my house
Turn desert of the sudden, all the gamsters
Blown up? Why is the music put to silence?
Or ha their instruments caught a cold, since we
Gave i'm the last heate? I must know thy ground
Of Melancholy.
You are merry, as
You came from kissing Celestina.
I
Feel her yet warm upon my lip, she is
Most excellent company, I did not think
There was that sweetness in her sex, I must
Acknowledge it was thy cure to disenchant me
From a dull husband to an active lover,
With such a Lady, I could spend more years,
Than since my birth my glass hath run 〈◊〉 minutes,
And yet be young, her presence has a spell
To keep off age, she has an eye would strike
Fire through an adamant.
I have heard as much
Bestowed upon a dull faced chambermaid
Whom love and wit would thus commend, true beauty
Is mocked when we compare thus, it self being
Above what can be fetched to make it lovely,
Or could our thoughts reach some thing to declare
The glories of a face, or bodies elegance,
That touches but our sense, when beauty spreads
Over the soul, and calls up understanding
To look when thence is offered, and admire,
In both I must acknowledge Celestina
Most excellently fair, fair above all
The beauties I ha seen, and one most worthy
Mans love and wonder.
Doe you speak Aretina,
This with a pure sense to commend, or i••
The mockery of my praise
Although it shame
My self, I must be just, and give her all
The excellence of women, and were I
A man.
What then?
I know not with what loss,
I should attempt her love, she is a piece
So angelically moving, I should think
Frailty excusd to dote upon her form,
And almost virtue to be wicked with her.
What should this mean? this is no jealousy,
Or she believes I counterfeit, I feel
Something within me, like a heate, to give
Her cause, would Celestina but consent,
What a frail thing is man, it is not worth
Our glory to be chaste, while we deny
Mirth and converse with women, he is good
That dares the tempter, ye• corrects his blood.
I have told you all my knowledge since he is pleased
To invite himself he shall be entertained,
And you shall be my witnesses.
Who comes with him.
Sir William Sentlove, that prepared me for
The honourable encounter, I expect
His Lordship every minute.
My Lord is come.
He has honoured me.
My Lord your periwig is awry▪
You sir —
You may guess, at the gentleman thats with him.
It is his Barber, Madam, dee observe
And your Ladyship want a shaver.
She is here sir,
I am betrayed Sentlove your plot, I may
Have opportunity to be revenged
She in the midst.
She's fair, I must confess,
But does she keep this distance out of state.
Though I am poor in language to express
How much your Lordship honours me, my heart
Is rich and proud in such a guest, I shall
Be out of love with every air abroad,
And for his grace done my unworthy house,
Be a fond prisoner, become anchorite,
And spend my hours in prayer, to reward
The blessing, and the bounty of this presence.
Though you could turn each place you move in▪ to
A temple, rather than a wall should hide
So rich a beauty from the world, it were
Less want to lose our piety and your prayer,
A throne were fitter to present you to
Our wonder, whence your eyes more worth than all
They look on, should chain every heart a prisoner.
It was pretty well come off.
By your example
I shall know how to complement, in this
You more confirm my welcome.
I shall love
My lips the better, if their silent language
Persuade your Lordship but to think so truly.
You make me smile Madam.
I hope you came not
With fear that any sadness here should shake
One blossom from your eye, I should be miserable
To present any object should displease you.
You doe not Madam.
As I should account
It no less sorrow, if your Lordship should
Lay too severe a censure on my freedom.
I wonot court a Prince against his justice,
Nor bribe him with a smile to think me honest,
Pardon my Lord this boldness, and the mirth
That may flow from me, I believe my father
Thought of no winding sheet when he begot me.
She has a merry soul, it will become
Me ask your pardon Madam for my rude
Approach so much a stranger to your knowledge.
Not my Lord so much stranger to my knowledge,
Though I have but seen your person a far oft,
I am acquianted with your character,
Which I have heard so often, I can speak it.
You shall doe me an honour.
If your Lordship will
Be patient.
And glad to hear my faults.
That as your conscience can agree upon em,
How ever if your Lordship give me privilege,
Isle tell you whats the opinion of the world.
You cannot please me better.
You're a Lord
Borne with as much nobility as would
Divided serve to make ten noble men
Without a Herald, but with so much spirit,
And height of soul, as well might furnish twenty.
You are learned, a thing not compatible now
With native honour, and are master of
A language that doth chain all years, and charm
All hearts, where you persuade, a wit so flowing
And prudence to correct it, that all men
Believe they only meet in you, which with
A spacious memory make up the full wonders;
To these you have known valour, and upon
A noble cause, know how to use a sword
To honours best advantage, though you were none;
You are as bountiful, as the showers that fall
Into the Springs greene besom; as you were
Created Lord of fortune, not her steward;
So constant to the cause, in which you make
Your self an advocate, you dare all dangers,
And men had rather you should be their friend,
Than justice or the bench, bound up together.
But did you hear all this.
And more my Lord.
Pray let me have it Madam.
To all these virtues, there is added one,
(Your Lordship will remember when I name it,
I speak but what I gather from the voice
Of others) it is grown to a full fame
That you have loved a woman.
But one Madam?
Yes many, give me leave to smile my Lord,
I shall not need to interpret in what sense,
But you have showed your self right honourable,
And for your love to Ladies have deserved,
If their vote might prevail a marble statue,
I make no comment on the peoples text.
My Lord I should be sorry to offend.
You cannot Madam, these are things we owe
To nature for.
And honest men will pay
Their debts.
If they be able, or compound.
She had a hard heart, would be unmerciful,
And not give day to men so promising,
But you owed women nothing,
Yes I am
Still in their debt, and I must owe them love,
It was part of my character.
With your Lordships
Pardon I only said, you had a fame
For loving women, but of late men say
You have against the imperial laws of love,
Restraind the active flowings of your blood,
And with a Mistress buried all that is
Hoped for in loves succession, as all beauty
Had died with her, and left the world benighted!
In this you more dishonour all our sex
Than you did grace a part, when every where
Love tempts your eye to admire a glorious harvest,
And every where as full blown ears submit
Their golden heads, the laden trees bow down
Their willing fruit, and court your amorous tasting.
I see men would dissect me to a fibre,
But doe you believe this?
It is my wonder!
I must confess a man of nobler earth
Then goes to vulgar composition,
Borne and bred high, so unconfind, so rich
In fortunes, and so read in all that sum
Up humane knowledge, to feed gloriously,
And live at court, the only sphere wherein
True beauty moves, natures most wealthy garden,
Where every blossom is more worth, than all
The Hesperian fruit, by jealous Dragon watched
Where all delights doe circle appetite,
And pleasures multiply by being tasted,)
Should be so lost with thought of one, turn ashes.
There's nothing left my Lord that can excuse you,
Unless you plead, what I am ashamed to prompt
Your wisdom too?
What that?
That you have plaid
The Surgeon with your self
And am made Eunuch.
It were much pity.
Trouble not your self,
I could convince your fears with demonstration
That I am man enough, but knew not where
Until this meeting beauty dwelt; the court
You talked of must be where the queen of love is,
Which moves but with your person, in your eye
Her glory shines, and only at that flame
Her wanton boy doth light his quickening torch.
Nay now you complement, I would it did
My Lord for your own sake.
You would be kind,
And love me then.
My Lord I should be loving
Where I found worth to invite it, and should cherish
A constant man.
Then you should me Madam.
But is the ice about your heart fallen off,
Can you return to doe what love commands?
Cupped thou shall have instant sacrifice.
And I dare be the Priest.
Your hand, your lip,
Now I am proof against all temptation.
Your meaning my good Lord.
I that have strength
Against thy voice and beauty, after this
May dare the charms of womankind, thou art
Bella Maria unprophaned yet,
This Magic has no power upon my blood.
Farewell Madam, if you durst be the example
Of chaste as well as fair, thou were a brave one.
I hope your Lordship means not this for earnest,
Be pleased to grace a banquer.
Pardon Madam.
Will Sentlove follow, I must laugh at you.
My Lord I must beseech you stay, for honour
For her whose memory you love best.
Your pleasure.
And by that virtue you have now professed,
I charge you to believe me too, I can
Now glory, that you have been worth my trial,
Which I beseech you pardon, had not you
So valiantly recovered in this conflict,
You had been my triumph, without hope of more
Than my just scorn upon your wanton flame;
Nor will I think these noble thoughts grew first
From melancholy, for some female loss,
As the fantastic world believes, but from
Truth, and your love of Innocence, which shine
So bright in the two royal luminaries
At Court, you cannot lose your way to chastity,
Proceed, and speak of me as honour guides you.
I am almost tired, come Ladies weal beguile
Dull time, and take the air another while.
But hath Sir Thomas lost five hundred pounds
Already?
And five hundred more he borrowed,
The Dice are notable devourers Madam,
They make no more of pieces, than of pebbles,
But thrust their heaps together to engender,
Two hundred more the Caster cries this gentleman,
I am w'ee. I ha that to nothing sir, the Caster
Again, tic covered, and the table too,
With sums that frighed me, here one speaks out,
And with a Martyrs patience, smiles upon
His monies Executioner, the Dice,
Commands a pipe of good Tobacco, and
In the smoke on it vanishes; another makes
The bones vault ore his head, swears that ill throwing
Has put his shoulder out of joint calls for
A bone setter that looks to'th box, to bid
His master send him some more hundred pounds,
Which lost, he takes tobacco, and is quiet;
Here a strong arm throws in, and in, with which
He brusheth all the table, pays the Rooks
That went their smelts a piece upon his hand,
Yet swears he has not drawn a stake this seven year.
But I was bid make haste▪ my master may
Lose this five hundred pound ere I come thither.
If we both waste so fast, we shall soon find
Our state is not immortal, some thing in
His other ways appear not well already.
Ye Tortoises, why make you no more haste,
Go pay to'th master of the house that money,
And tell the noble gamsters, I have another
Superf•uous thousand pound, at night isle visit em.
Dee hear?
Yes and please you.
Do it ye drudges,
Ta ra ra— Aretina.
You have a pleasant humour sir.
What should a gentleman be sad?
You have lost.
A transitory sum, as good that way
As another.
Doe you not vex within for it?
I had rather lose a thousand more, than one
Sad thought come near my heart fort, vex for trash,
Although it go from othermen like drops.
Of their life blood, we lose with the alacrity,
Wee drink a cup of sack, or kiss a Mistress,
No money is considerable with a gamester,
They have souls more spacious than Kings, did two
Gamsters divide the Empire of the world
They d make one throw for it all, and he that lost
Be no more melancholy, then to have played for
A morning draught, vex a rich soul for dirt,
The quiet of whose every thought is worth
A Province:
But when Dice have consumed all;
Your patience will not pawn for as much more.
Hang pawning, sell outright, and the fears over.
Say you so? I'll have another coach to morrow
If there be rich above ground.
I forgot
To bid the fellow ask my Jeweller,
Whether the chain of Diamonds be made up,
I will present it to my Lady Bellamour,
Fair Celestina.
This gown J have worn
Six days already, it looks dull, isle give it
My waiting woman, and have one of cloth
of gold enbrodered, shoes and pantables
Will show well of the same.
I have invited
A covey of Ladies, and as many gentlemen
To morrow to the Italian Ordinary,
I shall have rarities, and regale as
To pay for Madam, music, wanton songs,
And tunes of silken petticotes to dance to.
And to morrow have I invited half the Court
To dine here, what misfortune tic your company
And ours should be divided? after dinner
J entertain i'm with a play.
By that time
Your play inclines to the Epilogue, shall we
quit our Italian host, and whirl in coaches,
To the Douch Magazine of sauce, the Stillyard,
Where deal, and backragge, and what strange wine else,
They dare but give a name too in the reckoning
Shall flow into our room, and drown Westphalias,
Tongues, and Anchoavis, like some little town
Endangered by a sluice, through whose fierce ebb
We wade and wash our selves into a boat,
And bid our Coachmen drive their leather tenements
By land, while we sail home with a fresh tide
To some new rendezvous.
If you have not
Pointed the place, pray bring your Ladies hither,
J mean to have a Ball to morrow night,
And a rich banquet for i'm, where we will dance
Till morning rise, and blush to interrupt us.
Have you no Ladies in the next room, to advance
A present mirth? What a dull house you govern?
Farewell, a wife's no company—Aretina,
J've summed up my estate, and find we may have
A month good yet▪
What mean you?
And J do rather
Be Lord one month of pleasures, to the height
And rapture of our senses, than be years,
Consuming what we have in foolish temperance,
Live in the dark, and no fame waite upon us,
I will live so, posterity shall stand
At gaze when I am mentioned.
A mon'th good,
And what shall be done then.
Isle over Sea,
And trail a pike, with watching, marching, lying
In trenches, with enduring cold, and hunger,
And taking here and there a musketshot,
I can earn every week four shillings Madam,
And if the bullets favour me to snatch
Any superfluous limb, when I return
With good friends, I despair not to be entold
Poor Knight of Windsor; for your course Madam,
No doubt you may doe well, your friends are great,
Or if your poverty, and their pride cannot
Agree, you need not trouble much invention,
To find a trade to live by, there are customers,
Farewell, be frolic Madam, if I live
I will feast all my senses, and not fall
Less than a Phaeton from my throne of Pleasure,
Though my estate flame like the world about me.
Tic very pretty.
Madam Decoy.
What melancholy
After so sweet a nights work? Have not I
Showed my self Mistress of my art.
A Lady.
That title makes the credit of the act
A story higher, you've not seen him yet,
I wonder what he will say.
He's here.
Bear up
My little Mirmidan, does not Jack Littleworth
Follow?
Follow? He fell into the Thames
At landing.
The devil shall dive for him
Ere I endanger my silk stockings for him,
Let the Watermen alone, they have drags and engines,
When he has drunk his Julep, I shall laugh
To see him come in pickeld the next tide.
He will never sink, he has such a cork brain.
Let him be hanged or drowned alls one to me,
Yet he deserves to die by water, cannot
Bear his wine credibly.
Is not this my Aunt?
And another handsome Lady, I must know her.
My blood is rampant too, I must court some body,
As good my Aunt, as any other body.
Where have you been cozen?
At the bridge,
At the Bears foot, where our first health began
To the fair Aretina, whose sweet company
Was wished by all, we could not get a lay,
a Tumbler, a Device, a bone robe
For any money, drawers were grown dull;
We wanted our true firkes and our vagaries;
When were you in drink Aunt?
How?
Do not Ladies
Play the good fellows too? there's no true mirth
Without i'm, I have now such tickling fancies,
That Doctor of the chair of wit, has read
A precious lecture, how I should behave
My self to Ladies, as now for example.
Would you practise upon me?
I first salute you,
You have a soft hand Madam, are you so
All over?
Nephew.
Nay you should but smile,
And then again I kiss you; and thus draw
Off your white glove, and start to see your hand
More excellently white, I grace my own
Lip with this touch, and turning gently thus,
Prepare you for my skill in Palmistry,
Which out of curiosity no Lady
But easily applies too, the first line
I took with most ambition to find out,
Is Venus girdle, a fair semicircle
Enclosing both the mount of Sol and Saturn,
If that appear, she's for my turn, a Lady
Whom nature has prepared for the career,
And Cupped at my elbow, I put forward,
You have this very line, Aunt.
The boy's frantic.
You have a Couch or Palate, I can shut
The Chamber door, enrich a stranger when
Your Nephew's coming into play.
No more.
Are you so coy to your own flesh and blood?
Here take your playfellow, I talk of sport,
And she would have me marry her.
Here is Littleworth.
Why how now Tutor?
I ha been fishing.
And what ha you caught?
My belly full of water.
Ha ha, wheres thy rapier?
My rapier's is drowned,
And I am little better, I was up bi'th heals,
And out came a tun of water beside wine.
'Thas made thee sober.
Would you have me drunk
With Water?
I hope your fire is quenched by this time.
It is not now, as when your worship walked
By all the taverns Jack, dry as a bone.
You had store of fish under water Jack.
It has made a poor Iohn of me.
J doe not think but if we cast an angle
Jnto his belly, we might find some Pilchards.
And boiled by this time, dear Madam a bed.
Carry but the water Spaniel to a grasseplot
Where he may roll himself, let him but shake
His ears twice in the Sun, and you may grind him
Into a posit.
Come thou shalt to my bed
Poor pickerel.
Alas sweet gentleman.
I have ill luck, and I should smell by this time,
I am but new tan I am sure, sweet gentlewoman.
Your servant.
Pray doe not pluck off my skin,
It is so wet, unless you have good eyes
You'll hardly know it from a shirt.
Fear nothing.
He has sack enough, and I may find his humour.
And how first with your Ladyship? you look
Without a sunshine in your face.
You are glorious
In mind and habit.
Ends of gold and silver.
Your other clothes were not so rich, who was
Your tailor sir?
They were made for me long since,
They have known but two bright days upon my back,
I had a humour Madam to lay things by,
They will serve two days more, I think I ha gold enough
To go to'th Merc•r, Isle now allow my self
A suite a week as this, with necessary
Dependences, Beaver, silk stockings, garters,
And roses in their due conformity,
Boots are forbid a clean leg, but to ride in,
My linen every morning comes in new,
The old goes too great bellies.
You are charitable.
I may dine w'ee sometime, or at the Court
To meet good company, not for the table,
My Clarke of the Kitchens here, a witty Epicure,
A spirit that to please me with whats rare
Can fly a hundred mile a day to market,
And make me Lord of Fish and Foul, I shall
Forget there is a butcher, and to make
My footmen nimble, he shall feed on nothing
But wings of wildfoule.
These ways are costly.
Therefore Isle have it so, I ha sprung a mine.
You make me wonder sir, to see this change
Of fortune, your revenue was not late
So plentiful.
Hang dirty land and Lordships,
I wonot change one lodging I ha got
For the Chamber of London.
Strange of such a sudden,
To rise to this estate, no fortunate hand
At dice could lift you up so, for tic since
Last night, yesterday, you were no such Monarch.
There be more games then dice.
It cannot be
A Mistress, though your person is worth love,
None possibly are rich enough to feed
As you have cast the method of your riots,
A Princess, after all her Jewels must
Be forced to sell her provinces.
Now you talk
Of Jewels? What doe you think of this?
A rich one.
You'll honour me to were it, this other toy
I had from you, this chain I borrowed of you,
A friend had it in keeping, if your Ladyship
Want any sum, you know your friend and Alexander▪
Dare you trust my security.
There's gold,
I shall have more to morrow.
You astonish me, who can supply these?
A dear friend I have,
She promised we should meet again in the morning.
Not that I wish to know
More of your happiness, then I have aready
Heart to congratulate, be pleased to lay
My wonder.
Tic a secret.
Which isle die
Ere Isle betray.
You have always wished me well,
But you shall swear not to reveal the party.
Isle lose the benefit of my tongue.
Nor be
A afraid at what I say, what think you first
Of an old Witch, a strange ill favored hag
That for my company last night, has wrought
This cure upon my fortune? I doe sweat
To think upon her name.
How sir a Witch?
I would not fright your Ladyship too much
At first, but Witches are a kin to Spirits,
The truth is— nay if you look pale already,
I ha done.
Sir I beseech you.
If you have
But courage then to know the truth, isle tell you
In one word, my chief friend is the devil.
What devil? How I tremble.
Have a heart,
It was a she devil too, a most insatiate
Abominable devil with a tail
Thus long.
Goodness defend me, did you see her?
No it was in the dark, but she appeared first to me
In the likeness of a Bedlam, and was brought
I know not how, nor whither, by two Goblins,
More hooded than a Hawk.
But would you venture
Upon a devil?
I for means.
How black
An impudence is this? But are you sure
It was the devil you enjoyed.
Say nothing,
I did the best to please her, but as sure
As you live, it was a Helcat.
De'e not quake?
I found my self the very same in in the morning,
Where two of her familiars had left me.
My Lord is come to visit you.
No words,
As you respect my safety, I ha told tales
Out of the devils school, if it be known
I lose a friend, tic now about the time
I promised her to meet again, at my
Return Isle tell you wonders, not a word.
Tic a false glass, sure I am more deformed,
What have I done, my soul is miserable.
I sent you a letter Madam.
You expressed
Your noble care of me my Lord.
Your Lordship
Does me an honour.
Madam I am glad
To see you here, I meant to have kissed your hand
Ere my return to Court.
Sir Thomas has
Prevailed to bring me to his trouble hither.
You doe him grace.
Why whats the matter Ma∣dam?
Your eyes are tuning Lachrimae.
As you
Doe hope for heaven withdraw, and give me but
The patience of ten minutes.
Wonderful!
I wonot hear you above that proportion,
She talks of heaven, come, where must we to counsel?
You shall conclude me when you please.
I follow.
What alteration is this? I that so late
Stood the temptation of her eye, and voice,
Boasted a heart, 'bove all licentious flame,
At second view turn renegade, and think
I was too superstitious, and full
Of phlegm not to reward her amorous Courtship
With manly freedom.
I obey you sir.
Isle waite upon your Lordship presently.
She could not want a cunning to seem honest
When I neglected her, I am resolved,
You still look pleasant Madam.
I have cause
My Lord, the rather for your presence, which
Hath power to charm all trouble in my thoughts.
I must translate that complement and owe
All that is cheerful in my self to these
All quickening smiles, and rather than such bright
Eyes should repent their influence upon me,
I would release the aspects, and quit the bounty
Of all the other stars; Did you not think me
A strange and melancholy gentleman
To use you so unkindly.
Me my Lord?
I hope you made no loud complaint, I wot not
Be tried by a Jury of Ladies.
For what my Lord?
I did not meet that noble entertainment,
You were late pleased to show me.
I observed
No such defect in your Lordship, but a brave
And noble fortitude.
A noble folly
I bring repentance fort, I know you have
Madam a gentle faith, and wonot ruin
What you have built to honour you.
Whats that?
If you can love isle tell your Ladyship.
I have a stubborn soul else.
You are all
Composed of harmony.
What love de'e mean▪
That which doth perfect both, Madam you have heard
I can be constant, and if you consent
To grace it so, there is a spacious dwelling
Prepared within my heart for such a Mistress.
Your Mistress, my good Lord?
Why my good Lady?
Your sex doth hold it no dishonour
To become Mistress to a noble servant
In the now court, Platonic way, consider
Who tic that pleads to you, my birth, and present
Value can be no stain to your embrace,
But these are shadows when my love appears,
Which shall in his first miracle return
Me in my bloom of youth, and thee a Virgin,
When I within some new Elisium
Of purpose made and meant for us, shall be
In every thing Atones, but in his
Contempt of love, and court thee from a Daphne
Hid in the cold rind of a bashful tree,
With such warm language, and delight, till thou
Leap from that baize into the queen of love,
And pay my conquest with composing garlands
Of thy own myrtle for me.
Whats all this?
Consent to be my Mistress Celestina,
And we will have it Spring-time all the year,
Upon whose invitations when we walk,
The winds shall play soft descant to our feet,
And breathe rich odors to repure the air,
Greene bowers on every side shall tempt our stay,
And Violets stoop to have us tread upon em.
The red rose shall grow pale, being near thy cheek,
And the white blush overcome with such a forehead,
Here laid, and measuring with our selves some bank,
A thousand birds shall from the woods repair.
And place themselves so cunningly, behind
The leaves of every tree, that while they pay
As tribute of their songs, thou shat imagine
The very trees bear music, and sweet voices
Doe grow in every arbour, here can we
Embrace and kiss, tell tales, and kiss again,
And none but heaven our rival.
When we are
Weary of these, what if we shift our Paradise?
And through a grove of tall and even pine,
Descend into a Valley, that shall shame
All the delights of Tempe, upon whose
Greene plush the graces shall be called to dance
To please us, and maintain their Fairy revels,
To the harmonious murmurs of a stream
That gently falls upon a rock of pearl,
Here doth the Nymph forsaken Echo dwell,
To whom we will tell the story of our love,
Till at our surfeit and her want of joy,
We break her heart with envy, not far off
A grove shall call us to a wanton river,
To see a dying Swan give up the ghost,
The fishes shooting up their tears in bubbles
That they must lose the Genius of their waves,
And such love linsey woolsey, to no purpose.
You chide me handsomely, pray tell me how
You like this language.
Good my Lord forbear.
You need not fly out of this circle Madam,
These widows so are full of circumstance,
Isle undertake in this time I ha courted
Your Ladyship for the toy, to ha broken ten,
Nay twenty colts, Virgins I mean, and taught em
The amble, or what pace I most affected.
You're not my Lord again, the Lord I thought you.
And I must tell you now, you doe forget
Your self and me.
You'll not be angry Madam.
Nor rude, though gay men have a privilege,
It shall appear, there is a man my Lord
Within my acquaintance, rich in worldly fortunes,
But cannot boast any descent of blood,
Would buy a coat of arms.
He may, and legs booted and spurred to ride into the country.
But these will want antiquity: my Lord
The seal of honour, whats a coat cut out
But yesterday to ma•e a man a gentleman?
Your family as old, as the first virtue
That merited an Escutcheon, doth owe
A glorious coat of arms, if you will sell now
All that your name doth challenge in that ensign,
Il• help you to a chapman, that shall pay
And power down wealth enough fort.
Sell my arms?
I cannot Madam.
Give but your consent,
You know not how the state may be inclined
To dispensation, we may prevail
Upon the Heralds office afterword.
Isle sooner give these arms to'th hangmans axe,
My head, my heart, to twenty executions
Than sell one atom from my name.
Change that,
And answer him would buy my honour from me.
Honour that is not worn upon a flag
Or pennon, that without the owners dangers,
An enemy may ravish, and bear from me,
But that which grows and withers with my soul,
Beside the bodies stain, think, think my Lord
To what you would unworthily betray me,
If you would not for price of gold, or pleasure,
(If that be more your idol) lose the glory
And painted honour of your house — I ha done.
Enough to rectify a Satires blood,
Obscure my blushes here.
Or this or sight with me,
It shall be no exception that I waite
Upon my Lord, I am a gentleman,
You may be less and bea Knight, the office,
I doe my Lord is honest sir, how many
Such you have been guilty of, heaven knows.
Tic no fear of your sword, but that I wot not
Break the good laws established against duels.
Oft with your periwig, and stand bare.
From this
Minute isle be a servant to thy goodness,
A Mistress in the wanton sense is common,
Isle honour you with chaste thoughts, and call you so.
Isle study to be worth your fair opinion.
Sent love, your head was used to a covering,
Beside a hat, when went the hair away.
I laid a wager my Lord with Hairecut,
Who thinks I shall catch cold, that isle stand bare
This half hour.
Pardon my ambition
Madam, I told you truth, I am a gentleman,
And cannot fear that name is drowned in my
Relation to my Lord.
I dare not think so.
From henceforth call my service duty Madam,
That Pigs head that betrayed me to your mirth,
Is doing penance for it.
Why may not I
My Lord begin a fashion of no hair.
Doe you sweat sir william.
Not with store of nightcaps.
Heaven has dissolved the clouds that hung upon
My eyes, and if you can with mercy meet
A penitent, I throw my own will off,
And now in all things obey yours, my nephew
Send back again to'th college, and my self
To what place you'll confine me.
Dearer now
Than ever to my bosom, thou shat please
Me best to live at thy own choice, I did
But fright thee with a noise of my expenses,
The sums are safe, and we have wealth enough,
If yet we use it nobly? My Lord— Madam,
Pray honour to night.
I beg your presence,
And pardon.
I know not how my Aretina
May be disposed to morrow for the country.
You must not go, before you both have done
Me honour to accept an entertainment,
Where I have power, on those terms I'm your guest.
You grace us Madam.
Already
I feel a cure upon my soul, and promise
My after life to virtue, pardon heaven,
My shame yet hid from the worlds eye.
Sweet Madam.
Not for the world be seen here, we are lost,
Isle visit you at home; but not to practise
What she expects, my counsel may recover her.
Wheres Madam? pray lend me a little money,
My spirit has deceived me, Proserpine
Has broke her word.
Doe you expect to find
The devil true to you.
Not too loud.
Isle voice it
Louder, to all the world your horrid sin,
Unless you promise me religiously,
To purge your foul blood by repentance sir.
Then I'm undone.
Not while I have power
To encourage you to virtue, isle endeavour
To find you out some nobler way at Court
To thrive in.
Do it, and isle forsake the devil,
And bring my flesh to obedience; you shall steer me,
My Lord — your servant.
You are brave again.
Madam your pardon.
Your offence requires
Humility.
Low as my heart. Sir Thomas
Isle sup with you, a part of satisfaction.
Our pleasures cool, music, and when our Ladies
Are tired with active motion, to give
Them rest in some new rapture to advance
Full mirth, our souls shall leap into a dance.

HE, that his wonted modesty retains,
And never set a 〈◊〉 upon his Brains
Above your Judgments; nor did ever strive
By Arrogance or Ambition to achieve
More praise unto himself, or more applause
Unto his Scenes, then such, as know the Laws
Of Comedy do give; He only those 〈◊〉
Now prays may scan his Verse, and weigh his Prose:
Yet thus far he thinks meet to let you know
Before you see it, the Subject is so low,
That to expect high Language, or much Cost,
Were a sure way, now, to make all be lost.
Pray look for none: He'll promise such hereafter,
To take your graver judgments, now your laughter
Is all he aims to move. I had more to say-—
The Title, too, may prejudice the Play.
It says the Sparagus Garden; if you look
To feast on that, the Title spoils the Book.
We have yet a taste of it, which he doth lay
In the midst of the journey, like a Bait by the way:
Now see with Candor: As our Poet's free,
Pray let be so your Ingenuity.
AT first we made no boast, and still we fear,
We have not answered expectation here,
Yet give us leave to hope, as hope to live,
That you will grace, as well as Justice give.
We do not dare your Judgments now: for we
Know lookers on more then the Gamsters see;
And what ere Poets write, we Act, or say,
Tic only in your hands to Crown a Play.
With me gentlemen?
Only a few neighbourly and friendly words sir.
Oh you are most friendly welcome good Mr. Gilbert G•…lawire, and Mr. Walter Chamlet I take ye to be.
The same sir at your service.
Your fathers both were my good neighbours indeed; worthy and well reputed members of the City while they lived: but that may be read upon the Hospital walls, and gates; it is enough for me to say they loved me: Season Touchwood! and I were a wretch if I should not honour their memory in their hap∣pie succession: Again gentlemen you are welcome.
Yet you may be pleased sir to remember, though our fathers were both loving friends to you, yet they were sometimes at odds one with another.
True, true, ever at odds: They were the common talk of the town for a pair of wranglers; still at strife for one trifle or other: they were at law logger-heads together, in one match that held 'em tugging tone the tother by the purse-strings a matter of nine years, and all for a matter of nothing. They coursed one another from Court to Court, and through every Court Tempo∣rall and Spiritual; and held one an other play till they lost a thousand pound a man to the Lawyers, and till it was very suffice∣ently ad judged that your father was one fool, and your father was another fool. And so again gentlemen you are welcome: now your business.
You may now be pleased sir to remember that our fathers grew friends at last.
Heaven forbid else.
And note the cause, the ground of their reconciliation, which was upon the love, betwixt me and this gentleman's sister. My fathers Son married his fathers Daughter, and our two fa∣theirs grew friends, and wise men again.
To the point good gentlemen, yet you are welcome.
Troth sir the point is this: You know (and the town has tan sufficient notice of it) that there has been a long con∣tention betwixt you and old Mr. Striker your neighbour—
Ha?
And the cause or ground of your quarrel (for ought any
body knows but your selves) may be as trivial, as that which was derided in our fathers.
Are you there with me?
And great hopes there are, and wagers laid by your friends on both sides, that you two will be friends.
Isle hold you an hundred pounds of that.
Nay, more, that Mr. Striker will bee willing to give his Grand-child to your Son, so you'll give your consent.
And your coming is to persuade that, is it not? if it be so, speak; deal plainly with me gentlemen, whilst yet you are welcome.
Insooth it is so, we come to negotiate the match for your son, and your friendship with old Mr. Striker.
You are not welcome.
But when you weigh the reasons, and consider the perfect love of the young pair, and how the world will praise your re∣conciliation, and bless the providence, that made their loves the means to work their parents charity.
Again you are not welcome.
Your self but now commended the atonement
Of our two fathers, wrought by the same means:
I mean my marriage with his sister here
Against as great an opposition.
But our fathers loved their children.
Your fathers were a couple of doting fools, and you a pair of saucy knaves; now you are not welcome: and more then so, get you out of my doors.
Will you sir, by your wilfulness, cast away your son?
My son? no son of mine, I have cast him off already for casting an eye upon the daughter of mine enemy: let him go, let him pack; let him perish: he comes not within these doors, and you, that are his fine spoken spokes-men, get you off of my ground I charge you.
We are gone sir: only but wishing you Mr. Touchwood to remember that your sonne's your son.
Indeffinitely not sir, until hee does not only renounce all interest in the love of that baggage; but doe some extraordi∣nary mischief in that family to right me for the trespass hee has
done; and so win my good opinion, till which bee done a daily curse of mine hee shall not miss; and so you may inform him.
What an uncharitable wretch is this?
The touchiest piece of Touchwood that ever I met withal.
I feared we should inflame him.
All the comfort is, his son may yet out-live him.
BUt the danger is, his father may dis-inherit him
He cannot be so devilish; here comes his son, a gentleman of so sweet a disposition, and so contrary to his crab∣bed Sire, that a man who never heard of his mothers virtue might wonder who got him for him.
Not at all I assure you, Sam is his fathers noun son: for the old man you see, is gentle enough, till he be incensed; and the son being moved, is as fiery as the father.
But he is very s•…dome and slowly moved; his father often and of the sudden.
I prithee would thou have greene wood take fire as soon as that which is old and sere?
He is deep in thought.
Over head and ears in his Mrs. contemplation.
To dis-obey a father, is a crime
In any son unpardonable. Is this rule
So general that it can bear no exception?
Or is a fathers power so illimitable,
As to command his sons affections?
And so control the Conqueror of all men
Even Love himself? no: he, that enterprises
So great a work, forgets he is a man;
And must in that forget he is a father,
And so if he forgo his nature, I
By the same Law may leave my Piety.
But stay, I would not lose my self in following
This wild conceit
How now Sam, whither away?
I was but casting how to find the way
Unto my self. Can you direct me gentlemen?
Yes, yes; your father has told us the way.
Ha you had conference with him? ha ye? speak.
Marry sir ha we, and I think to purpose.
Ha you won ought upon him to my advantage?
As much as may restore you to acquaintance
With him again, can you but make good use on it.
Pray doe not trifle with me; tell me briefly.
Briefly he says you must not dare to see him;
Nor hope to receive blessing to the value
Of a new three-pence, till you disclaim your love
In your fair Annabell; and not only so,
But you must doe some villainous mischievous act
To vex his adversary, her Grand-father;
Or walk beneath his curse in banishment.
A most uncharitable and unnatural sentence.
But think withal it is your father, that
Makes this decree; obey him in the 'xecution:
He has a great Estate, you are his only son:
Doe not lose him, your fortune, and your self
For a frail piece of beauty: shake her off;
And doe some notable thing against her house,
To please your father
The Devil speaks it in thee,
And with this spell I must Conjure him out.
Oh friend you▪are too violent.
Hoe's too desperate,
To urge me to an act of such injustice.
Can her fair love, to whom my faith is given,
Be answered with so loud an injury?
Or can my faith so broken yield a sound
Less terrible than thunder, to affright
All love and constancy out of the breast
Of every Virgin that shall hear the breach
Of my firm faith?
Be not so passionate.
I have no further power to doe an out-rage
Against that Family to whom my heart
Is linked, then to rip out this troubled heart
The only ominous cause, indeed, of all.
My over passionate fathers cruelty; and that
(If I must needs doe an injurious Office)
Alone, shall be my act to calm his fury.
Prithee blow o'er this passion; thou were wont
To affect wit, and can not be a Lover
Truly without it. Love is wit it self,
And through a thousand lets will find a way
To his desired end.
The Ballet taught you that.
Well said, Love will find out the way:
I see thou art coming to thy self again,
Can there no shift, no witty slight be found
(That have been common in all times and ages)
To blind the eyes of a weake-sighted father,
And reconcile these dangerous differences
But by blood-shedding, or outrageous deeds,
To make the feud the greater? recollect
Thy self good Sam; my house, my purse, my counsel
Shall all be thine, and Wat shall be thy friend.
Let me entreat your friendship.
And me your pardon.
So, so, all friends; let's home and there consult
To lay the tempest of thy fathers fury;
Which cannot long be dangerous, it is but like
A storm in April, spent in swift extremes,
When straight the Sun shoots forth his cheerful beams.
YOu will not assault me in mine own house? I hope you will not; nor urge me beyond my patience with your borroughing attempts▪ good sir Hugh Mony-lacks I hope you will not.
I hope I moved you not, but in fair language sir;
Nor spoke a syllable that might offend you.
I have not used the word of loan, or borrowing;
Only some private conference I requested.
Private conference! a new coined word for borrowing of money; I tell you, your very face, your countenance (though it be glossed with Knight-hood) looks so borrowingly, that the best words you give me are as dreadful as Stand and deliver, and there I think I was w'ye. I am plain w'ye sir, old Will Striker I.
My father Striker, I am bold to call you.
Your father! no, I desire no such near acquaintance with you, good sir Hugh Mony-lacks: you are a Knight and a noble gentleman, I am but an Esquire and out of debt; and there I think I was w'ye again▪
I shall be with you anon, when you have tal'•…d your self out of breath.
It is true, I had the honour to be your Worships father in law when time was, that your Knight-hood married and Lady∣fied a poor daughter of mine: but yet she had five thousand pounds in her purse if you please to remember it; and as I remember you had then fourteen hundred a year: But where is it now? and where is my daughter now? poor abused Innocent; your rio∣tousnesse abroad, and her long night watches at home shortened her days, and cast her into her grave—And it was not long before all your estate was buried too; and there I was w'ye again I take it: but that could not fetch her again.
No sir, I wish my life might have excused
Hers, far more precious: never had a man
A juster cause to morn.
Nor mourned more justly, it is your only wearing; you have just none other: nor have had means to purchase better any time these seven years as I take it▪ By which means you have got the name of the mourning Knight; and there I am sure I was w'ye.
Sir, if you will not be pleased to hear my desires to you, let me depart without your derision.
Even when you please, and whither you please good sir Hugh Mony-lacks: my house shall bee no enchanted Castle to detain your Knight-errandship from your adventures. I hope
your errand hither was but for your dinner; and so far forth (and especially at your going forth) you are welcome. Your daughter I doe keep, and will for her poor mothers sake; (that was my daughter) peace be with her—she shall be no more a trouble to you; nor be your child any longer: I have made her mine; I will adopt •…er into mine own name, and make her a Striker; she shall be no more a Mony-lack•…, and if she please me well in matching with a husband, I know what I will doe for her.
I thank you sir.
Doe you thank me sir, I assure you you need not; for I mean so to order her estate, and bind it up in that trust that you shall never finger a farthing on it: am I w'ye sir?
I cannot choose but thank you though in behalf of my child.
Call her your child again, or let me but hear that you suffer her to ask you a bare blessing, isle send her after you upon adventures sir Knight▪ and who shall give a portion with her then? or what can she hope from a father that groans under the weight of a Knight-hood for want of means to support it?
I▪ shall find means to live without your trouble hereafter.
You may, you may; you have a wit sir Hugh, and a pro∣jective one; what, have you some new project a foot now, to out•…o that of the Hand-barrowes? what call you 'em the Sedams? oh cry you mercy, cry you mercy; I heard you had put in for a share at the Asparagud Ga den: or that at least you have a P•…zion thence; to be their Gather guest and bring 'em custom, •…nd that you play the fly of the new Inne-there; and sip with all companies: am I w'ye there sir?
You may be when you please sir; I can command the best entertainment there for your money.
In good time sir.
In the mean time sir, I had no mind to beg nor bore∣row of you, and though you will not▪ give me leave to call you father, nor my daughter my daughter, yet I thought it might be∣come my care to advertise you (that have taken the care of her from me) of a danger that will much afflict you, if it bee not
carefully prevented.
How's this?
You have an adversary—
But one that I know, the rascal my neighbour Touchwood.
There I am w'ye sir, I am informed that his only son is an earnest Suitor to your Daughter: (I must not call her mine)
How's that?
That there is a deep secret love betwixt 'em; and that they have had many private meetings: and a stolen match very likely to be made if you prevent it not.
Can this be true?
Give me but a piece from you, and if by due examination you find it not so, isle never see your face again till you send for me.
To be rid of you take it.
I am gone sir, and yet I think i'm w'ye.
Is the Devil become a match-broker? what, who with∣in there: what?
Annabell? what Friswood?
Here sir, I am here forsooth.
Are you so forsooth? but whore's your Mistress forsooth?
Listening is good sometimes; I heard their talk, and am glad on it.
Where is your Mrs. I say?
My Mrs. Annabell, forsooth, my young Mrs?
What other Mrs. hast thou but the Devils Dam her self, your old Mrs.? and her I ask not for; good Mrs. Flibber de'Jibb with the French fly-flap of your coxcomb.
Is the old man mad trow?
I ask for Annabell.
Bless me! how doe you look?
Whore's Annabell I say? fetch her me quickly, least I bast her out of your old Whit-leather hide.
How youthful you are grown? she is not far to fetch sir; you know you commanded her to her chamber, and not to
appear in sight, till her debauched father was gone out of the house.
And is not he gone now forsooth? why call you her not?
I warrant hee has told you some tale on her. That lewd Knight, now he has undone himself by his unthrifty practises, begins to practise the undoing of his daughter too! is it not so forsooth? has he not put some wickedness into your head to set you against her?
I never knew thee a Witch till now.
Ha, ha, ha; I warrant hee told you that your adversary Touchwoods son, and my Mistress Annabell are in love league together.
Marry did he; and I will know the truth.
Ha, ha, ha.
Dare thou laugh at me?
No, no; but I laugh at the poor Knights officiousness, in hope of some great reward for the gullery that I put upon him: ha, ha, ha. Good sir a little patience, and I will tell! you. Ha, ha, ha—it was I that devised it for a lye, and told it him in hope that his telling of it to you, would provoke you to beat him out of the house; for reporting a thing that had no probability or re∣semblance of a truth in it.
Is it but so?
Sir I have been your creature this thirty years, down lying and uprising; (as you know) and you should believe me, you had me in my old Mistresses days——
I, thou wast a handsome young wench then; now thou art old.
Yet not so wondrous old as to be sung in a Ballet for it, or to have been able ere Ad•…m wore beard to have crept into Eves bed, as I did into my Mistresses. (Heaven pardon you, as I doe with all my heart.)
What in thy fooleries now?
Nor so old neither but you are content to make a sorry shift with me still; as your abilities will serve you—
Come, come; thou art not old.
Nay that's not it that troubles me: but that I, that served you before your daughter was borne; I mean your daughter that
was mother to this daughter which now you have made your daughter; that I that saw the birth, the marriage, and the death of your daughter; and have had the governance of this her daugh∣la ever since, till now she is marriageable; and have all this while been as pliant as a twig about you, and as true as the sheath to your steel as we say, that I should now be mist•…usted to connive at an il match for her, for whom my chiefest care has bin from the Cradle? there's the unkindness.
Enough, enough; Fid▪ I believe there is no such matter.
I thought you had known me—
I doe, I doe; I prithee good Fid be quiet, it was a witty trick of thee to mock the poor Knight withal: but a pox on him, he cost me a piece for his news; there's another for thee: but the best is he hath tied himself by it, never to trouble me more; I have that into my bargain.
And you would tie me so too; would you?
Not so Fid, not so: but look to my Girl, and thus far mark me. If ever I find that young Touchwood, the son of that miscreant, whose hatred I would not lose for all the good neigh∣bor-hood in the Parish; if ever J say, he and your charge doe but look upon one another, isle turn her and you both out of doors: there J will be w'ye, look to it.
Agreed sir; agreed.
Look to it J say, J must abroad, my anger is not over yet: I would I could meet my adversary to scold it out; I shall bee sick else.
It was well I over-heard 'em, my young lovers had bin spoiled else: had not I crossed the old angry mans purpose before he had met with the young timorous Virgin, she had confessed all; and and all had bin dashed now.
HOw now Fris. is my Grand-father gone out of door?
If he were as safe out of the world, it were well for you.
Nay say not so good Fris.
Your unlucky father has destroyed all your hopes in Mr.
Sam Touchwood; in discovering your loves (what Devil soever gave him the intelligence) and you must resolve never to see your sweet Sam again.
I must resolve to dye first: oh.
Odds pity! how now! why Mrs. why Annabell, why Mrs. Annabell; look up, look up I say, and you shall have him spite of your Grand-father and all his works: what doe you think I am an Infidel, to take Mr. Samuels forty pieces? and a Ronlet of old Muskadine for nothing? come be well, and indeed you shall have him.
Oh Sam, sweet Sam—
These love-sicke maids seldom call upon other Saints then their sweet-hearts; look up I say, your sweet Sam is com∣ming.
Ha, where? where is he; why doe you abuse me?
I say he will come presently; look up I say, forgive me! he comes indeed: my Mr. thought I was a witch, and I now suspect my self for one. Oh Mr. Samuel, how came you hither? here he is Mrs. what mean you to come now to undo her and your self too? yet she had dyed and you had not come as you did. Why doe you not look upon him and be well? get you gone, we are all undone if my Mr. come back and find you: speak to her quickly, then kiss her and part, you will bee parted for ever else.
How fares my love?
Better then when I was in earthly being,
This bosom is a heaven to me; through death
I am arrived at bliss, most happily
To be so well revived thou made me dye.
I made you not dye, as you will dye, if you stand prattling till my Mr. return and take you: for Mr. Samuel, I must tell you Mr. Samuel, he knows all Mr. Samuel.
My father knows as much, and that's the cause
Of my adventuring hither to instruct you
In a strange practice; here it is in writing, 
It is such a secret that I durst not trust
My tongue with the conveyance of't; nor have I
The confidence to hear it read: take it,
And in my absence join your best advises,
To give it life and action; it is rule▪
Which (though both hard and grievous to pursue)
Is all that can our hopes in love renew.
What horrible thing must we doe trow? pray let me see the paper, I hope there is no pistolling nor poisoning in it: though my old Striker come short of the man he was to bee with me, I would be loath to shorten his days with the danger of my neck; or making a Bon-fire in Smithfield: pray let me see the paper.
Not until my departure gentle Friswood.
Is there such horror in it, that you dare not stand the opening of the paper?
Consider sweet our love is Fever sick,
Even desperately to death;
And nothing but a desperate remedy
Is left us: for our bodily health, what sour
Unsavoury loathsome medicines we will take
But to remove an Ague?
What sharpe incisions, •…earings, and cruel Corsives
Are daily suffered, and what limbs dissever'd
To keep a Gangrene from the vital parts,
That a dismembered body yet may live!
We in like ca•…e must to preserve our love,
(If we dare say we love) adventure life,
Fame, Honour, which are all but Loves attendants
To maintain it.
I understand you, sweet,
And doe before I read your strong injunction,
Resolve to give it faithful execution
What ere it be. I ha got courage now,
And (with a constant boldness let me tell you)
You dare not lay that on me Isle not bear:
And Love, predominant o'er all other passions,
Shall bear me out in it.
Oh you have made me happy.
As I live my Master—
Kiss and away; whip quickly through the Garden—
Run you up to your Chamber; isle see you out my self.
Thus let us breath that till we meet again.
Whoop what do ye mean?
We leave for truce at raising of the siege,
Our interchanged hearts each others pledge.
Go fools, this sets you both but more on edge.
Farewell,
Farewell.
SWeet wife content thy self.
Yes content my self! shall I so? with what, you Iohn Bopeepe? you must be my husband, and I must content my self, must I? no sir, it is you that must content me, or it is your heart must smart for it.
If you could be content with all that I have, or all that I can doe, and expect no further, I then might hope to pacify you.
All has not done it yet you see, nor have you yet found out the way. Five years practice one would think were suffi∣cient, so long you have had me; and too long it is unless I had got a better name by it, to be accounted barren——oh me.
Now it is out; zonnes what would you have me doe? whore's the defect think you? is it not probable that you may be defective as well as I?
That I may bee defective! I defy thee, Lubber; I defy thee and all that say so, thou fribling fumbler thou; I would some honest sufficient man might be Judge betwixt us whether I bee defective.
How now, always wrangling?
Defective quoth a—
What's the matter Land-lord?
Doe I look like a thing defective?
Land-Lady—
Oh fearful!
Mrs. Brittle-ware what's the matter?
You shall be Judge Sir Hugh, whether I bee defective; you have lain here Sir Hugh these three years, have been our constant lodger off and on as wee say; and can you think me defective?
You will not be impudent?
Good▪ Mr. Brittle-ware what's the matter?
The matter is sir she will be content with nothing.
The best wife in the world! and if you cannot afford her that to content her, you are a most hard-harted husband.
What nothing? would you wish him to afford me no∣thing to content me? I must have something to content me; and something he must find me, or I will make him look out for it.
Come, come, I know the quarrel; and I know you will never get a child by falling out.
Nor any way else so long as hee is such a jealous beast as hee is.
Oh you must leave your jealousy Mr. Brittleware; that's a maine hindrance
I am not jealous I.
Not, and stare like a mad Ox upon every man that looks upon me?
Fie upon him, is he such a beast, to be jealous of his own wife? if every man were so, it would spoil the getting of some children in a year.
And denies me all things that I have a mind to.
The best is▪ the loss of your longings will not hurt you; unless you were with child.
I must have my longings first; I am not every woman I,
I must have my longings before I can be with child I.
You must not long for every strange thing you see or hear of then.
As true as I live he fribles with me sir Hugh; I doe but now long for two or three idle things scarce worth the speaking of; and doe you think he will grant me one of 'em?
What may they be? he shall grant 'em.
One of my longings is to have a couple of lusty able bodied men, to take me up, one before and another behind, as the new fashion is, and carry me in a Man-litter into the great bed at Ware.
There's one, and will you deny her this to hinder a child getting?
Then I doe long to see the new ship, and to be on the top of Pals Steeple when it is new built, but that must not bee yet; nor am I so unreasonable but I can stay the time: in the mean time I long to see a play, and above all plays, The Knight of the burning—what dee' call it.
The Knight of the burning Pestle.
Pestle is it? I thought of another thing, but I would fine see it. They say there's a Grocers boy kills a Giant in it, and ano∣there little boy that does a Citizens wife thy daintielist——but I would fine see their best Actor doe me; I would so put him too't, they should find another thing in handling of me I war∣rant 'em.
Heyday! so last frost she longed to ride on one of the Dromedaries over the Thames, when great men were pleased to go over it a foot.
Well, shall I make a convenient motion for you both?
Quickly sweet sir Hugh, I long for that before you name it.
Have you this Spring eaten any Asparagus yet?
Why is that good for a woman that longs to bee with Child?
Of all the Plants, herbs, roots, or fruits that grow, it is the most provocative, operative and effective.
Indeed Sir Hugh?
All your best (especially your modern) Herbalists con∣clude, that your Asparagus is the only sweet stirrer that the
earth sends forth, beyond your wild Carrets, Corne-•…lag, or Gla∣dial. Your roots of Standergrasse, or of Satyrion boiled in Goats milk are held good; your Clary or Horminum in divers ways good, and Dill (especially boiled in Oil) is also good: but none of these, nor Saffron boiled in wine, your Nuts of Art∣chokes, Rocket, or seeds of Ash-tree (which wee call the Kite keys) nor thousand such, though all are good, may stand up for perfection with Asparagus.
Doe you say so sir Hugh?
I have it from the opinion of most learned Doctors, rare Physicians, and one that dares call himself so.
What Doctor is he, a fool on horse•…ask?
Doctor Thou-Lord, you know him well enough.
Yes, we know Doctor Thou-Lord, though he knows none but Lords and Ladies, or their companions. And a fine conceited Doctor he is, and as humorous I warrant ye; and will Thou and Thee the best Lords that dares be acquainted with him: calls Knights, Jack, Will, and Tom familiarly; and great Ladies, Gills, and Sluts too, and they cross him. And for his opinion sake, and your good report sir Hugh, I will have Sparagus every meal all the year long, or isle make all fly for it; and doe you look to it Fribble, for it will bee for your commodity as well as mine.
And sure it is a rare commodity when a Knight is become a Broker for to cry it up so.
And let me have some presently for my next meal, or you cannot imagine how sick I will be.
But mistake not me▪ nor the commodity we speak of Mrs. Brittle-ware; where would you have it? here in our own house? fie! the virtue of it is mortified, if it pass the threshold from the ground it grows on. No, you must thither, to the Garden of de∣light, where you may have it dressed and eaten in the due kind; and there it is so provocative, and so quick in the hot operation, that none dare eat it, but those that carry their coolers with 'em, pre∣sently to delay, or take off the delightful fury it fills 'em with.
Is there convenience for that too?
Yes, yes; the house affords you as convenient Couches to retire to, as the garden has beds for the precious plants to
grow in: that makes the place a palace of pleasure, and daily resorted and filled with Lords and Knights, and their Ladies; Gentlemen and gallants with their Mistresses—
But doe not honest men go thither with their wives too?
None other; some to their own costs, and some at other men's.
Why doe we not go then? or what stay we for, can you tell fumbler?
Nay Mrs. Brittle-ware, not so suddenly; towards the evening will be the fittest season of the day: mean while go in and fit your self for the walk, your husband and I are first for an other business.
Noble Knight I thank you, I hope my next longing shall be to bespeak you for a God-father.
You shall not long long for that.
I take your noble word.
She's gone, and now sir Hugh let me tell you, you have not dealt well with me, to put this fegary into her foolish fancy.
Wilt thou be an Ass now? doe not I know how to fetch it out on her again think thou? she shall not go, and yet be contented too.
I you tell me so
Why thou wilt not be jealous of me now, that has lain in thy house these three years, wilt thou? nor think me so foo∣lish to provoke thee with an injury; that know me and my ways so well.
I know something by your worship worth the price of a new Pillory.
Why so then; and will I wrong thee Jack think thou, ha? no nor mistrust thee neither: for though thou art a jealous coxcomb over thy wife, and she a touchy thing under thee, yet thou and I Jack have bin always confident of each other, and have wrought friendly and closely together, as ever Subtle and his Lungs did; and shared the profit betwixt us, have not we Jack: ha?
I think we have; and that you have some new device, some stratagem in hand now. Uds me, I now remember, is the party come to town?
Yes; and my Spring has seized him upon the way: and
here I expect him instantly.
And will he be made a gentleman?
That's his ambition Jack; and though you now keep a China-shop, and deal in brittle commodities (pots, glasses, Purslane Dishes, and more trinkets then an Antiquaries study is furnished withal) you must not forget your old trade of Barber Sir∣geon, it is that must sted us now in our new project.
I warrant you, is he a trim youth?
We must make him one Jack, it is such a squab as thou never saw; such a lump, we may make what we will of him.
Then sure we will make money of him.
Well said Jack, Spring has writ me here his full description.
SLid hoe's come already: now Mr. Spring?
I come to present a gentleman to you sir.
How a gentleman? will you abuse me?
He finds your defect already; but be bold sir, he desires to be a Gentleman sir; and (though he be but course mettle, yet) he has that about him which with your help may quickly make him a clear Gentleman.
I have four hundred pounds sir; and I brought it up to town on purpose to make my self a clear gentleman of it.
It was well brought up; it appears also that you have had some breeding, though but a Yeomans son.
It is true, I have a little learning sir, and a little wit, though last night I met with some upon the way at Hammer-Smith that had more: yet I had enough to perceive I was cheated of a matter of seven pound (almost all the odd money I had about me) at my Card before thy Card; a pox take the whole pack on 'em. Staggers if ever man that had but a mind to be a Gentleman was so noddy pooped! oh how I could chafe to think on it.
Oh but you must not, it becomes not the temper of a Gentleman.
So you told me; then I thank you friend.
Your small acquaintance sir.
I have had more acquaintance where I have found less love, and I thank you again good small acquaintance: you told me indeed it became not a gentleman to cry for losing his money; and I told you then, that I should, or would be a gentleman: Whereupon Small acquaintance (because I was resolved to play no more) you advised me to give over; and you told me you would upon our coming to the City, here bring me to a Knight, that was a Gentleman-maker, whom I conceive this to be, and here am I, and here's my four hundred pound, which my man has here drawn up to Town, and here I mean to quarter it.
But I will see what pennyworths you bargain for first, by your Masterships leave.
Drawn and quartered! you have a wit Sir, I find that already.
Yes sir, I have a down right Country wit, and was coun∣ted a pretty spark at home. Did you never hear of little Tim of Tanton? But I now mean to have a finical City wit, and a super∣finical Court wit too, before I see mine Uncle.
You may sir.
And be able to jest and jeer among men of judgment: I have a many small jests, petty Johns, as I call 'hem: But I will have a clubbing wit, and a drinking wit; and be able to hold play with the great Poets I: and with dry jests to maule the malli∣part'st lesser ones (that hold themselves better than the biggest) out of the pit of wit I, before I see mine uncle.
You may have all sir, if you quarter your four hundred pound discreetly: but who is your uncle I pray?
For that you shall pardon me, till I am a Gentleman: But I assure you he is a great gentleman in the City here; and I neither must nor dare see him, till I am one at least: and I will tell you presently how I mean to quarter my money.
They'll quarter that and you too, if I see not the better to the matter.
Dost thou know the uncle he speaks of?
No, nor cannot learn who it is for my life.
Some great man sure that's ashamed of his kindred: per∣haps some Suburb Justice, that sits of the skirts of the City, and lives by it.
Well said Jack.
Look you sir, thus had I cast it: Small acquaintance pray doe you note it too: I love your advice, that at first sight of me (which was but last night) could relieve me from Cheaters.
From some of his own companions to cheat, you more himself.
The first hundred pound to be for the making of me a gentleman: the second hundred shall be for apparel.
He speaks half like a gentleman already.
Right, there's half disposed of.
The third hundred •…le spend in pleasure: hark Small acquaintance, we'll have wenches.
What wants he of a gen•…lemon, and go no further, but save the last hundred.
Oh Small acquaintance, that must walk too: but all for profit to support my gentility hereafter.
As how?
I will be cheated of it.
How?
Nor in gross, but by retail, to try men's several wits, and so learn to shift for my self in time and need be.
Doe you hear this?
Theres a plot now!
I protest I admire him: J never found like Craft in a Yeomans son before.
No words on it J beseech you sir; nor name that foolish word Yeomans son any more: J came to change my Copy, and write Gentleman: and to go the nighest way to work, my Small acquaintance here tells me, to go by the Heralds is the farthest way about.
Well sir, we will take the speediest course for you that may be possible.
The season of the year serves most aptly too,
Both for purging and bleeding:
Give your name into this book sir.
Timothy Hoyden, sir.
Timothy Hoyden.
But must J bleed sir?
Yes, you must bleed: your fathers blood must out,
He was but a yeoman, was he?
As rank a Clown, none dispraised, as any in Sommerset shire.
His foul rank blood of Bacon and Pease-porridge must out of you to the last dram.
You will leave me none in my body then, I shall bleed to death, and you go that way to work.
Fear nothing sir: your blood shall be taken out by de∣grees, and your veins replenished with pure blood still, as you loose the puddle.
How must that be done?
I that each I would hear.
I commend you that you seek reason: it must bee done by meats and drinks of costly price; Muscatel caudels, jellies, and cock-broaths. You shall eat nothing but Shrimp porridge for a fortnight; and now and then a Pheasants egg soopt with a Peacocks feather. I that must be the diet.
Delicate!
This stands to reason indeed.
Then at your going abroad, the first ayre you take shall be of the Asparagus Garden, and you shall feed plentifully of that.
Of the ayre do you mean?
No of th'Asparagus. And that with a Concoction of Goats milk, shall set you an end, and your blood as high as any Gentleman's lineally descended from the loins of King Cadwala∣der.
Excellent, I like all excellently well, but this bleeding. I could never endure the sight of blood.
That shows the malignant baseness of your fathers blood within you▪
I was bewiteh'd I think before I was begot, to have a Clown to my father: yet sit my mother said she was a Gentle∣woman.
Said? What will not Women say?
Nay, small acquaintance, she professed it upon her Death∣bed to the Curate and divers others, that she was sister to a Gentle∣man here in this City; and commanded me in her Will, and up∣p•…n her blessing, first to make my self a Gentleman of good fa∣shion,
and then to go to the gentleman my uncle.
What gentleman is that?
I must not, nor I wo'not tell you that, till I am a gentle∣man my self: would you have me wrong the will of the dead? Small acquaintance, I will rather dye a Clown as I am first.
Be content sir; here's half a labour saved; you shall bleed but of one side: the Fathers side only.
Say you so?
The Mother vain shall not be pricked.
I thank you sir:
I would it were done once.
But when this is done, and your new blood infused into you, you shall most easily learn the manners and behaviour.
The Look, the garb, the congee—
And all the Complements of an absolute gentleman.
O brave!
For which you shall have best instructions;
You'll run a chargeable course in it, that Isle tell you:
And may yet if you please retain your money;
Cross your mothers will and dye a Clown.
By no means sir.
I begin to believe honestly of the Knight.
Doe you note this skin of his here?
Skin, it is a hide sir.
It is somewhat thick and foul indeed sir.
He must have a bath, and that will be more charge.
Tic pity he should be flayed.
I thank you small acquaintance; pray let me have a bath, what ere it cost me, rather than flea me.
Well sir, this house shall be your lodging, and this the Mr. of it, an excellent Surgeon, and expert in these affairs, shall be your attendant.
My man may attend me too, may he not?
Yes, by all means, and see the laying out of your money.
I like that best: sure they are honest men.
Is that your man? what does he wear a Coulter by his side?
No sir, my name is Coulter; I my self am a Coulter.
and this is but my Hanger on, as I am my Masters.
Thou moist make a Country gentleman in time, I see that by thy wit.
All my friends will be glad on it.
Come gentlemen, Isle lead you the way.
But how can you assure me gentlemen that this is true?
We saw't not acted sir, nor had reported it,
But on those terms of honour you have sworn to;
In which you are engaged first to forgive
Your son: then never to reveal to friend,
Or foe, the knowledge of the fact.
You cannot now but receive
Your son into your favour, that did urge him
To doe some outrage, some villainous shame or mischief
Upon that Family as he would shun your curse.
This is a mischief with a witness to it:
He has done it home it seems.
Sir, can a son
Doe his fathers will too fully?
You may be pleased to call him. 
I would now put on anger, but I fear
My inward joy's too great, to be dissembled:
Now for a rigid brow that might enable
A man to stand competitor for the seat
Of austere justice—Are you come to boast 
The bravery of your fact, with a dissembled
Show of obedience; as if you had merited
Forgiveness and a blessing; when my shame
For thy lewd action makes me turn and hide
My face—for fear my laughter be descried.
Pray turn not from him sir.
I have heard sir of your workmanship; but may
A man receive it on your word for truth?
It is too true, unless you please in mercy
To pardon, and preserve me from the rigour
Of Justice, and the sharper censure
That I shall suffer in all good opinion.
I mean you shall out of the noise on it presently:
So—there's a hundred pieces, get you gone;
Provide you for a journey into France,
Bear your self well, and look you come not home
A verier Coxcomb than you went abroad:
Pray wear no falling bands and cuffs above
The price of suits and cloaks, least you become
The better half undone in about at Buffets.
I hope you shall hear well of me.
Amen.
Pray bless me sir.
My blessing be upon thee,
Go get thee gone, my tenderness will show
It self too womanish else.
Goodness of nature.
We'll help to set you forward.
Thank ye gentlemen:
Be but my son, thou shalt not want a father,
Though somebody must seek one: ha, ha, ha—
Id give another hundred Pieces now
With all my heart, that I might be untongue-ty'd,
And triumph o'er my adversary now,
And dash this business in his angry teeth:
Strike Strikers teeth out with his own abuse:
Perhaps he knows't already, if he does;
I may take notice, and make bold to jeer him:
This is his usual walk.
I was too blame
To give it so much credit at the first,
As to be troubled at it.
It is the Rascal.
That he, the son of my despite and scorn,
Should gain of Fate a lot to see my Niece,
Much less a face to ask her for his wife.
Perhaps he's casting of his will.
Yet the vexation that I was but told so,
Lies gnawing in my stomach, that until
I vomit it upon that Dung-hill wretch;
I cannot eat nor sleep to doe me good.
And I thank Chance he's here.
He comes, and so have at him.
Hum, hum, hum, humh.
And ha, ha, ha to thee old puppy.
Sirrah, sirrah, how dare thou keep a son that dares but look upon my Niece? there I am we'yee sir.
Sirrah, and sirrah to thy withered jaws, and down that wrinkled throat of thine: how dare thou think a son of mine dares for displeasing me, look but with foul contempt upon thy loathed issue?
Impudent villain, I have heard he has seen her.
Has he but seen her? ha, ha, ha, I fear I shall out with it: I would not be forsworn: isle keep't in if I can.
Yes Malapert Jack, I have heard that he has seen her, but better had thou pissed him against the wall, then hee presume to love her: and there I am we'yee sir.
Hast thou but heard he has seen her: I tell thee thou old booby thou; if he had seen, felt, heard, and understood her: nay had he got her with child, and then left her, he were my son, and I would cherish him.
Dare thou speak so, thou old Reprobate.
Thou dost not hear me say it is so, though J could wish it were with all my heart, because I think it would break thine.
Hugh, hugh, hugh.
I hope I shall keep it within the compass of mine oath; yet there was a touch for him.
Oh thou hel-bred Rascal thou; hugh, hugh,
So, so, up with it, Lungs, Lights, Liver, and all: choke up in a churls name.
Hugh, hugh.
I have put him into these fits forty times at least, and not without hope it will throttle him at last——if you do break a gut, or a rib or two, with straining, a rope will be your only remedy: and so I leave you: by the way you have not heard me say that I know any thing by your Niece: But what I know Isle keep to my self.
And hang thy self, I care not what thou know, yet thus far take me we'yee sir.
Not a step, unless I were sure I were going to the de∣will, huh, huh: no sir, you shall not trip me: you shall not fetch it out of me: tush, my sonne's my son, and keep your niece to yourself, huh, and if she has any thing of his you may keep that too huh; and so choke up again with all my heart, and much good doe it you.
Huh, huh—h•…m! so he's gon, the villain's gone in hope that he has kilt me, when my comfort is he has recovered me:
I was heart-sicke with a conceit which lay so mingled with my
Phlegm there I had perished, if I had not broke it, and made me
spit it out; hemh, it is gone, and isle home merrily.
I would not that he should know the good he has done me
For half my estate; nor would I be at peace with him
To save it all: His malice works upon me,
Past all the drugs and all the Doctors Counsels,
That ere I cop'd with: he has been my vexation
These thirty years; nor have I had another
Ere since my wife died; if the Rascal know it,
He would be friends, and I were instantly
But a dead man, I could not get another
To anger me so handsomely.
YOu are welcome home sir.
And merrily too Fid. Hemh light at heart,
I met with my Physician, Dog-leech, Touchwood;
And cleared my stomach, and now I am light at heart.
And thou shalt hear on it Fid anon perhaps.
You are the better able then to hear
And bear what I must tell you.
Whore's my Niece?
How does she▪ ha?
As well as a young woman
In her case may doe sir.
Ha! how's that?
Twill out, and I as fit to tell't you as another.
Out with it then.
Tic true, I faced you down there was no league
Between young Touch-wood, and your Niece, in hope
To turn her heart from him before the knowledge
Of any thing that past should be a grief to you:
But since I have discovered tic too late;
And she can be fit bride for no man else.
He has not lain with her, has he?
You speak as just as Gormans lips.
I hope he has not leapt her so:
Prithee what can thou mean?
Sir, if you think
The knowledge of a truth of this sad nature
May prejudice your health, by drawing a Choleric fit into you, you were best to send for your Physician, your dog-leech Touch∣wood, as you called him, to break your bed of Phlegm, by laughing at you.
What dost thou mean now, I have asked thee twice.
I say young Touch-wood has touched, and clapped your niece;
And (which is worse) with scorn and foul disdain
Has left and quite forsaken; and is gone:
(They say) sent by his father to travail.
It was this the villain hammered on to day,
When he spoke mystically, doubtful words,
Reflecting on this mischievous sense: Hell, hell, hell.
It were good you would forsake the thought of hell sir,
And think upon some timely course to save
Her credit, and the honour of your house by marriage.
You counsel very well;
But were you privy in their loves affair?
Indeed I knew too much on it: think of a course good sir.
I know no course for her and you but one,
Young whore and bawd, and that is instantly
To pack you out of doors to seek your living,
And there I will be we'yee.
Sir that you must not.
Sprecious dost thou must me in mine own house?
In your own house sir, kill us if you please,
And take the sin upon you; but out of it
You must not dare to thrust us with your shame:
Which I will so divulge, as you shall find
Your house to be no sanctuary for your self;
And there isle be with you▪
This is lusty.
Consider wisely that I know you sir,
And can make foul relation of some passages
That you will shame to hear.
Hold your peace.
Remember sir, near thirty years ago,
You had a sister, whose great marriage portion
Was in your hands: good gentlewoman, she
Unfortunately loving a false Squire,
Just as your Niece hath now, did get a clap:
You know sir what I mean.
You'll hold your peace?
Isle speak it though I dye for it; better here
Than in a worse place: So clapped I say she was,
I know not yet by whom you doe, and bear
An inward grudge against some body to this hour for it.
But to my story, good gentlewoman she
Was by your most unbrotherly cruel usage
Thrust out a doors, as now you threaten us:
And miserably big-bellied as she was
Leaving her most unjustly detained her portion
In your false hands, forsook you and the town,
To fly the air, where •…er disgrace was spread:
Some jewels and some gold she had concealed:
But to what part of the world she took we know not,
Nor did you ever care, but wished her out on it,
By any desperate end, after her flight
From portion, blood and name; and so perhaps
Immediately she was: for which, this judgement
Is justly fallen upon you.
Yet hold thy peace.
Neither by threats, nor bribes, nor all persuasion,
Until you take your Niece into your care:
What will the world say when it hears this story
Of your own natural sister, and your cruelty,
When you shall second it with your Nieces shame?
I never was so mated, so astonished.
Nay, more than this, old Striker, isle impeach
You for foul incontinence; and shaking your
Old Bullion Tronkes over my Trucklebed.
Thou art not desperate! wilt thou shame thy self?
I value neither shame, nor name, nor fame;
And wealth I have none to lose; you have enough
To pay for all I take it.
Oh I am sick.
Be of good cheer, isle send for your Physician.
Sick, sick at heart; let me be had to bed.
I hope I have laid the heat of his severity,
So sometimes great offences pass for none,
When severe Judges dare not hear their own.
PRay lets agree upon it good wife, you are my wife I take it, and I should have the command, yet I entreat,
and am content you see.
And so would any man I think that has such a help and comings in by his wife as you have: tic not your dirty Sparagus, your Artichoaks, your Carpes, your Tulips, your Strawberries, can bring you in five hundred pound a year, if my helping hand, and brain too were not in the business?
Let us agree upon it: and two or three years toil more, while our trade is in request and fashion, will make us purcha∣sers. I had once a hope to have bought this Manor of Marshland for the resemblance it has to the Low Country soil you came from, to have made you a Banke-side Lady. Wee may in time be somewhat. But what did you take yesterday Mat in all, what had you, ha?
Poor piddling doings; some four and twenty pound.
What did the rich old Merchant spend upon the poor young gentleman's wife in the yellow bed-chamber?
But eight and twenty shillings, and kept the room al∣most two hours, I had no more of him.
And what the Knight with the broken Citizens wife (that goes so Lady like) in the blew bed-chamber.
Almost four pound.
That was pretty well for two.
But her husband, and a couple of serving-men had a dish of Sparagus, and three bottles of wine, besides the broken meat into one of the Arbors.
Every thing would live Mat: but here will be great Courtiers and Ladies to day you say.
Yes they sent last night to bespeak a ten pound dinner, but I half fear their coming will keep out some of our more constant, and more profitable customers.
Twill make them the more eager to come another time then Mat. Have they paid their reckoning in the Parlour?
Yes, but hutchingly, and are now going away.
O here they are going.
I protest Mr. Gardner your wife is too dear: Sixteen shillings for a dish of Sparagus, two bottles of wine, and a little Sugar, I wonder how you can reckon it.
That was your rec•…oning in all sir; wee make no ac∣count of particulars, but all to Mall, as they doe in the Nether∣lands.
Your Dutch account Mrs. is too high for us to trouble you any more.
That's as you please sir, a fair day after you:
Who would be troubled with such pinching guests?
I, tic good to misreckon such to be rid of 'hem.
They are ee'n as welcome as the Knight that comes hither alone always, and walks about the garden here half a day together, to feed upon Ladies looks, as they pass to and fro; the peeping Knight, whát doe you call him?
O Sir Arnold Cautiou•….
You may call him Cautious, I never saw five shillings of his money yet.
No, he comes but to feed his eye, as you say, with leering at good faces, and peeping at pretty insteps.
Sir Hugh-Money-lacke, our gather-guest as we call him, sends us no such dull customers: O that good Gentleman I never did any •…averne, Inn, or new Ordinary give tribute to a more deserving gentleman—oh here come gallants.
Three, and ne'er a woman! strange! these are not the Courtiers wee look for.
This is his daily haunt: I warrant thee we find him.
And it shall take, ne'er fear it Sam.
By your leave Mr. and Mrs. or rather Lord and Lady of the new plantation here.
Nay Prince and Princess of the Province of Asparagus.
The Island of two Acres here, more profitable than twice two thousand in the Fens, till the drainers have done there.
You are pleasant gentlemen: what is your pleasure?
Saw you Sir Arnold Cautious here to day?
Not yet sir.
Have you a room in your house for us?
Have you any more company to come to you?
Yes, we expect some gentlemen.
Gentlemen did you say?
Yes indeed gentlemen, no gentlewomen I assure you.
Intrude sir all the rooms within are gone.
What they are not gone abroad, are they?
You are always pleasant sir: I mean they are all ta∣ken up.
There are some taken up in 'hem, is it not so?
Still you are pleasant sir: they are indeed bespoken for great Courtiers, and Ladies that are to dine here.
If you will bestow your selves in the garden, and make choice of your Arbour: you shall have the best cheer the house can afford ye, and you are welcome.
Be it so then; lets walk about gentlemen. Pray send us some wine.
And a dish of your Sparagus.
You shall have it gentlemen.
Did you note the wit of the woman?
I, because we had no wenches we must have no chamber∣room, for fear she disappoint some that may bring 'hem.
She spake of great Courtiers and Ladies that are to come.
Some good stuff perhaps.
Why I assure you, right noble, and right virtuous persons, and of both sexes doe frequent the place.
And I assure you, as ignoble and vicious doe pester it too much; and these that respect profit merely have not the wit, and less the virtue to distinguish betwixt the best and the worst, but by their purses.
It is enough for them to weed their garden, not their guests: O here comes our collation.
ANd what's the price of this feast boy?
Plaist ill Monsieur.
What a•…t thou a French-man?
No, I took you for one sir, to bargain for your meat be∣fore you eat it, that is not the generous English fashion, you shall know anon sir.
Go get you gone with your wit, and tell your prodigal fools so.
Go, we'll call when we want attendance.
Sam you are too sad; let not your disguise alter you with us: Come here's a health to the Hans in Kilter, and the mother of the boy, if it prove so.
Isle pledge it.
We want Sir Hugh Mony-laok•… here to discourse the virtues of this precious plant Asparagus, and what wonders it hath wrought in Burgundy, Almaino, Italy, and Languedoc before the herborists had found the skill to plant it here.
What's he to whom weeseeke?
Who mine Uncle, Sir Arnold Cautious; he'll come, ne'er doubt him; he seldom misses a day to pry and pier upon the beau∣ties that come to walk here.
Tic such a Knightling, Isle but give ye his Character, and and he comes I warrant thee▪ he is an infinite admirer of beauty, and dares not touch a woman: he is aged about fifty, and a▪ batche∣lore: he defies wed locke, because he thinks there is not a my∣den▪head in any marriagable beauty to be found among Wo∣men.
Yet you say he is an admirer and hunter after the sight of beauty.
He gets a crick in his neck oft-times with squinting up at windows and Balconies; and as he walks the streets, he peepes on both sides at fair breasts and faces, as he were seeking Birds∣nests; and follows pretty feet and insteps like a hare tracker.
This is still mine Uncle.
And when he sees a Coach of Ladies about to alight, hee makes a stand, in hope to see a delicate leg slip through a laced smock, which if he chance to discover he drivels.
Well, how your plot may hold to my purpose I cannot see: he is the unlikeliest man to have a wench put upon that you can mention.
I grant the attempt is hard, but the higher will be the at∣chievement: trust my experience Sam: for as in every instru∣meant are all tunes to him that has the skill to find out the stops, so in every man there are all humours to him that can find their faussets, and draw 'hem out to his purpose.
Fear not the plot, as we have cast it, nor the perfor∣mance in the Comedy, though against mine own Natural Uncle.
Thy unnatural Vuncle thou would say; hee ne'er did thee good in's life: Act but thine own part, and be not out Sam, and fear nothing.
He's somewhat too young to act a rorer: but what Iads have we seen pass for soldiers?
O here come the great guests.
And these are noble ones indeed; these are Courtiers Clinquant, and no counterfeit stuff upon 'hem: I know 'hem all, every Lady with her own husband too: what a virtuous honest age is this: and see if thine Uncle bee not at his old game, bopeepe in the tail of 'hem. Hee shall follow 'hem no fur∣there: Sir Arnold Cautious, Noble Knight you are well en∣countered.
Good Master Gold wire, doe you know these Ladies; or be they Ladies, ha?
Yes, and noble ones, the three Graces of the Court, the Lady Stately, the Lady Handsome, and the Lady peerless, doe not you know 'hem?
No not I.
How the slave twitters; you look not up at greatness, you mind too much the worldly things that are beneath you: if you had such a Lady under you, (of your own I mean) you would mind her.
Oh fie, fie, fie.
Look no more aft•…r 'hem, they are gone: besides they are virtuous, and too too great for you: when will you get a convenient wife of your own, to work out the dry itch of a stale Bachelor?
Go, go, you are a wag, I itch not that way.
Will you go this way with me then, and hear what I will say to you?
With all my heart, I am free from business.
You have a Nephew, whose sister I married, a virtuous wife she is, and I love him the better for it; he is a younger bro∣there, and borne to no great fortune: now you are very rich, a Bachelor, and therefore I think child less—
In truth Mr. Gold-wyer you must pardon me, I may not stay with you: I had almost forgot a most important busi∣ness.
Ee'n now he had none.
Nay good Sir Arnold Cautious, you know not what Isle say.
I say he is an unthrift, a Squanderer, and must not expect supplies from me.
He does not, shall not, not to the value of a token: pray stay, and hear me sir; tic no ill ayre to stay in.
I withal my heeart good Mr. Gold-wyer; I like the air well, and your motion hitherto.
Will you be pleased to doe your kinsman the favour to fur∣there him in a match; I mean an honest lawful marriage match—but with your countenance, and a good word at most.
The most unthankful office in the world: pray use some other friend in it: indeed I stay too long.
Hear but who it is that he loves, how likely he is to obe∣taine, what abundant profit the match may bring him, and the desperate undoing danger he falls into if he be not matched, and then doe your pleasure.
Why what new danger is he towards, more than the old
ill company he was wont to keep?
Oh sir, he is now in league with a companion more dread∣full than 'hem all, a fellow that is in part a Poet, and in part a Soldier.
Bounce, bounce.
You have hit upon his name: his name is Bounce, do you know him sir?
Not I, nor desire acquaintance with either of his qua∣lites.
He is a gentleman sir, that has been upon some unfortunate late services, that have not answered his merit.
And now he is come home to right himself, by writing his own meritorious acts, is he?
Good in truth, I wish you would see 'hem, to come over 'hem with a jeer or two; I know you are good at it: They are in an Arbour here close by, drinking to their Muses, and glory∣fying one another for eiders excellence in the art most Poe∣tically.
Glorify doe you say? I have heard Poets the most en∣vious det rectors of one another of all Creatures, next to the very Beggars.
Abroad perhaps and asunder, but together there's no such amity: You never saw 'hem drink; pray see 'hem sir, it may take your Nephew off of his Ningle, who hath infected him with Poe∣try already: and twenty to one, if he fail in the match, which I was about to mention; he will win him away to the wars too, and then he may be lost for ever.
Good Mr. Gold-wyer go you to your company, I am not a man of reckoning amongst such; besides, I seldom drink betwixt meals.
Athis own cost he means.
I commend your temper: you shall not bee in the recko∣ning; but I beseech you let me prevail with you: See, wee are upon hem: save you Gentlemen: I have brought you a noble friend, your uncle; I know he is welcome to you brother Wat; and you I am sure will make him so Mr. Bounce: when you shall hear he is an admirer of Poetry and war.
Even a far off I assure ye: I never durst approach near
the fury of either of the fiery qualities.
It is your modesty, not fear that keeps you at distance I imagine.
Poets may imagine any thing: imagination is their wealth, some of 'hem would be but poor else: are you turned Poet Nephew?
For my private recreation sir.
What by writing Verses to win some Mistresses to your private recreation: mean you so?
You dare not sir blaspheme the virtuous use
Of sacred Poetry, nor the fame traduce
Of Poets, who not alone immortal be,
But can give others immortality.
Poets that can men into stars translate,
And hurl men down under the feet of Fate:
It was not Achilles sword, but Homers pen,
That made brave Hector dye the best of men:
And if that powerful Homer likewise would,
Helen had been a hag, and Troy had stood.
Well said Poet, thou tumblest out old ends as well as the best of 'hem.
Poets they are the life and death of things,
Queens give them honour, for the greatest Kings
Have bin their subjects.
Enough, enough; you are the first good Poet that ever I saw wear so good a Countenance: leave it, I would not have a gentleman meddle with Poetry for spoiling of his face: you sell∣dome see a Poet look out at a good Visnomy.
Think you so sir?
Yes, and that it is a Poetical Policy, where the face is naturally good without spot or blemish, to deface it by drinking, or winching, to get a name by it.
A death deserving scandal.
Hold, hold.
Thy malice, and thy ignorance
Have doomed thee.
Gentlemen what mean ye?
My blood must not endure it.
You have wronged us all, and me the most.
The wrong is chiefly mine; yet you add to it
By hindering my just vengeance.
Isle find a time to right you, or my self.
My next sight of thee is thy death:
I fear you are hurt sir; are you, pray sir tell me?
Let me first admire thy goodness and thy pity:
My own true natural Nephew.
Now it works.
I now consider, and will answer thee
In a full measure of true gratitude.
But good sir are you not hurt? if you bleed, I bleed with you.
Oh sincere Nephew, good boy I am not hurt,
Nor can I think of hurt, my thoughts are bent
Upon thy good; you were speaking of a choice sir,
My Nephew would be matched to, let me know the party.
Will you sir stand his friend?
Let me but know the party and her friend,
And instantly about it.
He is caught.
How am I bound to you!
Nephew I am yet bound to thee, and shall not rest till I am dis-ingag'd by doing this office for thee: what is she, let me know?
Sir, as we walk you shall know all: isle pay the reckoning within as we pass.
But by the way Nephew, I must bind you from Poetry.
For a Wife you shall sir.
Poetry, though it be of a quite contrary nature, is as pretty a jewel as plain deal•…ng, but they that use it forget the Pro∣verb.
COme Madams, now if you please after your garden Feast,
To exercise your numerous feet, and tread
A curious knot upon this grassy square;
You shall fresh vigour add unto the spring,
And double the increase, sweetness and beauty
Of every plant and flower throughout the garden.
If I thought so my Lord, we would not doe
Such precious work for nothing; we would be
Much better huswifes, and compound for shares
Of the gardeners profit.
Or at least hedge in
Our Sparagus dinner reckoning.
I commend your worldly providence:
Madam, such good Ladies will never dance
Away their husbands Lands.
But Madams will ye dance?
Not to improve the garden good my Lord,
A little for digestion if you please.
Music, play.
You have done Nobly Ladies, and much honoured
This piece of earth here, with your graceful footing.
By your fair imitation, good my Lords.
May the example of our harmless mirth
And Civil recreation purge the place
Of all foul purposes.
Tic an honest wish:
But wishes weed no gardens; hither come
Some wicked ones they say.
We seek not to abridge their privilege;
Nor can their ill hurt us; we are safe.
But let us walk, the time of day calls hence.
Agreed.
YOu are now welcome to the Asparagus Garden Land-lady.
I have been long a coming for all my longings: but now I hope I shall have my belly full on it.
That you shall, fear not.
Would I were at it once.
Well, because she desires to bee private, go in with your wife Mr. Brittleware, take a room, call for a feast, and satis∣fie your wife, and bid the Mrs: of the house to provide for us.
I will sir.
And how doe you feel your self Mr. Hoyden after your bleeding, purging, and bathing, the killing of your gross humours by your spare diet, and your new infusion of pure blood, by your quaint feeding on delicate meates and drinks? how doe you feel your self?
Marry I feel that I am hungry, and that my shrimped yet and sippings have almost famished me, and my purse too; slid I dare be sworn, as I am almost a gentleman, that every bit and e∣very spoonful that I have swallowed these ten days, has cost me ten shillings at least.
Is it possible that you can consider this, and bee almost a gentleman?
Small acquaintance I doe not lye to you: truth's truth, as well in a Gentleman as a beggar, for I am both almost, and per∣haps not the first that can write so.
Doe you note how his wit rises?
There's one of my hundred pounds gone that way, all but these twelve pieces.
You see now what a fine hand you have made of your mo∣ney, since you got it out of my clutches.
Then there's my apparel, a hundred pound went all in three suits, of which this is the best.
But what doe you think of your wit hundred pound?
Marry I think that was the best laid out: for by it I have got wit enough to know that I was as clearly cozened of it as heart can wish: of my soul and conscience, and as I am almost a gentleman, and a man had come to London for nothing else but to be Cheated, hee could not bee more roundlier rid of his money.
Well sir, if you rapine at your expenses now, that you want no hinge but your Belly-full of Sparagus to finish my work of a gentleman in you; I will, if you please, in lieu of that stuff up your paunch with Bacon and Bagge-pudding and put you
back again as absolute a Clown a•… ever you came from plough.
I would he're come to that once.
Take heed how you cross him.
Nay pray sir bee not angry, (though to the shame of a Gentleman I say it) my teeth doe ee'ne water at the name of the sweet Country dish you spoke of (bacon and bag-pudding) yet I will forbear it: but you say I shall fill my belly with this new Daintrill that you spake of; these Sparowbills, what doe you call'hem.
You shall have your belly full.
Top full I beseech you.
Humh—
You shall: but I must tell you, I must ha you turn away this grumbling Clown that follows you: he is as dangerous about you, as your fathers blood was within you, to cross and hinder your gentility.
True, you said you would help me to a boy no bigger than a Monkey.
And you shall have him, a pretty little knave, you may put him in your pocket.
Yes wuss, to peck's money out if he had it; shortly twill come to that bevore't be long.
Coulter you must to the plough again; you are too heavy a clog at the heals of a gentleman.
I with all my heart, and I con youthanks too.
The Clown, my fathers heir, will be glad of you.
Have you an elder brother?
You doe not hear me say he is my brother; but the clown my father had a former son, by a former wife, that was no gentle∣woman as my mother was, and he is a Clown all over, and ensue∣rabble, even get you to him, like to like will agree well: here's a Crown for you, twill carry you a foot to Tanton; and so get you gone like a Clown as you are.
It is well you allow me some mon ey yet: we shall have you beg all the way home shortly, when your Cheaters have done with ye.
How villain!
Why doe you not correct him sir?
Nay why do not you, he dares not? though he could spare his Clown blood, he dares not venture his Gentleman blood so, nor you yours, tic all too fine I doubt; therefore keep it, &amp; make much on it: I would be▪ loath a jail should stay my journey, or by my Cursen soul I would see, what colour the best on it were be∣fore I go. But if I don't your errand to your brother, and tell'n how you doe vlout'n behinde's back, then say Cut's a Cur: And so a vart for a varewell to the proudest o'yee; and if you be an angered, tak't in your angry teeth.
Mon. Ha, ha, ha.
What a rude Rascal it is? you are happy that he is gone.
And so am I, he hindered half my work; seven years time is too little to make a gentleman of one that can suffer such a Clown within seven mile of him.
Would hee were beyond Brainford on his way then by this time for me. But you forget the way you were in; you said you would fill my belly; and then fall to practice fine comple∣mints and congees to make me a perfect gentleman, and fit to see mine unknown uncle.
All shall be done.
See if my Surgeon and his wife have not filed themselves, and come wiping their lips already.
So shall you presently: now Landlady are you pleased with your Asparagus?
With the Asparagus I am; and yet but half pleased nei∣there, as my husband shall very well know.
Well, wee will leave you to talk with him about it: come sir let us into the house.
But half pleased sweet-heart?
No indeed Iohn Brittleware▪ the Asparagus has done its part; but you have not done your part Iohn; and if you were an honest man Iohn, you would make sir Hughes words good of the Asparagus, and be kinder to me: you are not kind to your own wife Iohn in the Asparagus way; you understand me: for ought
I see Pompeons are as good meat for such a hoggish thing as thou art.
Well, when we come at home Beck, I know what I know.
At home, is it come to that? and I know what I know: I know he cannot love his wife enough at home, that won't bee kind to her abroad: but the best is I know what my next lone∣ging shall be.
More longings yet! now out of the unsearchable depth of women's imagination, what may it be?
It begins to possess me already, still more and more: now tic an absolute longing, and I shall be sick till I have it.
May I know it forsooth, tell it that you may have it.
I dare tell it you, but you must never know that I have it.
If you dare tell it.
Dare▪ nay be as jealous as you will: thus it is, I do long to steal out of mine own house, unknown to you as other wo∣men doe, and their husbands ne'er the wiser, hither to this s•…me Sparagus Garden, and meet some friend that will be kind to me.
How, how!
In private; unknown to you, as I told you; it is▪ unpos∣sible I shall ever have a child else, and you so jealous over me as you are?
Art thou a woman and speak this?
Art thou a man, five years married to me; and ask me now if I be a woman?
Art thou so full of the Devil to fly out in this manner▪
Why his horns fly not out of me to fright thee, do they?
Oh for a hell that has not a woman in it?
Look you there Iohn jealousy▪ there's an example before your eyes, if nothing hang i'your sight; there you may see the dif∣ference between a sower husband and a sweet natured gentleman! good heart! how kindly he kisses her! and how feately she holds up the neb to him! little heart! when will you be so kind to your own wife Iohn.
Is that his wife think you?
No, no, I know her, tic Mris. Holy-hocke the precise Dra∣pers wife▪ oh, how my longing grows stronger in me: J see what shift soever a woman makes with her husband at home, a friend does best abroad.
Jndeed my Mris. will not take this money, there wants two shillings.
Why is my piece too light▪
Two light for the reckoning Mrs. it comes to two &amp; twen∣tie shillings, and this is but twenty.
Unreasonable; how can she reckon it,
J know what you had sir, and we make no bills:
Well fare the Taverns yet, that though they cozened never so much, would down with it one way or other•…e and their Jacks, go again; now tel•… your Mris. &amp; that will hinder her somewhat.
Not a jo•… sir.
Then tell her the Countess of Copt▪ Hall is coming to be her neighbour again, and she may decline her trade very dan∣gerously.
My Mris. scorns your words sir.
You. Rogue▪
Nay sweet Co•…, make no uproar•… for my reputation•… sake; here youth there's two shillings more, commend me to your Mi∣stress.
She pays the reckoning it seems.
It seems then he has been as kind to her another way.
How is it? J hope you are not wrangling now, but better pleased than so.
No, no, sir Hugh, it is not the Spa•…gus can do it, unless the man were better:
But may J now be confident that J am almost a gentleman.
Without that confidence you are nothing.
There wants nothing now, but that you learn the rules &amp; rudiments, the principles and instructions for the carriages, con∣gies, &amp; complements, which we'll quicly put into you by practice.
And then the spending the little rest of my money, &amp; J am a clear gentleman, &amp; may see my uncle.
Right, right.
And I will write it, and crowd it into as many Bonds as I can a purpose to write gentleman; Timothy Hoyden of Tanton—no, of London, Gentleman: London is a common place for all gentlemen of my rank, is it not?
Excellent, doe you not mark howfinely he comes on?
But as I hope to live and dye a gentleman Mrs. what shi▪ call, your reckoning was devilish dear▪ s'daggers three pound for a few Cuckoo pintles, they were no better I think.
Now you fall back again, and derogate from the condi∣tion of a gentleman most grossly, to think any thing too dear you cate or drink.
Pox on it, I had forgot.
When he has his rules and principles, which must be his next study, he will remember.
Pray let's about it 〈◊〉.
Now we'll go; but you forget me Mistress.
No indeed sir Hugh▪ here's two Piece for last week and this.
Tic well▪ Landlord and Landlady will you go?
Would you would long to be at home once.
〈◊〉 I doe perhaps and to be here again, and there again; and here, and there▪ and here again •… and all at once.
Hey kicksie winsie.
And I doe long to go to Windsor too, to know if the pro∣phesie 〈◊◊◊〉 there, 〈◊◊〉 reported here.
How did you hear it goes forsooth?
That all old women shall die, and many young wives shall have Cuckol•…s to their husbands▪
I heard forsooth that all young wives should dye that were pu•…e maids when they were married.
And none other?
〈◊〉 report goes forsooth▪
You speak very comfortably: It may be a long journey to the worlds end yet.
It seems you are not proscribed by the prophecy then?
I thank my destiny.
My first work when I am complete gentleman shall bee
to get them a Child, and make 'hem friends.
A most gentlemanly resolution.
And truly the City is much bound to such well affected gentlemen.
IS it possible that half this can be true, that a half brother of mine can be made such an ass all over?
Tic all true, as I am a Cursen fellow Mr. Thomas, every word on it: •… scorn to lye in a syllabub I; what luck had I to meet you? I never thought to see you at London.
S'daggers death, it has as good as veez'd me out o'my wits to think on it: was my vathers blood so quaisome to him, (with a mischief to it) that he must let it out to be a gentleman, because his mother was one (by her own report:) for our own parts we another know nor care where hence she coame, nor whi∣there she's gone, but dead she is) she brought my father a good purse of money, and kept another in store it seems, till she could keep't no longer, and then bestowed it well and wisely upon Chitty vace her zonne, to make him a geantleman, and told him what great house he coame on by her side; for she was a Striker forsooth, and ga'n directions to vinde an old Uncle of his here in Cuckold-shire, one Mr. Striker: but first she bade him put his zelfe into vashion, and bee sure to beare's zelfe like a Gentleman; and he has ta•…no a wise course to compass it, i•… zeems: I warrant he ha made a voole of his voure hundred pound by this time.
Ay, and o'his zelfe too, as his Cony catchers ha handled him: And you had zeen't, you would have be pissed your zelfe for woe, how they blooded him.
Ah.
And then how they spurg'd his guts out.
Ah.
A Bots light on 'hem, it would ha made a dog zick to zeet how like a scalded pig he looked.
Ha, ha, ha.
And then how they did veed'ne with a zort of zlip zlaps not all worth a' mess of milk porridge to make him vine vorsooth.
Ah.
You'll see such an altrication in him as never was seen in a brother.
But I wo'not zee'n yet as voule a Clown, as I am, and as vine a gentleman, as he is, I have a trick i'my skonce to make a younger brother o'ne.
I that would be zeene now.
I have it, and it is a vine one, I came to London to seek the voole my brother, and ha the same directions from our Curate, (to whom my mother told all) that Tim had to vinde his uncle Strikers house, and I ha quir'd it out; and this is it, and thou zhalt see what I chill doe now: wh'are within.
Who would you speak with.
By your leave vorsooth, I would speak with the Mr. of the house: I understand his worships name is Mr. Striker.
He is so sir, but he is not in case to buy any cattle at this time.
Nor doe I come to zell'n any; my coming is of a dead bodies errand vorsooth.
What strange fellow is this trow?
I▪ pray vorsooth, and you bee old enough (as it zeems you be) to remember when my mother was a maid, did you know a zuster of Mr. Strikers that was married into Zummerzet shire?
What was her name I pray?
Her Cursen name was Audrey, she zed, and a Striker she as before she was married; but my father made a Hoyden.
Hoyden.
Yes Hoyden, so I say; there be very good vokes of th name, as you shall well know; I cham one my zelfe, and she need not be ashamed I wuss of the kin she coame on, to hugger mugger it as she did to her dying day.
Most wonderful, but is she dead?
Yes void she's dead, and as sumptiously buried, though I zay't, as any yeomans wife within ten mile of Tanton, any time these ten and twenty year.
Pray what were you to her?
I tell you, my va•…her married her; and I should bee her zonne I think.
Good heaven, how things will come about!
Coulter keep thy countenance Coulter, ▪isle make•…' hem be∣lieve I am her very natural zonne, &amp; see what will come on it.
Isle keep my countenance, and get a vace on it too and no•…d be.
Your Uncle Striker at this time is very sick sir, but I will acquaint him with your desire: pray walk into the next▪ room the while sir.
If he should dye now Coulter, and make me his heir?
I marry Mr. so you might make a better journey on it then the gentleman your brother.
This to me is the greatest wonder of all, that I am pre∣sently possessed of my Mrs. sullen sickness, which has ee'n drawn him to deaths door, and my Mistresses unfortunable condition are nothing to this Country Hoydens relation:
O Mr. Touchwood, you are the welcom'st Gentleman that ever could come into so heavy a house.
A stinking one it is I am sure: that nasty carrion thy Mr. is i'my nose already, I think I were best go no further.
Let not the sadness of this place dismay you.
But is he dead already, ha?
Not altogether dead sir
The worse luck; and how does your Mistress? ha, ha, ha, well well I say nothing.
She is in bodily health sir, but very sad and much discon∣solate, poor Damsel.
Not for her Grandsire, is she: if the worst dog hee keeps howl for him, Isle worry sheep with mine own▪ teeth, and truss for him; but why is she sad, prithee tel me•… ha▪ ha, ha.
I marvel at your mirth sir.
I would now give her a new Gown, to tell me the true cause that I might save mine oath, and roar out my rejoicings: it was a devilish trick of the Rascals to bind me by oath never to speak of it, but to those that should tell me of it first. I have such a coil to keep it in now: Prithee tell me, what has the old Traveller▪ that is now bound for the Low Countries, gi'n thy Mrs. in his will, can tell?
Alas he is offended with her, she has displeased him in somewhat, that is the maine cause of his mortal sickness.
That's my boy, there boy, there, that was a home blow.
She comes not at him sir, nor dares not see him: do you know any thing by her sir?
No, no, no, not I, not I; s'bores I bit my tongue too hard.
If you doe sir, would you would speak a good word for her, that he may dye in charity with her.
The jade jeers me, Isle stay no longer •…the house.
Nay good sir say not so, after so many messages and en∣treaties, by all the best of the parish, and an exhortation made to you by the Minister himself: did you vouchsafe to come, and will you now come short to see my Master, now the Doctors have go∣ven him over, and he is dying?
I confess it was my desire to see that dying that brought me hither: where is he? Isle hold my nose, and have at him.
I hope you will be friends with him now sir; for he's ee'n a going.
Friends? Isle rather go with him, and fight it out by the way.
Look you sir here he is.
What up and in a Chair?
Yes sir; he will not yield by any persuasion to dye in his bed.
Then he may live to be hanged yet▪ for ought I see.
See sir, your neighbour Touchwood comes to be reconciled to you.
You are quite besides the book sir Domino, I have no friends in hell to send to by him: no sir, I come to see him dye, as he lived a hateful miscreant.
Let me pray and beseech you to speak more charitably, or else not to offend the dying man with your presence.
Doe I come to humour him, or you, or my self, think you: you that take upon you, and doe rather go about to sooth him up in his sickness, then to fright him out of his pain, rather encourage him to live then rid the world of him, and his abho∣minations.
Best look into your self Sir: The worlds a stage, on which you both are Actors, and neither to be his own Judge.
But he has played many wild and beastly parts in it, let him go, I would see his last Exit, and hiss him out of it; hark, the Ravens cry pork for him, and yet he dyes not.
O you are a hard-hearted man.
My heart's not hard enough to break his, I would it were: whore's your kind hearted Mistress, fetch her, and try what she can doe.
Huh, huh, huh,
What have you done sir?
So, so, so, so it works, it works.
Out snarling Hell-hound my curse upon thee, and thy cur∣sed son that has undone my Niece and me: curse upon curse light on ye.
Oh fearful.
How heartily he prays; sure he is near his end.
Pray sir depart, you are too uncharitable.
My son undone thy Niece: has he not done her think thou? ha, ha, ha.
Huh, huh, huh: Villain thou know what he has done; huh, huh.
I know not whether I know or no; tell me, and Isle tell thee.
Isle tell you then that which you know already,
Although you keep it for a joy within you:
Your wicked son has by her own confession
Done that unto her, that unless he play
The honest mans part and marry her, he will
Full dearly answer it in Hell.
Huh, huh, huh.
Speak English, has he lain with her?
Tic so:
She has confessed it to her grandfather,
To me, and Mr. Pancridge here is made
Acquainted with it.
Ha, ha, ha▪
The Virgin says
She is depusilated by your son.
Depusilated, ha, ha, ha.
It is no laughing matter: therefore send
Speedily for your son, before the rumour
Make it ridiculous; as yet none knows it,
But we a slender few.
Will you direct
Your Divine Rhetoric there to him; and win him
But to entreat me in this case, and try
What I will say to it.
Be persuaded sir.
In this extremity I doe entreat you that they may marry▪
I have my ends upon thee; quickly dye,
And take thine own, thy base submission
Has rendered thee more odious, more loathsome
To me than all thy former villainies.
Huh, huh huh.
And hark thee ere thou die, for now you are going▪
Before my son shall wed that whore thy Niece,
She shall bring all the hands of all the whore-masters
In City, Court, and Kingdom, (black Coats, and all)
I will spare none) unto a fair Certificate
That she is clear of all men but my son,
Huh, huh, huh.
Nay more:
That she is clear of him too; and that hee
Has never topped her in the way we treat of,
Before he wed her: for my son shall not ride
In his old boots upon his wedding night:
So, now dye and sink
Into thy grave, to rid us of thy stink.
I have not known such want of charity.
Unconscionable wretch, thou hast kilt my Mr.
Vgh, ugh, no Fid ugh hem! he has cured me:
I am light at heart again: he has cured me;
He has played the good Physician against his will;
And a halter be his fee for it.
The Devil I have, and his Dam it shall.
Ah hem! I am light at heart again.
O damned old counterfeit.
Well fare your heart old Master.
Though she prove bastard-bellyed, I will own her,
Cherish, maintain, and keep her from thy son.
Oh I could tear that tongue out.
Keep her child too.
Doe, and her next, and fill thy house with bastards.
Isle hold 'hem more legitimate than thy brood.
What mean you gentlemen?
For thou, thy son, thy house is all a Bastard.
Bear witness, he calls my house a Bastard.
Ha, ha, ha.
Isle make thy house to smoke for it.
Bear witness there, he says he will fire my house.
For neighbour-hood and Charity speak lower.
Tis'petty treason; isle be wi'yee there sir.
And hang thy self old scare Crow.
Will you eat a piece of Ginger-bread for your Wind Sir.
Out Witch.
O murder, murder.
Isle lay as many actions on thee as thou hast bones in that Swines foot of thine.
My Nails shall right me: Isle teach him to kick a wo∣man.
Hold mistress Friswood▪
O Villain kick a woman!
Thou laidst this plot to murder me, thou man-killer.
Blood-sucker thou lie.
Help from above, within, or any whence, in the name of sanctity I conjure you. Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo.
What's the matter? by your leave which is my zick Uncle? are you scuffling for's money before he be dead.
We'll part you with a vengeance.
Ha you your Tenants, your Clowns here brought in to butcher me?
Slave they are thine, brought in to spoil and rob me; I know 'he•…n not.
I fear I have conjured up fiends indeed, how infernally they look?
No sir, we come with no zick intendment on neither no∣there zide; but an you be Mr. Striker, we are o'your zide, an't bee to cut all the rest into Pot-hearbs.
No, this is my Mr.
Say but the word then, and have at 'hem.
Had you your ambuscado for me?
They are a pair of the Sedan Mules I take it.
Moyles sir, wee be no Moyles would you should well know.
We be Cursen folk as good as your zelfe, and get you out of the house by mine Uncles leave here.
Your Uncle, oh brave.
Orif I baste you not well a fine, and Lamb-skinne your jackets till your bones rattle i'your hides, then say cha betrayed the house I coame on.
Well sir, Isle go and leave you to your Uncle: rejoice
sir with your kind red: I hope you will have more shortly, if your Niece prove fruitful: Come Master Paneridge, will you go?
With joy for your recovery, and manners to your privy∣cy, Right Worshipful I leave you to talk with' Clown your Nephew.
Tarry, tarry; as sure as a Club, this Clown is sent for out of the Country, to soder up his cracked Niece in Matrimony, and therefore calls him Uncle; I could spoil the Match, but by my oath I dare not; and therefore Clown take thy course: come let us go Mr. Pancridge
And why you my Nephew sir?
And why not I your Nephew; have not she told you, and haven't I told you as much as the matter's worth, and doe ye mean to vlee from the bargain?
What new afflictions hourly find me out?
And for your health, I hope sir.
Sir, Isle have better testimony then your own;
Tic true I lost a sister; but till you
Bring stronger proof she was your mother sir,
Your Clowneship must not Uncle me; am I we'you sir?
Kings Crowns have been pretended to by'impostures;
And knavery is as rife in Russet Wool,
As in the proudest purple; get you gone,
There I am we'you directly.
Is it come to this now?
Your project will not hold Mr. Thomas, best seek your brother Tim, hee has a zertification from the parish, and the Priest too, of all your mothers mind, and you could cousin him on it, and come again, and uncle this weese gentleman, whether he wool or no; it would be vine i'vaith
Agreed: well sir, for this time I ha no more to say t'yee, since you be so budge: but he that made you zave you
Farewell sir, I doe begin to think there's something in it.
He made me think he was your sisters son In m sure.
I will not think so, no he was set on
By some of my maligners to abuse me;
It had been good to ha laid him by the heals:
But let him go; call down my Niece out of
The melancholy mist she's chambred in, 
All makes for her; their vexing me, restores
Her to my love again; and reason good;
She's mine own natural Niece: and though
She has lost the husband, and the name she sought,
Yet she appears a Striker; and I will cherish her.
Come you shall grieve no longer, I am friends wi'yee:
Stand up, stand up I say, and look up too,
Off with this mourning veil, and dry those tears:
I have considered that right Noble Parents
Have pardoned in their Children as great faults;
But let it bee your warning, not your licence.
For your security I am content,
And would entreat to live in that retirement,
Which your fair Justice, and my foul offence
Of late confined me to, to weep and sigh
My loathed life away.
No more: you shall
No longer live reclus'd in wilful darkness;
Enjoy your former liberty; see, and be seen:
And (as you weigh my pardon and my love)
Let not your blemish dwell upon your face;
Nor any argument of grief, or shame
Be legible there, to the most curious eye:
But let your cheek be cheerful, and your brow
Crowned with as great a confidence, as may
Comply with Virgin Modesty: and that
Add to your beauty with full strength of Art,
Beyond the eye to take a lovers heart.
In all I will obey you,
If I make
Choice of a husband for you then, you'll take him.
Twill but become my duty.
A good girl.
Sir here's the Knight come again, that has been here in the time of your sickness to have seen you, and my Mistress, but
could not: and left a letter for you once: hee that looks women through so.
Oh▪ Sir Arnold Cautious: did you tell him I was of the mending hand.
Yes I told him you were so, so.
Give me my Gown and Cap though, and set me chari∣lie in my sickly chair; his letter is a treaty of a match betwixt his Nephew and my Niece: go fetch him up.
In Niece, and be not seen until I call you: until you hear me call you, doe you hear?
Could I but catch this Cautious coxcomb Knight now—Isle put fair for it.
Here is the Knight sir.
Why reach you not a Chair? I hope sir Arnold
You'll pardon the necessity of my rudeness:
I cannot rise, nor stoop, to you, uh, uh, uh.
Rather excuse me sir, that press upon you
Thus in your weakness: but you understand
My business by my letter if you have read it.
Yes sir, go forth; but be not far I pray you. 
I have heard your Nephew is a wilde young man▪
A very bashful boy I assure you; that's the reason
That I am won to be a spokes-man for him.
Oh no dissembling sir; you know he is wilde,
And suffers under your displeasure for it: uh, uh, uh.
A witch could not guess righter: but they say
That dying men are Prophets oftentimes.
Suppose he has been wild, let me assure you
He's now reclaimed, and has my good opinion:
And is as like in person and behaviour
To gain the maids affection.
Speak to the purpose; pray what's his estate?
I there's the point indeed: why sir, he has
A hundred pound a year; and is withal
A hopeful, and a handsome gentleman.
Hopeful, and handsome! uh, uh, uh.
You sir have wealth enough.
And she has choice enough
Of greater matches: could I get her
Into a marriage vain, but she'll not look
Upon a man not she; but lives retired
Here in my house, and is a careful Nurse:
She's fitter sir to be an old mans Nurse,
Then any young mans bride: uh, uh, uh, uh.
Is she so grave in youth? I have often sought
A sight of her, but never could obtain it.
Not without my consent I warrant you;
Shoe's nearer to a mother than a maid.
I tell you truth sir, and you know deceit
Becomes not dying men: uh, uh, uh. For virtue and obedience
She's fitter for your self then for your Nephew:
But to the point, a hundred pound a year
You say he has, and hopes and handsomeness,
Which may acquire, with your assurance of
So much for jointure—Yes, a thousand pound
In portion with her: but sir let me tell you,
I'd rather give six thousand unto one
Of mine own choice; which she will not refuse,
If I but say this is the man, and take him.
Will not your Niece be seen: I fine would see her.
At hand: she will not out of my presence sir,
Nor ever was by man, not since the clock
Of her Virginity struck eleven, not she,
Except at door or window, as men pass:
And so perhaps your Nephew may have seen her.
In truth no otherwise; and so he told me▪
May not I see her sir?
I tell you true;
Deceit you know becomes not dying men: uh, uh, uh.
And therefore hark you sir, I have a purpose,
(That if she take the man whom I will choose)
To make her my sole heir; provided that
She match before I dye: uh, uh, I cannot last▪
Pray let me see your Niece.
Friswood—why Friswood.
Is that her name?
No sir, I call my maid.
A maid; I took her for an old woman.
A maid upon my virtue: and I fear
That her frigidity has mortified my Niece:
Deceit becomes not dying men you know
Friswood I say, I bad her not be far:
I dare not strain my self to call her louder.
Isle call her for you sir: Fris—
Hold sir, hold, pray use this whistle for me,
I dare not strain my self to wind it I,
The Doctors tell me it will spend my spirits, 
So, so, enough sir—Fie, f•…e upon you:
Go call my Niece, uh, uh.
Be of good cheer sir, and take courage man:
What you have been a Striker in your days:
And may be again, I would not have him dye.
Uh—alas I cannot last—why comes she not?
I cannot get her from her work; nor to
Believe me that you sent for her, because
I told her that a gentleman was with you
There was your fault, then I must call my self.
Why Anna-bell, ah, ah, ah, An-na-bell.
Take heed, strain not your self too hard, but send again:
The rarest beauty that I ever beheld, 
Which with a maiden-head of that growth, 
Would be an absolute wonder, her sweet modesty,
And meek obedience▪ justifies that too, 
And makes her up a miracle of nature;
My former misbeliefe I doe renounce,
And at first sight, (which is the birth of love)
A faith grows in me, strengthened by the word
Of this expiring man, that chastity
Has not forsaken beauty.
You shall hear him.
What to propound a husband? honoured sir,
Although I rather wish to dye a Virgin;
Yet my obedience to your grave behests
Shall sway my will: your choice shall be my liking:
But let me thus much favour beg, before
You make that choice, that you will not destroy
The building you have rear▪d; your care and cost
Hath built me up by virtuous education,
Unto that height that I consider heaven;
And wax so old in that high contemplation,
That to look down on youthful vanities,
Were to be at a stand; and to delight in 'hem,
Were to fall back again; and to be linked
In marriage, to a man whose wilde affections
Are bent to worldly pleasures a maine perdition.
I dare not speak to her for my Nephew now:
Nor (though I love her strangely) for my self.
Doe you tell me of his Nephew sir? even hee
The Knight himself, I hold to be too young
For a well governed man as the world goes.
I have not the heart to wrong her; she's too good.
Sir, here's a gentleman presses at my heals
To speak with you.
Mr. Goldwire, what's your haste?
I come to cry you mercy, and this good gentleman;
And this sweet Gentlewoman, who I take it
Is his fair Niece, of whom you are in treaty;
If it be not already gone too far;
Let me entreat you not to put your finger
Further in the business in behalf of your Nephew.
You first moved me to it.
Tic that repents me:
Your base unworthy Nephew has abused me;
I doe not speak it for a slight hurt he has gi'n me,
But for his breach of Faith to another Virgin.
Oh me; and would you speak for such a man?
And the false way, the plot he had upon you,
To put you on this enterprise, the Quarrel▪
In which he rescued you, to indeere himself to you,
Was a mere counterfeit squabble, a very trick
Contrived betwixt him▪ and his brother Poet
T'abuse your goodness:
J leave it to your consideration sir:
I am in haste; and so I wish you health sir;
And you much happiness in a husband Lady.
Has given me here a letter; I want but
Place fit to peruse it.
Had he a plot upon me, Isle have my plot too;
And now woe for my self sir if you please.
Sir, let me tell you, I think well of you, uh, uh,
Deceit becomes not dying men you know,
She would make ee'ne too good a wife for you:
〈◊〉 I have heard sir of your disposition,
Never to marry without best assurance,
First, of Virginity, and then of Chastity,
In her that you would choose; and let me tell you, uh, uh,
I know not where you can so well be fitted:
She's right, uh, uh, if you dare take a weak mans word,
Deceit would ill become me, uh, uh.
I take you at your word, and thank you sir.
Vh, uh, uh, uh—O lay me in my bed:
You need not leave me yet sir.
No sir, no,
It shall be a match, or no match ere I go.
NOw sir have you your rules by heart?
Both Rules and Rudiments I have al ad unguem.
Repeat your Principles.
Principles to be imprinted in the heart of every new made gentleman: To commend none but himself: to like no mans wit but his own: to slight that which he understands not: to send mo∣ny, &amp; never look for it again: to take up upon obligation, &amp; lend out upon affection: to owe much, but pay little▪ to sell land, but buy none: to pawn, but never to redeem again: to fight for a whore:
to cherish a Bawd, and defy a trades-man.
And can you observe and keep these rules think you?
I hope I can sir, and have begun pretty well already▪ you see I have spent and lent all my money; and pawned all my Clothes but these a▪ my back, as I am a clear gentleman; and for the rest of the rudiments, and the several carriages and de∣portments by garb, by congy, complement, &amp;c. which are to be attained by practice when I come abroad and amongst 'hem, you shall gain credit by me.
I commend your confidence: now Mr. Spring, and Mr. Brittleware, play you the Complementasters before him a little, for his further instruction: Imagine them a couple of Courtiers scarcely acquainted fall to; and look that you congy in the new French Bum-trick; here Landlord, take his Cloak and hat to ap∣pear more generous.
Bum trick!
Come meet and begin; play but two or three bouts at most at single Rapier complement, and one or two at Back-sword and you ha done: now observe sir.
Single Rapier, and Back-sword Complement foil.
Noble Master Fine-wit, the single example of Court-Cere∣money, if my apprehension deal fairly with me.
Sir, how auspiciously have I fallen upon the knowledge of you by virtue of the same apprehension.
So, there's one.
What's here?
Peace, let's see a little more.
As I am a Gentleman, a neat bout and fairly come off of both sides.
Sir▪ I shall ever bless the promptness of my memory, in being so fortunate to collect the fallacious acquaintance of so complete a goodness.
Sweet sir I shall ever bless, &amp;c.
Oh you are pleased out of that noble worth which can convert all things to the form and image of its own perfect∣on
to make your self glorious, with that which is miserably im∣poverish'd in it self.
Good, there's two.
Miserably impoverished in it self—oh sweet.
Sir, you have such a conquering way in humility, that hee shall be sure to come off vanquished that offers to contend with you.
This is the noblest of all humanity to piece up the defect of your friend with a glory of your own.
A plain hit that: here were three bouts well plaid.
Piece up the defect of your friend with a glory of your own: most stately fine, as I am a gentleman.
So much for single Rapier: now for your secret wipe at Back-sword.
I that I would see, like the heckling of the Millers legs: now for a delicate back-blow.
See you yon fellow I held complement with?
Yes sir, a well-spoken gentleman and a lovely.
The arrantst trifle in a Kingdom.
What he is not, is he?
Made only to make physic work: a very lump of laughter.
Ha, ha, ha.
You have done well: now you sir.
Doe you note him yonder that past from you?
That gallant sir?
The very scorn at Court;
So empty, not one passable part about him.
Good.
A very tilting stock for young practisers to break their jests on.
Enough.
Good and enough; doe you call this good enough, to abuse one another thus?
Yes, this is qacksword Complement: this wipes off the false praise which the first thrust on: you must bee seen in both, or you are no true garbist else.
J shall soonest hit o'this; for from a whelp I could give scurvy language.
Now break in upon 'hem; save you sir Hugh.
O course salutation: save you sir Hugh.
How got you hither gentlemen?
Here we are sir, and have seen part of your practice, your Courtly exercise.
Peace: but how got you in, and a stranger with ye?
He shall betray nothing.
We found fair entrance into the house.
'Sfoot whore's my wife then?
If your wife be the gentlewoman of the house sir, shoe's now gone forth in one of the new Hand-litters: what call ye it, a Sedan.
O Sedana.
He's run mad with his horns.
He's run with my Hat and Cloak by your leave.
He'll come again, near doubt him.
You say so small acquaintance▪ but I could ne'er see any thing of mine again, since I came amongst you, if it once got out of my sight: what money have I left trow?
I pray gentlemen which way took she:
Down towards the Strand I tell you, in a new Litter, with the number one and twenty in the breech on it.
A Litter of one and twenty in her breech: High time to run.
You see we have our plot in action too, sir Hugh, and it runs fairly on.
But what a rogue art thou to put such a slur upon thine own Uncle▪ first to put him on for thy self, then you with a Counterfeit trick to put him off of that course, to run despe∣rately headlong to break his own neck in a match: what a Rogue art thou to use thine uncle thus?
Nay what a wretch were you, if you should cross your daughter in such a fortune?
Which if I doe, cut my wind-pipe: what the young ras∣call Touchwood is gone into France they say?
I he's safe enough.
Sir Cautious to be caught! if I doe not love my daugh∣la the better for her lucky leg stretching▪ I am a villain, I am taken with such kind of roguery.
Take heed you have not a cross plot in that itching pate of yours to spoil all now.
Then cut my weasond I say.
And I swear I will, or cut these hands off; I thought good to tell you so, because I know what tricks you have done, &amp; what discoveries you have made for small parcels of ready money.
Hoo pox, I want no money; now look there comes Mr. Hoyden, salute these gallants.
What without a hat or cloak?
The better for a young beginner.
Sweet sir, I shall ever bless my auspicious stars, that shined me into the falicious acquaintance of so singular goodness.
Sir you forget your self.
Most singular sweet sir, most miserably impoverish't in it self.
Good sir forbear, make not an Idol of me.
You piece up the defect of your friend with a glory of your own.
Can you say this gentleman was a Clown within this fortnight?
Within this fortnight I assure you sir, as rank a Clown of one side, as ever held Cow to Bull.
Had it been of both sides, it had been miraculous.
Now note me sir: doe you see that fellow I left?
Yes, tic my friend.
The arrantest coxcomb in a Country
How sir?
Made only to make Physic work.
You doe not know him sure.
A tilting stock for young practisers to break jests on: there's a wipe for you at back sword Complement.
There's another for you sir.
You knock at the wrong door sir, and I pity your igno∣rance: go to school as I have done, and learn more wit: kick a gentleman.
Here he is and here be all the crew on 'hem, and more.
Here? thou mockst he is not here: sure these be all Lords I think.
How now; what's he?
Slid it is his Clown brother he spake of?
Is it possible? echo made a sweet jaunt after you &amp; have I wound a vine voole of the: whore's thy voure hundred pound? is that made a voole on too trow: whore's the zartificate my mother ga' thee to vinde thine uncle? give me that, chill •…ee what I can doe wi'it.
Away Clown I know thee not can thou complement?
Complement lies, I can complement dagger out o'sheath, an I get on it.
I hope he'll veeze you, and make your zilken jacket hum: well zed Mr. Thomas to 'hem, and to 'hem all Isle zi•…e ye.
Mr. Thomas does he call him?
Yes, Mr. Thomas, and what say you to that; and as good a Mr. as the best o'yee, and you go to that; for by uds shall jidge me, I think you are all but a company of Cheaterlings; and if you doe not give the voole my brother sartifaction for the wrongs you hawed one him, and me in him, Isle canvas it out of the carcass∣ses o'zome o'yee, by uds daggers death will I. Draw Could•…er, &amp; amongst 'hem.
Hold sir, hold, you shall have satisfaction.
O shall I zoe, put up again Coulter.
This is a stout roaring Clown.
Whore's the Mr. of the house?
He's run mad, after his wife, now he should look to his house.
Cha mesh a doe to vorbeare beating of the yet, my vine∣gers doe so itch at thee.
I understand thee not, as I am a gentleman.
But now I think on it Coulter, we'll have all ag•…in, &amp; by a quieter way; and teach 'hem to like honey, catch birds with Chafe, or go to plow with dogs.
Ha, ha, ha.
Ha, ha, ha; who understands the Barbarian trow?
Uds vish Master they do nothing but jeer to you all this while now.
Doe they jeer, let 'hem jeer &amp; gibe too; isle vetch ones Warrant shall out jeer 'hem all, and he be above ground.
You shall not need sir; go but in till the Mr. of the house comes home, you shall have your desire.
You say very well sir; say well is good, but doe well is better. Lets see what you will doe now.
Remember we have warned you sir Hugh, we must leave you.
Nay I'chill look to you: sirrah come in my hand.
Now for a trick to rid us of this Clown,
Or our trade sinks, and up our house is blown.
T•…s as I tell you Mr. Touchwood; your son has lost a fair fortune in the young gentlewoman, and as I con∣ceive by your wilfulness Sir Arnold Cautions licks his lips at her. I assure you; and a sweet lick it is, six thousand pound in present portion.
A sweet li•…k he has indeed if he knew all.
He does know all sir.
If he did, I know what I know; good oath let me not lose thy virtue.
He knows moreover, that Mr. Strike•…, her grandfa∣there has covenanted to give her two thousand pound more at the birth of his first Child, lawfully begotten on her body.
Ha, ha, ha; but what if her first child prove illegitimate?
That is not to be thought sir.
Yes, and spoken too, if I durst; but good oath let me not lose thy virtue.
And then he had entered into ten thousand pound bond, to leave her his heir if she survive him.
But he's well recovered you say.
Very lusty, very lively sir.
Then hang him, he'll never dye; I am a feared I must be fine to give him over, I shall never vex him to death: no, no, I shall never do it.
No sir, I heard himself say, that your vexing him has bin his physic, and the best means to keep him alive.
Did he say so? Isle tear this match in pieces presently: and see how that will work on him; isle do it, what's an oath to me, in respect of sending him to the Devil, Isle do it.
I would you could sir, and recover her for your son yet.
Vmh.
Because I love the young gentleman well
Vmh.
Though I assure you the writings are all past, signed, sealed, and delivered; but I have 'hem in my hands yet, and can doe you a pleasure.
Humh.
And came purpose•…lie to advise you, because I love your son.
Vmh—what a world of villainy lies in the jobber noule of a Lawyer.
Think of it sir, and be speedy.
Right learned in the Law, and my sons friend Mr. Tramp∣ler, Mr. Ambodexter Trampler, you are a most notorious knave, &amp; and you shall hear on it o'both sides, as you take fees.
Nay, and you be so hot Mr Touchwood I am gone.
I know my course; either I will crack the heart-strings of Striker, in crossing this match, with the cracked credit of his Niece, or else I will be friends with him, and that will kill him out right: But my oath still troubles me—Oh gentlemen you are welcome.
Ha you heard sir of your son yet?
Not I, he lacks no money yet it seems:
Young Travellers make no other use of their fathers.
But ha you heard the news of his young Mistress?
What of sir Cautious being caught, the wise and wary gentleman, your Uncle, that would not believe there could be a marriagable maid, though she were justified by a jury of Midwifes, and therefore purposed to have died a Bachelor: that he should now bee caught with a pipt Nut-shell, and a Maggot in it.
Sure he was strangely wrought to it.
I you must think
There have been knavish heads used in the business.
But I will cross it and their knaveries, what ere they are.
I hope you will not cross mine uncle in such a fortune tho.
What to marry a wench?
No, so much wealth sir.
Pray let me use my Christian Liberty, my Conscience pricks me to it, it must be done.
Now what say you sir?
We might ha spared this labour: he was resolved before we came it seems to spoil the marriage.
We could not bee too sure though: wee are now sure e∣nough, that our dissuasions will spur him on the faster.
And we are no less sure, that sir Hugh Mony-lacks will set his strength to life Sir Cautious off of the hooks, in hope of a mat∣la of 5. Pound, though •…e forfeit the obligation of his throat by it.
All the danger is, that Sir Hugh will be with mine Uncle too soon, &amp; prevent the match before he be too deep engaged in it.
For that my letter of instructions, which I have given An∣nobel shall prevent him; and Striker keeps Sir Cautious in his house so warily, that until the intended wedding hour, Sr. Hugh shall not obtain admittance.
Go fetch 'hem in, and make the warrant: ha, ha, ha: Gentlemen will you hear a complaint my man tells me of cer∣taine Clowns that desire my warrant to apprehend for notori∣os Cheaters, whom doe you think?
I cannot guess.
I know none I hope.
Even Sir Hugh Money-lacks, the mourning Knight, and some of his associates.
O'my life it is the roaring Clown, about the new made Gentleman his brother.
What is it you sir, Mr. Strikers Nephew, as I take it, you called his great worships Uncle lately as I take it, and did your best to tore me out of his house.
Zheart Coulter we be valence into the Bakers ditch.
And doe you bring your complaints to me sir, ha?
Get a good vace on it; and veare no colours though.
I am an honest man, and a true man for all that, and I thought you the vittest to make my complaint to because you were the next Justice, to as pestilence a piece of villainy as ever you were Master of in all your life: I come but v•…r justice, and to pay for what I take, and't be ivor hand, here it is, whether it be for your Clarke or your zelfe, who makes or meddles with it, your man has my complaint in writing, pray let me have your warrant.
You shall, but first tell me, how came it that you called that Strike•… uncle.
For cause that he is uncle to a voole that I have to my brother, and I thought I might be so bold wee'n, and he was not against it at first, till you were gone, and then he bad me go seek better testimony, and so I went and wound my bro∣there Tim, his own zusters zonne I assure ye.
His Sisters son?
Where he was made such a Tim, as ne'er was heard on in To•…ton, amongst a many Cheaters: by mass here are a couple of•….
These were of the crew.
How now my Masters: sure fellow thou art mistaken.
No sir, I am not mistaken I but I take 'hem I, where I vinde 'hem I: And I charge your justiceship with 'hem I, till they bring out my brother I.
Bring out your brother: why what has your brother done?
Done: nay they have done and undone him amongst 'hem. And I think devoured him quick too for he is lost, &amp; no where to be wound.
Doe you know the meaning of any of this gentlemen?
If he were your brother sir, that you found at Sir Hugh Money-lacks lodging, you know we left him in your hands.
We stepped in but by chance, &amp; such a youth we found there, &amp; there we left him in your and their hands, that had the managing of him.
So you did, but what then did me the rest, but plied me, and my man Coulter here with wine, and zack, and some∣thing in it, I dare be zwore that laid us a zleep, when we mistru∣sted nothing but vaire play: oh speak Coulter, oh.
And then when were vast asleep, they all gave us the zlip, the Knight was gon, and the Squire was gon, &amp; Mr. Tim was gon, but he was made away, without all peraventure; for all the parrell that he wore was left behind: and then—speak Master.
And then the Mr of the house came home, &amp; made a mon∣strous wonderment for the loss of his wife; he could not vinde her he zed. and so he vaire and vlatly thrust us out outdoors, and is gone a hunting after his wife again: speak Coulter.
Alas poor Britlew•…re.
And then we came for your warrant, to find all these men again.
And to take 'hem where we vinde 'hem, &amp; these were some on 'hem, when time was, and pray look to 'hem.
I know not what to make o'this but sure there's some∣thing in it: And for these gentlemen isle see them forth-comming.
We thank you sir.
And I will undertake Sir Hugh Mony-lacks will be at the Bride-house.
And thither will I instantly.
We'll waite upon you sir.
And I chill make bold to wait upon you till I be better zartified.
You shall, come on your way, come gentlemen.
Well, here is such a knot now to untie,
As would turn O•…dipus his brain •…wry.
Be appeased and comforted, good Mr. Br•…tleware, trouble not your head in running after your fate, nor break your weighty brains in seeking ways after your wives heals, which are so light by your own report, they cannot crack an egg.
Her credit yet they may and mine.
Besides your wife is your wife where ever she is abroad as we as at home, yea, lost perhaps as well as found: I am now going to yoke a heifer to a husband, that perhaps will say so shortly: whi∣there away Mr. Trampler?
To the wedding house: where I think I saw your wife last night Mr. Britleware.
Did you sir, did you•…
I cannot say directly; but I think it was she: does she not call the gentlewoman Aunt that keeps Mr. Strikers house?
Yes Mistress Friswood, she is her Aunt sir.
Come go with us and find her.
Pray gentleman stay, for I suppose She's here here's number one and twenty; &amp; this is sure the litter.
What peep y•…u for; you ought not to do so sir.
By what Commission ought you to carry my wife in a Close stool under my nose
Tic a close Chair by your leave: And I pray for∣bear, you know not who we carry.
I know the clothes she wears, and I will see the party.
I know that voice, &amp; let me see the man; it is my surgeon.
A Surgeon! I took you for a China shop-keeper Master Britleware; these by trades are for some by purposes, and I smell knavery.
And Lawyers cōmonly are the best upon that sent.
Gentlemen this is a man that lay in my house.
A gentleman you would say, or my cost was ill besto'd there.
These are my goods he wears; that was my mothers Gown, and feloniously he wears it.
Tic all I have to show for four hundred pound I laid out in your house; and Sir Hugh put it upon me, and hired these men to carry me—Whither was it?
Up to a lodging in St. Gileses sir.
Where he promised to finish his work of a gentleman in me, and send me to my Uncle.
O monstrum horendum; a man in women's clothes.
Tic felony by the Law.
Has sir Hugh gin me the slip to finish his work in private? it shall all out, I am resolved, though I bewray my self in it: pray gentlemen assist me with this party to Mr. Justice Strikers, you say my wife is there.
Yes you shall thither.
And there Isle take a course you shall smell knavery enough.
I find Jam abused enough of conscience: and shall be car∣ried to mine Uncle now before my time and not as a gentleman, but as a gentlewoman, which grieves me worst of all.
Hinc illae lachrimae, the youth is sure abused indeed.
Oh.
Come leave your crying: And you beasts up with your luggage, and along with us; isle fetch such dri∣verse as shall set you on else.
Let us be paid for our labour, and we'll carry him to Bride-well, if you please.
Oh, oh, that ever I was born in this groa•…g chair.
It was well I sent for thee Niece, to help me deck the Bride here; and that the jealous fool thy husband thinks thou art gone astray the while; it will be a means for thee to take thy liberty another night, and pay him home indeed, when he shall not have the power to mistrust thee: it is the common conditi∣on of Cuckolds to mistrust so much before hand, that when they are Du•…'d indeed, they have not a glimpse of suspicion left.
Their horns hang i•… their light then; but truly Aunt, for mine own part, I had rather my husband should be jealous still then be cured in that right kind; though I confess the ends of all my longings, and the vexations I have put him to
Were but to run his jealousy out of breath,
And make him pant under the frivolous weight
He bears; that is, a Cuckold in conceit;
Which without doubt he labours with by this time:
And when he finds me clear, twill be as well:
(I hope) and better then if it were done
By the broad way of foul pollution.
Nay I doe not persuade you, take the downright way,
Nothing against your Conscience Niece; I sent
For him to ha come and found you here by chance;
But he has shut up house, and is run mad
About the Town I hear to all your haunts.
He shall come hither and renounce his jealousy,
And then entreat me too before I go.
Yes, that's a wise wives part.
What's the Bride ready?
Yes sir, she's dressed.
And dressed, and dressed indeed;
Never was maid so dressed: oh sir you are happy;
The happiest Knight, and are now in election
Of the most sweet encounter in a bride,
That ever your chivalry could couch a Lance at.
I thank you Mrs. and Isle bring her shortly to bestow money w'yee in China wares.
She is her self the purest piece of Pur•…∣lane—that ever had liquid sweet meats licked out of it.
And purer too I hope.
Go call h•…r down.
She's at her private prayers yet sir, she.
When she has done, then hasten her away.
Such Brides doe seldom make their grooms their prey.
Doe you now conclude Sir Arnold you are happy?
As man can be being so near a wife.
By your leave gentlemen.
He come? I fear a mischief.
How comes it Father Striker, and son Cautious in election
That you huddle up a match here for my child,
And I not made acquainted, as unworthy,
Until the very intended marriage hour?
Who sent you hither, I sent not for you now sir:
And there I am with ye sir.
Tic true, I covenanted not to come at you,
Until you sent for me, unless you found
Young Touchwood had the love of Annabell,
You have heard he has touched her has he not?
Hold your peace.
Has he not made her Touchwood too?
Can you say so?
Yes, &amp; struck fire too in her tinderbox.
You will not speak thus.
To you I need not; for you know it already;
But to my friend Sir Cautious, whom I honour,
And would not see so shipwrecked, I may speak it.
Will you undo your daughter?
My daughter; no you shall not put her upon me now.
She is your daughter sir: if I bu•… call her mine,
Or suffer her to ask me a bare blessing,
You'll thrust her out: no, you adopted her
In your own name, and made a Striker of her,
No more a Monylacks.
The beggarly Knight is desperate,
And should he out with it, my shame were endless:
This is the way or none to stop his mouth:
Tic but a money matter; stay a little
Go not away sir Arnold, I must speak with ye.
I am not going sir.
Be not a Mad-man here, here's forty pieces,
I know you use to strike for smaller sums:
But take it for your silence, and withal
My constant love, and my continual friendship.
Give me your hand of that; enough. Sir Arnold.
What say you to me sir Hugh?
What does he mean trow?
You must not have my daughter.
No sir Hugh.
Unless you mean to take another leavings.
Oh devilish reprobate.
How mean you that?
Till she has buried first another husband,
And he leave her a widow: I am her father,
And claim a fathers interest in her choice;
And I have promised her to one already,
This very day, because I was not privy
To your proceedings; and have taken here
This fair assumpsit forty pieces sir;
You might admire how I should have 'hem otherwise.
Here's an impudent villain.
For these I give a hundred, if you wed her.
To show my love unto your daughter sir Isle pay't.
Security in hand were good.
Pray lend me sir a hundred Pieces.
I dare not cross this devil, I must fetch 'hem.
Twill ne'er the less be my disparagement.
What, when they know her grandfather disposed her,
That has the care of her, and gives her portion?
And then he can •…a' but his money, can hee?
Oh but the wench, the wench, is such a wench,
Scarce •…wo such married in a Diocese,
In twice two twelve months, for right and straight ones.
There said you well; the straight ones I like well:
But those that men call right, or good ones, suffer
A by Construction.
Amongst the Iewd.
Here sir.
But is here weight and number sir?
Now the fiend stretch thee—you may take my word.
Here I am with ye sir.
Though you are fully bent to cross the marriage,
Yet lets entreat you not to be too sudden.
Till they come to the word, for better, for worse
I will not touch at it.
How now, what mates break in upon us here?
I come not as a guest sir, or spectator
To your great wedding, but of the Kings affairs;
In which I must crave your assistance sir;
Deny it me, or my entrance, if you dare.
It is some weighty matter sure then.
But not to trouble your sconce with too much business
At once, pursue your own, we will attend a while.
So it is sir,
In that he has said well: I would the Bride
And Priest were come once; I am content they stand
For witnesses: what my kind Nephew are you here?
I thank you for your plot, you see what it is come to.
Tic not all finished yet sir.
All in good time: the Bride is coming now.
You and your brother Poet are grown friends I see.
But it may bee
Whats he?
A friend of Wats he brought for company.
He was amongst 'hem too at the cheating exercise, and yonds the Knight himself; I know 'hem all I trow.
And you'll stand to this, that your lost brother
Was Strikers Sister Audreyes son.
I ha told you twonty times, and yet because you say you'll stand my vrend, isle tell you more, she was with child with Tim be∣for my father married her (she brought him in her belly vrom this
town here (where they get Children without veare or wit) but for her money, and's own credits zake, my father was well apaid to keep it for his own; and no body knew to the Contrary, not Tim himself to this hour.
Then how came thou to know it?
My father told it me upon his death-bed, and charged me on his blessing, never to open my mouth to man, woman, nor child, so I told no body but vokes on it.
Well, hold thy peace, tic an absolute wonder! •…ow to the wed∣ding
Hows this? my bride in mourning habit, &amp; her head inwillow?
What's the meaning of it?
I said she was dressed as never Bride was dressed.
A solemn show, and suiting well the Scene!
She seems round bellied, and you mark it too.
My habit and my dressing suits my fortune.
Pray sir doe your office, her conceit
We will know afterword.
Hem, hem.
Oh, oh.
Oh me; why Mistress look up, look up I say.
Clap her cheek, rub her nose.
Sprinkle cold water on her face.
Cut her lace, cut her lace, and bow her forward, so, so, so.
Isle lay my life she quickens now with child.
Oh.
What think you is the matter?
Women how is it with her?
Sir, as with other women in her case.
How's that I pray you. you have bin doing something afore-hand sir.
Twill out, twill out,
Have I?
It seems so by the story.
Is she so dressed?
Ha, ha, ha.
You may leave laughing, it was your son that did it.
I am undone, my house disgraced for ever.
He know it before hand, now I may declar't,
Speak of thy Conscience, did•…t not?
Oh my heart.
Oh the hangman.
Deceit becomes not dying men you know,
Into a whirlepoole of confusion
Sink thou and all thy family, accursed miser.
This was a sure way now Sir Cautious,
To marry a maid, there's one in the mothers belly.
Vh, uh, uh, uh.
You knew not where I could be so well fitted.
Vh, uh, uh.
A rot o'your dissembling entrails, spit 'hem out, you durst not strain your self to wind your whistle, your Doctor told you it would spend your spirits, so made me whistle for her
Vh, uh, uh.
Cheer up, cheer up, I may be friends wi'yee now:
Here's one has cause, and knows the way to vex ye,
To preserve life in you as well as I.
A hem, a hem, I will out-live you both:
This days vexation is enough for a life time.
And may it last thee to thy lives last hour.
Now let me talk wi'yee, and come you hither sir.
I tell you true, your writings are so past, that if you go
Not off by composition, you'll shake your whole estate.
Come hither Nephew,
Isle give thee a thousand pound, and take her off me.
I cannot with my reputation now:
But I will doe my best to work a friend to 't.
Prithee doe, try thy Poetical soldier.
That Clown come hither too: I fear I am trapt.
Tic all as I have told you, and without question,
The man in question is your sisters son.
Would it might prove so, that I had yet a Nephew,
For now my Niece is lost.
Here's one shall find him out: or stretch a neck for it.
Sir Hugh you are charged for making of a gentleman.
Now I am in.
And more then so, for making him away.
What gentleman?
Marry my brother Tim.
Your patience yet a while: now gentlemen all,
Sir Cautious, and the rest, pray hear a story:
I have bin often urged to yield the cause
Of the long quarrel twixt this man and me:
Thirty years growth it has, he never durst
Reveal the reason; I being sullen would not.
You will not tell it now?
Indeed I will:
He had a sister (peace to her memory)
That in my youth I loved, she me so much,
That we concluded, we were man and wife;
And dread less of all marriage lets, we did
Anticipate the pleasures of the bed.
Nay it shall out; briefly, she proved with child:
This covetous man then greedy of her portion,
(Of which for the most part he was possessed)
Forces her with her shame to leave his house.
She makes her moan to me, I then (which since
I have with tears a thousand times repented)
Against my heart stood off, in hope to win
Her Dowry from him: when she gentle soul
(Whom I must now bewail) when she I say,
Not knowing my reserved intent, from him and me,
From friends, and all the world, for ought we knew,
Suddenly slipped away: after five years
I took another wife, by whom I had
The son, that has done that the woman says:
But where I left, if this mans tale be true,
She had a son, whom I demand of you.
I shall have a kind of an uncle of you anon,
And you prove Tims father.
The young Gentleman that sir Hugh had in handling, is in the house, and Master Brittleware with him.
Only we kept em back, till our more serious office were ended.
Pray em in, lets see him.
Sir, will it please you first to see a match quickly clapped up? This Gentleman whom I know every way deserving, were your Niece now in her prime of Fortune and of Virtue, desires to have her, and she him as much.
Hee shall not have her.
How can you say so?
He knows his son I fear.
My son shall make his fault good, and restore her honour to her if he lives, in meed for your f•…ire sisters wrong and my misdeed, my son shall marry her; provided that he take her in his Conscience unstained by any other man.
On that condition Isle give her all the worldly good I have.
We take you at your word.
My son!
I take her not with all faults, but without any least blemish.
My supposed slain: Thus I cast from me.
Znailes a Cushion, how warm her belly has made it.
And that all was but a plot twixt him and me, and these gen∣tlemen: This paper may resolve you.
Tic mine own hand by which I instructed her by a dissem∣bled way, to wound her honour.
Which, to preserve my love, again id doe,
Hoping that you forgive it in me too.
Now am I cheated both ways.
The plot is finished: now thanks for your thousand pound sir.
You are mine own; welcome into my bosom.
Whoop, who oomes here, my brother Tim dressed like Ma∣ster Majors wife of Taunton-Deane.
Tic all I could get to scope with out of the cozning house; and all I have to show of four hundred pound; but this certificate and this small jewel which my dying mother ga'me; and I had much ado to hide it from the Cheaters, to bring unto mine Uncle; which is he?
Lets see your token Sir.
This is a jewel that I gave my Audrey.
That was my mother.
And that's your father he says.
And a gentleman? what a devilish deal of money might I ha saved! for gentle-men let me tell you, I have been cozened black and blew; backe-guld and belly-guld; and have nothing left me but a lit∣tle bare Complement to live upon, as I am a clear gentleman.
Will you bestow some of it upon me.
Uncle you shall: First isle give you a hit at single Rapier com∣plement: and then a wipe or two with the Back-sword Complement and I ha done.
Pray begin.
Noble Mr. Striker the grave Magistrate (if my apprehension deal fairly with me) whose praises reach to Heaven, for the fair distribution of equal justice: the poor mans Sanctuary, the righter of Widows, and the Orphans wrongs.
Enough, enough, you have said very well.
Note you yond justice sits upon the Bench?
Yes, I do note him.
The Stocks were fitter for him: the most corrupted fellow
about the Suburbs, his conscience is stewed in Bribes, all his poor neigbours curse him; tic though the keeps a whore now at three score.
A very Western Southsayer, thou art mine own.
His Niece is much suspected.
Nay there you went too far, this is his Niece, and my daughter now.
I know no Niece he has, I speak but backsword complement.
You put me well in mind though, here's one, that ere the Par∣son and we part, isle make an honest woman.
And for your part sir Hugh, you shall make satisfaction, and bring in your Confederates.
Here's one that came to complain of me for my Robes here, but I ha lost my small acquaintance.
Isle answer for him too, &amp; give you al the satisfaction that I can
What you cannot shall be remitted, we have all our faults.
And have I found thee Beck in so good company?
I Jack, be you jealous no more, and I will long no more to vex rhee.
Live lovingly and honestly I charge you, or come not at me when I am married.
This yonker isle take care for,
And make him a new gentleman by new breeding,
Without the Diet, bathing, purge, or bleeding.
Sweet Sir I thank you.
Isle home again then and make Tanton ring on it.
Our quarrel in this piece of folly ends.
He parted us, and he has made us friends.
Nephew, and Gentlemen, I am friends with all,
You had your plot upon me, I had mine.
Lets in, and end all differences in wine.
AT first we made no boast, and still we fear,
We have not answered expectation here,
Yet give us leave to hope, as hope to live,
That you will grace, as well as Justice give.
We do not dare your Judgments now: for we
Know lookers on more then the Gamsters see;
And what ere Poets write, we Act, or say,
Tic only in your hands to Crown a Play.

ARe the Galleys come from Rhodes?
Yes, Sir; they arrived this evening.
Then w'are all in readiness; and if the gods smile upon us, those proud Sisters shall find they have pulled down fire by playing with my anger; thus to pretend a vow to peace, and feign a Law by which they're bound not to arm but in their own defence: come, it was treacherously designed; and since in our greatest danger they could leave us to that sudden ruin that then threatened all our Nation with a foreign yoke, they shall find (now our virtues have wrought through that storm) what enemies we can be, whose friendship they have despised; till in their bosoms I have thrown all those miseries of war, whose single name was such a terror to them; but whore's our Sister? did you call her, Cleon?
She went this evening, in her Galley, to take the air.
When she returns tell her, I must speak with her.—And (do you hear?) Eumenes! let all things be in readiness to put to sea, with the morning tide. The wind stands fair still?
Yes, Sir; the wind's south.
What said the Captain of the Galley that you took, had they notice of our intent?
Yes, Sir; he says they had intelligence, but they are so unprepared for war that the knowledge was no advantage; they received it as men stabbed in their sleep, that wake only to find their dangers certain.
Their falsehoods have begot their fears, and now like co∣wards they fall upon their own swords. Eumenes, let the slaves be well fed to night.
FLy Madam, save your self while we with our faiths op∣pose the pursuers; for know, Philon will lay his body a willing sacrifice to intercept your danger.
Oh Cozen, which way shall we take? I know not where we are; why did you land here? he durst not have pursued us to the harbour; my Brothers fleet, now in readiness to depart, would have protected us.
This way the slave ran that went to call for aid. 
Hark, Madam, w'are pursued; it is now no time to talk, upon my life, it is Gillippus, and the bold Pirate I fear knows the value of the prize he hunts.
They come, take some other way, and try if you can divert their chase whilst we take Covert in these woods.
FOllow Mates, for we have in chase the wealth of King∣doms; one whose maiden mine the gods would dig in, nor has her virgin earth been wounded yet for that precious me∣tal, but keeps her Indies still unconquered; if we gain her, we need sail no more to find uncertain fates; she's prize enough.
Slip not this opportunity then; you know not how long fortune will Court us; which path took she?
I know not; let us divide our selves; I'll take this.
Hipparchus, Hipparchus; what glorious things were those that fled us, as if we durst hurt 'em?
They were handsome women, man.
Were they but women?
But women! no, but women.—What ail'st thou?
I'm sure they are more then man; for I never saw any of that sex that made me tremble, yet these did; and with a cold fear the memory dwells in my breast still.
What? thunder-struck by a woman! courage, man.
Black eyes though they lighten yet they do not use to shrink our  hearts in the scabbard.
These do not use to fight, do they?—If they do, by all  the gods, they'll conquer me; oh Hipparchus, do not mock my misery; but tell me, hast thou seen many such? are such forms usual amongst'em? this has Medusas power, in a beauteous form, and I am changed to weeping Marble.
By this good day, he's in love; could I be so, how hap∣pie should I be; for I have been pretty lucky in the sex; and could I have loved all that I have lain with, what a share of heaven should I have had?—Look how he stands now! Pausanes! what dost mean, let fall thy weapon when thou pursu'st a Wench?
A Wench! what's that? I thought of none.
What is a Wench? why, the greater part, and the hand∣somest; and that they are not the better part of woman, is yet to be disputed.
How can thou distinguish 'em? how dost thou know a Wench?
How do I know'em? several ways, but the best and certain'st, is by feeling 'em.
But that I know from our rocking in the Cradle it still has been so, I should wonder how we two came to be friends; ther's such contrarieties even in our natures, that both looking on one and the same heavenly form, we should thus from the same subject draw such different thoughts; for whilst I was Philosophy∣sing upon her diviner part, and preparing how to worship her, thou were casting to pollute her; but, prithee tell me, were it not better to find those beauties that adorn her, the clothing of a perfect goddess, then such a falling image?
Faith, in serious thoughts (which handsome women ought not to be mingled with) worship is a good thing; but to have them worship me I should think were better.—But, prithee put off this serious discourse now; this is no time to talk when we have such prey in chase.
Fare thee well; but that I know thee stout, faithful to thy friend, and one that speaks worse of himself then any other dares, I'd tear thee from my bosom; but when I know this, and how strictly thou wilt pay thy vows to honour, thou shalt dwell for ever here.
YOu are very fair; let that remove your wonder, how I dare again gaze upon that excellence.—Why do you frown? is it your innocence, or your beauty, that you mi∣struck?  that thus you arm your self with anger to defend you: Pray leave to be an enemy, you see that could not protect you.
No, Monster; it is not to see thee play thy part that troubles me; but to think that heaven fails in hers, thus to leave virtue without a guard, while lust and rapine grow strong in mis∣chief; as if the innocent were created white, only to be fit to take the murderers purple.
As you have mercy remove that threatening danger;  that ruin in your curled brow, and in justice (which your anger cannot know) weigh my action and cross fate together; then call to mind how severely I was punished for a single fault, a fault that my love pleaded for, but did not excuse; and when you have found that blot in my story, if you are equal you must confess all my life, to that hour, paid you an humble and a faithful service, and to the King my Master a ready hand, and a loyal heart; nor could he urge any thing against my pretence, but that I was born his subject; yet that I could willingly have undergone, and all things else but your scorn, which still left me to my despairs, I had else waited my fortune, and not by force attempted to have gained my wishes.—Oh Madam, had you not bowed me that way, but tried what I could have suffered for you, not from you, it would have started your soft soul to have seen me suffer that would through a thousand hazards have courted your favour till I had fallen your Beauties Martyr.
Away; thy oily tongue, nor bloody hand can prevail, thy slattery and thy force; I am by my resolutions above both, for Love and his soft fire thou never felt it, nor know that god but by the name: These thy false stoopings conclude thou can not worship, that thus durst again by force attempt me; that heart that truly loves nobly suffers; and knows that god of passion is to the longing soul both the hunger and the food; and if his hey∣ven be not reached by knees, their hands dare not, nay cannot; yet may thou live to love, and me, I wish it not to glory in, but to punish thee.
Are you so resolved? then I'll kneel no more; but frow∣ning gather all thy sweets; begging Lovers teach women a way to deny,  which else they durst not know—(A slave there) Hippar∣choose, take to your charge this fair folly, and as your eyes look to  her; let not her face betray your faith; away, I say, convey her to the Galley, there my Empire will begin.
Think thou thy threats can fright me? no, I cannot so much doubt the care of heaven, as to think that power, whose providence considers the fall of every little Bird, will sleep now, and o'resee the ruin of a Kingdom; no, Monster, I defy thee.
Away to the Galley; there, when we have got the booty, I'll meet you.
It is a lovely form; with what a scorn she bears her fortune!
Sir, I am but a stranger to you; yet if you durst disobey this bad man, and give me freedom, I will not say I can reward such a benefit; but I am certain I can be grateful; can you do it?
If I durst be dishonest, Madam, I think I could.
Dishonest, Sir! if it were not mine own cause I would dispute the act; but since'tis for my self, I'll urge no more; for know I can with less pain be a prisoner then twice beg my free∣doom; obey him, Sir.
With pain and blushes, Madam, I shall.
Ha! it is she, and bound, Hipparchus! whither dost thou lead that innocence?
Our Captain delivered her to me, with command to car∣rye her to the Galley.
Hold, Hipparchus, at what price hast thou accepted this unbecoming office? it is not like thy self; the brave hunter dotes not upon the quarry; nor had Hipparchus wont to fight for spoil.
Nor do's he now; nor ever shall so faulty a conquest hang upon my name as to make me blush the victory: She was de∣levered me a prisoner by our Captain, as the Jewel of his soul; and she can witness that to my faith he left the securing her to the Galley; and Pausanes knows Hipparchus dares not break a trust.
Alas! thou mistake this service; for to do this act is breaking trust with heaven; thou break with the gods, thou break with them that gave thee credit for thy courage, and thine honour, and sent thee forth their Soldier to fight for them; and this is their day of Battle; here's the virtue on whose side thou ought to bleed, the innocence in whose cause they bid thee dye to live a conqueror with them; now thou fliest, now thou run away; Hipparchus flies, meanly vanquished, as if by a panic fear terror-struck, for he is beaten by a mistake, and conquers for his enemy, while he loses his same at home.
Hold, what means Pausanes thus with injurious words to wound his friend?
I injure thee! I wound Hipparchus! I throw a scandal upon my friend! ye gods strangely punish Pausanes when he do's so.
What do you less, when you upbraid me for my faith, and with art of words labour to make me appear faulty? as if you did not know the law by which we are bound is not alike with freemen; we are his slaves, and for our loyalty have been re∣warded with these privileges above our fellows; would have me kill the cause of his bounty, and in justice, for my treachery, become a slave, and make that which was my fate my punish∣meant? I tell thee, Pausanes, I could not be free here, should I do this act.
Defend me, ye powers, from this youth; his honour brings greater dangers then the traitors bands. Sir, pray plead  no more for me.
Thou see how tamely I have pleaded, and in calmness urged my reasons; once again, by our wounds and blood so oft to∣gether shed that their mixtures have in their fall upon the earth  begot a kind of kindred, by all our miseries which still have been allied, by our friendship I conjure thee, give me her freedom.
I see thou hottest me, else my Reasons would prevail, and thou would leave to prefer a Prisoner or a Face before thy Friend, and his faith given; and therefore know, though your friendship do plead, when it is thus wilfully against mine Honour, I can be deaf.
Thou can be any thing, and I can weep to find it: Ye Gods! would I have used Hipparchus thus?—O Heavens! that ever I should call thee Friend!—Hipparchus, stay; I have one  Argument still left, unbinde her or guard yourself.
Pausanes!
Your Sword.
Hear me speak.
No words, her freedom or your Sword.
Why then I draw; and Pausanes knows I will not be beaten into an opinion; and since thou hast drawn thy Sword I will not yield her, my honour forbids me. Thou art injurious to think thy force can prevail beyond thy Reason and thy friendship; for I tell thee, Pausanes, thy anger should not start me if I could make thee an Enemy.
Defend your self.
Will you yet give me leave to be faithful?
No, Hipparchus hunts his will, not his faith.
As you have honour hold, and let a Virgins tears that shall fall to Seas divide your anger but till my Prayers can confirm your friendship.
Look upon her tears and these wounds, whose anguish thy friendship not thy sword brings, and then weigh the act: I would thou had been ten Enemies rather than one Friend, to have disputed this cause.
MAke all possible speed aboard with the Booty, they pursue us close—Command Hipparchus and Pau∣sanes ashore to guard us; Tell 'em our Scouts are beaten in, and the Kings party presses upon us—Ha! what means this? What makes she ashore?
That which thou can not make aboard; she has made an honest man; and if thou dare make another she may have two Friends.
Hipparchus, resolve this Riddle.
This woman whom you gave to my trust Pausanes would have released; and when his Arguments, as Friend, could not pre∣vail, meanly, he threw off his faith, and by force attempted to take her from me.
Slave, did I for this prefer thee when at the Sack of Tunis thou become my Prisoner, and by thine own confession were a thing without a name, and could neither from men nor country
claim a being? now thy Treachery shall make thee as dark an Exit as thy base soul had entrance.
I scorn thy threats, from this death I shall begin to live; till now I lay wrapped in rust, and the Canker fed upon my fame; from this act I shall adopt a name which till this minute I despaired of since that fatal day in which old Perseus fell, in whom only lived that knowledge we so hunt for; and Hipparchus, if thou con∣tinuest thou'lt be ashamed to find. For the bounties thou urge, Gillippus, what were they but making us a better kind of Slaves, commanded Commanders, impaling our free souls so that we could employ but one virtue, our courage, since we served thee; and that has thrown us into dangers honour would be ashamed to own, and brought wounds that leave these blushing scars. This, when Hipparchus has let fall his passion, will make him tremble to find he could not fear but bleed for a Traitor, and struck against a virgins honour, and in his rage sold his Friend to buy his will: Then, then, Hipparchus, the wounds thou now art proud of will  hang upon thee with more dishonour than thy Chains; for me, I smile at the chance; for though I have mist my first freedom yet I have found my last wounds.
Ha!
Villain, hast thou not yet enough laid open thy treacherous soul? Art not satisfied to be false thy self, that thus thou labour to shake his tried faith? Hipparchus, kill him, kill even his memo∣rye, that the ungrateful Slave may fall like a Dog, and leave no name behind him—yet hold, he shall not die so nobly, nor find such  mercy in his fall: Hipparchus, Strip the Slave, and upon a Tree stretch the Traitor's body; there let him hang alive like the con∣damned fruit to the fruitless Tree, doomed thither to live a death; and would count that Murder that threw him there Mercy, if it would come and break the snare.
Bloody Villain, dare thou command this with a belief thou should be obeyed? What is he that has so much Hell about him, that dares execute what thy bloody rage imposes?
Gentle Soul, plead not for Pausanes, nor grudge him this glorious end; for now I fall, what I could not have lived with him, Honour's servant.
Away with him, and see it done; or by the Gods he pulls his own fate down that disputes it.
He that trembles at death let him die; it is just. Hold—Sir, witness my wounds, I dare be loyal; and when my faith was given I swam through the Straights of Friendship to serve you; yet though I did this, because my faith was given, and Honour told me I was in the right; Do not think I will be so faulty to my Friend as to start at your frown more than his sword, or be fright∣ed to the Murder of my Brother.
Ha! what's this?
No, Gillippus, I have no such aguey courage, nor comes my honour so by fits. Know, though I durst not break my trust, yet. I
dare disobey your impious commands: nor can you call it Trea∣cheri when to your face I disavow it: Frown not, for whilst I have mine old guide, Honour, there's no act brings so dark a hazard but Hipparchus will strike a fire from it shall light him through.
My Rage, whither wilt thou hurl me? Draw, Mates.—Villains, though my anger has lost her tongue, yet her hands are  left still; and those in wounds shall print on your wretched bodies my Revenge.
There, defend thy self; Fear not, Madam, these are our Enemies.
Now I have my wish.
At this rate take it.
Think thou I would not buy her freedom when my blood could purchase it? Have I lived as if I feared wounds? thou can scarce be mine Enemy after this favour. O that I could kiss it, thou should kill me ere I would take my lips from it.
For what fate I am reserved I know not, but I am re∣solved to shun this if it be possible—Help, Rape, Murder, Mur∣der.
Bind these, and pursue the rest. Sister, well met, Come you along with me.
YOu are my Sister, but I beg you will urge me no more; thy softness was betrayed, and because they were pe∣nitent thou though them innocent; I tell thee, Lysimella, if they could have hoped to have born thee hence thou should have seen Lust and Pride flow naturally in them; it was their fear made them fawn; Away with them to the Galley.
Our fears?
Had we escaped misfortunes till we met fears, thy Army, King, might have found a Grave ere they had seen us bound; and to let thee see we have no shaking souls, this threatened misery shall not make us or fear or fawn on thee.
Peace, Hipparchus, let him see us die ere touch an Oar; twill resolve him what we dare do.
Has my Brother lost all his nature? Then I shall not wonder that I have lost the interest of a Sister. Can you be a King and have  neither mercy nor justice? Farewell; henceforth I may obey but ne'er approve your acts—Hold, Sortanes; Sir, look upon their
wounds; ye gods! ought any thing that chance owns make men fall so low that we esteem'em less than beasts? See, they bleed still; Can you leave'em like Dogs to lick these wounds, whose every drop of blood, I can witness, fell a sacrifice to honour: O it is a fault, a fault (I fear) the Gods will punish; as if men in misery had no souls, or slaves did not upwards look.
Hold, Sortanes, unbinde 'em. Sister, they are your Pri∣sonars, and as you please dispose of 'em, and think not my nature cruel, or that I frowned upon them, for Kings do often so upon the fault when they pity the man; yet if I get the head of this Serpent, Gillippus, he shall find our justice with its full weight but we'll crush him.
Now I kneel to you, Sir.
What means my Sister? Rise, my occasions give me leave only to say Farewell; this accident has retarded me some hours beyond my resolution. Till my return my power I leave with thee, my Sister—And Philon, obey her as my self.
The Gods guide and bless the King.
Sortanes, command the Officers aboard, and give order the Galleys be all loose with the next Tide.
Cousin Philon, pray let your care provide for those men.
O Hipparchus, I am lost ere I have found my self, and have fought for bonds; Come my Friend.
That title confirms my life; for now I find my rage did not destroy my self, and through thy wounds let out thy friend∣ship, with joy I live to redeem my fault.
O Hipparchus! This be my witness, thy friendship grows here, nor were thou faulty at all to me, nor do I want an Argue∣meant  for what I did; thou had Reason, and I had Love to plead; Love whose power yet thou never felt; but when thou shalt find he is undiscerned got in, and in thy bosom displays his fiery wings, then like me with all that light thou'lt find thou arti'th' dark, and thus stoop to a willing yoke, sighing for what thou would not part with. These, these, Hipparchus, are the wounds I fear; those the Sword makes are remedies, and if deep enough bring a certain Cure.
This way, Gentlemen.
We shall follow, Sir.
NOble Gillippus, thus to venture your self and fortunes in our hazard is an obligation we know not how to pay; for the preparation you speak of brings our certain ruin, if by treaty we cannot appease his fury.
Pray, Madam, from whence springs his anger?
It is just you know the cause of this War that thus venture your self into the dangers of it: this Island blessed beyond our Neighbours with a fruitful peace drew us into a consideration how we came to be so happy; and in the search we found Ambi∣tion had no dwelling here: for our custom admits no one man chief, which kept all from that sin: our Government is here in the hand of a Priest and Judge, which are chosen by lot, not facti∣on; and their power remains to them during life, if they obey our Laws; the breach of one of which Laws has begot this danger; for when our Predecessors made their vow to peace, a Law was then enacted to prohibit our taking Arms but in our own de∣fence.
This Law the King credits not; for when we returned it as the Reason that forbad us to yield that aid to him he then im∣plor'd, he says we urged it but to hide our Treachery, and con∣cludes we assisted his Enemy because we would not fight for him; so that now having laboured through that storm that threatened Si∣cily his rage bends this way.
And at a time when we have neither Arms nor Counfel to defend us: now, Madam, the punishments your Fathers have called down pursue us banished for abusing the Oracle and trust reposed in them. Theagines being chief Judge and Memnon chief Priest of this Island, their Counsel and your Brothers swords were aids, which we shall best find when to our despairs we feel the want.
Yet let us not quit our selves when we must fall; the dearer we sell our lives the greater fame will wait us; nor have our men forgot to fight, though we have left to invade.
Spoke like a Soldier: How is the Town fortified towards the Harbour? for there your danger will begin.
It is no regular Fortification, yet it is in defence.
Madam, I beseech you remove your fears, they are ill omens here: Speak, Courage, you know not what Miracles we may act; the night comes on apace, pray retire to your rest, while Cremno∣field, Dion and my self, go set the Watch, and provide for the enter∣tainment of these strangers that come so rudely without in∣viting.
We'll go and join our strength of prayer with our Arms, which I hope will protect us, though they fail to conquer them.
I'll but order my Galleys to join with yours, and be ready in the Harbour to board 'em as they come straggling in, then I'll meet you upon the Guard.
Eucratia is the Word to night, Farewell.
Farewell, shallow Fools. Think ye Gillippus will sell his blood for airy honour? No, it is Revenge or the satisfying some other Lust engages; me therefore, I'll to my Galley, and while this dark protects us command Zenon to launch from the Harbour, and in a little Creek lie loose and undiscovered with his Galley, it is wis∣doom to secure a Retreat; nor will I again put my happiness in the power of Slaves whose Treachery wracked my soul, and deprived
me of the pleasures I had promised to my self, in the embraces of the fair Lysimella: but these faces have removed that pain; for he that like me loves beauty, where ever he meets it sows his Love, and when he enjoys it reaps his Mistress.
WAs the Fleet within sight of Land this morning?
Yes, Madam, they hung about the Isle of Asmarae these four days, kept back by contrary Winds.
When returns the Galley that came from my Brother?
This Tide she puts off.
This opportunity then will advance my Design. Have you fitted those Prisoners with a Disguise?
Yes, Madam.
Hark, what's that, a Lute? Are they musical?
One of 'em plays and sings.
Prithee, let's hear.
FOnd Pausanes, let not thy Love aspire
To a hope of coming higher:
But let thy faith grow under a Cloud
Of being not allowed.
And still pursue thy Love till she like well
To know it, but thou not tell:
Next thy care must be, she not perceive
Thou believe sh'has given leave:
Thy love and sufferings thus being humbly told,
And not a sigh too bold,
Nor with a look speak, or let a fear be proud
To be discerned, lest thou love too loud.
Whilst fairly thus thou dost thy love pursue,
Pretending nothing due:
Who knows but that in time her heart may grow
To wish thee well whether she will or no?
By such soft steps as these and slow degrees,
And ever on his knees,
Pausanes still shall approach his bliss,
But not come near enough to miss:
But at a distance look and love;
And see Lysimella far above:
Yet not wish her descending to my sense,
Or hope of meeting but by influence.
Call him hither.—Now, Lysimella, arm thyself with  resolution, that thy sex may not still be called weak, nor thou yield to thy passion, lest this god in a cloud deceive thee, and force thee with his yieldings; he sings his actions, and acts his opinions, which makes him a dangerous friend here; he's one that bold∣lie dares, yet humbly loves; he struck his Master, and bowed to me; and when his rage had filled his eyes with fire, he sighing turned, and looking this way, in languishing streams quenched their rising flames.—Oh power of honour! that makes this gal∣lant in him, and honour in me not to return his love; it starts me to find honour pleased still to confound our Reason; and impose upon us an obedience to her Laws, when Nature and Reason plead against it; but see, they come.
DO thou speak, while I collect my self; yet do not, why should I refuse by my disorder to speak her power? if  she deserve my love, I'm certain she may command my fears; nor is it a dishonour to shake here, it is not, I tell thee, Hipparchus, it is not; these are valiant fears, and I'll speak to her even what my heart sends out; for by my life, all that I resolved of I have quite forgot.
But do not rashly tempt her to a scorn.
Scorn! Oh no, Hipparchus! if ever her softness hath felt Loves power she knows his proper language is free prose, and their distractions wrap the powerfull'st truth; confined Verse tells us they are too much themselves, nor is he afflicted who can com∣pose his sufferings.—See where she stands.
Rise, your freedom is the bounty of another, and the thanks not due to me; I sent for you to tell you my Brother is now upon a design for Sardinia, but has been staid by cross winds, so that you may o'retake him ere he lands, in a Galley which this morning is bound for him, and in this disguise striking on his party unknown, pay his bounty.
Arm us, Madam, and you shall hear how deep we'll plow, how thick we'll sow their wounds too, but we'll reap the honour, my mistake has lost me in striking against your virtue; and now we are friends so that Pausanes and Hipparchus undivided draw, I think we shall not easily be overcome; for give me leave to say we are not often conquered but by our selves: and then though Pausanes be victor, Hipparchus triumphs.
We can be grateful, Madam, though not fortunate.
That's my Q. pray, let me be thankful too, lest you think I can only counsel it: within this Cabinet I believe is in value as much  as my person would have yielded at a Mart, if it be less, it is the mo∣dest opinion I ought to have of mine own worth makes me faulty
in the sum; for any other consideration take this too. 
It is just, Madam, that you throw this scorn on me; for I confess the fault looked as if I had fought for money: which open∣neon my refusal now I hope will remove.
Pray take it; why should you receive wounds for me?
I do not let my self out to dangers, nor is it my trade to fight: wounds and blood are neither my daily labour nor the sweat of my brow; they are honours and pay themselves: if I have courage, it is a gift the gods sent me freely, and as their blessing freely I'll dispense it.
Your pardon, Sir, I meant no injurious upbraiding, for by my life I do not think you faulty: if you will not be rewarded, yet give me leave to supply your wants.
I kiss your charity.
What to give him I know not; Oh unequal Law, that binds us women, and forces me to let him perish, because I know how to save him! I must not stay, I know you're friends, and what the one has is but the others store, I wish ye may be fortunate. My last words, ever I knew what you were.
O stay! unbind me ere you go; and hear my soul laboured with admiration of your beauties; but since I was blessed with know∣ledge of your diviner part, all your acts from honour sprung have collected those sparks your eyes kindled; and they are blown to a flame here, here it burns, and though this Altar (divinest) be built upon the meanest earth, scorn it not; for my offering shall be of the purest love; and my sighs shall constant incense breathe.
What thou might have done I know not; but I'm sure thou can not now, thou hast said too much: Go fight, fight, for thou know not how to love. Oh woman, woman, woman still!
Not love! what stranger then is this that's got in here, and wanders so to seek; not love! it is he or cowardice crept in, no third cause can beget the fears, the tremblings I labour with; Oh! teach me how to know him.
That stranger when thou meet him at the eye thou wilt find he is conceived in fire, and in an instant grows to perfect form; thence in fullness of time he takes his birth into the heart which is his world; there if he prove a healthy love he lives in silence, the tongue has no part 'ith birth of gallant loves; nor are they long lived that make their Exits that way; the true births of love know no delivery. But where they took their life through the eye, this is love: thine a short-lived passion, I fear.
My passions are no faults, Madam, when I master 'em; when we do not serve them we command admiration; or should I yield to 'em, could any passion be unbecoming that has so beauti∣full a cause as the fair Lysimella, who (I fear) has been used to such He∣catombs of hearts, that my single one being but a slaves might well be scorned at your shrine; yet if you be that power that my thoughts have worshipped, you must confess he that offers all, though a beggar, sacrifices equal to a King. O turn not from me, but be 
like those gods you bow to, which though they give and guard  our flocks, yet accept a Lamb.
Plead no more, if thou love thou wilt prefer me; I must not, dare not understand, I am too much a party to hear him  plead.
O do not show the several ways you have to wound: may the fire for ever inhabit in those eyes, but do not in frowns dart it this way.
Be gone then. And consider what thou suest for, a slave by his passion crowned, and a Princess by her enthroned.
Do but believe I love, it is all I beg; strike me heaven, if I have so faulty a wish as to attempt the unshrining such a power, or would live to see your beauty fall from this vast national adored condition, to make them my petty household god. O say! do you believe I love?
Yes, yes; I believe and fear.
O continue that friendly faith; I'll at a distance kneel, for it is a wealth I'll pray for, fight to keep, and weep to part with: and if that way of obtaining, that way of keeping, and this sense of  loss asked with a whole heart, and with a whole heart defended, but parted from with a broken one, can confirm it, all joys.
Peace, be gone. Lysimella collect thy self, for thou art lost. O ye gods, would ye had given more, or that I had known less of honour.
Hipparchus, my friend, I find my misery, and conjure thee that if thou out-live us, steal some of my ashes into her Urn, that in our earth being become equal we may become one.
This is strange, yet it is the best kind of anger; and the storm is to friend, if I can judge a woman.
EVmenes, now the Soldiers are landed let 'em be drawn  into Battalion; we'll charge this instant, and not give 'em leave at land to collect their loss at sea.
They were Gillippus's Galleys that boarded us; yet I saw not the Pluto there; her brazen Prow had wont with the earliest to bathe in blood her Proserpine.
That injury hath brought some fuel to my rage, to see they have given harbour to that traitor, that twice has attempted the rape of my Sister; and in advowance of his fault, in his Prow he wears the hellish president for that black deed.
Lose no time then, but while they are scattered with their
dangers, and their fears strike for us, let us bring that justice their treacheries have called down.
Away, every man to his charge.
Oh Hipparchus, the joy to find Gillippus here has dispersed all my sad thoughts. Ye powers that rule our fates! if Pausanes have any of you to friend, give me Gillippus, this day, within my swords reach.
So, now my friend speaks like himself; and when thou strik'st not at thy self, thou stand safe; but hark we must away. 
THis is no time to talk now; they have begirt the Town, and will instantly attempt to storm it, the immediate danger calls for resistance, not counsel; Dion, go you to the gate that's next the harbour; and, Cremnofield, take you the charge of the Princess's persons; I'll to that Port against which the Kings Standard is advanced; if we must fall, let us not go out faintly.
The gods protect us.
It was Gillippus; he fled, and left me to the multitude; Oh Hipparchus, pursue the chase, and if thou overtak'st him, thou'lt find the coward embossed with running from me; if thou can set him up, Bay him till I come; and as thou love me, let me not lose the honour of his fall.
Are you sure he's this way?
Yes, yes; I'm certain it was he.
THey have forced the Town, and there's no hope of safety, unless I can recover my Galley, S'death; I am accursed of late; I hunt nothing but unprofitable wounds.—  Ha! Leucanthe, the Princess! as I could wish; yet if fortune would smile, here were a prize would heal all my unlucky wounds.
Oh Gillippus, w'are lost, our lives, our honours and our gods, subject to the rage of the common Soldier.
Will you venture then to follow me? if we can gain the Port I have a Galley may secure you.
Oh guide me; which way, noble Gillippus?
Come Zenon, follow, for there's no abiding here; hell I think fights on their side, for it was nothing less then a devil that forced, and then pursued me through our Guards; By day it self, he struck as sure as if he had been the fate he brought; my flight could scarce out-strip his conquest.
They pursue us still; away, lose no time.
THis way, this way, Eumenes, the gallant Reapers went; sure by this their sickles are dulled, and their hands weary with griping such full victory; when the word was given they charged through their fellows, and like lightning scaled and leaped the wall, where once entered, cowards lose not faster then they gained ground; I was amazed to see their charge, it was as if they had flown, not fought for conquest.
They are not clothed proper for the Parts they Act; ei∣there their honour or condition is misplaced.
If they survive, this day, inquire'em out, and then, when we can reward we'll admire, now we'll assist the work.
Ha! the King! fly Madam, haste to my Galley and save your self.
Thou shalt not long impeach my stay; do you stare?
Hell take thee.
What have you, at length, found daring to look upon the dangers? is the dead-doing Zenon, so famed for his bold deeds?
Yes Euemenes, Pelius dares, though Zenon durst not; do's the name of Pelius start thee? know, false man, all thy dar∣ings cannot protect thee from the justice this brings, for the inju∣ries  thou did me during the Treaty here, when thou sought aid for thy ambitious Master.
What act of mine during that time were you con∣corned in.
Hast thou forgot the fair Zenonia? methinks the half I borrow, for my disguise, from that name, should prompt thy soul to a remembrance of the vows, the false vows thou made her.
False vows?
Yes, boasting her the conquest of thy vanity; when with thy perjured breath thou beg for that thou valu'dst not, merely to affront my passion which pursued her with all those truths of love, thou feignedst; yet never reaped a harvest for all my pains. But this is not the injury that wakes my anger; it is thy scorn, not thy love of her engages me to think it should be in any mortals power to scorn that deity which I sacrifice to.
How do you know I scorn her?
Say thou dost not; say thou wilt return and pay those vows of love, and by all our gods I'll kneel to thee; for if thou'lt love again (although my Rival) her love shall guard thee, and from henceforth thou shalt be my friend; but if thou proceed thus to triumph in her miseries (whose pains I feel, though she be insane∣ble of mine) thou shalt find, though I cannot entreat her love, yet I can force Revenge from her darkest Caves.
What do's Pelius see about Eumenes, that he should take him for a fool or coward; thus to think I would trust a Rival, or fear an enemy? and now I know the reason of thy hate, if thou should swear thou art my friend, I'd tell thee thou least; if mine enemy, why, I do not care.
Do you slight my proffered friendship? do you believe this language?
Yes, I understand it, and you shall find it by the answer I'll make.
This ring was hers, and shall witness I have punished his falsehood.—Gillippus wounded!
Yes, Zenon, but not slain, and yet the King struck home; I found it was folly to resist his force, unless I could have conquered his whole Army; and therefore wisely I preserved my self for better days.—Saw thou the Princess Leucanthe since?
Yes, she's fled toward the West-port.
Who's this? Eumenes fallen! well, pursue Leucanthe, gen∣tle Zenon; and if thou findst her tell her of my escape, say thou left'st me aboard the Galley; and if she know not where her Sister Eucratia is, tell her she's with me, who negligent of her own dan∣ger impatiently expects her coming to the Galley, where I'll go and wait your coming.
Yes, I'll go, but not to assist thy treachery, yet I'll bring her if I can; she has an interest in Zenonia; and if I can thus bring her into dangers, my protection of her honour will endear me to her; and so engage her to be my friend to Zenonia, the thoughts of whom my soul will ever labour with.
UNhand her.
She's my prisoner, and I will not lose her.
Dare thou be a Soldier and speak that falsehood?
I first seized her, and I'll keep her.
Had thine age been able to have kept flight with me, thou should have seen me hunt her through the straights of a thou∣sand wounds, and mow down all the weeds that grew about her; yet then, then this Laurel protected by her own virtue stood safe in the midst of all that Lightning; and let me tell thee, the same cause that kept me from laying violent hands upon her makes me spare thee; it is a reverence that in some measure thy silver hairs command.
I defy thee and thy naked Chin, Talker; this plead for me, nor shalt thou find a gray Coward here; Bind her, and then we'll dispute whose she is.
Bind her! Look upon her, and then tell me on which part of that divine form thou dare hang a Chain.
I'll dispute no more, unhand her, she's my Prisoner or but Earth.
Remove from her breast that threatened danger, or by our Gods thou art Earth.
Think thou Procles will quit his aged Honours for fear of a Boy proud in his first wounds?
Boy, nay then defend thee.
I know not too which is guiltiest, but I can ill preserve mine own.
She's gone, there's something whispers to me, Protect her; I'll follow her—There, take thy Sword, I will not rob thy age in  thy fall.
I thank thee, and may thine be no less fortunate than this has been, and thou buy thy Honours at a cheaper rate.
Had I lived to have finished my Revenge on that Traitor Gillippus, and from his bosom torn the knowledge of our selves, which in a golden Relic the Tyrant wears about his neck, and still with threatened loss would a we us to our faith, then, Hipparchus, I could have died in peace.
Whither did you go to find these wounds?
In pursuit of the fair Eucratia, I followed her through all her miseries, but not with intent to add to them, but to guard her from the raging lust of the common Soldier, till at length some of her party met us, and to them I owe these wounds.
This disorderly possessing the Town will ruin us; the wounds we received since the Conquest are more than we got in the Attempt; the Cowards fears have in their despair struck deeper wounds than their courage knew how to deal. 
This way, Madam.
O Zenon, Haste, I know not which I fly to with greater zeal, my Sister or my safety; Is it far?
If you can pass the Port you're safe. Ha!
Stand, the Word?
The Word! Death, if thou refuse us passage.
Or a Virgin's thine for ever, if thou dare let my inno∣cence escape this ruin. O speak, Death and Dishonour pursue us close. O speak, Sir; Shall I pass?
Pass! Yes, fair one, I dare let you pass, and through all ha∣zards serve you; O Pausanes, live to counsel me; something like thy description I feel here.
Shall we pass, or no?
Smooth your brow, your frowns will make no way here.
My Sword shall then.
No, Zenon, thou know it never could when Hipparchus denied thee passage.
Ha! Hipparchus!
Yes, Zenon, Hipparchus; who to let this Lady see how much he dares do in her cause, he will not only give her a passage, but with it all his peace of mind, and do thou thank her for this San∣ctuary; for were it not that thou had taken hold on that Altar the Murder of Eumenes here I would have punished; but such is the power of that Deity that I can defer my hate, nay, forgive thee, if she'll confess thy Sword or Faith hath sacrificed ought to her deliverance.
He has, he has, and he only can guide me to a hope of safety. Gentle youth, the Gods reward thee—Hark, I am pursued, if thou hast power divert their rage.
Your name, leave but that to call upon in my danger, and then I'll plant my self here an Enemy to all that dare pursue your softness. O do not hide your name from me, nor leave me to bow to a Power I know not.
My name's Leucanthe, the unfortunate Leucanthe; gen∣tle youth, May all thy wishes fall upon thy head. Away Ze∣non.
Now, Hipparchus, had I Reason once?
Leucanthe, the Princess Leucanthe, is it not?
Yes, Soldier, Leucanthe, the Princess Leucanthe, Which way went she?
This way she went, Sir; but I must beg you'll not pur∣sue her.
These are the Soldiers I so much admired. Is it your ignorance, or do you wilfully strike out the reward your daring youth has this day merited?
If we are faulty it is wilful; but this act (we hope) owns no guilt.
Is it not a fault thus to blot the Conquest, whose greatest beauties are gifts of your own hands?
My soul has vowed, and I see it written yonder, not to suf∣fer any one to pass this way whilst my Sword and I can impeach their stay.
And I, though weak in body, am strong in friendship; my Friends vows shall ever be my cause.
You see our resolution, Sir, and we dare die.
And I dare fight, and thus force my passage. 
O! hold, Sir, and hear me speak.
Shall I pass?
Your self can witness what faith I brought to your cause; my charge ushered pale death about the field; and when I found him lazy and waiting upon Fate I leaped from his lean side, and with my Sword dealt more deaths than he.
Pursue that act still, and let me hunt this scornful Lady till with miseries I have made her wild heart tame, the Conquest will be perfect then.
Ell's done already; I fought to Conquest, and Cowards only strike afterwards. A Foe that flies is your Slave, and no long∣er deserves the name of Enemy.
Shall I pass?
It is ssaughter you pursue, and will stain all those honoured wounds your Conquest gave; but for this Princess, whose virtue I bow to, O, Sir, can you be so blinded with your rage as to avow a War with her?
Leave counsel and obey; Mercy and Justice are speci∣os shows, but to obey is your best Sacrifice, which if thou offer not, by mine anger I'll offer thee.
Obey! Yes; the Gods I'll obey, and strike against all that strike at them; Know, you command a Free-man, one that chose your party, and none of that number that was born under you; And yet I beseech you, Sir, attempt not your passage here; for I must not betray her safety as to defend her cause we eakly.
Are you so resolute?
O Hipparchus! hold; Remember it is the King, lift not thy hand against him; this Victory will be full of Curses. O for strength enough to part them!
This by his habit should be a Commander to him, (since I must feel the misery of bonds) I'll yield my self. Defend me, Sir, I am your Prisoner, my name's Eucratia.
Hold your Swords; he that adds another stroke to War shall feel the weight of this.
Blessed chance.
Eucratia! Are you Eucratia?
Yes, and a Princess, till thy ambitions (King) hunted me to my ruin.
O Eucratia! Soul of sweetness, that wretched King see prostrate at thy feet; and if thou can not pardon, tread upon my neck, and let thy virtues sink me to my Grave: there's something divine about thee which in an instant has from my temples torn the Laurel reward of all my bleeding wounds, and from a conquering King made me all thy Slave—Command me something.
Help, Sir, to save the Princess Leucanthe that's lost, sold to lust and rape, if you redeem her not suddenly,
Unfortunate Leucanthe, I foresaw this danger, sad Fate! O my Sister!
Leucanthe! Which way went the Ravlsher? O Sir, your pardon.
I saw Gillippus, in the Pluto, bear her from the shore.
Gillippus! it is false, pray (Madam) remove your fears, my self slew him in the battle.
O Sir, he has abused you by some wile; for on my life I saw him since your encounter.
Let me die, if this be false.
O Sir! now I claim your offer, and beg, not Command, you will not complete your Conquest, and pursue this Ravisher.
Soldier, thy faith in her cause has been already tried, Do thou provide one of the swiftest Galleys for this Expedition. Come, Madam, we'll all go to save this Innocent: Some one help this wounded Youth aboard, and see he want for no care; such virtue shines not every where.
Sir, his courage has obliged me, and he shall be my care; he found me when I was fallen into the rage of the common people.
I kiss your hands, Madam; and it is happiness enough that I have lived to serve such a virue as is seated in the fair Eu∣cratia.
Command a Cessation of Arms, and let all Acts of War cease here; for the fair Eucratia is now the Conqueror.
Urge not his condition, I must not so mistrust the Justice of those Powers I bow to as to fear they would leave me to such a scorn; a common Slave? No, Philon, if there were not chance in his condition, their tongues would have doubled under such a Load, as Love. A Slave's heart would have had too many hungry wants upon it to have found lei∣sure to have begged for Love.
This, under favour, is no Argument; and though I fear a want in their blood, yet I believe they have wit enough, and their craft perhaps took hold of some pity which your Highness shew'd'm; for under favour, Madam, your mercies were even to weakness, and but that I fear to displease you, I could say, he but returns love.—This will move her; and as my faith and duty thus low bows 
so my honour bids me defend you, especially when you have so dangerous an enemy as your passion to engage my faith against: look but upon your habit, examine the nature of this act, and you shall find you walk blinded to your honours ruin; have you not thrown off your sex, the honour of a Queen, and now appear clothed in blushes, and disguised with faults? but this were no∣thing if my fears were false, which tell me, this habit is lined with as faulty resolutions; nor can you condemn those that know you not, if they conclude you have, with your sex, thrown off your modesty too.
Oh! Jam lost for ever.
No Madam, if you stay, you're safer for this attempt, by having found your error; I confess, to this journey I carry no∣thing but obedience; had you fled to meet a plighted faith, through darkest hazards I would have waited on you; but when you fly to follow one you know not, a slave too, that perhaps flies from you. Nay grant him a Prince, can your honour be safe when you pursue? Oh, Madam, when you were your self, and from your Reason collected truth, and from that rock would in Arguments give law to Love; I have heard your powerful Rea∣sons conclude, that a Queen is safer that is pursued by a slave, if he keep the path of love, then the greatest Monarch of the earth could be, should she pursue a god; and now upon my knees I beg you would not at this rate reward the ambition of a wretch.
Oh Philon, Philon, thou art cruelly faithful, and unsensible of my sufferings; can prescribe an abstinence! but had thou my Fever upon thee thou would drink (ambition) why? say he has that Giant fault; yet it is a glorious sin, and without it not one among all the Synod of the gods had filled his seat, and it was their fears that made it sin in us; yet, in Loves Religion it is meritorious still to aspire to a Mistress; and that love that gives, but will take no Laws, has called it gentleness, not savage Nature, for a servant to leap even at the heart of his Mistress: yet thus much I'll satisfy thy faith; by the honour of my mothers ashes, he wooed first, and in such words as my resolution only could deny; and for his na∣ture, how stout, how gentle, how full of honour, judge you that were witness of his actions.
Madam, I see you are resolved, and then I know you will not want an argument; and now I know not whether it were a bless∣sing, or no, their protection brought, since you believe they love.
If thou'lt turn away I'll blush, and tell thee why I believe he loves; thou saw his friendship could not divide him from me; it made his virtues faulty passions, searching with blushing wounds an enemy in his friends breast. Oh my Cozen! when I think on this, and call to mind how for my freedom he stood as if h'ad been immortal, and intending only that, let the false Gillippus wound his stout breast, which when he will defend, none, save the thunderer, or a friend can hit; oh Philon, Philon, when I consi∣der these miracles, why should I be so wicked as to conclude him less then a god that acts 'em? and now take a secret from me (for
I will satisfy thee even with a faulty act) which may look like va∣nity; but turn thy face, and hear me; I know my Cozen is full of honour; and I know, with all that honour; he loves me, this confession I would have died with ever it should have been forced from me, but to confute th•e, for it makes thee a party here, and thy love as unfit to give counsel, as mine incapable to take it; and now I conjure thee follow and obey me, that will obey my fate; nor shall the winds that now begin in storms to plead against me, prevail; I am resolved; and this night I'll to sea, and in her greatest  depths dive to find this rich Pearl, which the wise value not the less for having a rugged shell.
Oh Madam, to be born your Kinsman was one blessing, but to find I have a friends place in your thoughts, two; and that you know I love, and not I tell it, is a joy beyond all but what your love brings; forgive me, and henceforth I'll obey not coun∣sell. Your Galley shall instantly be ready; thus I have gained all my ends in love, by having no unworthy ends upon her I love.
O Love, do thou prosper my intent, and a Virgin shall thy Priest become; and these great truths in all thy Temples shall be sung how in thy infant hand thou grip'st a bow larger then Joves; so that, when thou thy darts let fly immortality is no guard, for oft they have through his lightning shot and struck the thun∣derer: thy Religion's easy, thy Law light; for thy Tables hold but one act one Commandment; obey, and we cannot miss the way; let none then say this youthful god or cruel is, or blind, since from disobedience grows all the strange crosses and dangers that we find.
GEntly Son; lay him down, and bow him forward; more  of those waters, he stirs; so, so, chafe him still while I dry his snowy hair which the sea could not melt, it is he, strange accident! but I'll not be discovered yet.
He sighs, there's some comfort in that.
Sad condition for his age, when it is a joy to hear him sigh.
Good heaven! what do's age abroad at this time of his life?
Sure he has wandered far that has missed a resting place in his evening; and to be pitied when he's forced to seek his Inn thus late at night.
Sure he was of some Religious Order, by his habit.
No matter for his habit, pull it off, and fetch him my gray Coat; dry now is better then rich.
Which opinion if he had held, perhaps his had been dry now. 
Good heaven, what a night's here! this evening pro∣missed dangers, but not like this; sure this Bark was one of that
Fleet that we saw off the Point last night, if we can recall life, he may inform us who they were.
He stirs, and sighs still.
Wretched, wretched Theagines; what mercy is this at length has found thee? was my self only saved of all this wrack?
All else perished.
Oh! that I had missed this charity too! my friend, aged Perseus, my Brother, brave Memnon, and my Son, the hopeful Pausanes, all these my former losses have robbed me of my griefs, which else these poor men would have required of me; O equal heaven! thy abused Oracle, and breach of vows, thou now but be∣ginn'st to punish. Father, by thy habit thou art vowed unto the gods; if then like me thou'lt not be punished for perjury, again de∣liver me to the doom they appointed, and in the watery womb of the Sea entomb me.
Oh, Sir; despair not; they appoint us better then we can choose, and in our greatest fears surprise us with their mercies.
Hear but what I am, and thou'lt be afraid to harbour me; for where ere I go, there vengeance pursues me; my name's Theagines, once Judge of Sardinia, and blessed with all that men call happiness; Children, Wealth, and power to save or destroy where I lived, and though our State forbad Kings, all but that name I possessed; my Brother too, whom they have punished, reigned chief Priest when I ruled as Judge, equal in our births, equal in our blessings, in our power equal, and in our faults too alike guilty, but not alike punished; for he I fear is lost for ever; but the fault which now they are busy in punishing, is this; it was enjoined by our Predecessors, as a grateful offering to peace, under whose protest∣on we found such benefits as all our neighbouring Countries want∣ed; that it should not be lawful for any to take up arms but in their own defence, nor upon pain of perpetual banishment send their Sons abroad, lest they might bring home the dangerous customs of other Countries; this law was made, and with it vows of the strictest ties; this vow we vowed, and to this Law with oaths were bound.
What danger could that bring you?
O Father, this Law we broke; and the curse of this vow pursues us; for know, we had each of us a Son and Daugh∣la; which blessings made us covetous to have our Sons succeed us in our honours; and therefore thought to breed them abroad, where they might learn'to rule: thus by ambition blinded we abused the Oracle, and told the people it was the will of the gods our Sons should be sent abroad; and I affirmed if they command∣ed, the Law assented. Then to the charge of a faithful friend we gave our children, who were so young they knew not them∣selves what they were, with a command to breed 'em fit to be Princes; but neither to the world nor themselves discover that they were so. Long this fault lay not hid, for the abused Oracle unasked complains, and to the incensed people tells our falsehood; by them we were banished, never to return till we had found our
Sons, which was some mercy; but alas! Fate was juster then the people; for our Sons are lost, my friend dead, and my Brother in our Pilgrimage by a strange accident divided from me. Now ought I to hope for mercy, or wish to out-live these losses?
As yet you are not secured that these are losses; nor has any assured you they are dead; therefore defer this sadness, and let me lead you into my Cabin.
Oh let me lean upon thy aged shoulder; for I have a load will sink me.
Do, do; sad time when I can be a stay to a Prince! Son  make a fire upon the shore, that if any wretch unfortunate be cast upon this loan place, they may see it and repair hither; twill be some comfort to find we have charity.
THe gods protect us, and recall this judgment, 
Hence, ye dogs, leave your howling; S'death, have we lived as if we hoped for mercy, or expected protection from our prayers? be gone, and endeavour; every wise man rules his stars, and may defer that fate which prayer cannot alter, see if I have not lost my power? why stay ye? who plies the Pump now, she'll founder through the slaves negligence.
Why should we labour against heaven that has decreed our ruin? there's no hope, we are all lost, the sea already is our grave.
Villain, thou shalt not dye by water, I'll be thy fate.—And yours if you stay.
See if the storm has not wrought in her Element of wa∣la too, and blown it in tears from her eyes.
Would it had blown the fire thence too, the earthy part would not wound me; my danger and their beauty in those active Elements lye; for in her living Jet the fire bears sway.
I know his resolution, but I'll watch him.
We are alone; I must not lose this opportunity; will you yet grant my suit, and yield me love? or must I follow the exam∣ples of the gods, and in a storm compass my will? say, will you give, or shall I force?
Is this a time for love, when the raging storm drowns thy words? Oh thou abused power! who thus enraged pursues us even to the last of all our name; and for abused sacrifice will the Priest in judgement offer? if thou hast decreed my fall, take it while I am fit for sacrifice, while I am pure, and my virgin snow uncoiled. Pro∣tect me from this ravisher, whose impious heat burns his hated  breast, even in the bosom of the sea.
Cease to call, and yield me love; thou see all the ship is busy with apprehension of our danger, which my love will not give leave to fear; thoughts of thee so take up all the room here, that care of my self cannot get in.
Away, unhand me; consider the dangers and misery thou  art in.
Dangers! it is but noise only; and to me no new thing to see the Elements thus at war, and strive to run again to their first Chaos. Thousands of times have I naked stood their rage, when the element of fire has shot his angry flame into the yielding main, as if he had meant to wound her god with his forked lightning; this I have seen, and felt the mischiefs the unruly winds beget when they break prison, and force from the entrails of the earth a dangerous birth; and still their dangers were but noise.
O impious man! hast thou seen their power, and felt a mercy above it, and dost thou slight it?
Slight it? no, nor fear it; nor would you apprehend it were you acquainted with the uncertainty of this element, and with me had seen these dangers grow from nothing. A thousand times I have looked upon her smoothest brow, and heard the false winds whisper to her, till their flatteries have wrought into her by∣some, and there filled with ambition the covetous element that would aspire at heaven, being thus seduced, discovering even to the eyes of men the secrets of her womb; this I have seen too, and wrought through these dangers; nor will I believe any thing can save me when I cannot save my self: will you yield? or you'll find other dangers.
Oh strange daring! O heaven! quench his saucy flames, or  add your fires to 'em, and hide your lightning in his lustful breast: fool and villain I never met before, though wise and wicked sell∣doom join; dost tempt me now with all my fears about me? if I were a common prostitute acquainted with sin I durst not, when thunder speaks, listen to thy wickedness; it shakes even my Reason; rather fall upon thy knees, and no longer tempt the gods thus to our de∣struction.
Away, I'm deaf.
Villain, wilt thou sin while their Plagues hang over thee; and add to thy faults while they are punishing? Oh ye winds, take  my tears upon your wings, and through this storm convey 'em to that youth whose honour took me even in the midst of my dan∣gers; and tell him his faith unfortunately has betrayed me to this misery. Hipparchus, unknown name of honour, guilty by chance, by fate only faulty; oh! that thy sword were here to defend us both.
Ha! is there another that you love? nay then the earth  shall not save you.
But it shall, veer more sheat, hale, tack aboard; who's at helm? Master, set a yare man to the helm, steer thus, thus.
Done it is.
Peace.
Hell take thee for thy interruption.
Low're your main-sail, it was your fault we loot our bon∣net to; full, full.
Done it is.
Strike her fore-sail, here's a gust will bear our Mast by the board else.
How now, Master, is she tight?
No, a pox on her for a Whore, she leaks, but we have girt her: port, port hard.
Done it is.
What Galleys are those that chase us? the Admiral's one.
I believe the King's aboard, she has stood with us all this day.
No matter what they are; would we had no worse enemies to deal with; who keeps the lead there?
O them a deep, fifteen fathom and a half, oh!
What ground have you?
Corral.
Corral, hell and confusion; we are upon the Rocks of As∣mara, luff, luff-hard, and veer, tack, hale your sheat aboard; Boatswain, brace your fore-sail, bring her in the wind, be yare Mates, clap the helm a lee, bring her upon her stays, w'are lost else.
Keep the lead going.
They are howling already, what's my fate's my fate, and it may conquer; but I'll never yield to it, nor sink while these oars  can bear me through.
LOose the slaves, we want men to trim our sails.
O Hipparchus, that we had but the Pluto here to bustle with this storm; this is a painted whore, her back's too weak to bear her burden.
Look out, Pausanes, the Galley that we chased is sinking.
The gods protect the Princess; see, see, she has escaped that gust, and now they bear up with the land.
Let us steer with 'em, we may save some; port, port hard.
Done it is.
Who's at the helm? slaves, we'll bring our sails into the wind, veer more sheat there; for heavens sake, Gentlemen, to your Cabins and pray.
We have changed our course to bear up with the Galley that's in distress.
Is the Princess in that Galley?
I, she's there, and her virtue interceding a safety against all their hopes or merits.
In with the lead there: Ho, the cunnery, due west, west,  steer due west; w'are so far upon the Lee-shoar we shall never weather the Land, if we fall to the southward w'are lost, the west∣ward has a safe bay; courage, Madam, we a tight ship, and a stout ging.
Mates, clear an anchor to drop, ere she strikes; heave out the long-boat there.
O ignorance of man! it is best seen in divers ways that knowledge runs in; this their art and wise directions is to me di∣stractions. O Madam! let me add to these dangerous multitude of waters my tears, that my repentance may wash off this stain. It is not the Sea I sink under, but my faults to you. Can you for∣give
my blindness that have led you into these dangers? Accursed be that Traitor Villain that brought 'em into this extremity. That on land I could have redeemed, but this all these waters cannot ex∣piate.
They are not dangers fright me, though yours be joined to them, for which Heaven knows I have a pain; you have proved such a friendly Enemy, my griefs concern not my self now, for I am only in the power of Heaven, and the Gods are no less strong at Sea than Land; for though their wonders dwell in the deep, yet their mercies wait there too.
O divine Eucratia! let me kneel to thee, and in this storm call upon thy name to save me.
Tempt not those Powers which must protect us, but join with me for my lost Sister, poor Leucanthe, who is not only subject to this storm, but the dangers too with which a Traitor's lust be∣girts her. O Sir! I know to die spotless is now her Prayer and all her wishes but what we pray against, a wrack.
It was her Galley that we chased, the Villain was forced to run ashore; nor will we fail with our endeavours to seek her safety: but O! she strikes: O! w'are lost, she strikes: O! 
Man the Long-boat, not a man enter till the King and Queen be in: Sir, descend, the Ship strikes, but we are near the shore, the Long-boat now is all our hopes.
THe fire of lust, and warmth which that heat lent gave me strength to resist the coldness of the water, and to my appetite and longings the Powers that saved me: If I can call back her life I'll sacrifice this Lamb; I made Zenon bind her, that she might not have her will ere I had mine; the knot in my teeth I held that when I could keep her no longer she might slip; for my love it is vowed to the living not to the dead; and when I cannot what I would I will what I can; to yonder fire which guided me to this safety I'll bear my load, when she begins to live I'll seem to die; and so I'll handle the chance, and in oily words cloth this service, faintly pleading Pardon for my past faults, as if I had only life enough to tell her the obligation she owes me: then if I find her melt, by degrees I'll let her charity prevail, and slowly seem to recover: but if she seem to rejoice in my fall, and my prayers fail, by all the Gods hers then shall not prevail.
THe storm begins to cease, and this our miraculous deli∣variance calls for a hearty and speedy sacrifice; Let the Long-boat immediately search the wrack for the Princess Leu∣canthe.
What other Vessel's that? Some of the wrack swims still.
It is a Sicilian Galley by her Flag.
O Sir! look, they swim still in charity as a Sacrifice for our deliverance, if it be possible save 'em; the Youth strikes the Wa∣ters with unskilful Oars: O save, save the Innocent.
Be at peace, Madam, if it be in man I'll save 'em.
What do you mean?
To leap in.
It is desperate.
It is honest, nay it is honourable; and when can a young man die better, or hope to have his end waited on with braver Mourners? Thou see I have hunted from danger to danger all my life but to find a name, or one to own me, and cannot compass it; therefore to choose I'll leap into this danger; for from this glo∣rios end I may in story force one; and therefore leave to counsel, and leap in with me; and let us through this as a thousand other dangers together labour; then if I faint, Hipparchus may be by; and if Hipparchus faint, Am not I there? Farewell, if thou wilt not follow, Farewell for ever.
He's gone, Pausanes, Friend, steer thy Course to yonder fire, there I'll meet thee, and if it be possible, assist thy brave reason∣lution.
Ye Gods! What strange kind of men are these?
SO, here I'll rest my Burden; she begins to recover her strength, and Reason works apace; she called for help, but  named no body, but at large, Gentle Soldier help.
O save me, save me, Gentle Youth, I am betrayed.
Hark! again.
Ha! Where am I? What place is this?
Now Gillippus, hide thy Snares cunningly, and then thou moist catch this Bird.
Ha! wet?—Good Heaven! now my fears return with my Reason, and I remember the danger I was in by a storm at Sea.—Ha! What's this? A man laid by my side? Sleeps he, or is he dead? Good Heaven protect me, How came I here?—Who's this? Gillippus? Bless me! he's so wicked, Me-thinks his Ashes should be dangerous. Hark! he groans. O! that faithful stranger, little does his soul fear what miseries his bounty has brought me. Hip∣parchus the Traitor called him, or my busy mind deceived me.
Yonder's the fire which my Friend, will steer his desperate Course to. Ha! What do I see? Leucanthe, and Gillippus dead by her? 
Who's that named Gillippus, Zenon?
What, alive?
Hipparchus! Nay, then I see my fate pursue es me.
Art alive?—Ye Gods, take this in sac ifice while I offer that—
It is he, it is the Youth that saved me—O Sir, protect me from this Ravisher.
If he scope me now I'm strangely cursed; Do you stare, Sir?
I bleed apace.
I'm wounded.
Nay, it has a mouth, would it had this tongue in it.
You can fall when you are not dead; if thou jest now take that in earnest.
Hold, I'm unfit for such a sudden Exit; O she's lost, she's lost, for ever lost.
O Sir! Spare him a little time to throw off that load that sinks him.
O Madam! to what danger has my mistake of service brought you? Are you not at war with all our Sex for the Trea∣cherries of this Villain?
How do you, Sir? Alas, he faints!
I bleed apace, and I fear my wounds are deeper than I ap∣prehended; for I feel a darkness now begin to close mine eyes. O Madam! Madam!
O! I fear he's lost; Good Gods, send some aid and coun∣sell to a wretched Maid whom ye have pursued with change of cruel fates. O that I had died ere I had seen this Youth; unfortunate Leucanthe, to see thy Love thus in the Cradle bloody, born only to add another cause of grief.
This way I heard some body cry for help, and it was min∣gled with the noise of Swords; What's here, a man wet and wounded? Good Heaven! last night thou little expected'st such a land fate: More misery! Whence are they? A woman too? It is some Murder sure. I'll take my Sword, those that could so destroy their youth will not spare my age.
What art thou, Father, that pettiest our sad fates? Come hither and I'll teach thee how to mourn.
Is he dead thou mourn thus? Let me see his wounds, Hold up's head, he breaths, Bow him forward while I fetch a Bal∣sam, whose sovereign power (if the vital parts be not perished) will restore his health.
Run, run; O my Joy! if thou dy'st, upon thy Tomb I'll lay Marble rough as thy fortune, and on it set fixed a living statue till with my tears I have polished it.
So, pour this Balsam into his wounds, and bind them up, and stay his head while I go find the Hermit's Son, he shall help to bear him to my Cabin.
Bring 'em to yonder fire; and while Euoratia applies her charity to the Youth I'll assist Pausanes.
Eucratia! Who named Eucratia?
Why, dost thou know Eucratia?
Know her! Yes, Leucanthe.
Father!
It is she.
O ye Gods! your hands are visible through all this change.
Who are those about the fire?
Leucanthe and Theagines. O Sir! w'are blessed beyond our  hopes.
Eucratia here too! O remove my doubts, by what fate are we met thus strangely?
Twill ask a longer time, Sir, than her charity now can spare to tell. 
Father, they are all acquainted, and yet in my conscience they never appointed this meeting.
What's here? A women's breast in a Doublet? Ladies, some of your hands will be more proper here, this habit belongs not to the Sex it clothes.
A woman!
Yes.
Sortanes, have you never seen that face? 
Yes, on my life.
It is Lysimella.
Here, O here! Who called wretched Lysimella?
Madam, your charity has found my Sister, my Friend, all that I call dear; and see if a cross fate has not attempted to snatch her hence: O persist in your charity, and a little dispense with your joy, and try to save her.
If my blood could save her, to every vein I would a pas∣sage give, and through those thousand streams pursue her safety.
More of that Strong-water, and give him leave to breathe.
Here, put on this loose Roll, and hide her Disguise.
Some charitable hand convey me to Hipparchus, that from my dying lips I may breathe him comfort. About my neck you'll  find two golden Medals which I took from him and Pausanes by∣some, in which (I heard one Perseus tell, who that day fell in bat∣tle) was writ in Characters their Names and Country, which yet they know not.
Perseus! Who can tell tidings of the aged Perseus?
That can I—At the sack of Tunis he fell by my hands, when I took those youths Prisoners, they called him Father—O! I feel I'm sinking, but whither, O whither, Mercy, Mercy, Heaven.
I am wrapped in amazement at these things; these are  the Medals we hung about our Childrens necks; Which of these two was called Pausanes?
This.
On thee then fall a blessing; but on thee my Son a thou∣sand, thousand blessings; all that a weeping Father can with peni∣tent  tears call down fill thy days.
What have I lived to see?
Oh, Leucanthe and Eucratia, see your long lost Brothers.
Though my part be strange; yet these wonders make it seem nothing, there's such providence in the chances; how fares my Lysimella?
Oh Brother, can you forgive this fault? I heard some body name Pausanes, where is he?
Here.
There! and not come to Lysimella? oh! my fears will end this wrack, speak; by all the honours of thy youth, I conjure thee, is he dead, or no?
No, upon my life, he lives and is found a Prince.
A Prince! and will not my Brother then—
Why dost thou hide thy blushes in my bosom, think thou I can be cruel to Lysimella? no, no; since I saw thee I have felt thy pain, and now can love too, but dare not promise I shall be fortunate.
Can I add to your joys? if I can, Sir, let this Priest witness my vows to the King.
Will it please the King to retire to my homely Cell, it is free from storms, unless you bring 'em with you; I have lived long there, but never felt any save what my sins brought. Some skill too I have in herbs, and fortunate (I thank the gods) I have been in my attempts in Surgery; and hope they'll smile upon these Pati∣ants too, I find no danger of death amongst 'em: and when I have my Salvatory laid by, then I'll take up my Beads; for the Priest, I see, must complete the joys of these happy pairs, my interest in which I'll no longer hide.—Oh speak Eucratia, think thou the gods will accept an offering from aged Memnon's hand again, that  once abused their altars by giving false Oracles, which thus they have revenged? if thou think they will, here I throw off my dis∣guise, and from a Father and Priest, Sir, receive her.
My Father!
Memnon, my Brother! oh welcome!
Let me interrupt your joys, lest their excess prove danger∣os; and to the gods that have wrought this blessing, let us pass on to sacrifice.
Lead on, Theagines, while we these young men bear off, on each of which a Virgin shall like their good genius wait; the story, how we came to be thus happy, we'll defer to a fitter time, when health and Hymen shall wait on these Princes, to set their Prisoners free, and prove Loves Fetters Liberty.

A little wit, less learning, no Poetry
This Play-maker dares boast: Tic his modesty.
For though his labours have not found least grace,
It puffs not him up or in mind or face,
Which makes him rather in the Art disclame
Bold License, then to arrogate a Name;
Yet to the wit, the scholar, and the Poet,
Such as the Play is, we must dare to show it
Our judgements to but too: And without fear
Of giving least offence to any ear.
If you find pleasure in it, we boasting none,
Nor you nor we lose by' expectation.
Sometimes at poor men's boards the curious find
Amongst homely fare, some unexpected dish,
Which at great Tables they may want and wish:
If in this slight Collation you will bind
Ʋs to believe you' have pleased your palates here,
Pray bring your friends w'you next, you know your cheor.
Good morrow my good Lord. How fares the King?
More sick in mind then body, by th'opinion,
(Not only of the skilful Doctors, but) of all
That come about him.
I that have not seen him
Since he was sick, can guess, then at the cause
Of his distemper. He is sick o'th'subject;
Th'unquiet Commons fill his head and breast
With their impertinent discontents and strife.
The peace that his good care has kept'hem in
For many years, still feeding them with plenty,
Hath, like ore pampered steeds that throw their Masters,
Set them at war with him. O misery of kings!
His virtue breeds their vices; and his goodness
Pulls all their ills upon him. He has been
Too long too lenetive: A thousand heads
(Or say a hundred, or but ten) cut off
Of the most gross ones, the prime, leading heads
Of theirs a month since, had preserved him better
Then all his doctors pills can purge him now.
You are too sharp Disanius. There's a means,
As mild as other of the Kings clear Acts,
In agitation now, shall reconcile
All to a common peace no doubt.
What's that Justinius?
Stay: Here comes Stratocles.
I fear, in that
Ambitious pate lies the combustible stuff
Of all this late commotion.
Why is man
Prescribed on earth to imitate the Gods,
But to come nearest them in power and action?
That is to be a King! That only thought
Fills this capacious breast. A King or nothing!
He's deep in meditation.
On no good.
It is some devilish waking dream affects him.
I'll put him out—And as I was about
To say my Lord.
What? when Disanius?
About a month since,
It stick still in my jaws. Be not ambitious,
Affect not popularity. It is the most
Notable break-neck in a kingdom.
In whom?
I know to whom I speak; would Stratocles
As well knew who he is, and what he does:
It would be better for him. Thank me not,
I wish it for the king and kingdoms good,
Not yours I do assure you, my great Lord;
Yet mine own Peer, if you forget me not.
You take your time Sir to make me your mirth.
A time may come—
When you may be my King,
And then up goes Disanius. Is it not so?
Yes, upto Court, to be king Stratocles fool.
The Court now privileges thee, or I would change
A cuff with your great Souldier-ship and popular great∣nos
With clowns and Citizens, and Gentry, sprung
By their late peaceful wealth, out of their dongue.
But let'em thank our pious King, not you
That claim (as merit for your service done)
Their loves and voices.
Cease my Lords this strife.
The King may hear on it, whose perplexities
Already are too grievous. Pray be silent,
The king approaches.
We'll attend his entrance.
Four of the chief in the commotion,
Upon the engagement of my faith, that you
Had past your kingly word for their return
In safety, I have brought to Court, who wait
Your present will and pleasure.
Bring'em in.
Disanius, welcome. I thought well to send for you
To take a Councellors part of my late cares
Into your consideration.
I attend
Your Highness pleasure.
Nearer good Disanius.
Do you deal in secret king? The Commons sent for
To their examination, and this old
Antagonist of mine called to confront me,
And I prepared by no intelligence
To fit me for th'incounter? Let'em come.
I must not be denied to stand as fair
In competition for the Crown as any man
The King himself elects for his successor;
The people are mine own through all his parts:
He may command their knees, but I their hearts.
Stratocles, Justinius, Disanius sit.
My lords, altho'our Laws of Thessaly
To you, as well as to our self, are known,
And all our customs, yet for orders sake
I shall lay open one to you. That is, when
A king deceaseth without issue male
(As I unfortunately must) the Commons
Are to elect their King, provided that
He be of noble blood, a sculdier, and one
That has done public service for the Crown—
That makes for me.
Or else the son of some
Great General slain in battle for his country
(As my Adrastus was.)
O my brave brother!
Twenty years sorrow for that Soldiers loss
Has not worn out his memory.
Your grace
Forgets not then Soldiers of fresher fame.
Some other time to boast good Stratocles.
It were good youl'd hear the king—A general,
Or a Generals son may be elected. There
Your Majesty left.
Or if the sonless King
Yet has a daughter, and he match her in
His life time to a husband that is noble,
He stands immediate heir unto the Crown
Against all contradiction.
Now think upon my service, Royal Sir.
Now think upon my Nephews, Royal Master,
The sons of brave Adrastus, who was slain
Twenty years since in fighting of your battle.
It were good you would hear the king. The husband of
Your daughter must be elected. There you left, sir.
It rests now that a speedy choice be made
Of a fit husband, one that may acquire
Eudynas love, and peoples approbation,
The people, (for whose noise I must not rest
Till my successor be appointed to them)
Are wild till this election be made:
They have, in arms, made their demand, and wait
My present answer.
O here they come. These be the principals 4 Rustiks.
The heads, the heads, forsooth they call themselves.
Head-carpenter, head-smith, head-plowman, &amp; head-shep∣herd.
Nay, pray approach; &amp; seem no more abashed
Here then amongst your giddy-headed routs,
Where every man's a King, and wage your powers
Against mine in soul defiance. Freely speak
Your grievance, and your full demand.
Tic humbly all expressed in this petition.
By all means have a care that, to any question, we give the King good words to his face; He is another manner of man here then we took him for at home.
I sweat for it. I am sure I have scarce a dry thread in my leather linings.
They made us heads in the country: But if our head-ships now, with all our country care should be hanged up at court for displeasing of this good King, for the next Kings good our necks will not be set right again in the next Kings reign I take it.
My head itches to be at home again.
My head itches to be at home again.
My head and heart both aches for fear. Would
I were honestly hanged out of the way to be rid on it.
There you may read my Lords what we before
Found would be their demand. Tic for a King
That must succeed me.
And because you have
Governed them long in peace, by which they thrive
Their wisdom would have you entail that piece
On them for after times; and so they nominate
Ambitious Stratocles to be your heir.
Envious Disanius, my merit is
Their Motive.
Cease your strife.—You have stood, more in∣clin'd
To lay your choice on Philocles, or Philargus
The Twin-born sons of long since slain Adrastus.
May it please your Majesty we are informed
That in their travails unto Delphos, both
Of them are dead.
That information
Was merely by suggestion (I dare speak it)
Insinuated by Stratocles. They both live
And are upon return.
Would we knew that.
Lord Stratocles then should pardon us. Hoe's a man
Gracious amongst us. But—
Philargus! O—
Philargus, be he living.
I say Philocles.
Brave Philocles is the man.
False, empty weathercocks.
I say Lord Stratocles is the man we know
And ought to honour.
There lives yet some hope.
What strange confusions this? Or whither will
You run by several ways? Philargus one,
Another Philocles; a third cries Stratocles.
In this you say you'll have no king at all.
This must be reconciled, or you pull ruin
Upon your selves. He, whom the king is pleased
To give his daughter to must be your King.
All that we crave (and that upon our knees)
Is, that the king will graciously be pleased
To make a speedy choice, and give us leave
With pardon to depart, and signify
His Royal pleasure to the doubtful countries.
Tell'em they shall expect, then, but a month,
In which short time my daughters marriage
Shall be consummate.
The Gods protect your Majesty.
And now, my Lords, the commons being at peace,
Let me prevail your private jars to cease.
Madam, the cause is mine; tic mine to mourn
In chief, if they be dead. They were your sons,
Tic true, and though they were your only comforts
Upon this earth, you but resign to heaven
The blessings that it lent you. But to me
They were a pair of equal lovers; and
By me so equally beloved; and by
The king my father so 'bove all men respected
That I by either had been made a Queen,
Which title I for ever will disclaim
If they be dead.
O my Philargus. O my Philocles!
Ye Gods I know they did not seek your Counsels
Nor dare to approach your altars, but with all
Due reverence and required ceremony.
And could your Delphian Oracle, when they
Were friendly competitioners for love,
Answer them but with death?
The rumour, Madam,
Carries so little show of truth, that you
Do ill to take so deep a sense of it;
Much worse t'expostulate, as if you had
An injury done you by the Gods. Have you
Been from mine infancy my governess,
And careful councel-giver; and must I
Find cause to chide you now? come dry these tears.
Whore's my sweet princess?
Whore's my Lady governess?
O Garrula, welcome. I could never wish
Thy company more usefully: For thou bring
Some recreation on thy countenance always.
I am glad my countenance pleases you. It may:
For I have on it now (could you discern'em)
A thousand joys dancing within these wrinkles
More then my feeble failing tongue can utter.
And that's a grief to me among all my joys;
The failing of the tongue, the tongue, the tongue
Is a great grief to any woman. But
To one in years, and well in years, as I am,
It is a grief indeed, more then the loss
Of any other member.
But I pray thee
Let not that grief deprive us of the hearing
Of, at least, one of thy whole thousand joys.
Tic a report of joy and wonder, princess;
Enough to make not only you, and you,
But King and kingdom glad, could I but utter't.
Thou dost speak well enough, and enough too,
I pray thee tell it.
Tic some feigned stuff
She hopes to palliate our sorrows with.
It is a report, worth more then all the stories
That I my self have told in child-bed chambers,
To restore spirit to the pallid flesh.
And I have been a woman as good at it
(Without vain boast be it spoke) as any she
In Thessaly, that ere durst undertake
The office of a Midwise: And that the queen
Your Mother knew, when I delivered her
Of the sweet babe (your self.) She is in bliss
Now in Elisium. But you, Madam Governess,
Can yet remember good old Garrula,
That took into the light your twin-born sons,
And thereby hangs a tale—
What means this woman?
Good Garrula, thy news? thy present story?
It is such a story, that could I but utter't
With volubility of tongue!—But O
This tongue, that fails me now; for all the helps
Of Syrups, and sweet sippings. I still go
Provided, as you see, to cherish it.
And yet it falters with me.
We shall have it
Anon I hope. Placilla, whats your news?
It is excellent Madam. And I was ambitious
To bring you the first taste of it. But if
Garrula has in that prevented me,
I can with no less joy relate it yet.
My brothers are returned, and safe, from Delphos.
Be thou as true as th'Oracle.
Now, Madam.
Mother, tic true.
It is that I would ha'told you
Had not my tongue failed me in the utterance.
Thy tongue ran fast enough, but lost its way.
Three minutes, Madam, brings'em to your presence.
How is it with you, Madam? Let not joy
Beget a worse effect then did your fears.
Help, Garrula.
Odds pity, what dee mean.
Madam, look up, and speak up too you were best,
Do you know who talks to you? Speak; and speak well too.
I shall speak that will be worse for you else.
Madam, you know, that I know what I know.
I am well I thank you, Garrula.
O are you so?
I have observed that often in her language,
This chattering Midwife glanceth at the knowledge
Of some strange hidden thing, which like as with
A Charm, she keeps my Governess in awe with.
I guess it but some trifle: For I know
The Lady is right virtuous; yet it may
Be worth my inquisition at fit time.
You have felt the comforts of my friendship Gar∣rule,
And had you common charity, you'd forbear me.
I—done Madam. Be secure. But yet,
Though I forbear to speak, I not forget.
You have not yet, Placilla, told the means
Of your rich knowledge.
Nor shall I need now Madam
These shouts of joy that followed them to Court
Attend them to your presence.
O let us meet'em. Madam, come away.
O ye Gods, I thank ye.
I have a son there too, as dear to me
As any Mothers only born can be,
Whose name's not voiced with theirs. Yet by your favour
Great Madam Governess, he has discharged
The office of a Governor ore your sons,
As well as you have over the Kings daughter.
And they have sucked more of his Helycon
Then she has of your doctrine: which their breeding
Together with their Travels through his care
Will testify (I doubt not) to my honour,
That have brought forth a son of such performance.
Did not I say, it was Stratocles that raised
That hideous rumour of their deaths, among
His wilde idolators, in hope to gain
Election by their ignorance and rudeness?
It was well those factious heads were wrought to come
Before the King to find his clemency,
And probabilily that these were living.
And how they then shrunk in their necks from Stratocles!
It has so laid the flames of his ambition,
That these may safely now tread out the fire.
Welcome again my princely Nephews, welcome.
Thanks, courteous Uncle.
You interrupt me, brother.
Good woman, cry thee mercy. Mothers are such things!
Why, what things are we mothers?
O the old night-piece with her dark lantern by her.
You'll give us leave to take
The comforts due unto us in our age,
For which we suffered sorrow in our youth!
Our children are our children young or old.
So is my horse my horse.
You have replied,
As Meanwhile did a Councellor at Law,
Who said his adverse Advocate had pleaded
To as much purpose as a hen i'th'forehead.
Geron. you are welcome. Thou still keepst thy humour,
Thy travels haven't changed thee. Thou came home
As wise as thou went out.
So Meanwhile said,
A miser, having much increased his store,
He had as much still as he had before.
Enough, I'll give thee over.
O my dear off-spring; every sight of you
Is a new recompense, and satisfaction
For all the pain and travel of your birth.
In you your fathers memory shall live
Beyond the malice of the grave and death:
And I, when my rejoicing shall be full,
And cannot take addition, freely yielding
My flesh to dust, shall yet be blessed by those
Who shall give testimony to your virtue.
It were a sufficient spur to noble actions
To be rewarded but with your content,
Which to procure we make our business.
Philocles,
Your brow is clouded. Has the Oracle
Adjudged against you. Pray let us partake
The knowledge of the Delphian decree;
And which of you stands highest in the favour
Of wise Apollo, to be husband to
Princess Eudyna here the Kingdoms heir.
What speaks the Oracle?
Such a Verdict, Madam,
Requires an O Edipus to construe it.
I neither know it, nor am solicitous
After the meaning.
Wisely spoken, Pupil.
So Meanwhile answered an Egyptian Porter
To one demanding what he bore concealed?
Tic therefore covered that thou should not know▪
The cases are alike.
Pray let us hear it.
Cannot your Tutor Geron play the Harms
T'interpret it?
I am not Enigmatical:
But all for Apophthegms. Besides, I say
(As Meanwhile Aristippus of a Riddle)
It is not safe to loose what being bound
Doth trouble us so much.
Let me come to it.
Yes by all means: For as one Meanwhile said
The blind are best in the dark.
My Lord, your trumps
Are ever shot at me. Blind as I am,
I perceive that. And make much of your Riddle,
I know both what it can and will come to,
Better without the sight of it, then all
You can, with all your wise constructions.
And so I leave you.
Not in anger, Garrula.
Madam, you know I know. I must take leave
To take a Nap▪
And Governor Geron, wait upon your mother,
Trust our cares with your charge.
So Meanwhile said
A School boy, when another raised his top,
Let me alone, my self can keep it up.
And now let me entreat that we may hear
The hidden sentence. Happily so many
May guess at the intent.
She longs to hear
Which of the two is pricked to be her husband.
Here it is. If there be any thing.
Let me be Clerk. I hope at least to read it.
Contend not for the Jewel, which
Ere long shall both of you enrich.
Pursue your Fortune: For tic she
Shall make you what you seem to be.
Apollo, thy great wisdom hath quite fooled mine.
Nothing but contradictions.
As how, Philocles.
He commands here.
Contend not for the Jewel—we agree,
Eudyna is the Jewel.—which shall both of you enrich.
How shall she enrichus both? Can she be wife to us both?
Then here he bids
Pursue your Fortune.—And we both agree
Eudyna is that Fortune too: she's both
The Jewel we must not contend for; and
The Fortune we must both pursue. Then here
He says tic she shall make us what we seem to be.
What do we seem? we are no Hypocrites
In flesh or spirit; no fantastic bodies
Or shadows of humanity.
No, Delphos is but a den of jugglers, which profanely
Abuse divinity, and pretend a God
Their Patron to authorize their delusions.
Nephews, the Gods had need be cautilous
For what they speak if you may be their Judges.
What thinks good Justinius?
My Lords, here's two commands;
One, that you not contend to gain the jewel;
The other, that you both pursue your fortune.
Both these commands are thus to be obeyed;
Contend not for her as to violate
Your unexampled friendship, which you are
Renowned for ore all Greece; And both pursue
Your fortune in her without eiders grudge,
At tothers happiness in her choice.
Noble Justinius, thanks.
This we can do.
And for the happiness which we both aspire to
We here confirm the friendship long since plighted,
Which never shall be broken by Philargus.
Noble Philargus.
So vows Philocles,
It is not the cloudy language of the Gods
Shall make our breasts tempestuous or stormy:
But with the same serenity and quiet,
As heretofore our hearts shall mingle still,
And fortify their truce. Let the event
Expound their Riddle. If good, it is our merit;
If bad, we know our virtue can correct it.
Mean time Philargus take the word of Philocles,
That though there be no happiness on earth
I can esteem above Philargus friendship,
But fair Eudyna's love, which only is
The treasure I can covet from Philargus;
And cannot look to live but to enjoy it
Rather then justly with his friendship, I
Will die to lose it.
Noble Philocles.
You have made my vow, my brother Philocles,
And friend, which is above it. I will seek
And rather die then fail to gain her love:
But that, and the whole kingdom in addition
Must divide our friendship or affection.
As we are Twins in birth, we will be in mind
Unto our latest breath. Let Greece hereafter
Forget to mention the Tyndarides
With their alternate Deities, and tell
Of two Thessalian brothers could refuse
A happiness (which only is not Heaven)
In detestation of priority;
Would not be happy, because they might not share
An individual, both Time and Thing.
Love, and ambition (I have heard men say)
Admit no fellowship; It holds not here.
These will have neither wife nor crown alone.
They each desire my love; but neither can
Enjoy't unless he were the other man.
My love is doubly tan, yet must gain neither,
Unless I could enjoy them both together. O, ye Gods!
Why made ye them two persons, and assigned
To both but one inseparable mind?
Or, why was I marked out to be that one,
That loves and must embrace, or two, or none;
O my perplexity.
Look to the Princess.
Madam. How fares the life of goodness.
She sinks. Dear Mother, Sister; bring your aids.
To keep the world alive give your assistance.
Ye Gods be now auspicious.
A love-qualm.
To bed with her and call for Cupids aid,
He best can cure the wound that he has made.
My Lesbia, my Cynthia, my Licorice
Or (which is best of names) my lovely Doris—that•. I.
I still am thine and cannot commutate,
I am as certain to thee as thy fate.
Tic not my study, or my travails can
Make me to thee appear another man:
Thou may affirm of me as Meanwhile did
Xantippe of her husband whom she chid,
Grave Socrates regardless of his worth
He still returned the same that he went forth.
Before I visit thee, thus may thou hear on
Thine in the tribulation of love—Geron.
Ha, ha, ha. Old Meanwhile Geron,! art thou come again?
Could Delphos not detain, nor the Sea swallow thee
But I must be in danger to be punished
With the porcupine bristles? Fate deliver me.
Doris, you must be vigilant in attendance,
And see that no man pass this lobby, towards
Her graces lodging. Tic your charge: look to it.
Mistress you know your Mother laid that charge
On me before, and I am ready here
To answer every commer in his kind
Had you forgot it?
Pardon me, I had;
But my care hurts not. One thing more good Doris.
If my dear brother Philocles come to visit,
Prithe call me. Speak, wilt thou.
—help your head.
I must not stir from hence, yet I must come
To call you forth. Away, some body comes.
I trust unto thee Doris.
What a sick Court is here? Shoe's love-struck too.
I can with half a sense find her disease;
But cannot guess the object of her love.
She keeps the fire so close up in her bosom,
That she will sooner perish by it, then suffer
A spark of it fly out to make discovery.
The Princess she's love-sick for two; and her
Despair of gaining eider's her consumption.
But what think I of their loves, when mine own
Is trouble enough? Now the visitants;
My great Lords Howdies are upon the entry,
And the unwelcom'st first.
Good morrow Lady.
May I crave admittance to the Lady Governess?
Yes, you may crave it Sir, But not obtain it:
Her nearness to the Princess at this time
Is by so strict necessity required.
May I prevail then, to impart the duty
I have in charge, unto the Ladies daughter?
That is the Mistress whom I wait upon,
Though now at remote distance: She attends
Her Mother at this instant, and her Mother
The Princess in much privacy. If I
May be thought worthy to receive the knowledge
Of what you have in trust unto the Princess,
It shall be orderly conveyed unto her Grace.
Lord Stratoeles, solicitous for glad tidings,
(Beseeching that her Grace be pleased to take
The tender of his service; and affirming
Upon his honour that no rest affects him
Until he shall receive a perfect knowledge
Of her recovery) prays to be advertised
In what condition of health she fares;
Or to gain leave to visit her himself.
Sir, you have lost much time: you might have said
How does the Princess? And I answer thus,
She is most dangerously sick; not to be seen
By him or any man.
Yet let her know
My Lords obsequious care for her recovery.
I'll tell my Mistress, who shall certify
Unto my Lady, who shall intimate
Unto the Princess what you have left in trust
With me, her Graces hand-maid thrice removed.
I will acquaint my Lord; who for your care
Shall upon his advancement to the Crown
Give me command, who will give present order
Unto my man for your promotion.
Your diligence deserves it.
My great Lords especially parasite. I am beholden to you.
Here comes another; an importunate,
Though impertinent suitor of mine own.
My beauteous Doris, first my love presented
Unto your self, my Lord Philargus craves
To know how fares the Princess.
This comes nearer
To my regard then tother; and deserves
A comfortabler answer. She's not well Sir,
But much amended in her health. It is like,
Your Lord (would he approach to visit her)
Shall find a fair admission to her Grace.
I dare not (to delay my Lord a minute
Of these glad tidings.) Stay to prosecute
My love-suit to your self.
No, no; away.
Away good Tersulus; and hazard not
Your Lords, for your own fortunes.
Yet my Doris—
Yet again man.
Be pleased to think of me.
I shall, and better of you when you are gone.
Winged with that hope, I fly.
A pretty nimble fellow and a Taylor.
I could almost affect him, did not this
More supple handed Barber put him by.
Sweet Doris! thus, by me Lord Philocles
Salutes the Princess.
This requires an answer
Of health indeed.
How fares her highness?
Well. Exce•ding well, and longs to see your Lord.
I'll hast to tell him so
Nay, good Varillus,
I have not gained a conference with you
Since your return from Delphos.
At more leisure
I'll tell thee wonders, Doris.
Something now.
Ha'you seen your lover Geron, the old tutor,
Since our arrival?
Here is an Epistle
Came from him to my hands this morning. Hang him.
Well: he has been the whole mirth of our journey
In the discovery of his love to you.
His meat, his drink, his talk, his sleep, has all
Been Doris, Doris, nothing but your remembrance
Has been the trouble of his company;
Isle tell thee at large hereafter. The fair Princess
Is well you say.
She was well when I left her,
But subject to much passion: She is well
And ill, and well again all in three minutes.
Great Ladies may be so. But if I should
B• sick and well, and sick again and well
Again as oft as she; the world would say
I had it—And had been a courtier, to some purpose.
They would say the Handmaid had been handled so.
Would they?
Like enough, but great ones must not be talked on
You have detained me to my undoing.
See, my Lord!
Isle send his sister to appease him.
You have done ill Varillus to neglect
A duty of that consequence, that I
Expected in your quick return, was this
A time to loiter?
My good Lord, the princess
Is well again; restored to absolute health.
Tic happy news. But why was I delayed
In this account? was it too precious for me?
Redeem your fault by some ensuing service,
Or you may lose a master, that has loved you.
I must proceed to gain Eudinas love
From my Philargus or l loose my self.
And gaining it, I must sorgo Philargus,
And equally be lost. O sister, welcome.
I must request your aid.
In any thing
Wherein I may be useful, best of brothers.
I would entreat you be my advocate
In love unto Eudina.—O, but hold,
Shall I be treacherous unto my brother?
A brother! What's a brother? A mere name;
A title which we give to those that lodged
In the same womb; so bedfellows are brothers;
So men, inhabiting one town, or country
Are brothers too: for though the place containing
Be greater, the relation is the same.
A friend! I that's the thing I violate,
Then which, nor earth nor heaven hath ought more sa∣cred▪
Tic my Philargus, nay my self I injure,
If I content my self.
Why, brother Philocles—
Did I say brother? How my tongue conspires
To torture me! If Brother be a naked
Title or name (as he suggests) I would
It had nor being, name, nor title. Philocles
You're passionate.
Fond reason I disclaim thee,
Love is a strain beyond thee, and approaches
The Gods estate: Friendship's a moral virtue
Fitter •r disputation, then observance.
Eudina. O Eudina! In what price
Art thou with me, for whom I cast away
The Souls whole treasury Reason and Virtue?
Placilla, you must wo Eudina for me.
Do you startle at it? Pray do it, as you love me.
If I were she you should not need an advocate.
I charge you by this kiss.—
Your wages
Corrupts your agent to be false. O whither;
Into what Sands will the rash Pilot, Love?
Drive this weak vessel? did I call it Love?
Tic sooty, hellish fire; unlawful flame:
Yet such as we may easier tax, then tame.
What troubles you Placilla? O you are
Already entertained to mediate
For him you better love, Philargus, do:
He best deserves her; Isle wo for him too.
Madam, my Lady calls for you? My Lord
The Princess has tan notice of your visit
And wishes you draw nearer if you please.
I meet that wish with swift, but fearful feet.
My joys are bitter, and my woes are sweet.
I have heard men say when they on gamesters look
(Though equally affected to both parties,
Or both were strangers to'em yet) they'll yield
A secret inclination which should win.
I am for Philocles, now, against Philargus,
Who is as noble, and as free to me,
As ever Philocles was. But tarry Doris;
You have a bett upon the game I take it,
Your love unto Varillus. If his Lord
Rise to a Kingdom, you may hope to climb
The ladder of a Ladyship by the man.
But not too fast: Here's one pursues the game
That is as like to win. Why if he does?
His follower Tersulus loves me past Varillus,
And may as much advance me. But I love not
Him, And the love of honour above husbands
Has been so common among Ladies, that
The fashions stale and ugly.
So't must be.
And so by transposition of my love
I shall be quiet, and Philocles doubly happy.
Doris, go seek my mother, and perceive
If I may see the Princess.
Yes my Lord.
Love, thou art well compared to fire, which where
It doth obey and serve being commanded
By higher powers of the soul, it fares
Like to the stone or jewel of a ring,
Which joins the orb, and gives it price and luster:
So glorious is that love, so necessary.
But, where it rules and is predominant,
It tiranizeth; Reason is imprisoned;
The will confined; and the memory
(The treasury of notions) clean exhausted;
And all the senses slavishly chained up
To act th'injunctions of insulting love,
Perched on the beauty of a woman. Thou
Masculine love, known by the name of friendship
Art peaceful and morigerous: But that
Of woman, is imperious and cruel.
Why should I then lose Philocles for Eudina?
Why? Can I look on her and ask a Reason?
O the divinity of woman! sure
There is no heaven without'em. If the Gods
Should thrust out Jove as he depos'▪l his Father
And elect me to be their thonderer
I'd not drink Nectar to forgo Eudina.
Fie, fie Philargus, you're a ssugish Lover.
I have been careful for you, yea and partial
Against your brother Philocles, to prefer
Your love to his: And you to suffer him
A whole hour opportunity before you!
Has he been here?
And is. Only for you
I have beguiled him of her presence, that
Till you have made first presentation
Of love to her he shall have no access.
Now Philocles, I suffer in thy injury;
And to proceed in it were treachery.
I would retire—But that magnetique beauty
To which are chained thousands of hearts and eyes
Has captived mine: nor must I seem to slight
A mothers care. She's not the first (tic known)
That of two sons hath best affected one.
Why move you not Philargus towards the Prin∣cesse.
Madam, you see she's busy.
Stratocles—
May thy ambition hoist thee into air;
And thy loose wings, like thy licentious paper,
There failing thee, let fall thy vicious body
To earth, as here thy name lies to be trod on.
Philargus, you are welcome.
Princely Madam,
That language from your gracious lips is powerful
To save him from the grave, that only lives
By your free favours.
Nay, my dear Philargus,
I thought me nearer to you, then that you
Should rove at me with Courtship. Stratocles
(The emblem of whose pride lies there in paper)
Shot from afar indeed; yet, like a Jove
(A self-conceited one) presumed to strike
Love by command into me by his Letters.
I cannot flatter pride, nor undervalue
Abilities. It is true that Siratocles
Has been a useful servant to the State;
But, doubtless, he would make as ill a Master.
No more of him.
Nor more be thought of him.
And therefore Madam, by your fair command,
To avoid all Court-circumlocutions,
I tender thus my service, and crave hearing.
You have it freely.
To avoid all lets,
I will withdraw my self.
The King has graciously been pleased, in lieu
Of my slain fathers services; and for love
To us his sons, (by us much undeserved)
To recommend unto your noble choice
My brother and my self. You standing doubtful
Whether to choose, we to avoid dispute
Of violating friendship, did implore
The Council of the Oracle to direct
You in th'election. But the hidden sense
In the dark sentence hath perplexed both you
And us with more anxiety.
It is too true.
Yet you are not prescribed; your choice is free.
To take your lot in Philocles or me.
We both, by strong injunction must pursue
Your sacred Love, yet keep our friendship true.
Then thus illustrious Madam.
Not so low.
As low as future duty must compel me,
When you shall be my Queen, let me beseech
The favour that I seek and would obtain,
Equal with heavenly bliss, to shine on Philocles.
That he may be your King?
May he prove so.
Be all example lost.
Friendship, with favour, may
Hold between King and Subject: But one throne
Cannot estate two Kings; Love's number's one.
O my Philargus, you have opened now
The meaning of the Oracle. I have the sense
Most perfectly. You have beyond example
Preserved your friendship with your brother; and
In wooing for him have won me to your self.
I am your own.
I am amidst the Gods.
The wealth o'th'world, the beauty of the Heavens,
And powers of both shall not redeem my interest.
—Provided that I lose not Philocles.
In that your constancy you win me more.
Your importunity hath prevailed. See Philocles,
The Princeis, and Philargus.
O, you are partial.
O help, my brother; speak, dear Philocles.
Ye Gods, how comes this? Let me raise him up,
Brother, and friend; speak, it is Philargus calls thee.
Philargus, let me go. It is your advantage.
Let me request the cause of your disturbance,
Good Philocles.
No other but my self.
Honoured Eudyna: For, who feeds to danger
Upon a dish he loves, ought not to blame
The meat, but his unbridled appetite.
How do you now? What a cold moisture
Spreads ore his temples here.
Let me come to him:
I can read his grief.
What's that to the redress?
The Delphian God, medcines inventor knows
That and not I.
His grief's a jealous passion
Upon my supposed favour to Philargus.
Shake it off Philocles, I am thine, as much
As ere I was, or his.
It is no jealousy
Only a fear Philargus had broke friendship:
So, my souls better part exited, left
The other languishing.
Had you expired
In that belief, and I had understood it,
My shadow should have posted after yours
Unto the Elision fields to vindicate
So causeless imputation.
And because
You charged my son with partiality
Let us remove, Philargus, come Placilla.
You will not take him from me. Stay Philargus.
What would you do with both?
I may not stir,
When she, whose power above me countermands
The precepts of the Gods requires my stay.
What not to give you brother Philocles
An opportunity for equal hearing?
Your grace will not deney't him.
True, I may not.
That spell convinces all. Friendships above,
And must control obedience, and love.
Tic not to injure thee my dear Philargus,
That here I linger, to oppose thy love;
But to prefer it.
What says Philocles?
To say I love you, Madam, with a zeal
That dares to meet the trial of Martyrdom,
And suffer't for your sake, might get a name,
A glorious one, and an immortal Crown:
Yet so I should forgo (in leaving you
On earth, a heaven on it) the bliss,
Which, grieving, I should in Elisium miss.
No, I will love you better then to die,
And be mine own chief mourner; yet must crave,
Under your gracious favour, leave to suffer
More then a thousand deaths, that is, to live
And part with my fair hopes in you for ever.
What means my Philocles?
Princely Madam,
Consider the necessity, which now
By further search I gather from the hidden
Oraculous perduit; by which I am tied
Not to contend for you, that is, I must not
Wound friendship in Philargus: B•t pursue
My fortune, which is to gain love from you.
For whom it says not, but the meanings plain,
I for Philargus should your love obtain.
The Gods deal after as they please with me,
My suit is that you take Philargus.
O—
Philocles you have made a double conquest
For you have got the victory of me
Which was before assigned unto Philargus.
Your fortune thus embraces you
This now,
And with Philargus friendship were to me
A fortune 'bove the envy of the Gods.
He cannot disallow't. He wooed me for you,
And won me to himself, as you have now
Suing for him.
I must not hold you then.
His title, as his friendship precedes mine.
Yet still the choice is mine. I may take you
Without offence to him. But now he comes,
And has again an equal interest,
Strange love! In others absence I took either
And loved each best; Now both at once appear,
Neither is mine. Fate, let me die to one
Rather then live in this confusion.
Now Madam, whithers love do you approve.
Confound me not with question. They are each
Wedded to others friendship: Either is
More studious for the other then himself.
And ever must.
And will be.
So will I
For both of you then for my self.
Alas.
Then let's continue thus with Maiden love,
With modest freedom, unsuspected joys,
As we had all been formed in one womb,
Till Heaven determine of us.
To determine
Of you Eudyna, is by heaven committed
In present unto me. On you depends
The future glory and prosperity,
Both of my house and Kingdom. Tic besides,
Exacted of me by my near Allies,
And by my Subjects (whom I must secure)
To constitute a Successor: And no longer
Will I expect your answer, then five days.
By then you must declare who is your husband;
Or else expect one from my self; the man
Whose name I am as loath to mention
As you to hear, even Stratocles.
Nay, death first.
Be you obedient; and by the way,
Take my approvement of Lord Philocles,
Not that I slight Philargus.
Here's a mystery too,
As dark as that from Delphos. He approves
My choice of Philocles, slighting not Philargus.
Come both you equal brothers; leave her to
Her thoughts a while.
In all obedience.
What strange amazement hath surprised you Ma∣dam?
No study, nor no strife can alter fate
Or the decrees, the Gods determinate.
A husband you shall have, be confident.
Be, as you were; secure of the event,
Till time produce it.
Madam, be your self.
Yet five days for love's war. Jove grant I have
By then, to end the strife, a peaceful grave.
Would you thus offer, by your own disease
To shorten your Mothers days? Or can you pine
And I not grieve? or cannot grief kill me
Do you think?
A wise Philosopher Meanwhile did affirm,
That women who have past the fire of love
Have hearts, which grief can neither pierce, no move.
Son, your Philosophy fails you, as your love
Blinds you: For Cupids fire I know may be
Quenched by old age: But grief's unquenchable.
My tongue still falters with me (there's my grief)
And there are not so many fadoms twixt
A women's tongue and heart, but grief may find
The bottom, but for care to keep it up
By sending down an Antidote before it.
But Meanwhile did the love-sick Poet prove,
No antidote against the power of Love.
Forbear your Whiloms, and your old said saws,
And since you are in love, and by that love
Grown sick with the concealment.
As Meanwhile
The Athenian boy who stole a fox did hide
Under his coat his theft from being descried
Until it tore his Gentles—his entrails
I should have said.
No more I say
Of your disease, but to the cure, which is
The love of Doris. How ha'you tried her, son.
By oratory, Epistles, and by gifts
Which Meanwhile Ovid said were best of shifts.
Yes, such a gift it might be, and so fastened.
But she, as Meanwhile said Anominus
Retorted all with scorn injurious.
Yet will you leave your Whiloms? And go seek
My Lady Governess? say I would speak with her.
But Meanwhile said Diogenes (tic true)
To one that would, I will not speak with you.
Will you say as I say; and do as you're bidden?
It is not her great Lady-ships daughters hand-maid
Shall scorn my son while I know what I know.
If you love Doris, run and tell her so.
For Doris love, as Meanwhile Daedalus.
I will take wing. But see I am prevented.
O Garrula! well found, I was in quest of you.
And I was even a sending for you, Madam.
What an imperious beldam's this. But I
Must humour her. Sending for me do you say?
For what, good Garrula.
Sending for you? Yes Madam, so I said,
And see it again. What, what, I know what I know.
You know I do; and that there is no such
Distinction twixt the honours of your birth
And place; and mine of age and knowledge, but
You might vouchsafe the summons when I send.
What needs this Garrula? I am here you see.
You know I know, and have deserved some favours,
I do not bossed for what. You know.
O me!
Who trust those secrets whereon honour rests
To custody in Mercenary breasts
Do slave nobility; and though they pay
A daily ransom, ne'er redem't away.
Pray let us be more private, though indeed
I love your son for his great care of mine.
O, do you so? Go forth son Geron, till
I call. All shall go well Isle warrant thee.
Meanwhile, so
Said a Physician, meaning to restore,
And killed the Patient was but sick before.
Why Garrula do you maintain a strife
Still in my grieved mind twixt hope and fear?
Cannot so many years of my known kindness
Win yet a confidence of secrefie.
You are as deeply bound by oath too as my self.
I do confess my oath, and would not break it;
Yet, Madam, as you are a woman, you
May know a broken oath is no such burden
As a great secret is; besides the tickling
A woman has to in and out with it. Oh
The tongue itch is intolerable! And were I
A woman of tongue, as most are of my calling
(Though Midwives ha'been held the best at secret
Co•ncel keeping) it had been out I fear.
But still take heed dear Garrula.
Yes Madam.
Yet there are kindnesses required on your part.
Have I not still been kind?
My memory serves me; and but that my tongue
Now falters with me—I could recount
All the rewards I have had from time to time,
Since you translated me from a Country housewife,
Into the Midwife Royal; what in Gowns,
In Gold, in Jewels, Chains and Rings; and (which
I prize'bove all) my syrrops and my sippings.
Your place of honour in the Court—
What, what?
I hope I had that before i'che Kings favour,
As his Queens Midwife. She is in Elisium.
Then Garrula your learned sons preferment,
Tutor and Governor to my Sons.
Thereby
Hangs a tale, Madam. Now I come to th'point;
My son affects your daughters hand-maid Doris,
Who slights his love. I must now by your power
Obtain her for my Son.
Be confident,
Though I confess I hold her worthless of him.
I tell him so: But love has blinded him.
Ho Geron, I say Geron, come and hear.
So Meanwhile prisoners have been called to come
From dungeon deep to hear a blacker doom.
Geron, be comforted. By all my power,
Doris shall be your own.
Then Meanwhile, as
Ovid his Corynna sweet, said o—
She comes, she comes. My joys do overflow.
Now Doris, what portends your hast? Speak Maid,
Is it to Geron, or to me, your business?
His ill looks, had almost made me miscarry'c.
Madam, the Princess instantly desires
Your company.
But by her Graces favour,
And your leave, Doris, I will trench so far
On both your patiences, and for your good,
As to be witness of an interchange
Of some few words twixt Geron and your self.
Why look you from him so? he loves you, Doris.
That's more then I ere knew, or read, by all
He speaks or writes to me. He clothes his words
In furs and hoods, so, that I cannot find
The naked meaning of his business, Madam.
Speak plainly to her, Geron.
To her Son.
My business is the same, that Meanwhile drew
Demosthenes to Corinth, some repentance,
So I pay not too dear.
Lo you there, Madam.
You must speak plainer, Son.
And be you kinder, Doris.
But not so kind, good Madam, as to grant
I know not what.
O forfeit not the praise
That Meanwhile Aristotle gave your Sex,
To be enriched with piety and pity.
I know not what to pity, but your want
Of utterance. It is some horrid thing
That you desire, and are ashamed to speak it.
No, gentle Doris, nothing but the thing,
Whereby great Alexander Meanwhile said,
He knew himself a mortal, and no God,
Coition—
Be it what it will; I cannot
Give what I understand not. You're too aloof.
There's comfort, Son. And I'll give thee instru∣ctions
To come more close to her.
I'll ease your care,
And be my self his Agent. Hoe's too learned,
Geron, you speak too learnedly, as if
You wooed a Muse: And Doris understands not,
But by your posture, what you'd have. I'll put
Your meaning into women's words; and such
As shall be sure to speed. But first I'll wait
Upon the Princess. Garrula, will you go?
And thank you for my Son: But still—I know.
Nay, I will do it Geron, be confident.
I thank your Ladyship as much as they
Who Meanwhile—Meanwhile—
Knew not what to say.
He's overjoyed.
Go Geron, lead the way.
Pray trouble me no further. I have said,
That if in five days space she make not choice
Of one of those whom (I must tell you Stratocles)
She loves, and I prefer before you, then
I'll weigh your suit, and reasons; and till then
I say it again, you are a trouble to me.
A trouble Sir? That were a time that knew me,
A trouble to your enemies, not you,
When this same lump of earth (which now's a trouble)
Stood a sole Bulwark of your Realm; repelling
Arms of foes; shrouding your fearful Subjects
Under my shield; guarding your fields and Vineyards
From desolation; your Palaces from ruin;
And am I now a trouble?
Stratocles,
You lose the glory of your deeds by blazing
Your own renown. He that commends himself,
Speaks upon trust, and is his hearers slave.
Peace, envy, and be thankful for thy life
Which thy tongue forfeits.
Let my mildness tell you,
You are irreverent before the King,
Who has not been forgetful of your worth,
Nor slow in your reward. Then moderate
Your heat with counsel; and be first assistant
Unto the public good: So shall you merit
The first regard in honours and affairs
Of private nature.
So.
This Oracle
Troubles me not a little. I had thought
Thereby to have declined this weighty care
From my declining shoulders, and have given
My country satisfaction, and my self,
In choosing of a son and successor.
But I am prisoner in the Labyrinth
Of the Gods verdict.
Their sublimity
In matters of the future seldom stoops
To humane apprehension; yet vouchsafes
To answer our demands: but chides withal
Our too much incense with obscurity.
Your grace however may presume, where they
Shall deign to spend a word, and take an offering,
It is a certain augury of good.
Thou hast allayed my fear. Justinus come,
Lead me thy brains assistance. For in thee
I find a temper that accords with me.
Souldler, I dare yet tell thee thou art rash;
Foolish as valiant; and as easily may
For all thy lostiness be undermined
As the base bramble: Boasting weakness, thee
And promising Ambition leads thee up
An earthly exhalation into th'air;
Where with a little borrowed light, one moment,
Thou shin'st the mark and wonder of all eyes;
But soon consumed and darted to the Center,
Become the scorn of men and sport of Children.
You are oath sect of Cinicks, and have learned
To bark Philosophy.
Then shall you hear
Your now adorning multitude upbraid
Your insolence and pride, and gain the name
Of Prophets by your downfall, while one swears
He had foretold it long; Another dreamt it;
All jointly cry we never could endure him;
See what a look he has; what brawny lips;
What poisonous eyes; and what an impudent front!
You will out-run your privilege of prating
And suffer for it.
I am too prodigal
Of seed upon so flinty soil as thou.
Be as thou art, and perish.
Ignorant wretch,
That out of all thy bookish Theory
Knows not the soul to be Aerial
And of a soaring nature; not unlike
The noble Falcon that will never cease
To work 'bove all that tops her. The supreme
Estate on earth, and next unto the Gods
Is majesty; and that's my present gain,
Though I have all but that, yet wanting that
All is as none to me: And since my way
Must be upon the Ruins (sour Disanius)
Of thee, and of thy glories in thy Nephews
The Kings dear darlings, for whose precious sakes
I must attend five days (yet be a trouble)
I'll travail through your bloods: Thy self has gi'n me
The quicker motion by thy timely envy.
Thou hast set spurs to the pale horse of death,
That into dust shall trample all those lets
Which stand twixt me and the Thessalian Crown,
Upon whose back I'll set this Rider.
My sovereign Lord.
I like that compilation:
Thou stil'st me as thou wish me, on whom
Depends thy consequent advancement, Matho.
But we but dream of sovereignty and sleep
To the Achievement: something must be done
With waekful eyes and ready hands my Matho.
Now my King speaks himself. Let but your eye
Find out the way these ready hands shall act
The strength of your designs. I can perceive
That now the labour of your Jove-like brain
Is bringing forth the Pallas, shall inspire
Me, to perform the work of my advancement.
Tic not yet ripe for the delivery,
But thou shalt quickly have it. Follow me.
Good Madam, let me be excused. The mirth
You offered to allay or quench my sorrows
Might have been well received at former times:
But now it is unseasonable.
Yet think on it, Madam,
How gravely Geron goes, and with what scorn
The wanton Girl recoils.
Good, speak no more on it.
Then Beldam Garrula's reasons urging Doris▪
Showing how either of his pupils grace
In your electing Philocles or Philargus,
Though to them doubtful, is a sure advancement
To her by Geron.
Still you move like those
That do in merry tales mis-spend their breath
To those that are that day marked out for death.
You may not say so (Madam) tic in you
By taking one, to give new life to two;
Your self, and if you'll give me leave to name
The other, be it Philargus: or, if chance
Shall favour better, Philocles or him,
Let it be him that gives you the first visit.
That were to fancy in our selves an Oracle;
Or to give fortune power, to execute
The judgement of the Delphian God.
Who knows
But that his Oracle would have it so.
Was it for that you now sent for Philargus.
Say, shall it be so Madam; or suppose so?
This pleases better yet then Gerons wooing.
Prayed Placilla sing. And may thy voice
Attract him that may prove the happier choice.
Isle try my best in notes, and what they want
Isle strive to make effectual in my wishes.
Thanks kind Placilla.—But the leaden weights
Of sleep oppress mine eye-lids, and I shall not hear thee.
Yet sit, and let her sing: you'll sleep the better.
Stay Philocles, stay Philargus. Let not fury
Lead you to end that difference with your swords,
Which only fits my life to satisfy.
What means your Grace.
Pursu'em, with prevention,
Before they meet again, or one or both
Must perish; did you not observe their challenge,
And eiders daring other to the field?
Who Madam, where? and when?
Now; here; your sons.
How can you ask?
Because we were awake
And saw nothing.
Collect your spirits Madam: you slept.
It was an ominous dream then.
And of good,
I dare divine it Madam. And now see
Whom fortune first hath sent to be your choice.
Philargus, you have won the glorious prize.
But dos the glory of the world, Eudina, grant it.
My affrightment shakes me still—
O my Philargus, I am now inspired
Sure by a vision from the Gods, with knowledge,
That, in my choice of you, or Philocles,
I shall become the ruin of you both.
Tic not in fate to wound our common friendship.
Tic better in my self to kill the danger.
The Gods avert such purposes. If you
Deprive the world of your fair self, then we
Both fall by necessary consequence.
But what are we? This Thessaly must suffer.
The King must yield, to see a new and strange
Successon appointed to his Crown;
And by his subjects, not himself.
Tic that
Deters me: yet let me prevail Philargus
(To quit me of my fears) that ere I pass
My faith unto a husband, your and Philocles,
Before the Gods, your Mother, and my self,
Once more, do celebrate your vow of Friendship.
And let me be excused in this: for I
Must tell you, dear Philargus, that though now
My love be fixed on one of you (albeit
I name not which) I will not take him with
Least scruple of a fear of losing him
Again by th'others spite; nor leave that other
Less loved by me, then now he is, for ever;
And tho but one can be possessed of me
One friendship, yet, must marry us all three.
The Gods have spoke it in you; it is their
Divine injunction; Madam, I obey it,
And dare engage as much for Philocles.
This is most fair: now, till you meet, tic fit
You fall on lighter purposes for your health.
Son, here was mirth to day; although the Princess
Relished it not.
I heard of Gerons love
To his fair Doris. We are now become
His Tutors, Madam, to be amorous.
Placilla, come you hither. I observe
A change in you of late; and do suspect
The Reason. What! Do you blush at my suspicion?
Nay then you mak'• my knowledge. You are in Love.
I'll yet come nearer you. I guess with whom:
And at fit time I'll school you for'•.
Come Madam;
Now if you please we'll take some air.
Craves leave to seek his brother.
Yes Madam.
I wait o'your Grace. Nay, do not look displeased:
I tell you Girl, there is danger in it.
Stay Placilla.
What! has my Mother chid you. I'll not question
Her Reason, nor your fault; but pray thee sister
If Philocles approach to see the Princess
Ere my return, tell him I stay it's lodging,
First, to confer with him.
I will my brother.
In truth thou weepst. Therefore to comfort you,
Because I know by some infallible signs,
You are more tender of his Love then mine.
He stands in equal competition yet
With me for fair Eudina. And if Fortune
Allots her me, I'll be as kind a brother
And still the same to you as Philocles.
I pray thee dry thine eyes.
If a disguised face and a counterfeit hand
Ever prevailed, may these in this plot speed.
My Lord, I had this in charge to render to you.
I am discovered in my lawless love.
Remember, Cupped, whom thou make thy Anvil;
A poor weak virgin. If thou art a God,
Be just and reasonable: It savours not
Of justice, to provoke incestuous flames,
Nor Reason to enforce an Ardency
Of things impossible. Let me not burn
With neighbouring fire, which, to enjoy, I must
Therefore despair because it is so near.
Ha! whore's this fellow? is he gone?
Yes, brother.
Tic Philocles his hand! An eager challenge!
A challenge, and to me, his friend and Brother.
Now Oracle, whore's your Riddle? Answer me,
Apollo's fiddle-stick. O ye Delphian Priests,
You hang religion up, like painted clothes
Before unseemly walls, to cloak their filth
And palliate their wicked mysteries.
How do you brother?
Sick in Philocles.
You'll hear more of his kindness to you shortly.
He suspects too, with much displeasure, my
Unreasonable Love to Philocles.
But why should we be Reasons followers
With loss of liberty? which of the Creatures
Allayes his heat toward any of his kind,
Because the same belly gave them being? They
Observe no difference of Sire, or Dam,
Brother, or Sister, being mature for love.
Ah, whither am I going? Bestial thoughts
Forth of my bosom; Leave me not my Soul,
Or my souls better part, my reason. Oh
It was returning but a flaming shaft
Of love has set it's Mansion afire
And frights it back again.
Sister.
That name of Sister, like a violent cold
Upon an extreme heat, fevers my blood
To death.
Me thinks you are sad and troubled sister.
Why thus alone? Or have you entertained
That troublesome companion, Love? Come tell me
I can advise you very learnedly:
For Cupids Scholars are more exquisite
In giving council then in using it.
How shall I answer him? I dare not look on.
Why are you sad.
Out of conformity
Unto the present garb: I have assumed
Only a veil of sadness.
Thou art only happy,
Whose sorrow is but outward, as a stranger
Called to be present at a funeral
Clads himself like the rest, is serious,
And silent with a countenance dejected,
And Testudineous pace; but has not tears,
No groanings for a loss to him unknown:
The Obsequies performed uncloaths himself
Of grief and weeds together. But my sister,
You are not pleased to talk upon this subject.
Where is the Princess?
He'has given me now a Colour for my sadness.
The Princess is retired; She has been troubled
With a most fearful dream of a Duello
Betwixt you and Philargus to be fought.
With friendly Courtesies?
Nay, with swords she said.
Ha, ha, ha.
Philargus hath been with her, and to him
She told her fears, enjoining him, that both
Of you should come, and jointly before her
Declare your constant friendship.
That's soon done.
But trust me Sir, I fear Philargus took not
All as she meant it; for at his departing,
He looked displeasedly; and, when I demanded
His healths condition, he said he was sick
In Philocles.
In Philocles his absence,
As I am in his. That was his meaning sister.
Pardon my fear; which is, that hoe's not friends w'ye.
Away, your fear has made you idle.
No.
It is my love, in that black horror clad,
Which will, before it leaves me, make me mad.
Isle seek him out.
My Lord, I was commanded
To convey these into your Lordships hands.
By whom were you employed?
My Lord it was not
The man that moved me. For I know him not;
But the reward. I humbly take my leave.
My brother write. Ha! Are we at such distance?
Thou art no Prophetess, Placilla, art thou?
O Gods and men! where shall we go to find
Friendship and truth? Be it so: For in th'event
We may be happy both: But with this odds;
One with Eudina, tother with the Gods.
We should love one another, brother Tersulus,
More inwardly, and be in friendship true
As our Lords are. Prithee let their example
Piece up all difference betwixt us.
Piece up,
I know your meaning and your jeer Varillus,
In your piece up.
Fie on thy jealousy. Because thou art a Taylor,
How ere a Gentleman by place, thou think
I jeer thy quality.
You should not. For
Look back unto the worlds beginning; there
Youl' find a Taylor was before a Barber.
Nay if you go to rip up old Antiquity.
Rip! there he is again.
You may as well
Collect, that the first man (who you suggest
Was his own Taylor) was his own Barber first.
As how?
Do you think he did not scratch his head
In casting how to fashion out his breeches?
And that's in part, you know, the Barbers office.
The scratching of the head.
And still
In use amongst Taylors on themselves. But note
The foul corruptions brought in by Time;
Of old they did but rub invention up,
How to contrive their work: But now their heads
Wrists, fingers, all have got an itch by it, which
Nothing but stealing can allay; though that
Can never cure it.
Lying and stealing went
Of old together: now they are shared it seems
Between the Barber and the Taylor.
Sharp.
Your instruments are sharp as mine, Sir Barber,
And you can pick more out of your Lords ears
Then I take from his Garments with my sheers.
Agree good brother, or would we had Doris
To stickle twixt us.
There you're before me too.
But come, Lords followers are their Apes in most things,
Why should not we be as friendly Rivals, now
In Doris Love, as are our Lords in the
Princess Eudinas. We will take up a fashion.
Varillus, whore's your Lord?
I know not Doris.
Tersulus, whore's yours?
I know not Doris.
You Echo one another. You're commanded
Both by the Princess and the Governess
To seek'em out.
Your love commands our stay.
Coupled together? Go yet one of you.
You I can spare best.
Why him?
You then.
Why him?
Do you conspire? I will return your care.
Nay gentle Doris stay. For, tic in vain
To seek our Lords. They are both rod singly forth
To take the Air. Mine an hour since.
Mine even now. I came but since to call
My brother Tersulus.
Your brother Tersulus?
As deeply vowed in friendship as our Lords are.
It is with us as tic with them: we both
Are brothers, friends; yet Rivals in your love.
Can you now, as the Princess is to them,
Be equally affected to us both?
Do you stay me to abuse me.
Nay, dear Doris.
We love our Lords? and as you love the Princess,
Who loves them, love you us. You are Eudina,
I Philocles, and he Philargus is.
Are the men mad.
Suppose so Gentle Doris.
The King commands you to make present choice
Of one of us, or else ambitious Stratocles
(That's Geron) must enjoy you. Now sweet Princess
Be speedy in your choice. The kingdoms good
Depends upon it. And in your Election,
O make Philargus blessed: He best deserves you.
Admired friend, and brother Philocles,
Your curtsy ore-comes me: I must sue,
Though my heart aches the while as much for you.
This is fine sooling—
Good Barber Philocles, and Taylor Philargus,
You shall not need to trim up his Affection,
Nor you to stich up his with your forced courtesies.
I know, in this, each woos but for himself,
And my Affection runs as even betwixt you,
As nothing but your sizors, or your shears
Had parted.
See Stratocles, alias Geron.
So Meanwhile did contend two warlike Princes
For a fair •and, till a powerful King
Subdued them both and it. Doris, take heed,
Be wary in your conversation
(As Meanwhile Tully warned his tender son)
With such Pl•beians, least their vulgar breeding
Corrupt your education.
Must she be
Your pupil learned Geron.
And my self
Her only study; such as Meanwhile was;
Ʋlysses to Penelope.
Take heed Doris
How you become his wife: For he will love you
So by the book, as he will never lie with you
Without an Author for it.
Sir, she shall be
More precious to me then Homers Iliads,
Meanwhile to Alexander, which he made
His mighty bed-fellow: But why stand I
To render this account? The Princess sent you,
Doris, to call their Lords to walk with her,
And take the air of Tempe.
They are gone to take the air already, sir.
Come you with me then, Doris.
And why with you
Antiquity? I have heard you all this while,
And though you boast you have an interest in me,
We are not yet one volume, both bound up
And clasped together.
She speaks in his Element.
No, I am yet loose paper; and it were good
To keep me so; for when I'm bound I must
Obey, be searched, examined and corrected.
Yet this I'll do, and now be serious,
If you will all obey my rule; and try
Your fortunes who shall have me.
We agree.
Their merits bear no aequability
With mine.
A very Stratocles.
You boast your worth, and stand on confidence
In powerful advocates: But what are all
Unto my Love, and (which is more) my will?
If you will hear my proposition, hear it.
We are agreed. Pray hear't.
Lets hear it then.
The Gods, in Love, Meanwhile have stooped with men.
That you all love me, I believe; and am
Content that every one of you do think
Himself prime man in my Affection:
And one of you I'll take. But yet my choice
Must wait upon Eudina's. Therefore mark
If your Lord wins the Princess, and becomes
The Kings immediate Heir, I will be yours;
If your Lord, yours.
Therein the odds is mine,
For they are both my Lords.
Then if both have her, I'll be yours: not else.
As Meanwhile said, None of the wisest Clerks,
When the Sky falls we shall have store
Of Whilomes: Ha, ha, ha.
Ha, ha, ha.
Your Mistress, Lady, Princess, and my Mother
Shall know your.
Away, old Meanwhile.
Ha, ha, ha.
Your Lords too I'll acquaint.
Away, old child,
Go tell it Mother, do.
If you had spent, in the Philosophers school
Your time no better, then in Cupids Lectures,
What a strange dunce you had been. Tell her, Love shows
In you, as Meanwhile—she knows what she knows.
Your Love I will forget; your scorn remember
In black revenge, and so—
Farewell December.
He will to his Mother now. But tell me, Doris,
What means that Beldam in she knows, she knows:
She's often up with it to the Governess.
It has relation to some uncouth passage
Betwixt them, in my Ladies youth I guess,
Tic some smock-secret I believe. But Gentlemen,
You know how I have laid my self out to you.
That, as the Princess shall bestow her self
On eiders Lord; you will embrace his man.
Right.
And to that you'll hold?
Yes
This for a Creed, That heaven must make its choice and hold you
Of one of them, before she take the other.
You understand me; and now cease your strife:
When th'ones Lord's dead, I'll be the others wife.
So farewell Gentlemen. I have staid too long.
She has given us both a hint now, would we take it.
You did not hear me say, Kill you his Lord,
Nor you kill his.
But she has laid a ground
To end a strife, that I should ne'er ha 'found.
Varillus, come, our Lords may be returned:
And we be shent for loitering.
I must think on it.
Now for my Combatants. Th'appointed ground
Is here; the time draws on; and the event
Foreseen in my imaginary light
Of every pass projected in their fight.
In the first passage, each shall wound the other;
Then shall they give, lend, pay, change wound for wound,
Till both of them lie fainting on the ground.
Holding between their teeth their doubtful lives:
When I, to end the question, friendly come in,
And with an equal hand dispatcht'em both.
And so into my ambush. One approaches.
This is the place. What is it that urges me
So promptly to deed, which being acted,
Will be th'astonishment of Heaven and earth?
Applauded no where but in Hell. Fair Tempe,
Let it not be derived to after Ages,
By any uncouth mark upon thy face,
Let not thy grassy locks, that shall receive
The drops of blood, wither and die, condemning
The place that bore them to continual baldness;
Let not the impress of our labouring feet
Hold it's proportion; nor that part of earth,
Whereon the slain shall measure out his length,
Reserve the stamp, and make it monumental,
By a perpetual spring of more procere
And bigger bladed grass: And, when my soul
Hath found an Exit (which my purpose is
My Brothers sword shall open) let the valley
(When hoe's departed) sink and undermine
The bordering hills that they may cover me.
He hath prevented me in hast: In death
I shall prevent his happily expected
Labour and toy'l, who for no other end
Am here arrived but to be sacrificed
For expiation of his discontent.
Let all the eyes of heaven be hooded, only
One star to guide his point unto my heart,
Which instantly shall fall, and be extinct
In my distilled blood; that so the Gods
May not behold him. May some magic spell
Instruct his arm and weapon how to slay
My name and memory, that of me, there be not
Any desire; on him no Imputation.
My cure is only how my breast may swallow
His point, without revealing mine intent.
I so't shall be: a violent assay
For provocation; and then spit my self
Upon his steel.
Philargus. What! so quick,
What's meant by this?
That should be my demand
Are you so changeable?
Not I Philargus.
This was my resolution;
Will you stain
The reputation raised of your high valour.
I came to make experiment of none
But what consists in suffering.
That's my part.
My self
If you deny me that last friendly office.
Brother you dally with me. Therefore I conjure you
By fair Eudina let your anger loose;
Break up this cask of blood, and give the earth
A draught unto her health.
By the same Beauty
(Then which no greater subject of an oath)
I swear to be your nuptials sacrifice,
Be you the Priest. I'll suffer without noise
In my displayed bowels you shall read
An augury of bliss unto you both.
This is hard measure, Philocles, to mock
Ere you destroy.
I'll mock no more. Adieu.
Hold, hold, and be not prodigal of that blood,
More precious then Pactolus golden streams.
Was then your challenge but totry me only?
Yours was, it seems; but none went out from me.
Then are we both ensnared by treachery.
This I foresaw it would come to. 'Save ye lord∣ings.
And whither travail ye? Do you not want a guide
To help ye on your way?
This is the villainy
That summoned me.
And me. Villainy, what art thou?
Unhappily guessed. I pray inquire no further.
What monster art thou?
Unworthy on thy face to bear mans ensign.
Who has suborned thee? See tic Stratocles man.
Die villainy, die. And were thy ma∣ster in thee,
The thirst of whose ambition sought our bloods;
His flesh with thine should here become a prey
Unto the Ravens.
O, be pitiful
And spare my life, my Lords, and I'll reveal
Matters of weight and wonder; which, concealed,
Will yet cost both your lives, and make the Princess,
If she not answer my Lords fierce desires,
Subject to rape and murder.
How can she
So fall into his power.
We shall abuse
The trust the Gods have put into our hands
If we neglect to execute justice on thee.
Let me but warn ye of Eudina's danger,
Whereby her virgin Innocence may not suffer,
And then inflict your furies on me.
That charms our ready hands and steel. Speak quickly.
This very hour she's to be surprised
By my Lord Stratocles, here, on Tempe plains,
Where she is come to walk, slenderly guarded
To take the air. He with a strength will seize her
And hurry her hence unto his Mansion house,
To yield to his desire, or death, if suddenly
Prevention be not made.
Tic worth our care.
Preserve me from his vengeance, and I'll bring you
Unto his enterprise.
We must not trust him,
He may have laid an Ambuscado for us.
See brother, stand upon our guard.
Help, help, aid me good people, help.
What means the villan now.
What's the complaint?
What is your grievance, speak?
I am a servant to Lord Stratocles
Who has preserved your Countey and your lives.
We are the more beholding to him; on.
It was more his gentleness then our deserving; on.
These two are his malignant enemies;
And finding that my Lord is in these parts
Together with the Princess, fair Eudina
(Who has made him her choice) they lie in wait
To murder him, as they had me, had not
The Gods sent you to rescue me.
It was more their Gentleness, then your de∣serving, on.
I have no more to say, but that you take'em
On your allegiance to safe custody,
And let me pass.
Un'ch, That would be more
Our gentleness then your deserving too. on, on.
Dear friends—
Good, interrupt us not we'll hear ye in order.
On you, Sir, ere you go; and come not back
For any thing unspoke you left behind.
I thank you, Sir, I had like to ha'lest my sword deserving,
Behind, which they disarmed me of.
That was their Gentleness more then your
(They having three swords, and you none to guard you)
They killed you not indeed, yet on again.
W••t further do you charge'em with.
No more, nor you, less you detain me longer.
Now you grow bold, and saucy I must tell you.
Now you're a knave, a villainy and a Traitor,
Lest you no more behind you but a sword?
I saw a scabbard on your face of late,
A false one: Seek it out.
O here it is.
Put it him on again. On with it, on.
Resist and we will hang thee. Now my Lords,
My Princess I may say: For one of you
Must be our King. We know you though you know
Not us; you may perhaps hereafter know us
More by your Gentleness then our deserving.
O worthy Country men.
We are the heads of Tempe; and the chief
Swain heads of Thessaly (the King has known us)
And here we came to lay our heads together
For good of common wealth. Here at the verge
Of this adjoining Thicket is our Bower
Of consultation; and from thence (regardful
Ever with eye and ear for common good)
We saw a beard pulled off; and heard that mouth,
(Which now is dumb) open a plot, unlike
The pitiful compl•int he made to us.
But saw you not some passages before?
Of his attempt upon our lives?
Good Gods.
No we came in but then. Those are enough
To hang the man, and turn his Lord out of
Our Country favour: If we find he has
That plot upon the body of the Princess
Of Rape and Murder. He can be no King
For us: for, sirrah, we have wives and daughters.
Stand close. See who comes here.
So, now go back my friends. There's some reward.
Thanks to the noble bounteous Stratocles.
Lady your tears are bootless.
Help ye Gods.
Your cries as unavailable. The Gods
(To whom your friendly foolish lovers
Have sacrificed each other) have given you up
To me the only worthy of you.
No they are both sublimed into one star,
Yet of a double influence, that shall
Strike death into thy purposes, and give
Me light by which t'ascend with them to live
After my present death.
Your hast to death shall not prevent my lust.
She must outlive thy Lust and the false Traitor
Hold, hold, disarm, but kill him not.
We'll keep him tame.
You have odds o'me.
I am in heaven already.
Live wonder of the heavens, a star on earth
Out shining theirs.
What a short journey it is
For heavenly minds to reach unto the Gods!
B•tray'd!
No not betrayed. You're but well meet my Lord,
But that's our Gentlen ess more then your deserving.
Am I become the shame and scorn of peasants.
Or if you'll have it betrayed, then blame your own
Overmuch policy and want of Beasts
To carry it to Market. We ne'er lay
More burden on a Ass, then he can bear
Here in the country: what is done at court
We know not. Here perhaps is one can tell,
Know you this bearded Satire?
Coward, slave,
Thy faintness hath betrayed me.
No, it was odds,
Such as men meet that sight against the Gods.
The fellow has some Grace; he weeps: But come
Princess and Princes, what is now your pleasure
We do unto these men?
For me, I have learned
By mine own sufferings in my afflictions
To be compassionate. I wish their pardon.
That mercy wounds me deeper with remorse
Then all my lost designs, and their derision
Have done with indignation.
There is some hope these yet may prove new men.
Lord Stratocles,
Those wounds that pierce the heart with true contrition
Do bring the precious balm in'em that cures it.
We wish yours may be such.
And that this shame
May guard you innocent of future blame.
Here's sweetness upon sweetness.
Now it remains, that we advise our selves,
Brethren of Tempe, that since these delinquents
Are fallen into our hands, that we discharge
Our Country loyalty with discretion,
And not release him from our power, but by
The power above us. (that's the kings) we'll wait
On you to court. On you for your new loves,
And you for old acquaintance.
I'll acquaint my father with your care,
He shall be witness of our bringing in
The ambitious Politic trapt in his own gin.
Bereft of all my joys and hopes at once!
Is there no com•ort, nor no counsel left me?
Why stand you gazing thus with sealed lips?
Where is your counsel now, which you are wont
In trifling matters to pour out in plenty?
Now, in the peril of my life and state
I cannot get a word. Give me my daughter,
Or take my Kingdom too. Where is she? Tell me.
All we can say or hear is, she was taken
Out of her private walks by violent hands,
Only we guess the master of the plot
Was Stratocles, who now is missing in the Court.
He asked my leave to leave the Court, and had it.
It was a fit gloss for his fowl treachery.
But what have you said for her recovery.
We have dispatch't a hundred several posts
To every coast and angle of your Kingdom:
No way of finding her is left unsought.
Could we find Stratocles, she might be found.
Still upon him? Whore's Philocles? whore's Philargus?
They are missing too.
Hell has not in it a thought
That can detract their honours.
Yet a Rumour
Is spread about the Court; they are gone to fight.
Against whom?
Against themselves. Nay more, that they
Have fought, and both are slain.
You may as soon
Believe the Arctic and Antarctic poles
Can meet it opposition, amidst
The firmament, and jointly in a fall
Extinguish both their lights in Neptunes bosom.
Whence springs this Rumour.
Stratocles is the head
We may be confident; and his men the pipes
That have dispers't it.
Still you judge Stratocles.
What purpose can he have in it.
O my sister
Has heard the news too. Weep not tender sister,
Your sons are safe.
Yes they are with the Gods.
And, had they tan Eudina with them too,
My doubts and fears were over, well as yours.
Here's one that makes a face, an ugly one,
And would weep too, had she but moisture in her.
How now! Whose Mare's dead, Garrula? Take thy bottle
And turn that into tears. Or dost thou wring
Thy face because that's dry? Gi'mee't, I'll fill it.
My son, oh, oh my son is at deaths door.
And is death so unkind to keep it shut
Against him? Out upon him churl.
My liege
And Madam (it shall out) you might have saved
My sons life in your servants love, whose scorn
Will be his death, except the King divert it,
And I shall tell him what you know I know—
O me undone.
And open such a secret
Unto his majesty—
Yet forbear me now.
Do you slight me in the care of my sons life?
Do you scorn my secret too, that may be worth
More then your kingdom to you?
Away old fool.
Now you shall never know it.
For thy good will
The king would thank thee, in offering at some mirth
To cool his grief, but that it is too hot
Yet to be touched.
Indeed you do not well
To move the King, or to perplex the Lady
Now in their sorrows fullness.
What's their sorrow
To mine? My sons a dying.
Her sons are dead,
And the Kings daughter lost.
But I pray, say,
Is my Lord Philocles and Philargus dead?
It is said so.
Then I say my son shall live.
And so wilt thou while thou can lift thy bottle
To that old Miser.
Hem! A hem! a ha!
Do you rejoice, and show the rotten half tooth
You have left that they are dead.
No I rejoice
That the advancement that the giglet gaped for
In one of their fine followers is lost,
In hope of which she scorned my son. But now
He shall scorn her and live.
Out envious trot
Isle comfort him with the news.
away you Hag,
Here comes one merry look.
Joy to the king.
Well said, speak up and home good
Your daughter's safe returned so is your son, Madam,
For which you are to thank the Gods: This is
Their true relation.
Where is Stratocles?
Caught in the snares of his foul treachery.
Bravely and honestly spoken Eupathus.
And by their hands whose voices he had once
For his election.
What his country heads?
They all turn head upon him now.
Brave heads
Observe my judgement now, my king: Those heads
I will so souse in our best Greekish Wines,
That they shall be such heads! O heads, heads, heads!
I do approve your judgment good Disanius,
But wish you not insult ore mans dejection.
We find that Stracocles is much Penitent
And troubled at his trespass.
A halter still him
For an ambitious hypocritical Traitor.
The time for my Eudina's match draws near,
And I no longer will attend on fortune,
I have decreed it past recall, regardless
Whether against the oracle, or with it.
Yet am I consident in your assertion
You priests of Delphos.
He will bestow her yet
On Stratocles, if she stand longer doubtful
In a fair choice.
Fear not my Lord. That doubt
Your Country heads will clear. He has lost them
For ever.
O brave heads! I will so ring
Their ears with jewels of praises and preferment
That they shall glare like direful comets at him.
One she shall choose of them: If not, I'll put
A third upon her.
With your pardon Sir,
Why are you (for I find it is so) stronger
For Philocles?
No reason urges me;
And yet I find an inclination in me
That pleads for him. I can perceive you too,
Are partial towards Philargus. Can you yield
A reason for it?
Yes, Sir, he is my eldest.
Alas, But not an hour. Well, I'll remit
My power propounding, and accept
Her choice of either, made within the time.
I, there my hopes do anchor; else they were
Certain of Ship-wrack: yet the perilous waves
My vessel rides on seems so many graves.
Brother, and friend, I'm deaf to all dissuasion.
I charge you by Eudina's love, our friendship,
And (if there be) ought that you hold more sacred,
Move not to alter my fixed resolution.
That resolution's mine; And I conjure you
By the self-same respects, and all that are
Or may be hollowed, to let me depart.
I will remove but for some few days journey
Whence you shall duly hear from me. But rather
I'll travail to the Antipodes, then here
Linger the vain impediment of your joys
In your Eudina.
Travel's my design.
Eudina must be yours. She is a bliss
Which heaven created for you.
Can a bliss
Be purchased with your absence? No: 'Twil torture
Equally in fruition as in want.
Were it a Kingdom only, we could part it
Without the quarrel of the Thebean brothers;
Or, were it heaven it self, Castor and Pollux
Should have our imitation. But Eudina
Is only indivisible.
Add to it this,
Their sentence is erroneous, that deny
Partition to the soul: For ours do witness,
Friendship can give her a division,
And make reciprocal community
Of all her faculties. But still Eudyna
Is indivisible. Why name I her,
Whom to forget must be my only tasque?
Brother adieu.
It is I that must take leave.
Is it even so?
I fear we are prevented.
Nephews, why left you so the presence? I
May justly fear you were ill advised in it.
The King expects your quick return, and will not
Let pass this peremptory day, set down
For matching of his daughter; to preserve
Life, State, or Kingdom. Have you a purpose,
First having begged that villain Stratocles pardon,
To give him up your interest in the Princess?
The Kingdom too, to boot? will you compel
The King to give him all?
Not so good Uncle.
What do you less in flying from the presence,
When that affair is now in agitation?
Uncle, you saw withal the great distraction
We left the Princess in. How when she looked
Upon Philargus, she inclined to him;
And when on me to me; when on us both
How extasied she fell!
A strong necessity
There is that one of us absent.
Therefore
You both fly off to travel several ways!
Come, let me tell you your curtsy is foolish,
And you unworthy to have such a fortune
Hang like a pregnant cloud over your heads
Ready to be dissolved in showers upon you,
While your own madness conjures up a wind
To blow't away.
Uncle, you are unjust,
I would remove to let that golden shower
Light upon Philocles.
I upon Philargus.
I could even swadle'em both for a brace of Babies.
Your folly makes me mad: will you return
Yet to the presence, both of you?
Uncle, you know
To be both there, is neither to be there,
But to breed more perplexity in Eudyna.
Pray take Philargus.
Nephew, come, be wise:
It is a crown that Courts you; and the name
Of friend, or Brother ought to stand aloof,
And know a distance, where such dignity
Is tendered. Take your opportunity,
I find you coming, come.
I pray take Philocles.
I'll take him for the wiser man then. Nephew,
Come, and embrace your fortune, and forget not
To thank the Gods your Brother has no more wit.
A Kingdom and a beauteous bed▪fellow
(There Nephew, there!) Do not those bare a sound
'Bove friend and Brother, ha?
not in mine ears.
What frost has ceiz'd their blood, &amp; brains, which neither
Beauty nor dignity can thaw? Go travel.
What stay you for? young Gentlemen sometimes
Wait for a gale of gold to blow'em out
O'th'harbour; Stratocles will furnish you,
And thank you more then for his forfeit life.
Stratocles can gain nothing by my absence,
While her Philargus stays.
No, nor by mine,
While Philocles remains.
Shall I make a motion,
Will one of you remain?
One must and shall.
Then yield to take your lots for it. (I will make'em)
As you respect my love; your mothers life;
The kingdoms good; Eudynas love and life,
Let it be so. Pause not upon it, but do it.
See, here's ink and paper. I am inspired,
Apollo, with thy wisdom. Love.—and friendship.
See, here's a pass for one, and a plantation
For tother. Love and friendship Gentlemen.
Love shall abide at home, and friendship walk,
According to the custom of the world.
Let it be so. ▪Come study not, but draw,
I'll draw upon ye both else.
Friendship for me then.
See here I have it brother. And yours is love.
My love be prosperous to you. My horse, my horse.
Ell's ready, Sir.
In the first place then bring
A parting cup, that by the grapes Elizar
As Jove by Acheron, I may protest
My constancy and zeal unto my purpose.
And now's my time to act thy purpose, Doris.
Kick not your heels against the Gods, Philargus,
It is most evidently their decree
That you abide and Philocles remove.
I do obey my Lot. And noblest brother.
Be you as free in love, as I from envy.
But how can you forgo that equal interest
You have with me in Thessaly, and Eudina?
Why should that trouble you? you see he does
Forgo't; and is a going. Would he were gone once.
Can love allow't?
Variety of objects
Like Nails abandon one a another. So
May I, by novelties of Travail, lose
The thought of Love; and cheerfully return
Both hers and yours in a more just relation.
Give me the bowl. Now brother to that love
You owe the fair Eudina, unto which
I give th'addition of mine own, and all
The joves that ere I wished my self and her,
And to that friendship, which nor Time, nor absence
Shall ever end or alter.
Now the service that may redeem my faults
Is to be done.
Give it me full, Varillus.
I'll give you more then you expect by this.
You have the victory in friendship, brother,
Who, by your resolute absence will enforce
And drive me to a happiness; wherein
I must not cease, in all the strength of prayers
Of sacrifice, and vows; in all my goods
Of fortune, mind and body to be yours:
Which that you may return to repossess
With the more speed, this health to auspicate
And expedite your travails.
They are done
Already if my Apothecaries skill fail not.
With this embrace my brother, and my last
Of present ceremony, I now wish you
In th'arms of your Eudina—
And may my better part of soul, which now
I leave in trust with you, by you be breathed
Into her breast; that she may lively find
She has my love in yours; and that in you
She has us both.
So, so, enough. Ha'ye done yet?
How is it with you brother?
As it is
With souls that leave the world in peace.
For shame
Leave womanish ceremony. Will you part
Before it be too late?
Too soon I fear.
Philargus! Brother! Friend! Ye Gods, how comes this?
What is he dead? I see then how it comes.
You or your man, or both ha'poyson'd him.
No, it was my self.
Thou wilt not go out o'th'world
With a lie i'thy mouth? Speak yet again,
He has said well for me already,
Gone, past recovery, but he shall not pass
Without my company.
Wilt thou die mad too?
Come, Sir, let go your whiblin. He has yet
Some breath. Run for Physicians—No, Sir, stay.
I will not quit you so. I can read guilty lines
Palpably on this villans visnomy.
Is there no more i'th'house? some help here! ho!
Nephew forbear. As you will have me think
You guiltless of your brothers blood, forbear.
How am I tortured! Ho! Philargus; rub him,
Rub him, he may live yet.
O that the world
Might be so happy!
So, well said: A box
Or two in kindness will not do amiss.
Stir not you sirrah. O, Sir, you lay hold
On that same traitor.
I'll not stir my Lord.
I'll hold you to your word, Sir, run, Sir, you
And fetch Physicians.
O my Lord, fallen dead!
Stay but to look upon him, and I'll swear
Thou art his murderer. Fetch the Kings Physicians,
If not to cure him; yet to rip the cause
Out of his sudden death. I guess they'll find
Your handy-work in's maw.
You heard him say
It was himself that did it. I am cleared.
My Lord, the King, impatient of your stay,
Has sent •.
What has he sent. Has he sent means
To call this man from death, or that from falling
After him into th'grave?
O heavy spectacle!
But, come I will not cry though. Pray assist me,
In with this body, Charity commands
When grieved necessity entreats your hands.
My Rustici amici, your Council and
Your virtue have restored me. And tic true
As Wholom said the good Antisthenes
Virtue is armour against the very fates.
We told you for your good, good Mr. Geron,
Fond love became you not.
It sat upon your coat like burs or briars
Stuck in the hindlocks of our fleecy sheep;
Who shake their heads; figgle, and writh their tails,
And bleat for woe; sprinkle the ground behind'em
Sometimes I wise: Twould make one laugh and pitty'em
And all at once, but all remediless.
Till we with helping wit and hands release'em
A wise man then in love is like a sheep
l'th' briars. As Meanwhile said
But (by the way)
What was that Meanwhile, Sir, you speak much of him,
But what was he pray.
An ancient Britain, whom I have affected
As idly as my love. But I'll forget it
And use that word no more. The clowns have found me.
But will you now proceed upon your plot
For th'honour of Tempe plains, and Tempe swains.
You can all dance.
After our country guise.
Like so many light horses.
So can our wives
Who have followed us up to Court we thank'em
Pray Juno we get them honestly home again.
There is no doubt. However fear you nothing
As why—Tic hard to leave off an old custom.
The why was out, but loom stuck in your teeth.
Tic well it did so. You can dance you say.
A dance I have projected for the Princess
Who ever marries her it shall serve. As why—
Again it was even a coming.
You are as quick as why—
And there again.
Nay we are heads, I tell you Master Geron,
And should have wit; and show it we can in th'countrey,
In the head vein, though hear at Court, like courtiers
We'll show it in our heels. Pray therefore on.
On, let us then to practise. King and court
Shall see, to crown their joys, some country sport.
No answer, no return? Must I entreat,
Yet have my undeserved favours slighted?
Yet, Sir, your Kingly patience.
Stupid folly
It were longer to attend. My vow is past
And registered in heaven; the minute is
Athand, that calls down thonder on me, which
No tear, or prayers can mollify or aver'•,
If I upon so long deliheration
Shall falsify. So, call in Stratocles.
O my dread father. Yet one hours patience
Till Eupathus or Disanius return.
One short, short hour: I may not live so long.
His wife you named; though you may force me take him.
I'll leave that to the Gods.
They will forgive. Give them your imitation
In mercy, as in power on earth. I know Disanius
Went not in vain to call'em to your presence.
And him that he brings first into this room
O Philocles or Philargus I will take,
Though he precede the other but one foot,
I have it by inspiration from the Gods.
You are full of dreams.
This cannot, Sir, be long
In trial. King Yet I am not bound to wait
On those ungrateful men. O Stratocles,
You have from your late Errors, which your then
Head-strong ambition hurried and cast you in
With that humility purged your self, that I
Conceive you now a temperate Man; and am
Instructed by the clemency of the Gods
To cherish and reward your virtue. Therefore
From their divine appointment, as my hands—
(O mighty, Sir—
Dare not to disobey me)
Receive Eudina.
Royal King and Master,
Mistake not so the pleasure of the Gods.
My forfeit life you have forgiven me:
Your Kingly power and grace might do it. You
Have given it freely: but I took't with caution,
By future service to make good your gift:
But for my forfeit love to fair Eudina,
And my lost honour to the twin-born brothers,
There can be no redemption, if I add
By acceptance of your bounteous offer
A second trespass, greater then the former.
Do you refuse her then.
In hope she'll plead
My pardon to your grace.
The Gods have wrought
Effectually for me.
Strangely, unexpected
Are you become a suppliant Placilla?
In the behalf, Sir, of your loyal subjects,
The Swains of Tempe.
I expected, rather,
News from your unkind brothers. See Justinius,
The Commons, rather then I shall bestow
My daughter upon Stratocles, do beseech me
To take a further time.
You're happy, Sir,
In his refusal and in their request.
They are fair predictions of ensuing joys
To you, your daughter, and the Kingdom, If
I may be worthy to divine so much.
How ere thy divination proves, thy wish
Is worth our thanks. And we may have
Glad tidings presently. Now Eupathus
Where is Disanius, Philocles, and Philargus?
Why come they not?
They are all at hand my liege.
This paper may excuse their stay.
O do
They plead excuse then?
I am full of fears.
And I of sudden joy.
Pray all be well.
The King has struck his breast, and seems perplexed.
Justinius, Stratocles, read here this Paper.
Go Eupathus, and let them enter. Stay.
Yet go, bring them in their prescribed manner.
I'll send the woman off, whose sudden grief
May be a bar to our proceedings. Madam—
I fear that Garrula has detected me.
I must entreat a while your absence, Lady.
May I presume to ask your reason, Sir.
My will has been above your question. Pray,
Let me request you go.
I know obedience.
And go Placilla, send old Garrula to me.
Now tic most evident. O mighty, Sir,
Conceive not worse of me then Garrula.
Let us appear together.
What means this?
You may be pleased to hear me first.
Pray pull not
More weight upon your breast then you can bear,
By your impertinent stay. Go I command you.
I must obey. However tic too late
To change the resolution of my fate.
I have not known her thus. I fear distraction
Fore-runs the voice of grief, as to prevent it.
Heaven knows I called for Garrula, but to send her
With best directions to prepare and arm
Her tender soul against the sting of sorrow
Before it should approach her. But Eudina
You must be valiant; and not let the sight
Of death in others shake your confidence.
How means your majesty?
Suppose that both
Your fatal lovers, Philocles and Philargus
Slept in the caves of death.
I should not live then;
Suppose his destiny had cut off one,
And, in him, all the impediments, that crossed
You in the enjoying of the other, say
Which could you wish survivor? But you have
Declared your constant purpose to possess
The first Disanius brings into this presence.
Come; one is dead. There is a strict necessity
You know it. Now collect your Reason: For it is not
Your passion for the dead; nor your dislike
Of Stratocles; no though my subjects yield you
A longer time, shall make me tempt the Gods
By breaking of my vow. Be steadfast then,
As you respect a father; and take courage.
See Philocles lives.
Philargus then
Is brought in dead be•ore him by Disanius;
And unto him the first to be brought in
My faith was vowed; and he is now my choice.
What being dead? Could you affect'em so
Equally, both alive, that you forbore
To choose, because you could not have'em both;
And now seek only him cannot be had?
What Love, what madness call you this? good Gods,
Throw not your wrath upon me in destruction on the other
Nor let your passion Master you great, sir, side,
As sudden grief does her. But give a little
Scope to her sorrow. She will soon return
And meet her Reason in obedience
To your desires.
I thank thee good Justinius.
Your virgin tears and vows ore your lost love
I did attend with pardon, my Eudina,
I• hope you are now compliant to my will.
Grieve not your father Madam.
I ha'done;
And as the Gods direct him to command me,
I must and will obey.
So that's well said.
The Gods have pleased Eudina to determine
Your doubtful choice, reserving Philocles
Unto your love without competitor:
Therefore it now remains that he be taken
Into your liking; whom I have decreed
My successor.
His merits are above
Me and this land; In which what interest
My birth hath given me I resign to him.
Only let me beseech a further respite.
For what? the celebration? I consent;
But for the contract, this imediate hour
Shall see it knit beyond all dissolution.
I that I thirst to see.
Give me your hands.
Yours Philocles.
Why give you not your hand,
Dare you not trust the King with it? should he now
Show a jades trick and fly back.
I beseech
Under your highness Pardon, yet, a respite.
More respits yet? Was ever hopeful match
Driven so round about?
Why this delay?
My brothers blood cries in me for your justice
Which must be executed on his murderer
Before I safely can, or dare possess
His interest in the faith of fair Eudina.
O, is that all? that may be soon dispatched.
Come forwards Poisoner. Good your Majesty,
For expedition, make me his judge,
And hangman too (I care not) rather then
Suffer this match hang of the tenters thus.
Has he confessed the fact?
Yes, yes to me.
I beat it out of him. Quickly good King.
Your patience good Disanius Sirrah speak.
It was my act. But may your mercy look
Upon my love in it unto my Lord.
Your Lord shall be your j•dge then.
I ad∣judge him
To sharp but lingering tortures (for his death
Alone can yield no satisfaction)
Tortures that may draw in, by his confession,
As accessories with him, all the homicides
That are in the Kingdom.
A hard matter that.
Nor can I think his only brain and hands
Composed the poison.
Hang him, hoe's a Barber,
And uses Aqua fortis, oil of Vitriol,
Mercury, and such like, to cleanse his Razors.
It is good that you Varillus clear your conscience
And, if you had confederates in the fact,
Give up their names.
Varillus, I suspect
Doris joined hand with you in my Lords death.
What's that you mutter?
It shall out my Lord;
The handmaid Doris put him on it; I know it
By what she said to us both we being her lovers.
The Taylor proves an honest man: because
He cannot have the wench himself, he'll hang her.
Of her I had the poison, tic confessed.
O that whore. King. Find her and drag her hither.
Whore's my Philargus? Give me yet his body,
That with a mothers tears I may embalm it.
You have heard the wosul news then; but my sister
Could grief recall Philargus, we would weep
A second deluge for his reparation;
Renew his breath by sighing, and awake him,
With groans out of his Sepulchre.
Already
Have you interred him then? you made strange hast.
Was it your subtlety to send me hence,
Fearing my cries might have revived him, king?
And so again delayed your daughters marriage?
I have enough to cross it yet Philargus
What's that?
Distraction sure.
My fear foresaw't.
You are deceived, for from my depth of so•row,
Through this thick film o• tears, I can perceive
You are about to join the hands and faiths
Of Philocles and Eudina,
Is not that
Enough to dry your tears, and show, you that
The Gods were rather merciful in leaving
This son, then rigorous in taking •other?
Or would you now, cause you have lost Philargus,
Kill Philocles too by crossing of this contract?
It is the pleasure of the Gods I cross it.
Of devils it is. What can she mean? Go sleep.
King by your leave.
What says old suckbottle now?
Nay I am here before you Garrula,
And now will tell the long hid secret for you.
And if I err in it, disprove me.
Tell't then.
My faltering tongue will fail me. I can hear though.
This contract must not be.
You then must yield
More reason then I find you have.
Your self
Can never make it. You will sooner join
The Wolf and Lamb. Falcon and Dove together.
No trifling I command you Thymele.
If you be serious, Mother, hold us not
In this suspense.
Let not the royal blood
Of Thessaly be stained with an incestuous match.
How!
She says right. They are both your lawful i will∣drone
By your own virtuous Queen now in—Elisium.
What dreams are these of your distempered heads,
This is no dream or fable. But unfeigned
As truth it self: Which with your gracious leave
I shall demonstrate, humbly craving pardon
For my so long concealment, as I'll yield
Due reason for it.
Freely speak, you have it.
You may remember in your civil wars,
(Those cruel wars, as I may justly stile' em)
In which my husband fell—
O my brave brother!
When open Rebels and domestic Traitors
Pursued your Crown and life; your gracious Queen
To have been brought to bed; and was believed
To have miscarried by an abortive birth.
True: In her flight she was constrained to take
A neighbouring cottage; and use the help
Of the Swains wife.
That swain-ess was my self,
Though my deserts have glorified me since:
And by my help (and somewhat of the Gods)
She then made you the Father of that Prince.
Take up thy bottle—Sister, speak you on.
Th'affrighted queen (yet wise in that extremity)
Suspecting that the innocence of her babe
Born to a Kingdom, could not be secured
In those combustions from apparent danger,
Sent him to me in private, then in travel
Of my Philargus—Charging me to fain
A second labour, with the Midwifes aid,
For Philocles: I did, and was reputed
Mother of both.
I cannot think our Queen
Would keep us ignorant of so good a Fortune.
I moved her oft to tell you. But she answered,
All is not sound, There's danger, yet; And when
After Eudyna's birth she felt her self
At point of death, she strictly did enjoin
Me and this woman, only conscious with her,
By oath of which she had prepared this copy
In her own hand, to keep it silent, till
Philocles should be able to secure
Himself from treachery; or that your term
Of life expiring, or some accident
Of no less consequence required detection.
For further proof—
My joy forbids more questioning
Give me my •lesh and blood into my bosom.
Thrice happy Fathers if your Children were
Borne to you thus of perfect Age. But where
Is now a Match for my Eudina. I
Have here a successor.
Ho! Voices in the Ayre that cry Philargus?
Voices that do tell me, I must follow him
Up to the heavens, and there be married to him.
Here's the She-Devil now.
You need not pull me
For that mans love, I laid thy Lord to sleep:
Had I loved thee best, then his Lord had slept.
How does he sleep? speak impudent baggage, how?
How? With a powder, Sir, which my own father
A skilful apothecary prepared; who, if
Philargus dye, shall hang with us for Company.
Your father?
Yes, But now the perils past.
See, if he sleep, tic walking.
Ha! Philargus.
Or but the shade; the spirit of my friend.
Be not amazed, as at an apparition.
Doth my son live? O then I have enough.
Come hither. come hither you three. I will dis∣charge
The scene of you▪ Thy love unto thy Lord
(Though somewhat unadvisedly employed)
Deserves reward; Isle see it given thee,
Thy Lord and King shall thank thee: take thy wench,
She has love in her wit, and wit in her anger.
I like the luck of things; that ill intents
Should bring forth good events. Thy faithfulness
To thy Lord too was happy. Go, I▪le see you
All royally rewarded. How now Geron?
My Lord I see here's joy towards, as why—
'Slife, stand not Whiloming now man:but be brief.
Cry mercy. I had left it. But my Lord
To celebrate the flowing joys in Court,
I and my Country heads have framed a Masque,
Rather an antic dance, rather a country toy,
Rather a Rustic round; rather a—
Hoy day!
Thy Rather's worse then thy Meanwhile. Dost know
What time o'day it is.
Tic a rural thing
To be presented at the Princess wedding
And, if you think it meet, I will induce
The practise of it presently. As why—
Go fetch the heads and heels, I'll stay the King,
To see and laugh at'em. That's grace enough.
Philargus you have much to know; the which
We will Eudina tell you, now shoe's yours.
Receive her and our blessing.
Were I dead
(As I was thought to be) your name pronounced
Over my grave, beyond all Necromancy,
Would call fresh blood into my veins again;
Strengthen my nerves, to break the Iron gates
Of death; and force my joyful spirit from
The Elision Paradise to live with you.
You shall not be a looser Thymele:
Philocles shall be yours, and in exchange
Placilla mine.
To me my beauteous spouse
Thou art as Juno to her Jupiter,
Sister and wife.
Your highness may be pleased
Now at so happy leisure to perpend
The Oracle; which truly hath effected
Each word of the prediction.
Who can repeat the answer, I ha'lost it.
I have it.
Contend not for the jewel, which
Ere long shall both of you enrich.
Eudina does so: me in a dear sister.
Me in a Peerless wife.
Pursue your fortune: for it is she
Shall make ye what you seem to be.
She has done that too: For now indeed w'are brothers
Apollo thou hast filled us all with joy,
But has our joy already filled our Court
With Music?
Will your Majesty yet sit
And see the practise of a presentation,
Against the Marriages by your Swains of Tempe
With thanks; and give it all the grace we may?
From Tempe plains, the Tempe Swains
With mirth and Melody,
With Dance and Song do hither throng
To greet your Majesty.
O there, look there, Madam my Son, and all
My old Temperian Neighbours.
We cannot hope in all our scope,
To gain much praise for skill,
But it shall be enough, if ye
Accept of our good will.
My thanks to all.
Heaven bless your Majesty.
Thanks to Apollo. Let his temple be
The place of our solemnity. His Altars
Let them be laden with Arabian spices;
Let his Priests lead, in a devout procession,
The horned Sacrifice, mantled with Ghirlonds
And we (our Temples crowned with Laurel) follow
With Music, sounding Hymen and Apollo.
Tic not the Poets art, nor all that we
By life of Action can present unt'ye
Can justly make us to presume a Play
Is good till you approv't: which that you may
It cannot mis-become us, since our gains
Come by your favour more then all our pains.
Thus to submit us unto your commands
And humbly ask that favour at your hands.

HE that could never boast, nor seek the way,
To prepare friends to magnify his Play,
Nor rail it's Auditory for unjust,
If they not liked it nor was so mistrust.
Full ever in himself, that he besought
Preapprobation though they liked it not.
Nor ever had the luck to have his name
Clapped up above this merit. Nor the shame
To be cried down below it. He this night
Your fair and free Attention does invite.
Only he prays no prejudice be brought
By any that before-hand wish it nought.
And that ye all be pleased to hear and see,
With Candor suiting his Integrity.
That for the Writer. Something we must say,
Now in defence of us, and of the Play
We shall present no Scandal or Abuse,
To virtue or to honour. Nor traduce
Person of worth. Nor point at the disgrace
Of any one residing in the Place,
On which our Scene is laid, nor any Action show,
Of thing has there been done, for ought we know.
Though it be probable that such have been.
But if some vicious persons be brought in.
As no new Buildings, nor the strongest hold
Can keep ou• Rats and Vermin bad and bold.
Let not the sight of such be ill endured;
All sores are seen and searched before the are cured.
As Ruffian, Bawd, and the licentious crew,
Too apt to pester Scituations new.
It is not amiss ere we begin our Play,
To entreat you, that you take the same surveigh
Into your fancy, as our Poet took,
Of Covent-Garden, when he wrote his Book.
Some ten years since, when it was grown with weeds.
Not set, as now it is, with Noble Seeds.
Which make the Garden glorious. And much
Our Poet craves and hopes you will not grutch
It him, that since so happily his Pen
Foretold its fair improvement, and that men
Of worth and honour should renown the place.
The Play may still retain its former grace.
I Marry Sir! This is something like! These appear like Buildings! Here's Architecture expressed in∣deed! It is a most sightly scitua∣tion, and fit for Gentry and Nobility.
When it is all finished, doubtless it will be handsome.
It will be glorious: and yond magnificent Piece, the Piazzo, will excel that at Venice, by hear∣say, (I ne'er travelled). A hearty blessing on their brains, honours, and welds, that are Projectors, Furtherers, and Performers of such great works. And now I come to you Mr. Rookesbill: I like your Row of houses most incomparably. Your money never
shone so on your Counting-boards, as in those Stru∣ctures.
I have piled up a Leash of thousand pounds in walls and windows there.
It will all come again with large en∣crease.
And better is your money thus let out on red and white, then upon black and white, I say. You can∣not think how I am taken with that Row! How even and straight they are! And so are all indeed. The Surveyor (what ever he was) has manifested himself the Master of his great Art. How he has wedded strength to beauty; state to uniformity; commode∣ousnesse with perspicuity! All, all is it should be!
If all were as well tenanted and inhabited by worthy persons.
Phew; that will follow. What new Plant∣tion was ever peopled with the better sort at first; nay, commonly, the lewdest blades, and naughty∣packs are either necessitated to 'hem, or else do prove the most forward venturers. Is not lime and hair the first in all your foundations? do we not soil or dung our lands, before we sow or plant any thing that's good in 'hem? And do not weeds creep up first in all Gardens? and why not then in this? which never was a Garden until now; and which will be the Gar∣den of Gardens, I foresee't. And for the weeds in it, let me alone for the weeding of them out. And so as my Reverend Ancestor Justice Adam Overdo, was wont to say, In Heavens name and the Kings, and for the good of the Common-wealth I will go a∣bout it.
I would a few more of the Worshipful here∣abouts, (whether they be in Commission or not) were as well minded that way as you are Sir; we should
then have all sweet and clean, and that quickly too.
I have thought upon a way for it, Mr. Rooks∣bill: and I will pursue it, viz. to find out all the enormities, yet be my self unspied: whereby I will tread out the spark of impiety, whilst it is yet a spark and not a flame; and break the egg of a mis∣chief, whilst it is yet an egg and not a Cockatrice. Then doubt not of worthy tenants for your houses Mr. Rooksbill.
I hope, Sir, your best furtherance.
I had a letter bur last night from a worthy friend, a West-countrey Gentleman, that is, now coming up with his family to live in Town here; and desire is to inhabit in these buildings. He was to lie at Hammersmith last night, and requested an early meeting of me this morning here, to assist him in the taking of a house. It is my business hither; for he could never do it himself. He has the oldest touchy, wrangling humour.—But in a harmless way; for he hurts no body, and pleases himself in it. His children have all the trouble of it, that do anger him in obeying him sometimes. You will know him anon. I mean, he shall be your Tenant. And luckily he comes.
It is not enough you tell me of obedience. Or that you are obedient. But I will be obeyed in my own way. Do you see—
My noble friend Mr. Croswill, right happi∣lie met.
Your troublesome friend Mr. Cockbrayne.
No trouble at all, Sir, though I have pre∣vented
yours in finding a fit house for you.
You have not have you, ha?
Actum est Mr. Croswill. But Civility par∣don me, Is not this your daughter?
All the Shee-things I have: and would I were well rid of her too.
Sweet Mrs. Katherine, Welcome—Mr. Gabriel, I take it.
Gabriel Croswill is my name.
But whore's your younger son Mihill? There's a spark!
A Spark! A dunce I fear by this time like his brother Sheepshead there.
Gabriel is my proper name.
I have not seen him this Twelve-moneth, since I chambered him a Student here in Town.
In town, and I not know it?
He knows not yet of my coming neither, nor shall not, till I steal upon him; and if I find him mopish like his brother, I know what I will doe.
Have you not heard from him lately?
Yes, often by his letters, less I could read more comfort in 'hem. I fear he's turned Precision, for all his Epistles end with Amen; and the-matter of 'hem is such as if he could teach me to ask him blessing.
A comfortable hearing of a young man.
Is it so Sir? but I'll new mould him if it be so.—I'll tell you Mr. Cockbrayne; never was such a father so crossed in his children. They will not obey me in my way. I grant, they do things that other fathers would rejoice at. But I will be obeyed in my own way, dee see. Here's my eldest son. Mark how he stands, as if he had learned a posture at Knights-bridge 
spittle as we came aloug while-eare. He was not only borne without wit, but with an obstinate re∣solution, never to have any. I mean, such wit as might become a Gentleman.
Was that resolution borne in him think you.
It could never grow up in him still as it does else. When I would have him take his horse, and follow the dogs, and associate Gentlemen, in hawk∣ing, hunting, or such like exercises, he'll run you a foot five mile another way, to meet the brethren of the separation, at such exercises as I never sent him to (I am sure) on worky days. And whereas most Gentlemen run into other men's books, in hands that they care not who reads, he has a book of his own Short-writing in his pocket, of such stuff as is fit for no mans reading indeed but his own.
Surely Sir.—
Sure you are an Ass. Hold your tongue.
You are my father.
What comfort should I have, were my son such.
And he has nothing but hanged the head, as you see now, ever since Holiday sports were cried up in the Country. And but for that, and to talk with some of the silenced Pastors here in town about it, I should not have drawn him up.
I would I could change a son w' you Sir.
What kind of thing is thy son? ha! dost thou look like one that could have a son fit for me to father, ha? And yet the best take both, and to please you at all adventures, ha?
I am sure there cannot be a worse, or more debauched reprobate then mine is living.
And is the devil too good a Master for
him, think thou, ha? Wherein can I deserve so ill at thy hands, fellow, whatever thou art, that thou should wish me comber'd with a worse burden, when thou hear me complain of this, ha? What is this fellow that you dare know him, Friend Cock∣brain? I will not dwell within three parishes of him.
My tenant! Bless me from him. I had ra∣there all my Rents were Bawdy houses.
Think nothing of his words, he'll forget all instantly. The best natured man living.
Dost thou stand like a son now that hears his father abused, ha?
I am praying for the conversion of the young man he speaks of.
Well said, Mr. Gabriel.
But by the way, whore's your son Antho∣ny? have you not heard of him yet?
Never since he forsook me, on the discon∣tent he took, in that he might not marry your daugh∣ret there. And where he lives, or whether he lives or not, I know not. I hope your davghter is a comfort to you.
Yes, in keeping her chamber whole weeks together, fullenning upon her Samplery breech-work, when I was in hope she would have made me a Grand∣father ere now. But she has a humour, forsooth, since we put your son by her, to make me a match-broker, her marriage-Maker; when I tell you friend, there has been so many untoward matches of Pa∣rents making, that I have sworn she shall make her own choice, though it be of one I hate. Make me her match-maker! Must I obey her, or she me, ha?
I wish, with tears, my son had had her now.
Wherein Sir, (under correction do I disobey you?
In that very word, under correction, thou dis∣obey'st me. Are you to be under correction at these years? ha! If I have not already taught you manners beyond the help of correction, go, seek a wiser father to mend 'hem.
Yet give me leave, dear Sir, in my ex∣cuse.—
Leave out correction then.
If I were forward as many Maidens are,
To wish a husband, must I not be sought?
I never was a Gadder: and my Mother,
Before she died, adjured me to be none.
I hope you'll give me leave to keep your house.
La there again! How subtly she seeks dominion over me! No, huswife, No; you keep no house of mine. I'll nestle you no longer under my wing. Are you not fledge; I'll have you fly out I, as other men's daughters do; and keep a house of your own if you can find it.
We had a kinswoman flew out too late∣lie, I take it.
What tell thou me of her; wise-acres? Can they not fly out a little, but they must turn arrant vvhores, ha? Tell me of your kinswoman? It is true, she was my Niece; she went to it a little before her time? some two years since, and so fled from Re∣legion; and is turned Turk, we fear. And what of that in your precisiancial wisdom? I have such children as no man has. But (as I was saying,) would ye top me husvvife, ha! Look you, now I chide her, she says nothing. Is this obedience, ha?
Perhaps, I might unfortunately cast my affecti∣on on a man that would refuse me.
That man I would desire to know; show me that man; see if I svvinge him not dares slight my daughter.
Still the old humour, self-vvill'd, cross, and touchy; but suddenly reconciled. Come, Mr. Cross∣will, to the business.
Oh, you told me of a house you had found for me.
Yes Sir. And here's the Landlord.
Does he look, or go like one could let a house worthy of me.
Sir, we have able Builders here, that will not carry least show of their buildings on their backs. This is a rich sufficient man, I assure you, and my friend.
I cry him heartily mercy, and embrace him. And now I note you better, you look like Thrift it self.
I cannot think you will throw away your houses at a cast. You have a son, perhaps, that may, by the commendations you gave of him. Lets see your house.
Come away Mr. Gabriel.
Come Sir, what do you gape a•d shake the head at there? I'll lay my life he has spied the little Cross upon the new Church yond, and is at defiance with it. Sirrah, I will make you honour the first syllable of my name. My name is Will. Croswill, and I will have my humour. Let those that talk of me for it, speak their pleasure, I will do mine.
I shall obey you, Sir.
Now you are in the right. You shall indeed. I'll make your heart ache else, dee see.
But truly I was looking at that Image; that
painted idolatrous image yonder, as I take it.
O heresy! It is some Lady, or Gentlewo∣man standing upon her Balcony.
Her Balcony? Where is it? I can spy from her foot to her face, yet I can see no Balcony she has.
What a Knave's this: That's the Balcony she stands on, that which jets out so on the fore-part of the house; every house here has one of 'hem.
It is very good; I like the jetting out of the fore-part very well; it is a gallant fashion indeed.
I guess what she is, what ere I have said. O Justice look to thine office.
Come now to this house, and then to my son Mihil, the Spark you spoke of. And if I find him cross too, I'll cross him: Let him look to it▪ Dee see.
I'll see you housed; and then about my pro∣jest, which is for weeding of this hopeful Garden. 
Why should not we in England use that free∣dome
The famous Courtesans have in Italy:
We have the art, and know the Theory
To allure and catch the wandering eyes of Lovers;
Yea, and their hearts too: but our stricter Laws
Forbids the public practise, our desires
Are high as theirs; our wills as apt and forward;
Our wits as ripe, our beauties more attractive;
Or Travellers are shrewd liars. Whore's the let?
Only in bashful coward custom, that
Stoops in the shoulders, and submits the neck
To bondage of Authority; to these Laws,
That men of feeble age and weaker eye-sight
Have framed to bar their sons from youthful pleasures.
Posits and Cawdels on their queasy stomachs,
Whilst I fly out in brave rebellion;
And offer, at the least, to break these shackles
That holds our legs together: And begin
A fashion, which pursued by Cyprian Dames,
May persuade Justice to allow our Games.
Who knows? I'll try. Francisco bring my Lute.
Troth I have a great mind to be one of the Philoblathici, a Brother of the Blade and Baton, as you translate it; now ye have beat it into my head: But I fear I shall never come on and off handsomely. I have metal enough methinks, but I know not how methinks to put it out.
We will help you out with it, and set it flying for you never doubt it.
Obotts, you mean my money metal, I mean my valour metal I.
Peace, hark.
T'other flies fast enough already.
Pox on ye peace.
O most melodious.
Most odious, Did you say? It is methinks most odoriferous.
What new devise can this be? Look!
She is vanished. Is it not the Mountebanks Wife that was here; and now come again to play some new merry tricks by herself.
A botts on it, I never saw that Mountebank; they say, he brought the first resort into this new plan∣tation, and sowed so much seed of Knavery and Co∣zenage here, that it is feared twill never out.
Nay but this creature: What can she be?
And then again, he drew such flocks of idle people to him, that the Players, they say, cursed him abominably.
Thou ever talk of the wrong matter.
Cry mercy Brothers of the Blade and Bat∣town: Do you think if I give my endeavour to it, I shall ever learn to roar and carry it as you do, that have it naturally, as you say.
Yes, as we'll beat it into you. But this wo∣man, this musical woman, that set her self out to show so, I would be satisfied in her.
And she be as able as she seems, she has in her to satisfy you, and you were a Brother of ten Blades, and ten Battounes.
I vow—Peace. I'll baton thy teeth into thy tongue else; she bears a stately presence. Thou never saw her before: Did thou Tony?
No; but I heard an inkling at the Paris Tavern last night of a She-Gallant-that had travelled France and Italy; and that she would—
Baton thy teeth into thy tongue.)
Plant some of her foreign collections, the fruits of her travels, in this Garden here, to try how they would grow or thrive on English earth.
Young Pig was speaking of such a one to me, and that she was a Mumper.
What's that a Sister of the Scabbard, brother of the Blade?
Come, come; we will in, we will in; it is one of our fathers buildings; I'll see the Inhabitants. Some money Clot. furnish I say, and quickly.—I vow—
You shall, you shall.
What shall I?
Vow twice before you have it.
I vow, and I vow again, I'll coin thy brains.—
Hold, hold, take your powl money; I thought I would have my will; and the word I look-for, I'll coin thy brains.—
I do not love to give my money for nothing, I have a volume of words here, the worst of 'hem is as good as a blow; and then I save my Crown whole half a dozen times a day, by half a crown a time, there's half in half saved by that.
Come let's appear civil, till we have our en∣trance, and then as occasion serves—
Who would you speak withal?
Your Mistress, little one.
Do you know her Sir?
No; but I would know her, that's the busi∣nos: I mean the musical Gentlewoman that was fiddling, and so many in the What-doe-call't even now.
What-doe-call her Sir, I pray?
What-doe-call her; it is not come to that yet, prithee let me see and speak with her first.
You are disposed I think.
What should we do here else?
You wont thrust in upon a body whether one will or no.
Away you Monkey.
O me, What do you mean?
O my brave Philoblathici.—
What's the matter the Girl cries out so?
I know not: I fear some rude company, some of the wild crew are broke into the house.
Within. Whether would you go, you wont rob the house will ye?
Will ye be quiet Whiskin?
O me it is so: Hell's broke loose; this comes of your new fingle-fangle fashion, your prepostrous Italian way forsooth: would I could have kept my old way of pots and pipes, and my Strong-water course for customers: The very first twang of your fiddle guts has broke all, and conjured a legion of de∣vils among us.
Nay, there's but a Leash of us. How now?
Who have we here? Are these the far travelled Ladies?
O thou party perpale, or rather parboild Bawd.
What shall I do? Dam. Out alas; sure they are devils indeed.
Art thou travelled cross the Seas from the Bankside hither, old Countess of Codpiece-row?
Party perpale and parboild Bawd.—
And is this the Damsel that has been in France and Italy? Clot. Codpiece-row.
Peace ye roaring Scabs: I'll besworn she supped at Paris Tavern last night, and lay not long ago at the Venice by Whitefryers Dock.
Prithee what is she Madge?
A civil Gentlewoman you see she is.
She has none of the best faces: but is she war∣rantable; I have not had a civil night these three months.
Nor none are like to have here, I assure you.
O Madge how I do long thy thing to ding didle ding.
O Nick, I am not in the humour, no more is she to be of the merry pin now; I am sure her case is too lamentable. But if you will all sit down, I'll give you a bottle of wine, and we will relate her story to you, so you will be civil. Nic. Well for once, I care not if we be.
Let us set to it then; sit down brother Tony, sit down Gentlewoman, we shall know your name a∣non, I hope it will fall in your story; sit down Clot∣poll.
You will call me brother Clotpoll too when I have taken my oath, and paid my entrance into the faternity of the Blade and the Baton.
It is like we shall. Now Lady of the Stygian Lake, thou black infernal Madge, begin the dismal story, whilst I begin the bottle.
This Gentlewoman whose name is Damyris.
Damyris stay. Her nick-name then is Dammy, so we may call her when we grow familiar: and to begin that familiarity, Dammy here's to you.—drink.
And what's your nick-name I pray Sir?
Nick: only Nick, Madge there knows it.
Then I believe your name is Nicholas.
I vow-witty. Yes Dammy, and my Surname is Rookesbill, and so is my Fathers too: and what do you make o'that?
Nothing not I Sir: sure this is he.
And I would he were nothing, so I had all he has: I must have tother glass to wash him out of my mouth, he furs it worse then Mondongas Tobacco. Here old Madge, and to all the birds that shall won∣der at thy howletship, when thou rid'st in an Ivy-bush, called a Cart.
Well mad Nick, I'll pledge thee in hope to see as many flutter about the tree, that thou shalt clime backwards.
A pox thou wilt be stifled with Offal and Car∣ret leaves before that day.
Fie, fie, what talk's this? it is he I am consi∣dent.
These are our ordinary complements, we wish no harm.
No Dammy I vow, not I to any breathing.
But your Father Nick.—Is he that Rooks∣bill.—
But my Fathet; Pox rot ye, why do ye put me in mind of him again, he sticks i'my throat, now I'll wash him a little further.—Here Brother Tony
Gramercy Brother Nick.
And to all the brothers that are, and are to be of the Blade and the Baton.
There said you well Clotpoll: Here it is—
I would but have asked you whether your Father were that Rookesbill that is called the great Builder.
Yes marry is it he forsooth; he has built I know not how many houses hereabout, though he goes Dammy as if he were not worth a great; and all his clothes I vow are not worth this hilt, except those he wears, and prays for fair weather in, on my Lord Mayors Day; and you are his Tenant, though perhaps you know it not, and may be mine; therefore use me well: for this house and the rest I hope will be mine, as well as I can hope he is mortal, of which I must confess I have been in some doubt, though now I hope again, he will be the first shall lay his bones in the new Church, though the Church-yard be too good
for him before it is consecrated. So give me the to-the cup, for now he offends my stomach. Here's to thee now Clotpoll.
And to all the Sisters of the Scabbard Bro∣there in Election. Dee hear, Pray talk of his father no more, for the next brings him to the belly-work, and then he'll drink him quite through him.
And so we shall have a foul house.
No he shall stick there. Now to the story Gentlewoman, it was that we sate for.
I to the story, I vow I had almost forgot it; and I am the worst at Sack in a morning: Dear Dam∣my to the story.
Good Sir my heart's too full to utter't.
Troth and my head's too full to hear it: But I'll go out and quarrel with some body to settle my brains, then go down to Mesh. Crossewill to put him in mind of our meeting to day; then if you will meet me at the Goat at Dinner, we'll have it all at large.
Will you be there indeed Sir, I would speak with you seriously.
Dammy if I be not, may my father out live me.
We both here promise you he shall be there by noon.
Lady, it is sworn by Blade and by Baton.
This will be the bravest discovery for Mihill, the new Italian Bone Robe Catsoe.
Why so sad on the sudden Niece.
But do you think he will come as he has pro∣missed.
He never breaks a promise with any of us' though he fail all the honest part of the world: But I trust you are not taken with the Ruffian, you'll ne'er get penny by him.
I prithee peace, I care not.
But Mistress, rhere is a Gallant now below, a Gingle boy indeed, that has his pockets full of, crowns that chide for vent. Shall I call him up to you.
I will see no man.
How's that? I hope you jest.
Indeed, I hope you jest.
You will not hinder the house, I hope. Marry heigh. This were a humour and it would last. Go fetch him up.
I'll fly then out at window. Nay, by this steel it is true.
What's the matter? have I got a mad wo∣man into the house. What do you go about to break me the first day of your coming, before you have han∣sell'd a Couch or a Bedside in it. Were you but now all of the heigh to set your self out for a sign with your fiddle cum twang, and promise such wonders, for∣sooth, and will not now be seen. Pray what's the Riddle.
I'll tell thee all anon. Prithee excuse me. I know thy share of his sins bounty would not come to thus much, take it, I give it thee. And prithee let me be honest till I have a mince to be otherwise, and I'll hinder thee nothing.
Well, I'll dismiss the Gallant, and send you, Sirrah, for another wench. I'll have Bess Bufflehead again. This kicksy wince Giddibrain will spoil all I'll no more Italian tricks.—
Thus some have by the frenzy of despair
Fumously run into the sea to throw
Their wretched bodies, but when come near
They saw the billows rise, heard Bores blow,
And horrid death appearing on the Maine,
A sudden fear hath sent them back again.
NAy, but honest Shoemaker; thy honest price.
I tell you intrude, Sir, it is as good a boot as e∣ver you pulled on in your life.
A little too straight, I doubt. What do you think of my boots honest Tailor.
They do exceeding handsomely, never trust me Sir.
Never fear it Tailor, you shall trust me, and please you.
You are pleasant Sir.
And what do you think of my suite Shooma∣kerr? can you say as much for the Tailor as he for you.
A very neat suite, Sir, and becomes you ex∣cellent.
Honest men both, and hold together; one would little think you were so near neighbours. Well, you, have fitted me both, I must confess. But how I shall fit you, now there's the point.
There's but one way for than and please you.
With paying us our money Sit.
Still both in a tale, I can not but commend your neighbourhood, I muse my Laundress stays,
I sent her three or four ways for moneys. But do not you stay for that. I have ways enough to pay you. I have ploughs a going that you dream not of.
No indeed, Sir, we dream of nothing but ready money, sleeping or waking.
I shall be rich enough ne'er fear't. I have a venture in the new soap business man.
We are but servants, Sir. And our Ma∣sters themselves have no faith, in flippery pro∣jests.
Besides, the women begin to grumble a∣against that slippery project shrewdly, and, it is feared, will mutiny shoe tly.
Burlakin, and they may prove more trouble∣some then a commotion of Sailors.
O welcome, Laundress, whore's the money.
Not a penny of money, Sir, can I get. But here's one come to town has brought you enough, and you can have grace to finger it.
Who's that I prithee.
Your father, your father Sir. I met his man by great chance, who told me his Master means to steal upon you presently, and take you as he finds you.
Is he come up with his cross tricks. I hey•d he was to come. And that he means to live here altogether. He has had an aim these dozen years to live in town here, but never was fully bent on it un∣till the Proclamation of restraint spurred him up. It is such a Crossewill. Well, he is my father, and I am utterly undone if thou help me not now at a pinch, at a pinch, dear Laundress. Go borrow me a Gown,
and some four or five Law-books? for, I protest, mine are in Duck-lane. Nay, trudge, sweet Lane∣dress, trudge.—  Honest Tailor and Shoemaker convey your selves away quietly, and I'll pay you to morrow, as I am a Gentleman:
As I am a Shoemaker, and that's a kind of a Centleman, you know, I'll not stir till I have my money, I am not an Ass Sir.
No body says thou art.
I have had too many such tricks put upon me in my days.
A trick! as I hope for money it is no trick.
Well Sir, trick or no trick. I must have my money or my boots, and that's plain dealing.
A pox of the boots, so my legs were out of 'hem. Would they were i'thy throat, spurs and all, you will not out.
No marry will we not.
Well-said Shoemaker, I commend thee, thou hast a better heart then I, though my stomack's good.
O well said, my good Laundress. How am I bound to thee; yet all this wo'not do it Laundress. Thou must bestir thy stumps a little further, and bore∣row me a couple of Gowns more for these Rascals here that will not away.
How! wo'not away? And they were well served, they would be thrust out of doors for saucy companions. Your Masters would not put a Gentle∣man to his trumps thus.
Nay, sweet Laundress, restrain thy tongue, and stretch thy feet. A couple of Govvns, good
Laundress, and forget not caps.  If I do now furnish you like Civil Lavvyers, and you do not keep your countenances; if ever you do but peep in at the Hall-door at Christmas to see the revels, I'll have you set in the stocks for this believe it.
If you do, Sir, I may hap be even with you before the year comes about, and set you in our stocks for it.
But will you make Lawyers of us.
Have you a mind to have your money you unbelieving Rascals.
I see your drift, and hope you'll prove an honest Gentleman.
Thou hast some hope, though no faith nor trust in any man.
Alas, Sir, our Masters sit at grear rents, and keep great families.
I cry you mercy, they are removed into the new plantation here, where, they say, are a tribe of Infidel-tradesmen, that have made a Law within your selves to put no trust in Gentlemen. But bear your selves handsomely here you were best. I am acquainted with a crevv that haunts about your ha∣bitations, with whom I will join, and so batter your windows one of these nights else.—O welcome, Laundress, how doest thou toil for me.
Your fathers talking, as I am a woman, be∣low.—As thou art a woman below, well-said. Come on with these Gowns, and lets see how you'll look. If we had time, the Shoemaker should wash his face; but seeing there is no remedy; pull the cap in your eyes, and good enough. Now Lane∣dress, set us stools, and leave us.
I hear him coming up.
Now let him come, we are ready for him. Shoemaker, keep your hand underneath the
book, that the pitch do not discover you.
I warrant you, Sir.
And Taylor, be sure you have no Needle on your sleeve, nor thread about your neck.
I warrant you too for me, Sir.
He's enrred.
Remitter, I say, is where a man hath two titles, that is to say, one of an elder, the other of a later. And he comes to the land by the later title; yet the Law adjudges him to be in by the force of the elder title. If the tenant in the tail discontinee the tail, and after he diseaseth his dis∣continue, and so dies seized, whereby the tenants descend to their issue, as to his Cousin inheritable by force of the tail. In this case the tenants descend, who have right by force of the tail, a Remitter in the tail taken for that in the Law, shall put and ad∣judge him to be in by force of descent. Pox on ye, speak something good or bad, somewhat.
The Remitter, you say, is seized in the tail.
Excellent Shoemaker, I say so, and again, I say, that if the tenant in the tail in feoffe his son, or his Cousin, inheritable by force of the tail, the which son or cousin at the time of the feoffment is within age, and after the tenant in the tail dierh, this is a Remitter to the heir in the tail to whom the feoffment is made, now Taylor.
Think you so, Sir.
Look either Fitzherbert, Perkins, or Dier, and you shall find it in the second part of Richard Cordelyon. So much for Remitter. Now I'll put a plain home-spun case, as a man may say, which we call a moot-case.
I pray do Sir.
Some father might take joy of such a son now. This takes not me. No, this is not my way.
The case is this
pull up your grounds closer and behanged, you are a Tailor, and you: a Shoemaker.
And you owe us money.
I put the case, I do, to you for a suit of clothes.
Well.
And to you for a pair of boots.
True.
I have broke my day with you both. Sup∣pose so.
Very well, we do.
You clap a Sergeant of my back. I put in bail, remove it, and carry it up into the upper Court, with habeas-Corpus; bring it down again into the lower Court with procedendo; then take it from thence, and bring it into the Chancery with a Cer∣tiorari; I; and if you look not to •t, bring it out of the Chancery again, and thus will I keep you from your money till your suite and your boots be worn out before you recover penny of me.
S•lied but you shall not, your father shall know all first.
S'foot Shoemaker wilt thou be an Ass. I do but put a case, Have you not feign it tried.
Yes, very often.
Away with books. Away with Law. Away with madness. I, God bless thee, and make thee his servant, and defend thee from Law, I say. Take up these books, sarah, and carry them presently into Pals Church-yard dee see, and change them all for Histo∣ries, as pleasant as profitable; Arthur of Britain,
Primalion of Greece, Amadis of Gaul, and such like de see.
I hope he do's but jest.
And do you hear, Sirrah.
I Sir.
Get Bells work, and you can, into the bar∣gain.
Which Bell, Sir? Adam Bell, with Clim •the Clough, and William of Cloudesley.
Adam Bell you Ass? Valiant Bell that killed the Dragon.
You mean St. George.
Sir Jolthead, do I not. I'll teach you to chop logic, with me.
Sfoot, how shall I answer my borrowed books? Stay Belt. Pray Sir, do not change my books.
Sir, Sir, I will change them and you too: Did I leave thee here to learn fashions and manners, that thou might carry thy self like a Gentleman, and dost thou wast thy brains in learning a language that I understand not a word of? ha! I had been as good have brought thee up among the wild Irish.
Why alas Sir, Had I not better keep my self within my Chamber, at my Study, then be rioting a∣broad, wasting both money and time, which is more precious then money? if you did know the inconve∣nience of company, you would rather encourage and commend my retired life, then any ways dehort me from it.
Why Sir did not I keep company think you when I was young? Ha!
Yes Sir; but the times are much altered, and youth more corrupted now, they did not drink and wench in those days, but nay, o it is abominable in these.
Why this is that I feared, the boys turning
meacock too, after his elder brother, it was time to look to him.
Why Croswill Mesh. What, not up yet and behanged. Or ha ye a wench a bed wye. Is this keep∣ing your home. Mihil runs to the door and holds it.
Sfoot the Rogue Rooksbil and his crew, I feared as much.
Break open the door, let me come to it.
Forbear, or behanged, you will undo me, my father's here. I'll meet you anon as I am honest.
Your father's a Clowterdepouch. Nay, I will come then, what Mademoiselle do you call fa∣there.
You would not believe me. Pray be civil.
It is so, we will Cry mercy, you are busy, we will not moot to day then?
I hope you may excuse me, I'll be w'ye a∣non.
Come to the Goat Capricorn. We have the bravest new discovery.
How now! what are these?
They are Gentlemen of my standing, Sir, that have a little over-studied themselves, and are some∣what—.
Mad; are they not? And so will you be shortly, if you follow these courses. Mooting do they call it? you shall moot nor mute here no long∣er. Therefore on with your cloak and sword, follow me to the Tavern and leave me such long-tail'd com∣pany as these are, for I do not like them.
No more do I, Sir, if I knew how to be rid of 'hem.
I think thou hast ne'er a sword, hast thou, ha?
Yes Sir.
Where is it, Sir, let me se't Sir.
It is here, under mybed, Sir.—Reach it.
Why there's a Lawyers trick right, make his weapon companion with his Pisse-pot. Fie, fie, here's a tool indeed. There's money, Sir, buy you a good one, one with the Mathematical hilt as they term it.
It would do better in Mathematical books▪ Sir, offer me no money, pray Sir, but for books.
Go to, you are a peevish Jack, do not pro∣folk me: do not you owe me obedience? ha!
Yes Sir, I acknowledge it.
It is good you do. Well, take that money; and put your self into clothes befitting your rank, Do so. And let me see you, squirting about without a weapon, like an Attorneys Clerk in Tearm-time, and I'll weapon you, What, shall I have a Noddy of you. This frets him to the liver. Go to, never hang the head for the matter. For I tell thee I will have it so, and herein be known what I am.
You are known sufficiently for your cross humour already; in which I'll try you if I can make you double this money, for this will not serve my turn.
What have you told it after me, you had best weigh it too.
No Sir, but I have computed that for my pre¦sent use, here is too much by half, pray Sir, take half back.
Body of me, what a perverse knave is this, to cross me thus! Is there too much, say you? ha•
Yes truly, sir.
Let me see it. Go thy ways, take thy mu∣sty books, and rhy rusty whittle here again. And take your foolish plodding dunci-coxcomely course, till I look after you again. Come away sirrah.
Sfoot, who's the Gull now? Taylor, Shoo∣maker, you may go pawn your Gowns for any mo∣ney I am like to have.
We have all played the Lavvyers to pret∣tie purpose, in pleading all this while for nothing. Well sir, to avoid further trouble, I am content to withdravv my action, that is, pull off your boots a∣gain, and be jogging.
And for my part, sir, I can do no less then take you by default and non-suit you.
Very good Lavvyers both, Is my father quite gone Belt?
Gone in a tempest of high displeasure, sir: And has sent you here all the money he had about him; and bids you refuse it if you dare, it is above tvvice the sum he offered you before; but good sir, do not refuse it. He svvears he will try when∣there you or he shall have his will. Take heed you cross him not too much.
Well at thy request, because thou shalt not have anger for carrying it back again, I will accept.
I thank you Sir. Consider, he's your fa∣there, sir.
I do most Reverend Belt. and would be loath to cross him, although I may as much in taking his money as refusing it, for ought I know, for thou knovv'st it is his custom to cross me, and the rest
of his children in all we do, to try and urge his obe∣audience; it is an odd way: therefore to help my self I seem to covet the things that I hate, and he pulls them from me; and makes show of loathing the things I covet, and he hurls them doubly at me, as now in this money.
Are you so crafty?
Yes, but do thou put it in his head, and I'll pick out thy brains.
You never knew an old Serving-man treache∣rous to his young Master: what? to the hopes of the house; you will be heir, that's questionless: for to your comfort, your elder brother grows every day more fool then the other. But now the rest of the message is, that you make haste, and come to my Master to the Goat in Covent-Garden, where he dines with his new Landlord to day.
He has taken a house then.
O, a most delicate one, with a curious Belconee and all belonging to it most stately.
At the Goat does he dine, say thou.
Yes sir.
My crevv are gone thither too. Pray Mars we fall not foul of one another. Well, go thy way, present my duty to him, I'll follow presently. Tell him I took his money with much unvvilling∣ness.
As Lavvyers do their fees. Let me alone sir.
Well Tailor and Shoemaker; you have put me to it, but here's your money.
It was for that we did put you to it Sir.
Let's see your biil Tailor
Here it is, sir, as ready as a Watchmans.
Then good words will pass it, 7 li. 4. sh. tell your money; yours is 14 sh. boots and Galoshes.
There it is and 12. d. to drink.
I thank your worship.
Are you right Tailor.
Yes and please you Sir.
There's a shilling for you too, to spend in bread.
He knows both our diets. We'll make bold to take leave of your worship.
Not so bold as I'm glad I'm too well rid of you, most courteous Gentlemen.
To see what money can do; that can change men's manners, alter their conditions: how tempestuous the slaves were without it. O thou powerful metal! what authority is in thee! Thou art the Key to all men's mouths. With thee a man may lock up the jaws of an informer, and without thee he cannot the lips of a Lawyer.
Down boy, and bid the Cook hasten din∣ner.
What will you please to drink in the mean time, sir.
I will not drink in the mean time, sir, Get you gone.
A fine old humorous Gentleman.
Hold up your head, Sirrah, and leave your precise folly. I'll leave you to the wilde world else, dee see. Is the name of a Tavern so odious to you? Ha. Your brother has vexed me sufficiently already, and perhaps he'll refuse to come too! If he dares let him. Welcome Mr. Rooksbil, welcome Landlord, and your fair daughter, welcome pretty one. Trust
me a pretty one indeed, pray be acquainted with my daughter there. In your Maiden-company, I hope she will not think the Tavern such a bugs nest as she did. I had much ado to draw my rebellious i will∣drone to the Tavern after me.
And truly, sir, it is the first to my knowledge that ever my daughter came into.
All in good time, she may increase in ver∣tu. But if it be a fault, (as in my conscience in his thought it is a great transgression) my unsetlednesse, and unprovidednesse else, where or how to entertain a friend, or feed my self, may well excuse us all, dee see.
O Sir, I cannot enough admire that virtue in your son.
It is a vice, as much a vice or more, as is your sons, your cast-aways as you call him, that sucks no other ai•e, then that of Taverns, Tap∣houses, Brothels, and such like. I would their ex∣tream qualities could meet each other at half-way, and so mingle their superfluities of humour unto a mean betwixt 'hem. It might render them both al∣lowable subjects, where now the one's a firedrake in the air, and t'other a mandrake in the earth, both mis∣chievous, see how he stands like a mole-catcher. What dirty dogged humour was I in when I got him trow?
However his carriage seems distasteful un∣to you, I could afford (with your allovvance, to make conditions of estate agreeable) to give all that is mine to him with my daughter.
What a mechanic slave is this, to thank a son of mine, however I under-rate him, a fit mate to mingle blood with his moore-ditch breed. True, his estate is great, I understand it, but of all foul I love not Moor-hens. Such another motion
would stir me to roar him down the tavern∣stairs.
What do you think on it sirs.
Heaven grant me patience.
Will you consider of it Master Cross∣will.
I was never so put to it. I wish we had a stickler. I muse that Master Cockbrayne stays thus.
You do not mind my motion sir.
Uds precious I mind nothing, I am so crossed in mind there I can mind nothing, nor I will mind nothing, dee see. Why comes not Mr. Cockbrayue, Ha!
Yet you mind him it seems. But he, sir, cannot come, and desires you to hold him excused. He's gone about some special undertaking, for the good of the Common-wealth, he says.
Fart for his undertaking; all the world is bent to cross me. What is my young Master come? ha!
My young Master Mr. Mihil will be here presently, he said he would follow me at heals, sir.
And why not come before you, sir. Does he not think that I have waited long enough, sir? sure I'll cross some body under that knaves pate of yours, d'y'fee.
Thus when any body angers him, I am sure to hear on it.
So now my spleen is a little palliated, let me speak with you Mr. Rooksbill. Get you down, Sir∣rah; and bring me word, dinner is not ready, and I'll give you as much more, do ye see.
That's his way to his stomach.
And is your brother that your father says is so ungracious, so well acquainted with my brother Mihil, say you.
Oh all in all, he's not so familiar with any man, if Mihil Croswill be your brother, as it is mani∣fest.
I would not that my father knew it, for all I can expect from him but his blessing, but does your father know it?
No, I would not he should mistrust it for all he has, blessing and all; and now that I have found you love your brother foe well, I will make over my reason and my counsel in trust with you, hoping you will not wrong that trust.
If I do, may the due price of treachery be my reward.
I love your brother, Lady, and he loves me. The only good act that ever my brother did, was to bring us acquainted, and is indeed all that he has to live on. For I do succour him with many a stolen piece for the felicity he brought me in your brothers love. Now, my father, whose irreconcilable hate has for e∣ver discarded my brother, should he but dream of their acquaintance, would poison all my hopes.
But let me ask you, is there an hope betwixt you and my brother ever to come together?
Yes, and a way he has for•t, which I under∣stand not yet.
Trust me, I pity you both, your case is very dangerous.
Love's above all adventures, the more hard the achievement is, the sweeter the reward.
I like her spirit well.
You Sir, come hither, what is hammering in your head now?
Is it not some Synodical question to put unto the brethren, concerning Whitsonales and Maygames? ha!
Surely sir, I was premeditating a fit thanks∣giving to be rendered before meat in. Taverns, accord∣ing to the present occasion which the time and place ad∣ministered, and that as the spirit shall enable me, shall be delivered before you in due season.
I am glad I know your mind; for that trick, my zealous son, you shall come in at half-dinner, like a Chafing-dish of coals, when the sauce is cold, to make use of the heat of your spirit; d ye see. I love not meat twice dressed.
Good sir, put the Proposition to him, that I made my affection to him, urges it more and more, I never was so taken with a man.
But what's that to your daughter? ha!
The same affection governs her, she is not mine else.
Well, hold your peace, and was that your spy∣ritual meditation?
Yes, verily.
Come Sir, at this Gentleman's request I will now put a question to you concerning the flesh. What, think you of yond Virgin there his daughter? can you affect her so well as to wish her to be your wedded wife?
You mean, elpoused in holy Matrimony.
Yes, I mean so.
hum hum hum Psalm tune. How happy.
But do thou say, yes verily to that, and as I hope to have peace in my grave. I'll break the Kings peace on thy pate presently.
It is a weighty question, and requires due pre∣meditation in a religious answer, pray give me leave to take advice—
What says he, Sir?
He says he will talk with a cunning man a∣bout her.
Sure you mistake him, sir.
You are welcome, Gentlemen. Will. Harry, Zachary.
Zachary is a good name.
Where are you? he (rings the bell) show up into the Phoenix. Is the Check empty?
Hoyday, here's a din.
A pottle of Canary to the Dolphin, score.
Y' are welcome, Gentlemen, take up the lil∣lie-pot.
Half a dozen of clean pipes and a candle for the Elcphant. They take their own Tobaccho.
Whose room do they foul Sirrah, Harry, Harry?
Do Elephants take Tobaccho?
Carry up a Jordan for the Maidenhead, and a quart of white muskadine for the blew Bore.
Now me thinks, the muskadine for that Maidenhead, and the Jordan for the Bore were better.
Knock aboue, and a pot thrown. Why boys, draw∣er, rogues, take up, (below) By and by, by and by, (above) Wine, Tobaccho.
What variety of noises is here? and all excel∣lent ill sounds. (Above) Call up the Fiddlers, Sirrah.
Such cries as these went forth before the deso∣lotion of the great City.
O profane tinkling the cymbals of Satan; that tickle the care with vanity, to lift up the mind to lewd∣ness. Mine ears shall be that of the Adder against the Song of the Serpent.
O rare, in a young man!
I will roar out aloud to drown your Insane∣tations. Yea, I will set out a throat even as the beast that belloweth.
Most happy youth!
Hold your peace, Sirrah, or I'll make you bell∣low for something.
Sfoot-back, Nick to your own room. Thy father's here too, as I breath.
I vow?
My Lucy too, as I live. How the devil got they acquainted? Sure he's his Landlord It is so.
Dare you come, sir, you should have stayed now till you had been sent for.
Verily, sir.
Are you at your Verilies too? ha!
But for di•pleasing you, I had rather have grazed on Littletons Commons, or have fasted this fourt∣night, then come for my repast into this Wilderness; but you will have it so
You are in the right Sir, I'll have it so in∣deed, I'll know why I shall not else. What do you know no body here?
I cry them mercy, my good brother,—and my loving sister.
But what virtuous men has this man to his sons, and how they thrive in grace against his will, it seems.
What Gentlewoman is this of your acquaint∣ance, Sister?
It is well dissembled brother, but I know your cunning.
Have you betrayed me?
Mum Mr. Mihil, mum.
Harry, Harry.
By and by.
What devil art thou that roarest in mine ear so.
Hold, I beseech you, I come to wait upon you.
What, with a By and by, that strikes into my head as sharp as a Stellatto.
I come to tell you, sir, that your table's co∣veered in a fairer Room, and more private, your meat is ready to go up, and all in a readiness.
Now thou art an honest fellow, there's a couple of shillings for thee. Have us out of thy windmil here, I prithee, and thy By and by's.
GO Sirrah, make your reckoning for our din∣ner. Leave us this wine, and come when we call you. We have business.
I shall, sir, by and by.
Well, sir, you will be of both you say, the Blade and the Baton?
Of both, sir, by all means, both Philoblathi∣cus and Philobatticus, I. I'll now have all that be∣longs to your order, or all my money again, that's for a certain.
Your money again? lo you there. You bring me a fit man, Gentlemen to be sworn, do you not? that talks of money again, when it is a main Article in the Oath, never to look for money again, once disfinger'd.
You will not spoil all now it is come so far? will you?
Well sir, when I have my Oath, and that I am sworn one of you. I'll do as you do, and care as little for money as he that has least.
Well, to the Oath then, for both the Bsade and the Baton you say?
I by all means, Captain, for both. S'lid the Baton may stick to me, when the Blade may fly out of the Hilts.
Yes, to the Brokers.
Lay your hands on these Hilts, sir. The Are∣ticles that you depose unto are these, To be true and faithful unto the whole Fraternity of the Blade and the Baton, and to every member thereof.
As ever faithful member was.
That at no time, wittingly or ignorantly, drunk or sober, you reveal or make discovery of the Brother, or a member of the Brotherhood, of his lodge∣ing, haunts, or by-walks, to any Creditor, Officer, Sut∣ler, or such like dangerous or suspicious person.
I defy them all.
That if any of the Brotherhood be in re∣strained or distress by imprisonment, sickness, or whatsoever engagement, you make his case your own, and your purse and your travel his; and that if a bro∣there die or finish his days, by end timely or untimely, by Surfeit, Sword, or Law. You wear the sable order of the Rebind in remembrance of him.
A convenient cheap way of mourning.
That your purse and weapon to the utmost
of your strength, be on all occasions drawn to the as∣sistance or defence of a Brother or Brothers friend, be it he, be it she.
I understand you, and shall be as forward to fight for a She-friend, as ever the best man in the mir∣roar of Knighthood was for an honest woman.
That you be ever at deadly defiance with all such people, as Protections are directed to in Parley∣meant, and that you watch all occasions to prevent or rescue Gentlemen from the gripes of the Law brissons. That you may thereby endear your self into noble society, and drink the juice of the Varlets labours for your officious intrusions.
And that will go down bravely.
You must rank your self so much the better man, by how much the more drink you are able to purchase at others costs.
Excellent.
You are to let no man take wall of you, but such as you suppose will either beat you or lend you money.
Better and better still.
The rest of your duties for brevity sake you shall find specified in that copy of your Order. Kiss the book.
I'll swear to them whatsoever they be.
So, now I am a Blade, and of a better Row then those of Tytere tu, or Oatmeal hoe, and so an health to our Fraternity, and in chief to our Noble Captain Driblow.
Agreed, Agreed.
Now are you to practise or exercise your qua∣lity on the next you meet that is not of the Brother∣hood.
Are you one of the Brotherhood sir, of the Philoblathici.
I had else lost much sir, I have paid all dues be∣longing to it.
So have I as I hope to gain honour by it 40 li. thick at least; yet I have this left, please you command the half sir.
Another time, your reckoning is not yet paid perhaps.
It is the first money of mine that was refused since my coming to Town. I shall save infinitely.
I see now that I am sworn. How would I swear to get by it.
Take heed of that, Come hither son.
How have you screwed this youth up into this humour, that was such a dry miserable Clown but two days since.
The old way, by watching of him, and keep∣ing him high-flown a mattet of forty eight hours to∣gether.
Men are apt to believe strange fancies in their liquor, and to entertain new opinions.
I have fastened three or four cups upon my precise brother. I would it were as many pottles, so it would convert him into the right way of good fell∣lowship.
I would we could see him, to try what good we could do upon him.
Perhaps we might convert him.
He's above still with the old men. I stole from him, but to see if your Italic Mistress were come yet. Your Madam.
No, she comes anon; but is my affliction a∣bove still.
Thy father? yes
Ptithee do not call him my father less he took better courses.
And so is thy Sister; the little Rogue looks so squeamishly on me, and I on her, as we had never seen before; but the foolish Ape out of a present affecti∣on she has taken to my Sister, has discovered to her the whole discourse of our love, and my familiarity with thee, which were enough to spoil all, if it were discovered to the old folks, befote my cards were played.
Well, remember Mr. Mihil, you have pro∣missed me half, if the old dogged fellow give her all, and you marry her.
Thou can not doubt me.
You know I can spoil all when I list, but to show my countenance in your cause.
Such is your virtue, Sir. Well, I'll up to 'em again before I be mist; and when they part, I am for you again.
I have given you all the rudimenrs, and my most fatherly advises withal.
And the last is that I should not swear, how make you that good? I thought now I was sworn into this Brotherhood, I might have sworn what, and as much as I would.
That's most unnecessary, for look you son, the best, and even the loudest of my sons do forbear it, not out of conscience, but for very good ends; and in stead of an Oath furnish the mouth with some af∣fected Protestation. As I am honest, it is so. I am no honest man if it be not. Ud take me, if I lie to you. Nev'rgo, nev'rstirre, l vow, and such like.
Or never credit me or let me never be trusted.
O take heed of that, that may be spoken in so ill an hour, that you may run out of reputati∣on, and never be trusted indeed; the other will gain you credit, and bring you into good and civil estimate∣on with your Hostesses; and make 'em term you a fair conditioned Gentleman if he had it; and truly I never heard worse word come out of his mouth.
Nev'r-go, nev'r-stir, I vow. l'le have, I vow then.
I vow, but you shall not, that's mine.
Cannot you lend it me now and then brother? I'll have, I swear then, and come as nigh swearing as I can.
I swear but you must not, that's mine you know.
I protest then, I'll have I protest, that's a Ci∣ty-word, and best to cozen with.
Come boys, fall to some practice, Let me see about at the new French balls, sprung out of the old English vapours
I protest come on. I'll make a third man.
Whose man are you?
Whose man is not to be asked, nor scarce whose subject, now he is of our Brotherhood.
Yes, by your favour he may ask.
I ask no favour, sir.
That may be granted.
You can grant nothing in this kind.
I vow he may grant any thing of any kind.
I swear, I neither can, nor will grant that.
That, I protest, may bear exception in∣deed.
Exceptions amongst us? nay, then I vow.—
I swear.
And I protest—
Part fair my boys; it is very well per∣formed; now drink a round to qualify this bout.
Agreed on all parts.
Look upon me ye Commonwealths men now, like a State-Surgeon, while I search and try
The ulcerous coare of foul enormity.
These are a parcel of those venomous weeds,
That rankle pester this fair Garden-plot.
Whose boisterous growth is such, that I must use
More policy then strength to reach their root,
And hoist them up at once.
This is my way to get within 'em.
So, it is gone round.
I muse these Mumpers come not.
Best send a boy.
Drawer, ha! where be those Rascals? (Within) By and by.
Are you one of 'em, sir?
I am one that has the favour of the house, sir?
To intrude into Gentlemen's privacies? ha!
To seek a poor living and 't please you, by picking up the crumbs of your liberality, for the use of my rare qualities.
And what's your quality?
It is to speak or sing ex tempore upon any Theme, that your fancy or the present occasion shall administer.
Can you drink before you lay your lips to it
O my weak eye-sight.
Or can you eat a crust without chawing, made of the Flower of Baton.
O good Gentlemen, forbear, I beseech you.
The flower of Baton. I protest a good jest, and it was mine own before I was aware, for he had the Maidenhead or first-blow of my Baton. Nay, it shall down.
I will not yet desist; but suffer private affli∣ction with a Roman resolution for the public well∣fare, with full assurance that my fortitude shall at last get within 'em.
You are not satisfied, i• seems, you Rascal, get you gone.
Phew! beat not the poor fellow so.
Let me come to him again, and flesh my self upon him. I will not only flesh my self, but tire up∣on him.
Enough, enough, good Gentlemen, you have beaten me enough of conscience. Was ever good Pa∣triot so rudely handled? but the end crowns all.
Forbear him sons. What can thou be, that can not be satisfied with beating? speak, art a man or a Ghost?
I have been, Sir, a man, and of my hands, however misfortune humbles me under your man∣hoods. But I have seen the face of war, and served in the Low-countreys, though I say it, on both sides.
Then it is impossible this fellow can be beat out of countenance.
We'll leave him in his qualiry for that con∣stant virtue.
Sure, it is Fenner or his Ghost. He was a ri∣ming soldier. Look, do his eyes stand right?
They had a dish even now, sir.
Of sack, it is true here, take another, and wash the inside of your Throat. And let us hear your pipes in their right tune.
Give me a Theme Gentlemen.
The praise of sack. Sing the praise of sack.
Let it be of the Blade.
And the Baton, I beseech you.
Do you call, Gentlemen?
I vow, I will have sack.
T'other quart of Canary? you shall.
Are your ears so quick? I vow, I'll dull 'em.
Anon, anon.
I say, a song of Sack.
I, let it be of Sack.
Now you pump, do you?
No, sir, but think of a tune.
If he can pump us up a spring of Sack, we'll keep him, and break half the Vintners in Town.
I vow, well-said.
I swear, it was well.
I protest the best that I have heard in this kind. I wonder at his ability. I prithee, art not ac∣quainted with my two Poetical Drury-lane Writers? the Cobbler and the Tipster.
No sir, not I, I work not their way. What I do is ex tempore after the Theme given.
But they run quite before you. Their Works are in print sometimes▪ and ready to be sung about streets, of men that are hanged before they come to the Gallows.
But did not Mihil say he would come again.
I marvel at his stay.
I, and the Mumpers, when come they? I long to see the Sisters, now I am a brother sworn and entered.
O here comes news. How now pig?
You must all presently to the Paris Tavern.
Must? at whose suit!
Mr. Mihil bade me tell you so.
Is he gone from hence?
He is, and all his gone and dispersed.
Then the old Jew my father's gone.
Only there's one delicate demure Gentleman with Mr. Mihil. travelled along with him towards Pa∣ris. I believe he means to make a mouth of him.
O, it is his precise brother. But vvhere's thy Mistress, and Madame Damaris? that they come not.
They desire to meet you there too, it is more private.
Away vve'll follow thee.
Pig, how does thy father Hog, the Turkie Merchant?
I am in haste, Sir.
Why Turkie Merchant?
Because he trades in nothing but Turkie commodities; Eggs and Concubines; 'tvvere well to geld him, and send him to the Grand Seignior, to wait in his Seraglio.
Thou hast such a wit in this Clotpoll of thine. The Reckoning Drawer.
Here, here, Sir; here's your bill.
Let see the sum. What is it Drawer? 40. sh. and 3. d. Si, your dinner, and what you had since, in all, sir.
It is very reasonable, Commend me to thy Master. Son Clotpoll pay't. It is your duty.
Yes, for my Brothership.
Boys, I must leave you.
40. sh. for four men's dinners, note that, yet he says it is reasonable.
Good Captain, He was ever the fairest Reckoner, though he has never the luck to pay any thing.
Fare you well, father.
When we have further occasion, we'll re∣pair to your lodging.
At Bloomesbury. Father, I know.
Bloomsbury? good, I note it.
Sirrah, look to the second Article of your Oath.
Against discovery of lodgings, haunts, or by-walks, I am warned.
Look that you be so.
40. sh. and 3. d. you'll bate the 3. d. will you not?
We'll not much stand for that Sir, though our Master sits at dear rent.
Give me your two pieces.
Pray let me see the bill before you pay it.
Well, I can hold it then.
Bread and beer, 1. sh. 4. d. I do not think we four could eat 3. d. of bread, and for my part, I drank but two glasses of beer.
And I but one, Ivow.
And my father and I but one betwixt us, I protest.
Have you no men below?
Below the earth doest mean? I am sure we have none above-ground.
I know not, Gentlemen, there's so much reckoned at the bar, and you please you may see it.
Nay, an't be at the bar, it stands for Law. Well, wine 5 sh. 9. d. I think we had no less. A Shoulder of Mutton stuff't with Oysters 8. sh. that cost your Master very near ten groats, a brace of Par∣tridge 5. sh. a couple of Cocks 4. sh. 6. d. a dozen of Larks 20. d. Anchovies 6. sh. I swear but a Saucer full.
I'll be sworn they are so much reckoned in the Ketch•n.
Ell's law, I tell you, ell's law in Taverns. But I hope there will be a law for you one o'these days. Then is their Fruit and Cheese, Tobaccho, Fire, and I know not what, is it right cast.
There is more hope of that young man, then of all the rest, indeed it is a sore abuse, another very weed in the city. I do note that also.
Sirrah, before you have your money, fetch me a glass of Beer. But can thou sing this upon a∣ny subject.
Any sir, any, an't be till midnight.
But you have strange helps to your invent∣on. I did note the rolling of the eye, and rubbing your Brows sometimes.
So did I, I protest, and therefore, I tell you what. If he can sing such another Song, and look steadfastly the while upon any thing, and hold his hands behind him. I'll give him half a crown; if not, he shall have nothing for tother.
Agreed Gentlemen, give me your Theme.
You shall give it him.
And withal, watch him if he stir hand or eye, especially the eye.
I will I protest, and set mine eye against his, that he shall not twink, but I'll perceive it, and lay him o'er the pare.
Well Sir, your Theme.
In praise of the Baton, and if you miss it you shall be sure on it.
You'll help me with the burden, Gentle∣men.
Yes, yes, for the more grace of the Song.
Take you no care for that. Set your eyes and begin.
To prove the Baton the most noble to be.
Of all other weapons observe his degree,
In Field to be Leader of all other Arms,
To conquest and honour, through hazard and harms.
The Gallant and Peasant, the Lord and the Lowne.
Must move by the motion of the Leaders Baton.
O give me the Baton.
The Pike and the Halberd are subject to it.
The Ensign, the Partisan, all must submit,
To advance, or retire, fall back, or come on.
As they are directed by the Leaders Baton.
Then it is to the Soldier the greatest Renown,
To purchase by service to bear the Baton.
O give me the Baton.
Marry, and take it Sir, why do you stare a∣bout? though you have broke Covenant, I have not.
Where be the Gentlemen?
Ha! they are not gone, I hope, where be my brothers Drawer.
Gone sir, and have sent me to you for the reckoning.
I protest you jest, do you not? I gave 'em the full sum, and all the money I had, I protest, I swear, I vow, now they are not here, I may make bold with their words. They have my money, I am sure.
If you have no money, pray leave a pawn, sir.
Take him there, put him in a cage, and let him sing it out.
We know him not, sir.
No? he said he had the favour of the house to sing to Gentlemen.
I fear I shall be discovered, sir, I can give your worship credit for a piece till you come to your lodging.
Protest, thou art generous; nay, I know where to finde'em; and thou shalt go with me to 'em, we will not part now, we'll shone 'em. I vow, (the words out) here, I'll leave my sword for t'other piece.
Your sword will not serve, sir, I doubt.
Take my coat too, a friend and a Baton is better then a coat and a sword at all times.
I am glad my fear is over. And after all my sufferings, if at last
Cock brain crow not these roaring Lions down,
Let him be balladed about the Town.
Let me now bid you welcome to my fathers house, where till your own be fitted, though my father keep too private a family to express large entertain∣meant, yet I hope at worst you shall have convenient lodging.
Indeed, I am glad that my father yielded to your fathers friendly request in it; and the more, in regard he is so hard to be entreated to any thing; but especially for your societies sake, sweet Sister. In∣deed I'll call you Sister always, and I hope you shall be shortly in my brother Mihils right.
I have laid open my heart to you, which in∣deed is his, but your father, I fear, will never be won.
Why you would not have him too, Sister, would you?
His consent I would, and my fathers, I hope, would easily be wrought. You saw he was willing your other brother should have me at the first sight, merely for his reservedness, and Mihil methought carried himself as civil to day as he; I mean, as ci∣vilely for a Gentleman, that should not look like one fathers of the Dutch Church at five and twenty.
He was put to it to day. The noise of the Tavern had almost wrought his zeal in•o fury, it is scarce out of my head yet.
But you were about to tell me how he first fell into this vein, this vanity indeed.
I'll tell you now, and in that something worth your observation.
I will observe you.
My father has an humour, not to like any thing at first, nor accept best courtesies of friends,
though presently he finds 'em most commodious to him; things that he knows not how to be without, and oftentimes desires with the same breath the things he vilisied, and scorned them the last syllable he spake before. You saw when your father offered him the use of his house here, till his own be furnished, he cried, ho • are all the houses in the Town yours Sir; and yet presently entreated for it, and thanked him.
That shows the best nature, they say.
But that is seldom attended by the best fortune. Nay, in us, I mean, his children, he will like nothing, no, not those actions which he him∣self cannot deny are virtuous; he will cross us in all we do, as if there were no other way to show his power over our obedience.
It is a strange fatherly care.
Now, note the punishment that follows it. There's not a i will•e he has, •hough we all know what we do, that make any conscience of crossing him, we have so much of his good nature in us.
And that's as odd a duty in children.
I must confess it is a stubbornness.
Yet for the most part we do nothing, but that which most Parents would allow in their children: and now for my brother Gabriel, with whom I must bring in the story of another Kinswoman of ours, my father had at home with us.
So.
Nay, mark, I pray you, as I would entreat an Auditory, if I now were a Poet to mark the Plot, and several points of my play, that they might not say when it is done, they understood not this or that, or how such a part came in or went out, because they did not observe the passages.
Well on, I pray.
My brother Gabriel, when he was a boy, nay,
till within these two years, was the wildest unta∣med thing that the country could possibly hold.
So he is still for ought I know, for I think no man of his Religion in his wits.
I mean in outward conversation, he was the Ring-leader of all the youthful Fry, to Fairs, to Wakes, to May-games, footbal-matches, any thing that had but noise and tumult in it; then he was Captain of the young train-band, and exercised the youth of tvventy parishes in martial discipline. O he did love to imitate a soldier the best,—and so in every thing, that there was not an handsome maid in an whole County could be quiet for him.
He may be good at that sport still, for there is almost none of his sect holds any other game lawful.
Yet did he bear the civillest and the best or∣dered affection to our Kinsvvoman I spake of.
Yes, I remember.
So loving to her person, so tender of her ho∣nor that nothing but too near affinity of blood could have kept them asunder.
And she did love him as well!
O dearly, virtuously well; but my father fearing what youth in heat of blood might do, re∣moves my brother Gabriel from home into the ser∣vice of a Reverend Bishop to follow good ex∣amples.
But he learned not to be a Puritan there I hope.
You shall hear, Sister, soon after came a Gal∣lant into the country from London here, and as we after found, a Citizens son, though he showed like a Lord there. Briefly, he grew acquainted with my brother Mihil. Then vvoo'd and won my
Cousin so secretly, my father never suspected, nor he nor I ever knew whose son he was, nor of what occupation my old lord his father was; but he pro∣missed her marriage, clapped her, you may guess where, and so like the slippery Trojan left her.
O devilish Rascal!
And foolish creature, she who soon repented it, and with her shame is fled to what part of the world we know not.
In truth it is pitiful, that villain would be hanged.
Now upon this, my poor brother that loved her so, fell into discontent, forsook his lord, and would have left the Land, but that he was prevented and brought home.
And ever since he has been thus religious.
Thus obstinate, for I think verily he does it but to cross my father, for sending him out of the way when the mischief was done.
I will not then believe it is Religion in any of the gang of 'em, but mere wilful affectation. But why, or wherein do you or Mihil. cross your fa∣there.
I tell you Sister we must. He is so cross him∣self, that we shall never get any thing of him that we desire, but by desiring the contrary.
Why then do you desire him to get you an hus∣band?
Because he should get me none. O Sister, both he and Mr. Cockbrayne, can wish now that I had had his son.
There's another youth now gone on love's pilgrimage, ever since your father crosthim in your love not to be heard of.
Hush! the old men.
In good truth sir, I am taken with your con∣versation. I like it now exceeding well.
I'm glad it pleases you.
It is very fair and friendly, I find we shall accord.
I am glad I have it for you Sir, I pray, make bold with it.
Then pray sir, let me urge my motion a little further to you.
What is it? you cannot utter it so easily as I shall grant it, out with it man.
That you will be pleased to accept my daugh∣la for either of your sons, your youngest if you please, now I have seen him, I'll give him with her presently, either in hand a thousand pound, and five hundred pound a child as fast as he can get 'em. And all I shall die seized of.
What a Dogbolt is this to think that I should get a child for him.
I hope you do think well on it.
Pray love he does. I hope so too.
I mark his Answer.
I could find in my heart to ask his good-will my self.
And that were a sure way to go without it.
How say you, sir, is it a match?
I will not stay a minute in thy house, though I lie in the street for•t.
Huswife, I'll sort you with f•tter companions, Come, follow me quickly.
H•aven bless me and my child too from matching with such a disposition.
Truly, sir, I longed to be out o the house be∣fore.
Before you came in it did you not? ha!
These new walls do so stink of the lime me∣thinks.
Marry faugh, Gooddie Foist.
There can be no healthy dwelling in 'em this twelve-moneth yet.
Are you so tender bodied?
Even please your selves then where you can like better, and you shall please me.
Why you will not thrust me out of your house, will you? ha!
There's no such haste, sir.
Indeed there is not, nor will I out for all your haste neither. I'll have look to my bargain.
With all my heart, sir.
But no more of your idle motions, if you love your ease in your house, your ••n here.
Here's a letter, sir, from Mr. Cockbrayne.
Is the earer paid, or give him that an't please you.
Some body has angered him, and I must suffer.
I sent you to seek my sons, good sir, have you found 'em? ha!
I cannot find 'em sir. They went out of the Tavern together, they say, and I have been at Mr. Mihils chamber, and there they are not. I went to the Tavern again, and there they were not. •hen I beat all the rest of the bushes, in this four est of foo es and mad men, and cannot find em I, where ever they be.
Sirrah, go find em me where ever they be, a∣ny where, or no where, find 'em, and find 'em
quickly; I'll find 'em in your Cockscomb else, d' ye see! and bring my sons Sanctity home before it be dark, lest he take up his lodging in a Church-porch; and charge Mr. Mihil that he come not to me till I send for him. Here's danger in the house. There was a match-motion indeed.
Good sir, either like my house well, or be pleased to please your self with some better.
Pray Sir, be quiet in your house, lest I send you out of it to seek another. Let me see my cham∣ber.
He must have his way, I see.
NAy, you perpetual Pusse, I'll fetch him out of the very bowels of thee.
He never came so deep himself yet with all that he could do, and I scorn the threatening of a She Marmoset.
(Within) why Bettie, Frank, you mankind Carions you. I vow, open the door, will you both kill one another, and cozen the Hangman of his fees?
Thou had been better have bit off the dugs of thy Damme, thou pin-buttock Jade thou, than have snapped a bit of mine from me.
Here's that shall stay your stomach better then the bit you snarl for. Thou greedy Brach thou.
(Within) why wenches, are ye wild? break open the doors.
That I could split that devilish tongue of thine!
I have as good a spite at as ill a member about thee.
Hold, what's the devil in ye.
Are ye so sharp-set ye Amazonian Trulls?
Let me but make one pass at her.
Pray let me go, and let her come.
Can no blunter tools then these serve to take down your furies?
Let me come but within nails reach of het.
Let me but try the strength of my teeth upon her.
As Hector twixt the hosts of Greece and Troy,
When Paris and the Spartan King should end
Their nine years wars, held up his brazen lance.
In signal, that both Armies should surcease,
And hear him speak. So let me crave your audience.
Dear Bettie be advised, and Frank, forbear
Thy thirst of Sisters blood. Whilst I rip up
The folly of your strife. Your cases both
Have been laid open to me. You contend
For love of a lewd Citizen, that sleights,
Nay more, disdains, nay more, daisies you both.
Tony can tell, Mun Clotpoll also knows
The words he spake, that you were both poor whores,
Not poor alone, but foul infectious harlots.
And that he wears your mark with pain and sorrow,
Hopeless to claw them off. With constant purpose
Never to see you more, unless to greet.
Your bumpin buttocks with revengeful feet.
Did he say so?
And must we two fall out for such a slander∣os Villain?
No, agree, agree.
Bus and be friends. Bus, or I'll baste ye both, I vow.
Come Sister we'll be in for ever now.
For my part, Sister, sure I was not out with you.
But did he say he would kick us?
Lo here, the man that dares it not deny.
But do ye hear, Gentlemen. I hope you will use me kindlier then so.
Than how, Sir?
Then to win all my money, and leave me at stake for the reckoning. Pray do you pay the Drawer for me, though I pay it you again.
What is it Drawer?
The Gentlewomen and he had 14. sh. in before you came.
It is a plain case, your cloak must answer it at the bar, Sir. Drawer, away with it.
Nay, but Gentlemen.
I vow, do but look after it, till we be gone, and these shall claw thine eyes out.
Well sir, I hope this quarter will not be al∣ways lawless.
Do you grumble? Mr. C•ffelesse.
I vow you shall have cu••es.
Yes, that you shall.
Cuts and slashes too before we part, Sir.
You will not murder me, will you?
Damsels forbear; and you, forbear your noise. I vow, I'll slit your wistly else. You shall give him due correction civilly, and we will make him take it civilly. Sit you down Sir.
What will you do with me?
I vow, mum.
O, are ye here! was it a brotherly trick do ye think, to leave me to pay one reckoning twice? or did I think never to be made a mouth more, after I had paid my swearing dinner, and am I now a greater mouth then ever I was?
Mum, hold your tongue still in your mouth, lest I halifax it with your teeth.
Halifax my tongue. And listen to a business.
Do yon know this man?
Yes, the City mouth we had tother night.
These are the Sisters that his lavish tongue so lewdly did deprave.
I cry them heartily mercy Are you of the sweet Sisterhood? I hope to know you all, all the pretty Mumpers in the berry here, before I have done. It is true, I protest, he spake words of you, that such flesh and blood could not bear. He could not have spoken worse of mutton of a great a quarter.
And were we so fond to fight for him?
But now we'll both be revenged upon the flesh of him.
Pray let me speak with you.
No, they shall beat you first. And mark me well. Do thou but stir an hand or foot, or raise a voice that may be heard to the next room, well cut thy weasand. Now wenches take your course.
Nay, you slave, we'll mark you for a Sheep∣biter.
We'll teach you how to scandalise.
Have I given you that you cannot claw off, you Mongrel.
Rare, I protest.
—oh—oh—oh.
There, there.
We'll claw thine ears off rather.
—oh—oh—oh.
O brave.
O out-rage, most insufferable, all this goes into my black book.
To him Bettie, at him Frank; there whores, there.
Fie, fie, forbear, enough, too much in con∣science.
That young man has some pity yet.
I swear you shall no more.
Alas, good Gentlemen, it is enough.
I vow, do you prate? you shall have as much. Come, take the Chair, Sir, the breeches shall bait him too.
O good Gentlemen.
I vow, they shall. To him and claw him, I'll clapperclaw your sides else
O me! what mean you?
Heyday! his beard comes off.
And his head too What rotten scab is this?
I protest, they have pulled my pieced brother in pieces here.
I vow, some disguised villain, and but for do∣ing the State so good service, we would hang him pre∣sently without examination.
I know him. And you shall not touch him. Best is, he knows nor me. Good Heaven, what Brain∣trick has possessed him.
I vow, what can thou be?
Come, it is an honest fellow, that is only a∣shamed to run so base a course for his living in his own face. Poor man, I warrant his fear threatens his breeches shrewdly. But let's away, and quickly, our stay is dangerous. Come, we forgot Mesh. Croswil and the wenches.
Come all away then, Sirrah, thank this Gentleman, and pray for him at the end of your Songs hereafter.
Farewell, friend Piece. I'll know you better now, before you have it again.
What monsters in mankind? what hell-hounds are they? only as Ovid feigned among the Getes. A friend at need, I with a friend was blessed, Whom I may gratify, and plague the rest. How is it with you, Sir?
O, I am very sore.
Indeed you are sorely handled. This may warn you out of such caterwaling company. You look like one more civil. And in hope you will be so, I'll bring you to a Barber.
Alas, my Cloak.
I'll help you to that too, so you with me, Will in an honest plot Assistant be.
O Sir, in any thing, and thank you too, Sir.
A Paris ill ya ben venue Here's no bush at this door, but good wine rides post upon it, I mean, the sign-post. Boy, get you down, and if Nick Rooksbill, or any of his company ask for me, bring 'em up, do ye hear.
I will, I will, Sir.
You are welcome to Paris brother Gabriel.
It is nevertheless a Tavern, brother Mihil, and you promised and covenanted with me at the last house of noise and noisomnesse, that you would not lead me to any more Taverns.
Lead you brother? men use to be led from Taverns sometimes. You saw I did not lead you nor bring you to any that was more a Tavern then the last, nor so much neither; for here is no Bush you saw.
It was that betrayed and entrapped me: but let us yet forsake it.
Pray let us drink first brother. By your leave here's to you.
One glasse-full more is the most that I can bear. My head is very full, and labours with that I have had already.
There Sir, I'll undertake one good fellow, that has but just as much Religion as will serve an honest mans turn, will bear more wine then ten of these get∣dy-braind Puritans, their heads are so full of whim∣seys.
It is mighty heady, mighty heady, and truly I cannot but think that the over much abuse of these outlandish liquors, have bred so many errors in the Romish Church.
Indeed brother, there is too much abuse made of such good creatures. Wine in it self is good, you will grant, though the excess be nought; and Ta∣vernes are not contemptible, so the company be good.
It is most true, we find that holy men have gone to Taverns, and made good use of 'em upon their Peregrinations.
And cannot men be content to take now and
then a cup, and discourse of good things by the way. As thus. Brother, here's a remembrance (if she be li∣avenge, and have not lost her honour) to our Cousin Door as.
O that kinswoman of ours. She was the dear∣est loss that ever fell from our house.
Pledge her, good brother.
I do—
I hope twill maudlenize him.
But have you never seen that miscreant that wronged her, since he did that same, they say you knew him.
Alas, suppose I had, what could be done? she's lost we see. What good could she receive by any course against him.
It had been good to have humbled him, though into the knowledge of his Trance•ression. And of himself for his souls good, either by course of Law, or else in case of necessity, where the Law promises no relief, by your own right hand you might have smote him, smote him with great force, yea, smote him unto the earth, until he had prayed that the evil might be taken from him.
This is their way of loving enemies, to bear 'em into goodness. Well, brother, I may meet with him again, and then I know what to do. If he knew him as I do now, what a religious combat were here like to be at Nicks coming.
Sir, here's a Gentlewoman asks for Mr. Rooks∣bill.
The travelled Gallant, is it not.
Yes sir, and the old black party, her Land lady with her. But they ask for no body but him, sir.
Say he is here by all means, and bring 'em up.
Women! pray brother lets avoid the place, let us fly it. What should we do with women in a Ta∣vern?
No harm assure your self, cannot we go∣vern ourselves?
Lady, stay, he will be here presently, that you look for.
I will not glance an eye toward tempta∣tion.
I am amazed sure, I have seen this face, however your habit and the course of time may give it another seeming.
Good Angels, help my thoughts and memo∣rye. It is my Kinsman Mihil. What's the other that hides his face, so?
Do you turn away?
It is my Cousin Gabriel, strangely altered.
Come hither you. I•le make a little bold with you. Thou that hast been a concealer of more sins in women's actions, then thou hast grizzled hairs.
Sure I will speak to him, he always loved me.
Reveal a truth to me on my demand, now instanrly, without premeditation. I'll cut thy tongue out else.
What's here to do? do you think I am a devil? that you make such conjurations over me.
I think thou art as true a servant of his as any Bawd can be. But he now if thou dare. How long have you known that Gentlewoman? and what do you know by her?
Sir.
Here's a stir about nothing. I know no∣thing by her, not •. Nor whether she has any thing or nothing, that a woman should have by the re∣port of knowledge of man, woman or beast, not I. She came to me but this morning, with a purpose to set me up in my new house as I hoped. But she has taken a course to make it honestly spoken of already, to my utter undoing, but she never comes within my doors again, as I hope to thrive by my Trade here∣after.
Pray look upon me, sir.
Was she so resolutely bent, and so soon al∣tered?
Upon the very first fight of the very first man that came into my house, the very first hour of my setting up in it.
What man was that?
A shame take him, your roaring friend, Nick. I think she is enamoured of him, or of something she guesses he has; and would fine play the honest woman with him, that never played honest man with woman in his life.
It is she, and it is most wonderful.
If you knew who I were, you would not be so strange to me.
And here she comes me a hunting after him, like a fondling, whilst half a dozen pieces might have been gotten at home by this time, and she have had the halfes of it in her purse by this time; if she would have done, as I thought, she would have done by this time.
Alas, poor Howlet.
I sent whooping after the best guest that haunt my house, to have taken the first fruits of her conversation, and she would not see a man of 'em, to my undoing.
Well leave thy hooting, Madge, and hold thy peace. thou shalt get by it.
Yes, I shall get a good name shortly, and this gear hold, and turn beggar, I shall.
Pray sir, but one word.
Speak to her, brother, it is our Cousin Dor∣cas.
Will you abuse me too? is she not lost?
And will not you give her leave to be found again? his wine and her sudden apprehension works on him at once. Cousin, I'll speak to you, though I confess the miracle of our meeting thus ama∣zes me.
O Cousins both. As ye are Gentlemen, and of that noble stock, whose mere remembrance, when he was given up, and at the brink of desperate folly, stroke that reverend fear into my soul, that hath pre∣served my honour from further falling. Lend me now your aide, to vindicate that honour by that man, that threw me in the way of loss and ruin.
All shall be well, good Cousin, you shall have both hands and hearts to re-estate you in him. So that in fact you have not wronged that ho∣nor, since he forsook you.
On my soul I have not.
Infants then shall be pardoned. Brother speak.
You were wont still to be my loving'st Cou∣sin.
What a strange dream has wine wrought in my head.
I hope it will work out his superfluous zeal.
And render him civil Christian again.
It is no dream, good Cousin, you are awake,
And I, that Dorcas, for whom you have wished
Affinity of blood might be dispen•'d with. And you
to be my choice. So well you loved me.
And will above my life affect you still. But you must leave these gads and profane dres∣sings.
Bawds did he say? how comes he to know me trow?
How came my Cousin Gabriel thus tran∣slated.
Out of gay clothes long hair, and lofty spirit,
Stout and brave action, manly carriage;
Into so strict a Reformation?
Where is the martial humour he was wont so to affect.
His purity and your disgrace fell on you both about a time, I faith.
Do you swear by your FAITH?
He's falling back again.
Some more wine. You will drink with our
Cousin, brother, will you not?
What wine is it, Gentlemen?
Yes, in a cup of sincere love.
What other wine you please, Gentlemen, we have none such i•the house.
Of the same we had, sir.
Call not for wine for us, Cousin.
Assuredly, we are no profane wine-bibbers, not we.
Modest, and well-spoken verily, she should be a Sister or a Matron.
Yes, yes, we'll all drink for the good of the house.
It is upon putting down, they say, and more of the neighbours. But Cousin, he knew you not to day.
No, nor dreams of me.
And the old one knows nothing, does she.
No, by no means.
She can bewray nothing then. My brother knows not him. I only do for his fair Sisters fake, of which you may hear more hereafter; in the mean, bear your self fair and free, as if you knew him not, and I'll work him to your end, never fear it.
You are a noble Spokesman.
Truly, you speak most edifyingly.
Well-said, give it to my brother. Drink to our Cousin, Brother.
I will, and to that virtuous Matron, whose care of her, I hope, tends unto good edification.—Truly the wine is good, and I was something thirsty.
Best drink again then, Sir.
I will follow your motherly advice.
Twill work, anon, I hope.
And you have travelled Cousin. I may sup∣pose you brought this well-disposed Gentlewoman from Amsterdam with you. And this unto your well∣come, hoping I shall be informed by you how the two zealous brethren thrive there? that broke in St. Hellens.
Of that or any thing sir, pray drink again, sir.
You Jade you, hold your tongue.
O, are ye here Gallants! I made all the haste I co•••, but was stayed, I vow, by the bravest sport, baiting of a fellow or two with our Pusse-cats here. I could even sind in my heart to marry 'em both for their valours.
Those words are daggers.
I pray dissemble your passion.
What? are you acquainted already?
Did not I tell thee she was a brave Ma∣dona?
How long have you had acquaintance with her, Nick?
Never saw her before this morning, I, stand∣ing upon her Belconee.
Truly Cousin, I think it was you that I saw to day too, standing upon a Bellconee.
You spell very modestly, sir. Your brother
I take it. But did you call her Cousin, sir.
Yes sir, she is my Cousin.
Twill out too soon. Why Nick, thou know∣est these kind of creatures call and are called Cou∣sins commonly.
Yes, in their tribe. But I thought he had been too holy for them. But Dammy—
O fearfully profane!
You said you had a story to relate, of dire misfortune. and of unquoth hearing. I come to hear your story, what stop you your ears at? sir.
I dare not speak it but in thy reproof. Thou swearest Gee o Dee, Dee a•m thee, as I take it.
I vow thou least, I called her Dammy, be∣cause her name is Damyris,
I say thou least, her name is Dorcas, which was the name of an holy woman.
Shall we have things and things? I vow.
And I protest.
This will spoil all. Brother, I pray for∣bear.
I may not forbear, I am moved for to smite him; yea, with often stripes to smite him; my zeal∣os wrath is kindled, and he shall fly before me.
Let me entreat you, sir.
What furie's this?
Great Damboys shrink, and give a little ground.
I will pursue him in mine indignation.
O me!
And beat him into Potsherds.
Now he has banged the Pitcher, he may do any thing.
Pray, brother, be persuaded.
A brother to be so controlled?
You sir, put up your Steel-stick.
I desire but to know first, if he be a bro∣there.
Yes marry is he, sir.
Sir, I am satisfied. So let him live.
Pray give me leave to ask you, do these men take part with the brethren?
Yes, and are brothers a little disguised, but for some ends.
Some State-occasions.
Mere Intelligencers, to collect up such and such observations, for a great Separatist that is now writing a book against playing at Barlibreak, moulding of Cocklebread, and such like profane exercises.
Truly such exercises are profane exercises, that bear the denomination of good things ordained for mans use, as Barley, Cockles, and Bread are such things to be made sports and play-games? I pray you let me see these brethren again, to make my atone∣meant with them. And are those Sisters too, that were wi•h them?
O, most notorious ones, and are as equally disguised to be as rank Spies as the other. S'lid man, and they should be taken for such as they are, they would be cut off presently. They came in this
mad humour to be merry with you for my sake.
Pray let 'em come again, I shall not be well until I have rendered satisfaction.
You must do as they do then, or they will think you are a Spy upon them.
I will be as merry as they, let wine be given unto us.
More wine, Boy, and bid 'em all come in.
Alas, Cousin, let him drink no more.
Fear nothing, Cousin, it shall be for his good and yours, as I will order it.
All welcome, not any repetition, but begin a new
I will begin it, two glasses: it shall be a faith∣full Salutation to all the Brothers and Sisters of—
The Blade and the Scabbard.
It shall go round.
I'll swear you do not well to let him drink so.
Well said civil Roarer.
Let it go round, go to, you are a wag. I know what you mean by the Blade and the Scabbard.
Who could have thought this had been such a brother.
Nay, who could have thought you had been of the brethren.
Brethren sir, we are the Brothers.
Yea, the disguised ones.
How? disguised ones?
Do not cross him again. If thou doest, and I do not maul thee. Yes, brother, these are virtue∣os
men however they seeeme.
I vow, I have so much virtue as to rebuke thee for lying. But we are brethren, sir, and as fa∣ctious as you, though we differ in the Grounds; for you, sir, defy Orders, and so do we; you of the Church, we of the Civil Magistrate; many of us speak in the nose, as you do; you out of humility of spirit, we by the wantonness of the flesh; now in de∣votion we go beyond you, for you will not kneel to a ghostly father, and we do to a carnal Mistress.
I'll stop your mouth, you said you came to be merry.
Yes, I vow, and brought Fiddlers along, but they must play in the next room, for here's one breaks all the Fiddles that come in his reach. Come fir, will you drink, dance, and do as we do?
I'll drink, I'll dance, I'll kiss, or do any thing, any living thing with any of you that is Bro∣there or Sister. Sweet-heart let me feel thy Co∣ney.
I now he's in. Play Fiddlers. Dance.
All bravely performed, admirably well done, &amp;c.
I vow, thou art a brother after my own heart.
We cannot commend you enough, sir.
This done in civil fort among our selves, I hope, will prove no scandal to a brother.
Twill prove an honour to our faction.
I thirst to do it honour.
Give him some wine, he thirsts.
Thou little dapper thing, thou, hold thy peace.
Thou see he can scarce stand.
No, my religious brethren, no more wine.
Enough's a feast, and little doth suffice.
I thirst to do some honour to our cause. To lead
forth legions to fight a battle against our. malignant adversaries.
Brave.
Such an employment now would make me famous, for my sufficiency of Att in Arms.
I vow, this man has hidden things in him.
He has as brave a warlike spirit, man, before his precise humour tainted it, as ever breathed in Hector.
I vow then, a good orderly diet of nothing but sack for a week together, would revive it in him, and bring it to good again.
I hope, it is done already.
How do you, sit?
I fear some Jesuitical fumes have invaded my Brain pan. All me thinks goes whirley, whir∣ley, whirley.
Best lie down upon a bed. Drawer!
Soldiers must not be curious. A Bench or a∣ny thing.
The Gentleman may have a bed here, an't please you. But sir, there's an old angry Gentleman below, that asks for you, and by all description for that mortified Gentleman. And will by all means press into your room here.
It is my father.
O me! What shall I do?
We shall be all clapped up.
Fear nothing, veil your face a little; Who is with him?
No body but his old Serving-man, that it seems discovered you. You may put this Gentleman into this inner room, and keep the Key your self. I know not what charge he has about him.
Admirable honest fellow.
And you may tell your father he is gone, for he is gone you see.
I vow. a wit.
Now if you'll be civil, I may bring him up to you, if not, because he is your father, we'll thrust him out of doors, an't please you.
Notable rascal, well sir, let him up. I know how to fit him.
But this delays my business, Cousin, and will, I fear, frustrate my hopes.
Nor hinder any thing, I'll warrant thee, he's thine. Play Fiddlers, t'other dance.
I vow.
Will you! protest.
You are not wilde?
Come Wenches, if he venture in his fathers sight, shame take us and we blush.
And I had not sold all my land to live upon my money in Town here, out of danger or the Statute, I would give thee a Copihold for this dis∣covery.
I thank your worship, and truly it is a good∣lie sight, me thinks, an't please your worship.
I'm glad it likes you. Heigh, excellent good again. Heigh, Heigh, what an happiness may fathers boast, that can bring their children up to this.  I cry ye mercy, Gentlemen all. Ha! I am so∣rye I interrupted your serious private occasions.
Would you speak with any here, sir?
It is my father, Gentlemen?
Tny father? hold thy peace; dare thou use thy father thus? to spend thy time thus! ha! Is this place fit for the son of a Geatleman of quality? ha! why doest not answer me, does this company sort with thy reputation? ha!
Sir, the company.—
Hold thy peace, I say, or are these exerci∣ses allowable for a Gentleman, that ever said or heard Grace at his fathers Table? answer me that.
An't please you, Sir.
Hold thy peace when I bid thee.
The company, sir, offends not you, I hope; you see the worst of us.
In good time, sir, you are the distracted Gentlemen, I take it, that asked him if he would moot to night? Is this your mooting? do you put cases to your VVenches, or they to you?
I vow thy father talks too much.
Which are the better Lawyers? ha!
But that you are his father, sit, and an old man, and he an honest young Gentleman, and our friend, we would tell you.
I thank you for him, yes truly, heartily; and for your good opinion of him, heartily. Pray keep him amongst you while ye have him, for In•e ha• no more to say to him, I. Is your Invectives against drinking, winching, and the abomination of the times come to this? is this your spending of time more precious then money? is it you that knows not what to do with money but to buy books; and were drawn with such unwillingness to a Tavern? ha! you shall graze upon Littletons Commons, or eat nothing but books, an't please you, for any exhibition thou e∣ver got from me—And in that faith thou hast lost a father. Come sir, you have brought me to a goodly sight here; would any Villain but thy self have showed his Master light to see so much woe! Thy Coxscombe shall yet pay fot't.
O sir, O.
This was your trim sight, was it?
O.
But well remembered. Pray whore's your bro∣there? my son I would say; for I know no brother or father thou hast. Where is Gabriel?
He is not here, sir.
Did you not tell me, Sirrah, he was here?
I told you then too much. I feel it here.
He was here, sir, but he is gone, sir.
So, so, he's lost. He must be cried, or we shall never find him.
I'll warrant you, I'll find him yet to night, sir. Pray Gentlemen pay you the Reckoning, I'll wait upon my father home.
Was that spoke like a son of mine? must o∣theirs pay your reckoning, and I in place; take that, and do not make me mad. And why should you home with me? I pray, sir.
Because sir, it grows dark, and it is the worst way as it is about the town; so many odd holes a man may slip into; pray take me with you, sir.
Pray take no care for me, sir, and let the way be as it is. Do not think me worse at it in the dark then your self, I beseech you. But you talked of the Reckoning, pray let not the want of money for that hinder the search of your brother. There's towards your pains for that; and so for a farewell to you and your friends here, till I hear thou keep better company, let me hear no more of thee.
There was no way to get this money, and be rid of him, but to offer him my service He would have driven me out before him else. But come, let's see my brother that went to sleep in so warlike a Passion. I hope he'll wake in a better.
Mun Clotpoll, thou art dull.
No, I protest, but struck with admiration at the old Blades humour.
Come, Dammy and the rest, be merry. I vow, we'll sup together, and so at last hear all thy dis∣mal story.
I mean he shall, and such an Audit make,
As shall restore her honour from the stake.
WHat has this Coxscombe Cockbrayne writ me here? That he desires his ab∣sense be excused. What have I to do with him? when I send for him, let him come to me. That he is up∣on a point of discovery in a most excellent project for the weeding of this Garden? what Garden? what project? A project he says here for the good of the Republike, Repudding. This fellow has in stead of brains, a Cob-web in his Noddle, with little straws, feathers, and wings of dead Butterflies hanging in it, that having motion by his aerie fancy, there dance and keep a Racket; it is to teach women silence, or some such foolish impossibility. He is ambitious to be called into authority by notice taken of some spe∣cial service he is able to do the tate aforehand. But what great service he is able to do it, or which way to undertake it, falls not in the reach of my imaginati∣on. But good Mr. Croswill, by your favour now, what reason have you to slight or wrangle at this man? this honest Cockbrayne? that has always been a con∣stant friend to you, and officious in many good ways, and is a Gentleman, not only of good descent and e∣state, but of a good disposition. And you two, Mr. Crossewill, by your leave, have always agreed like
neighbours children. I, the devil was in it, and now he vexes me again; we agreed in one point so well, that we have undone a couple of our children by it, and hindered the getting of I know not how many more. His son and my daughter should have married. And on a sndden he and I both consented to a dislike of the match and broke it, and have both repented it an hundred times since. We agree very well in that point; and now is his son irrecoverably lost, and my daughter resolutely bent to be an Ape-leader in Limbo. But whats all this to the affliction I suffer in my sons now? that one of them from a riotous boy. should grow into a Puritanical Woodcock; and the tother from a civil well-qualified fellow, turned absolute Ruffian. There, there, I there's the devil in it. I could beat my self for getting such children.
See, see, my Master for want of other company fall∣len out with himself, and it please you, sir.
It does not please me, nor thou please me, nor any thing pleases me. The world's bent to cross me, and thou shalt feel it.
O good sir.
Is it not so, sir, was not that dunce Gabriel, a most notorious wilde thing
Before he steered a Religious course? but then he run so full a sail, that he passed and was beyond the line of Religion before he was aware; and as he passed it un∣der the torrid Zone of Zeal, the Calenture took him of the pate, that he is mad with it, and as far beyond Religion now as it is to it.
Sir, there's hope that he may he fetched half way back again, by your fatherly advisement, and be∣come a sound man.
And then was not Mihil so civil, that he made me even sick to see him. And now is he flown out as far into rior t'other way.
But he, sir, will appear a present comfort to you, he is reclaimed already; you shall never see such a Reformation in a Gentleman.
What's this you tell me? ha!
He has cast off his long-curl'd hair and all.
He had been better have cut his head off.
Where is he!
Below sir, and a Gentlewoman with him, but very much afraid to appear to you. I never saw a man so timoursome.
Do you think it fit I should go down to him, or he come up to me, fir, ha!
I'll fetch him, here's a life!
I charged he should not come at this house too, for fear he might be caught with this mecha∣nick fellows daughter, though her portion be around one. And let him take heed he look not at her.
Bless me! what changeling is this? he's in his Brothers cut.
Sir,—Sir.—
Would you speak with any here, sir, do you know me. I know not you, I assure you.
The sense of your late displeasure, sir, has so humbled me into the knowledge of my self, that on the wings of true obedience, I flew after you to make a childes submission at your feet, to crave your pardon for my riotous transgression, and to ask your bless∣sing.
A delicate speech, pray take it for fashion-sake.
But if I know how to look towards thee.
Pray sir, bestow it really upon me.
God bless thee, I say, and so much many honest men bestow daily on sons that are none of their own, if thou be mine, how came thou thus like a fellow that had narrowly escaped the Pillory, and bragged in the publication of his ears? not an hair left to hide them.
To show my readiness to reform my life, sir. And yet a willingness withal to live, as well, as civilly, in which I am in all humility to prefer a suit to you. You know, sir, I am but a younger bro∣there.
What will this come to?
Here is a widow, sir, a Gentlewoman of great estate, and of a well-known life. Ancient she is, and has had husbands. How many?
Four truly, sir.
Four sir, I would not lie. Of which the worst spoke well of her on's death-bed.
What's that to me or thee? come to the point.
I have all wo'd and won her, sir, and crave but your good-will to marry her. I have brought a Church-man and a Kinsman to give her.
Why so, what needs two words then? do you think I can deny you?
If he does grant it, it is the first request that ever he granted in his life. Sure the old Match-ma∣kerr the devil thinks I am in earnest to marry this beast. And puts a readiness in his hand to for∣ward it.
Widow, you are welcome. Why call you not your Priest? or tarry sir, let me question you but a little, Do you think seriously you love this wi∣dow?
Better then many men love their wives, I am persuaded.
It is very well, what children have you wi∣dow?
Never had any, Sir.
Very well still.
Nor ever like to have any, fir, thats the com∣fort. We shall live at the less charge.
Thou art a covetous and a preposterous Knave. Would thou bury up thy youth in barren ground? doest seek after wealth, and not after issue? doest love to feed on other men's leavings? or travel only in a beaten path? ha!
A man goes certainest on his journey so, sir, and less trouble it is you know to go in at a great gate, then a narrow wicket.
You have said enough, sir, and delight to cross me; but I'll cross you for once, and lay a cross upon you, shall perhaps carry you to your grave. Go, fetch your Priest.
I'll face it as far as I dare. I hope I shall have the grace to pull my hand from the book when it comes so far.
Widow, you are resolved to have him too.
Before all men in the world by your fair leave, 1.
You shall not have him.
Without your free consent, I will not.
I am resolved I'll do it. And twill be the best cross trick that ever I did in my life. Pray let me speak in some more private with you.
If I but escape Bridewell, I care not.
Now Tonie, she's thine own, Now Sister Kate;
he's thine. The Priest has pronounced it. I say, A∣men to it. And heaven give you joy.
Now you have done the best brotherly office that ever made a Sister happy.
And the friendliest to a friend. We have been casting for it, Sweet, this Twelve-moneth, and Heaven pardon me. I vowed never to take acquaint∣ance of my Father, till it were effected. Although I know of late he has been willing.
And so is mine, I know, but yet he swore, that I should match my self before he know it, or I should never marry.
You'll find him of another mind towards me, and force me into wedlock presently.
You have taken the likeliest course that could be. But what is your disguised woman, Bro∣there.
What you shall never know, Sister, I hope.
Come sir, I have broken off the match with your widow; and she's content to leave you as she found you. And now take me this pretty, simpering, plump-lip't, ruddie-cheek't, white-neck't, long-fin∣ger'd Virgin in hand, or I will swindge you, Sirrah, look to it. If you cannot live civilly with a young wife, you cannot but be mad with an old, I think. Be∣sides, she's a friends daughter of mine, and prepared by her discreet father here to love you. Come, and kiss her, quickly, Sirrah.
I cannot do it for all the wealth in the world.
How's that?
Kiss a Maid I never saw above twice in my life.
He will have me think him a bastard, do I what I can. Can thou see a Maid twice, and not kiss her?
Yes, twenty times, sir, and not kiss her, or if once, not above, sir.
But you shall kiss her above and below, sir, and in every room of the house, sir, before you part. Stand fair pretty one.
I know not how to do it.
You were not best let me instruct you. I can be angry too.
His back side's towards me.
Turn your self, Sirrah, or I'll turn you. Go to, bend your body a little and be hanged. So, now come your way, and say after your little Sir John here, I Mihil take thee, Lucy, &amp;c. As learning shall enable him to proceed without book.
Pray let'em do it in the next chamber, they are too bashful before us. There are witnesses enough. Go all in, I pray you.
Widow, will you give me leave to obey my father?
With all my heart, and say Amen to the marriage.
I think I shall have my will at last upon one of my rebellious off-spring.
And now, pray give me leave sir, to let you know how happy I do hold my self in this marriage. I did like this Son better then the other before. And now I like him better then I did at my former view of him, by some Reformation that I do observe in him. And I do not a little rejoice in the honour I may have to call you brother.
That very word brother out of his mouth, has turned my stomach. I must pull all in pieces again. And yet let me see these young bloods when they
are set on it; if they do not marry, they will do worse. Let em even go on now.
You may easily conceive, sir, what a com∣fort it will be unto me, that I now growing old, and having (I give praise for it,) wealth enough, and no child that I make account of but this one daughter, may, before I die, see Grandchildren that I may have by her sufficiently provided for, be they more or less in number, they may have enough.
There he is again, he calls my Grand-chil∣drone that shall be, his Grand-children. Am I a Gentleman, and can hear this? if it be not too late, I'll spoil the getting of your Grand-children.
Heaven give you joy. Heaven give you joy.
What, are you married?
I do pronounce them man and wife.
Mad. Kat. And we are witnesses.
What remedy?
We are, and crave your blessings.
All blessings be upon you, (all sa∣lute).
But you, sir, Mr. Bridegroom.
I'll only gratify the Minister.
Do so, and pay him well, it is, perhaps, for the dearest fault that ever thou did.
There's for your pains, sir. Madge, there's for you. Enough to purchase thee a Licence to sell Ale, Tobaccho, and Strong-water again in Godpiece-Rowe, for here will be no dwelling for thee, I see that.
Now, brother Anthony, go you all back to the com∣pany we left, and see that my Instructions be followed
concerning my brother Gabriel, Nick, and his Dam∣my,
All, all.
Shall he go from me?
Yes, but you shall follow him presently, trust to me Sister. Go, take no leave of 'em. I'll bring 'em upon you presently.
Are you at leisure now, sir, to tell me of your brother.
Yes, to my grief, sir, praying you may have patience.
To your grief, sir, he is not dead then? Younger brothers seldom grieve for their Elders death.
Pray bear it as you may, sir I left him in an heavy plight. And let me speak it with sorrow, he lay speechless.
Alack-a day, good Gentleman, my son in-law, perhaps, is heir already.
And hast thou been here all this while fooling or wiving (ell's a matter) &amp; left thy brother in danger? ha!
He's well attended, sir, and looked unto. Nor would I wish you see his weak estate.
It can but grieve you, sir, my wife and sister, toge∣there with my self, will go. Or if
It please my father Rooksbill here, because his power in this quarter is available.
Co, show the way. I'll go in person, I. My son's my son.
Nay, pray sir.
Yes, because you have a wife, you shall con∣troul me. Will you go on, sir.
Well, I'll bring you to him, sir.
What was your widow, sir, she stunk of Aqua∣vitae, fearfully.
I'll tell thee as we go. Kiss.
What a drunken sot was I, that knew thee not all this while? I vow, thy story pities me. I'll marry thee, and turn thee to thy friends, for I am sure I have none that will keep thee for my sake.
I ask no further satisfaction of you, then to be honested by marriage. I'll work for a poor li∣avenge.
Prithee Mun seek me a Priest.
I have no acquaintance in their function, I.
My Cousin Mihil said he would bring or send one.
There's no starting, that Mihil has a fist o∣ver me. I vow, and thou were not his Kinswoman, thou should to the Common yet.
Father, how come you hither?
Did not the company send for me?
I vow, not we.
The City-mouth, that peck't us at my lodging last night, came to me with an abominable scratch't face, and warned me on a business hither.
I smell some trick.
Some treachery upon the brotherhood, per∣haps.
Timorous thing! what in our own Quar∣la?
If you doubt any thing, it is best remove.
The fellow was sorely handled.
I would but see the carcass of authority prance in our Quarter, and we not cut his legs off. Well∣come Tonie, what hast thou brought the word here to pass for the Reckoning.
Come, you must make a wedding-night on it Nick, Mihil will go no less.
My Vow is passed, and before you, sir, I con∣firm it. This is my wife. Anon, you shall perform the holy Ceremony,
It is well, pray sir, retire your self to the next room there a while, and stay you with him, Lady.
But what do you with Gabriel? Is it not time to wake him yet?
It is now upon the point, he has slept two hours.
Father, you'll see a brave experiment upon a Gentleman that has been a youth.
And of the Philoblathici, as we are now.
And since was grown one of the reformed, and we are now in practice to retrive, and bring him back to his first condition.
Have you followed all Mihils directions?
Hitherto we have. First, you saw he was laid defunct in Sack, next in his sleep, we have accou∣tred him in martial ab liments, and now we mean to wake him with alarms shall affright the silly humour out of him, and render him his warlike faculty, or our Art fails.
Where be the Wenches?
The Sisters of the Scabbard, there's the sport on it. They have their parts to play upon him too. But for his drink now when he wakes, you said you would have a bottle of the women's what do you call it yonder? the Medea.
What? the charmed liquor that Medea brewed to make old father Aeson young again?
Must that renew his youthful spirit in him?
No, Sack will do bett•. When he wakes he will be very dry, then a quart-draught of good Ca∣nary will so screw him up. It is time it were now in practice. So, softly, softly. We must but half wake him at first.
O some small drink.
Here, drink it off, sir,  D•um and Trumpet. An Alarm.
Surprised by the enemy, whilst we have plaid the Sluggard in our Tents.
Hold Captain, hold, we are your soldiers.
You're Mutineers, and have disturbed my rest. And I'll do Martial Justice on you all.
I vow, hold, are you mad?
Know you not discipline? or are you grown rebellious in the Camp. I'll teach you war∣fare.
You have conjured a fury into him to beat us into fitters.
My pate bleeds for it; I protest.
I'll make you know command.
Noble Commander, hold thy furious hand, and hear thy soldiers speak.
What have we women for our Martial Mu∣sick?
None but the She-Trumpet, a neighbour here, and her Sister, that was Drum-ma•or to my Coun∣trey-Amazons, that pulled up the Enclosures to lie all in Common.
Is the enemy in the field?
Upon their march, Captain, and we your of∣ficers: But roused you up to be in readiness.
You are my Lieutenant, you my Ancient, and you two my Sergeants; and you must know the Com∣mander
you serve under, to be none of those Letter-carriers that know not so much as the terms of dis∣cipline, what a Flanker is, Nor a Raveling is. Nor a Petarre is. Nor a Curtain is. Nor a Bulwark is. Nor a Bastile is. Nor a Counterscarp is. Nor a Casemate is. A Gabion is: Nor any left word of fortification. How can such fresh-water Captains command?
Right noble Colonel. He shall be our Co∣lonel.
One soldier made up of Sack, is worth as many as would drink a fresh water river dry.
I knew, men of abilities should at last be put in action.
Valiant men and wise,
Are only fit for weighty enterprise.
O noble Colonel.
What would an upstart Militaster now, That knew no rudiments of discipline, nor Art of war, do in a sudden service? or say, when I know how to have my Ordnance planted here, my Cavalry mount∣ed here, my Battery-discove•er on such a point, my Trenches cut thus, my Mine carried thus, my Gibe∣once raised thus. Here my Parapet, there my Pallisadoe o'th'top of that. The enemy made saltable six hun∣dred paces there. And I draw out my Musketeers to flank 'em in their Trenches here, while my Pikes and Targeteers advance to the breach there. What would Captain, my Lords man, or Sergeant-major, my Ladies Kinsman, sent in by honourable favour, do or say in such an expedition?
Braver and braver still.
This goes beyond the Blade and the Bat∣toon.
Or how would their brains lie in their breeches, when the able Captain leads up his men in the Head of a Troop bravely, charges with his shot,
makes a stand with his Pikes, does execution with his Sword, the Cannon playing, the Drum beating, the Shot thumping, the Ensigns waving, the Arms clashing, the Air rending, Dust and Smoke clouding, Blood raining. And then to bring up such a Division to fight, make good such a Ground, relieve such a Squadron, fetch off such a loss, r'enforce the Ranks that are broken. March on, Come off. Beat the Bessognes that lie hid in the Carriages. O the renown∣ed life of a worthy Commander.
Sound Drum and Trumpet.
A Colonel, a Colonel.
Whither hast thou brought me? does thy brother lie speechless in this house? ha! what in the name of tumult can these be?
Pray sit, attend, you will be pleased a∣non.
A still march now. So, I have lost a great ma∣ny of my men. But courage yet, you poor remainder of my scattered Troops. Stand. Qni vala. An Am∣buscado of the enemy. Alarm. Lieutenant, charge in with your Shot. Now Gentlemen, for the honour of Covent-Garden, make a stand with your Pikes; in to the short sword; well fought, take Prisoners. Sound a Retreat now. Fair, fair in the coming off. So, it was bravely performed.
Must we not fall to rifling now, Colo∣nel.
Part fair on all sides, Gentlemen.
What's this, a vision, sure I do ail some∣thing.
Is it possible it is thou? art thou run mad as far as hell the tother way now.
My wicked, caitiff, reprobate son is here too.
Pray let me flee, I am but a dead man else.
You shall receive no harm, sir Lay by your Arms my Masters. I bring none but friends.
I thou can not make that good, my father's there.
I'll make him friends with thee. Go and di patch within.
I'll see it done, and take our new made Brides with us for witnesses.
Has his shame yet taught him to shun my sight.
And shall return him instantly your com∣fort.
Unpossible, unpossible.
Attend the event.
I rather thought I should have found you, sir, disputing with the Pastors, and the Elders; yet to say truth, this is the better madness. What can this mean? how came he thus translated? what Charms, or what Enchantments are upon him?
What Babel was a building in my brains?
But now it turns, and I can recollect
The knowledge of a father, brother, Sister.
And that a thousand vain imaginations,
Like scatterings of light things upon the earth,
Rushes, loose leaves, sprigs, straws, and dust
Contracted by a whirlwind, were blown up,
And lodged in the rich Seat of Contemplation,
Usurping there the room of virtuous thoughts.
Honour awake me from this Lethargy.
What can those women that appear like furies be in this action?
They were but used as properties to give new motion to his mortified condition.
I know not what to say to any thing; there
is some Spell upon me too. My anger has forsook me. What are those men that bear a countenance. As if they stood indifferently affected to Bedlam and Bride-well.
Meaning by us, sir. If our sight offend you,
Know we are men that dare forbear the place.
I son, let's go, our stay is dangerous.
They look like Peace-maintainers, we•ll fall off.
O tarry, Gentlemen, we are all undone else. If you make not your peace before you stir, both you and I must suffer.
What's the matter?
The Magistrates and Officers with their Bill-men have taken us by surprise. They are in the house.
O me! the blew Gown College.
Wheels and whips. I feel what we must go to. Did not I say our stay was dangerous?
Did not I say there was some subtle pra∣ctice upon the Philoblatici? and that we were betrayed hither?
There's no escaping forth. And Gentlemen, It will but breed more scandal on my house, and the whole plantation here, if now you make rebellious up∣roar. Yield your weapons, and welcome Justice but like subjects new, and peace will follow.
But whore's Nick? whore's Tonie?
They shall yield up their weapons. So do you.
Yes yes, it is best.
Shall we, sir, shall we?
Yes sir, you shall.
So, sir, I will then, not the Blade alone. But
for your more security, the Baton, There see my Arms forth coming.
Say they shall have fair welcome, What are they married?
Yes, as fast as troth and holy words can bind 'em.
It is well. Now sir, let me entreat your favour.
It is my first suit to you since I was your son,
That before others entrances distract our troubled
Scoene, these may be reconciled.
Even unto the earth, sir, and humbled with as true a penitence, as son can be for wronging of a father, I beg your pardon and blessing.
Give it him, Brother Rooksbill, I dare say twill make him a good man.
Heaven make him so. My blessing and my prayers shall not be wanting.
What? my Niece Dorcas made an honest wo∣man?
Was that the man that wronged my Cousin Dorcas?
Yes, and has now made ample recompense.
Here they are altogether, sir.
Lay hands on all. First, on that old Ruffian, the Incendiary, that sets the youthful bloods on fire here with his Infernal discipline. Next, take his sons, there's one, that young Blade there, Have I now got within ye, Gentlemen? will you have Songs ex temporc? know ye me now? a ha! I'll be caned the
Weeder of this Garden. Take up those She weeds there. I have the rank one here. I took her straggling in my Round even now.
My Tenant, I take it, Mrs. Margerie How∣let.
Your widow sir, I think.
But for a shift sir, now you know my aim.
O good your worship, as you came of a wo∣man.
Peace Circes, cease thy charms. What clu∣ster have we here now. O here's another of the sons of noise.
That's my son now, sir, by your leave, and I'll bail him.
What Mr. Rooksbil, are you here? what wo∣man's this?
My Niece, sir, his sons wife. And I'll bail her.
What Mr. Croswill, you among this Ging too?
How will you escape commitment?
Why, Mr. Cockbrayne? how his brains crow now?
Who's here? your daughters too? but what are these?
I hope they'll prove my sons, and be indiffe∣rent men in time, sir, by that time their hair may grow, or be reduced to an indifferent length.
That's done on me already, sir.
Now he looks as like a Rogue as ever he did again.
And sir, for me, now that my Cousin is resto∣red, and the wilde fury of my wine abated.
I do you the obedience of a son, acknowledging my former formal habit was more of stubbornness then true devotion. For which I beg your pardon.
There's more deceit under these half Foot∣balls, then in whole Pudding-bags. Well boys, be you indifferent sons, neither too hot nor too cold. I have found a fault in myself, I confess. I will re∣form it, and be an indifferent father.
O here's the man I sought, whom, I confess, I am half sorry to commit with the rest, because I found him civiller.
Hoping you will not stake that good opinion, I'll now come nearer to you. And since here is such a convention of love and joy. I hope my offering of a sons true duty may sinde I dulgencie.
What? my son Antonie?
How? how? your son that should have had my daughter? Come hither Kate, now if thou love him, take him. Are you content, friend Cock∣brain.
O sir, most happily.
Why run you not together?
It is too late, or needless now for me to marry her.
Is it come to that? and if I do not swindge him—.Are you too good, sir, for my daugh∣la?
I do not say so, sir.
Huswife, do you like him?
No more then he does me, sir.
Get you together, or I'll swaddle you both into one, you perverse fools.
Sir, the truth is, we are married already.
It is so, indeed, sir.
Heyday! who am I trow? how durst you do it without my consent?
I had your consent, sir, you commanded me to take my choice in whom I pleased, before you would take notice.
I cannot abide this vvrangling. Give you joy.
Joy and my blessing on you. Why I know not whom to commit now.
You have done the Common-wealth a special piece of service the while with your State-braines. But let us make a night of this, I pray.
Sir, the parties have given me satisfaction, and I am content they be released.
There's an honest fellow now, and looks like one that would be beaten every day for ready money. Go now, while ye are well, and be seen no more in this Precinct.
Never and't please your vvorships, never.
'Tvvas built for no such vermin. Hence away.
And may the place be purged so every day.
It is no unworthy member may be found,
To pester or to vilify this ground.
That as it was intended, it may be
A Scoene for Virtue and Nobility.
Tic not the Poets Art, nor all that we
By life of Action can present on it, ye
Can or ought make us to presume a Play
Is good, it is you approve't. Which that you may
It cannot misbecome us, since our gains
Come by your favour, more then all our pains.
Thus to submit us unto your commands.
And humbly ask the favour at your hands.
It is done. And now that Poets can divine,
Observe with what Nobility doth shine
Fair Covent-Garden. And as that improves,
May we find like Improvement in your Loves.

