SO various are the pallates of our Age
That nothing is presented on the Stage,
Though ne'er so square, and opted to the Laws
Of poesy, that ean win full applause,
This likes a story, that a cunning plot
This wit, that lines, here one, he know's not what.
But after all this looking several ways,
We do observe the general guests to Plays,
Meet in opinion of two strains: that please
Satire, and wantonness, the last of these
Though old, if in new dressing it appear
Will move a smile from all, but shall not hear.
Our Author hath no guilt of scurrile friends.
For Satire they do know best what it means,
That dare apply, and if a Poets Pen,
Aiming at general errors not the men,
It is not his fault, the safest cure is, they
That purge their bosoms, may see any Play.
But here we quit your fear of Satire too,
And with these disadvantages to you
Thus humbly bow, to such helps tan away
What hope is there many will like the Play,
But good or bad, have patience but two hours,
The Poets credit is at stake with ours.
WEe are like to have a brave, and jolly time on it.
The Court looks now is it should be, after such
A tempest, what should follow but a calm,
And Sun-beames? wher's the Duchess?
And yet as the case stands, we can scarce give her
That title, all her glory is eclipsed, 
Shoe's in the west, poor gentle-woman I can
But pity her, I mean Euphemia.
I dare not speak.
Thou may speak any thing
That's Courtly, and in fashion.
But the Duke.
'Is Duke, and Heaven preserve him, let him have
His humour, and his Mistresses, what are we
The worse, nay lets consider like wise-men
We are the better for it, it gives us liberty,
And matter for our dutiful imitation.
But she was his Duchess.
What then?
A Lady of,
A flowing sweetness, and but in his eyes
Can want no beauty, how her nature may
Thus cruelly affronted, keep that soft,
And noble temper.
Take heed, and be wise,
We are or should be Courtiers, if it please
The Duke for reasons best known to himself
To have more Wives, I say it is sit he have 'em,
I make it my own ease.
Thou art not married.
No, I dare not for that reason, cause I hold it
Unfit my conscience should be limited,
But we are private men, and though the Laws
Have power on us, the State, and Dukedom may
Suffer, if he that is the soul of all,
I mean the Duke, should wast his life with one,
One melancholy wife, come let me tell thee
Since he has chosen one, that he thinks fairer
It is happy for his first to keep her head on,
Coulst thou have thought so cruel, las Euphemia
No thou art deceived, if I were Duke
It is ten to one I'd have no Wife at all,
How?
Not of mine own, while any of my subjects
Had those I could affect; whom I wo'd have
Presented by their husbands, they should doe
Themselves that courtesy, none would deny,
Considering what may follow.
Besides Horns.
Right, if the toy be gamesome, the husbands made
For ever.
Cuckold.
And his Wife a great one,
Horns excuse for all.
The old mind still.
I know my constitution
His countenance wears some sore of discontent
Does he not appear Cloudy.
Let's speak to him.
My Lord,—my Lord.
Not answer.
He does not hear.
My noblest Lord.
If I did think he were proud now of a sudden,
I wot not ask him how he does, to save
His life—I'll speak once more, my worthiest Lord,
Leontio.
Ha!
I ha wakened him.
Valerio, and Siluio.
I am your servants.
Not that we grudge our duties to your Lordship
Or breath, for without flattery, I dare
Be hoarse with praising, and with praying for you,
But we would willingly have your Lordship take
Notice, when we express our hearts to serve you.
Your pardon gentlemen, I am confident
You have more virtue then to let me suffer in your opinions
You look sad.
Not I.
And talk as you had but started from a dream,
I dare not be too bold to enquire the cause,
But your face will teach others melancholy.
Now in this general mirth it must appear,
The greater wonder to behold your trouble.
I shall betray my self, keep in my passions.
Ther's something in it more then we apprehend.
What should distract the freedom of your sole
Kinsman, and only favourite to the Duke,
The peoples love too, and these seldom meet,
The minion of the Soldiers, who honour you
Most infinitely for your valour, and your bounty.
Flatter not gentlemen.
I'll be your hind first.
Eclipse not, Sr, the glories of your mind
with this strange melancholy, I wot not for
My hopes the Duke should see this dullness, he
May with unhappy jealousy interpret—
What Jealousy?
I know not.
Is my heart transparent?
Now joy revels in the Court,
By his command, and his example too;
Doe not affront his pleasure, I am bold,
But it is my zeal, that wo'd not have you suffer,
And you may give it pardon.
I must thank
Thy love Valerio, thy heart does speak
A noble ftiendship, you shall witness Gentlemen
I will be very pleasant, keep, keep in
Ye rebel thoughts, and take some other time
To show your wildness.
Observed you that?
Shall I be bold to ask your Lordship a question?
Any thing.
You will pardon the folly on it?
What is it? be clear with me.
Are you not in love, my Lord?
In Love?
I have shrewd conjectures.
From what?
From these dull Symptoms, if you be
What then?
Let me be your Physician, it is a woman
I must presume.
What does a man love else?
There be those men are in love with their own clothes
Their wits, their follies, their estates, themselves,
But if you love a woman, let me advise you.
Hear him my Lord, his practise upon that sex
Has made him learned.
Something I have observed
After a hundred Mistresses, I had been dull else,
But to the point.
How would you advise me?
I would not counsel you not to love at all,
As some that are all Satyr, against the sex,
Love me a handsome Lady, but so love her
That still your heart find room for a fresh beauty,
For twenty, for a thousand.
Is inconstancy
So easy, and so pardonable.
Why dee' shift
Your shirt, the linen's sine, but not so clean
And sweet after a Journey, it is a Justice
To change: and a security a woman
Is Tyrant, when she finds a dotage, Love
But wisely, to delight our hearts, not ruin 'em
With too severe impression.
Prithee tell me,
What doe most men desire that are in love?
In this wise love I mean? why, my Lord, they
Desire to enjoy their Mistresses, what else
Can be expected? and it is necessary
In my opinion.
Had thou been woman,
Thou wot not have been so cruel.
Troth, my Lord,
I know not how the sex might have corrupted me
But had I been Atones, without question
My Lady Venus should have had no cause
To accuse my bashfulness, I should have left
The Forest to have hunted—
I believe it.
But I must be content.
Nothing will much trouble thy head Ualerio.
I doe not vex my self with much inquiry
What men doe in the Indies, or what Trade
The great Turke's on, nor what his design is,
Nor does the State at home much trouble me,
After the wars I enjoy my limbs, and can
Boast some activity, until some woman
In kindness take me down, be rule•d by me,
Employ your spring and youth upon those Joys
They are fit for, beget a new Elizium,
Under some pleasing shade lets lie and laugh
Our Temples crowned with Roses, with the choice,
And richest blood of Grapes, quicken our veins,
Some fair cheeked boys skinking our swelling Cups,
And we with Jovial souls shooting them round
At each mans lip a Mistress.
I did look for this before.
They in this Bower
Shall with their Songs, and Music charm our ears,
And nimbly dance, their bright hair loosely spread;
Nor shall they more their amorous beauties hide
Then those contended for the golden Ball.
Thou wot imagine many fine devices
But after all these pleasures, as there is
A limit, and a period set, what will
Succeed these raptures, when they are past enjoyings
But leave so many stings upon our thoughts.
We wo'not think of that, or if we do,
We'll venture upon Fortunes courtesy.
Thou art resolute Valerio, if ere sorrow
Lay siege to me, i'll wish thee my companion.
I am your humble creature, and shall be honoured
In your commands.
My Lord, the Duke
Asked for you.
I'll attend. Whither in hast?
We are commanded to attend
It is his pleasure, we should waite upon her
To his presence.
Ardelia,
It will become you, and but that his highness
Exacts my person, I should be a part
Of her attendance, but not serve her with
Half the devotion, I would pay Euphemia
The too much injured Duchess, now a stranger
To the Dukes bosom, while another sits,
And rules his heart, but this prepares my happiness,
My hopes grow from her misery, which may
Incline Euphemia to pity me.
I must use art.
Good Madam have more comfort.
Is not that she? her habit like her Fortune
Most black, and ominous, heir's a change of State,
No noise of waiters, and officious troops,
Of Courtiers futter here, where are the train
Of Ladies, with more blossom then the Spring,
Ambitious to present their duties to her,
Where be those Jewels, whose proud blaze did use
To vie with Sun-beames, and strike gazers blind?
All gone behind a Cloud? how she observes
The Structures, which more soft then Dionisio
seem to incline their marble heads, and sweat
In the compassion of her injury,
My heart is labouring for breath, and yet
I dare not speak to her, the Duke has spies
Upon her; and his anger carries ruin.
Sure I should know this place.
Tic the Court Madam.
And those were Courtiers that past by?
They were.
Some of them served me once, but now the Duke
Has discharged all, why dost not thou forsake me.
I served you Madam, for your self, and cannot
Think on you with less reverence, for your change:
Of Fortune.
Is not that Leontio?
It is Madam.
Does he decline me too? though I am miserable,
My grief wo'd not infect him, but he must
Compose himself to please, the Duke, whose creature
He has been always.
I will speak to her,
Though death in the Dukes eye threatens to kill me,
Great Mistress.
You doenot well Leontio to insult
Upon my misery, Dionisios frown
May make your field as barren.
By all virtue,
And by your self the Mistress, I have not
One thought so irreligious in my soul
I weep for your misfortune, and shall Study
All humble ways to serve you.
You have been noble.
Your titles are all sacred still with me,
The Dukes neglect cannot unprince you here;
Oh let not hasty sorrow boast a triumph
Over so great a mind, let not that beauty
Whither with apprehension of your wrong
That may be soon repented, and the Storm
That cowardly would shake that comliest building
Make for your happiness, some lament your fate.
Whose looks speak mirth, be confident, the Duke
Will chide the unlawful flame, that like rude
And wandering meteor, led him from your virtues
With so much danger to embrace Ardelia.
The Duke shall know your complements.
No more, least for your charity to me,
For I must call it so, you ruin not
Your favour with the Duke, farewell Leontio
Yet I would pray one favour from you.
Me?
My life's your servant.
If you hear the Duke
Speak of me, as I fear he never will
But in displeasure, tell him I will think it
No cruelty to take this poor life from me,
Rather then let me draw a wretched breath
With general scorn, let him command me dead,
And I forgive him, otherwise farewell.
That close snow•d something, like a will to be,
Revenged her breast heaved up, and fell again,
While both her eyes shot a contention upward,
As they would seem to put just Heaven in mind
How much she suffers.
If grief thus become her,
What magic will not love put on? I must
Stifle my passion. Pallante, welcome,
You are well met in Court;
Where dost thou live Pallante?
Every where,
Yet no where to any purpose, we are out
Of use, and like our Engines are laid by
To gather dust, the Court I haven't skill in,
I want the trick of flattery, my Lord,
I cannot bow to Scarlet, and Gold-lace,
Embroidery is not an Idol for my worship,
Give me the wars again.
But yet remember we fight for peace,
The end of war.
I never did, my Lord.
What?
Fight for peace, I fought for pay, and honour,
Peace will undo us.
Tic the corruption of our peace, that men
Glorious in Spirit, and desert, are not
Encouraged.
The faults somewhere.
I presume
Thou art not of so tyrannous a nature,
But thou could be content to wear rich clothes,
Feed high, and want no fortune without venturing
To buy them at the price of blood.
I could.
And isle engage thou shall it, be this the Prologue.
Not I, keep, keep your money.
You doe not scorn my bounty.
You may guess
That fortune has not doted much upon me,
And yet I must refuse it.
Your reason pray?
Why ten to one I shall spend it.
So tic meant.
Twill make me gay a while, but I shall pawn
My Robes, and put on these again,
Thou shall it not
While I have Fortune to preserve thee otherwise,
I say out of my love to you I must not,
I never yet took money upon charity,
I earned it in the War, and i'll deserue't
In peace, of you I cannot, tic my misery
To be unserviceable.
Is that your Scruple?
But that I know thy humour, I should think
This cunning, but you shall not, Sr, despair,
I shall find ways to have mentioned
In your accounts for merits, doubt not, I
Will give you occasion to deserve more.
On those conditions i'll take more, and think the better
Of my own life, honoured by your employments.
The Duke.
Ha? Leontio.
If I have any brains, he showed a passion
Did not become him to your Duchess, Sr.
Presumes he on his blood, above our favour?
Dares he but in a thought control our pleasure,
No more, we'll take no knowledge, oh my Lord
You absent your self too much, though we confess
Our State must owe much to your care, we would not
Your offices should wast you with employments
Preserve your health I pray—
I never did
Enjoy it more then when I studied service,
And duties to your grace.
Music, the minuets
Are sad in the absence of Ardelia,
And move too slow, quicken their pace with Luts,
And voices.
No more; we will be Music of our selves,
And spare your Arts, thought of Ardelia,
Should strike a harmony through every heart,
What brow looks sad, when we command delight?
We shall account that man a Traitor to us,
That wears one sullen Cloud upon his face,
I'll read his soul in it, and by our bright Mistress,
Then which the World contains no richer beauty,
Punish his daring sin.
He will deserve it
Great Sir, that shall offend with the least sadness,
Or were it so possessed, yet your command
That stretches to the soul, would make it smile,
And force a bravery, severe old age
Shall lay aside his sullen gravity,
And revel like a youth, the froward Matrons
For this day, shall repent their years, and coldness
Of blood, and wish again their tempting beauties
To dance like wanton Lovers.
My Leontio,
In this then thou dost present our bosom to thee,
What's he?
A Gentleman that has deserved
For service in your late wars, Sir, a Captain.
He may turn Courtier now, we have no use
Of noise, we can march here without a Drum,
I hope we are not in arrears to him,
He haunts us for no pay?
Your bounty beside that, hath won their hearts.
Why has he no better clothes? this is a day
Of Triumph.
I beseech your highness pardon,
I have drunk your health in better clothes, despise
My Christian Buff; this is the fruits of peace,
I'll waite on you again.
Wher's my Ardelia?
How at the name my spirits leap within me,
And the amorous winds doe catch it from my lips
To sweeten the Ayre—heaven at the sound
Looks clear, and lovely, and the earth putt's on
A spring to welcome it, speak Leontio
Strozzi, Gentlemen, but she appears.
For whom the World shall wear eternal shive,
Brightest Ardelia, Queen of love, and me,
The only honour, my ambition climes too,
Is to be held your highness humblest hand-maid.
Call me thy servant, what
New charms her looks does throw upon my soul.
How the Duke gazes?
There is some strange divinity within her,
Is there not Valerio?
I am not read so far yet as divinity,
Mine is but humane learning.
Speak again,
And at thy lips the quires shall hang to learn
New tunes, and the dull spheres but coldly imitate,
I am transformed with my excess of rapture,
Frown, frown Ardelia I shall forget
I am mortal else, and when thou hast thrown down
Thy servant, with one smile exalt again
His heart to heaven, and with a kiss breath in me
Another soul fit for thy love, but all
My language is too could, and we wast time,
Lead on, ther's something of more ceremony
Expects our presence, Italy is barren
Of what we wish to entertain Ardelia.
May all the pleasures thought can reach attend you.
BE counselled yet without being too ambitious
To buy a dear repentance.
Now we are.
Arrived at Court, shame to our resolution,
I prithee do'nt tempt me to such cowardice,
Horatio I must see her, sheele not blast us,
She was lovely when our eyes saluted last,
And at my fare-well many innocent tears
Witnessed her sorrow, clear as April weeps
Into the bosom of the Spring, not see
Ardelia?
You have travelled since, and she
Wanting no beauty, was not over willing
To languish in your absence, how I pity thee,
But that I wot not too much vex your folly,
Dost think ther's faith in any women's eyes,
She wept at parting, a strong obligation
When they can thread their tears, and make a chaino
Of water, let me wear one of their bracelets;
I will convince thy madness in six words,
Admit she said she loved you, and to your thinking
Vowed it, for you say you were contracted
All this is nothing.
No.
Not this; although
You had been married, and in the Sheets together,
And chaffered earnest for a boy, it is nothing
It binds not.
How?
Not with a thousand witnesses.
How not bind her?
Nor any woman living, that's possessed
With a wandering spirit, clap her in a dungeon,
Pile three Castles on her, yet she shall
Break prison when she has but the least mind too't;
She le work through a Steele-mine, to meet a friend
That she likes better, with more ease throw up
A quarry of Marble, than a Mole shall dust,
They work with spirits, man, and can doe wonders,
Especially a handsome woman, from whose false
And sly temptations, all my wits defend me.
There were some dealing with an Elvish female,
That had but a course face, or say but half a one,
Emnaticke eyes, with no more sight than could
Distinguish well, man from a horse, or bear,
To keep her from mistake in procreation,
A nose of many fashions, and as many
Water-workes in 'em, lips of honest hide,
And made to last, teeth of a Moors complexion,
A chin, without all controversy, good
To go a fishing with, a witches beard on it,
With twenty other commendations, such a thing
Were no mischief, and a man might trust
Her with no scruple in his Conscience.
This is plain madness.
You may call it so,
But Isle be bound to travel further with
This Night-mare, than the finest flesh and blood
You court, and call your mistress, why the Devil
With all his art, and malice will ne'er cuckold me,
And I should leave her in hell, and go a journey,
I should be sure at my return to find her
Safe, and untouched, sound of her wind, and limbs;
A fair, and handsome woman would not scope so:
You have my opinion now, and it were less evil
To practise it, you mind not my instructions.
Not I.
These Lectures have L read to the City
With the same success, that Gentlemen might live honest,
And men have luck to father their own children,
But twill not be, you are resolved to try it?
Am I engaged thus far to fall back now?
Remember where you are yet.
I am in the Court.
Where you expect to complement with the Dukes—
What?
What doe you think? the Dukes married,
They say although he love Ardelia,
And without question, in these parts may want
No intelligence of your purpose, and your person,
And theres no doubt, but if he find you quaile-catching,
He has power enough to cool your blood, and hers,
Should she remember what has past between you,
In that respect be cautioned, doe not work
A double ruin, to sooth one vain humour;
Eyes will beget an appetite of more nearness,
And how that may succeed, it is better fear, than prove.
I prithee fright me not with shadows.
You are then for her substance—isle not leave you.
Isle see her did the Duke proclaim it death.
I Had rather see the Cow, with her five legs,
And all the Monsters in the market, then
Be troubled with the spectacle, but on,
Stay, yet will you but see her? will her face content you,
A far off, without multiplying twinckles,
Ridiculous sighs, or crossed arms pinioned thus,
As the Kinght-Templers legs are, wholly buried,
Like Taylors, no djected looks, as y'ad
Your father alive again to send you out
To sea, with pension to maintain you in biscuit,
Poor John, and half a livery, which should be
Part of your governor, to read moral virtue
And lenton Lectures to you, or if she frown
As much as say my friend, I am not for you,
The Dukes the better Gentleman, and shall pay for it
Will you return then with a handsome patience,
And wisely love where no man else will rival you,
A Witch or some old woman,
I prithee leave
Thy frenzy, thou shall it witness isle be temperate.
Who's this? Signior Valerio.
Bentivolio, welcome to
Pave, and the Court.
My friend, Sir.
You both divide me.
Then I am no stranger,
In confidence of that friendship we both sealed
In Travel.
What affairs brought you to Pave?
Being at large, I had curiosity
To observe what might improve my knowledge here
With some taste of your Court.
And I am happy
I have some power to serve your wish, nor could you
Arrive to see it shine with more delight,
It is composed of revels, now all airs,
Let me present you to the Duke.
I shall be honoured to kiss his hand.
Shall it see his Mistress,
The fair Ardelia, the Dukes no saint,
I may tell thee.
Pray Sir, with your favour,
Cannot the Court furnish a Gentleman,
And need be, with an ugly face or two,
Such as would turn your stomach, would content
My fancy best.
What means your friend?
A humour he plays withal.
He would not play with such a woman, wo'd he?
Yes, and if the place be not
Too barren to afford me one ill-favoured
Enough.
Ne'er fear it, they are common here
As Crows, and something of a hue by moone-shine
Promise to keep your wits, and isle present you.
I have a lease Sir, of my brains, and dare
Enconnter with an army out of Lapland.
How likes Ardelia this?
If it affect
Your highness ear, duty hath so composed
My will to obedience, I must praise the music,
And wish no other object to that sense,
Unless you please to express more harmony
By some commands from your own voice, that will
Challenge my more religious attention.
What charm is in her language? cease all other
(But discord to her accents) what a sweet,
And winning soul she has, is it not pity
She should be less than Duchess, far above
Euphemia in beauty, and rare softness
Of nature, I could wonder, gaze for ever;
But I expose my passion too much
To censure, yet who dares dispute our will?
Leontio look upon Ardelia,
And tell me.
What Sir?
Can see nothing there?
I see a spacious field of beauty Sir.
Tic poor, and short of her perfection,
Bear her this other Jewel, I will have her
Shine like a volume of bright constellations,
Till all the world turn her Idolater:
When did Euphemia look thus?
Never sir.
Be Judge thy self Leontio, if my Duchess
Loved me, could she deny her Dionisio
This happiness, but she has a stubborn soul.
She has, and shall repent it.
Sir, remember
She is a princess.
You were best remember her,
Perhaps sheele take it kindly.
Sir, I hope
You have more assurance of my faith to you
Then to interpret—
Nothing, come, ell's well,
Name her no more, how ere she has displeased
Us, you can violate no duty still
To love her.
I sir?
This infects delight,
Let's dance my sweet Ardelia.
The Dukes jealous
Or i'm betrayed.
Leontio, Silvio, Strozzi,
The Ladies blush for you, they have breathed too much.
Sir, here are gentlemen desire the grace
To kiss your highness hand.
Ardelia supply our Duchess absence,
It is the Dukes desire by his example, you extend your
Fair hand to a pair of strangers, ambitions of the
Honour.
Bentivolio?
Tic he, how my heart trembles as my frame
Would fall to pieces, doe you know that gentleman?
Yes, Madam.
Let him attend me in my lodgings
It will be worth your friend-ship to conduct him.
I shall.
Your countenance changes, I observed
Your eyes upon that Stranger.
He revives
The memory of a brother, I loved dearly,
That died at Sea: I ne'er saw two so like.
For representing one so near Ardelia,
Receive another welcome, and what favours
Your thoughts can study from our Court, possess 'em.
You oblige my humblest services—how now, how dost like this?
Why scurvily, you flatter
Your self into destruction, I see
The Arrow will pierce thy heart, decline it yet.
Still frantickely opposing.
I have done
Be mad, i'll give my brain to somewhat else,
Sir, I'wod see a physiognomy, though it look
As big as the four winds, I have court-ship for it,
And wo not he blown off with an Hericano,
Yet trust me i'll be honest.
I believe you.
Only to please my eye.
What think you of
That Devils lans-schape, you observed not her,
Notwithstanding her complexion, she is a Lady
Useful at Court, to set of other faces,
Especially the Dukes Mistress, whom for that,
And some thing else his grace has recommended
To be her companion, will she serve turn?
Did you ever see a more excellent wall-eye
I marry, Sir.
Nay let me prepare you,
Madam dee observe that Gentleman,
The ••aring Stranger, he has business to you,
And you will bid it welcome.
Does he know me?
He inquired for you
By all descriptions—and I guess he may
Be worth your favour.
Mine?
If ever man
Were an Jdolater, he is yours, i'll bring him
To your lodgings Madam, if you please.
You'll honour me.
Again to our revels, ther's no life without being active,
Not now? you shall have opportunity, 
And I have commission to inform you something,
Away here's like to be a Storm.
What's she?
Euphemia.
Your Duchess, Sir.
How dares she interrupt us?
A guard about my heart, I am undone e'ls.
Each look, and motion in her grief present
Such a commanding sweetness, if I observe
With the same eyes I shall betray my self.
I come not Sir, with rudeness of my language,
Or person to offend your mirth, although
the nature of my sorrow is so wild
It may infect weak minds, and such as have not
Some proof in their own bosoms, but to make
One, and my last suite, which when you have heard
It may appear so reasonable, and proportioned
To what your thoughts allow me, that you will
Find easily a consent to make it fortunate,
And me in the prevailing.
Doe not move.
Ardelia, I am full protection here.
Ther's something sir in my request to make her happy too,
I dare not hear the Duchess,
Her looks wound me.
Speak your promising wishes.
Although I know not for what guilt in me
Of more then my obedience, and some less
Beauty then dwells upon Ardelias cheek,
You have exiled me from your love, and bosom,
And worse then one condemn•d by force of laws,
For sin against your bed have sentenced me
To wander with disgrace, carved in my brow
The Fable of a Duchess, and your anger;
My desires are you would have so much charity
Though you have made me an out-law by your doom,
Not to compel me after all my shames
To be a murderer.
Treason, our Guard.
You shall not trouble Sir your fears I bring
the least black thought against your person, heaven
Avert so foul à sin, the danger all
Doth threaten me, and my life, which I thus
Most humbly beg may not be forced through blood
By my own hands •urged by your heavy wrongs
To such a desperate mutiny, which you may
Prevent by your revenge of Law upon me.
To which, and your displeasure I would yield
My life your welcome sacrifice, i'll praise
Your mercy for my death, and bless the stroke
Davits my sad soul from me.
This your project?
Did you hear the Duchess suite?
No, but i'll beg
It may be granted, doe not sir deny
Your Duchess her desires so just, and reasonable;
How's this? she'll pray to be rid on her,
Audacious woman
Let me rise with horror.
Ardelia knows not what Euphemia asked.
She'll appear cunning.
I am confident
She hath propounded nothing ill becoming.
Nothing, a very trifle, wearied with
Her injuries she only begs the Duke
Would be so kind to order with as much
Convenience as he please, her head to be
Chopped of, that all, and you were charitable
To join so modestly in the advancement
Of her desires.
Defend it heaven,
Madam your pardon, I imagined not
You aimed such cruelty upon your self.
Proud, and dissembling woman, at such impudence
I take my spirit to me, and no more
Will put my breath to the expense of prayer
To be short-lived, I will desire to live
To see heaven drop down justice, with such loud,
And public noise of my revenge on thee,
And thy adulterate arts, as the world naming
But once Ardelia, shall be palsey-strucke.
I feel a new, and fiery soul within me,
Apt to disperse my rage, which fear and my
Religion would have stifled. Oh my fate!
She raves, to prison with her, we are not safe
While she enjoys the freedom of our ayre:
Stay (my good Genius) she carries yet
The title of our Duchess; tic our pleasure
Leontio, she be your prisoner,
But see her narrowly confined, till we
Determine what shall follow, in what we
Limit, you not make your own reason guide,
But on your life secure her.
Your commands
In all things I obey, most blessed occasion!
Fool, thou dost entertain what must undo thee,
And make you both ripe for eternal absence;
Hug Juno in the clouds, and court her smiles,
Though she consent not, tic enough you'll stand
Suspected, and exposed to equal danger.
You sha'not lose your ayre to plead for death,
Thus wele secure Ardelia.
I hear,
And with all chearefullnesse resign my will
To imprisonment, or death; forgive the wildness,
And fury of my language, I repent
My wish upon Ardelia, may she live
To doe so too, and you to be possessed
Of all joys, Earth and Heaven can bless your heart with
May danger never in a dream affright you,
And if you think I live too long, tic possible,
Before you send death to conclude my sufferings,
Some thoughts of you may wither my poor heart,
And make your path smooth, to what most you joy in
Be not a tyrant when i'm dead, upon
My fame, although you wish me not alive,
Yet say I was Euphemia, let that stick
Upon my Tomb, if you will grace my shade
With so much cost, in that name is supplied
Enough to tell the world for whom I died.
We hear too much, away with her.
I Have given a treasure to your bosom Sir.
You shannot friend repent it, and this act
Of so much confidence, new binds my faith to you;
Contracted to Ardelia? I may chance make use of this.
Your pilgrimage ends here—
Doe you know
What you have done?
I have told him what
Concerned Ardelia, and my self; thou wot
Suspect, and chide my credulous nature, come,
Isle trust him with my life.
That's done already,
He has a secret, much good doe him wo't,
Should have burnt a passage through my heart, and left
It ashes, ere th'ad wandered from me thus,
And if you never did before, pray now
He may be honost to you, tic too late
To find compunction for it, pray, and heartily
He may be dumb.
Signior Bentivolio?
So, so, thats over, now isle conduct you
To your precious Saint, unless your blood turn
Coward.
Obe, never fear it, Sir.
But would you did
First tell me and discharge me of some wonder,
You have an humour of the newest fashion
I ere yet saw, and how the Court may follow't
I know not, how long have you been possessed Sir?
Possessed? what Devil doe you mean? 
With these ilfavour'd, deformed women, you're bewitched sure?
Thou dost not know the fiends I have conversed with.
I have no ambition to be acquainted
With any Goblins, further then their knowledge
Might make me understand the ground of your
Enchantment.
Oh a world, Legions, Legions.
Of what?
Of handsome women.
They the cause of this?
Their false, and perjured natures, I ne'er met with
One handsome Face that made a conscience of me.
And dee' think to find
More Faith in those that look all ore like Devils?
Tic possible they may have souls, who knows?
However in my revenge, isle love, and dote on 'em,
And justify thy are the Sexes glory.
I have enough.
They are returned, this way Sir, to your Fayrie.
My dearest Bentivolio, why dost stand
At so much gaze, and distance, as thou wot
Teach love unkindness, can these out ward forms
Disguise me from thy knowledge, lets salute,
My lips retain their softness, and unless
Thy love be changed, our breath may meet, and we
Convey the hearty meaning of our souls,
As we once did.
You're very brave Ardelia,
But have no pride without you, these are no
Glories compared to what I wear within,
To see thee safe, whom my fears gave up lost,
And after so much absence, doe I live
To embrace my Bentivolio?
You would have me
Believe J am welcome hither, fair Ardelia,
Pardon, I know not yet what other name
To call you by, and if I wrong your titles,
Be gentle to my ignorance; this hand
You gave me once, when no ambition frighted
The troth we vowed, our chaste simplicity
Durst kiss without a shame, or fear to be
Divorced by greatness, tell me, sweet Ardelia,
When I did court thy Virgin faith, and paid
An innocent tribute to thy most chaste lip,
When we had spent the day with our discourse,
And night came rudely in to part us, what
Were then thy usual dreams? how many visions
Were let into thy sleep, thou should be great,
Torn from my bosom, to enrich thy self,
And a Dukes arms? and that a time should come,
When I, the promised Master of this wealth,
Should thus present my self a beggar to thee,
And count thy smiles a charity?
What means
My Bentivolio by this passionate language?
I doe confess I was compelled to be
An exile from thee, in obedience to
My father, who would trust me to the Seas,
Or any land, ere leave me to this shipwreck,
For so his anger sinned against thy beauty,
Whilst the Idol Gold graced not thy fairer Temple,
Yet when we plighted hearts, Ardelia,
I tied with mine an everlasting contract,
And did expect at my return to have found
Thine spotless.
Tic the same.
The same to me?
What makes you here then? doe not, doe not flatter
Thy guilt so much. Is not this Pavias Court?
Ardelias Court indeed, for she rules here,
The Lady Paramount whilst the Duke himself
Bows like a subject!
Be not, Sir too credulous,
And with too apprehensive thoughts doe injury
To that which you should cherish, the Duke is—
You'll say none of your subject,
He is a prince,
Prince of your Province, writs Ardelia his,
Tic ravished all from me, and I am become
A stranger to my own, nay stand, and see
My treasure rifled, all my wealth tan from me,
And dare not question the injurious power
That revels in my glory, but can think
I will be cold for ever, that all seeds
Of man lie dead within me, and my soul
Sunk in my phlegm, will never rise to form
Some just revenge? think there are then no furies.
You come to threaten not to love, and having
Already by long absence made a fault,
To quit your self would lay astaine on me,
Tic not well done.
The Duke.
The Duke?
Tic possible
He may not fear your anger.
I'll squat then
Behind this Hedge, this Garden hath quient shades,
I hope you'll not betray me.
This the form
Of your revenge,
My fair Ardelia
Excuse me if I press upon thy private
Walks, love gives a boldness to mean spirits,
But in a Princes breast: tic much more active,
And fears no imputation, what doth fright
Thy countenance? I hope Ardelia
My presence brings no horror.
Sir, much comfort,
Whether it were my fancy or a truth
I know not.
What's the matter?
You have no satires
Within this ground, doe any haunt this Garden?
Satiers?
As I have read 'em character'd,
So one appeared, or I imagined so,
And as you entered hid himself, they are
Half men——
Half beasts.
With Goats horns in their fore-head,
The thought on it troubles me.
The effect only of melancholy thoughts,
No such things are
In nature, yet i'll search, and—strange apprehension.
It was more then shape, sure it did talk to me,
And threaten me sor your sake.
How? for mine?
I'll have the Trees, and Arbors all torn up,
Devils lurk here? the earth shall not secure 'em,
He said he loved me, and accused my heart
Of perjury, as we had been contracted.
More strange! my guard!
Stay sir, before you go
Let me beseech your justice in defence
Of my much injured honour, as you are
A Prince, I doe beseech you speak all truth,
For let him be the Devil, I'll not have
My innocence abused, I know not from
What fame, or fond opinion voiced of me,
By some that had more thought to serve your will
Then virtue, I was made believe you loved me,
Which though my force resisted by some practises,
You gained my person hither, and in Court
Command my stay.
Entreat, my best Ardelia.
You may Sir, smooth your cause, but I can fetch
A witness from my bosom to convince
The truth I urge, yet let me not be lost
To gratitude, my soul bids me acknowledge
Never was subject to a Prince more bound
For free, and beauteous graces, then Ardelia
To your highness, and with many lives to wast
In service for them, I were still in debt to you.
Tic in thy power to satisfy for all,
And leave me ten times more obliged to thee.
Let me for this time beg on answer from you,
Although I am not ignorant, what price
Your wild blood would exact, speak in the ear
Of silent heaven, have you obtained so much
As one stoop to your wanton avarice,
One bend to please your inflamed appetite.
Not any yet, the more unkind Ardelia.
Speak clearly by the honour of a Prince.
By better hopes I swear, and by thy self.
You doe me Sir, but Justice, I will study
To pay my humblest duty, and i'll tell
When next I see the Satire——
To discharge those fears, i'll presently destroy,
This Garden, and not leave shelter,
For a Bird.
Your pardon,
To what wo'd my imagination lead me?
I see all was but melancholy, here was nothing.
Fruits of a troubled fancy, come be pleasant,
And tell me when you will redeem your cruelty,
It may incline you somewhat to remember
By what soft ways I have pursued your love,
How nobly I would serve you.
Love, your grace
Knows, never was compelled.
But love should find
Compassion to the wound it makes, I bleed,
And court thy gentle pity to my sufferings,
All Princes are not of so calm a temper,
Think of it my Ardelia, and reward
The modest expectations of a heart,
That in thy absence withers, but i'll have thee
To chide thy cruel thoughts, and till our lips
Salute again, flatter my self with hope
Thy nature will be wise, and kind to love,
Where tic so fairly courted.
Is he gone?
With what acknowledgment of my fault Ardelia
Shall I beseech thy pardon, I am lost
In wonder of thy innocence; it were just
I should suspect the truth of my own bosom,
Thou hast too rich a goodness.
Now you flatter,
I knew no way of the sudden to convince you,
But by the Dukes confession, I am yet
Preserved my Bentivolio, but with what
Danger of being lost to thee, and honour
I shall remain here, may concern our Jealousy,
Together with the knowledge of thy virtue
Like balsam powered into my ear, I took
A poison from the Duke, I find he loves thee
With a black purpose, and within his language
Was something worth our fear indeed, it will
Require our study, and much art, Ardelia.
Let's retire into my chamber, and mature
Some course for both our safeties.
I attend you.
I wo'not stay three minutes, isle but step aside for di∣stillation. I leave you the pleasure of your eyes.
Well, go thy ways.
Doe you not mock me Sir, shall I believe
A Gentleman of your neat, and elegant making,
Can stoop to such a creature as I am.
Will you have me swear?
By no means.
Then I wo'not,
But I will give it thee under my hand,
Read that.
What's this?
Something to show I hate all handsome women.
Is it a song?
It may be, with a voice, and tune put too't,
Isle read it.
L am come again Sir, and choose, rather then
To afflict you with expectation,
To bring my company along, you may
Salute 'em if you please.
They are not welcome.
Will you believe me now?
If we may trust our eyes.
Ladies you must excuse me, I affect
No vulgar beauties, give me a complexion
Cannot be matched again in twenty kingdoms,
You have eyes, and nose, and lips, and other parts
Proportioned.
Sure the Gentleman's distracted.
No, I am recovered, 〈◊〉 thank my stars,
To know, and heartily abhor such faces,
What come they hither for? dee' know 'em Madam?
I had no purpose they should be my guests
At this time, they are court Ladies, I confess,
Signior Valerio this was your plot.
My pure intention, Madam, to doe you
Service, I knew they were not for his palate,
These will inflame his appetite to you,
And set you off, mere foils to you doe they
Look as they were ambitious to be
Compared with you.
Noble sir, although
I have not beauty like these Ladies.
How? you have not beauty, take heed doe not show
Your self unthankful to wise nature, do not
They have not wealth enough in all their bodies
To purchase such a nose.
Ha, ha.
Ha, ha, good Madam Kick shaw,
That laugh to show how many teeth you have.
Be not uncivil Sir.
Why does that Fayrie grin then?
I'll justify there is more worth, and beauty,
Consider d wisely, and as it preserves
Man in his wits, and sense, than can be read
In the volume of their flattering Generations.
Good Madam look a squint, a little more,
So, keep but that cast with your eyes, and tell me
Whose sight is best, hers that can see at once
More several ways then there are points in the Compass,
Or theirs that looks but point-blancke.
A new way
To commend the eyes.
You think your fore-head pleases.
Whose top with frizzled, and curled hair beset,
Appears like a white cliff, with reeds upon it;
Your nose, which like an Isthmus parts two Seas.
Seas? you mean eyes again.
What of their nose?
Will be in danger, with continual beating
Of waves, to wash the paint off, and in time
May fall, and put you to the charge of building
A silver bridge for praises to pass over.
We will bar your commendations.
It sha'not need,
I doe not melt my wits to verse upon
Such subject, here's an instrument to smell with,
Tough as an Elephants trunk, and will hold water.
It has a comely length, and is well studded
With gems of price, the gold-smith wo'd bid money for it.
Is he not mad?
I can assure you no,
And by this token I would rather be
Condemned to'th Galleys, then be once in love
With either of your phisnomies.
Is it possible?
You may put your whole faith upon it.
Dee' believe him?
Madam.
Methinkes this is the prettiest mirth,
You have a mighty wit, could you be angry
I love you for it.
His humour takes me infinitely.
It does, and you doe love me for it?
Most strangely.
I would you did, and heartily.
What?
Love me.
So well, I could be happy in thy wife.
Could Fate make me so miserable if I did not
In less than a seven-night break thy heart, shu'dst
Cock old me at my own peril.
This Lady has
A mighty estate.
Tic all the fault she has,
Would she had none, had she no house, nor clothes,
Nor means to feed, yet I would sooner marry,
Observe, this naked salvage, then embrace
The fairest woman of the earth, with power
To make me Lord of Italy, I should always
Enjoy my health.
Her very face would keep
Your body soluble.
No fears compel me
To be a prisoner to my dining-room,
I might hawk, hunt, and travel to both Indies.
Give any Doctor leave to give her Physic.
Or change of Ayre.
Save much in your own diet,
Which else would call for Amber-greece, and roots,
And stirring cullices.
You might allow her
To visit Masks and Plays.
And the Bordellos,
I think she would be honest.
And thats more
Then any Christian conscience dare assure
By oath on your behalf to be short Ladies,
However you may interpret it my humour,
Mine'sa Platonic love, give me the soul,
I care not what course flesh, and blood enshrine it;
Preserve your beauties, this will fear no blasting:
I beg you call me servant.
Did you hear him?
You must acknowledge then I am your Mistress.
Isle wear your Periwig for my Plume, and boast
More honour int, than to be minion
To all the Ladies of the Court, dear Mistress
If you can love a man, jeer 'em a little.
Fair Ladies will you in, and taste a banquet,
Be not discountenanced that this Gentleman
Is merry with your beauties the Spring lasts
Not all the year, when nature that commands
Our regiment will say, faces about,
We may bee in fashion, no controlling destiny.
Passion, who curled your hair? here wants powder,
Who is your Mercer, Madam? I would know
What your cheek stands you in a week in Taffeta?
Your face at distance shows like spotted Ermine.
Or like a dish of white-broth strewed with Currains.
Right servant, that was a more proper simile,
Discretion should ha put more ceruse here,
Your fucus was ill made, do ye you not lie
In a mask all night, Madam.
Thou dost in a vizard
I will be sworn how the rude Gypsy triumphs
Enough, they now begin to swell, and sweat,
Let's leave 'em.
What a Hecate was this?
Will you not be revenged?
Yes, if we knew
By what convenient stratagem.
I have it,
There is another creature of my acquaintance,
If you have faith more monstrous then this beldam,
I will possess her with this gentleman's humour,
And screw her up to be this witches rival, what think you of that?
Will it not make her mad?
I wo'd go a pilgrimage to see it, twill be
A mirth beyond the Bears.
Loose no time then.
I'll fit him with a female fury, such
As the Devil with a pitch-forke will not touch.
Come Madam.
Have comfort Madam,
I prophecy your sufferings are short-lived.
You mean I shall die shortly.
We shall find
Less want of all the Stars, the aged World
May spare their light, while it is possessed of yours,
Which once extinguished, let those golden fires
Quite burn themselves to ashes, in whose heap
Day may be lost, and frighted heaven wear black
Before the general doom, have bolder thoughts,
And bid us all live in your only safety.
Let not your fancy mock the lost Euphemia?
Let not the apprehension of your sorrow
Destroy your hope, should the Duke never wake
His senses steeped in his adulterate lethargy
You cannot want protection, nor your will
To be revenged, an arm to punish his
Contempt of so much beauty.
How my Lord?
What Scithian can behold an outrage done
Upon these eyes, and not melt his rough nature
In soft compassion to attend your tears?
My Lord I know not with what words to thank
Your feeling of my sufferings. I will now
Believe I am not lost to all the World;
You are noble, and I must be confident
These streams flow from your charity.
Doe not injure
The unvalued wealth of your own honour Madam,
Let pore deserts be worth our charity,
All sacrifice of grief for you is Justice,
And duty to the Alter of your merit,
These drops are pale, and poorly speak my heart,
Which should dissolve into a purple flood,
And drown this little Island in your service,
Name some employment that you may believe
With what true soul I honour you, oh Madam
If you could read the Volume of my heart,
You would find such a story of you there.
Of me?
Tic that keeps me alive, I have no use
Of memory or reason, but in both
To exercise devotion to your excellence.
My Lord I understand you not.
You are
More apprehensive if you wot but think so,
In vain I still suppressed my dark thoughts Madam,
Which in their mutiny to be revealed
Have left a heap of ruins worth your pity.
Oh doe not hide that beauty should repair
What my love to it hath decayed within me,
For I must say I love, although you kill
My ambition with a frown; and with one angry
Lightning, shot from your eye, turn me to ashes.
Good heaven!
I know what you will urge against me,
You shannot need to arm your passion,
I will accuse my self, how much I have
Forgot the distance of one place beneath you,
And wounded my obedience, that I am
False to the Duke, the trust imposed upon me,
And to his favour which have made me shine
A Star, on whom the other emulous lights
Look pale, and wast their envies, I confess
I have not in the stock of my desert
Enough to call one bounteous smile upon me,
My whole life is not worth your liberal patience,
Of one, one minute spent in prayer to serve it,
Yet after all wished destiny commands
The poor Leontio to love Euphemia.
What doe I hear? consider sir again.
I have had contentions with my blood, &amp; forced
Nature retire, and tremble with the guilt
Of her proud thoughts, seeking to make escape
Through some ungentlebreatch made by our conflict
But no prevailing against love, and fate,
Which both decree, me lost without your mercy.
Oh bid me live, who but in your acceptance
Shall groan away my breath, and whither till
I turn my own sad monument.
No more,
First possible new miseries should oretake
Euphemia? Oh my Lord I with what offence
Have I deserved, after my weight of sorrow,
Your wounds upon my honour? call again
Your noble thoughts, and let me not reply
To your unjust desires, if I must answer them,
Take my most fixed resolve, ever I consent
To wrong Diovisio.
Stay.
May: be blasted,
Though with contempt he look upon me now,
His blood may clear, and he return to challenge
Euphemias pretty, our vow was made
For life my Lord, and heaven shall sooner fall,
And mixing with the elements make new Chaos,
Then all mans violence, and wrath upon me
Betray one thought to break it.
Aloof not all
Your peace at once, vouchsafe I may waite on you.
I know my prison.
Let me hope in this,
My pardon sealed Pallante?
My good Lord.
Your humble creature Madam, though the Duke
Confine your person, think upon your prisoner.
Our vow was made for life, it was so how swift
An apprehension love has? but hoe's Duke;
Conscience be waking, I shall launch into
A Sea of blood else, steer my desperate soul
Diviner goodness.
How I start at shadows?
Love take me to thy charms, and prosper me
Pallante thou art faithful.
To you my Lord,
May I be ever else condemned to an Hospital.
And dare assist to make me happy.
Yes,
Though with the hazard of my throat-cutting,
I hope Sir, you suspect not, name an action
Though it look n•ere so ghastly, see how much
I'll tremble at it.
In thy ear.
Once more
Tough service in the beginning, may I not think on it?
Yes.
And ask my self a question ere I answer.
You may.
At first dash kill the Duke, no less
To begin withal, how now Leontio?
Was there no other life but this, for saving
Of mine so often? he has trusted me,
To whom shall I turn traitor? pray my Lord,
Are you in earnest? would you have this done?
Ask one, whom tyranny hath chained to'th oar
For ever forfeited to slavery.
Whether he would not file off his own bondage,
And in the blood of him that owns the Gally
Swim to his freedom.
Doe you apprehend it
So necessary? why isle doe my poor endeavour,
Nay, tic but modest, if it concern your Lordship
In that degree, isle do it, you will have some
Convenient care of me, when tic dispatched,
He scorned my valiant Buff, I thought upon it,
You are the next in blood, when Dionisio
Visits the worms.
Thou give•st me a new life,
With the same care isle cherish thee Pallante.
And you doe not,
It is not the first onscience hath been cast
Away in a great mans service, cheer your heart Sir.
It is not mine Pallante, I have lost
The use and sway, tic to another grown,
And I have but the ruins of my own,
SO, so, now let's relieve our lungs a while,
They•l tire, I ne'er met with such a dancing Devil,
My Destinies take me to your charge, twill give
Us breath, if the Musicians exercise
Their voice upon the song I made, come sit.
You shall command me servant, now, the song.
The Lady Aurelia, Madam, and Macrina
Are come again to visit you.
I am not
In tune for their discourse, say, I am busy.
By no means, she has a plot upon me.
Then isle meet em.
Do not fear but I am fortified;
Here were a purchase now, and pension with
A Mistress, many a proper mans profession,
Nature meant she should pay for it, and maintain
A man in fiddlers, fools, and running-horses,
Here were no fear of any Lords return
From Tennis, no suspicion at home,
To force her to a politic pilgrimage
To try the virtue of some well, no kinsmen,
With looks to keep the flesh in a we, no children
To cry, and fright the house their mothers smothered.
They are here.
I wonder at Valerios stay.
He wo'not be long absent, never fear madam.
Ladies, I have no power to bid you welcome,
Or if I had you wot scarce thank me for•t,
You know my mind already.
See hoe's come,
And his Bear with him.
Signior,
You see what care I have to provide for you,
There is not such another dapple-mare in the Dukedom,
Unless this face content you, you may stay
Till the Cretin Lady go to Bull again,
Or Africa have more choice of Monsters for you.
I am ravished.
How's that servant ha? a rival.
Pray whats her name?
Her name is Scolopendra.
Scolopendra? I have read of her, what kin is she
To the Serpent with a hundred legs?
I know not
But she is Cosen-germane to the Salamander
She was a Cooke-maide once, so inu'rd to fire,
And tough, the flames of hell will hardly scorch her.
An admirable Dragon, can she speak?
Will she not spit fire if I should salute her?
Isle venture.
He has preservative
Against the odor of her lungs.
He had need
Of fortification for his eyes.
Not all
The spices in Arabia are like
Her breath.
Oh Sir, believe it, right Styx, most pure Avernus.
Sir, J did never see a Gentleman
Whom I did wish more heartily my husband.
To beget Scorpions on her.
Thank thee my precious Scolopendra, but
I have a kind of fear thou wot be inconstant,
Shall no man get thee from me; here's a face
Is worth my jealousy, and who looks upon it,
But with my eyes will be as mad as I am.
The needles not more constant to the North.
But for all that, the needles wavering
I would be certain.
They conspired to wrong me,
I fear hee•s taken with her more deformity,
Will you forsake me servant?
Humstand off,
And give my eyes play further yet, your shadows
Are yet to near—my judgment is confounded,
Consider one thing with another, they are both
Such matchless toads, I know not which to choose:
You have an excellent eye, but there's a pearl
In hers, no Gold-smith knows the value on it.
Observe the colours in my eye.
You're right Madam,
As many, and more bright then those in the rainbow
Delightful as the Parrots plume, but then
Her for-head—
So like a promontory or—
A Field of Hony-suckles, and Poppy-flowers
Embroidered with Daisies, and embossed
With Yellow-warts which like to Mole-hills swell,
Where many Emmets hunt, and sport themselve
In the Sun, till to her hair a quick set hedge
In the evening they retire.
But twixt her eyes
You may discern a Forest, some higher timber
Is so well grown, that fashioned on the top
With scissors and cut pointed like a pyramid,
The World will take her for an Unicorn.
Good beetle-browes.
Sir, you must be my champion.
Examine but this nose.
I have a totter.
Which placed with symmetry is like a Fountain
In the middle of her face—distilling Rheum,
And at two spouts doth water all her Garden.
But here's one soft as it were composed of wax.
A nose of wax.
It will melt presently.
Not stubborn, but submits to any shape,
Sheele put upon it round, flat when she is pleased
She can extend, and hang it with such art
Over her mouth, that when she gapes into
The Sun, and shows her Teeth, you will imagine
You see a perfect Dial in her Chaps,
To tell you what a clock tic, then her Lips.
I see not so much red there, as will make
A Dominicall Letter, look upon these Cheeks—
I never painted, Sir.
Here's red enough.
Which hideously disposed, and mixed with black,
The ground of her complexion will mortify
The most unnatural concupiscence,
While her cheeks represent in curious Landscape,
Gomorrah, and her sister Sodomy burning.
That comparison was home.
But she has a breath,
A more preservative then Methridate
But with one kiss she will preserve you from
The infection, and with stronger force repell
The poison of the Ayre.
I thank you sir,
I have a strong breath indeed
When she is moved
Sheele kill you with her phlegm, fowerscore point blank,
The innocent part of it will stain a Marble,
Let me alone to commend thee.
She carries not destruction like my tongue
Employed upon thy enemies Horatio.
The Bells rung backwards, or the Mandrakes cry,
Wolves howling at the Moon, the Scritch-owles dirge,
The Hieus voice, the groans of parting souls,
Added to these, what is in nature killing,
To the ear is not more fatal then my tongue
When it is bent on mischief, shall I blast
This Witch to begin withal?
Blast me?
Belch back-wards,
And then shoe's a dead woman.
I'll tear your Snakes.
Mine Hecate.
Well said Scolopendra.
They wonot skirmish.
The Devils will run at tilt.
Madam suffer this?
Compare with me?
Sa, sa, sa, now sound a point of War.
Madam the Duke.
His grace has spoiled the duel,
And we must sound retreat.
We trusted to your art about Ardelia,
She makes no hast to our delight.
And please
Your highness I have had a strange hand with her,
And I must tell you she was pretty coming
Until the stranger came.
What stranger.
Signior Bentivolio
Nay I know nothing by 'em, but he has
A most prevailing tongue upon a gentle-woman.
My fears! have I advanced him to supplant me?
Bentivolio so gracious with the Duke?
Hoe's courted next Ardelia.
Tic for her
We may imagine the Duke graces him.
Oh there is no such instrument, believe it
As a Court-Lady to advance a gentleman,
Or any masculine business, they are Sticklers
No more. Signior Bentivolio.
Whore's Horatio.
He was a afraid you might kill one another,
And so hoe's gon to hang himself.
Better all
Thy generation were executed, but I must to my charge
Your highness powers
Such infinite graces on me I shall want
Life to express my pious duties, though
Time should assure me ages.
Thank Ardelia,
Or if you would express your gratitude
To me.
employ your wit, and tongue, to gain
That Lady to our close embrace, you have
A powerful language, be it your first service
We doe not place this confidence on all.
You mean Ardelia.
That fair one, Strozzi.
Well Signior Bentivolio, my quondam
Friend, and fellow traveller, you owe
To me a part of your Court exaltation,
And least you should forget, as few great men
Are guilty of good memories, I mean
To pay my self.
I must not appear troubled.
I congratulate your favour with the Duke,
And think it, not the least of my own happiness.
That I was a poor instrument—
You honoured me,
And shall command my services: how sped
My friend Horatio?
He gave me thanks
I ha fitted him, you mist excellent sport.
I shall have time to enquire, and thank you for
The Story, you know how to excuse me friend,
If some engagements force me hence?
Why so.
He has the trick already, full of business,
Court agitations, he is yet scarce warm,
How will he use us when his pride boils over?
A nod will be a grace, while we stand bare,
And thank him for the rufling of his countenance,
And discomposing his Court face, that's bound
Upon some State affairs, tic very well.
Give him access, thou hast showed diligence,
And trust me to reward it.
Tic my duty sir.
I have some intelligence will be worth your hearing too.
Speak Signior Valerio.
Doe you know the gentleman
Whom you have graced so lately.
Signior Bentivolio.
That's his name, but doe you know his nature?
Or his business in these parts.
Prithee instruct me.
You doe but warm a Serpent in your bosom,
In short he loves your Mistress.
Ho's?
More is contracted,
And they both practise cunning, I ha searched
His heart—your ear—
The Duke seems moved,
Most strangely!
Expect a while.
Humbly your graces pleasure.
Your highness shall not wast a passion,
I am of counsel with his thoughts, and will
Present him ripe to your just anger, trust me
To manage things a while.
Honest Valerio.
〈◊〉 Keep your face smooth, least he interpret Sir,
I have betrayed him, ere his head be ready
For the execution, it were necessary
I should examine her pulse too.
Ardelia's?
Isle creep into her soul to bring you all
The best intelligence.
Precious Ualerio!
Endear me by this service, thou hast my heart.
My duty shall preserve it.
Strozzi.
This is the gentleman, an't please
Your highness, can discover most strange things.
To your private ear.
Ardelia? my best health,
Dear as my soul, I cannot be long absent.
So, how shall I begin now?
Madam, I have a suit to you.
To me
Noble Valerio, be confident
For your own worth, if any power of mine
Can serve your wish, you shall not find me slow
To exercise it.
Yes, tic in your power.
Presume tic finished then.
In your free power,
Without the Duke, or other to confirm it.
Y' are flesh, and blood.
What mean you?
No other than I say, nor wish it other,
A woman is a partner in the frailty
Of humane nature, and knows how to excuse
The errors of our blood, and yet you shall
Have cause to give me thanks, when you consider
My sense, and your own state, what dee' think
Of me?
For what?
For what you please to call it,
My persons not contemptible, though I be
No Duke, I can behave my self to please
Where I am accepted.
Whats your purpose Signior?
You cannot sure be ignorant of my meaning,
Theres not a girl of seven years old, but will
Expound it readily, here we suck this language
And our milk together, I could have used
More circumstance, have praised you into folly,
And when I had put out both your eyes with Metaphors,
Lead you to my desires, and to your pillow:
But it was about, I could have said I loved you,
Looked sad, and squeezed my eyes, have sighed perhaps,
And sworn my self quite over breath, that I
Thought you a Saint, and my heart suffered more
Than the ten persecutions; hanged, time's precious,
I take the nearest way, which your discretion
Will like me for, yet I can love you too,
And would for thy embrace forget as much
Goodness, and tempt as many mischiefs as,
Another man, I hope you understand me.
I am lost, and see a black conspiracy.
You shall see me naked. I have no conspiracies,
Carry no private engines more then nature
Armed me withal, be wise and doe not tremble.
How dare you be thus insolent? though my per-son
Move you to no regard, you shall find one
Will teach you manners.
You would mean the Duke now.
Has that name no more reverence owing to it?
Yes, I desire no better judge, he'll hear
Us both, and equally determine all;
Let's to his highness straight.
What means this rudeness?
You are the Dukes game-royall, or else should
Be the mistress of his thoughts, whose nod does make
Us tremble, and in time may be the Duchess,
Unless your sweet heart Bentivolio
Snap you before him.
Ha?
What fine nets you walk in,
You are no, Juggler, there has past no contract
Betwixt you, and the gallant, no? and while,
The honest easy Duke, whose spirit raise not,
Dotes on that face, humbled beneath a subject,
You have no private meetings, change no kisses,
Nor hot carreers, alas hoe's but a Stranger
Whom you respect but for the bare resemblance
Of a dead brother, there's no flame in you
But what lights you to charity; I wast breath,
The Duke is yet that tame thing, you ha left him,
His soul in a dream, let not your folly,
And peevish opposition to receive
Me to your arms, wake him into a tempest,
The lightning cannot move more nimbly, then
His rage to both your deaths, your Ganimede
Will find the Dukes revenge in his hot blood,
When his heart weeping the last drop shall have
No pity waite upon 'em, that durst feed
The rival to a Prince, though common men
For want of power, and courage to revenge
Neglect their shame, wild Princes that know all things,
Beneath their feet but heaven, obey no fate,
And but to be revenged will hazard that.
I am undone for ever.
Not so Madam,
You shall lead destiny in cords of Silk,
And it shall follow tame, and to your pleasure,
The Duke knows nothing yet, you shall seal up
My lip to eternal silence of your love,
If I may but enjoy you, you shall rule
With the same sway his bosom, and possess
Your wealth in Bentivolio too, I'm but
A friend or rather servant, that shall be
Proud of your smile, and now, and then admitted
To kiss you when the Curtains drawn, and so forth.
Who placed me on this precipice? sir, hear me,
Tic vain to ask how you derived the knowledge
Of what I thought concealed, you are a gentleman.
That does appear by my desires.
Have yet some mercy
On a distressed maid.
Maid? thank you for that, I wo'd you were
Indeed, virginity is wiser then
Men take it for, and therefore we distinguish,
There is one virginity in the wedge, or bullion
As we may say, and this we call lunor maiden-head,
And there's another in the coin, the gold
Is not less gold for the impression,
Your maiden-head is currant in this sense.
And in this maiden-sence you may give Milk.
By all the goodness that I wish were in you,
Not Bentivolio, whom you think I most
Affect, hath more of me then virgin knowledge,
Nor hath the Duke with all his flatteries
Wronged my first State, although I must confess
He every day expects my fall from virtue,
Doe not you more sir, then the devil could,
Taking advantage of my wretched fortune,
Betray me to a shame will kill us both,
In fame, and soul.
In fame? who shall reveal it?
And tother may repent.
Sir, can you kill me?
No, no I sha'not hurt thee, women are not killed
That way, I mean to skirmish, come you may
Save all with little study, and less hazard.
What is the toy we talk of? either resolve
Or the Duke knows all, and perhaps more.
Stay sir.
Yes, yes Madam I can stay, and be till
Tomorrow for the sport, I am not so hot
But I can bath, and cool my self.
Can you
Be just hereafter if to buy my own,
And my friends safety at so dear a value.
I'll cut my tongue out ever reveal my tongue,
All my concupiscence, and the cause, I will
Submit to thy own carving; fear not me,
I hate a blab worse then an honest woman,
Why so? this wisdom is becoming thee,
No blubbering, kiss me, and be confident,
A pretty rogue, tomorrow shall we meet?
Woe is me tomorrow.
No, thou shalt laugh tomorrow,
I'll come to thy own lodgings, that's but reason,
Far-well, another kiss, be comforted,
And safe, the Duke knows nothing, all shall live,
And we'll be very loving, mighty merry.
I must doe something to prevent this Devil.
Why so, this bargain was well made, and timely.
I have no peace within me, till I hear
How bold Pallanto thrives, oh love upon
What desperate actions dost thou engage us?
With scorn of opposition, like a fire
Which till it turn all that his flame can meet with
Into it self, expires not; fair Euphemia!
Bright in thy sorrows, on whom every tear
Sits like a wealthy Diamond, and inherits
A Starry-lustre from the eye that shed it,
The Duke must die—have I betrayed my self.
Hold, my Lord you know me.
For Valerio.
But must hand-backe that secret, it was not meant
So early for thy knowledge, from thy bosom
I'll tear or drown it in thy blood, past search
Of dangerous intelligence.
Hold my Lord,
You shall not need,
Think my Lord I know
The World, and how to keep a secret too,
Though treason be contained in it, I am not
So holy as you take me, my good Lord
For some ends of my own, I wish the Duke
In another World as heartily as your Lordship,
And will assist to his conveyance thither,
Though I be quarter•d for it, that's fair, and friendly,
You love Euphemia, why tic not amiss,
I love Ardelia, (I trust you my Lord)
You for the wife, I for the concubine,
How could the Duke being in heaven, hurt me now?
You are his kinsman, were his favourite.
How's that?
Oh sir, there is a gentleman my rival,
One Bentivolio got a round above you
In favour—
He shall die.
No, let him live
A little while, to kill his highness first,
And take your own time then to turn the ladder.
Thou talk a mystery.
It shall be clear,
Be advised, and second me my honoured friend,
You, and my Lord be more familiar.
Sir, I shall serve you.
Make me happy
My Lord, by your commands.
Your Mistress is in health—nay be not stirred.
I have done you a courtesy by acquainting
My Lord how things stand, and in truth he pities you,
We have had a counsel merely concerned you,
And the poor gentlewoman, whom the Duke has not
Yet lured to fist.
I know not how to thank you.
Hoe's next heir to'th Dukedom, and has power
When his grace dies—imagine, a sweet soul
May I perish in my hopes, if his eyes did not
Melt when I told thy story, and how much.
The innocent Lady suffered.
I am bound
Much to his goodness.
Sir I would doe more
Then pity your just cause.
Nay we have cast it,
And so much above blood, and state, has virtue
Impression in his heart, he can forget,
And think the Duke a dead man.
Excellent Lord!
I am ashamed, and trust me have applied
What my poor learning could affect, to cool
His riotous blood, but hoe's incorrigible,
And now more desperately bent then ever.
To Violate her?
I blush to say it, nor will
Your person be long safe.
Well interposed.
He shines on me with bounteous smiles.
They are dangerous,
And but engage you to a greater ruin.
You stand discovered.
That's my wonder sir,
Dee think your friend Horatio has not wronged you
In's drink perhaps—some men are such sponges,
A child may squeeze their soul out.
You fright my senses.
I doe now suspect, the Dukes command toward Ardelia confirms it.
Wisdom must prevent
I know thou hast a daring spirit, we
Are friends, tic clearly our opinion
You should by Steel or Poison—you conceive me
For your own safety, and your wives, I call her so
Whose life, and honour lies a bleeding, tic
Nothing to me, my Lord I told you, is
Next heir, and cannot but in conscience pardon you.
It were pity thou should suffer more.
But dare
Your Lordship mean this.
Be confirmed.
Your counsels
Have met a spirit, apt in my revenge
To fly upon the world, I hope I shall
Be construed in his death, to have done your Lordship
No great discourtesy, being next heir,
Tic to be understood.
The Dukedom made
Mine by his death, is nothing to the Crown
Of fair Ardelias love, in whose free bosom
My pardon, and best wishes shall soon plant thee
Past the divorce of tyrants.
I am new
Create, and build my hopes upon your honour.
They are secured dost think hoe's firm, and daring.
If he kill not the Duke—i'll cut his throat,
He sha'not scope however, if I have brains
I must have all his venison to my self,
I'll spare nor hanuch nor humbles, oh my Lord
Be confident if he meet the Duke, and time
Though it cost him a days Journey, he will go thorough him
Tic his own cause; he was wound up discreetly,
You doe not by this time repent your secret.
I can be wicked upon good occasion,
The devil sha'not part us now.
Be constant,
And meet the truest friend,
Meet at a wench
Till then your humble servant.
My fate smiles
Conscience steers not ambition by what's good,
Who looks at crowns or lust, must smile at blood.
HE will no longer be put off with ceremony,
You must consent this night to his embrace,
Or take what follows Madam.
I am lost,
And every minutes filled with new despairs,
It is in your power to persuade him yet.
I have said too much already.
Say I am not
In health, poor refuge!
Not in health, the Duke
Shall give you physic—there be Ladies no
Dispraise to your beauty, wo'd be sick a purpole
To have the Duke their Doctor.
What can cure
My sick fate? oh my heart, poor Bentivolio,
On what high going waves do we two fail,
Without a Star or Pilot to direct
Our reeling bark? Valerio too expects
A black reward for silence, he is here,
Already? doe not leave me Fiametta,
I charge thee by thy duty to his highness.
Why what's the matter?
Let me pay a duty
To her white hand, whom the Duke only honours,
You look not with a cheerful countenance Madam.
I am not well my Lord.
I am exelent at
Restoring health, send of Tosiphone
I wo'd not have her Picture in the room
When we are at generation.
Shoe's commanded
To stay here.
How? commanded? Madam I have
Commission to impart some private meanings
From his highness to this Lady.
And I have
Order, this my Lady have no such conference,
But I must be a witness.
You will not
Contest I hope, and dispute my authority,
What an officious fury tic? how shall I
Be rid on her? Madam you see this Ring,
A friend of yours signior Horatio
Desires another meeting by this token.
Where is my noble servant?
But you must
Express your love in making hast, I knew
Although for mirth I flattered Scolopendra,
That you would carry him, but loose no time.
Lend me thy wings sweet love to fly to him.
Fly to the Devil, he wants a companion,
I'll shut the door after your beldamship,
And trust my self with key.
You doe not mean
To play the ravisher my Lord.
As if
You meaned to putme too't, I have your promise
And where consents meet in the act of love,
The pleasures multiply to infinite.
Infinite horror! yet my Lord, be a man.
You shall not doubt that Madam, if you will
Apply your self discreetly, we loose time,
Although I be no Duke, I can present thee
With all the pleasures, appetite can wish for
Within Loves empire, when you know me Madam▪
You will repent this tedious ignorance,
And not exchange my person, to clasp with
The greatest Prince alive, (hristian or infidel,
Though I commend my self, I have those ways
To please a Lady.
Ways to please the Devil?
You wo'not be coy now.
My Lord I know,
At least I hope, howere you speak a language
Rather to fright then court a women's thoughts,
(Not yet acquainted with her own dishonour)
You have some love within your heart.
Can thou
Suspect it? wo't thou see my heart?
Give me a fort-nights warning, and let me
But all that while possess thy love, and those
Delights i'll prompt thee too, i'll wish to live
No longer, get what surgeon thou wo t
To cut me to a Skeleton, not love thee?
Then by that love my Lord, I must desire you
At this time to defer your expectation,
And leave my Chamber.
Quit the Chamber Madam?
If not for love of me, for your own safety,
There is danger in your stay, for every minute
I do expect a visit from the Duke.
This is some trick, you sha'not fright me Lady,
I must have that I came for.
Meet it here
Licentious devil, I shall do a benefit
To the world, in thus removing such a traitor,
To man, and women's honour, you shall carry
No tales to his highness, if thou hast a soul.
Pray, tic my charity to let thee live
Two minutes longer.
Madam, Ardelia,
You wo'not use me thus,
Will you pray sir?
Alas I have forgot, I haven't prayed
This tweny years at least, I am willing Madam
To obey, and quit the Chamber, pardon me,
My ghost may in revenge else, do you a mischief,
And betray Bentivolio to the Duke,
But if you let me live, I will be dumb,
Madam consider a wild flesh, and blood,
And give me leave to spend my rest of life,
Only in thinking out some fit repentance,
For I will never speak, if you suspect me.
The Duke is come already, I am undone
Mercy, and some concealment.
Ardelia
Alone, I heard another voice, with whom
Were you in Dialogue, and the door so fast?
It is but your suspicion.
This dissembling
I like not.
If he know who tic, I shall
Inflame his Jealousy—dear heart appear
Less troubled, do not throw such busy eyes
About the room, i'll whisper't in thy ear,
The Duke—
Where?
There, obscured behind the hangings
Upon thy entrance.
Guilt has made him fearful,
Oh I am lost, and thou art now not worth
My glorious rescue.
Softly, by all goodness
He has not injurd me, and if you durst
But trust our private conference, i'll die
Rather then bring thee ruins of my honour.
If thou be yet white, my own arm secures thee
From all his lust hereafter.
Oh
I am murdered.
What have you done?
Nothing but kilt the Duke,
You shall with me?
Whither?
No matter where.
So we escape the infection of this Ayre.
I am caught in my own toils, by the same Engine
I raised to the Dukes death, I fall my self,
The mystery of fate, I am rewarded,
And that which was the rank part of my life,
My blood, is met withal, and tic my wonder
My veins should run so clear a red, wherein
so much black sin was wont to bath it self,
I wo'd look up, and beg with my best strength
Of voice, and heart forgiveness, but heaven's just,
Thus death pays treason, and blood quenches lust.
Although I love, and wish the act of treason
The noise yet comes to near me.
Oh my Lord!
The Duke is killed.
The Duke? by what black murderer?
That gives the State another wound, we cannot
Suspect who was the traitor, to revenge it,
But whosoever was guilty of this parricide,
Is still within the Court, the deeds so fresh
He cannot be far off.
Shut up the gates,
And plant a strong guard round about the palace,
Let none go forth in pain of death, the devil
Sha'not obscure him here with his black wings,
Though he rob Hell to cover us with darkness,
We'll find him under twenty fogs, and drag him
To his just torment.
You're his pious successor.
Tic done, and my ambition's satisfied
Contain my heart, but to which bold assassivate
Pallante or Bentivolio must I owe
This bloody service.
I have don't my Lord.
Softly, thou art my brave, and glorious villain.
There have been better titles sir, bestowed
On men of my desert, the killing of
My lawful Prince, hath been esteemed an act
'Bove the reward of villain, though I know
I am one, and a monstrous villain too,
I wo d not be called so.
Thou shall it divide
Titles with me, dost think i'll not reward it?
Thou are• sad.
I am a little melancholy
After my work.
Dost thourepent thy service?
Were he alive, i'd kill him again for you.
Tic not his death that hints my conscience,
But the condition, and State he died in,
That troubles me.
What State, or what condition?
When I had taught him to believe he was not
Long lived, and that your Lordship had by me.
Sent him a writ of ease, for i'll make short.
Did thou discover me?
Why not? I was
To take an order he should ne'er reveal it,
Upon the mention of your name my Lord.
He fetch•d a sigh, I thought would have prevented
My execution on his heart, as if
That were a greater wound then death upon him,
But I, whose resolute soul was deaf to his prayer,
Bathed in as many tears, as would have wrought
A Marble to compassion, bid him choose
The humour he would die in, and collect
Some thoughts to waite upon him to eternity,
And what doe you think he made his choice?
I know not.
To die an honest man, no wish to part
The world with fair Ardelia in his arms, and give his ghost up in a wan-ton kiss.
But with a thousand groans, calling upon
Euphemia to forgive him, to whose virtue
His soul was going forth, to meet, and seal
To it, a new, and everlasting marriage,
Nay he had so much charity to forgive
You sir, and me, and would have prayed for us,
But that I sent the message to his bosom
That made him quiet, and so left his highness
Had he died obstinate in his sins, the wanton
Lascivious Duke he lived, I wo'd not blush for it.
Why, dost relent for this?
I find some mutiny
In my conscience, pray my Lord tell me
Do not you wish it were undone.
Thou hast
The tremblings of an infant, it exalts
My thoughts to another heaven, Pallante thou
Must not leave here, but make Leontio, owe
His perfect blessing to thy act, go to
Euphemia, and with thy best art drop
This news into her ear.
Within. Away with 'em.
What tumults that?
My Lord we have found the traitor
He does confess he killed the Duke.
Howes that?
He killed the Duke? tic Bentivolio.
I did my Lord, you shannot trouble much
Examination, with this hand I sacrificed
Ferneze, and you ought to call my act
Pious, and thank me for removing such
A tyrant, whose perfidious breath had heaven
Been longer patient wo'd have blasted Parma.
And in the confidence of this service done,
You present your self to be rewarded.
I meant not to have troubled you for that
Had not their force compelled us back.
Come nearer.
I wonder at this noise of the Dukes death,
Valerios tragedy is all that we
Are guilty of, which yet I have concealed
From Bentivolio.
Had you no aid
To this great execution, did you do it alone?
Alone, and tic my glory that
No hand can boast his fatal wound but mine,
And if you dare be just my Lord.
Be confident,
There is some mystery in this Pallante
Both could not kill the Duke, he does accuse,
himself.
I am all wonder my good Lord.
You are sure tic done.
Now you dishonour me,
Dee know blood royal, when you see it, you may
Believe that crimson evidence, I hope
Your Lordship will remember.
Fear it not,
But for a time you must be prisoner
To satisfy a little form upon
My life, no danger shall approach thee, trust
My honour, though I frown, and call thee traitor
I will study thy preserving next my own,
Is not this strange Pallante that heel take
The guilt upon himself, if both have kilt him
No fear but hoe's dead, this fool Pallante
Shall quickly by his death secure thy Fate.
Put on a cunning face mean time, and narrowly
Observe the full behaviour of the Court,
But 'specially insinuate with the greatest,
And as they talk of me, declare my passion,
And with what horror, I received the death
Of our good Duke, my pious zeal to appease
That blessed spirit with his murderers blood,
In care to their own heads, they will proclaim
Me Duke, i'll to Euphemia, and by some
Strong art make her my own.
Your grace is prudent.
Away to'th prison with 'em.
Let me bear
Him company my Lord.
You sha'not doubt it
Good Madam mischief, and repent together,
As you are like to bleed, and with full torture,
Howl out your wretched lives for the Dukes murder.
You are deceived my Lord, we wo'not dye
For that offence.
You wo'not, glorious strumpet.
You're a most
Uncivil Lord, thy birth had not more innocence
To justify thy mother.
Isle be modest,
And say, this is not honourable.
So Sir,
You will have time to talk at your arraignment,
Away with 'em, now to Euphemia.
Did you not send for me, and by this token?
Follow me not, unless thou wo't swear to imitate
What I shall lead thee too by my example,
For rather then not be rid of thee, at next
Convenient river I will drown my self,
And think I go a Martyrdom by water.
Cannot a Gentleman be merry w'ee,
But you will make him mad?
Isle never leave thee,
I will petition to the Duke, and plead
A contract.
Thou't be damned then.
What care I.
So, I shu'd have a blessing in this fiend,
This child of darkness once removed, I send for thee,
And by a token? I wo'd sooner send
For the hang-man, and pay him double fees
To strangle me, what I endured before,
Think it was a penance for some mighty sins
I had committed, and be quiet now.
Did you not love me then?
Love thee? consider
What thou hast said, and hang thy self immediately,
Isle sooner dote upon a mare, dost hear me,
A mare with fourscore, and ninteene diseases,
And she the greatest to make up a hundred,
Then harbour one such monstrous thought, thou art
A thing, no Cat that comes of a good kind,
Will keep the company, and yet thou look
So like a miserable ore-growne vermin,
Now I think better on it, it is my wonder
You are not devoured quick, leave me yet.
Not I Sir,
I know you love me still, all this is but
To try my constancy.
Art thou so ignorant,
Or impudent, or both? let me entreat thee
But to have something of a beast about thee.
Thy senses in some measure, look but how
I frown upon thee, for thy safety therefore,
If thou hast no desire to save my credit
Abroad, tame thy concupiscence, we draw
All the spectators but to laugh, and wonder it's,
And I shall be the greater prodigy
For talking so long with thee, wo't be ruled,
And trudge from whence thou came, good honest bruit,
My humours out of breath, and I have done,
But all that's ugly in thy face, or what's
Unseen deformity, I am now in earnest,
And therefore doe not tempt me.
My dear Signior.
To what?
Why, after all to beat thee, if
Thou leave me not the sooner.
Are not you
My Servant?
But in passion I forget things,
And if my Mistress want discretion,
I shall, in my pure zeal to have her wise,
Beat some into her, most abominably
Beat her, and make deformity to swell,
She sha'not get in to her chamber door.
Isle bruise, and make thee up into a ball,
And boys shall kick thee home, dost thou not fear me?
Isle endure any thing from thee, my love
Shall think no pain a suffering, come, kiss me
But once, and I will diethy patient martyr.
She wo'd be kilt, to have me hang for her,
Was ever such an impudence in woman?
You that are handsome Ladies, I doe ask
Forgiveness and believe it possible
You may be le•se vexations to men.
Dost hear? to tell thee truth, for it will out
By some, or other, you must here discharge
Your dotage, for it is but two hours since
I was married.
Married? to whom?
To the tother
Wild bear that courted me, to Scolopendra,
She met in the nick, and wee clapped up.
And you know tic not conscience to abuse
Our honest wedlock.
I shall run mad.
Wo'd thou wo'dst run into the Sea, and see
If I wo'd go a fishing for thee.
Furies,
Rise in my brain, and help me to revenge.
I am afraid she'll beat me now.
False man,
I have not breath enough to rail, and curse
Thy apostasy, how could thou use me thus?
But seek some sudden way to be divorced,
Or one shall dye.
Wo'd thou were buried quick.
But are
You married, tell me sweet Horatio,
And must I wear a willow garland for thee?
Wear a halter.
It is not possible, thou can be so
Unkind to me.
You may believe it Madam.
Yet I must love thee till I die, and you
May keep me alive, with now, and then some favour,
It wont's no president, we may kiss I hope,
And thus walk arm in arm, wo'd deny
Thee nothing.
Do not vanish me good Madam.
The people hoot already, none to reskue me.
Is not this Bentivolio, under guard,
And his fair Mistress pinniand? how now friend,
Wither are you bound with such a convoy.
To prison, they are traitors.
Traitors.
Do not believe 'em.
They have killed the Duke.
How's that?
Doe you know him sir?
Dear Madam are you prisoner too.
Take me along,
Better be hanged then hinted with that goblin.
Another of the conspiracy disarmed him.
Let me but speak a word to this old Damsel.
Shoe's of the plot too.
I? I defy him,
I know him not.
I hope you wo'not leave me in distress
Love, Mistress lady-bird.
I defy all traitors
Away with 'em, the Duke killed! out upon 'em,
That Fellow always had a hanging countenance
Bless me, defend me.
It is well treason will
Make her forsake me yet.
Dost know on what
Danger thou dost engage thy self?
Although
I die for company it is worth it gentlemen
You know not how you have relieved me Madam,
I did expect you'd bring him into mischief,
I am perfect in your sex now, come to prison.
You may repent your malice sir.
And you
May be a Saint, away with us, come friend,
Women have made me weary of the World,
And hanging is a help, we might have lived
If you had tan my counsel, nay i'll share w'ed
I have not lost all my good fellowship.
My sorrows, I forgive you all, this blessing
Has overpaid my heart, and though it crack
With weight of this so unexpected happiness,
I shall die more then satisfied.
Thou art too merciful, and my repentance
Is yet too feeble, and too short a wonder,
Sure thou dost slatter me, if not heaven suffered,
My fall with holy cunning to let thee
Shine the Worlds great example of forgiveness.
But wherefore does your grace come hither thus
Disguised, being your self, and mine again, what needs
This cloud upon your person, truth did never
Shame the professor.
Though I live to thee,
The World doe think me dead Euphemia,
Leonato whom I loved, and trusted most,
Designed my everlasting far-well from thee,
But he that should have been my executioner,
Without disordering this poor heap of nature,
Gave me another life, and growth to virtue,
Pallante, blessed good man
Leonates creature,
That honest Soldier after by his counsel,
I put this shape on, while to my false kins-man
He gives relation of my death, this key
He lent for my access to thy sad chamber,
I hope he is returned.
Tic Leonato.
My heart of the sudden trembles with the fear
Of a ne'er danger, I am unarmed too,
For our defence—Madam you are not wise,
And merit not this providence to dote
Upon a shadow, your dead husband, when
Leonato lives, with more ambition to
Succeed him in your love, then this fair Duke-dome.
What fellows this that pleads my cause, tic some
Pallante has appointed to prepare her,
With pardon, you deserve him not, and were
I Leonato—my good Lord.
Spare your
Dull Retorick sir.
That I could snatch
His sword, I dare not call for help, or leave 'em
She may be lost within a pair of minutes,
My heart, my brain!
Madam you said your vow
Was made for life, Fernizes death hath concealed
That obligation, and in midst of tears
Fate smiles upon you, if you dare look up,
And meet it with a will to be made happy
He courts you now, has power to kill all sorrow,
From these fair eyes, be just to your kind fortune,
And dress your face with your first beauty, Madam,
It may become the change, why weep you still.
I weep for you my Lord.
For me.
Because
You cannot for your self, pray tell me sir,
Is the Duke dead in earnest, you have not
A mourning face, but great heirs seldom die
With sudden grief, or weeping for their Father,
Or Kins-mens Funeral, I pray how died he?
Although he were not kind to take his leave,
I wot pay my obsequy of tears upon,
His Hearse, and weep a prayer to his cold dust.
That may be time enough.
How I desire
To kiss his lip again, oh show me yet
Whore's the pale ruins of my dead Lord? stay
He shall have half my soul, whore's a soft,
And silent breath I will convey to warm,
And quicken his stiff bosom.
Madam, what's
All this to my reward?
Reward for what.
My love which for your sake, and let me tell you
Not without some encouragement from you,
To give your heart more freedom to meet ruin,
Hath sent the Duke to heaven.
Thou art a murderer,
Treason?
Treason.
Who was that.
Some echo
Within the Chamber, nothing else my Lord.
Is not the Dukes ghost hovering hereabout,
It has a clamour like his voice, ha, but
I can take order for your silence, use
That tongue again, with the least accent to
Affright the air, and i'll dismiss thy soul,
To waite upon thy husbands angry shade.
Horror? what can preserve us but a miracle?
Yet i'll not so much favour you, it is death
Perhaps you have ambition too.
One word
My gracious Lord, it has been my trade to deal
With women, with your pardon you do practise
Too tame a court-ship for her nature, use
The opportunity, and force her, to your
Pleasures, away with Sword, and buckle with her,
Leave me to keep the door, I ha been used to too't
She'll thank you when'tis done, loose no time in talk.
Ha? do thy office.
Wot your Lordship know me?
You shall—what think you of this officer?
False to thy blood; thy honour, and thy Prince,
You're caught my precious kins-man, and I live
With my own hand to be revenged upon thee,
Ha then thorough her, I will receive my mends,
I did suspect that voice, had not my confidence
Of thy most certain death betrayed me thus,
I wot have made sure work, some Fate direct
His Sword thorough both our hearts.
No Treason, Treason.
So let me employ the short breath that remains
To tell you I engaged Pallante, to
The Dukes death with a full hope to satisfy
Lust, and ambition, but he jugled with me,
And so has Bentivolio, though he be
With his Ardelia in prison, for
Acknowledging himself your murderer,
To which Vallerio, and my self inflamed him.
Valerio traitor too.
Sir he is slain,
His wounded body found in Ardelias chamber.
Ardelia!
This dark mischief shall be cleared
Strozzi, command Bentivolo,
And Ardelia be instantly brought hither?
I shall sir.
Most ungrateful Leonato.
I know I am not worth your charity,
And yet my Lord your cruelty upon
Euphemia, and some licence I took from
The example of your wanton blood, was ground
Of these misfortunes, 't seems You're reconciled,
Be worth her love hereafter, thou were just,
Pallante, be still faithful to thy Prince,
I beg your general pardon.
We forgive thee.
Heaven is a great way of, and I shall be
Ten thousand years in travel, yet it were happy
If I may find a lodging there at last,
Though my poor soul get thither upon crutches
It cannot stay, far-well, again forgive me.
He is dead.
I pity him.
The prisoners waite.
Admit 'em.
Was your life so great a burden
That you upon the rumour of our murder,
Would take the act upon you, though you had
Promised to be the traitor, or did you
Envy another man should own the glory,
And title of our bloody executioner.
I, but confessed the guilt I then believed.
This is a mystery.
I can best clear it.
Tic my wonder how?
Valerio was slain.
That I must answer,
Although my Sword then promised to another
Revenge, yet in the wound he met a Justice,
I now repent not.
What's that gentleman.
I am one Madam that do court my friend here,
So well that though he be in fair election
To loose his Head, or to be Strangled—
Had rather take such as I find with him,
Then live to be tormented with a woman.
What woman.
Any woman, without difference,
I have heard your grace has a good fame, and though
It does become your subjects to believe it,
I was not borne here Madam, and i've had
Such ill luck with your sex, it does not bind
My faith, tic possible there may be good
Both fair, and honest women, but they were never
Under my acquaintance, no no yet ilfavored,
In whom I only looked to find a soul,
But bossed my labour. This is all truth Madam:
His humour makes me smile.
Enough, not only
Our pardon for Valerios death, I give
Thee back Ardelia, she was my Mistress
But I return her pure as thy own wishes.
This grace is mighty sir.
Weal see you married,
And what our person, and Euphemias
Can add to grace you.
You've already blessed us,
And heaven shower joys upon you.
The next thing is to honour thee Pallante,
Thou savest my life, and did now marry me,
Thy faith is not rewarded.
'Was my duty.
What, is all well again? and is she honest.
Most innocent.
Then shoe's too good for thee,
Come the truth is, and now i'll speak my conscience
If there be few good women in the World,
The fault rise first from one of our own sex,
By flattery in false-hood to deceive 'em,
And so the punishment does but descend
To us in justice.
That's some charity.
Come my Euphemia, this second knot
Shall be as firm as destiny, nor shall
What ever was to our chaste vow a shame,
In my lives after Story have a name.
GEntlemen, and Ladies,
If I have transgressed in any language
〈◊〉 handsome faces, I hope you will forgive
Me, and imagine, I have but plaid the part, which
Was most against my Genius, of any that ever I
Acted in my life, to speak truth,
Who is so simple to dote upon Witches, and hel-Cats.
Venus deliver us, the Poet stands liftning behind the arras
To hear what will become on's Play, under the
Rose if you will seem to like it I'll put
A trick upon him.
For though he hear when you applaud, I'll say
Your hands did seal my pardon, not the Play.

Bless me you kinder Stars! How are wee thronged?
Alas! whom, hath our long sick-Poet wronged,
That hee should meet together in one day
A Session and a Faction at his Play?
To Judge, and to Condemn: For it cannot be
Amongst so many here, all should agree.
Then it is to such vast expectation raised,
As it were to be wondered at, not praised:
And this, good faith Sir Poet (if I've read
Customs, or Men) strikes you, and your Muse dead!
Conceive now too, how much, how oft each Ear
Hath surfeited in this our Hemisphere,
With various, pure, eternal Wit; and then
My fine young Comic Sir, you're killed again.
But 'bove the mischief of these fears, a sort
Of cruel Spies (wee hear) intend a sport
Among themselves; our mirth must not at all
Tickle, or stir their Lungs, but shake their Gall.
So this joined with the rest, makes me again
To say, You and your Lady Muse within
Will have but a sad doom; and your trim Brow
Which longed for Wreathes, you must wear naked now;
'Lesse some resolve out of a courteous pride,
To like and praise what others shall deride:
So they've their humour too; and wee in spite
Of our dull Brains, will think each side in the right.
Such is your pleasant judgements upon Plays,
Like Par'lells that run straight, though several ways.
WElcome o'shore Meager! Give me thy hand!
Tic a true one, and will no more forsake
A Bond, or Bill, then a good Sword; a hand
That will shift for the Body, till the Laws
Provide for both.
Old Wine, and new Clothes Sir,
Make you wanton! Do you not see Pert, my Comrade?
Ambiguous Pert! hast thou danced to the Drum too?
Could a Tiff•ta scarf, a long Ostrich whing,
A stiff Iron Doublet, and a Brazeele Pole
Tempt thee from Cambric sheets, fine active Thighs,
From Caudles where the precious Amber swims?
Faith, wee have been to kill, wee know not whom,
Nor why: Led on to break a Commandment,
With the consent of Custom and the Laws.
Mine was a certain inclination Sir
To doe mischief, where good men of the Jury,
And a dull Congregation of gray Beards
Might urge no tedious Statute against my life!
Nothing but Honour could seduce thee, Pert!
Honour! which is the hope of the Youthful,
And the old Soldiers wealth, a jealousy
To the Noble, and mist'ry to the wise.
It was Sir, no Geographical fancy
(Cause in our Maps, I liked this Region here
More than that Country lying there) made me
Partial which to fight for.
True, sage Pert.
What is it to thee whether one Don Diego
A Prince, or Hans van Holme, Fritter seller
Of Bombell, doe Conquer that Parapet,
Readout, or Town, which thou ne'er saw before?
Not a brass Thimble to me! but Honour!—
Why right! else wherefore should thou bleed for him,
Whose Money, Wine, nor Wench, thou ne'er hast used?
Or why destroy some poor Root-eating Soldier,
That never gave thee the lie, denied to pledge
Thy Cockatrices health, ne'er spit upon
Thy Dog, jeered thy Spur-leather, or returned
Thy Tooth-pick ragged, which hee borrowed whole?
Never to my knowledge!
Comrade! tic time —
What, to unship your Trunks at Billings gate?
Fierce Meager! why such haste? doe not I know,
That a Mouse yoked to a Pescod, may draw
With the frail Cordage of one hair, your Goods
About the World?
Why wee have Linen Sir!
As much Sir as will fill a Tinder Box,
Or make a Frog a shirt. I like not friends,
This quiet, 'mo jest posture of your Shoulders!
Why stir you not, as you were practising
To Fence, or doe you hide your Cattle, least
The Skipper make you pay their passage over?
Know Pallatine! Truth is a naked Lady,
She will show all! Meager, and I have not—
The Treasure of Saint Marks I believe Sir,
Though you are as rich as cast Servingmen,
Or Bawds led thrice into Captivity!
Thou hast a heart of the right stamp; I find
It is not comely in thine eyes, to see
Vs Sons of war walk by the pleasant Vines
Of Gascoiny, as wee believed the Grapes
Forbidden Fruit: sneak through a Tavern with
Remorse, as wee had read the Alcharon,
And made it our best Faith.
And abstain flesh,
As if our English Beef were all reserved
For Sacrifice.
Whilst Colon keeps more noise
Than Mariners at Plays, or Apple-wives
That wrangle for a Sive!
Contribute, come!
Stand there close on you lives! here in this house
Lives a rich old Hen, whose young Egg. (though not
Of her own laying) I have in the Embers!
She may prove a Morsel for a discreet Mouth,
If the kind Fates have but the leisure to
Betray the old one.
Pallatine.
No plots upon generation; wee two
Have fasted so long, that wee cannot think
Of begetting any thing, unless
Like Cannibals, wee might eat our own Issue.
I say close; shrink in your Morions! go!
Why hidden thus? a Soldier may appear.
Yes in a Sutlers Hut on the Pay-day:
But doe you know the silence of this house,
The gravity and awe? here dwells a Lady,
That hath not seen a street, since good King Harry
Called her to a Masque: she is more devout
Then a Weaver of Banbury, that hopes
T'intice Heaven (by singing) to make him Lord
Of twenty Looms. I never saw her yet:
And to arrive at my preferment first,
In your sweet company will (I take it)
Add but little to my hopes. Retire! go!
We shall obey, but doe not tempt us now
With sweet meates for the nether Palate! doe not—
What Lucy! Luce! now is the old Beldam
Misleading her to a Cushion; where she
Must pray, and sigh, and fast, until her knees
Grow smaller then her Knockles. Lucy! Luce.
No hope! she is undone! shele number o'er
As many Orisons, as if she had
A Bushel of Beads to her Rosary!
Lucy! my April love! my Mistress speak! —
Pallatine, for Heavens sake keep in your voice!
My cruel Aunt will hear, and I am lost.
What can she hear, when her old ears are ••uff'd
With as much warm wax, as will seal nine Leases?
What a pox does she listening upon earth?
I'st not time for her t'affect privacy?
To creep into a close dark Vault, there gossip.
With worms, and such small tame creatures, as Heaven
Provided to accompany old People?
Still bettered unto worse! but that my heart
Consents not to disfigure thee, thou would be torn
To pieces numberless as sand, or as
The doubts of guilt, or love, in Cowards are!
How now Luce! from what strange coast this storm! ho!
Thou dost out-drinke the youth of Norway at
Their Marriage feasts, out-sweare a puny Gamester
When his first misfortune rages out quarrel,
One that rides post, and is stopped by a Cart:
Thy walking hours are later in the night,
Then those which Drawers, Traitors, or Constables
Th•mselves doe keep; for VVatchmen know thee better
Then their Lantern! and here's your Surgeons Bill,
Your kind thrift (I thank you) hath sent it me
To pay, as if the poor exhibition
My Aunt allows for Aprons, would maintain
You in Seareclothes.—
Can the Daughters of Brabant
Talk thus when Younker-gheek leads'em to a Stove?
I say (Meager) there is a small parcel
Of Man, that rebels more then all the rest
Of his body, and I shall need (if I
Stay here) no Elixir of Beef to exalt
Nature, though I were leaner then a great!
This Surgeon's a Rogue (Luce) a fellow Luce
That hath no more care of a Gentleman's
Credit, then of the Lint, he hath twice used!
Well Sir, but what's that Instrument he names?
He writes down here for a tool of Injection
Luce, a small water Engine which I bought
For my Taylors Child to squirt at Prentices!
I Sir, he sins more against wit then Heaven,
That knows not how t'excuse what he hath done!
I shall be old at twenty Pallatine,
My grief to see thy manners, and thy mind
Hath wrought so much upon my heart!
I'd as live keep our Marriage Supper
In a Churchyard, and beget our Children
In a Coffin, as hear thee prophecy;
Luce, thou art drunk Luce; far gone in Almond Milk,
Kiss me!—
Now I dissolve like an Eringo?
He's ploughing of the Indies, good Gold appear!
I am a new man Luce; thou shalt find me
In a Geneva-band, that was reduced
From an old Alder-mans Cuff; no more hair left
Then will shakle a flea; this debauched Whineyard,
I will reclaim to comely Bow and Arrows,
And shoot with Haberdashers at Finsbury,
And be thought the Grand-child of Adam-Bell!
And more (my Luce) hang at my velvet Girdle,
A Book wrapped in a greene Dimity Bag,
And squire thy untooth'd Aunt to an exercise.
Nothing but strict Laws, and age will tame you.
What money hast thou Luce?
I there's your business.
It is the business of the world: Injuries grow.
To get it, Justice sits for the same end;
Men are not wise without it; for it makes
Wisdom known; and to be a Fool, and poor,
Is next t'old Aches and bad Fame; tic worse
Than to have six new Creditors, they each
Twelve Children, and not bread enough to make
The Landlord a Tossed, when hee calls for Ale
And Rent. Think on that, and rob thy Aunts Trunks
Ere she hath time to make an Inventory.
A cunning Pioner! hee works to th'bottome.
Hast thou no taste of Heaven? were thou begot
In a Prison, and bred up in a Galley?
Luce! I speak like one that hath seen the Book
Of Fate: I'm loath (for thy sake) to mount a Coach
With two wheels; whilst the Damsels of the Shop
Cry out, A goodly strait chained Gentleman!
Hee dyes, for robbing an Attorneys Cloak-bag
Of Copper-seales, foul Night-caps, together
With his wives Bracelet of Mill-Testers!
There Sir!—
Tic gold! my Pendants, Carckanets, and Rings,
My Christening Caudle-cup, and Spoons
Are dissolved into that Lump. Nay, take all!
And with it as much anger as would make
Thy Mother write thee illegitimate!
See me no more! I will not stay to bless
My gift; lest I should teach my patience suffer
Till I convert it into Sin.
Temptations will not thrive. This Bagadge sleeps
Cross legged, and the Devil has no more power
O'er that charm, than dead Men o'er their lewd Heirs.
I must marry her, and spend my revenue
In Cradles, Pins, and Soap! That's th'end of all
That scope a deep River, and a tall Bough.
Pallatine! How much?
Honourable Pall!
Gentlemen, you must accept without gaging
Your corporal Oaths, to repay in three days!
Not wee (Pall) in three Iubilies, fear not!
Nor shall you charge me with loud vehemence
(Thrice before company) to wait you in
My chamber such a night; for then, a certain
Drover of the South comes to pay you money!
On our new Faiths!
On our Allegiance Pall!
Go then!—shift, and brush your skins well, do you hear!
Meet me at the new Play; fair, and perfumed!
There are strange words hang on the lips of Rumour!
Language of joy dear Pall!
This day is come
To Town, the Minion of the womb (my Lads)
My elder Brother, and hee moves like some
Assyrian Prince; his Chariots measure Leagues
Witty, as youthful Poets in their wine!
Bold as a Centaur at a Feast, and kind
As Virgins that were ne'er beguiled with love!
I seek him now, meet and triumph!
Meager, King Pall!—
Pert.
Sir Morglay! come! the hours have wings, and you
Are grown too old, t'overtake them: The Town
Looks (me thinks) as it would invite the Country
To a Feast.
At which Sergeants and their Yeomen
Must be no Waiters (Pallatine) lest some
Of the Guests pretend business: how dost like me?
As one, old women shall no more avoid,
Then they can warm Furs or Muskadell!
Pallatine! to have a volatile Ache,
That removes oftner then the Tartars Camp;
To have a stich that fucks a man awry,
Till he show crooked as a Chestnut Bough,
Or stand in the deformed Guard of a Fencer;
To have these hid in Flesh, that has lived sinful
Fifty long years; yet husband, so much strength
As could convey me hither, fourscore Miles
On a design of Wit, and glory may
Be Registered for a strange Northern Act.
I cannot boast those Noble Maladies
As yet; but Time (dear Knight) as I have heard,
May make mans knowledge bold upon himself.
We travel in the grand cause! These smooth Rags,
These Jewels too, that seem to smile ever they
Betray, are certain silly snares, in which
Your Lady-wits, and their wise Compeers-Male
May chance be caught!
Your welcome (Noble Brother)
Must be hereafter spoke, for I have lost
With glad haste to find you, much of my Breath! —
Your joy becomes you it hath Courtship in it!
Sir Morglay Thwack! I did expect to see
The Archer Cimbeline, or old King Lute
Advance his Fashion here again, ever you
Amongst so much smoke, diseases, Law, and noise!
What your Town gets by me, let'um lay up
For their Orphans, and Record in their Annals!
I come to borrow where Isle never lend,
And buy what Isle never pay for.
Not your Debts?
No Sir, though to a poor Brownists widow!
Though she sigh all night, and have the next morning
Nothing to drink, but her own Tears.
Nor shalt thou lend money to a sick friend,
Though the sad worm lie mortgaged in his bed
For the hire of his Sheets.
These are Resolves,
That give me newer wonder than your Clothes;
Why in such shining Trim, like Men that come
From rifled Tents, laden with victory?
Yes Brother, or like eager heirs new dipped
In Ink, that sealed the day before in haste,
Lest Parchment should grow dear. Know Youth wee come
To be the business of all Eyes, to take
The wall of our St. George on his Feast day!
Yes, and then embark at Dover, and doe
The like to St. Dennis: All this (young Sir)
Without charge too; I mean, to us; wee bring
A humorous odd Philosophy to Town
That says, pay nothing!
Why, where have I lived?
Brother be calm, and edify! But first
Receive a Principle, never hereafter
(From this warm breathing, till your last cold sigh)
Will I disburse for you again; Never!
Brother mine, if that be your Argument,
I deny the Mayor!
Resist Principles?
Good faith, though you should send me more Epistles
Than young Factors in their first voyage write
Unto their short haired Friends; than absent Lovers
Pen near their Marriage week, t'excuse the slow
Arrival of the License, and the Ring,
Not one clipped penny should depart my reach.
This Doctrine will not pass, how shall I live?
As we intend to doe, by our good wits!
How, Brother, how?
Truth is a pleasant knowledge;
Yet you shall have her cheap, Sir Morglay here,
(My kind Disciple) and my self, have leas'd
Out all our Rents and Lands for pious uses!
What, Co-founders! give Legacies ere death!
Pallatine the pious, and St Morglay!
Your names will sound but ill ith Calendar.
How long must this fierce raging zeal continue?
Till we subsist here no more by our wit,
Then weal renounce the Town, and patiently
Vouchsafe to resume our Mother Earth,
Lead on our Ploughs into their rugged walks
Again, grope our young Heifers in the flank,
And swagger in the wool, wee shall borrow
From our own flocks.
But ere we go, we may
From the vast treasure purchased by our wit,
Leave here some Monument to speak our Fame.
I have a strong mind to reedify
The decays of Fleet-Ditch, from whence I hear
The roaring Vestals late are fled, through heat
Of persecution.
What a small star have I,
That never yet could light me to this way!
Live by our wits?
So live, that Usurers,
Shall call their Moneys in, remove their Bank
To Ordinaries, Spring-garden, and Hide-parke,
Whilst their glad Sons are left seven for their chance,
At Hazard, Hundred, and all made at Sent;
Three motley Cocks of the right Derby strain,
Together with a Foal of Beggibrigge!
Sir, I will match my Lord Majors horse, make Jockeys
Of his Hench-boyes, and run 'em through Cheap-side.
What beauties Girls of feature govern now
In the town? tic long since wee did traffic here,
In midnight whispers, when the Dialect
Of Loves loose Wit, is frighted into signs,
And secret laughter stifled into smiles:
When nothing's loud but the old Nurses Cough!
Who keeps the Game up, ho! who misled now?
Not Sir, that if wee woo, weal be at charge
For Looks; or if wee marry, make a Jointure,
Entail Land on women? entail a Back,
And so much else of Man, as Nature did
Provide for the first wife.
I could keep thee,
Thy future Pride, thy Surfeits, and thy Lust,
(I mean, in such a garb as may become
A Christian Gentleman) with the sole Tithe
Of Tribute, I shall now receive from Ladies.
Your Brother, and my self have sealed to Covenants!
The Female Youth of the town are his; but all
From forty to fourscore, mine own: A widow
(You'll say) is a wise, solemn, wary Creature;
Though she hath lived to'th cunning of dispatch,
Closed up nine Husbands eyes, and have the wealth
Of all their Testaments, in one Month Sir,
I will waste her to her first Wedding-smock,
Her single Ring, Bodkin, and Velvet-Muffe.
Your Rents exposed at home, for Pious uses
Must expiate your behaviour here; Tell me,
Is that the subtle plot you have on Heaven?
The worm of your worships conscience would appear
As big as a Conger, but a good eye
May chance to find it slender as a Grigge!
Amazement knows no ease, but in demands,
Pray tell me Gentlemen, to all this vast
Disignment (which so strikes my Ear) deduct
You nought from your revenue, nought that may
Like Fuel, feed the flame of your expense?
Brother, not so much as will find a Jew
Bacon to his Eggs: These gay tempting Weeds,
These Eastern stones of cunning foil, bespoke
Against our arrival here, together with
A certain stock of Crowns in eiders purse,
Is all the charge that from our proper own,
Begins or furthers the magnifique plot,
And of these Crowns, not one must be usurped
By you.
No relief, but Wit and good Counsel!
The stock my Father left you, if your care
Had purposed so discreet a course might well
Have set you up in the Trade, but we spend light!
Our Coach is yet unwheel'd, Sir Morglay, come,
Lets suit those Friesland horse with our own strain!
Why Gentlemen, will the design keep horses?
May be Sir they shall live by their Wits too!
Their Masters are bad Tutors else; well, how
You'll work the Ladies, and weak Gentry here
By your fine gilded Pills, a Faith that is
Not old may guess without distrust. But Sirs,
The City (take it on my experiment)
Will not be gulled!
Not gulled? they dare not be
So impudent! I say they shall be gulled,
And trust, and break, and pawn their Charter too!
Is it lawful (Brother) for me to laugh
That have no money?
Yes Sir, at your self!
Two that have tasted Natures kindness Arts,
And men, have shined in moving Camps; have seen
Courts in their solemn business, and vain pride;
Conversed so long in the town here, that you know
Each Sign, and Pebble in the streets; for you
(After a long retirement) to lease forth
Your wealthy pleasant Lands, to feed Iohn Crump,
The Cripple, Widow Needy, and Abraham
Sloth, the Beads-man of More-dale? Then (forsooth)
Persuade your selves to live here by your Wits.
Where wee ne'er cheated in our Youth, we resolve
To cousin in our Age.
Brother, I came
To be your wise example in the Arts
That lead to thriving glory, and supreme life;
Not through the humble ways wherein dull Lords
Of Lands, and Sheep doe walk; Men that depend
On the fantastic winds on fleeting Clouds,
On seasons more uncertain than themselves,
When they would hope or fear; But you are warm
In another silk, and make your tame ease
Virtue, call it content, and quietness!
Write Letters to your Brother! do! and be
Forsworn, in every long Parenthesis,
For twenty pound sent you in Butchers silver!
Rebukes are precious! cast them not away!
Neither of these Philosophers were borne
To above five Senses; why then should they
Have hope, to doe things greater, and more new
In the world, than I? This Devil Plenty thrusts
Strange boldness upon Men! well, you may laugh
With so much violence, till it consume
Your breath! Though sullein want, the Enemy
Of Wit, have sunk her low; if pregnant Wine
Can raise her up, this day she shall be mine.
My Guardian horsed? this evening say thou Engine?
It's an hour (Madam) since hee smelt the Town?
Saw thou his slender empty leg in th'Stirrop?
His Every Box on his smooth Ebon staff
New civitted, and tied to's gouty wrist?
With his warped face close buttoned in his Hood,
That Men may take him for a Monk disguised,
And fled post from a Pursevant!
(Madam) beware I pray, lest th'Age and cunning
Hee is Master of, prepare you a Revenge,
And such as your fine wit shall ne'er entreat
Your patience to digest. To morrow night
Th'extreamest Minute of your Wardship is
Expired, and wee Magicians of the house
Believe this hasty Journey hee hath tan
Is to provide a Husband for your sheets!
And such a one, as judgement and nine Eyes
Must needs dislike, that's composition may
Grow up to his own thrifty wish.
Madam.
Your Arrow was well aimed; I call him Master,
But I am Servant unto Truth, and You.
He choose a Husband, fit to guide, and sway
My Beauties wealthy Dowry, and my heart?
Isle make Election to delight my self:
What composition strictest Laws will give;
His Guardianship may take from the rich Bank
My Father left, and not devour my Land.
Your Ladyship has lived six years beneath
His roof, therefore may guess the colour
Of his heart, and what his brains doe weigh.
But Engine (Madam) is your humble Creature.
I have bounty, Engine!
And thou shalt largely taste it, when the next
Fair Sun is set, for then my Wardship ends—
That speaks command, or hast open the door.
Lucy! weeping my wench? melting thine Eyes,
As they had trespassed against light, and thou
Would give them darkness for a punishment.
Undone (Madam) without all hope, but what
Your pity will vouchsafe to minister!
Hast thou been struck by infamy? or come
A Mourner from the Funeral of Love?
I am the Mourner, and the Mourned; dead to
My self; but left not rich enough to buy a Grave:
My cruel Aunt hath banished me her Roof,
Exposed me to the night, the winds, and what
The raging Elements on wandrers lay,
Left naked, as first Infancy or Truth.
I could ne'er endure that old moist eyed Lady!
Me thought she prayed too oft.
A mere receipt
To make her long winded, which our devout
Physicians now prescribe to defer death.
But Lucy, can she urge no cause for this
Strange wrath, that you would willingly conceal!
Suspicions of my Chastity; which heaven
Must needs resist as false; though she accused
Me even in dream, where thoughts commit by chance,
Not Appetite.
What ground had her suspect?
Young Pallatine (that wooed my heart until
Hee gathered Fondness where hee planted Love)
Was fallen into such want, as eager blood,
And Youth could not endure, and keep the Laws
Inviolate. I to prevent my fear,
Sold all my Jewels, and my trifling wealth
Bestowed them on him; and she thinks a more
Unholy consequence attends the gift.
This Luce, is such Apostasy in Wit,
As Nature must degrade her self in woman to
Forgive? shall Love put thee to charge? could thou
Permit thy Lover to become thy Pensioner?
Her sense will now be tickled till it ache!
Thy feature and thy wit, are wealth enough
To keep thee high in all those vanities
That wilde ambition, or expensive pride
Perform in youth; but thou invertst their use
Thy Lover like the foolish Adamant,
The steel; thou fiercely dost allure, and draw,
To spend thy virtue, not to get by it.
This Doctrine (Madam) is but new to me.
How have I lived think thou? even by my Wits!
My Guardians contribution gave us Gowns;
But cut from th'curtaines of a Cariers bed:
Jewels wee wore, but such as Potters wives
Bake in the Furnace for their daughters wrists!
My women's Smock's so course, as they were spun
Of the tackling of a Ship.
A Coat of Male
Quilted with Wire, was soft sarsenet to um.
Our diet, scarce so much as is prescribed
To mortify; Two Eggs of Emmets poach'd
A single Bird no bigger than a Bee,
Made up a Feast.
He had starved me, but that
The Green-sicknesse took away my stomach!
Thy disease (Ginet) made thee in love with Mortar,
And tho'eatst him up two foot of an old wall!
A privilege my Master only gave
Unto her teeth, none else of the house durst do it.
When (Lucy) I perceived this straitened life,
Nature (my Steward) I did call t'acompt,
And took from her Exchequer so much Wit
As h•s maintained me since. I led my fine
Trim bearded Males in a small subtle string
Of my soft hair; made um to offer up,
And bow, and laughed at the Idolatry.
A jewel for a kiss, and that half ravished.
I feel• I am inclined t'indeavour in
A Calling (Madam) Eld be glad to live!
Know (Luce) this is no Hospital for Fools!
My Bed is yours, but on condition Luce,
That you redeem the Credit of your Sex;
That you begin to tempt, and when the snare
Hath caught the Foul, you plume him till you get
More feathers then you lost to Pallatine.
I shall not waste my hours in winding Silk,
Or shealing Pescods with your Ladyship!
Frosts on my heart! what? give unto a Suitor!
Know? I would fine behold, that silly Monarch,
(Bearded Man!) that durst woo me with half
So impudent a hope!
Madam, you are
Not far from the possession of your wish,
There is no language heard, no business now
In town, but what proclaims th'arrivall here
(This morn) of th'elder Pallatine, Brother
To him you named, and with him such an old
Imperial buskin Knight as th'Isle ne'er saw.
What's their design?
They will immure thēselves
With Diamonds, with all refulgent Stones,
That merit price: ask 'em who pays? why Ladies!
They'll feast with rich Provincial wines, who pays?
Ladies. They'll shine in various habit, like
Eternal Bridegrooms of the day, ask 'em
Who pays? Ladies. Lie with those Ladies too,
And pay'em but with Issue-Male, that shall
Inherit nothing but their wit, and doe
The like to Ladies, when they grow to age.
My ears received a taste of them before.
Engine, how shall we see them? bless me, Engine,
With thy kind voice.
Though Miracles are ceased,
This (Madam's) in the power of Thought, and Time.
I would kiss •hee Engine, but for an odd
Nice humour in my lips; they blister at
Inferior breath! This Ring, and all my hopes
Are thine; dear Engine now project, and live!
Id loose my VVedding to behold these Dagonets!
My Guardian's out of Town! let us triumph
Like Caesars, till to morrow night! thou know
I'm then no more of the Family! I would
Like a departing Lamp) before I leave
You in the dark, spread in a glorious blaze!
Madam, command the Keys, the house, and me.
Spoke like the bold Cophetua's Son!
Let us contrive within to tempt um hither:
Follow my Luce, restore thy self to Fame!—
Luce! Luce!
Death on my Eyes! how came you hither?
I'm Luce, a kind of peremptory Fly,
Shift houses still to follow the Sun-beames!
I must needs play in the flames of thy beauty!
You've used me with a Christian care, have you not?
Come I know all! I'have been at thy Aunts house▪
And there committed more disorder than
A storm in a Ship, or a Canon Bullet
Shot through a Kitchen among shelves of Pewter.
This madness is not true I hope!
Yes Faith.
Witness a shower of Malmsey Lees, dropped from
Thy Aunts own Urinal, on this new Morion!—
Why you have seen her then?
Yes, and she looks like the old Slut of Babylon
Thou hast read of. I told her she must dye.
And her beloved Velvet-Hood be fold
To some Dutch Brewer of Ratcliffe, to make
His You Frowe slippers.
Speak low! I am deprived
By thy rash wine of all atonement now,
Unto her after Legacies or Love!
My Luce! be magnified! I am all plot!
All Stratagem! My Brother is in town;
My Lady Ample's Fame hath caught him Girl:
I'm told he means an instant visit hither.
What happiness from this?
As hee departs
From hence, I'have laid two Instruments, Meager
And Pert, that shall encounter his long ears:
With tales less true than those of Troy, they shall
Endanger him maugre his active wits,
And mount thee little Luce, that thou may reach
To dandle Fate, to sooth them till they give
Vs leave to make, or alter destinies!
You are too loud! whisper your plots within.
You call, and govern Gentlemen, as if
Your business were above your haste, but know
You where you are?
Sir Tyrant Thrift dwells here!
The Lady Ample is his Ward; she is
Within, and wee must see her; No excuses!
She is not old enough to be locked up
To sey new Perukes, or purge for Rheum.
Tell her, that a young devout Knight, made gray
By a charm (t'avoid temptation in others)
Would speak with her.
I shall deliver you both,
These Tigers hunt their pray with a strange Nosthrill!
Come unsent for so aptly to our wish?—
But this Sir Morglay will not doe, In troth
You break our Covenants.
Why hear me plead!
From forty to fourscore, the written Law
Runs so; this Lady's in her Nonage yet,
And you to press into my company
Where visitations are decreed mine own,
Argues a heat that my rebukes must cool.
What should I do? would have me keep my chamber
And mend Dark Lanterns; invent steel Mattocks,
Or weigh Gun-powder, solitude leads me
To nothing less than Treason; I shall conspire
To dig, and blow up all rather than sit still.
Follow your Task! you see how early I
Have found this young Inheritrix, go seek
The aged out; Bones, unto Bones! Like Cards
Ill packed, shuffle your selves together till
You each dislike the game!
Tic the cause I
Come for; a withered Mid-wife, or a Nurse
Who draws her lips together, like an eye
That gives the cautionary wink, are those
I would find here; so they be rich, and fat!—
My Lady understands your haste, and she
Her self, consults now in affairs of haste,
But yet will hastily approach, to see
You Gentlemen, and then in haste return!
What's this the Superscription of a Packet?
Now does my blood wamble! you! Sucket eater!
These Covenants (Knight) will never be observed,
Il'e sue the forfeiture, leave you so poor
Till for preferment you become an E•n•uch,
And sing a Treble; in a Chauntry, Knight.
Stay Gentlemen! good souls! they have seen (Lucy)
The Country Turtles bill, and think our lips
In the Town, and Court, are worn for the same use.
Pray how doe the Ladies there? poor Villagers
They churn still, keep their Dayrles, and lay up
For Embroidered Mantles, against the Heirs birth!
Who is begot in the Christmas Holidays.
Yes surely, when the Spirit of Mince-Pie
Reigns in the blood.
What? penny Gleek I hope's
In fashion yet, and the treacherous foot
Not wanting on the Table frame to jog
The Husband, lest he lose the Noble that
Should pay the Grocers Man, for Spice and Fruit!
The good old Butler shares too, with his Lady
In the Box, bating for Candles that were burnt
After the Clock struck Ten.
He doth indeed,
Poor Country Madams they are in Subjection still,
The beasts their husbands make 'em sit on three
Legged stools, like homely Daughters of an Hospital,
To knit sockes for their cloven feet.
And when these Tyrant! Husbands too, grow old
(A• th•y have still th'impudence to live long)
Good Ladies they are fine to waste the sweet
And pleasant seasons of the day, in boiling
•ellies for them, and rolling little Pills
Of Cambric Lint to stuff their hollow teeth.
And then the Evenings (warrant ye) they spend
With mother Spectacle the Curats wife,
Who does inveigh against curling and died Cheeks,
Heaves her devout impatient nose at oil
Of Iessamin, and thinks powder of Paris more
Profane then th'ashes of a Romish Martyr.
And in the days of joy, and triumph Sir,
Which come as Seldom to them as new gowns
Then humble wretches, they doe frisk and dance
In narrow Parlers, to a single Fiddle,
That squekes forth tunes, like a departing Pig.
Whilst the mad Hinds, shake from their feet more dirt
Then did the Cedar-Rootes, that danced to Orpheus.
Doe they not power their wine too, from an Ewre,
Or small guilt Cruise, like Orange-water kept
To sprinkle holiday Beards?
And when a Stranger comes, send seven miles post
By Moone-shine, for another pint?
All these indeed are heavy truths, but what
Doe you (th'exemplar Madams of the Town?)
Play away your youth, as our hasty Gamesters
Their light Gold, not with desire to lose it,
But in a fond mistake that it will fit
No other use?
And then reserve your age
As superstitious Sinners ill got wealth
Perhaps for'th Church, perhaps for Hospitals.
If rich you come to Court, there learn to be
At charge to teach your Paraqueeto's French,
And then allow them their Interpreters,
Least the Sage Foul should lose their wisdom on
Such Pages of the presence, and the Guard
As have not past the Seas.
But if you're poor,
Like wanton Monkeys, chained from Fruit,
You feed upon the itch of your own Tails.
Rose-Vineger to wash that Ruffians mouth!
They come to live here by their Wits, let them use'em!
They have so few, and those they spend so fast,
They will leave none remaining to maintain them.
You shall maintain us; a community
The subtle have decreed of late: You shall
Endow us with your Bodies, and your Goods;
Yet use no manacles called dull Matrimony
To obliege affection against wise Nature,
Where it is lost (perhaps) through a disparity
Of years, or justly through distaste of crimes.
Most excellent Resolves!
But if you'll needs marry,
Expect not a single 〈◊〉 for a Jointure;
Not so much Land as will allow a Grasshopper
A Salad!
I would no more doubt t'enjoy
You two in all variety of wishes,
(Were it not for certain Covenants that I lately
Signed to in my drink) then I would fear Usury
In a small Poet, or a cast Corporal.
You would not!
But look to your old Widows!
There my title's good; see they be rich too;
Lest I shall leave their Twins upon the Parish,
To whom the Deputy of the Ward will deny
Blew Coats at Easter, Loaves at Funerals,
Cause they were Sons of an old Country Wit!
Why all for Widows Sir, can nothing that
Is young affect your mouldy appetite?
No in sooth, Damsels at your years are wont
To talk too much over their Marmalade,
They cannot fare well, but all the Town must hear't!
Their love's so full of praises, and so loud,
A man may with less noise, lye with a Drum!
Think you so Sir?
Give me an old widow that commits Sin
With the gravity of a corrupt Judge,
Accepts of Benefits in the dark, and can
Conceal them from the light.—
Pray Sir allow me but your ear aside!
Though this rude Clime in the Clough, presume
In his desires more than his strength can justify,
You should have nobler kindness than to think
All Ladies relish of an appetite,
Bad as the worst your evil chance hath found.
All are alike to me: at least, I'll make
Them so, with thin persuasions, and a short
Expense of time.
Then I have cast away
My sight; my eyes have looked themselves into
A strong disease, but they shall bleed for it.
Troth Lady mine, I find small remedy!
Why came you hither Sir, she that shall sigh
Her easy spirits into wind for you,
Must not have hope the kindness of your breath
Will ere recover her.
What doe I hear? Hymen defend?
But three good corners to your little heart,
And two already broiling on Loves Altar?
Does this become her Ginet, speak?
As age, and half a smock would become me.
You have caught her Pallatine; insinuate Rogue?—
Love him, you must recant, or the small God
And I shall quarrel, when wee meet in the Clouds.
S'light, see how she stands, speak to her.
Peace Knight! it is apt cunning that we go;
Disdain is like to water poured on Ice,
Quenches the flame a while to raise it higher.
Engine show them their way. —
It lies here Gentlemen!—
There needs small sūmons, we are gone! but do you hear,
We will receive no Letters, we, though sent
By the incorporeal spy your Dwarf, or Audrey
Of the Chamber, that would deliver them
With as much caution, as they were Attachments
Upon money newly paid.
Nor no message
From the old Widow your Mother (if you
Have one) no, though she send for me when she
Is giving up her testy Ghost; and lies
Half drowned in Rheum, those floods of Rheum, in which
Her Maids doe daily dive to seek the Teeth
She coughed out last. —
Lass! good old Gentleman!
Wee shall see him shortly in as many Nightcaps,
As would make sick Mahomet a Turbaned
For the Winter.
Are they gone Luce?
Not like the hours, for they'll return again
Ere long▪ O you carried your false love rarely!
How impudent these Country fellows are?
He thinks you're caught; he has you between's teeth,
And intends you for the very next bit
He means to swallow.
Luce, I have a thousand thoughts
More than a Kerchief can keep in: Quick Girl!
Let us consult, and thou shalt find what silly Snipes
These witty Gentlemen shall prove, and in
Their own confession too, or I'll cry Flounders else,
And walk with my Petti-coat tucked up like
A long maid of Almaineny.
Don Meager, and Don Pert, you neither found
These imbroaderd skins in your mothers womb:
Surely Natures Wardrobe is not thus laced!
We flourish Pall, by th'Charter of thy smiles,
A little magnified, with show, and thought
Of our new plot.
The chambers bravely hung!
To thy own wish, a Bed and Canopy
Prepared all from our numbered pence; if it
Should fail, Meager, and I, must creep into
Our quondam rags, a transmigration Pall,
Which our Divinity can ill endure.
If I have more left t'maintaine a large stomach,
And a long Bladder, than one comely Shilling,
Together with a single ounce of Hope;
I am the Son of a Carman.
Doe you suspect my pro∣phecies,
That am your Mint, your grand Exchequer?
Pall, no suspicions Pall, but we that embark
Our whole stock in one vessel, would be glad
To have all Pirates o'shore, and the winds
In a calm humour!
How fares th'intelligence?
I left um at the Lady Ample's house
This street they needs must pass, if they reach home.
O I would fine project against the old Knight,
Can we not share him too?
This wheel must move
Alone, Sir Morglay Thwack's too rugged yet,
He'd interrupt the course, a little more
Of the File, will smooth him fit to be screwed up;
Shrink off Pall, I hear 'em!
Th'hast not the art of patient leisure to
Attend the aptitude of things; would thou
Run on like a rude Bull, on every object that
Doth heat the blood? this cunning abstinence
Will make her passions grow more violent.
But Pallatine, I doe not find I have
The cruelty, or grace, to let a Lady
Starve for a warm morsel.—
Now my fine Pert!
Sir, we have business for your Ear; it may
Concern you much, therefore tic fit it be
Particular.
From whom!
A young Lady Sir.
It is a secret will exact much care
And wisdom in the delivery; you should
Dismiss that Gentleman!
A young Lady! good!
All the best Stars in the Firmament are mine!
Our Coach attends us Knight in the bottom of
The hither street, you must go home alone.
Isle sooner kill a Sergeant, choose my Jury
In the City, and be hanged for a Tavern Bush!
Will it ruin all our destinies hath built?
Come, what are those sly silk-worms there that creep
So close into their wool, as they would spin
For none but their dear selves. I heard 'em name a Lady!
You heard them say then, she was young, and what
Our Covenants are, remember!
Young, how young?
She left her Wormeseed, and her Coral whistle
But a Month since: doe they mean so?
Morglay, our Covenants is all I ask!
May be she hath a mind to me, for there's
A reverend humour in the blood, which thou
Ne'er knew; perhaps she would have Boys begot
Should be delivered with long Beards, till thou
Arrive at my full growth, thou'lt yield the world
Nought above Dwarf, or Page.
Our Covenants still, I cry!
Faith, I'll stride my Mule too morrow, and away
To'th homely Village in the North!
Why so?
Alas, these silly Covenants (you know)
I sealed too in my drink, and certain fears
Lurk in a remote comer of my head,
That say the game will all be yours.
But what success can thou expect, since w'have
Not yet enjoyed the City a full day?
I say, let me have Woman; be she young,
Or old, Grandam or Babe, I must have Woman!
Carry but thy patience like a Gentleman,
And let me singly manage this adventure,
It will too morrow cancel our old deeds,
And leave thee to subscribe to what thy free
Pleasure shall direct.
We'll equally enjoy
Virgin, Wife, and Widow, the younger Kerchief with
The aged Hood.
What I have said, if I had leisure now
I'd ratify with oaths of thy own choosing.
Go! propagate! fill the shops with thy notched
Issue, that when our Money's spent, wee may
Be trusted, break, and couz'n in our own Tribe.
Leave me to fortune!
Do you here Pallatine.
Perhaps this young Lady has a Mother!—
No more, good night! —
I have obeyed you Gentlemen, no Ears
Are near us, but our own, what's your affair!
We'll lead you to the Ladies Mansion Sir,
It is hard by.
Hard by!
So near, that if your Lungs be good,
You may spit thither: that is the house!
These appear Gentlemen,
And of some rank! I will in!
So, so! the hook has caught him by the Gels;
And it is fastened to a line will hold
You Sir, though your wits were stronger than your purse!
Sir Morglay Thwack's gone home; his lodging I
Have learned, and there are certain Gins prepared,
In which his wary feet may chance to be
Ensnared; though he could wear his Eyes upon his Toes!
I must follow the game close! He is entered,
And ere this amazed, at the strange complexion
Of the house, but, it was the best our friendship
And our treasure could procure.
Gentlemen (if you please) lead me no further!
I have so little faith to believe this,
The Mansion of a Lady, that I think
It is rather the decays of hell; a sad
Retirement for the Fiend, to sleep in when
Hoe's sick with drinking Sulphur.
Sir you shall see this upper room is hung!
With Cobwebs Sir, and those so large, they may
Catch and ensnare Dragons instead of Flies.
Where sit a melancholy race of old
Norman Spiders, that came in with'Conqueror.
This chamber will refresh your Eyes, when you
Have cause to enter it.—
A Bed, and Canopy!
Ther's show of entertainment there indeed;
There Lovers may have place to celebrate
Their warm wishes, and not take cold: but Gentlemen,
How comes the rest of this blind house so naked,
So ruinous, and deformed?
Pray Sir sit down:
If you have seen ought strange, or fit for wonder,
It but declares the hasty shifts, to which
The poor distressed Lady is exposed,
In pursuit of your love. She hath good fame,
Great dignity and wealth; and would be loath
To cheapen these by making-her dull family
Bold witnesses of her desires with you:
Therefore, t'avoyd suspicion, to this place,
Sh'ath sent part of her neglected Wardrobe.
And will ere Time grows older by an hour,
Guild all this homely furniture at charge
Of her own Eyes; her beams can doe it Sir!
My manners will not suffer me to doubt!
Wee hope so too: besides though every one
That hath a heart of's own, may think his pleasure;
We should be loath, your thoughts should throw mistakes
On us; that are the humble Ministers
Of your kind stars: for sure, though wee look not
Like men that make Plantation on some Isle
That's uninhabited; yet you believe
We would teach Sexes mingle, to increase Men!
Squires of the Placket, wee know you think us.
Excuse my courage Gentlemen! good faith
I am not bold enough to think you so.
Nor will you yet be wooed to such mistake?
Not all the Art, nor Flattery you have
Can render you to my belief worse than
My self: Panders, and Bawds, good Gentlemen
I shall be angry, if you persuade me to
So vile a thought!
Sir you have cause!
And in good faith▪ if you should think us such,
Wee would make bold to cut that slender throat.
How Sir?
That very throat, through which the lusty Grape,
And sav'ry Morsel in the Gamesters dish,
Steal down so leisurely, with Kingly gust!
Sir it should open wide, as th'widest Oyster
In the Venecian Lake!
Gentlemen, it should!
It is a throat I can so little hide
In such a cause, that I would whet your Razor for it
On my own shoe.
Enough! you shall know all!
This Lady hath a Noble Mind; but it is
So much o'remastred by her blood, we fear
Nothing but death, or you can be her remedy!
And she is young?
O! as the April Bud!
It were pity faith, she should be cast away!
You have a soft, and blessed heart! and to
Prevent so sad a period of her sweet breath;
Our selves, this house, the habit of this room,
The Bed within, and your fair person wee
Have all assembled in a trice.
Sure Gentlemen,
In my opinion more could not bee done,
Were she Inheritrix of all the East!
But Sir the excellence of your pure fame,
Hath given us boldness to make suit, that if
You can reclaim her appetite with chaste
And wholesome homilies; such Counsel as
Befits your known morality, you will
Be pleased to save her life, and not undo her honour?
We hope you will afford her Med'cine by
Your meek and holy Lectures, rather than
From any manly exercise, for such
In troth Sir you appear to our weak sight!
Brothers, and friends a stile more distant now
Cannot be given: though you were in compass
Thick, as the Aspes, I must embrace you both —
You've hit the very Center, unto which
The toils and comforts of my studies tend!
Alas we drew our Arrow but by aim!
Why Gentlemen I have converted more
Than ever Gold or Aretine misled:
I've Disciples of all degrees in Nature
From your little Punque in Purple, to your
Tall Canvas Girl, from your Satin Slipper
To your Iron Pattin, and your Norway Shoe!
And can you mollify the Mother Sir,
In a strong fit.
Sure Gentlemen I can.
If books penned with a clean and wholesome spirit,
Have any might to edify; would they
Were here.
What Sir?
A small Library,
Which I am wont to make companion to
My idle hours: where some (I take it) are
A little consonant unto this Theme.
Have they not names?
A Pill to purge phlybotomy! a Balsamum
For the spiritual back! a lozeng against lust;
With divers others Sir, which though not penned
By dull Platonic Greeks, or Memphian Priests,
Yet have the blessed mark of separation
Of Authors silenced, for wearing short hair.
But Sir, if this chaste means cannot restore
Her to her health and quiet peace; I hope
You will vouchsafe your Lodging in yon Bed,
And take a little pains—
Faith Gentlemen, I was
Not bred on Scythian Rocks; Tigers and Wolves
I've heard of, but ne'er sucked their milk, and sure
Much would be done to save a Ladies longing!
Tic late Sir. pray uncase!—
Your Boot, believ't, it is my exercise! —
Well; tic your turn to labour now, and mine
Anon, for your dear sakes Gentlemen, I profess —
My friend shall wait upon you to your sheets,
Whilst I go and conduct the Lady hither:
Whom if your holy doctrine cannot well
Reclaim, pray hazard not her life; you have
A body Sir!
O! think me not cruel!
Pall! come in Pall!
Is he in Bed?
Not yet,
But stripping in more haste, than an old snake
That hop•s for a new skin!
If we could laugh
In our Coffin Pert, this would be a jest
Long after death: hee is so eager in
His witty hopes, that he suspects nothing.
O all he swallows Sir is melting Conserve,
And soft Indian Plum! Meager, what news?
Laid! gently laid! he is all Virgin sure,
From the crown of's head, to his very Navel!
Where are his Breeches? speak! his Hatband too!
Tic of grand price, the stones are Rosiall, and
Of the white Rock!
I hung'em purposely
Aside, they are all within my reach: shall I in?
Soft! softly my false fiend! remember Rogue;
You tread on Glasses, Eggs, and gouty Toes! —
Hold Pall! th'Exchequer is thine own! we will
Divide, when thou art gracious and well pleased!
All Gold! the Stals of Lombard-street powered into a purse.
These dear Pall, are thy Brothers goodly herds!
Yes, and his proud Flocks; but you see what they
Come to? a little room contains them all
At last; so, so, convey them in again!
Because he is my Elder Brother!
My Mothers Mayden-head, and a Country Wit,
He shall not be exposde to bare thighs, and a
Bald Crown! what noise is that? —
Death! there's old Snore
The Constable! his wife, a Regiment of Halberds.
And Mistress Queasy too, the Landlady
That owns this house.
Belike you have heard, our friend
The Bawd, fled hence last night; and now they come
To cease on Movables for rent!
The Bed within, and th'Hangings that we hired,
To furnish our design, are all condemned,
My brother too; theyle use him with as thin
Remorse, as an old Gamester would an Aldermans Heir!
No matter, our adventure's paid! follow
Pall! and Isle lead you a back way, where you
Shall climb ore tiles, like Cats when they make love.
Now I shall laugh at those, that heap up wealth
By lazy method, and slow rules of Thrift;
I'm grown the Child of Wit, and can advance
My self, by being Votary to chance,
Days of my breath, I have not seen the like!
What would you have my husband doe? it is past
One by Bow, and the Bell-Man has gone twice!
Good Master Snore, you are the Constable,
You may doe it (as they say) be it right or wrong!
It is four years rent, come Childermas Eve next!
You see Neighbour Queasy the Doors are open;
Heere's no goods, no Bawd left; I'd see the Bawd!
I or the Whores; my husband's the Kings officer,
And still takes care I warrant ye of Bawds,
And Whores! Show him but a Whore at this time
Of night (Good man) you bring a bed in faith!
I pray Mistress Snore let him search the Parish,
They are not gone far, I must have my rent;
I hope there are Whores, and Bawds in the Parish!
Search now? it is too late; a woman had
As good marry a Cowlestaffe as a Constable;
If he must nothing but search and search, follow
His Whores, and Bawds all day, and never comfort
His Wife at night: I prithee Lamb let us to Bed!
It must be late; for Gossip Neck the Nayleman
Had chatechys'd his Maids, and sung three Catches,
And a Song, ere we set forth!
Good Mistress Snore, forbear your husband but
To night; and let the search go on!
I will nor forbear; you might have let your house
To honest women, not to Bawds! fie upon you!
Fie upon me! tic well known I'm the mother
Of Children! Scirvie Fleak! tic not for nought
You boyle Eggs in your Gruel, and your man Simpson
Owes my Son in law, the Surgeon, Ten groats
For Turpentine; which you have promised to pay
Out of his Christmas Box.
I defy thee.
Remember thy first calling, thou set up
With a Peck of Damsons, and a new Sive;
When thou broakst at Dowgate corner, because the Boys
Flung down thy ware!
Keep the peace Wife! keep the peace!
I will not peace; she took my silver Thimble
To pawn, when I was a Maid; I paid her
A penny a month use!
A Maid? yes sure;
By that token, goody Tongue the Midwife,
Had a dozen Napkins of your Mothers best
Diaper, to keep silence; when she said
She left you at Saint Peters Fair, where you
Longed for Pig!
Neighbour Queasy, this was not
In my time: what my Wife hath done, since I
Was Constable, and the Kings Officer,
Isle answer: therefore (I say) keep the peace!
And when w'have searched the two back rooms, Isle to bed!
Peace Wife! not a word!
Tic time to get on wings, and fly!
Here's a noise of Thunder, Wolves, Women, Drums,
All that's confused, and frights the ear! I heard
Them cry out Bawds! the sweet young Lady is
Surprised sure, by the nice slave her husband;
Or some old frosty Matron of near kin;
And the good Gentlemen she employed to me
Are tortured, and called Bawds! If I am tan,
Isle swear, I purposed her conversion.—
Here's a Room hung, and a fair Bed within,
I take it, there's the hee Bawd too.
Cease on the lewd thing!
I pray Master Snore, cease on the Goods too!
Who would not be a Bawd? you have proper men
To their husbands; and she maintains him
Like any parish Deputy.
What are you?
I am the Constable,
Good, the Constable?
I begin to stroke my long ears, and find
I am an Ass! such a dull Ass, as deserves
Thistles for provender, and sawdust too
Instead of Grains! O I am finely gulled.
Truly as proper a Bawd, as a woman
Would desire to use?
Master Constable,
Though these your Squires of the Blade and Bill seem to
Be courteous Gentlemen, and well taught, yet
I would know, why they embrace me?
You owe my neighbor (Mist. Queasy) four years rent.
Yes and for three Bed Teekes and a Brass Pot;
Which your Wife promised me to pay this Term,
For now (she said) sh'expects her country Customers.
My Wife! have I been led to'th Altar too;
By some doughty Deacon, tan woman by
The pretty thumb, and given her a Ring
With my dear self, for better, and for worse,
And all in a forgotten dream? But for whom
Doe you take me?
For the he Bawd.
Good faith, you may as soon,
Take me for a Whale, which is something rare
You know, of this side the Bridge.
Tic indeed!
Yet our Paul was in the belly of one,
In my Lord Majors Show; and husband you remember,
He beckoned you out of the Fishes mouth,
And you gave him a Pippin, for the poor soul
Had like to have choked, for very thirst.
I saw it, and cried out
Of the City, because they would not be at charge
To let the Fish swim in a deeper Sea!
Indeed; why I was but a tiny Girl then;
I pray how long have you been a Bawd here?
Again! how the Devil,
Am I changed, since my own Glass rendered me
A Gentleman: well, master Constable,
Though every Stall's your Worships wooden Throne,
Here you are humble, and of foot; therefore,
I will put on my Hat; pray reach it me!—
Death! my hatband! a row of Diamonds
Worth a thousand Marks! Nay, it is time then
To doubt, and tremble to. My Gold! my Gold!—
And precious stones!
Doe you suspect my Husband?
He hath no need of your stones, I praise heaven!
A plague upon your courteous midnight Leaders!
Good silly Saints, they are dividing now,
And ministering (no doubt) unto the poor!
This will decline the reputation of
My Wit; till I be thought to have a less head
Then a Justice of Peace! if Morglay hear't,
He'll think me dull, as a Dutch Mariner!
No med'cine now from thought? Good! it is designed!
Come along! it is late.
Whither must I go?
To the Counter sir, unless my rent be paid!
And for being a Bawd!
Confined in Wanscot Walls too,
Like a licorish Rat, for nibbling
Unlawfully upon forbidden Cheese!
This to the other sauce, is Aloes and Myrrh!
But Master Constable doe you behold this Ring?
It is worth all the Bells in your Church steeple,
Though your Sexton, and Side-men hung there too,
To better the Peal.
Well, what's your request?
Mary, that you will let me go to fetch
The Bawd, the very Bawd, that owes this rent;
Who being brought, you shall restore my Ring:
And believe me to be an arrant Gentleman,
Such as in's Scutcheon gives Horns, Hounds, and Hawks,
Hunting Nags, with tall E•ters in Blew Coats,
Sance Number!
Pray let him go Master Snore;
We'll stay and keep the goods!
Yes, let him Husband.
For I would fine see a very bee Bawd!
Come Neighbours, light him out!
A Forest full of Palms, thy Lover (Luce)
Merits in Girlands for his victory.
I'm wild with joy! why there was wit enough
In this design to bring a Ship of fools
To shore again, and make them all good Pilots!
Madam, this Gentleman deserves to share
In your kind praise, hee was a merry Agent
In the whole plot, and would exalt himself
To your Ladyships service: If you please
For my humblesake, unto your Lip too! —
Sir you are friend to Pallatine,
And that entitles you unto much worth.
The title will be bettered (Madam) when
I am become a Servant to your beauty.
Why your confederate Pert, is courtly too;
Hee will out-tongue a Favourite of France!
But did thou leave thy Brother surfeiting
On lewd hopes?
Hee belives all woman kind
Dressed, and ordained for th'mercy of his Tooth!
And now lies stretched in his smooth slippery sheets!
O like, a wanton Snake on Camamile!
And rifled to so sad remains of wealth,
That if his resolution still disdain
Supplement from his Lands, and hee resolve
To live here by his Wits; hee will ere long
Betroth himself to Reddish women for
Their roots; pledge Children in their sucking Bottles,
And in dark winter Mornings, rob small School-boyes
Of their Honey, and their Bread.
Faith, Meager and I, used him with as much
Remorse, as our occasions could allow:
Las, he must think we shreds of time
Have our occasions too!
What (Madam) need he care?
For let him but prove kind unto his •uls,
Bring them their Heifers when their Crests are high;
Stroke his fair Ewes, and pimp a little for
His Rams; they strait will multiply; and then
The next great Fair, prepares him fit again,
For'th Cities view, and our surprise.
Why this young Gentleman hath relish in it▪
Yet when you understand the dark, and deep
Contrivements which my self, Engine, and Luce,
Have laid for this great witty Villager,
To whom you bow as foremost of your blood▪
You will degrade your selves from all prerogatives,
Above our Sex, and all those pretty Marks
Of Manhood (your trim beards) singe oft with Tapers,
As a just Sacrifice to our Supremacy!
If Sir Tyrant Thrift, your Phlegmatic Guardian
Leave but this Mansion ours till the next Sun,
We will make your haughty brother tremble at
The name of Woman, and blush behind a Fan
Like a yawning Bride, that hath foul Teeth!
Madame, tic time you were a Bed; for sure besides
The earnest invitation which I left,
Writ in his Chamber, these afflictions will
Disturb his rest, and bring him early hither
To recover his sick hopes.—
Meager! What news? Madam, the homage of
Your Lip again; A Man of War believ't;
One that hath fasted in the face of's foe;
Seen Spinola entrenched; sometimes hath spread
His butter at the States charge; sometimes too,
Fed on a Salad that hath grown upon
The Enemies own Land; but pardon me,
Without or Oil, or Vinegar!
Sir, Men in choler may doe any thing.
Your Ladyship will excuse his new plenty;
It hath made him pleasant.
Meager! what news? how doe our Spies prosper?
Sir rare discoveries! I've traced your Brother;
You shall hear more anon!
Your Ladyship forgets how carely your
Designs will waken you?
Madam, I'd fine be
Bold too, to hasten you unto your rest!
It is late (indeed) the silence of the Night
And sleep be with you Gentlemen!
Madam, good night: but our heads never were
Ordained to so much trivial leisure as
To sleep: you may as soon entreat
A Sexton sleep in's Belfry when the Plague reigns;
An aged Sinner in a Tempest, or
A jealous States man when his Prince is dying!
Pray dismiss your friends, I would speak with you.
Jig▪ Pall. Men of the puissant Pike, follow the lights.—
Pall, you are as good natured to me Pall,
As the wife of a silenced Minister,
Is to a Monarchy, or to lewd Gallants,
That have lost a Nose!
And why so Dame Luce!
So many yellow Images at once
Assembled in your fist, and Jewels too
Of goodly price, all this free booty got,
In lawful war, and I no tribute Pall?
What need it Luce? a Virgin may live cheap:
They are maintained with as small charge as a Wren
With Magots, in a Gheesemongers shop?
Well Pall, and yet you know all my extremes?
How for a little Taffeta to line
A Mask, I'm fine to mollify my Mercer
With a soft whisper, and a timorous blush;
To sigh unto my Milliner for Gloves;
That they may trust, and not complain unto my Aunt;
Who is as jealous of me as their wives, and all
Through your demeanour Pall; whose kindness I
Perceive, will raise me to such dignity,
That I must teach Children in a dark Cellar,
Or work Coifs in a Garret for cracked Groats,
And broken meat!
Luce, I will give thee Luce, to buy
What Pall.
An ounce of Arsnick to mix in thy Aunts Caudels,
This Aunt, I must see cold, and grinning, Luce,
Sealed t'her last wink, as if she closed her eyes
T'avoyd the sight of Feathers, Co••hes, and short Cloaks!
How many Angels of your Family
Are there in heaven? but few I fear, and how,
You'll be the first, that shall entitle them
To such high calling, is to me a doubt!
Why is there never a P•• there (Luce) but for
Your coughing Aunt, and you?
Had thou eyes like flaming Beacons, crooked homes,
A tail three yards long, and thy feet Cloven,
Thou could not be more a Fiend, then thou art now;
But to advance thy sins with being hard,
And costive unto me!
You lie Luce! you lie!—
There's Gold! the Fairles are thy Mintmen Girl,
Of this thou shalt have store enough, to make
The hungry Academics mention thee,
In Evening Lectures, with applause, and prayer:
A Foundresse thou shalt be.
Of Hospitals;
For your decayed self, Meager, and Pert,
Those wealthy Usurers, your poor friends.
A Nunn'ry Luce, where all the female issue
Of our decayed Nobility shall live
Thy Pensioners: it will preserve them from
Such want, as makes them quarter Arms with th'City,
And match with saucy Haberdashers Sons,
Whose Fathers lived in Allies, and dark Lanes!
Good night Pall! your gold Isle lay up, though but
T'incounter the next Surgeons Bill; yet know
Our Wits are ploughing too, and in a ground
That yields as fair a grain as this!
Farewell, and let me hear thy Aunt is stuck
With more Bay leaves and Rose-mary, than a
Westphalia Gammon.
Quick, dispatch Knight! thou art as tedious in
Thy dressing, as a Court Bribe; two ships might
Be rigged for the Straits, in less space than thou
Carienst that same old Hulk, can it be thought
That one so filled with hope and wise designs
Could be subdued with sleep, what dull, and drowsy?
Keep earlier hours than a roost Hen in Winter?
Pallatine, the design grow all Dream, Magic,
And Alchemy to me: I gave it lost!
Clove to my soft Pillow, like a warm Justice,
And slept there with less noise than a dead Lawyer
In a Monument.
This is the house; dispatch, that I may knock.
S'light stay, thou think I've the dexterity
Of a Spaniel, that with a yawn, a scratch
On his left ear, and stretching his hind legs,
Is ready for all day: O for the Biscayne sleeve,
And Bulloigne hose, I wore when I was shrive,
In Eighty Eight!
Faith thou art comely Knight!
And I already see the Town Girls melt,
And thaw before thee.
Wee must be content!
Thou know all men are bound to were their limbs
In the same skin that Nature bestows upon them;
Be it rough or be it smooth; for my part,
If she to whom you lead me now like not
The grain of mine, I will not flea my self,
T'humor the touch of her Ladi-ships fingers!
Well I had thought to have carried it with Youth,
But when I came to greet her beauties with
The Eyes of Love and wonder, she despised me,
Rebuked those haughty Squires, her Servants that
Convay'd me thither in mistake, and cried,
She meant the more Authentic Gentleman,
The reverend Monsieur, she!
The reverend Monsieur?
Why does she take me for a French Deane?
Her Confessor at least, her secrets are
Thine own; but by what Charms attained;
Let him determine that has read Agrippa.
Charms? yes Sir, if this be a Charm—or this—
Or here again t'advance th'activity
Of a poor old back!
No Ape, Sir Morglay,
After a years obedience to the Whip,
Is better qualified!
Limber, and sound Sir!
Besides, I sing, little Musgrove; and then
For, the Chive Chase, no Lark comes near me!
If she be t'ane with these, why at her peril be it!
Come Sir, dispatch! Isle knock, for here's the house▪
Stay, stay! this Lane (sure) has no great renown!
The house too, if the Moon reveal't aright,
May for it's small Magnificence be left
(For ought we know) out of the City Map!
Therein consists the Miracle, and when
The doors shall op, and thou behold, how lean
And ragged every room appears, till thou
Hast reached the Sphere, where she (Illustrious) moves,
Thy wonder will be more perplexed; for know
This Mansion is not hers, but a concealed
Retirement, which her wisdom safely chose
To hide her loose love.
Give me a Bagadg that has brains! but Pallatine,
Did not I at first persuade thee, those two
Trim Gentlemen, her Squires, might happily
Mistake the person unto whom the message was
Disposed; and that my self was hee?
Thou did! and thou hast got (Knight) by this hand
I think, the Mogul's Niece; she cannot be
Of less descent; the height and strangeness of
Her port, denote her foreign, and of great blood!
What should the Mogul's Niece doe here?
Alas thy Ears are buried in a Wool-sack;
Thou hear no News! it is all the voice in Court,
That she is sent hither in disguise, to learn
To play on the Gitarh, and make Almond Butter!
But whether this great Lady that I bring
Thee too, be she; is yet not quite confirmed!
Thou talk of the high, and strange comportment that
Thou found her in!
Right Sir! she sat on a rich Persian Quilt,
Thridding a Carckanet, of pure, round Pearl,
Bigger than Pigeons Eggs!
Those I will sell!
Her Maids with little Rods of Rose-marie,
And stalks of Lavender, were brushing Ermines skins;
Furs for the Winter! Isle line my Breeches with them!
Her young smooth Pages lay, round at her feet;
Clothed like the Sophies Sons; and all at Dice;
The Caster six Wedges a Cubit long
Cries one; another comes a Tun of Pistolets;
And then is covered with an Argosy,
Laden with Indico, and Cutchy nill!
This must be the great Mogul's Niece!
As for her Grooms, they all were planted on
Their knees, carousing their great Ladies health
In perfumed Wines, and then straight qualified
Their wild, voluptuous heats with cool Cerbet,
The Turks own Iulip?
Knock, Pallatine!
Quick Rogue! I cannot hold; little thought I
The Thwack's of the North, should inoculate
With the Mogul's of the South!—
Speak softly Master Constable, I've brought
The very hee Bawd!
Blessing on your heart Sir!
My Watch are above at Trea Trip, for a
Black Pudding, and a pound of Suffolk Cheese;
They'll ha'done straight: Pray fetch him to me,
Isle call them down, and lead him to a by-roome!
Pallatine, what's he?
The Ladies steward sir,
A sage Philosopher, and a grave Pander!
One that hath writ bawdy Sonnets in Hebrew,
And those so well, that if the Robins were
Alive, it is thought hee would corrupt their Wives.
Follow me Knight!—
Pallatine,
Half the large Treasure that I get is yours!
Good faith (my friend) when you are once possessed
Of all, it is as your Conscience will vouchsafe.
Dost thou suspect? Isle stay here till thou fetch
A Bible, and a Cushion, and swear kneeling!
My Faith shall rather cousin me; walk in
With this Philosopher — No words! for hoe's
A Pythagorian and Professes silence!
My Ring Master Constable—
Here yet my Reputation's safe! should hee
Have heard of my mischance, and not accompanied
With this defeat upon himself, his Mirth
And Tyranny had been 'bove humane Sufferance!
Now for the Lady Ample, she (I guess)
Looks on me with strong fervent Eyes; shoe's rich;
And could I work her into profit, it would
Procure my Wit, immortal memory;
But to be gulled? and by such Trifles too;
Dull, humble Gentlemen that ne'er drunk Wine,
But on some Coronation day, when each
Conduit pisses Cl•ret at the Town charge!
Well, though tic worse than Steel or Marble to
Digest; yet I have learn•d, one stop in a
Careire, taint• not a Rider with disgrace;
But may procure him breath to win the race.
Your Brother's in the house; the Letter which
I sent to tempt him hither wrought above
The reach of our desires; My Lady Sir,
Hee does believe is sick to death; and all,
In languishment for his dear love.
Pert, and Meager, though you have both good faces,
They must not be seen here; there is below,
A Brother o'mine; whom (I take it) you
Have used not overtenderlie.
S'light he must needs remember us!
We'll sooner stay t'out-face a Basilisk!
Whither shall wee go?
To Snore the Constable: Morglay is still
A Prisoner in his house; take order for's
Release, as I projected, but (do you hear)
Hee must not free him till I come.
Pall, will the dull Ruler of the night (Pall)
Obey thy Edict!
His wife will, and she's his Constable!
Name me but to her, and she does homage!
Enough, wee will attend thee there!
This way Gentlemen.
What's this, an apparition, a Ghost embroidered?
Sure he has got the Devil for his Taylor.
Good morrow Brother, Morrow!
You are in glory sir, I like this flourishing!
The Lily too, looks handsome for a Month;
But you (I hope) will last out the whole year!
What flourishing? O Sir, belike you mean
My Clothes; they are Rags, course homely Rags, believe it;
Yet they will serve for'th Winter sir, when I
Ride post in Sussex ways! —
This gaiety denotes
Some solitary treasure in the Pocket,
And so you may become a lender too;
You know, I'm far from home!
I'll lend nothing, but good Counsel, and Wit?
Why, sure, you have no Factors sir, in Delph,
Lyghorne, Aleppo, or'th Venetian Isles,
That by their Traffic can advance you thus;
Nor doe you trade in the City by retail
In our small Wares: All that you get by Law,
Is but a doleful Execution
After Arrest; and for your power in Court;
I know your stockings being on, you are
Admitted in the Presence.
What does this infer Brother?
Men of design are chary of their Minutes,
Be quick, and subtle!
The Inf'rence is
You prosper by my documents; and what
You have achieved must be, by your good Wits!
If you had had a Sybill to your Nurse,
You could not (Sir) have aimed nearer the truth.
I saw your Ears and Bags, were shut to all
Intents of bounty; therefore was enforced
Into this way; and it was at first somewhat
Against my Conscience too!
If not to vex
The zealous spirit in you, I would know why?
Good faith I've searched Records, and cannot find
That Magna Charta does allow a Subject
To live by his Wits; there is no Statute for it!
Your Common Lawyer was no Antiquary!
And then (credit me Sir) the Canons of
The Church authorize no such thing.
You have met with a dull Civilian too!
Yet Brother, these impediments cannot
Choke up my way; I must still on!
And you believe the Stories of young heirs
Enforced to sign at Mid-night to appease
The Sword Mans wrath, may be out-done by you!
I were unkind else, to my own good parts!
And that your Wit has power to tempt from the
Severe, grave Bench, the Aldermen themselves,
To rifle where you please, for Skarfes, Feathers,
And for Race Nags!
It is believed Sir, in a trice!
And that your wit can lead our reverend Matrons,
And tefty Widows of fourscore, to scale
(And in their smocks) for frail commodities
To elevate your Punk?
All this Sir, is so easy,
My Faith would swallow't, though it had a sore throat!
Give me thy hand! This day Isle cut off the entail
Of all my Lands, and dis-inherit thee!
Will you Sir? I thank ye!
But mark me Brother; for there's Justice in it,
Admits of no reproof; what should you doe
With Land, that have a Portion in your brain,
Above all Legacies or heritage?
I conceive you!
O to live here, in the fair Metropolis
Of our great Isle, a free Inheritor
Of every modest, or voluptuous wish,
Thy young desires can breath; and not obliged
To'th Plough-mans toils, or lazy Reapers sweat;
To make the world thy Farm, and every Man
Less witty than thy self, Tenant for life;
These are the glories that proclaim a true
Philosophy, and Soul, in him that climbs
To reach them with neglect of Fame and Life!
He carries it bravely! As he had felt
Nothing that fits his own remorse; but know,
Sir Eagle, th'higher that you fly, the less
You will appear to us, dim sighted Foul,
That flutter here below. Brother, farewell!
They say, the Lady of this house, groans for
Your love, the tame sick fool is rich; let not
Your pride beguile your profit!
I suspect him! Not all the skill I have
In Reason, or in Nature can pronounce
Him free, from the defeat upon my Gold,
And Jewels! it was like a Brother! but for
His two Confederates; though I should meet
Them in a Mist, darker than Night, or Southern Fens
Produce, my Eyes would be so courteous sure,
To let me know them!
Room! More ayre! if heavenly Ministers
Have leisure to consider or assist
The best of Ladies, let them show it now!—
How doe you Madam? Oh, I shall lose
The chief example of internal love
Of gentle grace, and feature, that the world
Did ever show, to dignify our Sex!
Work on! I must stand Sentinel beneath!
Is her disease grown up to such extremity?
Then it is time, I seem to suffer too;
Or else my hopes will prove sicker than she!
More cruel than the Panthar on his prey!
Why speak you not? no comfort from your Lips;
You Sir that are the cause of this sad hour!
He stands as if his Legs had taken root;
A very Mandrake!
How comes it (Lady) all these Beauties that
But yesterday did seem to teach
The Spring to flourish and rejoice, so soon
Are withered from our sight.
It is in vain, t'inquire the reason of
That grief, whose remedy is past; had you
But felt so much remorse, or softness in
Your heart, as would have made you nobly just,
And pitiful; the Mourners of this day
Had wanted then, their Dead to weep upon!
Am I the cause? forbid it gentle heaven!
The Virgins of our Land, when this is told,
Will raze the Monumental building, where
My buried flesh shall dwell, and throw my dust
Before the sportive winds, till I am blown
About in parcels less then Eie-sight can
Discern!
She listens to you sir?
If I am guilty of neglect;
Give me a taste of duty, name how far
I shall submit to love! the mind hath no
Disease above recovery, if wee
Have courage to remove despair!
O sir, the pride and scorns, with which you first
Did entertain my passions, and regard,
Have worn my easy heart away; my breast
Is emptier than mine Eyes; that have distilled
Their Balls to Funeral Dew! It is too late!
Ginet, my fears have in them too much Prophecy,
I told thee she would ne'er recover!
For my poor part, I wish no easier Bed
At night, then the cold grave where she must lie!
Luce, Luce! entreat the Gentleman to sit!
Sit near her sir! You hear her voice grows weak!
That you may see your scorns could not persuade
My love, to thoughts of danger or revenge;
The faint remainder of my breath, Isle waste
In Legacies, and Sir to you, you shall
Have all, the Laws will suffer me to give!
Who, I? sweet Saint, take heed of your last deeds!
Your bounty carries cunning Murder in it;
I shall be killed with kindness, and depart
Weeping, like a fond Infant, whom the Nurse
Would sooth, too early to his bed!
Nay Sir, no remedy, you must have all:
Though you procured her death; the world shall not
Report; she died beholding to you!
Go to her Sir, she'd speak with you again!
Sir, if mine Eyes, in all their health and glory,
Had not the power to warm you into Love,
Where are my hopes, now they are dim, and have
Almost forgot the benefit of light!
Not love! Lady! Queen of my heart! what oaths
Or execrations can persuade your faith
From such a cruel jealousy!
I'd have some testimony Sir; if but
T'assure the world, my love, and bounty at
My death, were both conferred on one, that showed
So much requital, as declares he was
Of Gentle humane race!
What shall I doe?
Prescribe me dangers now, horrid as those
Which Mid-night fires beget, in Cities overgrown;
Or Winter storms produce at Sea, and try
How far my love will make me venture to
Augment th'esteeme of yours!
That trial of your love which I request
Implies no danger Sir; it is not in me
T'urge any thing, but what your own desires
Would choose!
Name it! like eager Mastiffs, chained
From the encounter of their game, my hot
Fierce appetite diminishes my strength!
It is only this: for fear some other should
Enjoy you when I'm cold, in my last sleep;
I would entreat you to sit hear, grow sick,
Languish, and dye with me!
How! dye with you!
It were fit, you hastened her to write down all
She can bestow, and in some form of Law:
I fear, shoe's mad! her senses are so lost,
She'll never find them to her use again!
I pray Sir why?
Did you not hear what a fantastic suit
She makes, that I would sit and dye with her?
Does this request seem strange? you will doe little
For a Lady, that deny to bring her
Onward her last journey; or is it your thrift?
Alas you know, souls travel without charge!
Her little skull is tainted too!
Is hee not willing Luce?
My best dear Lady, I am willing to
Resign my self to any thing but death!
Doe not suspect my kindness now; In troth
I've business upon Earth will hold me here
At least a score or two of years; but when
That's done; I am content to follow you!
If this persuasion cannot reach at your
Consent; yet let me witness so much love
In you, as may enforce you languish, and
Decay, for my departure from your sight.
Can you doe less than languish for her death?
Sit down here, and begin! true sorrow Sir,
If you have any in your breast will quickly
Bring you low enough!
Alas good Ladies! do you think my languishment
And grief is to begin upon me now?
Heaven knows how I have pined, and groaned, since first
Your letter gave me knowledge of the cause!
It is not seen Sir in your face!
My face! I grant you; I bate inwardly!
I'm scorched, and dried, with sighing to a Mummy:
My Heart, and Liver are not big enough
To choke a Daw! A Lamb laid on the Altar for
A sacrifice hath much more entrails in it!
Yet still, your sorrow alters not your face?
Why no, I say! No man, that ever was
Of Natures making hath a face moulded
With less help for hypocrisy than mine!
Great pity Sir!
Though I endured the Diet and the Flux;
Lay seven days buried up to'th Lips like a
Deceased sad Indian in warm sand; whilst his
Afflicted Female wipes his salt foam off
With her own hair, feeds him with Buds of Guacum
For his salad; and Pulp of Salsa for
His Bread; I say, all this endured, would not
Concern my face! Nothing can decline that!
Yet you are used Sir, to bate inwardly!
More than heirs unlanded, or unjoynter'd Wives.
What shall wee doe? Sir Tyrant Thrift's come home!
Sir Tyrant Thrift!
My Ladies Guardian Sir!
He meets th'expected hour, just to my wish!
What, hath hee brought a husband for my Lady?
There is a certain one legged Gentleman,
Whose better half of limbs is wood; for whom
Kind Nature did provide no hands, to prevent
Stealing; and to augment his gracefulness,
Hoe's crooked as a Witches Bin!
Is he so much wood?
So much, that if my Lady were in health,
And married to him, as her Guardian did
Propose, wee should have an excellent generation
Of Bed-staves.
When does hee come?
To night if his slow Litter will consent;
For they convey him tenderly, lest his
Sharpe bones should grate together: Sir Pallatine,
I wish you could escape my Masters sight!
Is hee coming hither?
Hoe's at the door! My Ladies sickness was
No sooner told him, but hee straight projects
To proffer her a Will of his own making!
Hee means Sir to be heir of all: if hee
Should see you here, hee would suspect my loyalty,
And doubt you for some cunning Instrument,
That means to interrupt his covetous hopes!
Then Isle be gon.
No Sir, hee needs must meet you in
Your passage down! besides, it is not fit
For you, and your great hopes, with my dependency
On both, to have you absent when my Lady dyes;
I know you must have all: Sir I could wish
That wee might hide you here! —
Draw out the Chest within, that's big enough
To hold you: it were dangerous to have
My Ladies Guardian to find you Sir! —
How! laid up like a brushed Gown, under lock
And key! By this good light, not I!
O Sir, if but to save the honour of
Your Mistress fame, what will hee think to see
So comely, and so straight a Gentleman
Converse here with a Lady in her Chamber!
And in a time that makes for hi• suspicion too,
When hoe's from home!
I hate enclosure, I;
It is the humour of a distressed Rat!
It is retirement Sir, and you'll come forth
Again, so sage!
Sir Pallatine! —
Your Lady calls Sir, to her, and be kind!
Will you permit the last of all my hours
Should be defiled with Infamy, proclaimed
By lewder Tongues, to be unchaste even at
My death? what will my Guardian guess to find
You here?
No more, Isle in! but think on it gentle Lady!
First to bate in wordly, and then to have
My outward person shut thus and enclosed
From day light, and your company; I say
But think, if it be not worse than death!—
Locke him up Luce, safe as thy Mayden-head! —
Engine, whore's my charge Engine, my dear charge?
Sick as I told you Sir, and lost to all
The hope, that earthly med'cine can procure!
Her Physicians have taken their last fees,
And then went hence shaking their empty heads,
As they had left less brain than hope!
Alas poor Charge! come, let me see her Engine!
At distance Sir, I pray, for I have heard
Your breath is somewhat sour, with overfasting Sir,
On Holy-day Eaves!
Ha! what is she Engine?
A pure, good soul, one that your Ward desired
For love and kindreds sake, to have near her at
Her death; she'll outwatch a long Rush Candle,
And reads to her all night the Posy of
Spiritual Flowers!
Does she not gape for Legacies?
Fie no! there's a Cornelian Ring, perhaps
She aims at, cost Ten Groats; or a wrought Smock,
My Lady made now against her wedding Sir;
Trifles which Maids desire to weep upon
With Funeral Tales, after a Midnight Posit.
Thou said below, she hath made me her heir.
Of all, even to her Slippers and her Pins!
Luce, me thought Luce, I heard my Guardians voice!
It seems her senses are grown warm again;
Your presence will recover her!
Will it recover her, then Isle be gon!
No Sir, she'll straight grow cold again! On! on!
She looks that you would speak to her.
Alas poor Charge! I little thought to see
This doleful day.
Wee all are mortal Sir!
I've taken care, and labour, to provide
A Husband for thee; hoe's in's Litter now,
Hastening to Town; a fine young Gentleman!
Only a little rumpled in the womb,
With false his Mother took, after his making.
Death is my husband now! but yet I thank
You for your tender pains, and wish you would
Continue it in quiet governing my Legacies,
When I am past the power to see it Sir;
You shall enjoy all!
This will occasion more Church building;
And raising of new Hospitals; there were
Enough before; but Charge you'll have it so.
Isle make Sir one request; which I have hope,
You'll grant in thankfulness to all my bounty!
O dear Charge! any thing! Your Cousin here
Shall witness the consent and Act,
Because I would not have my vanities
Remain, as fond examples to persuade
An imitation in those Ladies that
Succeed my youthful Pride in the Town: my Plumes,
Fantastic Flowers, and Chains: my haughty Rich
Embroideries: my gaudy Gowns, and wanton Jewels,
I have locked within a Chest!
There Sir, there the Chest stands.
And I desire it may be buried with me!
Engine, take care Engine, to see it done!
Now Sir, I beseech you leave me: for twill
But make my death more sorrowful, thus to
Continue my converse with one, I so
Much love, and must forsake at last.
Alack, alack! bury her to night Engine!
Not Sir, unless she dies. Her Ancestors
Have sojourned long here in St. Bartholmewes,
And there's a Vault in the Parish Church, kept only
For her Family; she must be buried there.
I Engine, I, and let me see; the Church
Thou know, joins to my house, a good prevention
From a large walk; twill save the charge of Torch-light.
What Funeral Ghosts? the neighbours Sir, will look
To be invited!
No more than will suffice
To carry down the Corps; and thou know Engine,
She is no great weight.
And what to entertain them Sir?
A little Rose-marie, which thou may steal
From th'Temple Garden; and as many Comfits
As might serve to Christen a Watchmans Bastard:
Twill be enough!
This will not doe! Your Citizen
Is a most fierce devourer Sir of Plums!
Six will destroy as many as can make
A Banquet for an Army!
Isle have no more, Engine.
Isle have no more! nor (do you hear) no Burnt wine;
I doe not like this drinking healths to 'th memory
Of the dead; it is profane.
You are obeyed!
But Sir, let me advise you now to trust
The care, and benefit of all your fate
Presents you in this house, to my discretion;
And get you instantly to horse again.
Why Engine, speak?
In brief, you know, that all
The Writings which concern your Wards estate,
Lye at her Lawyers, fifteen Miles from hence!
Your credit, hee not knowing (Sir) shoe's sick,
Will eas'ly tempt them to your own Possession:
Which, once enjoyed, you're free from all litigious suits
His envy might incense her Kindred to!
Enough Engine, I am gone!
If you should meet the crooked Lover in
His Litter Sir (as it is in your own rode)
You may persuade him move like a Crab, backward;
For here's no mixture, but with worms.
It is well thought on Engine! farewell Engine!
Be faithful, and be rich! —
My breeding and
Good manners Sir, teach me t'attend your bounty!
But Engine, I could wish, she would be sure
To dye too night!
Alas good Soul! Isle undertake
She shall doe any thing to please you Sir!
Engine, thou hast wrought above the power
Of Accident, or Art!
If you consider't with a just
And liberal brain: first, to prevent
Th'accesse, and tedious visits of the Fiend
His love-sick Monster; and then rid him hence,
Upon a journey to preserve this house
Empty, and free to celebrate the rest
Of our designs!
This Engine, is thy Holly-day!—
What hoe! Sir Pallatine, are you within?
Is Sir Tyrant Thrift gone? open Lady! open!
The Casement Sir I will, a little to
Increase your witships allowance of air!—
But th'troth, for liberty of limbs, you may
As soon expect it in a Gally Sir,
After six Murders and a Rape!
How, Lady of the Lawn!
Sir Launcelot,
You may believ't, if your discreet faith please;
This Tenement is cheap; here you shall dwell,
Keep home, and be no wanderer!
The Pox take me if I like this! sure when
Th'advice of th'Ancients is but asked, they'll say
I am now worse, than in the state of a Bawd!
Do you know this Lady Sir?
The Lady Ample!
Her voile's off too! and in the lusty garb
Of health, and merriment! Now shall I grow
As modest as a snail that in's affliction
Shrinks up himself, and's horns into his shell,
Ashamed still to be seen.
Could thou believe,
Thou bearded Babe! thou dull ingenderer!
Male rather in the back, than in the brain,
That I could sicken for thy love? for th'cold
Society of a thin Northern Wit! —
Then Troyains wail with great remorse,
The Greeks are locked in the wooden horse!
Pall, come in Pall! tic done! the spacious Man
Of Land, is now contented with his own length.
Your Brother's come to see you Sir!
Brother! Mad Girls these I could thou believ't sirrah!
I am Coffined up like a Salmon Pie,
New sent from Den'shire for a token! Come,
Break up the Chest!
Stay Brother! whose Chest is it?
Thou'lt ask more questions then a Constable
In's sleep! prithee dispatch!
Brother, I can,
But mark the Malice and the envy of
〈◊〉 Nature: I am no sooner exalted
To rich Possessions, and a glorious men;
But straight you tempt me to a forfeiture
Of all; to commit Felony; break open Chests!
O for Dame Patience! the Fools Mistress!
Brother, you have prayed well, heaven send her you!
You must forsake your own fair fertile soil,
To live here by your Wits!
And dream Sir of
Enjoying goodly Ladies six yards high!
With Satin Trains behind them ten yards long!
Clothed all in Purple, and embroidered with
Embossements wrought in Imag'ry, the works
Of the ancient Poets drawn into similitude,
And cunning shape!
And this attained Sir by your Wits!
Nothing could please your haughty Palate but
The Muskatelli, and Frantiniak Grape!
Your Turin and your Tuscan Veale, with Red
Legged Partridge of the Genoa hills!
With your broad Liver of the Venecian Goose;
Fattened by a Jew; and your aged Carpe,
Bred in the Geneva Lake!
All this maintained Sir by your Wits!
And then you talked Sir of your Snails t'ane from
The dewy Marble Quarries of Carer,
And soused in Luca Oil; with Cream of Zwitzerland,
And Genoa pas••.
Your Angelots of Brie!
Your M•rsolini, and Parmasan of Lode!
Your Malamucka Melons, and Cicilian Dates!
And then to close your proud voluptuous Maw,
Marmalade made, by the cleanly Nuns of Lisbon!
And still thus feasted by your wits!
Deafened with tyranny! is there no end!
Yes Sir, an end of you; you shall be now
Convay'd into a close dark Vault; there keep
My silent Grandsire company; and all
The Music of your groans, engross to your own ears!
How! buried, and alive?
Brother! your hand!—
Farewell! I'm for the North! the fame of this
Your voluntary death, will there be thought
Pure curtsy to me; I mean to take
Possession sir, and patiently converse
With all those Hinds, those Herds, and Flocks,
That you disdained in fullness of your Wit!
Help Pall to carry him! he takes it heavily! —
I'll not endured! fire! murder! fire! treason!
Murder! treason! fire!—
Alas you are not heard!
The house contains none but our selves!
We bring you sir, commends from Pallatine!
I had as'live, y' had brought it from the Devil!
Together with his horns boiled to a Jolly,
For a Cordial against lust!
We mean the younger Pallatine; one Sir,
That loves your person, and laments this chance,
Which his false brother hath exposde you to!
And as we told you sir, by his command,
We have compounded with the Constable;
In whose dark house, you're now a Prisoner!
But sir, take it on my Faith; you must disburse!
For Gold is a restorative, as well
To liberty as health!
And you believe
(It seems) that your small-tinie Officer
Will take his Unction in the Palm as lovingly,
As your exalted Grandee, that awes all
With hideous voice, and face!
Even so the Moderns render it!
But Gentlemen, you ask a hundred pounds;
Tic all I've left!
Sir doe but think what a
Prodigious blemish it will be, both to
Your ingenuity, and fame, to be
Betrayed by one, that is believed, no wittier than
Your self, and lye imprisoned for a Bawd!
Sir name it not! You kill me through the ear!
I'd rather Sir, y'ould take my Mother from
Her grave, and put her to doe Penance in▪
Her winding sheet: there is the Sum! —
I'll in Sir, and discharge you!
These carnal Mulcts and Tributes are designed
Only to such vain people as have Land;
Are you, and your friend Landed Sir?
Such land as wee can share Sir in the Map!
Lo'you there now! These live by their Wits!
Why should not I take the next Key I meet,
And open this great head; to try, if there
Be any brains left, but sour Curds, and Plum-broth!
Cozened in my Youth! cozened in my Age!
Sir, doe you judge, if I have cause to curse
This false, inhumane Town! when I was young,
I was arrested for a stale commodity
Of Nut-crackers, long Gigs, and Casting Tops:
Now I am old, imprisoned for a Bawd!
These are sad Tales!
I will write down to'th Country, to dehort
The Gentry from coming hither, Letters
Of strange dire News; You shall disperse them Sir!
Most faithfully!
That there are Lents, six years long proclaimed by th'State!
That our French and Deal Wines are poisoned so
With Brimstone by the Hollander, that they
Will only serve for Med'cine to recover
Children of the Itch; and there is not left
Sack enough, to mull for a Parsons cold!
This needs must terrify!
That our Theaters are razed down; and where
They stood, hoarse Midnight Lectures preached by Wives
Of Comb-makers, and Mid-wives of Tower-Wharfe!
Twill take impregnablie!
And that a new Plantation Sir (mark me)
Is made in the Coven Garden, from the Sutlerie
Of the German Camps, and the Suburbs of Paris,
Where such a salt disease regnes as will make
Sassafras dearer than Unicorns Horn!
This cannot choose but fright the Gentry hence;
And more impoverish the Town, than a
Subversion of their Fair of Bartholomew,
The absence of the Terms, and Court!
You shall (if my projections thrive) in less
(Sir) than a year; stable your horses in
The New Exchange, and graze them in the Old!—
Iog off! there's Pall, treating for your liberty!
The Canopy, the Hangings, and the Bed,
Are worth more than your Rent! come, you're overpaid!
Besides, the Gentleman's betrayed! hee is no Bawd!
Truly, a very civil Gentleman!
Alas, hee hath only roared, and sworn, and cursed
Since hee was t'ane: no bawdry Isle assure ye!
Gossip Queasy! what a good'yer would ye have?
I am content, if you and I were friends!
Come, come agree! it is I that ever bleed,
And suffer in your wars!
Sweet Master Pallatine, here me but speak!
Have I not often said, Why neighbour Queasy,
Come to my house; besides, your Daughter Mall,
You know, last Pompeon time, dined with me thrice!
When my child's best yellow stockings were missing;
And a new Pewter Porringer marked with P. L.
I for Elizabeth Snore!
The Pewterer that marked it was my Uncle!
Why, did my Daughter steal your goods?
You hear me say nothing! but there is
As bad as this (I warrant ye) learned at
The Back-house! Isle have an Oven o'mine own shortly!
Come, no more words! there's to reconcile you
In Burnt wine, and Cake! Go, get you all in!
I'm full of business, and strange Mystery!
A hundred Pall! it was all his store; it lies
Here my brave Boy, warm, and secure in Pouch!
We'll share't anon.— What need your blush Sir Morglay,
Like a Maid newly undone in a dark
Entry? There are disasters sure, as bad
As yours Recorded in the City Annals!
Your Brother is a Gentleman of a
Most even, and blessed composition, Sir;
His very blood is made of Holy-Water,
Less salt, than Almond-milke!
My silly reprehension's were despised;
Y'would be his Disciple, and follow him,
In a new Path, unknown to his own feet.
Yet I've walked in it since; and prospered as
You see, without or Land, or Tenement.
Tic possible to live b'our Wits! that is
As evident as light, no humane learning
Shall advise me from that Faith!
Sir Knight, what will you give worthy my brain,
And me; if after a concealment of
Your present shame, I can advise you, how,
T'achieve such store of wealth, and treasure, as
Shall keep you here, th'exemplar glory of
The Town, a long whole year, without relief
Or charge, from your own Rents. This (I take it)
Was the whole Pride, at which, some few days since,
Your fancy aimed!
This was Sir in the hours
Of haughtiness and hope! but now—
Isle do it: whilst my poor Brother too; low, and
Declined, shall see, and envy it.
Live in full port; observed, and wondered at?
Wine, ever flowing in large Saxon Romekins
About my board; with your soft sarsenet smock
At night; and foreign Music to entrance?
All this, and more than thy invention can
Invite thee too.
Isle make thee heir of my
Estate! take my right hand, and your two friends
For witnesses!
Enough! hear me with haste!
The Lady Ample's dead!— Nay there are things
Have chanced since your concealment far more fit
For wonder Sir, than this: Out of a silly piety,
T'avoyd a thirst of Gold, and gaudy Pride
In the world; sh'ath buried with her in a Chest,
Her Jewels, and her Clothes; besides, as I'm
Informed by Luce (my wise Intelligence)
Five thousand pounds in Gold; a Legacy,
Left by her Aunt more than her Guardian knew!
Well, what of this?
Your self, and I, joined Sir in a most firm
And loyal League, may rob this Chest!
Marry, and will!
Then when your promise is but ratified,
Take all the treasure for your own expense!
Come let us go; My fingers burn till they
Are telling it! The night will grow upon's!
Only you and I, I'll not trust new Faces:
Dismiss these Gentlemen!
At the next street Sir!
This is at least a girne of Fortune, if
Not a fair smile. I'm still for my old Problem;
Since the living rob me, Isle rob the dead!
On my delicious Pert! Now is the time
To make our Purses swell, and Spirits climb!
Engine, draw out the Chest, and op the Wicket!
Let us not hinder him the ayre, since tic
Become his food!
Who's there? what are you? speak!
A brace of mourning Virgins Sir; that had
You died in Love, and in your Wits, would now
Have brought Roses, and Lilies, Buds of the Brier,
And Summer Pinks to strew upon your Hearse!
Then you resolve me dead!
It were good that you would so resolve your self!
She counsels you to wise and severe thoughts;
Why, you are no more mortified, then Men
That are about to dance the Morris!
Ladies, and Brother too (whom I begin
To worship now, for tenderness of heart)
Can you believe, I am so leaden, stupid,
And so very a Fish, to think you dare
Thus murder me in bravery of Mirth,
You have gone far: part of my suff'rance I
Confess a justice to me!
O, doe you so!
Hath your heart, and brain met upon that point;
And rendered you silly to your own thoughts!
Somewhat mistaken in the projection of
My journey hither! Three hours in a Chest
Among the dead; will profit more than three
Years in a Study; Amongst Fathers, Schoolmen,
And Philosophers!
And you're persuaded now, that there is relatiue
To'th maintaining of a poor younger Brother,
Something beside his Wits?
It is so conceived!
And that we Ladies of the Town, or Court,
Have not such waxen hearts, that every beam
From a hot Lovers Eye, can melt them through
Our Breasts?
Faith, it is imagined too!
That though th'unruly Appetites of some
Perverted few, of our frail Sex, have made
Them yield their honours to unlawful love;
Yet there is no such want of you Male-sinners
As should constrain them hire you to it with Gold?
You've taught me a new Music, I am all
Consent, and concordance!
And that, the nimble packing hand, the swift
Disordered shuf•lle, or the slur; or his
More base employment, that with youth, and an
Eternal back, engenders for his bread;
Doe all belong to Men, that may be said
To live sir, by their Sins, not by their Wits!
Sir, whom I love not, nor desire to love,
I am of your mind too!
Madame, a fair conversion, it is now fit
I sue unto you, for his liberty!
Alas he hath so profited in this
Retirement, that I fear he will not willingly
Come out!
O Lady, doubt it not! Open the Chest!
A little patience Sir!
Madam, we are undone, your Guardian is
At door, knocking as if he meant to wake
All his dead Neighbours in the Church!
So soon returned! it is not midnight yet!
I know the bait that tempts him back with such
Strange hast; and have according to your will
Provided (Madam) to betray his hopes!
Excellent Engine!
This Key convayes you through the Chancel to
The house Gall'ry! My way lies here; Isle let
Him in, and try how our design will relish!—
Come sir, it is decreed in our wise Counsel,
You must be laid some distance from this place!
Pray save your labour (Madam) I'll come forth!
No sir, not yet!
Brother, a cast of your voice!
She hath the Key Brother! tic but an hours
Dark contemplation more!
Madam, here me speak.
Nay, no beginning of orations now;
This is a time of great dispatch, and hast;
We have more plots then a General in a siege! —
None of the Writings Sir, and yet perplex
Your self, with so much speed in a return!
The Lawyer was from home, but Engine, I
Had hope to have prevented by my hast,
Though not her Funeral, yet the Funeral of
The Chest; Ah dear Engine, tell me but why
So much pure innocent Treasure, should be
Thus thrown into a dark forgetfulness!
I thought, I had encountered his intents!
All Sir, that Law, allowed her bounty to
Bestow, is yours; but for the Chest; trust me,
It is buried sir; the Key is here sir, of no use!
Ho, Engine! Give it me!—
And Sir, to vex your meditation more,
Though not with Manners, yet with truth; know there
Is hidden in that Chest, a plenteous heap
Of Gold; together with a Rope of most
Inestimable Pearl, left by her late
Dead Aunt by will, and kept from your discovery!
Is this true, Engine?
That precise Chit Luce, her cousin Puritan
Was at th'interring of't; concealed it till
The Funeral forms were past; and then forsooth,
She boasted that it was a pious Means,
To avoid covetous desires in the world▪
These Funeral tales (Engine) are sad indeed;
Able to melt an Eye, though harder than
That heart, which did consent to so much cruelty
Upon the harmless Treasure!
I morn within Sir too!
Give me the Key, that leads me from my house,
Unto the Chancel door!
Tic very late Sir, whither will you go?
Never too late too pray; My heart is heavy!
Where shall I wait you Sir?
At my low Gall'ry door, I may chance stay long.
This takes me more than all the kindness Fortune
Ever showed me: a descent transmutation.
I am no more your Steward, but your Spy!
There, there's more Money for your Watch; me thinks
You have not drunk Wine enough; they doe not chirp!
Your Wine mates them, they understand it not.
But they have very good capacity in Ale;
Ale Sir, will heat um more than your Beef Brewis!
Well, let them have Ale then.
O Sir, twill make um sing like the Silk-knitters
Of Cock-lane!
Meager, go you to Sir Tyrant Thrifts house,
Luce, and the Lady are alone, they will
Have cause to use your diligence, make haste!
Your dog, tied to a Bottle, shall not out-run me!
Pert, stay you here with Master Constable;
And when occasion calls, see that you draw
Your lusty Bill-men forth; bravley advanced
Under the Colours of Queen Ample, and
My self, her General!
If Ale can fortify, fear not! whore's Sir Morglay?
I'm now, to meet him in the Church-yard; th'old Blade
Skulks there like a tame filcher, as hee had
Ne'er stolen 'bove Eggs from Market women;
Robbed an Orchard, or a Cheese loft!
We'll wait your worship in this corner.
No stirring, till I either come, or send.
Pray Sir let's not stay long, it is a cold night;
And I have nothing on my Bed at home,
But a thin Coverlet, and my wives Sey Petti-coat:
She'll ne'er sleep (poor soul) till I come home
To keep here warm!
You shall be sent for strait!
Be merry my dull Sons of the Night, and Chirp!
Come, neighbour Runlet! sighing pays no Rent,
Though the Land-Lady be in love! Sing out —
With Lantern on Stall; at Trea Trip wee play,
For Ale, Cheese, and Pudding, till it be day:
And for our Break-fast (after long sitting)
Wee steal a Street Pig, of the Constables getting.
Sir, draw down your Watch into the Church,
And let um lie hid close by the Vestry door!
Is hee there already?
Fat Carriers Sir, make not more haste to bed,
Nor lean Philosophers to rise; I've so
Prepared things, that he will find himself mistaken!
Close by the Vestry door!
Right sir,
Isle to my Lady, and expect th'event of your surprise!
Follow Master Constable, one, and one:
All in a File! —
I cannot find where they have laid her Coffin!
But there's the Chest; Isle draw it out, that I
May have more room, to search, and rifle it!—
The weight seems easy to me, though my strength
Be old; how long, thou bright all powerful mineral,
Might thou lie hid, ere the dull dead, that are
Entombed about thee here, could reach the Sense,
To turn wise Thieves, and steal thee from oblivion!—
How! a Halter! what Fiend affronts me with
This Emblem! Is this the Rope of Orient Pearl? —
Now I have told you Master Constable,
The entire plot; mark but, how like that Chest,
Is to the other, where the Elder Pallatine
Lies a Perdu; Engine contrived them both!
Ho! what are these, the Constable and Watch?
Cease on him for no less than sacrilege!
Why neighbours, Gentlemen!
Away with him.
Wee shall know now, who stole the Wanscot Cover
From the Font, and the Vicar's Surplice!
Alas grave Sir, become a forfeiture
To'th King, for Sacrilege!
Hear me but speak!
No, not in a cause against the King!
Lead to's own house! he shall be Prisoner there,
And locked up safe enough.
Undone for ever!—
Why this was such a firk of Piety,
I ne'er heard of: Bury her Gold with her?
Tic strange her old shoes were not interred too;
For fear the days of Edgar should return,
When they coined Leather.
Come Sir, lay down your Instrument!
Why so?
I'm so taken with thy free jolly Nature,
I cannot for my heart proceed to more
Defeat upon thy liberty: all that
I told thee were rank lies!
How! no treasure trovar!
Not so much as will pay for that small Candle light
We waste to find it out!
I thank you Sir! —
You shall have cause, when you hear more; to this
Dark region Sir, solemn, and silent, as
Your thoughts must be, ere they are mortified.
Have I now brought you, to perceive what an
Immense large Ass (under your favour Knight)
You are to be seduced, to such vain stratagems
By that more profound Fop, your friend, my Brother!
How had I been served, if I'ad brought my scales
Hither, to weigh this Gold? but on! your brother!
Whose name (let me tell you first) sounds far worse
To me then does a Sergeant to a young
Indebted Lover, that's arrested in his Coach,
And with his Mistress by him!
You are believed: but will you now confirm
Me to your grace and love, if I shall maked
Appear, that in a kind revenge of what
You suffered Sir, I've made this false, and great
Seducer of Mankind, to suffer more.
The Legend, Talmud, nor the Alcharon,
Have not such doubtful tales as these; but maked
Appear, I would have evidence!
Then take it on my Religion Sir, he was
Laid up in durance for a Bawd before
He betrayed you to the same preferment!
Shall this be justified, when my disgrace
Comes to be known; wilt thou then witness it?
With a deep oath! And Sir, to tempt more of
Your favours on poor me, that ever mourned
For all your sufferings; know you shall now
See him enclosed in a blind Chest; where hee
Lies bathed Sir, in a greater sweat than ere
Cornelius took in his own Tub!
Here amongst Sepulchers, and melancholy bones:
Let me but see it; and I will dye for joy,
To make thee instantly my heir!
You shall; and yet ere the Sun rise, find him
Enthralled too in a new distress!
Dost want money? bring me to Parchment and
A Scriv'ner, Isle seal out two pound of Wax.—
You Sir, my nearest Ally, are you asleep?
O Brother, art thou come! quick, let me forth.
Here is a certain friend of yours presents
His loving visit Sir!—
Sir Morglay Thwack?
I had rather have seen my sister naked!
What, like a bashful Badger doe you draw
Your head into your hole again? Come sir,
Out with that sage Noddle, that has contrived
So cunningly for me, and your dear self!
Here, take my Eielids Knight, and sow'em up,
I dare not see thy face!
But what think you
Of a new Journey from the North, to live
Here by your Wits; or midnight visits sir,
To the Mogols Niece!
I have offended Knight!
Whip me with wire, headed with Rowels of
Sharpe Ripon Spurs! Isle endure any thing
Rather than thee!
Wee have (I thank your bounteous brain)
Been entertained with various consorts sir,
Of whispring Lutes, to sooth us into slumbers,
Spirits of Clare to bathe our Temples in,
And then the wholesome womb of woman too,
That never teem'd, all this for nothing sir!
Come, Isle let him forth!
Rogue! if thou love me!
Nay, let him be confined thus, one short month!
Isle send him down to Country Fairs for a
New motion made, b'a Germane Ingener!
Alas, he is my Brother.
Or for a solitary Ape,
Lead captive thus by the Hollander, because
He came aloft for Spain, and would not for the States!
Sir Morglay leave your Lantern here, and stay
My coming at yon door; Isle let him out!
But for the new distress, I promised on
His person, take it on my manhood sir,
He feels it strait!
Finely ensnared again, and instantly!
Have a good faith, and go!
Dear Brother, wilt thou give me liberty!
Upon condition sir, you kiss these Hilts,
Swear not to follow me, but here remain
Until the Lady Ample shall consent,
To'th freedom I bestow!—
Tic done! a vow inviolate!
Now silence Brother! not one curse, nor thanks—
Fate, and a good Starr speed me! though I have
Long since amazed my self even to a Marble,
Yet I have courage left, to ask, what this
Might mean? Was ever Two legged Man thus used!—
Pall, and his friend are gone, I must not stay
His sight; but after you have ceased upon him
Lead him a Prisoner to the Lady too. —
Warrant ye, though he were Gog, or Heldebrand!—
How now? What mean you Sirs?
Yield to the Constable.
It is yielded sir, that you are Constable!
But where have I offended!
Here Sir, you have committed Sacrilege,
And robbed an Aldermans Tomb, of himself,
And his Two Sons kneeling in Brass!
How, Flea Monuments of their Brazen skins?
Look, a Dark Lantern, and an Iron Crow!
Fine evidence for a Jury!—
I like this plot! The Lady Ample and
My Brother, have most rare, triumphant Wits;
Now by this hand, I am most eagerly
In love with both; I find I have deserved all;
And am resolved t'hugge them, and their designs;
Though they afflict me more, and more! Whither must I go?
Away with him! Saucy fellow! examine
The Kings Constable▪ —
I am become your Guardians Jailer, Lady;
Hoe's safe locked in the Parlour, and there howls
Like a Dog that sees a Witch flying!
I long to hear how my wise Tutor thrives
In the new defeat!
It is well you are converted!
Believe it that Gentleman deserves your thanks.
Lady seal my conversion on you Lip;
It is the first leading Kiss, that I intend
For after chastity!—
Luce, see you make the proposition good
Which I shall give my Brother from this Lady,
Or Isle so swaddle your small Bones.
Sweet Pall, thou shalt. Madam, you'll please to stand
To what I lately mentioned to your own desire?
To every particle, and more. —
Your Brother's come; this room must be his prison.
'Way Luce, away: stand in the Closet Madam,
That you may hear us both, and reach my call.
Isle stay, and see him.
No Knight; you are decreed Sir Tyrants Judge:
Go that way Sir, and force him to compound.
Isle fine him soundly,
Till's Purse shrink like a Bladder in the fire▪—
Here Sir, this is your Jail, too good for such
A great Offender.
Sacrilege! very well.
Now all the Pulpit Cushions, all the Hearse Clothes,
And winding sheets, that have been stolen about
The Town this year, will be laid to my charge!
Pray leave us Master Constable, and look
Unto your other Bondsman in the Parlour. —
This is the wittiest off-spring that our name
Ere had: I love him beyond hope, or lust,
My Father was no Poet sure, I wonder
How hee got him?
I know you curse me now.
Brother, in truth you lie, and who ere believes it.
Indeed you doe: Conjurers in a Circle,
That have raised up a wrong spirit, curse not
So much, nor yet so inwardly.
I've a great mind to kiss thee.
You have not sure?
I shall do it, and eat up thy lips so far,
Till you have nothing left to cover thy teeth.
And can you think all the afflictions you
Endured, were merited; first, for misleading
Morglay, your old friend; then, neglect of me,
And haughty over-vallewing your self?
Brother, I murmur not; the Traps that you
Have laid, were so ingenious, I could wish
To fall in them again.
The Lady Ample Sir,
There is the great contriver that hath weaved
These knots so intricate and safe: Alas, I
Was but her lowly Instrument.
Ah that Lady! were I a King, she should
Sit with me under my best Canopy,
A silver Sceptre in her hand; with which,
I'd give her leave to break my head for every fault
I did commit.
But say, I bring this Lady Sir, unto
Your lawful sheets; make her your bosom wife:
Besides, the plenty of her heritage,
How would it sound, that you had conquered her
Who hath so often conquered you?
Dear Brother, no new plots.
Six thousand pounds Sir is your yearly Rent;
A fair temptation to a discreet Lady:
Luce, hath filled both mine Ears with hope; besides,
I heard her say, she ne'er should meet a man,
That she could more subdue with Wit, and Government.
That Isle venture.
Well, my first bounty is your freedom Sir;
For'th Constable obeys no Law, but mine.
And now, Madam! Appear! —
You're welcome amongst the living Sir?
Lady, no words; if you've but so much Mercy
As could secure one that your Eyes affect.
Why, you're grown arrogant again: do you think
They are so weak, to affect you?
I have a heart so kind unto my self,
To wish they could; O we should live.
Not by our Wits.
No, no! but with such soft content; still in
Conspiracy, how to betray our selves
To new delights, keep harmony, with no
More noise, than what the upper motions make;
And this so constant too, Turtles themselves,
Seeing our faith, shall slight their own, and pine
With jealousy.
Luce, the youth talks sense now, no Med'∣cine for
The brain, like to captivity in a dark Chest.
O Madam, you are cruel!
Well my sad Convertite: joy yet at this:
I've often made a vow, to marry on
That very day my Wardship is expired:
And two hours since, that liberty begun.
Nay, hear her out! your wishes are so saucy Sir.
And know, my glory is dispatch. My Ancestors
Were of the fiery French, and taught me love,
Hot eagerness, and haste!
Let me be rude
A while; lye with your judgement, and beget
Sages on that! My dearest, chiefest Lady!—
Your braine's yet foul, and will recoil again.
No more: Isle swallow down my Tongue!
If Sir, your nature be so excellent,
As your kind Brother hath confirmed to Luce.
And me; follow, and Isle present you straight
With certain writings you shall seal to, hoodwinked,
And purely ignorant of what they are?
This is the swiftest, and the easiest test,
That I can make of your bold love; doe this,
Perhaps, I may vouchsafe to marry you▪
The writings are within.
Lead me to trial, come!
But Sir, if I should marry you; it is
In confidence, I have the better Wit;
And can subdue you still to quietness,
Meek sufferings, and patient awe.
You rap me still anew.
In Luce, our hopes grow strong, and Giantly!
To him Mistress Snore; it is hee has kept
Your Husband from his Bed so long, to watch
Him for a Church Robbery!
Ah, thou Iudas! I thought what thou'ldst come to!
Remember the Warrant thou sent for me
Into Duck-lane, because I called thy Maid Trot!
When I was fine t'invite thy Clerk to a
Fee Pie, sent me b'a Temple Cooke, my Sisters Sweet-heart!
Nay, and remember who was brought to bed
Under thy Coach house wall; when thou deuid'st
A wad of straw, and would not join thy halfe-penny
To send for Milk, for the poor Chrisome!
Now you may sweeten me with Sugar-loaves
At New-yeares-tide, as I have you Sir. —
We'll teach you to rob Churches! S'light, hereafter
Wee of the Pious shall be afraid to go
To a long Exercise, for fear our Pockets should
Be picked! Come Sir, you see already how
The neighbours throng to find you; will you consent?
Tic but a thousand pounds a piece to these
Two Gentlemen; and five hundred more to Engine.
Your crime is then concealed, and your self free.
No, he may choose, he will trust to'th kind hearted Law.
Let him, and to Dame Justice too, who though
Her Ladyship be blind, will grope hard Sir,
To find your Money Bags.
Sir you are rich▪ besides, you know what you
Have got by your Wards death; I fear you will
Be begged at Court, unless you come off thus.
There is my Closet Key, doe what you please.
Gentlemen, Isle lead you to it, follow me.
Do you use to find such sums as these beneath
An Ok, after a long March; I think sure,
The wars are not so plentiful.
Wee think so too.
You'd better trail a Bodkin, Gentlemen,
Under the Lady Ample, than a Pike
Under a German General.
We'll in for th'Mony Sir, and talk anon.
Sir Tyrant Thrift, here is your Ward come from
The dead, t'indite you for a Robbery
Upon her Ghost.
Ho! Is she alive too?
Yes, and her Wardship out, before you've proffered her
A Husband Sir; so the best benefit
Of all your Guardianship is lost.
In seven long years you could not Sir provide
A man deformed enough, to offer me
For your own ends.
Cozened of wealth, of fame! Dog Engine!
Wee must have you enclosed again: you're very
Forward with the Lady.
I will be Sir,
Until she groan! this Priest stays some what long.
How's this? troth I shall forgive thee then heartily.
I've t'ane him in the behalf of health; to chide
And jeer, for recreation sake, twill keep
Me Sir, in breath, now I am past growing.
Hark Knight! here's relish for your ears. I chose
None of your dull Country Madams, that spend
Their time in studying Receipts, to make
March-Pane, and preserve Plums; that talk
Of painful Child-births, Servants wages, and
Their husbands good Complexion, and his Leg!
New wonders yet!
What was that (Mistress) which I sealed to, hood-wink'd?
A simple trial of my confidence and love.
Your Brother has it, tic a gift to him
Of one fair Manor, amongst those many that you
Have in Possession Sir; and in this Bond,
You're witness to three thousand pounds I give to Luce!
Yes Sir, for Pall and I must marry too.
I were an Ev'nuch else, and th'world should know it.
Thou could not have betrayed me to a bounty
I more love. Brother! Give thee joy!—
You are the cause of all these Miracles:
Therefore I desire you to be my heir;
By this good day you must: for I've t'ane order,
Though I love your Wit, you shall not live by it.
My kind thanks Sir, the poor Mans gratitude.
Give you joy sweet Master Pallatine, and
Your Brother too.
And send you more such wives,
Every year as many as shall please heaven.
Tic day. Isle not to bed Sir now; my watch
Shall be drunk, at your worships wedding.
They shall, and there is Gold enough to keep
Them so, until thy reign be out.—
Laden with composition Pall.—
Tic for your sake wee groan under these burdens. —
The Offal of Sir Tyrants Trunks! Brother,
Pray know these Gentlemen, they owe you more
Money than they mean to pay now.
I remember um: But no words my Cavaliers,
And you are safe. Where shall we dine to day?
At Lucy's Aunts; we'll make her costive Beldamship
Come off; when she beholds a goodly jointure,
And our fair hopes.
First, to the Church. Lady,
Isle make your skittish person sure. Some of
Your pleasant Arts upon me, may become
A wise Example, and a Moral too;
Such as their haughty fancy well befits,
That undertake to live here by their Wits.
THe office of an Epilogue, is now
To smooth &amp;▪ stroke the wrinkles frō each brow;
To guide severer judgements (if wee could
Be wise enough) until they thought all good,
Which they perhaps dislike; And sure, this were
An over-boldnesse, raised from too much Fear.
You have a Freedom, which wee hope you'll use,
To advance our youthful Poet, and his Muse
With a kind Doom; And he will tread boldly then
In's best new Comic Socks, this Stage again.

SLaves, you have her? you have your Throats shaved with a short sword.
By what title is she yours? We fought for her.
And by our Laws you ought to stand to your Lot.
By what Laws? By the Roman Law, you Rascals? broad-sword-law; besides she looks as if she were sweet and sound, which are things you'll scarce bring a Presi∣dent, to prove your interest by.
We will not quit our shares for words; We have swords.
And no money; Go ye Rascals: do you show your teeth? Go, truss, be gone, to the next woods side, there speed with your Ploughs; do you threaten me with your cold Iron?
Your odds makes you presume, but if we meet you alone, of the Guard.
Then I'll cut thy Throat.
No, we'll spare you that labour, and have yours cut.
Yes, yes, I know thou art good at killing, by Attorney.
S'death, come away, follow, We shall a have time.
And that's all, but a wheel and a crowd, that thy end can claim,—
How now? weeping? come, dry, dry; I'll be a Father to thee. Art honest?
Dare not you be honest too?
Honest? Faith, pretty one, he that dares fight is as ho∣nest a Soldier as needs to be.
O! ye Gods. 
They are the prettiest kind of commodities, these wo∣men, that a man can deal in, there is nothing like 'em, but ready money.
Pray, Sir, leave talking, and fall to, that we may have  your leavings.
Not a bit, go home to your Doll, and fall to your cold meat, friends.
Hang her, she's old.
Speak reverently of her Age, the Jade brought great loads to our pleasure, in her youth, and must not be forgotten.
O but this, Sir, has such an excellent face.
Away, you Rogues, old chins, and naked chins, Boys of the first beard, and find distinction? must your weak stomachs have face-sauce, before you can fall to? the sex (you Varlets) was enough, when I was young; and I confess they have been sad days with me, since the Face and Petticoat came in esteem: look where she lies, (what? weeping, pretty one? now if I should dote in my latter days, and draw in at my eyes a punishment, they say the Gods are just, and may, through my doublet, punish the sins of my youth—Hum, I'll think no more on it;—Faith I must kiss thee. 
O Sir, be not so barbarous as to bring those dangers you have beaten hence; why do you lay such rude hands on me? Think you, the innocence of Maid and Virgin have no power to  guard me?
A Maid! by my faith, its strange, I should ha'jugded you at the second age, when women fall; have you no witness of what you say? I have no faith your witness, or I kiss. 
Away, unhand me, and force me not to call down a Plague to guard me, scorn not my words, if thou dost this wicked∣nos, thou wilt find the curse of an injured Maid strike as sure, as lightning, and as fatal; nor can all thy skill and courage defend thee, but despairs will find thee, and inhabit in thee, till thou art dissolved in the horrors of thy fear. But if this calm, which seems to allay  thy troubled blood, be real, upon my knees, I'll fall, and to the Gods send my Prayers for thee, and they'll prove as great a guard, and thou shalt find this good act interpose between thee and thy greatest dangers.
By this light she talks unhappily, should I keep her com∣pany, I must beg; no more of this discourse, pray.
Let me be safe in my Honour, and I'll be silent, and be∣side the reward that heaven will pay you, my Ransom shall be what you'll name.
You have prevailed, and shall be free from force; but take heed of talking of Heaven before these; to tempt them with such promises, is bidding them to their loss; for what can such fellows hope for there, but to become some odd Saints without Holy-daies?
Lieutenant, you are somewhat free in your Opinion of us.
Why, dost thou sweet heart, hope for better? look upon him has he not a promising face? Isle prophecy, Crabb, continue in thy calling, and thou art safe, for thou hast endeavoured long, and I fear not, but hast made good friends below, and may be of a good rank in hell.
Faith, Lieutenant, me thinks, you spurred fairly for∣wards, and, upon my Conscience, will be richly damned.
Who I? Faith and troth I think I shall, and yet, while  this lasts, I have good hopes; for I am of Opinion, no Man is damned that has money in his purse; nor do I see how poor folks can be saved; What noise is that?
I hear our Captains voice.
Away, take her to my quarter, and, upon your lives, no Insolence; pray step off with them, till I see what occasions this noise.
I will go, But if this be Treachery
Know, though it is easy to abuse the Gods,
Yet it is heavy for to bear their rods.
Away, you are safe.
SIR, these are some poor Rogues.
Hang 'em then for being poor.
Cannot our prayers find thy Mercy?
A pox upon your prayers, they could not protect thee; hang 'em I say.
Hold Sir, mistake not these Men, for, if I guess right, they are no beggars.
Bring the Torture then.
I believe, I know a way to gain the Truth without a Rack: There is a Wench—
I, What became of her?
She's in my power, and talks not like a beggar; by this day, she threatened me, and frighted me from my pleasure, she prof∣er'd a Ransom too, things that beggars never dream on.
Where is she? We will load her with chains, till they confess.
Patience a little, and Isle instruct you; do but threaten
to kiss her, (you understand me) and, upon my life, she'll tell all.
To the Dungeon then with these, and fetch her; but dost thou hear, Lieutenant, is she likely? is it a handsome Wench? dost thou see ready money in her face?
O, it is a proper Wench, and bravely built, such Eyes, so black, so great, of a Beauty that is currant every where, Then her Cheeks, and such Lips; ha! by this hand I could ha dwelt for ever there.
She came luckily for this Mart; what became of the Boys we took a swimming in Baio?
They are safe, and will be ready for the same freight.
And all will scarce quit cost.
Faith Captain, we have no luck of late, our old Soldiers are immortal too, they will not die, there comes no profit that way of late; When the Moor was Captain, in his years there fell as many of those rotten plums, as were worth ten thousand Drachms.
And since my reign, I cannot count a thousand. The young Cicilian, the bold Cilius, is returned too, and now I have no hope to continue another year.
Which? he that was the Prisoner?
Yes, the same, his hopes stand fair for the next Election, nor shall I envy him if he gain it, for it's a gallant Fellow, and in∣deed ought to command here.
Faith Captain, a competent ill nature (I thank the Gods) I have gained in the service, and to me it is indifferent who is Cap∣tain, for I must be Lieutenant still, till my lot falls, and yet I have so much gratitude as to be angry with old Tullius.
Why dost thou blame a Man for desiring to live?
By my Faith, when a Man desires it so unreasonably, I do; he knows he cannot live, and yet he has not so much good nature as to die; what if he may linger out this month? he'll die the next, and then your reign expires.
Marry, and the Villain is rich, and it were not amiss to be his Heir.
If he die in time; but if he live he will not be worth one Drachma; for since they told him he could not escape, The slave that grudged himself Bread before eats Gold now, and consider∣ing you are his Heir, it is your Gold he eats; would I had such Title to his Estate, by this light, I'd choke him, slave.
Thou art in the right, if he die this month, I am his Heir, by the Laws of our Band, if next, he that succeeds; and I am cer∣tain, he made his Fortune under me.
Why I, there's the point, Faith Captain, if you please, Isle go speak with him, and try what good nature will do, it may be he'll hear reason, Isle urge how much he is bound to you.
Thou may go, but I'm afraid it will be lost labour.
A party of Romans taken, where? guide my hate, that with fatal wounds I may empty their proud veins.
How now Cilius, what Rage is this?
O Teresius, can you be content, because our persons lie hid, to let our shames continue visible, and thus sleep out the suffer∣ings of our Country? I past over her bosom in my Journey, Oh! had you, with me, seen the general calamities she groans under, ruined even to a Chaos, and the wretched people, grown so dege∣narrate in their sufferings, that they begin, with joy, to obey the in∣sulting Conqueror.
It is wisdom now to obey.
Wisdom? Is Teresius grown so tame, to think so? let the Dogs, not Cilius, practise it.
Why thus impatient?
Our Country and our miseries call for our swords to pro∣tect her, and to see you thus tame makes me so.
This rage serves her as little—And it is now in vain to attempt their ruin, whose Conquest has taken such firm root.
Those that bled in the last battle thought not so.
To what rash attempts would your rage guide you! is the sad issue of that day no example which our brave Prince Facer∣tes was forced to survive, and adorn their Triumphs? But that being past, he had died upon the Hook, nor could the Intercession of Virgilius letters have deferred the doom, though he bestride him in the heat of battle, had not the far-fam'd Sophia, in his approaching Fate, called to mind that which he (though an Enemy) protected her Brother from, and in the instant kneeled and embraced Caesars knees, divinely pleading, Pallas inspired her, and with her own Beauties clothed the Virgin, and with such power the Goddess moved in her, that when Caesar gazed upon her blew eyes he left to be Caesar, and rather obeyed then granted, and to be her Father could scarce secure him from being fettered with those white wrists which circled his imperial knees.
Was Virgilius then in the Power of Facertes, that day, and did he let him escape, did he fawn upon the Roman?
It was but to return the Piety Virgilius showed his Foster-father, who (you know) protected him in that sad day our King was slain, and, by his power, he grew able to give that last blow for his Countries Freedom, which when the aged Negro saw inclining to the Romans, covetous to have his Age set in some glo∣rios Act, he charged the youthful Virgilius, but over loaded with Courage, his silver hairs sunk under the Roman, whose Piety be∣strid him like his Father, vowing to sacrifice upon that breast, sooner then wound it.
It was done like the Son of the first Julius; These are de∣generate, and succeed only in the others Fortune, not his Merit, Yet—had I been by—
What could your single Arm have done?
Killed Virgilius, in Revenge of the Rape the Roman Ploughs has made upon my Mothers womb. For other Parent then my Country, I yet could never find. Oh! that I had been that day with the brave Facertes, who knows but I might have dug a glorious Monument in some lucky wound, given in the face of this admired Virgilius, and after such a Fortune, I could have smiled, and, unshook, stepped into my gray. Or if slaved, such bold truths I would have uttered, they should not have de∣stroy'd me for cold Example, but rather because Rome durst not let me live. And yet I beg if there be any Power favourable to Cilius, let it set within my swords reach this Virgilius, this King of Men, This Sicilian scourge, that makes us kneel and kiss our Afflictions; Then, then, Teresius, thou shalt see, how with this sword Isle hunt his pale Soul to her last home.
It is a Gallant Youth, how his Spirit boils, to be in Action.
If I be chose Captain of our Band, by all our bondag'd Gods, in some disguise, Isle see that Rome, I will Teresius, and with a few wounds well dealt, gather a numerous Revenge; say, would not you obey, if I command, to join in such a Sacrifice, where, to fall, The Off'ring is as glorious, as to stand the Priest, and such at∣tempts are becoming Sacrifice for Men, let Women incense burn, it is properer for us to expiate with wounds, then Prayer or Fast∣ing, and had those we vainly dealt in Sacrifice been given upon our Enemies, our Herds had now been fair, and Rome Ashes.
May all thy thoughts prove Prophetic, and here I vow to obey what ere thou enjoin.—Though it be not safe to let thee know the Reason, nor the Interest thou hast in thy Countries sufferings.
Sir, will you come to the Examination, The Prisoners are at the Quarters.
What Prisoners?
The Romans.
Why are they not staked?
There's a Woman amongst'em.
You will not stake her, will you?
No, I make no war with Women.
If she must die, I beg the staking of her.
What is she?
More then young, and handsome, and one that talks un∣happily; I know not—
Isle go see her; Captain, Isle meet you at the Oak.
Isle to my Quarter, and attend you.
O Let me stretch my self, and thus enlarged possess my Joys; for know, my longing Soul made a Crown a Burden, and with greater joy I have put off an Empire, then thou thy chains; and now transported with my hopes, the Bird that from the Cage is flown, and broke that Prison, where she was wont to mourn, and sings all Tunes at once, That Bird, I say, cuts not the yielding Air with more joyful Freedom, then I, to find my self, and delivered from that imprisoning state.
Sir, Thus far I have obeyed your Commands, which en∣joined me to accompany you from Galley hither: But what your design should be, that makes you thus, with Joy, quit your Com∣mand there, and be pleased to find your self unknown and hid in a disguise at Naples, I cannot guess, nor shall I be so rude to ask; for sure if it were fit I knew it, you, that dare trust your sleeping self in my power, would not hide it from me.
Doe's not my Friend guess, whither I am bound?
Not the particular; but I am certain it is some great de∣sign, to conquer which, you thus in ambush lay the great Virgil∣lives.
The Body was made the Souls slave, and now but serves her to advance my ends; nor is my Mind less, or thoughts more subject to fear, then when an Army compassed me.
Sir, That you are alone makes you not less in my esteem; for it is not your power I admire, (the loss of mine own tells me, that's mortal) but your Mind; which, when Virgilius is nothing but what my Memory gives life to, will make me worcester∣ship his Monument.
No more, Prince Facertes, my Friend, and to confirm him take a secret, by which Isle bind him to me for ever; for se∣crets have stronger ties then Love, or Vows; for whilst thou hast Honour that binds thee, the other may by mistake or Passion (which Friendship's self is subject to) fall even to hate.
Then, when I have honour, I shall know your design.
When thou hast! O Facertes, my friend, it was born with thee; and where it is not natural, swords cannot acquire it; Take therefore into thy heart all the secrets of mine, and in a word, all my hopes, and all my fears, Cicely.
What of her, Sir?
She is all my hopes, all my wishes, and all my fears; and if she smile, I am fortunate: for know, my journey is to lay at her feet my self, and all that Conquest gave me. What thinks Facer∣tes? will she accept it, and not destroy the destroyer? For no∣thing can be conquest, where she suffered, but height of Murder.
What, do I hear my prayers forestalled, and those joys Our Country ought to sacrifice for, offered to us? I hope Virgilius
is not still pleased to triumph over our miseries, and throw a scorn upon that, which he thought worthy of his sword?
Have you not yet forgiven what was my fate? while these thoughts dwell in thee, I must not hope Facertes will join the power of a Brother to assist my wishes.
If you are real, you shall tread upon my neck, but if this be scorn, it is so unlike my friend, and so unbecoming the brave Fire∣gilius, that I should not fear to call him enemy, nor despair his conquest.
Real, Facertes! why when have I jested with my friend? Real? yes, as thy vows to Sophia. Never start, nor put on amaze∣meant, was I less worthy of a trust, because thou though me worcester∣thy to have been thy enemy? call me friend, and hide thy love? Either thou hast not found the knowledge, or lost the value of thy friend: I tell Prince Facertes, she, whom he sacrifices to, has great∣er ties upon me as Friend then Sister.
That I do love the divine Sophia, witness my part of heaven, which is all thou hast left me to swear by; but if thou hast gained the knowledge of that secret, by jealous guesses, purchased treachery, or with thy power hast wrought upon her sex to betray her innocent affection, draw thy sword, for, by all our Gods, no  distance, as enemy, nor nearness of Friendship shall divide us, or secure thee from my vengeance.
I am innocent, and you are angry; here read that, it will tell you, you have injured me. 
Can Virgilius pardon me, and still have patience to learn me how to conquer Nations first, and then my self, by his great Example?
Your friendship I shall never decline; and if Sophia be just, you have a warrant for you faith of mine. When I went for Galley to take command of those Legions there, at parting, we fell into discourse of you, and the never-enough-admir'd Cicely, whose beauties and virtues she always mentioned with admiration: I confessed to her, that her former descriptions had engaged my af∣fections to your Sisters fame so much, that I was resolved, in some disguise, to see her. O're-joyed with this news, she recommended you to me for a guide, And though I ever admired the honour I found in Facertes, yet I confess, I made a little stop ere I resolved to put my self in the power of one, whom I had tempted with such a ruin, as obeying my Fathers injunctions, had made me lay upon your suffering Country; to remove which doubt she blushed out this secret; I asked her then, why she suffered thee to be led in triumph? she said, she pleaded against it, what she durst, and had she loved less, she could have said more, but seeing her own guilt, she feared it might have been trouble to all: Now if this truth can satisfy Facertes, that I have not wronged him, and now I beg, he'll give me leave to return his vows, to Cicely; and now I conjure thee by that power which thou hast given her, in Sophia's name, here to bury all thy fears, all thy anger, all remembrance that I was a misfortune to thee, in return of which upon thy breast, the
Altar of friendship, I'll lay mine a sacrifice, and vow my self to fair Cicely, and her Country, a constant friend.
Oh! Sir, The joys you load your slave with, I wish you may find, when you sigh under such a pleasing burden, as the en∣joying all your wishes brings. And if my prayers be prosperous, Virgilius will prove our Physician, and the wounds he gave, but Prescriptions, and we have bled for our health only.
From hence then, I'll count my conquest over Facertes, and think I have brought more strength to our Empire, by his friendship, then his Country.
If you intend a sudden journey, give me leave to furnish you with a Galley, I have some acquaintance in the Town; I'll dispatch, and meet you presently upon the Mould: will you not send, to see whether your Sister be arrived at Baio?
Yes, and we'll touch there, as we go.
When I kissed her hands, to go for Galley, she said, she was immediately to retire to Baio.
We need not bid each other haste, since Love's our guide.
HItherto, fair one, your beauty has preserved you; but let not your pride teach you, from success, to scorn a proffered love, that brings safety with it; for me, I confess I durst not enter where that beauty guarded; there was something in that Angel from that stroke me, and I boast a wound received from you, more then a conquest over another.
This Act shows you truly valiant, and this fear, you pay the Gods, is courage: Fools and Cowards only dare their power, and you shall find success and conquest still await you, when you strike not against them; and my prayers shall invert the kind of this offering, and make a sacrifice of that which is duty: and you shall receive a reward for paying, as if you had given Hecatombs.
Faith, pretty one, I am pleased with what you say, though I understand it not, Pray, what kind of place is yours, in heaven? By this hand, I think she keeps the sweet-meats, or else, is woman Butler there.
Alas, Sir, I am so mortal, I am subject to you: for heaven, I know it not, but by faith, and that tells me, when I am injured, my curses wound, and when served, my prayers heal.
Then you have nothing to show, under the hands of those, what do ye call'um? those Gods?
Nothing, but the examples of their justice; which, with punishment, visit the wicked.
Now do I begin to find, I was a fool, and this wench a talker, By this hand I thought she had had some of the Gods in Li∣varies, at her Elbow, and there's no such thing, all is but a dream; 
but I'll be no longer fooled by my fears. Faith, pretty one, let's try whether they be at leisure, or no; or if they be, they cannot have the face to punish us for those faults they were so subject to themselves.
They are in a sad condition, that instead of repentance, seek examples for their sins; and the second is worse then the first; as insolence, is worse then weakness: why do you lay such rude hands upon me, You will not destroy what you have built?
Wait without.
Are you there? Then I am prevented, a Pox upon my  tender nature, this it is to be ignorantly wicked, and subject to fits of conscience.
Lieutenant, is that the Prisoner, you spoke of?
Yes Sir.
Thou least.
Sir.
I tell thee, its false, its here the Prisoner stands. 
That's she, I spoke of.
Leave us then.
Ye Gods, new miseries.
Why so; there's but three steps to a women's bed, liking, alone, and consent. Two of them he has past already, if she con∣sent, I would he might pay her: look how they gaze, This is Love, and I have bought wit, But if a long staff keep me from the next, let 'em geld me.
Fair one, what Country boasts these Beauties?
Sir, I can answer for my self, But for those Beauties, you speak of, let them find a friend, I have misfortunes enough to busy my time, and I find it business enough to make it appear fit to live: The thoughts of beauty, are fit for those that have fortunes like their faces, and if mine be like my fortune, (as a friend I counsel you) not to let your eyes dwell longer here, for its a dangerous habitation, Not safe to me, that am native there, and I should mourn more for your dangers, then mine own, for I know how to be just, but I could never find, how to be fortunate.
A Curse find him, and all passed Plagues be but stored for him, that would seek to deface that Temple, and what ere your modesty can urge.—Thus I'll pay my duty, for I know, such a  worship can be no new thing to the Deity, that's shrouded in their eyes.
If you kneel, I must kneel too, for the guilt is no less to take a worship where it is not due, then to pay it. 
But if the guilt be equal, pray refuse not to receive an un∣feigned one.
I dare not rise, while you kneel; for although the fault be equal, yet civility makes this fitter. 
I'll not dispute; for know, should you command, through sin, I'd serve you; and therefore you may be confident, I'll obey you, when you command me shun it; and here, with shame, I con∣fess, I came prepared with lust, hungry with sin, and looked to
have met a sacrifice to me.—But I have found the power, and now return as from the Altar, struck with holy despairs, and shall feed on what I have already fed my eyes and ears with.
Sir, I find there's honour in your breast, but I fear that safety dwells not every where; for the Soldier that you found with me, repents him of the good that saved me.
He dares as soon suck in a Pestilence, as breathe on that air, I frown in; he is my slave, and to my will his fate is tied, if he dares breathe ought but obedience, it is his own sentence; say, fairest, shall he live, By our Gods (but to serve you) he should not. What, ho! Lieutenant, Sirrah, what was it you said, to disturb this calm.
Faith little Sir, something that tended to the use of hand∣some women.
Slave, did thou look upon her, and not kneel? by her self, I swear (purer then which our Temples show nothing) if any act or word of thine shall henceforth pay less reverence here, then at the Altar, thou art Earth; mark me; this shall wound the into Earth. 
Sir it shall, and I'll call it justice, death has taken six I think, and is drunk with her beauty, a pox upon me: I must be praising her forsooth.
Sir, you need not threaten, the reward is not worth the hazard, and I am safe.
The reward! oh, that it were to be purchased at the rate of Kingdoms, then the sword might gather those Beauties! but they are neither within the compass of conquering, nor dying for, else I durst say, after all my wounds and triumphs, see your slave; but now I am lost in my despairs.
Sir, Truth has such affinity with truth, that I can scarce hide one from you, which I fear will be displeasing.
To serve you, is the first thoughts of my heart, and since I cannot, my self be happy, let me contribute my Power to make you so; dare you tell me who you are?
A vow forbids me.
Sir, the Captain expects you.
Me? I'll wait him presently: Lieutenant, see you cheerish your first act, and with honour treat this Lady, and you shall com∣mand me; your pardon, fair one, our Captain commands me hence, but you shall be safe from all dangers, but what your sadness brings, and I shall be proud to be called yours, though despised.
Witness heaven, all that honour can spare me is yours; And therefore I beg you will not injure me, to say I despise you: When we have not, we cannot pay, and I shall mourn to think I must dye your Debtor.
Madam, But I can admire and sacrifice in thoughts, pray com∣mand me to do something for you, oh! that these five tedious days were wasted, that, without a treachery, I might say, you are free, but if you can find a strength to resist these miseries, till then, By our Gods, you are as free as they, and as readily I'll obey you.
Sir, your first bounties make me happy; and since I have your protection for my Honour, all the rest, when they are blown over, bring but a pleasure in the relation.
I must go—There is a necessity that forces me to obey, I cannot else command your safety.—Lieutenant.
Sir.
Need I say again, Protect this Lady?
No Sir, By this hand, he hath gilt me with a look, Ma∣dam, will it please you to walk?
Yes Sir, Isle follow you, and I hope I shall not be ashamed to follow my Facertes, whose Soul, I think, holds Intelligence with this Soldier; and were it not that I been accustomed to see such Virtue, this would start me.
FLy, oh fly, and save your self, Madam, This Piety will give wings to your Innocence; for it is just, ye Powers,  by Miracle, to save that Miracle.
No Father, The fears and niceties of our Sex I have long since banished hence; and so many have been my days of mourning, that I thought not to have shed a tear for any new mi∣sery; But this is a loss I could not foresee, and by surprise this grief has got into my heart, look, if I have not tears left.—Oh! ye Heavens, Where is that Justice and Mercy we sacrifice to? Why were you absent when his sword struck in your own cause? He faints. Wounds, and Age! There is a kind of Sacrilege in this Murder, and I could be wicked in my anger, to see his faith∣full youth preserved thus to a punishment, and, instead of a reward, see him pursued like the wicked, and his Age set in Blood.
O excellent Maid! let not my ruin beget faults in thee;  nor do thou thus rapine at the last and greatest of my Honours; is it not better to sink thus, Then blushing say I surfeited, or go shaking out with an Ague, like a Coward School-Boy, to my Grave! Fairest, I have been bred a Soldier; and had it been as noble to yield as conquer, I could have died as easily, as killed.—Your Hand, Madam, for I find I faint, Why should I grieve to die, that have this to lay me in the Earth! O weep not, By this last smile I conjure you, weep not; But let your sadness die, and my Memory live; For witness that power, to whom I am now offering my self, as my last Sacrifice, I have all that dying Negro could wish; am I not blessed with my Countries cause to die in, while a Princess mourns at my Funeral, and an Angel Virgin is 
 sent to close mine Eyes.
He's dead.—
Hands off, This is my Prisoner.
She's finely built, I think she was furnished for the Mart.
Isle have her Clothes, I spied them first.
Isle have her, and let whose will take the rest; I de∣sire but to be lost in the wood with her, for a night, and let him take her that finds her in the morning.
He were a bold fellow, that would come after thee.
Come, leave this squabling, lest the Lieutenant come, and then you get not a bit.
Faith, and thou art in the right, and I confess I would be glad to find a way to be revenged for the last he took from us.
I could tell you how to do it, and profitably too, if you would all take my counsel.
Propose, propose.
Then quit your thoughts of this dainty bit, and lets away with her, and the rest, to Naples, and sell 'em, This fine  thing shall yield Money, that will buy Wine, and Wenches, that bring no fears along with 'em; This gay thing, should we touch her forbidden fruit, we were damned; and we are sure, our Lieutenant∣nant will pursue us with fire and sword.
Agreed, Agreed.
Thus rigged then, lets away, But we had best leave one to tell our Captain we are put to Sea, in pursuit of a Galley that bore the Roman Eagle, that will take off suspicion while we are absent; then we may return, and say, they out sailed us.
Isle stay, but remember my share.
What, dost thou think we are Thieves amongst our selves? Come, help draw these dead Bodies into the Wood, we will bury them when we return.
Bring her away too, and take care of her, lest she spoil her self, and undo our Market.
Come, pretty one.—Nay, you must part. 
Fools, you pull on your Fates, and labour to steal that Vengeance that would find you were you hidden in the Earth; and my Prophetic Soul tells me, I go but to see you punished.
What says she?
I know not what she says, but I hope she lies; do you hear, what kind of Women are your Witches?
A pox, they are old, Come Mistress, Dangers and handsome Women dwell not together; if they do, let me fall into them.—
WHat were those Romans, that fell to my share?
They were taken when the pretty Wench was taken, that Cilius would have had.
Did you deliver 'em to the Lieutenant, and bid him come hither with his Account?
I left 'em there, and bid him come to your Worship, but I found him a little troubled, he had been at the Soldiers; but the fellow is wilful.
But I have taken an order to bring him to Reason.
Whoreson Clown, refuse to pledge me or die; Rascal, nei∣there drink, nor die. Umh.
How now, Lieutenant, what passion's this?
Rogue, refuse to dye, or drink my Captains health, at my suit, and yet confess a Beer-glass would kill him.
Oh! is that the cause?
I'll swear, he is very unreasonable.
And ought to be put to death, for refusing a health.
That was spoke like my Captain, and I'll kiss his foot, nay, nay, do not hold me, let me go, let me go, I say, that I may kneel, and wish thou moist live, till I refuse a Beer-glass.
What hast thou there?
A Julep. 
What are the ingredients?
Simple Aqua-fortis, to warm his stomach. Dog, offer to live, when wine is a poison to him?
You shall not poison him.
No, I'll get his Doctor to prescribe it, and then it is Physic.
No, no poison.
Then he'll live.
No I have prevented his living, for I was afraid thou would not succeed. Thou hast no Oratory, thou can not per∣swade, Then, thou art so subject to choler; Did you mark the old woman you met at my Quarter? it was his wife. In six words, I made a price with her, to kill him, without any of the difficulties you found in persuading him.
Captain, you are weak, Captain; I not Eloquent? your Argument is weak; Death, do you think it is no more to persuade one to dye, then to hire another to kill him.
No.
Stand fair, and I'll confute you. Crabb.
Lieutenant.
What wilt thou give me to kill him.
Come, leave your fooling, and give me your Account.
Am I Eloquent then? 
Yes, yes, give me your Account, and I'll believe you Aloe∣quent, what's this?
Your Account.
My Account?
Yes, and an Eloquent Account.
What's here? paid, lent, given, and rests due; faith it's an Eloquent account indeed: But Lieutenant, is this all?
All? why would you have more?
Kind Lieutenant, I would have an Account.
Why have you not an Account? All is but this over and over; but if you'll give it me again, you shall have a longer Bill.
But Lieutenant, Eloquent Lieutenant, is that all that's left of my four thousand Sestertia.
Why, what account should I make you? would you not pay what you owe? and lend a good fellow that drinks fair; or is your Charity dead to pretty sinners in their necessity, and militant in the world?
But grant these uses, what is the sum? what paid, what lent?
Why, what you will.
Very good. But what means this, Rests due, of whom must I enquire for that?
Of me Torrafuco, lodging at the sign of the Lieutenant.
Crabb, knock, and if the Party be within, tell him, I would speak with him, and require an Account of certain living cry∣tures that were given to his trust, Women and Children.
They, Sir, are increased, the Moore has a Calf running by her side, of his own getting, the other Barberry is with Foal to; and she that you sent to day had like to have been leaped in his Collar.
The Alarm, Sir, is given, from the shore, and the Lie∣on is in chase of a Galley that bears the Roman Eagle, and Cilius waits directions at your Quarter.
Tell him, we come, and, do you hear, get the Leopards Gang ready; what will my careful Steward do, visit the sick? Pray, let the Prisoners be bathed first, and well fed, against the Mart.
Crabb.
Here, nobel Lieutenant, I am always ready to serve.—When he is in this humour I cleanse his Pockets, and that's my Revenue. 
Crabb, talking is not good for me when this fit is upon me; for I find, I am subject to grow angry, weak and drowsy.
Therefore you must master your passion, at first, ere it grow upon you; but there is no speaking to you when you are in an Argument.
I find thee an able man, and therefore I'll lean upon thee: what's that, Crabb?
What's what, Sir?
I felt a live thing in my Pocket, Crabb. 
It may be your worships breeches are torn.
I will reward thy faith with a Trust, Crabb, here, to let thee see, how dear thou art to me, keep my Tobacco-box.
Noble Lieutenant.
No thanks, but help to lay me down behind some tree, in the shade.
Your worships head is full.—I could have gilt him, the slave has drunk himself stiff.
Crabb, Crabb. 
Here, here.
Prithee stick a bough for a mark, that thou moist find me again, lest I be lost in my thoughts.
I shall, I shall.
CAptain, a word with you, I have viewed your ware, but is there any special piece amongst 'em?
As you see; they are young, and sound.
Will you give a trial?
With the eye, and the tongue, question, or search them, nothing else.
Not a little freedom alone? you were not wont to be thus hard.
Faith, we have had no luck of late, Mistress, this is the first Mart we have made this month.
And you come to our house, it shall cost you nothing.
At what price do you hold that fine thing?
That? it is the cream of our Mart, she will cost two thousand Sestertia.
Is she a maid?
I'll warrant that, if I sell her.
Come, a thousand is fair, and take you the profit of the first night.
No, altogether, or nothing, view her, she is worth the money naked.
But, my friend, I hope you have tried your self, ere now? are you fruitful? 
Yes, Mistress, and if you agree upon the price, you shall find me a faithful servant; and for the sport, if I raise you not a Crop from the Common, geld me.
Geld thee? Marry God forbid man; I'll lame thee first, art sound too? else I may live to curse your doings.
Sound as a Bell, and as ever you hope to be satisfied, buy me. 
Away, away, you're a wag, is your breath sweet, let me smell, you are very forward, pray turn, and let's see your price,  here Soldier, take your money.
Thank you, may his back never fail you.
Faith, you are too dear.—Stay, here comes the Prince Bragadine, the Viceroys Son.
How now, Soldier, what famous Prize is that?
A Greek Sir, a Virgin.
What's her price?
Two thousand Sestertia.
It's dear, and yet its a proper Wench.
My Sister not arrived yet at Baio? its strange.
No Sir, not yet, but she has been expected these ten days.
What crowd is that?
The slave-mart is held to day.
What stranger is that?
Was that fellow drunk? 
Either drunk or worse.
Is that excellent piece to be sold?
Yes Sir.
She is not, who can buy her? or who dares set a price upon that Beauty? Fairest, what Country is (at this time) cursed with your absence, for sure it is perpetual night when you are thence.
Greece, Sir, is my Country, more particulars I must not tell.
Fools that we are, to call our selves Conquerors of Greece, when one slave, one handful of that Earth, has power to conquer me, and lead me bound, even in my own Country.
It is not becoming your youth, nor fortune (how great so ever) to make a scorn of those miseries which chance throws upon the Innocent.
A strange curse find me when I scorn you; dare you not tell me what you were before this ruin?
I must not, Sir.
And are there no statues fixed in the Temples, or History, that preserves your Story? must all but your Beauty sink with this ruin?
Sir, if you will buy her, take her upon her price; if not,  give others leave to bid.
Fool, thou can not sell her, for thou know not how to value her, yet cozen thy self; what dost thou ask?
Two thousand Sestertia.
Is that all?
All! yes.
And is she free when that is paid?
Yes, if you please.
Madam, not to call you mine, but to have a power to appear yours, give me leave, with the loss of mine own, to find your Freedom. Go fetch two thousand Sestertia.—unbind her. 
What mean you, Sir?
They are proper here; and I beg you will not refuse (when Honour consents) to release me.
I hope my miseries will not beget Ingratitude in me, for I confess, it is some Joy in the midst of these troubles, to find that Honour that shines throughout this act; and though my bonds be as new and strange to me as your self, yet let me say, if there be a faulty thought that bids you hope to find a slaves heart here, you are deceived; for I would sooner sell my self to slavery, or, by a wound seek a freedom.
By thy self, by thy Angel self, I approach thee with thoughts as pure and as constant as those our Vestals wait on the holy flame with; and but that I know you would scorn a Sacrifice that's offered by profane hands, those Attributes are given to the Gods I'd kneel and pay to you.
Soldier, the Prince would speak with you.
Which is that fine thing you spoke of? 
That that the stranger stands by.
That stranger, know thou that stranger?
No, not I.
Now by the sins of my youth, it is a God-like form!—Why do they pull the Woman so? 
How now, unhand her Villain, is she not free?
You have not paid your money, and I must not lose my Market you talked, and another he's gon through with the bargain.
Another, what other?
One that will find the way to her Sex, before you'll come to kissing her hand: take her away.
Slave, dost thou glory in thy Villainies?—There, now let  him that dares claim her follow me and take her.
What have you done, Sir?
Fairest, begun a Justice I hope the Gods will finish. 
How, killed! whose act is this?
Mine, and I'll answer it; some one that knew him follow me, and take the money for this Lady.
That Woman I have paid for, and I will not quit my purchase; either yield her, or I shall force her.
I know what it is command, but never yet heard that voice (unless an Oracle) that I would have obeyed when the Speaker frowned, and thou look not like him whose voice is thunder.
Gallant Youth. 
I cannot talk, Sir, but I shall take my own.
Touch her not, yet I have patience, let her alone.—Nay, if you will be insolent, I'll punish it if I can.
Kill the Dog.
Hold Sir, as you have any sense of Honour, hold for shame, betray not thy Fame so poorly as to let a slave share in thy Re∣avenge; this base odds calls thee Coward, though thou conquerest.
Who made you a Judge of mine Honour?
So, I fear you'll find your Treachery no guard.
This way, this way he is gone, seize her and secure her to the Princes house, whilst we follow him.
VIllains, whither tends your Rage?
To revenge: yield, or thou art dead.
Slaves, leave to pursue that stranger, or I'll send those shall shake your wretched souls out of their Cases.
What's she?
What ere you are that thus have lent your pity to a stranger, in distress, may you never know what it is to want a pity.
To buy a slave?
Upon him, alive or dead, we'll have him.
Ha! the Prince engaged, draw.
HEll upon you all, where were your Mercenary swords when they should assist? S'death, to let a single stranger, in mine own door, brave me, and none by, to kill the dog? who now is escaped, to brag that he snatched from Braga∣dine a slave that he bought and paid for.
Sir, we could not Prophecy, your Highness would go out; and none called us; But for the slave, she is at home, and safe, The Sailors brought her, and are now in pursuit of the stranger.
If she be safe, let's lose no time, but follow them, lest he escape, with his glories, which which way went they?
This way, Sir.
HOw do you, Sir?
Not well.
What accident was this?
Oh! Facertes, I have seen my Fate, and I conjure thee by all our friendship, not to call me weak, nor dispute with my passion, but obey thy friend, and suddenly, or I am lost for ever; for her innocence, I fear, will be no guard against their power; and without impiety I may mistrust the Gods, for they already have slept, and let her fall into misery; oh, Facertes, I am a slave to a
slave, and to hers my Fate is bound. And Temples, not chains are due to her; and when thou see her thou wilt forgive me this change, for she has a Beauty against which thy honour must arm, else thy love will be no more a guard then was my re∣solution.
All this for a slave!
Oh! do not revile her; for when thou meet her, thy wonder and repentance will make but one thought, and like me thou wilt be lost in a maze.
This is strange.
I confess it; yet when the world was innocent before the bloody sword taught her pride by conquest, and learned the thirsty wool to drink the purple dye, till it grew enriched with the far∣fetched stains, such innocence and beauty as waits on her might any where have claimed a sacrifice.
Sir, though I grant all these beauties, yet to me they bring like miseries to those the swift lightning leaves the wretched hus∣band-man; who instead of full joys, reaps from those wounding fires nought but weighty griefs; yet I'll obey you, though in this chance I foresee my own despairs, to the little hopes I had of hap∣pines. Farewell.
Why do you conclude so? must you of necessity be mise∣rabble, if I be happy? are my friends joys the less, because mine are full?
Pardon me, Sir, if you find me troubled to see all my hopes withered, and those wounds you gave my suffering Country now despairing of a cure.
O friend! friend! has that word no power?
Yes, and that makes me slight my interest; for I am so accustomed to misfortune, it is almost natural to me: But when I think on whom you throw your fortune, youth and fame, I find a greater trouble as your friend, then as I am the lost Facertes; for you know not what she is; your love hunts thus in the dark, A slave, a thing set at sale for lust. 
That, that, Facertes makes me rage; and again by all that's powerful I conjure thee fly with me to her rescue, before such a ruin find her.
Virgilius, Sir, Virgilius stay; I must obey him, or he's lost.
Draw thy sword then, and let me see thee plead with that against her enemies, as thou did against me at Siracusa, and I'll conclude all hopes from that powerful Argument.
Sir, I never used my Arguments to spare my sword; nor was my tongue now drawn, because I meant that should sleep: See it is drawn, but in vain you hope a service from it, as your self; and therefore stay here, while I fit you with a disguise.
Be speedy then. 
I shall, but pray retire a little, this place is too public, I'll return immediately.
I'll stay at the corner.—
May I be bold?
With whom?
With you, Sir.
No.
Sir, your pardon. 
For what? I forgive thee.
Sir, I would beg.
Here, I'll prevent thee, if thou wilt let me go.—
No, Sir, my business is no money; it is your self must sa∣tisfie me.
Thou art mistaken sure, thy business was to my man.
No, Sir, I go upon no such Errands. Did you not fight for a slave even now?
Yes, what of her?
Are you he?
Yes, I tell thee.
Farewell then, till you are at leisure.
Prithee stay.
No, Sir, your man is busy.
Prithee excuse my trouble, which gave not ear to thee at first.
That's he, why stays she so long to deliver her Message? she is angry.
For once I excuse; you and look hereafter you entertain a woman with more: But to the business; the slave you wot of—(oh! that eye of yours) there lies a wag in it that will make a world of mischief,) you know not who it hath struck, pray heaven I get not a wound.
Nay, to your story, good Mother, and leave this wandering.
Mother? whose Mother, good-man boy? I am a Maid.
You mistake me, I meant, Mother of my joys, and so you will be if you can lay by this youthful fire that makes you thus subject to choler, and proceed with your story.
Yes, yes, do you jeer me?
I can endure no longer; Sir, what ere you are, take my faith for your safety, and make this house your sanctuary; something concerning that slave I would deliver to you.
Are you there, Hell and mischief find you.
Madam, who ere you are that offers this charity to a stranger; know, I dare enter though I saw my ruin in the door. For fear I never found his pale den yet, though I have oft trod those paths that led both to dangers and to death; and I should scorn my self, could I apprehend him now where beauty has the guard. Which way do your commands guide me?
That door.
Now a public Pox go with thee, that thy face may serve thee in no stead; malicious Villain, to call up my dead fears that had wont to tell me I had lost my time; proud scurvy fell∣low, to put me thus in despair; and if he had any good nature, he would have offered me a kindness, in curtsy to have com∣forted
me; I shall not eat to day; had he but called me Whore, yet it had been tolerable, for that carries youth with it. But old Mother? Rascal, none of thy Mother. But I'll be revenged.
CRabb, Crabb.
Oh!
Crabb, what's that groans?
Help, help for charity, more wounds, or remedy.
Ha! what's that? help, where am I? it is a man making his will, I'll be his heir, ha! what's here? a man wounded? this is that Rogue, Crabb; he has robbed him, and laid him here to make me accessory.
Help, if you have charity.
With all my heart, and prithee, do me the favour to live till we come to my Quarter.
If I do, I shall discover something pleasing to you.
Marry, I'll carry thee, for thy testimony, there is nothing else in this case can save me.—You are no Rogue, Crabb! Who did this?
Not he.
That's good evidence for me.
Nor I, by this hand, you must quit me, while you can speak.
I acquit you both.
Witness, witness, Crabb.
Where did you find him?
Find him? by this hand, he found me and lay down by me, as I was asleep.
Why, faith he is going a long journey, and came to take you with him, Thou art good company; but to leave this dis∣course, take my business: Our Captain would have you go visit the sick party, and see whether he will be persuaded yet or no to dye.
I hate to see the Rogue; I have such battles in my head, since morning, yet I'll go, while I am near him, and take you charge of this old man in the mean time, and see him careful∣lie dressed.
So, lean upon me, what Rogues were these to use an old man thus?
WHo's there?
Where is this old fellow, is he alive still?
Yes, Sir.
Bring him out, to take a little fresh air.
Is he come again? why did you let him in? he'll be a last∣ing a tedious affliction to me.
How now? how is it, how is it man?
Neither live nor die in peace?
Yes, dye in as much peace as you can.
When my time comes; but I hope a man may have leave to live out his days; my Physician says, I may escape yet.
Your Physitian's an Ass, and you give him too great Fees.
He tells me I may escape this fit, if I can recover mine en∣mies; for he assures me, my greatest danger is my heir.
Doe's he say so? I cry him mercy then, he is a knowing man, I believe so too: and you may, perhaps, at a great charge, recover; but, in my opinion, you had better dye, and take our prayers with you; for to recover would but incense the Captain, and lose your friends.
Sure my Captain would be loath to lose me; he ever loved me.
Why I; and yet you refuse him to dye, and think much to hasten your journey a day or two, for his sake.
Alas, I would be glad to serve my Captain in any thing that lies in my power, I'll pray for him, and I hope he will excuse me for desiring to live, and serve him.
You may flatter your self, but I'll assure you, he takes it very ill at your hands, that you, of all his company, should refuse him such a kindness, nay, not to appear willing to do it, if it were in your power; But thus, with an unnecessary charge, endeavour to live, crossing the disease that would be friend him.
Alas, I do nothing to cross it, I do but suffer.
Will you promise me that, and let the disease alone, it will be some satisfaction to him, and to us that are your friends, to see that you endeavour to satisfy him.
That I'll promise you: and from henceforth I'll seek no remedy, but put my self into the hand of his friend, as you called it.
Then you shall see how carefully we'll provide for you; for I hope you do not think, that we or he desires this, because he is loath you should live two or three days; for what were that to him, but that he is to go out then; and the next Captain will be your heir.
Alas, Sir, how can I help it? it is against my will, if any by∣die be my heir.
Well, look you keep Covenants, and endeavour to dye finely; banish your Physician and gelly-broth, I'll provide noises to keep you waking. Crabb, provide two Drums to beat here their watch a piece; and do you hear, beware of a good diet.
As you have charity, let me rest, those Drums are Daggers to me.
Nay, you'll be unreasonable again, I see it.
Oh misery of wealth!
I Confess, my first thoughts were like my self, faulty: but now I have gained by losing a desire, and I shall serve you faithfully in your love.
All my fears are, that he will violate her.
He dares not do it, I have conjured him from it, and when it may serve you, I'll boast my power, though purchased with a fault; and though your virtue secured you from that power, yet where sin has interest, mine never wanted a Command; and I know he dares not stand those frowns which your goodness melted into tears.
No more, when we have sighed for our faults, they vanish with the same air; yet I fear him, though I believe your power great; for he that dares be a coward will stop at no wickedness within his reach.
I made him ashamed of that base act, and vow not to pursue you; yet I counsel you not to stay long in this Town after you have her.
What time did he appoint to bring her?
He parted hence just as you entered, with a promise emma∣diately to return; and if he should find you here, I am afraid it would prejudice my power to serve you; else I should rejoice to be seen where so much honour dwells.
Your civilities and mercies, Madam, showed to me, a stranger, I shall with a grateful mention acknowledge through the world; pray, what time will your commands enjoin my return?
It will not be safe, Sir, to come at all; But pray be pleased to send a friend after dinner, and you shall have notice of his first departure, what time that will be; yet I know not, for I am so miserable, I cannot now be good, but with a wicked pretence, There is another door leads into a street less frequented then that you entered at.
Which way must I take to find it?
I'll guide you, Sir.
IT is well, happy discovery; now I shall be revenged at full; was it not enough to have his pride throw a scorn upon me, but she must revile me too? Fool, in scorn thou called'st me Mother, and thou shalt find the Malice of an old Woman here, that in her years, not desires, is aged; one that has lost that Mercy-kind∣ling fire which should plead for thee, and prevent that youthful Ma∣lice, whose fruitful mischiefs shall make thee old in miseries; nor shall Religion, nor beauties of thy youth, protect thee from that dangerous hate thy scorns have bred, till thy despairs have taught thee how killing a Malice hot Lust in cold Limbs pursues.—The plot is here; Jealousy, it is thou must work my ends, with that I'll assault the Prince, and from the wounds it brings, reap my Re∣avenge; for Jealousy, though it leave no scars behind, yet with de∣sperate wounds it assails the Mind.
THis, by the description of the house, should be the place that holds my miseries: from what a second height of happiness am I fallen? Virgilius is young, and I fear, the guilt of having so many ways ruined me will make him hate me for being innocent; But I am resolved, and will rather fall by misfortunes then faults; and, for the excellent Sophia's sake, will serve him till he blush to command me. And when his passion is over, he shall confess, I can bear a loss better then he rule a victory. But what are  these? I must stand close. It is he, and that (by her habit) the slave our Fortunes bow to: Gods! was it not enough we fell a sacrifice to the Julian Deity, and filled the Triumph of that Monar∣chy, that thus your rage pursues us? must all our Fortunes be slaved to a slave, and bound with chains to chains.—Ye Gods! What 
 do I see? Cicely my Sister?
What said he?
It is she. Blessed chance. Ye powers of Sicily, your hands are visible in this; forgive Facertes that confesses, Men may the metal bring, but the form of our happiness the Gods appoint us still.
FAith, Sir, hanging of 'em will be but a hindrance to your self; it is true they are Rogues, and have no Conscience, yet, at the worst, they are so much horse.
I say, hang 'em.
I say so to, if hanging were a punishment, but to them it is freedom.
No more dispute, but hang 'em slaves, to rob me now when I am quitting my Command.
Well, they shall be hanged, but they shall stay till they be hungry, and have digested their full Cups; if if you hang 'em now they're full and drunk, they'll think they have but swallowed a∣wry or surfeited; and instead of being punished, the Rogues will go out like Senators.
The old Soldier confesses they were of Sicily, and of Quality, and now sent for a Present to the Emperor, and that was the Vice-Roy that was slain, he would have yielded good money.
And one of the slaves confessed the Woman was of such a Beauty, and so ravishing, that they fought who should pur∣chase her.
There had been a fellow for your Bird at home, two such fleas would suck a Man to death.
Come, talk no more on it now, there's no remedy, Go pre∣pare those others for the Mart, and see the slaves hanged: What? how do they look? is it a handsome freight?
Yes faith, Sir, there will be a jolly number with the Boys; and I would advise you, Sir, not to show the Women and the Boys together, for they'll spoil the sale of the Wenches.
Why then we'll sell the Women first.
Who these Sicilians should be, troubles me; if we made haste we might hear some news of her at Naples, for there they were sold.
To morrow we'll provide for the journey; Lieutenant, see every thing in readiness.
Something I'll do, to give one of them her Freedom, as sure as you count her, though you refuse to sell it me.
Is the old fellow dead?
No. But I have prevailed with him to quit his Physic; and I am certain, he hath neither eat, nor drank, nor slept since.
Let's go see him.
Cilius is melancholy for the Wench.
No matter, I'd rather he were angry then lost; for though he know not his own value, I know it, Come let's leave him.
It is not Treachery to save the Innocent. I'll do it.
i'll sacrifice to Fortune, she shall henceforth be the Power I'll worship, to whom I owe this unexpected Joy, she he's tamed Lust, till it was Love, and lent only so much sin to the wick∣ed as served me; and I that could not stand safe among the Inno∣cent, find a security among the wicked.—Facertes?
Look here, ere I speak my news, Doe's not Virgilius see a Joy break like a Glory round about my Brow, to distinguish this my first happy hour?
It is thy Friendship that sympathises mine. Oh Facertes, such an accident hath happened since thou left'st me, that I must wink, rub mine eyes, and call all my Reason to secure me I do not dream.
What ever your Joys are, they must give place to mine; for they are yours and mine, not as we are barely friends, but from the assurance that we shall ever be so.
I confess thy Joys bring to me a greater Comfort then mine own, prithee give them a Name.
Do you believe a second view of her you have seen will not render her common to your eye? or, to possess those Beauties make them cheap in your Opinion? if not, I am happier then you, and when ever you enjoy your wishes I reap mine.
By our Friendship I beg this blessing from you, yet this is not strange where Friendship is not strange.
The slave is my Sister but by what accident fallen to this misery I know not.
Who? the famed Cicely?
She. Never free till now, and this fall was but to raise her to a greater height.
Then I mistrust my Joys; they grow too near a height to continue.
Are you sorry, Sir, it is she? Then it was not Chance changed our first design; is she less worthy of your Love now then before? I should be sorry to find your ignorance of what you va∣lued preferred before your knowledge; or is there some second face you have met hath blotted out this too?
O Facertes, why art thou so subject to mistake thy Friend?
If I mistake, why are you so sad? I found you full of joy.
Not that it is she makes me sad; for, witness Heaven, I have no wish beyond her,; Her Eye circles my Heaven, and till I have place in her esteem I am in Hell.
Why should that suspicion make you sad, considering you are, and what you have done for her? Besides, am not I here with a Brother and a Friends interest?
Who I am, That, Facertes, begets my despairs; for that it is I is all Arguments against me; will she not, when she sees me, call to mind a Father (whose piety the Gods spared) fallen, to sa∣tisfie the lust of Empire? are not yet the wounds bleeding, and the yoke still laid upon her suffering Country? Now judge what can be said of hope, when this pleads against me. Oh Facertes, thou hast not read thy Sister, thou look with a Brothers eye, This fate I prophecy from one sight; and let me tell thee, if she be worthy of Virgilius she must hate Virgilius.
Sir, I confess my friendship made me oversee what I was reconciled to, and now I begin to fear; yet when she shall know how I have been obliged, That mercy I found from the fair Sophia, her honour will guide her to return Virgilius; for though it makes her to resent your injuries, yet she must be just to her, and then her gratitude secures you; for though she has honour, yet she has woman too, and mercy is as great an attribute as justice, and she cannot be always angry.
Against any thing but her frown I could arm, and this night be happy. For by a strange chance I have found a way (if she consent) to release her.
By what accident came you to that power? have you seen her since?
No, but this place is too public; let's retire, and you shall know all; and when I would my Sister know, I'll read her through thy observations; but here let thy interest give way to my love.
I shall obey, Sir.
MY thoughts can find no rest; Love, wilt thou not quit me in Prison? art thou covetous of my chains too? Fool! hast thou not miseries enough of thine own? And yet I ought not to revile him; for he that hath filled my heart is full of honour, and could he guess my fate, I know he would quit a Crown, as a burden, and seek a freedom in these chains. The Gods are just, to let me fall into these miseries, that we may taste what it is our ambition imposes upon others, guilty only as I was, by being too weak.—Whose that? come in; Prisoners keep  no doors.
Madam, I come to tell you, our Captain has refused to sell me your freedom, and to morrow is the Mart at Naples; But if you dare trust him, whose misfortunes have made him appear your en∣my, I'll gage a life to save your honour, and give you freedom. The plot is already laid, and those that were taken with you I have already acquainted with it.
Sir, I shall willingly obey any directions, without a thought of fear, for sure there's no condition below this.
I will not now dispute this misfortune, but remedy it if I can; know, to morrow (lest the accident surprise you ere we put to sea) I have so ordered, that all the slaves that row in the Galley shall be loose, the Captain is my creature, and my self will still wait upon you, and be your guard; but be pleased to sit still when the word is given, and let us work your fate; But once free, com∣mand Cilius where you please, your friends too shall privately be armed.
Sir, what to say in return of this, I know not, and if you that can be thus gallant, thus good, cannot likewise from that ho∣nor that directs you now, find a reward, I fear you will lose this good deed.
It is a debt all honest men owe your virtue; and I but obey my genius, for I know not what it is, but something whispers to my soul, and bids me serve you, and when my life can purchase you a good, you shall not need command it; I beseech you no re∣ply, a Soldiers prayers (that seldom importunes heaven) I hope will protect you.—
How now, what's the news?
I should speak with you, Sir.
Madam, I'll wait upon you straight.—Are they all ready?
I have done it, they are all resolved, I gave them their lives for it; and let him swear when he sees them there, it is no matter: they are all loose and armed, their chains are but for show.
No matter for his rage, let him storm; once aboard, we are masters, for he's but one, and what's a General without obedi∣ence? his power we give, and if a multitude knew their own strength, who can command that beast?
I'll away, and send the other Galleys off before, lest they assist him.
Be faithful, and I'll make thee fortunate.
Sir, never fear it, I have said it, and I'll do it; he that re∣fuses to be a knave for a handsome woman, may he dye honest, and be executed for a knave.
Whore's the Lieutenant?
Here, Sir, I have waited this hour for you.
Come, shall we go see the sick man?
I'll follow you, Sir.
NO rest! no ease! O miserable, miserable riches! some drink, O, some drink, ere this thirsty flame hath licked up all my life, meat, any thing to satisfy this wolf here.
Have patience, it cannot last above a day or two, about which time I hope to see you quit of all the troubles of this world.
Let me sleep then, quiet those Drums, that I may dream of meat and drink; is there nothing to eat, no drink? oh misery of miseries!—Who's there? 
The Captain, Sir, and Lieutenant are come to see you.
Is it they? not a word then that I am hungry or thirsty, I'll buy thy silence at any rate.
How now, how is this sick man, where is he?
He has vomited such stuff, since the Lieutenant went; sure, that your worship gave him was good against an Impostume.
By this good day, the same water that eat Crabb's knife; what shall we do with this Rogue? a hole in his side, big enough to creep in at, will not kill him.
Let's speak with him.
Who's there? my noble Captain, and kind Lieutenant; thank you for this visit; truly, it joys me to see you both here, and  specially my noble Captain; And I am pretty lusty on the sudden; and I'll do what I do not use to do, I'll begin a health to my noble Captain, that he may see he is welcome; dost hear honest friend, fetch a bottle of Sack, I'll even drink it, come what will after it, and my friend there shall pledge me; and dost hear, reach me one  of the Gammons of Bacon out of the Chimney, it may be my Cap∣tain has a stomach,—If he has not, I'm sure I have.
I am glad to find you thus merry, and so resolved; it is the part of a good man to prepare and dye cheerfully.
I told you, you would find him well prepared; and what think you, is not Sack and Bacon better then Barley-water and soaked Chickens?
I confess, I was a fool then, but now I'll pledge you all the Sack I refused then; and to let my Captain see I resolve to dye, and serve him, look you but on, and I'll eat all the Gammon alone, but you must not tell the Physician.
Give me a knife and some Bread, fill, fill a bowl of Sack, and bring it hither. Lord! Captain, you would not think how it  rejoices me to see all this good company here.
I am beholding to you; fill, fill the sack.
Help to set me up. 
Hold, give me the Cup; I'll begin a health to the sick man.
No, pray give me leave to begin my noble Captain's? pray, pray let me begin it.
No faith, I'll begin.
Pray drink to me then. 
Why, you are very merry.
A Flincher,—Two draughts to one Cup?
This wine was musty, taste it.
Let me taste it, it may be it was an ill bottle, the wine's
good wine, admirable wine. 
Give me a bowl, I'll pledge it with a better will, because I see you do not desire it should succeed.
Alas! I desire to live but till I have drunk your health; To me good Captain, I'll pledge it with all my heart.
I hope so, I should take it ill to have you refuse me, for any nice scruple of your health.
As you did me, and cry, a Beer-grass would kill you.
Alas, I was a fool then, but now I am very desirous to re∣deem that fault; To me good Captain, your wine cools. 
Your hat Captain.
Oh! it's true.
Nay, pray drink, and spare your Complement.
Prithee give me a bit of that Gammon, to taste my Wine with.
Pray help him and me too, I would fain taste whether it be as good as the last was.
Yes faith, it is good, here Crab.
Nay pray let me drink to Crab.
No, by my faith, it shall go round.
Let me taste, was not your Wine musty too?
Here's none. 
Fill, fill Crab, and drink to me, for I long to do thee reason, and begin my Captains. 
It's an excellent Gammon, taste.
Some more, pray, to taste.
Where shall I carve you?
Any where, any where.
Sir, here's your Wine; will you pledge your health?
So, so, now I am happy; Noble Captain, a thousand times 
 I thank you, and with all my heart I'll pledge you.
Hold, a pox take you, Crab, for a cozening Rogue, you have put water in it.
No, by this hand.
No, by my life.
Let me taste, I'll not trust you.
Why taste, Noble Lieutenant; oblige me so far, as to let me drink my own health; nay Lieutenant, Noble Lieutenant. 
Now, was it not pure?
Hup! by my Faith it was pure indeed; here fill it a∣gain, give him a Brimmer.
I pray never spare me, Lieutenant, you were somewhat harsh the last time you were here, but I'll drink to you.
I was angry then, because you refused to pledge me; but now you'll drink, I am your Friend.
The Wine, whore's the Wine?
Here's none left Sir, shall I fetch another bottle?
Is all gone?
Yes, Sir.
All gone?
Go fetch another, for he shall pledge me, this trick shall not serve's turn.
Pledge me, alas, Sir, rather then my life I'd pledge you.
No, no, thou shalt not; faith Captain he's now good na∣tur'd, spare him; it will but make him sick; and troth he's an ho∣nest fellow when he is himself.
He shall pledge me.
Alas, Sir, when we are sick, the best of us are unreason∣able sometimes.
Lieutenant, Noble Friend.
I warrant thee, pray Sir let me excuse him for this time, he shall kiss the Cup only.
I swear I'll drink it, not pledge my Captain, and it were present death I'd do it, fetch some Wine?
Nay, then I'll pardon you; for since I find you willing, I'll excuse your weakness.
Let the Wine alone, Crab.
Lieutenant.
Spare your thanks. 
Lieutenant.
You know the Captain loves no Complements.
Farewell. Thank you for my Wine.
Captain.
Farewell, Farewell.
Captain, one word before you go.
What's the news?
Pray let me drink; for the truth is, I must either eat and drink or die.
How's that? and would you drink and live?
Why thou impudent Rogue; yesterday it was, if I drink I die, now some drink or you are dead.
Nay then he shall not drink, is this your professions?
Well Gentlemen, I see you're resolved I must die; let me but have my fill, and I'll die tomorrow.
Why, faith, it is but abstaining till tomorrow, and then you are sure of it.
And is it not all one how I die, so I be dead tomorrow? if it be alike to you, pray let me choose; for if Surfeit or Famine can but kill, pray let me surfeit.
I am indifferent how, so it be done.
Call me spade if it be not.
And look we have no Equivocation, but see you be dead tomorrow.
I fear he will prove a Rogue.
I hope you would not desire that I should lay violent hands upon my self.
Marry the Gods forbid, lay violent hands upon thy self; no, no, now you have consented, I'll get one shall do it for you.
Give me some drink, and do what you will with me after∣wards.
Set the Vessel by him.
But is it Sack, Lieutenant? is it Sack? excuse me if I be punctual too?
Give him a Bowl. 
Give me another, give me a third.
Farewell, Farewell, look you be dead to morrow, or by these hilts I'll apply my Dagger to thy side, and that will be a cer∣tain cure; come, Sir, will you please to go?
Captain, Captain, stay a little and see me die, give me ano∣there  Cup.
By this light, the Rogue is drunk.
Now do I not see any Reason, why I should die.
But I shall give you a Reason to morrow.
To die with all this Sack about me! No, I am immortal, let those die that are dry.—Hum, give me my sword.
Come leave him, he is drunk.
How now, what would you have? 
You'll give me leave to wait on my Captain down?
No Ceremony, good Tullius, no Ceremony.
It shall be yours Captain, indeed it shall be yours.
Alas, Sir, give him leave to take cold.
Nay, if it must be so, I obey.
Nay, why Lieutenant, what do you take me for? how do you think I have been bred?
Remember to morrow.
Remember to morrow, let to morrow remember me.
THis is the Place, Love be thou propitious, and let my fears prove false; hereabout should be the door.
It is true, I have promised him, when he comes, to deliver you; but he has vowed to use you with Honour, do you not know him?
No Madam, this is the first time I ever saw him.
Pray what Country claims your Birth?
Greece, Madam.
Pray grow not in Love with your griefs, but give some part of 'em to me, that now but begin to be sad.
Why should you be sad, that know no grief of Mind? have you lost Friends? or forfeited Freedom?
Fair one, I am more a slave then you; for I am bound by faults, and none can set me free; your miseries are but for a time, and I can release 'em, and yet cannot command my own Fate.
What strange misery can you apprehend? do you love unfortunately?
No, I love happily, but I have fallen unfortunately, and no length of days can set a period to my misery; I love, but can∣not hope a return, for I should hate him I love if he could love me; yet, as his Honour forbids him that, and me all hopes to enjoy him, so if he be a perfect Man he hath Mercy too, and he may pity and forgive, though not love Pauline.
I would ask another Question, but that I am afraid it would search too near your griefs; dare you trust me with the knowledge who it is you love? can I serve you?
You must not, and therefore cannot, for it is the stranger that fought for you. When first my Eye met his, it shot a flame in here, and the nobleness of that Act (which was sacrificed to you) shook me, and waked my sleeping Honour, and I began to find desires that till then were strangers here, for they had more of love then blood in them.—What's the business? 
There's a young fellow without desires to speak with you.
Your pardon.
I have spoiled your sport if all hit right.
MAdam, I come from that stranger that this morning your Charity preserved, what directions do you com∣mand me in his affairs of Love!
Sir, you are welcome, and from him all is so; This night I would desire him meet in the garden, where he shall receive her.
I must beg the favour to speak with that Lady, I have a message to impart to her.
You shall command any thing my power can serve you in, there she comes, and I'll wait upon you straight.
What shall I say to her? my joys have robed me of my Tongue.
It is he that this morning named me in the street.—Sir, have you any commands for me?
No Madam, I come to serve, if you'll please to enjoin; and though a poor Sicilian, yet I know what duty all that wretch∣ed Nation owes your Excellence.
Me Sir! sure you mistake.
No, Madam, I cannot mistake, nor can any miseries so cloud your Beauties, but through all the Innocence and Majesty of such a Princess will appear; sure you will not deny the name of Cicely? 
To you, Sir, I will not, yet I conjure you to conceal me, and let me know to whom I stand indebted for this Civil opinion.
My name is not worth your knowledge, but my for∣tunes
I boast of, for I had the honour to be a Soldier, and a Pri∣sooner with your Princely Brother, and fell with him the same day when we lost the battle at Siracusa.
Who, Facertes? where is he, at Rome! Oh, tell me how do's he bear the Insolence of that unworthy Conqueror? It is ma∣ny years since I saw that beloved Brother, did he never speak of me?
Yes, Madam, I have often heard him mention you with Tears, and like a Brother give your Character to the fair Sophia, sister to Virgilius, who saved his Life when he was doomed to the hook.
The Hook? Oh, ye powers, why do you let this wicked Tyrant thus triumph o'er our miseries? But for Virgilius, that false seed of the old Tyrant, that's young and false, and cruel in his youth, let him find some curse, strange as his wickedness.
Madam, upon my life, you injure him; for, my soul to pawn, he loves your Brother: and had no share in that guilty Tri∣umph, for he was then in Galley.
Oh, thou art deceived, he envies my Brother, and cannot love; and when he could not by force conquer him, by falsehood he sought his ruin.
I perceive, Madam, you are a stranger to the Prince's affairs at Rome.
What are they? new miseries?
Have you not heard how, at the Triumph, the fair Sophia and he, in a look, changed hearts, and that now he has his freedom?
No, this is the first time that I heard of it.
Madam, I saw him free; and (by his friendship with Virgilius) it is hoped he shall marry the Princess Sophia: But this is a secret I dare not give to any ear but your own.
My Brother and Virgilius friends? it is false, it must be false, I know he is too much my Brother to make a Friendship there.
His Love to the Sister, and her merits, who has a virtue equal to her Beauty, made him forget the injuries which Virgilius (in ambitious honour, not malice) threw upon him; besides, it will be a guard for Sicily hereafter, and Facertes gains his ends upon them.
Pray no more of this discourse; I hope my Brother has no ends beyond his Honour; it cannot be he should forget mine and his own injuries, or so bury a Brothers and a Fathers loss; but if ab∣sense can do all this, yet his Honour is with him, and that may tell him how glorious, in story, a Slave appears, whilst he keeps his Honour; and how mean and poor that Prince is that sells it for his passion.
Excellent Maid—Madam, I am sorry my dis∣course displeased you.
I would I were with him, or I would I could but write to him.
Madam, if you'll please to write, I'll deliver it him.
No, Sir, that would be too great a trouble, for I believe,
those Occasions which drew you hither are of more consider∣tion then a letter.
None of such importance as to serve my Prince; It is true, I have a Comrade, a Prince that has disguised himself into that condition, and is resolved, under that private habit, to see the world; a scurvy Accident befell him to day, upon the Mole, at the Slaves Mart, where he escaped hardly with his life; some wounds he has too, which will retard him, I fear, till my return.
Was it not this morning? a young man, brown-hair'd?
Yes, it was about a slave he saw, and fell in love with; and while he stayed for money to redeem her, another bought her; I was not at the beginning, but, I thank my fate, I came time e∣nough to his Rescue.
Is he safe then?
Yes, Madam, but so impatient, for fear some violence should be offered to her, I am now going in search of her; for I know he'll find no Peace, till he has gained her freedom.
Is he a Prince, say you, and in love with that Slave?
Yes, Madam, and now his soul labours in pain, to know what condition she is of; but I hope his flame is made of young men's fire, such as will not last.
Why do you hope so?
Because I have the honour to be his friend; and though I serve his passion, yet I should be loath to see him continue his Love for a Slave, that has nothing but miseries for his Honour to work upon.
A Prince! then all my Prayers fall not to the Earth, nor lose their way twixt heaven and my miseries.
Your prayers, Madam? how, under pardon, are you concerned in his love or birth?
You are a Soldier, and by your honour I conjure you; you are a Sicilian, and now Isle take the power you gave, and command you; or by my Brother and his friendship I enjoin you.
What, Madam?
Nothing, nothing; ye gods! whither am I falling? down,  down Woman; All the pleadings of my Sex be gone, I will not be a slave to my Passion.
Nor will I be so rude as to press a Secret from you; yet your Brother, Madam, should not serve you more faithfully, nor more willingly, then I.
I must not, no, I will not; yet I durst tell you, but it is not like Cicely, nor the Laws that she has ever followed.
Madam, your name has given Laws, and Cicilia's Acts have ever stood Examples, as unquestioned as unimitable: and by your self, I beg this trust.
Then, as you are a Soldier, take it, and protect it, (I know no guilt,) why should I fear? I was that slave he fought for; and I rejoice, the man I honour is so favoured of the Gods.
O Madam, this is a blessing beyond my hopes; dare you trust me to discover who you are? I'll first sound whether his Love
aim with honour, and by degrees work upon him till I have found the secrets of his heart; he shall despair too, and in fear spend some days; But at length dare you not let him know there is a hope? pray leave it to me, I'll see all the Laws of Love observed, he shall doubt, and hope, and you shall defer his Joys; But still  I'll wish your Love may increase too, for I know he'll deserve it.
Sir, I have not said I love, nor will not, till I hear him say so first; I confess I hope he loves, and what that hope can be called I acknowledge.
Then all my Joys are full—Nay, my Sister, you must not turn away.
Sister?
Did I say Sister?
Yes, and if my Ears abuse me not, this morning you called me sister.
Then I'll hide my self no longer from thee; and since you could confess to a stranger you hoped he loved, I claim so 
 much trust as to confess you love; will this satisfy you who I am? I mean to give it to the Prince.
Oh, my Brother, why did you hide your self from me? is it true you told of your self? are you in love? shall not I know your story, that I may rejoice in your joys?
Thou shalt know all, but let me not now defer the Prince's joy, who waits without and suffers in the doubts which longing love brings.
The Prince without? is that a truth? pardon me, for since you have deceived me once, it is lawful to suspect.
Yes, and there is another truth which I durst not disco∣ver till thy love warranted it me: But now know the man thou hated'st is the man thou love; for Virgilius is that Prince; but when thou hast made an acquaintance with him thou wilt confess thy ignorance only could hate him.
Virgilius, then I am miserable!
Do not say so, but take a Brothers knowledge of him, I have tried him, friend and enemy, and by both find him pure; and I conjure you, give me your griefs, and believe my love before your hate of the man you love.
Is it Virgilius then?
By thy self, it is he.
Swear not, unworthy; witness the Gods, that saw and pi∣ti'd not my griefs, with what pain I lost thee; yet that was nothing, compared to this affliction, that finds thee thus; Go boast to thy friend, what success thy treachery, assisted by a Brothers interest, has gained upon a Sister, overcome with misery.
Why do you accuse me thus? have I injured you? is it a fault, to tell you your opinion wrongs a gallant man?
Were he a God, and his friendship of so sovereign a nature, it would protect us against their rods, when with a plague they make a curious search amongst men: were he this, yet, in thee and me it were sin to sacrifice to him; and I would sooner oppose that
plague which only wounds my mortal part, then meet Virgilius as a friend.
Why do you conclude me so unworthy, as to call him friend without a satisfaction?
Thou art not Facertes; he knows there can be no satis∣faction: did he not ruin our Country? fell not my aged Father under a Roman sword? is not Lucius, our Brother, lost? and his Ghost still wandering for want of Funeral Rites: But if thou art Facertes, remember how his falsehood let thee adorn a triumph; but these are past. Am not I this day sold a slave? do's not our Country still bleed; and whilst we talk, the licensed lust of the common Soldier add new crimes? Oh! my Brother, let me not have reason to repent that nearness, but learn to hate him; and while he is in our power take a brave revenge; that he would do something to redeem these faults is no Argument to prefer him be∣fore your Country; and though it be gallant in him to love, yet in thee or me a low mean sin.
Had he not said all this, had he not condemned himself, I had done it; but when I see his youth soul-sick with love, and full of despairs, ready to sacrifice himself to redeem the misfor∣tunes of a conquest (which he was but a servant in) I must tell Ci∣cilia, when he leaves thus to be an enemy, I must be a friend, for I scorn to hate what loves me; but he loves thee, and to destroy him now is murder, and not revenge.
That he loves I owe him nothing, for it was chance and fate; and that I love him will be no guard: if I did not love him, it were easy to destroy the thing I hate; but it shall be my glory, through my love and loss of peace, to find revenge.
But his love was no chance; this journey we designed by the counsel of his Sister, whose interest pleads here, and we were bound for Sicily, and his intents were to heal, by marriage, the wounds you thus lament in our Country; and if now you destroy this means of peace, you have ruined it; Cicely has destroyed her Country, and to obey her passion wilfully sacrificed our freedom.
Still thou blow new fires; were your designs for Sicily and me? what has rendered me so cheap to my Brothers thought, as to believe I would receive such a visit from a vain swollen Con∣queror, promising to himself success? But he shall find I dare, and can scorn him; and now if I had all the passions that our sex ever yet sunk under, I'd forbid him to my self; and he and you shall find Cicilia's mind not subject to his conquest.
Women, when they have said they are angry are half revenged; and friends, when they have avowed a quarrel. I know her soul full of softness, however her fortune makes this war betwixt her nature and her justice.—Sir, you have heard, I fear, the little hope she gives; yet she loves, let that secure you.
Will you take my opinion of your Sister hereafter? This I  foresaw.
What shall we do?
Something I will do, pray, let me serve her in some dis∣guise, till she be freed from this place while I have an interest here.
If I can, I'll persuade her to escape this night.
I would I had spoke with her, I would fain say something to her before I dye.
Dye, Sir?
Yes dye, Facertes, now when I would fainest live; for why should I linger here when that which makes her excellent must render me miserable? for had she forgiven me, I could not have forgiven her; for she has justice, and I despair; farewell Fa∣certes, I'll meet thee at the Galley.
Pray stay, Sir, you shall speak with her, and it may be she cannot find that strength against you.
If you'll gain me the liberty of speaking with her, I shall gladly do it; and then what I will do shall ask no long time to consider.
Pray, Sir, follow me.
I dare not press in there; I that have forced a passage through the world dare not enter there where love only has the guard.
THey are now there; she is false, and you abused; she threatened me with wounds, unless I would obey her, and invite him to her bed, and the slave would scarce be won to come.
But has she given the slave to him that I presented to her to day?
She has given him all, and to lay the greater scorn upon you, to your enemy, she is one who loves the slave, and wants the common excuse of being wooed.
Was this the reason she commanded me not to pursue my revenge? Fool, it shall now fall on you both.
You must be speedy then; for this night they are gone, and the garden is the appointed place to receive the slave in; but if you'll obey my counsel, they shall find their graves there; and then the old woman will laugh at the young Rascals.
But how shall I come to this opportunity of revenge?
Go arm your self, and take such to your assistance, whose
faith you have tried, and bring'em in the evening to our garden, where I'll place you so, that you shall have a full view of them, and take your revenge safely.
The Moon will assist us, for she shines early this night.—This in earnest. 
Sir, I expect no money, I have said, I love you.
O, excuse me till to morrow.
I thank you, Sir,—How all these young things are subject to oversee a woman when she is stricken a little in years! and this Fool too, whom I choose, because I thought all had been alike to fools, and yet see how hardly he is drawn on; as I live, but that there is one young man that I love, I would make him kill'em both, and take the wench; Ah! farewell the memory of my dear Britain, Gorgianus; well did he deserve to be their Patron, he never refused and old woman, but they knew his virtue, and while he was young called him home. O happy Island, that has one young man in it that will be charitable to the old woman: Every one strives to feed the young till their bellies burst again, while we praise and beg, and can scarce get'em to sell us their ware.—How now, what have we here? oh is it you? I'll retire.
If thou hast not lost all thine honour, By the memory of thy Fathers ashes, By that chaste Mother, whose memory thou so oft hast worshipped, give me leave to retreat to my strength, and while I have power preserve my honour, lest there be none left in our fa∣mily, for thou hast thrown off thine, as if it had been a burden to thee.
Dare you not hear him speak? if you have no Argue∣meant to deny what he said, why do you accuse me of weakness, when I was conquered?
I dare not longer hear him speak? for all the weakness that our sex or nature is subject to plead against me, and I have on∣lie honour to defend me; yet I can give you powerful Reasons that can destroy all his hopes.
No, no, give 'em him when you see him.
It is just you fly me, it is just you scorn me, and here I stand mine own judge, my own accuser and executioner too, if you frown, and bid me strike.
Sir, you mistake me, if you think I scorn you; there are other ways, and just ones, to be revenged without a fault.
Facertes, you do not covet a revenge more then I thirst to give it; and now I know what you desire, with wings I'll haste to serve you.
You cannot, her fruits are seldom sweet, unless we pluck them our selves.
Let me beg you will not pay such a rate as your inno∣cence for it, can you not forgive? Is there nothing can expiate
what my fate was only guilty in? for I was never faulty to you.
Nothing; my honour tells me I must not find a peace,—But my heart tells me I belie it.
Oh, do not frown; can you not be just but you must be an∣gry too? The Judge that speaks the Malefactors fate, and tells him to morrow thou shalt dye, he do's it because it is just, not that he is pleased with the wretches misery. Oh, be you but so merciful; let my doom come but as a necessity from you, and not appear to affect my miseries.
Brother Facertes, what shall I say? Cicely, be thy self, or thou hast lost the glory of thy revenge.
No, divinest, do not wrong me so, as to think I plead for life; it is for your pity only that I beg; do not you destroy me, command some one that the act but adds to his guilt; stain not with blood that innocence, nor with cruelty punish cruelty.
No, Sir, I know your friend has said enough to secure you I cannot be cruel; but since such a sullen fate attends me that my passion will rob me of the revenge I hoped to have had on you, I'll take it on my self; and if thou love through my own wounds, strike thy false heart which I see, yet have no power to punish.
False? oh, do not say so, any thing, but false.
Did thou not plead thus, till thy Arguments pre∣veiled with my Brother, that Brother under whose Sword thou fell•••, and found protection, though his enemy? did thou not vow there he should not be led in triumph, who else would not have lived? for he defended himself only to let thy pride see thou coldest not overcome him; and when he had taught thee with his sword that he could conquer, he yielded to let thee see he durst dye.
Dare you be judged by that Brother?
Yes, when he is himself; but these injuries are silent, when I call to mind that barbarous rage that did not spare the aged snow of my honoured Father. What glory could his death add to your conquest, whose heart had not blood enough to stain the sacrilegious weapon.
Oh! Madam, for these misfortunes which call me their head, I plead the duty I owed a Father, whose Battle I fought; and it became me to obey mine, as it do's you to mourn yours.
Then, to these add the vanity of this journey, promising your self a victory over our hearts too; and because your sword is forbid in this war, alone you undertook the journey; as if Verge∣lives name were enough to slave the world.
Madam, witness Facertes, how full of despairs I obeyed my fate, and your misfortunes will quit me of vanity; for when they had set a rate upon your beauty, when there was a price made for the excellent Cicely, yet then I durst not hope a purchase. Vain, false and cruel! think me any thing but such a monster.
Oh Brother! cruel Brother! Sir, if I have injured you, I shall teach you to forgive by forgiving greater faults: my faith,
and my faith, alas, that can neither advantage me, nor prejudice Virgilius.
Do not say so; it is the saving balm; it is mercy it self; and your faith of me must save me here, as mine hereafter; Oh, Divinest, stop not your mercy, but let it fall here; your eyes are full of pity; let that precious dew drop upon my thirsty heart, and save me, ere despair hath licked all my life thence; Turn not away, but look upon me as I appear in repentance, in the whiteness of my  tears, in their Innocence, in my Souls Love to Cicely, strewed up∣on the Earth in submission. Behold me, and view me, not as I stand stained with thy miseries, but speak to me, and speak mercy, Mercy whose figure thy fair self wears, and adorns; O let her softness guide thy tongue, and let my Souls bleeding sadness make thy fathers wounds dumb.
Oh, ye gods, why did not ye make him Innocent? pray Sir, Why do you kneel?
For mercy, is there no mercy? your tears should be  friendly; can you weep when you are Angry?
No, Sir, my tears have Prophetic misery, and so much weakness in them, they deserve your pity.
Oh, Madam, do not call it weakness, This is Charity, and her Alms yields a double benefit, and adorns as well as saves; Oh, my fate, would you had made me any thing that's most scorned, rather then an Enemy here.
That had been too great a Blessing; for know• Sir, you do not, more then I, wish your Innocence, or with sadder thoughts mourn your guilt.
She must not see this Passion; Sir, pray let your love give way a little to Our safety; Pauline is coming, and twill be dangerous, by the discovery of yours, to put her Love to a de∣spair; Sister, I hope your Reason has found a way to be reconciled to this Prince, whose misfortunes I know cannot deserve your hate; when your Justice guides; pray let her not see you here.
I can forgive him, and you; But I can ne'er forgive my self; and something I'll do shall save my honour.
Pray, Sir, put off this sadness, and solicit Pauline to deli∣ver her this Night; is she as unsensible of your Love as she ap∣pear'd to be?
She is all honour, all her self; All thy Sister, and I happy only to be more miserable.
Pray retire, before Pauline comes.
I'll follow you.
This way we shall meet her, courage Sir; After Parley Women's wars give Quarter still, and she cannot long be cruel.
ARe you all provided?
Yes, Sir, how many are they?
Three is the most; give me a Pistol, it is about the time she appointed, stay here, and whistle, if she comes; I'll look out.
This wench has every day a Quarrel; I killed two for her, the last Olympic.
Marry, the gods send her many Quarrels, peace Brings us no harvest; Who comes here?
The Moon is up, and he not come. They are upon de∣parture; This Coward will fail me, and they will escape, and the Rascal will scorn me to death.
Who's there?
It is I, whose that? the Prince?
No, Madam, but one of his Creatures.
Who's that? Ennius? why, where have you been ma∣ny a day?
Faith, I durst not be seen till last night.
You promised me a visit once, but you broke your word.
Lets retire, and call my Lord; I'Ie pay it now.
Follow me then, is my Lord this way?
Yes, let me guide you.
Who's that passed by?
It's the old Woman, that serves Pauline.
O, are you ready, Sir, you have stayed the utmost time; she expects him with longing thoughts, they are all provided, and a Gally lies ready at the Mole, to convey them away; but if your hearts be true, we will stay their Journey.
We are all ready, and resolute.
Follow me then, I'll see you placed where they must pass by.
Lead the way.
WHat return to make you, for this good Act, I know not; But I shall ever admire you for daring (in so wicked a Place) to be so singly good.
I, that durst be wicked, ought not to dispute now; but with shame to look upon my faults, and offer this, as my first sa∣crifice,
to witness I repent; and may my wishes prove fortunate, and make you happy in that Love that makes me miserable.
You cannot be so miserable as I,—That must love my  Enemy.
Madam, are you ready, they stay at the Garden gate, shall I let them in?
Yes, yes, and see the gates shut that lead to the street.
All is safe, pray make haste.
We'll meet you, call at my window.
THis Moon is friendly, come, pray let not this cloudy sadness hang upon our Joys; you see she consented to put her self into your protection; her tears too are your warrant, for all Women's storms are past when those showers fall.
I do not now grieve for fear she should be angry, but that I am so unlucky as to deserve it; and my Friends can wit∣nos my heart never sinned against her, yet something lies heavy upon it I cannot remove; for my fears tell me she'll take some Revenge upon her self; for you saw it was her Passion, not her rea∣son, that forgave me.
I know her Religion will protect her against her self, and she has too much honour, to wish health, and put poison in the Cup; and though she threatened revenge, yet she scorns to take it when she is reconciled.
Oh, she is too Excellent to be false; Peace. Whose there?
Is the Galley ready, they Expect you.
Ell's ready, lead the way.
Follow me.
Stand close, I hear 'em come.
Stay here, while I return, with the Key.
This is the Garden. 
Oh! This may be just: but whether it be fair, or no, Heaven, thou see.
How do you, Sir?
Why well, Facertes; The Bullet but glanced.
Oh my sister, If thou hast a hand in this Treachery, may Plagues sudden and lasting find and sink thee with despairs, when mercy flies thee as thou hast done thy honour; nor shall all  the ties of love, or nature, prove thy guard, nor the mercies due to thy weeping penitence; No, thy sex shall not protect thee from the Justice of my swollen rage, which with sword, and words (that wound more) shall afflict thee.
Why dost thou rage and curse her, still mistaking that ex∣cellent Maid? Upon my Soul, she has no hand in it, she is too full of Honour, to take so base a way to her Revenge, or seek by Treachery a life that's only worn to serve her; and when she frowns, may command me put it off.
Draw your sword then, and take my counsel, if your strength fail not, and fall, as if their malice had been more prosper∣os,  perchance the Villain, Author of this deed, lurks here about, and expects such a sign ere he dare discover himself.—Pray, Sir,  let me bear you home.
No, Facertes, let me die here. 
Unfortunate Youth, Murder, Villains, where are you, you accursed Actors of this black deed? do you hide already Cowards? dare you not look on your Act? 
It was my Brothers voice that cried Murder.
I heard a Pistol, whore's Olympia?
Hark, there's some body comes.
Villains, dare you not yet appear?
Yes, fool, we dare, and laugh upon your miseries.
Yes, an old Woman will laugh; fool, thou had better have destroyed thy Mother, then with scorn have awaked my Malice, now where is all your young wits? am not I proved a Mo∣there of your Joys? fool, I am revenged now.
What cry was that?
How now, what ails you? 
Oh me, oh me, I am dead.
Then, though our miseries be great, they are not so ill as I feared; what moved thee, Villain, to this base Act?
Revenge, fool; though thou, I could forgive a wound, and such an Injury as to have her I call mine possessed by another?
Villain, thou shalt dearly pay for this base Act; Rise, Sir,  the Truth is now at large discovered.
Oh!
Ha, alive?
Yes, and I hope shall find so much Mercy as to punish thy Treachery. 
Draw, Ennius, we have yet as many swords as they.
I warrant you, Sir, and as good hearts.
Traitor, thou want the cause.
It is they, they are set upon, I hear their swords too; let's haste, our presence may bring some aid; for Heavens sake, let us not look on and see them murdered.
Hold, as thou hast Mercy, hold; and as thou hast faults, show Mercy.
Yes, in this Justice, for Justice is ever merciful.
There, Villain, There's thy treacheries first reward; thou art going for thy last.
Ha! upon the ground, Facertes, what accident is this?
Whore's the Prince?
Here, how fares Facertes?
Well, only a little scratched.
Sir, I hope you believe I had no hand in this Treachery.
No Madam, we know the unworthy cause.
What was it?
All our Joys (within this minute) had a cloud on them; and I confess, I was afraid it had hid my Sisters faults, whilst I feared a mistake of Justice had betrayed thee to a Murder; yet then in his wounds the Prince was himself, and collected; I chid my mistrust; see, he bleeds still, do's not that expiate? This is twice he has shed it in sacrificing to thy liberty; and now to be angry is wilful and humour, not honour.
Do you command, Cicely shall obey; for I confess, the Prince is Master of that honour I but talked of; will you mediate a pardon for the Injuries my Passion threw upon him? and I shall joy to find I was mistaken.
O Madam, do not speak of pardon, for your Innocence knows not the way to that Injury I could not forgive; But I will not talk; for I should hate my self, if I had words to express this Joy.
Ha! The Prince slain, and Olympia dead? as you love your safety haste hence; he whom your Justice has found is the viceroy's Son, and its present death if you be taken.
No distraction; The Galley is ready, and waits us at the Mole, thither we'll immediately; Sister, dare you yet put your self into the Princes Protection?
Yes, but not now; when I am free I will; and as I re∣fus'd at first, because it was early, so now, because it is forced, and looks like giving upon the Death-bed; and I would be loath to be∣come the Princes Legacy.
I beseech you, let not a nicety interrupt my Joys; but trust me with your protection, till I have made good my vows to your Brother, whose Joys my Affairs have deferred: But when you see him possessed of his Country, then I'll kneel for a Blessing in the fair Cicely; dare you bid me hope?
I promise to do what honour shall warrant 〈…〉 and when these wounds are healed, I shall not call it weakness that makes me yield to my passion.
This Cloud is blown over by Fate; and now I'll smile and prophecy, through all our wounds and tears, a joyful issue.
We'll for Sicily first, the Vice-Roy being dead they dare not refuse my Authority; besides, if they do, the Army is mine, and that shall secure Facertes. Madam, what Commands have you to enjoin me, that I may return this favour?
When you appeared a private Man and compassed with dangers you had a power here, which now is turned to duty; and I beg a protection in your company, for the Prince was known to have an Interest here; and to be found dead in my Garden will bring a certain ruin upon me; For that I am Innocent will be no guard, but I shall fall now to expiate my other faults; and I confess, I would fain live now, for I am certain I repent, and shall ever sa∣crifice to the Prince Virgilius as my good Genius.
Sure we shall not deny you a safety, to whom we owe all ours.
No Complement, but this way through the Garden to the Galley, the wind is somewhat high.
The Clouds are black, we'll keep under the shore, that if need be, we may put in upon the Coast of Calabria.
Not I, as I live.
Let me beg that Olive branch sign of Peace; and witness  all, I joy more to be thus bound, then to have conquered Sicily.
THe Captain has refused to give me the freedom of her I Love, but if the Lieutenant keep his word, I shall make him repent it at as sad a rate as I bear my misery; it is not Love, sure, that afflicts my Heart, for I have heard 'em say, That it is a soft and gentle Passion, which strokes and courts the Mind, and his  service perfect freedom, for Love is both the Famine and the Food, none of these chains afflicts them; I have seen Women and Boys play with this Power: It is the sport of Virgins, and yet their Hearts last Ages; Nay, they can be false too, and yet not lose one Grace, nor one Beautyfalls; Even the perjured Lovers wear their quiet Minds and fair Faces still, whilst I pine and wither under these two days misery. I cannot eat nor sleep since I saw her, and my friends are irksome to me, I love loanness, and hunt Corners, and prize a thought of being her slave, more then a Conquest over the world; Yet I stammer still, and cannot speak sense when my griefs would tell her, the story of what I ail. I have lost my Courage too of late; for, by all our Gods, I start and tremble when I see her; Nay, I am a Dog if I do not weep when I behold her; no Boy at School has his tears readier then I, I could weep like froward Children. This makes me mad, to find my self a∣bandoned by all the Gods, whose ends I cannot guess, nor why they send me this new way to misery.
How, Sir, upon the ground? up, Sir, the Soldiers are prepar∣ed, and expect your presence only to finish the work; The slaves too are loose and privately armed; and when he is once aboard, give but the sign, and be Master both of him and her.—Fie, Sir,
what means this dejection? up, for shame.
See Lieutenant, I am grown the obedient'st thing that  ever sighed himself away; O Lieutenant, kind old Friend, if we miscarry in this design, I am lost for ever; for I am become the wretched'st thing thy heart can fancy.—Prithee pray.— 
Bondue, pray? you have found your Man indeed.
The Angry Gods to send Men and bold wounds, not cow∣ardly thoughts and Women when they will, call Cilius to the Earth again.
Death! what aisle you, Sir?
Oh Friend! this trouble of my Mind is sent like some new disease to scourge thy Friend, and act what sword and sickness could not do; and my despair will throw me upon some horrid Crime, against which it is in vain to oppose or Arms or Virtue; The Tyrant-Boy Lords it o'er my Heart, and now he has wounded me will make me kiss the Dart.
Oh! is this it you complain of? Let me know Man or boy that dares wrong you; By this hilt, I will send him on a cold Errand.
Thy threats are vain, for my griefs are a disease I never felt before; The remedy too is hid from Gods and Men, the Maid, the lovely Maid thou give me.
A pox on her, the Wench, is she the cause? was she not sound, Sir?
Sound!
I, sound, by this hand for all that I know she was; I am a Dog if I touched her; and but for a kiss or two you had her as pure as I found her.
Peace, Beast.
By this Light, Sir, I am in earnest, and unless it were Crab had a touch,—for no body else was alone with her, it is that old Rogue has spoiled her.
Villain, Slave.
Why, in passion, Sir? you are not the first; why this, what a pox, a Clap is no such dishonour to a Soldier.
Peace, wretch.
He is modest; a Plague upon her for a dissembling prating Whore: By this hand I would have ventured my life she had been sound.
Dog, dost thou know her whom thou thus profan'st? 
Know her? mischiefs know her and the whole sex, they are nothing but dissimulation: why do you strike me? you beg of me to be your Baud, and are angry for a mischance, thank your self; you were never quiet till you had a bout with her.
He will mistake me still.
Mistake you? It is you mistake your self; can I help it if you have a Clap; if you will tell me what you ail, there are ways and easy cures enough for such chances, without the sword; you have but one remedy for all diseases, that damned sword, you think, can cure all.
Fool, thou hast profaned a Maid with thy base thoughts purer then thy Prayers.
I understand not your Raptures; if she has given you a touch, I'll help you to a Surgeon, and my self to another; if you'll be modest and lick your self whole you may.
How natural it is for him to apprehend such dangers as he has found. Fool, thou hast mistaken me all this while, and would thou have been silent I had told thee; it is her Eyes that have wounded me, and my disease is Love, desperate Love; if I can judge of that strange Passions; for it is Love for her that dies for another; hast thou a remedy for such a wound in the Mind?
Love, is that your disease? I am glad it is no worse; by my troth, Sir, if you will starve with meat before you, I will bu∣rye you, but I will never pity you; Love and Marriage are the only two mischiefs that belong to the Sex which I have not had, and therefore can only prescribe you Wine and Women for a remedy.
Prithee no more and if thou lov's• me, let thy kind∣nos excuse my Passion, without making Mirth of my mi∣sery.
Now. cannot I be angry with him though I bleed; Sir, I would fain serve you if I knew how. Can you tell what it is your Love would have? what does the blind Child cry for, would he lie with the Wench? by this hand I will fetch her to you once more, if I thought that would cure your disease.
No more as you are a Soldier, by your Honour no more; your Honesty in other things excuses your Ignorance in this; no more I say. Alone I will find my remedy; and this sword, as I said before, has a Cure for all my miseries; for he that dares die may defy the worst of Fates.
Faith, Sir, but he that dies for a Woman in Italy is but a small friend to the Sex and Lachrymae, and by my consent should be buried in a feather-bed.
WHat, are you all resolved?
Yes, Sir, release us and we'll do it.
Or must I make an Oration to persuade you to this Gear?
No, Sir, we need no persuasions.
Methinks you should not, considering I humbly desire you not to be hanged, and shall take it for an obligation, if you will throw away your cold water, and pledge me in Greek wine, and entreat your worships to quit these iron Jewels, and hard benches, for Gold-chains and pretty Wenches.
Sir, we hope you do not mean to abuse us, and show us this heaven only in words.
By this good day I am real, and you shall all be loose and armed; and when he comes aboard, put off speedily, and then dis∣cover your selves; if he resists, kill him, if not, only bind him; by these hilts, I have order to hang you every man, and mine own safety tells me I were best to do it.
Oh! Lieutenant, noble Lieutenant, you know we have been honest Rogues to you always.
All but my friend that would cut my throat the other day, because I would not give him my Wench.
It is true, Lieutenant, I was faulty, and you may leave being a Lyon, and take revenge upon a Dog; but you know you spoil a good fellows drinking when ever you hang me; and it may be, you'll not find one to bear my part in your Catches when I am gone; and then you'll wish you had not been so revengeful.
No, you Rogues, you know I am of a most merciful na∣ture, and that makes you so presumptuous; and to confirm you, I'll have all join hands, and you shall see what a miracle I'll work; so now, circle me about while I conjure up a spirit that shall tell me all your thoughts, and you mine.

 TO Bacchus bow, to Bacchus sing,
with wine and mirth let's conjure him.
 By his Mothers eye
 And his Fathers thigh
 By her God brought delight.
 And his too glorious sight,
 By Juno's deceit,
 And they sad retreat
 Appear, appear, appear
 Kind God in Bottles, here.
Lo I appear, lo I appear.
 To Bacchus bow, to Bacchus sing,
with wine and mirth let's conjure him.
 By Ariadne's wrongs,
 And the false youth's harms,
 By the rock in his breast.
 That fled from the distressed
 By the tempest in her mind
 Which ceased when thou were kind.
 By those beauties that he fled,
 And the pleasures of her bed.
 Appear, appear, appear
Kind God in Bottles here.
Drink and I will appear.
Drink deep and I am here.
 To Bacchus bow, to Bacchus sing,
It is wine and mirth that conjures him.
 By this blood of the Vine,
 Thus poured on thy shrine;
 By this full glass
 To the last kind lass,
 It was a girl twice nine
 That clasped like thy Vine.
 By this and that appear, appear, appear
 Kind and kinder God in Bottles here.
 Lo I appear, one kind bottle more and I will dwell here.
 Then thus again we will conjure him
Because he has propitious been.
 Hence this glass, a poor and single sacrifice,
 A Hecatomb in this bottle dies,
 By the men that thou hast won,
 And the women thou hast undone.
 By the friendships thou hast made,
 And the secrets thou hast betrayed.
 By this cure of our sorrow,
 Thus charmed till to morrow.
 Appear, appear, appear
 Kind God in bottles here.
 Lo I appear, lo I am here,
And there and there;
Lo, I am every where.
Is Bacchus a Devil, Lieutenant, that he obeys your charm? I thought he had been a God.
Faith, that is as he is used, and may be both; But I mean he shall play the Devil now; and therefore each man take into his hand one of these Familiars; and when he has sucked the secret from him, let him release the spirit into the Cellar again.
But what secret, Lieutenant?
Converse with that spirit, and he will instruct thee: whi∣sper to him thus.—Hup, and thou shalt find liberty slip down thy  throat.
Hast thou met him yet?
Not yet, but I believe he's hard by, for I met his bag∣gage; I could be angry to think he should have so many fine Wenches and we none.
He's in the right, anger and lust, liberty is hard by, I war∣rant  it; but she is in the last drop, and have at her; will you take my word hereafter?
Yes, but good Lieutenant, call to the devil for one Bottle more, and let it be burnt sack.
It is too late, yonder comes our chief, The brave Cilius.
Chief, Lieutenant? We have no Chief, Lieutenant, but liberty.
How now, Lieutenant, what noise is this?
We have been consulting, Sir, about this business; I, and my fellow Soldiers here,—I have ground the Rogues to such an edge they will cut iron; and being persuaded they are free, you may command them like Dogs.
Haste then to the Galley, I'll stay the Captain and his com∣pany till you are aboard; and honest friends when this is done, command your own and my power to serve you.
Long live Cilius, long live Cilius.
Thanks to all, did the storm last night do no mischief amongst the Galleys?
I had taken six when I lay down, and it did but rock me.
Pray lose no time, but haste aboard; for I must wait up∣on the Captain.
Fear not us; how now, who have we here?
Gentlemen, and my fellow Soldiers, I have an humble suit to you.
What is it, what is it?
That I may have leave to live.
Live? why not?
You must ask my Lieutenant that, he knows the reason better then I; for he has a bill of my hand, to be dead to morrow.
Thou art a fool, here's nothing but liberty; and he that dares drink shall never dye.
Nay, I'll drink, so I may live.
Hum! Fellow Tullius, no covenants, no conditions for drinking while you live, drink freely.
Join hands, and sing aboard, there's liberty.
MAdam, be confident, for it shall not be in his power to wrong you, my self will be your guard.
Sir, last night (but that I threatened, not to out-live his in∣jury) he had forced me.
We appeared upon her call, and with our cries made him suspect the noise might have given notice to the Soldiers.
Force you? he dares not do it, by our Laws he dies, or any that forces a Virgin after she is in our public Treasury, which you are now; for your price, Madam, if you were sold, is to be dive∣ded; it is true, if he will marry you, that privilege he has as Cap∣tain;
he pays our shares, and takes you, but from all those dan∣gers, my life and honour to pawn, I'll secure you.
The gods, Sir, I hope, will reward this goodness, and join with you to protect our Innocence.
Will it be long, Sir, ere we go to the Galley?
No, he is now coming with the rest of the Slaves; I be∣seech you be not sad, it looks prophetickly, and it is a kind of ill Omen; The Soldiers are all firm for you, I dare not stay; for to be seen with you might breed Suspicion.—I kiss your hand.
Be not dejected, Madam, you see by what strange means your stars have raised you a power among your Enemies. This gallant youth will not be so false as to deceive your trust; and once in Italy Sophia's name is guard enough.
Sir, had you named your self, or Country, The famed Negro had found no Enemies here; for we are all a part of that un∣fortunate Island, that are thus forced to live by spoil of them that have destroyed us; and I am sad to think of the misfortune of Our Princess, especially this last Accident, wherein the virtuous Cicely suffered; But for those slaves whose falsehood were the Authors of her Misery, This day the Dogs shall, upon the hook, find a Justice.
Sir, I have no joy now left; for I have seen all my Masters family ruined; and Our Country sold to slavery, yet if we make haste, we may again redeem the unfortunate Cicely; for be∣ing sold at Naples, it is not likely they will so suddenly remove her.
We are this morning bound thither, the Slaves Mart is held there to day.
What do I hear? Negro named, was not that he my Bro∣there saved in the Siracusan battle?
Yes, Madam, and that was he that saved the Prince Facertes in that battle where his Father fell.
And the Princess Cicely was she that Prisoner that the slaves stole? Oh, my Facertes, then thy hopes and mine are sunk.
Have patience, Madam, lest you discover who you are; these new griefs of their lost Princess may bring a certain ruin upon us, should they know how near a relation you have to the cause.
I am instructed Sir, what are they that stand bound? 
Roman Prisoners, slaves for the Mart.
Though their Tyrannies have made them odious; yet when I see them miserable it finds a pity.
Are you ready, Sir, all stays; The wind is fair too.
Did the storm do no harm, last night? it was very violent for the time.
Not much, the Galleys were well moored, only the Lyon drove.
Come Sir, We have now a double Occasion; and I hope we shall in Naples find our last hope; Cilius, bring off the Slaves, and follow.
I shall follow, to your pain, Come Madam, now let
your prayers strengthen our designs; for where they side, the party cannot lose.
MAdam, the unfriendly winds have forced us to an un∣frequented place, and brought new troubles; but I hope your virtue can arm against them.
I am so used; Sir, to misery, that this is a common chance, and here only the Gods war with us.
Pray let me serve you, your charity deserves a greater care then this.
Madam, the unruliness of the weather made you lose the benefit of last nights sleep; pray repose here while we watch, lest some rude passengers interrupt you.
I cannot sleep, Sir, I have too many cares, and waking thoughts upon me, Brother; how do's our Friend do?
She will not rest neither, she seems to be less able to bear troubles then you; pray give Example, and try to sleep, lest sick∣nos find you, and add a heavy accident to your other misfortunes.
If the Prince will sleep too, I will try to betray my  thoughts; for truly I am weary.
Till you are safe I cannot; but I'll kneel by you; are you not afraid of me? for it is my fortune and cross fate that brings you all these troubles; and where I am you cannot be happy; say Divinest, am not I troublesome to you?
Oh, Sir, do not make me blush, to say you are welcome; for I grieve more, that you are so unfortunate as to have a share in my miseries, then that I was unfortunate; for I have now no wish, but that the Prince Virgilius had no Interest in the cause.
No more of sadness now; but pray try if you can take some rest.
It is not sadness now; there is a Joy in this grief; and when we are happy, it is a pleasure to recount our passed miseries.
What noise is that? 
It draws nearer.
Some Bacchanal, by their Song,—whether tends this noise, turn back again, there's no way this way.
Sir, we have seen strange things, and therefore let us go.
How now, my Friend, who would you speak with?
With none of you; pray turn, and take another Path.
Turn, no not we; and I advise you not to stop us, for we have a world of Sack about us, and our way lies this way.
Lieutenant, by these hilts, it is he that killed our Cor∣poral, he that fought for the Slave at Naples.
Is it so? Look about, it may be, she is here too.
What do you stare at? 
I look for a thing that troubles you; Oh, there it lies; come fellows, we will help 'em to carry it.
Away, be gone, or I'll make thee curse the time thy er∣ring feet strayed this way.
Draw, Mates, Sir, we dare fight; you shall not brave us  at home, though you did at Naples.
Draw, Facertes, these are the same Pirates we charged when thy fair Sister was sold at Naples.
Yes, yes, these are they, and we will sell your worships there. 
Lose no time, for that Horn was a Call, and I fear some aid.
Though courage be a virtue, and beauteous conquest courted amongst men, yet murder has no share in either; and those that be disarmed cannot be called enemies, nor their death conquest; and if ever you knew what it was to want it, you'll find mercy, and hear me, a kneeling Virgin that never bowed to any (but the Gods) before, and save my Brother.
And save thy Brother?
If there be any thing that's dear to thee, by that I conjure thee; save him.
Fair one, I have already unfortunately struck against one who now commands my fate; and know, I do not use to war with mi∣series; or if I could, who durst destroy what your prayers protect? or what desperate fool hope a safety, when your prayers have called down his ruin?—Take his life, unbind him, and bind me, if you cannot forgive; for know, there is one in Beauty, Inno∣cence and Miseries so like you, that I glory to serve you; for it is a kind of sacrifice to her; for whose dear sake had you interposed those eyes, you had divided us more then seas; and would I were able to say too that she were free as well as safe; and something, it may be, I shall do for that liberty too.
May your Prayers, your Sword, nor your Love never find a stop, but such as adds glory to the conquest, for being thus good, thus merciful.
Madam, I cannot talk.—Soldiers, carry these to the Captains Quarter, and with your lives protect them from all inso∣lence; let them be apart with the Romans, and stay with them till I come. Your pardon, Madam, I must hence, lest this accident discover a Plot, whose good success may make me capable to serve you; if it miss, it brings a ruin where I must love, and cannot hope return. Sir, you that know so well how to deal wounds, I am cer∣tain will forgive them.
Sir, I never hated the person of mine enemy, much less you that have proved a friend.
I dare not stay; your pardon. Be careful of your charge; and do you hear, be speedy, and meet me at the Captains Quar∣la; my peace dwell for ever here.
I am paid, how the slave has notched me!
How do you, Sir?
How do I? why thou see I am spoiled: a dozen of Surgeons will scarce repair me; how now, what are those?
Prisoners, Sir.
There's some comfort in that, come, bring 'em away, bring 'em away, set half a dozen of Surgeons to work.
Oh Facertes, I fear the Prince is lost.
HA! gone, fool that I was, whither did my rage guide me? I have fought and conquered to my ruin, as rash∣lie and unreasonably as beasts, forgetting the cause for which I fought; they are gone, which way shall I take? Love, either guide me to her rescue, or to my grave.
I am paid; what a case I am in—The Bottle is whole,  that's some comfort still; I live now by the Spirit of sack, for all my blood's gone.—He has lamed my drinking hand too: How shall I stop a Pipe? I leak apace, and reel as if I were drunk; how I stumble? dying is a king of being drunk; It grows night by my eyes; I shall faint ere I get to my Quarter. A pox take him that set me abroach, he has quite spoiled my skin, a Tanner will not give a great for it,—This is the first time that I re∣member  I ever fell when I was sober; if I die alone, I shall be as Melancholy, as a lame man in a ditch, Oh! for a Beer Glass of Sack, or Crab, and a Catch, to prepare for the Melancholy, and a cold grave.
This was my Lieutenants plot, All the world is my En∣my; how they have hacked me, it is a scurvy trade, this fighting it wears out ones clothes, worse then drinking; I will hide me in this Wood till the storm is over; and if I get safe to Naples, Celia and I will live out my few days merrily, and spoil my Captains plot; I  will spend all, and die mine own heir.
Sure I heard Tullius his voice; who's there?
I am pursued, yet if I can counterfeit dead well, I may live; My fear will betray me; O that I were valiant enough but to lie still; I never found the use of courage till now: Lord, how I shake!
It is his voice; Tullius, Tullius, prithee stay a little.
It is my Lieutenant; if he should take this opportunity now, and kill me, and say the Enemy did it, and share with my Captain in all I have; Oh, the misery of Wealth! men can neither be happy with it, nor without it; I dare not look towards him, I'll creep backward, and run away.
The ill-natured Rogue is gone, and left me; I shall bleed to death before any Friend finds me; Now the Rogue is revenged upon me for the frights I put him in to day.
Hum! say you so, bleed to death—His wounds have healed mine—Now do I grow strong, and valiant—Lieutenant  how is it?
Faith, quite spoiled, I fear the Rogues have made lanes quite through me; prithee help me to my Quarter, for I am faint.
Has been something uncivil with your Breeches, I smell it,—How fell you out? did he refuse my Captains health? 
No, no, there was no wine in the business, yet there was a Wench, the other half of mans mischief; but it is no time now for to talk, for unless thou help me to a Surgeon, thou wilt find me a mortal Lieutenant.—Give me thy hand good Tullius, oh! what  hast thou done.
Alas! farewell, noble Lieutenant, We must all dye; there is a tall man, and a fair drinker, gone; I will say that for thee.
Why Tullius, thou wilt not leave me in this misery? I have not fingers enough to stop the holes; get a Surgeon, or I shall dye.
It is sack, pure sack, and it is pity it should leak thus; but  that I will not hinder our Captain the occasion of being your heir, when you die so conveniently now, just upon his going out.
A pox o'this fooling, it is unseasonable; be but kind to me, and thou shalt be my heir.
How! your heir? By this light, and it is well considered, now I think on it; I will be thy heir, or at least a careful steward for my Captain; let me see, this sword has a good guard, this hat and feather how sits it?
What dost thou mean?
This Buff-coat will not be amiss neither.— 
Villain, unhand me.
Nay, nay, you must part.
Dog.— 
And these Breeches too, and this Doublet, I'll wear them for your sake; nay, no resisting.
Slave, Villain.
See how impatient you are, come, come, you are going to another world (as you say) quit the thoughts of these transitory things now, and prepare to dye finely like a fine gentleman, and a Lieutenant.
Hell take thee, slave.
It is more then ever I got by a Legacy before; by my faith, it is a fair Coat; a pox take'em that cut it thus: Now for the Breeches.
Why, thou wilt not murder me?
No, no, only borrow your Breeches; for look, Sir, what need you such gay things as these now when you are going to lie alone in the dark?
Oh! misery of miseries!
Ha, ha, this revenge is better then long life.
O inhumane slave! 
What noise is that?
It is vengeance, slave; I will make thee curse thy self.
Silence, my small friend, or else I have a Plaster of cold  iron, hight a Dagger; By this hilt, I will apply the point to your side, if you breathe one loud syllable more; marry, if you will, curse inwardly; it was my own case once, and I forgive it.
Patience, oh patience.
I, I, come when she will, you will have use of her; this noise draws this way, I must pluck him into the wood, and then I'll cut his throat; you had best bethink you of some odd prayer, for it must be so. 
Murder, Villain, Dog.
Come, come along, Sir; why should you grudge to dye when I am to be your heir?
Oh misery, misery of miseries, is there no revenge?
WHence grew this sudden Alarm?
I fear, from the discovery of the Plot; if it be so, we are lost for ever.
Lead them in and bind 'em, and some one run for a Surgeon.
What are these, Sir?
I know not; pray heaven they be worth the purchase: We have paid dear for 'em; prithee help me off.
Facertes! it is he, and women in his company; I will not suspect him she that is jealous; sets a cheap rate upon her self; for if he be worthy of such a pain as jealousy, he cannot be so faulty as to deserve it.
I am amazed, it is the Princess Sophia.
Sophia?
What miseries do I see, Madam, to add to mine own afflictions; I never thought I should have lived to see the day
wherein I should have grieved to have met the fair Sophia.
Why are you afflicted to meet me now?
Oh! Madam, my love begets my sorrows; for what shall I think? my thoughts are divided, to meet your Highness, where license sows, and sin reaps; here, where rage fetches her fire, and murder bathes his bloody hands; and unsensibly recounts in security the treacherous stabs.
Say this guilt be here, must I be subject to the infection?
I do not think you are guilty, yet my fears tells me, where tired lust retires to pant, such beauties as adore the fair So∣phia, must kindle fresh fires.
Why do you wound me thus with your suspicion, and rob me of the joy I had to see you? it is not kindly done to add such a pain to my misfortune; had you fallen into the power of our sex, though sold to sin; like these, I could have died sooner then have injured you so as to think you would-out live your honour; and when you are just to me, you will not believe I prize mine so little as to sell it for a shamed life.
Oh! divinest, pardon my love, whose fears still appre∣hend the worst.
Madam, let the impatience that begets this rudeness ex∣cuse it while I profess my self, by all ties, yours; for though, till now, a stranger to you; yet I am one that owes your civil menti∣once a life, which your mercy lent this unfortunate Brother.
Speak, Facertes, is this the Princess, Cicely?
This was; but what she is now the Gods only know. 
Oh! Madam, in love and miseries we are become one; and my whole stock of tears I would waste here, could that wash off my Countries crime, or remove the stain.
I have forgot my part of them; so new and so strange are the favours you and your gallant Brother have loaded us with, that his dangers now are all my fears.
My Brother! where is he? have you seen him?
Yes, Madam; and I fear he is at this instant hunting, with certain danger, our uncertain safety.
Ha! the same Prisoners that were stole, and sold at Naples.
Upon my life, Sir, it is true.
It is, it is she, and the Prince Facertes too. 
The honoured Negro?
Alive? oh ye Gods! This day is full of your hands; and all is like you (wonder.)
Rise, why do you kneel? oh, lay that aged head here; where are we? what strange place is this the Sicilian Deity is run to hide her self in?
Though I do not know thy face; yet to Facertes name, here kneels a subject, and one of those your dead Father called faith∣full, my name Terresius.
Terresius?
Yes Terresius, Negro, that with him from the same battle, when you fled with this gallant Prince, bore away the hopeful Lucius; we have run strange fortunes since; but I durst not tell him what he was, lest his fiery nature should have pulled on a certain ruin.
My Brother Lucius living?
Yes, Sir; and that, I hope, will expiate the fault my igno∣rance this day committed.
Where is he, Sir?
I left him pursuing the victory, but I'll haste and tell him this news it will stay his rage, which else may pursue his own ruin upon his friends.
For heavens sake haste, lest he and the Prince Virgilius meet; for either of their conquests brings my ruin.
Let me accompany you.
I dare not, Sir, for yet the Soldiers know you not; and their mistake of duty to me may bring on a sad consequence.
For heavens sake lose no time, but haste to prevent this danger.
I'll send an Officer, Sir, to guard you; and then with safety you may come but till then; I beseech you stir not.
Pray, Madam, what blessed chance brought my Brother to have the power to serve you.
Defer that story till a fitter time, and haste now to the saving of your Brother.
Pray lead the way, lest our ceremony hinder our charity.
If you'll give me leave to command, I'll obey; you must not refuse me your hand; oh! that the Gods had made our Coun∣tries join thus in peace.
THey cannot escape; I have fired their Galley, and mine lies loose, in wait for any that shall come to their aid. Miserable Virgilius! unfortunate that I am, preserved only to a greater loss; this way a Soldier (whose dying words could only guide me) said they took; I'll hunt them to their den but I'll find the monsters.
THe Galley fired, and the Lieutenant slain; Hell upon him, he has crossed all my designs; Fate thou art Fate
still, but whither just or no thus to strike against the intentions of the honest, the Gods be Judge; All my hopes are sunk; that ex∣cellent Maid is lost too, and I shall appear guilty and treacherous to her; But if I find the cursed Incendiary, with his hateful Blood I'll quench the flame: Take that path, if you find him, call.
Sir, this is he. 
This, by description, should be him I seek.
What art thou, that walk with such confidence in these forbidden Woods? Know, thou hast kindled a fire nothing but thy Blood shall extinguish.
Unless thou wilt fall too, and make one in that ruin, I counsel thee immediately to deliver (without repetition) those whom thy treacherous odds have ravished hence.
I will not revile thee, because I mean to fight with thee; Yet I would gladly know whence thou art, that hope with thy threats to wash off this glorious colour, and shake those fruits that Conquest gave a growth to here.
Rome claims my Birth.
So it does of him I hate more then the loathed Issues of the Earth.
What art thou, that dare avow such a hatred of a Roman to a Roman's face?
I am of Sicily, the unfortunate subject of your Rage.
So is she I prefer equal with the Gods; yet her interest in the Nation shall not protect thee that art so base as to make spoil of thine own nest.
You'll find words of no force here, and thou look as if thou would not yield upon entreaty.
Nor can thou conquer me, when I fight in her cause, though thou take the odds of his sword.
His? he dares not strike, where he sees my sword drawn upon a single opposite.
You will not deliver these Ladies then?
I'll give thee all my glory first; yet I know thou art the Author of all those miseries that shall succeed; for had not thou burnt my Galley, I had decreed their safety, but now thou hast sold them to perpetual slavery.
The guilty never want excuses, but I shall punish both those falsehoods.
Soldier, upon your life stir not a foot to my rescue, I scorn to live upon Charity.
I'll talk no longer, their freedoms or thy sword; for my vows are writ in Heaven, never to sheath this sword till I found them or a Grave.
One of them I'll guide you to, or miss my aim.—For∣tune,  hast thou decreed that I shall blush to death? Loose where my Love and Countries Genius both strike? If thou be a Deity save my Honour.
Will you yield, or try a farther Fate? 
No, Roman, we may be overcome, but we scorn to yield.
Ask thy life, or thou art dead.
No, when thou can give it, it is not worth asking.
Then it is not worth taking.
What noise is that?
I know not, Sir.
Draw, and kill any thing that offers to rescue me; for when Cilius cannot stand alone in this cause, let him fall for ever.
I would thou had not deserved my sword.
Stand, he that advances a step as Friend or Enemy, till they have done, shall kill or die.
How now, Sirrah? Cilius, if the name of Facertes or Cici∣lia have a power, you'll cease to be an Enemy there. 
Or if the brave Virgilius be satisfied with shedding of Sci∣cilian Blood, he will now spare the lost Lucius, and reconcile him∣self  to that Brother Enemy.
Prince Lucius!
Virgilius!
Yes, Sir, Virgilius, and there are coming those whose In∣terest in either will quickly clear this doubt.
Sir, by the name of Brother; I conjure you to defer this hate till you have heard us speak.
And if I have a Sisters interest it will disarm Virgilius.
Sister? what strange accident brought thee hither?—Madam, will you pardon that uncivil Joy that passed you to find  a Sister?
Yes, Sir, if you'll help me find a friend to Virgilius, and a lost Brother to Cicely.
Terresius, unfold this Riddle, amazement yet with-holds my sword, and has almost bound my Reason; what means this shuffling of Facertes, Cicely, Virgilius and Lucius together? Those names, and this dearness, what means it?
Dare you trust me?
The honoured Negro.
Or me, whose faith you have bought; and give us leave to reconcile this wonder?
Madam, I am all your slave, and when your hand deals it destruction shall fall on Cilius unresisted.
Dare you show your breast? it is all I beg.
Yes, fair one, and every thought of it shall to you be visible.
Here, here, it is a thousand witnesses to prove the lost Lucius.
It is so, and upon his knees Teresius begs his pardon for keeping this secret so long from you; But now it comes accom∣pany'd with many blessings; see here your Brother, the Prince Fa∣certes, and the Excellent Cicely, whose Loves have been by Fate ap∣pointed to restore our Country to her long-lost liberty.
And if Lucius finds a part of this Joy, let him with friend∣lie arms embrace Virgilius, who is now a Brother, and ever a Friend.
Dare you from my hand take him?
That I have been thus long silent, let the wonder you have begot plead for me; And, Sir, that we durst be Enemies should  be no stop to that faith, which confirms we dare be friends.
Sir, your last act assures Virgilius, who cannot believe he is safe till you embrace him; for I know, such an Enemy as Prince Lucius reconciled will prove a conquering friend.
The Gods make this friendship as lasting as it is strange.
Madam, doth this change bring no hope to Lucius? must he still be the despairing Cilius? dare you not yet tell me who you  are?
Yes, my Name's Sophia.
Ha, the Princess Sophia?
Yes, Lucius: But why is my Brother sad? do's he mourn my Interest there?
No, Sir, I neither mourn yours there, nor the Excellent Sophias here; but I am hunting out a way to bear my self like Lu∣cius in this great day; your hand, Madam,—Here Facertes from Fate receive this Jewel, it is a Wealth I cannot hope to possess, but by being unworthy of it; and it shall be Lucius his glory to say, To keep his Fame, he gave that away.
Let no replies defer the Joys that attend this day.
To the Temple then, while with healing sacrifice Fire∣gilius loads the Altars.
I shall follow, if Lucius will lead the way. Thus blessed, and thus embraced, more a God then they.
Yet lest we leave our Enemies behind,
Let's know how these our Judges stand inclined.

SEleucus, you know the soul of our Design lies in the speedy and silent execution of the Plot; let us not then presume in their security till we fall in our own; but go, and when they have begirt the place give us notice, that with our Charge they may at once fear and feel their danger, and by us be clothed in Ruin ere they know whose Livery they wear—This, if Fortune be kind,  must be; for where Justice and she strike in what corner of the Earth can Victory hide her self, and that youthful hand not find her?
I should blush at this, if there needed more Arguments to confirm I shall be victorious than the reward proposed; for had the Gods intended the far-fam'd Claricilla's Virtues a Reward for Treason they would not then have left her Virtue such a Guard, whose power hath stood amongst Traitors when yours fell upon the faith that bore it.
You oblige me, Sir, and this goodness makes me beg you would be pleased to let me once again call to your memory some particulars of that tedious story which so often in my miseries I re∣counted to your Highness: This Traitor Silvander having by my love gained an interest, and by my smiles climbed o'er the Heads of all his Fellows in the strength of that trust grew too powerful for me, and in a Battle (where my cause only struck) our Forces be∣ing not half the Traitors number we lost the day, to which Theft, not Conquest, was joined the Murder of my Brother and loss both of my Crown and Daughter.
That fault the Gods will punish; but his usurpation of the Princess, and intended Rape which in a forced Marriage he la∣bours, are those that blow my rage.
It is true, it has always been his aim, but his Love, by Hey∣ven appointed for his punishment and our Guard, has given her a constant power over him, which we have so directed that she has prevailed with him to quit his greatest strength, and retreat with her to this private Villa, where now he remains attended only with some few Troops of Horse: This opportunity we owe her piety, that has put it in our power to strike for our Revenge and Right again.
Arm, Sir, and behold how in the obedience to your commands they are lost; Ruin in silence like Growth steals up∣on them; they are now impaled, and destruction hovers yet undis∣covered to the Prey; but defer not, for Night makes haste away, and the Cause hath such a Glory cast about the Soldier that it forces Day, and Victory in their resolution waits but your Com∣mand to send her forth.
Sir, pray be pleased to give these Iost men their Dooms; the Signal's yours.
It is an Honour, and I accept it—And thus I give it, Follow me. 
And that Soldier that refuses such a Signal, let his weigh∣tie fears sink him where he stands. Come, Seleucus. Exit King.
Come, Seleucus had not wont to be the Word upon a Charge; O Love, thy power hath disarmed me, or rather Envy hath disarmed my Love; could it be else that I should stand thus unspirited in Claricilla's cause, while others gild their Swords in her revenge? it could not be—Hark, how eagerly they pursue my  misery; cruel Honour too puts in, and tells me, I lose my interest in her, unless by giving wounds I pull on mine own by making way for this Prince's hopes.
COme, Timillus, let us haste to the Charge, lest our Friends believe Fear declined our Peace; and we are early enough, if we succeed, to let them see we have brought the wishes of Friends.
Faith, if we do not succeed we shall find we came too soon, I am sure I shall; In an overthrow I am certain to get my share; when I live to want an Enemy my Friends shall knock me of the head; for I thank my Fates, Fortune has been as bountiful of her mischiefs to me as an Enemy could wish, and that's but a hard condition, you'll say, for a man that cannot ask rewards when he does well.
Mention not that here where reward grows within thy reach in every daring forehead; and if Timillus dares not gather
them he must go without 'em; jests brings none of the swords har∣vest home.
You are ever thus snappish till I am angry, and then I fight to my own ruin not mine enemies; one would think you might allow a man his humour, and not be forced to fight your quar∣rel, but he must fight your way too.
Prithee no more, leave this discourse and follow me.
And what wilt thou do, Jacomo?
Who I? I'll follow my Master.
No prithee, let us be friends, choose some other place, for I'm resolved to keep that my self till I am beaten from it.
You're merry, Sir, but I have seen them clawed ere now that have taken it; but I hope you'll find better fortune.
A pox of Fortune, she has no such thing as good or bad belongs to her; follow me and if we gain the day I'll give her thee.
FLy, Madam, and leave 'em, for these enemies bring our freedom.
Be constant heaven.
What, ho Claricilla, gentle Claricilla, dost thou fly me too? nay then I'm lost indeed; thou might have had mercy, though no love, and preserved me for thine own sake; for in this fall of mine thou hast a hand in ruining thine own Temple; nor can thou after this ingratitude be termed the just, however the fair Claricilla.—No, since Claricilla's cruel I will not stir a foot that  leads from danger, nor vainly attempt to escape the hand of hey∣ven, unless I could hide me from his eye too.—What art thou that wear such death about thee, and look as if thou came to  put off thy habit here?
It is not you I look for,—It is something that shot  from heaven before me; she appeared like innocence her self, striking in her own cause; saw you not that star, did she not in her descent pass this way?—He minds me not.
It is so; this youth but saw her, and he's overcome.—Stay, what ere thou art, that once again I may see thy face, and read the story which Love and Anger appears so mingled in.—Now, By all our gods, it is nobly writ; and had I met it when I commanded fortune, I would have studied thee, and by obligate∣once have grafted thee my friend; but since that power is gone, by this—and my name, I command thee be my Priest, know Sell∣vander the unfortunate calls thee back. 
Silvander! Oh ye gods! what power ye give to trea∣son?  that name hath dispersed the cloud that passion threw be∣twixt him and the revenge a Fathers murder called—Unfortunate as wicked; what fate ruled thee thus to call me back!
Prithee youth, no noise; I was a traitor, but true to Love. A King, and yet his power commanded me; and could my love to Claricilla have consented to have worn such a Jewel in less then a Crown, or been satisfied to have seen her whom I preferred before the gods stand second to any; thou in all thy wounds and faith which thus adorn thee, should not have out-shin'd me this day in loyalty.
Love and Treason mixed! know, though thou hast proved thy self a cunning Chemist in attempting to destroy that noble by∣die; yet I have that here shall in spite of all thy adulterate mix∣tures restore and fix it: Guard thee.
Prithee threaten not, for though I prophecy thou bring my winding-sheet, yet thou shalt see my smiles in scorns wreathe it about me; and yet I mean not to fall unlike a Soldier, nor be buried without my Rights about me, my sword upon my breast thus: and therefore guard thee. 
Guard me! it is the office of the gods.—To kill thee is to do the execution, and the way as safe as that the Ministers of Justice tread: and were it as noble as just, I would command thee hold thy neck out; but I scorn such ways to my revenge; and therefore take an equal trial.—Yield, and your Person's safe; for it was against your cause, not you, I drew my sword, which scorns  to strike even Silvander upon the ground.
Hold, and ere this darkness hath quite shadowed me, hear my story; that as thou hast punished my treason, thou may pity my misfortune: and thus (when I am gone) report of me, Sell∣vander bowed to a cruel power, who when he had offered all that a Lovers thought could compass, and the power of a King worn on∣lie to serve in when that power lessened, and my offerings came to be in the heart, not hand, the way to his mercy was shut, and my prayers because unperfum'd unheard, and I the offerer thus made the sacrifice: Oh gentle youth, would any bow to such a power as flies us in our miseries, or worship that image which thus falls upon her Priest.
Unfortunate indeed, as all men are that build upon faults; but I will not say I pity thee; for where a King once grew to sow pity is the worst of changes.
This way he went, Sir, if he be mortal; but his stay's so short that we but seem to follow in the tract he makes.
Let us lose no time then in overtaking him, that we may assist his work.
I will not fight a foot farther that way; if there be no enemies backwards, I'll make some; S'death, I'll not take Mars his leavings in the field.
Come Seleucus, turn this fire the right way, and twill light thee to find out honour.
It has don't; but to day she's so busy in obeying one mans fortune that my wounds are not currant pay to pur∣chase her.
We're sure he's this way, for here's his mark; where ere he goes he makes death his character; know you this that bears it?
Know him? yes, this stroke killed not a traitor, but trea∣son it self fell here: this is Silvander, and he's gone.—Envy, be not prophetic; his aims beyond a Crown: it must be Claricil∣la then, ye gods! whither else tends this youths flight, or what but she will satisfy; when a King cannot make his quarry! this doubt makes me pursue him, though to a dangerous know∣ledge.
SUre this stranger knows me not; he pursues me as if I were part of the enemy.
O stay; for know, since I have once again seen my fate I'll read it what ere it be, it is written in so fair a book.—See, un∣confident of my arms I beg your stay; he begs that dealt death as  oft as wounds to his opposers in your pursuit; your fears wrong me; he that dares fight with men will not war with beauty; and this sword that hath cut through so many fates, this day, to find mine own, tremble not at it, for it hath ever been the servant of ju∣stice, not cruelty.
Sir, I know not guilt enough to beget a fear; yet if you mean me no harm, why do you pursue me, and neglect the advan∣tage Fortune throws upon your daring youth? have you such choice of honours you scorn to stoop for this you have ventured so far for? what dress would you wear? what beauties would your youth put on to make it lovely, when those wounds a Crown and conquest cannot satisfy? when your heart thinks these no harvest, where would your sword sow your hazards to reap one more glorious?
Fair soul go on; and whilst you blame the effect, I'll read, the cause, and thus look upon the conquest; Crown and reward I struck for, and if ever I have triumph it must pass through those Arches in gentle smiles; and whilst I enjoy this happiness, let the Crown and Victory pass by as the lesser good. Nor would I give this sight to possess the blessings that attend them both.
Heaven grant this fruit be from a noble stock, and yet it is safer it were not; for I fear I am not proof against such virtues; it was the dress my Melintus wore when he appeared most comely (nor need I doubt him) for never honour grew where it was not sowed; Sir, you forget your wounds, they exact a care.
No, fair one; I am now pouring Balm into them; and could I hope you would afford this way of cure, it would be one health not to be healed.—Why do you turn away, and let my truths fall ere they reach your ears? is it your fears that would re∣move  you? let this truth secure you; though I appear in this bloody dress, more like a Priest, yet know I am a sacrifice, and that sacrifice which once was acceptable to you.
Sure I have heard that voice.—Sir, for heavens sake, wound me not with doubt, but tell me who you are.
Are there no lines in all this misery that you can call to mind?—Nor the print of one joy left which you set there.
Oh yes! there is.
O Claricilla!—Soul of honour, why do you not in charity quit your virtue, it is single here, that I may throw off my pain.
O Melintus, you must not wish it; Melintus can bravely suffer, he's a Soldier, Loves Soldier, but Honours Leader; let me weep my soul into thy noble breast; this payment I can make to none but to thy self; those tears that were due to absence sadness paid thy memory; Oh let me rest upon thee, my joys are too great a load to bear; and feel how the Melintus here beats to meet Me∣lintus there.
Oh ye gods, it is Paradise sure; the way was so •gged that lead to it.
It is a great power we serve; nor is it more seen in his pu∣nishment that parted us, then in this reward; but let us not, my soul, unhandsomely, or saucily, express our joys; it may displease those powers that have been thus favourable; and my Melintus had not wont to sacrifice to himself and forget the gods.
Oh gentle Claricilla, remove not from me; for you mistake the posture, the breast is Loves Altar, and the seat of friendship; and for sacrifice, is not Claricilla a fuller offering in either kind then a Cake or Spice? but I submit, for Melintus shall never know a reason that contradicts Claricilla.
Yet let us remember what we owe to your safety; your wounds too (but that I know Melintus ever placed dangers behind his Love) I should ere this have prompted you to a care of.
For my wounds, the cause will heal 'em; to me you owe nothing for your deliverance; your freedom grew here, and your enemies mistaking the place, in search of my dangers, dug it out; and you shall find this truth in the beauty of the scars they leave. Oh Claricilla, thy faith makes me smile through all this blood; but hark, I fear we are pursued; this upon your fair hand, and then let me hide my love and name under my disguise. 
Good night, Melintus; for thou hast now put out the light, and like Love himself thou art blind, and thou art all I worship of that god.
See where the Eagle stands, my fears were true; the
Princess in his hand too, he holds her like his prey in the foot.—  Sir, though you fought well, this Lady will not prove your re∣ward, she cannot be a prisoner here, Sir.
What I did well was rewarded in the act; and for this Lady I am so far from hoping she should be my prisoner, that I would have suffered all the miseries of war ere struck one blow against her freedom.
Here is a Prince whose youthful fire blown with desire to serve your Highness has through thousand dangers, this day, courted your favour, and in his hand you'll seem more aptly worn.
Madam, though his friendship seem to direct, your high∣nos has an interest that commands here; and it is honour enough if you please to let me kiss your hand.
Sir, civilities are always fruitful, and beget civilities, if they meet with honour; which I hope shall not be wanting to give a a growth to what you venture here.
Madam, I see it is not my opinion only, but this Lords too, that I am unworthy of this honour.
If it be an honour, Sir, wear it; you first secured it. 
Will you make your hand the reward of Fortune then, and scatter your favours so that they may be had for stooping? is that an honour due to the first comer? if so, I grudge it not, for such favours and upon such ties he may wear; else I should be loath to stoop to her that bows to him.
You are insolent.
Thus, Madam, be pleased to accept your due, and then give me leave to exact mine.—Sir, let not your interest here  and the opinion you have but a single enemy, make you presume to injure me, nor so mistake my bounty as to think I have thrown my blood away in vanity; for though I set no price upon my wounds, and contract not for killing of a Traitor, yet I can tell whether I am bid fair or no when I have don't; and it is nobler far to give a curtsy then sell it under.—Do you smile? it may be  you have had good markets, and such weak chapman for those few good deeds you have done.
Yes, but if thou were from this place I would make thee pay dear for one which should on thy heart write, Thou were but my factor; and all the honour thou art thus proud of but my store.
You promise to your self too fair; and noises fright only when we are ignorant of the cause, and there's too much in thee to have a dangerous depth.
Hold, Seleucus,—Sir, when you know his good, you will pardon this ill, nor do I conceive it an injury to show by his envy what value he sets upon your glories; and I make no doubt when his reason hath purged this choler from his honour, you'll find him a healthy friend, and his acquaintance not subject to these sickly passions; if he does, as of a surety, command my faith to make this good.
Come, prithee leave thy fooling, and let me see it; I hope it is not dangerous.
No, no, ne'er fear it; this narrow Lane will ne'er prove my High-way to Heaven.
Prithee come away then, we shall be observed to be so long together.
Hang observers, for I am sure I ne'er had any.
STrip those Slaves, and to the Bank chain the Cowards; Slavery is no new thing to such as fear: and Tullius, loose the Rhodian on the Star-board bank: Me-thinks that Fellow looks as if he were unjustly yoked with his misery; in the heat of the sight I saw him shake his Chain like a fierce Dog held from the Chase.
Sir.
Urge me no more; Justice as well as Blood has an interest in the Revenge I take; and that makes it healthy, though it may be that which Anger hunts would taste as sweet.
Sir, your pardon; it is my ignorance in the cause of your displeasure made me mediate for them.
And because Tullius shall not think that Manlius would in misery expect the compassion that he would not give you shall  know why I refuse these my Countrymen in misery that mercy I found from thee in mine.
Sir, not that I doubt you have one, but the desire to know it, makes me beg you would relate the cause; Tullius can be but faithful when he has heard it, and that I hope is not to be quest∣on it now.
Know then, in that day when Treason flew above Justice, and false Silvander enriched by his Master's trust out-vy'd the no∣ble King with his own bounty, who too late found his love had not gained a Friend, but begot a Traitor, it was in that day the brave Thisander fell. The interest I had in this fault Heaven, I hope, hath pardoned as well as punished; but to be short, our party ha∣avenge gained the day, the Crown and Beauty that attended it, the fair Claricilla fell into the hands of false Silvander, where her fire∣tues by daily seeing them dispersed the Cloud Ambition had set be∣twixt my Loyalty and me, and then too late I repented what I had done; yet not willing to despair before I had attempted something, I undertook an act, which if Heaven had smiled on, might have redeemed my forfeit Honour; it was to heal the wounds I had
made with the blood of the surprised Traitor, whose fall I had decreed in the midst of all his false glories.
How came it, Justice was so absent in her own cause?
His sins it seems were not ripe, nor this punishment that Heaven designed him, which by I hope this is fully paid: But to the parcular; one night being in the Princesses chamber contriving her escape, which we resolved should be ere I gave the blow, a Guard seized me, and no cause given; I was sent unto my ruin, as he designed, there your gratitude preserved me, I afterwards learned the occasion of my imprisonment; these men whom Fortune now has given into my power urged the lust-burnt Traitor to a Rape upon the Princess, and with a forced Marriage counselled him to confirm his Title, blowing in his eat that there was love betwixt the Princess and me, which if his care removed not would be a hindrance to his designs; from his guilt and jealousy grew that no∣cessity which made me receive the command my better fortunes gave your merit: And now judge whether or no there be a justice in this punishment.
It is visible they bow under a weight that justice hath laid upon them, and my Galley is both a Prison and a Sanctuary.
Is this Manlius, and the cause of his disgrace?
But see the Slave I have sent for, Tullius; Was he bought or taken?
It is one of that Ging defended the Rhodian when we lost so many men in fight.
I remember the story; but how came it he was left when you sold the rest?
They did not like the price; besides he was dogged, and that made me put him to the Oar.
Of what Country art thou, and thy name?
Of no Country,—nor no name, in Chains; Slave is a being—That what has been is of no force against; else my Name and Country are not things to be ashamed of.
Yet if you think they have power to gain your freedom you are too blame to keep 'em hid.
I have vowed never to discover either till I have my free∣doom, and I will not break my vow.
Why so dogged in your answer?
Why not? What is there in my fortune that needs fear a worse condition? or what danger in a Slave worth your concede∣ration what he says? If you dare a venture good deed, give me credit for one and set me free.
No, no, we must not be forced to a benefit. Tullius, com∣mand the Galley to put from shore, and lie loose to night to be rea∣die if there be occasion offered, we will stay a shore to night and expect what issue this days trouble hath.
Yes, I was of the Rhodian Ging, and chief, though you know it not; and had our Seconds been men of souls and not made up of fears, might have plaid your parts now. To what a misery∣ble condition am I fallen? The last Mart, because I was wounded,
no body would buy me, the soul of a Slave in their esteem not weighing down his limbs: Ye Gods, either send me liberty or take your gifts again: Honour and her Issue, Courage, Justice, Faithfulness, are of no use to me; Who would be judged by a Slave? Courage in Chains, what can it hurt? or to be faithful, of what use when we are not trusted? O my fate! Why was I born free? Had I been bred a Slave I could have sung in Chains; nay, to have perished in them had been dying in my Calling; but to fall from greatness, and without a fault be punished with the guilty! nay, where the guilty scope! False Rhodes! my Curse kindle a fire within thee; the freedom that my soul brought thither threw me into her dangers which their Cowardice had made such certain ruin in their apprehension that not one amongst them had man enough to look upon their fears; I then a God was held, because I durst venture thus to become a Sa∣crifice.
YE Gods, by what ways or marks should men follow what is good? when virtue it self does not always keep one path; when Claricilla who has all I know of virtue shall quit the God-like attribute of Truth, and the Guard which Innocence se∣cures her from impious men with, and fly for safety to an Excuse? She denied my visit at the price of a Lie, and at that rate of sin bought a strangers company: Olinda assures me he's at this time with her; but why do I thus without dangers bark against him, and let this Tree without a Root, this Lie stand in my prospect? It shall not, I will see her; and since she can so put off her Honour, as to lie for one man, who knows but she may lie with two?
YOu have now heard all the passages of my life since that sad day we parted to this joyful hour; which if poor Philemon had lived to see, how happy had we three been!
Have you not heard of him since his loss at Rhodes? Do you believe him dead?
My love makes me believe what I fear, for he had many wounds; besides, I know his Ransom would have pleased the Con∣querour better than his bonds, for they were Pirates; but no more of this sad subject now.
O Melintus, grow not weary of mentioning a Friend; though it be sad, it is just, and let that bear the weight; had Philemon lived to have seen me and Melintus lost, we should have spent our
days in your story ere suffered your name to have past un-men∣tion'd. Philemon, to his Friend a Lamb, and in such softness he al∣ways wore his Lions heart; Philemon, whose youth had growth with us, a Plant by the same hand set, a flower from our own stock, and all his sweets akin to us; and we ought to be allied to his misfortunes too: but why do I teach Melintus? it is bold∣lie done to give Laws to him that is such a Master in the rights of friendship.
To let you see I love Philemon, I do not grudge him that precious dew; and gentle Claricilla, to witness my soul hath one consent with yours, See, I can bear you company in your own Sex.
O ye Gods! he weeps, Melintus weeps; What Agony must this noble Youth feel when his Soul sweats such drops? Par∣don me for thus stirring thy grief.
Do not think I left the subject because I was weary of the discourse, or could enough mention Philemon, that durst be my Friend when it was certain ruin; and now he's dead I break no trust to tell you the cause was a greater tie than any effect it had. Know, Philemon was in love with Claricilla, and it was with Clari∣cello and not himself; for when by my trust he found your soft∣nos had received impression from my constant love, and you were pleased to call me your Melintus, I became his too; and to serve us in our wishes was all the Heaven he aimed at. And now (my Soul) you must either confess me unworthy, or else grant, such daring courage, and such fearful love as Philemon commanded, could never sink from the soul of Melintus.
Since Melintus hath begun, take my confession too; know I saw it long ago, and decreed rewards of friendship for the noble youth; but when it was beyond my power to cure, it had been cruelty to have inquired the pain, and therefore would not see what I pitied. And now you have all the secrets of my heart; those of joy thy friendship multiplies, and those of grief; thus thou di∣vid'st the pains.
O lay the whole weight here.
Madam, Seleucus upon earnest business, as he pretends, will see you.
How? will see me? Tell him—
Nothing, Madam, he knows too much already; and though my Anger, which Envy and your Cause begot, was grown to such a destructive height that I could not rule it till it found mine own ruin in your frown, yet a Soldiers envy is no sin; nor ought his anger be punished by his friends, when he appears not in love with his fault, nor seeks to justify it. This day I begged leave to crave your pardon for my offence; and your Highness re∣fus'd my visit, and made an Excuse to admit this—Madam, twill be  no glory to you that you could withstand the sieges which Silvander
and my self laid against you by many services, when it shall be known you were overcome by a single one, and yielded at first sight to a stranger.
Seleucus, when I take you for my friend I'll take your counsel, and not till then; for the services you urge they have been always dressed so in commands that they appeared unbe∣coming.
Madam, you did not look with equal eyes upon them, else their passion would have appeared their greatest beauty; and I never spake Loves language more than when I was least a Poet.
The love of Subjects to their Prince is duty; and those whom we pay we do not thank; the Hireling ought to serve.
Madam, you speak as if I served for bread, and forget that Subjects are Heavens servants; and it is the Gods that appoint us Kings, and I am doomed to it. It is that, not want that makes me a Subject, which condition your Highness is not exempt from. But I wonder what mighty Prince this is that thus vouchsafes to hide himself.
This insolence here?
Your pardon, Madam, it is my Q. your Sex cannot strike, and it was the respect which this place claims made me stand his mark thus long-Now to you who this second time have with scorn looked upon my temper when a calm has hid it. Know in the best of all thy ills, thy love, thou art a Traitor; else thou durst not hope this Prin∣cess would be food for servants; and though thy fawning on thy Masters feet hath been cherished so that thou hast left the Crumbs there, and are now set by him, snatching at his own dish.
This to me?
Yes, to thee whose pride hath now but begun its leap, which I prophecy will end at his throat; nor are such Dogs strange in this state. Remember yesterday, when one of that hated breed fell unpitied.
Sure you take me for a Coward, you durst not urge me thus else.
No, Sir, that would secure you; nor do I believe, though you have many faults, coward any of them.
I'll expect you in the garden then.
I'll follow you—Madam, let not this threatened strom fright you; your interest lies in the security of my innocence, which cannot fall here.
O that Melintus would hear my Reasons for what I say ere accuse me for having too much woman in my suit, and then I would tell him he must not fight, at least not now.
Not fight? My honour is concerned.
And my honour is concerned; twill look like fighting for me; and I hope, Melintus will not set that at stake against open∣neon, especially when his courage is so far from being in question, it is become a Proverb. Besides, though you conquer you are lost; you see his interest in my Father makes him not look with justice on your merits; and to kill his creature may threaten your own
ruin, but these Arguments have their period in fears still; and therefore I'll not urge the reasons they bring, as of force against the danger that honour threatens.
And those that come not so attended are commands to Melintus, who covets only to keep those beauties of his mind, that you may not be put to make excuses for your love.
Then gently thus, let me prevail with you to appoint a farther day, to determine this angry question, whilst I acquaint my Father with his ambitious hopes, which he not dreams are levelled at me, and consequently the Crown; I'll tell him of his insolence now, and at the Battle; then I will urge the late treason, and bid him call to mind the dangers that Traitors hopes threatened, which sprung from this root. I know twill startle his soul; and if it fail to ruin him, yet twill take the edge of the Kings faith off from what he says, and with jealous eyes he will look upon his growing greatness; and when he is thus shook, thus parted from the Cedar that shelters him, then let thy justice pour a storm upon his head: And now by the power Melintus hath given me I command him deliver his honour for a time into my protection; this (if I have not appeared too careless of mine own) you cannot deny me.
You have overcome me, take my honour which I have preserved through thousand hazards, I freely give it you, and now rest secure I am yours for ever; for my love and honour being gone, what remains is fit for nothing; I will not meet this angry man; his insolence shall have justice on her side; and I will give him cause to scorn me.
Melintus shoots his presents, and then they wound, not oblige; courtesies done unwillingly is throwing the frozen into the fire, where too much heat kills the charity, and proves but alter∣ing, not rescuing the danger.
Pardon, Madam, if you find me unversed in the way that leads to dishonour; for though I submit to your reason, yet Seleu∣cus nor the world (to whom he will barely tell the fault) will know what argument with-held me.
Pray obey me once without dispute; and I hope this cloud is all that is left of many that lowered upon our joys, and we shall see a clear evening yet to crown our wishes. Farewell.
HEnce Love, and thy pale dew of tears be gone; Re∣avenge and her beauteous purple, it is to thee I bow, Love cannot now reach my ends; though at first I stalked with it, it was indeed a proper Nurse, and rocked the Cradle while my de∣signs were young; but now they walk alone waited on by my reason∣lutions and confident of my strength; I need not such her milky miracles, to confirm my faith; nor ought the event (though ill) be
laid to me; for to dare speaks the great soul, not the success; since Prophets well seen in things to come have been themselves o'retaken with an unknown doom; but stay, the business now in hand requires my being present here.—Now, Sir, you're some∣thing slow in justifying, though quick in doing injuries; sure you  believe me the dog you called me, you would not have made me wait thus else.
It is true, injuries are things I am as slow to justify, as com∣mit; they are commonly the children of choler, and such bastard issue shame the Parents; and if through weakness at any time I get them I hide them if I can with satisfaction.
Words are too near akin to heal words; your sword hath a more certain cure, and I repair to that, draw.—Do you not understand the word? draw.
First hear me; that I came un-invited, and now am go∣ing without taking leave, shows it was choice put me upon these hazards, not necessity; and that I dare fight I have it written in my face, here under my enemies hand, to witness; and such torn Ensigns tell the bearer fled no dangers; let that satisfy it is not fear binds my hands, and yet I will not fight.
It was the cause I see gave you fire; and I am ashamed to call that man enemy which I must bid twice draw his sword, which do or I'll kill thee.
I tell thee I will not fight.
You will not fight? By my life I'll kill thee then.
When I will not fight any body may do it; but when I will thou can not; and once again I tell thee I will not fight, nor dare thou kill me.
Not dare? why what hast thou about thee that can pro∣tect thee from the justice this brings?
Thou hast that about thee that protects me; and though I hate thee yet I can be just.
Do me justice with your hand, your tongue has lost his power; draw your sword, it is her proper emblem, or, By my an∣ger, thou art lost; nor shall this new kind of coward save thee; Turn, and do not tempt me, or, By him that rules the day, I'll kill thy fame too with a cowards wound in thy back.
Thou dare not do it; I know thou wilt not take so little for thine honour; it cost thee too dear to be sold so cheap as to take a naked life, that's undefended, for it; thou see I am resolved not to fight to day; so bound by a resolution that coward could not lose it, therefore in vain thou tempt'st me.
Why the devil did you take this resolution against me that long to fight with you?
It is but for a time.
Will you then hereafter?
Yes, by all my hopes; and nothing but this resolution then in thee shall protect one of us.
Till this fit be over, then, I'll leave you.
It is strange, having both one business, our way should lye
so several, Claricilla, thy commands can put me into any form, that can bow me thus.
WAs the Prince in the garden when you left him?
Yes, my Lord; and he had newly parted with the King; he's this morning to make his visit to the Princess; your Lordship is appointed by the King to accompany him.
You saw not Olinda since?
No, my Lord.
Go find her and tell her of this visit; bid her single her self from the company, tell her I must speak with her this morning—Claricilla will think me very bold, to dare thus soon to press into  her presence; but it is no matter; her thoughts have now no pow∣er to punish me that have set my self free; nor will I again stand in fear of ought but that power which does create cause as well as beget the fear; that power that made Fate to be Fate, and yet his servant; there I will pay all that I have for fear; here to tremble is to fear the Idol I my self have made.
MAdam, the Prince is without attended with Seleucus, and desires to kiss your Highness hand.
Wait him in; this Prince is in report a man of a noble soul, I guess his business, and must with pain impose that which will sound what depth of honour is in him.—He comes. 
Now those clouds which thus long have hid your ver∣tues, and that storm is again blown over; so that your Highness begins to break like your self among us; Appius is come, though unconfident in the success, labouring with ambitious hopes to beg you will give the services of his life leave to wait upon your happy days.
Ere your Highness proceed be pleased to hear a suit that I must blushing make, and to your own ear only; and if you please to retire with me I shall acquaint you with it.
Command me, Madam.
Olinda, a word with you.
This way then.
SIR, it was his Counsel, thus, by a trust, to oblige your Highness to be our friend, rather then by injuries (which has been the common way of States) to decline your pretensions.
It was charitably done not to let my hopes lead me too much astray; and since it is to so gallant a Rival as Melintus, I shall without envy, though not pain, lay down my hopes.
He's now in Court, but yet unknown; it is the stranger that yesterday made such way to my rescue; at first I fled him that with such love pursued; for his disguise kept me ignorant who it was; within I shall acquaint you with our design, and beg your counsel; and sometime this night I would fain speak with him in the Garden.
I shall not fail to serve you.
The stranger! is he the man, and must you meet him in the Garden this night? this shall to Seleucus; I'm sure of my pay, for I have my reward already.
I See it is neither so easy, nor so safe to be a Villain, as I thought; it is true, wicked any fool may be; but to be a Villain and Master in that Art, oh the baseness that we stoop to! the hated means, the loathed subjects that with Chemists patience we must extract our ends through! and when the work's done we have but whet the sword of Justice, and with our own hands pulled down unpitied dooms.—The thought strikes amazement into my soul, which has not yet consented to my ills: What shall not I fall to, that could consent, for the knowledge of a secret, to make my self the steps by which a Whore climbed to her ambitious lust? the baseness of the act hath awaked my sleeping honour; and I'll be honest ere I'll again pay such a rate for sin. No Love, its thy cruelty has begot this distraction in me. 
Ha! upon the ground? up, my Seleucus, up, I am yet breathless; my Love in her descent has made such haste that it be∣got a fire in the motion that had like to have burnt our Cupid's wings.
What ails thee? is it impudence, or distraction begets
this boldness; what is it that thou thus labour with, has it no name?
It had a name, and it was called a secret whilst but by two known, and Claricilla's secret; but it shall become a general knowledge, I overheard it when she gave it to the Prince, and by this name, the only secret of her soul; she is in love, and by ho∣nor engaged, Does that move you? when you know to whom, your love will sacrifice her to your anger: It is the st anger; and but that her bashfulness could not name him aloud, I now might have told you who he was, for she named him, and he is this night to meet her in the Garden; the Prince is of their party too, and has promised to quit his pretension, and only stays to serve her in her love; so there's but I faithful to Seleucus; now, do I rave or no?
No, my Olinda; it is I that rave, and beg of one that lives upon another alms.
Thus would I sacrifice the Gods should they scorn what I love.
Thou art my Goddess.
Will Seleucus then be just, and reward that faith that thus has flown o'er those poisonous Plants, and from them with danger sucked this honey-secret? Will he, I say, be just, and give me leave to unlade this precious Dew in his gentle by∣some, and there find my Hive when I return from travelling in his service?
Thou shalt have any thing, but be gone now, twill breed suspicion to be seen with me alone: Art certain they are to meet to night?
Be gone! Seleucus, there was more discretion than love in that Injunction. Urge me not to jealousy; for I that could be∣tray a Mistress and a Friend for love of thee, if injured, I would have thee know, for my revenge my love shall go. But I hope bet∣la, and I obey.
This the King shall know—Yield at first blow! It is worshipping a stranger God, and a sin in honour though he were so—But stay, who are these? the Prince and the stranger. He,  she says, is of their party; as I could wish, I hope it shall ruin him too.
Be pleased to urge it as a thing you are displeased with, and that the Princess made it her complaint, and desired your Highness would acquaint his Majesty with it; and Sir, when you have completed this work which thus nobly you have begun, and finished your creation, command us and our happiness as the Cry∣tures that owe their being to your favour.
Noble Melintus, when I have served you, twill but pay the expectation your early faith gave me credit for.
Look, Seleucus! Sir, I hope his ears have not met our words. Your pardon, Sir. I'll step off ere I am discovered; after I have this night waited on the Princess in the Garden I shall in your Cham∣ber acquaint you with all our proceedings, and there hope to hear
how the King entertains the complaint against this great man; it is the first step to a Favourit's fall when the Prince will hear com∣plaints of him—I kiss your hand.
This Letter will make me seem not to have seen them; Dissimulation do thou assist me, and I'll break as it were from a cloud of thoughts; and chance that threw me into this way—My Lord, the Prince, whither so fast with your spoil? Me-thinks I see conquest in your eyes. How did the Princess entertain your noble offer? Do you not find the path that leads to her heart untrod by Lovers feet? Were not her Guard of blushes called to defend her against your assault? Loves treaties, my Lord, are strangers to her maiden ears.
Against impious men the Sanctuary is no Guard, else the reserved modesty with the privilege of birth and beauty that wait upon the Princess might have defended her against your sau∣cy flames, which too late have aimed at the top of thy Masters house; but that injury was not so great as this, that thou durst think thy Poison would not break her Crystal, but with this in∣jurious hope believe she should conceal thy insolence, which I'll spread.
Ha! Is it come to this? either prevent this danger, or thou art lost, Seleucus: The Prince is flying with my ruin to the King; Thanks yet to his choler that thus has armed me. Passion is no deadly Weapon; we hear her noise before she does the execution, and then we arm. Now, my brain, be ready with excuses, thy wo∣mans weapon, to defend me.
IS it possible?
Sir, if you please but to go to your Daughters Chamber you shall yet find the storm not laid which her anger raised, to think such a scorn should be designed for her.
Some one go find Seleucus, and command him hither immediately; we'll take him with us, and by all our Gods this poi∣sonous ingratitude that swells him thus ambitiously shall burst him.
I cannot stay, for I have earnest business with the King; Are you sure he is not in the Lodgings? in your return you shall find me in the Garden; if I meet him there—Hold, Carillus, the Kings here.
Seleucus!
Sir, I have been this morning in search of you, I have a bu∣siness for your own ear only, let your Guard attend, Sir.
Yes, it shall stay. Noble Appius, your pardon, I'll meet you at my Daughters.
This morning I have discovered—
So have I, that which thou shalt rue, fond Wretch.
Sir!
Impudence, with what brow dare thou thus meet my fury? Think thou to scope? Art thou again raising new Trea∣sons ere the fire has consumed the Sacrifice for our last delivery, again to put my preservation into the power of a miracle only to relieve me? No, thou shalt find thy ingratitude hath destroyed my mercy, and begot an anger that shall consume thee. Seize him.
That you have the power of the Gods, and I am subject to your Thunder, is confessed: but my innocence protect me; as yet I know not the cause why it singles me out. It is true, I came to see you dressed like Jove, for now it is just you wear your Light∣ning, but not for me who have with longing sought you to de∣liver the greatest service that ever yet my faith pleaded re∣ward for; but why you thus meet me in displeasure, Heaven strike me if I can guess; nor do I believe I am guilty; for you proceed not with me as I were a Delinquent, the worst of which are heard ere condemned: But I see you repent your fa∣vours and desire my fall, which is the time I ought not to out-live; and therefore by this wound I'll plead my faith and readiness to serve.
Disarm him.
They cannot; but when I am gone you'll hear a mischief my life might have prevented.
Hold, or I shall conclude thy fear of deserved torture makes thee thus by a sudden stroke execute thy self.
Fear? No, I fear button more than a King trembles at, and that's the Gods, and him; and to let your Majesty see I apprehend not Torture, thus I throw away all dangers that my own act threatens; and now, Sir, be so just as to let me know the cause of your anger ever it strikes.
Were not you this morning with my Daughter, and there made the traitorous offer of your love?
Yes.
Yes! Dare thou avow it, and know how lately that danger threatened our ruin in Silvander?
Will you be pleased to hear me? if I be guilty punish me; if not, give me leave to tell you, a King can only cure such a wound as your suspicion, Sir, hath given my diligent faith, which has ever been watchful in your Majesties service.
Speak, let him loose.
Know, Sir, though I am amazed to find this news before me, I came now from the Princess Chamber, drawn thither by an occasion; which if you please to lend your ear to, I am confident you'll say I had reason for what I did.
Can you prove this?
Can I prove it? Yes, Sir, I can prove it; but Jealousy is a Weed whose Root lies so many ways that if once it take growth it is hardly dug out; and this sad truth (if once suspect∣ed, and never confident) is fallen upon me, else what I shall say
would find a faith with you; but I desire not now to have my words clear me; take but my counsel, and I shall give your Majesty the satisfaction you desire; seem still to frown on me, and require not the Princess company this night in the Court; the rest, Sir, in your ear.—Will this confirm you I am loyal, and by several  ways hunt your safety?
Come, Seleucus, this trouble shows thy loyalty; you are my friènd, and shalt ever have an interest here.
Yes, I will have an interest in the Crown, whatever I have in thee; and now thou believe thou art safe thy dangers but begin.
It is a brave clear night, and something may be attempted 
 from the Town, we must keep a strong watch to night.—How now, who have were here? rouse up, I say.
Who's there? lye down, why do you kick me? ye gods! one would think this bed were large enough; if the earth be not, where shall the wretched lye? that thus you kick me out as if you wanted room?
Up I say, leave your snarling, you dog; sleeping in your watch?
If I am a dog, why should I be punished for obeying na∣ture, the only Deity that beasts bow to? if not, why am I refused the benefit of reason?
Are you grumbling? look to your duty; you'll find you have use of other thoughts else.
Oh ye gods! why do you thus load a youth? I was not proud when I was bowed to; nor ever with repinings did I bow to you; why then on my free-born soul do you lay the load of slavery, and thus let your justice sleep, that she does not now guide my prayers; but suffers them to lose their way twixt hey∣ven and my sufferings: which I have been so long acquainted with, that I am now grown a kin unto my woes, allied unto my oar, where I have set, forced to unwilling haste, sighing for my freedom, till through a thousand eyes I have sweating wept my miseries: oh look down in time upon them, ere I yield to those irreligious thoughts that tempt me to question my faith; for ye cannot blame me if I grow weary of praying, when I find that mighty power that threw me here want mercy to break the snare.
Strike an Anchor through the body of the slave; he has not hurt you, I hope.
No, he has mist me.
What urged the villain to this bold undertaking?
Unless the opportunity that the night afforded, and the nearness of the Town made him attempt it for his freedom, I know not else.
Look that to morrow early as the day the dog be sacri∣fic'd to the parting shades, that their black may still be friendly to our deliverance; and do you hear, let him be broke upon an An∣chor, that, on Hopes Emblem, the wretch may meet his despair∣ing cross.—When dogs thus fly at their Masters, it is just we strangle them, neither their kind nor use considered; go, Tullius, let the watch be set, and some good guard put into the wood to se∣cure the Passage from the Town.
It shall.
Tullius, did the Peasant say the King was crowned again, and the Usurper dead, and the Princess to be married to the stran∣ger, Prince Appius, that came in aid of the King; and that Seleu∣cus has been in some disgrace to day?
So the fellow says, for certain.
To morrow then we'll fit us with our disguise, and to Court we'll go; for now virtue sits at Helm and holds the purse; gratitude will find some reward for me that wished well to her power; for this night see the Galley at road, and when the watch is set, to rest; and to morrow call at my Cabin.
I shall.
Lye you there, and let no body, without exception, trow∣ble, till I call, unless some dangers threaten, then give me notice. 
Methinks, in that condemned slave I read mine own for∣tune, whose cross fate hath forfeited him to eternal bonds for stoutly attempting his freedom; which if ever it comes within my power, here stands another marked for sacrifice, if he fails in the attempt; for death frights not me, nor binds the innocent, but comes to set them free; I cannot let it sink with patience into my thoughts, I have not man enough, nor Religion to continue an ac∣quaintance with that virtue that says, endure: when I consider I was •orn a Prince by the consent of all, distinguished from a Chaos of common people, created their head, and so stood the man of men, till this misfortune struck me, in which I am not sure I shall have a burying place; for a slave can call so little in this world his own, that the very earth he wears about him is not his, nor can I command this handful, not this, not mine own clay: But lost like yesterday; when my Masters Fiat comes, I fall and dissolve to the first Mass of things. 
SO, now leave us; and if any body ask for me, say, I am laid to rest.
I shall.—And where you rest too.
Dear Timillus, is Jacomo ready with the horses?
He is, and waits us at the Postern.
Let us not lose a minute then of this precious time; twill be a reward for thy faith too, when they shall say Timillus had a hand in this great work: prithee, let thy friendship secure the passage that leads from the Kings lodgings.
So, now have I an honourable excuse to take cold with; it is a strange bold venture he makes; and a confident virtue, that of hers, that dare trust themselves in the hands of my opinion, when I am alone to guess how they mean to employ this oppor∣tunity.
Madam, it is not the fear of my particular that makes me urge this sad parting, but your interest which is joined to it; and when your Highness is concerned, it is a civility to fear, and an obligation to doubt my joys; for Claricilla knows despair is no sin in Loves Religion.
Let me not understand thee, nor let not reason bind up that you urge; oh Melintus, it is the first time that ever I was grieved to hear thee in the right; and you must pardon it; for though parting be the only way to confirm my joy, I cannot con∣sent at such a rate to buy my happiness.
Thus you increase the wished number of my bonds; the Prince until my return will observe all your commands, and assist us in our escape, and by his favour countenance the act; for Mes∣sina, if my Father commanded there in chief, I could not hope a greater power then I am confident Pelius will allow your worth when you arrive there; and ever this Moon hath felt her change, I will again attend you with the Galleys here.
Must you then be gone? and again with absence spy• our loves into a thread which is fastened to our fates; I hope that no distance may find the end; say, must you go? must it needs be so?
I would there were not such a strict necessity, but that I might say, no.
Well, since it must be, resolved then, but not contented, I submit unto my fate; and thou Lawrel-tree which so oft hast been a witness of our sad parting, if within thy Bark the angry god hath with the trembling Virgin any of his passion hid, thou know what pain they feel that with longing love follow their flying joys; and see, look, Melintus, casting mine eye by chance, I have spied one of the witnesses of our infant love; do you re∣member when we changed our characters, and with them printed
our faith on this yielding bark, it was then but a small scratch we gave; but now like our miseries by time increased, it is in her ten∣der side to a large wound grown.
Why should we not for ever grow thus? why should  the gods with thunder part what themselves have joined? we that have known but one wish, and to each others thoughts have parent been; why should not we thus gazing sit, and tie with kind smiles soft fetters for the eyes? but this cannot be; and therefore hear me pronounce mine own doom. Farewell, but ever I obey this sad necessity let me on your fair hand print my faith, and with holy vows bind my self to you for ever.
Oh hold, give me no contract, gentle Melintus; no ties but love; these are bonds I scorn to throw on such who from mine eyes can go.
Doth this object satisfy, have I performed, nor no?
Yes. Claricilla, this act, when thy story shall be written, will not appear a kin unto the rest, that have had honour and duty still their guide, and not thus lead astray by passion.
Sir, I must not be beaten from my strength here, though you frown; a fault, I confess, but dishonour has no share in it.
Sir, you came a friend, and you are a stranger; nor will I while I labour to punish commit a fault by being ungrateful; or break the laws of hospitality, by laying hands upon you; only thus much, the injuries you have done me and the Prince bid me tell you, if to morrows Sun set upon you within my Court, his shades will bring yours upon you.
Revenge, you are prosperous, and in my anger this is lost; Craft, be thou as friendly to my designs upon that shallow Prince, and I alone stand fair for Claricilla still; I'll watch how it works; oh how he'll fume anon!
The wounds that amazement gives strike all our senses, and like lightning destroy without a breach; and yet I see some food for, my Revenge; and whilst that fuel lasts this flame shall not perish. Seleucus, come back, and let your friend stay.
Carillus, stay; what, your fit is off then I perceive, and you can be angry upon your own score, and fight when women are not by you.
Yes, thou shalt find I can, fond man! and the flame that thou hast kindled in my breast I will husband so that it shall consume thee; and neither hold it so high as to lose it in my cho∣ler, nor so low as to let patience tread it out.
Spare your threats; your words wound not; when I re∣fuse to fight upon a strange resolution then rant and rail, and I'll excuse it.
No, I am no Railer; I could wish thee rather a more glo∣rios Enemy, on whose name scandal of no kind had ever light∣ed; by my life I wish it, and that thou were clear from this base act, whose weight has sunk all the honour that swam in thy blood; and I am ashamed to think this necessity forces me to offer one so lame in honour, and in passion blind, to the power I worship; for the imperfect are not fit for sacrifice.
I hope you have none of those faults, but will become an Altar. Lead the way, and you shall find Seleucus dares follow without being pulled to slaughter.
Under the Woods side that borders on the Haven will be a fit place; it is near the Town, and I believe free from company.
There I'll meet you then.
Hist, hist, to him. So, now they are come within my way  to put in: I am no good Talker; but when opinions are to be maintained thus, I think I have as strong an Argument as ano∣there.
HAste to Prince Appius, and desire him immediately to do  me the honour to speak with me. O me most misery∣ble! this night has ruined me; my Fame which was like a Star, bright and fixed in the Court till this sad hour; Treachery black Treachery in some body, has made appear a Meteor; but if it pore∣tend my Melintus fall, my night at Court is come too; and in that vast Element I'll shoot, and be no more remembered.
SEe, here come two of the long-staff-men that struck so desperately under the Hedge to night; I hope to appre∣hend one of them by virtue of this Warrant.
Bold and injurious Seleucus still.
Let your anger pass, and hear what I say, for this is the last talk I'll have with thee what ere thou art; Know, since first thou crossed these eyes my Jealousy and Envy have waited upon thee; and now I have gained my end; it was to see whether Conquest grew upon thy Sword or no, when this (not used to lose) should go forth thy Enemy and Rival; and therefore guard thee, and with thy Sword only make reply.
It is my wish, for words are not the weapons I fight with.
Do you hear, Carillus, may not you and I fall to at this feast before your Lord has supped?
Yes, and be mine own Ca•ver too.
That I believe, for I ever took thee for a sawey Serving∣man.
I am lost.
Does your load sink you? thy faults will grow too heavy anon.
I know no fault but that I am unfortunate.
Lie there Talker.
A pox upon thee, thou hast don't.
Yield, or by my hopes in thy heart I'll write my Con∣quest.
Strike, Dog; I'll perish ere I'll have so base a sin to answer for.
Hold, or I'll write the same story here.
Ha! Timillus fallen? though it speaks his praise, my Friend calls for revenge, and thus I bring it.
I fear no single arm.
Be prosperous, Carillus, and I will call thee Friend, the Sa∣ver  of my Fame—twill not be. That wound hath sent me frowning to my home.
A pox of Fortune, have I escaped the Master so often to be served in thus, like broken cold meat for the Serving-men? I find I cannot live, I begin to have serious thoughts—No, Faith, I am  gone. I always feared such sober wounds as these; they are in such earnest I know they'll kill me, if they would endure a jest there were some hopes.
Hold, if thou hast honour, and tell me who thou art, that strik'st with such a constant fortune.
I have no leisure now—O Timillus, speak to thy unfor∣tunate Friend, whose acquaintance hath never brought thy faith to any thing but misery and dangers: How dost? I hope thy wounds are not mortal.
No, nor our troubles; would they were, that we might once see an end of them—But no more of this now. I hear a noise, and I know we shall be pursued; therefore make haste  and fly.
For shame urge like thy self, if thou would have me take thy counsel; bring my Friend into a danger, and leave him there? No, Timillus, we grew Friends, and we will fall toge∣there
Leave me, and provide for thy safety, or by my life I'll be∣tray thee, and tell who thou art; nor will I, if thou stay, attempt the possibility of my own cures. S'Death? because I could kill my Enemy, must I destroy my Friend?
Why thus passionate!
If Melintus loved me he would obey the passion of his Friend, and not chide—Hark, you will be taken, step into the  Wood, and in some Disguise you may come to Court.
Farewell, Timillus, I obey.
This way they went, Sir, and here lies one.
Seleucus slain?
And here lies Carillus.
Who's the third?
A Bird of the same flight, that had worse luck than my fellows; for my wings only broke, that I might live miserably, to make sport for the Fool that laid the snare; Shall I never be so happy as to be knocked of the head when it is to do me a cur∣tesie?
The bodies are yet warm; bring them with all possible speed to the Town, that no care may be wanting to save my Friend; bring him along too, he shall find our love till he be well; I will not offer a ruin to my Friend; when he's repaired he'll scarce be a full satisfaction. Some other pursue the bold Mur∣derer; if he once come within my reach he shall find his Sword has no power to protect him against that which my justice brings.
So, thus much honour I am sure of; but how much more I know not, do you my Friend?
No, Sir; and yet I think you'll find what you de∣serve.
You're courteous and liberal of your opinion, and there∣fore I will not be sparing of mine; it may be I shall be honourably hanged for having a hand in killing Seleucus.
It may be so.
WHat noise is this that thus circles us? 
This noise is every where, and begirts us round; I'll go wake Manlius, twill be worth our care to search the cause.
Stand, who goes there?
I, Tullius; Have you waked the Captain?
No.
It is time he were waked.
Hold.
How now!
It was his command, that no man, without exception, should come to him till he had notice, nor be called unless some danger threatened.
Did you not hear the noise?
Yes, but noise is no danger, nor will I call him.
You will not call him? Who am I that thou dare tempt me thus? Call him, and call him quickly, or thou shalt call thy last.
I serve but one Master, and him I will not call; nor shall you break his rest while I can hinder it.
Do not play with my anger; by all our Gods with a wound I'll make my way; and it shall lie over thy belly (Slave) if thou provok'st me.
Wounds are easily given to naked men; and thou wilt sooner bring 'em than I fear 'em.
S'Death! braved by my Slave? Thus, Villain, and then I tread under my feet thy scorned earth.
Help, Manlius, help.
Unloose thy hold, or by my vexed soul I'll print Deaths cold Seal on thy Heart.
I will not loose it: O my Vow, to what strict Laws thou  bind'st me; else here I would throw off my bonds, and with thy own knife cut thy hated throat; Dog, thou art more a Slave than my Chains can make me.
Ha! what sudden cry was that called for help?—The Rhodian grappled? How's this? and Tullius under? Let go, or I'll part thee with death. Is this a posture for a Slave?
No; if I would have been a Slave I had been safe, and you it may be might have felt these wounds.
Tullius, what mean these wounds?
Wounds are the food of Slaves, else I deserve not these for my faith; but Loyalty is against kind in me, and therefore I am punished for obeying your command, which was that no man without exception, should pass this way till I had given you no∣tice, which he would have done, and because I refused him thus my faith's rewarded.
Is this true?
In part it is; the Wood this night was full of noise, and I awaked with the Alarm, would have given you notice, and he re∣fus'd to let me pass, and therefore—
You would have killed him?—Come, it was not well, such a piety as faithfulness among Slaves is so scarce it ought to have been cherished not punished. Every day by one act or other this Fellow begets my wonder, Honour and Courage still striking in him—Come hither; once again I command thee tell me who  thou art, and by my life I'll set thee free.
I see you have honour, Sir, and therefore presume when you shall know I am bound by a Vow never to disclose my self whilst I am in bonds, you'll call it Religion, not disobedience, when I refuse to tell.
Wilt thou be faithful when thou art free?
I will be faithful though I am not free.
Vow that, and I will immediately knock off thy Chains.
Arm but my hand, and set me free, and then I'll take a Vow; and having sworn faith to thee all the earth's wealth shall  not make me false.
Here, by this I manumize thee; and if thou prov'st a Gentleman, henceforth thou art my Friend, however thou art free.
And, Sir, since your pity hath thus made my joys put off my fears that I should have fell forgotten, and returned to my Mo∣there Earth like her common Issue—Thus in thankfulness with eyes to Heaven bent, and a soul full of gratitude, I vow a constant faith to virtue, and—
To what strange fate am I reserved, or by what sin have I pulled down this Curse of a general hate that all paths I tread are armed against me? Ha! more Enemies? Nay then, Melintus, yield, for it is visible thou war with Heaven.
What art thou that with such pains hast to this place hunted thy ruin, and thus with injurious wounds in the dead of night awaked our anger?
Prithee go forward with thy injury; such another Charm will call back my anger, and then I shall be safe; for it hath ever yet been prosperous, though that success made me unfortu∣nate.
Leave thus vaingloriously to urge your former success, for twill be no ground now to build a future conquest on; and therefore yield thy Sword, and quickly, before I command it and thy head; Know my power here rules even thy fate.
Yield my Sword? By what other privilege do I hold my life among my Enemies? Prithee look upon me, and if thou can read these Characters, they'll tell thee I was not born to yield; and though  thou art the glorious Master of the sport, and I unfortunate by a cross fate am hunted into the Toil where dangers on all sides be∣girt my innocence, yet with the Lion I dare be angry with my bonds; and although I may become thy Prey yet I will not be thy scorn.
I'll dispute no longer; Seize him; if he resist, in his heart seal the first stroke of thy freedom.
Ha! Melintus!
He named me; What art thou that call me by my name? Ye Gods, is misery so near akin that by instinct the wretched know me?
How now! 'what do you muse on? Had you daring one∣lie while you were unarmed?
No, it was a consideration of the baseness of the act, not fear, made me stop, and the remembrance that I am free held me from staining that maiden liberty the Gods have sent me with so base an act as to strike where there's three to one: besides, his po∣stur and his habit speak him a Gentleman, and his misfortunes rather to be pitied than increased.
A help from Heaven if this be real.
Slave, and ungrateful, thou shalt find thou hast too soonmention'd thy freedom; Fool, only free in hope; and this act hath but increased thy load of chains. Curse thy self for thy in∣crease
of miseries shall make thee find you are more a slave then ever.
Do not deceive thy self; look there and here.—And  ere thou art lost in thine anger, hear this truth I speak, he that is master of this and will become a slave must be a coward too; and now I'm armed I scorn to ow my freedom to any but the gods.
Death, dog dost thou brave me with my curtsy? draw,  Tullius, my thirsty rage will be quenched with nothing but the slaves blood.
Heaven! for ought I know we are by thy direction thus cast two to two; if not, I'm sure by honour we are—here, take this sword.
Now, Tullius, thou shalt see how mortal thy power is, which so like a god thou wear among thy slaves. Revenge and freedom guide me to thy ruin; and you, Sir, strike to prevent the use of such an opportunity; a vow forbids me to tell you who I am—Now the wound that thou basely give me when I was bound  and naked shall be revenged.
I have but few words.
I am your choice then.
As it happens. 
I am slain, and by my Slave bound for ever.
Nay, then I'll smiling fall now I have my revenge; for I see thou were born to be a slave, and all thy acts of honour were but distempers in thee; and now thy nature is strong thou ap∣pear'st thy self a slave in thy soul; come, what stays thee, I have a breast so clear it defies thy Poniard, Traitor.
No, I was born free, and Manlius's rage once over he will say he has injured me:—And, Sir, as I drew my sword against my Master when Honour bad me; so when you shall seek  to make me faulty, I am your enemy; and therefore attempt no farther this mans danger, it is not safe.
My wonder waits upon all this fellows acts.
What art thou that thus in less then a man hides more then a god?
What am I? a soul with her old clothes on, a slave with wounds and crosses torn; and yet in better fortune I have known your face.
If thou hast mercy in thee tell me who thou art.
Mark me well, dost thou not see thy self here? not yet?—Now I am sure thou dost in these Crystal drops; friendship will guide Melintus to know Philemon. 
Philemon! Oh ye gods! new weights to sink me!
Oh! it is a powerful rod that Melintus friendship strikes with; a thousand miseries have smote upon this rock; but never any that made water issue through till now.
Oh Philemon, Philemon, what cannot friendship do? it is from her living springs this dew falls.
Melintus and Philemon! good heaven, what change hath
begot this misery? Oh noble Princes, upon my knees I beg, when  your surprised joys are over, you'll shower a pardon upon unfor∣tunate Manlius.
Manlius! is this Manlius? he was Claricilla's friend.
It is Manlius, and I hope a fair day will break from this bloody evening.
Your pardon, Sir, or here upon my breast return the wounds my rage directed against yours.
Repeat it not, Sir; you make me but call to mind my shame, which I must ever blushing wear when I remember a slave could look further into honour then my self.
Oh Melintus, I have a story for thee, that we shall weep out together.
When I look upon thee, I am distracted to think the gods would consent thus to let their temples be ruined, and virtue al∣ways walk naked like truth's Emblem, while better fates clothe the wicked.
Dear Melintus, let not the sense of my misfortunes urge a consideration from thee at the rate of sin, nor dare those powers which I know thou fairest.
I have done, noble youth; yet when I look upon thee, joy and amazement will seize me, I have strange things to tell thee, but this nor time nor place.—Who is this that thus unfortunate∣lie met thy anger?
A stout and grateful fellow; it was the Captain that saved me when I was doomed to death by the Usurper, Silvander, because I designed Claricilla's freedom.
He stirs; heaven, I hope, will not let the guilt of one ac∣cidental fault hang upon this evening to cross our joys.
I am sorry, since there dwelt such honour in him, that he proved my enemy; this was the Pirate took me at Rhodes, in that unfortunate fight where we were parted.
Pray help him aboard my Galley, where we may all re∣pose until to morrow; and resolve what is to be done in this new change in Sicily.
Lay thy hands here, Melintus, for these bonds can only set Philemon free.
I Have done; passion can be a friend to none, she's so uncon∣stant; give her way, and she destroys her self; if I had been so fortunate to have spoke with you last night, I had proven∣ted this sad chance; for I knew Melintus's anger would take a dan∣gerous leap, when by amazement he had contracted it.
If I could have feared such a danger, I should not have been so absent with the remedy; but I am not satisfied how it was
discovered by the King; yet if civility had not prevented me ere now I had spoke my fears; and long since said, beware of Olinda.
Olinda! she betray me! it cannot be, it is such a common fate I blush to think it; I cannot fear a punishment that comes such a road way; and yet I'll observe her: but pray what said Timillus, was Melintus wounded?
Not dangerous, some slight hurts he had, and upon our approach he took covert in the Wood; Timillus says he is resolved in some disguise to attempt to speak with you; and my counsel is to send some one that's trusty in search of him.
I shall; and then if you please we'll walk into the Garden.
I'll wait upon you.
I Rejoice that this day has proved so fortunate as to bring your youth a freedom with less sadness, then last nights storm threatened.
Sir, my safety is a debt I owe your watchful mercy, that thus amongst the earliest of your joys could let your noble pity hunt for so lost a thing as Ravack.
Now we are arrived we have no spare time to clothe truth fine, therefore give my naked faith a hearing; I am confident you will not refuse to take our fortunes in this design, whose inno∣cency, though we are thus forced to hide with the marks of guilt, and slaves habits, yet know there is so much justice on our side, that though we fall in the attempt, and this haste prove but run∣ning to embrace the stake, yet we shall in our stories be destine∣guished, and live in the glorious shine which breaks from the Brows of Honours Martyrs.
I am but one, and I'll not say I shall be fortunate; but I am certain I shall attempt any thing that may speak my gratitude.
Give me leave to break this discourse; and since you are pleased to trust me with this service let me not lose time; but while this expectation is in the Court let me see whether I can walk unseen, or no; and because Seleucus danger was only loss of blood, they will be more intent about him then if he had fallen; I'll be gone, the day grows old, in the Garden you say it is likely I shall find her, and the Prince is a young man, fair haired.
Yes.
I am instructed.
It is the mind I see that binds or sets us free; for that be∣ing satisfied we have made our fears our sports, and thus mask in our miseries; but, by my life, the earnest they once were in makes me start to think thee thus miserable in jest.
Philemon's love is more fortunate then Melintus; for it
sinds kind ways to express it self, while I unfortunate only wish and cry how fain I would rejoice in the lasting knot, which we have thus triply tied: By blood, by love, by miseries allied.
THis place returns my forgotten miseries, by calling to mind how happy once I was; but who are these?
Who's that that walks there?
I know not, is he not of your acquaintance?
No, Madam; walk on, and mind him not.
Who would the man speak with all?
What would you, friend? would you speak with the Princess?
Yes, Sir; Madam, I am one that wants, but cannot beg; yet when I have put off my blushes, be pleased to cast your eye up∣on a Soldiers scars, and pity a Gentleman bowed by misfortunes, not faults, to this wretched lowness; if then your bounty find not a charity, your pardon, and I am gone.
A Soldier is the god I worship, and to him I offer this charity.—Here take all that at this time I have about me; pray,  of what Country are you?
The name of Soldier is such a common Theme to beg with, and a disguise so many cheat under, that I should not dare ask like my self, but that I can show under the honoured hands of those Commanders where I served, who and what I am; and had it been my fortune to have met the brave Princess, Melintus, and Phi∣lemon here, the service I once did them they would not have seen unrewarded.
Prithee softly; dost thou know Melintus and Philemon? say, and be not amazed I ask thus hastily; where did thou know them? gentle Soldier, speak.
Yes, Madam, I do know 'em; and here under their hands I have to show the service I did them, which if you please you may read.
Prithee has't of late heard of Philemen, or can thou tell whether he be alive or no; or can thou give any account of Melintus lately?
Oh yes, yes, he can; read there and satisfy your self. Oh noble Manlius, where is Melintus, where is the Galley, where is Philemon? why do I stay, cannot you guide me, will not you guide me, will not Prince Appius go? I am resolved I will, and be miserable no longer here, where Religion, Friendship, Duty, Love no harvest bring; all my endeavours here as vainly beat the air, as the Impostors beads that fall without a Prayer; say, shall we go? will you remove me from this place so full of danger, to my friends? look, he writes to me to come, and shall I stay? no, no, Melintus, I obey; and were it to shrink into the earth I'll meet
thee, and no longer with my prayers protect this ungrateful place from the punishment her treacheries call down. Let fools like Beads-men to the Altar bow for others sins; I'll pay none but mine own vows.
We must follow her, Sir, and within counsel or charm her passion.
IS there no hope of Carillus life?
No, my Lord.
Will Timillus scope?
Yes, my Lord, his wounds were slight.
But he shall not, nor shall fortune have power to add ano∣there sickly week to his hated days, wait all without.—My hopes are blasted, nor must I expect ever to gain my ends by fair means from Claricilla, I have wound up her hatred to so great height; and it were folly to hope a peace from a woman crossed in her love; no, no, policy or force must gain the pleasure I am at.—Who's  there?
Sir, the King.
Oh Sir, hide me from my shame, or my blushes will not let me look upon you; the disgrace brands me with coward for ever, that I should be overcome when nothing but a Traitor struck; a thing which ought to have been the scorn, not fear of honest men when they are armed.
Quiet thy self, and be not troubled at such a scorned sub∣jest; I come to tell thee ere this shame be over, while I can with justice frown, I would have Claricilla married; and how to work our ends we'll now resolve.
Sir, there's a Sea-man without desires to speak with you; he says he has earnest business that concerns the State.
Admit him.
Diffimulation, thou that so oft hast been prosperous in thy attempts upon the innocent, once let virtue owe thee for a service.
What's your business, Sir, that so hastily requires a hearing?
Ha! the King! I must not know him; Sir, be pleased to command your servants off, and I shall whisper a service shall claim a reward, which I will not require till it be perfect.
There needs no whisper here; for if it concern the King∣doom speak it to the King.
The King! thus low I beg your pardon, Sir; and then give me leave to ask whether it be worth your care, or no, to have  in your power the stranger that fought with my Lord Seleucus.
softly.
Dost thou know where he is? can thou direct my an∣ger
which way to seize the Traitor? if thou can propose thine own reward, and take a Kings word, thou shalt have my power to effect it.
Sir, I will not bargain; but in snort, thus; I have been faulty; and a Pirate speaks the kind; but it was while the fault was in fashion here, and a thief (Silvander) wore the Crown; your pardon for my past faults is the reward I beg for this service; which if I were not confident I could do I were mad thus to wake your anger with a deluded hope. But to the business; early this morning there came to my Galley (which now rides in the haven) two strangers, as they pretended, that had unfortunately in a duel slain one that had a near relation to your Majesty, and by many arguments pleaded my protection; which at first sight their miseries engaged me to, and I undertook to serve them: one of them (the fair-hair'd-man) gave me a Letter to deliver to the Prin∣cess, from whom he says I should have great rewards if I would be faithful; I undertook it; and if this may procure my peace, when you please to command me, they are dead.
The Letter, prithee let's see the Letter; it is he for certain, but who the second should be!
I cannot guess.
Thy pardon, and a reward for thy faith, upon my life, thou shalt receive.
Hast thou the Letter?
Yes, Sir.
Ha! Melintus and Philemon, their hands subscribed to this treason; see Seleucus, it is Melintus and Philemon that in dis∣guise have waited our destruction; the gods are just still, and now from the height of all their impious darings have let them fall into our punishments; look, they urge Claricilla to an escape by the as∣sistance of this honest Soldier; they assure her she may safely make it, and call all this treason flying from slaughter; assist me, Seleucus, that I may invent some strange torture to afflict their falsehoods.
Is this possible?
Work on, Mischief, till their rage has blinded them; that in the dark I may the easier lead them to their ruin. 
Melintus and Philemon, it is no new danger, this; my rage distracts me; and in the strength that anger lends me I can perform all you can require from a sound and healthy friend; but do it quickly, Sir, before I am unbent; and thus by her assistance reach their ruin.
It cannot be she should consent to my destruction.
It cannot be! then he were a fool, and only sowed dan∣gers, to reap dangers; think you he would lose his heaven to place another there? no, it is visible, he loves; and that has been the cause moved all his darings; and that he loves the Princess, do's that start you? call to mind the surprise in the garden, what rage will that meeting fill your breast with, when you shall know it is no aerie, hopeless, single Love; no Cupped with one Wing that
threatens now as when Silvander struck, these have made the im∣perfect Boy a perfect god betwixt 'em; and with return of eternal faith have given both wings and eyes, and direct by their bold souls; what to do is now upon the wing, and flies with more cer∣tain danger in your Court then death, or fire.
This is a dangerous truth; and if my Daughter consent to their desires, they dye.
To be secured of which, seal this Letter, and deliver it this honest man; and let him deliver it to your Daughter, and urge her answer, which when he has, let him return with it to your Ma∣jesty; this will guide your justice which way to steer; and your anger shall only find the guilty; and the act being just, consequent∣lie it is safe; for the guilty have no revenge to follow their fall.
I am resolved, if she consent they fall; dispatch him with the Letter, and let me have an answer at my Chamber.
Sir, now you consent to be safe, be not troubled, but leave the rest to me.—Now to our business, I'll immediately  send a servant for a woman of the Princess, my creature, from whom I have daily intelligence; she shall get you an opportunity to deliver the Letter; her name's Olinda; and to her I'll address you; to be false now is to be faithful.
And that makes me so false; but stay, Sir; I have a mind to make you indebted to me for a greater benefit then you dream on.
Whither tend'st thou?
To assure you I intend to be faithful, and to oblige my self; to make which good I'll put my life into your hands; and if you dare obey my directions, I'll propose away that with safety you may reach your revenge; a Crown, and Claricilla.
Claricilla! can thou propose a way to gain her? let but that appear, through fire and water, opposed dangers, greater then cowards fears create I'll fly to embrace it.
Within I'll instruct you, and then I'll obey the Kings di∣reactions for the Letter; which will be one step to advance our plot, and if it thrive, what I shall be I'll leave to your own bosom to resolve.
What thou shalt be? why, thou shalt be my bosom.
I Wonder he stays so long; I am afraid his reason will not prevail with my Father and Seleucus; and though I was by strength of your argument persuaded to it, yet I am sorry I consented to let them know it is Melintus whom they pursue, a name already subject to their hate: but heaven I hope will di∣rect all.
If I were not assured that Manlius were honest, I should not have ventured thus to persuade you to discover where your
health lies; but when I am secure that those in whose power he is will with their lives protect him; and his discovery is only a bait to draw his enemy into his power; I must again desire you will with patience attend the issue of what is well designed, however it may meet a cross.
Oh Madam, I am laden with joy; and the strangeness of the burden makes me thus sink in the way; I have discovered who it is that betrays you, it is Olinda; Seleucus made it his boast; but you must not yet take notice of it, but seem to rely upon her faith as a means of your escape, which is consented to by all, un∣der a hope that they shall seize you and your friends together; I cannot tell you all the particulars now; only thus much, our de∣signs have taken as I could wish; this Letter by their consent is returned to you; had you seen the care your Father took that the violence the seal met might not be perceived, you would have laughed; they expect your answer, and I have promised to bring it immediately, which must be, that you will meet Melintus this evening without delay, your woman only in company; and to be received from the Garden-wall; this being dispatched I'll to the King and show it him, and there make all sure; Sir, you must be pleased to mingle your self in the presence; and there cheerfully accept any Proposition the King shall make, which shall only be what we resolve on within; and then I'll to my boat, and there in smiles pitch the bloody toils, wherein we'll take these hunters, and make them our prey.
Lose no time, for heaven's sake, it is a strange torture; do not you, nor you, feel it? thus to be delayed in the path that leads to brave Melintus.
Madam, we'll lose no time; be you ready to obey yours, and I'll strictly observe my part; and I hope the next thing we dis∣course of will be the sacrifice due to heaven, for our delive∣rance.
It is about the time that Manlius bid us expect his return; if we be so happy as to see Claricilla, what kind of habit will thy joy wear? I am afraid mine will be clothed in a pale∣nos, for I cannot promise my self strength enough to bear such unexpected happiness.
Prithee think not of it, let it steal upon us; I find I have not man enough to meet her without trembling; the very thought has struck a coldness through my blood; and now you have told her that I love, I could easier dye for her then speak to her; for though my love has none, yet I shall still have a guilt about me when I but look or speak to her.
Dear Philemon, we believed thee lost when I told the story; and I did it that thy friendship might live in her noble mention.
Sir, your pardon for that we entertain ourselves when you stand by, to whom me-thinks Love should not be a stran∣ger.
I have a story too, but this no time to tell it.
Noble Princes, do 'you not find me strangely altered with the joy that now possesses me? the Princess is well, and salutes you both, and the Prince kisses your hand.
Prithee let us partake the joy; Will the virtuous Claricilla come? Say, Have we an interest in this joy too?
Yes, but I have a thousand things to tell you, which if you will attend and follow my directions, we shall ere to more∣row Sun see all our wishes crowned; but let us in, for we lose time, the day will be too short to bound our business in; and only thus much know, we but the metal bring, the Gods will have the way, and form to our deliverance the work of their own hands.
Let us softly follow, and give thanks with hearts that up∣wards look; for gratitude is to mercy both the Bait and Hook.
THis Soldier was sent from Heaven I think to take care of me, all things run so even that he takes in hand; the Princess hath consented, the King I have persuaded to go in person and surprise her, the Prince too will bear them com∣pany, and what then?—My joys want a name; Melintus, Phil∣mon, and the King, must die, Their fate which is, I have said it. The Prince shall live, but first I will show him Death to engage him in my action, upon no other condition shall he wear his head. O the several habits their humours will be in that Rage, Envy, Fear, and Amazement will breed in their wretched thoughts, when they shall find my words pronounce their doom, possess me of Clari∣cello, whose beauties increased by the sweetness of force will make me more a King than all the power that a Crown can give. But I lose time, and neglect my part in my own affairs; the King and Prince I must see meet at the place, where they must stand but as Witnesses to the receipt of all my part in Heaven, a Crown and Claricilla.
THis is the place he appointed we should wait for him, and it is much about the time he bid us expect him; if they come we shall profess a joy we hoped not; he brings revenge along, whose fruits the Gods have been pleased to feast with, and
the sweets we see makes them from us Mortals with fiery injunction still enclose the Tree.
Hark, I hope he comes, the Moon is friendly, it is he.
Are you ready?
Yes, yes.
Be resolute then, and still, for they are coming.
Are we right?
Yes, Sir.
Whore's the Soldier?
He's stepped before.
Sir, I refrained to tell you what the occasion was till now, because I was ashamed to let you know my Daughters fault till you might be a witness of it, and then you would not wonder at my displeasure, when you perceive she could so put off her honour as to leave me lost in my promise to your self, and hope of a wished Heir to succeed me here.
Sir, I hope some mistake has begot this doubt; the Princess ever promised a fair return of love to your Majesty, and I shall be glad to find you are deceived.
No, Sir, it is too true; for had not Seleucus his faith been watchful this night she had made her base flight into the loathed embraces of a Traitor and a Subject, nor does she yet know she shall be prevented.
I am sorry, Sir, your doubts have so much reason to build upon.
We are called.
This way, your hand.
Manlius, do they know how to distinguish me?
Yes, I have given them a Sign.
Is it long to the time she appointed?
No, Sir, it is the hour she commanded me to wait; one of you look out, and if you spy a fire call, that we may approach to the Garden-wall with the Boat.
I go.
If it be possible let Olinda fall by the board, I'd have her dead, she'll be talking else.
I have made a Light from the Princesses Window.
Quickly then set to the Wall; and do you hear Rho∣dian?
Leave that to me.
Dost think they'll come? Dost thou believe I shall be happy? My Love was ever of her bliss afraid.
You need not fear, I am confident your thoughts will be prosperous, I hear the water dash. Who's there, the Soldier?
Yes, it is I. Who's there, Olinda?
Yes, and the Princess.
Come to the next corner, we are all ready, be speedy.
You are safe, the Slaves are the men I told you of; your Father, Appius, and Seleucus are all here; but be confident.
Stand close till they be off the Wall, and Olinda come, for she is guilty too.
Fallen by the board, and not to be found? S'death, Slave, thy life shall answer the neglect.
She perished by her haste, no fault of mine.
Leave your prating, Sirrah. Madam, your pardon for this unfortunate accident, your Maid is lost, fallen by chance by the board, and drowned; I should not dare to look you in the face after this but that I am confident I shall show you other Friends that are as dear to you.
My Maid lost! O set me back again, this ill omen foretells a greater danger.
Can there be danger to Claricilla where these Friends are?
Ha! Traitor to my Love and me, What hast thou done?
Thou art a Traitor, unworthy, no more a Daughter, but the sin and shame of my blould; Fool that thou art, could thou thou believe that thy base passion could walk id so close a disguise that my anger could not find it: no, thou art deceived; and to urge thee to despair, know, thy obscure Paramours, Melintus and Philemon, (the two Wolves to my heart) thou hast thus with safety cut away, put off to the shore, and there thou shalt behold their ruin.
Yes, Put off, that's the Word, and then put off hope, and in amazement behold the Lightning that's wrapped in this swollen cloud, which now breaks, and in death shoots your several fates.
Heaven, thou art just; and it is equal to let me fall in the design I laid to destroy those noble youths; but for thee, I will not look upon such an hated Traitor when I am so near my home.
No, you must be witness first to the Marriage of this Prin∣cess, then you shall both be a Sacrifice to our Hymen.
Thy wife? I smile upon thee; thou art so base a thing thou could never find my anger yet; my scorn was ever strong enough to strangle thy hopes.
Anon twill be my time to smile when died in thy Father's blood, my Revenge shall force all their Sweets from thee which I will gather in the presence of thy Paramour; nor shall he or these have liberty to die before I have enjoyed thee; but that act once past the Earth shall not redeem their Lives; Do you perceive how small a share you are like to have in this Kingdom?
I am glad to see thee grown to such a height of sin; for now my hopes tell me the Gods will not suffer such a Dog to bay them long, their Lightning will shoot thee, Monster.
Sir, stay not to talk, but away to Neptune's. Temple; when we have performed what you resolved there, then to the Gal∣lie, and end your hunt.
Bind them then, and let's be gone.
WHo's there?
It is I, Jacomo; we are lost if you stay this night, your Friends aboard are betrayed to the King, and the Princess that was this night to meet him is surprised in her journey by the treachery of a Soldier that they trusted; and if you attempt not your escape you are lost; your Window's large and stands upon the Haven; if you can swim, this night leap in, and I'll be ready on the shore to receive you, with dry Clothes and Horses, to convey us to our safe∣tie; if you stay you perish.
Nay, I can swim, but the season is somewhat too cold for that pleasure; I could be glad to have the wounds the mad Dog gave me cured without being drenched in Salt-water; but however if you'll assist me, I'll leap far enough.
What hour shall I expect you?
At Twelve.
Till then Farewell.
There's some comfort yet, where there is a way, when leaping forth a Window can do it; Well, if I get free if ever I come into any company that think it lawful to love any woman longer than a man has use of the Sex, they shall geld me. By this hand I have lain with a hundred unsound Wenches with less dan∣ger than I have looked upon this wooing, this scurvy honourable Matrimony, which is so dangerous a thing the very standers by are not safe. I must swim but for wishing well to it; but from this time either Melintus shall quit his honourable way to his Loves, or I'll leave him to the honourable dangers.
STand, now Priest do your office.
Has this impious Traitor bound the hands of Justice, that thus she lets him proceed to mischief, and will not in her own battlestrike? Must the innocent fall and none defend them?
Yes, fair one, and in their usual way show their power, which thus from the meanest of the earth Heaven has raised me a Guard for your Virtues.
Ha!
Who is so much a Slave that he can let this sin chain him for ever?
How's this?
We that have together born our miseries, and with a harsh fate worn out our weary days, have not amongst them all met one that will lie so heavy on us as this base act if we assist the Traitor.
Sir, be free, and let honour only draw your Sword.
Kill that Traitor, Slave.
Free the King—Fool, can thou yet read the mise∣ries thy hated life shall feel? Here Melintus tells thee what they are.
Melintus!
Yes, Melintus, whilst Philemon and Manlius triumph in the Victory their Loyalty has gained over thy insulting treacheries∣—Sir, to you I kneel for pardon, for thus venturing to threaten dangers; all else are acquainted with the Plot we laid to discover to your abused trust this wretched Monster.
The Prince, Sir, was of Council in all we did.
And we have his consent, Sir, to be happy.
Of all I ask a pardon whom my doubt has injured; and I'll no longer cross your joys, you have my consent, and Heaven crown your wishes; but for thee, thy villainy shall destroy thee.
Madam, to your virtues which my mischiefs still have hunted thus low I bow, and when with repentant tears I have washed the way let my last breath find your faith. That I loved the rate I would have paid speaks how much; and since from him I derive these miseries, by his power which you have bowed to I beg and conjure your mercy that it may in pardon find me; and then with a wound here I'll give Balm to those under which my honour now languishes.
Disarm him.
Attempt it not.
Hold, I forgive.

I Dare not cross you sir, but I would gladly
(Provided you allow it) render you
My personal attendance.
You shall better
Discharge the duty of an honest servant,
In following my instructions which you have
Received already, then in questioning
What my intents are, or upon what motives
My stay's resolved in Mantua: Believe me,
That servant overdoes, that's too officious;
And in presuming to direct your master,
You argue him of weakness, and your self
Of arrogance and impertinence.
I have done sir; but what my ends are
Honest ones, I know it:
I have my bills of exchange, and all provisions
Entrusted to you; you have shown your self
Just and discreet, what would you more? and yet
To satisfy in some part your curious care,
Hear this, and leave me: I desire to be
Obscured; and as I have demeaned my self
These six months past in Mantua, I'll continue
Unnoted and unknown, and at the best
Appear no more then a Gentleman, and a stranger,
That travails for his pleasure:
With your pardon, 
This hardly will hold weight, though I should swear it,
With your noble friends and brother.
You may tell'em,
Since you will be my Tutor, there's a rumour
(Almost cried up into a certainty)
Of wars with Florence, and that I am determined
To see the service: Whiter I went forth,
(Heaven prospering my intents) I would come home
A Soldier, and a good one.
Should you get
A Captains place, nay Colonels, it would add little
To what you are; few of your rank will follow
That dangerous profession
It is the noblest, and Monarchs honoured in it:
But no more on my displeasure.
Saints and Angels guard you.
A war indeed is threatened, nay expected
From Florence; but it is against me already
Proclaimed in Mantua: I find it here,
No foreign, but intestine war: I have
Defied my self, in giving up my reason
A slave to passion, and am led captive
Before the battel's fought; I fainted when
I only saw mine enemy, and yielded
Before that I was charged: And though defeated,
I dare not sue for mercy; like Ixion
I look on Juno, feel my heart turn cinders
With an invisible fire: And yet should she
Deign to appear clothed in a various cloud,
The majesty of the substance is so secret,
I durst not clasp the shadow: I behold her
With adoration, feast my eye, while all
My other senses starve; and oft frequenting
The place which she makes happy with her presence,
I never yet had power with tongue or pen
To move her to compassion, or make known
What it is I languish for; yet I must gaze still,
Though it increase my flame: however I
Much more then fear I am observed and censured
For bold intrusion. 
Know you, boy, that Gentleman?
Who, Monsieur Melancholy? hath not your
Honour Marked him before?
I have seen him often wait
About the Princess lodgings, but ne'er guessed
What his designs were.
No? what a sigh he breathed now!
Many such will blow up the roof; on my small credit
There's gunpowder in 'em.
How Crack! gunpowder?
He's flesh and blood, and devils only carry
Such roaring stuff about 'em: you cannot prove
He is or Spirit or Conjurer.
That I grant; but he's a Lover, and that's as bad; their sighs
Are like petards, and blow all up:
A Lover! I have been in love my self, but never found yet
That it could work such strange effects.
True, Madam,
In women it cannot; for when they miss th'enjoying
Of their full wishes, all their sighs and heigh-hoes
At the worst breed timpanies, and these are cured too
With a kiss or two of their Saint, when he appears
Between a pair of sheets: but with us men
The case is otherwise.
You will be breached, boy,
For your physical maxims: But how are you assured
He is a Lover?
Who, I? I know with whom too,
But that is to be whispered. 
How? the Princess! th'unparallel'd Matilda!
Some proof of it; I'll pay for my intelligence.
Let me kiss
Your Honours hand; it was ever fair, but now
Beyond comparison.
I guess the reason;
A giving hand is still fair to the receiver.
Your Ladiship's in the right: but to the pur∣pose,
He is my Client, and pays his fees as duly
As ever Usurer did in a bad cause
To his man of law; and yet I get, and take 'em
Both easily and honestly: All the service
I do him, is to give him notice when
And where the Princess will appear; and that
I hope's no treason: If you miss him when
She goes to the Vesper or the Matins, hang me;
Or when she takes the air, be sure to find him
Near her coach; at her going forth, or coming back:
But if she walk, he's ravished; I have seen him smell out
Her footing like a Lime-hound, and knows it
From all the rest of her train.
Yet I ne'er saw him present her a petition,
Nore'r shall: He only sees her, sighs, and sacrifices
A tear or two; then vanishes.
It is most strange:
What a sad aspect he wears! but I'll make use of't.
The Princess is much troubled with the threats
That come from Florence; I will bring her to him,
The novelty may afford her sport, and help
To purge deep melancholy. Boy, can you stay
Your Client here for the third part of an hour?
I have some ends in it.
Stay him, Madam; fear not:
The present receipt of a round sum of crowns,
And that will draw most Gallants from their prayers,
Cannot drag him from me.
See you do.
Ne'er doubt me,
I'll put him out of his dream. Good morrow Signior.
My little friend, good morrow: Hath the Princess
Slept well to night? 
I hear not from her women
One murmur to the contrary.
Heaven be praised for it:
Does she go to Church this morning?
Troth I know not; I keep no key of her de∣votion, Signior.
Goes she abroad? pray tell me.
It is thought rather
She is resolved to keep her chamber.
Ay me!
Why do you sigh? If that you have a business
To be dispatched in Court, show ready money,
You shall find those that will prefer it for you.
Business! can any man have business, but
To see her, then admire her, and pray for her,
She being composed of goodness? For my self,
I find it a degree of happiness
But to be near her; and I think I pay
A strict religious vow, when I behold her,
And that's all my ambition.
I believe you:
Yet she being absent, you may spend some hours
With profit and delight too. After dinner
The Duke gives audience to a rough Ambassador,
Whom yet I never saw, nor heard his title,
Employed from Florence: I'll help you to a place
Where you shall see and hear all.
Tic not worth my observation.
What think you of
An excellent Comedy to be presented
For his entertainment? He that penned it, is
The Poet of the time; and all the Ladies
(I mean the amorous and learned ones)
Except the Princess, will be there to grace it.
What's that to me? without her all is no∣thing,
The light that shines in Court, Cimerian darkness:
I will to bed again, and there contemplate
On her perfections.
Stay sir! see the Princess,
Beyond our hopes.
Take that, as Moors salute
The rising Sun with joyful superstition:
I could fall down and worship. O my heart! 
Like Phoebe breaking through an envious cloud,
Or something which no simile can express,
She shows to me; a reverend fear, but blended
With wonder and amazement, does possess me;
Now glut thy self, my famished eye.
That's he, an't please your Excellence.
Observe his posture,
But with a quarter-look.
Your eye fixed on him, will breed astonish∣meant.
A comely Gentleman! I would not que∣stion your relation, Lady,
Yet faintly can believe it: How he eyes me!
Will he not speak?
Your Excellence hath deprived him
Of speech and motion.
It is most strange.
These fits are usual with him.
Is it not, Ascanio,
A personated folly? or he a statue?
If it be, it is a master-piece; for man
I cannot think him.
For your sport vouchsafe him a little con∣ference.
In compassion rather:
For should he love me as you say (though hopeless)
It should not be returned with scorn; that were
An inhumanity, which my birth nor honour
Could privilege, were they greater. Now I perceive
He has life and motion in him; to whom, Lady,
Pays he that duty?
Sans doubt to your self.
And whither goes he now?
To his private lodging,
But to what end I know not; this is all
I ever noted in him.
Call him back: In pity I stand bound to counsel him,
However I am denied, though I were willing
To ease his sufferings.
Signior, the Princess commands you to attend her.
How? the Princess! am I betrayed?
What a lump of flesh is this?
You are betrayed, sir, to a better fortune
Then you durst ever hope for: What a Tantalus
Do you make your self? the flying fruit stays for you,
And the water that you longed for, rising up
Above your lip, do you refuse to taste it?
Move faster, sluggish Camel, or I will thrust
This goad in your breech: Had I such a promising beard,
I should need the reins, not spurs.
You may come nearer;
Why do you shake, sir? If I flatter not
My self, there's no deformity about me,
Nor any part so monstrous to beget
An ague in you. 
It proceeds not, Madam, from guilt, but re∣verence.
I believe you sir; have you a suit to me?
Your Excellence is wondrous fair.
I thank your good opinion.
And I beseech you that I may have licence To kneel to you.
A suit I cannot cross.
I humbly thank your Excellence.
But what,
As you are prostrate on your knee before me,
Is your petition?
I have none, great Princess,
Do you kneel for nothing?
Yes, I have a suit;
But such a one, as if denied, will kill me.
Take comfort; it must be of some strange nature,
Unfitting you to ask, or me to grant,
If I refuse it.
It is, Madam, —
Out with it.
That I may not offend you, this is all,
When I presume to look on you.
A flat Eunuch! to look on her? I should desire my self.
To move a little further.
Only that?
And I beseech you, Madam, to believe
I never did yet with a wanton eye
Or cherish one lascivious wish beyond it.
You'll never make good Courtier, or be
In grace with Ladies.
Or us Waiting-Women, if that be your
Nil ultra.
He's no Gentleman, on my virginity it is apparent:
My Tailor has more boldness, nay my shoo-maker
Will fumble a little further, he could not have
The length of my foot else.
Only to look on me? ends your ambition there?
It does, great Lady,
And that confined too, and at fitting distance:
The Fly that plays too near the flame, burns in it.
As I behold the sun, the stars, the Temples,
I look upon you, and wish'twere no sin,
Should I adore you.
Come, there's something more in it;
And since that you will make a Goddess of me,
As such a one, I'll tell you, I desire not
The meanest Altar raised up to mine honour
To be pulled down; I can accept from you
(Be your condition ne'er so far beneath me)
One grain of incense with devotion offered,
Beyond all perfumes or Sabean spices
By one that proudly thinks he merits in it:
I know you love me.
Next to heaven, Madam,
And with as pure a zeal. That we behold
With th'eyes of contemplation, but can
Arrive no nearer to it in this life;
But when that is divorced, my soul shall serve yours,
And witness my affection.
Pray you rise, but wait my further pleasure.
I'll present you,
And give you proof I am your friend, a true one;
And in my pleading for you, teach the age
That calls erroneously Friendship but a name,
It is a substance. Madam, I am bold
To trench so far upon your privacy,
As to desire my friend (Let not that wrong him,
For he's a worthy one) may have the honour
To kiss your hand.
His own worth challenges a greater favour.
Your acknowledgment
Confirms it, Madam: If you look on him
As he's built up a man, without addition
Of fortunes liberal favours, wealth or titles,
He doth deserve no usual entertainment.
But as he is a Prince, and for your service
Hath left fair Parma (that acknowledges
No other Lord) and uncompelled exposes
His person to the dangers of war,
Ready to break in storms upon our heads;
In noble thankfulness you may vouchsafe him
Nearer respect, and such grace as may nourish,
Not kill his amorous hopes. 
Cozen, you know I am not the disposer of my self,
The Duke my father challenges that power:
Yet thus much I dare promise; Prince Uberti
Shall find the seed of service that he sows
False not on barren ground.
For this high favour
I am your creature, and profess I owe you
Whatever I call mine. 
This great Lord is
A Suitor to the Princess.
True, he is so:
Fame gives him out too for a brave Commander
And in it does him but deserved right;
The Duke hath made him General of his horse
On that assurance.
And the Lord Farneze pleads for him, as it seems.
It is too apparent:
And this considered, give me leave to ask
What hope have you sir?
I may still look on her,
However he wear the garland.
A thin diet, and will not feed you fat, sir.
I rejoice, rare Princess, that you are not to be won
By Carpet-courtship, but the sword: with this
Steel-pen I'll write on Florence helm, how much
I can, and dare do for you.
It is not questioned,
Some private business of mine own disposed of,
I'll meet you in the presence.
Ever your servant.
Now sir to you: You have observed, I doubt not,
(For Lovers are sharp. sighted) to what purpose
This Prince solicits me; and yet I am not
So taken with his worth, but that I can
Vouchsafe you further parley. The first command
That I'll impose upon you, is to hear
And follow my good council: I am not
Offended that you love me: persist in it,
But love me virtuously, such love may spur you
To noble undertakings, which achieved,
Will raise you into name, preferment, honour:
For all which, though you ne'er enjoy my person,
(For that's impossible) you are indebted
To your high aims; visit me when you please,
I do allow it, nor will blush to own you,
(So you confine your self to what you promise)
As my virtuous servant.
Farewell sir, you have
An unexpected Cordial.
May it work well.
Your love, yes, so she said, may spur you to
Brave undertakings: Adding this, You may
Visit me when you please. Is this allowed me,
And any act within the power of man
Impossible to be effected? no,
I will break through all oppositions that
May stop me in my full carrier to honour;
And borrowing strength to do, from her high favour,
Add something to Alcides greatest labour.
This is your place, and were it in our power,
You should have greater honour, Prince of Parma:
The rest know theirs; let some attend with care
On the Ambassador, and let my Daughter
Be present at his audience. Reach a chair,
We'll do all fit respects; and pray you put on
Your milder looks; you are in a place where frowns
Are no prevailing agents.
I have seen
More then a wolf, a Gorgon: 
What's the matter?
A Page of mine is fallen into a swoon,
Look to him carefully.
Now when you please, the cause that brought you hither?
The protraction
Of my dispatch forgotten, from Lorenzo
The Tuscan Duke, thus much to you Gonzaga
The Duke of Mantua: By me his nephew
He does salute you fairly, and entreats
(A word not suitable to his power and greatness)
You would consent to tender that, which he
Unwillingly must force, if contradicted.
Ambition, in a private man a vice,
Is in a Prince the virtue.
To the purpose; these ambages are im∣pertinent.
He demands
The fair Matilda (for I dare not take
From her perfections) in a noble way;
And in creating her the comfort of
His royal bed, to raise her to a height
Her flattering hopes could not aspire, where she
With wonder shall be gazed upon, and live
The envy of her sex.
Suppose this granted.
Or if denied, what follows?
Present war, with all extremities the Con∣queror can
Inflict upon the vanquished.
Grant me licence
To answer this defiance: What intelligence
Holds your proud Master with the will of Heaven,
That ere th'uncertain Dye of War be thrown,
He dares assure himself the victory?
Are his unjust invading Arms of fire?
Or those we put on in defence of right,
Like chaff to be consumed in the encounter?
I look on your dimensions, and find not
Mine own of lesser size; the blood that fills
My veins, as hot as yours; my sword as sharp,
My nerves of equal strength, my heart as good,
And confident we have the better cause,
Why should we fear the trial?
You presume you are superior in numbers; we
Lay hold upon the surest anchor, virtue;
Which when the tempest of the war roars loudest,
Must prove a strong protection.
Two main reasons (seconding those you have already heard)
Gives us encouragement: The duty that
I owe my mother Country, and the love
Descending to my daughter. For the first,
Should I betray her liberty, I deserved
To have my name with infamy razed from
The catalogue of good Princes: And I should
Unnaturally forget I am a father,
If like a Tartar, or for fear or profit,
I should consign her as a bondwoman
To be disposed of at another pleasure,
Her own consent or favour never sued for,
And mine by force exacted. No, Alonzo,
She is my only child, my heir; and if
A fathers eyes deceive me not, the hand
Of prodigal nature hath given so much to her,
As in the former ages Kings would rise up
In her defence, and makes her cause their quarrel:
Nor can she, if that any spark remain
To kindle a desire to be possessed
Of such a beauty, in our time want swords
To guard it safe from violence.
I must speak, or I shall burst; now to be silent, were
A kind of blasphemy. If such purity,
Such innocence, an abstract of perfection,
The soul of beauty, virtue, in a word,
A Temple of things sacred, should groan under
The burden of opprestion, we might
Accuse the Saints, and tax the Powers above us
Of negligence or injustice. Pardon, sir,
A strangers boldness, and in your mercy call it
True zeal, not rudeness: In a cause like this,
The Husbandman would change his ploughing-irons
To weapons of defence, and leave the earth
Untill'd, although a general dearth should follow:
The Student would forswear his book; the Lawyer
Put off his thriving gown, and without pay
Conclude this case is to be fought, not pleaded:
The women will turn Amazons, as their sex
In her were wronged; and boys write down their names
In the muster-book for soldiers.
Take my hand;
Whatev'r you are, I thank you: how are you called?
Hortensio, a Millanoise.
I wish Mantua had many such. My Lord
Ambassador,
Some privacy if you please: Manfroy, you may
Partake it, and advise us. 
Do you know, friend,
What this man is, or of what country?
Neither.
I'll question him my self; what are you sir?
A Gentleman.
But if there be gradation
In Gentry, as the Heralds say, you have
Been overbold in the presence of your betters.
My betters, sir?
Your betters! as I take it, you are no Prince.
It is fortunes gift you were born one:
I have not heard that glorious title crowns you
As a reward of virtue; it may be
The first of your house deserved it, yet his merits
You can but faintly call your own.
Well answered.
You come up to me.
I would not turn my back
If you were the Duke of Florence, though you charged me
In the head of our troops.
Tell me in gentler language,
(Your passionate speech induces me to think so)
Do you love the Princess?
Were you mine enemy,
Your foot upon my breast, sword at my throat,
Even then I would profess it. The ascent
To th'height of honour, is by arts or arms:
And if such an unequalled prize might fall
On him that did deserve best in defence
Of this rare Princess, in the day of battle
I should lead you a way would make your Greatness
Sweat drops of blood to follow.
Can your Excellence
Hear this without rebuke from one unknown?
Is he a Rival for a Prince?
My Lord, you take that liberty I never gave you:
In justice you should give encouragement
To him or any man that freely offers
His life to do me service, not deter him;
I give no suffrage to it: Grant he loves me,
As he professes, how are you wronged in it?
Would you have all men hate me but your self?
No more of this I pray you: If this Gentleman
Fight for my freedom, in a fit proportion
To his desert and quality, I can
And will reward him, yet give you no cause
Of jealousy or envy.
Heavenly Lady! 
No peace, but on such poor and base con∣ditions?
We will not buy it at that rate: Return
This answer to your Master: Though we wished
To hold fair quarter with him, on such terms
As honour would give way to, we are not
So thunder-struck with the loud voice of war,
As to acknowledge him our Lord before
His sword hath made us Vassals: we long since
Have had intelligence of the unjust gripe
He purposed to lay on us; neither are we
So unprovided as you think, my Lord,
He shall not need to seek us, we will meet him
And prove the fortune of a day, perhaps
Sooner then he expects.
And find repentance when it is too late.
Farewell.
No, my Matilda,
We must not part so: Beasts and birds of prey
To their last gasp defend their brood; and Florence
Over thy fathers breast shall march up to thee,
Before he force affection: The arms
That thou must put on for us and thy self,
Are prayers and pure devotion, which will
Be heard, Matilda. Mansroy, to your trust
We do give up the City, and my daughter;
On both keep a strong guard: No tears, they are ominous.
O my Octavio, my tried Octavio
In all my dangers! now I want thy service,
In passion recompensed with banishment.
Error of Princes, who hate virtue when
She's present with us, and in vain admire her
When she is absent! It is too late to think on it:
The wished for time is come, Princely Uberti,
To show your valour; Friends being to do, not talk.
All rhetoric is fruitless, only this,
Fate cannot rob you of deserved applause,
Whether you win or lose in such a cause.
NO matter for the Ring I asked you for:
The Boy not to be found?
Nor heard of, Madam:
He hath been sought and searched for, house by house,
Nay, every nook of the City, but to no purpose.
And how he should escape hence, the Lord Manfroy
Being so vigilant ore the guards, appears
A thing impossible.
I never saw him
Since he swouned in the presence, when my Father
Gave audience to the Ambassador: but I feel
A sad miss of him; on any slight occasion
He would find out such pretty arguments
To make me sport, and with such witty sweetness
Deliver his opinion, that I must
Ingeniously confess his harmless mirth,
When I was most oppressed with care, wrought more
In the removing of it, then music on me.
An't please your Excellence, I have observed him
Waggishly witty; yet sometimes on the sudden
He would be very pensive, and then talk
So feelingly of love, as if he had
Tasted the bitter sweets of't.
He would tell too a pretty tale of a sister that had been
Deceived by her Sweetheart; and then weeping swear
He wondered how men could be false
And that when he was a Knight, he would be the Ladies Champion,
And travel ore the world to kill such Lovers
As durst play false with their Mistresses:
I am sure I want his company
There are Letters, Madam,
In post come from the Duke; but I am charged
By the careful bringer, not to open them
But in your presence.
Heaven preserve my Father!
Good news, an't be thy will!
Patience must arm you against what's ill.
I'll hear 'em in my Cabinet:
Why have you left the safety of the City
And service of the Princess, to partake
The dangers of the Camp? and at a time too
When the Armies are in view, and every minute
The dreadful charge expected.
You appear so far beyond your self, as you are now
Armed like a soldier, (though I grant your presence
Was ever gracious) that I grow enamoured
Of the profession, in the horror of it
There is a kind of majesty.
But too heavy to sit on thy soft shoulders, Youth; retire
To the Dukes tent that's guarded.
Sir, I come
To serve you: Knights adventurers are allowed
Their Pages; and I bring a will that shall
Supply my want of power.
To serve me, boy! I wish (believe it) that it were in my nerves
To do thee any service; and thou shalt
If I survive the fortune of this day,
Be satisfied I am serious.
I am not
To be put off so, sir: since you do neglect
My offered duty, I must use the power
I bring along with me, that may command you:
You have seen this Ring.
Made rich by being worn upon the Princess finger.
It is a favour
To you, by me sent from her: view it better;
But why coy to receive it?
I am unworthy
Of such a blessing, I have done nothing yet
That may deserve it; no Commanders blood
Of th'adverse party hath yet died my sword
Drawn out in her defence. I must not take it.
This were a triumph for me when I had
Made Florence Duke my prisoner, and compelled him
To kneel for mercy at her feet.
It was sent, sir,
To put you in mind whose cause it is you fight for;
And as I am her creature, to revenge
A wrong to me done.
By what man?
Alonzo.
Th'Ambassador?
The same:
Let it suffice, I know him by his armour and his horse;
And if we meet — I am cut off, the Alarm
Commands me hence: sweet Youth, fall off.
I must not; you are too noble to receive a wound
Upon your back; and following close behind you,
I am secure, though I could wish my bosom
Were your defence.
Thy kindness will undo thee.
We'll charge the main Battalion, fall you
Upon the Van, preserve your Troops entire
To force the Rear: he dies that breaks his ranks,
Till all be ours and sure.
It is so proclaimed.
It is he, Ascanio: Stand!
I never shunned
A single opposition; but tell me
Why in the battle, of all men, thou hast
Made choice of me?
Look on this Youth; his cause
Sits on my sword
I know him not.
I'll help your memory. 
What have I done? I am doubtful
To whom to wish the victory; for still
My resolution wavering, I so love
The enemy that wronged me, that I cannot
Without repentance wish success to him
That seeks to do me right. — Alas he's fallen.
Alonzo falls.
As you are gentle, hold sir! or if I want
Power to persuade so far, I conjure you
By her loved name I am sent from.
It is a charm
Too strong to be resisted: He is yours.
Yet why should you make suit to save that life
Which you so late desired should be cut off
For injuries received, begets my wonder.
Alas, we foolish spleenful boys would have
We know not what: I have some private reasons,
But now not to be told.
Shall I take him prisoner?
By no means, sir; I will not save his life
To rob him of his honour: when you give,
Give not by halves: One short word, and I follow.
My Lord Alonzo, if you have received
A benefit, and would know to whom you owe it,
Remember what your entertainment was
At old Octavio's house, one you called friend,
And how you did return it.
I remember I did not well; but it is now no time
To think upon it; my wounded honour calls
For reparation, I must quench my fury
For this disgrace in blood, and some shall smart for it.
O Prince Vberti, valour cannot save us;
The body of our Army's pierced and broken,
The wings are routed, and our scattered Troops
Not to be rallied up.
It is yet some comfort,
The enemy must say we were not wanting
In courage or direction; and we may
Accuse the powers above us partial, when
A good cause, well defended too, must suffer
For want of fortune.
All is lost; the Duke
Too far engaged, I fear, to be brought off:
Three times I did attempt his rescue, but
With odds was beaten back: Only the stranger
(I speak it to my shame) still followed him,
Cutting his way; but it is beyond my hopes
That either should return.
That noble stranger,
Whom I in my proud vanity of greatness
As one unknown contemned, when I was thrown
Out of my saddle by the great Dukes lance,
Horsed me again in spite of all that made
Resistance; and then whispered in mine ear,
Fight bravely Prince Uberti, there's no way else
To the fair Matilda's favour.
It was done nobly.
In you, my bosom friend; I had called it noble:
But such a curtsy from a Rival, merits
The highest attribute.
Stand on your guard, we are pursued.
Preserved! wonder on wonder.
The Duke in safety?
Pay your thanks, Farneze,
To this brave man, if I may call him so,
Whose acts were more then humane: if thou art
My better Angel, from my infancy
Designed to guard me, like thy self appear,
For sure thou art more then mortal.
No, great sir,
A weak and sinful man, though I have done you
Some prosperous service, that hath found your favour,
I am lost to my self; but lose not you
The offered opportunity to delude
The hot pursuing enemy: these woods
Nor the dark vail of night cannot conceal you,
If you dwell long here: You may rise again,
But I am fallen for ever.
Rather borne up
To the supreme sphere of honour.
I confess my life your gift.
My liberty: You have snatched
The wreath of conquest from the Victors head,
And do alone in scorn of Lorenzo's fortune
Though we are slaved, by true heroic valour
Deserve a triumph.
From whence then proceeds this poor dejection?
In one suit I'll tell you,
Which I beseech you grant: — I loved your daughter,
But how? as beggars in their wounded fancy
Hope to be Monarchs:
I long languished for her,
But did receive no Cordial, but what
Despair my rough Physician prescribed me.
At length her goodness and compassion found it.
And whereas I expected, and with reason,
The distance and disparity considered
Between her birth and mine, she would contemn me,
The Princess gave me comfort.
In what measure?
She did admit me for her Knight and servant,
And spurred me to do something in this battle
Fought for her liberty, that might not blemish
So fair a favour.
This you hrve performed to th'height of admiration.
I subscribe to it, that am your Rival.
You are charitable:
But how short of my hopes, nay the assurance
Of those achievements which my love and youth
Already held accomplisn'd, this days fortune
Must sadly answer. What I did, she gave me
The strength to do; her piety preserved
Her Father; and her gratitude for the dangers
You threw your self into for her defence,
Protected you by me her instrument:
But when I came to strike in mine own cause,
And to do something so remarkable,
That should at my return command her thanks
And gracious entertainment, then alas
I fainted like a coward; I made a vow too
(And it is registered) ne'er to presume
To come into her presence, if I brought not
Her fears and dangers bound in fetters to her,
Which now's impossible. — Hark, the enemy
Makes his approaches: save your selves, this only
Deliver to her Sweetness; I have done
My poor endeavours, and pray her not repent
Her goodness to me: May you live to serve her,
This loss recovered, with a happier fate,
And make use of this sword: Arms I abjure,
And conversation of men; I'll seek out
Some unfrequented cave, and die Loves martyr.
Follow him.
It is in vain; his nimble feet
Have born him from my sight.
I suffer for him:
We share in it, but must not sir forget
Your means of safety.
In the war I have served you,
And to the death will follow you.
It is not fit,
We must divide our selves.
My daughter, if I retain yet
A Sovereigns power ore thee, or friends with you,
Do, and dispute not; by my example change
Your habits: As I thus put off my purple,
Ambition dies; this garment of a shepherd
Left here by chance will serve; in lieu of it
I leave this to the owner. Raise new forces,
And meet me at S. Leo's Fort; my daughter,
As I commanded Manfroy, there will meet us.
The City cannot hold out, we must part,
Farewell, thy hand —
You still shall have my heart.
The day is ours, though it cost dear; yet it is not
Enough to get a victory, if we lose
The true use of it. We have hitherto
Held back your forward swords, and in our fear
Of ambushes, deferred the wished reward
Due to your bloody toil: But now give freedom,
Nay, licence to your fury and revenge;
Now glut your selves with prey, let not the night
Nor these thick woods give sanctuary to
The fear-struck Hares our Enemies: fire these trees,
And force the wretches to forsake their holes,
And offer their scorched bodies to your swords,
Or burn'em as a sacrifice to your angers.
Who brings Gonzaga's head, or takes him prisoner,
(Which I incline to rather) that he may
Be sensible of those tortures, which I vow
T'inflict upon him, for denial of
His daughter to our bed) shall have a Blank
With our hand and signet made authentical,
In which he may write down himself, what wealth
Or honours he desires
The great Dukes will shall be obeyed
Put it in execution.
Begirt the wood, and fire it.
Follow, follow.
Uberti, Prince Uberti! O my friend
Dearer then life! I have lost thee. Cruel fortune,
Unsatisfied with our sufferings! We no sooner
Were parted from the Duke, and even then ready
To make a mutual farewell, when a troop
Of the enemies horse fell on us: we were forced
To take the woods again, but in our flight
Their hot pursuit divided us: we had been happy
If we had died together; to survive him
To me is worse then death, and therefore should not
Embrace the means of my escape, though offered.
When nature gave us life, she gave a burden,
But at our pleasure not to be cast off,
Though weary of it; and my reason prompts me,
This habit of a Florentine which I took
From a dying soldier, may keep me unknown
Till opportunity mark me out a way
For flight, and with security.
Was there ever such a night of horror?
My friends voice! I now
In part forgive thee, fortune.
The wood flames,
The bloody sword devours all that it meets,
And death in several shapes rides here in triumph.
I am like a Stag closed in a toil; my life
As soon as found, the cruel Huntsmans prey:
Why fliest thou then what is inevitable?
Better to fall with manly wounds before
Thy cruel Enemy, then survive thine honour:
And yet to charge him, and die unrevenged,
Mere desperation.
Heroic spirit!
Mine own life I contemn, and would not save it
But for the future service of the Duke
And safety of his daughter; having means,
If I escape, to raise a second Army,
And what is nearest to me, to enjoy
My friend Farneze.
I am still his care:
What shall I do? If I call loud, the foe
That hath begirt the wood, will hear the sound.
Shall I return by the same path? I cannot,
The darkness of the night conceals it from me:
Something I must resolve.
Let friendship rouse
Thy sleeping soul, Farneze: wilt thou suffer
Thy friend, a Prince, nay one that may set free
Thy captived Country, perish, when it is in
Thy power with this disguise to save his life?
Thou hast lived too long, therefore resolve to die;
Thou hast seen thy Country ruined, and thy Master
Compelled to shameful flight, the fields and woods
Straw'd ore with carcasses of thy fellow-soldiers:
The miseries thou art fallen in, and before
Thy eyes the horror of this place, and thousand
Calamities to come; and after all these
Can any hope remain? shake off delays,
Dost thou doubt yet? To save a Citizen,
The conquering Roman in a General
Esteemed the highest honour; can it be then
Inglorious to preserve a Prince? thy friend?
Uberti, Prince Uberti, use this means
Of thy escape; concealed in this thou moist
Pass through the enemies guards: the time denies
Longer discourse; thou hast a noble end,
Live therefore mindful of thy dyng friend:
Farneze, stay thy hasty steps: Farneze!
Thy friend Uberti calls thee: it is in vain,
He's gone to death an Innocent, and makes life
The benefit he confers on me, my guilt.
Thou art too covetous of another safety,
Too prodigal, and careless of thine own:
It is a deceit in friendship to enjoin me
To put this garment on, and live, that he
May have alone the honour to die nobly.
O cruel piety, in our equal danger
To rob thy self of that thou give thy friend!
It must not be, I will restore his gift
And die before him. How? where shall I find him?
Thou art overcome in friendship; yield Uberti
To the extremity of the time, and live:
A heavy ransom, but it must be paid.
I will put on this habit: pitying Heaven
As it loves goodness, may protect my friend,
And give me means to satisfy the debt
I stand engaged for; if not, pale despair
I dare thy worst, thou can but bid me die,
And so much I'll force from an enemy.
I know him, he's a man of ransom.
True, but if he live it is to be paid to me:
I forced him to the woods.
But my art found him,
Nor will I brook a partner in the prey
My fortune gave me.
Render him, or expect the point of this.
Were it lightning, I would meet it
Rather then be outbrav'd.
I thus decide the difference.
My sword shall plead my title. 
Ha! where learned you this discipline? my
Commanders
Opposed against one another? what blind fury
Brings forth this brawl? Alonzo and Pisano
At bloody difference! hold, or I tilt
At both as enemies. Now speak, how grew
This strange division?
Against all right;
By force Alonzo strives to reap the harvest
Sown by my labour.
Sir, this is my prisoner,
The purchase of my sword, which proud Pisano
That hath no interest in him, would take from me.
Did not the presence of the Duke forbid me,
I would say —
What?
Tic false.
Before my face!
Keep 'em asunder. And was this the cause
Of such a mortal quarrel? this the base
To raise your fury on? the ties of blood,
Of fellowship in arms, respect, obedience
To me your Prince and General, no more
Prevailing on you? this a price for which
You would betray our victory, or wound
Your reputation with mutinies?
Forgetful of your selves, allegiance, honour?
This is a course to throw us headlong down
From that proud height of empire, upon which
We were securely seared: shall division
Oreturn what concord built? If you desire
To bath your swords in blood, the enemy
Still flies before you: Would you have spoil? the Country
Lies open to you. O unheard of madness!
What greater mischief could Gonzaga wish us,
Then you pluck on our heads? no, my brave Leaders,
Let unity dwell in our tents, and discord
Be banished to our enemies
Take the prisoner, I do give up my title.
I desire your friendship, and will buy it:
He is yours. 
No man's a faithful Judge in his own cause;
Let the Duke determine of him, we are friends sir.
Show it in emulation to oretake
The flying foe; this cursed wretch disposed of,
With our whole strength we'll follow.
Death at length
Will set a period to calamity.
I see it in this Tyrants frowns haste to me.
Thou machine of this mischief, look to feel
Whatever the wrath of an incensed Prince
Can pour upon thee: With thy blood I'll quench
(But drawn forth slowly) the invisible flames
Of discord, — by thy charms first fetched from Hell,
Then forced into the breasts of my Commanders.
— Bring forth the tortures.
Hear, victorious Duke,
The story of my miserable fortune,
Of which this Villain (by your sacred tongue
Condemned to die) was the immediate cause:
And if my humble suit have justice in it,
Vouchsafe to grant it.
Soldier be brief; our anger can brook no long delay.
I am the last
Of three sons, by one father got, and trained up
With his best care for service in your wars:
My father dyed under his fatal hand,
And two of my poor brothers. Now I hear
Or fancy wounded by my grief, deludes me,
Their pale and mangled ghosts, crying for ven∣geance
On perjury and murder.
Thus the case stood. —
My father (on whose face he he durst not look
In equal mart) by his fraud circumvented,
Became his Captive: we his sons lamenting
Our old sires hard condition, freely offered
Our utmost for his ransom. That refused,
The subtle Tyrant for his cruel ends,
(Conceiving that our piety might ensnare us)
Proposed my Fathers head to be redeemed,
If two of us would yield our selves his slaves.
We upon any terms resolved to save him,
Though with the loss of life which he gave to us;
With an undaunted constancy drew lots
(For each of us contented to be one)
Who should preserve our Father: I was exempted,
But to my more affliction; my brothers
Delivered up; the perjured Homicide
Laughing in scorn, and by his hoary locks
Pulling my wretched Father on his knees,
Said thus, Receive the Father you have ransomed;
And instantly struck off his head.
Most barbarous!
I never saw this man.
One murmur more,
I'll have thy tongue pulled out. Proceed.
Conceive, sir,
How thunder-struck we stood, being made spectators
Of such an unexpected tragedy:
Yet this was a beginning, not an end
To his intended cruelty; for pursuing
Such a revenge, as no Hircanian tigress
Robed of her whelps durst aim at, in a moment
Treading upon my Fathers trunk, he cut off
My pious Brothers heads, and threw'em at me.
Oh what a spectacle was this! what mountain
Of sorrow overwhelmed me! My poor heartstrings
As tenter'd by his tyranny, cracked; my knees
Beating against one another, groans and tears
Blended together followed; not one passion
Calamity ever yet expressed, forgotten.
Now mighty sir, (bathing your feet with tears)
Your suppliants suit is, that he may have leave
With any cruelty revenge can fancy,
To sacrifice this Monster, to appease
My Fathers ghost and Brothers.
Thou hast obtained it; choose any torture; let the memory
Of what thy Father and thy Brothers suffered
Make thee ingenious in it, such a one
As Phalaris would wish to be called his.
Martino, guarded with your soldiers, see
The execution done; but bring his head
On forfeiture of your own, to us: Our presence
Long since was elsewhere looked for.
Soldier to work; take any way thou wills for thy revenge,
Provided that he die: his body's thine,
But I must have his head.
I have already
Concluded of the manner: O just heaven,
The instrument I wished for offered me!
Why art thou rapped thus?
In this soldiers hand
I see the murderers own sword, I know it,
Yes, this is it by which my Father and
My brothers were beheaded: Noble Captain
Command it to my hand. Stand forth and tremble;
This weapon of late drunk with innocent blood
Shall now carouse thine own. Pray, if thou can;
For though the world shall not redeem thy body,
I would not kill thy soul.
Can thou believe
There is a heaven, or hell, or soul? thou hast none.
In death to rob me of my fame, my honour,
With such a forged lye? tell me thou hangman,
Where did I ever see thy face? or when
Murdered thy sire or brothers? look on me
And make it good: thou dare not.
Yes I will 
In one short whisper, and that told thou art dead.
I am Uberti; take thy sword, fight bravely,
We'll live or die together.
We are betrayed.
And have I leave once more, brave Prince, to ease 
My head on thy true bosom?
I glory more
To be thy friend, then in the name of Prince
Or any higher title.
My preserver!
The life you gave to me, I but return;
And pardon, dearest friend, the bitter language
Necessity made me use.
O sir, I am
Outdone in all; but comforted, that none
But you can wear the laurel,
Here's no place
Or time to argue this; let us fly hence.
I follow.
A thousand Furies keep you company!
I was at the gate of — but now I feel
My wounds not mortal; I was but astonished,
And coming to my self, I find I am
Reserved for the gallows: there's no looking on
Th'enraged Duke, excuses will not serve,
I must do something that may get my pardon:
If not, I know the worst, a halter ends all.
It is true, by proof I find it, humane reason
Views with such dim eyes what is good or ill,
That if the great Disposer of our being
Should offer to our choice all worldly blessings,
We knew not what to take.—
When I was young,
Ambition of Court-preferment fired me;
And as there were no happiness beyond it,
I laboured for it and got it; no man stood
In greater favour with his Prince, I had
Honours and offices, wealth flowed in to me,
And for my service both in peace and war
The general voice gave out I did deserve 'em.
But oh vain confidence in subordinate greatness!
When I was most secure, it was not in
The power of fortune to remove me from
The flat I firmly stood on: in a moment
My virtues were made crimes, and popular favour
(To new-rais'd men still fatal) bred suspicion
That I was dangerous: which no sooner entered
Gonzago's breast, but straight my ruin followed:
My offices were took from me, my state seized on;
And had I not prevented it by flight,
The jealousy of the Duke had been removed
With the forfeiture of my head.
 Or show compassion, or I will force it.
Ha! is not poverty safe?
I thought proud war that aimed at kingdoms ruins,
The sack of palaces and cities, scorned
To look on a poor cottage.
What would you have?
The devil sleeps in my pocket, I have no cross
To drive him from it. Be you or thief, or soldier,
Or such a beggar as will not be denied,
My scrip, my tar-box, hook and coat will prove
But a thin purchase; if you turn my inside
Outwards, you'll find it true.
Searches his scrip.
Not any food?
Alas sir,
I am no glutton, but an under-shepherd,
The very picture of famine; judge by my cheeks else:
I have my pittance by ounces, and starve my self;
When I pay a pensioner, I have an ancient mouse,
A crum a meal. 
No drop left?
Drunkard, hast thou swilled up all?
How? Drunkard, sir! I am a poor man, you mistake me sir:
Drunkard's a title for the rich, my betters;
A calling in repute, some sell their lands for it,
And roar wines better then money. Our poor beveridg
Of buttermilk or whey allied with water,
Ne'er raise our thoughts so high. Drunk! I had never
The credit to be so yet.
Ascanio, look up dear youth: Ascanio, did thy sweetness
Command the greedy enemy to forbear
To prey upon it? and I thank my fortune
For suffering me to live, that in some part
I might return thy courtesies: And now
To heighten my afflictions, must I be
Enforced, no pitying Angel near to help us,
Heaven deaf to my complaints too, to behold thee
Die in my arms for hunger? no means left
To lengthen life a little? I will open
A vein, and pour my blood, not yet corrupted
With any sinful act, but pure as he is,
Into his famished mouth.
Young man forbear
Thy savage pity; I have better means
To call back flying life.
You may believe him,
They apply them∣selves to Ascanio.
It is his sucking-bottle, and confirms
An old man's twice a child; his nurses milk
Was ne'er so chargeable: should you put in too
For soap and candles, though he sell his flock for it,
The baby must have this dug: he swears it is ill
For my complexion, but wondrous comfortable
For an old man that would never die
Hope well sir,
A temperate heat begins to thaw his numness,
The blood too by degrees takes fresh possession
On his pale cheeks, his pulse beats high; stand off,
Give him more air, he stirs: 
And have I got thee, thou bottle of im∣mortality?
Where am I?
What cruel hand hath forced back wretched life?
Is rest in death denied me?
O sweet liquor!
Were here enough to make me drunk, I might
Write my self Gentleman, and never buy
A coat of the Heralds.
How now slave?
I was fainting,
A clownlike qualm seized on me, but I am
Recovered, thanks to your bottle, and begin
To feel new stirrings, gallant thoughts; one draught more
Will make me a perfect Signior: 
A tough cudgel
Will take this gentle itch off: Home to my cottage,
See all things handsome.
Good sir, let me have
The bottle along to smell to: O rare perfume!
Speak once more, dear Ascanio! How he eyes you,
Then turns away his face! Look up sweet youth,
The object cannot hurt you; this good man
Next heaven is your preserver.
Would I had perished
Without relief, rather then live to break
His good old heart with sorrow. O my shame!
My shame, my never dying shame!
I have been
Acquainted with this voice, and know the face too:
It is she, it is too apparent; O my daugbter!
I mourned long for thy loss; but thus to find thee,
Is more to be lamented.
How? your daughter!
My only child: I murmured against heaven
Because I had no more; but now I find
This one too many. Is Alonzo glutted 
With thy embraces?
At his name a shower
Of tears false from her eyes: she faints again.
Grave sir, overrule your passion, and defer
The story of your fortune: On my life
She is a worthy one, her innocence
Might be abused, but mischiefs self wants power
To make her guilty. Show your self a Father
In her recovery; then as a Judge,
When she hath strength to speak in her own cause,
You may determine of her.
I much thank you
For your wise counsel: you direct me sir
As one indebted more to years, and I
As a pupil will obey you. Not far hence
I have a homely dwelling; if you please there
To make some short repose, your entertainment
Though course, shall relish of a gratitude,
And that's all I can pay you. Look up Girl,
Thou art in thy Fathers arms.
She's weak and faint still: 
O spare your age! I am young and strong, and this way
To serve her is a pleasure, not a burden:
Pray you lead the way.
The Saints reward your goodness.
No hope of safety left?
We are descried.
I thought, that covered in this poor disguise
I might have passed unknown: 
A diamond, though set in horn, is still a diamond,
And sparkles as in purest gold. We are followed:
Out of the troops that scoured the plains, I saw
Two gallant horsemen break forth, (who by their
Brave furniture and habiliments for the war 
Seemed to command the rest) spurring hard towards us;
See with what winged speed they climb the hill
Like Falcons on the stretch to seize the prey;
Now they dismount, and on their hands and knees
Overcome the deep ascent that guards us from him.
Your beauty hath betrayed you; for it can
No more be night when bright Apollo shines
In our Meridian, then that be concealed.
It is my curse, not blessing; fatal to
My Country, Father, and my self: why did you
Forsake the City?
It was the Dukes command,
No time to argue that; we must descend:
If undiscovered your soft feet (unused
To such rough travail) can but carry you
Half a league hence, I know a cave which will.
Yield us protection.
I wish I could lend you
Part of my speed; for me, I can outstrip
Daphne or Atalanta.
Some good Angel
Defend us, and strike blind our hot pursuers.
She cannot be far off; how gloriously
She showed to us in the valley!
In my thought
Like to a blazing Comet:
Brighter far:
Her beams of beauty made the hill all fire;
From whence removed, it is covered with thick clouds.
But we lose time; I'll take that way.
I this.
It is a degree of comfort in my sorrow.
I have done one good work in reconciling
Maria, long hid in Ascanio's habit,
To grieved Octavio: what a sympathy
I found in their affections! she with tears
Making a free confession of her weakness
In yielding up her honour to Alonzo,
Upon his vows to marry her: Octavio
Prepared to credit her excuses, nay
T'extenuate her guilt; she the Delinquent,
And Judge, as it were, agreeing. But to me
The most forlorn of men, no beam of comfort
Deigns to appear; nor can I in my fancy
Fashion a means to get it: To my Country
I am lost for ever, and it were impudence
To think of a return; yet this I could
Endure with patience: But to be divorced
From all my joy on earth, the happiness
To look upon the excellence of nature,
That is perfection in herself, and needs not
Addition or epithet, Rare Matilda,
Would make a Saint blaspheme. Here Galeazo
In this obscure abode it is fit thou should
Consume thy youth, and grow old in lamenting
Thy star crossed fortune, in this shepherds habit;
This hook thy best defenc, since thou could use
(When thou did fight in such a Princess cause)
Thy sword no better. 
Are you men, or monsters?
Whither will you drag me? can the open ear
Of heaven be deaf, when an unspotted Maid
Cries out for succour!
It is in vain; cast lots who shall enjoy her first.
Flames rage within me,
And such a spring of Nectar near to quench 'em!
My appetite shall be cloyed first: here I stand
Thy friend, or enemy; let me have precedence,
I write a friends name in my heart; deny it,
As an enemy I defy thee.
Friend or foe
In this alike I value, I disdain
To yield priority; draw thy sword.
To sheath it in thy ambitious heart.
O curb this fury,
And hear a wretched Maid first speak!
I am marble:
Where shall I seek out words, or how re∣strain
My Enemies rage, or Lovers? oh the latter
Is far more odious: did not your lust
Provoke you, for that is its proper name,
My chastity were safe;
And yet I tremble more
To think what dire effects lust may bring forth,
Then what as enemies you can inflict,
And less I fear it. Be friends to your selves,
And enemies to me: Better I fall
A sacrifice to your atonement, then
Or one, or both should perish. I am the cause
Of your division; remove it, Lords,
And concord will spring up: poison this face
That hath bewitched you; this grove cannot want
Aspicks or Toads, creatures though justly called
For their deformity the scorn of nature,
More happy then my self with this false beauty
(The seed and fruit of mischief) you admire so.
I thus embrace your knees, and yours a suppliant,
If Tigress did not nurse you, or you suck
The milk of a fierce Lioness, show compassion
Unto your selves in being reconciled,
And pity to poor me, my honour safe,
In taking loathed life from me.
What shall we do?
Or end our difference in killing her,
Or fight it out?
To the last gasp. I feel
The moist tears on my cheeks, and blush to find
A Virgins plaints can move so.
To prevent
Her flight while we contend, let's bind her fast
To this Cipress-tree.
Agreed.
It does presage my funeral rites.
I shall turn Atheist,
If heaven see and suffer this: why did I
Abandon my good sword? with unarmed hands
I cannot rescue her. Some Angel pluck me
From the apostasy I am falling to,
And by a miracle lend me a weapon
To underprop falling honour.
She is fast, resume your arms.
Honour, revenge, the Maid too
Lie at the stake.
Which thus I draw — 
Ell's mine,
But bought with some blood of mine own: Pisano,
Thou were a noble Enemy; wear that laurel
In death to comfort thee; for the reward,
It is mine now without Rival. 
Thou art deceived;
Men will grow up like to the Dragons teeth
From Cadmus helm sown in the field of Mars,
To guard pure Chastity from lust and rape.
Libidinous monster, Satire, Fawn, or what
Does better speak thee slave to appetite
And sensual baseness; if thy profane hand
But touch this virgin-temple, thou art dead.
I see the aid of Heaven, though slow, is sure.
A rustic swain dare to retard my plea∣sure?
No swain, Alonzo, but her knight and servant
To whom the world should owe and pay obedience;
One that thou hast encountered, and shrunk under
His arm, that spared thy life in the late battle
At th'intercession of the Princess page; look on me better.
It is my virtuous Lover,
Under his guard it were sin to doubt my safety.
I know thee, and with courage will redeem
What fortune then took from me.
Rather keep 
Thy Compeer company in death — lie by him
A prey for Crows and Vultures; these fair arms 
Unfit for bonds, should have been chains to make
A Bridegroom happy, though a Prince, and proud
Of such captivity: whatsoever you are,
I glory in the service I have done you;
But I entreat you pay your vows and prayers
For preservation of your life and honour,
To the most virtuous Princess, chaste Matilda:
I am her creature, and what good I do
You truly may call hers; what's ill, mine own.
You never did do ill, my virtuous servant,
Nor is it in the power of poor Matilda
To cancel such an obligation as
With humble willingness she must subscribe to.
The Prencess? ha!
Give me a fitter name,
Your manumissed Bondwoman, but even now
In the possession of lust, from which
Your more then brave heroic valour bought me;
And can I then for freedom unexpected
But kneel to you my Patron?
Kneel to me!
For heavens sake rise; I kiss the ground you tread on,
My eyes fixed on the earth; for I confess
I am a thing not worthy to look on you,
Till you have signed my pardon.
Do you interpret
The much good you have done me, an offence?
The not performing your injunctions to me,
Is more then capital: Your allowance of
My love and service to you, with admission
To each place you made paradise with your presence,
Should have enabled me to bring home Conquest.
Then, as a sacrifice to offer it
At the altar of your favour, had my love
Answered your bounty or my hopes, an Army
Had been as dust before me; whereas I
Like a coward turned my back, and durst not stand
The sury of the Enemy.
Had you done nothing
In the battle, this last act deserves more
Then I, the Duke my father joining with me,
Can ever recompense. But take your pleasure,
Suppose you have offended in not grasping
Your boundless hopes; I thus seal on your lips
A full remission.
Let mine touch your foot, your hand's too high a favour.
Will you force me to ravish a kiss from you?
I am entranced.
So much Desert, and Bashfulness, should not march
In the same file: Take comfort, when you have brought me
To some place of security, you shall find
You have a seat here, a heart that hath
Already studied, and vowed to be thankful.
Heaven make me so! oh I am overwhelmed
With an excess of joy! Be not too prodigal,
Divinest Lady, of your grace and bounties
At once, if you are pleased I shall enjoy 'em,
Not taste 'em and expire.
I'll be more sparing:
What noise of clashing swords, like armour fashioned
Upon an anvil, pierced mine ears? the echo
Redoubling the loud sound through all the valleys,
This way the wind assures me that it came.
Then with your pardon I'll take this.
Why sir?
Because, sir, I will trust my heels before
All winds that blow in the sky: We are wiser far
Then our Grandsires were, and in this I'll prove it;
They said, Haste to the beginning of a Feast,
(There I am with 'em) but to the end of a Fray,
That is apocryphal, it is more canonical
Not to come there at all; after a strom
There are still some drops behind.
Pure fear hath made the Fool a Philosopher.
See Maria, see!
I did not err; here lie two brave men weltering
In their own gore.
A pitiful object.
I am in a swoon to look on it.
They are stiff already.
But are you sure they are dead?
Too sure, I fear.
But are they stark dead?
Leave prating.
Then I am valiant, and dare come nearer to 'em,
This fellow without a sword shall be my Patient.
Whatever they are, humanity commands us
To do our best endeavour: Run Maria 
To the neighbour Spring for water; you will find there
A wooden dish, the beggars plate, to bring it.
Why dost not, dull drone, bend his body, and feel
If any life remain?
By your leave he shall die first, and then
I'll be his Surgeon.
Tear op his doublet,
And prove if his wounds be mortal,
Fear not me sir;
Here's large wound, how it is swollen and impostum'd!
This must be cunningly drawn out; should it break, 
It would strangle him: what a deal of foul matter's here!
This hath been long a gathering: Here's a gash too
On the reme of his belly, it may have matter in it.
He was a choleric man sure: what comes from him 
Is yellow as gold: How troubled with the Stone too! 
I'll cut you for this.
Oh, oh! 
He roars before I touch him.
Robbed of my life?
No sir, nor of your money
Nor jewel, I keep 'em for you; if I had been
A perfect Mountebank, he had not lived
To call for his fees again.
Give me leave, there's hope of his recovery.
I had rather bury him quick
Then part with my purchase; let his ghost walk, I care not.
Well done Maria, lend thy helping hand;
He hath a deep wound in his head, wash off
The clotted blood: He comes to himself.
My lust!
The fruit that grows upon the tree of lust!
With horror now I taste it.
Do you not know him?
Too soon, Alonzo! oh me! though disloyal,
Still dear to thy Maria.
So they know not
My Patient, ell's cock-sure: I do not like
The Romanish restitution.
Rise and leave him, applaud heavens justice.
Twill become me better
T'implore its saving mercy.
Hast thou no gall? no feeling of thy wrongs?
Turtles have none; nor can there be such poison in her breast
That truly loves, and lawfully.
True, if that love
Be placed on a worthy subject. What he is,
In thy disgrace is published; Heaven hath marked him
For punishment, and it were rebellious madness
In thee t'attempt to alter it: Revenge,
A sovereign balm for injuries, is more proper
To thy robed honour. Join with me, and thou
Shalt be thy self the Goddess of revenge,
This wretch the vassal of thy wrath: I'll make him
While yet he lives, partake those torments which
For perjured Lovers are prepared in hell,
Before his cursed ghost enter it. This oil
Extracted and sublimed from all the simples
The earth when swollen with venom ever brought forth,
Poured in his wounds, shall force such anguish as
The Furies whips but imitate; and when
Extremity of pain shall hasten death,
Here is another that shall keep in life,
And make him feel a perpetuity of lingering tortures.
Knock'em both on the head, I say,
And it be but for their skins; they are embroidered,
And will sell well in the market:
Ill-look'd Devil,
Tie up thy bloody tongue. O sir! I was slow
In beating down those propositions which
You urge for my revenge; my reasons being
So many, and so forcible, that make
Against yours, that until I had collected
My scattered powers, I wavered in my choice
Which I should first deliver. Fate hath brought
My Enemy (I can faintly call him so)
Prostrate before my feet: shall I abuse
The bounty of my fate, by trampling on him?
He alone ruined me, nor can any hand
But his rebuild my late demolished honour.
If you deny me means of reparation
To satisfy your spleen, you are more cruel
Then ever yet Alonzo was; you stamp
The name of Strumpet on my forehead, which
Heavens mercy would take off; you fan the fire
Even ready to go out; forgetting that
It is truly noble, having power to punish,
Nay King-like to forbear it. I would purchase
My husband by such benefits, as should make him
Confess himfelf my equal, and disclaim superiority.
My blessing on thee!
What I urged, was a trial; and my grant
To thy desires shall now appear, if art
Or long experience can do him service,
Nor shall my charity to this be wanting,
However unknown: Help me Maria; You sir,
Do your best to raise him. — So.
He's wondrous heavy;
But the Porter's paid, there's the comfort.
It is but a trance, and twill forsake both.
If he live, I fear not
He will redeem all, and in thankfulness
Confirm he owes you for a second life,
And pays the debt in making me his wife.
MAntua is ours; place a strong garrison in it
To keep it so; and as a due reward
To your brave service, be our Governor in it.
I humbly thank your Excellence.
Gonzaga is yet out of our gripe; but his strong Fort
St. Leo, which he holds impregnable
By the aids of art, as nature, shall not long
Retard our absolute conquest. The escape
Of fair Matilda, my supposed Mistress,
(For whole desired possession it was given out
I made this war) I value not; alas
Cupid's too feeble-ey'd to hit my heart,
Or could he see, his arrows are too blunt
To pierce it; his imagined torch is quenched
With a more glorious fire of my ambition
T'enlarge my Empire: soft and silken amours,
With Carpet-Courtship, which weak Princes stile
The happy issue of a flourishing peace,
My toughness scorns: Were there an abstract made
Of all the eminent and canonised Beauties
By truth recorded, or by Poets feigned,
I could unmoved behold it, as a Picture
Commend the workmanship, and think no more on it;
I have more noble ends. Have you not heard yet
Of Alonzo, or Pisano?
My Lord, of neither.
Two turbulent spirits unfit for discipline,
Much less command in war; if they were lost,
I shall not pine with mourning.
Bring 'em forward; 
This will make my peace, though I had killed his father,
Besides the reward that follows.
Ha! Martino?
Where is Farneze's head? dost thou stare? and where
The soldier that desired the torture of him?
An't please your Excellence — 
It doth not please us; are our commands obeyed?
Farneze's head, sir, 
Is a thing not worth your thought, the soldiers less sir:
I have brought your Highness such a head, a head
So well set on too, a fine head.
Take that 
For thy impertinence: what head, ye Rascal?
My Lord, if they that bring such presents to you
Are thus rewarded, there are few will strive
To be near your Graces pleasures: but I know
You will repent your choler. Here's the head,
And now I draw the curtain, it hath a face too,
And such a face.
Ha!
View her all o'er, my Lord;
My company on it, she's sound of wind and limb,
And will do her labour tightly, a Bone Robe:
And for her face, as I said, there are five hundred
City-dub'd Madams in the Dukedom, that would part with
Their Jointures to have such another: Hold up your head, Maid.
Of what age is the day?
Sir, since Sun-rising about two hours:
Thou lie: the Sun of Beauty
In modest blushes on her cheeks, but now
Appeared to me, and in her tears breaks forth
As through a shower in April, every drop
An orient pearl, which as it false, congealed,
Were Ear-rings for the Catholic King,
Worn on his birth-day.
Here's a sudden change.
Incensed Cupped, whom even now I scorned,
Hath took his stand, and by reflection shines
(As if he had two bodies, or indeed
A brother-twin, whom sight cannot distinguish)
In her fair eyes; see how they head their arrows
With her bright beams, now frown, as if my heart
Rebellious to their edicts, were unworthy,
Should I rip up my bosom, to receive
A wound from such divine artillery.
I am made for ever:
We are lost, dear servant.
Virtue's but a word; Fortune rules all.
We are her Tennis-balls.
Allow her fair, her symmetry and features
So well proportioned, as the heavenly object
With admiration would strike Ovid dumb,
Nay force him to forget his faculty
In verse, and celebrate her praise in prose:
What's this to me? I that have passed my youth
Unscorch'd with wanton fires, my sole delight
In glittering arms, my conquering sword my mistress;
Neighing of barbed horfe, the cries and groans
Of vanquished foes suing for life, my music:
And shall I in the Autumn of my age,
Now when I wear the livery of time
Upon my head and beard, suffer my self
To be transformed, and like a puling Lover
With arms thus folded up, echo Ay me's!
And write my self a Bondsman to my Vassal?
It must not, nay it shall not be: Remove
The object, and the effect dies. Nearer, Martino:
I shall have a Regiment, Colonel Martino,
I cannot go less.
What thing is this thou hast brought me?
What thing? Heaven bless me, are you a Florentine?
Nay, the Great Duke of Florentines, and having had her
So long in your power, do you now ask what she is?
Take her aside and learn; I have brought you that
I look to be dearly paid for.
I am a Soldier; and use of women will, Mar∣tino, rob
My nerves of strength.
All armour, and no smock?
Abominable! A little of the one with the other
Is excellent: I ne'er knew General yet,
Nor Prince that did deserve to be a Worthy,
But he desired to have his sweat washed off
By a juicie Bedfellow.
But say she be unwilling to do that office?
Wrestle with her, I will wager
Ten to one on your Graces side.
Slave, hast thou brought me
Temptation in a Beauty not to be
With prayers resisted; and in place of council
To master my affections, and to guard
My honour now besieged by lust, with the arms
Of sober temperance, mark me out a way
To be a ravisher? Would thou had shown me
Some monster, though in a more ugly form
Then Nile or Africa ever bred. The Basilic
(Whose envious eye yet never brooked a neighbour)
Kills but the body; Her more potent eye
Buries alive mine honour: shall I yield thus?
And all brave thoughts of victory and triumphs,
The spoils of Nations, the loud applauses
Of happy subjects made so by my conquests;
And what's the crown of all, a glorious name
Insculp'd on Pyramids to posterity,
Be drenched in Lethe, and no object take me
But a weak Woman, rich in colours only,
Too delicate a touch, and some rare features
Which age or sudden sickness will take from her,
And whore's then the reward of all my service?
Love-soothing passions, nay idolatry
I must pay to her. Hence, and with thee take
This second, but more dangerous Pandora,
Whose fatal box, if opened, will pour on me
All mischiefs that mankind is subject to.
To the deserts with this Circa, this Calipso,
This fair Enchantress; let her spells and charms
Work upon beasts and thee, then whom wise nature
Ne'er made a viler creature.
Happy exile!
Some spark of hope remains yet.
Come, you are mine now;
I will remove her where your Highness shall not
Or see or hear more of her: what a sum
Will she yield for the Turks Seraglio?
Stay, I feel
A sudden alteration.
Here are fine whimsies. 
Why should I part with her? can any foul∣nos
Inhabit such a clean and gorgeous palace?
The fish, the fowl, the beasts may safer leave
The elements they were nourished in, and live,
Then I endure her absence; yet her presence
Is a torment to me: Why do I call it so?
My sire enjoyed a woman, I had not been else;
He was a complete Prince, and shall I blush
To follow his example? Oh but my choice,
Though she gave suffrage to it, is beneath me:
But even now in my proud thoughts I scorned
A Princess, fair Matilda; and is it decreed
For punishment, I straight must dote on one
What, or from whence I know not? Grant she be
Obscure, without a Coat or family,
Those I can give; and yet if she were noble,
My fondness were more pardonable. Martino,
Dost thou know thy prisoner?
Do I know my self?
I kept that for the Lenvoy; it is the daughter
Of your enemy, Duke Gonzaga.
Fair Matilda! I now call to my memory her picture,
And find this is the substance; but her Painter
Did her much wrong, I see it:
I am sure
I tugged hard for her, here are wounds can witness,
Before I could call her mine.
No matter how:
Make thine own ransom, I will pay it for her.
I knew it would come at last.
We are lost again.
Variety of afflictions!
That his knee that never yet bowed to more∣tality, 
Kisses the earth, happy to bear your weight,
I know begets your wonder. Hear the reason,
And cast it off, Your beauty does command it:
Till now I never saw you; same hath been
Too sparing in report of your perfections,
Which now with admiration I gaze on.
Be not afraid, fair Virgin; had you been
Employed to mediate your Fathers cause,
My drum had been unbraced, my trumpet hung up,
Nor had the terror of the war ere frighted
His peaceful confines; your demands had been
As soon as spoke, agreed to. But you'll answer,
And may with reason; Words make no satisfaction
For what's in fact committed. Yet take comfort,
Something my pious love commands me do,
Which may call down your pardon.
This expression
Of reverence to your person, better suits
Takes him up, and kneels.
With my low fortune. That you deign to love me,
My weakness would persuade me to believe
(Though conscious of mine own unworthiness)
You being as the liberal eye of heaven
Which may shine where it pleases: Let your beams
Of favour warm and comfort me, not consume me;
For should your love grow to excess, I dare not
Deliver what I fear.
Dry your fair eyes;
I apprehend your doubts, and could be angry
If humble love could warrant it, you should
Nourish such base thoughts of me: Heaven bear witness,
And if I break my vow, dart thunder at me,
You are and shall be in my tent as free
From fear of violence, as a cloistered Nun
Kneeling before the Altar. What I purpose
Is yet an Embrion; but grown into form,
I'll give you power to be the sweet disposer
Of blessings unexpected; that your Father,
Your Country, people, children yet unborn too,
In holy hymns on Festivals shall sing
The triumph of your beauty. On your hand
Once more I swear it: O imperious Love!
Look down, and as I truly do repent,
Prosper the good ends of thy Penitent.
You must not be too sudden, my Maria,
In being known: I am in this Friars habit
As yet concealed; though his recovery
Be almost certain, I must work him to
Repentance by degrees. When I would have you
Appear in your true shape of sorrow to
Move his compassion, I will stamp thus, then
You know to act your part.
I shall be careful.
If I can cure the ulcers of his mind,
As I despair not of his bodies wounds,
Felicity crowns my labour. Gothrio!
Here sir.
Desire my Patients to leave their chamber,
And take fresh air here: how have they slept?
Very well sir,
I would we were so rid of 'em.
Why?
I fear one hath the art of memory, and will
Remember his gold and jewels: could you not mi∣nister
A potion of forgetfulness? what would Gallants
That are in debt, give me for such a receipt
To pour in their Creditors drink?
You shall restore all,
Believ't you shall: will you please to walk?
Will you please to put off
Your holy habit, and spiced conscience? One
I think infects the other.
I have observed
Compunction in Alonzo: he speaks little,
But full of retired thoughts: The other is
Jocund and merry, no doubt, because he hath
The less account to make here.
Reverend sir,
I come to wait your pleasure; but my friend
(Your creature I should say, being so my self)
Willing to take farther repose, entreats
Your patience a few minutes.
At his pleasure; pray you sit down, you are faint still.
Growing to strength,
I thank your goodness: but my mind is troubled,
Very much troubled, sir; and I desire,
Your pious habit giving me assurance (please
Of your skill and power that way, that you would)
To be my my Minds physician.
Sir, to that
My order binds me, if you please to unload
The burden of your conscience, I will minister
Such heavenly cordials as I can, and set you
In a path that leads to comfort.
I will open
My bosoms secrets to you; that I am
A man of blood, being brought up in the wars,
And cruel executions, my profession
Admits not to be questioned: but in that
Being a subject, and bound to obey
Whatever my Prince commanded, I have left
Some shadow of excuse: with other crimes
As pride, lust, gluttony, it must be told
I am besmeared all over.
On repentance mercy will wash it off.
O sir, I grant
These sins are deadly ones; yet their frequency
With wicked men, make them less dreadful to us.
But I am conscious of one crime, with which
All ills I have committed from my youth
Put in the scale weigh nothing: such a crime,
So odious to heaven and man, and to
My seared up conscience so full of horror,
As penance cannot expiate.
Despair not,
It is impious in man to prescribe limits
To the divine compassion; out with it.
Hear then, good man; and when that I have given you
The character of it, and confessed my self
The wretch that acted it, you must repent
The charity you have extended towards me.
Not long before these wars began, I had
Acquaintance (it is not fit I stile it Friendship,
That being a virtue, and not to be blended
With vicious breach of faith) with the Lord Octavio,
The Minion of his Prince and Court, set off
With all the pomp and circumstance of greatness:
To this then happy man I offered service,
And with infinuation wrought my self
Into his knowledge, grew familiar with him,
Ever a welcome guest. This noble Gentleman
Was blessed with one fair daughter, (so he thought
And boldly might believe so, for she was
In all things excellent without a Rival)
Till I (her Fathers mass of wealth before
My greedy eyes, but hoodwinked to mine honour)
With far more subtle arts then perjured Paris
Ere practised on poor credulous Oenone,
Besieged her Virgin-fort, in a word took it,
No vows or imprecation forgotten
With speed to marry her.
Perhaps she gave you just cause to break those vows.
She cause! alas
Her innocence knew no guilt, but too much favour
To me unworthy of it: it was my baseness,
My foul ingratitude, what shall I say more?
The good Octavio no sooner fell
In the displeasure of his Prince, his state
Confiscated, and he forced to leave the Court,
And she exposed to want; but all my oaths
And protestation of service to her,
Like seeming flames raised by enchantment, vanished;
This, this sits heavy here.
He speaks as if
He were acquainted with my plot: You have reason
To feel compunction, for it was most inhumane
So to betray a Maid.
Most barbarous.
But does your sorrow for the fact beget
An aptness in you to make satisfaction
For the wrong you did her?
Gracious heaven! an aptness!
It is my only study; since I tasted
Of your compassion, these eyes ne'er were closed,
But fearful dreams cut off my little sleep,
And being awake in my imagination,
Her apparition haunted me.
It was mere fancy: 
It was more, grave sir, nay it is,
Now it appears.
Where?
Do you not see there the gliding shadow
Of a fair Virgin? that is she, and wears
The very garments that adorned her when
She yielded to my Crocodile tears: A cloud
Of fears and diffidence then so chased away
Her purer white and red, as it foretold
That I should be disloyal. Blessed shadow!
For it were a sin, far, far exceeding all
I have committed, to hope only that
Thou art a substance: look on my true sorrow,
Nay, souls contrition; hear again those vows
My perjury cancelled, stamped in brass, and never
To be worn out.
I can endure no more;
Action, not oaths must make me reparation:
I am Maria.
Can this be?
It is, and I Octavio.
Wonder on wonder!
How shall I look on you? or with what forehead
Desire your pardon?
You truly shall deserve it
In being constant:
If you fall not off,
But look on her in poverty with those eyes
As when she was my heir in expectation
You thought her beautiful.
She's in herself both Indies to me.
Stay, she shall not come
A beggar to you, my sweet young Mistress! no,
She shall not want a dower: here's white and red
Will ask a jointure; but how you should make her
Being a Captain, would beget some doubt,
If you should deal with a Lawyer.
I have seen this purse:
How the worl'ds given, I dare not say to lying,
Because you are a Soldier; you may say as well
This gold is marked too: you being to receive it,
Should ne'er ask how I got it. I'll run for a Priest
To dispatch the matter; you shall not want a Ring,
I have one for the purpose. Now sir, I think I am honest.
This Ring was Pisano's.
I'll dissolve this riddle at better leisure:
The wound given to my daughter, which in your honour
You are bound to cure, exacts our present care.
I am all yours sir.
Thou hast told too much to give assurance that
Her honour was too far engaged to be
By humane help redeemed: If thou had given
Thy sad narration this full period,
She's dead; I had been happy.
Sir, these tears
Do well become a father; and my eyes
Would keep you company as a forlorn Lover,
But that the burning fire of my revenge
Dries up those drops of sorrow. We once more,
Our broken forces rallied up, and with
Full numbers strengthened, stand prepared to endure
A second trial; nor let it dismay us
That we are once again to affront the fury
Of a victorious Army; their abuse
Of Conquest hath disarmed themselves, and called down
The powers above to aid us. I have read
Some piece of story, yet ne'er found but that
The General that gave way to cruelty,
The profanation of things sacred, rapes
Of virgins, butchery of infants, and
The massacre in cold blood of reverend age,
Against the discipline and law of Arms,
Did feel the hand of heaven lie heavy on him,
When most secure: We have had a late example,
And let us not despair but that in Lorenzo
It will be seconded.
You argue well,
And it were a sin in me to contradict you:
Yet we must not neglect the means that's lent us
To be the Ministers of Justice.
No, sir: One day given to refresh our wearied Troops
Tired with a tedious march, we'll be no longer
Cooped up, but charge the Enemy in his trenches,
And force him to a battle: 
Ha! how's this?
In such a general time of mourning, shouts
And acclamations of joy?
Long live the Princess! long live Matilda! Within they cry
Matilda! the Princess name,
Matilda, oft echoed.
What speaks thy haste?
More joy and happiness
Then weak words can deliver, or strong faith
Almost give credit to: The Princess lives,
I saw her, kissed her hand.
By whom delivered?
That is not to be stalled by my report,
This only must be told: As I rode forth
With some choice troops to make discovery
Where the Enemy lay, and how entrenched; a Leader
Of th'adverse party, but unarmed, and in
His hand an Olive-branch, encountered me;
He showed the great Dukes seal that gave him power
To parley with me: his desires were, that
Assurance for his safety might be granted
To his royal Master, who came as a friend
(And not as an enemy) to offer to you
Conditions of peace. I yielded to it.
This being returned, the Dukes Pretorum opened;
When suddenly in a triumphant Chariot
Drawn by such soldiers of his own as were
For insolence after victory condemned
Unto this slavish office, the fair Princess
Appeared, a wreath of Laurel on her head,
Her robes majestic, their richness far
Above all value, as the present age
Contended that a women's pomp should dim
The glittering triumphs of the Roman Caesars.
I am cut off; no Canons throat now thunders,
Nor Fife nor Drum beat up a charge; choice Musique
Ushers the parent of security, long absent Peace.
I know not what to think on it.
May it poise the expectation!
Thus to meet you
Great Duke of Tuscany, throws amazement on me:
But to behold my daughter, long since mourned for,
And lost even to my hopes, thus honoured by you,
With an excess of comfort overwhelms me:
And yet I cannot truly call my self
Happy in this solemnity, till your Highness
Vouchsafe to make me understand the motives
That in this peaceful way hath brought you to us.
I must crave licence first; for know, Gonzaga,
I am subject to another will, and can
Nor speak nor do without permission from her:
My curled forehead, of late terrible
To those that did acknowledge me their Lord, 
Is now as smooth as rivers when no wind stirs:
My frowns or smiles, that killed or saved, have lost
Their potent awe, and sweetness: I am transformed
(But do not scorn the Metamorphosis)
From that fierce thing men held me; I am captived,
And by the unresistable force of beauty
Led hither as a prisoner. Is it your pleasure that
I shall deliver those injunctions which
Your absolute command imposed upon me,
Or deign your self to speak 'em?
Sir, I am
Your property, you may use me as you please;
But what is in your power and breast to do,
No Orator can dilate so well.
I obey you. That I came hither as an enemy
With hostile arms, to the utter ruin of
Your Country, what I have done, makes apparent:
That fortune seconded my will, the late
Defeature will make good: That I resolved
To force the sceptre from your hand, and make
Your Dukedom tributary, my surprise
Of Mantua your Metropolis can well witness:
And that I cannot fear the change of fate,
My Army fleshed in blood, spoil, glory, conquest
Stand ready to maintain: Yet I must tell you
By whom I am subdued, and what's the ransom
I am commanded to lay down.
My Lord, you humble your self too much, it is fitter
You should propose, and we consent.
Forbear,
The articles are here subscribed and signed
By my obedient hand: All prisoners
Without a ransom set at liberty,
Mantua to be delivered up; the Rampires
Ruined in the assault, to be repaired;
The loss the husbandman received, his crop
Burnt up by wanton licence of the soldier
To be made good; with whatsoever else
You could impose on me, if you had been
The Conqueror, I your Captive.
Such a change wants an example: I must owe this favour
To the clemency of the old Heroic valour,
That spared when it had power to kill; a virtue
Buried long since, but raised out of the grave
By you to grace this latter age.
Mistake not
The cause that did produce this good effect,
If as such you receive it: it was her beauty
Wrought first on my rough nature; but the vertnes
Of her fair soul, dilated in her converse,
That did confirm it.
Mighty sir, no more:
You honour her too much, that is not worthy
To be four servant.
I have done, and now
Would gladly understand that you allow of
The art cles propounded.
Do not wrong
Your benefits with such a doubt; they are
So great and high, and with such reverence
To be received, that if I should profess
I hold my Dukedom from you as your vassal,
Or offered up my daughter as you please
To be disposed of, in the point of honour
And a becoming gratitude, it would not cancel
The bond I stand engaged for: but accept
Of that which I can pay, my all is yours sir,
Nor is there any here (though I must grant
Some have deserved much from me) for so far
I dare presume, but will surrender up
Their interest to that your Highness shall
Deign to pretend a title.
I subscribe not to this condition
The services
This Prince hath done your Grace in your most danger,
Are not to be so slighted.
It is far from me
To urge my merits, yet I must maintain
However my power is less, my love is more;
Nor will the gracious Princess scorn to acknowledge
I have been her humble servant.
Smooth your brows,
I'll not encroach upon your right, for that were
Once more to force affection (a crime
With which should I the second time be tainted,
I did deserve no favour) neither will I
Make use of what is offered by the Duke,
However I thank his goodness: I'll lay by
My power; and though I should not brook a Rival,
(What we are, well considered) I'll descend
To be a third Competitor; he that can
With love and service best deserve the garland,
With your consent let him wear it; I despair not
The trial of my fortune.
Bravely offered, and like your self, great Prince.
I must profess
I am so taken with it, that I know not
Which way to express my service.
Did I not build
Upon the Princess grace, I could sit down,
And hold it no dishonour.
How I feel
My soul divided! all have deserved so well,
I know not where to fix my choice.
You have
Time to consider: will you please to take
Possession of the Fort? then having tasted
The fruits of peace, you may at leisure prove
Whose plea will ptosper in the Court of Love.
YOu need not doubt sir, were not peace pro∣claimed
And celebrated with a general joy,
The high displeasure of the Mantuan Duke,
Raised on just grounds, not jealous suppositions.
The saving of our lives (which next to heaven
To you alone is proper) would force mercy
For an offence though capital.
When the Conqueror
Uses Entreaties, they are armed Commands
The vanquished must not check at.
My piety pay the forfeit,
If danger come but near you. I have heard
My gracious Mistress often mention you,
(When I served her as a Page) and feelingly
Relate how much the Duke her sire repented
His hasty doom of banishment, in his rage
Pronounced against you.
In a private difference,
I grant that Innocence is a wall of brass,
And scorns the hottest battery: but when
The cause depends between the Prince and Subject,
It is an unequal competition; Justice
Must lay her balance by, and use her sword
For his ends that protects it. I was banished,
And till revoked from exile, to tread on
My Sovereigns territories with forbidden feet,
The severe letter of the Law calls death,
Which I am subject to in coming so near
His Court and person. But my only Child
Being provided for, her honour salved too,
I thank your noble change, I shall endure
Whatever can fall with patience.
You have used that medicine too long; prepare your self
For honour in your age, and rest secure of't.
Of what is your wisdom musing?
I am gazing on
This gorgeous House, our Cote's a dishclout to it;
It has no sign, what do you call it?
The Court; I have lived in it a Page.
Page! very pretty:
May I not be a Page? I am old enough,
Well timbered too, and I have a beard to carry it:
Pray you let me be your Page, I can swear already
Upon your pantable.
What?
That I'll be true unto your smock.
How, Rascal?
Hence, and pimp
To your Rams and News; such foul pollution is
To be whipped from Court: I have now no more use of you,
Return to your trough.
Must I feed on husks, before I have plaid the prodigal?
No, I'll reward
Your service; live in your own element
Like an honest man; all that is mine in the cottage
I freely give you.
Your Bottles too, that I carry for your own tooth?
Full as they are.
And gold, that will replenish 'em.
I am made for ever, this was done in the nick.
Why in the nick?
O sir, it was well for me that you did reward my service
Before you entered the Court; for it is reported
There is a drink of Forgetfulness, which once tasted,
Few masters think of their servants, who grown old,
Are turned off like lame hounds and hunting-horses,
To starve on the Commons.
Bitter Knave! there's craft in the clouted shoo. Captain!
I am glad to kiss 
Your valiant hand, and yours: but pray you take notice
My title's changed, I am a Colonel.
A Colonel! whore's your Regiment?
Not raised yet;
All the old ones are cashiered, and we are now
To have a new Militia. All is peace here,
Yet I hold my title still, as many do
That never saw an Enemy.
You are pleasant,
And it becomes you. Is the Duke stirring?
Long since,
Four hours at least, but yet not ready.
How?
Even so; you make a wonder of't, but leave it:
Alas, he is not now (sir) in the Camp,
To be up and armed upon the least alarm;
There's something else to be thought on.
Here he comes, with his Officers, new rigged.
A looking-glass!
Upon my head he saw not his own face
These seven years past, but by reflection
From a bright armour.
Be silent, and observe.
So, have you done yet?
Is your building perfect?
If your Highness please, here is a water.
To what use? my Barber
Hath washed my face already.
But this water
Hath a strange virtue in it, beyond his art;
It is a sacred Relic, part of that
Most powerful Juice, which with Medea made
Old AEson young.
A fable; but suppose
I should give credit to it, will it work
The same effect on me?
I'll undertake
This will restore the honoured hair that grows
Upon your Highness head and chin, a little
Inclining unto gray.
Inclining! Doctor:
Pardon me, mighty sir, I went too far,
Not gray at all; I dare not flatter you,
It is something changed, but this applied will help it
To the first amber-colour, every hair
As fresh as when, your manhood in the prime,
Your Grace arrived at thirty.
Very well.
Then here's a precious oil (to which the maker
Hath not yet given a name) will soon fill up
These dimples in your face and front. I grant
They are terrible to your enemies, and set off
Your frowns with majesty: but you may please
To know (as sure you do) a smooth aspect,
Softness and sweetness, in the Court of Love,
Though dumb, are the prevailing Orators.
Will he new create me?
If you deign to taste too
Of this Confection.
I am in health, and need no physic.
Physic sir! an Empress
(If that an Empress lungs, sir, may be tainted
With putrefaction) would taste of it
That night on which she were to print a kiss
Upon the lips of her long absent Lord,
Returning home with conquest.
It is predominant
Over a stinking breath, is it not Doctor?
Clothe the infirmity with sweeter language,
It is a preservative that way.
You are then admitted to the Cabinets of great Ladies,
And have the government of the borrowed beauties,
Of such as write near forty?
True, my good Lord, and my attempts have prospered.
Did you never minister to the Princess?
Sir, not yet;
She's in the April of her youth, and needs not
The aids of art, my gracious Lord: but in
The Autumn of her age I may be useful,
And sworn her Highness Doctor, and your Grace partake
Of the delight.
Slave! Witch! Impostor! 
Mountebank! Cheater! Traitor to great Nature,
In thy presumption to repair what she
In her immutable decrees designed
For some few years to grow up, and then wither
Or is it not crime enough thus to betray
The secrets of the weaker sex, thy patients,
But thou must make the honour of this age
And envy of the time to come, Matilda,
(Whose sacred name I bow to) guilty of
A future sin in thy ill-boding thoughts,
Which for a perpetuity of youth
And pleasure she disdains to act, such is
Her purity and innocencce?
His foot on the Doctors breast.
Long since I looked for this Lenvoy.
Would I were well off!
He's dangerous in these humours.
Stand concealed.
O sir, have mercy! in my thought I never
Offended you.
Me? most of all, thou monster:
What a Mock-man property in thy intent
Would thou have made me? a mere Pathick to
Thy devilish art, had I given suffrage to it.
Are my gray hairs, the ornament of age,
And held a blessing by the wiseft men,
And for such warranted by holy Writ,
To be concealed, as if they were my shame?
Or plaster up these furrows in my face,
As if I were a painted Bawd or Whore?
By such base means if that I could ascend
To the height of all my hopes, their full fruition
Would not wipe off the scandal. No, thou wretch,
Thy cozening Water and adulterate Oil
I thus pour in thine eyes, and tread to dust
Thy loathed Confection, with thy trumperies:
Vanish for ever.
You have your fee, as I take it,
Dear Domino Doctor! I'll be no sharer with you.
I'll court her like my self; these rich adorn∣mints
And Jewels, worn by me an absolute Prince,
My Order too, of which I am the Sovereign,
Can meet no ill construction: yet it is far
From my imagination to believe
She can be taken with sublimed clay,
The Silk-worms spoils, or rich Embroderies;
Nor must I borrow helps from power or greatness,
But as a loyal Lover plead my cause,
If I can feelingly express my ardor,
And make her sensible of the much I suffer
In hopes and fears, and she vouchsafe to take
Compassion on me, — Ha! compassion? 
The word sticks in my throat: what's here that tells me
I do descend too low? rebellious spirit,
I conjure thee to leave me: there is now
No contradiction or declining left,
I must and will go on. 
The tempest's laid; you may present your selves:
My gracious Lord!
Your humble Vassal.
Ha! both living?
Sir, we owe our lives to this good Lord, and make it
Our humble suit—
Plead for your selves: we stand
Yet unresolved whether your knees or prayers
Can save the forfeiture of your own heads:
Though we have put our armour off, your pardon
For leaving the Camp without our licence
Is not yet signed. At some more fit time wait us.
How's this?
It is well it is no worse; I met with
A rougher entertainment, yet I had 
Good cards to show: He's parcel mad, you'll find him
Every hour in a several mood, this foolish Love
Is such a shuttlecock; but all will be well
When a better fit comes on him, never doubt it:
How do you find her?
Thankful for my service,
And yet she gives me little hope; my Rival
Is too great for me.
The great Duke you mean.
Who else? the Millanois (although he be
A complete Gentleman) I am sure despairs more then my self.
A high estate, with women,
Takes place of all desert.
I must stand my fortune.
The Duke of Florence! sir.
Your Highness presence
Answers my wish. Your private ear: — I have used
My best persuasion with a Fathers power
To work my daughter to your ends; yet she
Like a small Bark on a tempestuous sea
Tossed here and there by opposite winds, resolves not
At which port to put in, this Prince's merits,
Your grace and favour; nor is she unmindful
Of the brave acts (under your pardon sir
I needs must call them so) Hortensio
Hath done to gain her good opinion of him:
All these together tumbling in her fancy,
Do much distract her; I have spies upon her,
And am assured this instant hour she gives
Hortensio private audience; I will bring you
Where we will see and hear all.
You oblige me.
I do not like this whispering.
Fear no foul play.
The Princess, sir, long since expected you;
And would I beg a thanks, I could tell you that
I have often moved her for you.
I am your servant.
She's come; there are others I must place to hear
The conference.
Is it your Excellencies pleasure that we at∣tend you?
No, wait me in the gallery.
Would each of us, Wench, had a Sweet∣heart too!
To pass away the time:
There I join with you.
I fear this is the last time we shall meet.
Heaven forbid!
O my Hortensio!
In me behold the misery of Greatness,
And that which you call Beauty: had I been
Of a more low condition, I might
Have called my will and faculties mine own,
Not seeing that which was to be beloved
With others eyes: But now, ay me, most wretched
And miserable Princess! in my fortune
To be too much engaged for service done me,
It being impossible to make satisfaction
To my so many Creditors, (all deserving)
I can keep touch with none.
A sad Exordiam.
You loved me long, and without hope, (alas,
I die to think on it!) Parma's Prince invited
With a too partial report of what
I was, and might be to him, left his Country
To fight in my defence. Your brave achievements
In the war, and what you did for me, unspoken,
(Because I would not force the sweetness of
Your modesty to a blush) are written here.
And that there might be nothing wanting to
Sum up my numerous engagements (never
In my hopes to be cancelled) the great Duke
Our mortal enemy, when my Fathers Country
Lay open to his fury, and the spoil
Of the victorious Army, and I brought
Into his power, hath shown himself so
Noble, so full of honour, temperance,
And all virtues that can set off a Prince,
That though I cannot render him that respect
I would, I am bound in thankfulness to admire him.
It is acknowledged, and on your part to be returned.
How can I,
Without the brand of foul ingratitude
To you, and Prince Uberti?
Hear me, Madam,
And what your servant shall with zeal deliver,
As a Dedalean clew may guide you out of
This labyrinth of distraction. He that loves
His Mistress truly, should prefer her honour
And peace of mind, above the glutting of
His ravenous appetite: He should affect from her,
But with a fit restraint, and not take her
To give himself: He should make it the height
Of his ambition, if it lie in
His stretched out nerves to effect it, though she fly in
An eminent place, to add strength to her wings,
And mount her higher, though he fall himself
Into the bottomless Abyss; or else
The services he offers are not real,
But counterfeit.
What can Hortensio infer from this?
That I stand bound in duty
(Though in the act I take my last farewell
Of comfort in this life) to sit down willingly,
And move my suit no further. I confess,
While you were in danger, and Heavens mercy made me
Its instrument to preserve you, (which your goodness
Prized far above the merit) I was bold
To feed my starved affection with false hopes
I might be worthy of you: For know, Madam,
How mean soever I appeared in Mantua,
I had in expectation a fortune,
Though not possessed of't, that encouraged me
With confidence to prefer my suit, and not
To fear the Prince Uberti as my Rival.
I ever thought him more then what he seemed.
Pray you forbear.
But when the Duke of Florence
Put in his plea, in my consideration
Weighing well what he is, as you must grant him,
A Mars of men in Arms; and those put off,
The great example for a Kingly Courtier
To imitate: Annex to these his wealth,
Of such a large extent, as other Monarchs
Call him the King of Coin; and what's above all.
His lawful love, with all the happiness
This life can fancy, from him flowing to you;
The true affection which I have ever borne you,
Does not alone command me to desist,
But as a faithful Councellor to advise you
To meet and welcome that felicity
Which hastes to crown your virtues.
We must break off this parley.
Something I have to say.
In tears I thank
Your care of my advancement; but I dare not
Follow your council: Shall such piety
Pass unrewarded? such a pure affection,
For any ends of mine, be undervalued?
Avert it Heaven! I will be thy Matilda,
Or cease to be; No other heat but what
Glows from thy purest flames, shall warm this bosom;
Nor Florence, nor all Monarchs of the earth
Shall keep thee from me.
I fear, gracious Lady,
Our conference hath been oreheard.
The better:
Your part is acted; give me leave at distance
To zany it, sir, on my knees thus prostrate
Before your feet.
This must not be, I shall
Both wrong my self and you in suffering it.
I will grow here, and weeping thus turn marble,
Unless you hear and grant the first petition
A virgin, and a Princess ever tendered:
Nor doth the suit concern poor me alone,
It hath a strong reference to you
And to your honour; and if you deny it,
Both ways you suffer. Remember, sir, you were not
Born only for your self; Heavens liberal hand
Designed you to command a potent Nation,
Gave you heroic valour, which you have
Abused in making unjust war upon
A neighbour Prince, a Christian; while the Turk,
Whose scourge and terror you should be, securely
Wastes the Italian Confines: it is in you
To force him to pull in his horned Crescents,
And it is expected from you.
I have been in a dream, and now begin to wake.
And will you forbear to reap the harvest of such glories,
Now ripe and at full growth, for the embraces
Of a flight woman? or exchange your triumphs
For chamber-pleasures? melt your able nerves
(That should with your victorious sword make way
Through the Armies of your Enemies) in loose
And wanton dalliance? Be your self, great sir,
The thunderbolt of war, and scorn to sever
Two hearts long since united: your example
May teach the Prince Uberti to subscribe
To that which you allow of.
The same tongue
That charmed my sword out of my hand, and threw
A frozen numness on my active spirit,
Hath dis-enchanted me. Rise, fairest Princess!
And that it may appear I do receive
Your council as inspired from heaven, I will
Obey and follow it: I am your debtor,
And must confess you have lent my weakened reason
New strengths once more to hold a full command
Over my passions. Here to the world
I freely do profess that I disclaim
All interest in you, and give up my title
Such as it is, to you sir: and as far
As I have power, thus join your hands.
To yours I add my full consent.
I am lost, Farneze.
Nearer to the port then you suppose:
In me our laws speak, and forbid this contract.
Ay me! new stops!
Shall we be ever crossed thus?
There is an Act upon record, confirmed
By your wise predecessors, that no Heir
Of Mantua (as questionless the Princess
Is the undoubted one) must be joined in marriage,
But where the match may strengthen the estate
And safety of the Dukedom. Now this Gentleman,
However I must stile him honourable,
And of a high desert, having no power
To make this good in his alliance, stands
Excluded by our laws: whereas this Prince
Of equal merit, brings to Mantua
The power and Principality of Parma:
And therefore since the great Duke hath let fall
His plea, there lives no Prince that justlier can
Challenge the Princess favour.
Is this true, sir?
I cannot contradict it.
There's an Ambassador
From Milain, that desires a present audience;
His business is of highest consequence,
As he affirms: I know him for a man
Of the best rank and quality.
From Milain?
Admit him. — How? so low!
I am sorry, sir, to be the bringer of this heavy news:
But since it must be known —
Peace rest with him,
I shall find fitter time to mourn his loss.
My faithful servant too, Julio!
I am orejoy'd to see your Highness safe.
Pray you peruse this,
And there you'll find that the objection
The Lord Farneze made, is fully answered.
The great John Galeas dead?
And this his brother, the absolute Lord of Milain.
I am revived.
There's no contending against destiny,
I wish both happiness.
Married, Alonzo? I will salute your Lady, she's a fair one,
And seal your pardon on her lips.
Octavio, welcome even to my heart! Rise, I should kneel
To thee for mercy.
The poor remainder of
My age shall truly serve you.
You resemble a Page I had, Ascanio.
I am your Highness servant still.
All stand amazed
At this unlooked for meeting: But defer
Your several stories. Fortune here hath shown
Her various power; but Virtue in the end
Is crowned with laurel: Love hath done his parts too;
And mutual friendship after bloody jars,
Will cure the wounds received in our wars.
PRay you Gentlemen keep your seats; something I would
Deliver to gain favour, if I could,
To us, and the still doubtful Author. He,
When I desired an Epilogue, answered me,
It was to no purpose: He must stand his fate,
Since all entreaties now would come too late;
You being long since resolved what you would say
Of him, or us, as ye rise, or of the Play.
A strange old Fellow! yet this sullen mood
Would quickly leave him, might it be understood
You part not hence displeased. I am designed
To give him certain notice: If you find
Things worth your liking, show it. Hope and Fear,
Though different passions, have the self-same ear.

MY worthiest Mistress! this day cannot end
But prosperous to Pedro, that begins
With this so wished encounter.
Only, Servant,
To give you thanks in your own Courtly language,
Would argue me more ceremonious
Then heartily affected; and you are
Too well assured, or I am miserable,
Our equal loves have kept one rank too long
To stand at distance now.
You make me happy
In this so wise reproof, which I receive
As a chaste favour from you, and will ever
Hold such a strong command o'er my desires,
That though my Blood turn Rebel to my Reason,
I never shall presume to seek ought from you,
But what (your honour safe) you well may grant me,
And Virtue sign the Warrant.
Your love to me
So limited, will still preserve your Mistress
Worthy her servant, and in your restraint
Of loose affections, bind me faster to you:
But there will be a time when we may welcome
Those wished for pleasures, as Heavens greatest blessings;
When that the Vice-roy your most noble father,
And the Duke my uncle, and to that, my Guardian,
Shall by their free consent confirm them lawful.
You ever shall direct, and I obey you:
Is my sister stirring yet?
Long since.
Some business
With her, joined to my service to your self,
Hath brought me hither; pray you vouchsafe the favour
T'acquaint her with so much.
I am prevented.
Do the rest here; my Cabinet is too hot,
This room is cooler. Brother!
Morrow sister,
Do I not come unseasonably?
Why good brother?
Because you are not yet fully made up,
Nor fit for visitation. There are Ladies
And great ones, that will hardly grant access
On any terms to their own Fathers, as
They are themselves, nor willingly be seen
Before they have asked council of their Doctor,
How the Cervize will appear, newly laid on
When they ask blessing.
Such indeed there are
That would be still young, in despite of time,
That in the wrinkled winter of their age
Would force a seeming April of fresh beauty,
As if it were within the power of art
To frame a second nature: But for me,
And for your Mistress, I dare say as much;
The faces, and the teeth you see, we slept with.
Which is not frequent, sister, with some
Ladies.
You spy no sign of any night, —
Mask here,
(Tie on my Carkanet) nor does your nosthril
Take in the scent of strong perfumes, to stifle
The sourness of our breaths as we are fasting:
You are in a Ladies chamber, gentle Brother,
And not in your Apothecaries shop.
We use the women, you perceive, that serve us,
Like servants, not like such as do create us:
Faith search our pockets, and if you find there
Comfits of Amber-greece to help our kisses,
Conclude us faulty.
You are pleasant, sister,
And I am glad to find you so disposed,
You will the better hear me.
What you please, Sir.
I am entreated by the Prince of Tarent
Don John Antonio.
Would you would choose
Some other subject.
Pray you give me leave,
For his desires are fit for you to hear,
As for me to prefer. This Prince of Tarent
(Let it not wrong him, that I call him friend)
Finding your choice of Don Cardenes liked of
By both your fathers, and his hopes cut off,
Resolves to leave Palermo.
He does well,
That I hear gladly.
How this Prince came hither,
How bravely furnished, how attended on,
How he hath borne himself here, with what charge
He hath continued; his magnificence
In costly Banquets, curious Masques, rare Presents,
And of all sorts, you cannot but remember.
Give me my Gloves.
Now, for reward of all
His cost, his travel, and his duteous service,
He does entreat that you will please he may
Take his leave of you, and receive the favour
Of kissing of your hands.
You are his friend,
And shall discharge the part of one to tell him
That he may spare the trouble; I desire not
To see, or hear more of him.
Yet grant this,
Which a mere stranger in the way of Courtship
Might challenge from you.
And obtain it sooner.
One reason for this would do well.
My will
Shall now stand for a thousand; shall I lose
The privilege of my sex, which is my Will,
To yield a Reason like a man? or you
Deny your Sister that which all true women
Claim as their first prerogative, which Nature
Gave to them for a law? and should I break it,
I were no more a woman.
Sure a good one
You cannot be, if you put off that virtue
Which best adorns a good one, Curtsy
And affable behaviour. Do not flatter
Yourself with the opinion that your birth,
Your beauty, or whatever false ground else
You raise your pride upon, will stand against
The censure of just men.
Why let it fall then,
I still shall be unmoved.
And pray you be you so.
What Jewel's that?
That which the Prince of Tarent —
Left here, and you received without my know∣ledge;
I have use of't now. Does the Page wait without,
My Lord Cardenes sent t'enquire my health?
Yes Madam.
Give it him, and with it pray him
To return my service to his Lord, and mine.
Will you so undervalue one that has
So truly loved you, to bestow the pledge
Of his affection (being a Prince) upon
The servant of his Rival?
It is not well,
Faith, were it Lady? send gold to the Boy.
Twill please him better.
Do as I command you,
I will keep nothing that may put me in mind
Don John Antonio ever loved, or was,
Being wholly now Cardenes.
In another
This were mere barbarism, sister, and in you
(For I'll not sooth you) at the best it is rudeness.
Rudeness?
Yes rudeness, and what's worse, the want
Of civil manners, nay ingratitude
Unto the many and so fair deservings
Of Don Antonio: does this express
Your breeding in the Court, or that you call
The Vice-roy father? A poor peasants daughter
That ne'er had conversation but with beasts
(Or men bred like them) would not so far shame
Her education.
Pray you leave my chamber;
I know you for a Brother, not a Tutor.
You are too violent, Madam.
Were my Father
Here to command me, (as you take upon you
Almost to play his part) I would refuse it.
Where I love, I profess it; where I hate,
In every circumstance I dare proclaim it:
Of all that wear the shapes of men, I loath
That Prince you plead for; no antipathy
Between things most averse in nature, hold
A stronger enmity then his with mine:
With which rest satisfied; if not, your anger
May wrong your self, not me.
My Lord Cardenes!
Go; in soft terms,
If you persist thus,
You will be one.
What one? pray you out with it:
Why, one that I shall wish a stranger to me,
That I might curse you: but—
Whence grows this heat?
Be yet advised, and entertain him fairly,
For I will send him to you, or no more
Know me a Brother.
As you please.
Good morrow.
Good morrow, and part thus? you seem moved too:
What desperate sool durst raise a tempest here
To sink himself?
Good sir, have patience;
The cause (though I confess I am not pleased)
No way deserves your anger:
Not mine, Madam?
As if the least offence could point at you,
And I not feel it: 'As you have vouchsafed me
The promise of your heart, conceal it not,
Whomsoever it concerns.
It is not worth
So serious an enquiry: My kind Brother
Had a desire to learn me some new Courtship
Which I distasted, that was all.
Your Brother,
In being yours, with more security
He might provoke you; yet if he hath past
A Brothers bounds—
What then, my Lord?
Believe it,
I'll call him to account for it.
Tell him so.
No more.
Yes, thus much; though my modesty
Be called in question for it, in his absence
I will defend him: He hath said nor done
But what Don Pedro well might say or do.
Mark me, Don Pedro! in which understand
As worthy, and as well as can be hoped for
Of those that love him best, from Don Gardens.
This to me Cousin?
You forget your self.
No, nor the cause, in (which you did so Lady)
Which is so just, that it needs no concealing
On Pedro's part.
What mean you.
I dare speak it,
If you dare hear it, Sir: He did persuade
Almira, your Almira, to vouchsafe
Some little conference with the Prince of Tarent
Before he left the Court; and that the world
Might take some notice, thoūgh he prospered not
In his so loved design, he was not scorned,
He did desire the kissing of her hand,
And then to leave her; this was much:
It was more
Then should have been urged by him, well denied
On your part, Madam, and I thank you for it.
Antonio had his answer, I your grant:
And why your Brother should prepare for him
An after interview, or private favour,
I can find little reason.
None at all.
Why you should be displeased with it.
His respect
To me, as things now are, should have weighed down
His former friendship, it was done indiscreetly,
I would be loath to say maliciously,
To build up the demolished hopes of him
That was my Rival: What had he to do
(If he view not my happiness in your favour,
With wounded eyes) to take upon himself
An office so distasteful?
You may ask
As well, what, any Gentleman has to do
With civil curtsy
Or you with that,
Which at no part concerns you: Good my Lord
Rest satisfied, that I saw him not, nor will.
And that, nor Father, Brother, nor the world
Can work me unto any thing, but what
You give allowance too; in which assurance
With this, I leave you.
Nay take me along,
You are not angry too?
Presume on that.
Am I assured of her, and shall again
Be tortured with suspicion to loose her,
Before I have enjoyed her? the next Sun
Shall see her mine; why should I doubt then? yet
To doubt is safer, then to be secure
But one short day: Great Empires in less time
Have suffered change; she's constant, but a woman,
And what a lovers vows, persuasions, tears,
May in a minute work upon such frailty.
There are too many, and too sad examples.
The Prince of Tarent gone, all were in safety;
Or not admitted to solicit her,
My fears would quit me; it is my fault, if I
Give way to that, and let him ne'er desire
To own what's hard, that dares not guard it.
Who waits there?
Would your Lordship might?
It is well
You are so near.
Take care all things be ready
For my remove.
They are.
We meet like Friends,
No more like Rivals now: my emulation
Puts on the shape of love and service to you.
It is returned:
It was rumor'd in the Court
You were to leave the City, and that wan me
To find you out: Your Excellence may wonder
That I that never saw you till this hour,
But that I wished you dead, so willingly
Should come to wait upon you to the Ports,
And there, with hope you never will look back,
Take my last farewell of you.
Never look back?
I said so, neither is it fit you should;
And may I prevail with you as a friend,
You never shall, nor while you live hereafter
Think of the Viceroy's Court, or of Palermo,
But as a grave, in which the Prince of Tarent
Buried his honour.
You speak in a language
I do not understand.
No? I'll be plainer.
What mad-man, that came hither with that pomp
Don John Antonio did, that exact Courtier
Don John Antonio, with whose brave fame only
Great Princesses have fallen in love, and died;
That came with such assurance as young Paris
Did to fetch Helen, being sent back, contemned,
Disgraced and scorned, his large expense laughed at,
His bravery scoffed, the Lady that he courted
Left quietly in possession of another
(Not to be named that day a Courtier
Where he was mentioned, the scarce known Cardenes,
And he to bear her from him) that would ever
Be seen again (having got fairly off)
By such as will live ready witnesses
Of his repulse, and scandal?
The grief of it,
Believe me, will not kill me. All mans honour
Depends not on the most uncertain favour
Of a fair Mistress.
Troth, you bear it well.
You should have seen some that were sensible
Of a disgrace, that would have raged, and sought
To cure their honour, with some strange revenge:
But you are better tempered; and they wrong
The Neapolitans in their report,
That say they are fiery spirits, incapable
Of the least injury, dangerous to be talked with
After a loss, where nothing can move you.
But, like a Stoic, with a constancy,
Words nor affronts, can shake, you still go on
And smile when men abuse you.
If they wrong
Themselves, I can: yet I would have you know,
I dare be angry.
It is not possible.
A taste of't would do well: And I'd make trial
What may be done. Come hither Boy, you have seen
This Jewel, as I take it.
Yes, it is that
I gave Almira.
And in what esteem
She held it, coming from your worthy self,
You may perceive, that freely hath bestowed it
Upon my Page.
When I presented it,
I did not indent with her, to what use
She should employ it.
See the kindness of
A loving soul; who, after this neglect,
Nay gross contempt, will look again upon her,
And not be frighted from it.
No indeed Sir,
Nor give way longer: Give way, do you mark,
To your loose wit, to run the Wilde-goose chase,
Six syllables further: I will see the Lady,
That Lady, that dotes on you, from whose hate
My love increases, though you stand elected
Her Porter, to deny me.
Sure you will not.
Yes, instantly: Your prosperous success
Hath made you insolent; and for her sake
I have thus long forborne you; and can yet
Forget it, and forgive it, ever provided,
That you end here, and for what is past recalling,
That she make intercession for your pardon,
Which at her suit, I'll grant.
I am much unwilling
To move her for a trifle; bear that too,
And then she shall speak to you.
Men and Angels,
Take witness for me, that I have endured
More then a man:— O do not fall so soon,
Stand up; take my hand, so: When I have printed
For ever contumelious word, a wound here,
Then sink for ever.
O! I suffer justly.
Murder, murder, murder. 
Apprehend him.
We'll all join with you.
I do wish you more,
My fury will be lost else, if it meet not
Matter to work on; one life is too little
For so much injury.
O my Cardenes,
Thou dead, still my Cardenes: Villains, cowards,
What do ye check at? can one arm, and that
A murderers, so long guard the cursed Master,
Against so many swords, made sharp with Justice?
Sure he will kill us all; he is a devil.
He is invulnerable.
Your base fears
Beget such fancies in you: Give me a sword,
This my weak arm, made strong in my revenge,
Shall force a way to it.
Would it were deeper Madam,
The thrust; which I would not put by, being yours
Of greater force, to have pierced through that heart
Which still retains your figure: Weep still Lady,
For every tear that flows from those grieved eyes,
Some part of that which maintains life, goes from me.
And so to die, were in a gentle slumber
To pass to Paradise; but you envy me
So quiet a departure from my world,
My world of miseries; therefore take my sword,
And having killed me with it, cure the wounds
It gave Cardenes.
It is too true: Was ever
Valour so ill employed?
Why stay you Lady?
Let not soft pity work on your hard nature:
You cannot do a better office to
The dead Cardenes, and I willingly
Shall fall a ready sacrifice, to appease him,
Your fair hand offering it.
Thou could ask nothing
But this, which I would grant:
Flint-hearted Lady!
Are you a woman, Sister?
Thou art not
A Brother, I renounce that title to thee:
Thy hand is in this bloody act; it was this
For which that savage homicide was sent hither.
Thou equal Judge of all things, if that blood,
And innocent blood —
Oh Cardenes,
How is my soul rent between rage and sorrow,
That it can be, that such an upright Cedar
Should violently be torn up by the roots,
Without an earthquake in that very moment
To swallow them that did it.
The hurt's nothing,
But the deep wound is in my conscience, friend,
Which sorrow in death only can recover.
Have better hopes.
My son, is this the marriage
I came to celebrate? false hopes of man,
I come to find a grave here.
I have wasted
My stock of Tears, and now just Anger help me
To pay in my Revenge the other part
Of duty which I owe thee. O great Sir,
Not as a Daughter now, but a poor Widow,
Made so before she was a Bride, I fly
To your impartial justice; the offence
Is death, and death in his most horrid form:
Let not then title, or a Princes name
(Since a great crime is in a great man greater)
Secure the Offender.
Give me life for life,
As thou wilt answer it to the great King
Whose Deputy thou art here.
And speedy Justice.
Put the damned wretch to torture.
Force him to
Reveal his cursed Confederates, which spare not,
Although you find a Son among them.
How?
Why bring you not the Rack forth?
Wherefore stands the Murderer unbound?
Shall I have hearing?
Excellent Lady, in this you express
Your true love to the dead.
All love to mankind from me, ends with him.
Will you hear me yet?
And first to you; you do confess the fact
With which you stand charged?
I will not make worse
What is already ill, with vain denial.
Then understand, though you are Prince of Tarent,
Yet being a Subject to the King of Spain,
No privilege of Sicily can free you
Being convict by a just form of Law,
From the municipal Statutes of that Kingdom,
But as a common man, being found guilty,
Must suffer for it.
I prize not my life
So much, as to appeal from any thing
You shall determine of me.
Yet despair not
To have an equal hearing; the exclaims
Of this g iev'd Father, nor my Daughters tears
Shall sway me from my self; and where they urge
To have you tortured, or led bound to prison,
I must not grant it.
No?
I cannot sir;
For men of his rank are to be distinguished
From other men, before they are condemned,
From which (his cause not heard) he yet stands free:
So take him to your charge, and as your life
See he be safe.
Let me die for him else.
The guard of him should have been given to me.
Or unto me.
Bribes may corrupt the Captain.
And our just wreak, by force or cunning practice,
With scorn prevented
Oh!
What groan is that?
They are apparent signs of life yet in him.
Oh that there were! that I could pour my blood
Into his veins!
Oh, oh!
Take him up gently.
Run for Physicians.
Surgeons.
All helps else.
This care of his recovery, timely practised,
Would have expressed more of a Father in you,
Then your impetuous clamours for revenge.
But I shall find fit time to urge that further
Hereafter to you; it is not fit for me
To add weight to oppressed calamity.
WHy should your love to me, having al∣ready
So oft endured the test, be put unto
A needless trial? have you not long since
In every circumstance and rite of friendship
Outgone all presidents the Ancients boast of,
And will you yet move further?
Hitherto
I have done nothing (howsoe'r you value
My weak endeavours) that may justly claim
A title to your friendship, and much less
Laid down the debt, which as a tribute due
To your deservings, not I, but mankind
Stands bound to tender.
Do not make an Idol
Of him that should, and without superstition,
To you build up an Altar. O my Pedro,
When I am to expire, to call you mine
Assures a future happiness: Give me leave
To argue with you, and the fondness of
Affection struck blind, with justice hear me.
Why should you, being innocent, fling your life
Into the furnace of your fathers anger
For my offence? Or take it granted, (yet
It is more then supposition) you prefer
My safety before your own, (so prodigally
You waste your favours) wherefore should this Captain
His blood and sweat rewarded in the favour
Of his great Master, falsify the trust
Which from true judgment he reposes in him,
For me a stranger?
Let him answer that,
He needs no prompter: Speak your thoughts, and freely.
I ever loved to do so, and it shames not
The bluntness of my breeding; from my youth
I was trained up a Soldier, one of those
That in their natures love the dangers more
Then the rewards of danger. I could add,
My life, when forfeited, the Viceroy pardoned,
But by his intercession; and therefore
It being lent by him, I were ungrateful
(Which I will never be) if I refused
To pay that debt at any time demanded.
I hope, friend, this will satisfy you.
No, it raises
More doubts within me. Shall I from the school
Of gratitude, in which this Captain reads
The text so plainly, learn to be unthankful?
Or viewing in your actions the Idea
Of perfect Friendship, when it does point to me
How brave a thing it is to be a Friend,
Turn from the object? Had I never loved
The fair Almira for her outward features,
Nay, were the beauties of her mind suspected,
And her contempt and scorn painted before me,
The being your Sister would anew inflame me
With much more impotence to dote upon her:
No, dear friend, let me in my death confirm
(Though you in all things else have the precedence)
I'll die ten times, ere one of Pedro's hairs
Shall suffer in my cause.
If you so love me,
In love to that part of my soul dwells in you,
(For though two bodies, friends have but one soul.)
Loose not both life and me.
The Prince is dead.
If so, shall I leave Pedro here to answer
For my escape? As thus I clasp thee, let
The Vice-roys sentence find me.
Fly for Heavens sake,
Consider the necessity; though now
We part Anthonio we, may meet again;
But death's division is for ever, friend.
The rumour spread Sir, of Martino's death,
Is checked, there's hope of his recovery.
Why should I fly then? when I may enjoy
With mine own life, my friend.
That's still uncertain,
He may have a relapse; for once be ruled friend.
He's a good debtor that pays when it is due;
A prodigal, that before it is required,
Makes tender of it.
The Bark, Sir, is ready.
The wind sits fair.
Heaven favours your escape.
Hark how the Boatswain whistles you aboard.
Will nothing move you?
Can I leave my friend?
I must delay no longer, force him home.
I'll run the hazard of my fortunes with you,
What violence is this? hear but my Reasons.
Poor friendship that is cooled with Argue∣mints.
Away, away.
For Malta.
You shall hear
All our events.
I may sail round the world,
But never meet thy like. Pedro.
Anthonio.
I breathe my soul back to thee.
In exchange
Bear mine along with thee.
Cheerly my hearts.
He's gone. May pittying-Heaven his Pilot be,
And then I weigh not what becomes of me.
I tell you right Sir.
Yes, like a rough Surgeon,
Without a feeling in your self, you search
My wounds unto the quick, then pray declare
The tediousness, and danger of the cure,
Never remembering what the Patient suffers.
But you preach this Philosophy to a man
That does partake of passion, and not
To a dull Stoic.
I confess you have
Just cause to mourn your Son; and yet if reason
Cannot yield comfort, let example cure.
I am a Father too, my only daughter
As dear in my esteem, perhaps as worthy
As your Martino, in her love to him
As desperately ill, eider's loss equal,
And yet I bear it with a better temper.
Which if you please to imitate twill not wrong
Your piety, nor your judgment.
We were fashioned in different moulds,
I weep with mine own eyes Sir, pursue my ends too,
Pity to you's a Cordial,
Revenge to me, and that I must, and will have
If my Martino die.
Your must, and will,
Shall in your full sailed confidence deceive you.
Hear's Doctor Paulo Sir.
My hand? you rather
Deserve my knee, and it shall bend as to
A second Father, if your saving aids
Restore my son.
'Rise thou bright star of knowledge,
The honour of thy art, thou help of nature,
Thou glory of our Academies.
If I blush Sir
To hear these attributes ill placed on me,
It is excusable, I am no God Sir,
Nor holy Saint that can do miracles,
But a weak sinful man: Yet that I may
In some proportion deserve these favours,
Your excellencies please to grace me with,
I promise all the skill I have acquired
In simples, or the careful observation
Of the superior Bodies, with my judgment
Derived from long experience, stand ready
To do you service.
Modestly replied.
How is it with you princely Patient?
Speak,
But speak some comfort Sir.
I must speak truth,
His wounds, though many, Heaven so guided yet
Anthonio's sword, it pierced no part was mortal.
These Gentlemen who worthily deserve
The names of surgeons have done their duties.
The means they practised, not ridiculous charms
To stop the blood; no Oils, nor Balsoms bought
Of cheating Quack-salvers, or Montebanks,
By them applied: The rules by Chiron taught,
And AEsculapius, which drew upon him,
The thunderers envy, they with care pursued,
Heaven prospering their endeavours.
There is hope then
Of his recovery?
But no assurance;
I must not flatter you. That little air
Of comfort that breathes towards us (for I dare not
Rob these t'inrich my self) you ow their care;
For yet I have done nothing.
Still more modest,
I will begin with them, to either give
Three thousand crowns.
I'll double your reward;
See 'em paid presently.
This magnificence
With equity, cannot be conferred on us;
It is due unto the Doctor.
True; we were
But his subordinate ministers, and did only
Follow your grave directions.
It is your own,
I challenge no part in it.
Brave on both sides.
Deserve this, with the honour that will follow
In your attendance.
If both sleep at once,
It is justice both should die.
For you grave Doctor,
We will not in such petty sums consider
Your high deserts. Our treasury lies open,
Command it as your own.
Choose any Castle,
Nay City, in our Government, and be Lord of't.
Of neither Sir, I am not so ambitious;
Nor would I have your Highnesses secure.
We have but faintly yet begun our journey,
A thousand difficulties and dangers must be
Encountered, ere we end it. Though his hurts,
I mean his outward ones, do promise fair,
There is a deeper one, and in his mind
Must be with care provided for. Melancholy,
And at the height, too near of kin to madness,
Possesses him; his senses are distracted,
Not one, but all; and if I can collect 'em
With all the various ways, invention,
Or industry ever practised, I shall write it
My master-piece.
You more and more engage me.
May we not visit him?
By no means Sir,
As he is now, such courtesies come untimely,
I'll yield you reason for it. Should he look on you,
It will renew the memory of that
Which I would have forgotten. Your good prayers
(And those I do presume, shall not be wanting
To my endeavours) are the utmost aids
I yet desire your Excellencies should grant me.
So with my humblest service.
Go and prosper.
Observe his piety I have heard, how true
I know not, most Physicians as they grow
Greater in skill, grow less in their Religion.
Attributing so much to natural causes,
That they have little faith in that they cannot
Deliver Reason for: This Doctor steers
Another course; but let this pass, if you please.
Your company to my Daughter.
I wait on you.
Took she no rest to night?
Not any Madam,
I am sure she slept not. If she slumbered strait,
As if some dreadful vision had appeared,
She started up, her hair unbound, and with
Distracted looks, staring about the Chamber,
She asks aloud; where is Martino? where
Have you concealed him? sometimes names Anthonio,
Trembling in every joint, her brows contracted:
Her fair face as it were changed into a curse,
Her hands held up thus, and as if her words
Were too big to find passage through her mouth.
She groans, then throws her self upon her Bed,
Beating her Breast.
It is wondrous strange.
Nay more,
She that of late vouchsafed not to be seen,
But so adorned, as if she were to rival
Nero's Poppy, or the Egyptian Queen,
Now careless of her beauties; when we offer
Our service, she contemns it.
Does she not
Sometimes forsake her Chamber?
Much about
This hour, then with a strange unsettled gate
She measures twice, or thrice the Gallery,
Silent, and frowning (we dare not speak to her)
And then returns. She's come, pray you now obe∣serve her.
Why are my eyes fixed on the ground, and not
Bent upwards? Ha! that which was mortal of
My dear Martino, as a debt to nature,
I know this mother Earth hath sepulchred:
But his diviner part, his Soul, o'er which
The tyrant death, nor yet the fatal sword
Of cursed Anthonio, his Instrument,
Had the least power, borne upon Angels wings,
Appointed to that office, mounted far
Above the Firmament.
Strange imagination!
Dear Cousin your Martino lives.
I know you,
And that in this you flatter me. He's dead,
As much as could die of him: But look yonder
Amongst a million of glorious lights
That deck the heavenly Canopy; I have
Discerned his soul transformed into a star.
Do you not see it?
Lady.
Look with my eyes.
What splendour circles it! the heavenly Archer
Not far off distant, appears dim with envy,
Viewing himself out-shin'd. Bright Constellation
Dart down thy beams of pity on Almira;
And since thou findst such grace where now thou art,
As I did truly love thee on the Earth,
Like a kind Harbinger, prepare my lodging,
And place me near thee.
I much more then fear,
She'll grow into a frenzy.
How! what's this?
A dismal sound! Come nearer Cousin, lay
Your ear close to the ground, closer I pray you.
Do you howl? are you there Anthonio?
Where sweet Lady?
In the Vault, in Hell, on the infernal rack,
Where murderers are tormented: Yerk him soundly.
'T was Rhadamanths sentence; Do your office Furies.
How he rores! what plead to me to mediate for you?
I am deaf, I cannot hear you.
It is but fancy,
Collect your self.
Leave babbling; it is rare Music.
Rhamnusia plays on a pair of tongs
Red hot; and Proserpine dances to the confort;
Pluto sits laughing by too. So, enough,
I do begin to pity him.
I wish, Madam,
You would show it to your self.
Her fit begins
To leave her.
O my brains! are you there Cousin?
Now she speaks temperately. I am ever ready
To do you service: How do you?
Very much troubled.
I have had the strangest waking dream of Hell
And Heaven, I know not what.
My Lord your Father
Is come to visit you. As ye would not grieve him
That is so tender of you, entertain him
With a becoming duty.
Still forlorn?
No comfort my Almira?
In your sorrow,
For my Martino, Madam, you have expressed
All possible love and tenderness. Too much of it
Will wrong your self, and him. He may live Lady
(For we are not past hope) with his future ser∣vice,
In some part to deserve it.
If Heaven please
To be so gracious to me, I'll serve him
With such obedience, love, and humbleness,
That I will rise up an example for
Good wives to follow: But until I have
Assurance what fate will determine of me,
Thus like a desolate Widow, give me leave
To weep for him; for should he die, I have vowed
Not to out-live him; and my humble suit is,
One Monument may cover us, and Anthonio
In justice you must grant me that be offered
A Sacrifice to our Ashes.
Prithee put off
These sad thoughts, both shall live (I doubt it not)
A happy pair.
O Sir, the foulest treason
That ever was discovered.
Speak it, that
We may prevent it.
Nay it is past prevention,
Though you allow me wise (in modesty,
I will not say oraculous) I cannot help it.
I am a Statesman, and some say a wise one,
But I could never conjure, nor divine
Of things to come.
Leave fooling; to the point,
What treason?
The false Prince Don John Anthonio
Is fled.
It is not possible.
Peace, Scriech-owl.
I must speak, and it shall out, sir; the Captain
You trusted with the Fort, is run away too.
O miserable woman, I defy
All comfort, cheated too of my revenge!
As you are my Father sir, and you my Brother,
I will not curse you; but I dare, and will say
You are unjust and treacherous. If there be
A way to death, I'll find it.
Follow her,
She'll do some violent act upon herself:
Till she be better tempered, bind her hands,
And fetch the Doctor to her. Had not you
A hand in this?
I sir, I never knew
Such disobedience.
My honor's touched in it:
Let Galleys be manned forth in his pursuit,
Search every Port and Harbour; if I live,
He shall not escape thus.
Fine hypocrisy!
Away dissemblers, it is confederacy
Betwixt thy son and self, and the false Captain,
He could not thus have vanished else. Ye have mur∣ther'd
My Son amongst you, and now murder Justice.
You know it most impossible he should live,
However the Doctor for your ends dissembled,
And you have shifted hence Anthonio.
Messina, thou art a crazed and grieved old man,
And being in my Court protected by
The law of hospitality, or I should
Give you a sharper answer: May I perish,
If I knew of his flight.
Fire then the Castle,
Hang up the Captains wife and children.
Fie sir.
My Lord, you are uncharitable; capital treasons
Exact not so much.
Thanks most noble Signior,
We ever had your good word and your love
Sir, I dare pass my word, my Lords are clear
Of any imputation in this case
You seem to load. 'em with.
Impertinent fool;
No, no, the loving faces you put on
Have been but grinning visors: you have juggled me
Out of my son, and out of justice too.
But Spain shall do me right; believe me Viceroy,
There I will force it from thee by the King,
He shall nor eat nor sleep in peace for me
Till I am righted for this treachery.
Thy worse Messina, since no reason can
Qualify thy intemperance, the corruption
Of my subordinate Ministers cannot wrong
My true integrity, let privy searches
Examine all the Land.
Fair fall Anthonio.
This is my wife, my Lord; troth speak your conscience,
Is it not a goodly Dame?
She is no less Sir,
I will make use of these; may I entreat you
To call my Niece.
With speed sir.
You may my Lord
Suspect me as an Agent in these State conveyances.
Let Signior Cuculo then be never more,
For all his place, wit, and authority,
Held a most worthy honeit Gentleman.
I do acquit you Signior. Niece you see
To what extremes I am driven, the cunning Vice∣roy
And his son Pedro, having expressed too plainly
Their cold affections to my son Martino;
And therefore I conjure thee Leonora,
By all thy hopes from me, which is my Dukedom,
If my son fail, however all thy fortunes,
Though heretofore some love hath past betwixt
Don Pedro, and thy self, Abjure him now.
And as thou keep Almira company,
In this her desolation, so in hate
To this young Pedro for thy Cousins love,
Be her associate; or assure thy self,
I cast thee like a stranger from my blood.
If I do ever hear, thou see, or send
Token, or receive message by you Heaven,
I never more will own thee.
O dear Uncle,
You have put a tyrannous yoke upon my heart,
And it will break it.
Gravest Lady; you
May be a great assister in my ends.
I buy your diligence thus: Divide this couple,
Hinder their interviews; fain it is her will
To give him no admittance, if he crave it,
And thy rewards shalll be thine own desires.
Whereto good Sir, but add your friendly aids,
And use me to my uttermost.
My Lord,
If my wife please, I dare not contradict.
Borachia, what do you say?
I say, my Lord,
I know my place, and be assured I will
Keep fire and toe a sunder.
You in this
Shall much deserve me.
We have took upon us
A heavy charge. I hope you'll now forbear
Th'excess of Wine.
I will do what I please.
This day the markets kept for slaves, go you
And buy me a fine timbered one to assist me.
I must be better waited on.
Any thing.
So you'll leave Wine.
Still prating?
I am gone Duck.
Pedro! so hot upon the scent, I'll fit him.
Donna Borachia, you most happily
Are met to pleasure me.
It may be so,
I use to pleasure many. Here lies my way,
I do beseech you Sir, keep on your voyage.
Be not so short, sweet Lady, I must with you.
With me Sir, I beseech you Sir; why, what Sir
See you in me?
Do not mistake me Lady,
Nothing but honesty.
Hang honesty;
Trump me not up with honesty. Do you mark Sir,
I have a charge Sir, and a special charge Sir;
And it is not honesty can win on me Sir.
Prithee conceive me rightly.
I conceive ye?
But understand.
I will not understand sir,
I cannot, nor I do not understand sir.
Prethree Borachia, let me see my Mistress;
But look upon her, stand you by.
How's this?
Shall I stand by? what do you think of me.
Now by the virtue of the place I hold,
You are a Paltry Lord to tempt my trust thus.
I am no Helen, nor no Heccuba,
To be deflowered of my loyalty
With your fair language.
Thou mistake me still.
It may be so; my place will bear me out in it;
And will mistake you still, make you your best on it,
A Pox upon thee, let me but behold her.
A Plague upon you, you shall never see her:
This is a croon in grain! Thou art so testy,
Prithee take breath, and know thy friends.
I will not,
I have no friends, nor I will have none this way.
And now I think on it better, why will you see her?
Because she loves me dearly, I her equally.
She hates you damnably, most wickedly,
(Build that upon my word) most wickedly;
And swears her eyes are sick when they behold ye.
How fearfully have I heard her rail upon ye,
And cast, and rail again, and cast again;
Call for hot Waters, and then rail again.
How? it is not possible.
I have heard her swear
(How justly, you best know, and where the cause lies)
That ye are (I shame to tell it) but it must out.
Fie, fie, why, how have you deserved it?
I am what?
The beastliest man; why what a grief must this be,
Sir-reverence of the company, a rank whoremaster:
Ten livery whores, she assured me on her credit,
With weeping eyes she spake it, and seven Citizens,
Beside all voluntaries that serve under ye,
And of all Countries.
This must needs be a lie.
Besides ye are so careless of your body,
Which is a foul fault in ye.
Leave your fooling,
For this shall be a fable. Happily
My Sisters anger may grow strong against me,
Which thou mistake.
She hates you very well too,
But your Mistress hates you heartily; look upon ye?
Upon my conscience, she would see the devil first,
With eyes as big as saucers. When I but named ye,
She has leapt back thirty foot: If once she smell ye,
For certainly ye are rank, she says extreme rank,
And the wind stand with ye too, she is gone for ever.
For all this I would see her.
That's all one.
Have you new eyes when those are scratched out? or a nose
To clap on warm? Have you proof against a Piss∣pot;
Which if they bid me, I must fling upon you?
I shall not see her, then you say?
It seems so.
Prethree be thus far friend, then good Bore∣chia,
To give her but this Letter, and this Ring,
And leave thy pleasant lying, which I pardon;
But leave it in her pocket, there's no harm in it.
I'll take thee up a Petticoat, will that please thee?
Take up my Petticoat? I scorn the motion,
I scorn it with my heels; take up my Petticoat?
And why thus hot?
Sir, you shall find me hotter
If you take up my Petticoat.
I'll give thee a new Petticoat:
I scorn the gift: Take up my Petticoat?
Alas my Lord, you are to young, my Lord;
To young my Lord to circumcise me that way.
Take up my Petticoat? I am a woman,
A woman of another way, my Lord;
A Gentlewoman. He that takes up my Petticoat,
Shall have enough to do, I warrant him.
I would fain see the proudest of you all so lusty:
Thou art disposed still to mistake me.
Petticoat.
You show now what you are, but do your worst, Sir.
A wild-fire take thee.
I ask no favour of ye,
And so I leave ye; and withal I charge ye
In my own name, for sir I would have ye know it,
In this place I present your fathers person:
Upon your life, not dare to follow me;
For if you do
Go, and the Pox go with thee,
If thou hast so much moisture to receive 'em.
For thou wilt have 'em, though a Horse bestow 'em,
I must devise a way, for I must see her,
And very suddenly; and Madam Petticoat,
If all the wit I have, and this can do,
I'll make you break your charge, and your hope too.
COme rank your selves, and stand out hand∣somly.
Now ring the Bell, that they may know my Market.
Stand you two here, you are personable men,
And apt to yield good sums, if women cheapen:
Put me that Pig-complexion'd fellow behind,
He will spoil my sale else, the slave looks like famine:
Sure he was got in a Cheese-press, the whey runs out on's Nose yet.
He will not yield above a peck of Oysters,
If I can get a quart of wine in too, ye are gone Sir:
Why sure, thou had no father.
Sure I know not.
No certainly, a March Frog kept thy mother;
Thou art but a monster Paddock. Look who comes, Sirrah.
And next prepare the Song, and do it lively.
Your tricks too Sirrah; they are ways to catch the buyer,
And if you do 'em well, they'll prove good Dowries,
How now?
They come Sir, with their bags full laden.
Reach me my stool. O! here they come:
That's he.
He never fails monthly to sell his slaves here,
He buys 'em presently upon their taking,
And so disperses 'em to every Market.
Begin the song, and chant it merrily —
Well done.
Good morrow.
Morrow to you Signiors:
We come to look upon your slaves, and buy too,
If we can like the persons, and the prices. 
They show fine active fellows.
They are no less Sir,
And people of strong labours.
That's in the proof Sir.
Pray what's the price of this Red-bearded fellow?
If his Call be good, I have certain uses for him.
My Sorrel slaves are of a lower price,
Because the colours faint. Fifty Chekeens Sir.
What be his virtues?
He will poison Rats,
Make him but angry, and his eyes kill Spiders;
Let him but fasting, spit upon a Tod,
And presently it bursts, and dies; his dreams kill;
He'll run you in a wheel, and draw up water;
But if his Nose drop in it, twill kill an army.
When ye have worn him to the Bones with uses,
Thrust him into an Oven, luted well,
Dry him, and beat him, flesh and bone to powder;
And that kills Scabs and Aches of all climates.
Pray at what distance may I talk to him?
Give him but Sage and Butter in a morn∣ing,
And there's no fear: But keep him from all wo∣men,
For there his poison swells most.
I will have him.
Cannot he breed a plague too?
Yes, yes, yes.
Feed him with Fogs probatum. Now to you Sir,
Do you like this slave?
Yes, if I like his price well.
The price is full an hundred, nothing bated.
Sirrah, sell the Moors there; feel, he's high and lusty,
And of a gamesom nature; bold, and secret,
Apt to win favour of the man that owns him,
By diligence, and duty: Look upon him.
Do ye hear Sir?
I'll be with you presently.
Mark but his limbs, that slave will cost ye fourscore.
An easy price, turn him about, and view him.
For these two Sir? why they are the finest i will∣drone,
Twins on my credit sir. Do you see this Boy, sir,
He will run as far from ye in an hour.
Will he so sir?
Conceive me rightly, if upon an errand,
As any horse you have.
What will this Girl do?
Sure no harm at all sir,
For she sleeps most an end.
An excellent house-wife.
Of what Religion are they?
What you will sir,
So there be meat, and drink in it; they'll do little
That shall offend ye; for their chief desire
Is to do nothing at all sir.
A hundred is too much.
Not a do it bated,
He's a brave slave; his eye shows activeness,
Fire, and the mettle of a man, dwells in him.
Here's one you shall have.
For what?
For nothing,
And thank ye too.
What can he do?
Why, any thing that's ill,
And never blush at it: He's so true a thief,
That he will steal from himself, and think he has got by it.
He stole out of his Mothers belly, being an Infant,
And from a lousy Nurse he stole his nature;
From a Dog his look, and from an Ape his nimble∣nos;
He will look in your face, and pick your pockets,
Rob ye the most wise Rat of a Cheese-paring;
There where a Cat will go in, he will follow,
His body has no backbone. In to my company
He stole, for I never bought him, and will steal in to yours,
And ye stay a little longer. Now if any of ye
Be given to the excellent art of lying,
Behold, before ye here the master-piece;
He will out-lie him that taught him, Monsieur De∣vile,
Offer to swear he has eaten nothing in a twelve month,
When his mouth's full of Meat.
Pray keep him, he's Jewel,
And here's your money for this fellow.
He's yours sir?
Come follow me.
Twenty Chekeens for these two.
For five and twenty take 'em.
There's your money;
I'll have 'em, if it be to sing in Cages.
Give 'em hard Eggs, you never had such Black birds.
Is she a Maid, dost think?
I dare not swear Sir,
She is nine year old, at ten you shall find few here:
A merry fellow, thou say true. Come i will∣drone.
Here tell your money; if his life but answer.
His ontward promises, I have bought him cheap Sir.
Too cheap a conscience, he's a pregnant Knave.
Full of fine thoughts, I warrant him.
He's but weak timbered.
It is the better,
He will turn Gentleman a great deal sooner.
Very weak Legs.
Strong as the time allows Sir.
What's that fellow?
Who this? The finest thing in all the world Sir,
The punctuallest, and the perfectest, an English mettle,
But coined in France; your servants servant Sir,
Do you understand that? or your shadows servant.
Will you buy him to carry in a Box! Kiss your hand sirrah;
Let fall your cloak on one shoulder; face to your left hand;
Feather your Hat; slope your Hat; now charge your honour.
What think you of this fellow?
Indeed I know not,
I never saw such an Ape before. But hark you,
Are these things serious in his nature?
Yes, yes;
Part of his Creed: come do some more devices.
Quarrel a little, and take him for your enemy,
Do it in dumb show. Now observe him nearly.
This fellow's mad, stark mad.
Believe they are all so.
I have sold a hundred of'em.
A strange Nation:
What may the women be?
As mad as they;
And as I have heard for truth, a great deal madder.
Yet you may find some civil things amongst 'em;
But they are not respected. Nay never wonder,
They have a City Sir, I have been in it,
And therefore dare affirm it; where, if you saw
With what a load of vanity it is fraughted,
How like an everlasting Morris-dance it looks;
Nothing but Hobby-horse, and Maid-marrian;
You would start indeed:
They are handsome men.
Yes: If they would thank their Maker,
And seek no further; but they have new Creators
God Tailor, and God Mercer, a kind of Jews Sir,
But fallen into Idolatry, for they worship
Nothing with so much service, as the Cow-calfs.
What do mean you by Cow-calfs?
Why their women.
Will you see him do any more tricks?
It is enough, I thank ye;
But yet I'fl buy him, for the rareness of him,
He may make my princely patient mirth, and that done,
I'll claim him in my study, that at void hours
I may run o'er the story of his Country.
His price is forty.
Hold, I'll once be foolish,
And buy a lump of levity to laugh at.
Will your worship walk?
How now Apothecary,
Have you been buying too?
A little Sir;
A dose or two of mischief.
Fare ye well Sir,
As these prove, we shall look the next wind for ye.
I shall be with ye Sir.
Who bought this fellow?
Not I.
Nor I.
Why do's he follow us then?
Did not I tell ye he would steal to ye?
Sirrah.
You mouldy chops, know you crib, I would wish you
And get from whence you came.
I came from no place.
Wilt thou be my fool, for fools they say, will tell truth.
Yes, if you will give me leave Sir to abuse you,
For I can do that naturally.
And I can beat ye.
I should be sorry else, Sir.
He looks for that, as duly as his victuals,
And will be extreme sick when he is not beaten.
He will be as wanton, when he has a bone broken,
As a Cat in a bowl on the water.
You will part with him?
To such a friend as you Sir.
And without money?
Not a penny Signior;
And would he were better for ye.
Follow me then,
The Knave may teach me something.
Something, that
You dearly may repent, however you scorn me,
The slave may prove your Master.
Farewell once more.
Farewell, and when the wind serves next, expect me.
Come Sir, you are mine, Sir, now; you serve a man Sir,
That when you know more, you will find.
I hope so
What dost thou hope?
To find ye a kind master.
Find you your self a diligent true servant,
And take the precept of the wise before ye,
And then you may hope Sirrah. Uuderstand:
You serve me. What is me? a man of credit.
Yes Sir.
Of special credit, special office.
Hear first, and understand again, of special office.
A man that nods upon the thing he meets,
And that thing bows.
It is fit it should be so Sir.
It shall do so. A man near all importance.
Dost thou digest this truly?
I hope I shall Sir.
Besides, thou art to serve a noble Mistress,
Of equal place and trust. Serve usefully,
Serve all with diligence, but her delights,
There make your stop. She is a woman sirrah;
And though a culled out virtue, yet a woman
Thou art not troubled with the strength of blood,
And stirring faculties, for she will show a fair one?
As I am a man, I may; but as I am your man,
Your trusty, useful man, those thoughts shall perish.
It is apt, and well distinguished. The next precept,
And then observe me, you have all your duty:
Keep as thou would keep thine eye-sight, all Wine from her,
All talk of Wine.
Wine is a comfort, Sir.
A Devil, Sir; let her not dream of Wine,
Make her believe there neither is, nor was Wine,
Swear it.
Will you have me lye?
To my end, Sir;
For if one drop of Wine but creep into her,
She is the wisest woman in the world straight,
And all the women in the world together
Are but a whisper to her; a thousand Iron-mills
Can be heard no further then a pair of Nut-crackers:
Keep her from Wine, Wine makes her dangerous.
Fall back; my Lord Don Pedro!
Now Mr. Office:
What is the reason that your vigilant greatness,
And your wives wonderful wiseness have locked up from me
The way to see my Mistress? whose Dog's dead now,
That you observe these Vigils?
Very well, my Lord;
Belike we observe no law then, nor no order,
Nor feel no power, nor will of him that made 'em,
When State-commands thus slightly are disputed:
What State-command? dost thou think any State
Would give thee any thing but Eggs to keep,
Or trust thee with a secret above lousing?
No, no, my Lord I am not passionate,
You cannot work me that way to betray me.
A point there is in it, that you must not see sir,
A secret and a serious point of State too;
And do not urge it further, do not Lord,
It will not take; you deal with them that wink not:
You tried my wife, alas you thought she was foolish,
Won with an empty word; you have not found it.
I have found a pair of Coxcombs, that I am sure on.
Your Lordship may say three; I am not passionate.
How's that?
Your Lordship found a faithful Gentle∣woman,
Strong, and inscrutable as the Viceroy's heart,
A woman of another making, Lord:
And lest she might partake with women's weakness,
I have purchased her a rib to make her perfect,
A rib that will not shrink, nor break in the bending:
This trouble we are put to, to prevent things,
Which your good Lordship holds but necessary.
A fellow of a handsome and free promise,
And much methinks I am taken with his countenance.
Do you serve this Yeoman, Porter?
Not a word
Basta, your Lordship may discourse your freedom;
He is a slave of State sir, so of silence.
You are very punctual State-cut; fare ye well,
I shall find time to fit you too, I fear not.
And I shall fit you Lord; you would be billing;
You are too hot, sweet Lord, too hot: Go you home,
And there observe these lessons I first taught you,
Look to your charge abundantly; be wary,
Trusty and wary: much weight hangs upon me,
Watchful and wary too! this Lord is dangerous,
Take courage and resist; for other uses
Your Mistress will inform ye. Go, be faithful,
And do ye hear? no wine.
I shall observe Sir.
He must take air.
Sir, under your correction,
The violence of motion may make
His wounds bleed fresh.
And he hath lost already
Too much blood, in my judgment.
I allow that;
But to choke up his spirits in a dark room,
Is far more dangerous. He comes; no questions.
Certain we have no reason, nor that soul
Created of that pureness books persuade us:
We understand not sure; nor feel that sweetness
That men call Virtues chain to link our actions.
Our imperfections form, and flatter us;
A will to rash and rude things; is our reason,
And that we glory in, that makes us guilty.
Why did I wrong this man, unmanly wrong him,
Unmannerly? He gave me no occasion;
In all my heat how noble was his temper?
And when I had forgot both man and manhood,
With what a gentle bravery did he chide me?
And say he had killed me, whither had I travelled?
Killed me in all my rage, oh how it shakes me!
Why did thou do this, fool? a woman taught me,
The Devil and his Angel woman bid me.
I am a beast, the wildest of all beasts,
And like a beast I make my blood my master:
Farewell, farewell for ever name of Mistress,
Out of my heart I cross thee; love and women
Out of my thoughts.
I, now you show your manhood.
Doctor believe me, I have bought my knowledge,
And dearly, Doctor; they are dangerous creatures,
They sting at both ends, Doctor; worthless creatures,
And all their loves and favours end in ruins.
To man indeed.
Why now thou take me rightly:
What can they show, or be? what act deserve us
While we have virtue, and pursue her beauties?
And yet I have heard
Of many virtuous women.
Not many, Doctor, there your reading fails you:
Would there were more, and in their loves less dangers.
Love is a noble thing without all doubt sir.
Yes, and an excellent to cure the itch.
Strange melancholy!
By degrees twill lessen,
Provide your things.
Our care shall not be wanting.
Good Madam, for your healths sake clear those clouds up,
That feed upon your beauties like diseases:
Times hand will turn again, and what he ruins
Gently restore, and wipe off all your sorrows
Believe ye are to blame, much to blame Lady;
You tempt his loving care whose eye has numbered
All our afflictions, and the time to cure 'em:
You rather with this torrent choke his mercies
Then gently slide in to his providence.
Sorrows are well allowed, and sweeten Nature,
Where they express no more then drops on lilies;
But when they fall in storms, they bruise our hopes,
Make us unable (though our comforts meet us)
To hold our heads up: Come, you shall take com∣fort;
This is a sullen grief becomes condemned men,
That feel a weight of sorrow through their souls:
Do but look up: Why so? is not this better
Then hanging down your head still like a Violet,
And dropping out those sweet eyes for a wager?
Pray ye speak a little.
Pray ye desire no more,
And if ye love me, say no more.
How fain
(If I would be as wilful, and partake in it)
Would you destroy your self? how often, Lady,
Even of the same disease have you curd me,
And shook me out on it; chid me, tumbled me,
And forced my hands thus?
By these tears no more.
You are too prodigal of 'em. Well, I will not,
For though my love bids me transgress your will,
I have a service to your sorrows still.
Indeed my Lord, my place is not so near;
I wait below stairs, and there sit, and wait
Who comes to seek accesses; nor is it fit Sir
My rudeness should intrude so near their lodgings.
Thou moist invent a way, it is but a trial;
But carrying up this Letter, and this token,
And giving 'em discreetly to my Mistress,
The Lady Leonora; there's my Purse,
Or any thing thou wilt ask me: if thou knew me,
And what I may be to thee for this curtsy.
Your Lordship speaks so honestly, and freely,
That by my troth I'll venture.
I dearly thank thee.
And it shall cost me hard; nay, keep your purse Sir:
For though my bodies bought, my mind was never.
Though I am bound, my courtesies are no slaves.
Thou should be truly gentle.
If I were so,
The state I am in, bids you not believe it.
But to the purpose Sir, Give me your Letter,
And next your counsel, for I serve a crafty Mistress.
And she must be removed, thou wilt else ne'er do it.
I, there's the plague. Think, and I'll think a while too.
Her husbands suddenly fallen sick.
She cares not
If he were dead, indeed it would do better:
Would he were hanged.
Then she would run for joy, Sir.
Some Lady crying out.
She has two already.
Her house is a fire.
Let the fool, my husband, quench it.
This will be her answer: This may take, it will sure!
Your Lordship must go presently, and send me
Two or three bottles of your best Greek Wine;
The strongest, and sweetest.
Instantly;
But will that do?
Let me alone to work it;
Wine I was charged to keep by all means from her,
All secret locks it opens, and all counsels,
That I am sure, and gives men all accesses.
Pray Heaven she be not loving, when she's drunk now;
For drunk she shall be, though my pate pay for it;
She'll turn my stomach then abominably,
She has a most wicked face, and that lewd face,
Being a drunken face, what face will there be?
She cannot ravish me. Now if my Master
Should take her so, and know I ministered,
What will his wisdom do? I hope be drunk too,
And then ell's right. Well Lord, to do the service,
Above these Puppit-plays, I keep a life yet.
Here come the executioners: You are welcome,
Give me your load, and tell my Lord, I am at it:
I will sir, speed you sir.
Good speed on all sides.
It is mon-strong, strong Wine: O the yauns that she'll make!
Look to your stern deer Mistress, and steer right,
Here's that will work, as high as the Bay of Portugal:
Stay, let me see; I'll try her by the Nose first,
For if she be a right Sow, sure she'll find it.
She is yonder by her self, the Lady's from her.
Now to begin my sacrifice, she stirs, and vents it.
O how she holds her nose up like a Janet
In the wind of a Grass-mare! She has it full now,
And now she comes. I'll stand aside a while.
It is wine; I sure it is wine! excellent strong wine!
In the must I take it: Very wine: this way too.
How true she hunts? I'll make the train a little longer.
Stronger, and stronger still! still blessed wine!
Now she hunts hot.
All that I can make for this wine,
This way it went sure.
Now she is at a cold scent.
Make out your doubles Mistress. O well hunted,
That's she, that's she.
O, if I could but see it!
O what a precious scent it has! but handle it!
Now I'll untappice.
What's that? still it is stronger.
Why how now sirrah? what's that? answer quickly,
And to the point.
It is wine forsooth, good wine,
Excellent Candi-wine.
It is well forsooth:
Is this a drink for slaves? Why saucy sirrah,
Excellent Candi-wine; draw nearer to me,
Reach in me bottle, Why thou most debauched slave,
Pray be not angry Mistress, for with all my service
And pains, I purchased this for you, I dare not drink it;
For you a present, only for your pleasure,
To show in little, what a thanks I owe
The hourly courtesies, your goodness gives me.
And I will give thee more; there kiss my hand on it.
I thank you dearly for your dirty favour,
How rank it smells!
By thy leave sweet Bottle,
And Sugar-candi-wine, I now come to thee;
Hold your hand under.
How does your Worship like it?
Under again, again; and now come kiss me,
I'll be a mother to thee, Come, drink to me.
I do beseech your pardon.
Here's to thee then,
I am easily entreated for thy good,
It is nought for thee indeed, twill make thee break out;
Thou hast a pure complexion: now for me
It is excellent, it is excellent for me.
Son slave I have a cold stomach, and the wind.
Blows out a cry at your both ends.
Kiss again,
Cherish thy Lips, for thou shalt kiss fair Ladies:
Son slave I have them for thee; I'll show thee all.
Heaven bless mine eyes!
Even all the secrets, Son slave,
In my dominion.
Oh here come the Ladies,
Now to my business.
This air will much refresh you:
I must sit down.
Do, and take freer thoughts;
The place invites you, and I walk by, like your Sen∣tinel.
And thou shalt be my Heir, I'll leave thee all,
Heaven knows to what twill mount to; but abun∣dance:
I'll leave thee two young Ladies, what think you of that Boy?
Where is the Bottle? Two delicate young Ladies:
But first you shall commit with me. Do you mark son,
And show your self a Gentleman, that's the truth son:
Excellent Lady, kissing your fair hand,
And humbly craving pardon for intruding
This Letter, and this Ring.
From whom, I pray you sir?
From the most noble, loving Lord, Don Pedro,
The servant of your Virtues.
And prithee, good son slave, be wise and cir∣cumspect,
And take heed of being overtaken with too much drink;
For it is a lamentable sin, and spoils all:
Why it is the damnablest thing to be drunk son,
Heaven cannot endure it. And hark you, one thing I would have done:
Knock my husband on the head, as soon as may be,
For he is an arrant Puppy, and cannot perform —
Why, where the devil is this foolish Bottle?
I much thank you, and this sir for your pains.
No, gentle Lady,
That I can do him service; is my merit,
My faith, my full reward.
Once more I thank you.
Since I have met so true a friend to goodness,
I dare deliver to your charge, my answer:
Pray you tell him Sir, this night I do invite him
To meet me in the Garden. Means he may find,
For love, they say, wants no abilities.
Nor shall he, Madam, if my help may pro∣sper.
So everlasting Love, and Sweetness, bless ye.
She's at it still, I dare not now appear to her.
What fellows that?
Indeed I know not, Madam,
It seems of some strange Country by his habit;
Nor can I show you by what mystery
He wrought himself into this place, prohibited.
A handsome man.
But of a mind more handsome.
Was his business to you?
Yes, from a friend you wooed of.
A very handsome fellow,
And well demeaned.
Exceeding well, and speaks well.
And speaks well too?
I passing well, and freely,
And as he promises of a most clear nature,
Brought up sure far above his show:
It seems so:
I would I had heard him, friend. Comes he again?
Indeed I know not if he do.
It is no matter.
Come let's walk in.
I am glad you have found your tongue yet.
My wife is very merry; sure it was her voice,
Pray Heaven there be no drink in it, then I allow it.
It is sure my Master, now the game begins;
Here will be spitting of fire a both sides present∣lie,
Send me but safe delivered.
O my heart oks!
My head oks too: Mercy, O me she's perished!
She has gotten wine! she is gone for ever.
Come hither Ladies, carry your bodies swimming;
Do your three duties then, then fall behind me.
O thou pernicious Raschal! What hast thou done?
I done alas Sir, I have done nothing.
Sirrah,
How came she by this wine?
Alas, I know not.
Who's that, that talks of wine there?
Forsooth, my Master?
Bring him before me, son slave.
I will know it.
This Bottle? how this Bottle?
Do not stir it;
For if you do, by this good wine, I'll knock ye,
I'll beat ye damnable, yea, and nay, I'll beat you;
And when I have broke it about your head, do you mark me?
Then will I tie it to your Worship's tail,
And all the dogs in the Town shall follow you.
No question I would aves you how I came by it.
I will have none of these points handled now.
She'll never be well again, while the world stands.
I hope so.
How doest thou Lamb?
Well, God-a-mercy Bell-wether, how doest thou?
Stand out: Son slave, sit you here, and before this Worshipful Audience
Propound a doubtful question: See who's drunk now:
Now, now, it works, the devil now dwells in her.
Whether the Heaven, or the Earth, be near∣er the Moon?
Or what's the natural Reason, why a woman longs
To make her husband Cuckold? Bring me your Cousin
The Curate now, that great Philosopher;
He that found out a Pudding had two ends;
That learned Clerk, that notable Gymnosophist,
And let him with his Jacobs-Staff discover
What is the third part of Three farthings, three
Half pence, being the half, and I am satisfied.
You see she hath Learning enough, if she could dispose it.
Too much for thee, thou Logger-head, thou Bull-head.
Nay good Borachia
Thou a sufficient States-man?
A Gentleman of Learning, hang thee Dog-whelp;
Thou shadow of a man of action;
Thou scab of the Court, go sleep you drunken Ras∣cal;
Ye debauched Puppy, get you home, and sleep sirrah,
And so will I son slave, thou shalt sleep with me.
Prithee look to her tenderly.
No words sirrah
Of any wine, or any thing like wine,
Or any thing concerning wine, or by wine,
Or from, or with wine: Come lead me like a Countess.
Thus must we bear, poor men! There is a trick in it,
But when she is well again, I'll trick her for it.
NOw if this honest fellow do but prosper,
I hope I shall make fair return. I wonder
I hear not from the Prince of Tarent, yet
I hope he's landed well, and to his safety,
The winds have stood most gently to his purpose.
My honest friend!
Your Lordships poorest servant.
How hast thou sped?
My Lord, as well as wishes,
My way hath reached your Mistress, and delivered
Your Letter-love, and Token, who with all joy,
And virtuous constancy, desires to see you,
Commands you this night, by her loving power,
To meet her in the Garden,
Thou hast made me,
Redeemed me, man, again from all my sorrows;
Done above wonder for me. Is it so?
I should be now too old to learn to lie sir,
And as I live, I never was good flatterer.
I do see some thing in this fellows face still,
That ties my heart fast to him: Let me love thee,
Nay, let me honour thee for this fair service,
And if I ere forget it.
Good my Lord,
The only knowledge of me, is too much bounty.
My service, and my life sir.
I shall think on it;
But how for me to get access?
It is easy,
I'll be your guide sir, all my care shall lead you;
My credits better then you think.
I thank ye,
And soon I'll wait your promise.
With all my duty.
Ell's as I tell you Princes, you shall here
Be witness to his fancies, melancholy,
And strong imagination of the wrongs.
His inhumanity to Don Anthonio
Hath rent his mind into so many pieces
Of various imaginations, that
Like the Celestial Bow, this colour now
The object, then another, till all vanish.
He says a man might watch to death, or fast,
Or think his spirit out; to all which humours,
I do apply my self, checking the bad,
And cherishing the good. For these, I have
Prepared my Instruments, fitting his Chamber
With trap-doors, and descents; sometimes presenting
Good spirits of the air, bad of the earth,
To pull down, or advance his fair intentions.
He's of a noble nature, yet sometimes
Thinks that which by confederacy I do,
Is by some skill in Magic. Here he comes.
A bed drawn forth, Martino upon it, a book in's hand.
Unsent I do beseech you. What do you read Sir?
A strange position which doth much per∣plex me:
That every Soul's alike, a musical Instrument,
The Faculties in all men equal Strings,
Well, or ill handled; and those sweet, or harsh.
How like a Fiddler I have plaid on mine then!
Declined the high pitch of my birth and breeding,
Like the most barbarous Peasant; read my pride
Upon Anthonio's meek humility,
Wherein he was far more valiant then I.
Meekness, thou wait'st upon courageous spirits,
Enabling sufferance past inflections:
In patience Tarent overcame me more
Then in my wounds. Live then no more to men,
Shut day-light from thine eyes, here cast thee down,
And with a sullen sigh breath forth thy soul.
What art? an Apparition, or a Man?
A man, and sent to counsel thee.
Despair
Has stopped mine ears; thou seem a holy Friar?
I am, by Doctor Paulo sent to tell thee:
Thou art too cruel to thy self in seeking
To lend compassion and aid to others.
My Order bids me comfort thee: I have heard all
Thy various, troubled passions. Hear but my story.
In way of youth I did enjoy one friend,
As good and perfect as Heaven ever made man:
This friend was plighted to a beauteous woman,
(Nature proud of her workmanship) mutual love
Possessed 'em both; her heart in his breast lodged,
And his in hers.
No more of love, good father;
It was my surfeit, and I loath it now,
As men in Fevers meat they fell sick on.
However it is worth your hearing. This be∣trothed Lady
(The ties and duties of a friend forgotten)
Spurred on by lust, I treacherously pursued:
Contemned by her, and by my friend reproved,
Despised by honest men, my consclence seared up,
Love I converted into frantic rage;
And by that false guide led, I summoned him
In this bad cause, his sword against mine to prove,
If he or I might claim most right in love.
But fortune (that does seld' or never give
Success to right and virtue) made him fall
Under my sword. Blood, blood, a friends dear blood,
A virtuous friends shed by a Villain, me,
In such a monstrous and unequal cause,
Lies on my conscience.
And durst thou live
After this to be so old? it is an illusion
Raised up by my charms: A man would not have lived;
Art quiet in thy bosom?
As the sleep
Of Infants.
My fault did not equal this;
Yet I have emptied my heart of joy,
Only to store sighs up. What were the arts
That made thee live so long in rest?
Repentance
Hearty, that cleansed me; Reason then confirmed me
I was forgiven, and took me to my Beads.
I am in the wrong path; tender conscience
Makes me forget mine honour: I have done
No evil like this, yet I pine, whilst he,
A few tears of his true contrition tendered,
Securely sleeps. Ha, where keeps peace of conscience,
That I may buy her? No where, not in life.
It is feigned that Jupiter two Vessels placed,
The one with honey filled, the other gall,
At th'entry of Olympus: Destiny
There brewing these together, suffers not
One man to pass before he drinks this mixture.
Hence is it we have not an hour of life
In which our pleasures relish not some pain,
Our sowrs some sweetness. Love doth taste of both.
Revenge, that thirsty Dropsy of our souls,
Which makes us covet that which hurts us most,
Is not alone sweet, but partakes of tartness:
Is it not a strange effect?
Past president.
His Brain-pan's perished with his wounds: Go to,
I knew it would come to this.
Peace, man of wisdom.
Pleasure's the hook of evil, ease of care,
And so the general object of the Court:
Yet some delights are lawful. Honour is
Virtue's allowed ascent: Honour that clasps
All perfect Justice in her arms; that craves
No more respect then what she gives; that does
Nothing but what she'll suffer. This distracts me,
But I have found the right. Had Don Anthonio
Done that to me, I did to him, I should have killed him;
The injury so foul, and done in public,
My Footman would not bear it. Then in honour
Wronging him so, I'll right him on my self:
There's honour, justice, and full satisfaction
Equally tendered; it is resolved, I'll do it.
They take all weapons from me
Bless my son.
The careful Doctor's come again.
Rare man!
How shall I pay this debt?
He that is with him,
Is one of the slaves he lately bought, he said
T'accommodate his cure. He's English born,
But French in his behaviour; a delicate slave.
The slave is very fine.
Your English slaves
Are ever so; I have seen an English slave
Far finer then his master. There's a State-point
Worthy your observation.
On thy life
Be perfect in thy lesson. Fewer legs, slave.
My thoughts are searched and answered; for I did
Desire a Soldier and a Courtier
To yield me satisfaction in some doubts
Not yet concluded of.
Your Doctor did
Admit us Sir.
And we are at your service; whatever it be, command it.
You appear
A Courtier in the race of Love; how far
In honour are you bound to run?
I'll tell you,
You must not spare expense, but wear gay clothes,
And you may be too prodigal of oaths
To win a Mistress favour; not afraid
To pass unto her through her Chamber-maid,
You may present her gifts, and of all sorts,
Feast, dance, and revel; they are lawful sports:
The choice of Suitors you must not deny her,
Nor quarrel though you find a Rival by her:
Build on your own deserts, and ever be
A stranger to Loves enemy, Jealousy,
For that draws on —
No more; this points at me,
I ne'er observed these rules. Now speak old Soldier,
The height of honour?
No man to offend,
Ne'er to reveal the secrets of a friend;
Rather to suffer, then to do a wrong;
To make the heart no stranger to the tongue;
Provoked, not to betray an Enemy,
Nor eat his meat I choke with flattery;
Blushless to tell wherefore I wear my scars,
Or for my conscience, or my Countries wars;
To aim at just things; if we have wildly run
Into offences, wish 'em all undone.
It is poor in grief for a wrong done to die,
Honour to dare to live, and satisfy.
Mark how he winds him.
Excellent man.
Who fights
With passions, and orecomes 'em, is endued
With the best virtue, passive fortitude
Thou hast touched me Soldier; oh this Honour bears
The right stamp; would all Soldiers did profess
Thy good religion. he discords of my soul
Are tuned, and make a heavenly harmony: 
What sweet peace feel I now? I am ravished with it.
How still he sits!
Hark, Musique.
How divinely
This Artist gathers scattered sense; with cunning
Composing the fair Jewel of his mind,
Broken in pieces, and nigh lost before.
See Protean Paulo in another shape.
Away I'll bring him shortly perfect, doubt not.
Master of thy great Art!
As such we'll hold thee.
And study honours for him.
I'll be sick
On purpose to take physic of this Doctor.
Doctor, thou hast perfected a Bodies cure
T'amaze the world; and almost cured a Mind
Near frenzy. With delight I now perceive
You for my recreation have invented
The several Objects, which my Melancholy
Sometimes did think you conjured, otherwhiles
Imagined 'em Chimera's. You have been
My Friar, Soldier, my Philosopher,
My Poet, Architect, my Physician;
Laboured for me more then your slaves for you
In their assistance: In your moral Song
Of my good Genius, and my bad, you have won me
A cheerful heart, and banished discontent;
There being nothing wanting to my wishes,
But once more, were it possible, to behold
Don John Anthonio.
There shall be Letters sent
Into all parts of Christendom, to inform him
Of your recovery, which now Sir I doubt not.
What honours, what rewards can I heap on you?
That my endeavours have so well succeeded,
Is a sufficient recompense. Pray you retire Sir,
Not too much air so soon.
I am obedient.
How strangely this Fellow runs in her mind!
Do you hear Cousin?
Her sadness clean forsaken:
A poor slave
Bought for my Governess, say you?
I fear so.
And do you think a Turk?
His habit shows it,
At least bought for a Turk.
I, that may be so.
What if he were one naturally?
Nay it is nothing,
Nothing to the purpose; and yet methinks it is strange
Such handsomeness of mind and civil outside
Should spring from those rude Countries.
If it be no more,
I'll call our Governess, and she can show you.
Why do you think it is?
I do not think so.
Fie! no, no, by no means; and to tell thee truth Wench,
I am truly glad he is here, be what he will;
Let him be still the same he makes a show of,
For now we shall see something to delight us,
And Heaven knows, we have need on it.
Heigh ho! my heart oks.
Prithee call in our Governess. Pox o'this fell∣low —
Why do I think so much of him? how the devil
Creep'd he in to my head? and yet beshrew me,
Me thinks I have not seen, I lie, I have seen
A thousand handsomer, a thousand sweeter.
But say this fellow were adorned as they are,
Set-off to show, and glory. What's that to me?
Fie, what a fool am I? what idle fancies
Buzz in my brains?
And how doth my sweet Lady?
She wants your company to make her merry.
And how does Master Bug, I pray you Madam?
Do you mean her little dog?
I mean his Worship.
Troubled with Fleas a little.
Alas poor Chicken:
She is here, and drunk, very fine drunk, I take it,
I found her with a Bottle for her Bolster,
Lying along, and making love.
Borachia,
Why, where hast thou been Wench? she looks not well, friend.
Art not not with child?
I promise ye, I know not,
I am sure my Bellies full, and that's a shrewd sign:
Besides I am shrewdly troubled with a Tiego
Here in my head, Madam; often with this Tiego,
It takes me very often
I believe thee.
You must drink wine.
A little would do no harm sure.
It is a raw humour blows into your head;
Which good, strong wine will temper.
I thank your Highness,
I will be ruled, though much against my nature:
For wine, I ever hated from my Cradle,
Yet for my good.
I for your good, by all means.
Borachia, what new fellows that thou hast gotten?
(Now she will sure be free) that handsome stranger?
How much wine must I drink, an't please your Ladyship?
She's finely greazed. Why two or three round draughts Wench.
Fasting.
At any time.
I shall hardly do it:
But, yet I'll try good Madam.
Do twill work well.
But prithee answer me, what is this fellow?
I'll tell you two: But let it go no further.
No, no, by no means.
May I not drink before bed too?
At any hour.
And say in the night it take me?
Drink then. But what this man?
I'll tell ye Madam,
But pray ye be secret. He's the great Turks son, for certain,
And a fine Christian; my husband bought him for me.
He's circumsing'd,
He's circumcised, thou would say.
How doest thou know?
I had an eye upon him;
But even as sweet a Turk, an't like your Ladyship,
And speaks ye as pure Pagan. I'll assure ye,
My husband had a notable peni-worth of him.
And found me but the Turks own son, his own son
By father and mother, Madam.
She's mad drunk.
Prithee Borachia call him, I would see him,
And tell thee how I like him.
As fine a Turk, Madam,
For that which appertains to a true Turk:
Prithee call him.
He waits here at the stairs; son slave come hither.
Pray ye give me leave a little to instruct him,
He's raw yet in the way of entertainment,
Son slave, whore's the other bottle?
In the bed-straw,
I hid it there.
Go up and make your honours.
Madam, the Tiego takes me now, now Madam,
I must needs be unmannerly.
Pray ye be so
You know your cure.
In the bed-straw?
There you'll find it.
Come hither sir: How long have you served here?
A poor time, Madam, yet, to show my ser∣vice.
I see thou art diligent:
I would be, Madam,
It is all the portion left me, that and truth.
Thou art but young?
Had Fortune meant me so,
Excellent Lady, Time had not much wronged me.
Wilt thou serve me?
In all my prayers, Madam,
Else such a misery as mine but blasts ye.
Beshrew my heart he speaks well, wondrous honestly. 
Madam, your loving Lord stays for ye.
I thank ye.
Your pardon for an hour deer friend.
Your pleasure.
I dearly thank ye sir.
My humblest service.
She views me narrowly, yet sure she knows me not:
I dare not trust the time yet, nor I must not.
Ye are not as your habit shows?
No Madam.
His hand, that for my sins lies heavy on me,
I hope will keep me from being a slave to the de∣vile.
A brave clear mind he has, and nobly sea∣son'd.
What Country are ye of?
A Biscan, Lady.
No doubt, a Gentleman.
My father thought so.
I, and I warrant thee a right fair wo∣man
Thy mother was; he blushes, that confirms it.
Upon my soul, I have not seen such sweetness,
I prithee blush again.
It is a weakness, Madam,
I am easily this way wooed too.
I thank ye;
Of all that ere I saw, thou art the perfectest. 
Now you must tell me sir, for now I long for it.
What would she have?
The story of your fortune;
The hard, and cruel fortune brought you hither.
That makes me stagger; yet I hope I am hid still, 
That I came hither, Madam, was the fairest.
But how this misery ye bear, fell on ye?
Infandum regina jubes renovare dolorem.
Come, I will have it; I command ye tell it,
For such a speaker I would hear for ever.
Sure, Madam, 'twil but make you sad and heavy.
Because I know your goodness full of pity,
And it is so poor a subject too, and to your ears,
That are acquainted with things, sweet and easy,
So harsh a harmony.
I prithee speak it.
I ever knew Obedience the best Sacri∣fice,
Honour of Ladies, then first passing over
Some few years of my youth, that are imperti∣nent;
Let me begin the sadness of my story,
Where I began to loose my self, to love first.
It is well, go forward. Some rare piece I look for.
Not far from, where my Father lives, a Lady,
A neighbor by, blessed with as great a beauty,
As nature durst bestow without undoing;
Dwelt, and most happily, as I thought then,
And blessed the house a thousand times she dwelt in.
This beauty in the blossom of my youth,
When my first fire knew no adulterate Incense,
Nor I no way to flatter, but my fondness.
In all the bravery, my friends could show me,
In all the faith my innocence could give me,
In the best language my true Tongue could tell me,
And all the broken sighs my sick heart lend me,
I sued, and served. Long did I love this Lady,
Long was my travel, long my trade to win her,
With all the duty of my Soul, I served her.
How feelingly he speaks! and she loved you too;
It must be so.
I would it had deer Lady,
This story had been needless, and this place
I think unknown to me,
Were your bloods equal?
Yes, and I thought our hearts too.
Then she must love.
She did, but never me, she could not love me,
She would not love, she hated, more she scorned me,
And in so poor, and base a way abused me;
For all my services, for all my bounties,
So bold neglects flung on me.
An ill woman!
Be-like you found some Rival in your love then?
How perfectly she points me to my story. 
Madam, I did, and one whose pride, and anger,
Ill manners, and worse man she doted on;
Doted to my undoing, and my ruin.
And but for honour to your sacred beauty,
And reverence to the noble Sex, though she fall,
As she must fall, that durst be so unnoble,
I should say something unbeseeming me.
What out of love, and worthy love, I gave her
(Shame to her most unworthy mind) to fools,
To girls, and fiddlers, to her boys she flung,
And in disdain of me.
Pray ye take me with ye.
Of what complexion was she?
But that I dare not
Commit so great a sacrilege against virtue,
She looked not much unlikely though far, far short.
Some thing I see appears, your pardon, Madam,
Her eyes would smile so, but her eyes would cousin,
And so she would look sad, but yours is pity,
A noble Chorus to my wretched story,
Hers was disdain and cruelty.
Pray Heaven
Mine be no worse: he has told me, a strange story, 
And said it would make me sad! he is no lier.
But where begins this poor state? I will have all,
For it concerns me truly.
Last to blot me
From all remembrance, what I have been to her,
And how, how honestly, how nobly served her,
It was thought she set her gallant to dispatch me.
It is true, he quarrelled, without place, or reason.
We fought, I killed him, Heavens strong hand was with me;
For which I lost my Country, Friends, acquaint∣ance,
And put my self to Sea, where a Pirate took me,
Forcing this habit of a Turk upon me,
And sold me here.
Stop there a while, but stay still.
In this mans story, how I look? how monstrous?
How poor and naked? now I show what Don John
In all the virtue of his life, but aimed at
This thing hath conquered with a tale, and carried.
Forgive me thou that guid'st me! Never Consci∣ence
Touched me till now, nor true love: Let me keep it.
She is there, speak to her, you will find her altered.
Sister, I am glad to see you, but far gladder,
To see you entertain your health so well.
I am glad to see you too sir, and shall be gladder
Shortly to see you all.
Now she speaks heartily,
What do ye want?
Only an hour of privateness,
I have a few thoughts.
Take your full contentment,
We'll walk aside again; but first to you friend,
Or I shall much forget my self. My best friend,
Command me ever, ever, you have won it;
Your Lordship overflows me.
It is but due sir.
He's there still. Come sir, to your last part now,
Which only is your name, and I dismiss you.
Why, whether go ye?
Give me leave, good Madam,
Or I must be so seeming rude to take it.
You shall not go, I swear, you shall not go:
I ask ye nothing but your name, ye have one,
And why should that thus fright you?
Gentle Madam,
I cannot speak; pray pardon me, a sickness
That takes me often, ties my tongue: Go from me,
My fit's infectious, Lady.
Were it death
In all his horrors, I must ask, and know it.
Your sickness is unwillingness. Hard heart,
To let a Lady of my youth and place
Beg thus long for a trifle.
Worthiest Lady,
Be wise and let me go: you'll bless me for it,
Beg not that poison from me that will kill ye.
I only beg your name sir.
That will choke you,
I do beseech you pardon me.
I will not.
You'll curse me when you hear it.
Rather kiss thee,
Why should thou think so?
Why, I bear that name,
And most unluckily, as now it happens,
(Though I be innocent of all occasion)
That since my coming hither people tell me
You hate beyond forgiveness. Now heaven knows,
So much respect, (although I am a stranger)
Duty, and humble zeal I bear your sweetness,
That for the world I would not grieve your good∣nos:
I'll change my name, dear Madam.
People lye, and wrong thy name; thy name may save all others,
And make that holy to me, that I hated:
Prithee what is it?
Don John Anthonio.
What will this woman do? what thousand changes
Run through her heart and hands? no fixed thought in her;
She loves for certain now, but now I dare not,
Heaven guide me right.
I am not angry, Sir,
With you, nor with your name; I love it rather,
And shall respect ye, ye deserve. For this time
I licence you to go; be not far from me,
I shall call for you often.
I shall wait, Madam.
Now what's the news with you?
My Lord your father
Sent me to tell your Honour, Prince Martino
Is well recovered, and in strength.
Why let him,
The stories and the names so well agreeing. 
And both so noble Gentlemen.
And more, an't please you.
It doth not please me neither more nor less on it.
They'll come to visit you.
They shall break through the doors then.
Here's a new trick of State; this shows foul weather;
But let her make it when she please, I'll gain by it.
SOld for a slave, say thou?
It was not so well:
Though I am bad enough, I personated
Such base behaviour, barbarism of manners,
With other pranks, that might deter the buyer;
That the market yielded not one man that would
Vouchsafe to own me.
What was thy end in it?
To be given away for nothing, as I was
To the Vice-roys Doctor; with him I have con∣tinued
In such contempt, a slave unto his slaves;
His horse, and dog of more esteem, and from
That villainous carriage of my self, as if
I had been a lump of flesh, without a soul;
I drew such scorn upon me, that I passed,
And pride in every place without observance.
For which, if you desire to be made men,
And by one undertaking, and that easy,
Ye are bound to Sacrifice unto my sufferings.
The seed I sowed, and from which you shall reap
A plentiful harvest.
To the point, I like not
These castles built in the air.
I'll make 'em real,
And you the Neptunes of the Sea, you shall
No more be Sea-rats.
Art not mad?
Ye have seen
The star of Sicilie, the fair Almira,
The Vice-roys daughter, and the beauteous Ward
Of the Duke of Messina?
Madam Leonora.
What will you say, if both these Princesses
This very night, for I will not delay you,
Be put in your possession?
Now I dare swear
Thou hast Magots in thy brains, thou would not else
Talk of impossibilities.
Be still
Incredulous.
Why can thou think we are able
To force the Court?
Are we able to force two women,
And a poor Turkish slave, where lies your Pinnace?
In a Creek not half a league hence.
Can you fetch Ladders
To mount a Garden wall?
They shall be ready:
No more words then, but follow me, and if
I do not make this good, let my throat pay for it.
What heaps of Gold, these beauties would bring to us
From the great Turk. if it were possible
That this could be effected.
If it be not
I know the price on it.
And be sure to pay it.
Her fair hand threw this from the window to me,
And as I took it up, she said, Peruse it,
And entertain a fortune offered to thee.
What may the inside speak — for satisfaction.
 If the contempt I showed Don John Anthonio,
Whose name thou bear, and, in that dearer to me,
I do profess I love thee. How! it is so,
I love thee, this night wait me in the Garden,
There thou shalt know more, subscribed
Thy Almira—
Can it be possible such levity
Should wait on her perfections? when I was
My self, set off withal the grace of greatness,
Pomp, bravery, circumstance, she hated me,
And did profess it openly; yet now
Being a slave, a thing she should in reason
Disdain to look upon. In this base shape,
And since I wore it, never did her service,
To dote thus fondly? And yet I should glory:
In her revolt from constancy, not accuse it,
Since it makes for me. But ere I go further,
Or make discovery of my self, I'll put her
To th'utmost trial, in the Garden: Well,
There I shall learn more. Women! Giddy women,
In her the blemish of your sex, you prove
There is no reason for your hate or love.
At this unseasonable time to be thus brave,
No visitants expected? you amaze me.
Are these Jewels set forth to the best advantage
To take the eye?
With our best care.
We never
Better discharge our duties.
In my sorrows,
A Princess name (I could perceive it) struck
A kind of reverence in him, and my beauty
As then neglected, forced him to look on me
With some sparks of affection; but now
When I would fan them to a glorious flame,
I cannot be too curious, I wonder
He stays so long.
These are strange fancies.
Go
Entreat, I do forget my self, command
My Governess, Gentleman, her Slave, I should say,
To wait me instantly; and yet already
He's here. His figure graven on my heart,
Never to be razed out.
There is the prize,
Is it so rich, that you dare not seize upon it?
Here I begin:
Help Villain:
You are mine.
Though somewhat course, you'll serve after a storm,
To bid fair whether welcome.
Ravisher,
Defend me Heaven.
No aid near?
Help.
Dispatch.
No glory, nor handkercher to stop their mouths?
Their cries will reach the guard, and then we are lost.
What shrieks are these? from whence? O blessed Saints!
What sacrilege to beauty? Do I talk,
When it is almost too late to do. Take that. 
All set upon him.
Kill him.
You shall buy
My life at a dear rate, you Rogues.
Down with 'em.
Unheard of treason.
Make in Loggerhead;
My son Slave fights like a dragon: Take my bottle,
Drink courage out on it.
Madam, you are free.
Take comfort, dearest Mistress.
O you Micher,
Have you a hand in this?
My aims were high,
Fortune's my enemy: To dy's the worst,
And that I look for.
Vengeance on your plots.
The rack at better leisure shall force from 'em
A full discovery: Away with 'em.
Load 'em with irons.
Let 'em have no wine
To comfort their cold heart.
Thou man of men.
A second Hercules.
An Angel thus disguised.
What thanks?
What service?
He shall serve me by your leave, no service else.
I have done nothing but my duty, Madam;
And if the little you have seen exceed it,
The thank due for it pay my watchful Master,
And this my sober Mistress.
He speaks truth, Madam,
I am very sober.
Far beyond thy hopes
Expect reward.
We'll straight to Court, and there
It is resolved what I will say and do.
I am faint, support me.
This strange accident
Will be heard with astonishment. Come friend,
You have made your self a fortune, and deserve it.
Perfectly cured?
As such I will present him,
The thanks be given to Heaven.
Thrice reverend man,
What thanks but will come short of thy desert?
Or bounty, though all we possess were given thee,
Can pay thy merit? I will have thy Statue
Set up in Brass.
Thy name made the sweet subject
Of our best Poems; thy unequalled Cures
Recorded to posterity.
Such false glories
(Though the desire of fame be the last weakness
Wise men put off) are not the marks I shoot at:
But if I have done any thing that may challenge
Your favours (mighty Princes) my request is,
That for the good of such as shall succeed me,
A College for Physicians may be
With care and cost erected, in which no man
May be admitted to a Fellowship,
But such as by their vigilant studies shall
Deserve a place there; this magnificence,
Posterity shall thank you for.
Rest assured
In this, or any boon you please to ask,
You shall have no repulse:
My humblest service
Shall ne'er be wanting. Now if you so please,
I'll fetch my Princely Patient, and present him.
Do, and imagine in what I may serve you,
And by my honour with a willing hand
I will subscribe to it.
Make way there:
My daughter!
How's this? a Slave crowned with a Civic garland!
The mystery of this?
It will deserve
Your hearing and attention. Such a truth
Needs not rhetorical flourishes, and therefore
With all the brevity and plainness that
I can, I will deliver it. If the old Romans,
When of most power and wisdom, did decree
A Wreath like this to any common Soldier
That saved a Citizens life, the bravery
And valour of this man may justly challenge
Triumphant Laurel. This last night a crew
Of Pirates brake in Signior Cuculo's house,
With violent rudeness, ceasing on my sister,
And my fair Mistress, both were in their power,
And ready to be forced hence; when this man
Unarmed, came to their rescue, but his courage
Soon furnished him with weapons: In a word,
The lives and liberties of these sweet Ladies,
You ow him, for the Rovers are in hold,
And ready when you please, for punishment.
As an induction of more to come,
Receive this favour.
With my self, my son
Shall pay his real thanks. He comes, observe now
Their amorous meeting.
I am glad you are well Lady:
I grieve not your recovery.
So coldly.
Why fall you off?
To shun captivity sir
I was too long a slave, I'll now be free.
It is my desire you should. Sir my affection
To him was but a trifle, which I played with
In the childhood of my love; which now grown elder,
I cannot like of.
Strange inconstancy!
It is judgement sir in me, or a true debt
Tendered to Justice rather. My first life
Laden with all the follies of a man,
Or what could take addition from a woman,
Was by my head strong passions (which overruled
My understanding (forteited to death:
But this new being, this my second life,
Begun in serious contemplation of
What best becomes a perfect man, shall never
Sink under such weak frailties.
Most unlooked for.
It does transcend all wonders.
It is a blessing
I owe your wisdom, which I'll not abuse:
But if you envy your own gift, and will
Make me that wretched creature which I was,
You then again shall see me passionate,
A lover of poor trifles, confident
In mans deceiving strength, or falser fortune;
Jealous, revengeful, in unjust things daring,
Injurious, quarrelsome, stored with all diseases
The beastly part of man infects his soul with;
And to remember what's the worst, once more,
To love a woman, but till that time never.
Stand you affected so to men, Almira?
No Sir; if so, I could not well discharge
What I stand bound to pay you, and to nature.
Though Prince Martino does profess a hate
To womankind, it were a poor world for women
Were there no other choice, or all should follow
The example of this new Hippolitus:
There are men, Sir, that can love, and have loved truly;
Nor am I desperate but I may deserve
One that both can and will so.
My allowance
Shall rank with your good liking, still provided
Your choice be worthy.
In it I have used
The judgment of my mind, and that made clearer
With calling oft to heaven it might be so.
I have not sought a living comfort from
The reverend ashes of old Ancestors;
Nor given my self to the mere name and titles
Of such a man, that being himself nothing,
Derives his substance from his Grandsires tomb:
For wealth, it is beneath my birth to think on it,
Since that must wait upon me, being your daughter,
No Sir, the man I love, though he wants all
The setting forth of fortune, gloss, and greatness,
Has in himself such true and real goodness,
His parts so far above his low condition,
That he will prove an ornament, not a blemish,
Both to your name and family.
What strange creature
Hath she found out?
I dare not guess.
To hold you
No longer in suspense, this matchless man
That saved my life and honour, is my husband,
Whom I will serve with duty.
My son Slave!
Have you your wits?
I'll not part with him so.
This I foresaw too.
Do not jest thy self
Into the danger of a Fathers anger.
Jest, Sir? by all my hope of comfort in him
I am most serious. Good Sir look upon him,
But let it be with my eyes, and the care
You should owe to your daughters life and safety,
Of which without him she's incapable,
And you'll approve him worthy.
O thou shame
Of women! thy sad Fathers curse, and scandal:
With what an impious violence thou take from him
His few short hours of breathing!
Do not add, Sir,
Weight to your sorrow in the isle bearing of it.
From whom, degenerate Monster, flow these low
And base affections in thee? what strange philters
Hast thou received? what Witch with damned spells
Deprived thee of thy reason? Look on me,
(Since thou art lost unto thy self) and learn
From what I suffer for thee, what strange tortures
Thou dost prepare thy self.
Good Sir, take comfort;
The council you bestowed on me, make use of.
This Villain, (for such practises in that Nation
Are very frequent) it may be hath forced
By cunning potions and by sorceress charms
This frenzy in her.
Sever 'em.
I grow to him.
Carry the Slave to torture, and wrest from him
By the most cruel means, a free confession
Of his impostures.
I will follow him,
And with him take the Rack.
No, hear me speak,
I can speak wisely: Hurt not my son slave,
But rack or hang my husband, and I care not;
For I'll be bound body to body with him:
He's very honest, that's his fault.
Take hence
This drunken beast.
Drunk! am I drunk? Bear witness.
She is indeed distempered.
Hang 'em both,
If ere more they come near the Court.
Good sir,
You can recover dead men; can you cure
A living drunkenness?
It is the harder task;
Go home with her, I'll send you something that
Shall once again bring her to better temper,
Or make her sleep for ever.
Which you please, sir.
Why linger you? rack him first, and after break him
Upon the wheel.
Sir, this is more then justice.
Is it death in Sicily, to be loved
Of a fair Lady?
Though he be a slave,
Remember yet he is a man.
I am deaf
To all persuasions: Drag him hence. 
Do Tyrant,
No more a Father; feast thy cruelty
Upon thy Daughter: but Hell's plagues fall on me,
If I inflict not on my self whatever
He can endure for me.
Will none restrain her.
Death hath a thousand doors to let out life,
I shall find one. If Portia's burning coals,
The Knife of Lucrece, Cleopatra's Aspicks,
Famine, deep waters have the power to free me
From a loathed life, I'll not an hour outlive him.
Sister.
Dear Cousin.
Let her perish.
Hear me;
Th effects of violent love are desperate:
And therefore in the execution of
The Slave be not too sudden. I was present
When he was bought, and at that time my self
Made purchase of another. He that sold'em
Said that they were companions of one Country.
Something may rise from this to ease your sorrows:
By circumstance I'll learn what's his condition,
In the mean time use all fair and gentle means
To pacify the Lady.
I'll endeavour
As far as grief and anger will give leave,
To do as you direct me.
I'll assist you.
Hath he been visited already?
Yes sir,
Like one of better fortune; and t'increase
My wonder of it, such as repair to him,
In their behaviour rather appear
Servants, then friends to comfort him.
Go fetch him.
I am bound in gratitude to do more then wish
The life and safety of a man that hath
So well deserved me.
Here he is, my Lord.
Who's here? thou art no Conjurer to raise
A spirit in the best shape man ere appeared in.
My friend, the Prince of Tarent! doubts forsake me,
I must and will embrace him.
Pedro holds
One that loves life for nothing, but to live
To do him service.
You are he most certain,
Heaven ever make me thankful for this bounty:
Run to the Viceroy, let him know this rarity. 
But how you came here thus? yet since I have you,
Is it not enough I bless the prosperous means
That brought you hither?
Dear friend, you shall know all;
And though in thankfulness I should begin
Where you delivered me —
Pray you pass that over,
That's not worth the relation.
You confirm
True friends love, to do courtesies, not to hear'em.
But I'll obey you. In our tedious passage
Towards Malta, I may call it so, for hardly
We had lost the ken of Sicily, but we were
Becalmed, and hulled so up and down twelve hours,
When to our more misfortune we descried
Eight well manned Galleys making amain for us,
Of which th'Arch Turkish Pirate cruel Dragnt
Was Admiral. I'll not speak what I did
In our defence; but never man did more
Then the brave Captain that you sent forth with me,
All would not do; Courage oppressed with number,
We were boarded, pillaged to the skin, and after
Twice sold for slaves; by the Pirate first, and after
By a Maltese to Signior Cuculo:
Which I repent not, since there it was my fortune
To be to you my best friend some ways useful.
I thought to cheer you up with this short story,
But you grow sad on it.
Have I not just cause,
When I consider I could be so stupid
As not to see a friend through all disguises;
Or he so far to question my true love,
To keep himself concealed?
It was fit to do so,
And not to grieve you with the knowledge of
What then I was; where now I appear to you,
Your sister loving me, and Martino safe,
Like to myself and birth.
May you live long so.
How doest thou honest friend? your trustiest servant.
Give me thy hand. I now can guess by whom
You are thus furnished.
Troth he met with me
As I was sent to prison, and there brought me
Such things as I had use of.
Let's to Court,
My father never saw a man so welcome,
As you'll be to him.
May it prove so friend.
The slave changed to the Prince of Tarent, says he?
Yes sir, and I the Captain of the Fort,
Worthy of your displeasure, and th'effect of t,
For my deceiving of that trust your Excellence
Reposed in me.
Yet since all hath fallen out
Beyond your hopes, let me become a suitor,
And a prevailing one to get his pardon.
O dearest Leonora, with what forehead
Dare I look on him now? Too powerful love,
The best strength of thy unconfined Empire
Lies in weak women's hearts Thou art feigned blind,
And yet we borrow our best sight from thee.
Could it be else, the person still the same
Affection over me, such power should have
To make me scorn a Prince, and love a slave.
But art thou sure'tis he?
Most certain sir.
Is he in health, strong, vigorous, and as able
As when he left me dead?
Your own eyes sir
Shall make good my report.
I am glad of it,
And take you comfort in it sir, there's hope,
Fair hope left for me, to repair mine honour.
What's that?
I will do something that shall speak me
Messina's son.
I like not this one word sir.
We'll prevent it.
Nay, look up my Almira, now I approve
Thy happy choice. I have forgot my anger,
I freely do forgive thee.
May I find
Such easiness in the wronged Prince of Tarent,
I then were happy.
Rest assured you shall.
We all with open arms hast to embrace you.
Welcome, most welcome.
Stay.
'T was this I feared.
Sir, it is best known to you, on what strict terms
The reputation of men's fame, and honours
Depend in this so punctual age, in which,
A word that may receive a harsh construction,
Is answered, and defended by the sword.
And you that know so much, will I presume,
Be sensibly tender of another credit,
As you would guard your own.
I were unjust else.
I have received from your hands, wounds; and deep ones,
My honour in the general report
Tainted and soiled, for which I will demand
This satisfaction, That you would forgive
My contumelious words, and blow, my rash
And unadvised wildness first threw on you.
Thus I would teach the world a better way,
For the recovery of a wounded honour,
Then with a savage fury, not true courage,
Still to run headlong on.
Can this be serious?
I'll add this, He that does wrong, not a∣lone,
Draws, but makes sharp his enemies sword against
His own life, and his honour. I have paid for it,
And wish that they, who dare most, would learn from me,
Not to maintain a wrong, but to repent it.
Why this is like your self.
For farther proof,
Here sir, with all my interest, I give up
This Lady to you.
Which I make more strong;
With my free grant.
I bring mine own consent,
Which will not weaken it.
All joy confirm it.
Your unexpected courtesies amaze me,
Which I will study with all love and service
To appear worthy of.
Pray you understand Sir,
There are a pair of Suitors more, that gladly
Would hear from you as much, as the pleased Vice∣roy
Hath said unto the Prince of Tarent.
Take her,
Her dowry shall be answerable to
Her birth, and your desert.
You make both happy.
One only suit remains, That you would please
To take again into your Highness favour
This honest Captain: Let him have your grace.
What's due to his much merit, shall from me
Meet liberal rewards.
Have your desire.
Now may all here that love, as they are friends
To our good fortunes, find like prosperous ends.
CUstom, and that a Law we must obey
In the way of Epilogue, bids me something say.
However to little purpose, since we know,
If you are pleased, unbeg'd, you will bestow
A gentle censure: On the other side,
If that this Play deserve to be decri'd
In your opinions, all that I can say,
Will never turn the stream the other way.
Your gracious smiles, will render us secure.
Your frowns without despair, we must endure.

