IO, of whom we next discuss,
Daughter to the River Inachus,
(The fairest Nymph that lived that time,
As being in her youth and prime)
Was seen by Jove loved, and comprest.
Queen Iuno, Her, as of the rest,
Grown Jealous o'er, doth project lay,
How in their sports them to betray.
Whom to prevent (J know not how)
But Jove transhapes her to a Cow.
The Goddess knowing how indeard
She was to him, comes to the Heard,
And begs this Heifer. He not dared
(However the request seemed hard)
Her to deny. Shoe's now her charge,
And nought her freedom can enlarge.
The passages that hence may grow,
The sequel will hereafter show.
HEre, Daphne, by your father Peneus streams
(which falling from the top of Pindus mount,
Waters Hemonian Tempe) let us sit,
All daughters to the Rivers flowing near:
There old Apidanus steals (murmuring) by;
Next, Poplar-shadowed Enipeus glides:
Not far, Amphrisus, Eyes, and amongst these,
(Not least) my father, good old Inachus
Lifts up his reverend head, with fresh flowers crowned,
Prescribing laws and limits to his streams,
To bound them in their channels, curb their torrent,
Lest in their pride they should o'reswell their banks;
Commanding them, through thousand strange indents
To pay his plenteous tribute to the seas.
And how much are we bound unto the gods,
(Fair Io) to be Nymphs, not generated
From marish Meares, nor yet from standing Lakes,
From sedgy brooks, thick pools, or shallow fords,
Nor yet from violent and robustuous seas.
Their waters keep a smooth and gentle course,
Not moved to fury by the warring winds;
Nor when loud fluxes fall to swell their bounds,
And make deep inundations on the meads:
Nor can the parching drought so dry their springs,
But that their channels keep a temperature:
Their modest shallows serve us for cool baths
In summer time to play and wanton in:
Their depths, to bate our hooks with worms and flies
Fastened to lines made of small twisted silk,
And so betray the creatures of the flood.
Their crystal waves are Myrrhors, in the which
We dress our heads, and put these curls in form,
Sometimes so cunningly, as if that Art
Had power to exceed Nature: and again,
With careless, but so curious a neglect,
As if mere Chance did antecede them both.
This makes us of the Satyrs so admired,
And of the Fauns and Swains so much beloved.
Why, have you Suitors, Daphne?
Besides such,
For these my father, by whose will I am swayed)
Accounts as mean) of Gallants I have change;
•oath City and the Court.
But I may claim
Priority above all water Nymphs,
Nor can the Naiads compare with me;
No, Daphne, not your self. The rural Swains,
•hey gather from these banks mellifluous flowers,
•nd make you chaplets to adorn your brows,
•nd shadow your choice beauty from the Sun,
•ay think them costly Presents: but I'am one
To whom the gods themselves have offred gifts.
Then before all the daughters of these floods
• claim a just precedence.
By what dream,
•r rather by what brain-sicke fantasy
•ath Io been deluded?
My apprehensions
••e no weak phantoms to beguile the sense,
••t real, and in action; with their form
•hey bear a being substance.
Hath your Beauty
••d amongst men such long and strange neglect,
••at Io would to colour such disgrace,
•ccuse the gods of weakness?
Let earths Beauties
•ensure of Earth, mere terren as yours be,
••d aim no further: the while this of mine
••all be new questioned by the Powers Divine.
Now by what gods, for Heavens sake?
Not the meanest,
•• such as we call under-deities,
• melancholy Saturn, (by his son
•il'd and banished from the supreme rule)
Phoebus, a mere Vassal to the earth,
And forced each natural day to measure heaven;
As Neptune, Sovereign o'er the Seas, to whom
Our tributary rivers hourly pay:
As Mercury, though son to Jove himself,
No better than his Foot-boy or his Page,
Compelled at every summons to his speed:
But of the potent Thunderer.
He of whom
You have learned to thunder these impossible braves.
Io, I am ashamed.
Yes, that your beauty's
Composed of the grosser elements,
Want that attraction to call Jove himself
Down from his heavenly Fabric, to behold
Vs in our eminence.
Strange wonder sure,
To look upon that face in which we Mortals,
And value it at best, can nothing spy,
Breed admiration in a Deity!
Appear, Jove, in thy glory, let them know
Ei, shamed confess their fond surmises vain,
And what it is, thy god-head to profane.
Fly, fly, lest we be thunder-strooke, away;
Let's seek our safety, danger's in our stay.
Thou Daphne, who Ioves presence now dost shun,
Swifter ere long shalt from, Apollo run.
But there lie that which makes us terrible,
Affrighting gods and men. Io to thee
In calms I come, and Fair one make me proud,
To seal the love which I so long have vowed.
What steal? what vow?
Both thou shalt find impressed
On thy smooth cheek, soft lip, and Ivory breast,
Forbear to handle; yet I never knew
A man so bold and rude: Can gods dispense,
To teach us Women unknown impudence?
Nay rather we solicit you to prove
What yet you have not tried, the sweets of love.
Things that I would not learn.
A Truant still?
If you want art, Io, I can teach you skill:
Give me your hand, your lip: why these but are
The Prologue to a pastime much more rare.
Women by nature are ambitious, and
Long to know what they do not understand.
I'll practise you in that which you before
Ne'er knew.
In all this lip-sport? or what more
Is in these kisses meant? I am so dull,—
All these my Comment shall explain at full.
In vain you strive.
Should I do ought save well,
I were undone, my fathers floods would tell;
These are his banks, they'll blab: What mean you? fie;
They swell above their bounds, only to spy
And see what we are doing. Pish, away,
Such deeds of darkness can you do by day?
Besides, shall I consent to what you mean,
Not all these silver drops can wash me clean.
Where I doe stain I can again make pure:
And that Day shall not hinder us, be sure:
Arise you fogs and damps, your vapors gather,
To shroud us both from Iuno and thy father.
You make me blush.
These blushes none shall see;
Behold these mists, to curtain us and thee.
Well, when what most you sue for, you have won,
My comfort is, I see not what is done,
And Io now I'll teach thee sports untried,
In darkness best a Virgins blush to hide.
Not in the heavens? where then? In vain it were
To search the seas; the blew veined Nor•ae,
And green haired Dorides with all their brats,
Styled by the names of water goddesses,
(Though Prostitutes to Neptune) amongst them all
Yield not a face to please his curious eye.
Where then? The earth? I that, if any place,
Yields choice of tempting Beauties: Argos bred
A golden Danaë, Thebes afforded an
Alcmena and a wanton Simile;
Pelagia, a Calisto; Sparta nursed
A swan-like Laeda, (Strumpets) of all which
I sought a sure, but found a vain revenge.
Why may not then Thessalian Tempe yield
Like fascination, since their impudence
Is more and more encouraged by my wrongs:
Here then I make inquiry. The day's clear;
Whence come these foggy mists that choke the air,
In so serene and bright an hemisphere?
Aut ego fall•r, aut ego ledar.
If from the earth, this sudden overcast
Would smell of thick and suffocating damps:
If from the air, or any sulph'rous fire,
It would be found by their caliditie.
If from the Rivers, or these moorish fens,
Humidity would tell vs whence they were.
No, these are forced, and by some god-like power,
Created for a more peculiaruse:
And now my jealousy most truly prompts me.
It is some illusion, made to blind mine eyes
From a new injury; which if I find,
On this one Strumpet I will study more,
Than all that have my vengeance escaped before.
The clamorous Queen's descended from the Spheres,
To find the cause of this illusive Fog:
But Io I have so transhap'd thee now,
That she by no means can discover thee;
And in that confidence I'll front her boldly.
Jove hear? my jelousies are then not vain,
However I'll give him gentle entertain,
Concealing what's within.
My lovely Iuno?
My Brother and my Husband Iupiter?
What make you here on earth?
What other reason,
But that I mist my sovereign Lord in heaven;
And then I yoked my Peacocks, to their bills
Tied silken bridles, and in my light chariot
Made of fine gold, and decked with Ostrich plumes,
Descended as you see. But what affair
Might Iuno be so bold to ask her Lord)
Detains you now in Tempe?
Though it fits not
Your Sex to ask a thing that ill beseems,
Or pry into the counsels of the gods;
Yet thus much I'll resolve you? I came down
To censure here some causes amongst men,
And set things crooked upright.
Now I spy
That which hath drawn him headlong from the sky,
And I will make the Adulterer himself
•uthor of my just vengeance.
Thou once gon,
•e were again transhap'd, and we both one.
•weet Iuno will you once more mount your Chariot,
•nd keep your state above My designs ended,
• will not long be from you.
My craft now
Shall match his cunning; if there be in me
A godhood, I have cast her destiny.
Dear loving Lord, since it was my kindness drew me
To see unto your safety (though I know
The Deities in every place secure)
Give me some gift on earth, that I in heaven
May applaud your royal bounty.
Be it bred
Beneath the Moon, it is my Saturnia's.
I have not seen so sweet and lovely a Beast
White without spot or stain; Is she of the herd
Belonging to these Meadows?
She is, no doubt.
Why doth my Iuno ask?
To make her mine.
A gift too small for Juno to entreat,
Or Jove to grant; Demand some greater boon.
This Cow or nothing.
Shoe's not for thy use;
What would my Love do with her?
Only this,
(Being above the rest most beautiful)
To sacrifice her to your Deity.
Not for the triple world: What was it, Sweet,
That you of me demanded?
Now to know
What put you in this fear? Nay I have begged,
And must not be denied. And have I found you?
In what a straight am I? her to betray,
And give her up into her enemies hand,
In man would prove a savage cruelty,
Much more in us: and to deny a gift
Appearing of so small a consequence,
Would but augment her too much jealousy,
And open that which is as yet concealed.
What hope have I to enjoy greater things,
That am denied a trifle?
Say I will not,
And give no reason; it may then appear,
This Heifer to be no such as she seems.
Well, she is yours; but how will you dispose her?
So carefully, because she is your gift,
My servant Argus with a hundred eyes
Shall guard her from all dangers.
It is enough,
In that, to us you shall express your love.
But prove he to her churlish or unkind,
There's one, at once his hundred eyes shall blind.
So, she is now your charge.
And being mine,
I'll teach base Earth to injure what's divine.
Where is my servant Argus?
Who's that calls?
The sacred goddess Iuno? What new service
Will you command your vassal?
Tak't in brief;
Behold thou This? This? This no matter what,
Not worth a name; only a thing I loath;
Out on thee: But I'll spare my railing words,
To express my hate in action.
What's the cause
The poor beast trembles that?
A Beast indeed:
Like such she shall be used; behold her, Argus;
Are these lips fitting for a god to kiss?
These hooves apt palms to gripe? these tears fit pillows?
On which a Deity should breast himself?
These, eyes to tempt? or this an hide to touch?
These horns? (ô me) in mine own heraldry
She mocks me without blushing.
In all this
How will you use my service?
As a Spy:
An hundred eyes thou hast, of all which number
I will allow thee two to sleep by turns;
The rest to watch this Strumpet; and of all,
But two to wink, the rest to gaze at full:
Behind thee thou hast eyes, both sides, before;
Which way so ever thou turnst shoe's in thy view.
"A thousand he had need, all piercing bright,
"To watch a Lover from his choice delight.
And is this all?
Something I had forgot:
Thou art an Herdsman, Argus, and thou know
To tame unruly cattle; she is such:
In some unworthy halter bind her neck,
For such a Beauty the first Ca•kanet.
Her browsing be the Brakes and bitter couch,
For dainties feed her with the sourest herbs;
Lead her through briers &amp; brambles, which may scratch
Her itching skin even till her soft sides bleed,
Raise up the mud in clear springs when she drinks,
Keep her from shadow, in the parching Sun,
Till she be stung with horse flies, and the brees:
Let her not rest but where the ground's still bare;
Feather her bed with thistles and sharp thorns;
And for her footing choose the barren paths
Strewn with loose pointed flints to gall her hooves.
Argus farewell, I leave her to thy trust,
A sweet revenge for her insatiate lust.
Drawing this piece of Beasts flesh thus along,
Me-thinks I look like Lybian Hercules
Leading the Dog of hell: nay I shall fit her
According to my charge, and I will keep thee
(Calfe with the white face) safe enough from bulling,
The longest day that I have eye to see.
What do you hang an arse? Ptrow, come along,
I'll lead you to bare feeding, and find sallets
To take down your full flanks and these plump cheeks.
Along, I'll watch thee well enough from shrinking
Neck out of collar. Nay, on; thou shalt find,
Though my face from thee, I have eyes behind.
Speak not to me of comfort, Jo's lost!
Had she miscarried on the earth, her body
Would have given instance of her timeless fate:
Or had she been by savage beasts devoured,
Her garments stained with blood would tell her death.
Had she in mine or these my neighbour floods
Perished, they would have borne her gently up,
And cast her on some bank for burial.
Dear Inachus do not torment your self,
Nothing so lost, but may be found at length:
For having seen no token of her death,
There's of her life some hope.
Behold, Amphrisus
With this your ancient neighbour Appidan,
Peneus and others, as we moan your loss,
So in our pity come to comfort you.
O, brackish not your waters with your tears,
That yet run pure and fresh; but be of comfort.
In vain you speak of what you cannot give,
As I in vain lament mine Io's loss.
How now, cursed Cow? What, start you at that name?
I'll make your long horns shorter.
Io, where?
If under earth, I'll send my springs in search
As low as to the Centre, Io, where?
If snatched up in the air, like dew exhaled,
With eyes fixed upward I will still thus gaze,
Till from the bosom of some gentle cloud,
Thou drop into mine arms. Fair Io, where?
I think the beast hath breezes in her tail,
She cannot keep her still.
But stay, what's hee
That leads the fairest Heifer tethered fast,
That ever drunk of my streams; for Io's sake
I love all creatures that are beautiful.
How now you Harlotry?
Thou churlish herdsman,
I know thee, Argus, jealous Iuno's Spy,
Why can thou be so fierce to one so fair?
What's that to thee, or any of you all.
Amongst all creatures Nature ever made,
Some to have native beauty 'bove the rest,
Commanding soft affection, this is such.
With all mine eyes I spy no difference,
But love all beasts as beasts.
The more beast thou.
But why should this, the fairest of all herds,
Cast such a piteous moving eye on you,
As wooing your acquaintance?
And it is true,
Where ere I go, her sad eye follows me,
So she too, did not Argus keep her back:
See, see, how gently she endures my touch,
And makes an offer (had she power) to speak.
Hear, take these flowers, and now she kissed mine hand,
Whilst piteous tears drop down her tender cheeks.
What should I say? poor beast I pity thee,
And all the good I can do is to grieve,
The hast such a churlish Keeper.
Inachus, I fear
There's something greater in it.
What greater can be,
Unless there live some understanding spirit
In this irrational and savage shape:
What would thou have, that in this bestial figure
Beg humane pity? what intends she, think you,
By pawing on the ground? Observe her, brethren,
It seems she hath writ something in the dust,
And see, two letters are imprinted fair,
As if it were my Io's Character, And here I read Io.
Io: and see, in every step she hath trod,
That word impressed.
This she? whom I so long in vain have sought,
Through forests, groves, and mountains, fields &amp; floods?
This she, whom I in finding shall most lose?
O miserable wretched Inachus,
More miserable Io, thus transformed:
I term thee lovely, till I knew thee such;
But when thy former beauty I record,
Thou ugly art, mishapped, and terrible.
Can the gods suffer this?
Leave this your howling.
Forbear, or in this cord I lead her forth,
Isle strangle her. Dare not to follow me,
There's danger in me both ways; she shall perish,
And you must bleed. Come, Minion we will clime
You craggy mountain top, a prospect fit
For Argus only, who (not moving) can
Behold at once from whence the four winds blow,
And there with her I'll like a Beacon stand,
To watch and to give warning. Will you drive?
I say pursue me not, for if you do,
Isle make her sure, and you repent it too.
Why ptrow there.
With what a piteous action, wailing tongue,
She gave a loving, but a loath farewell.
But that the high Powers are not limitable,
Who would believe this wonder possible.
We must not question what the gods can do,
Yet in the extremity of all extremes,
And worst of bads, despair not, Inachus.
How easy it is for those that taste not grief,
Bid others be of comfort.
Reverend Sir,—
There is no reverence due: not to the gods,
If this be seen and suffered: O my Io.
With acclamations I will fill the Meads:
In stead of prayers, Isle execrate and curse,
And to the burden of mine untuned shrieks
The rocks and caves shall echo to thy name.
But Inachus.—
But when your Channels swell,
You can have dams and sluices to discharge
Superfluous waters, lest your torrents rage;
And will you bar the conduits of mine eyes
To ease the flux of my surcharged heart?
My care was, Io, to provide a man
To be thine husband; but I now must find
One of the bellowing heard to cal me son:
To have some pretty infant draw thy breast,
But now must some py'de urchin suck thy teats.
But that I am immortal, and the doors
And gate to death against me are debarred,
I'd weep my self to nothing, and this Being
Scatter amongst my floods, that mixed with them,
They might (in less than drops) amongst their waves,
Convey me to the all-devouring seas,
To mix my brine with his, and be so lost;
And lost, forgotten: But I am still the same,
And Io, I'll still call upon thy name.
How am I moved with Inachus exclaims?
Why are the ears of gods kept open still,
But first to hear, then pity? hast thou not, Mercury,
Seen Io's tears? Perceived her scalding sighs,
And even thus far heard her suspires and groans,
Tortured beneath that Neatherd churlish groom,
More savage than the beasts he feeds?
I have.
How oft hath she, thinking to heave her hands
For divine pity; when she spied her hooves
Cast them to the earth, with them her head with shame,
And bellowing when she would complain her grief,
Started at her own sound?
How oft, when grazing on her fathers banks,
(These fruitful banks on which she used to sport)
Offering to drink, when in his Crystal streams,
In which so often she with pride hath looked,
On her white brow, red cheek, and golden curls:
Now when she spies those lips a god hath kissed,
Stretched to so vast a wideness, penthoused o'er
With enlarged nostrils; looking on those eyes,
(In which it was once my sole delight to look)
To see them broad and glaring; her clear brow
Late decked with shining jewels, pressed with horns.
How oft hath she (more frighted than ashamed)
Thought, from her self, in vain, to hide her self?
This can you see? not study how to help?
I do, and will, by thine aid, Mercury;
Hye therefore to the top of Pindus mount,
(There Argus keeps his watch) in some disguise;
Thy Caduceus and thy wings laid by,
Find with the slave some conference, till by cunning
Thou charm'st his waking eyes, and being fast,
Cut off his head, and with one blow extinguish
So many lights at once.
Great Jove I will:
But thus conditioned, you will interpose
Your awful power twixt me and Iuno's hate.
Presume the art safe in vs.
Then Argus dies;
One fatal stroke shall shut an hundred eyes.
How dost thou like thine usage, madam Cow?
Your lodging and your diet? How dost think
This hempen chain becomes thee? Will you see
Your sweet face in the river once again?
Or how doth your fair beastship feel your self?
Would thou not have some Bulchin from the herd
To physic thee of this venereal itch?
If not, I'll see what Nettles muddy streams,
Couch-grasse and weeds, thorns, briers, &amp; flints can d•
These failing, here's a goad to prick your sides.
If all these medicines will not tame your lust,
I'll muster new inventions. Nay, I know
You look for pity, but it lives not here.
In this high watch-tower stand I sentinel,
To spy who comes and goes. I am made thy guardian,
Isle guard thee both from danger and from rest;
It was in thy hearing, Iuno's late behest.
This shape may prove suspectlesse, and the fittest
To cloud a godhood in; my plumed hat
And fether'd sandals, by the which I am known,
I have left at foot of this descending hill:
My snaky Rod I have to this sheephooke turned.
Accommodated thus, to Argus now,
Aristors son: behooves him keep good watch,
Whom Mercury (Ioves son) intends to catch.
But Many-eyes have spied me.
How now shepherd,
There's none who in that simple shape or name
Needs treason fear. Should any come prepared
For mischief, I have lights about me shine
Sufficient to prevent it: but thou seem
None of such rank. Come sit by me and talk.
The servant to the great Saturnia
Doth me no common grace.
Thou know me then?
What shepherd but not only knows your name,
•ut fears your strength?
Nay sit (by me you are safe)
And tell some pretty tales to make me laugh:
• have not long been merry.
First resolve me;
•s that fair heifer of some neighbour herd,
You drag thus in an halter?
Shoe's my charge,
A witty Brute, a most ingenious beast,
A very apprehensive Animal,
That can do tricks: she hath been taught, I tell thee,
To write and read.
Argus, not possible.
It is as I said before: but having her,
Some pretty tale, I prithee.
But what if
Some goddess should live in this shape disguised,
To whom you are so churlish. I could tell you
A story to that end.
Such toys I love.
Thus the Pierides report: The Giants
Assembled and made war against the gods,
Heap Ossa upon Pelion, Caucasus
Upon Pernassus, Pindus above them;
Hill upon mountain, mountain upon hill,
Till they had made a scale that reach to heaven.
The conflict then began: the monstrous Typhon
Was Captain of the Giants: Of the gods
Great Jove, Archduke. The Generals met and fought.
In brief (to cut off circumstance) the earth
Prevailed against heaven. The gods are forced to fly:
Jove, chased by Typhon into Egypt, changed
Himself into a Ram: Apollo, frighted,
Turns to a Crow, Bacchus into a Goat,
Iuno a Cow, Diana to a Cat;
Venus into a Fish, and took the sea;
Mars to a Pygmy, lest he should be known:
And Mercury, surnamed the crafty god,
Into a Fox.
A Fox? But I would meet
That craft which could beguile Argus bright eyes.
Proceed, proceed, good shepherd.
Why may not then
Some goddess be included in this shape?
A goddess, say thou? think me equal then
With one of these huge Giants, if not greater,
That have the power and potency to lead
A god-head in a string. But ha, what music
Was that struck up? It was sweet and delicate,
Nor have I heard the like.
My fellow shepherds
Behind that rock (from whence an echo grows)
For the more grace have chose that place as fittest,
Pressed to bestow their cunning upon you,
Whom they havé heard, much tired with watching long
And shall we have some merry Madrigal
To pass away the time with?
What you please.
I fame would know how first these Pipes came up
That make this dainty music?
First from Pan
The god of Shepherds. In the memory
Of the Nymph Sirens, Music strike and tell,
How in the Arcadian plains it once befell.
Syrinx, one of Dean's train,
Hunting with her on the plain,
Armed alike with shafts and bow;
Each from other would you know?
Which from which could not be told,
Save ones was horn, the others gold.
Hey ho; very fine music I promise you.
Now it begins to work.
Pan he sees himself makes fine,
In his cap he pricks a Pine:
Now grows careless of his heard,
Sits by brookes to prune his beard,
Meets her, and hath mind to woo,
Much he speaks, and more would doe.
It is pleasing, but it makes me melancholy,
And drowsy too withal.
Twill do anon.
Still he proffers, she denies;
He pursues (for Syrinx flies.)
Past her knees her coats up flew,
He would fine see something new:
By the leg and thigh he guest
(It seems) the virtue of the rest.
Were it not for my charge I'd take a nap.
This adds wings unto his pace,
The goal for which he is in chase.
She adds feathers to her speed;
Now it was no more than need.
Almost caught, Alas she cries,
Some chaste god my shape disguise.
The rest may sleep secure, so I can keep
But two eyes waking.
Here's a charm for them.
Laedon hears, and girts her round,
Spies a reed that makes sweet sound:
Such is Syrinx. Wondering Pan
Puts it to his mouth anon:
Yet Syrinx thou art mine he said,
And so of her his first pipe made.
My charm hath took effect; with these thine eyes
Take thy last sleep, thou hast not one to see;
My task is done, and Jo thou now free.
The dying groans of Argus called down,
To know what of his lustre is become.
What, all extinct? and is no memory
Extant of their known brightness? hath one night
(Whose nature should be to be proud of stars)
Shut at one time an hundred? nay at once?
Should every piece of time deprive so many,
How shortly would these lights innumerable
Be vanished into nothing? But dear Argus,
That all may know thou had a loving mistress,
Grieving thou should thus perish for her sake;
And that these eyes (now blind) in after-times
May give a light to perpetuity,
And memorise thy name, thy faith and fall,
Thy hundred eyes (who wast for Iuno slain)
I will transport into my Peacocks train;
Whilst such a bird hath breeding, and can bee,
Her painted feathers shall remember thee.
And whilst an heifer graseth on the plain,
Io, her hoof shall still imprint thy name.
My Iuno are we friends? Let her long divorce,
My fair entreats, with Inachus exclaims
Invoke thy love and pity, by my life.
You use me like a sister, not a wife,
My bed is still so empty.
Now by Styx,
An oath no god was ever known to break,
Sign her release, she shall hereafter be
To Jove as a mere stranger.
Since by that you swear,
What's past is lost, it cuts off future fear,
Saving my quarrel, Mercury, to you.
Madam, I did your servant no great wrong,
•ave teaching him to relish a new song.
Where jars are mediated, vain it were
Call injuries in question. As with Iupiter,
With you we are atoned.
Now Mercury,
•ince Iuno is appeased, fetch Io hither,
•• her own native beauty, whom we will
Restore unto her father.
Sir I shall.
O Iupiter! ô Iuno!
Inachus,
••rcease exclaims, thy prayers have had access,
•hy tears been pitied, and thy loss bemoaned;
Argus is slain, and fair Saturnia pleased,
•nd Io to her pristine shape restored.
Thanks you immortal gods.
No sooner was this mighty Queen appeased,
•t the rough hair dropped from her tender skin,
•er horns fell off, her eyes appeared to shine
• a less orb, her mouth and lips contracted
•oath into compass, and their native sweetness,
••r shoulders are restored, fingers and hands;
••r parted hoof divided into five,
•ow with two feet contented, for on them
•e straightway stood erect, and of a Cow,
••ve whiteness, nought retaining, and even yet
•e fears to speak, lest she in stead of words
•old bellow forth her mind.
Yet will I dare
•s give my father greeting.
O my child.
I am still jealous of that face: What's he
•hat makes but a mean sport of wedlocks breach,
But thinks to violate an oath no sin,
Though calling testates all the Stygian gods?
Great King and Lord, Brother and Husband too,
If I be worthy of those attributes
Yourself have deigned, and all the gods approve,
Grant me a second boon.
For thy remissness
In Io's late affliction, speak, it is granted.
Then from these fields of Tempe banish her,
As far as into Egypt.
From her father?
Be you pleased,
And Iuno shall, I hope, be satisfied.
Io, you shall to Egypt be confined,
Be that your punishment for Iuno's hate:
Which executed you shall taste our love.
In Egypt held a goddess thou shalt be,
Adored and worshipped in thine heifers shape;
Oblations shall be daily offered thee,
And Incense burnt to thy divinity,
And this for ever. Iuno, in vain you sorrow,
Ioves word is past, and cannot be revoked.
And now with this one Maxim we conclude;
Where lust is punished, though the blood be tainted,
It (after such long Penance) may be sainted.

THE Author, Royal Sir, so dreads this Night,
As if for writing he were doomed to th'sight.
Or else, unless you doe protect his fame,
Y' had saved his Play, and sentenced him to the flame.
For though your name, or power, were ith'reprive,
Such works, he thinks, are but condemned to live.
Which, for this place being rescued from the fire,
Take ruin from th'advancement, and fall higher.
Though None, he hopes, sit here upon his wit,
As if he Poems did, or Plays commit.
Yet he must needs fear censure, that fears praise,
Nor would write still were it to succeed in the Baize.
For he is not of the trade, nor would excel
In this kind, where tic lightness to doe well.
Yet as the Gods refined base things, and some
Beasts foul in the Heard grew pure in the Hecatomb;
And as the Ox prepared, and crowned Bull
Are Offerings, though kept back, and Altars full:
So, Mighty Sir, this sacrifice being near
The Knife at Oxford, which y' have kindled here,
He hopes twill from you, and the Queen, grow clean,
And turn to Oblation, what He meant a Scene.
WEre it his trade, the Author bid me say,
Perchance he'd beg you would be good to the Play.
And I, to set him up in Reputation,
Should hold a Basin forth for Approbation.
But praise so gained, He thinks, were a Relief
Able to make his Comoedy a Brief.
For where your pity must your judgement be,
Tic not a Play, but you fired houses see.
Look not his quill, then, should petitions run;
No Gathering's here into a Prologue spun.
Whither their sold Scenes be disliked, or hit,
Are cares for them who eat by the stage, and wit.
He's One, whose unbought Muse did never fear
An Empty second day, or a thin share;
But can make the Actors, though you come not twice,
No Losers, since we act now at the Kings price.
Who hath made this Play public, and the same
Power that makes Laws, redeemed this from the flame.
For the Author builds no fame, nor doth aspire
To praise, from that which he condemned to the fire.
He's thus secure, then, that he cannot win
A Censure sharper then his own hath been.
I Promise you twill be a most rare plot.
The City, Mr Seathrift, never yet
Brought forth the like; J would have them that have
Fined twice for Sheriff mend it.
Mend it? Why
Tic past the wit of the Court of Aldermen.
Next Merchant Taylor that writes Chronicles
Will put us in.
For, since I took him home,
Though, Sir, my Nephew, as you may observe,
Seem quite transfigured, be as dutiful
As a new prentice; in his talk declaim
Against revelling Companions, be as hard
To be enticed from home as my door posts▪
This reformation may but be his part,
And he may act his virtues. I have not
Forgot his riots at the Temple. You know Sr—
You told me Mr Warehouse.
Not the sea
When it devoured my ships cost me so much
As did his vanities. A voyage to the Indies
Has been lost in a night. His daily suits
Were worth more then the stock that set me up.
For which he knew none but the Silk-mans book,
And studied that more then the Law. He had
His Loves too, and his Mistresses; was entered
Among the philosophical Madams, was
As great with them as their Concerners, and I hear
Kept one of them in pension.
My son too
Hath had his Errors; I could tell the time
When all the wine which I put off by whole sale
He took again in quarts, and at the day
Vintners have paid me with his large scores. But
He is reformed too.
Sr, we now are friends
In a design.
And hope to be in time
Friends in Alliance, Sir.
Isle be free,
I think well of your son.
Who, Timothy?
Believ't a virtuous boy, and for his sister
A very Saint.
Mistake me not, I have
The like opinion of my Nephew, Sir,
Yet he is young, and so is your son, nor
Doth the Church-book say they are past our fears.
Our presence is their bridle now: Tic good
To know them well whom we doe make our Heirs.
It is most true.
Well, and how shall wee know
How They will use their fortune, or what place
We have in their affection without trial?
Some wise men build their own Tombs, let us try
If we were dead whether our Heirs would cry,
Or their long cloaks: this plot will do it.
Twill make us
Famous upon the Exchange for ever. Isle home
And take leave of my wife and son.
And Isle
Come to you at your Garden house▪ within there.
Now Cipher, whore's my Nephew?
In the Hall
Reading a letter which a footman brought
Just now to him from a Lady Sir.
A Lady?
Yes, Sir, a Lady in distress; for I
Could overhear the fellow say she must
Sell her Coach Horses, and return again
To her Needle, if your Nephew not supply her
With money.
This is some honourable seamstress.
I'm now confirmed: They say he keeps a Lady,
And this is she. well Cipher, tic too late
To change my project now. Be sure you keep
A Diary of his Actions, strictly mark
What company comes to him, if he stir
Out of my house observe the place he enters.
Watch him till he come out: follow him disguised
To all his haunts.
He shall not want a spy Sir.
But Sir when you are absent if he draw not
A Lattice to your door, and hang a bush out—
I hope he will not make my house a Tavern.
Sir I'm no Sybils son.
Peace here he comes.
Good morrow Nephew: how now? sad? how comes
This melancholy?
Can I choose but wear
Clouds in my face when I must venture, Sir,
Your reverend age to a long doubtful voyage
And not partake your dangers?
Fie, these fears
Though they become you, Nephew, are ominous.
When heard you from your Father?
Never since
He made the escape Sir.
I hear he is in Ireland:
I'st true he took your sister with him?
So
Her Mistress thinks, Sir, one day she left the Exchange,
And has not since been heard of.
And Nephew
How like you your new course? which place prefer you
The Temple or Exchange? where are, think you,
The wealthier Mines in the Indies, or
Westminster Hall?
Sir my desires take measure
And form from yours.
Nay tell me your mind plainly,
In the City tongue. I'd have you speak like Cipher.
I doe not like quaint figures, they doe smell
Too much of the Innes of Court.
Sir, my obedience
Is ready for all impressions which—
Again?
Sir I prefer your kind of life, a Merchant
Tic spoken like my Nephew: Now I like you.
Nor shall I ere repent the benefits
I have bestowed, but will forget all Errors,
As mere seducements: And will not only be
An Uncle but a Father to you: But then
You must be constant, Nephew.
Else I were blind
To my good fortune, Sir.
Think man how it may
In time make thee of the City Senate, and raise thee▪
To the sword and Cap of Maintenance.
Yes, &amp; make me
Sentence light bread, and pounds of butter on horse-back.)
Have Gates and Conduits dated from thy year▪
Ride to the Spittle on thy free beast.
Yes,
Free of your Company.)
Have the people veil
As low to his trappings as if he thrice had fined
For that good times employment.
Or as if
He had his Riders wisdom.)
Then the works
And good deeds of the City to go before Thee,
Besides a troop of Varlets.
Yes, and I
To sleep the sermon in my Chain and Scarlet.
How say you? Lets hear that.
I say, Sir, I
To sit at sermon in my chain and scarlet.
Tic right, and be remembered at the Cross.
And then at Sessions, Sir, and all times else,
Master Recorder to save me the trouble,
And understand things for me.
All this is possible,
And in the stars and winds: therefore dear Nephew,
You shall pursue this course, and to enable you
In this half year that I shall be away,
Cipher shall teach you French, Italian, Spanish,
And other Tongues of Traffic
Shall J not learn
Arithmetic too, Sir, and short-hand?
Tic well
Remembered, yes, and Navigation.
Sir, Mr Seathrift says you 'will loose the tide,
The boat stays for you.
Well, Nephew, at my return
As J hear of your carriage, you doe know
What my intentions are; and for a Token
How much I trust your reformation,
Take this key of my Counting-house, and spend
Discreetly in my absence. Farewell. Nay
No tears▪ Isle be here sooner then you think on it
Cipher you know what you have to do.
I warrant you, Sr.
Tears? yes my melting eyes shall run, but it
Shall be such tears as shall increase the tide
To carry you from hence.
Come Mr Plotwell shall I
Read to you this morning.
Read what? how the price.
Of sugar goes, how many pints of Olives
Go to a jar, how long wine works at sea,
What difference is in gain between fresh herrings
And herrings red?
This is fine, ha you
Forgot your Uncles charge?
Prithee what was it?
To learn the Tongues &amp; Mathematiques.
Troth
If I have tongue enough to say my prayers
In the phrase of the Kingdom J care not; otherwise
I'm for no tongues but dried ones, such as will
Give a fine relish to my backragg; and for Mathematiques,
I hate to travail by the Map, Me thinks
Tic riding post.
I knew twould come to this.
Here be his Comrades.
What my Fleetstreet friends?
SAve you Merchant Plotwell.
Mr Plotwell
Citizen and Merchant, save you.
Is thy Uncle
Gone the wished voyage?
Yes, he's gone, and if
He dye by the way hath bequeathd me but some
Twelve hundred pound a year in Kent, some three-
Score thousand pound in money, besides Jewels, Bonds,
And desperate debts.
And dost not thou fall down
And pray to the winds to sacrifice him to
Poor John and Mackrel?
Or invoke some rock
To doe thee justice?
Or some compendious Canon
To take him off in the middle?
And why my tender
Softhearted friends?
What to take thee from the Temple
To make thee an old Juryman, a Whittington?
To transform thy plush to pennystone, and scarlet
Into a velvet Jacket which hath seen
Aleppo twice, is known to the great Turk,
Hath escaped three shipwrecks to be left off to thee,
And knows the way to Mexico as well as the Map?
This Jacket surely was employed in finding
The Northeast passage out. Or the same Jacket
That Coryat died in.
Very good.
In Ovid
There is not such a Metamorphosis
As thou art now. To be turned into a tree
Or some handsome beast is courtly to this.
But for thee, Frank, O Transmutation!
Of Satin changed to Kersy hose I sing.
Slid his shoes shine too.
They have the Gresham dye.
Dost thou not dress thy self by 'em? I can see
My face in them hither.
Very pleasant Gentlemen.
And faith for how many years art thou bound?
Doe you take me for a prentice?
Why then what office
Dost thou bear in the parish this year? Let's feel,
No batteries in thy head to signify
You are Constable?
No furious Jug broke on it
In the Kings name?
Did you contrive this scene
By the way Gentlemen?
No, but the News
Thou should turn Trades-man, and this Pagan dress,
In which if thou should dye thou would be damned
For an Usurer, is comical at the Temple.
We were about to bring in such a fellow
For an Apostate in our Antimasque.
Set one to keep the door, provide halfe-crowne rooms,
For Isle set bills up of thee, what shall I
Give thee for the first day?
I, or second?
For thou't endure twice or thrice coming in.
Well my conceited Orient friends, bright Offsprings
Of the female silkworm, and Taylor male I deny not
But you look well in your unpaid for Glory.
That in these colours you set out the Strand,
And adorn Fleet-street. That you may laugh at me
Poor Working day of the City, like two Festivals
Escaped out of the Almanac.
Sirrah Bright,
Did look to hear such language beyond Ludgate?
I thought all wit had ended at Fleet-bridge.
But wit that goes of the the score, that may extend
If it be a Courtiers wit into Cheapside.
Your Mercer lives there does he? I warrant you
He has the patience of a burnt Heretic:
The very faith that sold to you these silks
And thinks you'll pay for em is strong enough
To save the Infidel part of the world, or Antichrist.
W'are most mechanically abused.
Let's tear
His Jacket off.
A match take that side
Hold, hold.
How frail a thing old velvet is, it parts
With as much ease and willingness as two Cowards.
The tenderst weed that ever fell a sunder.
Ha you your wits? what mean you?
Go, put on
One of thy Temple suits and accompany us,
Or else thy Dimmity breeches be mortal.
You will
Not strip me will you?
By thy visible ears we will.
By this two handed Beaver; which is so thin
And light a Butterflies wings put to it would make it
A Mercuries flying hat and soar aloft.
But doe you know to how much danger
You tempt me? should my Uncle know I come
Within the ayre of Fleet-street—.
Will you make
Your self fit for a coach again, and come
Along with us?
Well my two resolute friends
You shall prevail. But whether now are your
Lewd motions bent?
Weel' dine at Roseclaps, there
We shall meet Captain Quartfield, and his Poet,
They shall show us another fish.
But by the way we have agreed to see.
A Lady, you Mechanic.
What Lady?
Hast
Not thou heard of the New-sprung Lady?
One
That keeps her Coachman, Foot-boy, woman, and spends
A thousand pound a year by wit.
How? wit?
That is her patrimony, Sir; tic thought
The fortune she is borne to will not buy
A bunch of Turnips.
She is no Gamester is she?
Nor carries false dice?
No, but has a Tongue,
Were in a Lawyers mouth, would make him buy
All young Heirs near him.
But does no man know
From whence she came?
As for his birth she may
Choose her own pedigree; it is unknown
Whither she be descended of some Ditch,
Or Duchess.
She's the wonder of the Court,
And talk of the Town.
Her name?
Aurelia.
I'ue heard of her. They say she does fight duels,
And answers challenges in wit.
She has been
Thrice in the field.
In the the field?
Yes, in Spring Garden.
Has conquered with no second but her woman.
A Puritan, and has returned with prizes.
And no drum beat before her?
No, nor Colours
Flourished. She has made a vow never to marry
Till she be won by Stratagem.
I long
To see her.
In the name of Guild-hall who comes here?
By your leave Gentlemen.
Mr Timothy!
Welcome from the New world. I looked you should
Ha past through half the signs in Heaven by this.
And ha conversed with Dolphins. What not gone
To sea with your Father?
No faith, I doe not love
To go to sea, it makes one lousy, lays him
In vvooden sheets, and lands him a preservative
Against the plague. Besides, my Mother was
Afraid to venture me.
Believ't she's wise,
Not to trust such a wit to a thin frail bark
Where you had sailed within three inches of
Becoming a Jones. Besides the tossing, to have
All the fierce blustering faces in the Map
Swell more tempestuously upon you then
Lawyers preferrd, or Trumpeters. And whither
Were you bound now?
I only came to have
Your judgement of my suit.
Surely the Taylor
Has done his part.
And my mother has done hers,
For she has paid for it. I never durst be seen
Before my Father out of Duretta and Serge.
But if he catch me in such paltry stuffs,
To make me look like one that lets out money,
Let him say Timothy was borne a fool.
Before he went he made me doe what he list;
Now he's abroad Isle doe what I list. What
Are these two? Gentlemen?
You see they wear
Their Heraldry.
But I mean can they roar,
Beat Drawers, play at dice, and court their Mistress.
I mean forthwith to get a Mistress.
But
How comes this, Mr Timothy, you did not
Rise such a gallant this morning.
Alls on for that.
My Mother lost her Maiden-head that I
Might come first into the world; and by Gods lid
Isle bear my self like the elder brother, I.
Do you think Isle all days of my life frequent
Saint Antlins, like my sister? Gentlemen
I covet your acquaintance.
Your servant, Sir.
I shall be proud to know you.
Sir, my know∣ledge
Is not much worth; I me borne to a small fortune,
Some hundred thousand pound, if once my Father
Held up his hands in Marble, or kneeled in brass.
What are you Inns of Court-men?
The Catechism
Were false should we deny it.
I shall shortly
Be one my self, I learn to dance already,
And wear short cloaks; I mean in your next Masque
To have a part, I shall take most extremely.
You will inflame the Ladies, Sir. They'll strive
Who shall most privately convey Jewels.
Into your hand.
This is an excellent fellow;
Who is it?
Rich Seathrifts son thats gone to sea
This morning with my Uncle.
Is this he
Whose sister thou should marry? The wench that brings
Ten thousand pound.
My Uncle would fain have me,
But I have cast her off.
Why?
Faith she's hand∣some,
And had a good wit, but her Schoole-Mistresse
Has made her a rank Puritan.
Lets take him
Along with us and Captain Quartfield shall show him.
Twill be an excellent Comoedy, and afterwards
I have a project on him.
Gentlemen
Shall we dine at an Ordinary? You
Shall enter me among the Wits.
Sir, I
Will but shift cloths then we'll associate you.
But first you shall with us and see a Lady,
Rich as your Fathers chests and odd holes; and
Fresh as Pygmalions Mistress newly wakened
Out of her Alabaster.
Lead on;
I long to see a Lady and to salute her.
WHY we shall have you get in time the turn
Up of your Eyes, speak in the Nose, draw sighs
Of an ell long, and rail at Discipline.
Would I could hear from Baneswright, ere Isle be tortured
With your preciseness thus, Isle get dry palms
With starching, and put on my smocks my self.
Surely you may, and ayre'em too, there have been
Very devout and holy women that wore
No shift at all.
Such Saints you mean as wore
Their Congregations, and swarmed with Christian Vermin.
You'll hold clean linen Heresy?
Surely yes,
Clean linen in a Surplice; That and powders
Doe bring dry summers, make the sickness rage,
And the Enemy prevail, It was revealed
To Ms Scruple and her husband, who
Doe verily ascribe the German war,
And the late persecutions, to curling,
False Teeth, and Oil of Talc.
Now she is in
A Lecturer will sooner hold his peace
Then she.
And surely, as Master Scruple says,
That was her Schoolmaster. One that cools a feast
With his long grace, and sooner eats a Capon
Then blesses it.
And proves it very well
Out of a book that suffered Martyrdom
By fire in Cheapside, since Amulets, and Bracelets,
And Love-locks were in use, the price of sprats,
Jerusalem Artichocks, and Holland Cheese,
Is very much increased, so that the Brethren,
Botchers I mean, and such poor zealous Saints,
As earn five groats a week under a stall,
By singing Psalms, and drawing up of holes,
Can't live in their vocation, but are fine
To turn—
Old breeches.
Surely, Teachers and Prophets.
O Mr Baneswright, are you come? my woman
Was in her preaching fit, she only wanted
A Tables end.
Why whats the matter?
Never
Poor Lady had so much unbred holiness
About her person; I am never dressed
Without a sermon, but am forced to prove
The lawfulness of curling irons before
She'll crisp me in a morning; I must show
Text for the fashions of my gowns, she'll ask
Where Jewels are commanded, or what Lady
In the primitive times wore ropes of pearl or rubies;
She will urge Counsels for her little ruff
Called in Northampton shire; and her whole service
Is a mere confutation of my clothes.
Why Madam, I assure you time hath been
However she be otherwise, when she had
A good quick wit, and would have made to a Lady
A serviceable sinner.
She can't preserve
(The gift for which I took her) but (as though
She Were inspird from Ipswitch) she will make
The Acts and Monuments in sweet-meats; Quinces
Arraigned and burnt at a stake; all my banquets
Are persequutions, and Dioclesians days
Are brought for entertainment, and we eat Martyrs.
Madam she is far gone.
Nay, Sir, she is
A Puritan at her needle too.
Indeed?
She works religious petticoats; for flowers
She'll make Church Histories; her needle doth
So sanctify my Cushionets, besides
My smock-sleeves have such holy imbroderies,
And are so learned, that I fear in time
All my apparel will be quoted by
Some pure Instructor. Yesterday I went
To see a Lady that has a Parrot, my woman
While I was in discourse converted the foul.
And now it can speak nought but Knoxes works,
So theres a parrot lost.
Faith Madam she
Was earnest to come to you, had I known
Her Mistress had so bred her I would first
Ha preferred her to new England.
Surely, Sir,
You promised me when you did take my money
To help me to a faithful service, a Lady
That would be saved. Not one that loves profane,
Unsanctified fashions.
Fly my sight
You gooddy Hofman, and keep your chamber till
You can provide your self some cure, or I
Will forthwith excommunicate your zeal,
And make you a silent waiting woman.
Ms Dorcas,
If you'll be usher to that holy learned woman
That can heal broken shins, scald heads, and the Itch,
Your schoole-mistresse, that can expound, and teaches
To knit in Child, and work Hebrew samplers,
Isle hlpe you back again.
The motion sure is good
And I will ponder of it.
From thy zeal,
The frantic Ladies judgements, and Histriomastix,
Deliver me. This was of your preferring,
You must needs help me to another.
How
Would you desire her qualified, deformed
And crooked like some Ladies, who doe wear
Their women like black patches to set em of?
I need no foil, nor shall I think I'm white
Only between two Moors; or that my nose
Stands wrong, because my women's doth stand right.
But you would have her secret, able to keep
Strange sights from the knowledge of your Knight when you
Are married, Madam, of a quick faining head?
You wrong me, Baneswright, she whom I would have,
Must to her handsome shape have virtue too.
Well Madam I shall fit you. I doe know
A choleric Lady which within these three weeks
Has, for not cutting her corns well, put off
Three women; and is now about to part
With the fourth, just one of your description.
Next change of the Moon, or weather, when her feet
Doe ache again, I doe believe I shall
Pleasure your Ladyship.
Expect your reward.
LAdy, let me taste the Elizium of your lips.
Why what are you? you will not leap me, Sir,
Pray know your distance.
What am I sweet Lady?
My Father is an Aldermans fellow, and I
Hope to be one in time.
Then, Sir, in time
You may be remembered at the quenching of
Fired houses, when the bells ring backward, by
Your name upon the Buckets.
Nay they say
You have a good wit Lady, and I can find it
As soon as another: I in my time have been
Of the University, and should have been a scholar.
By the size of your wit, Sir, had you kept
To that profession, I can foresee
You would have been a great persecutor of Nature▪
And great consumer of rush Candles, with
As small success, as if a Tortoise should
Day and night practise to run races: Having
Contemplated your self into ill looks,
In pity to so much affliction,
You might ha past for learned: and 't may be,
If you had fallen out with the Muses, and
Escaped Poetry, you might have risen to scarlet.
Here is a rare Lady with all my heart, by this
Light Gentlemen, now have I no more language
Then a dumb parrot, a little more she'll jeer me
Into a fellow that turns upon his toe
In a steeple and strikes quarters.
And why should you
Be now so dainty of your lips? verily
They are not Virgins, they have tasted Man.
And may again but then Isle be secured,
For the sweet ayre of the parties. If you
Will bring it me confirmed under the hands
Of four sufficient Ladies that you are
Clean men, you may chance kiss my woman.
Lady,
Our lips are made of the same clay that yours,
And have not been refused.
Tic right you are
Two Inns of Court-men.
Yes, what then?
Known Clatters
Through all the Town.
Clatters?
Yes, Catholic Lovers,
From Country Madams to your Glovers wife,
Or Laundress; will not let poor Gentlewomen
Take physic quietly, but disturb their pills
From operation with your untaught visits.
Or if they be employed, contrive small plots
Below stairs with the Chamber-maid; commend
Her fragrant breath, which five yards of salutes,
At four deflowers a Rose, at three kills spiders.
What dangerous truths these are?
Ravish a lock
From the yellow waiting-woman, use stratagems
To get her silver whistle, and way-lay
Her pewter knots or bodkin.
Pretty, pretty.
You think you have abused us now?
Isle tell you,
Had I in all the world but forty Mark,
And that got by my needle and making socks;
And were that forty Mark Mil-sixpences,
Spurroyals, Harry groats, or such odd coin
Of husbandry as in the Kings reign now
Would never pass, I would despise you.
Lady,
Your wit will make you die a witherd virgin.
We shall in time when your most tyrant tongue
Hath made this house a wilderness, and you
As unfrequented as a states man fallen;
When you shall quarrel with your face and glass,
Till from your pencil you have raised new cheeks,
See you beg suitors, write Bills ore your door,
Here is an ancient Lady to be let.
You think you are handsome now, and that your eyes
Make star-shooting, and dart?
'Tmay be I doe.
May I not prosper if I have not seen
A better face in signs, or ginger-bread.
yes, I for two pence oft have bought a better.
What a sweet innocent look you have!
Fie gentlemen,
Abuse a harmless Lady thus, I can't
With patience hear your blasphemies. Make me
Your second Madam.
And make me your third.
O prodigy to hear an Image speak.
Why, Sir, I took you for a Mute in the Hangings.
Isle tell the faces.
Gentlemen doe I
Look like one of them Trojans?
Tic so, your face
Is missing here, Sir, pray step back again
And fill the number; you I hope have more
Truth in you then to filch your self away,
And leave my room unfurnished.
By this light
She'll send for a Constable straight and apprehend him
For the every.
Why Lady doe you think me
Wrought in a Loom, some Dutch piece weavd at Mooreclack▪
Surely you stood so simply, like a Man
Penning of Recantations, that I suspected
Y' had been a part of the Monopoly.
But now I know you have a tongue, and are
A very Man, Isle think you only dull,
And pray for better utterance.
Lady you make
Rash judgement of him, he was only struck
With admiration of your beauty.
Truly
And so I was.
Then you can wonder, Sir?
Yes when he sees such miracles as you.
And love me can't you?
Love you? By this hand
Id love a dog of your sweet looks; I am
Enamoured of you Lady.
Ha, ha, ha, now surely
I wonder you wear not a cap; your case
Requires warm things, Isle send you forth a Caudle.
The plague of rotten teeth, wrinkles, loud lunges
Be with you Madam.
Had I now pen and ink,
If I were urged I'd fine know whether I
In conscience ought not to set down my self
No wiser then I should be.
Gentlemen
How like you her wit?
Wit? I verily
Believe she was begotten by some wit;
And he that has her, may beget plays on her.
Her wit had need be good▪ it finds her house.
Her house? Tic able to find the Court, if she
Be chaste to all this wit, I doe not think
But that she might be shown.
She speaks with salt,
And has a pretty scornefulnesse, which now
I'ue seen I'm satisfied.
Come then away;
To Roseclaps.
Lead on, Let us dine: This Lady
Runs in my head still.
Sir, My Lady prays.
You would dismiss your company, she has
Some business with you.
Gentlemen walk softly,
Isle overtake you.
Newcut slight her wit
is come to private meetings.
I, J thought
She had some other virtues. Well make hast,
We will stay without, when thou hast done inform us
What the rate is; if she be reasonable
We'll be her Customers.
You're merry, Sir.
NAy sister you may enter, they are gone.
I did receive your ticket this morning. What?
You look the Mine should run still?
O you are
A careful brother, to put me on a course
That draws the eyes of the Town upon me, and makes me
Discourse for Ordinaries, then leave me in it.
I will put off my Ladyship, and return
To My Holland, and to making shirts,
And bands again.
I hope you will not.
I
Repent I left the Exchange.
Faith I should laugh
To see you there again, and there serve out
The rest of your Jndentures, by managing
Your Needle well, and making Night-caps, by
A Chafing dish in winter mornings, to keep
Your fingers pliant. How rarely it would become you
To run ore all your shop to passengers
In a fine sale tune?
What would you have me doe?
Do you think I'm the Dutch Virgin that could live
By the sent of Flowers? Or that my family
Are all descended of Chameleons,
And can be kept with ayre? Js this the way
To get a husband to be in danger to be
Shut up for house-rent, or to wear a gown
Out a whole fashion, or the same Jewels twice?
Shortly my neighbours will commend my clothes,
For lasting well, give them strange dates, and cry
Since your last Gorget and the blazing star.
Prithee excuse me sister, I can now
Rain showers of silver into thy lap again;
My Vncle's gone to sea, and has left me
The key to the golden fleece. Thou shalt be still.
A Madam, Pen, and to maintain thy Honour,
And to new dub thee take this. But sister, I
Expected you ere this out of the Throng
Of suitors that frequent you, should have been
Made a true Lady, not one in Type or show.
I fear you are too scornful, look too high.
Faith brother it is no age to be put off
With empty education; few will make Jointures
To wit or good parts. I may dye a Virgin,
When some old widow which at every cough
Resigns some of her teeth, and every night
Puts off her Leg as duly as french Hood,
Scarce wears her own Nose, hath no eyes but such
As she first bought in Broad-street, and every morning
Is put together like some Instrument,
Having full Coffers shall be wooed, and thought
A youthful Bride.
Why sister will you like
A Match of my projection? you doe know
How ruinous our fathers fortunes are;
Before he broke you know there was a Contract
Between you and young Sea-thrift. What if I
Make it a wedding?
Marry a fool? in hope
To be a Lady Maioresse?
Why sister, I
Could name good Ladies that are fine to find
Wit for themselves &amp; Knights too.
I have heard
Of one whose husband was so meek, to be
For need her Gentleman usher, and while she
Made visits above stairs would patiently
Find himself business at Tre-trip in the Hall.
He's only City bred, one month of your
Sharp conversation will refine him; besides
How long wilt be ere your dissembled state
Meet such another offer?
Well Brother you shall
Dispose of my affections.
Then sometime
This afternoon Isle bring him hither▪ doe you
Provide the Priest; your Dining room will serve
As well as the Church.
I will expect you.
Sirrah, Isle beat you into air.
Good Captain.
I will by Hector.
Murder, murder, help.
You needy, shifting, cousning, breaking slave.
Nay, Mr Salewit, help to part 'em.
Captain.
Ask me for money, dog?
Oh! I am killed.
Help. Help.
Nay Captain.
Men of my coat pay?
Jle call in neighbours. Murder. Murder.
Rascal
Jle make you trust and offer me petitions
To go of the score.
Good, tic very good.
How does thy head sweetheart?
Away be quiet, Mill.
Roseclap, you'll never leave this, I did tell you
Last time the Captain beat you what a Lion
He is being asked for reckonings.
So you did
Jndeed good Mr Salewit; yet you must
Ever be foolish husband.
What if we
Doe owe you money, Sir, first fit for you
To ask it?
Well, Sir, there is law; J say
No more, but there is law.
What law you Cur?
The law of Nature, Custom, Arms, and Nations,
Frees men of war from paiments.
Yes, your Arms Cap∣taine,
None else.
No soldiers ought to pay.
Nor Poets:
All void of money are privileged.
What would you have,
Captains and Poets, Mr Salewit says,
Must never pay.
No, nor be asked for money.
Still I say there is law.
Say that again,
And by Bellona J will cut thy throat.
You long to see your brains out.
Why you Mongrel,
You Iohn of all Trades, have we been your guests
Since you first kept a Tavern, when you had
The face and impudence to hang a bush
Out to three pints of Claret, two of Sack
In all the world?
After that, when you broke,
Did we here find you out, customd your House,
And helped away your victuals which had else
Lain mouldy on your hands?
You did indeed,
And never paid for it. I doe not deny,
But you have been my Customers these two years,
My Jack went not, nor Chimney smoked without you.
I will go farther; your two mouths have been
Two as good eating Mouths as need to come
Within my doors, as curious to be pleased
As if you still had eaten with ready money:
Had still the meats in season; still drunk more
Then your Ordinary came to.
And your conscience now
Would have this paid for?
Surely so I take it.
Was ever the like heard?
Tic most unreasonable
He has a hardened conscience. Sirrah, Cheater,
You would be questioned for your reckonings, Rogue.
Doe you inform.
I hear one of the Sheriffs
Paid for the boiling of a Carp a Mark.
Most unheard of exactions!
Yet surely, Cap∣taine.
No man had cheaper reckonings then your self,
And Mr Salewit here.
How cheap?
I say
No more good Captain; not to pay is cheap,
A man would think.
Sir, Don't you reckon Air,
And make it dear to breath in your house, and put
The Nose to charges?
Right, perfumd Air, Captain.
Is not the standing of the salt an Item,
And placing of the bread?
A new way, Captain.
Is not the folding of your Napkins brought
Into the Bill?
Pinched Napkins, Captain, and laid
Like Fishes, Fowls, or Faces.
Then remember
How you rate sallets, Roseclap; one may buy
Gardens as Cheap.
Yes, Mr Salewit, sallets
Taken from Euclide, made in Diagrams,
And to be eaten in Figures.
And we must pay
For your Inventions, Sir.
Or you are damned,
Good Captain, you have sworn to pay this twelve-month.
Peace you loud, bawling Cur; doe you disgrace me
Before these Gallants, See if I don't kill you.
SAve you Captain Quartfield, and my brave Wit,
My man of Helicon, salute this Gentleman,
He is a City wit.
A Corporation
Went to the bringing of him forth.
I embrace him;
And so doe I.
You are a Poet, Sir,
And can make Verses, I hear?
Sir, I am
A servant to the Muses.
I have made
Some speeches, Sir, in verse, which have been spoke
By a greene Robin Goodfellow from Cheapside Conduit,
To my Fathers Company; and mean this afternoon
To make an Epithalamium upon my wedding.
A Lady fell in love with me this morning,
Ask Mr Francis here.
Heart you spoil all,
Did not I charge you to be silent?
That's true,
I had forgot. you are a Captain, Sir?
I have seen service, Sr.
Captain I love
Men of the sword, and buff, and if need were
I can roar too, and hope to swear in time,
Doe you see, Captain.
Nay Captain we have brought you
A Gentleman of valour who has been
In Moore-fields often, marry it has been
To squire his sisters, and demolish Custards
At Pimlico.
Before me, Mr Plotwell,
I never hoped to see you in silk again.
I looked the next Lord Majors day to see you of the Livery,
Or one of the Bachelor Whiflers.
What is
Your Uncle dead?
He may in time; he's gone
To sea this morning, Captain, and J am come
Jnto your order again. But hark you, Captain,
What think you of a Fish now?
Mad wags, mad wags.
By Heaven its true, here we have brought one with us.
Rich Seathrifts son, he'll make a rare sea-Monster.
And shall's be merry in faith?
Salewit shall make
A song upon him.
And Roseclaps boy shall sing it.
We have the properties of the last fish.
And if I
At dinner doe not give him sea enough,
And afterwards if I, and Salewit doe not
Show him much better then he that shows the Tombs,
Let me be turned into a Sword-fish my self.
A natural change for a Captain. How now Roseclap,
Pensive and cursing the long Vacation?
Thou look as if thou meanst to break shortly.
Ask
The Captain why I am sad.
Faith Gentlemen,
I disciplined him for his rudeness.
Why these
Are Judgements, Roseclap, for dear reckonings.
Art thou
The half Crown fellow of the house?
Sir, I
Doe keep the Ordinary.
Let's have wine enough;
I mean to drink a health to a Lady.
Still
Will you betray your fortune? One of them
Will go and tell her who you are, and spoil
The Marriage.
No, peace. Gentlemen if you'll
Go in we'll follow.
Please you enter, dinner
Shall straight be set upon the board.
We'll expect you,
Come Gentlemen.
But Mr Francis, was that
The business why she called you back.
Believe it
Your Mothers smock shined at your birth, or else
You wear some Charm about you.
Not I truly.
It can not be she should so strangely dote
Upon you else: slight had you stayed, I think
She would have wooed you her self.
Now I remember
One read my fortune once, and told my father
That I should match a Lady.
How things fall out?
And did she ask you who I was?
I told her
You were a young Knight.
Good.
Scarce come to the years
Of your discretion yet.
Good still.
And that a great Man
Did mean to beg you for his daughter.
Most rare.
This afternoone's the time?
Faith she
Looks you should use a little Courtship first,
That done, let me alone to have the Priest
In readiness.
But were I not best ask
My friends consent?
How? Friends consent? thats fit
For none but Farmers sons, and Milk-maids. You shall not
Debase your judgement. She takes you for a wit,
And you shall match her like one.
Then I will.
But no more words to the Gallants.
Doe you think
I am a sive and cannot hold.
Gentlemen
The company are sate.
It shall be yours.
Nay, Sir, your fortune claims precedence.
Fetched abroad by two Gallants say you?
Yes, Sir,
As soon as you were gone; he only staid
To put on other clothes.
You say my son
Went with em too?
Yes, Sir.
And whether went they?
I followd'em to Roseclaps Ordinary
And there you left em?
Yes, Sir, Just before
I saw some Captains enter.
Well, I give
My son for lost, undone, past hope.
There is
No more but this we'll thither straight. You Cipher
Have your instructions.
Sir, let me alone
To make the story doleful.
Go, make you ready then▪
Now, Mr Seathrift, you may see, what these
Young men would doe left to themselves.
My son
Shall know he has a sister.
And my Nephew
That once he had an Uncle. To leave land
Unto an unthrift is to build on sand.
FOre Jove the Captain foxed him rarely.
O Sir
He is used to it; this is the fifth fish now
That he hath shown thus. One got him twenty pound.
How Rosclap?
Why the Captain kept him, Sir,
A whole week drunk, and shout him twice a day.
It could not be like this.
Faith I doe grant
This is the strangest fish. you I have hung
His other picture into th'fields, where some
Say tic an oregrowne Porcpisce; others say
Tic the fish caught in Cheshire; one to whom
The rest agree, said it was a Mermaid.
S'light,
Roseclap, shalt have a patent of him. The Birds
Brought from Peru, the hairy Wench, the Camel,
The Elephant, Dromedaries, or Winsor Castle,
The Woman with dead flesh, or She that washes,
Threads needles, writes, dresses her children, plays
Of the Virginals with her feet, could never draw
People like this.
O that his Father were
At home to see him.
Or his Mother come,
Who follows strange sights out of Town, and went
To Branford to a Motion.
Bid the Captain hasten,
Or he will recover and spoil all.
They are here.
BEarback there.
Pray you doe not press so hard.
Make room for the two Gentlewomen.
What is it?
Twelvepence a piece.
We will not give it. Q. Make room
For them that will then.
O fortune here's his Mother.
And who's the other?
One Ms Holland, the
Great seamstress on th'Exchange.
We gave but a great
To see the last fish.
Gentlewoman, that
Was but an Irish Sturgeon.
This came from
The Indies, and eats five Crowns a day in fry,
Ox livers, and browne past.
Well there's three shil∣lings,
Pray let us have good places now.
Bear back there.
Look Ms Seathrift here be Gentlemen.
Sure tic a rare Fish.
J know one of'em,
And so doe I, his sister was my prentice.
Lets take acquaintance with him.
Ms Seathrift.
Hath the sight drawn you hither?
Yes Sir I
And Mrs Holland here, my Gossip, past
This way and so called in. Pray, Mr Plotwell,
Is not my son here? I was told he went
With you this morning.
You shall see him straight.
When will the Fish begin, Sir?
Heart she makes him
A puppet play.
Why now they only stay
For company, 't has sounded twice.
Indeed
I long to see this fish; J wonder whither
They will cut up his belly, they say a Tench
Will make him whole again.
Look Ms Seathrift,
What claws he has.
For all the world like Crabs.
Nay mark his feet too.
For all the world like Plaice.
Was ever better sport heard?
Prythe peace.
Pray can you read that? Sir, I warrant you,
That tells where it was caught, and what fish tic.
Within this place is to be seen,
A wondrous Fish. God save the Queen.
Amen, she is my customer, And I
Have sold her bone-lace often.
Why the Queen?
Tic writ the King.
That was to make the rime.
Slid thou did read it as it were some picture of
An Elzabeth fish.
Bear back there.
Make room, you
Friend that were going to cut a purse there, make
Way for the two old Gentlemen to pass.
What must we give?
We take a shilling Sir.
It is no less.
Pray God your fish be worth it.
What is it a whale you take so dear?
It is
A fish taken in the Indies.
Pray dispatch then,
And shout, us quickly.
Pray forbear, you'd have
Your head broke Cobbler.
Yonder is my Nephew
In his old Gallantry.
Who's there too? my wife?
And Ms Holland? Nay I looked for them.
But whore's my wise son?
Mass I see not him.
Keep out Sir.
Waterman you must not enter.
This is no place for scullers.
I must needs
Speak with one Mr Plotwell.
You must stay.
Thrust him out.
And one Mr Seathrift
On urgent business.
They are yet employed
In weightier affairs, make fast the door.
There shall no more come in: come in boy.
Don't
They speak as if my son were in the room?
Yes, pray observe &amp; mark em.
Gentlemē,
And Gentlewomen, you now shall see a sight,
Europe ne'er showed the like; behold this fish.
O strange look how it sleeps.
Just like a Salmō
Upon a stall in fishstreet.
How it snorts too,
Just like my husband.
Tic very like a man.
Thas such a nose and eyes.
Why tic a Man fish.
An Ocean Centaur, begot between a Siren
And a he stock fish.
Pray where took ye him?
We took him strangely in the Indies, near
The mouth of Rio de la plata, a sleep
Upon the shore just as you see him now.
How say y', a sleep.
How? would he come to land?
Tic strange a fish should leave his Element.
Ask him what things the Coūtry told us.
You
Will scarce believe it now. This fish would walk you
Two or three mile oth'shore sometimes; break houses,
Ravish a naked wench or two, (for there
Women go naked) then run to Sea again.
The Country has bin laid, and warrants granted
To apprehend him.
I doe suspect these fellows,
They lye as if they had patent for it.
The company
Should every one believe his part, would scarce
Have faith enough among us.
Mark again.
The States of Holland would have bought him of us
Out of a great design.
Indeed?
They offered
A thousand dollars.
You cannot enter yet.
Indeed? so much? pray what to doe?
Why Sr,
They were in hope in time to make this fish
Of faction against the Spaniard, and doe service
Unto the state.
As how?
Why, Sr, next plate-fleet
To dive, bore holes in the bottom of their ships,
And sink em; you must think a fish like this
May be taught MACHIAVEL, and made a state-fish;
As dogs are taught to fetch.
Or Elephants
To dance on ropes.
And pray what Honour would
The States have given him for the service?
That,
Sir, is uncertain.
Ha made him some sea Count;
Or't may be Admiral.
Then, sir, in time,
Dutch Authors that writ Mare Liberum,
Might dedicate their books to him?
Yes being
A fish advanced, and of great place. Sing boy.
You now shall hear a song upon him.
Listen
Doe they not act it rarely?
If it were their trade
They could not doe it better.
Hear you that sir?
Still I suspect.
I warrant you this fish
Will shortly be in a Ballad.
Begin boy
We show no monstrous Crocodile,
Nor any prodigy of Nile.
No Remora that stops Your fleet,
Like sergeants Gallants in the street.
No sea-horse, which can trot or pace,
Or swim false gallop, post, or race.
For crooked Dolphins we not care,
Though on their back a fiddler were.
The like to this fish which we show,
Was ne'er in Fishstreet Old, or New.
Nor ever served to th'sheriffs board,
Or kept in souse for the Major Lord.
Had old Astronomers but seen
This fish, none else in Heaven had been.
The song has wakned him, look, he stirs.
Oh,
Captain—pox—take—you—Captain.
Hark he speaks.
Oh-my—stomach.-
How's this?
Isle pawn my life
This is imposture.
Oh—Oh—
Heart the Captain
Did not give him his full load.
Can your fish
Speak friends? the proverb says they are mute.
Isle tell you
You will admire how docile he is, and how
He will imitate a man; tell him your name
He will repeat it after you; he has heard me
Called Captain and my fellow curse sometimes,
And now you heard him say pox take you Captain.
And yesterday I but complaind my stomach
Was over charged, &amp; how he minds it?
strange?
J is it not?
The towardness of a fish.
Would you think when we caught him he should speak
Drake, Drake.
And did he?
Yes and Hawkins;
A sign he was a fish that swum there, when
These two compassed the world.
How should he learn
Their names J wonder.
From the sailors.
That may be.
He'll call for drink like me, or any thing
He lacks.
O-God-my-head.-
Do you hear him?
Oh,
Hostess—a—basin—
slid he'll spew.
No matter.
Nay J have seen him foxed, and then maintain
A drunken Dialogue.
Lord how J long
To hear a little. Pray try him with some questions,
Will you, my friend?
Sometimes he will be fullen,
And make no answers.
That is when he's angered,
Or kept from drink long.
But Isle try him: Ms Sea.
To see what Creatures may be brought to.
Tim,
You are drunk.
Plague take you Captain—Oh—Lord
You—made—me—
S'death my sons name.
D' you call him?
He'll answer to no name but that.
And Tim,
What think you of a wench now?
Oh Ime sick
Where is she, Oh.
Isle lay my life this fish
Is some confederate Rogue.
I drink to you, Timothy,
In sack.
Oh Oh.
A health, Tim.
I can drink
No more, Oh.
What not pledge your Mistress?
Oh,
Let me alone.
He is not in the mood now.
Sometimes you'd wonder at him.
He is tired
With talking all this day. That and the heat
Of company about him, dull him.
Surely,
My friends, it is to me a miracle
To hear Fish speak thus.
So, Sir, 't has been
To thousands more.
Come now next Michaelmas,
Tic five years we have shown him in most Courts
In Christendom, and you will not believe
How with mere travelling and observation,
He has improved himself, and brought away
The language of the Country.
May not I
Ask him some questions?
Sir, you may, but he
Will answer none but one of us.
He's used,
And knows their voices.
He is so Ms. Now
We will open door.
Well my belief doth tell me
There is a mist before our eyes.
I mar'le
My wise son mist this show.
Good people, we
Doe show no more to day; if you desire
To see, come to us in Kings-street to morrow
Come Gossip let us go, the Fish is done.
By your leave Gentlemen. Truly tic a dainty fish.
PRay which is Mr Plotwell?
I'm he friend,
What is your business?
Sir, I should speak with
Young Mr Seathrift too.
Sir, at this time,
Although no Crab like you, to swim backward, he is
Of your element.
Upon the water?
No
But something that lives int. If you but stay
Till he have slept himself a land Creature, you may
Chance see him come a shore here.
Oh—my—head—
Oh—Captain—Mr Francis—Captain—Oh.—
That is his voice Sir.
Death o my soul my son?
He is in drink, Sir, is he?
Surely friend,
You are a witch, he is so.
Then I must tell
The news to you, tic sad.
Isle hear't as sadly.
Your Uncle, Sir, and Mr Seathrift are
Both drowned some 8 mile below Greenwitch.
Drowned?
They went in the Tilt boat, Sir, and J was one
Of the oars that rowed 'em, a Cole-ship did ore run us,
I escaped by swimming, the two old Gentlemen
Took hold of one another, and sunk together.
How some men's prayers are heard? we did invoke
The sea this morning, and see, the Thames has took 'em.
It cannot be, such good news, Gentlemen,
Cannot be true.
Tic very certain, Sir,
It was talk upon the Exchange.
We heard it too
In Pals now as we came.
There friend, there is
A fair for you; I'm glad you escaped; I had
Not known the news so soon else.
Sir, excuse me,
Sir, it is conscience; J doe believe you might
Sue me in Chancery.
Sir, you show
The virtues of an Heir.
Are you rich Ware-house
Heir, Sir?
Yes, Sir, his transitory pelf,
And some twelve hundred pound a year in earth,
Is cast on me. Captain, the hour is come,
You shall no more drink. Ale, of which one draught
Makes Cowards, and spoils valour; nor take off
Your moderate quart-glasse. I intend to have
A Musket for you, or glass Canon, with
A most capacious barrel, which we will charge,
And discharge with the rich valiant grape of
My Uncles cellar, every charge shall fire
The glass, and burn it self in the filling, and look
Like a Piece going off.
I shall be glad
To give thanks for you, Sir, in pottle draughts,
And shall love Scotch cole for this wrack the better,
As long as I know fuel.
Then my Poet,
No longer shall write Catches, or thin Sonnets,
Nor preach in verse, as if he were suborned
By him that wrote the whip, to pen lean Acts,
And so to overthrow the stage for want
Of salt or wit. Nor shall he need torment
Or persecute his Muse; but I will be
His God of wine t'inspire him. He shall no more
Converse with the five yard butler, who like Thunder
Can turn beer with his voice, and roar it sower;
But shall come forth a Sophocles, and write
Things for the Buskin. Instead of Pegasus,
To strike a spring wed's hoof, we will have a steel
Which shall but touch a But, and straight shall flow
A purer, higher, wealthier Helicon.
Frank, Thou shalt be my Phoebus. My next Poem
Shall be thy Uncles Tragoedie or the life
And death of two Rich Merchants.
Gentlemen,
And now in faith what think you of the fish?
Why as we ought, Sir, strangely.
But do you think
It is a very fish?
Yes.
Tic a man.
This valiant Captain and this man of wit
First foxed him, then transformed him. we will wake him
And tell him the news. Ho Mr Timothy!
Plague take you Captain.
What does your sack work still?
Where am I?
Come you've slept enough.
Mr Timothy!
How in the name of fresh Cod came you changed
Into a sea Calfe thus?
Slight, Sir, here be
Two Fishmongers to buy you; beat the price
Now you're awake, your self.
How's this? my hands
Transmuted into Claws? my feet made flounders?
Arrayed in Finns, and scales? arn't you
Ashamed to make me such a Monster? pray
Help to undress me.
We have rare news for you.
No letter from the Lady I hope?
Your Father
And my grave Uncle, Sir, are cast away.
How?
They by this have made a meal
For Jacks and Salmon. They are drowned.
Fall down
And worship sea-coals, for a ship of them
Has made you, Sir, an Heir.
This fellow here
Brings the auspicious news: And these two friends
Of ours confirm it.
Tic too true, Sir.
Well,
We are all mortal; but in what wet case
Had J been now, if I had gone with him.
Within this fortnight I had been converted
Into some Pike, you might ha cheapened me.
In Fish-street; J had made an Ordinary,
Perchance at the Mermaid: Now could I cry
Like any Image in a fountain which
Runs Lamentations. O my hard misfortune!
Fie Sir, good truth it is not manly in you,
To weep for such a slight loss as a father.
I doe not cry for that.
No?
no; but to think
My Mother is not drowned too.
I assure you,
And thats a shrewd mischance.
For then might I
Ha gone to the Counting house and set at liberty
Those harmless Angels, which for many years
Have been condemned to darkness.
You'd not doe
Like your penurious Father, who was wont
To walk his dinner out in Pals, whiles you
Kept Lent at home, and had, like folk in sieges,
Your meals weighed to you.
Indeed they say he was
A Monument of Pals.
Yes, he was there
As constant as Duke Humphrey. I can show
The prints where he sate holes in the loggs.
He wore
More pavement out with walking then would make
A row of new stone-Saints, and yet refused
To give to the reparation.
I've heard
Heed make his Jack go empty to cousin neighbours.
Yes, when there was not fire enough to warm
A Mystic patch to apply to his wives Temples
In great extremity of tootach. This is
True, Mr Timothy, first not?
Yes. Then Linen.
To us was stranger then to Capuchins.
My flesh is of an Order with wearing shirts
Made of the sacks that brought ore Cutchyneele,
Copprice, and Indico. My sister wears
Smocks made of Curran-bags.
Isle not endure it.
Lets show our selves.
Stay hear all first.
Thy Uncle
Was such another Plotwell; I have heard
He still last left the Exchange; and would commend
The wholsomenesse of the ayre in Moore-fields, when
The clock struck three sometimes.
Surely my self,
Cipher his Factor, and an ancient Cat,
Did keep strict diet, had our Spanish fare,
Four Olives among three. My Uncle would
Look fat with fasting; I ha known him surfeit
Upon a bunch of Raisins, swoon at sight
Of a whole joint, and rise an Epicure
From half an Orange.
Gentlemen tic false.
Cast off your Cloud. Do you know me, Sir?
My Uncle!
And doe you know me, Sir?
My Father!
Nay,
We will open all the plot, reveal your self.
Cipher the waterman!
Salewit away;
I feel a tempest coming.
Are you struck
With a Torpedo Nephew?
Ha you seen too
A Gorgons head that you stand speechless? or
Are you a fish in earnest?
It begins to thunder.
We will make bold to take our leaves.
What is
Your Captain fled?
Nay Gentlemen, forsake
Your Company?
Sir, we wave business.
Troth
It is not kindly done.
Now, Mr Seathrift,
You see what Mourners we had had, had we
Been wrecked in earnest. My grievd Nephew here
Had made my cellar flow with tears, my wines
Had charged glass Ord'nance, our funerals had been
Bewaild in pottle draughts.
And at our graves
Your Nephew and my Son had made a Panegyric,
And opend all our virtues.
Ungrateful Monster.
Unnatural villain.
Thou Enemy to my blood.
Thou worse then Parricide.
Next my sins I doe
Repent I am thy Uncle.
And I thy Father.
Death O my soul, did J when first thy Father
Broke in estate, and then broke from the Counter
Where Mr Seathrift laid him in the hole,
For debt among the ruins of the City,
And Trades like him blown up, take thee from dust,
Give thee free education, put thee in
My own fair way of traffic; nay decree
To leave thee Jewels, Land, my whole estate,
Pardond thy former wildness, and could thou sort
Thy self with none but idle Gallants, Captains,
And Poets, who must plot before they eat,
And make each meal a stratagem? Then could none
But J be subject of thy impious scoffs?
I swoon at sight of meat; I rise a Glutton
From half an Orange; Wretch, forgetful wretch;
Fore Heaven I count it treason in my blood
That gives thee a relation. But J'le take
A full revenge. Make thee my Heir? J'le first
Adopt a slave, brought from some Gally; One
Which Laws doe put into the Inventory,
And men bequeath in Wills with stools, &amp; brass pots.
One who shall first be household stuff, then my Heir.
Or to defeat all thy large aims J'le marry;
Cipher, go find me Baneswright; he shall straight
Provide me a wife. I will not stay to let
My resolution cool. Be she a wench
That every day puts on her Dowry, wears
Her fortunes, has no portion, so she be
Young and likely to be fruitful, J'le have her;
By all thats good I will; this afternoon;
I will about it straight.
I follow you.
And as for you Tim Mermaid, Triton, Haddock,
The wondrous Indian Fish caught near Peru,
Who can be of both Elements, your sight
Will keep you well. Here J doe cast thee off,
And in thy room pronounce to make thy sister
My heir; it would be most unnatural
To leave a Fish Land. Lass, Sir, one of your
Bright sins and gills must swim in seas of sack,
Spout rich Canaries up like Whales in Maps.
I know you'll not endure to see my Jack
Go empty, nor wear shirts of Copprice bags,
Nor fast in Pals, you. J doe hate thee now,
Worse then a Tempest, Quick-sand, Pirate, Rock,
Or fatal Leake, I or a Privy seal.
Go let the Captain make you drunk, and let
Your next change be into some Ape, (tic stale
To be a Fish twice) or some active Baboon.
And when you can find money out, betray
What wench in the Room has lost her maiden-head;
Can mount to'th King, and can doe all your feats,
If your fine chain, and yellow coat come near
The Exchange, Jle see you, so I leave you.
Now
Were there a dextrons beam and two-pence hemp,
Never had man such cause to hang himself.
I have brought my self to a fine pass too▪ Now
Am J fit only to be caught, and put
Into a pond to leap Carps, or beget
A goodly race of Pickrel▪
HOw now mad Lads, what? is the storm broke up?
What sad like brokē Gamsters? Mr Timothy
Slight who would think your Father should lay weals
To catch you thus?
If ever I be drunk
With Captains more—.
Whore's Bright and Newcut?
They
Were sent for to the Temple, but left word
They would be here at supper.
They are sure friends,
To leave us in distress:
What a mad plot
These two old Merchants had contrived, to fine
A voyage, then to hunt you out disguised,
And hear themselves abused?
We heard all.
If J had staid they had paid me for a Captain.
They had a fling at me. But doe you think
Your Uncle in this furious mood will marry?
He deeply swore it; if he doe, the slight
Upon the cards, the hollow dye, Park corner,
And Shooters hill are my revenue.
Yes,
And as for me, my destiny will be
To fight by the day, carry my Kitchen, and
Collation at my back, wear orderly
My shirt in course, after 't has been the shift
Of a whole Regiment in the Low-Countries.
And after all return with half a leg,
One arm perchance, my nose shot off, to move
Compassion in my father, who in pity
To so much ruin my be brought to buy
Some place for me in an Hospital, to keep me
From Bridges, Hill-tops, &amp; from selling switches.
Yonders your Uncle at the field door talking
With Baneswright, as hot, and earnest for a wench,
As a recovered Monsieur.
What is this Baneswright?
A fellow much employed about the Town,
That contrives Matches. One that brings together
Parties that never saw, or ever met,
Till't be for good and all. Knows to a penny
Estates and Jointures; J'le undertake he has
Now lying by him unprovided some twenty
Widows of all fortunes that want husbands,
And men that want wives, and at an hours warning
Can make things ready for the Priest.
Let us
Devise to get him hither and cross the Match.
I have great interest in him, the fellow loves me.
Could I speak with him and draw him to be
An Actor in it, J have a stratagem
That can redeem all, and turn the plot
Upon these sage heads.
By Minerva, look,
Here is Baneswright.
Mr Baneswright!
Save you Gal∣lants.
You are employed I hear to find a wife out
For my young sprightly Uncle.
Sir, he has
Retained me to that purpose. I just now
Came from him.
And doe you mean the match
Shall then proceed?
I have a Leiger wench
In readiness, he's gone to put himself
Into fit ornaments, for the solemnity.
I'm to provide the Priest and Licence, we go
Some two hours hence to Church.
Death you Pander.
Forbid the banes or I will cut your wizzell;
And spoil your squiring in the dark; J've heard
Of your lewd function, Sirrah; you prefer
Wenches to Bawdy-houses, Rascal.
Good, Sir.
Threaten me not in my vocation.
Why Baneswright you can be but paid, say I
Procure the wench, a friend of mine; and double
Your bargain, such a fair reward me thinks
Should make thee of my project. Thou dost know
My fortunes are engaged, and thou moist be
The happy instrument to recover 'em.
Be my good Angel once, I have a plot
Shall make thee famous.
By Mars deny, and I
Will act a Tragoedy upon thee.
Gentlemen,
I am a friend to wit, but more to you, Sir.
Of whose misfortunes I will not be guilty.
Though, then, your Uncle have employed me, and
Have deeply sworn to wed this afternoon,
A wife of my providing, if you can
O'rereach the angry Burgess, Sir, and bring
His wisdom to the Gin, show me the way
I'll help to lay the trap.
Now thou art
An honest hearted pimp, thou shalt for this
Be drunk in Vine Dee, Rascal: I'll begin
A Runlet to thee.
Gentlemen lets in,
I'll tell you my design; you, Salewit, must
Transform your self to a French Deacon. J
have parts for Bright and Newcut too. Mischief
Upon their absence.
We'll send for 'em.
And
For Mr Timothy J have a project
Shall make his father everlastingly
Admire his wit, and ask him blessing.
Come,
Lets in and drink a health to our success.
I'm for no healths unless the glass be less.
I did commit her to your charge that you
Might breed her, Ms Scruple, and doe require
Her at your hand. Here be fine tricks, indeed;
My daughter Susan to be stolen a week,
And you conceal it; you were of the plot,
I doe suspect you.
Sir, will you but hear
Me meekly?
No, J'le never trust again
A woman with white eyes, that can take notes,
And write a Comment on the Catechism.
All your devotion's false; first possible
She could be gone without your knowledge?
Will you
Attend me, Ms Seathrift? If my husband
To wean her from love courses, did not take
More pains with her then with his Tuesday Lectures,
And if J did not every day expound
Some good things to her against the sin of the flesh,
For fear of such temptations, to which frail girls
Are very subject, let me never more
Be thought fit to instruct young Gentlewomen,
Or deal in Tent-stitch. Who ere it was that seduced her,
She took my daughter Emlins gown and ruff,
And left her own clothes: and my Scholars say
She often would write Letters.
Why tic right
Some silenced Minister has got her: that J
Should breed my daughter in a Conventicle!
Pray husband be appeased.
You are a fool.
You hear her Ms could not help it.
Nor
Your son help being a fish.
Why, Sir, was he
The first that was abused by Captains?
Go
You talk like prating Gossips.
Gossips? slight
What Gossips, Sir?
What Gossips are we? speak.
J'le tell you since your know: my wife and you,
Shrill Ms Holland, have two tongues, that when
They are in conjunction, are busier, and make
More noise then country fairs, and utter more tales
Then blind-folkes, Mid-wives, Nurses. Then no show
Though't be a Juggler scopes you. You did follow
The Elephant so long, and King of Sweden,
That people at last came in to see you. Then
My son could not be made a Fish, but who
Should I find there much taken with the sight
But you two? I may now build Hospitals,
Or give my money to Plantations.
Lets follow him, come Ms Scruple.
Just
As your Sue left her Schoole-mistresse, my Pen
Left me.
They'll come again J warrant you.
SIster tic so projected, therefore make
No more demurs, the life of both our fortunes
Lies in your carriage of things well▪ think therefore
Whither you will restore me, and advance
Your own affairs, or else within this week
Fly this your lodging, like uncustomd sinners,
And have your Coach-horses transformed to Rent,
Have your apparel sold for properties,
And you return to Cut-work. By this hand
If you refuse all this must happen.
Well, Sir,
Necessity which hath no Law, for once
Shall make me of the conspiracy, and since
We are left wholly to our wits, Let's show
The power and virtue of 'em; if your Baneswright
Can but persuade my Uncle, I will fit
Him with a Bride.
The Scene is laid already;
I have transformed an English Poet into
A fine French Teacher, who shall join your hands
With a most learned legend out of Rablais.
But for my true groom who you say comes hi∣there
For a disguised Knight, I shall think I wed
His Fathers Counting-house, and go to bed
To so much Bullion of a man▪ Faith I've
No mind to him, brother, he hath not wit enough
To maked a lawful marriage.
Y' are deceivd,
I'll undertake by one weeks Tutoring,
And carrying him to Plays and Ordinaries,
Engaging him in a quarrel or two, and making
Some Captain beat him, to render him a most
Accomplished Gallant. Or say he be borne, sister,
Under the City planet, pray what wise Lady
Desires to match a wise Knight? you'd marry some
Philosopher now, that should every night
Lye with you out of Aristotle, and loose
Your maiden-head by Demonstration.
Or some great statesman, before whom you must sit
As silent and reserved as if your looks
Had plots on foreign Princes, and must visit
And dress your self by Tacitus. What he wants
In Naturals, his fortunes will make up
In Honours, Pen; when hoe's once made a Lord,
Who'l be so sawey as to think he can
Be impotent in wisdom? She that marries
A fool, is an Hermaphrodite, the Man
And wife too, sister. Besides tic now too late,
He'll be here presently, and comes prepared
For Hymen. I took up a footman for him,
And left him under three tyremens hands, besides
Two Barbers.
Well, Sir, I must then accept him
With all his imperfections, J have
Procured a Sir Iohn yonder.
Who first?
One
That preaches the next parish once a week
A sleep for thirty pounds a year.
Here is
A Knight desires your Ladyship will give
Him audience.
Tic no Knight Ambassador?
He rather looks like a Knight of the Sun.
Tic He.
Let him come in.
If you be coy now, Pen,
You spoil all.
Well, Sir, I'll be affable.
HEre he comes.
Sirrah, wait me in the Hall,
And let your feet stink there; your ayre's not fit,
To be endured by Ladies.
What quarrel with
Your Footman, Sir?
Hang him, he casts a sent
That drowns my perfumes, and is strong enough
To cure the Mother or Palsy. Doe I act
A Knight well?
This imperiousness becomes you
Like a Knight newly dubbed, Sir.
What says the Lady?
Speak lower, J've prepared her, show your self
A Courtier now she's yours.
If that be all
I'll Court her as if some Courtier had begot me
In the Gallery at a Masque.
Madam, this Gentleman
Desires to kiss your hands.
And lips too Lady.
Sir, you much honour both.
I, I know that,
Else Id not kiss you. Yesterday J was
In company with Ladies and they all
Longed to be touched by me.
You cannot cure
The Evil, Sir, nor have your lips the virtue
To restore ruins, or make old Ladies young?
Faith all the virtue that they have, is that
My lips are knighted. J am borne, sweet Lady,
To a poor fortune that will keep my self,
And Foot-man, as you see, to bear my sword
In Cuerpo after me I can at Court,
If J would show my gilt in the Presence, look
After the rate of some five thousands
Yearly in old rents, and were my Father once
Well wrapped in seare-cloth, I could fine for Sheriff.
Heart you spoil all.
Why?
She verily believd
You'd ne'er a father.
Lives your father, then Sir?
That Gentleman told me he was dead.
Tic true,
I had forgot my self, he was drowned, Lady,
This morning, as he went to take possession
Of a summer house and land in the Canaries.
Now you've recovered all.
D' you think I have
Not wit enough to lye?
Break your mind to her,
She does expect it.
But Lady this is not
The business which J came for.
I'm at leisure
To hear your business, Sir.
Mark that.
Indeed,
Sweet Lady, I've a motion which was once
Or twice this morning in my mouth, and then
Slipped back again for fear.
Cowards ne'er won
Ladies, or Forts, Sir.
Say then I should feel
Some motions, Lady, of affection; might
A man repair Pals with your heart, or put it
Into a Tinder-box?
How mean you, Sir?
Why is your heart a stone, or flint?
Be plain, Sir,
I understand you not.
Not understand me?
Y' are the first Lady that ere put a man
To speak plain English; some would understand
Riddles, and signs; say J should love you, Lady?
There should be no love lost, Sir.
Say you so?
Then by this air my teeth even water at you;
I long to have some Off-spring by you; we
Shall have an excellent breed of wits; J mean
My youngest son shall be a Poet; and
My Daughters, like their Mother, every one
A wench of the game. And for my eldest son,
He shall be like me, and inherit. Therefore
Lets not defer our joys, but go to bed
And multiply.
Soft, Sir, the Priest must first
Discharge his office. I doe not mean to marry
Like Ladies in New England, where they couple
With no more ceremony then birds choose their Mate
Upon St Valentines day.
Madam the Preacher
Is sent for to a Churching, and doth ask
If you be ready, he shall loose, he says,
His Chrysome else.
O miracle! out of
your little Ruff, Dorcas, and in the fashion?
Dost thou hope to be saved?
Pray Madam doe not
Abuse me; J will tell you more anon.
Tell him shees coming.
Sir, please you par∣take
Of a slight banquet?
Just as you are sate
I'll steal the Priest in.
Doe.
When you are joint,
Be sure you doe not oversee, but straight
Retire to bed, she'll follow.
Tic not three
A clock in the afternoon.
Tic but drawing
Your Curtains and you doe create your night.
All times to Lovers and New married folks
May be made dark.
J will then. By this Room
She's a rare Lady. J doe almost wish
I could change sex, and that she might beget
Children on me.
Nay will you enter?
Lady,
Pray will you show the way.
Most City like,
'Slid take her by the arm, and lead her in.
Your arm sweet Lady.
BUt are you sure the are they?
I'll not believe
My treacherous eyes again, but trust some dog
To guide me, if J did not see his Uncle
Coming this way, and Baneswright with him.
Who,
The fellow that brings Love to banes, and banes
To bare thighs about the town?
The very same, Sir;
The City Cupped that shoots arrows betwixt
Party and party. All the difference is,
He has his eyes, but they he brings together
Sometimes doe not see one another till
Till they meet in the Church.
What say you now if Ware-house
Should in displeasure marry?
Tic so, this fellow
In's company confirms me. Tic the very business
Why Plotwell has sent for us.
Here they come.
Prithee lets stand and overhear 'em.
Stand close then.
MAdam Aurelia is her name?
Her father
Was, Sir, an Irish Baron, that undid
Himself by house-keeping.
As for her birth
I could wish it were meaner. As many Knights
And Justices of peace as have been of
The Family are reckoned into the portion;
She'll still be naming of her Ancestors,
Ask Jointure by the Heralds book, and I
That have no Coat, nor can show azure Lions,
In Fields of Argent, shall be scorned; she'll think
Her Honour wronged to match a man that hath
No Scutcheons but them of his Company,
Which once a year doe serve to trim a Lighter
To Westminster and back again.
You are
Mistaken, Sir. This Lady as she is
Descended of a great house, so she hath
No Dowry but her Arms. She can bring only
Some Libbards heads, or strange beasts, which you know
Being but Beasts, let them derive themselves
From Monsters in the Globe, and lineally
Proceed from Hercules labours, they will never
Advance her to a husband equal to
Her self in birth, that can give Beasts too. She
Aims only to match one that can maintain
Her some way to her state. She is possessed
What streams of gold you flow in, Sir,
But can she
Affect my age?
I asked her that; and told her
You were about some threescore, Sr, and ten;
But were as lusty as one of twenty, (or
An aged Eunuch)
And what replied she?
she,
Like a true Lucrece, answered it was fit
For them to Marry by the Church book, who
Came there to cool themselves; But to a Mind
Chaste and endued with virtue, age did turn
Love into Reverence.
Or Sr Reverence.
Prythe observe.
Is she so virtuous then?
It is all the fault she has, she will out-pray
A Preacher at St Antlins; and divides
The day in exercise; I did commend
A great Precision to her for her woman.
Who tells me that her Lady makes her quilt
Her smocks before for kneeling.
Excellent Creature!
Then, Sir, she is so modest.
Too.
The least
Obscene word shames her, a lascivious Figure
Makes her doe penance; and she maintains the Law
Which forbids fornication, doth extend
To kissing too.
I think the time an age
Till the solemnity be past.
I have
Prepared her, Sr, and have so set you out!
Besides, I told her how you had cast of
Your Nephew, and to leave no doubt that you
Would ere be reconciled, before she went
To Church would settle your estate on her,
And on the Heirs of her begotten.
To make all sure,
We'll call upon my Lawyer by the way,
And take him with us.
you must be married, Sr,
At the French Church, J have bespoke the Priest;
One that will join you in the right Geneva form,
Without a licence.
But may a man
Wed in a strange tongue?
I have brought together
Some in Italian, Sr, the Language doth
Not change the substance of the Match; you know
No licence will be granted, all the Offices
Are before-hand bribed by your Nephew.
Well,
Lets to the Lady straight, to cross him, I
Would marry an Arabian, and be at charge
To keep one to interpret, or be married
In China Language, or the tongue thats spoke
By the great Cham.
Now Newcut, you perceive
My divination's true, this fellow did
Portend a wedding.
Plague of the prognostication.
Who'd think that Madam were the Party?
Oh Sr,
She'll call this wit to wed his bags, and lye
With some Platonic servant.
What if we
Before we go to Plotwell, went to her
And strived to dissuade her?
Lets make hast,
They'll be before us else.
BY this hand Lady you shall not deny me:
Since we are coupled, I shall think the Priest
Has not done all, as long as I'm a Virgin.
Will you not stay till night, Sir?
Night? No faith,
I've sworn to get my first child by day, you may
Be quick by night.
Madam, your Knight speaks reason.
I will both speak and doe it.
Well Sir, since
There is no remedy, your beds prepared;
By that time you are laid I'll come, Mean time
Isle pray that Gentleman to conduct you, There's
My Foot-man to pluck of your stockings.
Come Sir.
Sweet Lady stay not long.
I'll promise for her.
Faith I admire your temperance to let
Your Bride-groom go to bed and you not follow.
Were J in your case J should ha gone first,
And warmed his place.
Well wench but that thou hast
Revealed thy self unto me, I'd admire
To hear a Saint talk thus. To one that knows not
The Mystery of thy strange conversion, Thou
Would seem a Legend.
Faith I have told you all,
Both why I left my Schoole-Mistresse, who taught me
To confute Curling-Irons, and why I put
My self on this adventure.
Well wench my brother
Has had his plots on me, and Isle contribute
My help to work thy honest Ones on him.
Doe but perform thy task well and thou winn'st him.
Let me alone; never was man so fitted
With a chaste Bride, as I will fit his Uncle.
Madam your Knight doth call most fiercely for you.
Prithee, go tell him some business keeps me yet,
And bid him stay himself with this kiss.
BY your leave Madam, what for practise sake
Kissing your woman? Lord how a Ladies lips
Hate Idleness, and will be busied, when
The rest lies fallow, And rather then want action
Be kind within themselves, an't be t'enjoy,
But the poor pleasure of contemplation!
And how doe you find her Madam?
Stay wench.
Does it not grieve you now, and make you sigh,
Lord,
And very passionately accuse Nature,
And say she was too hard to make your woman
Able to kiss you only and doe no more?
Js it not pity but besides the gift
Of making Cawdles, and using of her Pencil,
She had the trick oth'other sex?
Me thinks
Your own good breeding might instruct you that
My house is not a new Foundation, where
You might, paying the rate, approach, be rude,
Give freedom to your unwashed Mouths.
My Lady
Keeps no poor Nuns that sin for victuals, for you,
With whom this dead vacation you may trade
For old silk stockings and half shirts. They say
You doe offend of the score, and sin in chalk,
And the dumb walls complain you are behind
In pension; so that your distressed Vestalls,
Are fine to foot their stockings, pay the Brewer,
And Land-Lords-rent in woman-kind, and long
More earnestly for the Term then Norfolk Lawyers.
Why you have got a second, Lady, your woman
Doth speak good Country language.
Offers at wit,
And shows teeth for a jest.
We hear you are
To marry an old Citizen.
Then surely
You were not deaf.
And doe you mean his age,
Which hath seen all the Kingdom buried thrice,
To whom the heate of August is December;
Who, were he but in Italy would save
The charge of Marble vaults, and cool the ayre
Better then ventiducts, shall freeze between
Your melting arms? Doe but consider, he
But marries you as he would doe his furs,
To keep him warm.
But he is rich, Sir.
Then,
In wedding him you wed more infirmities
Then ever Gallon wrote of; He has pains
That put the Doctors to new experiments.
Half his diseases in the City bill
Kill hundreds weekly. Alone Hospital
Were but enough for him.
Besides,
He has a cough that nightly drowns the Bell-man;
Calls up his Family; all his neighbours rise
And go by it, as by the Chimes and Clock.
Not four loame walls, nor saw dust put between,
Can dead it.
Yet he still is rich.
If this
Cannot affright you, but that you will needs
Be blind to wholesome counsill, and will marry
One who by the course of Nature ought to have been
Rotten before the Queens time, and in Justice
Should now have been some threescore years a Ghost,
Let pity move you; In this Match you quite
Destroy the hopes and fortunes of a Gentleman,
For whom had his penurious Uncle starved
And pined himself his whole life, to increase
The riches he deservest' inherit it
Had been his duty.
You mean his Nephew Plotwell;
A prodigal young man; one whom the good
Old man his Uncle kept to the Inns of Court,
And would in time ha made him Barrister;
And raised him to his satin Cap, and Biggon,
In which he might ha sold his breath far dearer,
And let his tongue out at a greater price,
Then some their Manors. But he did neglect
These thriving means; followed his loose companions,
His Brights and Newcuts; two, they say, that live
By the new Heresy Platonic Love.
Can take up silks upon their strengths, and pay
Their Mercer with an Infant.
Newcut!
I,
J doe observe her Character; well then
You are resolved to marry?
Were the Man
A statue, so it were a golden one,
I'd have him.
Pray then take along to Church
These few good wishes. May your husband prove
So jealous to suspect that when you drink
To any man you kiss the place where his
Lips were before, and so pledge meetings. Let him
Think you doe Cuckold him by looks; and let him
Each night, before you go to rest, administer
A solemn oath, that all your thoughts were chaste
That day, and that you sleep with all your hairs.
And which is worse, let him forget he lay
With you himself, before some Magistrate
Swear it was some other, and have it believed
Upon Record.
Sister J've left your Bridegroom,
Under this key locked in, to embrace your pillow.
Sure he has eat Eringoes, he's as hot—
He was about to fetch you in his shirt.
Hows this? his sister?
J conceive not this.
My Noble friends, you wonder now to hear
Me call her sister.
Faith, Sir, we wonder more
She should be married?
I'ft be your sister, we
Have labourd her she should not match her Uncle,
And bring forth Riddles, Children that should be
Nephews to their Father, and to their Uncle sons.
I laugh now at your ignorance: why these
Are projects, Gentlemen; fine gins, and projects.
Did Roseclaps boy come to you?
Yes.
I have
A rare Scene for you.
The boy told us you were
Upon a stratagem.
I've sent for Roseclap,
And Captain Quartfield to be here. J have
Put Salewit into orders, he's inducted
Into the French Church, you must all have parts;
Prithee speak out of Clouds.
By this good light
It were Justice now to let you both dye simple,
For leaving us so scirvily.
We were
Sent for in hast by the Benchers, to contribute
To one of'em thats Reader.
Come with me,
I'll tell you then. But first J'le show you a sight
Much stranger then the Fish.
Madam, here is Barneswright
And an old Merchant doe desire access.
Bid 'em come in.
Gentlemen, fall off.
If we be seen the plot is spoiled. Sister,
Now look you doe your part well.
J am perfect.
MAdam, this is the Gentleman J mentioned,
I've brought him here, according to my function
To give you both an interview; if you
Be ready, the Church and Priest are.
Is this, Sir,
The wealthy Merchant?
Madam, this is He
That if you'll wear the price of Baronies,
Or live at Cleopatra's rate can keep you.
Come you a Suitor, Sir, to me?
Yes Lady,
I did employ my speaker there, who hath
I hope informed you with my purpose.
Surely,
Your speaker then hath and; I understood
Him for my woman, if you can like her, Sir,
It being for ought I hear, all one to you,
I've wooed her for you. But for my self, could you
Endow me with the stream that ebbs and flows
In waves of gold, J hope you doe not think
Id so much stain my birth as to be bought
To match into a Company▪ Sir, plainly,
I'm matched already.
Baneswright, did not you
Tell me she'd have me?
Faith, Sir, I have ears
That might deceive me, but I did dream waking
If she were not the party. Madam, pray you
One word in private.
I'll prevent you; tic true,
My Brother laid the Scene for me, but since
W'have changed the plot, and tic contrived, my woman
Shall undertake my part.
I am instructed.
I was mistaken, Sir, indeed the Lady
Spoke to me for her Gentlewoman. How
Doe you affect her, Sir? you see she is
As handsome as her Lady, and her birth
Not being so high she will more size with you.
I say, J like her best. Her Lady has
Too much great house in her.
Tic right, this you
May govern as you list. I'll motion't: Lady,
Pray pardon our mistake, indeed our Errand
Was chiefly to your Gentlewoman.
Sir,
She's one whose fortune J so much intend,
And yours, Sir, are so fair, that though there be
Much disproportion in your age, yet J
Will over-rule her, and she shall refer
Her self to be disposed by me.
You much
Oblige me, Madam.
Dorcas, this is the Merchant
I have provided for you, he is old,
But he has that will make him young, much Gold.
Madam, but that I should offend against
Your care as well as my preferment, J de
Have more experience of the Man, J mean
To make my husband. At first sight to marry,
Must argue me of lightness.
Princes, Dorcas,
Doe woo by pictures, and Ambassadors,
And match in absent Ceremonies.
But
You look for some great portion, Sir.
Fair Mistress,
Your virtues are to me a wealthy Dowry.
And if you love me J shall think you bring
More then the Indies.
But, Sir,'t may be
You'll be against my course of life. J love
Retirement, must have times for my Devotion,
Am little used to company, and hate
The vanity of visits.
This makes me
Love you the more.
Then J shall never trust you
To go to sea, and leave me; I shall dream
Of nought but storms, and Pirates. Every wind
Will break my sleep.
J'le stay at home.
Sir, there
Is one thing more; J hear you have a Nephew,
You mean to make your Heir. I hope you will
Settle some Jointure on me.
He's so lost
In my intents that to revenge my self,
I take this course. But to remove your doubts,
I've brought my Lawyer with blank deeds,
He shall put in your Name, and J, before
We go to Church will seale'em.
On these terms
Where is your Priest, Sir?
He expects me at
The French Church, Mistress.
Come, when you have sealed, Sir,
I'll bear a part in the solemnity.
WEll Sister, by this hand J was afraid
You had marred all; but I am well content
You have out-reacht me. If she doe act it well now,
By Jove I'll have her.
She hath studied all
Her Cues already.
Gentlemen, how doe
You like the project?
Theirs was dull and cold
Compared to ours.
Some Poet will steal from us
And bring into a Comoedy.
The jest
Will more inspire then sack.
I have got Cipher
Over to our side too; He has been up and down
To invite Guests to the wedding. How now Salewit, like a Curate
Are they gone home?
Yes faith, for better, for worse;
I've read a Fiction out of Rablais to 'em,
In a religious tone, which he believes
For good French Liturgy. When J had done
There came a Christening.
And did thou baptise
Out of thy Rablais too?
No faith, J left 'em
In expectation of their Pastor.
Newcut,
Who does he look like in that dress?
Hum? why
Like a Geneva Weaver, in black, who left
The Loom and entered into the Ministry
For conscience sake.
Well Gentlemen you all
Doe know your parts, you Captain, and Baneswright
Go get your properties. For you two, These
Two Mules shall carry you in greater state,
And more ease then the Fistula. You sister
We will leave unto your Knight, to come anon.
Roseclap and J will thither straight. You Cipher
Know what you have to doe?
And as for me
I'm an invited Guest, and am to bless
The Venison in French, or in a Grace
Of broken English.
Before we doe divide
Our Army, let us dip our Rosemaries
In one rich bowl of sack to this brave girl,
And to the Gentleman that was my Fish.
Agreed, Agreed.
Captain you shall dip first.
MY dearest Dorcas, welcome. Here you see
The house you must be mistress of, which with
This kiss I doe confirm unto you.
Forbear, Sir.
How wife, refuse to kiss me?
Yes, unless
A sweeter ayre came from you; y' have turned my stomach.
I wonder you can be so rude to ask me,
Knowing your Lungs are perished.
This is rare.
That I should live to this great age, and never
Till now know I was rotten!
I shall never
Endure your Conversation; I hope you have
Contrived two Beds, two Chambers, and two Tables;
It is an Article that I should live,
Retired, that is, a part.
But pray you wife
Are you in earnest.
Do you think Jle jest with age?
Will you not lie with me then?
Did ever Man
Of your hairs ask such questions? J doe blush
At your unreasonableness.
Nay then—
First fit J should be buried?
I reach you not.
Why to lye with you were a direct Emblem
Of going to my grave.
I understand you.
I'll have your picture set in my wedding ring
For a Deaths head.
I doe conceive you.
I'd
Rather lie with an ancient Tomb, or embrace
An Ancestor then you. Do you think I'll come
Between your winding sheets? For what? to hear you
Depart all night, and fetch your last groan? and
In the morning find a Deluge on the floor,
Your Entrails floating, and half my husband spit
Upon the Arras?
I am married—
Then,
For your abilities, should twelve good women
Sit on these reverend locks, and on your heat,
And natural appetite, they would just find you
As youthful as a Coffin, and as hot
As the sultry winter that froze ore the Thames;
They say the hard time did begin from you.
Good, I am made the curse of Watermen.
Your humours come frost from you, and your nose
Hath ycicles in June.
Assist me patience.
Why hear you mistress, you that have a fever,
And Dog days in your blood, if you knew this
Why did you marry me?
Ha, ha, ha.
She laughs.
That your experienced ache, that hath felt springs
And falls this forty year, should be so dull
To think J have not them that shall supply
Your cold defects.
You have your servants then?
And I am forked? hum?
Doe you think
A woman young, high in her blood—.
And hot
As Goats, or Marmosets—
Apt to take flame at
Tvery temptation—
And to kindle at
The picture of a Man—
Would wed dust, ashes,
A Monument, unless she were—
Cracked, tried,
And broken up?—
Right, Sir, or lacked a Cloak?
Mischief and Hell, and was there none to make
Your cloak but I?
Not so well lined.
O you
Staid for a wealthy Cuckold, your tame beast
Must have his gilded horns.
Yes, Sir, Besides
Your age being impotent, you would I knew
In conscience wink at my stolen helps, if I
Took comfort from abroad.
Yes, yes, yes, yes,
You shall be comforted, I will maintain
A Stallion for you.
I will have friends come to me
So you'll conceal.
Alas, I'll be your Pander;
Deliver letters for you, and keep the door.
I'll have a woman shall doe that.
O impudence!
Unheard of impudence!
Then, Sir, I'll look
Your Coffers shall maintain me at my rate.
How's that?
Why like a Lady; for I doe mean
To have you Knighted.
I shall rise to honour.
Do you think I'll have your Factor move before me,
Like a Device stirred by a wier, or like
Some grave Clock wound up to a regular pace?
No, you shall have your Usher, Dame, to stalk
Before you like a buskind Prologue, in
A stately, high, majestic motion, bare.
I doe expect it; yes, Sir, and my Coach,
Six horses, and Postilion; four are fit
For them that have a charge of Children; you
And I shall never have any.
If we have,
All Middlesex is Father.
Then Jle have
My Footman to run by me when I visit,
Or take the ayre sometimes in Hide-park.
You,
Besides being chaste, are good at Races too?
You can be a Jockey for a need?
You're pleasant, Sir.
Why hark you, hark you, Mistress, you told me
You loved retirement, loved not visits, and bargained
I should not carry you abroad.
You? no;
First fit I should be seen at Court with you?
Such an odd sight as you, would make the Ladies
Have melancholy thoughts.
You bound me too
I should not go to Sea, you loved me so
You could not be without me.
Not if you staid
Above a year; for should I, in a long voyage,
Prove fruitful, I should want a father to
The Infant.
Most politiquely kind,
And like a Whore perfect in the mystery.
It is beyond my sufferance.
Pray, Sir, vex,
I'll in, and see your Jewels, and make choice
Of some for every day, and some to wear
At Masques.
Tic very good. Two days.
Of this I shall grow mad, or, to redeem
My self, commit some outrage—O—O—O.
SIr, I am sorry such a light offence
Should make such deep impressions in you; But that
which more afflicts me then the loss of my
Great hopes, is, that you're likely to be abused, Sir,
Strangely abused, Sir, by one Baneswright. I hear
You are to marry.
Did you hear so?
Madam Aurelia's woman.
What of her, Sir?
Why, Sir, I thought it duty to inform you,
That you were better match a ruined Bawd;
One ten times cured by sweating, and the Tub,
Or pained now with her fiftieth Ach, whom not
The power of Vsquebaugh, or heat of fevers
Quickens enough to wish; one of such looks,
That Judges of Assize, without more proof,
Suspect, arraign, and burn for witchcraft.
Why pray?
For she being past all motions, impotence
Will be a kind of chastity, and you
Might have her to your self, but here is one
Knows this to be—
An arrant whore?
I see
You have heard of her, Sir; Indeed she has
Done penance thrice.
How say you, penance?
Yes, Sir,
And should have suffered—
Carting should she not?
The Marshall had her, Sir.
I sweat, I sweat.
She's of known practice, Sir: the clothes she wears
Are but her quarters sins, she has no linen
But what she first offends for.
O blessed Heaven
Look down upon me.
Nay, Sir, which is more,
She has three children living, has had four.
How? Children? Children say you?
Ask him Sir,
One by a French Man.
Another by a Dutch.
A third, Sir, by a Moore; borne of two colours.
Just like a Sergeants Man.
Why she has known then
All Tongues and Nations.
She has been lain with far∣there
Then ever Coryat travaild, and lain in
By two parts of the Map, Afrique, and Europe.
As if the State maintained her to allay
The heat of Foreigners.
O—O—O—O.
What ail you, Sir?
O Nephew I am not well,
J am not well.
I hope you are not married.
It is too true.
God help you then.
Amen;
Nephew forgive me.
Alas good Gentleman.
Would you trust Baneswright, Sir?
Nephew in Hell
There's not a torment for him; O that I could
But see that cheating Rogue upon the rack now:
I'd give a thousand pound for every stretch,
That should enlarge the Rogue through all his joints,
And but just show him hell, and then recall
His broking soul, and give him strength to suffer
His torture often; J would have the Rascal
Think hanging a relief, and be as long
A dying as a chopped Eel, that the Devil
Might have his soul by pieces. who's here? a Sailor?
ARe you, Sir, Ware-house, the rich Merchant?
Sir,
My name is Ware-house.
Then you are not, Sir,
So rich by two ships as you were.
How mean you?
Your two ships, Sir, that were now coming home
From Ormus are both cast away; the wrack
And burden on the place was valewd at
Some forty thousand pound. All the men perished,
By the violence of the storm, only my self
Preserved my life by swimming, till a ship
Of Bristol took me up, and brought me home
To be the sad reporter.
Was nothing saved?
Two small Casks; one of blew Figs, the other
Of pickeld Mushromes; which served me for bladders,
And kept me up from sinking. It was a storm
Which, Sir, J will describe to you. The Winds
Rose of a sudden with that tempestuous force—
Prithee no more; I have heard too much. Would I
Had been in the tempest.
Good your worship give
A poor sea-faring man your charity,
To carry me back again. I'm come aboue
A hundred mile to tell you this.
Go in,
And let my Factor if he be come in,
Reward thee, stay and sup to.
Thank your Worship.
Why should I not now hang my self? Or if
It be a fate that will more hide it self,
And keep me from discredit, tie some weight
About my neck, to sink me to the bottom
Of the Thames, not to be found, to keep my body,
From rising up and telling tales. Two wrecks?
And both worth forty thousand pound there? why
That landed here, were worth an hundred. J
Will drown my self; I nothing have to doe
Now in this world but drown my self.
Fie these
Are desperate resolutions. Take heart, Sir,
There may be ways yet to relieve you.
How?
Why for your lost ships, say, Sir, I should bring
Two of the Assurance Office that should warrant
Their safe return, tic not known yet. Would you
Give three parts to secure the fourth?
I'd give
Ten to secure one.
Well, Sir, and for your Wife,
Say J should prove it were no lawful match;
And that she is another Mans? you'd take
the piece of service well.
Yes, and repent
That when I had so good an Heir begot
Unto my hand, I was so rash to aim
At one of my own dotage.
Say no more, Sir,
But keep the Sailor that he stir not. We'll
About it straight.
How much I was deceived
To think ill of my Nephew. In whose revenge
I see the Heavens frown on me; Seas and Winds
Swell and rage for him against me. But J will
Appease their furies, and be reconciled.
MUch joy to you, Sir, you have made quick dis∣patch
I like a man that can love, woo, &amp; wed,
All in an hour, my husband was so long
A getting me, so many friends consents
Were to be asked, that when we came to Church
It was not a Marriage, but our times were out,
And we were there made free of one another.
I looked to find you abed, and a young Sheriff
Begot by this. My husband, when I came
From Church, by this time had his Caudle; I
Had not a Garter left, nor he a point.
Surely all that my husband did the first
Night we were married, was to call for one
Of his wrought Caps more, to allay his Rheum.
We hear you've matched a Courtier, Sir, a Gallant;
One that can spring fire in your Blood, and dart
Fresh flames into you.
Sir, you are not merry.
Me thinks you doe not look as you were married.
You rather look as you had lost your Love.
Or, else as if your Spouse Sir, had rebuked you
How is it, Sir? you feel have brought along
My Fiddlers with me; my Wife and Ms Holland
Are good wind Instruments. Tic enough for me
To put on sadness.
You, Sir, have no cause.
Not I? ask Ms Scruple. I have lost
My Daughter, Sir she's stolen. Then, Sir, I have
A spend thrift to my son.
These are felicities
Compared to me. You have not matched a Whore, Sir,
Nor lost two ships at sea.
Nor you, J hope.
Truth is you are my friends. I am abused,
Grossly fetched over. I have matched a Stews;
The notedst woman of the Town.
Indeed J heard
She was a Chamber-maid.
And they by their place,
Doe wait upon the Lady, but belong
Unto the Lord.
But is this true?
Here was
My Nephew just now, and one Roseclap, who tell me
She has three Children living; one dapple grey,
Half Moore, half English. Knows as many men
As she that send by the Calendar, and divided
The nights of the year with several men.
Bless me good∣ness!
Then like a mad condemned to all misfortunes,
J have estated her in all I have.
How?
Under hand &amp; seal, Sir, irrecoverably.
LOok Ms Scruple here's your husband.
Bee
The leave of the fair Company.
My Husband?
His cold keeps him at home. surely J take
This to be some Dutch Elder.
Were is
The Breed an Breed-groome? Oh, Monsieur, J'me com't
To give you zhoy, and bless your Capòn; were
Is your fair Breed?
O Monsieur, you have joined me
To a chaste Virgin. Would when J came to you
Y' had used your Ceremonies about my Funeral.
Foonerall? Is your Breed dead?
Would she were.
I'd double your Fee, Monsieur, to bury her.
Ee can but little English.
No, J see
You are but new come over.
Dover? Tere
Eelanded.
J, Sir, pray walk in; that door
Will land you in my dining room.
Ee tank you.
This is the Priest that married us.
This is
A French-man first not?
It was at the French Church.
SEt'em down gently, so.
They make me sweat▪
Pictures quoth you? slight they have weight enough
To be the Parties.
My Lady, Sir, has sent
A Present to your wife.
What Lady pray?
Madam Aurelia, Sir.
Oh—
Sir, they are
A brace of Pictures with which my Lady prays
She will adorn her Chamber.
Male Pictures pray,
Or Female?
Why do you ask?
Because me thinks
It should be Mars and Venus in a Net,
Aretines postures, or a naked Nymph,
Lying asleep, and some lascivious Satyr
Taking her lineaments. These are pictures which
Delight my wife.
These are Night-peeces, Sir,
Lord how I long to see'em? I have at home
The finest ravished Lucrece!
So have I
The finest fall of Babylon! There is
A fat Monk spewing Churches, save your presence.
Pray will you open 'em.
My Lady charged us
None should have sight of 'em, Sir, but your wife.
Because you make so dainty, I will see'em.
Tic out of our Commission.
But not of mine.
Hell and damnation!
How do you like 'em, Sir?
Look they are pictured in their clothes.
They stir too.
Sir, they are drawn to life; a Masters Hand
Went to 'em, I assure you.
Out Varlets, Bawds,
Panders, avoid my house. O Devil! are you
My wives Night-peeces?
Sir, you are rude, uncivil,
And would be beaten.
We cannot come in private
On business to your wife, but you must be
Inquisitive Sir? Thank God tic in your own house,
The place protects you.
If such an Insolence
Scope unrevenged, henceforth no Ladies shall
Have secret servants.
Here she comes, we will ask
If she gave you Commission to be so bold.
Why this is far beyond example rare.
Now J conceive what is Platonic Love,
Tic to have men like Pictures brought disguised,
To Cuckold us with virtue.
HE would not offer't would he?
We have been
In danger to be searched; hereafter we
Must first be questioned by an Officer,
And bring it under hands we are no Men,
Or have nought dangerous about us, before
We shall obtain access.
We doe expect
In time your Husband to preserve you chaste,
Should keep you with a guard of Eunuchs; or
Confine you, like Italians, to a room
Where no male Beast is pictured, least the sight
Of ought that can beget, should stir desires.
I mar'le, Sir, who did licence you to pry,
Or spy out any friends that come to me;
It shows an unbred Curiosity;
Which J'le correct hereafter, you will dare
To break up Letters shortly, and examine
My Taylor, least when he brings home my gown
There be a Man in it. J'le have whom I list,
In what disguise I list, and when I list,
And not have your four eyes so saucy, to peep,
As if you by prevention meant to kill
A Basilic.
Mistress, doe what you list,
Send for your Couch out, lie with your Gallants there
Before us all. Or if you have a mind
To fellows that can lift weights, I can call
Two Footmen too:
You are too patient, Sir.
Send for the Marshall, and discharge your house.
Truly a handsome woman, what pity tic
She is not honest?
Two proper Gentlemen too.
Lord that such Pictures might be sent to me.
O Nephew welcome to my ransom; here
My house is made a new Erection; Gallants
Are brought in varied forms. Had I not looked
By providence into that frame, These two
Had been conveighd for Night-peeces and Lantskips
Into my chaste Brides chamber. Till now she took
And let her self out; now she will be able
To hire, and buy Offenders.
J'le ease you, Sir.
We Two have made a full discovery of her.
She's married to another man, Sir.
Good.
Nephew thou art my blessed Angel: who
Are these two?
Two that will secure your Ships;
Sent by the Office. Seal you, Sir, The have brought
The Assurance with'em.
Nephew thou were borne
To be my dear preserver
It is duty, Sir,
To help you out with your misfortunes. Gentlemen,
Produce your Instruments. Uncle put your seal,
And write your name here, they will doe the like
To the other parchment. So, now deliver.
I doe deliver this as my Act and Deed.
And we this as our Act and Deed.
Pray Gen∣tlemen
Be witness here. Upon a doubtful Rumour
Of two Ships wrecked as they returned from Ormus,
My Uncle Covenants to give three parts
To have the fourth secured. And these two here
As Delegates of the Office, undertake
At that rate to assure them. Uncle now
Call forth the Sailor, and send for the Priest
That married you.
Look here they come.
First then,
Not to afflict you longer, Uncle, since
We now are quit, know, all this was my project.
How?
Your two Ships are richly landed: if
You'll not believe me, here's the Sailor, who
Transformed to Cipher, can tell you.
Tic very true, Sir.
I hired this travailing case of one of the Sailors,
That came in one of 'em. They lie at Black-wall.
Troth I in pity, Sir, to Mr Plotwell,
Thought it my duty to deceive you.
Very well, Sir.
What are these Masquers too?
Faith, Sir, these
Can change their forms too. They are two friends
Worth threescore thousand pound, Sir, to my use.
Baneswright, and Captain Quartfield!
Nay old boy
The hast a good penny-worth on it. The jest is worth
Three parts of four.
Faith, Sir, we hope you'll pay
Tunnage and Poundage into the bargain.
O
You are a precious Rogue, you ha preferred me
To a chaste Lucrece, Sirrah.
Your Nephew, Sir,
Hath married her with all her faults, They are
New come from Church.
How?
Wonder not, Sir, you
Were married but in jest. It was no Churchforme,
But a fine Legend out of Rablais.
Troth
This reverend weed cast off, I'm a lay Poet,
And can not marry unless't be in a Play,
In the fifth Act, or so; and thats almost
Worn out of fashion too.
These are the two
That shout my son.
Lets have our money back.
But Uncle for the Jointure, you have made her,
J hope you'll not retract. That and three parts
Of your two Sips, besides what you will leave
Us at your death, will make a pretty stock
For young beginners.
Am I o'rereacht so finely?
But are you married, Sir, in earnest?
Troth,
We have not been abed yet, but may go,
And no Law broken.
Then I must tell you, Sir,
Y' have wronged me, and I look for satisfaction.
Why? I beseech you, Sir.
Sir, were not you
Betrothed once to my daughter?
And did not I,
And Ms Holland help to make you sure?
I doe confess it.
Bear witness, Gentlemen,
He doth confess it.
I'll swear it too, Sir.
Why
Then have you matched this woman?
Why? because
This is your Daughter, Sir, I'm hers by Conquest,
For this days service.
First possible I should
Be out in my own child so?
I told you husband.
Surely my spirit gave me it it was she.
And yet to see, now you have not your Wire,
Nor City Ruff on, Mistress Sue, how these
Clothes doe beguile. Jntruth I took you for
A Gentlewoman.
Here be rare plots indeed.
Why how now, Sir, these young heads have outgone us.
Was my Son of the plot too?
Faith, Sir, he
Is married too; I did strike up a wedding
Between him and my sister,
Look, Sir,
They come without their Maiden heads.
Why this
Is better still. Now, Sir, you might have asked
Consent of Parents.
Pray forgive me, Sir.
I thought I had match a Lady, but she proves—
Much better, Sir; I'd chide you as a Fish
But that your choice pleads for you.
Mother pray
Salute my wife, and tell me if one may not
Lie with her lips; nay you too, Mr Holland;
You taught her to make Shirts and Bone-lace; she's
Out of her time now.
I release her, Sir.
I took your sister for a Lady, Nephew.
I kept her like one, Sir, my Temple scores
Went to maintain the Title, out of hope
To gain some great match for her, which you see
Is come to pass.
Well, Mr Seathrift, things
Are just fallen out as we contrivd'em; I
Grieve not I am deceived. Believe me, Gentlemen,
You all did your parts well; it was carried cleanly;
And though I could take some things ill of you
Fair Mistress, yet it was plot, and I forget it;
Lets in and make 'em Portions.
Lead the way, Sir.
Pray stay a little.
More Revelations yet?
I all this while have stood behind the Curtain;
You have a brother, Sir, and you a father.
If he doe live, I have.
He in his time
Was held the wealthiest Merchant on the Exchange.
Tic true, but that his shipwrecks broke him.
And
The debt for which he broke I hear you have
Compounded.
I am paid it.
Then I thank you.
My brother Plotwell!
Son I wish you joy.
O my blessed stars! my Father.
And to you fair Mistress
Let it not breed repentance that I have,
For my security to scope your Father,
A while descended from my self to this
Unworthy shape. Now I can cast it off,
And be my true self. I have a ship which fame
Gave out for lost but just now landed too
Worth twenty thousand pounds towards your Match.
Better and better still.
Well what was want∣ing
Unto our joys and made these Nuptials
Imperfect. Brother you by your discovery
Have fully added.
Sir, The two Sheriffs are
Within and have both brought their Wives.
The Feast
Intended for my wedding shall be yours.
To which I add may you so love, to say
When old, your time was but one Marriage Day.
THE Author was deceived, for should the Parts,
And Play which you have seen, plead Rules &amp; Arts,
Such as strict Critics write by, who refuse
T'allow the Buskin to the Comic Muse,
Whose Region is the People, every strain
Of Royalty being Tragic, though none slain:
He'd now, Great Sir, hold all his Rules untrue,
And thinks his best Rule is the Queen and You.
He should have searched the Stories of each Age,
And brought five Acts of Princes on the Stage.
He should have taken measure, and raised sport,
From persons bright, and glorious as your Court▪
And should have made his Argument to be
Fully as high, and great as They that see.
Here, he confesses, you did nothing meet
But what was first a Comoedy in the street:
Cheapside brought into verse, no passage strange
To any here that hath been at the Exchange.
Yet he hopes none doth value it so low
As to compare it with my Lord Majors show.
Tic so unlike, that some, he fears, did sit,
Who missing Pageants did or'esee the wit.
Since then his Scenes no pomp or Highness boast,
And low things graced show Princes Princes most,
Your Royal smiles will raise't, and make him say,
He only wrote, your liking made the Play.
ONce more the Author, ere you rise, doth say
Though he have public warrant for his play,
Yet he to the Kings command needs the Kings Writ
To keep him safe, not to b'arraign'd for Wit.
Not that he fears his name can suffer wrack
From them who six-pence pay, and six-pence crack.
To such he wrote not; though some parts have been
So like here, that They to Themselves came in.
To Them who call it reproof to make a face,
Who think they judge when they frown ith'wrong place;
Who if they speak not ill of the Poet, doubt
They loose by the Play, nor have their two shillings out,
He says, he hopes, they'll not expect he'd woo,
The Play being done, they'd end their sour looks too.
But before you who did true Hearers sit,
Who singly make a box, and fill the Pit,
Who to his Comoedy read, and unseen,
Had thronged Theaters, and Black-Friers been,
He for his Doom stands; your Hands are his Baize;
Since They can only clap, who know to praise.

ANother Tragedy? What will become
Of the soft Muse? She'll shortly have no room
On this transformed stage. Ladies shall not blush,
Nor smile under their fans: nor he in plush,
That from the Poets labours in the pit
Informs himself for the exercise of wit
At Taverns, gather notes. Stay, I should be
A Prologue, not a Satire. You shall see
A piece from a rich subject drawn; but how
The workmanship will please, and you allow
The imperfect colours and the weak design,
Let your own judgements tell you, and not mine.
The Author warrants us the story's clear;
Unless to fit the Stage he doth transfer
Some actions that were ones to other men:
The places sometimes changed too for the Scene.
Which is translated as the music plays
Betwixt the acts: wherein he likewise prays
You will conceive his battles done, and then
The method shall appear, in which his pen
Hath smoothly dressed the argument. It is free
As ever Play was from scurrility.
Nor need you Ladies fear the horrid sight:
And the more horrid noise of target sight
By the blue-coated Stage-keepers: our spheres
Have better music to delight your ears,
And not a strain that's old, though some would task
His borrowing from a former play. We ask
Your patience but two hours, by which time hee
Shall either dye or live to Poesy.
HEre's the right use of victory, to tame
Our furies with soft case and wantonness,
After so many travels. Had our Hanniball
Possessed himself of Rome without a Capua,
The conquest had been poor.
These spoils of beauty,
And free ones too, that uncompel'd will run
To embrace a Soldier; rock him in her arms;
Sing him asleep, and with her icy fingers
K•mbing the knotted curls of his black hair
So long neglected, make her self the ravisher:
O•l' is Elysium.
Nay, to have such change
Of 〈…〉; as if their inventions
〈…〉, busy to make our delights
The object of their care. Here we are feasted
With Chalcedonian Tuning; Rhodian guilt heads,
And more than Simian gluttony. We drink
No wine, but of Campania's Mascicus,
Or grape crowned Alone. Boys more fair than hee
That bears Ioves Cup, rapt on the dusky wings
O•'s sky-borne Eagle, serve the banquet up
In golden dishes, or Corinthian plate,
Luxuries chiefest.
To crown the entertainment,
Here sits a Lady, Hebe never blushed
A colour like her check: and in her eye
A thousand Cupids move in wanton friskes,
To catch the gazers. There's another decked
In the Seas riches, which the Negro dives for:
Her pearls reflection dimacing the dark tapers,
As if all light were borrowed from those Suns
Their orient roundness mocks us with. A third
Betrays through a transparent lawn the beauty
Of a complexion, white and red did never
Mix•a more perfect; and a shape exact
As Natures first Pandoras. The possession
After desire hath made a preparation
In every sense to entertain these joys,
Can earth afford a Heaven, and this not bee
The best hope ever feigned?
Then to be clothed
In silks of Tyrian dye; tosleepe on down,
And waking clasp a Goddess in ones arms,
Lovely as Cytharea; revel sometimes,
And dance to th'Mermaides music, 'till the night
Is made one artificial day, inverting
The course of time and's actions: oh delights,
Beyond weak comprehension! Wee begin
To taste them without sense, did not diversity
Whet appetite anew?
Yet so much change
Should make invention barren: but it is fruitful,
Pregnant, and teemes as fast as it is delivered.
Delicious Capua!
Pleasures only storehouse!
Were I an Hanniball? and conquest quiet me
As fair as day-light spreads his crystal wings.
One Capua should ransom all.
What's here?
She courts him with as earnest zeal, as Cynthia
Would her Endymion, or the gray-ey'd Morn
Her early Cephalus.
Now by my Sword.
Is that a Soldiers oath in Capua?
By the bright tresses of my Mistress hair,
Fine as Arachne's web, or Gosshimere:
Whose curls when garnished with their dressing, show
Like that spun vapour when it is pearled with dew.
Or by the Sunshine of her crystal eyes,
Wherein the God of Love his wet wings dry's
After his bathing in sad Lovers tears.
These are the only oaths a Soldier swears.
What should we doe with swords?
Indeed it is true
Their bloody use hath been so long neglected,
And for my part I am so cloyed with women,
Mine must bee filed to powder, and prepared
To bee their Physic: the greene-sicknesse else
Will not bee cured by me.
Mine shall be drawn
To wear for pins: and that which oft hath reigned
The blood of Romans on my hilts and hand,
Wearied almost with slaughter, shall bee touched
With trembling fingers, white as Othris snow;
Whilst the soft handler starts, if by mischance
The point but prick her skin, and must consult
With some learned unguentary to prevent
Th'invisible scarre. Why here we cannot quarrel
Amongst ourselves for wenches. There's a Lady,
As mean a beauty heretofore hath been
The ground of a sad war, or in a Camp
Sur'd up a mutiny: wee cannot envy it,
That he, a common Soldier, valours cipher,
One only pressed to make the number up,
Enjoves her wholly, and perhaps hath change.
Nay, stands upon nice 〈◊〉 for his reward;
And must bee hired to pleasure, such as some
Would even through any danger to embrace.
Prithee observe..
Why should I be denied?
Am I not fair enough? My beauty fresh
As the new springs, when wanton Phoebus mounts
His ournish't chariot early to salute her,
And k•sse dew from her cheeks.
There are as feet
And free. A pension Lady must be thought of;
I cannot else be sportive.
Is tha all?
Isle full thy burgnet with Iberian gold
Stamped into medals; Sell my wanton treasury,
Rings, Jewels, Catkanets, ever thou shalt want,
But what thy wish can covet.
This old buff
Would be translated.
Into Persian mantles,
Richly embroidered; no rough pelt of thrumbes
To fight with weather. Shalt be clothed in silks,
Such as may vie for touch with their softness
When it is calmest, and no violent gust
Doth wave it into wrinkles.
I must eat too.
Nothing but choicest caddies, and drink wine
That shall have pearls dissolved in it. Come let's hasten
To our delights. I have prepared a bed
Of artificial Roses mixed with down;
Wherein our dalliance we will emulate,
The Cyprian Queen and her loved warrior,
When in her Ivory arms she did embrace
His Iron sides.
Soft Lady, there are yet
Stricter conditions. 'I is not come to that.
I must not be confined to times or place;
Nor to your single number. I must change
As I see cause.
Shalt be thine own disposer.
He minister, and like a hand-maide waite
When thou wilt grace another; nor rapine,
But with a patient longing.
On these terms
I feel a provocation. Come. 
Did ease
Ever before produce such acts of shame?
No matter. It is a better life than war
Affords her sons. A hard cold bed of earth:
Sleeps broken with a thousand apprehensions
Of danger; diet course, and seldom seasonable;
Hunger and thirst; and death each hour presented.
Let us translate our Carthage unto Capua;
We shall not need to toil in blood and sweat
For more enlargement.
How doth he like this softness? it agrees not
With his rough nature.
Music every place
Surfeits with this lasciviousness.
March on my merry mates
To Venus wars:
You need not fear your pates,
You shall receive no wounds nor scars,
You may come naked to the fight:
We'll have no other vesle but night.
Only you must not see
The blushes of your enemy.
The loving battail's set,
And we began
To counter meet
With active striving who shall win.
I saint and yet me thinks you yield,
Both lose, and yet both win the sealed.
Recover strength, and then
We'll to these pleasant wars again.
Bravely maintained and well come off on both sides.
Curse on this case. You're well met noble Captains,
How doth your courage brooke this silken slavery?
Is it not an easy bondage to be tied
In bracelets of a wanton Ladies hair?
And chain your daring spirits to the awe
Of every glance her eye shoots? Tell me truly
How doe the pleasures of this Capua
Relish upon your senses? are they not
Even what desire can shape?
They are my Lord
Most absolute.
And you are pleased with them?
They cannot bee refused, being offered us
So ap•y after labour, as the fruits
And harvest of our pains. What stupid earth
Can be so void of apprehension,
As not to think them blessings?
That can Hanniball;
Who through the twarthy vizard age and cares
Have tanned his face with, blushes at the change
Of Soldiers into women. Why in stead
Of Plume-crown'd crests wear you not tyres? and deck
Your necks with gems, in stead of arming them
With Corslets? Lay by all command, save only
To set your distaffe-servants tasks, and study
Lascivious dressings, not wars discipline?
Better employ invention how to court
A Mistress in the fashionable garb,
Than to contrive a useful stratagem
Where force prevails not.
Whom have we to sight with?
Lead us again to action, we'll express
A courage doubled by this little rest:
And from the hopes of such another conquest
We will act wonders, to make victory
Dote on our valours.
You like Carthaginians
Speak from the sonles of men. Muster your Soldiers:
We will again to Rome, and with the terror
Of our approach make earthquakes in the hearts
Of her gowned Senators; burn the proud trophies,
Adorn her Capitol, or make them scar-crowes:
Bury her high-ascending Towers in heaps
Of their own ruins; and till Tyber's died
With blood of his own children, not an arm
Shall cease from slaughter. Have we cut our way
Thorough Mountains, and thawed rocks of Ice for passage
To reach the head of Rome, and shall we not
Triumph in her rich spoils? Yes; we will triumph.
Or by the Genius of my native Carthage,
And the religious oath I made my Father,
When yet my youth had seen the progress but
Of nine suns through the twelve celestial mansions,
Isle level all the rugged Appennines;
And mount the humblest valleys, 'till their heads
Be wrapped in clouds; whence thunder shall not force me,
Till I survey the plains of Italy,
Like earth manured chalked with the bones of Romans,
After their slesh is buried in the gorges
Of Kites and Vultures.
Speak like Hanniball.
What Lady's that?
Shoe's of Salapia.
She's lovely. What unusual passions
Soften me on a sudden? I me thinks
Could play with ayre, and wanton with the breath
Of such a Mistress: court her amorously,
And not mistake a phrase, nor fright her tenderness
With any repetitions of wars horrors.
Cease your rebellion thoughts. I must be man,
And keep my freedom.
Dost observe his eye
How it is fixed?
What did creation mean
A woman for, but pleasure? Should not I
Pursue it then since it is the end of all
We either doe or wish? it is actions soul
That makes it live. I must enjoy it this way.
Desire's a law set down by natures Counsel,
And not to be disputed.
So my Lord!
Example shall direct us: we may well,
If Anniball turn Courtier.
One at once.
Sweet gentlemen. Though I should covet change
At once l'de not admit plurality.
To you (fair storehouse of your sexes excellence)
I would direct the language of my heart.
It is sure a noble dialect, my Lord,
That must express it.
Lady it can speak.
Nothing but passion. You have wounded it.
And from the self same eye that shot the dart
I must have balm to cure it.
Y' are my Lord
A conqueror; and may command the wills
Of all beneath you.
But I am your captive.
And in that pleasant bondage would abide,
Though I might force my ransom.
Violence
Would it become those virtues same proclaim's
To have possessed you: and I dare be confident
Nothing could tempt you to turn ravisher,
Though I should boast virginity.
Suspect
Of such an ill, wrong's your own innocence.
My love is zealous, and the passive flame
Fed with a pure desire. I would enjoy you
To mix our souls, not merely to delight
The wanton senses.
How can you, a man
Whom custom hath habituate in th'extremes
Of cruelty, change nature? and perhaps
Your first, innate, and not a second, only
Borne out of use. Me thinks it is not possible
Your thoughts should be possessed of other objects,
Then what wars horror paint's with bloody colours.
Love and a Lady are for such as case
Hath softened into women: Hanniball
Hath nothing in him, but what's masculine:
So hardened too, that those weak sires can never
Alter his temper.
Yes; your eyes have done it.
Although my skin be horny, and my flesh
Almost insensible through daily weight
Of heavy arms, the substance of my heart
Is flexible, and takes impressions
Of love from your perfections. It not derogates
From the best difference in mans composition
To love: for that best speaks him man, and argues
Hee hath a spirit capable of things
Worthy his being. Come then perfect me
With your addition: make my captivity
A conquest, and Isle fixc.
That were enough
To brand you with a lasting infamy.
You have designs for action. Should you stop
The prosecution of a war begun
With such success, and only for a woman,
To would make you be the scorn of men; the subject
Of jesters libels. I could court your valour
As you are Hanniball: but as a lover
The thought of that cools all affection.
Had I at Cannas been, or Thrasimenus,
Guirt in an Amazonian male, my head
Wrapped in an Iron tiara, and my hand
Armed with a sword, I would have kept the side
Of Hanniball, to dote upon those wonders
His conquering arm then acted.
As from water
Cast on bitumen, so from these sharpe checks
My flame increases. You express a soul
Makes others valours but derivative
From yours; as if the spring of all flowed thence;
And we but drank our small proportions
From your abundance. Our embraces would
People the wasted world with Warriors.
Whence speaks your hast? and what?
I come from Spain,
And bring important news; but sad.
Shall wee
By change ride through the Zodiac of your pleasures,
And feast our selves in every house?
You still
Mistake the sign.
It is not in Virgo sure.
Nor yet in Taurus, though I have a husband.
You two are Gemini: a pair of—Captains.
She slouts us sure.
What should this courtship mean?
Maharball and Himulco that were character'd
For valiant Captains, turned sinock-souldiers?
And Hanniball?
The ayre of Capua
Hath not so changed us, but we can preserve
Our modesties.
Oh miracle! that Capua
Hath honest women in it.
Will Hanniball
Attend my message?
Hast thou brought her pearls
Ravished from necks of richest Roman dames?
I'll pave the path we tread to Hymens joy
With spovles of all the cities I have conquered.
N•t of new Carthage; Sagunt; Locris; Tarracon.
All these are re-orecome by Scipio;
In Spain he only triumph's.
Doth not Hannibal?
Mind the sad news? Revenge if nothing else
Should wing him to new conquest.
I perceive
Errors in my behaviour. Court a woman,
When I should threaten vengeance! But shoe's fair.
Hang beauty: that and ease are the only engines
To ruin virtue. Ladies pray withdraw:
The affairs of men are handling.
May they prove
Your honours more in valour th〈◊〉n in love. 
I am prepared: and if there were an accident
That did exceed in horror, praise or wonder,
Discourse it lively, that it may impress
Something within to beget an act
Shall parallel it.
That must be new Carthage
Her siege and taking. When the Roman general
Approached the walls, a cold fear shoke her Genius:
The earth groaning with weight of such a multitude.
His Navy likewise at that instant made
A cloud upon the Sea. So round about
The city was beguirt. Our resolution
Mix't with despair soon armed us; and th'assault
Being sudden, we did doe before consider:
Yet what we did thus with the walls height proving
Successful, we had respite to advice.
The Sea we thought sullicient to defend
That pait it washes, and directed all
Our force to th'Isthmus: where we sallied forth.
The enemy retir's; but out of policy
To draw us farther on. And now the Sun
Surveyed us from his height; when suddenly
A violent North-winde joining with the ebb
Swept all the channel dry. Of which the Romans
Being informed by certain Fishermen
Seize the opportunity, and freely pass
To the unmanned walls; entering without resistance.
What more they, being fully conquerors, did,
Need's no relation: custom shew's it Hannibal.
The example made some other cities yield;
Some policy won; some force; some treachery
Deliv'rd up: all are possessed by Scipio.
Then Rome shall ransom them. Revenge is able
Out of a flinty cowardice to strike
The fire of valour, with that new supply
I doe expect from Carthage we will to Rome,
And emulate this victory; nor let it
Be your affliction that blind chance hath robed
Your former labours of their due reward;
Rome will repair all.
Cozen what answer send's the Carthage Senate
To my demands? Thy looks speak discontent;
As if the business of thy errand choak't
The unwilling passage. Utter it; my breast
Is proof against all misfortune.
I must then
Deliver a relation of ingratitude
Beyond example. Those whom you have made
Masters of wealth and honour, and released
Their palsied age from many a coward fear,
Not minding the rich benefits you have done them,
Deny your need relief. If you want aid,
They say your conquest's but a lying rumour:
Nor will they credit doubtful, testimonies
Of any presents. They not stick to call
The ground of this your war in Italy
Your own ambition, not their sa•ety: malice
Of Hannos faction having fra•n'd pretences
To cloud the glory of your actions.
Which to confirm the more, see their command
That you should instantly withdraw your forces,
And to return to Carthage.
Not till now?
When in my talons I had almost seized
Romes Eagle, and prepared my sharpened beak
To prey upon her hear?
Tic likewise feared
That Massanissa hath forsaken Carthage.
So that unless some policy can win
Syphax unto us, we must never more
Expect Numidian aid. His Counselors
Seem to desire it; for they wish your presence:
And that you'll put th'instructions here contained
Into a sudden act.
Must I then leave
Rome unsubverted? So a man that strives
To make himself eternal by erecting
Of some stupendous monument, is forced
To his last quiet ever the work be perfect.
Leaving it but a lame and half design
Of his ambition.
Hath not Hanniball
His forces here? Let's forward with that strength
Which yet is left us; nor regard the ties
Their doting policies would chain us with.
Valour consists in hearts more than in number.
Let's on to Rome.
No: passion shall submit
Unto my best part. Conquest of my self
Shall speak me more in this, then if my power
Had levelled her seven hills. I leave her only
To grow more worthy of my victory.
I will obey, though each unwilling step
Wounds me beyond the cure of common patience.
Commands of power must not be withstood.
Great actions make men great; good actions good.
'T will prove I fear lame policy to halt
Betwixt these factions, awed by two such spirits,
As ne'er were stilled from envy or revenge.
Brave Hanniball; brave Scipio; great Carthage;
But greater Rome: whose Eagle eyes have gazed
Against the Sun of many a glorious triumph!
When the bright beams reflected from their riches
Have blinded day-light, as if heavens great eye,
Borrowed his only from them.
Carthage is
Oar ancient friend, and friendship long continued
Should not be easily lost.
A useful tenant
Where the condition's private; but in Kings
It doth not hold. Wars chance is variable:
And he that now is victor may be conquered
Before his peace be settled. From example
We must consult our safety, more than from
A m•rall precept. Hath not Scipio
Got Spa••• from Hanniball, and joined unto him
Massilia's King? Are not their armies flushed
With the rich spovles of Sagunt? and who knows
But they'll transport then forces, and begirt
Carthage it self. It is better that we yield
Freely to amity, than be compelled,
Than Scipio must bee welcome.
But if fortune
Prosper my counterplot, he will be greeted
With an affront shall cloud his entertainment;
And dim the painted glory of that pomp
Your complement intends. Our youthful King
Must not direct our counsels; nor affairs
Of state be ordered by th'affection
Of one so weak in policy, indulgent
To his own passions. Carthage is set down
By our experience for Numidia's love,
And shall possess it.
We may then consider,
The Carthaginian General is a man
Worn with employment into more decay
Of strength and years, than can give any hopes
Of a continuance. Romes greene Champion
Is full of growing sap to make him spread.
Whilst the other like an aged Ok that long
Hath fought with tempests, and withstood the rage
Of burning ayre, now yields to every gust.
A bough or arm, 'till one more violent
Shatters the dried limbs, or quite roots it up.
Tic better to provide for lasting state,
Then merely to prevent a present fate.
Then Scipio must be welcome.
But if Syphax
Would hear our reasons.
Crates you have been
Our worthy counsellour, and by your wisdom
Steered government in a right course whilst yet
Our youth did want it: but we are now grown
Riper in judgement, and we can distinguish 
The different grounds of any politic act.
Nor doe we find it safe in rules of state
If Seipio be not welcome. What's your hast?
The Roman General is arrived, and entering.
And no feigned thunder to inform us of it
From the loud voice of slocking multitudes,
Should throng to bid him welcome?
Hoe's scarce known
To any but my self. His train is private,
Without due state: only some needful servants
To wait upon his person.
Were they his army,
I would exhaust my treasury to feast them:
And every common soldier should drink healths
In his Corinthian Goblet, which should be
His largess likewise. Let our ministers
Fill the shrill throats of wars loud instruments.
And Dodonean brass be beaten deaf
Whilst it proclaims his welcome. Let the Sea
Echo the sounds to Sagant, and return
Their shoots again. 
Never did Syphax joyful arms embrace
A guest of so rich value, in whose mind
Worlds of heroic virtues are congested
To make him up a worthy.
I'll not answer
Your kindness Syphax with a complement.
My tongue's not oyld with slattery. I have stolen
A little time from action, to inform
Numidia's King, how Rome, by my advice,
Hath chosen him a favourite of her cause
That suffers by false Carthage. The success
Of my recovering Spain, hath given new hopes
Unto her fainting spirits, that were near
Their last expiring by the massacres
The Carthaginian made. Six Consuls have
Already fallen: my Father, and mine Uncle;
Sempronius; Terentius and Flaminius;
And last Marcellus, who received his death
Even in the sight of Rome. Yet there's a Scipio
Surviv's to conquer him, or dye in th'enterprise.
And that brave Scipio shall not want what aid
My person, or my Kingdom can afford him.
Rome shall make great esteem of Syphax friendship
And when she shall be wrapped in silken wings
Of victory and peace, his statue crowned
Shall grace the triumph.
I should rather joy
To see him chained a captive, though my se••e
And family were sold to be his ransom,
In Carthage quarrel.
This cold entertainment
Doth make me jealous.
See: how soon their eyes
Have found each other?
Sure it is Hanniball.
His name and nature's stamped upon his brow;
I in those wrinkles read it: valour mixed
With cruelty; to which ambition only
As the first wheel in engines moves the rest.
That eye he lost passing the fens of Arnus;
And such a look his counterfeit is drawn with.
If there be treachery.
What would Hanniball?
Is it Hanniball? We are betrayed by Syphax.
What art?
Romes General, and thy enemy.
Ha! Scipio! Then the character report
Give's of hem's false. He scorns ignoble ways
Of honour; to ore-come by treachery.
I thought the same of Hanniball.
And findst it.
Tic only thy conspiracy with Syphax;
Who makes his Court a privilege for that
Fame will proclaim with blushes.
Why this uproar?
Syphax you are treacherous.
To Rome and Scipio.
To Hannibal and Carthage.
Now observe
How he will calm the tempest.
What to answer
From sudden doubts you both possess me with,
I cannot easily resolve. A jealousy
Is sometimes strengthened by th'excuse should kill it.
Yet if your confidence will give credit to
A Kings religious oath, by all that makes
The sacred difference in me I am free
From thought of ill to either. Your arrivals
Were unexpected; and if eiders danger
Be smothered in intent, you brought it with you:
Which Isle prevent, if all Numidia's strength
Can doe it. Think not me perfidious,
For then Isle doubt you: since self cvills are
Most commonly the parents of suspicion.
But for your own mistrusts, you're safer here
Than in your own camps, guarded with a maze
Of your best soldiers.
It is a satisfaction.
I bless the occasion makes us meet: my longings
Were violent to see thee Scipio.
Mine more to see thee Hanniball; but rather
Armed in the sealed, prepared for an encounter,
Then here to parley.
Doubt not such a greeting
When next we meet.
I needs must interpose,
And moderate this contention. Pray my Lords
Let me be powerful to dispose your tempers
For other mild impressions, that my Court
For entertaining two such enemies
At once, be made discourse for after-ages.
A banquet waits ye: music usher it. 
Thus peace bids Soldiers welcome.
Syphax no.
Think of Romes cause, and let your feast be seasoned
With saith to that. If thou prove treacherous,
Expect a vengeance, justice never yet
Gave severe execution to a greater.
I must be gone; th'affaires of war attend me
When I have settled Romes peace, we'll comply
In the effects: action 'till then must live
By blood and labour. Hanniball farewell:
Next greeting will be rougher.
Not to be calmed
With words. Grow strong; be still a conqueror,
Till I shall conquer thee.
Thou art but flattered
By an ambition vainer than thy dreams.
Ten Carthages and Hannibals will not weigh
Equal with the atchievment.
One Hanniball
And Carthage poised but in an equal scale
With twenty Romes, and twenty Scipios,
Shall weigh like led against feathers.
Proud insister
Upon his own slight merits! Remember Syphax
Thy vow hath made thee Romes.
Which Isle preserve
As sacredly inviolate, as if
Eternal seals had ratified it. Usher
The Roman General forth. 
Have words such power
Upon our General to deject him thus?
My brain is labouring.
Isle help to deliver it.
As giddy fancies when they doe present
Delightful shadows, seem to please the sense
When it is quiet, and not capable
Of any object, 'till the dreamers joy
Suddenly wakes him, and the false impressions
Vanish to their first nothing, so have I
Flattered my hopes.
I prophecy success
Despite of Scipio. Syphax Counselors
(Whose secret correspondence with us
Taught the great means by which their Masters love
Must be regained) a long experience
Confirms our friends: then prosecute it thoroughly.
My Lord' till now the accidents
Cause by the Romans presence did prevent us
From giving satisfaction to your doubts,
Which were but justly grounded. Our young King
Is full of's youthful passions, and so violant
In the prosecution ofthem counsel rather
Doth set a keener edge upon his appetite.
We therefore give him way. But if we cannot
Reduce his actions to a rule of judgement,
We'll openly oppose him, or conspire
As against a tyrant that makes will his law.
See hoe's returned: be confident.
How! whispering!
I doe suspect.
If Syphax dare be private.
Dare Hannibal! Had thou intents more bleak
Than ever night gave execution to,
Even in Carthage Senate house as well
As in mine own Court, I dare stand th'encounter
Of single Hannibal. Withdraw.
They must not.
The wrongs thou hast done Carthage must be witnessed:
That when same speaks them loudest, partial men
Make not their incredulity an excuse
For what no satisfaction can restore,
Thy honour lost in infamy.
Thou tempt'st me
With these dark prefaces. Yet thy upbraydings
Doe seem so frivolous, my patience rather
Laughs at their vainness. Clear my understanding
Without more circumstance, for yet my innocence
Knowesnot to accuse my self, unless for•giving
Thy saucy taunts a privilege.
What error
But to defend it self will strive (though vainly)
To mock truth out of truth? Well Syphax knows
The expectation of a state deluded
Cannot but trouble it. A King is more
Than a mean person, bounded with dimensions
Of the bare man. His actions are his peoples;
And what he doth or suffers they must stand.
Consider then when Carthage shall call up
Revenge, and with all force pursue the injury
To satisfaction; when her soldiers
(Whom custom hath made pitiless) shall plough
The wombs of teeming Mothers with their fashions,
To prevent the issue that might vindicate
A father slain; make your Numidian Virgins
The ruins of their pleasure, and not leave
An altar to your gods, nor private Lar
That may defend a household from their violence:
When these (whose very repetition carry's
Horror enough to fright men into peace)
Shall happen—
When they shall! it rather seems
A positive threat. Tell Carthage were her power
Of an extent that limits could not bound
With any circumscription, I'd not fear it.
To dye for Rome were above victory.
Furnished ten thousand choice Numidian Horsemen
To wait on Scipio. Why are our commands
No more respected? Isle have execution
Forerunne my Edicts that concern the good
Of Rome and Scipio. Stand ye like dull statues
Fixed to their first foundations; when your diligence
Should borrow speed from winds, as if ye rid
On the contracted ayre to hasten it?
Full well their age wise with experience knows
To disobey a Kings unjust commands
Law and religion warrants. Syphax youth
Were fitter to court beauty, than to sit
At a states helm, and steer the various course
It's subject to, by his greene violent passions.
With which his bed ever this had been enriched,
Had Carthage found him kind: Fair Sophonisba.
That name hath stattled him.
She from whose eyes
The amorous sun, resigning first his own;
Might be ambitious to derive new fires.
Yet she to be reserved for his embraces,
Who slights that honour all the neighbouring Kings
Have been competitors for, and would lay down
Their Crowns to purchase; sell their very beings
To be translated into a possession
Of Sophonisba.
It begins to work.
Whence did th'intent of this great honour to me
Derive it self?
From a desire of friendship
And league with Syphax: which his passionate love
To Rome and Scipio (that admits no reason)
Denying, I must publish the dishonour
Done to a Lady, at whose least command
A Nation shall be armed, led by such Captains
As in their emulation will declare
What mortals owe to her divine perfections;
That warrant her revenge as just a quarrel,
As ever stirred up valour in a conscience
Scruples had cowarded. Here my commission
Takes end, and I must go.
Stay Hanniball.
Strange passions war against my resolution;
And love begins to circle me in flames
Ever my eye takes the fire. What's Rome or Scipio
To Sophonisba? in whose richer beauty
Mor's comprehended, then the Macedonian
Could from his many conquests, and subversion
Of Monarchies boast himself owner of.
What's a King's promise but a politic
(And that's allowed) evasion to gain time
For counsel with his will? Isle be for Carthage
To enjoy Sophonisba. I'am inflamed
From the report, and if my senses find
Truth answering fame, great Hannibal shall lead
Numidias power' against Rome, or any place
He hath designed for conquest.
But if Syphax
Should again suffer Scipio's menaces
To fright his weakness out of this resolve I
My weakness! tempt me not with a suspect.
Let me have Sophonisba, or I'll make
A rape upon your Carthage, not on her,
For what delight's in violence? Enquire
The cause of that loud shout. 
I come t'informe you.
A stately ship from her rich laden womb,
Hath on our shore delivered such a train
Of glorious Virgins that attend on one,
Who lead's the rest—
No more; it is Sophonisba.
Receive her with religious ceremony.
Perfume the ayre with incense richer then
The Phoenix funeral pile. Let harmony 
Breath out her soul at every artists touch.
Cover the pavement which her steps must hallow
With Persian Tapestry. How I am ravished
With th'expectation? and like somelight matter
Catched in a whirlwind, all my faculties
Are hurried forward.
Beauty no more the subject be
Of want on art to slatter thee:
Or in dull figures call thee spring;
Lilly or Rose, or other thing:
All which beneath thee are, and grow
Into contempt when thou dost show
The unmatch't glory of thy brow.
Behold a sphere of Virgins move,
None amongst them less then Queen of Love.
And yet their Queen so far excels
Beauty and she are only parallels.
But it is not Sophonisba. Fairer yet.
Unhappy Syphax from whose eyes such wonders
Have been to long concealed. Which is the goddess?
Which Sophonisba?
Can thy sense distinguish?
See Syphax, thus I deign to show thee that
Kings have been proud to worship.
Ever I embrace
Let me admire. 〈◊〉each eye sit's a Cupped;
Who as he skip's about to shoot his darts.
Is himself fettered in the golden curls
That deck her brow. Elysium's but a fable.
And that eternity the Poets dream of
Serv's but to figure this.
Although my difference
Might challenge more, I'm not ambitious
Of shallow praise. My spirit must fly high
To catch at fame, not flattery.
Came you not
To love me then?
I did: but not to think
All your expressions (though they were extended
Beyond my wish) can merit it.
I am
A King; and you me thinks should court the fortune
With a glad readiness, to share my honours,
And to be made my equal.
Were you more,
I am above addition in my self:
And should be lessened if I did confine
A thought to any person, and the act
Included nothing but bare satisfaction
Of a desire. I will not let a smile
Fall loosely from me, but shall be attended
By actions worth their history; which read
Shall with the apprehension of my greatness
Amaze posterity.
Can Sophonisba
Be covetous of more then the earths honours?
When she shall sit encompassed in a ring
Of noble Matrons that shall deify
Her beauty with their praises? When she shall
Be crowned with sparkling wreathesto blind the gazers,
As if a Constellation had been robed
To make her shine. When in a Kings arms sleeping
All pleasures shall be ministered, that Nature
And art in their contention strive to own,
And take their glory from.
I hei'r pretty baits
To catch an easy wanton, whose dull earth
A little varnish'to're doth know it self
No farther then the superficial tincture
Discovered in her glass. I have a soul
Greater then Syphax Kingdom: and to bound it
Would take from what I am. Twill be your honour
'Bove all that your ambition can direct you
To hope for (next eternity) If I
Vouchsafe to add unto your petty royalty
My greater self; and the addition be
Greater then you can purchase by your conquests.
It is but her due when Sophonisba crav's
Worlds for her Kingdoms, their Kings for her slaves.
Should Syphax make a resignation
Of all he own's for me; it were but as if
He par'd a mol-hill from the earth, to place
An Atlas in its stead.
Come Sophonisba
You must consent: ther's fame in it that will give you
An everlasting being in the memory
O• benefits your Country will derive from it.
Children shall first be taught to speak your name;
And from their aged grandsires learn your story.
Whose often repetition shall take from
The tediousness of age, and make them seem
As if they danced for joy, when palsies shake them.
Am I enslam'd, and shall I not enjoy?
Mock me not Lady into a despair.
You show me heaven, and shut the gates against me.
Make not a King, that daign's to be your servant,
A slave unto your cruelty.
To give
Syphax a satisfaction, your competitor
False Massanissa, he that shar's your Kingdom.
And would engross it all, hath long solicited
For Sophonisbas love.
Oh Massanissa.
He having now forsaken Carthage, she
Out of her piety to doe her Country
A good, preferr's you: and that her revenge
May be pursued with greater violence,
Allow's her elf your right; though she's a treasure
Might be disposed of to a more advantage
Of Carthage strength.
Will Sophonisba love then
If I fight Carthag's quarrel?
Yes; your fortune
Wh•••• it is at hight: but the least declination
Waving it to an ebb, I from that fall
Must mount to higher honours, if a gale
Meet it to raise me.
Massanissas person
It seam's could limit your desires.
He was
A man made up of fire; no gross earth clogged
His spirit when it would mount to honours top,
And load same with his acts. Had he not fallen
From Carthage, Sophonisba had but been
The price of his desert. And yet I love him.
Dear Massanissa!
She hath overcome me.
I will be great; every days action
Shall raise me a step higher, and I'll take
You with me Lady: no; you shall lead me
The tribute I will pay for every kiss
Shall be a victory o'er your enemies.
Proud Rome shall find Syphax can be a Soldier,
When Sophonisba bid's him put on steel.
The not to be resisted power of beauty.
Carthage I will salute thee now with joy.
Nor shall the thought of thy ingratitude
Make me less willing to pursue thy good
Through a deep sea of vanquished. Roman's blood.
We'll feast, then fight. Who led by such bright eves
Would not match on to any enterprise? 
Syphax so soon revolted I what weak man
Would mock away his safety? Chldren thus
Playing with fire to please their foolish sense
Are often burned and make their sport the instrument
Of their own danger. Massanissa yet
Is constant, and by this time hath subdued him.
Success must follow those attempts that rise
From a just cause, and crown the enterprise.
Lelius what news?
I labour with th'event;
Joy hinder's a delivery. Massanissa
Guirt in a conquest, greater never made
A triumph glorious, is returning back
To present Scipio with Numidias spoils,
And Syphax cativ'd.
It is a joyful errant.
Just Nemesis, thy Grirfins have been swift,
And borne thee well to see the execution
Of a revenge upon perfidious Syphax.
Had thou failed in it, we justly might disclaim
Thy deity, and without fear of punishment
Profane thy altars: on whose marbles now
We'll pay a sacrifice of richest flame
Mixed with the blood of Kings, Discourse the progress
To this event.
When your successful policy
Had destroyed both the Camps of Asdrubal
And Syphax with devouring fire, whose flames
seemed to the distant gazers on it a prodigy
That threatened dissolution, and begot
Their greater fear, then when the Artillery
Of heaven spook's loudest through the burning ayre
To tell the world Iove's angry: When you retired
To Vtica to prevent an invasion
Intended by the Carthaginian Navy,
Which dark't the Sea (much like a cloud of Vultures
That are convented after some great fight
To glut their ravenous gorges with the gore,
Thousands of soul-lesse men lye reeking in)
The mad Numidian King, in whom despair
Had kindled a new valour, gather's head.
And with a fresh supply of unmanned men
(For had they been such as experience
Had taught the useful order of a war
Th'end had again been doubtful) giv's us battle.
Their first assault made us retire; yet still
We kept the sudden form hast put us in
For best advantage: 'till their heedless courage
Hurried them on, where our foot Legions
Observing their disorder (for they fought
In throngs so thick, that many times one striking
Wounded his fellow) giv's them new resistance.
At which they stop, mated with apprehension
Of their own danger: whom th'incensed King
Mixing his threats with promises of honour
Labour's to bring one till his horse being killed
We took him prisoner, with two thousand more.
The rest not flame are fled.
Brave victory
Worthy th'atchievers, to whose memories
Eternal statues shall be raised, and trophies
Rich as Romes Capitol is glorious with.
But where is Massanissa?
He pretended
To visit Cirtha, Syphax chiefest City:
Which is delivered up.
I have new fears 
That woman will again bewitch him. Know
The cause.
It is Massanissa.
Th'only wealth
I'd be possessed of. I embrace in thee
A boundless treasure.
Let not Scipio
Flatter me into pride for what is rather
Fortunes then mine.
The actions of thy virtue.
Fortun's an under power that is her self
Commanded by desert. It is a mere vainness
Of our credulity to give her more
Then her due attribute; which is but servant
To an heroic spirit.
This example
Might instance proofs for her divinity.
Ell's but endeavour until perfected
By the success, and that is fortunes only;
Desert shar's little in'r.
Let not thy modesty
Maintain such errors. To refuse just praise
Is an extreme worse then man's over-weening
Opinion of himself. Great Massanissa
Shall have all honours due unto his conquest;
And wear triumphant Garlands; that false King
Chained to his Chariot from the gazers eyes
Inviting scorn, not pity.
It is not manly
To insult over misery, to which
Thy self's as subject, and perhaps mai'st feel,
Chance mak's prosperity when it is at highest
But pastime to delight her giddy humour:
And will d jest the most seem possessor,
When she comment's a restitution
Of her lent favours, that she may confer them
Upon another. This consideration
Might invite mercy.
When superior justice
Mak's us her instrument, should we be partial
I th'execution, it were to mock the power,
And call down vengeance. Yet I grieve for Syphax
That he deserv's the punishment; whose weakness!
Suffered a piece of painted earth to tempt him
From his religion, and neglect the gods,
Whom he invoked for witness to that vow
A woman made him violate.
It is my hope
She may deceive thee too, and with her charms
Bewitch the boasting Conqueror that's her slave
From his faith to Rome.
His madness will betray me
To a reproach
It tak's from mine own suffering
To see mine enemy in the same danger:
When he by his adulterous embraces
Receiv's the like infection int' his soul
That made me sick of virtue, and of all
But my disease.
Doe you enjoy the Lady?
Yes: she's my wife.
Yoar act was somewhat rash;
Before her husbands death! Doth the religion
You pay Numidia's gods warrant it law full?
Syphax is dead in his captivity.
Hislife was mine; which I but lent him only
For Romes great triumph.
We'll consult a little,
And then dispose you Syphax.
As your will
Advises you. It is the curse of greatness
To be it's own destruction. So we see
That mountain Cedars have the least defence
Against storms, when shrubs confront their violence. 
When first you freely did commit your self
Unto my charge, and promised with a vow
My liking only should dispose your actions,
Either you loved them, or your slattery
Pretended admiration of some virtues
You thought possessed me. One I must confess
I glory to be master of, that's continence.
I have conversed with beauties rich as Nature
Did ever make art proud to counterfeit;
Might have commanded some that conquest gave me:
Yet have I still kept out desire, but you
Have yielded to that passion doth betray
A weakness in you, will obscure the glory
Of all your other goodness. Think how dangerous
It is to a young man (on whose expectation
Opinions eye is six't) to mix his actions
With wanton pleasures, when his thoughts transfer
The wicked objects of his humorous sense
Unto his soul, that poison all her faculties,
And make them useless. Noble Massanissa,
Your good deeds sung by same are music to me:
Your errors I had rather you your self
Would silently consider, and reform,
Before with any show of least unkindness
You force me to reprove them.
Let not Scipio
Deny those errors an excuse. If nature
Had a like clothed men's dispositions,
And all did wear one habit of the mind,
You need not urge th'example of your own
T'instruct another continence: for all
From a necessited and innate temperance
Would be as you are. Though I doe not boast
Command o'er pleasures, I pursue them not
With an intemperate appetite, but make
Reason my guide, that tell's me to provide
For a succession, doth become the judgement
Of a wise King. Posterity may well
Be called th'eternity of life: he never
Dy's that hath issue; for which I have married
Her mine own conquest gave me.
Your own conquest!
Pray doe not arrogate too much: you must not
Dispose Romes prisoners whilst you fight her quarrel.
The warr's not yours, though yours the victory.
She must attend her sentence from our Senate;
Which hardly will be partial to her beauty,
Though it were adulterated with more art,
Then ever lasciviousinesse was mistress of,
And rack 't invention for. Let Sophonisba
Be then delivered up.
Perhaps your self
A•la your boatted continence would have her
To be your own.
Is that your jealousy?
Weak passionate man, that through thy blinded reason
Foresee'st not thine own danger by th'example
Of others misery, and yet art ripe,
To maintain grossest errors of thy will,
And seem discretions master. Had not Syphax
(Bewitch by magic of her wanton eye
Into a dotage) broke his faith with Rome,
He might have flourish't in his height of glory;
And still commanded over his Division.
Which Rome will add to Massanissas Kingdom
Yielding up Sophonisba.
You would seem
To give me mines, upon condition
I should restore the gold, reserving only
The earth to trample on. In Sophonisba
I have a treature mine own life shall ransom,
If she be forced away; and to consent
She should be yielded up to any Roman
Were worse then sacrilege, though I should tsar
The hallowed sta'ues of Nunsidias gods
Down from their altars, and convert their Temples
Into the loathsom'st uses of necessity.
Kings oaths are equal with decrees of Fate,
Those I have made I cannot violate.
Then I disclaim thee. Ther's not so much danger
In a known foe, as a suspected friend.
To preventan incendium it is best;
To quench a brand before it fire the rest. 
He's angry, and I must not let it grow
To ripeness of his hate. I am resolved
To be th'example of a constancy
Fame shall proclaim for wonder.
Come ever my wish could summon her. Her sight
Begins to shake the weak foundation
Of my resolves. Like stones shot from an engine
She ruin's with the battery of her eye
What my intents had built.
Why is my Lord
Thus cloudy? I expected entertainment
Of other difference; such as cheerful love
Present's desire with from the interchange
Of smiles and amorous glances.
Sophonisba!
I was new entered into meditations
Of death, and other wretchedness, depend's
Upon mortality.
Is that the argument
Of your dejectedness? it shew's too much
Of women's weakness. Man should have a spirit
Above the fear any consideration
Can work within him. Death is but an entrance
To our eternity: and if our life
Merit a blessedness hereafter, we
Should run with joy to meet it.
But if one
Possessed of happiness beyond the hope
Of any greater; that denies another
Can be in expectation (more then what
His soul enjoy's already) apprehended
A separation from it by the malice
Of death, or other accident, it would force him
Weep silently within, though shame restrained
His outward tears.
This circumstance would seem
To prepare something that should have relation
Unto your self or me. Perhaps the Consul
Hath urged that I should be delivered up
To Romes disposing. Massanissas vow
Made with religious ceremony cannot
If he respect the gods consent to it.
And rather then their tyranny should make me
Wretched a new, to my first earth return me,
The worst remains of Sophonisba.
Dare she
Dyethen to quit her fears?
And meet the instrument
With greater cherefalnesse, then fondest parents
Can show at the return of their decree child
From long captivity. This tender frame
Lodges a masculine and heroic spirit.
And if thy passionate love deny's thy self
To be the Actor in this benefit,
Give me thy sword; my own right hand shall guide
The point unto my heart: I'll without trembling
Open a passage for the crimson drops;
And smile to see them diaper the pavement,
As if it were some conceited workmanship
Made by the lookers fancy.
Ever mine eyes
Should suffer such an object to offend
Their hitherto pleased sense, I would dissolve them
In their own humour. No Sophonisba;
This breath shall first wast into empty ayre,
And leave my naked bones i'th'hallow'd pile
Ever I prove false to thee. Give me some wine:
I'll drink a bridal health to Sophonisba,
And mix it with Nepenthe. Here's the juice
Will cause forgetfulness, and mock th'extremity
Of any adverse fortune. 
Sure it is poison.
Will Massanissa leave me then unguarded
To Scipios violence? I have here no father
Nor uncle to defend me; not so much
As a poor tear by weeping to stir up
A Romans pity: I shall only dart
An anger from my burning eye, to show
The Carthaginian spirit I was borne with,
Which not with standing will not quit this part
From a captivity: this Scipios rage
Will hurry in his triumph to be gazed at,
And scorned by the course rabble. Doe not then
By such a keeping of it break thy vow;
For it is no less to me. I must still want
The benefice of such a constancy.
For though himself live not to yield me up
I am exposed to it, and without least power
To make resistance. Let me then partake
That means of best security
Not to have
A Monument of lasting Adamant
Raised to my memory. No Sophonisba
This is no potion to preserve a beauty
In it's first greene; or ripe it to a Summer;
Or prevent the Autumme; or return the Winter
Into a new Spring. This will pale the dye
Which thy cheek blushes when it would cloth mo∣desty
In a rich scarlet: make that Ivory breast
(Now Loves soft bed whereon he ploy's the wanton,
And ambusheth himself to catch the flames
He shoot's at others from thy eyes) as cold
As Scythian sands, bleak't with continual freezing
Into a seeming crystal. Scipio dar's not
Insult o'er thee: thy face would check his malice
Into a silent admiration of it.
Or if he sin so much as to deject thee
With the least fear of ill, the gods themselves
Will leave their immortality to be
Each others rivals in thy love, and strive
Which should revenge thee best. This must not weaken
What is so powerful.
If my Lord be then
Resolved to leave me widowed, being yet
Scarce warm in his embraces, let me mix
A tear with his last drink, that he may carry
Something of Sophonisba with him.
That
Hath in it sufficient virtue to convert
All the Thessalian, Pontick, Phasian aconites
Into pretervatives, and turn this draught
Into an antidote: which yet is powerful,
'Bove all that Art and Nature in conspiracy
Of mischief ever invented. We that are
Great, and yet subject to th'incertainty
Of Fortune, have this custom to prevent it.
We affect glory: and conclude no slate
That end's not in it self, is fortunate.
So— 
Let my Lord first give me leave to breath
An errant o'er it; that when he is entered
Ely sium, throngs of Carthaginian Heroes
May bid him welcome, and inform themselves
From him of Sophonisba.
Do it then quickly.
I'll bear it, and command the King of night
Resign his ravished Queen to be thy hand-maid.
Hell, I shall now be armed to meet thy horrors
With greater power then thine.
If there be Fate,
Why is it concealed? The revelation of t
Would make us strive to mock eternal providence,
Th'ingenious Artist that did form this cup
Foresaw not such a use of't. Had he known
It should have ministered death to a King,
His trembling hands could ne'er have finished it
With such exactness. What so ever decree
Is written in the Adamantine Tables
Of Destiny, we must subscribe to. Time
Though he keep on his swift and silent pace,
Death's sure at first or last to win the race.
Pray keep out Scipio: I have almost ended.
So— 
Ha! 'what hath Sophonisbas madness done'?
Oh Aesculapius if thy deity
Be not a feigned one, then administer,
And show it powerful in restoring back
My Sophonisba to her former safety.
Numidia shall pay worship to none other
But thee and Phoebus. Altars shall be raised
Made of Iberian gold, and flame with incense
Until Arabia's richest earth grow's barren
Of gummes and spices.
Why doth Massanissa
Invoke vain aide? The gods are merciful
In their denying it: and it is but justice
That I should dye; m'adulterous easiness
Deserved it, that without the least resistance
Left my yet living husband to embrace
His enemy. But it had warrant from
The end, my Countries good, and the first love
I bare thee Massanissa. Now let Scipio
Boast of his conquest; Sophonisba is
Her own subverter. It begin's to work
With a full strength: my blood would serve to heate
A Salamander, and convert his ice
Into a flame. Aetna's but painted fire
To that which burn's my marrow. Yet my looks
Are cheerful and erected. Victory
Was never met more joyfully, then I
Embrace that death prevents my misery.
My weak earth totters underneath a weight
That sink's it downwards: my still living spirit
Red's upon clouds to reach Ioves highest sky.
Who fear not death, but in the worst part dye. 
She's dead. Sink ye supporters of this fabric
Into your deep foundations; make them graves
For your own ruins, since there is not left
A weight worthy your bearing. Shoe's not dead:
Only she hath translated her divinity
To it's own blessed abodes, and call's on me
To pay a mortals duty. Shallt have sacrifice,
And rich too. Kings out of devotion shall
Offer themselves in flames, and from their ashes
Rise glorious stars; whence learned curiosity
Deriving a new art, shall teach Astrologers
The virtues of an influence shall include
Secrets to make credulity astonished
At their presages. I will be their president;
And make this earth, already consecrated
With Sophonisba's precious feet, an altar.
Open thy crannies to receive my blood,
And from it's mixture spring a grove of Balsam.
Led by whose ravishing odour the new issue
Of every Phoenix shall neglect Panehaia,
To bring her mothers spicy death bed hither,
That's likewise her own cradle. But this action
Should have more state, and ceremony. No.
A King's the Priest; a King's the Sacrifice;
His own sword whilst it is yet warm with his victory
Shall serve forth' axe, and so—Shall I but dye then?
I'll live to pay her more then th'expiration
Of a short breath, and dye to all delights,
But what I can derive from her fair memory:
Which shall be treasured here; and by it's virtue
Revive to kill me; every life it giv's
Causing another death.
The Lady dead!
To Scipios malice.
Could not Massanissa
Acquit himself of one, but by committing
A greater folly! But I must not chide.
Most worthy Massanissa!
Keep your flattery.
I have no Sophonisba. Touch her not:
None but my self shall bear her to the pile.
The sacrilegious hand besides attempt's it
I will cut off. Your triumph shall not twice
Kill Sophonisba. 
With best care attend him
Unto our Tent; least that his passion grow
Into a desperate frenzy, I must cure it
By counsel mixed with gifts. In that weak woman
Half Carthage strength is gone.
Our Spies inform
That the other half (which I conceive is Hannibal)
Intent's upon th'event of one great battle
To hazard all. His Camp's already pitched
Near Zama: whence a messenger is sent
That show's the Carthaginian much desit's
To have some conference with you.
We'll dispose
Our Army thitherward. Me thinks I see
Victory crowned already clap her wings
Over our heads. What a strange circulation
Is in times accidents? From victory
Peace is derived; from peace security;
Thence lust; ambition: two maine grounds of jars:
We fight for peace, and peace again breed's wars. 
Pray take no notice that we know th'event
Of the late battle. I already have
Employed my Faction about a peace, and Scipio
Is not far off. It shall not be the act
Of Hannibal to boast of. When we have
Betrayed him to the Romans, the conditions
Besides are casie.
Mind the public Bostar:
Do you think it not concern's you?
I was my riches
Made me a Senator: my wisdom never
Deserved the purple. Be you politic;
Let me preserve my state.
Your wealth! it is granted
Raised you to this high place. Necessity
May corrupt justice in a Magistrate:
Which to prevent, at least our jealousies,
Our Carthaginian custom in election
Of Senators, sometimes preferr's the rich
Before the best men. Take your seat.
To fill it:
Fear will not let me sleep.
Attend the Message:
It seam's from Hannibal.
A worthy man.
He sent us home three bushels full of rings,
Of which I shared the most.
Before I speak,
Me thinks the ayre about me as the sound
Of my sad words doth pass through it, should thicken
Into a cloud; then melt at every period
Into a weeping rain, till none be left
To give us breath for sighs. Our Hannibal
Is vanquished by the Romans.
We shall then
Have no more wealth brought home, nor safely keep
What we possess already. Curse on chance
That mock's us thus. I'll never make her statue
Of gold hereafter, and by consequent
Ne'er worship her: I have but cold devotion
Towards a wooden goddess.
It is not fit
Evils remediless should be lamented.
From a misfortune something may arise
To prevent greater, if it be applied
With an exact consideration
O'all occurents that may make it useful.
Relate it then.
Before the battle joined
The worlds two Captains (for besides them none
Merit's the name in equal competition)
Met to have conference: where for a space
They stood astonished at each others presence:
And like two Comets tilting in the ayre
Against one another, shot prodigious flames
From eiders eyes; and with a counterchange
Of fierce and angry looks seemed to begin
An eager fight: 'till Hannibal broke silence,
And moved a peace: Which Scipio (or suspecting it
To be but wonted policy, or confident
Both of his own strength and success) refused.
Then like two clouds swollen big with a mights tempest,
And hurried forward by contrary winds,
Iusling each other, 'till their ribs being broken
The sulphurous issue slie's through the black ayre;
An inundation following that would fright
Natures Archeus from his quiet center;
To seek an Aetna or Vesaevus out
Where he might dry himself: so met the Armies.
And with a shout, that out-noys'd thunder, charged
Each other bravely; at their first encounter
Mixing their bloods in streams, that every way
Flowed like a tide. As yet the peaceful goddess
Inclined to neither part, 'till Massanissa
Brought up his right wing of Numidian horsemen,
And broke th'array; enforcing our first battle
Back to our second; when we were compelled
To fight against our own, least their retiring
Might put us out of order; 'till betwixt us
Dead bodies made a Bulwark; so that neither
We nor the Romans but by trampling on
Our fellows carcasses could strike a blow
Of any use. The Roman Legions now
O're-prest us with their number, and both wings
Of horsemen wheeled about t'assault our rear.
We then were compassed; yet like angry Lyons
Whom the toil hamper's, laboured for our freedom;
But few escaped: five hundred only live
Of forty thousand, which to Adrumentum
Are fled with Hannibal: whence he intent's
To visit Carthage suddenly.
His welcome
If he fore-knew't would give him small encouragement.
Th'incertainty of war! Did Hannibal
Solicit peace? l'le seem t'oppose it then,
Though it intend a good. The inborn malice
Bet waxed our families will not permit me
Allow his acts or counsel. By his greatness
Mine is eclipsed: and though this overthrow
May make him less in popular opinion,
His Faction yet is strong.
What mean you Bostar!
I'm dead; that horrible relation killed me
In'ere shall see addition to my heap,
Now Hannibal is conquered.
You have stored
Enough wealth to maintain another Army
That may bring home increase. Pray'let us use
Your state, we'll spare your wisdom.
How's that Hanno!
My state, and spare my wisdom. I'm a Senator,
And wear my gown as formally as you:
Can nod and spent at th'end of every sentence,
And number with my own Arithmetic
More somes of coin then thy whole family.
Part with my wealth l I'll rather dye, and purchase
Hell with it, if Pluto would but sell his Kingdom.
Yet sure it cannot be so rich as I am.
The judges there are just; bribes cannot buy
A partial sentence,
Ha! me thinks they should
Salute me, though I bring not victory.
When I presented them with wealth, their flatteries
Were greater then became them. Am I less
In merit now, then when success attended
My actions! glued unto their seats, and Hannibal
Entered. Grave fathers.
On sir: we are patient
To hear you speak.
But patient! he that stand's
Accused may challenge that, or justly tax ye
Of more then tyranny.
Are you so confident
You dare affront your Judges?
Ha! my Judges.
What envy though it were stilled from the black galls
Ofleane Erinnis Adders, can so blemish
My life or same, that from the least suspect
I might incur a sentence! Wa'st for this
I have through blood and sweat made Carthage great
As Rome her self; and had not politic dotage
Infected with your private avarice
(That would not spare me what my self bestowed
Upon your case) prevented it by calling
Me and my Army home, I had ever this
Made Rome your tributary; and am I
Returned now to be judge, because I have
After so many victories lost one battle!
The monstrous bi•th of your ingratitude
Were able to fright manhood from posterity,
And check all undertakings.
Whence did you
Receive commission to move peace with Scipio?
From mine own judgement that foresaw the danger
My power could not prevent.
It seam's you were
Declm'd to coward.
Ther's no privilege 
Under your gown for that. Learn to know man;
Then be his judge.
Pray heaven he hurt not me.
Most valiant Hanniball.
I hate your slattery,
Tic mixed with scorn; and I will rather trample
Upon your purple.
Good my Lord forbear
Your violence. Consider but their persons
And dignities.
Should Jove himself provoke me
With a disgrace like this, l'de challenge him
To meet upon a cloud ram'd full of thunder:
And dart it at him, 'till with flames I had
Consumed the brass supporters of his heaven;
Tumbling him down with all his petty gods
Unto their first mortality.
The custom
Of Carthage government commands respect
Unto their difference.
Let the respect
Belikewise taught them that belongs to me.
And if my labour hath maintained their ease.
In which they have both studied and establish't
Civil formalities, my rugged life
Did never practise, it may well excuse
A greater error. Who is my accuser?
Your self.
My self! my self will be my judge then:
And maketh'abus'd seat honoured for a justice,
Which your corrupted souls would never suffer
Your power to execute. Look Carthaginians;
And if your reasons eyes can see the errors
Your blinded envy led it to, with blushes
Guide them to reformation. I that took
An oath at nine years old before the Altar,
When it was smoking with the horrid sacrifice
Of immolated men, to be Romes enemy,
And perfect what my Father had begun;
I that transferred the wealth of Spain to Carthage,
And thorough the frozen Alps melted my way
Into the fertile plains of Italy;
That waded with my army thorough the fens
Of gloomy Arnus, in whose fogs I lost
One of my bodies comfortable lights;
I that o'rethrew six Consuls, and at Cannas
In one sight killed a hundred Roman Senators,
And thence presented Carthage with a prey
That might out-vye an Indian treasury
Crammed with the choicest wealth; I that abroad
Whilst here you bathed in pleasures made my body
Proofs against a tempest, and endured the rage
Of more prodigious storms then ever frighted
Mortals into religion.
Yet at Capua
The fair Salapian Omphale could teach
Our Carthaginian Hercules to spin,
And mind his distaff; else she would not smile
Upon him for his work.
Thy malice Hanno
Like to the broken some a rock beats back
Upon the angry maine, fowl's thine own bosom.
I am above it; and in spite of thee
Or all the battery of thy calumnies,
Will stand like a Colossus to be gazed at
By all beneath me, when the scorn of men
Shall lash thy envy with the whips of Satyrs:
Who vainly dost attempt to ruin that
Is built for fame.
Nay you may keep your seat,
It well becomes you.
It becomes you better,
When your grave nod and formal hem strik's terror
Through the affrighted malefactors heart;
Who for some slight offence expects his judgement,
No less than banishment, or confiscation
Of all his substance; which is shared amongst you,
The public use neglected. But in vain
I tax your vices, when your souls are fullyed
With an ingratitude to me, that makes
All others white as innocence compared
With that black monster. Carthage I disclaim thee,
And rather then employ my power again
To raise thy head 'bove others, in thy ruins
Isle hide mine own. And but for reverence
I bear the ashes of mine ancestors,
I would my self plough furrows in thy womb,
And sow my faction only for th'increase
Of mine own greatness.
Pray observe it Fathers.
He doth affect the Monarchy; he would
Alter our government.
You are deceived.
You're weak enough already; there's no need
Of a sedition to subvert your state.
Can ye resist the Romans, and make peace
Upon your own conditions?
You are betrayed my Lord; your safety needs
A sudden resolution. Scipio's entered
The Gates of Carthage.
Oh inhumane treachery!
But for preventing justice that will fall
Heavy upon you by some other instrument,
It were piety to wash corruption
From this abused place with your bloods; whose staines
Would yet infect the pavement, and remain
Like blushes in the marble to betray
The guilt ye died for. When the Romans practise
Their tyranny upon you, wish in vain
Ye had an Hannibal.
Your danger will not
Allow your passion vent. Pray 'fligh my Lord.
Into some desert to converse with beasts;
Th'have grateful souls. Carthage me thinks an earthquake
Should palsy thy old joints, &amp; shrink thy head
Into thy shoulders: or thy Genius wrap thee
In a perpetual cloud to hide the shame
Of this base act. Revenge, Isle court thee through
The ruin of mine own. Carthage shall see
Not mine from her, her greatness grew from me.
All those that love me follow. 
Would we had
Ensnared him better: but his faction wanting
A head, it is strengthless. Let a crier publish
The sentence of his banishment, that Scipio
May take it for our act. We must comply
With all occasions that may make our peace
A useful good, no voluntary bondage.
We must receive the Romans with a show
Of less fear, then the straits of our necessity
Might excuse manhood for.
Now Carthaginians,
Although I am a conqueror, success
Swelis me no higher to prefer my self
Above what judgement warrants. I have strove
With all opposing reasons to forget
Your often breach of faith: which you are taxed with
By all men for a vice that the air you breath
Infects you with, as if the places nature
Enforced it from necessity. But custom
Must be concluded, is the most efficient
To cause that barbarous neglect of piety,
Which should be mans sole object. I am strengthened
Sufficiently against fear; since I can easily
Compel you to subjection. But preferring
A mild command before imperious rigour,
Declare your selves, and you shall find that we
Practise no cruelty.
Most worthy Roman
We might excuse the general, and confer
The guilt upon some private few, who led
By an ambition made this war without
Consent from us. Some we have justly punished;
And him, by whom (as by the first great mover)
The rest were hurried forward, we have banished,
To take from Rome all cause of after-jealousie.
His faction did prevent it, else we had
Yielded him up to Scipio. Peace is now
The thing we crave, and the conditions
No stricter then the Carthaginians
Would have proposed, had they been conquerors,
And Scipio sued to them.
Can there be faith
In those that would betray their own! and such a one
As made the end of all his actions
Your greatness first, and when that failed your safety?
A man that more than figured Mars, and merited
A deifying by your gratitude.
Blush at it fame, and with thy hundred tongues
Till all are hoarse proclaim it. The conditions
Proposed shall stand, if but to punish this,
This monstrous act. Nature me thinks should throw ye
From her warm bosom with an angry motion
Of all th'earths sinews, and not suffer ye
To suck her milk; but dry her fruitful womb
Into a barrenness, before such monsters
Should be again produced. As you perform
The strictest clause, and what afflicts ye most,
Call it not satisfaction for our injuries,
But punishment for your ingratitude
To Hannibal.
That will take from my suffering.
When those we hate in misery bear a part,
Envy grows fat by eating her own heart. 
Lelius attend the Carthaginian Senators;
Survey the City, and see execution 
Of all the league includ's. Doth Scipio triumph,
And Massanissa hang the head! One article
Is that they shall restore to Massanissa
All that they have deprived him of.
They cannot
Restore my Sophonisba.
Still that passion!
I thought her memory had been washed away
With the large streams of blood so lately flowed
From his victorious sword. Come Massanissa
You shall enjoy a Roman Lady; one
That shall out-vye the glory of a sun
Throned in his clearest sky, and make his light
Appear but as a shadow to her beauty,
One that shall comprehend within her self
All that was ever feigned of other women,
And make their fables probable.
Rome hath not
Another Sophonisba.
That the wealth
Of Romes best province might but ransom home
His lost command o'er passions.
A Spanish captive.
Did ever innocence
Look sweeter as if she were joyed to make
This little frame her mansion. Why do ye weep?
They shall not hurt you pretty one.
They say
They'll carry me to Rome.
Suppose they doe;
Romans are full of gentleness, and mildly
Will entertain you; where you shall be taught
Civility of manners. Education
Clothing your mind in ornaments of virtue
Fitting your expectation, and your beauty
Rip't with mature age, Roman Knights shall court it.
Perhaps my self would take you to my bed.
Indeed you should not. You are a rough soldier;
Your looks would fright me.
Can you then deny
To cherish such a hope? You should enjoy
Delights above your wish. Your house should be
A court of pleasure. Spring should always dwell
Within your gardens, as it Tempe were
Translated thither. Virgins should attend you
Fair as the morning, when she ushers in
The day with blushes. Your bathes should be the dew
Gathered from Roses, and your garments soft
As the curled ayre, by mild Etesian winds
Made temperate, when the Sun rides on his Lion
To hunt heavens Dog up. You should sleep on down
Driven from Swans white necks; be visited
By Matrons; ushered to solemnities;
And at the public shows out-shine the glory
Of daylight with the lustre of those jemmes
You should be decked in and a conqueror when
His head's wrapped in triumphant Laurel, couch it
Upon your lap.
He's taken. Mans weak judgement,
That calls it vice in others, which himself
Is equally inclined to.
I ne'er heard
Of such fine things before.
The barren soil
That bred you is in fault. I must confess
Nature hath in your yet imperfect beauty
Showed wonders to the world: you areth'epitome
Of her most curious labours; and if fortune
Should in so fair a book blur any lest
Exact drawn line, her deity were cruel.
Your owne's a barbarous country, where civility
Hath scarce a name. You cannot there expect
A value of your self, above the worship
Their eyes will give you, when they rudely gaze
Upon your form, and by the sense distinguish
The outward workmanship. We teach our souls
A glorious conversation with those virtues
That deck the inside of a beauteous frame,
And vary pleasures, honours, earths delights
To th'imitation of that infinite
And never dying part.
You Lucius
Did never court me thus. You'd only tell me
That I should be a Queen, when your old Father
Went to the lower Kingdom.
What is Lucius?
A Prince amongst the Celtiberians.
This Lady Nobly borne to me betrothed,
If Scipio will be merciful, l'de ransom.
You love her then?
Above my self: without her
My being is not perfect.
Blessed occasion.
Now Massanissa if example may
Rectify errors in thee, make my act
An imitable president. Young Prince
Receive her from my hands; withal the sum
Intended for her ransom as a dowry.
Love Rome and Scipio.
Nobleness above
The reach of praise. How shall I show my gratitude?
When he hath made me Queen, He bid you well∣come
To Lucius Court.
And Lucius when grown man
Will bring you Soldiers.
Seemed he not to love her?
And yet without least pause he gave her back
Being possessed. I am overcome; I see
Passion's the noble souls worst enemy
I'm all for action. 
Massanissa is
Become himself again. Wherefore this music?
To gratulate your victory, and the peace
That gives them rest, the Soldiers have prepared
A slight solemnity: The Carthaginians
Mix with the Romans, though their heavy hearts
To part with so much treasure scarce admits it.
It is seasonable: there is cause to joy,
Since Massanissa's new wed to my bosom,
And this young Ladies nuptials.
On bravely, on; the foe is met;
The Soldiers ranck't, the battle set.
Make the earth tremble, and the skies
Redouble echoes from your cries.
Blood puts a scarlet mantle on
The late greene plain: they 'l sty anon.
Then follow; but your orders keep;
Take prisoners; set their ransoms deep.
Retreat. For same and the delight
That peace brings only Soldiers fight.
So you proportion pleasures, we give way to it.
Is Lelius yet informed of Hannibal?
That he is fled unto Antiochus,
Or else to Prusias of Bythinia.
His ends are doubtful.
If his discontent
Should anew whet his envy to attempt
Their aids, it would much disturb the Asian provinces.
We'll follow to prevent it. Lelius you
Shall carry our success unto the Senate,
And with it Syphax, and the Carthage pledges.
Come my souls half, we'll hunt this Africa Lion
Into a stronger toil. Fame shall waite on us
Till we have loaded her, and that she see
Our triumph finished in his tragedy. 
You're welcome, though your fortun's ebbed. The memory
Of what you have bin should cōmand respect
From good men to you. Virtue is not lessened
By want of a success; that's but a gloss
Fortune sets on her: Misery doth make
Her inside glorious sometimes, when desertlesse,
And bastard actions as the heirs of chance
Shine in their superficies: but being searched
Are found like bladders, swollen with an enforcement
Of wind into them: which the least necessity
Or adverse fortune pricking, they dilate
Th'included ayre, and shrink into their first
Narrow dimensions: When true virtue bears
Her owners head above afflictions waves,
And steers him into harbour.
You are noble,
And like a King with judgement value me.
My mind was ne'er subjected: I have known
So much of both, that neither of the pastimes
Fortune delights her self with, can incline me
To height above a moderate, nor decline me
Below my self. Prosperity, adversity;
Both make one even scale, and weight being added
To either, shows the difference. Hoe's not man
Will be dejected or exalted. Every one
Should temper the condition of his state,
Such as the present makes it, with the fear
Or hope of after change: and when hee labour's
In the extremity of one, or sloes
In the swelling height of the other, still his mind
Should be the same. Chance varies every way;
But virtues course is constant.
You express
A noble resolution, and your soul
Shows rich and glorious even through the clouds
Of your misfortune. There's a readiness,
And a propens• desire in me to aid you.
But circumstance must make it probable
Whether the causes justness may command
Th'attendence of success. For an attempt
That's warranted by justice, cannot want
A prosperous end.
If to desend my Country.
Or to compel encroaching 〈◊〉
To satisfaction, such as would deprive us
Of th'earth that nature in her legacy
Made our proportion be a justice, I
Did never injury; for these were only
The motives to my actions. Fame I know
Could not be silent, but she must inform
Even the remotest dwellers, how proud Rome
(Whose infant greatness by ambition nursed
Is now in growing, and will spread it self
If a prevention stay it not, beyond
All limits of the yet known world) insults
Over her neighbouring Provinces. From Carthage
She hath enfore't Sicilia (the worlds granary)
And other Hands: and her General
Swollen with his fortune, hath attempted farther
To overslow all Africa. You may likewise
Expect he will encroach upon your Asia;
Antiochus being already vanquished,
And sled to Ephesus. If nothing else,
Your safety should invite you to take arms,
Though but defensive. States that never knew
A change but in their growth, which a long peace
Hath brought unto perfection, are like steel;
Which being neglected will consume it self
With its ownerust. So doth security
Eat through he hearts of states whilst they are sleeping
And lulled in her false quiet. Prusias therefore
Should dwell no longer in so great a danger.
If he will not be a Soldier, let him arm
His people; Hannibal will be their Captain,
And lead them unto actions that shall take
Fam. with the wonder, 'till I have made Rome
(Who like th'earths issue heaps up hills on hills,
To raise her proud head) nothing. My right hand
Jove-like is armed with thunder, which shall sligh
Winged with prodigious slames of just revenge
To punish her impiety.
I could gladly
Cherish your resolutions, being grounded
On justice: but t'engage my self or people
In an uncertain war, before provoked
By enemies, were rashness that excuse
Could no way gloss to make it show an act
Worthy a man, much less a King.
You value
Those scruples more than a full weight of honour.
Heaven gave the difference to you but to be
The sigure of that power, that will exact
A just account of a Kings greater actions,
Then what inferiors owe to their creation.
Th'essentiall part of your eternity
Depends upon that point: and can you more
Express your self heavens minister, then when
You doe the things agree with it?
Rome comply's
With us for peace. The violation
Of a religious oath, superior justice
Cannot but punish: else we might be bold
To call the worship of the gods no more
Than th'issue of credulity, produced
To fright us with a name that had no power
But what our fears allowed it. Rome is yet
Our friend; and 'till she fall from honour, we
Must hold her dear.
In that consists your danger.
Shoe's masked in policy, and like a Statesman
Without religion, steers her course by shows
And mere appearance to what ever ends
Amoition points her. Be not then too rash.
Make not the greatness which is yet your own
Derivative from her. 'T will leave your name
A stain in times records, and blot the tables
That should preserve it.
Noble Hannibal
Be safe with us and confident. I expect
The Roman Legates; and if mediation
Or any practice which I can with honour
Assay to reconcile ye, may be useful.
To reconcile us! Time shall first run back
To his beginning, and the world return
To its first Chaos ever I will admit
Of such a word. L'et those that fawn upon
The smiles of peace and softness to delight
Their wanton appetites, practise their low
Effeminate souls in fears and passions.
Each thought of mine shall be a numerous Army
To led against Rome: in my imagination
I will fight with her still, though I want Soldiers.
Nobly resolved.
Ha! Scipio and Flaminius
Amongst the Roman Legates! there's some treachery.
Inform thy self Himulco. His pursuing 
My course, imports no good, and my sad soul
Labours with a prophetic apprehension
Of something he intends. Beready thou,
Thou my last refuge.
Sudden clouds me thinks
Creep o'er your eyes. Though you be enemies,
Peace warrants gentle greeting. She is emblem'd
In Doves that have no gall. You're here my guests,
And shall partake a courtly entertainment
Worthy such persons.
Hannibal I know
Hath put of the rough habit which his mind
Was lately wrapped in: and since chance hath made him
The subject of my conquest, in the peace
Rome hath allowed his Country (the conditions
Being strictly kept) all past contentions
Must lose their memory, and after streets
Be stisled in their first birth by prevention.
I must acknowledge my ambition
Bore my thoughts higher than my Countries good,
Or her enlargement only. Had my fortune
Captived the person of great Hannibal.
My triumph should out-vye all the rich pomps
That ever made Rome shine.
That person yet
Is free, and capable of new designs,
To make himself full owner of a glory
'Bove Scipio's conquest. Tic not thy success
Declines me the least step towards subjection
Of my still high built hopes: which being strongly
Propped with my resolutions, shall in time
Raise monuments of fame unto my actions.
Let not one chance exalt thee. Hannibal,
Though Carthage owns him not, comment's a world
Greater than her, or Rome.
But the dimensions
Are bounded with that strict necessity
They cannot be extended. Flatter not
Those hopes with expectation of a change
To any better than the now condition
Of thy subverted greatness: which being ruined
Beyond all reparation, thy attempts
To build it new, wanting materials,
Are vainer far than the Sycilian Dogs
Barking against the Moon.
Be not deceived
With too much confidence. The more they are pressed,
The more palms flourish. That that would make Scipio
Look downwards, lifts me up.
How thou art mocked
With selfe-opinion! Know I have a soul
So full instructed, it hath power to temper
The difference of my fortune with that mean,
That even the highest glory to my self
Is but adversity, and an abject state
No less then is my present greatness. Man
From outward accidents should not derive
The knowledge of himself: for so hoe's made
The creature of beginnings over which
His virtue may command: Fortune and chance.
When he by speculation hath informed
His divine part hoe's perfect; and 'till then
But a rough matter, only capable
Of better form. It oft begets my wonder
That thou a rude Barbarian, ignorant
Of all art, but of wars, which custom only
Hath (being joined to thy first nature) taught thee,
Should know so much of man.
I study man
Better from practice, than thou can from books.
Thy learning's but opinion, mine known truth;
Subject to no gross errors, such as cannot
Be reconciled, but by production
Of new and greater. Did thy learned Masters
Of Arts, with whom even armed thou hast conversed
Before a battle joined (if fame speak truth)
By their instructions show thee surer ways
To victory, than Fortune joined to valour,
And a full strength of men?
That which consists
In action only, and th'event, depends
Upon no certain rule demonstrative,
Is fates, not reasons.
Fie, this strife sounds harshly,
Come Massanissa, you have shared your part
Of virtue and of fortune.
Least of virtue,
That left a just cause to support a wrong one;
Such was his fall from Carthage.
You being judge
In your own cause: but who will else subscribe
To such a partial sentence?
Pray no more.
My Court looks like a Parliament of Soldiers;
Where war me thinks should be discoursed on; how
A battle should be ordered, or what form
Hath most advantage. What men have you known,
Or History doth mention, that exceoded
In the degrees of merit?
Alexander
The first best Captain.
Who the second?
Pyrrhus.
And who the third?
Doubtless my self.
What then
Am I that conquered Hanniball?
If I
Had conquered Scipio, I had then been first.
Did ever pride so swell th'infected parts
Of a rich soul! Were not his mind corrupted
With that disease of virtue, I should covet
To join mine with it in an eternal fellowship;
And only here in outward enmity
Divide our bodies.
How art satisfied?
Am I yet safe?
My observation
Hath been I fear too curious: for your danger
If any be intended wants all means
Of opposition. But my fear perhaps
Interprets worse than a consideration
Will from the circumstance; which yet hath show
Of probability.
Why what hast seen?
Armed troupes guard all the passages by which
The house is entered.
I am then betrayed.
Can Kings be treacherous? have they mortal parts
Subject to that corruption staines with leprosy
The glorious brow of honour! Can creation
Be in her different works so negligent
As not to perfect them? Shoe's idle when
She makes Kings, should be like gods, less then men.
Prusias and Scipio, thus I mock your plots.
Be treacherous now; you shall have nothing but
Hannibals earth to work on. 
What's the meaning
Of this?
Tic poison surely that he takes.
Restrain him.
It is too late.
Call our Physicians.
All help is vain as your conspiracy.
It was no juggling sop to wrap the senses
In slumbers like death, Colches never yielded
A juice more baneful. I went still prepared
Thus to overcome your malice; which discovered,
My death bears me above it.
Why should Hannibal
From the weak warrant of a bare suspicion
Be guilty of such barbarousnesse! By all
The hopes I have of good men's loves, or memory
Amongst their true valuing of desert, I ever
Restrained m'uncertaine thoughts their liberty
From being busy about betraying Hanniball
By any practise honour might not father,
And gladly call his own.
Persuade thy flatterers
To credit it: Those that would deify
The virtues in thy book, not of thy mind.
Practice hath taught me how to read men's souls.
Doe not I know then thy hypocrisy
Plasters the wounded credit of thy act!
But if thou healst it, there will be a scarre
To show posterity that what thou did
Was full of base corruption.
Thou did much
Lessen thy self in thy first fear; and now
By the ill-grounded jealousy of my virtue
Wilt make thy own taxed. From this Paedia
I have been truly moral; th'institutions
Have been my guides in every action
Which I did either as a man, or Prince.
Cirrus himself, to whom they were directed,
Pursued them not so strictly as I have.
Breath not thy soul forth then 'till thou art satisfied
Of my true innocence: for if thou dy'st
In thy suspicion, be assured it will
Disturb thy peace hereafter, and thy ashes,
As the pile hallows them, will fright thy ghost
With shapes of the dishonour thou unjustly
Would lay on Scipio.
Tell thy Philosophers
The earth hath not a center; that the day
Is not illumined by the Sun; that fire
Is colder than the ever-frozen rocks
That bear the North-end of th'earths Axeltree:
When they allow these paradoxes, I
Will credit Scipio. Work on thou brave minister
Of my last victory over my self.
Quench thy unnatural flames with my scorched bowels.
Now thou hast met a heat, which joined to thine
Makes all the frame like the bright forge, whence Jove
Hath his artillery. My heat, my heart;
Quench it Eridanus: but it would dry
Thy waters up. I'm wrapped in greater fires
Then the rash boy thou choak'st. Would this were Oeta;
That like the furious Thebane I might build
Mine own pile, and the flame as it ascends
Transform it self into a constellation;
Or fix in the upper region of the ay re
Like a perpetual comet to fright Rome
With his prodigious light. Me thinks an earthquake
Totters the aged fabric that so long
Hath borne me on it, and the divided poles
Embrace to kiss each other. An inversion
Of natures order shall attend the fate
Of dying Hannibal. So Oaks eradicated
By a prodigious whirlwind, tear the earth
Through which their large roots spread themselves.
No less then the whole world to be my grave.
He's dead: with him my glory. Scipio's acts (Isle have 
Havenot another object worthy them,
Or his attempts.
Fame break thy trumpet now;
Deaf thy wide ears, and silence all thy tongues
Since he's dead, who with his actions wont
To imp new feathers to thy broken wings,
And make thee sligh a pitch above the reach
Of common eyes.
Left that my honour suffer
In the suspicion of betraying him,
I will provide a lasting monument,
And fix his statue on it.
You Massanissa
Isle see established in your Kingdom. Carthage
Thy base ingratitude to him, whose merit
But justly challenged all that thou coldest own
Shall teach me a prevention. Solitude
Is the souies best companion. At Linturnum
My Country Villa I will terminate
My after life free from men's flatteries,
And fear of their lean envy. He that suffers
Prosperity to swell him 'bove a mean,
Like those impressions in the ayre, that rise
From dunghill vapours, scattered by the wind,
Leaves nothing but an empty fame behind.
Our strife is ended: yet in ones I spy
Peace smile, and war frown in another eye.
Being victorious I must not submit
To a dislike. Rather to him that writ
Our story, gratefully I would allow
One leaf of Laurel torn from mine own brow.
And with their fair opinion of it these
May make it a full Garland if they please.

WHat horror wakes me! and disturbs the peace
I sate enthroned in? shall dissention ruin
Eternal acts? Hath the great deity
Made me his instrument, and shall my power
Be slighted so by their rebellious difference?
Cease mutiny, or be your own destructions.
Accursed confusion that neglects the form
Nature prescribes. I rather would preserve ye:
That in distinguished order ye might show
The glory of my work; each in his sphere
Subscribing to my better government.
But my commands are useless. Their deaf wills
Persist to act their own and my sad ills.
Whore's my delight I whence is this sad dejection?
How amazed Nature stands I Have our embraces
Brought forth a race of elemental forms
That live in simple bodies, to be made
Pregnant for other births, and will she now
Neglect their teeming? I would be a Grandfather,
And see my issue multiply.
Oh husband!
Our union hath been vain; our off-spring proves
A rebel to our peace, and natures laws.
Light fire descends to earth, beneath whose weight
He groans to be delivered, till with struggling
He lifts earth up, in whose repression ayre
Contracts his forces to extinguish fire.
Again; fire from this mutinous assault
Doubles his strength; when straight ambitious water
Climbing his seat consumes her self in flames.
Thus fire, ayre, water, earth, each would be all,
And are made neither; but a confused mass,
And indigested Chaos.
Am I Ianus,
(The figure of eternal providence)
And shall this disobedience scope the stroke
Of my sever'st correction? Fire I shall lash you,
And make your nimble pyramids skip upward.
Isle chain earth to her centre. Ayre had best
Confine himself to his three regions,
Or else Isle disinherit him. If water
Exceed her bounds.
See; the dissentious come
Mazed in the errors of their own confusion:
As if their dissolution should precede
Their yet not perfect being. How my griefs
Press down the organes of my utterance,
And choke words in their passage! Speak good Ianus.
Ye disobedient children of that love
That joined us to produce ye.
Stop good father,
Our wills are deaf to counsel.
Or to threats.
Set both your brows with wrinkles, and put on
The austerest anger, we'll be awed by none
But our own wills.
Isle quench my brothers flames,
Or burn my self into him. My cold moisture
Shall not be tied to embrace as cold a sister,
And not ascend above them.
Isle be active
As ayre or fire. Else with my ponderous weight▪
Isle press their climbing heads beneath my centre;
And by inversion bury them within me,
'Till earthquakes shatter all, and small ruin
Dilate their passage.
Are we not one birth?
Why then should there be a precedence,
And not an equal power of all first qualities?
Be not you partial parents, we'll obey
The government of nature.
Otherwise
With our own strength we will prosecute this war
'Till ruin stop's it.
Stubborn boys, Isle yoke ye
In such a bondage.
Gentle husband try
Persuasions strength: Perhaps twill better work
Upon the temper of their fiercer nature.
I am your mother; let me reconcile ye:
That in your peace I may preserve the order
Of my intended work. Should fire forsake
His lofty mansion, and infect his flames
With grosser weight, it would benumb his activenesse,
And make his motion dull. Were my pure ayre
Pent in his sisters entrails, her foul veins
Would soon infect him. What creation meaned
In your diversities, your rash ambitions
Must not pervert. Since providence hath made ye
The means for many ends, dispute not them,
Nor your own thought-defects: each i• supplied
With a perfection, and an equal worth
Distinguished in proportion; but the excellence
Of your own attributes cannot appear,
Whilst you disturb the distribution
Of them to other forms, which from your mixtures
Must enter different bodies of the first,
Second, third, fourth, fifth composition.
Vapours &amp; exhalations; meteors; vegetables
And minerals; animals, and lastly man,
Called so from concord▪ for he doth contain
A harmony of parts, and in them figure
His end of being. Let not then your wills
Persist in this rebellious mutiny,
And hinder high intendments. Pray agree,
And leave the reason of such acts to me.
Vain oratory. Think you us so easy
To be overcome by words! swell high my rage,
And with licentious fury break the ties
Of these too weak commands.
Let's on to fight,
Whilst the yet discord of the untuned spheres
Add's courage, and delights our warlike ears.
What shall we doe? The universal fabric
Will be averted, if this war continue:
Let's sue to Love; his power may be prevailing.
See; Love appears at thy request.
Thou cause of motion and of rest.
Thou greater powers great substitute,
Whose will and acts none must dispute.
Thou that form'st the best of things
From thought-impossibles, and brings
Contrary matters to produce
Another difference, then the use
Of a mere quality in one
Can work unto perfection.
Thou that thy secrets dost unlock
To propagate a lasting stock;
And multiply that the issue might
Be little less then infinite.
Thou mother of all that is found
Within this universal round,
What is thy will with Love?
Oh gentle power
Thou that art Natures soul, and the beginning
Of every humane thing: that give them laws,
And to thy self art law. Figure of peace;
That to thy godheads attribute an next
The quiet order of the worlds vast frame
To have its form and being from thy rule;
Which must be now imperious or its ruin
Will prevent time. The mutinous elements
Have rased rebellion, and dis-joynted quite
The order of their fabric. The pure heavens
(Whose motion should be harmony) roll cross,
And bend their Axle-tree, 'till both the poles
Doe kiss each others ends. Then rectify
Great Love this dire confusion.
Straight Isle doe it.
Can Love deny if Nature woo it.
The heavens first in tune Isle set;
And from their music soon beget
A charm, of power to make light fire
Skip to his sphere, and earth retire
To her parch• den. The subtle ayre
Isle calm from mists, and make it fair,
And water with her curled waves sweep
The bounded channels of the deep,
That order may succeed, and things
Grow perfect from their lasting springs.
Move right ye spheres in concord sound,
And with your music fill this round.
Hence confusion and dissention.
Be no more new forms prevention,
Crossing still
A mothers will,
And Natures great intention.
Concord is the soul of being.
Nothing's better than agreeing▪
Then let embraces crown this times beginning,
Loves power is winning.
And when he throws the darts that arm his hands,
Who can resist his great commands?
Nature must pay Love thanks for this great work
Of reconciliation. May the peace
Be lasting as your selves, and no ambition
Move a new war: but from your loving mixtures
New generation follow.
Spheres again
Your brazen trebles higher strain.
And lusty moving sounds advance
To make us active whilst we dance.
Now to the other work•: our art
Shall make all perfect ever we part.
Come forth thou son of earth, and view the day
That glories in the presence of thy beauty.
What am I? My imperfect sense is yet
Vnapprehensive, and the intellect
My mother hath inspired, doth not instruct me
To know my self.
Look up thou master-peece
Of Natures workmanship, thou little world:
Thou that excel'st in form, that comprehends
All the perfections which her curious hand
Designed and finished: That when other cr•atures
Behold the earth, and with dejected eyes
Look downwards on it, hast an erected figure
To see the stars, and contemplate their beings,
Celestial causes, and their influence,
Whence great effects ensue: Thou that hast speech
To be thy thoughts interpreter, expect
A farther act of Love to crown thy life
By joining thee to an immortal wife.
Receive my thanks great power. I yet am mazed,
And wander in a labyrinth of thoughts,
That throng confusedly together, striving
Who should first issue, 'till their multitude
Chokes up the passage. Oh ye powers that made me
To be a King, and to have sovereignty
Annexed unto my difference, send me quickly
The glorious guide that may remove this darkn•sse.
Ha! what are these?
You may go look. Yet if you ask me mildly, perhaps Isle answer you.
We are sent to be your servants.
By whom?
Our parents, the four Elements.
Your names?
My name is Choler. I was beg•t by Fire on Natures Cooke-maide in the time of a Festival. I was dry nursed by a lean Butterwife, and bred up in Mars his Fencing-schoole: where I have learned a mystery that consists in lying, distance and direction; pace, space and place; Time, motion and action; progression, reversion and trav•rsion; blows, thrusts, falses, doubles, ships and wards; closings, gripes and wrestlings; fights guardant, open, variable and close. Then have wee our stocatas, imbrocatas, mandritas, puintas and puintas reverses; our stramisons, pesetas, carricadas, amazzas and incartatas.
And what's all this?
Terms in our dialect to pusle desperate igno∣rance.
What's yours?
My name is Blood. Ayre was my father, and my mother a light-heel'd madame that kept a vaulting-schoole at the sign of Verge•. As she was one day practi∣sing a high trio•• she lost her hold, and fell down into my fathers regions, where had not hee kind man stopped her about tho middle, she had brake her neck against a rock of Ice that hung beneath her, and Blood had not been as he is, a Dancer sir.
What art skilled in?
Garbs and postures of the body. Here's an honour for a Lord; a back-fall for a Lady, and a high ri∣sing is best in an active gallant. But pardon moi monsier, it doe strain a de back too mush. Here's a traverse for a nimble Lawyer. A hop and skip shall raise the son of a Cobbler well under-lay'd with pieces to the govern∣meant of a province, 'till over-much ambitious cutting wears him into his Last. A turn above ground for a Mercurial pick-pocket, and an easy passage to destru∣ction
for him that dances after infected wantonness▪ Cum multis alijs.
And what's your name?
Phlegm mine sir. Water was my mother, and she made me a Physician. I was nursed by Apollo•s Herb∣wife that dwells at the sign of the Crab, and she taught me to go backwards.
And what can you doe?
Live by the inspection of excrements, and draw aurum palpabile out of them. Kill any one cum privilegio are•is. I am Venus Midwife, and trusted with many se∣crets, which I never reveal but to my Apothecary when we meet at Libra to share and settle our correspon∣dence. Your Physician will serve you at your death sir.
Now your name?
I am called Melancholy. I was begotten on the earth after a great drought in the time of barren∣n•sse: who breeding me up hardly, enabled me the bet∣la for this hungry profession. I would feign be in love; but having no other mistress. I am enforced to love mine own humour.
All these are humours, and must be my servants.
What a vast bounty have the heavens given me?
But I must labour to preserve them regular,
And not exceeding their proportions
Of substance or of quality, for then
They will be masters. Disagreeing!
He hath stirred me sir, and I will be angry.
Then Phlegm must cool you.
Phlegme's a fool.
Or a Physician.
Choler, you must be taken down.
Isle soon be up again. Provoke me no more: I am adust with rage, and will make you an odd number∣ber.
Come, this agrees not with a servants duty.
You must subscribe to order. Phlegm shall be
My substitute to moderate these jarrings.
And if hereafter any one transgress
But in the least dissention that disturbs
The quiet of my state, he shall correct it;
Nor spare himself. For in a government
The offence is greatest in the instrument
That hath the power to punish; and in laws
The authors trespass makes the foulest cause.
What admiration works upon my sense!
I hey•e and see such objects as would make
Creation doubtful whether she were perfect
Without these parts. Into what strange delights
I'm hurried on the sudden? ha!
Look hither
Thou comfort of my love that gave thee being
To figure greater power. See, Love hath brought
Thy wish a spouse of's own immortal race,
Clad in the glory of her innocence.
Doe not defile her, yet shoe's virgin white,
And joined unto thee, that thou may enjoy
Knowledge and virtue, not thy sensual pleasures,
For being linked unto thee she is made
As sensible of thy corrupted passions,
As thou of mortal griefs. Let her direct
Thy powers of appetite. She'll show thee heaven,
And the reward of good; and if thou miss
The path she guides thee in, thou will• enforce her
To share thy ruin, and pervert the ends
Of her eternity. Which if thou tread
By her directions, she communicates,
And makes thee like her self. She must be changed
According to thy disposition.
Then let my counsel be so deep impressed
The prosecution of't may make thee blessed.
Fairest of all earthly things,
Mount thy thoughts upon the wings
Of contemplation, and aspire.
To reach at my supernal fire:
Whose heate shall purge thy spouse and th•e
From all dreggs of impurity.
Let no falser love delight
Thy sense deluding appetite
To seek out other wantons led,
So heaven at length shall crown thy head.
Descend thou fairest of all creatures,
Graced with all thy heavenly features,
In whom all perfections shin•;
P•r thou art
In every part
Little less than divine.
Take thy Bride and enjoy her,
But not with soul desires annoy her:
For she is white
And hath no true delight
But what is given
From the desire of heaven.
Now join, and each to other happy prove.
That neither •ay
Be led astray
To seek a stranger love.
After •y sacrifice of vows and thanks
Let me embrace with reverence, Oh my life▪
And better soul: joy hath possession taken
Of all my faculties, and gives a welcome
To these delights.
Doe not abuse them then▪
For my pure substance will admit no mixture
With any thing that's earthy, lest it should
Be so defiled. Together with my self
I must bestow on thee two different servants.
The one is like my self, all innocence,
The other's clad in an infernal robe
Of malice to us, and will tempt thy frailty
To loose desires, from her black invention
Forging aspersions on me to divert
Thy love: which I so prize, my bliss or ruin
Hath sole dependence on it. If she urge
Those accusations, deaf thy understanding
To her suggestions, and inform thy reason
Only from the other, who best knows my passions,
Powers and habits: thou wast made for me
To be my instrument, and I for thee.
And when I doe forsake thee, or infect
My looser thoughts with any other object
Then thy wished good, may I be made th'example
Of imbecility; the spoil of time;
Mockery of fortune; image of inconstancy;
The scale of envy and calamity.
And this fair structure (now by these upheld)
Be buried in it's own and their lad ruins.
I am angry at it. We shall have moral now in¦stead of Martial discipline. Challenges will bee pro∣claimed cowardice: and every white-liver'd silk-skinn'd Lady-courtier will answer a mans anger with, if it were
not for the law and conscience. If no body will pro∣folk me, Isle quarrel with my self.
Take heed Choler of a halter.
Phlegm thou art a Mountebank, and I will make thee quake.
Not so hot good Choler. I am partaking, and as discontented at this match as envy can make me. I could hatch a conspiracy to sever them, should cause po∣sterity attribute all Matchiavillianisme to Melancholy.
Blood's prevented, and the expectation of so many children begot on several mothers that should dote on the quivering of my calves, and the strength of my back is utterly frustrate. No Lady of liberty must admire this passage, or that skipping, 'till her veins swell with my addition. I must no more run here and there to tickle her sense, and fright the g•eene-sicknesse from her complexion.
Shall it be a plot?
Let's kill them presently.
But the means?
Why, is not Phlegm a Physician?
Come my kind servants, let your active limbs
Move to delight us, whilst the spheres agree
To guide your measures with their harmony.
I am disturbed within; a new desire
Whet's appetite of pleasure in some change,
Such as may touch the sense without a scruple
Of wedlocks breach. Hence with these laws of consci∣ence
That would set limits to what's infinite.
Two kisses more will cloy me▪ nought can relish
But variation.
Hearken then to me.
Leave this strict Bride that curbs licentious will,
And rayn's it with her temperance. Liberty
Makes delight full and swelling: it must feed
On several objects, else twill glut it self
Into a loathing.
I applaud thy counsel,
And am prepared to act it.
Ha! Physander.
So suddenly forgetful of thy vows
Before full consummation of those rites
Crown Bridegrooms happy?
Be not thus mis-led
By her malicious envy. She but shows thee
The easy path to ruin, whose broad entrance
Painted with falsest pleasures, ends in a point
Of all the •l•s attend our misery
Con•racted into one. Though virtues way
Be hard and straight to enter, yet the end
Reaches to heaven, where her fair hand bestows
Wreath•s of bright stars to crown deserving brows.
Whisper that still; each accent's musical.
The me•e conceit of it makes me immortal.
Henc•; 〈◊〉 converse is hateful. Isle not tie
Desire to such embraces. Isle enjoy
A mistress 〈◊〉 and sportive; that can vary
All shapes of dalliance, and present delight
Each minute in a several fashion.
Guide me, Isle follow.
And we will attend.
Wretched Bellamina, that in the instant
Of thy expected comfort, should be thrown
Below all misery▪ O that lustful sense
Should cause divorce betwixt us! I am lost
Almost beyond recovery, since my substance
Must be partaking of his hated ills:
Such is the fate of wedlock. His content
In false delights, must be my punishment.
I'm bravely sitted; these are fitting ornaments.
Come my best prompter, with endeavours wings
Let's cut the ayre, and strain our motion,
'Till we attain this bower of Sensuality.
And let the repetition of her praise
Sweeten my painful longings. My desire
Fee'ls many throes of travail; 'till delivered
Of it's sweet issue.
You must suffer for it.
Pleasures whose means are easy, in the end
Doe lose themselves. Things only are esteemed
And valued by their acquisition.
Should you win her delights without some pains,
They would not relish. Whilst your expectation
Labours with the event, prepare your self
To court it bravely. Shoe's high-spirited;
And will not stoop to every common bait
That catches easy wantonness.
What's the best?
A rough Soldiers phrase; a strong back, and a brawny limb: bait her with these she'll bite home. If she be coy, kick her in the breech, and cry farewell: after a few dissembling tears she'll yield with the gre∣la appetite. If she refused me, I'd kill her.
Could you but dance sir, and show your self active before her, it were impossible for her to hold out 'till the discovery of one knave amongst many officers. Dancing is the most taking: if a man rise well, his Mi∣stress cannot choose but fall.
Court her with solid language, and such dis∣course
as may relish of aged experience. Express your thoughts such, and your actions such, as she may con∣ceive judgement to be entailed upon you. If she be ver∣tuous, that wins upon her soul, and let your Physician alone with her body: If she bee wanton, Phlegm can administer provocatives.
Might I advise you sir, a passion at Courtship were more powerful. Let a sigh be the period of every amorous sentence. Sing her some pathetic madrigal full of chromatic •lats: twill sharpen her. I would have all lovers begin and end their prick-song with Lachry∣m•, 'till they have wept themselves as dry as I am.
The ayre me thinks begins upon a sudden
To be perfumed, as if Arabian winds
Scattered their spices loosely on the •ace
Of some rich ea•th, fruitful with aromatic.
Music breathes forth the soul of harmony.
How eagerly my senses catch these objects!
But what are these?
Servants to Sensuality
That waite her will, and with a diligence
Becoming duty doe prepare her pleasures.
The'r sent to entertain you.
What their names,
And offices?
Seeing mine sir. I am my Ladies Chamber∣maid, and the daughter of a Glasse-maker. A piece of brittle ware, and apt to be cracked. I have been often cemented together, but could never hold above a month. Through me sir you may see my Ladies secrets, and mine own are at your service when you shall com∣mand their revelation.
My name's Hearing. I am usher of the Hall, and the trumpet that proclaims dinner ready with, Gentlemen, and Yeomen. When my Lady removes to
her City privacy (for she keeps open house in the Country) I am the foreman at her Gate, with an instru∣meant of correction for the offensive beggars. If you love noise sir, my wife and my self are at your service.
Pray sir your name?
Mine is Smelling. I am my Ladies Huntsman, and keep some lesser beagles for her chamber-use to excuse the freeness of her necessities eruptions. I play the Gardner likewise, and attend her always when she goes to pluck a Rose. My Mistress Close had a very stinking breath, before Misackmos perfumed her, and she is now grown less common, then when her imperfe∣ctions lay open. When you will use me sir, you shall al∣ways have me under your nose.
And what's yours?
Tasting mine sir. I am my Ladies Cooke, and King of the Kitchen: where I rule the roast; command imperiously, and am a very tyrant in my office. My Sub∣jests being all Soldiers are d•ely encountered by most fierce stomachs, and never returned but maimed and dis∣member'd. Brawn, Beef, and Pork are always mu∣ster'd in the van, and bring up Veale, Mutton, Minc't∣pie, Goose, Turkie, Duck, and so forth. I have a sort of cowardly Custards, borne in the City, but bred up at Court, that quake for fear: yet are as valiant in suffe∣ring as the rest, and are all overcome even by the wo∣men with much noise. I then send forth a fresh supply of Rabbits, Pheasant, Kid, Partridge, Quail, Lark, Plo∣ver, Tele, Tarts, &amp;c. With a French troop of Pulpa∣toones, Mackaroones, Kickshaws, grand and excellent. The battle ended, I survey the field; and those whom I find untouched, I place in garrison in my larder: the rest endure a new and fierce assault by the valiant Serving∣men. I then repairs my broken army; see their over∣throw at supper; drink my self drunk; go to bed, and my that days fury's over. Isle bee your servant sir in spite of your teeth.
Now yours?
Touching mine. I am my Ladies Gentleman-usher, and kill Spiders for her Monkey. I am always her foreman in public, •nd sometimes in private: which makes way for me to her favour in reversion, if she survive two or three defective husbands, and her yet uncloyed appetite can pretend an expectation of issue. Mean time a hand•ull of •ringoes and a little tickling w•ds me and the waiting women in her closet with more vows and protestations then a wanting gallant makes when he borrows money. Wee will conduct my Lady to her Bower, where she prepares to entertain you.
Me thinks I am transformed into a happiness
Cannot be figure▪d. It before enjoying
The expectation can beget such bliss,
What will possession?
Shall I question you sir Cooke?
Qu•stionlesse a Cooke can answer a Physician.
What Physical observations have you in your sauces, and condiments? Shall I instruct you?
I thank you sir. My method is to dress Phe∣sant, Partridge and Coney for Lords, but their Ladies many times make the sauce. The waiting women are fed with Wagtailes. I prepare tongues for Lawyers: most commonly Woodcocks for Aldermens Heirs, and Puddings for costive Citizens; whose wives must have flesh of a Court-dressing, or their bellies will never bee full. Your projectors feed upon Calves-braines, and your students upon innocent Mutton.
I hope sir our after familiarity will bee the often taking down of Chollers stomach. Wee should agree well; we both love fire.
And Choler shall not want his Brawn whilst Cookery and Winter feasts last. I must in and look to my roast, of which at dinner you shall most plentifully taste.
I am inflamed. My appetite begins
To burn with hot desires; and if protraction
Delay their satisfying, they'll consume
Themselves and me.
She comes: these sounds forerunne her.
Flow •low delight,
And pleasures swell to height.
Drown every eye with joyful tears.
And fill the ears
With sounds harmonious as the spheres.
Let every sense be ravished quite
With a large fullness of delight.
Join all ye instruments of pleasure;
And from the abundance of your treasure
Choose out one t'enrich this bower,
And make the Mistress of this paramour.
Elysium sure is here, and that eternity
I lately dream't of.
Let mine eyes first gaze
Upon his figure. It is a heavenly creature,
And worthy my embraces, I have yet
Conversed with earthy shapes, the baser issue
Of that gross element, but here's a form
Mingled with fire, that moves the soul of sense,
And kindles passion in me. What was she
Durst aim to prepossess her self of him
My mouth can only challenge? Welcome sir.
If my expressions suit not entertainment
Of such a guest, creation must be blamed
That gave none other; for what ere in nature
Is found that can affect you, here it is stored;
And shall be a•l exhausted to declare
How much I love you.
You in throne me Lady
In happiness, above the difference
Of that may b•th can boast. You make me perfect:
And every touch of this delicious hand,
Ch••k•, lip immortalise me.
O'pe my treasury,
And let it waste to emptiness. Wilt please
Thine eyes? We'll mount a Chariot made of diamonds,
Who•e lights reflection shall create a day
In the C•mmerian valleis. From some height
We will survey the earth, and where weak beams
Cannot extend themselves, we'll have an optic
Shall show us in an instant all the hemisphere.
We'll see the fair Arcadian Virgins hunt
In their Parthenian groves. We'll count the beasts
Lurk in Hucanias dens; number the pines
That crown Lycaus.
You are the only object
Mine eyes would gaze at.
Would thine cares be blessed
With pleasing sounds? The aerie Choristers
Shall strain their throats by art, and harmony
Call down the spheres to make her consort up.
Your words are only music.
For thy smell
Saba shall be translated where thou go,
And strew thy path with spices. Panthers skins
Shall be thy couch, and amber pave the floor
Where thy foot treads.
This breath's perfume enough
To create a Phoenix,
Would delight thy taste?
Then Samlan Peacocks, and Ambracian Kid•,
Henns of Numidia, Pheasants, Phenicopters,
Ta•tel•an Lampreys; Eels of Benacus,
Cockles of Luc•no; Eleusinian Plaice
Shall fill thy dish, and thousand changes more
To wh•t new appetite. Shalt drink no wine
But what •al•r•us or Calabrian Alone
Y•old from their grapes.
This kiss is more then Nectar.
Shalt sleep upon a bed of purest down,
Driven from white necks of Caysters Swans,
And Peneus par•owes. With Assyrian silks
〈◊〉 cloth •hy body.
But this touch is softer.
You •avish me with jo•es beyond expression.
Why, this is rare. I am not angry.
I am very joyful: this tickles me.
And mak's me young.
And me merry.
Now my •icon•iate murderer, what say you to a dish of gluttony will bread the gout in a Lord before a beggar can break his fast with it? Are not we cooks good instruments? who together with an Hospital of sin cause diseases faster then you can cure them?
A livelier music, come sweet heart we'll dance.
How doth my sweetheart like it?
I doe not with an O•conomick strictness
Observe my servants, and direct their actions:
Pleasure is free.
But what sad object's this?
I come to snatch a Husband from thine arms
Lascivious strumpet; thou whose looser eyes
Bewitched his ill affection, and entice
His thoughts with wanton appetite of sense,
From my chaste love. Doth not Physander see
Ruin hid under every bait of pleasure;
She lays to catch him?
Laugh at her sweet heart,
Thou art secure in the•e embraces.
Do not
Afflict me thus. Those false dissembling kisses
Wound me to death. Return unto my bosom,
That never shall be warm with others touch.
Shoe's common, and will mix her lustful blood
Even with beasts.
Tic but her envy to me.
Let not her Siren charms bewitch thee thu•
Unto a shipwreck. Every smile of hers
Shadow's a rock to split thee: in my arms
Shalt sleep as safe as if the clouds did guard thee.
Am I not fair? Shoot not mine eyes a fire
As live•lie? grow not colours on my cheeks,
Brighter then those that paint her rottenness▪
And will Physander leave me? Did I not
Forsake th'etheriall Palace of my father,
To be thine only? and a whore to rival me!
Oh misery!
The art barren of those pleasures
I here enjoy.
What pleasures? gilded ones,
To mock thy sense▪ their inside's bitterness.
Return, with me shalt find delights,
As far exceeding these as the great day Starr
His pale cheeked sister, or nights lesser beauties.
A thousand winged intelligences daily
Shall be thy ministers, and from all parts
Inform thee of the Worlds new accidents.
Shalt from their scanning frame by my advice,
Rules of prevention▪ shalt command all arts▪
As hand-mayds; Shalt converse with Heaven and Angels;
And after all Isle bring thee to Elysium.
Cold there compels no use of rugged furs,
Nor makes the mountains barren. Ther's no dog
To rage and scorch the harvest labourer▪
Whilst the lascivious Landlord wastes th'increase
In prodigal contrivements, how to allay
The furious heat with artificial snows,
And drinks his wine in ice. Spring's always there,
And paints the valleys: whilst a temperate ayre
Sweeps their embroidered face with his cursed gales,
And breaths perfumes, no Persian aromatic:
Pontick Amomus, or Indian balsam
Can imitate. There night doth never spread
Her •bon wings; but daylight's always there,
And one blessed •eason crowns the eternal year.
He hear no more: nor can I be so credulous
Having possession, to expect such fables.
Here I am fixed.
And I made miserable.
Let's in to feast, and revel; and at night
Shalt be possessed of a more full delight.
Thus doth chaste wedlock suffer. Heavenly servant
Whisper some powerful counsel in his ear,
That may reclaim him. If it works, return,
And bring me comfort, who 'till then must mourn.
The other health my boys.
No more health if you love me.
Indeed health agrees not with your profession.
But we will have more health, and less health; or I will make a close stool pan of your Physicians nod∣dl.
Good brother Choler he pacified.
I will not be pacified. He that deny's health let him think himself dead ever he pronounce it. Choler's dry.
So is Melancholy.
Blood would be heated better.
And Phlegm moistened.
Blood's a skip-jack, and I will make him caper.
Nay brother Choler, thou art so cross.
And will she not return? then may the Sun
Stable his horses ever, and no day
Go•lt the black ayre with light. If in mine eye
Sh•e be not placed, what object can del•light it?
Excellent amorist. He•e's to thee Melancholy.
What do I see? •lush gray-ey'd morn, and spread
Thy purple shame upon the mountain topps:
O• pale thy self with envy, since here com's
A brighter Venus, then the dull-eyd ••are,
That lights thee up
Very fine Law now: Melancholy hath been some neglected Courtier: hoe's perfect in she-flattery. If he mistake me for the idol of his passion, Isle abuse him.
Oh let me kiss those pair of red twinn'd cher∣ries.
That do disti•l Nepen•he.
〈◊〉 and spare not.
Bite not the cherry stones and eat, I care not.
Oh turn not from me• let me smell the gumms,
Which thy rich breath creates.
As for my gumms you 'l find
Sweeter here. I have no rotten teeth behind.
This leg's not right.
I know it. It is my left.
Carry your toes wider.
Take been that I foe•te not you.
Now do your cinque pass cleanly.
My cinque pass cleanly! A cooke defies it.
You lye too open. Guard your self better, or I shall bang your coat.
It is a dangerous w•ren. Here's an hypostas•s argues a very bad stomach.
Some Soldier perhaps that wont's his Pay.
This sediment b•tokens a great swell•ing in the belly.
It is some Chamber-maide sick of a Midwifes timpani.
It were good she changed ayre. Remove her into the Country, and if she fall again into the greene-sicknesse▪ she knows the 〈◊〉. This water argues a great heart-burning.
It is a Lovers that: or some misers that drank small beer in the Dog-dayes at his own charges.
The owner of this hath an impostume in his head, and it is near breaking.
Perhaps it is a Fencers, or some Shopkeepers, whose wife sells underhand by retayle.
Let him compound for his light wife, and he may b• cu•'d without the charity of an Hospital.
How on a sudden my delights are clouded?
As when a surfeit makes the pleasant dish
That cause it more did•stefull then th'offence
Of any bitter potion. My dulled senses
Relish no objects. Colours doe not take
My filmed eyes. Mine ears are deaf to sounds,
Though by a Ch•rus of those lovely maids
Which •ova begot on fair Mu•m•sy••
Sung to Apollo's harp.
Is it thereabouts? Isle play the state knave, and inform presently.
Sickness begins
To make this 〈…〉 m•n•ion. Fevers burn it,
And shake the weak foundation: then a cold
Chills it again, as if a thousand Winters
Contracted into one scattered their snow
With Northern blasts, and froze the very centre.
Palseys dis-joynt the fabric: loosen all
The house-supporters, and at length they fall.
Help me good servants.
We cannot help our selves.
Let's kill him, or he will kill us.
Phlegm doe thou choke him.
Isle empty his veins.
Isle doe it. Blot's not worthy the employment.
Worthier then Choler.
Thou lie in thy throat.
Thou hast inflamed me.
Hold I command ye: How dare ye insult
Upon my weakness thus? Oh I am wounded.
Perfidious villains, was this treachery
Your duties act? What fury prompted ye
To such inhuman• violence? Will no hand
Of art or heaven supply me with a balm!
Then I must die, and bury all my glories
Ever they are fully gazed at. Why did nature
Produce me for her darling; and not arm
My passive body with a proof against thunder?
Oh thou in whose embraces I have slept
And dream't of heaven, when my waking sense
Possessed delights in thee, I seemed to ride
Commanding pleasure as if she had been
My captive, and her spoils enriched the triumph;
Help now to save me: or with wonted kisses
Make me to lose the sense of this great pain
My bleeding wounds inflict. Let me expire
Within thy bosom, and I shall forget
That death hath any horror.
This Physander!
I know him not. The bloody spectacle
Is too offensive: Would it were removed.
Please you, Isle carry the Calfe into my Slaugh∣terhouse. But I fear he will hardly be dressed for your Lady∣ships too•h: he hath bled too much to be sweet flesh.
Not know me Lady! how am I transformed!
The sand of many minutes hath not fallen
From times gray glass, since you vouchsaf't to call me
Lord of your self and pleasures.
Let me have
Another sweet heart• one whose lusty heat
May warm my bosom. Gather all the flowers
Tempe is painted with, and strew his way.
Translate my Bower to Turias rosie banks,
There, with a Chorus of sweet nightingales
Make it continual Spring. If the Suns rays
Offend his tender skin, and make it sweat,
Fan him with silken wings of mildest ayre;
Breathed by Etesian winds. The briskest Nectar
Shall be his drink, and all the Ambrosian cates,
Art can devise for wanton appetite.
Furnish his banquet. As his senses tire,
Varye the object. Let delights be linck't,
So in a circled chain no end we see,
Pleasure is only my eternity.
Sick Sir farewell. By that time you are dead▪
Will have made you a caudle.
I sure have dream't; all past was but illusion.
Hold out ye bloodless Organes until I
Have railed upon this strumpet, then I'll dye.
How my distraction swells my tongue with curses?
That I could shoot the poison of a •asiliske
From my inflamed eyes▪ or infect the ayre
With my last breath to kill her.
Ha, ha, he.
Who's that can laugh at mis••y?
It is!
That triumph in thy ruin. I contrived •t,
And cause divorce betwixt thee and thy wife:
Whom now! will torment.
That wound is deeper
Then all the •est Calling to mind my ills,
That left a chaste wi•e for the loose embraces
O ••n•ualitie, a painted whore,
〈…〉 with beasts. D•ath hold thy ashye hand,
Till 〈◊〉 concil'd to my Bellanima,
Then st•i•e and spare not.
Fix• in that resolution,
Isle bring her to thee.
That's my good Genius.
The horrors of a thousand nights made black
With pitchy tempests, and the Moons defect,
When •hoe's affrighted with the howlings of
C•otonean Wolves, and groans of dying Mandrakes
Gathered for charm••▪ the S•hritch•owls fatal dirge▪
And Ghosts disturbed by fury•s from their p•ace.
Are all within me.
Wounded by the hands
Of hi• d•stemper'd servants that are fled.
Look up Physander, I am come to help thee,
N•t to afflict: I share thy su••earrings.
There's not an anguish but it is inflicted
As equally on me. Why would Physander
Cut wedlocks Gordian, and with looser eyes
Dote on a common wanton▪ what is pleasure
More then a lustful motion in the sense?
The prosecution full of anxious fears▪
The end Repentance. Though content be called
The soul of action, and licentious man
Propounds it as the reason of his life;
Yet if intemperate appetite pursue it,
The pure end's lost, and ruin must attend it.
But I would comfort thee. Doe but express
A detestation of thy former follies,
We will be reunited, and enjoy
Eternal pleasures.
Can Bellanima
Forgive the injuries that I have done her?
Shoe's milder then thou Love, or pities self.
Let me be banished ever to converse
With Monsters in a desert▪ it is a punishment
Too little. Let me be confined to dwell
On the North pole, where a continual Winter
May bleak me to a statue; or inhabit
The Acherusian fenns, whose noisome ayre
May choke my nostrils with their poisonous fumes,
Yet linger death unto a thousand ages.
We'll live Physander, and enjoy each other
In new delights: thou shalt be cured by Temperance.
Shoe's the Physician that doth moderate
Desire with reason, bridling appetite.
Yonder's her Cave, whose plain, yet decent roof
Shines not with ivory or plates of gold.
No Tyrian purples cover her low couch▪
Nor are the carved supporters artists work
Bought at the wealth of provinces; she feeds not
On costly viands, in her gluttony,
Wasting the spoils of conquests: from a rock
That weeps a running crystal she doth fill
Her shell cup, and drinks sparingly.
She cannot
Heal my affliction; mercies self denies
A time and means, and only black despair
Whispers th'approach of death.
Remove that sin,
And hope with sorrow. Greatest faults are small,
When that alone may make amends for all.
Might I yet live to practice my resolve
Of reformation, sooner should the day
Leave to distinguish night; the Sun should choke
His breathless horses in the western mayne,
And rise no more, the gray morn ushering in
His light approach, then my relapse from thee,
And goodness cause new miseries. Direct me,
Yet heavenly ministers; inform my knowledge
In the strict course that may preserve me happy,
Whilst yet my sighs suck in th'unwilling ayre,
That swells my wasted lunges. Though not in life,
In death Isle be Bellanima's.
Physander,
Expire not yet: thy wounds are not so mortal.
Help me to bear him yonder; gently raise
His weakened body. What can we not endure,
When pains are lessened by the hope of cure?
What wretched piece of miserable riot
Is this that needs the aid of Temperance▪
What cause his sickness?
Liberty in ills
To please his senses, which have surfeited
With an excess: and if your art supply no•,
Death will divorce us. Pity then sweet Lady,
And from your treasure of instructions
Prescribe a powerful medicine that may quicken
His cold defects, which more and more increase,
Less'ning his weakened powers. To a chaste wife
Preserve (now it is reformed) her husbands life.
Let the earth be his bed; this rock his pillow;
His curtains heaven; the murmur of this water
Instead of music charm him into sleep.
And for the cates which gluttony invents
To make it called an art, confected juice
Of Pontick nuts, and Idumean palms
Candied with Ebosian sugar; lampreys guts
Fetched from Carpathian straights, and such like wanton∣ness,
Let him eat sparingly of what the earth
Produces freely▪ or is where it is barren
Enforced by industry. Then pour this balsam
Into his wounds, and whilst his senses rest
Free from their passive working, and endure
Partial privation of their means and objects,
His slumbers shall present what mor's required
To make him sound.
My endless thanks great power,
Mother of other virtues. Whilst he sleeps,
My cares shall watch him. Oh thou death like god,
That chayn'st the senses captive, and dost raise
Dreams out of humours, whose illusive shadows,
Oft work on fancy to beget belief
Of prophecies, let no black horrors mix
Their frightful presence, but with gentle shows,
(Yet such as are instructive) sweetly work
Upon what wakes within whilst the other cease;
Then sleeps the figure of eternal peace.
I feel quick sense return, and every Organ
Is active to perform its proper office:
I am not hurt. What miracle hath Heaven
Wrought on me?
Next to Heaven, the thanks are due
To this thy lifes restorer. She hath precepts,
By which thou may preserve it to a length,
And end it happy.
What thy dreams presented,
Put straight in act, and with a constancy
Persevere in it. Rewards will only crown
The end of a well prosecuted good.
Philosophy; religious solitude
And labour waite on Temperance: in these
Desire is bounded; they instruct the minds
And bodies actions. It is lascivious ease
That gives the first beginning to all ills.
The thoughts being busied on good objects, sin
Can never find a way to enter in.
Let me digest my joys; I only now
Begin to live: the former was not perfect.
We'll shortly to my father, who with joy
Will entertain us.
I will meet ye there;
Where ye shall be invested by the hands
Of Justice, Prudence, Fortitude and me
In the bright robes of immortality.
My heart's too narrow to contain the joys
This reconciliation fills it with.
Chain me again to misery, and make me
Wretched beyond despair when next I fall.
Let this my resolution be enrolled
Amongst eternal acts not to be cancelled.
Then man is happy, and his bliss is full
When hoe's directed by his better soul.
It must not be; his glory is my shame.
Mischief attempted if it want success,
Is the contrivers punishment. As darts
Shot at resisting walls, in their return
May light on him that did direct them. Malice
Suggests a new attempt. Isle practise all
That hell can teach me, but Isle work his fall.
Who's here?
Into what misery hath riot
Brought my decayed state? Whilst I had the means
To purchase pleasures, all delights were sold me.
Those gone, necessity and lust then made me
A mercenary prostitute, and since
By the gradation of a wanton life,
I'm fallen to this. Want and a loathsome sickness
Make me reflect; nor can I but accuse my self
At Conscience bar, but not with penitence;
That's still in opposition with my will,
Now custom hath confirmed me in all ill.
To accuse Physander, thither will I go,
And if all fail try what despair can doe.
Hoe's here.
I shall not need your diligence.
Your treachery (although forgiven) hath made me
Watchful upon ye. I have gotten now
A careful guide to manage my affairs.
Retire. I do embrace thy fellowship
Prudence, thou virtue of the mind, by which
We do consult of all that's good or evil
Conducing to felicity. Direct
My thoughts and actions by the rule of reason.
Teach me contempt of all inferior vanities.
Pride in a marble portal gilded ore;
Assyrian carpets▪ chairs of ivory;
The luxury of a stupendous house;
Garments perfumed; gems valued not for use
But needless ornament; a sumptuous table,
And all the baits of sense. A vulgar eye
Sees not the danger which beneath them lye.
Shoe's a majestic ruler, and commands
Even with the terror of her awful brow.
As in a throng sedition being raised,
The ignoble multitude inflamed with madness,
Firebrands and stones fly; fury shows them weapons:
'Till spying some grave man honoured for wisdom,
They straight are silent, and erect their ears,
Whilst he with his sage counsel doth assuage
Their minds disorder, and appease their rage.
So Prudence, when rebellious appetites
Have raised temptations, with their batteries
Assaulting reason, she doth interpose,
And keep it safe. Th'attemps of sense are weak,
If their vain forces wisdom deign to break.
Temperance, to thee I owe my after life;
Thou that command o'er pleasures, hating some,
When thou dispens'st with others; still directing
All to a sound mean: under thy low roof
Isle eat and sleep, whilst grave Philosophy
Instructs my soul in Justice. What is she?
A habit of the mind by which just things
Perfect their working. Man's the best of creatures
Enjoying Law and Justice; but the worst
If separated from them. It is established
By fear of Law, and by Religion;
Distributes due to all.
That is reward
To vrt•ue, and to vice it's punishment.
The thought of it hath horror in it. I fell
From height of goodness in forsaking thee,
And must be punished. Why is it delayed?
Inflict it straight; protraction makes it greater.
Physander is forgiven. Reflect not back
On thy past errors, but with sorrows eyes,
That may be guides to the prevention
Of after ills.
Distract me not with comforts.
If justice hath no other instrument.
I must and will be just unto my self.
When I have felt a torment that doth equal
The offence for which I suffer it, twill confirm me,
Bellanima is satisfied.
She is,
And can expect no greater. Think on Fortitude.
Be not dejected by a fear that's grounded
On such a weak foundation. Tic not th'appetite
Of things that carry horror makes men valiant;
But patient bearing of afflictions
That are necessited.
Can Fortitude
Be without Justice? Justice without Fortitude
Is perfect in it self. When I am just,
Valour is useful.
It begins to work;
Isle prosecute the rest. What he intends
For good, shall be inverted to my ends.
Dis•wade me not Bellanima, I cannot
Think the dimensions of thy goodness such,
That it may be extended to remit
So great an ill without it's satisfaction.
Then will I challenge thy forgiveness due
When I have suffered punishment; I dare not
Owe all unto thy gentleness.
Resist
This black temptation: thy ill Genius whispered it.
It is taught m• here; justice instructs me in it.
Y•t when I feel the lashes of their snakes
Hells judges doe employ: when vultures gnaw
My growing liver, and the restless wheel
Hue•rios my racked limbs, (for these torments are
Less then my fault deserves,) Isle laugh at all,
And with a scorn provoke the executioners
'Till they are tired; and whilst they take in breath,
Contrive some yet unhear'd of. Fortitude
Shall teach me to bear all, (their end being justice)
With more delight, then when I did enjoy
Pleasures with Sensuality.
Isle try him.
Hells malice sometimes doth pretend that good
Which Heaven instructs, to make distinguishable
Their several acts. But like a ball that bounds
According to the force with which it was thrown:
So in afflictions violence he that's wise,
The more hoe's cast down will the higher rise.
Presume not yet Physander: thou art weak.
Fear, so Pusillanimous, is better
Then daring confidence.
I will encounter
With a whole host of deaths, though each were armed
In all th'artillery that ever conquered
Mortality; meet thunder if but warned
That it is coming, and be fixed unmoved
To embrace the subtle fire, though one step
Might guard me in a grove of Magic Baize
Walled with Been•s skins. The apprehension
Of horror shall not fright me, though presented
In the most hideous shape conceit can paint.
What apparition's this? or are ye Furies
Sent to torment me? Speak, and satisfy
My growing fears, which like an earthquake, when
Pent ayre dilates it self with violence
Doe shake my trembling heart.
We are the daughters
Of night and Acheron; our number three,
Answering those three affects that bear then headlong
Into all wickedness. These knotted snakes
Shall sting thy bosom, and infect thy blood
With burning rage, until it hurry thee
Unto some desperate act, and on thy self
Thou be thine own revenger.
Now Physander,
Where is this boasted valour? Feare's expressed
Even in thy silence. Te•roar of an ill
In sometimes greater in the expectation,
Then the isle it self: yet where true fortitude
Guard's the mind with resolves, it is lessened by it,
When it increases boldness. Chance may clear
Many of punishment, but none of fear.
Thou art not well instructed: go with me,
Isle teach thee how to shun them.
Hath he escaped us?
And left my vipers hissing for their prey,
Which should have been his heart? Then they must feed
Upon mine own.
Now my copartners
In this black fellowship, is it successful?
No; reason guards him; frustrates our design.
And we must back to be our own tormentors.
Will nothing prosper! Lend me Erinnis adders,
That from their poison my infected envy
May swell until it break, venting a sea
Of mischief to o'rewhelme him. One birth more
My malice labours with. If that miscarry▪
Isle in content of heaven that go•rds his bride
Eat mine own heart, and ne'er be satisfied.
The Judge is entering.
Make way there for my Lord Conscience: he is up•n coming, and I was afraid the cushions had not been handsomely laid for his case. Long causes many times require a nap. How I tremble to think of a long sitting before dinner; it makes fear have but a cold sto∣mack. Bless me▪ who's this? one of the devils she law∣years? Her case must needs have a black box.
I come t'accuse Physander. Why dost quake so?
You never knew fear without an ague.
Fear often cur's it.
In the country where wise physicians practise.
Is the court ready to sit?
Instantly. But pray how long have you been a sollicitrix?
Never before.
I feared as much, when you ask an officer so many idle questions without some feeling.
What officer art?
No worse th•n the mouth of the court, that re∣••eves all in with, O yes.
You see the power of that word;
They are here. Stand by there.
Hope must be •till an advocate.
It is well.
Despaire's a subtle pleader, and employed
Only by hell.
Be winged, and fetch him hither:
Let me alone; Isle have a plea shall shake
His courage.
Fear call a court.
O yes, ô yes, ô yes: All wicked mortals that have any business in the court of Conscience, let them come and accuse themselves, if they have so little wit▪ and they shall be judged by the proverb.
List to my charge. Conscience the judge of actions
Is neither power, nor habit, but an act;
To wit an application of that knowledge
That sh•was the difference. Its Synteresis,
Or purer part, is the instigation
Of will to good and honest things, and seats
The mind in a •each throne of endless quiet;
When being clogged with guilt of many ills,
Those leaden weight express it as it mounts,
And sink it into horror. Conscience stained
Is like a fretting ulcer, that co•rod's
The part •t hath infected, and though cured
It leaves a sca•re. So heal a wounded Conscience:
Repentance stays as the vestigium,
Or mark impressed, by which the past disease
Is found to have been. There's no punishment
Like that, to bear the witness in ones breast
Of perpetrated evils, when the mind
Beat's it with silent stripes; guilty of blame.
But being unstained it laughs at lying fame.
Silence in the court, and hearken to the charge: it may indoctrinate ye for Justices, if there be not too much of Conscience in it.
Hope is in opposition with despair;
And like a zealous advocate •the cause
Of his afflicted client, labours still
To overthrow the fallacies and quirks
Despair is nimble in; whilst fear with trembling
Expects the trials issue. By these three
M•ns acts informed of, scanned and canvas'd be,
At length by Conscience censured, thy are sent
To have reward, or suffer punishment.
Hem. Now enter that woman.
What are you?
A desperate piece of neglected mortality, that have been a Lady of pleasure, and kep• an open house where Lords took me up at high rates, 'till my bare commons would no longer serve their high feeding.
And the Geese that gras'd on it would always be ever roasted.
I thence fell to inferior customers, and doted most on the junior actors, to the danger of cracking many a voice. Night-walking then supplied me, whilst I had any thing to pleasure a constable, or relieve the mortified watch with a snatch and away. But now I am not worth the reversion of an almes-basket: and those which heretofore would hire me to sin, doe now de∣ny me the benefit of a Spittle. I have not strength to climb and hang my self; and having been so light all my life time it is impossible I should be drowned.
Hope yet with grief, and mend.
My mending must be miraculous. Were it in art to repair this rotten carcase, and in my stock of credit with the broker enough to case it, I might hope for as golden days and coaching again. But now well∣come a cart or a Shrove-tuesdayes tragedy. Despair tells me there is a fire in hell, and why should I, that have conversed with heats all my life time, fear it!
Stand by there. What are you?
My Ladies ape, that imitated all her fashions; falling as she did, and running the same course of folly: the difference only, that what was hers first was mine in reversion; except her gentleman usher. Hell I fear not, for I have prevented leading apes. Besides the whips of furies are not half so terrible as a blew coat, and the shrieks of tormented ghosts nothing to the noise of hemphammers.
Proceed quickly with the rest.
I would excuse my self; but I despair of be∣ing heard, now my Lady's decayed and housekeeping broke up. I fear nothing so much as to be torn in
pieces by the revengeful beggars.
That punishment must I share. For I was an honest huntsman, and provided burial for many a scavin∣gers horse in my dogs bellies; but finding it troublesome and unsavou•y, took an easier course, and converted the remains of dinner and supper that should have fed the poor, into my dogs breakfast. For which I expect to be pursued by the common hunt, till I come to hell; and there the qu•st will be so hot, I shall not possibly scope it.
Thou seem to have been a good fellow: shall I speak a word in thy behalf?
No: Fear's an ill orator; he will be out. I have been the most notorious thief, that ever robed by privilege of his office. I have converted more butter into kitchen stuff, then would have victualled a flemish garrison. I have cheated butchers; gone on their scores, and paid them with horns: helping to undo my Lady with the greatness of mine own credit. I have coney-catcht ma∣ny a poulterers wife, and she hath plucked my feathers: what I got by the back I spent on the belly. But now short commons serve, licking my fingers and the halfe-cold dripping pan. Since my Ladies decay I am degree∣ded from a cooke, and I fear the devil himself will en∣tertaine me but for one of his black guard; and he shall be sure to have his roast burnt.
Stand by. You shall be sentenced presently.
I was a spruce observer of formality; wore good clothes at the second hand, and paid for them quarterly. Together with my Ladies my fortune •ell, and of her gentleman usher I became her applesquire, to hold the door, and keep sentinel at taverns. I can play the Bravo where my affronting is upon sure advan∣tage▪ otherwise I can be kick't with as much patience, as a hungry fiddler, when he expects the reversion of a gal∣lants oysters. I may yet be serviceable to the Su••ubi in hell, but other preferment I despair of.
Custom in ill• that doe affect the sense
Makes reason useless, when it should direct
The ills reforming. Men habituate
In any evil, it is their greatest curse,
Advise doth seldom mend, but makes them worse.
He's come Now use your utmost skill in plea,
For fear our cause miscarry.
Who is this?
Her's his accuser that prefers th'indictment.
Let it be read.
Stand out Physander.
Thou are• in•icted •y the name of Physander Lord of Microcosmus, for that being wedded to the fair and chaste Bell•a••ma, daughter and heir of immortal Love, thou hast u••justly forsaken her, and been guilty of incontinence with a common whore, Sensuality.
It is not denied, no• needs it other witness;
I bear it in my Conscience. Yet reverend judge,
Sorrow for ills past doth restore frail man
To his first innocence. What mine hath been,
My earth bed wet with nightly tears can witness,
And sighs, have made the trembling ayre retire,
Unwilling to be lodged in a sad breast
Already filled with zeal. If a perseverance
Sprung from a constant resolution,
And joined unto this sorrow may prevail
To the expiation of my former guilt,
I hope forgiveness.
But despair me thinks
Should fright that hope with apprehension
Of what eternal justice will inflict:
And fear of deserved punishment should make thee
Tremble with horror.
It is not so false orator,
Necessity may be a powerful strengthening
Of humane frailty: and as it acut's
Sloth often into Diligence, Despair
May be Hopes cause. The temple-robber to appease
The offended god head to the Altar flies;
Nor shames to beg his pardon with drowned eyes.
Let thy resolves be firm.
As fates decrees
Enrolled in steel. Nor will I be secure
In any confidence of mine own strength:
For such security is oft the mother
Of negligence, and that th'occasion
Of unremedied rue••e. From instructions
Found here, we will consult our after-safetyes.
And in all courses of my following life,
I will be guided by my heavenly wife.
Isle then pronounce ye happy. Man's a ship
Laden with riches. Tempests rage, and hell
Sends pirates out to rob him; heavens eye guards him;
His solo's the pilot, who through various seas
Of time and fortune brings him to the port
Of endless quiet. Now dismiss the court.
My malice burst me. I have toiled in vain:
And mine own torment is my only gain.
•e with thee to that place where horrors fright
The guilty conscience with eternal night.
N•w freely pass unto the blessed abodes,
Where those heroes that do merit it
In life, are crowned with glory, and enjoy
Pleasures beyond all comprehension.
All lets are now removed; hells malice falls
Beneath our conquest, and Loves palace gates
Ope'to receive our triumph.
Welcome, welcome happy pair
To those abodes, where spicie ayre
Breaths perfumes, and every sense
Doth find his objects excellence·
Whore's no heate, nor cold extreme;
No winters ice, nor summers scorching beam.
Whore's no sun, yet never night.
Day always springing from eternal light.
All mortal sufferings laid aside
Here in endless bliss abide.
Welcome to Love my now loved heir,
Elysium's thine; ascend my chair.
For following Sensuality
I thought to disinherit thee.
But being new reformed in life,
And reunited to thy wife,
Mine only daughter, fate allow's
That Love with stars should crown your brows.
Join ye that were his guides to this:
Thus I enthrone ye both. Now kiss,
Whilst you in active measures move,
Led on to endless joys by Love.

you're great in all that's good.
You show the bounty
Of your opinion; my extent in
all things
Is but to bid you welcome; you
had a sister,
The envy of the Angels whilst
she lived
Our Queen, now made their
blessed companion;
Should wee exempt those fair deserts dwell in you,
So much we owe her memory.
Pray no more.
We must not be too open, truest friend,
Thy bosom is my Sanctuary.
When it leaves
To be Religious for thy safety, may it
By an angry flame from heaven, be turned to ashes.
Your nature is too soft; let not the mention
Of her that was my sister, and you Queen
Beget another sigh; she was long since blessed;
Cesaria 〈◊〉 in heav•n; we are met for joys;
You were not framed to be her Monument;
Sleep let her ashes in the urn, contains 'em.
I ha done.
Your sister.
Is all the treasure
Is left me sir, but cannot be too rich
For your acceptance.
All my wealth is summed
When she does smile upon me, and her Character
In the full glory, when shoe's named your sister;
Are you not weary of a guest dear Madam?
Am I still welcome?
Sir wee are
All honoured in your presence; and though not high
To your merit, yet your entertainment is,
As full of love, as nature can express
To a twin brother, more I dare presume,
You shall accuse your self, if you be less,
A Prince in Naples by free use of power,
Then your own Florence.
Madam you must b•
Less fair, and powerful in tongue, if you
Expect I should be still a Prince; and yet
My ambition will be high, and glorious
Enough to be received your Graces servant;
For whom I should account my age no travel,
To have my pilgrimage rewarded with
Your fair eyes Madam, able to create
Another life and spirit in old Nature.
How does Montalto like the Duke?
Sir, Naples cannot study an addition
Of fame, beyond what this alliance will
Deserve in future story; the excess
Of what is good, nay excellent in him
would stock a barren Province.
Tic our happiness.
But it is not mine; for though I thus disg•uise
My face, and tongue, my heart is my own friend,
And cannot wish my ambition supplanted
By any smooth chained Prince alive; my Lords—
Look how they flock, and fawn upon his greatness;
These are his creatures, by his power placed
So near about the King, he can hear nothing
Of his great favourite, but what their flattery
And partial tongues convey into his ear.
Pity so sweet a nature as the Kings
Should be abused by Parasites; but I may
In time dissolve these court mists, that so long
Have hung upon it, and render the Kings eyes
••ee to distinguish objects, if there be
No witchcraft ex•rciz'd upon his senses.
My Lord you are very pleasant.
Is it not
Becoming the discretion of a young
•ourtier to observe times and methods; and when Madam
Are you for this ma•ch?
What my Lord?
You wot not
Be sad at heart, to sleep with such a bedfellow
As the Duke is?
How my Lord?
Provided
Matrimony were not far of; y•t without it
There are some Ladies, would excuse their modesty,
And meet and think their fate at all adventures,
If no worse man would make their husband of
The honourable order of the night-cap.
When will you marry my Lord?
I am young;
Yet when I am ripe to grapple with a maidenhead,
The Lord Montalto the great Court Patron
Will help me to a wife.
You are bound to his Lordship.
And so I am Madam, if you knew all;
I have many obligations to his honour,
But there is one writ here, whose memory
Will keep my soul awake.
Andrugio—
I doe not like their conference.
Alas he has no employment in the state;
He waits like a dull cipher and I have
My spies upon him; if I find him busy,
My power with the king shall soon transplant him,
Or force him like Riviero his old friend,
But of more brain and faction, to give up
His ghost abroad.
It was just for your own safety.
This is an honest easy Nobleman,
Allowed to wear some Court formality;
Walk on the tarres, pick his teeth, and stroke
Upon a festival some golden sentence
Out of his beard, for which the guard admire him,
And cry him up a Statesman; hoe's sent off
When he is troublesome to a phlegmatic clime
A dull Ambassador; no, that Duke, Guido,
Is all my fear, but I have contrived something
May rectify my fate.
How much you honour me;
But you might spare all other entertainments
And bravery of Court; they may affect
My eyes with wonder, and obliege my just
Acknowledgement, but all their glorie's met
Into one height, hold no proportion
To inflame my heart, or more express my welcome
Then this your free grace Madam, and those hopes
That bless my imagination from your favour.
I am but wh•t my brothers love, and virtue
Will make me; but there's nothing that can move
With his consent, I shanno• fl•e to obey.
I had rather feed upon his heart;
You promised Sir the Duke to hunt this morning.
I had forgot; will you be plea•'d to try
The pleasures of a Forest.
Isle attend.
Theodosia, you are not for that exercise
Guido.
I wish all pleasures waite upon you;
My heart must covet your return.
And mine,
To dwell for ever in so fair a bosom•.
To horse; the morning wastes.
Some policy
Must cure this fear; my bold resolves are fixed;
I have made some attempts, and courted her,
But she h•s not understood me; I must work
By countermine and scatter into air
His swelling hopes: Octavio—
My good Lord.
Sir I present this Gentle•man to kiss
Your hand; hoe's the Dukes secretary, a Roman
Borne, and has a great ambition
To be known to you for your fathers sake,
With whom he did converse in Rome, and honour,
Till death concluded their acquaintance.
Sir,
Your love, and knowledge of my father will
Deserve you should be welcome to his son.
He made me his companion many years;
No brothers were more chained in their aff•ctions.
He did impart much of his bosom to me.
You knew why he left Naples?
He did trust me, with the cause my Lord, and every circumstance
The Kings minority, and Montaltoes power,
Against which no innocent could plead in Naples.
Not to loud Sir; you may be heard.
Your pardon.
Why should truth
Faint at the name of greatness? this Colossus
Montalto is but mortal sure; time has
Forgot to use his wings, or nature is
Unwilling I should grow to write full man,
To take rev•nge upon that politician,
Our Protean favourite.
It is my wonder
The King so strangely should continue this
Affection to Montalto.
There's some magic in 't.
Dare none complain.
His engines are so placed
None can approach the kings ear, at which hang
So many flatterers to infect it with
Montaltoes praise.
Pray give me sir this boldness;
Hee that doth lift an Axe to strike the root
Of any family, cannot be without
A thought to wound the branches; you were left.
By computation, but an Infant when
Your fathers discontents, and faction of
This Montalto made him forsake Naples,
Which added to your mothers death, the guard
And comforts of your life, were taken from you;
Having expressed this malice to your father,
A thousand ways he might have sent you to
Another world, and taken off all fear
Of a revenge; how comes it that you live,
And vis•it Sir the Palace with this freedom?
My Lord Andrugios knowledge of you Sir▪
Is my assurance of your faith.
Isle give
You reasons at some opportunity▪
Not to repent your confidence.
You have
Supplied my fathel in your care of me.
I live? why I am this great Lords favourite,
Courted, his creatures are my honours
Companion to his pleasures.
I observed
Some gestures very loving to your Lordship.
The King himself for his sake gracing me▪
With title of his bed-chamber.
Tic stange;
This news will cool my resolution.
Tic truth he doth engage him to all favours.
Tic not impossible he may be honest.
And mean so; but my soul cannot be bribed
So easily to prostrate my own justice
And leave my fathers ashes unrevenged
Which in my ear groan from beneath the Marble
To keep my thoughts awake.
We may suspect
This is to catch applause a trick to win
Upon the people who did love Riviero
And morn his fate.
How ever I have art
To keep my breast close, and accept his flatteries,
Can complement, and with officious bend
Thank his high favours, wear a face of mirth
And prattle with the Ladies as if all
The business I came into the world for,
Were but to talk and dance, and go a feasting.
I must presume, you want no counsel from
My Lord who loved your father, how to manage
Your self to best advantage of your •am
And honour; unto both I am a servant.
My Lord Montalto may expect you Sir.
It is not safe we be observed too much.
My Lord you have begun a favour by
The acquaintance of this Gentleman; I will
Hope to salute him often by your means;
You shall not meet a heart more prompt to bid
You welcome Sir.
You too much grace your servant;
I shall present a trouble.
Come my Lord.
Montaltoes change hath staggard me already;
These favours may be hearty to Octavio,
And argument of penitence; Isle observe
And sift his close heart; if it prove unsound,
He whets revenge to make the deeper wound
I would speak with your Lady Sir.
You may.
Direct me.
With which of my Ladies.
With both, or one.
I serve the daughter.
I would speak with her.
She is—I know not where.
What Coxcombe's this.
Dost hear friend, I would speak with my Lady
Simphorosa.
This way and please your Lordship.
Stay prithee; what fellowe's that?
A servant of my Ladies.
Is he mad?
A little fantastic, but very harmless,
And makes my Ladies merry; my young Madam
Domitilla calls him her secretary for sport▪
And wonder of his good parts.
What are they?
He can neither write nor read.
An excellent Secretary.
But he has been much given to 't,
To reading, till much poring night and day
Made him book blind; and defying spectacles,
He walks and thinks he is wise, and talks upon
His old stock.
Prithee acquaint my Lady; 'ith mean time
Isle have more dialogue with him;
Save you Sir.
Save your self Sir; you are I tak't a Courtier▪
And you my Ladies Secretary.
I am so.
I hear you are an understanding Secretary.
Tic so, I am; how came you by that knowledge▪
We have your same at Court Sir.
Can you read?
I hear you cannot.
Right.
Nor write.
Tic true.
What make you with a book? ha this is Euclid.
Euclid; it may be so.
Why these are Mathematickes.
I have a Chest full of them in my custody;
They were my old Lords, gray when I took charge on 'em
But now look spruce and young; there's something in 'em.
What in the name of ignorance dost thou doe with 'em.
I am excellent at turning over leaves,
By which I keep the worms away.
Most learnedly.
I learnt it of my Ladies Chaplain Sir;
Men are not always bound to understand
Their Library; but to omit learning,
Not now considered by wise men, what is
Your business here I pray?
It does concern
Your self; the King has heard of your good parts.
Sir, as you love me say you saw me not;
I knew I should one time or other be
Found out for state employments; heir's my Lady.
I must obscure my self.
Why how now Secretary,
Whether so fast.
You little think.
What prithee.
Nor ever would believe; but tic not my foul•
If the King come in person, Isle not be seen.
The King.
Few words; there's one I know him not
I• little better then a spy upon me;
If you look not to me I am gone.
So it seems.
How? dine to day with us.
Such is his r•yall pleasure;
He is now hunting with the Duke, whom he
Intends to make your guest too.
My Lord I am not used to entertainments,
Nor is my house sit for so great a presence;
To avoid a storm they might obey
Necessity, and take it for some shelter,
But in so calm a day.
Madam although
You please to undervalew what's your own,
The King despairs not you will bid him welcome;
You have no narrow dwelling, and he knows
Your heart is spacious like your fortunes Madam;
Princes doe honour when they come upon
Their subjects invitation, but they love
Where they invite themselves.
My duty is
To meet that interpretation, though the new•
Come unexpected; now it will my Lord
Become me to be thrifty of the minute•,
Their persons being so near; you will excuse
If so short summons doe expect my care
To entertain 'em; my good Lord you have honoured me.
Tic service I am bound to.
Pray my Lord.
In your opinion, what should move the King
To invite himself our guest, and bring the Duke
Along with him; he used not to retire
From hunting with this ceremony.
Princes
Are like the winds, and not to be examined
Where they will breath their favours.
Tic confessed
An honour to us, and I hope you'll pardon
A women's curiosity.
Shall I
Deliver my opinion; while the King
In entertainment of the Duke is showing
The pleasures and the glories of his kingdom
He cannot hide, that which his Naples boasts,
Her greatest ornament your beauty Madam.
I thank your Lordship; I may now believe
The court's remooving hither; yet this language
Might doe you service to some other Lady
And I release it willingly; your complements
I know my Lord are much worse for wearing
You rather will believe your self worth praise
Then hear it; though we call it modesty,
It grows from some thing like a women's pride▪
But it becomes you Madam; I take leave;
My service to your noble Lady mother.
Mine shall attend your Lordship.
Now Domitilla, is my Lord gone?
Yes Madam.
I expected not▪
These guests to day, they'll take us unprepard.
Not with our hearts to serve 'em, and their goodness
Will excuse other want.
I know not daughter,
But I could wish rather to enjoy our selves,
Not for the cost, those thoughts are still beneath me.
You have cause to fear I hope you're troubled.
For thy sake Domitilla.
Mine dear Madam.
It was for thee I chose this quiet life
Upon thy fathers death, and left the court;
Thou art all my care, sole heir to all my fortunes,
Which I should see unwillingly bestowed.
On some gay prodigal.
I cannot •each
Your meaning.
By some hasty marriage.
You would have me live a Virgin; a less fortune
Would serve me for a Nun.
Tic not my thought;
Thou art young and fair and though I doe not
Suspect thy mind, thus far bred up to virtue,
I would not have it tempted but reserved
For a most noble choice, wherein should meet
My care and thy obedience.
You're my mother,
And have so far by your example taught me,
I Shall not need the precepts of your virtue,
And let no thought of me take from your cheerfulness
To entertain the King; we owe him duty,
And that charm wo'not hurt us.
This does please me.
It shall be still my study.
I must see
How they prepare, things may want method else.
I kiss your fair hand Madam Domitilla;
The King and Duke and all the jolly hunters
With appetites as fierce as their own hounds,
Will be here presently.
I hope they will not
Devour us my good Lord.
But I would sit and feast and feed mine eyes
With Domitillaes beauty.
So my Lord; here was a gentleman
You could not choose but meet him spake your dialect;
I have forgot his name, but he was some
Great Lord.
Fie what a ignorance you live in,
Not to be perfect in a great Lords name;
There are few Ladies live with us but know
The very Pages; leave this darkness Madam▪
And shine in your own sphere, where every star
Hath his due adoration.
Where?
Th• Court
Confine such beauty to a Country house▪
Live among Hinds, and thick skinned fellows that
Make faces, and will hop a furlong back
To find the tother leg they threw away
To show their reverence; with things that squat
When they should make a curtsy; to Court Madam,
And live not thus for shame, the second part
Of a fond Anchorite; we can distinguish
Of beauty there, and wonder without spectacles,
Write Volumes of your praise, and tell the world
How envious diamonds, cause they could not
Reach to the lust•re of your eyes dissolved
To angry tears; the Roses droop, and gathering
Their leaves together, seem to chide their blushes
That they must yield your cheek the victory:
The Lilies when they are censured for comparing
With your more clear and native purity
Want white to doe their penance in.
So, so;
Have you done now my young poetic Lord.
There will be no end Madam of your praises.
And to no end you have spent all this breath;
Allow all this were wit, that some did think us
The creatures they commend (and those whom love
Hath cursed into Idolatry and verse
May perhaps die so) wee doe know our selves
That we are no such things.
First possible.
And laugh at your Chimeras.
You're the wiser.
If this be your court practise, let me dwell
With truth and plain simplicity.
If I
Might have my choice, I would live with you Madam▪
A neighbour to this innocence; your mother.
The king is come already.
Madam though you are
So unkind as not to see the court sometime,
Th• court is come to visit you.
You have
Humbled your self too much to do• us honour.
The Duke of Florence.
Tic a blessing that
My roof can boast so great a guest.
Her daughter
Worth your salute.
She is worth a world my Lord,
What is that Lad•es name?
In this you most
Appear a stranger; she is the glory
Of Naples, for her person and her virtues
That dwells in this obscure place like the shrine
Of some great Saint, to which devotion
From several parts brings daily men like pilgrims.
Her name.
She is wit, beauty, chastity, and all
That can make woman lovely to mans soul,
So far from the capacity of ill
That virtues in all other of her Sex
Like staines, but fit of her perfection▪
And when is named all goodness in her titles,
The ornament, nay glory of them all
Is Domitilla Sir.
You speak her high,
And I may guess by your description
My Lord, this Lady hath another name▪
She is your mistress.
Not mine; she was created for some Prince,
And can beside her 〈◊〉 bring a fortune
Worth his embrace•.
What charms are in her looks.
Are you there Duke; this meeting was my project;
Things may succeed to my ambition,
If I doe noose your highness.
Please your Majesty.
All things must please here.
I follow Sir.
This is a grace I ever must be proud of.
Have th•y almost dined? stay, stay a little:
The last course is of the table;
Why doe not you waite?
That were a way indeed to be discovered▪
No, the King shall pardon me; he has
Not seen me yet for all his cunning▪
Whom doe you mean.
The King; thou art ignorant
Isle tell thee after dinner; 'ith mean time
Direct a wandering bottle of wine this way
And let me alone though I appear not in it
I may have a humour to make a Mask if they
Stay supper.
Thou make a Mask.
I doe not say Isle write one, for I have not
My writing tongue, though I could once have read,
But I can give if need be the design,
Make work among the Deal board•, and perhaps
Can teach 'em as good language as another
Of competent ignorance; things go not now
By learning; I have read it is but to bring
Some pretty impossibilities, for Antemaskes
A little sense and wit disposed with thrift,
With here and there Monsters to make 'em laugh;
For the grand business to have Mercury
Or Venus Da•deprat to usher in
Some of the gods that are good fellows dancing,
Or goddesses, and now and then a song
To fill a gap; a thousand crowns perhaps
For him that made it, and theres all the wit.
In what?
In getting of the money.
You are witty signior Bombo to advance
The muse, Isle fetch a bottle that you talked of,
If there be a superfluous Pheasant
Twill quell my hunger for a time; I hear
Intelligence of an Oleo; if any
Such things may be recovered from the courtiers
That have •even appetites upon hunting dinners;
You shannot need to enquire much after me.
I shall be here abouts; why thou hast wings.
A bottle of rich wine.
Thou were always honest.
There's asking for my Ladies Secretary
I know it; I am not here;
Doe they inquire already? come Isle pledge thee;
What wilt thou say if some body be sent for to Court.
Isle drink some bodies health.
You are a good •allow, and this courtesy
Shall be remembered.
I am called.
Leave, leave your wicket▪ fren• weal drink a cup
When thou art gone; tic very excellent wine;
And now I have a stomach like an edge tool;
But no good comes of idleness—toth•r cup;
The bottle grows light headed; how now friend?
No dish of meat appear; nothing to show
The Kitchen and the Wineseller are friends?
I would the Cooke were •octet honest Iacamo
I was thinking of a brace of Co•k• just as you came.
I have retrieved a cove•y of Partridge for thee.
And a cup of Greek wine; •ears to thee.
I understand Greek wine; Isle lose no time.
What's this a Book.
No, tic my learned trencher
Which Scholars sometimes ea•e, Euclid they call it;
In my opinion this wing and leg
Is worth all bodies mathematical;
Now let's dispute in Greek, to the Kings health.
To me, Isle pledge.
It shall go round.
And why doe you think my friend the King
Came hither with the Duke.
To dine.
Thy brains are in thy guts; you shall hear more;
Whats this?
Potato Bully.
A cup of wine to clear the passage; so▪
Here is as they say Latin; here is Greek, and
Here is for ought I know an Hebrew root, most learnedly
Met together.
Heel be drunk presently.
Bottle in battle ray, present, give fire, so, as
You were; have they good stomachs Iacamo?
How feeds the King?
He was very pleasant with your Lady;
But the Duke feeds upon her looks.
My Ladies health, my Lady little Domitilla•s health.
Well said; about, about▪
I am about another to our reverend Lady Simphorosa;
So, so; this wine they say will make us see things double,
Here is but one Leg visible; well for this favour
Gentlemen if I be force•d to live in court Isle make
You all in time; who can write or read among you.
None, none; we scorn it.
You shall have all preferment trust to me,
And mark my steps; here to the courteous drinker;
Now doe I find a noble constitution in me, now
Could I leap; would thou were any living Lady
In my way now.
Away; the Lords are risen.
The Lords doe rise and fall.
Hes paid; the King will come this way.
Every man go his own way; I wonnot see
The King for all this.
Friend.
This is the Ladies Secretary, pray my Lords
Be acquainted with him.
Dee hear no body say he saw me, I wonnot
Be seen yet.
Though he be made a spectacle; but leave him
It was a handsome entertainment of the sudden.
A pretty hunting dinner; but did you not
Observe with what intention the Duke
Shot eyes on Domitilla.
And the King
Applied all his discourse to her; I know not;
He has made no vow against a second marriage
But if he choose at home and look at beauty.
Shees a very pretty talking Lady.
Very ingenious.
And with your favour, though she be no Court Lady.
She wants no confidence.
What if the Duke be taken with her
Let him be taken a bed with her, tic my opinion
My Lord Montalto wonnot die for grief ont.
They are here.
Your grace is sad; excuse
My diligence to waite on you; I could wish
If it made no intrusion on your thoughts,
I had opportunity to express
What might not be unworthy of your patience:
Duke. To me.
The King.
This way Ladies to the Garden; let me have
The honour to attend you.
Wh•••s the Duke.
He took that way to the Garden Sir, with
The Lord Montalto.
You may remove• a little;
You have no fear to trust your self with me.
I cannot Sir forget you are the King,
And in a Wilderness could have no thought
With the least prejudice upon your virtue.
You have the greater innocence at home▪
My intents are fair enough, and you may stand
The danger of a question; pray how old are you?
Although it be not held a welcome complement
To our Sex, my duty bids me not dispute;
I am fifteen my mother says.
And are
You not in love.
I must not charge my self
With so much ignorance to answer, that
I understand not what it means; I know
The word, but never could apply the senc•,
Or find it in a passion more then ordinary.
Cupped hath lost his quiver then; he could not
Be armed, and let you scope, whose sole captivity
Would be more glory then the conquest made
As Poets fine upon the gods.
Tic language
With which you are pl••s'd to mock your humble handmaid.
But this as•uric him blind.
He would deserve
To lose his eyes indeed if he should aim
A shaft at me.
Madam you have a heart.
To which no other
Flame can approach; then what shall light it to
Obedience of your will and my good mothers.
Obedience to my will; what if it were
My will that you should love.
Sir, I doe love.
Love with the warm affection of a mistress
One Isle present a servant▪ why that blush;
The words are not immodest; there did want
No blood upon your cheek to make it lovely;
Or does it slow in silence to express
That which your virgin Language would not be
So soon held guilty of, consent.
To what?
To love by my direction a man
Whose worth considered shall deserve thee too,
And in the noblest way invite thy freedom
Until the holy Priests declare, your hearts
Are knit into one blessing; theres no harm
In this.
Most royal Sir I know not, with
What words to say, you honour me; how can
One so unworthy as poor Domitilla
Be entertained within your thoughts and care
In this high nature.
Though your mother have
Made both her person and your self a stranger
To Court, I have had eyes upon your virtues
Which waited on by a most ample fortune,
I have studied to advance, if you'll accept
A husband of a my choice; what say you Madam?
I have a mother Sir.
She shall think it fortunate
Bove expo•ation; you have not vowed your self
To a cold Nunnery.
Not I Sir.
When
I shall declare how precious he is
To my own bosom.
Royal Sir, this language
Must needs prepare a welcome; I should think
My heart unlike another women's, not
To obey a charm so powerful as your praise;
But when you are considered as my King,
Duty takes off the merit of my will
And humble• every thought beneath obedience•.
His name is.
Pardon I b•seech you Sir,
Conceal it yet; what gentle spirit walks
Upon my blood; I dare not look upon him
My hopes my fears; it is enough great Sir,
That you leave one within your thought, you would
Commend to Domitilla, one you• love,
And precious to your bosom; sure you blessed him
With such a Character.
It was too short.
My heart is a false Prophet; tic a fate
Too good and great for Domitilla.
Well his name shall be reserved; but when it op•ns
It self to your knowledge you will honour it,
And thank me Domitilla; ith mean time
Let the opinion you have of me
Live in your trust, and make room in your heart
To meet the husband I shall bring.
Why may not this be meant by his own person?
More wonders have been read in story; I
Find thick but amorous tremblings in my heart;
Hoe's King; why not? love has done stranger things,
And can lead captive the proud heart of Kings.
Here none can reach our voice: be free and clear.
First let me kiss your hand, on which I swear
To speak all truth; tic justice to your person,
Your merit and my faith; next though the secret
May both concern and benefit your knowledge,
I shall desire your pardon
You prepare me
For wonder▪ if it be an act of Friendship
To me, it will become me to reward it,
Not thanks, nor pardon.
But all truths meet not
With charitable ears; there is a descant
That pleases not sometimes though the best art
Present it, if our sense be indisposed
To patience and calm hearing.
Doe not doubt me.
Twill not become me so much as in thought
To enquire how long, or with what firm devotion,
You affect the Princess, Theodosia;
But Naples is more conscious, then to doubt
You bring a welcome treaty in your person,
And every voi•e and heart is busy with
The expectation of your marriage;
Whilst every eye bright with your stame is able
To light a Torch to Hymen; Virgins have
No other care then with what flowers sweet
As your own name to adorn the smiling altars.
You promised Sir a secret.
It will come
To fast upon your knowledge; have you never
Looked from the prospect of your Palace window▪
When some fair sky courted your eye to read
The beauties of a day, the glorious Sun
Enriching so the bosom of the earth
That trees and flowers appeared but like so much
Enamel upon gold; the wanton birds
And every creature but the drudging Ante
Despising providence, and at play and all
That world you measure with your eye, so gay
And proud, as winter were no more to shake
His Icy Lockes upon 'em, but the breath
Of gentle Zephyr to perfume their growth,
And walk eternally upon the Springs;
When from a coast you see not, comes a cloud
Creeping as overladen with a storm▪
Dark as the womb of night, and with her wings
Surprising all the glories you beheld;
Leaves not your frighted eyes a light to see
The r•ins of that flattering day.
This Language
Carries both mystery and horror; pray
My Lord convey your meaning to my knowledge.
I shall▪ I had in vain prepared you thus else;
Pardon again the story; Theodosia,
More beautiful then the day I figured by her,
Is quite orecast and looks through an Eclipse
Upon your love: she has no heart, but what
Another is possessed of.
Ha.
I know
It cannot but afflict your thoughts that all
Your expectation ripe and courted, to
The enjoying such a treasure as she is,
Must finish in embracing of a shadow,
Invited to a fable, not a bride
That should with joy dwell in your princely arms▪
For Theodosia without sacrilege
Cannot be yours; she is contracted.
How?
The King of Naples must not Sir engage
Florence to such a mockery.
Tic my duty
To clear his honour in it he has a pure
Intention to make his sister yours; her close
Though honourable love's designed without
His knowledge, and you will but waste your rage
Upon her destiny which will bury her
In her own ruins, if your anger make
The King her enemy.
I doe not find
My heart in any disposition
To break at hearing of this news, but wish it
Truth to prepare rooms for another guest;
The fairer Domitilla is here sainted.
Your excellence.
Must not be thus affronted
Montalto, and return with this dishonour▪
Was there no cheaper person to be made
Ridiculous in Naples.
Calm your blood,
I know you must resent it, but let not
Your passion make the world believe you should
Despair to find one ap•er to your bosom;
The richest beauty in the world, your birth
And fortune must deserve and 〈◊〉 should curse
My forward duty to your grace.
No more
I have considered better and although
Your love may merit thanks, yet this intelligence
Wonot concern my faith; this cannot be Sir.
My honour is engaged then to convince you
Though with the hazard of my life and fortunes,
Both which must now depend upon your mercy;
Your breath shall make 'em bleed or live.
What means
Montalto?
To translate the power of all
My Stars, and make you Lord of my whole fate
The•dosias heart Sir should be mine, by free
Gift of her self, who has been pleased to take
My vows in the exchange, which now may boast
Some time and growth, which could not be a sin
Against your love, with which all that can spring
From me deserves no name, nor dare I take
Boldness to call her mine, who am a thing
Lighter then ayre in balance with your grace▪
If you but chide the ambition, and could render,
Though I commit a rape on my own life,
All that her love hath promised me.
Tic strange.
But she let me take freedom to be plain▪
Is not to be reduced you'll •ay.
Sir, women
Love not with that safeguard upon their passion▪
She has a wise art to dissemble then.
Tic fear it should arrive at the King knowledge.
In whose displeasure she is lost and not
A will to mock your grace, for whom there is
Another wound within her mind, that she
Should wear a smiling summer in her brow
Yet frost within her heart, in which unhappily
She comes to near the nature of the Adamant
Hard to your grace whom she attracts; but love
Your wisdom knows is in the volume of
Our fate decreed, whose periods when they are
By time made known; greatness on earth, that means
To play the tyrant with us, may have strength
To punish not reverse.
I am confirmed
And prosper in my thoughts.
It takes.
My Lord,
You have expression act of confidence
Which I must not betray though to my loss▪
It is some happiness to know this early;
We may be expected; you shall find me Sir
A Prince, but no usurper.
I am your creature▪
The King.
We build upon your piety
Until some little time may call our loves
Out of this silence.
You understand me Madam?
And am honoured.
Her eyes beget new wonder; I shall be observed.
Come, now to whore••.
I shall attend; your 〈…〉
Obliged us Madam.
It was not worth such guest;
But prayers and duty must supply.
Now Madam you are a great part of my care▪
Depend upon me for a husband.
First not plaaine▪
Madam another guest must take his leav•,
That •ere would choose his palace.
You are gracious, and but encourage more to honour you
Isle creep and kiss thy Altar love, allow
Them flame, and knit more charms upon her brow.
Tic thy old quarrel against Montalto makes
Thee incredulous, I dare believe he loves
Theodosia.
Tic not that I question Sir,
But that part which concerns her love to him
Sounds like a plot upon your nature, to
Secure his own ambition.
Why the Princess
May love; as great a heart has been made stoop•.
Your grace should else in vain court her your self
And late your highness thought she me•t your person
A fair design of love, with all the soft
Behaviour of a Princess.
But tic not
Impossible a Lady should dissemble.
Allow her but the honour she was borne with,
And sheel'e not stain her blood so much.
But love
Must be obeyed, and prepossession
Of hearts is a lewd thing to wrestle with▪
I make it my own c•s•, and if I loved
Another Lady better then the Princess,
As every man's not proof against all beauty,
I think I should be constant too•• would
Be something to remove 〈◊〉.
Then the King.
He knows not; &amp; I have bound my self in honour
Not to betray, if they be decreed
To make a marriage; a soft destiny
Attend their loves.
There is some mystery;
But will you rest and take for granted she
Does love Montalto; if it be a truth
You're in the same condition when she
Confirms it.
Tic not good to be busy
In search of these unwelcome certainties;
There's hope while things are clouded in suspicion.
But so your jealousy may wound her honour,
Which you may cure by knowledge.
I will think on•t;
Mean time let this dwell in that honest silence
You have possessed; there is another secret
May follow.
You must challenge my whole bosom,
And I am confident your highness will
Stere all your resolutions by honour,
Which in a Prince is sacred.
Sir, the Lord
Montalto is coming up.
Then try your art upon him,
And inform your self, Isle take
My time to appear.
I obey
My honoured Lord.
Most noble •hilberto,
Where is the Duke?
If you'll but excuse a few minutes
Tic
My duty to attend.
How is it with the Princess my good Lord?
The Princess? she is in health; why this to m•▪
Hee is of inward counsel with the Duke,
I must be resolute.
I ask, because,
His grace intends a present visit to her,
And was but now in mention of your Lordship
To bear him company.
I like not that;
He knows he may command my services.
He will deserve your love; pray my Lord tell m•,
And let us be plain breasted; you enjoy
The King, as I, but with less stock of merit,
The favour of his excellence; how affect you
The present state of things; wilt be a match?
There is loud expectation in the world,
And after all, my Master's fond to have it
Proceed; to these, I am of opinion
Theres no retreating now without dishonour;
Yet as I am Philiberto I much pity
He should through any wound to your affection
Perfect his love.
He has told you then the secret,
And not to waste more language, I collect
From what you have expressed, he does resolve
To destroy me; Montalto must be trod on.
Not so my Lord.
Yes, and my heart the ascent,
To his Hymeneal altar, which must be
Made crimson with the blood of a true lover▪
His will be obeyed, Theodosia shall see
To advance her, Montalto will go smiling
To his sacrifice, and after many prayers,
That she may live the darling of his heart,
Isle change my acquaintance of this world to be
At peace in my own ashes.
You will not
Commit a violence upon your self?
I sha' not need; the thought of her will kill m•
With as much silence as I go to sleep;
I only shall bleed inward, and my life
Remove it self like a fair appa•ition
That vanishes to the eye, and with less noise
Then a calm Summers evening; but when I
Am dead, tic not impossible, some may
Report Theodosia was but ravished from me;
Fear of a brothers anger, and the trick
Of politic states, that marry to knit power
Not hearts, did force her to Herares arms,
Whilst I, torn from the branch where I once grew,
Travel I know not whether in the air.
I begin
To think him worth some pity.
Into what
Vain thing would the severe apprehension
Of grief transform us? coward, let the Duke
Move with all amorous haste to his delight,
And glory in the hope of his fair bride,
Mine by the gift of heaven, and hearts; but all
My flowers grow dully on their stalks, and wither;
Let her gay Pa•animphs with •osie Chaplets,
Which will take all their colour from her blush,
Attend on Theodosia to the Temple,
While as they go, no rude wind shall be heard,
But so much breath of heaven as gently may
Lifting their loose hair up, whisper my wrong
To every Virgins care; let them be married,
Knit hands, and plight a ceremonious faith;
Let all the triumphs waste; let them be wasted,
And night it self bribed with a thousand forms
Of mirth and Revels, till the night grow faint
And pale with watching,
Invite to bed; yet there he shall enjoy
But Theodosia•s body, and not that
As his fair thoughts expect, perhaps the conquest
Of one whom he loved better.
How was that.
Now shall I trust him? if my sense mistake not
The•dosia may not be a Virgin.
It was
His bold conclusion.
Where is now the honour
You talk of; durst Montalto charge her with
This stain, without his conscience to assure it.
Yes, and to me this tenders him the more
To be suspected and I am so far
From thinking she affects Montalto, that
I am convinced he loves her not; can he
Have any noble thought of Theodosia,
That dares traduce her honour; think of that;
And can revenge in any lover be
A reason to wound a Ladies fame; it tastes
Of rank injustice, and some other end
Time will discover; and yet your grace is bound
To have his accusation confirmed,
Or hant this spotted panther to his ruin,
Whose breath is only sweet to poison virtue.
What I resolve inquire not.
I see throe•gh
Mont altos soul, and have been so long tame
In my own sufferings; but this will make
Him ripe for punishment; Andrugio and
My son.
I cannot with the wings of duty
Fly swift enough to prostrate my obedience
And welcome from a long supposed death,
My honoured father.
Then I must appear so.
And let me give a son up to your blessing
Worthy your best prayers, and embrace; it was time
To bring you acquainted; he had else this night
Contrived Montaltoes tragedy at a Banquet,
For your revenge his active thoughts I could not
Counsel no longer patience.
Thou hast but
Prevented me Octavio; I was
Weary of my concealment.
But my joys are wilde,
And will I fear, transport me.
My best friend,
And my own spirited boy, fear not Montalto;
Hoe's now upon a precipice; his fate
Stoops with the glorious burden of his pride.
Things may be worth our counsel; we shall see
This prodigy that would be held a Star,
And did so fright us with his streaming hair,
Drop like a Comet, and be lost in the air.
First possible the day should be so old,
And not a visit from the Duke.
While he
Enjoys health, I shall easily forgive
A little ceremony.
And a lover;
Your grace must chide him; other men may have
Excuse for their neglect of time, but he
That loves deserves no pardon.
Judge with charity
My Lord; the case may be your own; you would
Think her a cruel mistress, that should doom
Your life to exile, for not payment of
One ceremonious visit.
Not where such
Perfection were to engage my service Madam;
Pardon the bold comparison; death were not
Enough to punish that rude thought that could
Start from your bright Idea; or converse
With praters that did not first concern your excellence▪
I would not be ambitious of a blessing
But from reflex of yours.
You would express
A most officious servant to that Lady
Were honoured in your thought; but the Duk• of Florenc••
And I shall make no such severe conditions.
If he doe love you Madam, that will teach him
Above what ceremony prescribes to honour you.
If he doe love.
Your graces pardon; I
Speak from an honest freedom taken from
The assurance of your goodness, that know better
How to distinguish truth; I am not judge
Of his breast Madam.
I suppose you are not.
And yet being a man another way
Conclude his passions are but such as have
Been read in humane nature.
What infer you
From hence my Lord?
Nothing but that a Prince
May be no Saint in love.
Howe's that?
It was in my fear I should displease.
Your will.
Not for the Empire of the world; I shall
Repent I live with your suspicion
Upon my humbled soul.
Pray Sir be free
Touching the Duke; I must know all; what first
Makes him no Saint.
Madam he is not dead,
And in his life I see no miracles.
You talked of love.
No miracles of love;
He loves as other men that have professed▪
Devotion to a mistress—but
What? speak
I charge thee by the memory of what
Thou dost affect most.
Though it wound my self
•e are•'d and hear it; how I blush within me,
To tell your highness Fl•rinse has transplanted
His heart, and all his active thoughts are placed▪
On whom?
On Do•itilla.
Ha.
I did observe 'em Madam, at her mothers house,
Where we were lately feasted after hunting,
How strangely he was taken, how his eyes
Did wanton with her face, and on her hair
Tie many golden knots, to keep love chalnde;
But these are but suspicions; he since
Confessed to me in hope to win me to
Negotiate his affair, how at first sight
He took in desperate flames, and that she rules
The intelligence of his soul; I hear the King
Hath sent for her to Court, which must give Madam
A dangerous opportunity to actuate
His ends with your dishonour; I was unwilling
To speak this knowledge of his hasty change,
But all my bonds of piety and faith
Would have been forfeit into a long silence.
Shall I be thus affronted.
We see Princes,
Whom we call gods on earth, in the affairs
Of love turn men again.
For Domitilla.
That's the dishonour Madam, and infects
My brain to think on it, and as much beneath
Your grace in all the ornaments of soul
And person as she is in b•ood, if my
Impartial thoughts may take so bold commission
To judge between your beauties.
Is it possible;
Tic too certain Madam; I should b•
A villain to accuse the Duke unjustly,
Or bring but shadows of a truth; for though
He be unworthy of your love that dares
Thus value your perfection•s, below
That Phanto me 〈◊〉 lo• not passion
Make you to rash in managing a c•use,
On which depends your fame, compared to which
Ten thousand lives added to mine were nothing;
Observe him at next visit.
Isle study thanks Sir▪
You pay me with a blessing, if my name
But live within your memory.
This troubles me.
Are they both come to court?
And in those lodgings were prepared.
Tic well, and came they cheerfully?
Yes Sir, but something
I nigh discern like trouble, and by starts
In Domit•lla; but they are pleased with their
Remove, and waite all your commands.
So leave us;
Theodosia, whats the matter? art not well.
Where•s the Duke.
I thought to have met him here.
Is Domitilla come to Court?
She is
By my command to waite on thee.
To rival me.
Howes that?
I meant her a wife for good Montalto,
As the reward of his just services;
He knows it not, as he is ignorant
For whom I have prepared her; Rival? strange
I must know more of this; she is in nature
Too apprehensive; for although in love
Suspicion to men a torment be,
There is no Fiend to women's jealousy.
You may doe what you will Madam; 〈◊〉 me
Into fine clothes, and make an ass of me;
But should you wrap me in a Lyons skin.
You have ears that will betray what beast you are.
Pray Madam tell me in six words of sense,
What shall I doe hete; Isle not see the King,
Though he have cunningly devised this trick
Only to bring me hither and betray me
To offices, make me at least an Idol.
Whats that?
An Idol in the Country I have read
A thing we call a worshipful, a right worshipful,
Descended from the house of the face totums,
Lord of the soil, and Cock of his own dunghill.
You may be out of fear; you cannot read now▪
Nor set your name to a warrant.
All that nothing;
Ignorance every day comes into fashion,
And no mean statesmen now when they doe writ•
Their names, doe for their honours so con••iv it,
You can hardly know a nobleman from a mark.
If you be an enemy to all preserment,
Your best way is to leave the world and turn
A lay Fryer.
No I find no such thing in my constitution;
Every man is not bound to be Religious;
Men of my bulk and bearing should not fast so;
I am not given by nature to drink water,
Or lye without a shirt; I have corns Madam,
And I would make less conscience to undo
My Shoemaker, then walk on wooden Pantables
I will endure to serve you still and dwell here,
So you c•nceale me from the King; tic not
That I doe owe his Majesty ill will;
I could endure him too upon condition,
He would make nothing on me.
Why he shall
Make nothing on thee take my word, or if
Thou hast a mind Isle pray him make thee less.
No, I would be a middling Christian;
But what will you doe here your self; you'll be in.
With whom dost think.
And cast away your self
Upon some pageant, one whose wit must be
Beholding to another Wool to keep it warm;
One that can dance and sing and wag his feather,
An artificial Calfe carrier;
A youth that's sowed together by his Taylor,
And taken a pieces by his Surgeon.
Why how now Secretary.
I could say more.
Is this wit natural?
You were best say
I got it here at Court; pray heaven I doe not
Loose what I brought; I had a wholesome wit
In the Country; ask the Parish and the Parson
For I kept company with those that read
And learn wit now by the ear; if any slip from me,
As where there is a plenty some will out,
Here are so many wit catchers, a lost maidenhead
Is sooner found and set upon the shoulders
Of the right owner.
I prithee tell me Bombo,
And tell me truth, doe not you think your self
After all this a fool?
A fool; your servant Madam.
Isle speak thou moist be the Kings fool.
I thank you,
I tell you Isle not see the King, or if I did,
Yes I look like a fool, I could be angry,
But then you'd say I were a fool indeed.
Be not so passionate.
Wot I had been a fool,
I would I had, for my own sake I wish it,
I should not have been tempted hither then,
By which I have endangered my good parts,
To State employment; but Isle be wise enough,
He has not seen me yet nor shanot if
There be a witch in Naples, or a mist
That will be bought for money to walk the Court in▪
But take your course, and I were at home again.
What then?
I would live in the Cellar, the Wine Cellar.
Tic your humility.
There were some fortify•ation to be made
Against the Court invasions, coun•••mines
Of sand and Sack, a man might thrust himself
Among the bottles, and defy the world,
Be drunk, and not be called out of his sleep
To go Ambassador.
So, so, fear not,
Have a strong faith, and thou moist die• in the country
For all this; here's my mother; let your care
Be now that none may interrupt us.
I will doe any thing but see the King.
With pardon Madam you seem full of thought.
I am studying Domitilla why the King
Should send for us to Court.
Mother you cannot
Mention the King in any act of his
That is not glorious and like himself;
He is the great example of a King,
But richer in his soul then state.
But why
To us this favour; to call us from those
Cold and obscure shades of a retirement
To plant us here near his own beams?
He has some meaning in it.
It tic yet dark to me.
We sh•' not stain his Court; his sister's but
A Lady of more distinction of birth;
Yet all that have been Princes, came not to
Their state by a de•••ned; the Heralds know
Some were not borne to purple and to scepters
That have been Queens; virtue has raised some,
And beauty has had many charms to rule
The heart of Kings.
Whats all this Domitilla?
I hope you are not dreaming of a Queen;
Such wilde interpretation •f the Kings
Favour to us cannot be made without
The forfeits of wits and duties which
Should teach us to contain our thoughts in their
Own Sphere• and not to point them upon objects
Above our Level.
I Betray my s•lfe,
When I said beauty had a power to charm•
A King; it might acquit me from suspicion
Of any hope to apply them so ambitiously;
You'll grant it just to love the King.
Our duties.
And he may where he please place his affection,
Leave that to her; it may concern.
And she
Thats marked for so great honour should be mad
To quarrel with her kind fate.
What's all this
To thee?
To me; why mother first not possible
A Lady not much fairer then my self
May be a Queen; great Princes have eyes
Like other men, and I should sin against
What heaven and nature have bestowed on me,
Should my fate smile to think my face would be
The bar to such preferment.
Leaving this
Which is but mirth I know since we are fallen
Into discourse of love, what would you answer
To Lord Montalto if he came a wooing
And recommended by the King?
I would
Even recommend him to the King again.
Is not his favourite worth your love, if he
Descend to be your servant.
As a servant
He may be entertained, and were I Qu•en,
Perhaps he should be favourite to both;
And I would smile upon his services
In imitation of the King while he
Preserved his modest duty and his distance:
My daughter is transported, sure you are•
No Queen sweet Domitilla.
Tic a truth,
Nor is Montolto yet my favourite.
I hope shoe's not so miserable to affect
The King, by whose directions I prepare
Her for Montalto.
A sprig of the Nobility called Octavio
Desires access.
Admit him.
I must let this passion cool and leave her.
Welcome to Court; why so; this sphere become•s you,
Or rather it takes ornament from you;
Now Domitilla shines indeed; your presence
Doth throw new beams about the Palace Madam;
Before we looked as we had lost our genius.
You came not from the King with any message,
I made this hast to tender my own service.
You have no other suite to me?
Yes Madam.
Speak it.
And Isle not wander much about; shall I
Be admitted a young lover?
Men must not love till they be one &amp; twenty,
They will be mad before they come to age else.
This Law was ne'er decreed in the Parliament
Of Cupped; such a Statute would undo
Many sweet Virgins like your self; yet if
You'll promise to stay for me, I shall think it
A happy expectation; we are both
Young; we may choose each other Valentine
And couple, as we grow more ripe hereafter.
Isle ask you but one question my Lord,
What would you give to be the King of Naples?
I dare not think so ambitiously.
Tic modest: what if I cannot love under a Prince.
Can he be less, whom you will make happy
To boast in the possession of your fair
Person, a thousand provinces; those eyes
Are able to create another Indies;
All the delights that dwell in blessed Tempe
Divinely bud and blossom in your cheek;
The treasure of Arabia's in your breath;
Nor Thebes alone, as to Amphions Lute
Stoops to the heavenly magic of your voice,
But all the world.
No more of this; these praises
Are made for children, and will make truth blush;
They may fill up where nature is defective;
And were I Queen of Naples I should punish
Such flattery; but you are young and may
Outgrow this vanity.
You are merciful.
I shall be ever so to you Octavio,
Let this encourage you to think I love you
In the first place, of those which are borne subjects;
If you will answer my respects forbear
To question further.
I shall waite sometime, and kiss your hand.
And if my power may
Prevail to doe you favour with the King,
Make your address.
Has not the court transformed her.
Me thinks I move upon a state already
And yet tic not the glory of his title
Affects my hope so much; his person's lovely,
And both together make the charm; I doe
Expect his royal presence; how shall I
Behave my looks when he declares himself,
Madam.
Admit not every Lord to trouble m•;
I will take physic; but Isle be observed;
You may frame some excuse to Ladies too
That press their visit.
Tic the Duke.
The Duke.
Of Florence.
Princes must not be neglected;
That name gives him access; say I attend.
The acknowledgments I owe your favours Madam,
Late your rude guest brings me to kiss•e your hand.
Your excellence is pleased to interpret fairly
Of our intents.
And till occasion ripen
My whole discharge for your fair entertainment,
Madam, be pleased to wear these Diamonds,
Which of themselves betray their want of lustre,
And come with an ambition to recover
Flame from your smile.
It can be no dishonour
To take these from a Prince.
The King with wings,
Isle haste to meet him,
Gone, and so abruptly
Her business might allow her breath to thank me
For my rich present; but Isle follow her;
I wo'd not meet the King here; if she prove
Gentle, my heart I consecrate to love.
My pretty Domitilla, now you are
My guest, tic fit whom I have made my charge
Should live within my eyes, welcome once more to Court.
You are bounty Sir it self, and bind
A Virgins prayers.
What art thou yet prepared
To hear his name, I would declare thy husband.
The King.
The Duke; this confirms it.
Unlucky fate he has spied me.
Thou shalt have
A little patience, while the Duke and I
Change some discourse in private.
I Obey
He is sent off; I hope the King is not
In love with her himself.
Now my Lord, what
Alone, I see you can address your self
To a handsome Lady.
He has prevented mē.
Where I receive favour I shall never
Want heart to acknowledge.
That rule binds to all.
It does but with distinction, to pay.
But with distinction to pay,
First love to those that best deserves it from us.
Tic justice Sir.
This granted, there's another
Whom though you can forget, my sister Sir
Deserves to be remembered.
You are jealous
That I visit this Lady.
That were only
To doubt; I must be plain; Florence has not
Been kind to Naples to reward us with
Affront for love, and Theodosia must not
Be any Princes mockery.
I can
Take boldness too, and tell you Sir it were
More for hēr honour, she would mock no Prince•
I am not lost to Florence yet, though I
Be Naples guest, and I must tell him here
I came to meet with fair and Princely treaties
Of love, not to be made the tale of Italy,
The ground of Scurrile pasquills, or the mirth
Of any Lady, who shall preingage
Her heart to another bosom, and then sneak
Off like a tame despised property,
When her ends are advanced.
I understand not
This passion; yet it points upon something
That may be dangerous to conclude; Theodosia
Is Naples sister, and I must not see
Her lost to honour, though my kingdom bleed
To rescue her.
Now you are passionate;
Tic I must be repaired; my name is wounded,
And my affection betrayed; your sister
That looks like a fair star, within lov•s sky
Is fallen, and by the scattering of her fires
Decla•es she has alliance with the earth,
Not heavenly nature.
Are my senses perfect;
Be clearer Sir; teach me to understand
This prodigy; you doe not scorn our sister?
Not I; as she has title to your blood
She merits all ambition, she is a Princess,
Yet no stain to her invention, we are paralells
Equal, but never made to meet.
How's this?
Truth is my witness I did m•an
No ceremonious love, until I found
Her heart was given from me, though your power
Contract our bodies.
Stay and be advised,
And if your doubts by some malicious tongue
Framed to abuse my sister, and your self,
Have raised this mutiny in your thoughts, I have
A power to cure all.
Sir you cannot.
Not to court thee for her husband, were possessed
Of all, ore which our Eagle shakes his wings,
But to set right her honour; and ere I challenge
Thee by thy birth, by all thy hopes and right
To fame, to tell me what seditious breath
Has poisoned her; hear what my sister sends
By me so late, time is not old in minutes,
The word's yet warm with her own breath; pray tell
The Duke says she, although I know not from
What root his discontents grow, to devote him
To Domitilla.
How does she know that?
Whose beauty has more spell upon his fancy,
I did contract my heart, when I thought his
Had been no stronger to his tongue, and can
Not find within it since, what should divert
His princely thoughts from my first innocence;
Yet such is my sterne fate I must still love him;
And though he frame his heart to unkind distance,
It hath embracing virtue upon mine,
And with his own remove, draws my soul after him;
If he forget I am a Princess, pray
Let Naples doe so too; for my revenge
Shall be in prayers, that he may find my wrong
But teach him soft repentance, and more faith.
All this must not betray my freedom Sir.
You'll not accuse our sister of dishonour.
I would not grieve you Sir to hear what I
Could say; and press me not for your own peace;
Fems must be gently touched.
As thou art Florence speak.
I Shall displease;
Yet I but tell her brother that doth press me;
Lucrece was chaste after the rape; but where
The blood consents, there needs no ravisher.
I doe grow faint with wonder • here's enough
To blast an app•ehension, and shoot
A quaking through the valiant soul of man;
My sisters blood accused, and her fair name
Late chaste as trembling snow, whose fleeces clothe▪
Our Alpine hills, sweet as the Roses spirit
Or Violets cheek, on which the morning leaves
A tear at parting, now begins to wither,
As it would haste to death, and be forgotten;
This Florence is a Prince that does accuse her;
And such men give not faith to every murmur
Or s•ight intelligence that wounds a Lady
In her dear h•nor; but she is my sister;
Think of that too; credit not all, but ask
Of thy own veins what guilty flowings there
May tempt thee to believe this accusation.
Tic she;
You are come Theodosia to my wishes.
What does distract you Sir.
I have done your message to the Duke, and find
He does love Domitilla.
Her he shall meet and marry in Elisium.
What mean you?
I have shook off my tameness; doe not hinder
My just revenge; Isle turn their triumphs into death.
There is a question of more consequence
Thou must resolve; it does concern thee more
Then thy own life.
You fright me.
Are you honest?
Honest.
I could have used the name of chaste,
Or virgin; but they carry the same sense;
Put off thy wonder Theodosia,
And answer me by both our parents ashes,
Which now are frighted in the urn, and scarce
Contained beneath their marble, while their same
Bleeds in my wounded honour art thou still
My sister without sty•no; upon thy chastity
Tell me and answer truth, for both our lives.
Nay, nay, there is no time for thy amaze;
Hast thou not lost thy self and been enjoyed;
I blush to name the way.
Never.
Again.
By all the good we hope for I an innocent
As your own wishes.
You are my virtuous sister.
But by your love and all that bound to
Be just, now let me know my strange accuser.
Thou shalt know that hereafter; let thy thoughts
Live in their own peace, and dispute not mine.
Not speak to me; he fround too; sure I have not
Displeased him; wherefore stays the Princess?
Show spirit now or never. Domitilla
The greatest part of my affliction;
Let my revenge begin here.
Your grace does honour your unworthy servant••;
And if I might beseech one favour more,
Tic but to know what has displeased the King.
Must you be of counsel with his passions;
What hath advanced you to this boldness?
Pardon••
Why does your grace put on those angry looks;
I never did offend you in a thought.
Cunning dissembler, yes, and tic thy death
Must satisfy; yet ere I give thee punishment
Tell me what impudence advanced thy thoughts
So high in our dishonour• was •here none
In your own for me of blood •it for your love,
But you must flatter your prou? hopes with one
So much above thy birth • though he in frailty
Consent to make thee great, dar•• thou accept it,
And with my shame aspite to be his equal;
Disclaim these hopes, and swear never to love him.
Madam.
Doe, or with this I will secu•e my fears,
And stand the malice of all other fate.
Hear me.
Be brief.
I know not by what genius prompt•d Madam,
To live or die, more happily, I have no
Fear of your rage, which is so far from making
Me sin against my love, it has enlarged
My heart, which trembles not to be loves martyr;
I can forgive your hand too, if you promise
To tell the King how willing I die for him.
The King; thou love the Duke.
Hoe's not concerned
In my affection; I have no thought
Of any Prince alive, but your own brother;
Such an example of loves folly have
My stars decreed me; yet if pride and duty
May in one action meet and be good friends,
Both shall assist my last breath which shall offer
Humbly the King, and his affairs to heaven
This he will pardon, shall he know it done
By me more sit to die then live for him.
Alas poor Domitilla; she is wounded
As deep as I; rise and forgive my jealousy;
I cannot promise thee to be my sister,
But I will love thee like one; let us call
A counsel of our thoughts, and mingle sorrows;
Yet when we have done all, and tired our breath,
There is no cure for love, but love or death.
How will Montalto counsel me; I am
Wilde with the repetition.
The Duke
Lay such a black aspersion on your sister;
Tic blasphemy to honour; but as soon
He may pollute the Sun beams, or de•isle▪
The dew of heaven ere it approach the earth
Make us believe the rocks of ice doe flame,
And may endanger the north star; my wonder
Will make me reasonless•it throws a poison
On your whole family, a stain so deep
And so prodigious, all the blood within
His Dukedom wo'not purge it; could he find
No excuse for his revolt to Domitilla,
But blasting the sweet Princess.
Domitilla
Whom I must tell you I already have
Prepared to be thy bride, as an addition
To the reward I owe thy services.
Prepared for me? you are too bountiful
In you I kneel both to my king and father;
But my aspiring will be satisfied
To be your servant still: in your grace I
Enjoy the bri•de my heart affects; let me
Grow old with duties here, and not translate
My affection till my weary soul throw off
The burden of my dust.
No more: in this
One act, Isle build a monument of my love
To thee, and my revenge upon the Duke;
Thou instantly shalt marry Domitilla;
Her Beauty, Blood and Fortune will deserve thee.
I am your creature▪ but how this may inflame▪
The Duke.
Tic meant so.
But your sisters fame
Were worth your first care; this may be done
With more access of joy when she is righted:
You have been pleased to hear my counsel Sir
And not repented.
What would thou advise me?
The Duke is young and apt to err; you cannot
Preserve your hospitable Laws to affront
Him openly, nor will it be thought prudence
To let loose these suspicions to the descant
Of peoples tongues; th'aire is dangerous;
Let me search the Dukes bosom, for the spring
Of this dishonour.
How?
Mistake me not;
Philoberto is his secret consellour,
And the receiver of his thoughts; leave me
To manage this great work; I have a way
To every angle of his heart; mean time
Be pleased to keep your person but retired;
A silent discontent will fright him more,
And arm us with full knowledge.
Wise Montalto,
I like thy honest counsel, and obey it;
But lose no time.
It never was more precious;
My essence is concerned and every minute
Brings a fresh siege against Montaltoes life;
There's none but Philoberto conscious
To my last accusation of the Princess;
Then hee must be removed; delays are fatal;
Isle poison him to night; I have the way;
This done, the Duke may follow, or be bribed
With Domitillaes person to quit Naples.
My honoured Lord.
Guido, Aloisio;
Why make I this distinction you're but one,
To your Montalto, have one heart and faith;
Your love and diligence must now be active.
You have deserved us.
Lord of our fortunes.
Wee are your creatures,
Bound by all Law and conscience of the court
To serve your ends.
Tic but to waite close
And contrive excuses, if the Duke
Desire access to the King.
This all.
Be careful
None of his train nor faction be admitted,
In special Philoberto; if he appear,
Present my service, and desire to speak with him;
This is no mighty Province gentlemen
To waste you much; yet this neglected will
Destroy my tall fate, in what fall you must
Stoop and be stricken dead with the large ruins.
Kill us not first by your suspicion;
We look upon you as out destimy;
Prosper as we are faithful.
You divide me.
There is much trouble in his face, how e•e
Let us be firm; is not this Philoberto.
My honoured Lords.
We are proud to be your servants.
I am yours; where is the Lord Montalto.
New gone from us, and desires to speak with you,
And is gone either to your lodging or the Dukes.
I have some affairs with the King, and that
Dispatched Isle waite upon him.
We are confident
You will excuse us; we received command
That none should interrupt him.
I come from the Duke.
His excellenct will construe it our duties.
This was not won.
We dar• not sit dispute
Our masters pleasure.
Perhaps his confessor is with him.
Perhaps there is some cunning; nay preserre
The business of the soul, I may presume
He has no long Catalogue to account for.
You have not been of toun•eu with his conscience;
We doe not use to limit his devotions.
Tic picus, and you three by 〈◊〉
Montaltoes knaves here placed, to keep away
Discoveries: in spite of all your subtilties,
The king shall know my mind, and understand
The history of your patrons and your service;
Let time speak your reward in your own chronicles.
You not forget my Lord Montalto ha•
Desire to speak with him.
Tic all my business;
Be careful of your watch and look about you,
Some Wee sell may get in else.
Does he jeer us?
Let him; his Embassy is not performed.
You doe amaze my understanding Si•
To require I should justify a tale
Made to the blemish of so chaste a Lady.
Did not your Lordship tell such a story
To Philoberto in my lodging•.
I date his molice, to aff•••t; and tic not
Done like your self to sully with one breath
Two sames.
Shall I not credit my own ears?
Dear Sir, collect your self, and let not passion
To Domitilla whom you may passesse,
Here after make you so unjust.
Dear Machiavill
This will not doe; the King shall know your stratagems.
Go threaten babes; this would exalt my rage,
But I remember 〈…〉,
Nor would I grieve the genius of my country,
To place my own revenge above her honour.
Poor shadow.
Now.
Twill not be safe; you know your change.
We are proud to sc• your eace 〈◊〉 in health.
Where i• the King?
A little 〈◊〉 Sir.
Not yet I think, he is at his prayers.
Isle add to his Litany.
It wo'not need;
I think his ghostly father can direct him,
With whom he is in private.
I know not
How to interpret this; I want Philoberto.
Your graces
Servant; he looks displeased.
My Lord Octavio.
Your servant Lords.
You meet the Duke.
His face showed discont•ned.
We sum our fortunes in Montaltoes smile,
By whose commands we have denied the Duke
Access to'th King.
You have done well▪ it much
Concerns my Lord; his and all our fate
Depends upon it; continue still your care
And circumsp•ction, and while I am within
Let none be admitted.
Let us alone;
A spirit may have the device to enter,
But if he have so much body as a Gnat
Isle know his errand; whose this; oh it tic
My Lady Domitillaes Secretary.
Here are so many tricks, and turns, and doors
I'these Court lodgings, I have lost my self.
Mr. Secretary.
It was you betrayed me to the King, and cause
My Ladies to be sent for, with more cunning
To bring me hither; but alls one, he has
Not seen me yet not sha'not; which
Is my •ay out of this labyrinth.
Why are you so unwilling the King should see you?
Or to live in Court; me thinks this habit
Becomes you now; doe• it not my Lord.
He looks like a true Hero.
You are beside the story Sir; I did read once
That Hero had no upper lip; she was
A Lady of Lenders lake.
A wit? theres a new word; now for the Hellespont,
Heel make a subtle courtier.
It has undone me.
Undone thee how?
I know not whether it be my wit or clothes,
Or disposition of the place, or all
Together, but I am su•e I am in love,
I find it by the losing of my stomach;
I am most strangely in love.
With whom?
I know not.
Can you not guess.
I hope tic with my self, for I did vow
When my first mistress dyed which was,
What?
A dairy maid that we had in the Country,
To love no living woman bove an hour;
She was the very cream of all her Sex;
Oft have we churned together.
And drunk healths
In Butter-milke.
But doe you hope you are in love with your self Sir.
Marry doe I Sir; is that so wonderful at Court.
You are pleasant.
Lets be rid on him.
Come you shall now speak with the King,
And he shall knight thee; more honours may follow.
You shall excuse me; put your honours
Upon some body else.
Doe you know what tic.
I have not read of late.
But you are much given to hearing,
What is honour.
Honour a bubble is that is soon broke,
A Gloworme seeming fire, but has no smoke.
There's fire and water.
And smoke for ayre;
A painted Sun-beame, piece of gilded Chafe,
And he that trusts leanes to a broken staff.
You should have reconciled the four elements
To the conceit; there was fire, air, water;
Wheres the earth.
Oh he that leanes to a broken staff shall
Find that presently.
The King.
King bee your leave; I vanish.
This paper contains wonder; tic not possible.
Upon my lise Sir, Philoberto can demonstate these.
The Devil has not art
To abuse us so; this will require some counsel;
Hoe's here,
Montalto; leave us.
Sir your pleasure.
Is all in thee; hast met with Philoberto?
Not yet.
No matter; I have thought upon it,
And doe conclude it best to let things pass
Yet in a dream; choice and enquiry may
Awake suspicion upon innocence.
You cannot think her guilty Sir.
I am not
Without some fears; I have collected things
Since we conferred, that stagger my good thoughts.
Of her you cannot; Sir unthinke again,
What ever would betray her to your jealousy;
A Virgins Monument cannot be more chaste
Ith Temple.
Yes, yes; we may be all consent;
And therefore let her pass among things desperate;
Yet were I c•rtaine she were spotted thus,
As tic but a young Leprosy upon her,
I could wish heartily my Sister timely
Married, not to the Duke that would betray us,
But to some one I know not, who could love
Vs both, so well as be that rare friend
And save our honours.
Doe you then suspect her.
Oh the Dukes Character had a powerful sense;
And who knows but she may be lost by one
Not fit to make her reparation;
Could any Nobleman be found in Naples
To bind her wound up by so great an act
Of secrecy and marriage; but some wind
May listen and convey, I know not whether,
What my sad breath has scattered in the air;
Thy Master has no servant that dares take
One sorrow from him.
You are Sir provided
Of more then that can rise to in my service.
Can thou be so compassionate to lose
Thy hopes of richer beauty, for my sake?
Dare thou with all this knowledge hide her stain•,
And marry her?
My duty to your Majesty
Shall marry me to death; let not this trouble
The quiet of your heart; Isle take Theodosia,
And think upon her as she had the whiteness
Of my good Angel.
You are a miracle;
Teach me but which way I may reward this love;
Till now I had no poverty; thy worth
Will make me everlastingly in debt;
What shall I say?
Great Sir, no more; your favours
Flow from a bounty, which hath only heaven
Above it.
They are all trifles; let me see,
Is nothing in thy power to make thee find
My gratitude? how barren are we, wealth,
Honour.
Ther's nothing good or great you have not
Freely possessed me with; your favours would,
So mighty have they fallen upon me, rather
Express a storm, and I had su•ke beneath
The welcome violence, had not your love
From whence they flowed, enabled me to strength
And manly bearing.
I was inprovident
To reserve nothing, or it was a fault
In thee to be so prodigal of merit
In thy past services; can thou think of nothing
Worth my addition.
Nothing Sir.
I have it,
And thank my better genim I have it,
Such a reward Montalto that I dare
Be modest yet pronounce, never did Prince
Exceed it to his friend.
Sir you amaze me,
And shame my want of merit.
In the title,
Let Kings peruse the benefit and study
An imitation to their best loved creatures;
They are great as fortune can invent; Isle teach thee
A way Montalto, to know all thy friends.
And enemies.
That were a precious knowledge,
Were it in nature; with your highness pardon
The hearts of men are not to be measured
With what we reach the stars, 〈◊〉 fathom Seas;
Oh he thats active in a state has more.
Chainde to him by the power and strength of office,
Then genuine respect; and tic not worth
Or person, but the fortunes of a Statesman
That sometimes men adore.
Tic true; and therefore
I am pr•ud in this that I can teach thee look
Into men's souls, to know 'em fit for scorn, or
Thy embraces.
How may this Sir be done?
Almost 'ith twinkling of an eye too.
Strange.
I seem to frown upon thee.
How Sir?
Doest apprehend me; I will counterfeit
That I am displeased with thee; doe not mistake me,
And have it voiced about the Court, thou art
Consigned, doest mark; at this will all thy enemies
Whose hearts thou can not see, their tongues before
By thy great power silen•d, join in faction
Complain, discover their whole stock of malice,
Tickling their spleens, that thou art out of favour,
Whom I shall hear and smile at; then all those
Whose honest souls deserve thee, will rise up,
The champions of thy same of the other side
And be so many Orators to make
Thy faith and honour shine; when this done,
The scene is changed, I send for thee; thou comes
With a most glorious train; and then Isle smile,
Take thee again in the sight of all, discover
It was but a trick, thy friends keep still thy bosom,
And thou in triumph shoot'st a scorn with mine
To strike all envy dumb; First not a rate one?
I cannot doe enough for thee Montalto.
You have found out a way I must confess;
But with your pardon, I shall be more able
To do: you service in the other ignorance,
Then rue•• a desperate hazard in this knowledge;
Some hold it sin, and capital enough
To have the Princes• favour, which once lost
Though but in suspicion; they may rage,
And like a torrent rise to o'rewhelme nature.
These sha'not wound thee.
And how other Indges
May wrest the actions of a man employed
Though ne'er so faithful to his King and state.
I am confident of thy justice and decree,
Thy triumph in it; thy goodness thus con•••cuous
Renders thee loved, and fit for Theodosia
When she is brightest; the Sun never smi•
More cheerful upon teeming earth,
Then I to find thee perfect; for I doe
But seem displeased; come, I will have it so;
If thou dost love me, no dispute, but let me
Pursue my fancy meant to doe thee honour.
Who waits?
Now it begins;
Attend my Lord Montalto to his Chamber,
Where our will is, he be consigned until
Our pleasure further known.
How's this?
Aloe. Consigned!
No ceremony Sir; when that's done,
We ease you of the trouble too of waiting;
You know the way my Lords to your own lodgings,
From whence on peril of our anger stir not
Until wee send for you—Octavio.
Doe we not dream.
Something wo'd creep
Like a dead sleep upon me; I am in
A Labyrinth; but hence with coward fear;
I know the worst; grim death can but translate
Me hence, and there's an end of death and fate.
He conforted and counselled Domitilla;
I have my part in loves affliction.
This I feared
I must acquaint the King; where is your fellow
Bombo? his mirth might now be seasonable.
Hoe's gone Madam.
Gone, whither?
Back to the country house; he heard of my Lord
Montaltoes disgrace, and the fear of his supp'ying
The place of a favourite, sent him away this morning
With all his movables; the country he says
Is wholesome, where he will dye without fear or wit when
His time comes; he durst not stay to see the King.
Would we had still been strangers to the Court;
Leave us; my daughter is much bound to your grace.
It is the King you speak of; pray be careful
You speak all goodness of him, he deserves it,
And will when I am dead.
Isle lose no time.
I wish it prosper.
I dare not say the King dissembles with me;
That were a fault beyond my love; but sure
Something he said that made my heart believe
He did not mean me for another; and
Montalto, whose reward I must be thought,
Is now consigned, and under his displeasure.
He will have more care of his honour then
To place thee so unworthily; Montalto
Has plaid the cunning traitor with our loves,
If I may trust thee noble Philoberto
That told me the whole story of his falsehood,
Which I before suspected.
And if he should despise me as tic justice,
Will heaven be angry if I love him still;
Or will the King call it a treason in me?
If hee doe, I can willingly dye for it,
And with may last words pray he may live happy;
But why am I this trouble to your grace?
My story is not worth one of your minutes;
Dear Madam pardon me, and teach me how
To make my time more happy, spent in something
That may concern your highness; you doe love too.
Madam, the Duke of Florence.
How the Dake?
Why does he visit me? Madam indeed
You may believe I love him not.
Admit him
I prithee, and conceal me Domitilla;
I know he comes a wooing to thy beauty;
I prithee let me hear the second part:
I shall against my own desires obey you.
The ambition of my eyes can not be thought
Immodest, if they ever wish to dwell here;
They have found their light again; let no misfortune
Be a second cause to bury me in darkness.
Your graces pardon, if my haste to attend
The King and his commands made me appear
Rude when I left your excellence.
This does more
Then satisfy.
I know not how I may
Stand guilty in your thoughts by keeping a
Rich Caskanet.
You honoured me to accept it.
But with a blush I must remember too
I did not thank you; there was want of time
Or manners; I must leave it to your mercy,
And would by any duty to your grace
Expiate my error.
Madam it is not worth
The mention of this gratitude; Your breath
Makes the oblation rich, and me who am
Encouraged by your 〈◊〉, to present you
With something of more value, then a world
Of these poor empty glories; I dare give you
My heart Madam.
Bless your grace from such a meaning.
Can you be cruel to it?
I ne'er had
The confidence to look upon a wound;
And such a bleeding object as your heart
Would fright my senses.
You are more ingenious
Then not to understand that I mean love;
I love you Madam, best of all your sex.
You cannot Sir, you dare not.
How?
You dare not be so wicked I am am sure
When you remember, what you are, a Prince.
Is it a sin for Princes to love Madam?
Or if you could dispense with so much passion
To love me, and durst give me, what I tremble
To think you promise, that, that very act
In which you most advance affection to me,
Would make me think you love me not.
Be clearer.
How should I think his courtship worth my trust,
And meet him with a real change of hearts,
Who in his very first attempt of love,
Would blast my honour, and betray me to
A shame, black as the tongue of infamy.
Would I?
And more;
For you in this
Would tempt me to an act, by which I should
Not only wound my self to death of honour,
But make me guilty of another blood,
And kill an innocent Lady, whose least tear
Is worth a thousand lives of perjurd men
That make a scorn of virtue.
What Lady?
Have you forgot the Princess Sir?
The Princess!
In that name you'll find your self again
Lost in a mist of passions; oh think
The fems and hopes of two rich countries are
Engaged upon your faith; your highness pardon,
I find some blushes chide my too much boldness,
And by a nearer view now of your goodness,
I see my error to believe you meant
Other then tri•ll of me, or could fall
To any thought beneath your birth and honour.
But if Theodosia be made another
By her own gift, and I at large, with what
Justice may I be thought then to address
My passions hither.
If the Princess, which
I must not think, give your heart back again,
And that you could quit all your ties with honour,
My thoughts are all resigned to the Kings will;
He must dispose of me, by my own vow,
Without his free conlent never to marry.
The King; there tic; I thought she was his mistress;
Tic not possible the Princess now
Can pardon my neglect; Montaltoes practise
Upon me, and his poisoning of her virtue
Wo'not excuse my shame; I dare not see
Whom I have injured, Theodosia;
In am resolved, this •ight Isle •ea•e from Naples.
Nay doe not hi•de your face my Lord; it will
Appear as fresh and lovely to my eyes,
As when it first presented me your smiles;
I am Theodosia still.
But I have been?
Abused; time will discover to the ruin
Of his own name, and glory of our loves,
Montaltoes practise to divide our sonles.
You cannot be so merciful; or else
This sweetnefle is put on to enlarge my guilt,
When we are both compared; dare you believe
I can repent and be'reveng'd.
Upon whom?
Upon my self, for suffering my •ye•
To wander from this sweetness.
You outdo
The satisfaction; if your grace can find
Me grow again within your heart, where first
My love desired to plant.
Oh let me drown
My blushes in this over slow of charity;
But there's an act that justice calls me to,
Before I can be worthy of this peace.
Montalto has plaid the villain; now I find it,
And from his treacherous heart my sword must force
A bloody satisfaction for thy honour,
Poisoned by him.
Stay that revenge; shame has
Already sunk him.
Sir the King desires
Some conference with your grace, and with you Madam.
I shall attend you Sir; we shall present
Together, thus no object to displese him.
Though I shall blush to see him, Isle waite on you.
Good heaven, upon what humane bosom shall
We that are made your substitutes on earth
Place secure confidence? and yet there may
Be malice in complaints; the flourishing Oak
For his extent of Branches, stat••e, growth,
The darling and the Idol of the wood,
Whose awful nod the under trees adore,
•hook by a tempest, and thrown down must need•
•ubmit his curled head and full grown limbs,
•o every common Axe, be patient, while
•he tortures put to every joint the Saws
•nd engines, making with their very noise
•he Forests groan and tremble; but not one
When it was in his strength and state reviled it,
Whom poverty of soul, and envy sends
To gather sticks from the trees wished for rum,
The great mans Emblem; I did love Montalto,
And wed not have him lost if justice would
Consent, and be a little of his side;
But here are the two plummets weigh him down;
His impious practice on the Duke, and base
Aspertions on our sister that defame
Our whole blood, is a loud, loud accusation.
His conscience dares not Sir deny it.
And you
Speak here the tragic story of Rivi•to,
Whose honest soul for not complying with
His power and ends, chose in a discontent
To make himself an exile, ye pursued,
And by the practise of Montalto poisoned
At Rome.
This letter sent to Alvarez,
Whose 〈◊〉 Physic purged his soul away,
Is too much testimony.
Tic his Character.
Octavio you come for justice too.
It were a vain breath to desire it Sir;
Your thoughts are still so conscious of virtue,
They will prevent petition.
Come nearer.
The King is troubled.
Where he loved, to find
So much ingratitude.
Andrugi•.
Things are not yet mature for my discovery.
You observe—away—
We may be just Philoberto,
Yet not destroy another attribute,
Which shows whose repre sentative we are;
Mercy becomes a King; too much can be
But thought a sin on the right hand; we are
Resolved.
Madam you are welcome.
I begin
To fear there is some spell upon the King;
If after this Montalto shall prevail,
Let innocence be stronger to the world,
And heaven be afraid to punish vice.
Remove
For a few minutes.
I obey.
You tell me wonders Madam; las poor Lady,
I shall then have enough to reconcile;
She was too hasty to interpret me
Her lover.
If you Sir apply no cure,
The fond impression may I fear endanger
Her sense and life; I urged Montalto Sir
By your command, before his change of fortune•,
But she took no delight to hear him named.
No, no, nor I; good heaven how I am troubled
How to repair this pretty piece of innocence,
Whom I have brought into a waking dream
Of passion; something I must doe; pray tell me,
But tell me truth; I charge thee by thy duty
To me, to Naples, and to heaven, or if
There be in women's faith, or thy Religion
Any thing else to make it up a full
And perfect conjuration.
You fright me;
Without these not a thought within my heart
But you have power to summon.
Tell me then,
Is D mitilla virtuous?
How Sir?
Is she exceeding virtuous; is sh•e most
Divinely chaste; can she doe more then blush
At wanton sounds; will she be'very angry
At an immodest offer, and be frighted
To hear it named; tell me; does she pray
And weep, and wot be torn upon the rack
Ere she consent to stain one virgin thought:
Or dares she more then Lucrece kill her self
To save her honour, or doe something more
Miraculously then all this to preserve
Her white name to posterity.
I know not
How to reply to these particulars;
But if your meaning be to have me speak
Truth of her modest and pare thoughts, she is
All that her mother can beseech of heaven
To bless a child with of so chaste a soul,
And virtuous simplicity.
No more;
I doe believe, and will find out a way
To make her satisfaction; tic just;
Say I desire her presence.
Now you bless us;
A widows prayers and tears for this great bounty.
Your sister and the Duke Sit.
There's new trouble.
Never so lovingly united;
The pleasant language of their eyes and gestutes
Doth speak their hearts at peace.
That would rejoice me.
Take us to your love;
All jealousies are banished, and we both
Breath from one soul.
My wonder and my joy.
Your pardon.
Take my bosom.
The misfortune
Kept us at distance, was your cr•atures act.
The clouds are now removed.
Lord Montalto, Sir.
Let Music speak
His dear approach; we sent for him.
How's this:
Let me entreat you to obscute your persons
A while.
My Lord you're welcome to us, very welcome
We have kept our word, and find you have not lost
Your confidence; what a brave armour is
An innocent soul? How like a •ocke it bids
Defiance to a storm, against whose ribs
The insolent waves, but dash themselves in pieces,
And fall and hide their heads in passion 〈…〉
How would a guilty person tremble now,
Look pale, and with his eyes 〈◊〉 to the ground
Betray his fear of justice.
Where should honour
Shine with his pure and 〈…〉
Where there is such a King, so good, so great,
The example and reward; he must be
A rebel twice to 〈◊〉 that can live
To be convinced of a dishonour near
Such an instructive goodness.
Where be all his fierce accusets?
Call 'em to his presence,
Whom all their envies would destroy.
So, so;
The King is charmed.
They are gone upon the first
News of my Lords 〈◊〉 they vanished Sir.
So may all reason fly the brow of innocence▪
Tic well said; but they sha not fly their names;
Read there just to our thoughts, they apprehended
Thee lost in our displeasure (wheres our sister)
And now they came to be revenged Montalto,
Upon our favours.
Right, and please your grace.
Theres something may concern your want of grace
Andrugio, Philoberto.
We are undone Guido, and I see more
Engines are leveld at my fate.
The King would have your Lordship peruse this.
And these.
That you may know your friends and enemies.
Lost, lost for ever.
Sir you know
You have obliged the Princess Theodosia
And the Duke to you, and you may presume
To use their favours, they are here.
It were better
For me they had no being. I did never
Expect this; to accuse me for the death
Of Riviero; but I must obey
This fatal revolution.
Why does Montalto kneel.
I dare not ask your pardon,
Only I beg you would put on a brow
Rough as the cause you have to make it frown,
And that may strike me dead without more torment.
Ungrateful man! am I rewarded thus▪
Not only with my faith abused and subjects,
But wounding all our honours.
Let him find your mercy Sir
For his offence to me.
I must not, dare not pardon; it were a sin
In me of violence to heaven and justice.
You have been a Royal Master.
Take him hence;
His life will draw a scorn upon the Kingdom;
Expect the censure of o•r laws you gentlemen▪
We only banish from the court.
You are merciful.
Pray and be honest.
That last w•ll be the greatest 〈…〉
My passion would be strong but here is one
Come to divert the stream; how is it with
My pretty Domitilla; you and I
May change some words in private.
The King is just, and tic within your silence
To make Montalto nothing.
Hee will sink
Apace without that weight upon him; malice
Shall have no share in my revenge.
And since Montalto
Is become incapable,
I wo'not marry thee; that• a thing too common?
But thou shalt be my mistress, a preferment
Above my first intention; be wise
And entertain it; oh the days and nights
Weal spend together.
The King's very pleasant
With Domitilla.
Come kiss me
Domitilla; kiss me now
Before all these; what needs this modesty;
Come let us take in one another soul.
Are you the King of Naples.
So they call me,
And if there be a power within that name
It shall be thine to make thee glorious,
And great above our Queen; there is no title
•eke unto that our heate and blood creates
A mistress Domitilla.
Are you Sir in earnest?
Doe but thou consent, and I
Will give thee such a proof in my embraces
Of the delight; they will not follow us;
〈◊〉 tell thee more in the bed-chamber.
I dare
Not understand this language▪ can the King
Be impious; how was my opinion cozened
Sin hath deformed his very shape; his voice
Hath now no harmony.
This is but to draw
More courtship from me.
Pardon I beseech you;
I have found my error.
Will she yield?
I did consent
Too soon to my captivity,
Though modesty would not allow me strength
To tell you so; but you have Sir, by what
My fond thoughts never did expect, relieved me,
to make me know my self; and now preserving
That duty which I owe you as my King,
I call love back again, and can look on
Your lusts with a becoming scorn.
You can.
Yes, and were Naples, Rome, and all the wealth
Of Italy laid down, the great temptation,
Thus I would spurn their glories.
Come this is but the trick of all your sex;
We know you can dissemble appetite,
As if you were not slesh and blood.
Sir give
Me leave to go while I have power to pray for you,
Where was I lost? is there no friend to goodness;
Have I contracted such a leprous form
That I have lost all men's defence and charity.
Madam your innocence doth raise in me,
Though young, a willing champion, and with
My safe obedience to the King, I dare,
Armed with the witness of her cause, defy
The greatest soldier in the world.
How's this?
Sir, in a noble canse, if you to whom
In the first place truth flies as to an Altar,
Wave her religious defence I dare dye for her.
You so brave? to prison with him;
We will correct your sauciness.
You will grace
My first act Sir, and get me same by suffering
For so much sweetness.
Let not your displeasure
Great Sir fall upon him; revenge what you
Call disobedience here.
You owe much to
His confidence; nor is there any punishment
Beyond your love and liking of his boldness;
You two should make a marriage with your follies.
Let Domitilla make Octavio
So blessed.
My Lord you now deserve I should
Be 〈◊〉 whom with the hazard of the Kings
Anger, and your own life you have defended;
There is a spring of honour here, and too it
•th presence of the King, his Court and Heaven,
〈◊〉 dare now give my heart; nor is it without
My duty to a promise.
Now you make
Octavio happy.
Tic to my desires,
•nd I dare wish you joys; forgive this practise;
•ay pretty Domitilla I did this
•ut to divert more happily thy thoughts
•f me, who have not paid yet the full tribute
〈◊〉 my Cesarias dust; again let me
•ongratulate thy choice in young Octavio,
•hose birth and forward virtue will deserve thee;
•other and sister love, and wish them happiness.
Theo. May all joys spring within their hearts.
Duke. I must present this gentleman to be more known to you
Octave. I hope you are no enemy to this blessing.
Simon. I add what doth become a most glad mother,
blessing to your loves.
Noble Riviero.
I live again by your acknowledgment.
Sir you may trust my testimony; Alvarez
Letter is now an argument of his safety,
Who is yet living to increase the guilt
Of false Montalto.
Welcome; tic thy life
That hath reversed Montaltoes doom, whose sentence
Now shall bee only banishment; our hearts
Are full and sprightly; nothing wants but to
Perfect with holy ceremony, what
Your hearts have sealed; mirth in each bosom flows,
Distraction never had so sweet a close.
Our Poet doth forget his Play;
There is something he would pay
Due to your greatness, and the day
Which by a revolution of the sphere
Is proud to open the New year.
And having looked on you, hath hid his face,
And Changed his robe with Stars to grace
And light you going to bed, so waite
With trembling Lustre on your state.
Shine brighter yet, you're not the same
Clear Lamps you were shine like the name
Of him I bow too, while aflame
Active, and burning here with pure desires
Shall equal the best borrowed fires.
May health, the bosoms friend, stream through your blood,
And know no ebb of the chaste flood,
And though time shift, and years renew,
May yet the Spring be still in you.
May She, whom heaven hath sweetly graced
And in your noble bosom placed,
Whose heart by only yours embraced,
Hath made one true, and holy Gordian, prove
Fruitful in Children, as in love.
And may this fair Top-branch, whose early bloom
Doth promise all the fruit can come
To virtue, and your name be blessed,
And live a story to the rest.
All Honour with your fame in crease,
In your bosom dwell soft peace,
And Justice, the true root of these;
Wealth be the worst, and out side of your fate;
And may not heaven your life translate,
Till for your Royal Master, and this Isle,
Your deeds have filled a Chronicle,
In all thats great, and good, be bold,
And every year be copy of the old.

FEllow colleagues, since it hath pleased our King,
Renowned Edward, of his special favour
To sphere us in this height of eminence,
And makes vs rulers over Scotland,
Lets show our selves worthy the dignities
Conferred upon us.
That's not by lenity,
For howsoever the armed hand of war
He's made them ours, they are a Nation
Haughty and full of spleen, and must be managed
With straighter reins and rougher bitts.
Alas,
I find them easy, tractable and mild,
Autority may with a slender twine
Hold in the strongest head, then what needs tyranny,
Use rein or bit, by this all doubts are cleared,
It is always better to be loved then feared?
And by your leave, Sir Thomas,
We have good reason to defend our own.
You are as clear of danger, and as free from foes.
As he that holds a hungry wolf by the ears,
The principles are true, trust not thy wife
With secrets, nor thy vassal with thy life,
Sound example proves it.
And private policy confirms it, I could urge rea∣son why, show cause, wherefore, and speak to purpose whereby, but my betters are in place, I know them to be pregnant, and a ready wit's worth all.
For our own safeties then, and Englands honour,
Let not us lose what our King hardly won.
To that effect called we this solemn meeting,
To which we have summoned divers: chiefly Wallace,
Late Sheriff of Ayre, which office tho the King
Conferred on me, the haughty Scot thinks much
To tender up, observe his insolence.
Presumptuous Groom, this is a seat for Eagles,
And not for Haggards.
Selbie it is a seat,
I, and my Grandsires Grandsire have enjoyed
And held with worship, and till Edwards hand
Remove me from it, Wallace will still possessed.
Proud Wallace dares not.
Selbie, both dares and doe,
And must, and will, tho subject unto Edward,
I'm Selbies equal both in birth and place:
Tho in mine Office, Edward joined you with me,
He never made you ruler over me.
You'll find he did, read that Commission,
And tell me then, if Selby or your self,
Be Sheriff of Ayre.
To what my King commands
I humbly bend, resigning on my knee
Both Staff and Office.
Which thus Selby breaks
Over thy head, and now proud Sir acknowledge
Selby your Ruler, and with your place resign
Your Castle and your Lands.
That's not inserted in your Commission.
What the King has given I surrender,
For my Lands they are still mine own,
Were purchased with the sweat of my deer Ancestors,
And ere I lose a pole, a foot, I or the smallest turf a silly
Lark may build on, Isle lose life.
At your own choice, either your lands or life,
Or both.
Or neither, royal Edwards mercy
Sits above Selbies malice.
Surly Groom,
Mercie's for subjects, by what Evidence,
Charter or Service do you hold your Land?
Selby by none, that title which I had
I have given my son, a boy of that proud temper,
As should he hear thy insolent demand,
Would pluck thee from thy seat, and lay thy head
A satisfaction at his fathers feet,
But heavens forbid it, Selby thus it stands,
Thou hast my Office, and my son my Lands.
He must show how he holds 'em.
So he can,
And Selby will show evidence sufficient,
Mine, my dear Fathers, and my Grandsires sword.
He wears good evidence about him Selby,
And will upon the least occasion
Both show and prove it lawful.
If the sword be your best plea, you've but a naked title,
And by our autority we here command
You and your son at our next general meeting,
To bring in your Surrender, or undergo
The penalty of traitors.
Oh you the patrons of poor injured subjects,
Do Graham justice, Selbies riotous son
Assisted by a crew of dissolutes!
Has stole my only daughter, and intends
A violent Rape, or which more cuts my soul
A forced marriage.
Inconsiderate fool,
The boy affects her, and with my consent
Intends a lawful marriage, it is a favour
Her betters sue for.
Oh let u'm hate, my blood
Shall never enter league nor hold alliance
With him that hates my Country.
Rest your thoughts,
He has her, if he likes her he shall wed her,
And Graham as a dowry shall enjoy
Thy present state, revenues, goods and lands,
Fret out thy soul, he shall.
Shall?
I, Sir shall,
It's the highest favour conquest can afford,
For a slave to join alliance with his Lord,
And Wallace see present surrender made
Or look for storms.
So say I too, and it is not the least part of policy, neither.
Will have my Lands.
Enforce me give a dower.
Misery decre'd above comparison.
Complain unto the King.
The King alas.
I have heard a story how the subtle Fox
Having stole a Lamb, the family of sheep
Drew a petition, and with full consent
Prefrr'd it to the Lion, he employed
About earnest and more serious business,
Appoints the Bear Commissioner, to take up
This bloody difference; the Bear impanels
A partial jury all of Wolves, they choose
The Fox their Fore-man, they consult and find
The sheepish Nation guilty, and with general breath,
Cast, judged, condemned, and sentenced all to death.
Men should have souls.
But tyrants being no men,
Have consequently none; complaints in slaves,
Are like to prayers made over dead men's graves,
Nor heard, nor pitied, heaven he's imposed a curse,
Which suffrance in time may cure, cōplaints make worse.
Then as it is lets bear't, win heaven to friend
He that begins knows when and how to end.
Mask her, come Peg hide your Scottish face.
Why shild I hayd my Scottis face, my Scottis face is as good as yare English face, it is a true Scotties face.
I know it is sweet Peggy, and because it is not a picture for every Painter to draw forth, let this curtain be pind before it.
Hang yare flee-flaps, na Scottis woman is a∣sheamed a that luke, that the master painter abuife guifes her, where mun I gang and now, fey, fey, fey, what losel am I that am hurrand thus till and fra with sweards and wapins, whey mun backerd men gang fencing and flori∣shing about me, am I yare may-game?
No Peggy, you are my prisoner, but here's thy jail.
Are ye my jalor? what kin bin you to the hang∣man? senu you? whore's hee? when is that foul loon a∣mang you, that mun be my hangman?
Here's no man here your hangman, or your jailor.
When then be you?
Your friends that hold you only in bonds of love.
I reckand mickle your luife, fey upon seek luife, the old felon thief, luifand the true mans siller as you luifand me, I'd rather be a Scutchmans whore, then an English∣mans waif, and be dreave to the Kirk with halters.
Tell me what proud Scot loves thee, what Scot dare touch thee now you are Selbies?
Hang thee, hang thee foul meazel'd lowne,
What Scuttishman darres guiff my luif understood
My case, on Gads dear earth you sud no farther gang
As butchers kie toth the grunt he sud you bange.
All mildness is in vain, take some rough course.
To the Church, away, Isle marry her there by force.
Away with her.
Yonders Wallace, and's true.
The Devil and's dambe be it, budge not.
O my luife these Sotherne Carlos mickle wrang against me warcke, and now wad force me gang until the Kirk, and marry Selby, Wallace my Io not I.
Vnhand that beauteous prize, proud slave, it is mine.
Slave! you are a villain Selby.
Are ye so brave.
Look to my wench.
Kill 'em.
We are no Stares to die by dozens.
Back, the quarrels mine, and if one single Scot proud'st of your swarm dares answer me, step forth.
Your first man I Sir.
Hark Gentlemen, let not so slight a shower,
Which yet lies hid and wrapped in one poor cloud,
Be by rough winds (raised up by you) dispersed
Into a general storm, to many eyes
Of Scots and English shoots, quick lightning forth
Already, but your absence will allay
Those fires which else must kindle, get then away,
Take shelter in yon tavern.
Agreed.
Look to my Peggie.
Guard my love, hee and I will only exchange cold words.
Now Sir, your cold words.
This Scotch Lasle I love.
Is that all?
Yes.
I love her too, can any words more cold,
Strike to your heart?
Is she your wife?
No.
She's your whore.
Vmh, neither.
She gangs with me then.
But the dew likens not whither,
If you can win her, wear her, she's wholly mine.
She is?
She is, our Lass are not English common,
I'm right Scotch bred, till death stick to a woman.
And to the death thou shalt, no more but this,
Thou shalt bear from me Scot.
When?
Instantly.
Make time Sir, of your weapon, time, and place.
This Whinyard.
This.
Our swords do now agree, and of one length and scantling.
Why should not we, if we must Surgeons
Have to morrow or anon
If not as good now, it is the English fashion
To swagger it out, and then drink and then fight
And kill in cold blood having slept sound all night,
And oftentimes all gashed, the seconds fall,
When home in whole skins come the principal.
So about words, the Lawyer wrangling stands,
And loses in mean time his clients lands.
Dost teach me fencing too in thy own school?
I'll beat thee or be beaten, one draws short breath.
I feel no sickness.
Yet you are near thy death.
At it so hotly.
Kill him, it is fair.
Inglorious conquest, for King Edwards crown,
I'd trample on no enemy were hee down.
There—if you are well, part.
I'll die, or in thy heart blood wash this infamy.
Mercy on my soul. 
He's slain.
Away.
Shift for your selves, twill prove a stormy day.
Search, call for Surgeons, follow the murderer.
Wa is me, legs my luife on the cawd ground,
Let me come kiss his frosty mouth.
What Scot first?
Oh, it is young Selby!
Ha'my son, who slue him?
That fatal hand of Wallace.
Follow the villain.
Ize jocund and weel now.
Lay upon her fast hold.
Hang me I reck not.
Away with her to prison.
Not all the blood and treasure we have spent
Like zealous prodigals in Palestine,
Goes half so near our heart, as that proud France,
Knowing our merit should bar us of our due.
France dares not.
Yet he does.
It was not demanded.
How, not demanded? thinks the bold Lord Percy,
That Grimsby dares not (lawfully employed) demand.
But not command.
Yes command, Percy.
Grimsby, thou can do well in Garrison.
Wear shamoys for a grace, project for blood,
Make eight days to one week, turn executioner,
And hangman like send fifty in one morning,
To feed the Crows, and live upon dead pay.
He's a man worse then dead that—
Stop thy throat or—
What?
Isle cut it.
Cut throat.
It is a trade,
By which few prosper, and yet thou art made.
A man as good as—
A hangman.
A foul blot
Lies in your throat.
Thy foul-mouth, wash it Scot.
In Percies blood Il'e washed.
Grimsby you lean
To hard upon our sufferance, and noble Percy.
Our honoured second in all inward combats,
Thou hast too many worthy parts of man,
To throw thy self on this unequal ha•zard,
Grimsby thou standst so much degreed below him,
Both in descent and eminent quality,
The many favours we have graced thee with,
Blush to have been conferred upon a man
No better tempered.
May it please my Sovereign
Confirm his grant touching—
The Crown of Scotland,
Save other time, Grimsby you have raised
A storm which showers of blood can hardly lay.
Dread Liege,
If all the youthful blood that I have spent,
And wealthy honours that my sword hath won
Waving the Christian Standard in the face
Of the proud Pagan, in the holy Land,
Merit the name of hangman, Grimsby casts
Them and himself at royal Edwards feet,
And like an out worn soldier, humbly begs,
No pension (but look Percy) nor yet office
But leave to leave the Court, and rich in stars
To lose more blood, or win more worth in wars.
We will not lose thee Grimsby, valiant Percy,
If love in us, or loyalty in you,
Have any power.
My Sovereigns pleasure sits above my private passions.
Then join hands,
Our subjects both the native of two Lands.
Friends Grimsby.
Friends in show,
But in my breast bloody revenge lies ambush't.
Gracious Liege.
You are no Musician, Bruce, thou keep false time,
We strike a bloody lachrymae to France,
And thou keep time to a Scotch lig to arms.
Edward will be more kind to Christians.
Let Christians be more honest then to Edward,
In expedition of this holy war,
When France in person was enjoined to march,
To work his safety we engaged our own,
Cashiered his fainting soldiers, and on promise,
Of so much gold at our return, supplied
The French designs our self, and is our love,
And loss of blood, half which at least had dropped
Out of French bosoms, quittant with owe none,
Pillage and play the free-butter for more,
The news.
Dread Sovereign, Scotland is infected
With a most dangerous surfeit, it breaks out
In strong rebellion.
This is your Kingdom Bruce.
I have no hand in it tho.
Should have no head, did we but think it,
Whose the chief?
One Wallace, a fellow meanly bred,
But spirited above belief.
Some needy borderer.
How is our bosom parted, is their power
Of any strength? Bruce, levy powers for France;
If we but thought thee touched in it, warlike Percy,
Beaumont and Sebastian fetch him in
Or with a second and more fatal conquest
Ruin that stubborn Nation.
Gracious Edward,
Tho war he's made them subjects, heaven defend
Subjects should make 'em vassals.
We conceit you,
If any officer of ours transgress
Our will, or go beyond his bounds prefix't
VVee'l have his head, he our high worth depraves,
That our free subjects seek to make his slaves.
We do not.
See we find it not.
Let Eleanor win so much favour as to march along
Tho conquered, alas we are neighbours of one clime,
And live like them subject to change and time.
Royal Edward,
Though Wallace and some spleenfull dissolutes
Wronged with the yoke of bondage cast it off.
Let not the whole Land suffer.
Nor do we wish it Grimsby, should the fates
But turn the wheel we might with them change states,
Be Scotlands subjects, let but Rebellion kneel,
We'll wear soft mercy, and cast off rough steel.
I'll undertake it.
Let messengers be sent,
To question the proud Rebel, and if Grimsby
Fail in his plot, Northumberland and Clifford
Shall second him in arms, so slight a foe
Must not detain us from our French designs,
Our Queen he's all our breast, and tho we might
Justly perhaps confine your liberty,
Bruce, we enlarge it, giving you command
In our French wars, observe him nearly Lords,
I have read this maxim in state policy.
Be sure to wear thy danger in thy eye,
France lights a Comet, Scotland a blazing Star,
Both seek for blood, we'll quench um both with war.
Prithee good Wallace.
Ill betides his soul,
That speaks of goodness, thinks or meditates
Of any goodness more then how to free
Imprisoned Peg.
But hear me.
Castle wears but a slender bolt of brick.
Turned mad!
And say the moat be fifty fathoms deep,
Fifty times fifty, say it reach through to hell,
Wallace will swim't.
Swim't, yes so wilt thrust an ox into an Eg-shell,
And roast it by Moon-shine, but why should Wallace?
Why should proud Selby, though his forward son
Were justly slain, imprison Peg?
Poor Lamb she is no murderer.
In my conscience she ne'er drew weapon
In anger in her life.
Not at sharp I think, but by your leave it is thought,
She he's practised in private; put Wallace to foil, and made
Him lie at his hanging ward many a time and oft.
Wher's my son?
With Peggie, father, manacles of grief,
Hang heavy on my senses.
Shake 'em off.
Show thy self worthy him that thou call father,
Or Peggie dies.
What thunderclap was that?
Able to waken death or shake the shroud
From off a dead mans shoulders, Peggie dies,
Should thunder speak it, Wallace would swear it lies,
Who spake that, fatal Nuntio?
His breath.
That gave thee being, Haslerigs returned.
Whence, from the Devil?
From England, and this instant
But thou come in, and yield thy self, her life
Dissolves to air.
The charitable Angels waft her to heaven.
Resolve you then to lose her?
How shall we save her, singly as I am
I will oppose me against the town of Lavercke,
Swim the vast moat, and with my trusty sword
Hew down the Castle-gates, dishing the doors,
File off her irons, and through a wall of steel
Attempt her rescue.
It is impossible.
Impossible, what's the news from Englands?
Grimsby the fire-brand of his Country
Comes to ensnare you, on the heel of him
Treads a huge army led on by the Queen,
Percy and Clifford.
Torture and death itself cannot divide us.
Sir John Graham, you shall be the engine
Our policy must work with, straight give out
That hearing of the English expedition,
Our faction is dissolved.
Whats's this to Piggies rescue?
Much, this rumour
Blown through the Land will stay the English forces,
And give us time and means to strengthen ours,
That once in act, repair to Hasterig,
Selby and Thorn, urge Piggies innocence,
And for her freedom and your own make faith,
To yield me prisoner, twill be no doubt excepted,
Your self once pardoned, and your daughter free.
What rests for Wallace?
Prospered destiny,
If the great cause we undertake be good,
Twill thrive, if not, be it washed in VVallace blood.
Is it by general Proclamation voiced
That but proud VVallace yield, Peg Graham dies,
The Criers are all hoarse with balling of it.
It is time for providence to stir the King,
(I know not upon what complaints) pretends
This rank Rebellion rather, took his root
From wrongs in us, then treacheries in VVallace.
And sends his forces rather to examine
And question our demeanours, then their treasons.
We must prevent it, how think you, Sir Jeffery?
Troth even as you think, policy must prevent it.
Sir John Graham craves conference with the Cōmissioners.
Admit him.
A man, me thinks, of your experience,
Respect and education should not link
Your self in such a chain of counterfeits.
Nor have I Lords, but for your best advantage,
And Englands good, traitors and dottrels,
Are sold for all alike, he that will take them
Must seem to do as they do, imitate
Their vicious actions, strive to take upon him
Their idle follies, join companies, and drive
Them into a net suspectlesse.
So did not Graham.
Speak not before your knowledge, you detain
My only daughter prisoner, will Selby
And his colleagues free her and pardon me,
If I dissolve the brood of traitors
And give up Wallace in bands?
Let's daughter be produced.
And the execution for awhile deferred,
Though in her cause Selby he's lost a son
And with him all content, so deer I tender
The peace of Scotland and my Sovereigns good,
As give the traitor to the hand of Law
And with her life take thine.
Good policy.
Aye trow, ye mean not Wallas his devoire,
And dowty valour merits mare repute nor
Seek fawe language.
A foul traitor,
I have conversed with Wallace, thrown my self
Into his bosom, mingled thoughts with him,
And find him neither worthy of thy love,
Nor my alliance.
Fey, sa, not sea, my bunny Wllace luifes me.
Yes as a Politician does a knave
For his own ends, hearing thy death proclaimed,
But he come in, I told him on it, he smiled.
I urged thy love and constancy, still he smiled,
And to confirm't he basely he's cut off
All his associates, and given up himself
Wholly to me.
Hawd rherefor charity, and wad ye give
Him to his faes, that gave
His blood to your protect?
I will and have,
For thine enlargement and my own I have,
No more, here comes the Rebel.
Traitorous man,
Is this thy love? these thy deep promises?
Art thou their Espies? See Selby here's the hand
Cleft thy sons heart.
For which base villain I'll see thee hanged.
Thou know not thy own eyes,
May feed the Crows as soon as mine, Toads and Snakes
May dig their lodgings in thy breast,
And Devils make faggots of thy bones first,
But my sentence.
Here, Graham, for thy service,
We enlarge thy beauteous daughter.
A mild exchange,
Angels approve it.
Next, thee to thy Lands and Offices we restore.
And what for Wallace?
Race him from your thoughts.
Raced bin his name furth the
Whayte buke of life that speaks it.
Hence.
Dear Wallace, thoe an shrude
Hawd not our bands, wees meet in yonder cloud,
Where na fell Southern nowther can extrude,
Nor bar na fra celestial pulchritude,
Aid gang thy gate, till heaven, and as we flay,
Like turtle Dowes weese bill &amp; find good play.
Rare resolution, what weak heart would faint,
Having so constant a companion?
Selby my soul's bound on a glorious voyage,
And would be freed out of this jail of flesh,
Then hinder not my voyage.
It is not policy, we'll rather set it forwards.
Raise a Gallows fifty foot high,
ye shall not go by water, we'll send you up a nearer way.
Ell's one,
Axe, halter, famine, martyrdom, or fire,
All are but several passages to heaven,
Let my soul go the furthest way about,
Come tired with tortures, shooting out my heart,
The deepest wounds, like strong Certificates
Find kindest welcome.
Stay th'execution, and having read this Warrant, know
It is the Queens pleasure, you send in this traitor
Under my conduct to the English Camp:
Rebellion of this nature must be searched,
With sharper torture.
I outdare the worst,
He is no man that is afraid of death,
And Wallace his resolve shall out-live breath.
It is but short-lived else, first see him bound and hud-winckt,
Then leave him to my care.
Bear with this Rebel, my love.
My service.
And my policy to the good Queen and Ladies.
Come Wallace, now your pride draws near the fall.
Why Grimsby, if I fall,
It is but to gather stronger force to rise,
For as a ball's thrown down to raise it higher,
So death's rebound shall make my soul aspire
The glorious clouds, so long I die secure.
Death cannot threat more then I dare endure.
No not a man more then my private followers,
The Queen enjoyns it.
Farewell, valiant Grimsby, and farewell danger.
Policy and all.
The traitors fled, and Wallace thus suppressed,
My sons bloods paid, and his wronged ghost at rest.
And the whole land at quiet, wher's Sir Iohn Graham?
We'll join him partner in Commission,
Twill be a means to make our party strong,
And keep down mutinies, search out old Wallace,
And hang the Carl at his own door, Sir Ieffrey,
Place tables in the streets, bonfires, and bells,
Since without cause they murmur, let u'm know
That with their knees we'll make their proud harts bow.
Sir Jeffrey, be you Master of the Feast,
You keep the purse, if money fall out short,
Send out for more, you have commission for it.
what talk of Conscience? you are an appa∣rant rebel.
How can he be a rebel was ne'er subject?
What right has Edward to the Crown of Scotland
(The sword except) more than my self, or Grimsby?
What greater right then conquest?
Then what cause,
Juster thou mine? respected Country man,
Thou hast been nobly valued, and held rank
With best deservers, look upon the wounds
And mortal stabs of that distressed breast
That gave thee suck; see thy poor brethren slaves,
Thy sisters ravished, and all out-rages
That bloody Conquest can give license to,
See this, and then ask Conscience if the man
That with his blood seeks general reformation
Deserves the name of Traitor,
Whither dost lead me?
To Northumberland
And Beaumont.
Butchers do your worst,
Torture, I spit defiance in thy face,
And death, embrace thee with as kind a narme
As if thou were.
Thy Father.
And thy waif.
In heaven or in a slumber, who resolves me?
Speak, am I dead, or living? or asleep?
Or all, or both, or neither? tell me fate.
Me thinks I see my Father, warlike Graham,
The Fryer, what Peggie too? I prithee joy
Do not ore-flow my senses, dearest friends
Pig, Father, Coming, Mentith, Graham, see
I am new moulded, and here stands the creature
That by a warrant granted from the Queen
Formed me from out a second Chaos breathed
New life, new motions, new dimensions,
To tell the story were to shame the world,
And make all mankind blush.
May luive.
Our prayers.
And all our friendship like a coat of steel
Stand betwixt him, and danger.
All join hands,
Thus like a mountain Cedar Wallace stands
Amongst a grove of friends, not to remove
For Edwards thunder, nor the frown of Jove,
I'll hew the yoke from off my countries neck,
Or never house, this religious Fryer
Is a full witness to the sacred bond
Twixt heaven and me, which on my part I'll keep,
Or pay the forfeit with my blood.
Heaven shield
Many a tall wood oak been felled
Ere Wallace stoop, heed Gentrid saw
Theke sword shall keep in mickle awe,
Fell Sotherne folk, many a cry,
Fray cradled barns, ever he shall fly,
Nurses sighs, and mothers tears
Shall swell the clouds, till thy awne blood,
Prove false thilk Crag sall ne'er leg dead.
Shall Wallace live till his own blood prove false,
Why, that can never be till palsy age
Hath thrust his icy fingers through my veins,
And frozen up the passages of blood.
The town of Lavercke, peopled only with English pride
And overjoyed with thy surprise are made drunk with mirch,
Bonfires, bells, banquets, and the devil and all
Invite our swords to their sad funeral.
Close with advantage, put your selves in Arms,
And cease their forfeit lives, this holy Frien
Shall first bestow a matrimonial band
Of our united love, and then my sword
Like winged lightning shall prepare a way,
To Lavercks doom.
No marry, stay a when,
Dip not thy winyard in the weambe
Of Lavercks town, for giffe thou gang,
Thouse work thy lives friend mickle wrang,
Thouse come back seafe, but barn I fear,
Ise never blink upon thee mere,
Kneel till thy Sier his benuson crave,
Next duty bin till dig her grave,
Kiss, kiss thy Peg, for well a near,
Thase amorous twins sall ne'er kiss mare,
Till in deaths arms they kiss, thilke state
Stands writ in heaven and sealed by fate.
Then fate dissembles with me, this the second time
She has by vision summoned me to arms,
Whom have you there?
Seeking the cave for shelter,
See whom kind fare hath given us.
Treacherous Wallace,
The doting wizard, and dissembling woman
Chief cause of this Rebellion, now revenge,
Clothe thee in crimson, and prepare to feast,
We'll tune such dismal music, as shall dint,
Smiles in thy shallow cheeks.
Alas, for woe,
What gorse this Iewde? what ill intend ye man?
To make rebellion fatherless,
And murder a matting widower.
Oh, spare mine age.
Pity my beauty.
My religion.
Like pity, as thy barbarous son bestowed
On my boys life, isle print upon thy bosom.
Like pity as thy husband pitiless,
Took on the widows tears, and Orphans cries
That kissed his, and hung about his knees
At Lavercks massacre, Isle show on thee.
Thus fell my son,
And thus the father of his murderer false.
Thus withered the pride of Laverck,
And thus fades the flower that cause their ruin.
Thus religious cries
Were stopped with steel, and thus religion dies.
Wallace, revenge me as thou art my son.
Revenge thy wait,
Revenge Religion.
Thunderbolts and fire rampire your throats,
The slaves grown infinite,
And moves in every place at once,
Shift for your selves:
Proud Wallace recking in the blood of Lavercke,
Like a fierce tiger nursed in humane spoil,
Pursues the slaughter, the barren hills lye strewed
With mangled limbs, such as the gentle night
Rescue from death, fall in the morning flight,
Then fly or fall for company,
Fly from a rebel, but fate keep true course,
Weal ebb like floods, to flow with stronger force.
Pursue the slaughter, whilst I, salvation shield me.
Fryer Gertrid answer me, what barbarous hand
Has cast my friend into this cold dead sweat,
Resolve me gentle Father, felon death,
Tha'st acted sacrilegious burglary, and told my father.
Wallace.
No excuse.
Ay sea husband.
Entreat not, ye are guilty both.
And parties in the dearest robbery,
Then though my wife and father (mercy fate,)
Play not the tyrant with me, do not try
My senses bore their weak ability,
Cease to afflict me, or I shall turn Rebel,
And breathe invectives against thy power.
O my dear Wallas for the luive waif,
For siuve of awe souls, and thy daying waif,
Lift to my latter accens, and attend
Of all thy joys the derne and dismawe end.
Torture above endurance,
King of dreams dissolve my vision.
Wallace is awake.
O if I be, let my soul never sleep,
In the blessed bosom of my Ancestors,
Till I have drawn a sea of purple tears
From forth the bosoms of the murderers,
Dear Peggie, father, Gertrid, which way, where
How, when, what means, what cause shall I devise
To find it out, and avenge your tragedies?
I'll teach ye how,
Selby and Haslerigg bin the fell blood-hounds
Whae have hunted life until thick toils of death,
Are they turned hangmen?
Religious cries, beauteous entreats, and reverend well-awayes
Could not win grace or favour,
Wallas revenge my death,
And for a favour keep my hindmost breath.
And house it here.
Whore's VVallas? never eye
Saw such a ruthless massacre.
Yes Grimsby,
VVallace can show a massacre will prove
Thine but a may-game.
Terrible and strange!
Dost start at this? then see a spectacle
Of force to stay the motion of the spheres,
Or strike the Sun dead in the brow of heaven,
Look, and like men short from the brow of thunder,
Fall seneeles, death wounds not so deep as wonder.
Whose bloody act was this?
The bloody acts
Contrived and plotted by experienced villains.
Who were the authors?
Judge, they all spake English,
Death best becomes that Dialect,
The first was bloody Hasleriggs, the second
More villaine-like was Selbyes, but the third
All had a hand in.
English Ambassadors.
They are welcome, let not one sullen brow
Be seen in all this fiery firmament.
Welcome, your business?
Far more like a Prince,
Then a base rebel looks the Northern traitor.
Thus to a rebel from a royal King,
If VVallace will confess himself a traitor,
And for his bloody outrages and thefts,
Crave mercy, and submit himself to Edward,
There's hope of life.
Still charitable English.
Tic not he sure,
This looks not like a man should shake a kingdom.
This it he shall deny,
Rape, murder, ruin, all the sons of war
Stands striving for the prey, and once let loose,
Shall not be checked, nor taken up, till rage
Be tired with murder, and thy self in chains
Hanged like a villain.
This is all perfect English, have ye yet spoke?
We have.
Then we begin,
And to a tyrant thus says a loyal subject,
If Edward will confess himself a tyrant,
And kingly felon, and make good such theft
As he and his have practised, sue his peace
By yielding up his and himself to VVallace,
There's hope of life, this if he shall deny
Rape, murder, ruin, all the brood of war
Shall be let fly, and never be lured of
Till they be gorged, and bated with the heart
Of the proud King himself.
Now speaks a man
Would thrust Jove from Olympus.
Calm your spleen,
For now speaks mercy, if your Countries wrongs
Grow from abuse in Edwards substitutes,
You shall have equal hearing, and the wrongs
Punish't in the deservers.
This should not be English,
Or if it be King Edward is no tyrant.
What answers VValace?
First pray pardon me,
If like the working of a troubled sea
My bosom rose in billows, for though the winds
That raised the storm be down, yet the dear ruins
Lye still in view, a father, and a wife,
Age, beauty, and religion, for thee
Thousands shall weep, as many wives
Shed purple tears for thee, as many Church-men
Offer their reeking souls in sacrifice,
Court, City, Church, the Chamber of your King,
The Chair of State shall be no privilege.
This was not Edwards act.
Yet such as Edward
Placed in commission, oh t'was a churlish storm,
And wretched I like a forlorn survivor
Left to inter their dear remembrances.
Good gentleman.
But bid relentless Edward
Send in the pirates Haslerigg and Selbye,
And in their hands letters of Murt subscribed,
To make me Master of my own revenge,
Or like a Ball wrapped in a cloud of fire,
Ruin shall fall upon his palace top,
Pierce through the roof, and in his chair of State
Solicit Justice.
Into his Princely ears I'll give your wrongs.
Will VValace here advise?
Yes.
Then be ruled by Grimsby.
Thanks for thy kindness. Lords Ambassadors,
Such we esteem you, may we crave perusal
Of your commission?
VVallace shall command it.
Mountfort and Glascott, what third fellow's that?
One of our followers.
Good, his name is not inserted,
One call out a headsman.
Ambitious rebel, know I am a Prince,
And nephew to the Queen.
Were it thou the King,
Having no portion in the Embassy,
I'd have thy head, go on, and strike it of,
A second cut his tongue out, and a third
Thrust out their eyes, and put their followers to the sword.
VVallace will be more mild.
VVallace will be more just
Then see the Law of Arms disgraced
Sound Drums and drown their cries.
Revenge beats at heavens gates for tyrannies.
So now our tragic Muse jets on the stage,
You that for seeing baseness want your sight,
Bear with this present our endeared, commends
Back to the Queen, and say so much we tender
Her sacred honour, weed not see it wronged
Even in her Nephew, you that for sparing speech
In honours cause are justly mute, conduct
This eyeless messenger, abuse not our intent
In the delivery, make speedy haste,
Lest we be there before you, share in like wrong,
Lend him your eyes, and borrow you his tongue,
If any question you about your harms,
Say Wallace did it in the right of Arms.
This will affright the English.
Honoured Grimsby,
This and ten thousand, thousand more extremes
Cannot appease my anger, you that love me
See those I loved inhum'd, my self disguised,
Will be their Convoy to the English Camp,
And see their usage.
Twill be an act of danger.
The fitter him that undertakes it, Wallace
Would hold himself not worthy of his fate
Should he bawke danger, dissuade not, I will on
Were certain death against my bosom bent,
There's gain in blood it's honourably spent.
And such I fear will thine be, honoured friends
See those remains of honourable love
Cradled in earth, that once performed take Arms
To avenge their deaths, Mentith, I attend
The coming of some special friends by oath,
Bound to assist us, hark how their friendly drums
Chide them for loitering.
Honoured Douglas, welcome,
Welcome Mackbeth, and doughty Wintersdale,
Not, unto men more, driven in needful want,
Could you have brought supply.
The better welcome,
Gold to rich men, and treasure to the wealthy,
Are known companions, wher's our General,
The hopeful VVallace?
Gone in quest of death,
Firm as his fate, cause he sees danger shuns him,
He's gone to seek it in the English tents.
So Hercules sought honour out in Hell.
He not deserves, the name of General,
Dares not face danger, and out-do the Devil.
And such a man is VVallace, yet least worth
Bears him beyond his strength, bring up your powers
For present charge, his thoughts are tragical,
And full of blood, active, and violent all.
You that best know 'em, feed 'em, all that's ours,
For Scotlands good call VVallaces and yours.
Where man? till the English Camp senu you,
gad sides you gang as I have seen money a your Country∣men like rank riders amble up westward, you gang the wrang way man, you sall luse and ye play at shoola∣groat, have ye na linckers?
Alas I want my eyes, but have a tongue,
He sees, but cannot speak.
Blyncke at smaw faults then, make me the third∣man, and here's a bunny noise of Fiddlers to gang fra winehouse to winehouse, a blind harper, a mute Cornet, and an old Scotch bagpipe worn to the stumps.
Are you a Scotch man Sir?
Ye marry am I, body and sawle a true Scotch∣man borne, but a true liegeman, hang him that does not luife your King, and your Countryman, what good vi∣ctales is that which thilke bonny man that haz glazen windows to his lindging has tied up in his wallet there?
Tic the head of a young murderd gentleman.
What senn you man! a mans scalp, I doubt ye be three fawse knaves liggand yare heads together about na gudenes, a traitors head first not?
No, but we have met with villains worse then traitors.
VValace your countryman, that bloody hangman
Mangled us all three thus.
VValas my Countryman, ay say upon him,
Fawe lymmerlike wad I had his head here too,
Ized bear it by my sawle to the English Camp
Or near gang farther.
Twold be a glorious fight there.
And you could see it ye sulled sea so man, VVallace
Cut of my shancks too, cause I ran away from him
To serve your good Prince, hark man, I wear
Na shooen but wooden clampers.
Of charity lead us to the English Camp,
Ye shall besides thanks be most royally paid.
Began•…along man tic hard by now, a mans head
I deempt the pure man had gaugand lang to law
And sae was thrust out of doors by head and shoulders.
No law was ere so cruel as Wallas is.
No marry? na law sa cruel, fey man fey, I luick'd upon a man a law not lang since that sent an awde man and his wife, and many barnes a begging, he had better a slizand their weazond pipes, and cut their heads off, but whey was a sa bludy minded think ye?
I cannot judge.
Marry man, to get possession of the pure mans house, but there was a cat ganged beyond the man a law.
A cat go beyond a lawyer? how?
I'll tell you how, the man a law being got in, the Cat outreached him, and leaped to the top oath lindg∣ing, and standand on the tiles, the man a law scoarning any an to be abuife him, offer to fling and dingand down the poor puscatt, but she meawed at him, and cried hawd thou foul lowne hawd, as thou thrusts out this poor man and his barnes, sa there is an abuife sall thrust out thee, stay blind man, here comes soldiers.
Stand que vole, spies about our trenches?
And see they have knocked some man down sir,
You that carry two faces under a hood,
What are you?
He must be pressed, he will not speak.
What art thou I charge thee? hast thou near a tongue
In thy head? give the word.
He has no tongue indeed sir.
Two heads and near a tongue, what are you?
That like a blind •sse stand still, and cannot tell us so.
I'm blind indeed,
Conduct us to the Lords in the English Camp.
How Lords, are you Ladies that you long for Lords?
Do you take us for gulls to go tell the Lords here's a dumb man would speak with'em, what are you sir? come halt not, lets not find you in two tales you're best.
Ize a Scotch man sir, ye shall near find me in two tales.
A Scotch man sir, do you know where you are sir?
Your blew bonnet on before an English scull,
Whore's your leg sir, when an Officer speaks to you?
My leg sir is not in my galligaskin and flop as yours is, I'ze a pure Scotch soldier out at heals, and am glad to bestir my stumps, guide these good men you're wranged Countrymen, when that fawse traitor Wallace has misusand in seek wise.
Wallas, oh slave!
I shall live (fellows in arms out at Elbows)
To give fire to my piece with a burnt inch of match
Made of that rascals fat of mawegut.
By my sawle sir wad I might come
To'th making of seek a match.
Here's my hand, because thou say so,
Thou shalt be by when I make him give fire to my touch-hole.
The Lords are going to view the trenches.
Every man to his parapet,
To your trenches you tattered rogues!
Its well done fellows.
Cry your Lordship mercy,
This blind buzzard here cannot see,
Whither will you march headlong my friend?
What men are these?
I leave them to your Honours sifting,
I have fortifications to look too.
There's drinking money, hence to your works.
Bless your honours.
What men are these, I ask, will no man speak?
Hear and in hearing wish the sound unheard,
Youthful Sebastian nephew to the Queen
Longing to see the man famed for the excess
Or goodness and of badness, seeing unjoyned
In honoured Embassy disguised attempted
The rebel Wallaces presence.
Glascot and Mountford.
Who did this damned villainy?
Our message told,
The traitor newly set on fire with madness,
Showing the mangled bodies of a Fryer,
His wife and father, burst out into flames
Hye hot and violent, In which fierce rage
Revolted Grimsby knew Sebastian
(Tho Herald like he went disguised) and seized
Him and us for three intelligencing spies,
Cut off his head, his tongue, and Glascots eyes.
Hang up this, provide for these, trufle him up.
What sen ye man?
What slave, what Turk that murders his own brethren
Durst play the tyrant thus? hang all the Nation
Whom we have tan to mercy, I'll not spare
Fathers, nor mothers, nor their bawling barnes,
fire their houses, hang up this tike first.
Ah bonny men, I met um play and at bo-peep, &amp; gangand out a their way, and sall I be hanged for my good deeds of charity, I'ze a poor Scutch soldier, and am ron away from that Rebel Wallas, to feight and for your good Prince, ah he's a good King, and you're all bonny men, I'ze follow ye all to the death, and to the Devil, and any man dare gang so far for all my clutches, giffe I clutch Wallace, he's near carry it till hell nor heaven.
If he do, may Percies name be crossed
Out of the roll of men.
So much swears Clifford.
Sneak not away sir, you're not gone yet.
I ken it vary weel.
I'ze not gangan to hanging yet.
Yet though a traitor, thus much let me speak
For absent VVallace, were the case your own,
Or one that's baser having any spirit,
A murdered father and a bleeding wife,
Mangled before him, would strike fire in snow,
Make loyalty turn traitor, and obedience
Forget all duty.
But our Nephews death
And the disgrace done our Ambassadors.
They then put off their title, and put on
The name of spies, when in their companies,
They take disguised observers.
By my sawle the English are gallant men.
No snare to entrap this Wolf?
How Northumberland, entrap a foe?
Sure it is no English word,
Clifford at least was ne'er acquainted with it.
Give him fair summons, dare him to the field,
And trap him then.
Ah bony man!
His being a traitor warrants it, dispatch
A second message with acknowledgment
Of former wrongs to our Ambassadors,
With promise of a friendly interview
Early to morrow, impartially to hear
Their wrongs, and mildly minister redress.
Ensnare him so and spare not, for you'll find I fear,
That Selby, Haslerig, and the rest
Lay yokes too heavy on the Nations neck.
If they do punish 'em.
Punish 'em, stead hang 'em.
Shall we agree to have such message sent
To allure this bloody Tiger into the net
And waking then or s••aping kill him.
No.
All stratagems are lawful against a foe.
Do what you will, but my consent is no.
I'll venture to the Rebel.
Do good Beaumont, Scotsmen dare thou con∣duct him as his guide?
But return sir, or the next time we take ye
You're Crag shall pay for it.
I'ze not run away fra ye, giffe I do hang me and drae me, cum bully Joe, I dare not gang to the Scottis Camp, the isle sa slay upon me, Ise near cum back again, but ls bring you where ye shall see that Lowne VVal∣lace.
That's all I wish; lead on.
Marry sall I, luke to your self,
Ise thrust you into the Dewles chops.
For getting out let me scuffle.
Consult for present execution.
What is, what should, what can this Wallace be?
Whom fame limbs out for such a gallant piece,
And is so curious in her workmanship,
No part deforms him,
Yet Wallace is a Rebel, his chief scandal
Is poverty of Gentry, by my sword
Were no impeach to my dear Ancestors,
I well could spare him some of my unused titles,
Or would at martial gaming so I might lose
And Wallace win so much of Cliffords honour,
Our stocks might be alike, but I exceed,
This night he is betrayed, he shall not,
I'll turn traitor first he shall not,
Call Beaumont back, or else by Cliffords honour,
An oath which I esteem above my life,
I will turn traitor, and reveal your plots,
Call him back.
Is Clifford mad?
No Percie's lunatic, suppose he be a traitor
And discipline of the field allow the act,
What honour is it for a herd of yours
To worry a sleeping Bear? go call him back.
See he comes uncalled.
The news.
News call you it, let no Scot come near your tents,
Wallace sends you this token.
Ha, how, Wallace.
Was that the traitor?
By Mars his helm, a complete Warrior,
I so love his worth, I'll court it with my sword.
Had you but stood in distance of his thunder,
For, we parted just where our trenches ended,
You'd have sworn the God of War had spoke,
Quoth he, tell Percy, he shall not need.
To hunt me in my tent, I'll rouse him in's own,
And bids me give you this wooden stump,
And swears to make you wear it,
If you dare stand him in the field.
Base Rebel, why durst he not stand here?
None prayed him stay,
It was manners being not welcomed to get away.
He sends, commends to Clifford, with this wish,
That if at this great match of life, and death,
He chance to lose the smallest part of honour
His sword may joyn't, he knows best how to use it.
At my return from France, quoth he, this vow
Which I have promised shall be surely payed,
Our Country overtopt with tyranny,
Makes us fly thither for succour, Aeolus,
Let favourable winds and tides assist me,
That spoke, revolted Grimsby and his powers
Met him in Arms, what further he intends,
Hark their Drum tells, here my Commission ends.
Lets send him commendations too, beat ours.
Set down Bolt, I can bear with thee no longer.
No more can I bear any longer with you, Sir Ieffry, but what a reeling drunken sot is this sea, that casts up such gobbets as this, is this a windfall or no now sir Ieffery? your Worship knows both the tags and points of the law.
Yes sure it is a windfall, for as we walked upon the shore, we saw the ship split, this fell out, the winds were the cause, therefore it must needs be a windfall.
Well some body he's had but a bad fish-dinner to day.
The Seas have crossed them that sought to cross the Seas, and therefore for my part I'll never meddle with these water-works.
Nor I, lets be more wise then a number of gal∣lants, and keep the land that's left us, did you ever see such gambols as the waves made sir Ieffery?
Never since I wore the nightcap of Justice, and that this her dudgeon dagger was a my side.
Did you note what puffing the winds made till they got great bellies, and then how sorely the ship fell in labour.
Did hear what a doleful cry they made,
When their maine yard was split?
Alas sir, would it not make any man roar that had but an inch of feeling or compassion in his belly to have his mayne yard split, and how the mariners hung by the ropes like Saint Thomas Onions.
I saw it Bolt with salt eyes.
So that you may see at sea however the wind blows, if a man be well hung, hes cock sure.
But Bolt what dost thou think this to be?
A matter of some weight as I take it.
I hope it is gold it is so heavy, and it was going out of the Land.
Like enough, for gold goes now very heavily from us, and silver too, both red chincks, and white chincks fly away, but sir Ieffery, if this be gold, how rich is the sea, think ye, that has innumerable such sands?
More rich then the land, and more fat.
So it had need, for the land looks with a lean
pair of cheeks, yet it has an excellent stomach, it digests any thing.
Then tic like the sea, for ell's fish that comes to net there.
I'll tell you the mystery of that, look what mouths gape at land, the self same gape at sea, all the land is one kingdom, and all the sea another.
And people in it.
And people in it (right worshipful) but they all go Westhod, as there are good and bad here, so there are good and bad there, gulls here, gulls there, as great men here eat up the little men: so Whales feed upon the lesser fishes.
Belike then the watery common wealth are ill governed.
No bravely, for heroical Hector Herring is King of fishes.
So.
Rich cobs his good subjects, who at Yarmouth lay down their lives in his quarrel, sword-fish and Pike are his guard.
On.
Fresh Cods the gallants, and sweet slipper the Knights, whiting-mopps the Ladies, and Lillie-white-mussels the wayting-gentlewomen.
Dangerous meat to take too much of.
But who the pages?
Shrimps.
No, no sir, perriwinckles are the pages, perriwinc∣kles.
No Justices among them?
Yes sir Ieffery, Thornebacks are the Justices, Crabs the Constables, whom if you butter with good words, it is passing meat at midnight.
Ah, ha.
Dogfish are Jailers,
And Stockfish the poor common people.
Indeed they live hardly.
But sir they are beaten too't, then have you wet Eels for whores, and great Oysters for Bawds.
Why great Oysters Bawd?
Because for the most part they are stewed.
Very good.
Lastly, because no Kingdom can stand without laws, and where law he's her eyne, there Lawyers &amp; Pet∣tifoggers swarm, therefore the Lawyers here are sharks, and gudgeons the poor Clients.
Wa ho to sol fa, sol fa.
Hark.
Peace Bolt.
Nay peace you good sir Ieffery, peace, peace.
Sol la, sol la sol la sol la.
Some Falconers teaching his Hawk pricksong, Shall I mock him in's own key.
Do.
Sol fa sol fa, here boy.
Here boy, wa ha ho ho,
All hail to you two.
And all snow to you sir.
Sir what art thou that wish all the hail to light upon us two?
Answer wisely to my master,
For hoe's a Justice of peace, and you'll be smelt out.
I am a drowned rat.
A Rat?
Do you take sir Ieffrey for a Rat-catcher,
You'll tell a sweet tale for your self anon.
Pox rot you, I am shipwrecked,
Give me some meat.
Shall I make his Mittimus? he begs sir.
I'ha met more then my match, Neptune and I,
Wrestling for false, he got the mastery,
I'm with his beating bruised, weary, cold, weak,
Liquored soundly.
He's drunk.
Yet so thirsty scarce can speak,
If ye be men, help me to food and fire.
What Countryman art thou sir?
A Scot, give me some victuals pray.
No mind but of thy belly.
Sir, sir, you are a Scot, and I a true English Justice.
Not a word of Latin, neither Justice, nor Clarke.
Peace Bolt in the Kings name, I charge thee, if you will eat bread earn bread, take up this luggage, sir, foal∣low me home to my house, thou shalt have good bread, good drink, and good fire, up I command thee.
I am necessities slave, and now must bear.
Must! nay, shall: are not the English your good Lords and Masters?
Well they are.
Do you grumble sir, on sir Jeffrey.
Have an eye to him Bolt, lest he give us the slip,
And were you in this terrible storm at Sea say you?
Over head and ears, sir.
If th'execution had been upon the land Sir Ieffrey, as it was upon the Sea, your worship had been in a worse pickle then he.
Why Knave? why?
Because he that he's a bad name is half-hang'd,
And your worship knows, ye have but an ill name.
Thou Varlet is not wise good?
Yes, come along porter, wise is good.
And is not acre good?
Yes passing good.
Why should Wiseacre being put together be nought then?
Is not Plumb-porridge good, Sir Ieffrey?
Yes.
Would I had this trunk full of 'em.
Peace Greedi-gut, Plum-porridge is good, and Bag-pudding is good, but put them together, and they are filthy meat.
Well, that's true.
Right sir.
How now?
Hunger is good, and two Woodcocks are good, But the feathers of those two Woodcocks must be plucked first.
Hold I charge thee.
Y are a scurvy Justice, yare man's an Ass, and you another with a velvet foot-cloth on your back, I ken ye vary weel, and Ise knock ye vary weal, if any thing be worth victales, it goes down here.
The Devil choke you, if you be a man of your word.
Wiseacres, if you would fain know who he's got this trash from ye, it is I, Wallace the Scot.
Wallace.
Fly sir Ieffrey,
He calls us Woodcocks, let's fly and raise the Country.
D'e ye grumble? raise the Devil and spare not.
Were thou a chest of gold, I'd give thee all for victuals,
Hunger, they say, will break stone walls,
Your chops are not so hard,
Ye shall burst tho with iron ribs ye were bared,
—victuals—wine too,—few justices doe feed the hungry thus, o these VViseacres are the bravest fell∣lowes, specially English VViseacres.
I'll now be my own carver, misery and age
Want and despair have brought me to deaths door,
And shall I not enter? yes I will, this key
Shall do it, is death so surly, may a poor man
Speak sooner with a King then speak with him
When he has most need of him, ugly lean slave,
So I may see him, no matter for a grave.
How now, what dost look for?
For that which a quarter of the world
Wants, a tree to be hanged upon.
Art weary of thy life?
Yes all men are of their old wives, my life he's gone up and down with me this threescore and odd years, it is time to be weary on it I think now.
And when tha'st hanged thy self, whither dost think to go then?
To the Linnen-draper.
What Linnen-draper?
The richest in the world, my old Grandmother the Earth, how many pair of sheets has she had, think ye, since Adam and Eve lay together, It's the best Inn to lye at, a man shall be sure of good linen.
Who dwells hereabouts?
One upon whom all the poor in the Country cries out.
Whose that?
Scarcity, dearth, penury, famine, hunger, I have
not known that man lives by food these four days, and therefore I'll descend to the Antipodes, because I'll kick at this world.
Stay, famine shall not kill thee, sit and eat
Thy belly full, thy cares in good wine drown,
By my own fall I pity others down,
Is it not good cheer?
Brave, I thank you for it, how many beggars does a rich man eat at his table at one meal, when those few crumbs are able to save a mans life, how came you sir into this fearful nest of Screech-owles and Ravens?
Cast up by the Sea, I was shipwrecked and lost all my company.
Would I had been one of 'em, I have lost more then you have done, I have lost all that I had but my sins, and they hang so heavy on my eye-lids, I can scarce look so high as the brims of my hat to heaven, I have such a mind downwards, I have almost forgot who dwells over my head.
Look up, be not afraid, there reigns no tyrant,
Wud thou had been with me at sea.
So wud I.
Had thou an Atheist been, and God not known,
Th'adst found him in the deep, there hoe's best shown,
He that at Sea is shipwrecked, and denies
A Deity (being there saved) damned lives and dyes,
Man no where in the twinkling of an eye
Is thrown so near to hell, or raised so high
Towards heaven, then when hoe's tossed upon the waves
It must be a hand omnipotent there that saves,
But how came you sir hither?
I was banished from England (but that grieves me not)
But I killed an old man, he was called Wallace.
Ha?
Wallace, and me thinks hoe's still at mine elbow.
Elbow? idle: Selby my fathers murderer?
Think not upon it, sit eat heartily
Thy last, sit down, I say, never to rise,
Drink wine, drink deep, let thy soul reel to hell.
I am almost dead with cold.
I'll fetch dry sticks,
And with two flints kindle fire, beat out his brains:
O that physic had the power to make thee young,
I'd fetch thee drugs from th'utmost of the world,
And then would arm thee, or, into thy veins
Half my own blood I'd power, to lend thee strength,
That I might kill thee nobly.
Be quiet, I'll pay thee.
How now?
A slumber took me, and me thought old Wallace
Clapped me upon the shoulder with one hand,
And with the other pointed to his wounds,
At which I started, spake, but know not what,
I'm cold at heart.
I'll seek for fire.
I thank ye, if what I utter ye tell to any, I am a dead man,
You have me at your mercy, and may betray me.
Not I, eat and get strength, I'll seek for fire,
Unless I be a devil (tho I have cause
To kill thee) yet my quick hand shall eschew it,
Thy careless confidence does bind me to it,
This mercy which I show now is for Gods sake,
In part of payment of his shown to me,
If I should kill thee now, thou owe me nothing,
Live, and be still my debtor, I shall do thee
More harm to give thee life, then take it from thee,
Heaven in my fathers blood who is chief sharer,
Shall strike for me a revenge more just and fairer.
Selby, Selby,
How like a Churl thou feed alone,
And greedy art to fatten misery—Selby?
Here.
Look I have found a jenniting tree.
Where stands it?
I'll not tell thee; see brave food.
Lets taste it.
Not a paring, what hast there?
The dole of plenty.
Good old Rogue I thank thee,
I have a stomach like a Lawyer,
Lets eat fruit when we have filled our bellies.
Not a bit.
Ha?
Not a paring of cheese.
I must.
Thou shalt not, I pay thee in thy own coin.
Thy doting age is almost at her journeys end,
My youth having far to go needs more provision,
And isle have this—
Hands off
You Dog, you old Devil.
I thank thee, thou hast cut the thread in two,
Of all my woes, heaven pardon us both, adieu.
Selby, no water from the hallowed Fount,
Touched thee, thou art so fatal, Selby, dead!
Gods building which he's stood this threescore years,
This he's defaced, would it were up again
With ruin of mine own, I never knew
Partners but one still the other overthrew,
Thou and I did set up with one stock of care
I have undone thee, and now ell's my share,
It is not so sinful nor so base a stroke
To spoil a Willow as an old reverend Ok,
From me you are gone, but i'll from hence ne'er fly,
But sit by thee, and sigh, and weep, and die.
Stand, that's he who turns his tail to us, which is as much as to say, A fart for your Worship.
Down with him.
Peace, it's a wilde Bull wee come to set upon, and therefore let those Dogs that can fasten bite soundly.
My harts, we come not to bait an Ass in a Bears skin, but a Lion in his own skin, he's a traitor.
How know we that?
Thus, he hides his face, and wee are not to back a traitor, Sir Jeffrey, you'll get between me and the Gal∣lows, if I strike him down.
I'll enter into a Recognisance to hang before thou shalt hang.
If you see my heart begin to faint, knock you me down to put life into me.
Fear nothing.
Be damned both gods and men the act detest,
Oh heaven; wipe this sin out for all the rest.
Your sins are wiped out sir, your Scottish score is paid sir.
Is he down?
He sprawls, stay there's one asleep by him,
Shall I kill the lice in his head too?
No, wake not a sleeping Mastiff, the Kings in the field, Lets post to him, Bolt, thou shalt be a Knight as deep as my self, for this manly deed, as ye go through the
Country, cry aloud, the traitor's dead.
Cry it out at the Cross, and at the old Palace,
That Bolt was the man that brained lusty Wallace.
The traitor's dead, the traitor's dead, &amp;c.
Thou shalt have fire anon old man, ba', murdered?
What should thou be? the face of Haslerig,
It is he, just heavens ye have bestowed my office
Upon some other, I thank ye that my blood
Stains not my hand, however both did die
(In love or hate) both shall together lie,
The Coffin you must sleep in is this Cave,
Whole heaven your winding sheet, all earth your grave,
The early Lark shall sadly ring your Knell,
Your Dirge be sung by mournful Philomell,
Instead of flowers and strewing herbs take these,
And what my charity now fails to do,
Poor Robin-redbrest shall, my last adieu,
I have other streams to swim through, or calm
Venture, it is brave when danger's crowned with palm.
Upon this field-bed will we lodge this night,
The earth's a soldiers pillow, here pitch our tents.
Up with our tents.
To council, beat a Drum.
Beat it for action then, and not for words,
Upon our Spear points our best counsel fits,
Follow that (noble General) up with no tents
If you dare hold me worthy to advise,
But with an easy march move gently on.
You speak against the Scholarship of war.
Now their Beef-pots, and their Cans,
Are tossed in stead of Pikes, their Arms are thrown
About their Wenches middles, there's their close feight,
Let us not lose the forelock in our hands,
Of us they dream not, yet we are as free-born
As the English King himself, be not their slaves,
Free Scotland, or in England dig our graves.
A Wallace, A Wallace, A Wallace!
Rugerosse, what cry is this?
Of the whole Army,
Grown wild twixt joy and admiration,
At the sight of Wallace.
Ha.
That dreadlesse Soldier,
For whom all Scotland shed a sea of tears
As deep as that in which men thought him dead,
Sets with his presence all their hearts on fire,
That have but sight of him.
A Wallace, A Wallace.
Entreat him hither.
Do ye hear the English march? they are at hand.
Now Grimsby, they for Pikes are tossing Cans.
I am glad our thunder wakes 'em.
Shall we on?
Whether first best to stop 'em in their march,
Or here to make a stand and front 'em.
Stand.
Or else retire back to the spacious Plain
For battle far more advantageous.
And so retiring be held runaways.
Here stands my body, and ere this English Wolves
Stretch their jaws ne'er so wide, from hence shall drive
I'll rather lie here fifty fathom deep,
Now at this minute, then by giving back
One foot, prolong my life a thousand years.
Then let us die or live here.
Arm, arm.
Fall back? not I, death of my self is part,
I'll never fly my self, here is no false heart:
Lets in our rising be, or in our falls
Like bells which ring alike at Funerals,
As at Coronations, each man meet his wound,
With self-same joy as Kings go to be crowned,
Where charge you?
In the battle, valiant Grimsby
Is General of our Horse, the infantry
By coming is commanded, Mentith and you
Shall come up in the Rear.
The Rear.
Yes.
No, sir.
Let Mentith, Wallace shall not.
He may choose.
Were I to hunt within a Wilderness
A herd of Tigress, I would scorn to cheat
My glories from the sweat of others brows,
By encountering the fierce beasts at second hand,
When others strength had tamed him, let me meet
The Lion being new roused, and when his eyes
Sparkle with flames of indignation,
I have not in the Academy of War
So oft read Lectures, chief now to come lag,
Isle have the leading of the Van or none.
Then none, you wrong us all,
Men now are placed, and must not be dishonoured.
So, dishonoured.
Charge in the Rear for Gods sake, now to stand
On terms of worth hazards the fate of all.
Well be it so then, the Rear, see you yon hill,
Yonder i'll stand, and tho I should see Butchers,
Cut all your throats like sheep, I will not stir
Till I see time my self.
Your pleasure, on,
Each Leader spend his best direction.
Which is the fellow?
I am the party sir.
Stand forth before the King,
Nay, he's no sheep-biter.
Did thou kill Wallace?
Yes marry did I sir, if I should be hanged here before ye, I would not deny it.
How did thou kill him? hand to hand?
Hand to hand, as Dog-killers kill dogs, so I beat out his brains I'm sure.
Me thinks, thou should not look him in the face.
No more I did, I came behind his back &amp; felled him.
Art thou a Gentleman?
I am no gentleman borne, my Father was a poor Fletcher in Grubstreet, but I am a gentleman by my place.
What place?
A Justices Clarke, sir Jeffery Wiseacres.
My man, if it please your Majesty, an honest true Knave.
Give to sir Wiseacres Clark an hundred pounds.
I thank your grace.
God confound all your foes at the same rate.
But if this Wallace, sir, be alive now,
You and your hundred pounds shall both be hanged.
Nay I will be hanged ere I part from my money,
Who pays, who pays?
Charge, charge.
The news brave Clifford.
The daring Scot fuller of insolence then strength Stand forth to bid us battle.
Throw defiance back down their throats, and of our Heralds
Northumberland the honour shall be thine, tell'um
We come to scourge their pride with whips of steel,
Their City hath from Justice snatched her sword
To strike their Sovereign, who he's turned the point
Upon their own breasts, tell 'em this.
I shall.
Whore's noble Bruce?
Here.
I have a message, but tic more honourable, sent to you too,
The Herald says that Wallace dares ye, his
Spite is all at you, and if your spirit be great
As his, you find him in the rear.
Hang up that wiseacres, and the fool his man.
My master, not me sir, I have a Recognisance of him
To stand betwixt me and the gallows.
A Kings word must be kept, hang 'em both.
One word more good Sir, before I go to this gear,
If a Kings word must be kept, why was it not kept, when he gave me the 100. li. wipe out one, I'll wipe out the other.
That jest hath saved your lives, let me see you fight to day.
Bravely like Cocks.
Now Wallace look to your coxcomb.
Move on.
We have fleshed them soundly.
I would not wish to meet with braver spirits.
Stay, Bruce, what's yonder on the hill?
They are Colours.
Why do they mangle thus their Armies limbs?
Whats that so far off?
Sure it is the Rear, where burns the black brand,
Kindles all this fire, I mean the Traitor Wallace?
What turned Coward?
A dog of so good mouth, and stand at bay?
If in this heat of fight we break their ranks,
Press through, and charge that devil, Bruce thy self.
To hell if I can chase him.
Charge up strong, hark, brave,
Let now our hands be warriors, not our tongues.
They fly, they fly.
The English shrink, knit all our nerves
And fasten Fortunes offer.
Keep steady footing, the day is lost if you stir,
Stir not, but stand the tempest.
I cry on.
And I.
So do not I, this starting back is but an Eng∣lish earth-quake, which to dust, shakes rotten towers, but builds the sound more strong.
Lets on, and dare death in the thickest throng.
Did I not give you warning of this whirpoole
For going too far?
We are all dead men, yet fight
So long as legs and Arms last.
In how quick time
Have we about you built a wall of brass?
Had he whom here you call your General
A Soldier been remarkable of great breeding,
And now to be caught with lyme-twigs?
Keep our ground.
If we must fall, fall bravely.
Wound for wound.
Exeunt King and Bruce pursuing the Scots.
Take breath, I would not have the world robed
of two such spirits, post to the King, and tell him that the noblest Harts of the whole heard are hunted to the toil,
Ask whether they shall fall, or live for gain.
I shall.
Charge.
For honours sake come down, and save thy Country.
Whose is the day?
Tic Edwards, come rescue
Our General, and the noble Grimsby.
Who?
Our General and stout Grimsby are enclosed
With quick-sets made of steel, come fetch them off,
Or all is lost.
Is the day lost?
Lost, lost.
Unless the day be quite lost, I'll not stir.
Tic quite lost.
Why then descend amain, art sure tic lost?
Yes.
Then we'll win it again.
How now?
The King proclaims that man a traitor
That saves when he may kill.
Charge them black day,
The Lyon hunts a Lyon for his prey.
A fight.
Too late.
Why then farewell,
I'll make what haste I can to follow thee,
Bruce, Bruce, I am here, it is Wallace calls thee,
Dares thee.
Tho I ne'er stooped unto a traitors lure,
I scorn thine, why dost thou single me,
Yet turnst thy weapon downward to the earth?
Lets breathe and talk.
I'll parley with no traitor but with blows.
Ye shall have blows your guts full,
I am no traitor.
Why against thy Sovereign lifts thou then thy sword?
You see I lift it not.
Tell Edward so thy King.
Longshancks was never Sovereign of mine,
Nor shall whilst Bruce lives, Bruce is my Sovereign,
Thou art but bastard English, Scotch true borne,
You are made a mastiff amongst a heard of wolves,
To weary those thou should be shepherd of.
The fury of the battle now declines,
And take my counsel, though I seem thy foe,
Wash both thy hands in blood, and when anon
The English in their Tents their deeds do boast,
Lift thou thy bloody hands up, and boast thine,
And with a sharpe eye note, but with what scorn,
The English pay thy merit.
This I'll try.
Dare thou alone meet me in Glasco-moore,
And there I'll tell thee more?
Thou hast no treason towards me?
Here's my hand,
I am clear as innocence, had I meant treason
Here could I work it on thee, I have none.
In Glasco-moore I'll meet thee, fare thee well.
The time.
Some two hours hence.
There I will untie
A knot, at which hangs death or Sovereignty.
We have sweat hard to day.
It was a brave hunting.
Sit, some wine
Away in the field all fellows, whose is this?
It was my Coat at Arms, but now tic yours at legs.
Away, why give thou me a cushion?
Because of the two, I take you to be the better man.
A soldiers coat shall never be so base
To lye beneath my heel, you are in this place
My fellow, and companion, a health to all in England.
Let it come.
Is not this he that killed VVallace?
No sir, I am only he that said so,
As you sit, so did I lye.
Sir, whore's your master?
My master is shot.
How shot, where?
In the back.
Oh he ran away.
No, my Lord, but his harness Cap was blown off, and he running after it to catch it, was shot between neck and shoulders, and when he stood upright he had two heads.
Two heads how?
Yes truly, his own head and the arrow head, it was twenty to one that I had not been shot before him.
Why prithee?
Because my Knights name being Wiseacres, and mine Bolt, and you know a fools bolt is soon shot.
He he's pind the fool upon his masters shoulder very handsomely.
Sir, go seek your master, and bid him take or∣der for burying of the dead.
I shall Sir, and whilst he takes order for the bu∣reels of the dead, i'll take order for the stomachs of the living.
How fought to day our English?
Bravely.
How the Scots?
The pangs of war are like to child-bed throws
Bitter in suffering, but the storm being past,
The talk, as of escaped shipwreck sweet, doth taste,
The death of the Scotch General went to my heart,
He had in him of man as much as any,
And for ought I think, his blood was poorly sold
By his own Countrymen, rather then sought by us.
Had not the Rear where Wallace did command,
Stood and given aim, it had bin a day
Bloody and dismal, and whose hard to say,
Sir, you shall give me leave to drink a health
To all the valiant Scots.
Clifford, I'll pledge thee, give me my bowl.
Sir, I remembered Wallace in my draught.
I did not, so this cup were Wallace Skull,
I'd drink it full with blood, for it would save
The lives of thousands.
I for your Kingdoms would not pledge it so.
I would, no matter how a traitor falls.
Percy, ten thousand Crowns should buy
That traitors head, if I could hav't for money.
I would give
Twice twenty thousand Crowns to have his head
On my swords point cut from him with this arm,
But how in the field, nobly, hand to hand, not this straw
To a hangman that should bring it me.
Let that pass,
Wher's Bruce, our noble Earl of Carrack?
I saw him not to day,
I did, and saw his sword
Like to a Reapers Sith, mow down the Scots.
Here he comes.
Brave Armoury, a rampant Lion within a field all Gulls,
Where hast been Bruce?
Following the execution which we held
Three English miles in length.
Give him some wine, art not thirsty?
Yes for Scottish blood, I never shall have
Enough on it, the Kings health.
Let come.
How greedily you Scot drinks his own blood!
Ha, ha, ha.
If he should taste your bitterness, it were not well.
What's that ye all laughed at?
Nothing but a jest.
Nay, good Sir tell me.
An idle jest, more wine for Bruce.
No more, I have drunk too much,
Wallace and I did parley.
How in words?
No Percy, I'm no praetor, it was with swords,
Your laughing jest was not at me?
Sir, no.
Bruce would fain quarrel,
I ha done sir.
Peace, what Trumpet's that?
From the enemy sure.
Go learn.
I come from Wallace.
So Sir, what of him?
Thus he speaks.
He bids me dare you to a fresh battle, by to morrows sun,
Army to Army, troup to troup, he challenges,
Or to save blood, fifty to fifty, shall the strife decide,
Or one to one.
A Herald to the traitor.
Go and thus speak, we bring whips of steel,
To scourge Rebellion, not to stand the braves
Of a base daring vassal, bid him ere that Sun
Which he calls up be risen, pay it and save
His Country and himself from ruin, charge him on his head,
To make his quick submission; if he slow the minutes,
We'll proclaim in thunder his and his Countries ruin,
Go be gon, Arm.
Arm, Arm.
A Land that's sick at heart must take sharp pills,
For dangerous physic best cures dangerous else.
As you are a soldier, as y' are noble
I charge you and conjure you to unclasp
A book in which I am graveld.
Perhaps I cannot.
Yes, if you dare you can.
Dare? Clifford dares
Do any thing but wrong and what's not just.
Then tell me sir, what was that bitter scorn,
Which I like poison tasted in my wine?
I care not if I doe, because I love virtue even in
My enemy, the bowl of wine kissing your lip.
Behold, quoth one how eagerly you Scot,
Drinks his own blood.
You Scot drinks his own blood, which Scot?
Best wake some Oracle.
Who brake the jest upon me?
Pray pardon me.
The Oracle I'll wake is here, oh Wallace,
I ne'er had eyes till now, they were closed up
By braving English, witchcraft drinks his own blood,
England my stepdame take my bitter curse,
Thy own nails tear thy own bowels, oh my parent
Dear Scotland, I no more will be a goad,
Pricking thy sides, but if ere I draw a sword,
It shall be double-edg'd with blood and fire,
To burn and drown this Kingdom and this King.
My General
Charged me in privacy to give you these.
Thanks noble Clifford, what did he bid thee say?
Nothing but so.
A pair of Spurs, Bruce ne'er was runaway,
Twelve silver pence, oh bitter scorn, with Judas,
I have betrayed my Master, my dear Country,
And here's the emblem of my treachery,
To hasten to some tree, and desperate die,
Twelve sterling silver pence, sterling, ha sterling,
It is a limb of Scotland, spurs for flight,
Clifford, i'll thither, comment I wrong or right.
Stay noble Grimsby, ere he further pass
One of us certify our General,
Perhaps he will not admit him to his presence.
It is like so, stay him here, that pains be mine.
Let Ruge-crosse bring his pleasure.
Come agreed.
You bring from Longshanks some strange mes∣sage now.
At least he sends his Gauntlet.
Gauntlet, no the English
Fight not two days together, but like swaggerers,
A fray being made up with a wound or so,
The man whose throat before should have been cut,
Is a sworn brother, now we have mall'd your Nation,
Thei'le fawn on us like Spaniels, will they not?
And that's thy errand, first not?
Commonly, when English see at cuffs they are too weak, they fall to fishing, and then bait the hook with mercy, and the Kings pardon, at which who bites he's his swallowing spoiled for ever, there's no Scot but scorns to hang his hope on your Kings promises, be it ne'er so smoothly gilded.
He gilds none sir.
I warrant he would pawn half his Dominions to shake hands with Wallace, and be friends.
Had he but him in's Court, he would out-shine
His capering gallants, be would dote on him,
As Jupiter did on Ganymede, and make him
His chief Minion.
Hee does already so really dote upon him, it is not yet the age of one hour since my Master swear to give ten thousand Crowns to Scot or English, that were so bold to bring him Wallace's head.
The English Herald.
Ten thousand Crowns.
Would make a fair show in our purses Jack.
I could pick out five thousand heads,
That I durst boldly sell him at that rate.
Ten thousand Crowns.
I and Court wind-falls too,
Some English Earldom or so, here is none but friends,
Should you betray the conference, I care not,
I would deny it, and I would oresway
Your proofs tho near so massy.
It shall not need, believe me worthy Mentith.
What here you look is safe.
Shall we earn this English gold, ten thousand crowns?
My hand.
They are ours, hoe's dead.
No more, he comes.
I am to him no vassal, hoe's a tyrant,
So tell him, ere his frown shall bend my knee,
This shall be hanged upon the gallow tree,
For my appearance tell him this, I'll dine
On Christmas day next in his English Court,
And in his great Hall at Westminster, it's own board,
We'll drink Scotch healths in his standing cups of gold:
His black Jacks hand in hand about his Court
Shall march with our blew bonnets, we will eat nothing
But what our swords shall carve, so tell his Soldiers,
We'll sit like Lords there whilst they rail like slaves,
Go with Scotch threats, pay back your English braves.
You'll make the English mad.
A brave defiance.
Defiance,
Lets mad them more, they shall not sleep to night,
Good Grimsby beat a drum, let bon-fires shine
Through all our army, as if our Tents were burnt,
And we dislodged, but recollect our troops
Into an ordered body, some thing we'll do
To make our Chronicles swell with English rue.
A Drum, call a Drum.
Oh sir John Mentith I have cracked the Ice,
To a design, which if it will succeed,
England no more shall strike, nor Scotland bleed.
Com. Lets be partakers, dear sir.
What will you say, if I win Bruce from the English?
The happiest day that ever shone on Scotland.
And crown him King?
That's the up-shot must crown all, I'm to meet him
Before one hour grow old in Glasco-moore.
How meet him?
As I am, both come alone, no words to any.
Our lips are sealed.
Will you ride, or go on foot?
No more, I'll ride.
We'll pass the wood on foot.
Jack Mentith, I do laugh to think what face,
Longshancks will make, when he shall hear what guests
Will dine with him in's Court on Christmas day.
What face? he'll kill the Herald sure.
Oh! some charm for me to be invisible there, and see him.
For my part, of ten thousand crowns by this hand,
I do wish you there.
For as many of mine, I swear.
Time may come,
In his Exchequer we may share twice that sum.
Hence, hye you before, keep close in the wood,
Break forth if you spy treason, if not, not.
Good.
Ha, if what thou seem thou art, step forward, speak,
I have faced more horrid terror.
Where dost gang?
What's that to thee?
Thouse not lest and lang,
Two wolves will suike thy blued, by the third night,
I charge thy sawle meet mine, thy death is dight.
Thou art a lying spirit.
Bruce bin thy bane,
Gif on thou gang luke not turn back again,
Wallace beweere, me thinks it thee should irk,
Mare need hast thou to serve God in the Kirk.
Stay, if thou hast a voice you are blood and bone,
As I am, let me feel thee, else I'll think thee
A sorceress imaginary sound:
Stand me, you are some English damned witch,
That from a reverend Fryer has stolen his shape
To abuse me—stay—art gone? no Hag I will not.
It spake sure, told me Bruce should
be my bane,—cannot—shall not,
heaven knows such things only.
That eye hath shot me throw, wounds me to death,
I know that face too well, but it is so ghastly,
I'll rather with my nails here dig my grave,
Then once more behold thee.
Part from me vexed spirit, my blood turns to water,
I beseech thee affright me not—it's gone.
Alace Scotland to wham salt thou complain,
Alace, fra mourning when sall the refayne?
I thee beseekand for him died on tree,
Come not ne'er Bruise, yet Bruise sall not hurt thee,
Alace, alace, no man can stand against fate.
The damp dew fra the heaven does gin to few,
I to my rest mime gang ere the Cock crawe.
It was my wife, what horror meet I here?
No Armour in the world can hold out fear.
We stay for your direction.
Whom did you meet?
No body.
Saw ye nothing?
Not any thing.
It was my brains weakness then,
I have seen strange sights, that anon I'll tell;
If Grimsby we meet never more, farewell.
Ha, I am struck dumb, oh mans slippery fate!
Mischiefs that follow us at our backs we shun,
And are struck down with those we dream not on.
I have beside with Wallace sheriff of life,
Held private conference, who in Longshancks name,
Who swears to me we shall have good preferment,
Beside the promised gold.
Peace, Wallace comes.
Is the Bruise come?
It is not yet his hour.
Who came along with you?
My foot-boy only, who is tying up my horse.
Him must I kill.
I'll look if Bruce be in sight yet— 
Do.
You're sad.
My mind is shaken but the storm is o'er,
What cry is that?
Be armed, Bruce with a force comes to betray thee,
From some villains hand thy foot-boy is murdered.
Murdered? Bruce shall repent this deed.
So shalt thou, away with him.
Help to disguise me Soldier, in exchange
Take these for thine, and here's some gold to boot.
If I be not hanged, my Lord, in all my bravery,
I care not.
Phew, I warrant thee,
Seal up thy lips and eyes, thou neither see
Nor can tell where I am.
Not I my Lord.
Oh my poor wronged country, pardon me heaven,
And with a feather plucked from mercies wing,
Brush off the purple spots, that else would grow,
Like freckles on my soul.
My Lord, here comes company.
Here quick mine own again, and get thee gone.
Sir Soldier, saw thou the Earl of Huntington?
Huntington?
The Lord Bruce, I mean.
Who calls for Bruce?
Muffled up, and alone, I'll to the King.
Do, sir be gone.
Whither's Percy gone? he asked for Bruce.
There's great enquiry for you.
By whom?
The King has a fresh command for Bruce.
For me? he may command his Subjects.
True, and Huntington is one.
Is none.
No Subject?
None that dare oppose your King, Oh my impostum'd spleen,
Will fly into their faces, what command
Has England now?
Fresh powers are to be levied,
Which Bruce of Huntington must lead.
Against whom?
Against proud Wallace, against the Scots.
I will not, I'm not his Butcher,
Against the Scots I will not fight.
How, will not?
No, will not Clifford.
Peace.
My Lord, I dare not,
In this last battle I received some wounds
That yet bleed inward, I will no more banquet strangers
With my native blood.
Bruce speaks not like a subject.
English Edward commands not like a King,
Thrice honoured Clifford, I'll trust you with my bosom.
No, you shall not.
My virgin honour is so chaste, it shall not
Keep company with a disquiet bosom,
Nor talk with discontents.
It shall not, I will but,
Spare me, the ayre hath ears no more,
You sent to me, I will but tell bold Clifford
Not a word,
My thoughts owe as much honour as their Lord.
Within traitor, traitor.
A mutiny, what noise is it?
Mentith, a Knight of Scotland.
Keep him off.
What come thou for?
Comyn my countryman and I have brought
A jewel to your Highness, which if it were right
As it is known counterfeit, it were worth a kingdom,
Wearied with war, and pitying the deep wounds
Which fainting Scotland bears upon her breast,
And knowing that the only sword which gashes
Her tender sides, is grip'd in Wallace hands,
I in my love to peace, and to the safety
Of two great Nations, am the man that laid
Snares to entrap this monster, that devours
So many thousand lives, the Rebell's tan.
Where is he?
I have brought him to your English Camp,
Force would not do it, but policy, we struck the Stag
To the ground, and thought him dead, but heaven put back
The blow of purpose, hoe's now come to life,
From an astonishment when we thought him dead,
To th'end the world may see the public shame
Of an Arch-traytor.
Mentith hath won fame,
And honour by this act, fetch in this devil.
Thou wilt have Englands thanks, but Scotlands curse,
Thou never hast done better, never worse,
Damned Iudas to thy Country-man and friend.
Where am I?
Here with Bruce.
Bruce my Sovereign?
My blood is sold, this is not Glasco-moore,
Some villain hath betrayed me.
Speak to your country-men, Comyn and Mentith.
Comyn and Mentith?
Something it was that made the modest night
Look angry on the world, I this was it,
And this was it that cleft my fathers grave,
And raised him from his monumental bed of earth
To give me gentle warning, this was it,
That made my star, when all the rest looked pale,
Blush like a fiery Meteor, can Heaven wink at this?
It can, it doth, and at far greater mischiefs.
Not of thy acting?
Yes of mine.
Not here.
Here or in Hell.
Why then go act them there,
Boast of them there, in that black Kingdom tell
That by a true subject a base Rebel fell.
Whats that?
Your Scotch jeweller is slain,
By whom?
By Wallace.
Hear me speak King Edward.
Good my Liege hear him,
Clef. I have vowed,
Neither to hear nor see him, drag him hence,
Mine eye shall nor be so compassionate
To view him, least I pity him: hang, draw, and quarter him.
First hear me speak,
Drag him hence, and let that heart, those limbs,
Which were the motives to rebellious war
Be torn asunder, cast upon that ground,
Which he with unkind steel so oft did wound,
Away with him.
Farewell, to all the World,
I ha met death too often to fear him now,
Only it grieves me that I have not freed
Scotland my native soil from tyranny,
Bruce, thou hast a Kingdom, lose it not.
Stop his throat.
I go to one too,
And on my grave, when death hath there down laid me,
Be this my Epitaph, mine own betrays me— 
Let him have noble trial.
He shall have the trial of an Arch-traitour,
Percy and Clifford take hence Bruce.
Me hence?
You hence sir, from this hour I swear,
Never to see thee Earl of Huntingdon,
Hark Clifford, and Northumberland, awa
What is King Edwards meaning?
Your head shall feel our meaning, see it dispatched.
You may.
My honoured Lord, although untimely death,
Hath taken hence one engine of that work,
That brought that Rebel Wallace to his end.
Seeing our Countries peace, and Englands good,
Is by his death made perfect and complete,
I doubt not but the promised reward
Of full ten thousand Crowns shall now remain,
To the Survivor.
Come, I perceive
It was reward, not love that acted it,
But you shall have your due, of that anon.
I told thee Bruce, that thou upon thy head,
Should feel our meaning, and that all the world,
May know we value honour above conquest,
Having a power able to turn all Scotland
Into a Chaos, here twixt both our Armies,
Give us thy oath of fealty, and wear
Both Crown and title of thine Ancestors.
England is full of honour, Bruce doth bend
To thy command.
Give him his oath of fealty,
With him those Lords which are his Countrymen.
Stand back, a Serpent shall not with his breath
Infect our Kingly ears, die slave, for he
That would betray his friend shall ne'er serve me.
What hath Bruce done?
A sacrifice of honour and revenge, no traitors hand
Shall help to lift a Crown up to my head,
Thou did betray, then die unpitied.
Brave Bruce, I'll love thee for this honoured act,
Thou hast performed a noble piece of justice:
Now shall the Ghost of Wallace sleep in peace,
And perfect love shall twixt these Lands increase.
He hath his full reward for his foul treason,
Drag hence the slave, and make him food for Crows.
The Lamp that gave Rebellion light, hath spent
The oil that fed it, all our spears are turned
To Palms and Olive branches, all our stars
Are now made whole, peace is the balm of wars.

Amongst all the youthful lovers which adore
Your daughters beauty, and implore my aid,
Don Roderigo and Don Sancho strive
Who shall show most the fire her beau∣ties raised.
But yet Cimena is indifferent
To both their loves, and with an equal eye
Beholds them both, nor does she take away
Or add ought to their hopes, but still expects
A husband from your choice alone designed.
She does her duty, both of them deserve her,
Both sprung from brave and noble families,
Both young, yet such as in their faces show
The illustrious virtue of their Ancestors,
But above all, in Roderigo's face
There's not a line which speaks not a brave man;
His family has been fruitful still in soldiers,
As if they had been borne in the midst of laurels.
His fathers valour, in his time, unequalled,
(Whilst his strength lasted) was a prodigy.
The furrows in his fore-head seem to be
The ingravements of his noble actions,
And Roderigo's person seems to promise
The virtues of his father. In conclusion,
My daughter if she love him shall please me;
Go entertain her with it, but be sure
You hide my intentions, and discover hers,
At my return we'll speak of it together,
Time calls me now to wait upon the Council,
Where the King means to choose a Governor
Unto the Prince his son, or rather seat me
In that high place of honour, for my merits
Forbid me to expect an opposition.
HOw welcome news will this be to our lovers?
How fortune has provided, that all things
Should sort to their contentment?
How now Elvira?
What in conclusion must I hope or fear?
What must become of me? what says my father?
Only two words, enough to charm your senses,
You cannot love Roderigo, more than he
Does value him.
Prithee speak truth Elvira,
The excess of this my happiness does stagger
My faith in it; may I believe thy words?
Nay he went farther, he approves his love,
And will command you meet with his desires,
This you will find 'soone as the Council rises,
And that Don Diego meeting time, and place
Fit for his purpose, shall propose the business;
Fear not but your desires will be contented.
I cannot tell, but yet me thinks my soul
Does not receive this joy; but all confounded
Expects what moment will present to me
A divers face from this my happiness,
And cross my present fortune.
You will find
This fear of yours most happily deceived.
Well, let us go then, and attend the issue.
Go boy, look out Cimena, and from me
Tell her, her presence was expected sooner,
My friendship must complain of this her sloth.
I perceive, Madame, that all days alike
You 're sad and pensive, and the same desire
To know how her love goes, still presses you.
How should it not? when I my self have made her
Receive the hurt wherewith her soul is wounded,
She loves Don Roderigo by my means,
And by my means he has vanquished her disdain,
Then since to take um I have laid the snare,
To free um unto me belongs the care.
And yet in the midst of all their good success
One may perceive in you a kind of sorrow;
Why should that love which lifts them up with joy
Weigh your great heart down with a heavy sadness,
And the interest which you have in their love,
Make you unhappy, when themselves are blessed?
But I'm too forward, and grow indiscreet.
To stifle it increases more my grief!
Leonora, thou shalt know it, and now hear
What a strange conflict I have had within me,
And when the hast heard it, pitying my weakness,
Admire my virtue, love is such a Tyrant
As will spare none, this Gentleman, this lover
Which I've bestowed on her, I love my self.
You Madame?
Lay thy hand upon my heart
And feel now how it pants at the hearing of
The name of its own Conqueror.
Pardon me, Madam,
If blaming of your love, I doe forget
My due respect; is he a match for you,
A private Gentleman? can you a Princess
In a point of such consequence forget
Whose child you are? what will the King say, think you?
Doe you remember, Madam, whose you are?
Yes, yes, Leonora, and will rather die
Than doe a thing unworthy of my birth:
Though I could tell thee that in noble souls
Merit alone ought to produce true love,
And if my passion would fly to excuses,
Many examples might authorize it,
Yet I'll not follow that in which my honour
Must be engaged. If I have much of love,
I have much more of courage, and me thinks
A noble true disdain tells me that I,
The daughter of a King, should deem all others
Below my love, unless it were a Monarch:
But when I see my heart is not of force
To make its own defence, I give away
That which I dare not take: 'stead of my self
I put Cimena fast into his fetters,
And kindle their fire to put out mine own.
Be not amazed then, if with distraction
I still expect their marriage; you see
All my repose only depends on it,
If love doe live on hope, it dies with it;
It is a fire, that not nourished will go out,
And spite of my ill fortune, if Cimena
Marry Don Roderigo, my long hopes
Dying, my mind will be at ease; till then
I'm still in torment; till his day of marriage
Roderigo is my love, whom though I labour
To lose, I cannot choose but grieve to lose him;
I find my soul divided in two parts,
My heart with honour fired as well as love:
This Hymen's fatal, I both wish, and fear it.
Nor can I hope for any perfect joy,
Since whether he obtain his love, or no,
So many baits my love and honour have,
In stead of comfort I must find a grave.
After this, Madam, I have nought to say,
Unless it be to grieve for your misfortunes,
Before I blamed you, now I pity you:
But since your virtue has made good it self,
So strongly against the powerful charms and force
Of love and honour, and beat back the assault
Of this, and bait of that, in a short time
Twill give you ease of all, in the mean while
Cast your firm hope on heaven, which has more justice
Than to let virtue be a sufferer long.
My best of hopes is to cast off all hope.
Madam, Cimena's come, as you commanded.
Go, entertain her in the Gallery.
But will you still remain in these sad fancies?
No, I will spite of all my grief, put on
A face of gladness. Go, I'll follow you.
Just heaven, from whence I doe expect my aid,
Put now at length some period to my evils;
Assure mine honour with some ease of love,
I seek my happiness in another bliss,
To which give speed good heaven, or more strength
To my yet feeble soul, which ne'er can be
(Till Hymen have bound them) at liberty.
WEll sir, you have got the day, the Kings high favour
Has lifted you to that which was my due,
H' has made you governor to the Prince of Castle.
This honour which he has done my family,
Shows he is just, and knows well how to pay
With recompense, past services.
Though Kings
Be great, they are like us, and as much subject
To be deceived, as we, and this his choice
Makes us (which are his servants) see, how ill
He recompenses present services.
Pray let's no more of this: perhaps to advance
My business, favour did as much as merit:
And happily you had been the better choice,
But yet the King thought me more fit for him:
You may to the honour which the King has done me
Add one more if you please, in joining both
Our families by sacred marriage.
Roderigo loves your daughter, whom h' has made
The chiefest object of's affections,
Give your consent, and take him for your son.
O Sir, Roderigo must look higher now,
The splendour of this honour newly done you
Ought to put greater thoughts into his heart.
Look to your office well; govern the Prince,
Show him the way how he may rule a Province,
Make people every where obey his law,
Teach him to love the good, to awe the bad,
Add to these virtues, those of a General,
Instruct him how to harden his soft body
With pain and travel, till he leave himself
Without a Rival in the art of War,
To sit continued days and nights on horse-backe,
To take his rest in's Arms: To force a Rampire,
And not to owe a victory but to himself,
Show him this by example, and remember
You ought to represent what you would teach.
To instruct him by example, this I'll say
In spite of envy, let him read my life,
And by that story learn to tame fierce Nations.
To set on any place, to range an Army,
And lay his ground of honour on his actions.
Living examples move more forcibly
Than books, in which a Prince scarce learns his duty:
But what I pray has all your long years done
That one day of my actions has not equalled?
If you were valiant once, I still am so,
This arm's the firm supporter of Castle,
My sword once drawn has made Granado tremble,
Arragon quake; without me other laws
You must have had, and other Princes served:
Each day, each instant, to my eternal glory,
Has piled up victory on victory.
The Princeto set an edge upon his valour,
Marching by me shall be victorious,
Far from your cold instructions, he shall learn
(Though to my valour they're preferred by some)
In seeing my actions, how to overcome.
In vain you tell me that I know already,
I've seen you fight, and under me command.
When age hath shrunk my sinews up with cold,
Your youth and valour have supplied my place.
But not to make so many words of nothing,
You are what I was once, and yet the King
Twixt our deserts has put a difference.
That which was my desert, you have obtained.
He that has got it, sure has best deserved it.
He that can best discharge it, best deserves it.
It is no good sign though to be put beside it.
Like an old Courtier, by much suit you got it.
My honourable actions stood for me.
Come, come, the King thus honoured your gray hairs
He prized my valour, when he gave it me.
If so, the honour had been mine, not yours.
He that could not obtain't, did not deserve it.
Not I deserve it, mean you?
No, not you.
Take that, rash Dotard, for thy impudence.
Nay make it up, and after this affront.
Take my life too.
What dost thou hope to doe thou feeble fool,
Thy sword is mine, but yet I scorn to take it,
Go now and bid the Prince read o'er thy life,
And let him not omit this part of it,
In which he will find the just revenge I take
Of this thine insolence, a fair example.
Will you then spare my life?
I'm satisfied;
Mine eyes cry shame unto mine hands for this.
Then you doe scorn to take it.
If I should,
I did but cut the thread of three days lasting.
Rage and despair! must I needs live thus long,
To see this, one day of my infamy
Blast all the Trophies of my former years,
O fatal dignity! which art to me
No other than a precipice, from whence
Mine honour headlong false unto the earth,
Let him that has disarmed me take the place
Of Governor to the Prince, for I that am
A man dishonoured, am not fit for it.
And thou my sword, that hang here for a show,
The glorious instrument of my actions past,
But now the idle ornament of my age,
Go to his hands that can tell how to use thee,
Be then my sons, who, if he be my own,
Cannot but have a sense of my dishonour,
And though he love Cimena, yet it is fit
His love give place to the more ardent fire
Of valour, animated by an affront,
Which, though it fell on me, did yet result
On him: and see, he's here, Roderigo tell me,
Hast the any courage?
ANy man but my father
Should quickly find I have.
Well said, my boy,
I now perceive my blood runs in thy veins,
This noble anger says thou art my son;
My youth revives in me from this thy heat.
Thou shalt revenge me son.
Of what, or whom?
Of an affront so cruel, that our honours
Suffer together in it. It was, Roderigo,
A box of the ear, which on th'insolent giver
I had revenged, but that my feeble age
Failed my strong heart. This sword then, which my arm
Knew not to wield, take thou, and with it punish
The arrogant that wronged me, and be sure
Thou kill, or die, for such a stain as this
Is never washed, but in the offenders blood.
But let me tell thee, I doe send thee now
To combat with a man whom I have seen
All on a gore, in midst of a fought battle,
Making himself a Rampire of slain men.
Pray Sir his Name, let him be what he will.
To tell thee more then; besides that he is
The bravest soldier, and the best Commander
That I have seen; he is—
For heavens sake what?
The father to Cimena.
The?
Reply not,
I know thy love, but yet remember son,
He that can live contemned, doth not deserve
To breath an hour; thou know the affront was given
To me, to thee I leave the just revenge;
The sense of honour, and the fire that springs
From thence, should put out the less heat of love;
Revenge me, and thy self, show thy self worthy
Of me thy father, now o're-borne with miseries,
Which whilst I go to moan, haste thou to punish.
Struck to the very heart, with a blow as fatal
As un-foreseene; what shall I doe? I must
Revenge my father, and provoke my mistress,
Either betray my honour, or my love,
It were a better choice for me to die
Than to doe either:
If I revenge my father, I must lose
My love; if not, I must live infamous;
How can I live, having lost all I live for?
But infamy pursues me after death.
On then my soul, and rather choose to die
Losing thy love, than live ingloriously,
And start not at the name of the offender,
Because he is the father of thy mistress,
But rather think thine own received the offence,
And thou art bound to give the recompense.
I Must needs say, when I did give the affront
My blood was over-heated, and my hand
Somewhat too ready, but now who can help it?
Since it is done, it cannot be recalled.
Faith, Let your courage stoop to the Kings will,
He takes the business much to heart, and being
So highly incensed, believe it he will proceed
With his full power, and then what defence
Can you make for your self, when the affront,
And it's high quality shall be aggravated
By the person of the offended, and the place.
These will require of you, my Lord, submissions
Beyond all ordinary satisfaction.
Then let him take my life, it is in his power.
Abate some of your heat, and hear what's reason,
Will you not seek to appease a Prince that loves you
He says, I'll have this done, will not you doe it?
Sir, to preserve my honour, I cannot think
It is such a crime, somewhat to disobey,
But were it greater, what I've done for him,
Would be more than enough to make my excuse.
Suppose you've done all that a man can think
In the Kings service: is he bound to thank you?
Can a Prince be beholding to a subject?
You are too much o're-weening, you must know,
He that best serves his King does but his duty,
If you think otherwise, you are undone.
I shall believe you when I find it so.
Your can't but fear the power of the King.
One day destroys not such a man as I am.
Let him arm all his power to punish me,
The state shall rather perish, than I suffer.
Doe you so little fear the sovereign power?
What? of that Sceptre? which if not for me
Had ere now fallen out of his hand: my person
Is Sir, of so much consequence to the King,
That if my head fall, his crown cannot stand.
My Lord, give reason leave to settle you,
Think on it a little.
The thought's already taken.
What shall I say then? I must give him an account.
This: that I know not how to give consent
To mine own shame.
But my Lord imagine,
Kings will be absolute.
Let um be so,
The Die is cast Sir, let's talk no more on it.
Then I must take my leave, since my persuasions
Can doe no good: though you be covered o'er
with laurels, yet my Lord, take heed of thunder.
I'll wait it without fear.
It will come home.
If it doe, D. Diego's satisfied.
How little am I scared with these poor threats?
My honour once engaged, a thousand deaths
Presented to me in the most hideous forms,
Cannot once startle me.
MY Lord a word.
Speak.
Resolve me of a doubt, doe you know
Don Diego well?
I doe.
And that he was
The spirit and the glory of his time,
Doe you know this?
Perhaps he might be so.
And that this ardor which mine eyes doe bear,
Doe you know it is his blood it represents?
What's that to me?
Some distance from this place
I'll make you know it.
Presumptuous boy!
Be not so hot, I know I'm young, but yet
In noble souls, valour prevents their years.
But who has led thee to that vanity?
To set thee upon me, thou that did never
Bear arms, perhaps thou know not who I am.
Yes: and I know a stouter man than I
Would tremble at the hearing of thy name.
Thy head is covered o'er with laurels, where
Victory perches, and from thence reads to me
The fate of my destruction: I doe challenge
Like a rash youth, a man inured to conquest,
Yet having heart enough, I shall not want strength,
Or if I should, wearing my fathers cause
Upon my sword and arm, they cannot fail me.
This courage which appears in thy discourse,
I have been long acquainted with, and hoping
To see the honour of Castle in thee,
It was in my thoughts to give my daughter to thee;
I know thy love, and am amazed to see
It's motions to give place unto thy honour,
And meaning to find out a perfect man,
And complete Cavalier for my son in law,
I'm not mistaken in the choice I've made.
But here my pity intervenes, and though
I wonder at thy courage, yet I grieve
To see thy rashness: doe not seek thy death,
Prithee excuse my valour from a combat
So far unequal. If thou fall by me,
Twill be no honour to me. To overcome
Where there's no danger, will be a triumph
Where there's no glory: for thou wilt be thought
To have with ease been ruined, and my self
Shall alone feel the grief that I have done it.
The hast seconded the affront thou give my father,
With a pity worse than that, dare thou deprive me
Of my honour, and yet fear to take my life?
Leave me good youth.
Let's go, and talk no more on it.
Art thou so weary of thy life?
Art thou
So afraid to die?
Come then, thou dost no more
Than is thy duty, he's a degenerate son
That will out-live one jot his fathers honour.
BE not so grieved, Cimena, dry thine eyes,
Use now thy constancy in this misfortune,
Thou'lt see it clear up after a little tempest:
Thy happiness is but clouded for a while,
And some small time will make thee no great loser.
What can I hope now, but continual troubles,
A storm so sudden coming o'er this calm
Threatens a certain shipwreck to our loves:
It is past all doubt, I perish in the haven.
I loved, was loved again, our friends agreed,
And I no sooner had told you the news,
But in an ill hour sprung their fatal quarrel,
Which when I heard, I knew my hopes were ruined:
Cursed ambition, honour pitiless,
Under whose tyranny the bravest souls
Doe ever suffer: how many tears and sighs
Must I pay for you?
Thou hast no reason
To fear their quarrel, which on a sudden borne,
Will as soon die: there's too much noise of it
To let it live. The King shall take it up,
And for thy sake I'll see it shall go no farther.
This business will admit no composition,
The affronts to honour never are repaired,
Wisdom or power can prevail little here;
This wound will not be healed, it may be covered,
And stifled hate nourishes secret fires
Within the breast, but such as burn more fiercely.
But the holy knot which shall once join Cimena
To Roderigo, will dissolve the hatred
Of both their fathers, and the bonds of love,
As being more strong, will quickly stop their discord.
rath e r doe desire, than hope it, Madam,
Don Diego is too haughty, and I know
My father well, of what a spirit he is.
I feel my tears run, which I would retain:
What's past, torments me, and I fear the sequel.
Dost thou fear what a weak old man can doe?
Roderigo is not weak.
But he's too young.
Valiant young men are ever very sudden.
But that thou need not fear. He loves thee too well
To anger or displease thee, one poor word
Out of thy mouth, will quickly stay his heat.
If he doe not obey, how great's my grief?
And if he doe, what will men say of him,
That being a Gentleman, he could put up
Such an affront? so that if he resist,
Or else give way to his affection,
I cannot but be troubled, orasham'd
At his too much respect, or just denial.
Cimena's generous, and though she be
Engaged, she cannot suffer a base thought.
But if I make a prisoner of this lover
Until this business be tan up betwixt them,
Will not your love turn into jealousy?
Ah, Madam, in this case I have no such thought.
Boy, look out Roderigo, bring him hither.
He, and the Count of Gormas
Good God, I tremble!
Speak.
Went out together.
Alone?
Alone, and as it seemed, they went to quarrel.
Ay me, my fear's, they 're fighting by this time.
Let's spend no more time then, but go look um out.
IS he so vain, has he so little reason,
That he dares think his crime yet pardonable?
I treated long with him on your behalf,
I did (Sir) my devoir, but obtained nothing.
Just heaven! can a subject be so rash
To have so little care to please his Master?
He has stricken Don Diego, scorned his King,
In my own Court he means to give me laws:
Be he ne'er so good a soldier or commander,
I'll make him know what it is to disobey.
I would have treated him with all fair means,
But since he has abused my patience,
Go some of you and look him out, and whether
He doe resist, or not, make sure of him.
Perhaps some little time will bring him in.
He was taken boiling in his choler, Sir,
And a stout heart will hardly yield to reason,
In the first motion of its rage and heat.
Here's no man, that not thinks he is to blame,
But yet so high a spirit is not brought
At first so easily to confess his fault.
Don Sancho, hold your peace, and let me tell you,
He that shall take his part is alike faulty.
I obey Sir, and am silent, but with favour,
A word in his defence.
What can you say?
Sir, that a soul accustomed to great actions,
Cannot abase it self to low submissions.
It knows not how to doe it without shame,
And that's the word which troubles most the Count.
He finds it somewhat hard to doe his duty.
He would obey if he had less of courage;
If you'd command, that he being used to arms,
Should with his sword repair this injury,
I'll undertake he shall make satisfaction.
You are too bold Sir, but your age I pardon,
Thinking it to proceed from heat of youth.
A prudent King knows better how to husband
His subjects blood, then so to venture 'em.
For mine, I mean my care shall still conserve um.
As the head cares for the members which doe serve it.
You speak Sir, as a soldier, but I must
Doe as a King, and whatsoere the Count
Does say or think, I'm sure he cannot lose
Ought of his honour in obeying me:
The affront he did to him whom I have made
Governor to my son, does touch me nearly,
And this his insolence hath quarrelled me,
And the choice I made: So if he doe submit,
I am the man he satisfies. But no more,
Don Arias, by an advice of late received,
I hear the Moors mean shortly to surprise us.
Dare the Moors stir?
Their vessels are discovered
At the Rivers mouth, and you know how easily
At a full Sea they may come up.
The battles
Tthey've lost already, should make um loose the heart
To set on such a Conqueror as you.
They cannot but with Jealousy look on,
Seeing me rule in Andalouzia,
And this fair Country, which I took from them,
Keeps their designs awake. It is the reason,
Why here in Sevill I have placed my Throne,
That being neere'um I may be more ready
To meet with their attempts.
Sir, they have learnt,
At the great charge of their own heads by this time,
How much your presence does assure your conquest,
Y' have nothing Sir, to fear.
Nor to neglect:
Too much assurance still draws danger with it:
The enemy which we now think to destroy,
If he can take his time, may annoy us.
But yet since I'm not certain of my news,
I would not stir up in my subjects hearts
Vain panic terrors, or this present night
Affright the City with a false alarm:
Let the haven be well guarded, and the walls,
And for this night it shall suffice.
Sir, the Count is dead,
Roderigo's hand has satisfied his father.
I divined what would follow, when I first
Heard of the affront, and would have then prevented it.
Sir, here's Cimena, who presents her grief
Upon her knees, with tears demanding justice.
Although my soul suffer with his misfortunes,
The affront he did, deserved the punishment,
Which though it were most just, yet can't I lose
Without regret, a servant of his merit.
Justice, Sir, Justice, I ask it on my knees.
O Sir give ear to my defence.
Revenge my fathers death.
Of him that punished the highest insolence.
Roderigo, Sir,
Has done the office of an honest man.
Has killed my father.
Has revenged his own.
A King owes justice to his subjects blood.
A just revenge can fear no punishment.
Rise both of you, and speak without disturbance,
I bear a part, Cimena, in thy sufferings.
Trouble her not, when she has done, I'll hear you.
My father's slain, Sir, and these eyes have seen
His blood gush out in bubles; that dear blood
Which has so oft preserved your walls, so oft
Been fired to gain you battles, and which yet
Reakes with just anger, to have been spilt for any
But you the King, which war durst never draw,
Roderigo in your Court has made to flow
Upon the earth, and for his first essay,
Has tan away the firm prop of your State,
Breathless, and pale, I came unto the place,
And found him dead! Dead! pardon Sir, my grief,
My voice does fail me, let my tears speak the rest.
Daughter, take comfort, and be confident
Thou hast a King will be a Father to thee.
You'ave done my miseries, Sir, too much honour.
Thither I came amazed, and found him dead,
He spoke nought to me, but the more to move me,
His spilt blood wrote my duty on the dust.
Rather his worth reduced to that poor State,
Spoke to me through his wound and hastened me
To this pursuit, and to be heard the better,
Of the most just of Kings, borrowed my voice.
Suffer not Sir, such rage to pass unpunished
Before your eyes, and let not heady youth,
Lave themselves in the blood of your best Soldiers,
And brave their memories. If you permit it,
You'll have, but few that will desire to serve you,
In fine my Father's dead, I demand justice
Rather for yours, than my own interest,
You are engaged in the loss of such a man,
Revenge it then, and require blood for blood.
Sacrifice D. Diego, and his family
To your self, to the people, to Castle,
What can be dear enough to satisfy
For my dead Father?
D. Diego answer.
How happy is the man Sir?
Who parts no sooner with his strength than life,
Since to the valiant, age is most unhappy
Accompanied with weakness; I that have
Gotten such glory by my former actions,
Whom victory has ever waited on
See my self now, for having lived too long
Affronted, and overcome. And that which neither
Combat, nor siege, nor ambushes could doe,
Nor all your enemies, nor mine to boot,
The pride of one man in your Court has done
Almost before your face, and sullied
The reverence, and honour of my age,
Advantaged by his youth, and by my weakness,
And so Sir, these my hairs which have grown white
Under my helmet, and my blood, which has
So oft for you been spent, should have descended
Unto the grave with cureless infamy.
Had I not got a Son to save my honour,
Who lending me his hand has slain the Count.
If to show courage, and a sense of wrong,
If to revonge a blow of the face deserve
Severely to be punished, let it fall
On me that tempest, what soer'e it be,
For the arms fault, we punish oft the head,
I am the head, Sir, he is but the arm,
And if Cimena doe complain that he
Has slain her Father, I must answer her,
Had I been able, he had never done it.
Sacrifice then this head, which age will take,
The arm Sir, may hereafter doe you service.
And let Cimena's wrong be satisfied
At my own blot's expense, and I shall be
So far from thinking it an unjust censure,
That dying with mine honour, I shall die
Withou t regret.
The affair is of importance,
And merits to be heard in a full Counsel.
Don Sancho, wait upon Cimena home,
Don Diego's word shall be his surety.
Let his son be looked out. I'll doe you justice.
It is just great Sir to cut off murderers.
Daughter, take truce a little with your griefs.
To give them truce, is to increase them more.
WHat mean you Roderigo? whither would you?
I would pursue the course of my sad for∣tune.
But this is a strange boldness, to appear
In the same place which you have filled with mourning,
Come you to affront the ghost of the dead Count?
Have not you slain him?
His life was my disgrace,
Mine honour at my hands required dis death.
But in the house of death to look for refuge,
Did ever homicide make that his Asilum?
Did never any murderer present
Himself unto his Judge? ne'er wonder at me,
I come to seek for that I gave another,
That's death; my love Cimena is my Judge.
When I deserved her hate, I deserved death,
And for that cause I stand here to receive
My sentence from her mouth, death from her hand.
Fly rather from her sight, and doe not meet
With the first motions of her grief and anger,
Why, would you more inflame her present passion?
No, that dear object which I durst displease,
To punish me cannot have too much passion;
I should be happy if I could augment it,
And hasten so my death from her fair hand.
Cimena's at the Court, bathed in her tears,
And will return thence with much company.
For heavens sake fly: what will men's censures say
If y' are discovered here? they must report
Cimena to have received into her house
The Assassin of her father. Hark, she comes,
It is her voice: at least, Roderigo,
To save her reputation, hide your self.
I Madame, never think of any other
But bloody sacrifices: your anger's just
And your grief lawful, for my part Madame
I'll neither go about to pacify
Or comfort you; but if my present service
Can be of use to you; employ my Sword
To cut out your revenge; from your commands
My heart takes courage, and my arm its strength.
O me unfortunate!
Madame accept my service.
I shall offend the King then who has promised
To doe me Justice.
But you know, justice
Is so slow paced and languishing, that seldom
It overtakes the crime; the wrong was done
By th'sword, then let a Cavalier revenge it
By the sword again: It is the readiest way.
It is the last remedy, but if it must
Arrive at that, and this your noble pity
Of my misfortunes doe continue with you,
I shall then give you the freedom you desire.
It is the only happiness I wish,
So having hopes to see it, I take my leave.
AT length I find I'm free to open to thee
The fadnesse of my soul, and to give way
to my deep sighs, which else would stifle me.
My fathers dead, Eluira, the first sword
That Roderigo used has cut his thread,
Weep, weep mine eyes, melt into tears my brain
Half of my life, the other half has slain,
And ti's me to revenge on what is left,
That part of which by this I am bereft.
Quiet your self, sweet Madame.
How unfitly
Thou bid me to be quiet, when at once
I must bewail my loss, and th'hand that made it,
Or what is it I can hope for in this life
But torments, near to be redressed by time,
If loving the Author, I pursue the crime.
Can you then love the man that killed your Father?
Love him, Eluira? more than that I adore him,
My love stands up against the sense, I should have
Of a slain father, and would quite o're-beare it.
I find my lover in mine enemy,
And spite of all my anger, in my heart
Roderigo makes his part good against my father:
Yet though my love has these advantages,
I'll not advise with it about my duty.
Nothing is dearer to me than Roderigo,
My heart would take his part, but then my honour
Tells me I had a father, which he slew.
But doe you mean to prosecute him, Madam?
O cruel meaning! cruel prosecution!
To which I'm forced. I ask his head, and yet
Fear to obtain it. I would ha him punished,
And yet my death, I know, must wait on his.
Fie, Madam, quit this tragical design,
Be not so cruel to your self.
Shall I see
My father die between my arms? his blood
Crying vengeance to me, and shall not I hear him?
Shall my heart think, because it is charmed by love,
That nothing's due unto a fathers death
But childish tears? or shall I suffer love
To steal into my heart, and thrust out honour?
Believe me, Madam, you may well be pardoned,
If you preserve unto your self a man
You cannot parallel, and one you love.
You've done enough to have been with the King,
Ne'er press it farther, be not obstinate.
Then is my glory lost; no, it behoves
I be revenged.
But you love Roderigo,
He can't displease you.
No I'll swear he can't.
These things considered, Madam, what can you doe?
To save mine honour, and to put an end
To all my griefs at once, I am resolved
First to pursue him unto death, and then
To die my self.
TO save the trouble of
Pursuing me, behold I'm here before you,
Glut your self with the pleasure of my death.
What place is this, Elvira? who is this?
Roderigo in my house! before my face!
Spare not my blood, but taste the sweetness of
My death, and your revenge, without resistance.
Aye me!
Hear me Cimena.
I dye.
A word
Away and let me dye.
And afterwards
Make me no answer but with this my sword.
That sword be fmear'd with the blood of my dead father.
My Cimena
Fie, take away that object
Which to mine eyes upbraids thy crime, and life.
Look on it rather to increase thy hate
T'excite thine anger, and to speed my death.
It is died in my own blood.
Plunge it in mine,
And make it lose the colour so of thine.
What cruelty is this, which in one day
Father and daughter both deprives of life,
One by the sword, the other by the sight?
Remove that object of my hate, thy sword,
Thou would be heard of her thou mean to kill.
I doe obey, yet with the same desire
To dye by thee. For from my affection
Never expect a cowardly repentance
Of a good action, the box of the ear
Thy father gave, dishonoured mine, thou know
How home that touches any man of spirit,
I shared in the affront and went to seek
The Author, having found him I revenged
Mine and my fathers honour: were it to doe
Again I'd do it, yet think not but thy love
Held out against my father, and my self,
A combat long enough, and made me doubt
Whether I should displease thee or sit down
By the injury received. I held my hand
And blamed my self for too much violence:
And without doubt thy beauty had o'er swayed,
Had I not cast in balance, that a man
Dishonoured never could be worthy thee,
That she who loved me when my fame stood clear,
Would hate me, stained with infamy. It is true,
I did thee an affront, and it is as true
I ought to doe it both to save my honour
And merit thee. But having thus acquitted
My father and my self, it is only you
That I now come to satisfy, and make
A present of my blood. I know the thought
Of a slain father, arms thy hate against me,
Nor will I rob thee of thy sacrifice
Here, offer to the blood already shed
The blood of him, that glories to have shed it,
True Roderigo, (though thine enemy)
That thou did shun disgrace, I cannot blame thee,
And whatsoever face my griefs put on
I not accuse thee, but my own misfortune.
I know what honour, after such an out rage,
Demaund's of any brave and generous spirit.
Thou did thy duty but in doing it
Thou t'aught'st me mine. The same regard thou had
To vindicate thine own, and fathers honour
Fall's now one me, and the more t'afflict me
Of thee I must require, what I have lost;
It is thy interest makes me despair,
Had any other hand, or sad missortune
Deprived me of my father, I had found
My comfort in thy sight, the only charm
Against my griefs: When by so dear a hand
My tears had been wiped off: but now I must
Lose him and thee too, and what's more cruel,
I'm bound my self to labour thy destruction,
For never look from my affection
The least resentment for thy punishment;
For though our love would speak in favour of thee,
Mine honour yet must go as high as thine;
Thou in my wrong should thy self worthy me,
I in thy death will appear worthy thee.
Never defer then longer what your honour
Requires of you. It demands my head,
To stay till justice give it you, will delay
As well your glory, as my punishment.
I shall die happy, dying by your hand.
Away, I'm thy accuser, not thy heads-man,
Is it fit for me to take the head thou offer?
It is of another that I must obtain it;
I must pursue thy crime, not punish it.
Though love speak to thee in my favour, yet
The bravery of thy mind ought to answer mine,
Which trust me (my Cimena) cannot be,
If to revenge thou borrow'st other hands.
For my revenge I used none but my own,
And thou for thine, must use thy hand alone.
Cruel! to be so obstinate in this,
If without help thou did revenge thy self,
Why dost thou offer't me? I'll follow thee,
My courage is too great to let thee bear
The least part in my glory, neither shall
Mine, or my fathers honour stoop so low
As to thy love, or thy despair to owe.
Hard point of honour! can I by no way
Obtain this grace? punish me in the name
Of thy dead father, or our dearest love,
Either do it in revenge, or else in pity.
Twill to thy lover prove a gentler fate,
To die thus by thy hand, than to live with thy hate.
Away, I hate thee not.
Thou ought to hate me.
I can't.
But fear thou not the blame and scandal
Which men will raise, when they shall know my crime,
And the continuance of thy love; no, rather
Force um to silence, and without more words,
By my death give thy reputation life.
It will live better, if I let thee live;
I'll have the voice of the most black mouthed envy
Admire my glory, and pity my hard sufferings,
When they shall know, that though I love thy person,
I prosecute thy crime. Go Roderigo,
And let the darkness of the night conceal
Thy parting hence, mine honour cannot run
A greater hazard, than if men shall know
That I have kept thee company so long.
It is death to hear this.
Away.
But what, are you resolved to doe.
Spite of this loving fire which would restrain
That of my anger, I shall doe my best
To have full vengeance for my fathers death,
And yet in spite of this so cruel honour,
My desire is to have my desires crossed.
O miracle of love!
But heaped with griefs.
How many tears will these our fathers cost us?
Who would have thought it Roderigo?
Who
Cimena would have said it?
That our joys
Should be so nigh us and so quickly lost.
And that so near the Port a sudden storm
Should shipwreck all our hopes.
Go Roderigo,
And think I cannot, dare not, hear thee longer.
I go then to draw out a dying life,
Till thy pursuit shall bring it to an end.
If I obtain the effect, I sadly vow
Not to draw breath one minute after thee,
Adieu, and have a care thou be not seen.
AT length I see what all my industry
Could not effect, chance offers to me, this
Must be my Son. Roderigo, blessed be Heaven
That gives me leave to see thee.
Ay me!
Doe not confound my joys with these sad accents,
But give me leave to praise thy early Valour,
Which shows the noble stock from which thou sprang
The first stroke of thy sword, has equalled all
That mine could doe, and thy brave youthful spirit,
Has reached the glory of thy Ancestors.
Prop of my age, and fullness of my joy,
Touch these white hairs, whose honour thou hast saved,
Come kiss this cheek; and view the place which thou
Being affronted, rescud'st from disgrace.
The honor's due to you, heaven be my witness
That coming from you, I could doe no less,
I hold my self most happy, that the first
Trial of my poor valour should please him
To whom I owe my life, but in these pleasures
Have not a jealousy of me, because
After you, I dare satisfy my self
Give me leave to despair; it is all I ask.
Let not your praise flatter me out of that.
By, from so brave a heart banish this weakness,
Think there are Mistresses enough in the world,
But no more than one honour; love, is but
A little pleasure, honour is a duty.
What say you, Sir?
That which thou ought to know.
Would you then shame me with inconstancy,
A coward Soldier, and a perjured Lover,
Run the same course of infamy alike.
Cannot I be thought generous unless
I be perfidious. Alas my bonds
Are too fast tied, to be so soon undone
And since I can nor have, nor leave my love,
The death I mean to seek is my best comfort.
This is no time to seek out death. Thy King,
Thy Country needs thy aid, the Fleet wee feared
That entered on the River, is now ready
To take the City by surprise. The Moors
Are come in silence almost to our walls,
The Court is in an uproar, and the people
Call to take arms. Nothing but cries are heard
In the midst of these calamities, my fortune
Has favored me so much to let me see,
Five hundred of my friends, within my house,
Who hearing of the affront was given me,
Offered their lives to vindicate mine honour,
Thou hast prevented them, but their brave valours
Will better be employed against the Moors;
Go march in the head of them; where honour calls thee,
Impeach the landing of the enemy.
And if thou must seek death, go find it there;
But rather Crowned with victory return,
And by thy valour force even justice self
To pardon, and Cimena to be silent,
If thou dost love her, think thy coming home
A Conqueror, must regain her heart, or nothing.
But time's too precious to be spent in talk,
I stay thee in discourse, when thou should fly,
Come follow me to my house: Let the King see
What he has lost in the Count, he has found in thee.
BUt is this true, Elvira? art thou sure on it?
How hard it is to be get faith in you,
When every man extoll's the glorious actions
Of this young Heroes: The Moors before him
Appeared, but to their shame. They quickly landed,
But quicker was their flight. Three hours fight
Left to our men a victory entire,
And two Kings prisoners. Their leaders valour
Could meet with nothing durst stand in its way.
And was it Roderigo's hand that did these wonders.
The two Kings which he vanquished are his prize.
Whence coldest thou gather this strange news, Elvira?
From those who sound his praises up and down,
The people, who with one voice doe salute him
Their Guardian Angel, saver of their Country.
How does the King look, upon this his valour?
Roderigo dares not yet appear in Court,
But Don Diego, in the Conquerors name,
Has made a present of these Crowned Captives,
And all he does demand, is, that the King
Would deign to see the hand that freed his Country.
But has he got no wound?
I know not that.
Why change you colour so? resume your spirits.
Let me resume my anger, which my love
Has so enfeebled; must my care for him
Make me forget my self? peace, peace my love,
And let my anger work; though he have vanquished
Two kings, he has not overcome my duty.
These mourning habits, where I read my miseries,
Are the first fruits his valour did produce,
And though all tongues should speak in his defence
All objects here doe represent his crime.
Veil, Cypress, and these blacks sad memories
Of my dead Father, keep a little up
Mine honour against my passion, and when love
Shall get the power of me, tell my heart
I owe a duty to a Father slain.
Be not transported so: The Infanta's here.
I Come not here, Cimena, with faint comforts
To plead against thy grief, but with sad sighs
To mingle with thy tears.
Nay rather, Madame,
Share in the common joy, and fully taste
The happiness, kind heaven has sent to you,
I only am designed for grief; the dangers
From which y' are rescued by Rodcrigo's hand,
And all your safeties purchased by his arms.
To me alone bequeath these tears and sighs,
It is he has saved the City, served his King,
And only ruined me.
It is true, Cimena,
He has done wonders.
Yes the unwelcome news,
Has pierced my ears already, I can hear
How the voice goes, and that hoe's famed no less
A Valiant Soldier, than a luckless lover.
How comes this news to be unwelcome to you?
Was not the man they praised your servant once?
And had not he your heart? in honouring him
They honour much your choice.
I needs must say
His honours are but due, and yet to me
Each p raise of him, is a new punishment,
For I can't chose but know how great my loss is,
Finding the value of the thing I lose
The more his merit, and my love increases,
The more my duty gets advantage of me,
And spite of my affection puts me on
To prosecute his crime.
But will you, Madam,
Believe the counsel of a faithful friend.
Not to obey you were a sin unpardonable.
Though yesterday purfuing your revenge,
You did so much that all the Court admired
Your height of spirit, and bewaild your love;
Yet the same way is not now to be taken.
Roderigo's now the only hope and stay
Of all Castle. The terror of the Mores.
His valour has restored us what before
It took away, in him your father seems
To live again, and in a word pursuing
His death, you go about the public ruin,
What? to revenge a father, is it lawful
To give your Country up to its Enemies?
And are we to be punished for his fault?
I say not this, that I would have you marry
The man y' are bound to prosecute. I'd rather
You should avoid that envy, and deprive
Him of your love, but not us of his life.
Ah, Madam, give my spirit its full course,
Though my heart make a faction against me,
Though he be loved by the King, adored by the people,
Though he be compassed with the stoutest Soldiers,
He overwhelm his Laurel, with my Cyprus.
I must confess, it is a mark of spirit
To prosecute the life you loved so dearly,
Yet I should think, it were more noble fat
To give up to the public interest
The private ones of blood. For credit me,
Cimena, it is enough, to leave to love him:
Banish him from your heart and he will find
A heavy punishment. Your Countries good
Requires this, besides you must not think
The King should grant you your request.
He may.
Refuse me if he please, but I must speak.
Consider well, Cimena, what it is
You go about, and think of it at leisure.
THou brave descendant of a noble race,
Who have been still supporters of my kingdom,
(Who's valour the first proof of thine has equalled)
My power is too narrow for thy merit.
To free thy Country of so rude a foe
As are the Moors, before my self could give
Order for their repulse, is such an act
As flies beyond all thought of recompense.
But the two captived Kings which thou hast taken,
Shall give thee thy reward, they both have named thee
Their CID before me; which in their tongue sounds
As much as Lord in ours, and this fair title
I will not envy thee; from henceforth be
Their CID, that at thy name the Moors may tremble.
And that my Subjects hearing it may know
Thy value, and how much to thee I owe.
Let not your Majesty confound your servant
With too much shame, to set so high a prise
Upon so poor a service. I must blush
To see such honour done so slender merit.
My debt to you, Sir, and my Country is
The blood I live by, and the air I breath;
And when I lose um for so fair an object,
I doe, Sir, but the duty of a Subject.
Few of those whom their duty binds to serve me,
Can so acquit themselves, as thou hast done,
Suffer then thy just praises, and at full
Relate the story of thy Victory.
Sir, you have heard how in this urgent danger,
Which put the City in so great a tumult,
A company of my friends met at my fathers,
Moved me to go upon this enterprise,
But I crave pardon of your Majesty:
For daring to employ um without leave,
The danger was at hand, So were my friends;
The hazard of my head, made me I durst not
Appear at Court, and I had rather lose
My life in the defence of the whole State,
Than give it up unto Cimena's plaints.
I must excuse the heat of thy revenge,
The State defended speaks in thy defence,
Henceforth Cimena moves me but in vain,
Whom if I hear it is but to give her comfort;
But on with your relation.
Under me
This troop advanced with such a confidence,
And so good order, that where ere they passed
They diffused courage through the lookers on,
Which so much moved um that although at first
We numbered but five hundred, ere we reached
The Port, we were increased into three thousand,
Two thirds of these when I arrived, I hid
In the bottom of our ships, which there I found,
The rest, whose number every hour increased,
Lay close to the ground, and in deep silence past
The greatest part of that fair night away.
To the guard I gave command to doe the like,
Affirming stoutly that I had your order,
For what I did. At length the glimmering star light
Made us discover thirty sail coming up
With a full tide, for the swollen Sea at once
Powered both it self, and them into our Haven,
We let um pass discovering none of us
In the haven, or the walls, and this our silence
Made them so confident of our surprise,
That presently they landed, fiercely running
To meet the ruin which awaited them.
Then rose we up, having received the signal
From those within our ships;
Who starting up in arms, did so confound
The Moors, that they were frighted ere half landed.
They came to pillage, but they met with War
At Sea and Land, we bore um down before us,
Many we slew in the place before they could
Fall into rank or make the least resistance,
When suddenly in spite of our endeavours,
Their Princes rallied their dispersed troops,
And from a shame they felt, to dye so tamely,
They took new courage, and restored their ranks,
With their swords drawn, making their fight on foot,
Then fell the bravest of our Soldiers
Mixed with their Captains, the land, the water,
Their Fleet, our Haven, seemed a field of slaughter
Where death did only triumph; blood, and darkness
Covered the place; what had their valour been,
Who fought thus in the dark, had they been seen.
I, on all sides encouraged our own men;
Some I made fall upon the foe, and others
I kept from falling from us, those that came
I ranged in order, put um on the places
Which they were to make good; but what was done
We had no means to know, 'till the first light
Showed us our victory, and their loss.
They seeing a new supply come to our aide,
Fled now more fiercely, than before they fought.
They got into their ships, and cut their cables,
Disorderly retreating, and not minding
Whether their Kings retired or stayed behind,
Fear more prevailing, made them lose their duty.
They came in with the flood, and with the ebb.
They went away. In the mean time their Kings,
And some few of their men engaged amongst us,
Sold their lives dear enough; I bid'um yield,
But while they had a Sword to fight, they would not,
Till seeing their Soldiers fall about their feet
And that alone they must defend them selves,
They asked who was our leader, I was named,
They yield themselves to me. So was this Battle
Ended for want of men to fight it out.
And thus, Sir, when we are about your service
Sir, here's Cimena come to ask you justice.
What shall I doe? I would not have her see thee,
In stead of thanks I must dismiss thee from me,
But ere thou leave the Court, return again
Unto thy Kings embraces.
It is strange, she should
Pursue the man thus, whom she fine would save.
I'm told she is in love with him. I'll try, 
Make show as you were sad. At length Cimena,
Content your self, for your desires have met
With their success. Though Roderigo's valour
Ha'got the better of the Moors. Himself
Has perished with the wounds he there received,
Give thanks to heaven that has given you vengeance;
Her colour's changed already.
But, Sir, mark
Her swoundings, and by them how she betrays
The secrets of her Soul, surely she loves him.
Is Roderigo dead then?
No, no, he lives,
And still remains thy true, and constant lover,
Thou shalt enjoy him, take thy mirth again.
Sir, we as often faint with joy as sadness,
And when excess of that surprises us,
It soon confounds our senses.
Thou would fine
That to do thee a curtsy we should
Believe impossibles; but here thy sadness
Has showed it self too plain.
Well, Sir, you may
Add this too, if you please, to my misfortunes,
And call my swoundings the effects of grief,
I must confess, I grieved to see my self
Robed of the life I sue for. If he dye
Of wounds he has received for 's Countries good,
My vengeance is lost, and my designs betrayed,
I ask his death, but not a glorious one;
I would not have him dye in the bed of honour,
But on a Scaffold, that his name may rot,
And his memorial perish, It is no shame
To say I love his victory, by it
He has assured the State, and rendered me
A noble sacrifice, in stead of Flowers
Crowned with victorious bays, and such a one,
As I'd have offered to my Fathers ghost.
But why, alas, am I transported so?
Roderigo needs not fear what I can doe.
What can a Virgins tears despised and scorned.
Your Kingdom is to him a place of free
Security, and he shall triumph over me
As 'ore his enemies, the blood of the Moors
Shall choke up justice here, which must be made
A Trophy to the Victors crimes; Whilst I
Amongst the rest, adorn his victory.
Sweet heart y' are too much hurried with your passions.
We, when we render Justice use to cast
Each thing in balance, Roderigo killed
Thy Father, but he gave the first offence.
Equity binds me then, to show some sweetness
To the first injured. But before thou accuse him,
Ask counsel of thy heart. Of which hoe's master.
I'm sure thy love, secretly thanks thy King,
Whose favour keeps so brave a Lover for thee.
For me! my Enemy the Author of
My miscries, the murderer of my father.
Is my just suite so slighted that I'm thought
To be obliged because I am not heard?
Sir, since my tears cannot obtain it of you,
Let the sword, I beseech you, give me justice
By that I'm injured and by that I crave
To be revenged. Of all your Cavaliers
I ask his head, to him that brings it me,
As to the Conqueror I give my self,
The Combat ended, he shall be my husband,
This, I beseech your Majesty may be published
By your authority.
This Countries custom,
More ancient than good, under the colour
Of punishing unjust attempts, has robed
The state of its best Soldiers, and often
The success does not answer the intent,
The guilty scope, and kill the innocent;
I must dispense with Roderigo's blood,
It is more precious to me, than so flightly
To be exposed to hazard, though his spirit
Forced him to doe an outrage, yet in freeing
His Country from the Moors, h'has freed himself.
How, Sir, for him must you reverse your laws,
Which have so often been observed? what will
The people, or the tongue of envy say,
Hearing he lives by your protection?
And that it only serves him for a colour
To hide his cowardice. These are favours, Sir,
Which bring dishonour, with'um to the takers,
The Count durst doe a wrong, my Son durst punish,
Let him maintain the honour hee has won.
Since you will have it so, let it be done,
But if Roderigo be exposed to all
That will come in to fight for such a prize▪
He must be sure to want no enemies.
I will have only one t'incounter him.
Choose whom you will, Cimena, and choose wisely,
But after this, urge me to nothing farther.
An't please your Majesty to let the lists
Be opened, I shall be the undertaker;
Madam, you know your promise, I beseech you
Let me obtain the grace to be your Champion.
What say you, Cimena, shall he be the Man?
Sir, I have promised him.
Be ready than to morrow.
Defer it not so long, Sir;
A man of courage is at all times ready.
Shall he no sooner be returned from one,
But he must enter on another fight?
He has tan breath, Sir, in recounting it.
How ere, an hour or two let him repose,
But lest I should be thought to countenance
Proceedings of this bloody nature, neither
My self nor any of my Court shall see it performed,
Doe you look to it, and take care that both
Present themselves, as befits men of arms,
The Combat done, bring me the Conqueror,
I mean my self to give him to Cimena.
That were t'impose too hard a law upon me.
Thy love dares not avow this thy complaint,
If Roderigo conquer, thou must have him,
Never dispute my sentence or rapine,
Who ere is Victor, I will make him thine.
WHat Roderigo, in the open day!
Whence comes this boldness? doe you mean t'undoe
Me, and mine honour? Fie, retire your self.
Madame, I go to dye, and therefore come
Before my death, to take my last farewell,
My love does owe you this: and my thrall'd heart
Dares not depart your Kingdom without leave.
You go to dye?
Nay, more, I run; as soon
As I have tan my leave, the Count's revenged.
You go to dye! And is Don Sancho then
A man so terrible, that you need fear him?
Who has made you so weak? or him so valiant?
Roderigo goes to fight, and thinks himself
Already dead. He that nor feared the Moors,
Nor yet my Father, going to encounter
Don Sancho, trembles at it. Does your spirit
Fail you at greatest need?
It is not to the Combat
That I go now, but to my punishment.
For when you seek my death, my love cannot
Defend a life against you. My heart is still
The same, but not my arm, when it should guard
That which displeases you. This night already
Had been my last, if for my private quarrel
The fight had been: But since it was for the King,
His People, and my Country, had I left
My self defenceless, I'd betrayed them all:
I must confess, I did not hate my life
So much as with false treachery to part from it.
Now, since no interest but mine own is in it,
And you demand my death, I accept your sentence,
For which you've made choice of another hand.
(It seems I not deserved to dye by yours)
I shall not go to exchange blow, for blow,
I owe him more respect that fights for you
And since it is your honour which hee fights for,
I'll open him my breast, in his, adoring
Your hand, from which I'll welcome my destruction.
If the just violence of a fatal duty,
Which makes me to pursue thee against my will,
Prescribe unto thy love so hard a law,
That thou wilt not defend thy self against him
That fights for me. Take head least thou forget
That both thy life, and glory fall together,
And howsoever Roderigo has lived
Being slain, he will be thought a vanquished man.
Honour was dearer once then I was to you,
When in my Fathers blood you embrued your hands,
It made you then in spite of your affection
Renounce the hope of ere enjoying me;
But now you value it so little that
You care not who it is that conquers you.
See how unseasonable your virtue is,
Why were you valiant once &amp; are not now?
Were you so only to doe me an outrage?
Or will you be so cruel to my father,
That having conquered him, you will submit
Your self to any hand. No Roderigo
Defend thy honour, though thou slight thy life.
Mine honour cannot need any defence
More than it has already. He that could
Defeat the Moors, and kill the Count of Gormas,
Has not an enemy besides to fear.
No, no, Roderigo know's what ere you think,
How in this fight to die and save his honour,
That none shall dare to think he wanted courage,
Only they'll say he did adore Cimena.
He would not live, having deserved her hate,
How he gave way unto the cruel fate
which forced his Mistress to pursue his death.
She asked his head, and his great heart conceived
He should commit a crime, if he denied it.
T'acquit his honour he renounced his love,
T'acquit his Mistress he renounced his life.
Thus shall you see my glory in this Combat
Shine more than ere it did. My willing death
Shall have this honour, that no Man but I
Could for the wrong done to you satisfy.
Since nor thy love, nor honour can prevail
To hold thee from thy ruin, dear Roderigo,
If ere I loved thee, I conjure thee now
To doe thy best, if for no other end
To free me from Don Sancho, let me not
Be given up to the object of my loathing.
What shall I say more? go defend thy self,
And if thy love be not congealed to ice,
Be Victor where Cimena is the price,
Adieu! this last word makes me blush for shame.
Is there an Enemy now, that I can fear?
Moors, and Castilians, or what ere you be,
Whom Are gone, or Spain thinks valiant,
Appear, and make one army of your selves,
My soul encouraged thus shall throw me on you.
For so sweet hopes, what is it I dare not meet with?
IS it to me you come now Leonora?
Madame, I come to testify the joy
I feel, to see your heart at rest.
My heart?
Can rest come to a heart that's filled with griefs?
If love doe live on hope, and dye with it,
Roderigo cannot trouble you any longer,
You know the Combat where he is engaged
By his Cimena, there he must or dye,
Or be her husband, but what ever happen,
Whether he live, or dye, your hope is dead.
But how can thou assure me it is dead,
If upon these conditions Roderigo
Doe entertain the Combat, have not I
Inventions enough to break it off?
Love the sweet Author of my punishment,
Can teach the wits of lovers many slights.
Hope you to breed a discontent between'um,
Which a Fathers death cannot. Cimena shows
By her conduct of this affair, that hate
Causes not her pursuit, it is true she has got
The Combat granted, but to take her part
Whom has she chosen, not an expert man,
Or one already famous for his actions.
Don Sancho serves her turn, who till this time
Did never put on arms; she loves in him
His small experience. This her sudden choice
Must make you see, she sought for such a Combat
As might enforce her duty to be silent,
And yet assure Roderigo's conquest.
I see it well enough, and yet my heart
Strives with Cimena's, who shall most adore him,
What had I best resolve on, Leonora?
Madam, bethink your self of whom you're borne,
A King, heaven owes you, and you love a subject.
No, no, my thoughts are off from their first object,
I love not Roderigo as a Gentleman,
Hee that I love now, is the Valiant CID,
The Moister of two Kings. And yet I mean
T'orecome my self, not for the fear of blame,
But that I won't disturb so fair a flame,
And though they would now crown him, yet I should not
Resume the gift which I have given another
Then since thou say Roderigoe's Victory
Is certain, let's go give him to Cimena.
And thou that know how far my love has run,
Come, see me finish what I have begun.
WHat shall I doe Elvira? all my hopes
Are lost, and I have nothing left but fears,
I dare not give consent to my own wishes,
I've cause two Rivals to take arms for me,
What ever happens. Sorrow is my lot;
For think the best, I can of fate obtain,
My Father's unrevenged or lover slain.
From both sides you will find reason of comfort,
Either you have revenge or Roderigo
How ever destiny disposes of you
It saves your honour, and provides y'a husband.
What? the object of my hate, or of my anger?
Roderigo's, or my Fathers murderer,
From this or that, I must expect a husband
Died in the blood of him I held most dear,
I fear the issue worse than any death.
Go vengeance, or my love that trouble me,
Thou hast not sweets I'm sure to make me amends,
And thou the powerful mover of that fate
Which does me all this violence, determine
This Combat equally, without advantage,
That neither be the Victor, or the Vanquished.
That were to handle you with too much cruelty,
If when the fight were done, you should be bound
A new to demand justice, and near leave,
With rigour to pursue the man you love.
No, it were better that his unmatched valour
Should get him victory, and silence you,
And that the King, according to his law
Should force you to comply with your own wishes.
Doest think though he be Conqueror that I will
Yield my self his? my duty is too strong,
And my loss over great. He may overcome
Don Sancho easily, but not so soon
The glory of Cimena. Though a Monarch
Have promised me unto his victory
Mine honour, (rather than I'll be his prize)
Shall raise him up a thousand enemies.
Take heed, lest heaven for this strange pride of yours
Suffer you not to be revenged at all.
What? mean you to refuse this happiness
That you may when you please sit down with honour?
What is it you would pretend? what can you hope?
Will your Lovers death restore your Father to you
Or is your Fathers death so small a mischief,
That you'd heap up loss on loss, grief upon grief.
Well, doe, continue in this stubborn humour.
You scarce deserve the man they 'ave destined for ye
And heaven being weary of its too much favour,
In stead of him, will wed you to Don Sancho.
The griefs Elvira, I sustain already,
Need not thy fatal augury to augment um,
I would, if possible, avoid them both,
If not, Roderigo has my best of wishes.
Not that my love inclines me more to him,
But lest he failing, I should be Don Sancho's.
The thought of that, makes me to wish him well.
What's this Elvira? See it is done already.
AT your feet, Madame, I present this sword.
What that yet reeking with Roderigo's blood?
Traitor, how dare thou come into my sight,
When thou hast ravished from me, all I loved?
Shine now at full my love, thou need not fear,
My Father's satisfied. One only blow,
•as to mine honour given security,
To my soul despair, to my love liberty.
Hear me with better temper.
Dare thou yet
Speak to me? Cursed murderer of that Heroes
Which I doe most adore. Go, thou hast slain him
Perfidiously, for otherwise that man
Could never fall by such a hand as thine.
But hear him, Madame.
What would thou have me hear?
Can I doubt, when my eyes are satisfied,
I have obtained the mischief which I sought for,
And my just suit has had too good success,
Pardon dear love, its bloody cruelty.
Think though a lover, yet I was a daughter.
If on thy blood I have revenged my Father.
For thy revenge I will exhaust my own,
My soul has nothing now, that should retain it,
It shall go after thine, to ask it pardon.
And thou that think to obtain me by his death,
Disloyal minister of my cruel fate,
Hope nothing at my hands. Thou hast done me
No service, only hastened on my death.
It is a strange passion will not give me hearing.
What would thou have me hear thee, whilst with boasting
Thou point out to me my own fatal crime,
And his misfortunes, that thy cruel story
May kill me in thy sight. No, I can dye
Without thy help. My soul can find out death,
Instructed by no aid but her own mischiefs.
SIr, I need not now dissemble any longer
What never art of mine could hide from you
I loved, you know, yet to revenge my Father
I would proscribe the head I held so dear,
By that your Majesty might easily see,
I meant my love should give place to my duty.
In fine Roderigoe's dead. His death has changed
Her, who was once his mortal enemy
To an afflicted lover. That revenge
I to my Father ought, and to my love
These tears which now I shed; Don Sancho has
In taking of my part quite ruined me,
And yet for doing so I'm made his prize.
Sir, if kind pity ever moved a King,
Now of your grace revoke this cruel law,
Though he have slain the man I loved so dearly,
I'll give him all I have for his reward,
So he will leave me to my self, and that
I may bewail (the time I have to live)
My Father, and my Lover, in a Cloister.
Now you perceive she loves, Sir, and not thinks
It is such a crime to a vow her lawful love.
Sweet heart mistake not, Roderigo lives
Don Sancho has made thee a false report.
Sir, not by me, but by her too much heat
She was deceived: For had she given me leave;
I should have told her, that her noble Lover,
When he disarmed me, bade me banish fear,
For that (said he) I'd rather leave the conquest
Uncertain, than I'd spill a drop of blood
That's ventured for Cimena, but since I
Am by my duty called to attend the King,
Ooe you and entertain her in my stead,
And at her feet offer your life and sword.
Which when I came to doe, the sword deceived her,
With which seeing me return, she thought that I
Had been the Victor. Presently her anger
Betrayed her love, with such impatience
That I had not a minutes audience.
For my part though I am a vanquished man,
And though the interest of my love be great
Yet I repute my self in this my loss
To be a gainer, loving my distress
Which brings so fair a flame, so good success.
You must not be ashamed of such a love
Cimena, or seek means to disavow it,
Your honour's disengaged, your duty quited,
Your Father satisfied; what would you more?
Must you still put Roderigo in new danger,
You see hey ven otherwise disposes of him.
And since that it has done so much for him,
Doe you too something for your self, and take
Him for your husband that I offer you,
And whom I know you love.
COme Cimena,
Dry thy eyes: And receive with a glad heart
This noble Conqueror, from thy Princesse's hand.
Great Sir, be not offended if before you,
The duty which I owe to love, doe cast me
Here at her feet. I come not to demand
The prize which I have won, but once more yet
To offer you my life. My love shall not
Or plead the combats law, or the Kings will,
If all that's done cannot appease your anger,
Tell me what means is left to satisfy.
Must I encounter yet a thousand Rivals,
Travail from one end of the Earth to the other
Or force a Camp my self, or rout an Army,
If at length I may expiate my crime,
I shall attempt all this: But if your honour
Be still inexorable, and nothing can
Appease it but my death; Behold my head
I cast it at your feet. Take it your self,
And arm no other hand for your revenge,
Since none but yours can do it. Yet let my death
Be all my punishment, and let me not
Be banished from your memory, but say
If any time you call to mind my pain
Had he not loved me, he had not been slain,
Rise Roderigo. Sir, I must needs say
My love has showed it self too much, for me
Now to deny it. Roderigo has
Such virtues, as I know not how to hate.
And you're my King. I cannot but obey you,
But is there here any appearance of
A Marriage, if it be, it is a sad one,
That one day should begin, and end my mourning,
That having laid my Father in his grave,
I should lay Roderigo in my bed:
That were to hold intelligence wed's murderer,
And soil my honour with eternal shame.
Time often makes that lawful, which at present
Seems not to be so. Roderigo, has won thee,
And his thou must be. But though his valour
Have made you his, yet I should doe you wrong
So soon to give him the reward he fought for.
Take if you will a year, to end your mourning.
In the mean time Roderigo shall take arms,
And having under his command my Army,
Shall carry back the War unto the Moors
Which they brought hither, that they all may tremble
At this brave name of CID, which they have given thee
They've called thee Lord already, and they would
Make thee their King. But let not (Roderigo)
Thy great exploits, take off thy loyalty;
Return, if possible, more worthy of her,
And let thy deeds set such a price upon thee,
That she may court thy Marriage as an honour.
For my Cimena, Sir, and for your service,
What can you bid me doe I won't accomplish?
And though I hardly can endure her absence,
Yet are the hopes you give sufficient happiness.
Rely upon thy valour and my promise,
And now thou hast thy Mistress heart already,
This point of honour (which is the last thing)
Let time o'er come, thy valour, and thy King.

SEt forth that Table Jar.
Will you not go in and dine, Sir?
No: I am of other diet to day.
The whole company expects you.
May they sit merry with their cheer,
while I feed on this hard meat. And wait
you within: I shall not change a trencher.
Alas my good Master.
Here are the nests, but all the
Birds are flown.
How easy a thing it is to be undone,
When credulous Man will trust his 'state to others!
Am I drawn dry? Not so much as the Lees left?
Nothing but empty Cask? have I no refuge
To fly to now? Yes, here, about a groats worth
Of paper it was once. Would I had now
Greens groats-worth of wit for it. But twill serve
To light tobacco-pipes. Here (let me see)
Here is three hundred pound, two hundred here.
And here one hundred, and two hundred here;
Fifty; fifty; fifty; and one hundred here,
And here one hundred and fifty. Besides
A many parcels of small debts, which make
Two hundred more. I shall not live to tell it,
But put it up, and take it by the weight.
O me! how heavy it is! And, doubtless, so it would be
At some mans heart. It troubles me a little.
Now what news?
My mistress, and your Mother Sir,
Entreats you to come to dinner.
These they are; My debts,
That strike me through. This bag will never pay
Any of these.
Sir, shall I say you'll come?
How well it were, if any of my Creditors
Could once but dream that this were current money!
What shall I say?
Even what thou wilt, good Jeremy.
Alas you know, this dinner was appointed
A friendly meeting for most of your Creditors,
And many of your Debtors.
But I hope
Few of the last appear.
None but some privileged Courtiers, that dare
Put in at all men's Tables. They're all set,
Your Creditors on one side, and your Debtors
On t'other; and do only stay for you.
To feed on; do they? Go. I will not come.
I fear, Sir, you will overthrow the good
That was intended you. You know this meeting
Was for the Creditors to give longer day,
As they should find your Debtors to acknowledge
The sums they owe you. Sir I should be sorry
To see you sink, or forced to hide your head,
That looked as high, as any in the City.
Prithee go in. And if they seem to stay,
Pray 'em fall too; tell 'em I take this time
Only to order my Accounts, and that as soon
As they are full, and fit to talk, I'll come:
Good Jeremy go.
In truth I pity him—
A right good Boy thou art. I think on thee:
What must I do now? All I have is lost,
And what I have not, sought to be forced from me,
I must take nimble hold upon Occasion,
Or lie for ever in the Bankrupt ditch,
Where no man lends a hand to draw one out▪
I will leap over it, or fall bravely in it,
Scorning the Bridge of Baseness, Composition,
Which doth infect a City like the Plague,
And teach men Knavery, that were never born to it:
Whereby the Rope-deserving Rascal gains
Purple and Furs, Trappings and golden Chains.
Base Composition, baser far then Want,
Then Beggary, Imprisonment, Slavery:
I scorn thee, though thou love a Trades-man dearly
And make a Chandler Lord of thousands yearly.
I will have other aid. How now! Again?
O, Sir, you are undone.
Hast thou no news, Jeremy?
Alas your Mother Sir—
Why what of her?
Is there a Plate lost, or a 'Postle-spoon
A China Dish broke, or an ancient Glass,
And stained with Wine her Damasque table-cloath?
Or is the Salt fallen towards her? What's the matter?
Her mischievous tongue has over-thrown the good
Was meant to you.
What Good, good Jeremy?
Your Creditors were on a resolution
To do you good, and madly she opposed it,
And with a vehement voice proclaims you a Beggar;
Says, you have undone her Daughter; that no good
Is fit to be done for you: And such a storm
Of wicked breath—
She's drunk; Is she not, Jeremy?
No Sir, it is nothing but her old disease,
The Tongue-ague, whose fit is now got up
To such a height, the Devil cannot lay it.
The learned School-master, Mr. Sarpego
Has conjured it by all his parts of speech,
His Tropes and Figures; and cannot be heard
In the furious Tempest. All your Creditors
Are gone in Rage; will take their course, they say.
Some of your Debtors stay, I think, to laugh at her.
Now deafness seize me. I disclaim my hey∣ring. I defy my audituall part. I renounce mine ears. Mistress Pyannet, a desperate Palsy is on thy lips, and an everlasting Fever on thy Tongue?
What raging Rout hath rent thy rest;
What Scold hath scutch'd thy skonce:
I'll breath it to thy bolder breast,
That ask me for the nonce.
You understand or know, that here hath been a Feast made, to take up a ponderous difference be∣tween Master Sneakup your Father in Law, and your self Mr. Crazy; and between most of your Creditors and Debitors. Food hath been eaten; Wine drunk; Talk past; Breath spent; Labour lost: For why? Mi∣stress Pyannet your Mother in Law, Mr. Sneakups Wife (though she will be called by none but her own name) that woman of an eternal Tongue; that Creature of an everlasting noise; whose per∣petuall talk is able to deafen a Miller; whose discourse is more tedious then a Justices Charge; She, that will out-scold ten carted Bawds, even when she is sober; and out-chat fifteen Midwives, though fourteen of them be half drunk: this Shee-thing hath burst all. Demosthenes himself would give her over. Therefore hopeless Sarpego is silent.
O, are you here Sir! You have spun a fair thread.
Here's much ado, and little help. We can make bolt nor shaft, find neither head nor foot in your business. My daughter and I may both curse the time, that ever we saw the eyes of thee.
Sir, you have the civil virtue of Patience in you. Dear Sir hear me.
He says he hears thee, and is ashamed to see thee. Hast not undone our Daughter▪ spent her Port∣on; deceived our hopes; wasted thy fortunes; undone thy credit; proved Bankrupt?
All was but my kind heart in trusting, in true∣sting, Father.
Kind heart! What should Citizens do with kind hearts; or trusting in any thing but God, and ready money?
What would you, dear Father, that I should do now?
Marry depart in peace Sir. Vanish in silence Sir. I'll take my Daughter home Sir. She shall not beg with you Sir. No marry shalt thou not; no, 'deed Duck shalt thou not.
Be yet but pleased to answer me, good Sir. May not an honest man—
Honest man! Who the Devil wished thee to be an honest man? Here's my worshipful Husband, Mr. Sneakup, that from a Grassier is come to be a Justice of Peace: And, what, as an honest man? Hee grew to be able to give nine hundred pound with my daughter; and, what, by honesty? Mr. Sneakup and I are come up to live in the City, and here we have lain these three years; and what? for honesty? Honesty! What should the City do with honesty; when it is enough to undo a whole Corporation? Why are your Wares gummed; your Shops dark; your Prizes writ in strange Chara∣cters? what, for honesty? Honesty? why is hard wax
called Merchants wax; and is said seldom or never to be rip'd off, but it plucks the skin of a Lordship with it? what! for honesty? Now (mortified my Concupi∣sconce!) Dost thou think, that our Neighbour, Master Linsy-Wolsie here, from the son of a Tripe-wife, and a Rope-maker, could aspire to be an Aldermans Depu∣tie; to be Worshipful Mr. Linsie-Wolsie; Venerable Mr. Linsie-wolsie; to wear Satin sleeves, &amp; whip Beg∣gorse? And, what? By honesty? Have we bought an Of∣fice, here, for our towardly and gracious son and heir here, young Mr. Sneakup—
Yes forsooth Mother.
And made him a Courtier, in hope of his ho∣nasty? Nay, (once for all) Did we marry our Daugh∣la, here, to thee; racked our Purses to pay Portion; left Country house-keeping to save charges, in hope either of thine, or her honesty? No, we looked, that thy Ware-house should have eaten up Castles, and that for thy narrow Walk in a Jewellers shop, a whole Country should not have sufficed thee.
If my uncunning Disposition be my only vice, then Father—
Nay, and thou hast been married three years to my Daughter, and hast not got her with Child yet! How dost answer that? For a woman to be married to a fruitful Fool, there is some bearing with him yet. (I know it by my self) but a dry barren Fool! How dost thou satisfy that?
It may be defect in your Daughter, as probe∣ble as in me.
O impudent varlet! Defect in my Daughter? O horrible indignity! Defect in my Daughter? Nay, it is well known, before ever thou saw her, there was no defect in my Daughter.
Well: If to be honest, be to be a fool, my utmost
Ambition is a Coxcomb. Sir, I crave your farewell.
Marry Sir, and have it with all his heart. My Husband is a man of few words, and hath committed his tongue to me: And I hope I shall use it to his Worcester∣ship. Fare you well Sir.
Thanks for your cheer and full bounty of En∣tertainment, good Mr. Sneakup.
He rather thanks you for your patience, and kind visitation, good Sir Andrew Ticket. Yes indeed forsooth does he.
I take my leave Sir, too.
Good Madame—
Uds so! ther's a trick! you must talk, must you? And your Wife in presence, must you? As if I could not have said, good Madame. Good Madame! Do you see how it becomes you?
Good Mistress Sneakup▪
Good Madame, I beseech your Ladyship to ex∣cuse our deficiency of Entertainment. Though ou• power be not to our wish, yet we wish that our Power were to your Worth, which merits better service—
Pardon me.
Then our rudeness—
You wrong your self.
Can tender, or possibly express by—
I beseech you forsooth—
Our best labour, or utmost devoire. Yes I pro∣test sweet Madame. I beseech you, as you pass by in Coach sometimes, vouchsafe to see me; and, if I come to Court, I will presume to visit your Ladyship, and your worthy Knight, Good Sir Andrew! And I pray you Madame, how does your Monckey, your Parrot, and Parraquitoes? I pray commend me to 'em, and to all your little ones. Fare you well, sweet Creature.
We'll leave you to take private farewell of your Wife, Mr. Crazy.
We'll meet you at your Horse, brother.
Loved, my dear heart, my sweetest, my very being, will you needs take your journey? I shall fall before your return into a Consumption. If you die but conceive what your departure will bring upon me, I know (my sweet) nay I do know—but go your ways; strike my finger into mine eye: It is not the first true tear a married woman has shed.
Why you hear the noise of that woman of Sound, your Mother. I must travel down, or not keep up. Yet—
Nay, go I beseech you; you shall never say, I undid you. Go I pray: But never look to see me my own woman again. How long will you stay forth?
A fortnight at the least; and a month at the most.
Well, a fortnight at the least. Never woman took a more heavy departure. Kiss me. Farewell. Kiss me again. I pray does your Horse amble, or trot? Do not ride post as you come home, I pray. Kiss me once more. Farewell.
Hay hoe! How I do gape.
What's a clock Bridget.
Past three forsooth.
Tic past sleeping time then, Bridget.
Nothing is past to those, that have a mind and means.
Thats true and tried. Go lay my Pillow Bridget.
Lord, what a thing a woman is in her Husbands ab∣sense!
Wast thou ever in love, Jeremy?
Who I forsooth? No forsooth.
I forsooth, and no forsooth? then I perceive you are forsooth. But I advise you to take head, how you level your Affection towards me: I am your Mi∣stress; And I hope you never heard of any Apprentice was so bold with his Mistress.
No indeed forsooth. I should be sorry there should be any such.
Nay, be not sorry neither Jeremy. Is thy Ma∣ster gone? Look. A pretty youth, this same Jeremy! And is come of a good Race. I have heard my Mother say, his Father was a Ferretter—
He is gone forsooth.
Come hither Jeremy. Dost thou see this Hand∣kerchief?
Yes forsooth.
I vowed this Handkerchief should never touch any bodies face, but such a one, as I would entreat to lie with me.
Indeed forsooth!
Come hither Jeremy. There's a spot o'thy Cheek, let me wipe it off.
O Lord forsooth. I'll go wash it.
Heaven made this Boy of a very honest Appe∣tight, sober Ignorance, and modest Understanding. My old Grandmothers Latin is verified upon him; Ars non habit Inimicum praeter Ignorantem. Ignorance is women's greatest Enemy. Who's within? Bridget.
Here forsooth.
Go your ways to Mistress Parmisan, the Cheesmongers Wife in old Fishstreet, and commend me to her; and entreat her to pray Mistress Collifloore the Hearb-woman in the Old Change, that she will de∣sire Mistress Piccadell in Bow-lane, in any hand to be∣seech the good old dry Nurse mother, Et cetera, she knows where, to provide me an honest, handsome, secret young man; that can write, and read written hand. Take your errand with you; that can write and read written hand.
I warrant you forsooth.
So, now will I meditate, take a nap, and dream out a few fancies.
WEE take our leaves Mr. Crazy, and wish good Journey to you.
Farewell good Mr. Crazy.
Adiue Brother.
Iterum iterumque vale.
Heartily Godbuy, good Mr. Crazy.
Nay but Gentlemen: A little of your patience you all know your own Debts, and my almost impu∣dent necessiries, satisfy me, that J may discharge o∣theirs. Will you suffer me to sink under my Freeness? shall my goodness, and ready Piety undo me? Sir Andrew Ticket, you are a professed Courtier, and should have a •ender sense of honour. This is your day of pay∣meant for two hundred pound.
Blood of Bacchus, tic true, tic my day, what then? Dost take me for a Citizen, that thou think I'll keep my day? No, thou'st find that I am a Courtier, let my day keep me and twill. But dost hear? Come to the Court. J will not say what I will do for thee. But come to the Court. I ow the two hundred pounds: I'll not deny it, if thou ask seven years hence for it, fare∣well. I say no more, but come to the Court, and see if I will know thee.
O, Sir, now you are in favour, you will know no body.
True: tic just. Why should we, when we are in favour know any body; when, if we be in disgrace, no body will know us? Farewell honest Tradesman.
That is Synonima for a fool. An ironical E∣pithite, upon my Fecundity.
O Master Sarpego! I know you will satisfy your own driblet of ten pound, I lent you out of my Purse.
Diogenes Laertius on a certain time, demon∣ding of Cornelius Tacitus an Areopagit of Syracusa; what was the most Commodious and expeditest me∣thod to kill the Itch, answered—
Answer me my monies I beseech you.
Peremptorily, Careo Supinis; I want money. I confess, some driblets are in the Debet. But, me
thinks, that you being a Man of Wit, Brain, Forecast and Forehead, should not be so easy, (I will not say foolish, for that were a figure) as to lend a Philoso∣pher money, that cries, when he is naked, Omnîa mea mecum porto. Well Sir, J shall ever live to wish, that your own Lantern may be your direction; and that, where ever you travel, the Cornu copy of A∣bundance may accompany you. Yes sure shall I. Vive valeque.
Why look you Brother, It was thought, that I had a tender Pericranion; or, in direct Phrase, that I was an unthristy fool. Signior no: you shall now find, that I cannot only keep mine own, but other men's. It is rightly said, He that is poor in Appetite, may quickly be rich in Purse. Desire little; covet little; no not your own: And you shall have enough.
Enough?
Yes Brother, little enough. I confess I am your Debtor for the loan of some hundred Marks. Now you have need: who has not? you have need to have it. I have need to pay it. Here's need of all hands. But Brother, you shall be no looser by me. Purchase Wit; Get wit (look you) wit. And Brother, if you come to the Court, now my Mother and my Father have bought me an Office there, so you will bring my Sister with you, I will make the best show of you that I can. It may chance to set you up again, Brother; tic many an honest mans fortune, to rise by a good Wife. Farewell sweet Brother. Prithee grow rich again; and wear good Clothes, that we may keep our Ac∣quaintance still. Farewell, dear Brother. Exit.
Mr. Rufflit—
What, does thy fist gape for money from me?
I hope it is not the fashion, for a Gallant of fashion, to break for so small a Portion as the sum of an hundred Angels.
For a Gallant of fashion to break, for a Gal∣lant of fashion? Dost thou know what a Gallant of fashion is? I'll tell thee. It is a thing that but once in three Months has money in his Purse; A creature made up of Promise and Protestation: A thing that fowls other men's Napkins: towseth other Men's Sheets, flatters all he fears, contemns all he needs not, sterves all that serve him, and undoes all that trust him. Dost ask me money, as I am a Gallant of fashion, I do thee Courtesy, I beat thee not.
I lent it you on your single word.
Tic pity but thou shouldest loose thy Free∣doom for it: you Tradesmen have a good Order in your City, Not to lend a Gentleman money without a Citizen bound with him: But you forsooth scorn Orders! By this light, tic pity thou loosest not thy Freedom for it. Well, when I am flush, thou shalt feel from me, Farewell. Prithee learn to have some wit. A handsome straight young fellow, grown into a pretty Bear, with a proper bodied Woman to his Wife, and cannot bear a Brain! Farewell. Dost hear? Be ruled by me, Get money, do, Get money and keep it; would thrive? Be rather a knave then a Fool. How much dost say I ow thee?
Fifty pound.
Thou art in my Debt. I have given the Coun∣sell worth threeskore, Dog-cheap, well I'll rent the odd money.
Strange mad fellows these same, Mr. Crazy, me thinks to deal withal.
You are right Mr. Linsey wolsie▪ I would my Genius had directed me, to deal always with such
honest neighbourly men as your self. I hope you will not deny me a Courtesy.
Not I, I protest, what is it?
You took once a Jewel of me, which you sold for thirty pound, for which I have your Bond for sixty, at your day of marriage. If you will now, because I want present money, give me but twenty pound, I'll acquit you.
My good friend Mr. Crazy, I have no tricks and Jerks to come over you, as the witty Gentleman had ere while: But I know a plain bargain is a plain bargain: and wit is never good till it be bought. If twenty pound will pleasure you, upon good security I will procure it you. A hundred if you please, do you mark Mr. Crazy? On good security. Otherwise you must pardon me, Mr. Crazy. I am a poor Tradesman Mr. Crazy, keep both a Linen and a Woollen Drapers shop, Mr. Crazy, according to my name, Mr. Crazy, and would be loath to lend my money, Mr. Crazy, to be laughed at among my Neighbours, Mr. Crazy, as you are Mr. Crazy. And so fare you well, Mr. Crazy.
Is this the end of unsuspicious Freeness?
Are open hands of Cheerful Piety,
A helpful bounty, and most easy Goodness,
Re•arded thus?
Is, to be honest, termed to be a fool?
Respect it Heaven. Bear up still merry heart.
Droop not: But scorn the worlds unjust despising.
Who through Goodness sinks, his fall's his Rising.
O Master, Master, upon my knowledge, my Mistress is forced since your departure to be
What Jeremy?
Honest Sir. Get up your Debts as fast as you can abroad: For on my understanding (which great Jove knows is but little) she will take up more then your due at home easily.
Boy. Did never observe at the Court gate, that the Lord was no sooner off from his Horse-back but the Lackey got up into the Saddle and rode home?
Yes Sir, tic common.
I scorn not my Betters Fortune. And what is not my sin, shall never be my shame.
In truth I was fine to make my self an Ass, or else I had been tempted to have been a knave.
Boy, thou art now my Prentice. From hence be free. Poverty shall serve it self. Yet do one thing for me.
If it be in the power of my poor Sconce.
If ever it be in thy possible ability, wrong all Men, use thy wit, to abuse all things, that have but sense of wrong: For without mercy, all men have in∣jur'd thy mistrustles Master, Milked my thoughts from my heart, and money from my Purse, and, last, laughed at my Credulity. Cheat, chosen, live by thy Wits: Tic most manly, therefore most noble. Horses get their living by their Backs, Oxen by their necks, Swine and Women by their Flesh, Only man by his Brain. In brief be a knave and prosper: For honesty has beggerd me.
Farewell Master. And if I put tricks upon some of them, let the end of the Comedy demonstrate.
I am resolved I will revenge. I never provoked my brain yet. But now if I clap not fire in the tails of some of these Samsons Foxes—seems my defect of Fortune want of wit? No.
The sense of our slight sports confessed shall have,
That any may be rich, will be a knave.
EGregious and most great of Expectation, my right dignified and truly Cice•onion Pupil, now that I have brought you into the Amoene fields with my ready thankfulness for the loan of this ten pound, I commit you to the grace of Court.
I shall expect that money shortly. Care to send it; For I purchased my place at a racked recom∣pence.
Your Sarpego is no slippery Companion. You know I am to marry, and this money shall provide me Complements.
Beloved of Phoebus, Minion of the Muses, dear Water Bailey of Helicon, let it not be distaste∣full to thy Divine ears, to receive the humble Petite∣on of a poor Creature, made miserable by the policy of Providence. That thy rare and absolute Mu••fi∣cence might supply what fortune had l•st defective: I kiss thy learned toes.
I tell thee, by the Axioms of the Peripateticall Aristotle, thou art a Monster. My reward shall be therefore like thy self, monstrously lame. This is a figure in Eloquution called Apoxegesis.
I am not fed with Figures Sir.
You are an idle vagabond, and lye in wait for the blood of the learned. Labour, and live.
Right eloquent and well-phrased Sir, my adieu∣cation has been liberal. I sometimes fed my flock on horned Parnassus: But my wants forced me to my Sword.
You did peradventure sip on the top of Science, Primoribus labijs, or so, but did not convert it in Suc∣cum &amp; sanguinem.
That I may ever remain a true man—Extend.
The Sun, Moon and the seven Planets are my invoked witnesses, I should be grieved, that necessity should make me grow violent on so adored, adorned Gramme∣ticall Disciplinary—Be gracious in Contribution—Sir—
J will give thee an infinite treasure. Sis integer vitae, scelerisque purus. Vale poor Rogue.
Sir, this Sword can bite—But, J know you had rather give it freely out of your own Proclivity.
Yes I protest, as I am Erudite. Here dreadful Mavortian, the poor price of a Dinner.
If I might in modesty importune the poor price of a Supper too.
I do speak it in the Optative Mood, I do wish it lay in the model of my Fortune to give harbour to your shaken state, yet receive this with appeased clutch.
If I might not seem audacious even to impu∣dence, I poor Freshman in Literature, would implore
of your well-salted, &amp; best seasoned virtue, some larger allowance to supply my defects of Raiment, Books, and other necessaries: which magnificence shall ever entitle you, my most bounteous Maecenas. Be induced to it Sir.
Yes, yes, yes, that you may know how dear you are to me; Know this is more then usual largess—for non omnibus dormio—There's a Figure too.
O yes Sir, I understand this Figure too very well. Now dear Mecenas, let me implore a Purse to enclose these Monies in—Nay if you impart not with a cheerful forehead, Sir
Vae misero mihi! sweet Purse adieu. Iterum ite∣rumque vale.
May you be importuned to do it, Sir.
You shall have it instantly. I will only deprome, or take out a little stuffing first.
Tic no matter. As it is, As it is, good Sir, as it is. Jle accept it as it is. Most fragrant-phrased Ma∣ster, suffer thy self •o be entreated. Doe—
You have most powerfully persuaded: Take it.
Most exorbitantly bounteous Mecenas, you have given me all this, have you not?
Yes, yes, and you have taken all that, have you not?
Yes, yes, but as your gift. Jove bless thy brows, and make clear thy Physiognomy. Vale. Your learned Worship stincks.
Now Barbarism, Incongruity, and false Orthography shame thee; The curse of Priscian take thee. All the parts of speech
defy thee. All the Interjections of sorrow, as Heu hei▪ of Shunning, as Apogee; of Disdaining, as Hem vah; of Scorning, as Hue; of Exclaiming, as Proh Deum at∣que hominum fidem take thee. My dear Pupils lend∣ings hast thou lewdly licked away: And sorrowful Sarpego is licked dry. There's a figure left yet! But ô thou Castalion Traitor, Pick-purse of Parnassus, and Hang-man of Helicon: Dives thirst in thy Throat; Ix∣ions wheel on thy back; Tantalus hunger in thy guts; and Sisyphus stone in thy Bladder.
O fearful curse! Well; I hay given my first pinch, and a little scratched my Goat-bearded Gram∣marian, that Broke jests on my uncunning easiness. But he with the rest shall feel, that modest Simplicity is not always a defect of wit, but will: What my willing honesty hath seemed to loose, my affected deceits shall recover. I'll rid 'em one after another, like Guts, till they shall stink worse then Jewes.
And they shall find with most ashamed eyes,
The honest Breast lives only rich and wise.
Bridget.
Here forsooth.
Bridget, I say.
Here, Lady.
That's comfortably spoken! Nay blush not:
We women can never have too much given us. And
Madame▪ Josina would sound well.
Yes indeed, Madame Josina Crazy.
No; not Crazy; hang Crazy: Crazy is my Hus∣bands name. I wonder why Women must be called by their Husbands names, I.
O, they must forsooth.
And why not men by their Wives?
Marry forsooth, because that Men, when they marry, become but half men: And the other half goes to their Wives. And therefore she is called Woman; where before she was called but Maid.
Is a married Man but half a Man? what is his other half then?
Truly, oftentimes, Beast. Which part the wife gives to boot, in exchange of her name. One knocks.
Hark, some body knocks; go see. What should any body knock at my Garden door for? I doe not use to be visited in my Garden.
Yonders a Gentleman craves admittance to converse with you.
I'll converse with no Gentleman. What have I to do with Gentlemen?
A fair-spoken, comely, modest Gentleman he is.
Is he so? I'll speak with no modest Gentleman▪ You were best be his Bawd. But are you sure he is a true Gentleman? does he wear clean Linen, and lack Money?
Here he comes forsooth.
He is very confident, and forward, me thinks.
Exquisite; very Elixir of Beauty, vouchsafe to receive the tender of my Faith to you; which I protest is zealously devoted to your particular service.
You may speak louder Sir: for I assure you, my Maid is very thick of hearing, and exceeding weak sighted.
Then, Lady, let it be spoken in bold phrase, I love you.
I thank you Sir. How should I stile you, pray?
My name is Pulse-feel: A poor Doctor of Phy∣sick, that wears three-pile velvet in his Cap; has paid a quarters rent of his house afore-hand; and as meanly as he stands here, was made Doctor beyond the Seas. I vow (as I am right Worshipful) the taking of my Degree cost me twelve French crowns, and five and thirty pound of salt Butter in upper Germany. I can make your beauty, and preserve it; Rectify your Body, and maintain it; perfume your skin; tinct your hair; enliven your Eye; Heighten your Appetite. As for Gel∣lies, Dentifrices, Diets, Mineral Fucusses, Pomatums, Fumes, Italian Masks to sleep in, either to moisten, or
dry the Superficies of your face; paugh, Gallon was a Goose, and Paracelsus a Patch to Doctor Pulse-feel▪ Make me then happy, dear sweating, in your private •avours: The which I vow with as much secrefie, constancy and Resolution, to preserve, as you, with Bounty, sweetness and Freeness shall impart.
I protest you speak very far within me; I re∣spect you most affectionately.
Then Isle attend you at your Chamber: where the best pleasure, youth, Cupped can minister shall en∣tertaine you.
Entertain me with pleasure? what pleasure I pray you?
Nothing but kiss you Lady, and so forth.
Well, for kissing and so forth, I care not; But look for no dishonesty at my hands, I charge you.
I will be provident.
And honest, I beseech you: And secret, and re∣solute, I advise you.
Good.
And very chaste I command you. But a kiss, and so forth.
I understand you. This be my pledge of faith.
And this of mine.—The thought of me rest with you. And hear you Doctor; I prithee pro∣cure me some young Fellow, that can write: For I am so troubled with Letters, that I neither read nor an∣swer—
Rely upon me. I can fit you rarely. I know a well qualified fellow, that dances rarely, plays on di∣verse
Instruments, and withal is close.
I marry, Close! Pray let me have him. Kiss and adieu.
I will maintain it. He only, that knows it, per∣mitts, and procures it, is truly a Cuckold. Some fellow would be divorced now. Crazy, speak; wilt be di∣vorc'd? why, what and I were? why then thou art an Ass, Crazy. Why Sir? why Sir! why prithee tell me, what would thy Divorce hurt her? It would but give her more liberty. She should have bounteous Cu∣stomers; Gallants, that would hoist her tires, bestow deep on her. And she should be paid for it. You speak somewhat to the matter Sir. Nay Crazy, believe it, though she be not a very modest woman for a Wife, thou may force her to be a reasonable private wench for a Whore. Say you so? Byr'lady, and I'll take your Counsel. It is a pretty Drab. I know not where to compass such another? troth Sir, I'll follow your ad∣vice.
And, if my hopes prove not extremely ill,
I'll keep her flesh chaste, though against her will.
He took her by the middle so small
And laid her on the Plain:
And when he had his will on her,
He took her up again.
And what was she then the worse for wearing?
Can you tell Mr. Doctor?
What art thou?
One Sir (I dare tell you in private) that can conduct you to a more lovely Creature, then her you last courted.
A young Pimp, a very sucking-pig Pimp! What an Age is this, when children play at such great game! So young, so forward!
The young and the old mun too't, mun too't,
The young and the old mun to it;
The young ones will learn to do it, to do it,
And the Oldforget not to do it.
This Infant piece of Impudence ama•es me. Prithee what art thou? or whom dost thou serve, or broke for.
As delicate a piece of Woman-flesh as ever Mortal laid lip to. O she is all Venus! And, to come close to you, she wants a Physician. You are one I take it: I am a fool else.
I am caught? This habit will betray me. What is she, I say.
O she is, she is a matchless piece,
Though all the world may woo her;
Nor golden shower, nor golden fleece,
Is price enough to do her.
For what wants she a Physician?
For what you please, when you come to her. Sir, upon my life, shoe's free from any Disease, but the Counterfeits. Will you know all Sir? she wants a wi•e mans counsel to assist her in getting a Husband. I take hold of you for that wise man, she relies upon my Election. Will you go Sir? Tic in an exceeding civil
house; a precise one, indeed. Know you not Mr. Lin∣sey Woolsey?
Not at his house?
Pardon me Sir. At his very house. All the wise wenches in the Town will thwack to such Sanctuaries, when the times are troublesome, and Troopers trace the streets in terror.
Prithee, what call thy Mistress?
There she lies Sir, by the name of Mistress Tryman; a rich young Cornish Widow; though she was borne in Clearken-well; and was never half a days Journey from Bride well in her life. Her Father was a Pinn-maker—Sings.
Along along, where the Gallants throng
By twenties, away the Widow to carry:
But let them tarry: For she will carry
Twenty, before that one she will Marry.
Will you along Sir?
Tic but a weak engagement: yet Isle go;
Needless are fears, where Fortunes are so low.
A Widow! what is she? or of whence?
A lusty young wench, they say: A Cornish Girl; able to wrestle down stronger Chines then any of ours.
But how is she pursed, Jack? Is she strong that way?
Pretty well for a younger Brother; worth 7 or 8 thousand pound.
How man!
You are a married man, and cannot Rival me▪ I would not else be so open to you.
I swear Isle help thee all I can. How did find her out?
I have intelligence, that never fails me, she came to town neither but very lately; and lodged at Mr. Wolseys.
Who, Linsey wolsie, the Hermaphroditicall Dra∣per! That's a precious No•t-headed Rascal. He will go near to aim at her himself.
Like enough. He may aim at her: But she will be hit by none but a Gentleman, that I hear 〈…〉 Oh she has a fierce Ambition to a Ladyship, though her late Husband was a Tanner.
A Tanner, well Jack, cake heed how thou ven∣tur•st on her to make her a Gentlewoman: She will kill •hee at her Husbands occupation before thou wile be able to make her Hide gentle. Thou w••• find a tough piece of Curriers work on her. Look who here is.
Truly▪ Mr. Toby Sneakup, me thinks I find an alteration in my self already.
Nay, I told you; would you but give your Mind to it, you would be a Gentleman quickly.
How's this? let's stand aside a••tle.
Sure, hoe's about to turn himself into a Gentleman to win to the Widow!
And what a Tutor he has picked out to instruct him!
Me thinks I love the name of a Gentleman a great deal better then I did.
But could you find in your heart to lend a Gentleman a score of Angels, Mr. Wolsey, on his word?
Uhm—I is not gone so far upon me yet.
Oh, but it m•st though, I know it. A Citizen can never be a Gentleman, till he has lent all, or almost all his money to Gentlemen. What a while it was ere the rich Joiners son was a Gentleman? when I my self was a Gentleman first, my money did so burn in my Pockets, that it cost me all that ever I had, or could borrow, or steal from my Mother.
But Mr. Toby, a man may be a Country Gentleman, and keep his money, may he not?
You see Sir, This Widow is removed from the Country into the City, to avoid the multiplicity of Country Gentlemen that were here •uitors. Nay you must be a City Gallant; or a Courtier.
I see no Courtiers, but are more apt to borrow, then to •end.
I, those that were born, or bred Courtiers I grant you, But to come to it at your years—
I can the sooner learn. Your Courtier Sir, I pray.
Isle tell you in a brief character was taught me. Speak nothing that you mean, perform nothing that you promise, pay nothing that you owe, flatter all a∣bove you, scorn all beneath you, deprave all in pri∣vate, praise all in public; keep no truth in your mouth, no faith in your heart; no health in your bones, no friendship in your mind, no modesty in your eyes, no Religion in your conscience; but especially, no Money in your Purse.
O that Article spoils all.
If you do, take heed of spending it on any thing but Panders, Puncks, and Fiddlers; for that were most unfashionable.
I thank you Sir, for your Courtly and Gentle∣manlike instructions, and wish you grace to follow them: I have seen too fearful an example lately in my neighbour Crazy, whose steps I list not trace; nor lend my Money to be laughed at among my Neighbours. Fare you well Sir.—
Ha ha ha.
Mr. Wolsie! Well met. How does your fair Guest at home, Mrs. Tryman?
How should he come to the knowledge of her? Some of these Gallants will snatch her up, if I prevent not spy∣deli.
Why speak you not Mr. Wolsie? How does the Widow?
Truly not well Sir. Whether it be weariness of her journey, change of ayre, or diet, or what I know not; something has distempered her.
Or Love, perhaps of you Mr. Wolsie.
Me? Alas, I look like no such Gentleman.
You may in a short time.
Hark hither Mr. Wolsie.
We overheard you man: And I guest as much before.
Tic very true Sir, she is worth nine thousand pound: But marry she will not'but a Gentleman: And I think I have beat him off of the condition, I have put him off of that scent for ever, with a false character, Heaven and the Court forgive me.
Thou hast in truth Boy: And on purpose to have her thy self, I perceive it.
He does not. He's an Ass.
Well, if I were a Bachelor, I should envy thy wit, and thy fortune. Is she very handsome?
So so: You shall see we'll make a shift with her.
Mr. Wolsie, I would you had her with all my heart; you shall not want my good word and best wishes.
Do you speak this in earnest Sir, or as you are a Courtier:
In earnest I, and as I am a Gentleman.
Then in earnest, and as I am an honest man, I do not believe you. Mr. Toby Sneakup has told me what Gentlemen and Courtiers are, too lately.
Mr. Sneakup▪ well met.
Good Mr. Rufflit.
Now fair Maids lay down my B•d,
And draw the Curtains round:
Tell the World that I am dead,
And who hath given the wound,
Ah me poor Soul!
Alack for love I dye,
Then to the Sexton hie,
And cause the Bell to towel.
O here he is! Mr. Wolsie, indeed my Master Wolsie, if ever you will see my Mistress your Sweetheart alive, you must go home presently.
My Sweetheart!
I think she is; and that in death she will be so. I speak by what she says, and others think.
Tic the Widows Boy,
Is she sicker then she was.
O she is even speechless, and calls for you exceedingly. I fetched a Doctor to her, and he can do her no good. Master Sarpego has made her Will and all.
Has she given me any thing?
Quickly go and see Sir, you will come too late else, I am going to get the Bell to towel for her.
Fare ye well Gentlemen.
Tic. Ruff. Nay, we'll along with you.
Sing.
Did never truer heart
Out of the World depart,
Or cause the Bell to towel.
LOok up Mistress.
Jo. Take a good heart, the worst is past, fear not.
Ah, ah, ah.
Reach the Bottle again of Doctor Stephens water.
No no, apply more warm clothes to her sto∣mack, there the matter lies which sends this distem∣perature into her brain. Be of good cheer Gentle∣woman.
Is Mr Wolsie there?
Nothing but Mr. Wolsie ever in her mouth.
Pray Sir, how do you like her? I am much af∣afraid of her.
Let me see, to night it will be full Moon. And she scope the turning of the next Tide, I will give her a gentle Vomit in the morning, that shall ease her sto∣mack of this conflux of venomous humours, and make her able to sit a hunting Nag within this seven-night.
A rare man sure. And, I warrant, well seen in a Woman▪
Uh, uh, uh, uh.
Well said, spit out gently, strain not your self too hard.
Agh—faugh.
Tic very well done. La'you. Her colour be∣gins to come. Isle lay all my skill to a mess of Tewks∣bury Mustard, she sneezes thrice within these three hours—
Good Sir want nothing, that your skill shall approve necessary in this time of need. Good Wives and kind Neighbours, I thank you for your cares.
Is Mr. Wolsie there?
She does nothing but call for you Sir, pray speak to her.
Whore's Mr. Wolsie.
Here Lady. How do you?
Then I am even well me thinks—agh—agh—
Shoe's very far gone I fear, how do you find her disease Sir?
Dangerous enough Sir. For she is sicker in mind then in body. For I find most plainly the of∣fects of a deep melancholy, fallen through her distem∣perature of passion upon her Liver; much disordering, and withal wasting the vitals, leaving scarce matter for Physic to work on. So that her mind receiving
the first hurt, must receive the first cure.
Agh agh ah—poh faugh—
So so: Strain not your self too hard. No hurt; so so.
Here's melancholy and choler both in plenty.
He speaks with great reason, me thinks, and to the purpose, I would I understood him.
Do you not know▪ Sir, any that has offended her by open injury, or unkindness?
Alas Sir, no such thing could happen since her coming hither.
Then, on my life, tic Love that afflicts her.
Oh oh uh oh—
I have touched her to the quick. I have found her disease, and that you may prove the abler Doctor in this extremity.
Who I? Alas I believe no such matter.
Mr. Wolsie, Mr. Wolsie.
Here he is Lady. Pray speak your mind to him. Must I pull you to her? Here he is. What do you say to him? Pray speak.
Oh no, no no no—
She hath something troubles her that con∣corns only you. Pray take her by the hand, do as I entreat you. Lady we will go, and leave you in private awhile, if you please.
Pray do. O but do not, pray do not.
Do you perceive nothing in this passion of hers?
How does she feel your hand?
O, she does so quiddle it, shake it, and gripe it!
You are then the man Sir, the happy man. For she shall recover suddenly.
Who I? Alack a day.
What will you have me dye intestate. Is not my Will made, as I directed?
Where are you Mr. Sarpego, with the Will.
Ad manum. Sweet Buds of Generosity, for∣bear you may Admirer, at the abundance here specified: But not find a Legacy bequeathed among you
We expect nothing.
I only wish your health, Lady; and that it may, or might have been my happiness to sue to you for Love; as I do now to the highest power for Life.
Would I were married to her, as she is; and it were but for an hour, I cared not. Had my mother been but acquainted with her, before she fell sick, here had been a match!
O Dij immortales! A rich Widow shall have Suitors on her Death-bed.
Good Sir, It is too late to speak of these things. I only crave and wish your prayers in your absence: This place can yield no pleasure to you I know. Mr. Wolsey, pray your hand again: I could be even content to live me thinks, if I had but such a man as you to my Huh, uh, uh, uh.—
By your leave. Pray by your leave. Help Women. Bear up her Body a little. Bow it forwards. So, speak to her, Sr. Good Lady drink of this Cordial.
How do you now forsooth?
What now she is drinking—Now speak Sir, you or no man must do her good.
How do you forsooth?
Well said Sir, speak cheerfully to her.
How dee doe? how dee doe, Mistress Tryman How first now, ha?
Very comfortably spoken!
I, was it not?
Alas she cannot speak. I'll call my Neigh∣bore Mistress Sneakup. If any body can make her speak, it is she.
I'll call my Mother for you. She will make her speak, if she have but a word left in her belly—Mass here she comes.
How comes it Mr. Wolsey, that you have a Gentlewoman sick in your house, and not send for me? Let me feel her hand. Alas she is shrewdly distem∣per'd. When had she a stool Sir, Prithee Daughter step home to my Closet, and bring the Vial of—my own Water, which stands next to my blew Vel∣vet Cabinet.
That's my Doctor was with me to day
Shoe's a young Gentlewoman; may have many Children yet, let me note her eyes: I find nothing there. When did you see her water Mr. Doctor?
What Devil sent this fury among us?
In troth I beshrew you, Mr. Wolsey, you sent not for me, but I hope I come not too late. Pluck up a Women's heart, you shall find a good Neighbour of me.
I will thank you in my Will. I shall not live to thank you otherwise.
Alas talk not of your will. You shall have time enough to think of that many years hence.
I tell her so, Lady, yet she calls for it still.
Pray let me see it, that I may sign it. Ʋh Ʋh—
Lord how my Daughter stays. Good Sir Andrew Ticket! worthy Mr. Rufflit! My Son To∣bias is highly honoured in your noble Acquaintance, and Courtly conversation.
We rather hold our selves dignified, in being his endeared Companions.
I assure you Mother, we are the three of the Court.
I most entirely thank you for him. And I do beseech you make your selves no strangers to my poor house. Wee are alone; can give but light enter∣tainement, my Daughter and I; since my Son Cra∣sies misfortune drave him from us—
O welcome Daughter—I beseech you noble Sirs estrange not your selves to us, your Servants.
Pox o'your Complement.
Give me the Vial Daughter. Take up the La∣die. Taste of this. It is a Composition of mine own distilling.
Uh, uh, uh, umh—
Well done. Nay it will make you break wind, I tell you.
By the service I owe you sweet Mistress, tic un∣fained. My Wife desires to see you.
As I can best witness; And fears you enjoy not the liberty of a Woman, since your Husbands de∣parture.
Your Brother having promised too, to con∣duct you to Court.
It is confessed, and I will do it.
Where the best entertainment a poor Ladies chamber can afford, shall expect you.
I shall embrace it.
Sfoot, tic time to part you—Mistress, I be∣seech your help, joined with your virtuous Mothers.
You forget the young man, that can Dance Write, and keep Counsel.
I forget you not Lady. But I wish you to be∣ware of these Courtiers, till I tell you what they are:
I'll be hanged if this Doctor be not of her smock Counsel.
How is it now, good heart?
Much enlightened, I thank Heaven and you. Now, pray, read Sir my Will.
In Dei nominee. Amen.
O let us hear the Will.
I Iane Tryman of Knockers hole, in the County of Cornwall, Widow, Sick in Body, but whole in Mind, and of perfect memory, do make my last Will and Testament, in Manner and Form following.
As for the Manner and Form tic no matter. To the Legacies, briefly.
Hum hum. Imprimis, A Dole of Bread to be given to the Poor of this Parish—five pound.
Stay. This I entreat of you Mr. Wolsey, that whether I live or dye, this Dole may be given to more∣row. It was the Charge of my Mother to see it done; Saying, it was better to take the Prayers of the Poor with me, then leave them to be sent after.
It shall be done: and you, I hope, shall see it.
To Mr. Sarpego, the Writer hereof, A Mourn∣ing
Gown, and forty pound, to Preach at the Fun∣rall.
How! forty pound?
Di bone! No. Tic forty shillings. Item to my Nephew, Sir Marmaduke Trevaugh an of St. Mine∣ver, one thousand pound in Gold. Item to my No∣phew Mr. Francis Trepton, one thousand pound in Gold. Item to my Kinsman, Sir Stephen Leggleden, I do forgive two thousand pound, for which his Lands are Mortgaged to me. Item to his Daughter, my God-daughter Iane Leggleden, five hundred pound in money; my best Basin and Ewer; two silver Flagon Pots, and three silver and gilt standing Cups. Item to the poor of the Parish of Knockers-hole, ten pound, and forty pound towards the reparation of their Church. Item to Mr. Linsey wolsey the Ring, which was my Wedding Ring, and fifty other Rings, with several stones in my Trunk, in his house, valued at two hundred and fifty pounds. Item to all his ser∣vents, and to the Women that attended me in my sickness, five pound a piece.
Now the Lord receive her to his mercy.
My Legacy will save her life; for never any body dyed yet, that bequeathed me any thing.
Item, to my Page Jeffery Crack forty pound. And all my other Servants ten pound a peace. Item to my Niece Barbara Tredrite five hundred pound; my second Basin and Ewer, a dozen of silver Dishes, and four dozen of silver Spoons. Lastly, all the rest of my Lands, Jewels, Plate, Money, Debts, Movables and Unmoveables, to my dear and loving Brother, Sir Gre∣gory Flamsted, whom I make my full Executor. In cujus rei testimonium, &amp;c. This is the brief of it.
Tic well. Only add to it—Ʋh—A Gold Chain also in my Trunk to this virtuous Gentlewo∣man.
And another Chain, that is there of Pearl, to her Daughter. To this learned Doctor twenty pound. And to the Gentlemen which have visited me, for them and their friends an hundred pound to be spent in a Banckquet.
Hoc nihil referred. I must write all over again then.
Do so then. And make your forty shillings five pound.
Gratias vel ingentes ago. It shall be done—
Now Mr. Wolsie, and your virtuous Neighbour here, I entreat, that when I have signed this Will, that you keep it till my Brother comes to Town. This Doctor shall direct you in all. And that he may be the better able so to do, I desire you all that I may a while be private with him.
With all our hearts.
Are they all gone?
Now Mr. Doctor, what think you of the sick Widow?
Has she done her part hitherto?
Beyond my expectation! Better then I for a Doctor.
You are right. And I am even the same for a Widow as you for a Doctor. Do not I know you? Yes good Mr. Crazy. I dare trust you, because you must trust me. Therefore know, that I the rich Widow am no better, then a Lady that must live by what I bear about me. The vulgar translation you know, but let them speak their pleasure, I have no Lands, and since I am borne, must be kept, I may make the best of my own, and if one member maintain the whole body, what's that to any one?
I collected as much by your young Whiskin that brought me hither.
It was by my direction that he did so. And, by my Instructions, he has had an Eye upon you in all your disguises ever since your pretended •journey out of Town. Nay startle not, nor muse at my acquain∣tance with you: I have had you in my Purlews, be∣fore you were a Freeman: And will hereafter give you certain tokens of it. In the mean time, if you comply with me, you can be no loofer by it. I am grown weary of my old course; and would fine, by wiser, do my self good, before Age or Diseases make it too late.
I will work close and friendly with thee. Therefore say, this rich Cockscomb is thine own. O here comes your Pigg-wiggen.
He is of Counsel, and one of us. He is indeed my Brother, and has been one of the true blew Boys of the Hospital; one of the sweet singers to the City Funerals with a two penny loaf under his arm.
Well: He never sung to the wheel in Saint Brides Nunnery yonder.
Nay Jeff, be not angry; thou hast sung to the Organs I know, till fearing their downfall, thou be∣took thy self into my more certain service. All friends, good Jeff.
Yes, yes, we must all agree, and be linked in Covenant together.
By Indenture Tripartite, and't please you, like Subtle, Doll, and Face.
Witty Jeff. I cannot see which can be spared from the rest, least the whole trade break.
Then let us be friends, and most friendly agree.
The Pimp and the Punk and the Doctor are three,
That cannot but thrive, when united they be.
The Pimp brings in custom, the Punk she gets treasure,
Of which the Physician is sure of his measure,
For work that she makes him in sale of her pleasure.
For which, when she fails by diseases or pain,
The Doctor new Vamps and upsets her again.
Thou art a brave Lad, and in the high way of preferment.
Not the high Holborn way, I hope Sir.
And for you Damsel, as I said before, say to your self, the Match is yours.
I mean to say, and know it shortly. Some three days hence all may be completed. Now draw the Curtains; and follow your affairs, while I put on my sick Face again. Ʋh, uh, uh.
NOw could I Accost that Catlinarian Traitor, that defea∣ted me of my ten pound, I have a precogitated Ore∣tion should make him suspend himself. But Abiit, e∣visit, erupit. Or if the rich Widow would have dyed, there had been a supply. But she is nearer a Nuptial, then a Funeral: And hopeless Sarpego, that should wed, has not to furnish him to his intent, Vae mihi mi∣sero nec Aurum, nec Argent—tum! Here comes my Beatitude.
O, are you here Sir? I was to seek you. My old Mistress would speak with you instantly.
My Legitimate Spouse, when is our day of con∣junction?
Our day of conjunction? Mary faugh Good∣man Fist. Our day of conjunction?
Did you not once vow you did love me?
Did not you once swear you had money?
Hic jacet, I am now but a dead man.
O whore's Mr. Sarpego? Fortunate Mr. Sarpe∣go? Venerable Mr. Sarpego? O Sir, you are made. Never think under right worshipful. Imagine nothing beneath Damasque Gowns, Velvet Jackets, Satin Sleeves, Silk Nightcaps, two Pages and a Footcloth.
The Son of Phoebus rectify your Brain-pan.
Indeed, and't shall please your Worship, it is—
It is! What is it? You will be speaking, will you? And your Wife in presence, will you? you show your bringing up. Master Sarpego, bless the time that ever you knew the Progeny of the Sneakups: my worcester∣shipfull Son and Heir apparent hath preferred you to be the young Prince his Tutor. Here's Mr. Holywater, a Gentleman; of place, a Courtier; of Office, is sent for you.
Right fortunately-learned Sir. So passionate∣lie doth his Grace approve the Language, Literature, and Haviour of your sometimes Pupil, Master To∣bias Sneakup.
Umh.
That I was, with all expedition, commanded to entreat your instant Attendance.
Umh Umh—
It is even so Sir; You are like to possess a Princes ear; you may be in place, where you may scorn your foes; countenance your friends; cherish virtue, control vice, and despise fortune: Yes sure shall you Sir. And (which I had almost forgot) your old Pupil entreats you to send him by me the ten pound he lent you: An od ten pound, that he may be furnished with the more seemly Complements to con∣duct you to his Grace.
Quid nuns?
Whist Mr. Sarpego. Let not your poverty be read in your face. Here's ten pieces. Bear it as your own payment: You talk of ten pound for my Son, Sir.
O, an od driblet. Here, Friend, I use not to carry Silver: Convey it in Gold.
I hope, dear Love, you will not forget your affection to me now.
Poor Maid, I will prefer thee to scratch my head; make my Bed; wash my Shirt, pick my toes, and evacuate my Chamber-pot. I will instantly procure me attire, fitting my fortune, and attend the Grace of Court—
Now am I but a dead woman.
I am much grieved for it. It was your sons much labouring, that Mr. Crazy was sent for, to sell his Grace some Jewels: But since his fortunes are so sunk that he hides his head, I can but lament his loss.
Shall I tell you Sir, (pray you husband stand a∣side;) My Son-in-Law Crazy is not now worth—his very wife. We hoped he would have proved a crafty Merchant, and he proved an honest man, a Beggar (if I chance to speak above your capacity, I pray tell me of
it) And as I said, when I perceived he began to melt, and that every stranger abused him; I, having some wit, fell too, and most cozened him my self. I looked for my daughters good: And so betwixt us, found the trick to get, or steal from him two Jewels of good deep value, being indeed the main of his rest of Fortune. Now Sir, I come to you.
I, now you come to the point.
Right Sir: For there is no woman, though she use never so many by-words, but yet in the end she will come to the point. Now Sir, I having these Jewels, will send them by my husband. A poor easy weak man, as you see; but very obedient in truth—
By your husband.
Yes, do you mark? By my husband. But now note my wit: His Grace knows not Crazy: My hus∣band, habitat like a Citizen, shall take the name of Crazy upon him; offer his Jewels to the Prince; you shall present them; praise them and raise them: His Grace pays; my husband returns; and we will share. Do you approve?
Nay admire.
Away then. No Complement among good wits; but away. Come your ways hi∣there, good man; Put off your hat; Make a leg; Look simply. Why so! Pish, ne'er tell me: He will make a rare Citizen. I have Jewels for you to carry to the Prince.
Yes forsooth, I'll carry them.
La! you are so quick! I have charged you not to shoot your bolt, before you understand your mark. And you shall carry them like a Citizen; call your self Crazy; sell them at my price; and now cast no further. You see the limits of your understanding. Now Sir, how will you bear your self to his Grace?
How behave your self at Court?
I hope I am not too wise to learn.
Why, that was well spoken. Modest mistrust is the first step to knowledge. Remember that sen∣tence. Now mark. I will instruct you: When you come at the Court gate, you may neither knock nor peace. Do you mark? You go through the Hall co∣ver'd; through the great Chamber covered; through the Presence bare; through the Lobby covered; through the Privy Chamber bare; through the Privy Lobby covered; to the Prince bare.
I'll do it I warrant you. Let me see. At the Court gate neither knock nor make water. May not a man break wind?
Umh, yes: but (like the Exchequer payment) somewhat abated.
Through the great Chamber bare.
Covered.
Covered? Well: Through the Presence co∣ver'd.
Bare.
Bare? I will put all dow in my Table-book, and con it by the way.
Well thought on. Something he has in him like my husband! But now you come before the brow of Royalty. Now for your carriage there Sir: Sup∣pose me the Prince. Come in, and present. Here sits the Prince. There enters the Jeweller. Make your ho∣nors. Let me see you do it handsomely.
Yes, now I come in; make my three legs—And then—
Kneel.
Yes; and say—
What?
Nay, that I know not.
An't please your Grace, I have certain Jewels to present to your liking.
An't please your Grace, I have certain Jewels to present to your liking.
Is this Crazy, that had wont to serve me with Jewels? It is that honest man, so please your High∣ness. That's for M. Holywater, the by-flatterer to speak. You are a Cuekoldly Knave, Sirrah, and have often a∣bused me with false and deceitful stones.
My stones are right, so please your Ex∣cellence.
Why that was well, Very well. I perceive there is a certain infection taken with lying with a wo∣man that hath a good wit. I find it by my husband. Come, I'll disguise you, and away to Court in∣stantly.
Truly wife, I fear J shall be discovered among the Gallants presently.
No, no, A fool is never discovered among mad∣men.
WEll Dol, (that thou say is thy name) though J had forgotten thee, J protest. About London-wall was it (say thou?) Well, J can∣not but highly commend thy wisdom in this, that so
well hast mended thy election; from being a foun∣tain of aches, bald brows, and broad plasters, thus to remember thy Creation.
I did consider, and I think rightly, what I was; and that men that loved my use, loved it but to loath me: Therefore I changed my self into this shape of a demure, innocent Country Widow, that had scarce beauty enough to be tempted, but not wit e∣nough to be nought; and quite forsook the path I trod in, and betook me to this private course of co∣zenage.
But all my wonder is at the means, how thou got into this house and reputation. And to be held a woman of such an estate.
That shall bee made plain to you here∣after.
Now Brother Geffrey, where left you M Wolsie?
Among the Mercers, so troubled, as if all the Satin in Cheapside were not enough to make you a wedding Gown. He is over-joy'd that his happy day is at hand; and I over-heard him invite one spe∣ciall friend to his Nuptials. He cannot contain him∣self. On a sudden he fell a singing, O shoe's a dainty Widow. O are you come Sir, in your new shape? Dos not that beard fit you handsomely? Thank my ac∣quaintance with the Players.
I think thou art acquainted any way, to set out knavery.
If you can perform your part as well, it is well. Hark, I hear him coming.
Where are you sweet Widow? Look you, Look you: How do you like these patterns?
Sir, here's a Gentleman has a Letter to you: He tells me it imports the making, or the undo∣ing of his dearest friend.
From whom, I pray you?
Your sometimes neighbor Sir, M: Crazy.
It shall take effect, doubt not.
He scratches his head, though.
He had as lief part with his blood as his money.
M. Crazy writes to me for thirty pound; the value of a Ring I had of him. I grant I am to pay threescore at my day of Marriage. But we are all mortal. And who knows whether I shall live till to morrow.
If not, Sir, your Bond is due to night: For it is equally payable at your hour of death.
O, but such payments never trouble a man. What the eye sees not—
Are you in Bonds, M. Woolsie, for your day of Marriage?
Only for this sixty pound. It is for that Ring you wear, and I gave you upon our Contract. It is worth thirty pound ready money.
Then when you are married, you may say you paid the rest for your wife. Pray Sir make even such reckonings before you wed. It will show nobly in you towards your poor Creditor, and be a special argument of your love to me, your wife. Pray dis∣charge it, I shall not think you love me else.
Hark you Sir, if you will take thirty pound in full
payment, and give me in my Bond, here is your money. It is your best course. Alas, I am an unlikely fellow for wedlock. What woman, think you, would bestow her self upon me, a stale Bachelor, unhandsome and poor—not worth above six or seven thousand pound? Do; take thirty pound.
If you please to be friend Mr. Crazy but which thirty pound, Isle set it received upon the Bond. Here it is. And he shall demand no more till it be due.
Pray Sir pay it all, and take in your Bond. You shall be married within these two days; to morrow, if you please: What use will your money yield you for a night? Pray pay it. In truth I'll pay it else. It is but threescore pound.
Say thou so, Sweetheart. Come Sir. Come in and tell your money—
And thank you too, good M. Linsey VVolsie, that knew so well, a bargain was a bargain, and would not part with your money to be laughed at a∣mong your neighbours. I would heartily now, if I could intend it. But I must purse your money, and then about my Court affairs. This wench I am in∣finitely beholden to. She remembers some old curt∣sie that I have forgotten. Perhaps I pidled with her when I was Prentice.
THis is the Presence. I am much amazed, or stupefied, that Mr. Tobias Sneakup, my quon∣dam Pupil, attends not my Conduct! Ha! So in∣stant was his Grace, his importunity to enjoy me, that although I purchased the loan of Clothes, yet I had not vacation, nor indeed variety to shift my shirt. And now I come to Court, I feel certain little Cattle of infamous generation about me, that do most inseparably haunt me. Now if (when the Prince surveys me) any of them being strangers here, should peep to behold strange sights, and his Grace perceive them, what should I answer?—
O, my glorified Pedant in his most natural strut!
I will say it was by influence of the heavens; or, to appear the more perfect Courtier at the first dash, I will say, that though my outside were glorious, yet of purpose I left my inside lousy.
Sed, O Dii! Quem video? nonne Mr. Sneakup?
See my worshipful Father-in-Law! Now the Woodcocks shoot into the glade.
Pray ye peace, you must not know me.
O monstrum horrendum! May not you and I know one another?
Pray go home, and ask my wife.
Mr. Crazy. Is not one Mr. Crazy here?
Yes Sir. Here is Mr. Crazy for a need Sir.
Well done: Be bold Sir. Let not your dissi∣mulation be read in your eyes. You know me; give me the Jewels.
Yes Sir.
Let me alone to present them to his Grace, and praise them, before you are called.
Will you do so Sir?
Yes; For you know I must not seem to in∣dear them before your face: For that would smell rank of correspondence.
You say right Sir.
But betwixt us both we'll make a shift to cheat him. Stay you here. I will return instantly. O Mr. Sarpego! Your Pupil will come and conduct you pre∣sently.
Thus sometimes, by deceit, deceit is known:
It is honest craft, by wit to get ones own.—
My Quondam Pedagogue!
My Nuper Alumnus! Come, present me to the Grace of Greatness. I am ready; behold I am approached according to thy entreats, to approve thy praise, and mine own perfection. Set on: His Grace shall see that we can speak true Latin, and construe L•dovicus vivas: Go, set on.
I cry you mercy Sir. Upon my troth, I took you for Mr. Sarpego, my learned Tutor. He is very like him; Is he not Gentlemen? But now I come to my self again, I remember this was never his walk, nor these his clothes.
Sent you not a Nuntius, or a Messenger for me, intimating, that it was his Grace his instant desire, to entertain me as his Instructor?
Alas, he has over-studied himself! You were best let blood in time Sir.
Sent I not you, by the same messenger, your ten pound?
My ten pound? Ha, ha ha: I would laugh i faith, if you could bob me off with such payment.
Sure Sir, you use some Dormitories. Best shave your head, and anoint it with Oil of Roses.
Father! Father!
Pray peace son. The plot will be discovered else.
The plot? what plot?
The Jewels are sent in, What, I am Mr. Cra∣sie now, you know. I shall be sent for in to his Grace instantly.
Midsummer Moon! Midsummer Moon!
In very truth son, hit as twill, I say we are beholding to Mr. Holywater.
Heaven not bless me, if I understand not the Baboons mumpings better then your speech. You are more dark then Delphos. What Holywater?
Why the Gentleman, you know, you sent to bring M. Crazy to serve his Grace with Jewels.
Father, Heaven pardon me: For sure I have a great desire to call you Cockscomb. I sent no man; nor is there any so stiled as Holywater about the Court.
Do you not want sleep sir?
Or have you not seen a spirit sir?
Or have you not over-mus'd, or over-thought your self, as wee doubt Mr. Sarpego, here, has done?
Or has not my mother over-beaten you, fa∣there? You may tell me.
Son, I am not so very a fool, but I perceive I am made a stark Ass. Oh son, thy father is co∣zen'd; and thy mother will beat me indeed, unless your charity conceal me in the Court here, till her few∣rye be over.
Hee shall stay at my Wives Cham∣ber.
And there instruct us in the passages of this cozenage.
Do not weep father. My Lady Ticket will appease all.
Adieu Mr. Sarpego. Lure your brains back again.
Sic transit gloria Mundi. The learned is Co∣ny-caught; and the lover of Helicon is laughed at. The last six-pence of my fortune is spent; and I will go cry in private.
NOw, whilst my politic Mother-in-Law is in expectation of her great adventure, and my worshipful Father-in-Law stinks at Court for fear of her; I in this last disguise will pursue my new affairs. Me-thinks these Jewels smile on me now more cheer∣fully then when they were mine own before. First to my honest Punk.
Who would you speak with Sir?
With thy sister. Dost thou not know me Jeffrey. Where is she? Look better on me.
O, is it you Sir? Hang me if I knew you in this habit; though I was set here on purpose to watch for you.
What's the matter Jeffrey?
Sir she is fallen into a new fit of Melancholy. Some new project she has in her noddle. But she de∣sires you to work upon this, [he gives him a paper.] I dare not be seen to talk with any body.—Exit.
What new device is this? [he reads.] Since I last saw you, your Mother-in-Law, Mrs. Sneakup, has earnestly dealt with me to make me a Bride for her son Tobias. If there may be any thing wrought out of it to benefit you, I will suddenly take occasion to
break with the Fool Wolsie; of whom I am heartily weary; and after, be wholly disposed by you. Sure this wench studies nothing but my profit. Well: I have thought already to make the best of her. Now to my new Mistress. This is the house, and here's her maid.
Would you speak with any here Sir?
With your Mistress, (I take it) Mristresse Crazy.
May not I deliver your mind unto her Sir?
My business is of weight and secrecy: yet you may tell her, here is the Gentleman that her Do∣ctor sent her.
O she expects him most impatiently—Pray en∣la Sir. She's ready for you, there before you Sir—
A business of mine own makes me wait here.
I think I saw my learned Love make this way.
But he (alas) though small in fleshly growth,
By reason of his high preferment is
Now grown too great for me.
It is hee; I know his stature,
Though not his clothes, the Ensigns of his greatness,
In which how big he seems, though but a sprawler!
So clothes can make men greater, but not taller.
He's deep in study; I dare not interrupt him.
I have adventured, though with trembling feet,
Unto this Mansion, to exonerate,
At least extenuate my suspirations
For my dear loss. The Lady of this place.
Who had an equal venture, and hath suffered
In the same Fate with me, may ease my sorrow.
Solomon miseris socios habuisse doloris.
I of my wrongs, and she of hers shall clamour.
But ass noster ubi asset Amor.
Most worshipful Sir, welcome from Court, If your poor Handmaid may presume to say so.
Where is your Mistress? I mean your grand Matron, Mrs. Sneakup.
In the first place let me beseech you Sir,
Vouchsafe your answer to a longing Maid,
That can be comforted in nothing more,
Then the good news of your prosperity;
Of which I hope a part at least to be,
Preferred by your late promise to your service.
I will now breath a most strong and Poetical execration
Against the Universe. [Bri.] Sir I beseech you—
From henceforth Erit Fluvius Deucalionis
The world shall flow with dunces; Regnabitque, and it shall rain
Dogma Polla Sophon, Dogs and Polecats, and so forth.
His Court advancement makes him mad, I fear.
From hence let learning be abomination
Among the Plebeians, till their ignorance
Shall lead them blind into the Lake of Lethe.
What pity it is that honour and high places
Should make men lose their wits, sometimes their heads!
May Peasantry and Idiotism trample
Upon the heads of Art and Knowledge, till
The world be shuffled in the pristine Chaos.
Dear Sir, though you are highly dignified,
Forget not the preferment, that you promised me,
To scratch your head; to make your bed; to wash
Your shirt; to pick your toes, and to evacuate
Your Chamber-pot.
Elephantem ex Musca facet. She takes me for a Mountain, that am but a Mole-hill.
But when she reads my poverty again,
And that these Garments must return to th'Gambrels,
Her scorn will be impetuous.
Go find another room maid for your talk,
Mr. Sarpego, my mother calls for you.
Has she received Aliquid novi, news from Court?
She has now received a Letter. Pray be gone,
I have more serious business of mine own.
You are the Creature then that my dear
Doctor has sent me, that can dance, read, write, and be secret. I shall use you all in all. And I prithee how fa•es my Physician?
I can confirm that he is yours protestedly. And to morrow night—
Peace: Here comes my mother.
I can my Cinquepace friend. But I prithee teach me some tricks. Who would care for a female, that moves after the plain pace? No: Give me the woman of tricks. Teach me some tricks I prithee.
Ha! Tricks of twenty: Your Traverses, Sli∣dings, Falling back, Jumps, Closings, Openings, Shorts, Turns, Pacings, Gracings—As for—Corantoes, Levol∣toes, Jigs, Measures, Pavins, Brawls, Galliards, or Ca∣•aries▪ I speak it not swellingly, but I subscribe to no man.
Tic a rare fellow!
Am I then cheated? my wit begins to be out of countenance. O the Plague that hangs over her head that has a fool to her husband, as thou and I have daughter.
How now sweet mother? What ill news champion∣geth your face thus?
O dear daughter, my Lady Ticket writes here, that the fool, thy father, is cheated of two rich Jew∣ells, that thou and I stole from the Idiot thy husband Crazy.
O that Crazy was ever a silly fellow.
A very Citizen, a very Citizen. How should I call you Sir?.
One Mr. Footwell, Mother; who teaches Gen∣tlewomen to doe all things Courtly, to dance Court∣lie, to love their husbands Courtly—
Your name is Mrs. Pyannet, I take it.
Pyannet Sneakup, Sir.
Your husband is cozened at Court, I take it.
So my Lady Ticket writes, Sir.
That Lady Ticket is a cunning creature. I have been inward with her; And such are my private Intel∣ligences, that if equal courtesy might recompense, I could unshale a plot is upon you.
Recompense? Sir command me, command my daughter, my maid, my house, only tell it I beseech you.
I pray see wherein we may be grateful. I pray speak.
So it is, I am a decayed Gentleman, quite out of repair; fallen for want of means to the use of my feet: Nor have I hope to see better light, but only that Love and Fortune have put upon me a right wealthy widow. She lies at a near neighbours house
here; and here I hover about her: but for want of some good friends countenance, some means for clothes and fit housing, she holds off from consumma∣ting our Marriage. Now Lady—
I apprehend you Sir. Bring her to me; lodge her with me; Isle call you Cousin I. Is she very rich? At a near neighbours, said you,—Not she at Mr. Wol∣sies, is it?
The very same.
(By'r Lady a match for my Acquired son and heir. Bear a brain dancer, or I may chance to show you a cross caper.) Sir, bring your Widow. Swear to your self my house is yours. Now the plot, or I burst.
Why then will I disclose who cozened you; by what means you are injured, and how you may be revenged, only you shall vow to conceal the secret-re∣vealer, else you lose the benefit of further Intelli∣gence.
Stand off daughter: I will not trust mine own flesh with a secret; for in truth I have found it frail. Now speak, I beseech you.
Sure, precious Mistress, very absolute cry∣tures have had Cockscombs to their husbands.
Nay that's indubitable, I know it by my self.
Marry to bee made Cuckqueane by such a Cockscomb, to have her Jewels prig'd away, to be∣stow on a Court Mistress; to have a trick put upon her, as you have, it would move (I must confess) a wo∣man that were not part a Philosopher, and had a strong wit as you have. Why did you not feel the deceit? your husbands unworthiness, having no means to enjoy this Court-Lady but by gifts; and having no course for gifts, but from you, procures some Pander to perform a famed message. Your hope of game puts
the weighty trust upon the counterfeit fool your hus∣band; his simplicity seems cozened, whilst this Lady excuses all, and keeps all: So that your own Jewels purchase your own horns; nay, and you were not withal laughed at for your purchase, it were scarce e∣nough to run mad for.
It is most plain: I will have such a revenge, as never woman had.
Good Mrs. Pyannet, bear't as well as you may: Your loss is heavy, yet under the strength of your constant wisdom—I faith my wife was so careful lest you should take too deep sense of it, that she im∣portun'd my own presence to comfort you: For sure I know—
You are a Wittily Cuckold I know. I com∣mend thy wives modesty yet: She will not doe it a∣fore thy face, but will send thee out of an errand yet.
What mean you? you amaze me.
Nay, I look you should seem ignorant: What, to take sense or notice of your horn, as long as it winds you into profit, were most uncourtly. Well, you hear not me rage nor rave: marry I will slit the Drabs nose, crop off her ears, scratch out her eyes—
Bless us!
Tear off her hair, pluck out her throat, that's all. Come along Sir.
Now they are gone, I prithee M. Footwell stay a little, I will fetch thee some Letters to read for me, which I have not o∣penned yet, because I durst trust no body.—
These Letters must necessarily come from my Brace of Courtiers, Sir Ticket, and Monsieur Rufflit, which I will read clean contrary, as if they slighted her, and answer them across from her meaning, as if she slighted them: And so letting my self down in∣to their inwards on both sides, what they can get, or what my wife has, will I pump into mine own purse.
Now dear M. Footwell, as ever you pitied the use of a poor Gentlewoman, that would fine use her •eauty, whilst there is some pleasure in it, read and an∣•were these Letters with commanding eloquence; force them to affect me.
Ha, ha, ha: Will you not be offended, if I read them truly?
No: I prithee what is it?
Stay, it seems you have written to them.
Yes: but I cannot read the answer. Prithee •hat first?
Faith you'll be angry.
Nay, and you love me, what first?
Sir Andrew here, he says, tic not your broad •im'd hat, your tiffeny dress, Spanish ruff, and sell∣•er bodkin can make him disloyal to his wives bed. Rufflit here, he writes that you have a gross body, a •ll eye, a lowe forehead, a black tooth, a fat hand, ••d a most lean purse. I there's it: And you could but ••ve, and you had but to send—
A lean purse!
I, the lean purse. There's the Devil: Were 〈…〉u as bald as Time, as stiffly wrinkled as frozen ••wed Lands, more dry then a Fever, more lean then
death; had you engrossed deformity, yet if you had but to give—
Why Footwell, though my husband be but a Bankrupt Knave—
Nay faith, rather a fool, Mistress.
Well, fool let him be then; yet I have a Mo∣there will not see me want for necessary ends: And I hope I had the wit to cozen my husband of somewhat against a rainy day. Look you Sir, I kept these for a friend in a corner.
Nay, but I would not wish you to send them now: What, relieve the base wants of prating Skip∣jacks to pay for your damnation?
Nay thats sure, I will not give them:
And yet, i faith, what can a Gentlewoman give too much for her pleasure? Can there be a more heavy disgrace blown abroad upon any Lady, then that she has not at the least two servants, since many Lovers are the only noble approvement of beauty?
Isle send them both, thats sure.
But both of them to Mr. Rufflit: Oh, hoe's an absolute spirit! He has an English face, a French tongue, a Spanish heart, an Irish hand, a Welch Leg, a Scotch beard, and a Dutch buttock.
O J: J am wholly his, J will send all to him.
O but Sir Andrew, he is a Courtly Lover: He can kiss you courtly, handle you Courtly, lye with you Courtly.
O yes: he shall have one. J prithee praise me to them both, and commend to each of them one of these Jewels, not that I doe so much care for the use of them, yet because I would not be wondered at like an Owl among my neighbours, for living honest in my husbands absence. I prithee work effectually for me, sweet M. Footwell.
Mrs. Crazy: Hist Mrs. Crazy.
Peace Sir, forbear: As you would hope, doe not pursue a woman when she is out of the humour. O, untimely importunity is most distasteful. There are cer∣tain seasons to take the coldest Appetite, when she is pinning a Ruff, playing with a Monkey, hearing a wanton Song, or half drunk.
O hat are you Sir?
A private Messenger to you Sir, from the Gen∣tlewoman you pursue. This is your hand, is it not?
Yes:
You may keep your Letter.
But what says my utmost hope, the end of my ambition?
Only that you are poor, a Gallant of a very wanting fortune.
The more honour for her to redeem me.
Alas, I think her means are but weak, her hus∣bands sinking hath brought her low.
Her husband! Alas poor fly; only made to be sucked and forsaken. His wife has the life-blood of her fortunes in her, and I'll be her cupping-glasse.
I wonder his wife could nourish so unbelieving a conscience!
Conscience! All things rob one another: Chur∣ches poule the People, Princes pill the Church; Mini∣once draw from Princes, Mistresses suck Minions; and the Pox undoes Mistresses; Physicians plague their Pa∣tients; Orators their Clients; Courtiers their Suitors, and the Devil all. The water robs the earth, earth chokes the water: fire burns ayre, ayre still consumes the fire.
Since Elements themselves do rob each other,
And Phoebe for her light doth rob her Brother,
What first in man, one man to rob another?
You have spoken most edifyingly sir, but for you, of whom I understand Crazy merits the best Of∣feces; for you to corrupt his Wife, and with a cove∣tous sinning expect use for the loan of your Loins!
Death man, they are my Exchecquer, my Rent: Why I have no possession but my Estate tail. And at for Crazy, he has no wit; he was created a fool, to have Knaves work upon him: a fellow made to have some pity, and all wrong; he had ever an open Purse, and now an empty. He made it a common hole, every Gallant had his fingers in it. Every man loved his Fortune, squeezed it, and when it was unjuic'd, farewell kind heart. I confess I owe him a good turn: Isle pay't his Wife. He kept her always exquisitely neat; temptingly gallant, and as a protested Cuckold should do, about his degree and means sumptuously proud. Her Eye artificially spirited, her Cheek surphu∣led, her Teeth blanched, her Lip painted, her Neck car∣kanetted, and her Breast bared almost to her Belly. And shall a piece, thus put out to sale, stand unattempted, as not worth the purchase.
Yes Sir, if you could compass her; as sure she may be corrupted: for she is very covetous.
If I could but make show of a Gift, or pre∣sent one—
Only not to appear of so needy a Fortune—Why if you chance to possess her.
Pish, it were all mine again, and all that she had besides. And troth, I think she is wealthy.
Wealthy! look you Sir, Here are two of her Jewels, I fetched from an Ant of hers, where they lay hid from her Husband. These are not worth the pursuit.
Nay, tic an easy Female: He, that has her, has all. What should I send? A Gift would do it. Let me think. Tic but a gross-bodyed Wench, with a blackish hair neither.
Oh the better. Your lean No-bodies with yellow Manes have most commonly rotten teeth and wicked breaths. No, your full plump Woman is your only Venus.
A hundred golden pieces I am entrusted with∣all by my elder Brother, to purchase a piece of In∣justice. If I should send them—
Oh Sir, these both were yours, and they too. She pretends this strain, but only to explore your strength of means, and to try how far you dare engage them for her enjoying.
I will send them, win her, use her, suck her Purse, recover my own, gain hers, and laugh at the poor Cuckhold her Husband. Commend with th•se my lifes blood, and Souls service to my Mistress▪ Fare∣well—
Sir Andrew Ticket, I take it.
The same, Sir. Is Mrs. Crazy within? I cannot keep pace with her Mother. O, when jealousy is once set a going, it runs on high speed. But let her make hast to arrive at Court, while I land on her Daughter in the City. Is she privately idle?
What dost thou mean by that?
My Vow's discharged, and her Revenge is done. I am no Pander, Sir, and yet I am of Counsel with Smock secrets, Buttock business Sir.
Are you so stale a Courtier, and know not the noses∣city of Gifts?
Is that the matter I am rejected by her?
Why? would it not provoke any Woman to be called fool, and foule-face?
I never called her so, by the Soul of my Affection, not I.
No; Do you not intimate she is a fool, when you hope to enjoy her without a Gift? And foul, when your neglect of cost says she deserves none.
Before Heaven I was a silly Ass, now I think on it, to send a Sonnet without some rich present.
Why Sir? A man must do as he would be done to. Do you, or any man use to be made Cock∣hold for nothing?
I should have sent a Gift. What, if I enjoy her, she may requite it.
May; Nay can; nay will. Look you Sir, here's Gold. Here are Jewels. They are hers; they may be yours. I would not seem a Pander to you though; for you have a Wife Sir.
Pish, who cares to drink out of a River? What I can command out of duty hath but a dull relish. Had not Dane been kept in her brass Tower, she had never tempted a Gods piercing. I must send, though it be but to show the ability of my Fortune, and the desert of her Beauty.
And then to send but a trifle would disgrace both.
Hold, convey this Carckanet unto her; tic of value, and let her read by this, how much I seek her.
And how dear you hold her. Sir, I can speak; but I use to take nothing for my pains.
Yes, receive this little—Nay, I prithee.
Only not to appear Uncourtly, or uncivil. I protest I abhor Panderism; only as a second, or so. As you have beheld two Horses knubbing one ano∣there; Call me, Call thee, an old kind of Courtship.
I prithee return instantly my success: You shall find me at the Ordinary; come and Dine with me.
I have procured a private Stable for my Horse: And therefore I my self would be loath to stand at Livery.
Dost compare common Stables for Horses, and public Ordinaries for Gallants together.
Troth yes sir, for as in Stables, here a goodly Gelding of twenty Pounds price, &amp; there a raw-backd Jade of four Nobles by him. So at Ordinaries, here a worthy Fellow of means and virtue, and there a Cheating Shifter of wants and cosenage. Here a Knight, there a Beggar; Here a Gallant, there a Gull: Here a Courtier, there a Coxcomb; Here a Justice of Peace, and there an Esquire of low Degree. Or, in direct Phrase, a Pander.
Such a one as thou art.
Umh, Virtue goes often wetshod, and is forced to be cobbled up with base means, to hold out water and cold necessity. You command me no further sir.
No honest Knave, farewell—
Now Mr. Crazy, will I button up your Cap with a Court-brooch.
You demand Debts, do you? Isle pay you none. Oh it was a notable dull Flat-Cap. He would invite Courtiers; stand bare, say grace, make legs, kiss his hand, serve us in perfumed linen, and lend us money upon our words, or bare words. Were it not a sin to
let such a fool pass unsuckt? No, Fortune dressed him only for us to feed on, and Isle fall to.
BEE comforted Mr. Sneakup; Re∣member you are in my Chamber. Bear the heart of a Husband, who scorns to tremble at the face of his Wife? Do not fear sir.
Stand firm Father, do not sink before the face of a Lady.
I have sent my own Husband to satisfy her, and I hope he will do it thoroughly. Be your self therefore; all the Pleasures the Palace can afford, shall strive to mitigate your fears.
Have you any Pleasures in the Court, can make a man forget he has a Wife?
Sir we have pleasures will make a man forget any thing, even himself; therefore necessarily his wife, who is but part of himself.
Boy, sing your song of the Court de∣lights.
Are you lulled in your delights? No pillow for your Goatish, head, but her Ladyships lap?
O dear! O wife! I did not know you were so nigh truly.
You are ignorant still, I know: But I will make thy bones suffer as well as my brows. Thou Cullion▪ could not thine own Cellar serve thee, but thou must be sneaking into Court Butteries?
Oh, oh, oh—
Vae misero.
Hold dear mother.
Sweet Mrs. Pyannet hold.
Art thou there, daughter of an Intelligencer, and strumpet to a Bearward?
Now Beauty bless me, was not thy mother a notorious Tripe-wife, and thy father a professed Hare∣finder? Gip you Flirt.
How now Madam Tiffany! Will none but my Cock serve to tread you? Give me my Jewels thou Harlot.
Mother—Pray Mother—
Bestow steeping thy skin in perfumes to kill the stink of thy paintings, and rotten inwards to catch Cockscombs.
Dear mother.
But thou shalt not cozen, and Cucquean me▪
Sweet mother—
Lupus in fabula. The Devil's in the women's tongue.
A whip on her; rotten eggs and kennel dirt on her silken Whoreship.
Nil tam difficile. Nothing can lay her.
Nay, let the Country Gentlewoman bee mad and rave on; she knows I know my Country Gentlewoman had a Bastard before she was mar∣ried.
Did um so? The Country Gentlewoman was more chaste in a Bastard, then the Court Madam in her barrenness. You understand me; you have no Green-sicknesse there, yet (I hope) you have few Christ'nings; you have tricks for that, have you?
Nay mother—
You have your Kickshaws, your Players March∣pains; all show and no meat.
Nulli penetrabilis Astro. She'll hear no reason.
Go to; you know how in private you com∣mended your Horse-keeper to me.
Well: And did not thou in as much privacy counsel me to contemn my husband, and use an Itali∣an trick that thou would teach me?
Quid faciendum? Best stop their mouths?
Out you bauble; you trifle; you burden smocked sweaty sluttery, that could love a fellow that wore worsted stockings footed, and fed in Cooks shops.
Jaculis &amp; Arcu. Thunder and Lightning.
Odds my precious—▪
Nay dear, sweet wife—
How's this—
Honey Mother—
Take this, and take all. Why goody Com∣plexion, thou Rammy Nastiness, thou know where∣fore
thy Gentlewoman left thee; did she not swear that she—
For modesties sake—
Had rather be at the opening of a dead old man, then stand dressing thy head in a morning. Remember the Page that wore thy picture, and the song which thou had in the praise of the male Baboon.
Tacit parvuli: You have said too much.
Indeed mother you will be sorry, when you know how much you mistake; some crafty fellow has put a trick upon you.
Me-thinkes sweet wife you should rather condole our loss with me.
Hold you your peace; do not you prate.
Red te Harpocratem: The man is wise e∣nough.
It is true; misfortune hath wrought the Jew∣ells from my father.
Indeed wife, truly, truly, I am Cony∣caught—
But for my father, or this Ladies wronging you, as I am your son, I assure you I have been an eye-wit∣nos of all fair respect towards you.
Is it even so?
Mother, as I respect your blessing it is perfect truth.
I humbly beseech you sweet Madam, that my earnest and hearty sorrow may procure remission for my inconsiderate and causeless Invectives. Let my confession seem satisfactory, and my contrition win in∣dulgency to my forgetful delinquency. I pray you let us kiss and be friends.
Alas sweet friend, you and I have been inward a great while, and for us to fall out, and bare one a∣nothers secrets—
Well, it was mine error, not malice; but as for the procurer of it, if I pay not him in his own Coin—Mr. Footwell! Isle show you a trick of twenty. Come son, I have a wife for thee.
A Wife! a Wife, Mother! O where is she?
I, my boy, a Wife—
O ho.
And such a one as thou shalt bless me for pro∣curing. Courteously farewell, sweet Madam: Whore's my Fool? Come, leave the Court sirrah, and man your own wife into the City—
BUt I prithee satisfy me: What return they? Received they my Jewels?
Yes, they proved acceptive,
And what said they? Can they affect?
Can they be damned? Before I will undergo again such a business—fore Heaven I do as little dif∣fer from a Pander! only I have nothing for my pains, or else—
Thou shalt have. Are thy news happy?
Are your own wishes happy?
Hold, spend this ten pound for me, Footwel.
Will you make me a Bawd. What a Bawd?
And yet in truth, what would not a man be for your sake, that have such wit and such bounty!
I cannot refuse, but suffer your Virtue to be exer∣cis'd upon me.
Now, prithee speak; what's their answer?
Why, Isle tell you, they are both your own.
Both Footwell: I prithee how?
Why, no more but this; they are both yours; only you know, but one hand in a Glove at once. But I had so much to do with one of them; such a coil to draw him to it—
Which, I prithee? Sir Andrew?
Even he: He says, he understands that you affect a Mountebank. Sure, your Doctor is but some base bragging Rascal.
Do you think so?
How should Sir Andrew know else that he is come to embrace you to night?
Does he know that too?
Yes marry does he, which the worthy Knight takes so contemptuously, suffering so base a Rival, that he vows, unless you beat him, bastinado him soundly when he comes, he will loath you most con∣stantly.
Enough, if I do not make him an Example to all the bawdy Quacks in the Kingdom; say there is no virtue in Cudgels, and Bed••aves. Isle charm him for opening any more secrets of mine, Isle warrant him. And so write to Sir Andrew.
Welsaid Mistress, be resolute. I mean to help you my self.
Isle cast about for weapons 〈…〉—
Yes, I will write to Sir Andre•w 〈…〉 that, which he shall have small cause to thank me for. I will write for him to come in the habit of this Doctor. My•…
Shoe's gone, shoe's gone: Was ever man so cheated? Threescore pound for a Ring; and the Ring gone too, for which I paid it: A months diet and lodging, besides the charge of Physic and attendance. Five pound in dole bread, would have served my house a twelve month. I am undone; broke, Bankrupt: But thou Rogue shalt smart for all, now I have caught thee,
Mercy, dear Sir, mercy.
Were you making up your pack to bee gone too?
Nothing but my own Sir, my Lute, and a few Musick-books.
You and your Mistress have made sweet Mu∣sick of me: Therefore sirrah quickly—Are the Beadles gone for?
Therefore quickly, I say, as you were an Acter in the Cosenage, bring her to light, or—
Shoe's light enough her self: But a very Inno∣cent I, Sir. She has cozened me of half a years service, wrought me off o'my legs, strained my back, cracked my voice, done me to my utter undoing; and can you think I knew of her running away?
I'll make you sing another song sirrah: Are the Beadles come?
Any song Sir, or as many as you please.
Pretty I confess. But that's not the song must do it; nor can any song please me at this time. Are the Beadles come?
Dear Sir, let 'em forbear a little. And if I cannot please you with a song, commit me to their fury.
It is but to trifle time: yet sing be∣fore you suffer. Worse then t'other this; you shall sing in another place, to the whip, to the whip, Sir? Bring in the Beadles, and a∣way with him to Bridewell.
Yet once more, good Sir, try me this last time, and but promise me, if I can sing a song that you shall like, to forgive and free me.
Sing a song that I shall like, and I will free thee.
Then shall a present course be found
For M. Wolsies threescore pound;
And his Ring,
And the thing
That has given him the slip—
I marry, that I like well.
Then I have escaped the whip.
Think you so Sir?
Yes: For you like the song well, you say, and I am free; I hope you will make good your noble Ci∣tie word, Sir.
City words use not to pass for songs Sir▪ Make you good the words of your song, Sir, and I
shall make my word good Sir: Come away Bea∣dles.
O stay Sir, I beseech you, and let your Ju∣stice fall on the right shoulders. I'll confess all.
O will you so Sir?
It is most true Sir, that the Gentlewoman; whom I called Mistress, is a most cunning whore, and a notorious cheat.
These are good words indeed!
She came to your house with four men in Liveries; they were all but hired Panders.
Yes, and divers Trunks of supposed Treasure, which I find to bee Bags of Nails, and other old Iron, and all the Rings and Stones she boasted in her Will are but Curtain Rings, and Brick∣bats.
Your own covetousness cozened you Sir: But if I now bring you not where you shall see how she is since bestowed, and that you find not hear∣tie cause to rejoice that you were cozened of her, let me be whipped to death, Sir.
Well, come along Sir: But I will have a Guard upon you.
What Guard you please Sir, so my poor skin may scope the Lash-guards.—
O thou Varlet, thou unconscionable Unbelie∣ver, ungodly Miscreant! Hast thou cozened my easy Credulity? And would have undone and mar∣ried me, like a Cony-catching companion, as thou art? Did not thou tell me, thou had moderate means of life, friends of fashion, and civil• reputation? And now this virtuous, religious Gentlewoman tells me, thou art an arrant Skipjack.
Nay, and has not a hole to put thy head in, but upon my courtesy.
But I thank this Matrons worship, her pity will not permit my easy Nature to suffer under thy Co∣senage: But bestows her generous Son and Heir here upon me.—
A Gentleman of another sphere, another •anck then you are Sirrah; that shall have three hun∣dred year in Esse, and five in Posse.
That is acquainted with young Lords; has had the honour to make a Hunting match.
I, and a challenge to ride the wilde Goose •has.
That hath made Ladies Posies for Cheese tren∣chers.
And played with Countesses at Shuttle-cock.
And to this Elegant Spirit and choice hope am I, and my Fortunes contracted.
How! contracted.
Yes Sir, contracted. Look you, I dare seal it before your face.
Are you so.
She is mine sir, mine sir. Do you mark, I dare likewise seal it sir.
Is there honesty in this dealing?
Yes sir, Is there not profit in this dealing?
Tic very well. If there be no Law upon words, Oaths and Pre-contracts, and Witness. If a man may spend a hundred Angels upon a Widow; have her affied before Witness, and then have his Nose wiped of her. Why, Tic very well.
Intrude dear heart, and sweet Mother in ex∣pectation, to speak equally, there have some words of course past betwixt us, which may seem to impart some Engagement. Surely I have been too liberal of some speech of advantage. Truly it would not be amiss, (considering his Expense and Interest) to fall to some slight Composition. Some hundred Pounds would make the poor Knave do any thing.
Mother, let's be wise. Let's be wise Mother; fetch a hundred pieces presently: That even upon his first consent, he may be satisfied and silenced.
For if he chance but to be delayed till he ask Counsel, then—
Mum. A word to the wise.—
Nay, I hope as long as I am a Subject, I shall have Law: I doubt not but I shall have Law.
Come Sir, you shall not deservedly exclaim of my neglecting you.
For our sometimes Love, I have procured you a hun∣dred Pounds.
To disclaim my right in you, Isle take it. Here's my hand, Isle take it.
Pox, how my Mother stays.
Scorn my Poverty! Come, where first? Because I have not the Muck of the World. Come, the mo∣ney.
Here sir, upon this consideration, that you dis∣claim and renounce all interest—
Yes most freely.
In this Gentlewoman; and do vow, never to pretend future claim to her.
I do, marry.—
Nay, no marries sir, you have received the mo∣ney. You shall make no more marries here. Come my betrothed Spouse, bid a Fice for him, Say black's thine Eye who dares. Mother Isle be married to night, and to bed presently.
This night, Son; tic very late.
never to late to be wise. I hope I am your Son; and must bear a Brain.
Indeed, he that deals with Woman, must take occasion by the fore Lock. Away—
Why! I am weary of money now: I have got∣ten more in a weeks Cosenage, then in all my days of Honesty. What an easy cool thing it is to be a rich Knave! Gramercy Punk. A witty Wench is an excel∣lent help at a dead lift. But in despite of the Justice that provoked me, my Conscience a little turns at these
brain-tricks. But they have all been ungrateful; un∣grateful! Tic a sin that should have no mercy: tic the Plague-spot; who has it should not live.
If holy wisdom from the thundering Cloud
Had given more Laws then ten, this had ensued:
Avoid, O man, mans Shame, Ingratitude.
For my poor Lot, I could have sweetly slept
In quiet want, with resolute content,
Had not defect of wit, uncurteous scorn
Been thrust upon me. Now they all shall feel,
When honest men revenge, their whips are steel.
My Courtiers are the next that I must exercise up∣on. This night my wife expects the embraces of one of them at least, if this hasty Marriage call her not from her Chamber. But she being a right woman may pre∣vent that with a fained sickness, or so. Let me remem∣ber, J wrote to Rufflit to come like her Doctor Pulse∣feel, to minister to her. This will jump right with a counterfeit sickness: It may, perhaps, break a Urinal about his Coxcomb.
How now! O perceive this great Wedding goes forward.
Then enter Rufflit like a Doctor.
So, this falls out pat. She is no sooner gone Sick to her Chamber, but here comes her Physician, to cover and recover her in a trice.
Hist, Footwell, Footwell.
Seignor Rufflit; J am a fool if J took you not for a Physician.
She wrote to me, that J should come in this ha∣bit.
Right Sir, to avoid suspect: For which cause she has counterfeited herself sick, and lies longing and languishing till you minister to her.
And am J come pat? am J come in the nick?
Your Fortune sings in the right Cliff, sir, a wench as tender as a City Pullet.
But not so rotten.
Oh sir, health it self; a very Restorative. Will you in? The way lies open before you.
Hold Footwell, tel that till J return—from branching the most merited Cuckold Crazy. Poor Snake, that I must force thee to cast thy Skin. And he were not a Citizen J could pity him: He is undone for ever. Methinks J see him all ready make earnest suite, to wear a red Cap, and a blew Gown; comely to carry a Staff-torch before my Lord Mayor upon Alhalloune night. Watch Footwell, J mount.—
But now, if the agitation of my Brains should work through my Brows. If my Wives pitiful hand should fall to composition with my Doctors Pate, and my deceit be discovered before the Bastinado had go∣ven charge to his Shoulders, were not my Forehead in apparent danger. Tic done in three minutes. Death, my Courtier has a sanguine Complexion: He is like a Cock sparrow, Chit, Chit, and away. Heart of man! And I should be blown up in mine own Mine now! Ha.
within▪ Hold Mrs. Crazy. Dear Bridget. Help Footwell.
Ho the hubbub's raised, and my feare's vanished.
Out you Pispot-caster.
You Suppository.
You Glister-pipe, think to dishonest me?
Hold, dear Lady—I am—
A stinking saucy Rascal thou art, take this remembrance.
Hold, sweet Mistress.
Oh I thank you good Mr. Footwell.
Oh, it is not so much worth verily.
Oh, but tic sir.
Rogue. Rogue.
Nay prithee sweet Rascal, Pox on you, I did not mean to hurt you, my honest Vagabond, tell me, tell me: Come, who was it put this Trick upon me. Thou art a precious Villain: Come, whose devise was it? Whose plot. At whose Suit was I Cudgeled? Who made me feign my self a Physician, till I must be forced to go to the Surgeon? And dare'st tell me?
Nay, then I will tell you. Dare! why it was your Friend and Rival, Sir Andrew Ticket.
Ticket.
Even he sir. His Gold hired me to gull you. And this brain procured your beating. Yes faith sir, Envy, bribes, and wit have wrong upon you.
Well, if I revenge not—
But how sir.
I, before Heaven, that's well thought on. Give me but the means, and I will not only forgive, but reward thee richly.
Come faith, because I would have both your Shoulders, go in one Livery, I must disclose. Why sir, Knavery is restorative to me, as Spiders to Mon∣keys. The poison of wit •eeds me.
Look you sir, he's come. Stand close, take this Cud∣gell, grasp it strongly, stretch your Sinews lustily; And when you see him hang by the middle in a Rope, let your Fist fall thick, and your Cudgel nimbly.
And soundly. My ambitious blows shall strive which shall go foremost.
Good sir.
draw him up but half way.
So sir, I must up to receive.—
Do so: I shall be so revenged now! He had been better have been taken in Bed with another mans Wife, then have prevented me thus.
Vanish Sirrah with the Light. This I am sure is the Window which her Letters called me to.
I would you would begin once, that I might be at work. I do not love to stand idle in the Cold thus.
Hist, Footwell, Footwell.
above: Here sir, here. O I watched to do you a good turn. Will you mount sir?
I will mount, remount, and surmount. I won∣der that there is not a solemn Statute made, that no Citizen should marry a handsome Woman; Or if he did, not to lye with her. For and it were not for Gal∣lants
help, they would beget nothing but Fools.
Right sir, right sir. Take the Rope, and fasten it about your middle sir.
Why, that's Crazy; a very Coxcomb.
An Ass, an Ass.
A mere Citizen. Were it not a shame his wife should be honest? Or is it not pity that my own man should wholly enjoy a rare excellent proper woman▪ when a whole Corporation scarce affords two of them.
Most true sir. Now mount sir. I pluck courage∣ously. Pray Hercules my strength fail me not.
Up sir, up sir.
Pox, and pain! Hold Doctor.
Save you sir.
I am most sensible of your Salutation. Pluck Footwell.
Alas the Cord sticks-sir; Isle call some help sir.
Death and Devils!
Fists and Cudgels.
Heart, Lungs, Lights.
Arms, Shoulders, Sides.
Help, help, help.
Passion of Heaven Doctor: Isle Doctor you a∣way.
Redeem me dear Footwell
Yes sir I come for the same purpose. Alas sir, me thinks I even feel your blows. Are you not sore •ie?
Sore? Could thou not pluck?
Sure I was Planet-struck; the rope stuck in a slit Sir.
A Pox of the •lit, say I.
Know you this mad Doctor? Or do you owe any Doctor any thing?
I know him not; nor do I owe any Doctor any thing; I only owe my Barber-Surgeon for a diet∣drink.
Speedily make up your face Sir, here comes company: M. Rufflit!
Honest Footwel▪ how dost? Sir Andrew! Heartily how is it?—
As heartily as thou wilt; but not so hard I prithee.
Why what's the matter?
I bruised my side even now against a forms edge.
Parma••tie, Sir, is very good, or the fresh skin of a flayed Cat?
Flayed Cat?
The fly-blows of a dead dog, made into oil, and spread upon the kill of a meazell hog.
Hark Gentlemen, the Wedding comes, forget old bruises, and put on sense of the lightest colour: for this house to night vows to run giddy with mirth and laughter.
Joy, health, love and children to this happy union.
Unbruis'd bones, and smooth foreheads to you both.
What shall no device, no mirth solemnise my sons match? Go Sneakup, call down our daughter.
In despite of sickness, mirth and joy shall make this night healthful.
O mother, cold sobriety and modest melancho∣lie becomes the face of the Matron; unedifying gauds are Profane vanities. Mirth is the fat of fools, only virtue is the nourishment of purity and unsinning sin∣cerity.
By the leave of your wisdom daughter, we'll take the wall of your preciseness: for Mr. Sarpego has told me of a learned subject for a Ballet, which wee shall see acted presently.
What is it, some Heathenish Play?
No certes, but a very religious Dialogue, full of nothing, but moral conceits betwixt Lady Luxury, a Prodigal and a Fool.
But who should act and personate these?
Why in that lies the nobility of the device; it should be done after the fashion of Italy by our selves, only the plot premeditated to what our aim must tend: Marry the Speeches must be extempore. Mrs. Bride would I have to play Dame Luxury, and Mr. Footwell here the Prodigal.
And my husband the Fool.
I, and't please you wife.
Isle play the Inductor, and then we are all fit∣ted.
I pray you what is Lady Luxury? A woman regenerative.
A Whore, wife:
In sincerity not much better then a Courtesan; a kind of open Creature.
And do you think me fit to represent an open Creature? Saving your modesties, a Whore. Can I play the Strumpet, think ye?
Trust me Sister, as long as it is done in private, in ones own House, and for some few selected Gentle∣men's pleasure; Me-thinks the part is not altogether the displeasingst.
Modesty defend me! you think tic nothing to play the Strumpet.
Why surely religious Lady, it can be no dis∣grace to you to figure out the part: For she that can∣not play the Strumpet if she would, can claim no great honour to be chaste.
How gravely and sententiously he speaks.
Wife, it shall be so: It is my first Injunction; you shall do it, or disobey me. You must play it.
What, the Whore sir?
I, in jest: What hurt is it? And Mother, you shall excuse my Father for this once: For since my wife plays the Whore, Isle play the Fool my self. Though, I know, you had rather see him do it, you shall see for a need, I can make shift to perform it as well as he; as naturally, and to the Life.
Exceeding well thought on, I pray you, Lady, approve of it.
Let learning direct, I am not to prescribe to the Muses.
Come sweet heart, let's in and tire us, and be ready to enter presently.
I fausto pede—
Now for the Prodigal.
O doubt not, Mr. Sarpego: For know Sir, I am but a poor serving creature, that lives upon expo∣ctation;
Oh Sir my end must be husks. Fear not my discharge of the Prodigal—
Nil nisi Carmine desunt.
To entertain ye, while we attire our selves.
We want but now some Music, or a Song,
But think you have it. Sit: we'll not be long.—
Seat you Gallants▪ Sit, sweet Sir Andrew, Ma∣dam▪ and the rest, and we'll imagine Music, as M. Sarpego bids us.
How now! By what misrule comes he to trow∣ble us?
By your leave, Gallants, I have brought you Music.
You Sir, I know your purpose, and it is proven∣ted; you come after the Marriage to forbid the banes. Ha ha ha—you are short, M. Wolsie, you are short.
Good Mrs. Sneakup you are wide. I come to wish joy to the match, and to tell you I rejoice, that I mist a Bridegrooms part.
How's that?
You see I wear no Willow, and am merry▪ Ell's true you told me, boy?
Yes by my detestation to Bridewell Sir.
Sing boy that song, If I have any grief, it shall be all vented in a Hymeneal Song.
I have not known him in this humour.
Sure it is a merry madness for the loss of the widow,
Since you come friendly, you are welcome, M. Wolsie. Pray sit with us, and hear your Hymen∣all Song.
Jo Hymen, Jo Hymen, Jo Hymen
Was wont to be still the old song
At high Nuptial Feasts
Where the merry merry guests
With joy and good wishes did throng:
But to this new Wedding new notes do I bring,
To rail at thee Hymen, while sadly I sing.
Fie ô Hymen, fie ô Hymen, fie ô Hymen,
What hands, and what hearts dost thou knit?
A Widow that's pr•re,
And a very very Whore,
To an Heir that wants nothing but wit▪
Yet thus far, O Hymen, thy answer is made,
When his •••ns are spent, they may live by her trade.
He sings Hymen and Hymen; but me-thinkes the song is scandalous to the Marriage.
Excuse me Lady, though I was cozened of the Bride, I have no such malice; it is a song that the boy could sing by chance, and made by a couple that were lately married in Crooked-Lane.
O, is it so Sir? I knew not what to make of it.
Let us attend I pray; the Prologue enters.
Right Country Dame, and Courtly Lady,
Look for sense as s•all as may be;
But, if wit deceive your thinkings,
Know our Muse disdains base shrinkings.
Hold a while your Verdicts bridle,
Judge not yet our Project idle,
Till at length the close may show it,
If we act the part of Poet.
Speak Lechery and Folly, Luxury I would say;
I need not prompt them, they know what they should say.
Out you base Rascal, you muddy Slave; thou hast married me, and I will drink a health to thy Cuc∣koldmaker.—
Sfoot I am afraid she'll play the whore better then I shall act the fool.
Thou under-hearted, dull-blooded Pantaloon▪ thou whose utmost honour is to be made so good • thing as a Cuckold; thou son of a Copy-holder▪ and the Pudding-pye women's daughter, dost tho• think, dare thou but imagine, that I shall ever vouch∣safe to love to doe any thing, but laugh at thee? Hence you Poltroon; thy voice sounds not so far as thy breath stinks—Kicks him▪
Nay but, nay but do you hear wife? I do not very well like this; me-thinks you play too much in earnest.
In earnest? Why Goodman Fool, you Cock•▪ comb, you Ninnihammer, you Clotpold Country Gentleman, thou dirty greediness.—
Why how now daughter? Are you well? Me▪ thinks you over-do it too much.
Thou dream my good husband, that thou
hast married the rich widow, ha ha ha—
Now enters Prodigality.
When the troth is, dear brother, you have married the rank whore. Ha ha ha.
Sir!—who, brother Crazy?
Sweet husband!
Dear son!
Precious friend!
Neighbour Crazy!
Dij bone! Domino Crazy!
And how doe you wife? When comes your Doctor Pulsfeel? But a kiss and so forth? And would not one of these free Gallants, these proper youths have served the turn? I pray pardon mine incivility, Mother; I was bold to retain mine own Jewels. Have you not forgot your singles and your doubles, your fallings back, and your turnings up wife?
Why in faith, dear heart, dost think me so simple, that I did not know thee all the while? Alas man, I did but counterfeit, as you did, to maintain the jest; kiss me sweet duck—only to maintain the jest in faith.
Yes, yes, yes, we are Friends. I heartily thank these kind Gentlemen for their loves to you, yes saith, heartily: I am better by it five hundred at least. Be not you jealous Madame, they had nothing for it; not a bit by this Light.
Death o'my Fortune! that was my Gold.
Plague of a Villain, that was my Jewel.
True Gentlemen; and your bounty likewise lies in this Bag.
Sir, we sent these things to your Wife.
I thank you for it; we have but one Capacity in the Law, you know: What's hers must be mine. I know thou would have it so sweet-heart. I am only sorry Gentlemen, that you were so well favourdly bea∣ten. That the Fool Citizen, the Ass Citizen, the Cuckold Citizen should procure such a sound swaddling to your wise, valiant and substantial Shoulders. Is it not a sore matter? But rest, Salves and warm Oils may in time recover it.
How do you kind Mother? Gentlemen, if any of you want Money Gentlemen, here stands a City-wit that has it. I have it, if you want any; speak, I have it, and will keep it. How does your Costard Sir? A Pox of the Slit, Sir. Beloved of Phoebus, Minion of the Muses; dear water bailey of Helicon, be not proud of your Preferment, though you are his Highness tutor. Mo∣there, J take the restoring of my rich Jewels very kindly. O my kind Brother, you have got the rich Widow; and you have borne a brain Mother. Your hundred pound, brother, was most thristily and opportunely be∣stowed. J could have procured her to you at an easier rate, Mother. J am only sorry for you Mr. Wolsy, that you had her not: Because you very honourably releast me of your Bond before it was due; and are in shrewd danger to be laughed at among your Neighbours.
How does good Mr. Crazy, the Princes Jeweller? Mother, did not my Father look too wise for a Citizen? How dost honest Punk? I am as much beholden to thee, as to the rest of them.
My son and my heir is utterly undone.
O! I am quite cast away.
O no, you shall be no loser by me; you shall be a gainer by me Brother: Get wit Brother (mark you) wit. Good faith I pity the poor Citizen, hee has no wit; a handsome young fellow, with a pretty beard, and a proper bodied woman to his wife, and cannot bear a brain!
Why dost hear, modestly mumping Mother∣in-Law, with thy French-hood, gold-chain, and flag∣gon-bracelets, advance thy snout. If the fool thy son, the Idiot my husband here, have but as much brains as a Battledore, he may make a fair revenue of me: Has he not a place at Court? Can he not lodge me there, and prove weak-sighted, thick of hey∣ring, sleepy after dinner, and snort when others enter∣taine and Court me? Can he not survey the hang∣ings, read Cupids Conybery, the Park of pleasure, Christian Love-Letters, or some other Pamphlet, or fine some errand into the Town, whilst his brows are turning into gold?
O impudence beyond women's apprehension! Son Crazy, we have all wronged thee, thou know it; thou hast revenged it, we feel it; only do not un∣do my heir, save him, bring him but off o'this match with any loss.
Why mother, is your son grown such a saucy Knave, as he thinks scorn to be a Cuckold? I cannot clear him; in truth I cannot: He has paid for her deeply, and it is pity they should be parted, yes faith is it.
Woman, we do pray thee, we do beseech thee, even upon our knees—have pity on the house of the Sneakups: quit my son, re∣linquish
thy right, make frustrate this marriage, and look thee, before these able witnesses, we heartily for∣give all, and forget: And withal, freely bestow this chain upon thee—
I do receive it.
She does receive it, bear witness all, she does receive it.
Marry on this condition—
No I'll no more marries nor conditions, you have received it.
I, you must make frustrate the Marriage; for look you, you have received it.
I will, and freely do; only the condition I would have made, is this, That if you intend longer to be Master of your husband, now that you have seen how well it became me, you will henceforward do as I do—Look you, wear breeches.
O horrible!
How! do you wear breeches?
Yes Sir, breeches; and as good lining and stuffing in them, I hope, as yours have, though they be of Satin.
I'll feel that: Sfoot mother this is a man. Come and feel else.
A young one Sir.
See Master your poor servant Jeremy, if he has per∣formed his part, desires to be admitted into the Livery of wit, and to wear this chain as his ensign of Free∣dome.
Omnes Jeremy!
Jeremy! O Jeremy! thou were it ever too hard for—
Except at spoonmeat, Sir.
Ieremy!
Yes, Mistress: Indeed forsooth.
Well, give me thy hand: I will love thee as long as there is swiftness in meditation, smoothness in flattery, or constancy in malice.
And for the cure that he has wrought on me,
I will applaud his wit; and bless the light
It gave me to discover my foul error:
Which by his demonstration showed so monstrous,
That I must loath my self, till I bee purged.
Sir, by your fair forgiveness, which I kneel for—
Heaven make me thankful: Wife I have no words
To show how I rejoice: Rise, let me kiss thee—
Tempora mutantur. The towne's ours again.
Only, to fill the Scene with joy, may wee
Conjoin sweet maid, in the Catastrophe.
Would you that have taught Greek, and whip't great boys, come back to your Horn-book, and let down your Gascoines to me, that would, if I had you, bee more tyrannous then any Pedant that e∣ver reigned since the days of Dionysius: Besides here is my choice, with my Master and Mistresses leave, Je∣remies brother.
But is hee seriously thy brother?
Yes, and no more a Pimp Sir, then I am a Wench.
Well, Mr. Sarpego, I'll help you to a fitter match, and Crack I will give thee something with her: Take the security of my hand.
I only desire to be secure from this mans few∣rye, and so consequently from Bridewell.
He shall have nothing to say to thee.
I will have nothing to say to man, woman, or child, while I live again.
Fortune nihil aufert sapienti: Fools and Fid∣lers are her Favourites.
Let us make this a merry night.
Think of no losses. Sirs, you shall have none;
My honest care being but to keep mine own.
What, by my slights, I got more then my due,
I timely will restore again to you.
Omnes, Thanks kind Mr. Crazy, thanks.
Gratias vel ingentes Domino Crazy.
NOw let me Scholastikewise
For us all Epilogues:
If these slender Scenes of Wit
Are received, as they were writ,
For your mirth, and no offence;
Let your Grace quit our suspense
With applaus'd Catastrophe.
I am short, w'yee (as you see)
There a Figure, which pray note ye,
Sic valet valetote.
Gratias Reddo Cuicunque.
Valetote •terumque.

