LAnguage and matter, with a fit of mirth,
That sharply savours more of air than earth,
Like Midwives, bring a Play to timely birth.
But wheres now such a one? in which these three,
Are hansonely contrived? or if they bee,
Are understood by all who hear to see.
Wit, wit's the word in fashion, that alone
Cries up the Poet, which though neatly shown,
Is rather censured often-times than known.
He who will venture on a jest, that can
Rail on another pain, or idly scan
Affairs of state, oh hoe's the only man.
A goodly approbation, which must bring
Fame with contempt, by such a deadly sting,
The Muses chatter, who were wont to sing.
Your savours in what we present to day,
Our fearless Author boldly bids me say,
He tenders you no Satyr, but a play.
In which, if so he have not hit all right,
For wit, words, mirth, and matter as he might,
A' wishes yet a' had for your delight.
ACcomplished man of fashion.
The times wonder.
Gallant of gallants Genoas Piero.
Italies darling, Europes joy, and so forth,
The newest news, un-vampt,
I am no foot-poast,
No peddler of Aviso's, no monopolist
Of forged Corantos, monger of Gazets.
Monger of courtesans, fine Futelli,
In certain kind a merchant of the staple
For wares of use and trade, a taker up,
Rather indeed a knocker down, the word
Will carry either sense but in pure earnest,
How trowles the common noysc?
Auria who lately
Wedded and bedded to the same Spinella,
Tyred with the enjoyments of delights, is hasting to 〈◊〉 the Tur∣kish pirats, in the service of the great Duke of Florence.
Does not carry
His pretty thing along.
Leaves her to buffet
Land pirats here at home.
Thats thou and I,
Futelli (sirrah) and Piero—blockhead
To run from such an arm full of pleasures
For gaining, what? a bloody nose of honour,
Most sottish and abominable.
wicked
Shameful and cowardly I will maintain.
Is all my signiors hospitality
Huge banquetings deep revels costly trappings
Shrunk to a c•bbin, and a single welcome
To beverage and biscuit,
Hold thy peace man.
It makes for us—he comes, lets part demurely.
Wee wish thee (honoured Auria) life and safety,
Return crowned with a victory, whose wreath,
Of triumph may advance thy countries glory,
Worthy your name and Ancestors.
My Lord,
I shall not live to thrive in any action,
Deserving memory when I forget
Adurnis love and tavour.
I present ye•
My service for a farewell.
Let few words
Excuse all arts of complement.
For my own part,
Kill or be killed, for theres the short and long on it.
Call me your shadows hinch-boy.
Gentlemen,
My business urging on a present hast,
E•forces short reply.
Wee dare not hinder
Your resolution winged with thoughts so constant.
All happiness.
PHVT. Contents.
So leave the wintred people of the North,
The minutes of their summer, when the Sun
Departing leaves them in Cold robes of Ice, 
As I leave Genoa,—now appears the object
Of my apprenticed hart, thou bring Spinella
A welcome in a farewell, souls and bodies
Are severed for a time, a span of time;
To join again without all separation,
In a confirmed unity for ever.
Such will our next embraces be for life;
And then to take the wrack of our divisions,
Will sweeten the remembrance of past dangers,
Will fallen love in perpetuity,
Will force our sl•epes to steal upon our stories▪
These days must come, and shall without a cloud
Or •ight of fear, or envy: to your charge,
(Trelcatio our good uncle) and the comfort
Of my Spinella's sister, fair Castanna,
I doe entrust this treasure.
I dare promise,
My husbanding that trust with truth and care.
My sizer shall to me stand an example,
Of pouring free devotions for your safety.
Gentle Castanna, thou art a branch of goodness,
Grown on the self same stock with my Spinella.
But why my dear, hast thou locked up thy speech in so much silent sadness, oh at parting!
Belike one private whisper must bee sighed,
Uncle the best of peace enrich your family,
I take my leave.
Blessings and health preserve ye.
Nay nay Castanna, you may hear our counsels.
A while, you are desigad your sisters husband,
Give me thy hand Spinella, you did promise,
To send me from you with more cheerful looks,
Without a grudge or tear, deed love you did.
What friend have I left in your absence?
Many thy virtues are such friends, they cannot fail thee,
Faith, purity of thoughts and such a meekness,
As would force scandal to a blush.
Admit Sir,
The patent of your life should be called in,
How am I left then to account with griefs;
More• slaved to pity then a broken heart?
Auria! soul of my comforts, I let fall
No eye on breach of fortune••, I contemn
No entertainment to divided hopes;
I urge no pressures by the scorn of change;
And yet my Auria, when I but conceive
How easy tic (without impossibility)
Never to see thee more, forgive me then,
If I conclude I may be miserable,
Most miserable.
And such conclusion sister
Argues effects of a distrust more voluntary then cause by likely hood.
T is truth Castanna.
I grant it truth, yet Auria I am a woman;
And therefore apt to fear, to show my duty
And not take heart from you, Isle walk from ye,
At your command, and not as much as trouble
Your thought with one poor looking back.
I thank thee,
My worthy wife! before we kiss, receive
This caution from thine Auria, first Castanna
Let us bid farewell.
Speak (good) speak▪
the steps
Young Ladies tread left to their own discretion,
How ever wisely printed are observed
And construed as the lookers on presume,
Point out thy ways then in such even pather,
As thine own jealousies from others tongues
May not intrude a guilt, tho undeserved.
Admit of visits as of Physic forced
Not to procure health, but for safe prevention
Against a growing sickness in thy use
Of time and of discourse be found so thristy,
As no remembrance may impeach thy rest,
Appear not in a fashion that can prompt
The gazers eye, or holla to report;
Some widowed neglect of hand, some value
In recreations be both wise, and free,
Live still at home, home to thy self how-ere
Enriched with noble company, remember
A women's virtue in her lifetime, writes
The Epitaph all covet on their tombs,
In short I know thou never wilt forget
Whose wife thou art, nor how upon thy lips,
Thy husband at his parting stald this kiss.
No more.
Dear heaven I go sister, go.
Done bravely, 
And like the choice of glory to know mine,
One of earths best I have forgone,—see, see,
Yet in another I am rich; a friend,
A perfect one, Aurelio.
Had I been,
No stranger to your bosom Sir, erenow
You might have sorted me in your resolves,
Companion of your fortunes.
So the wrongs
I should have ventured on against thy fate
Must have denied all pardon, not to hold
Dispute with reputations, why before
This present instant I concealed the stealth
Of my adventures from the Counsels, know
My wants doe drive me hence.
Wants, so you said,
And it was not friendly spoken,
Hear me further.
Auria take heed, the covert of a folly
Willing to range; be not without excuse
Discovered in the coinage of untruths.
I use no harder language, thou art near
Already on a ship-wrack in forsaking
The holy land of friendship in forsaking
To talk your wants. Fie.
By that sacred thing
Last issued from the Temple where it dwelt,
I mean our friendship, I am sunk so low
In my estate, that bids me live in Genoa
But six months longer, I survive the remnant
Of all my store.
Vmh.
In my Country, friend
Where I have sided my superior friend
Swayed opposition, friend, friend here to fall
Subject to scorn, or rarely found compassion,
W•re more than man that hath a soul could bear,
A soul not stooped to servitude.
Your show,
Nor certainty, nor weak assurance yet
Of reparation in this course: in case
Command be proffered.
He who cannot merit
Preferment by employments, let him bare
His throat unto the Turkish cruelty,
Or dye or live a slave without redemption.
For that so, but you have a wife, a young,
A fair wife; she, though free could never claim
Right in prosperity, was never tempted
By trial of extremes, to youth and beauty,
Baits for dishonour, and a perished fame.
 Show me the man that lives, and so my face
Dares speak, scarce think, such tyranny against
Spinellas constancy, except Aurelio
He is my friend.
There lives not then a friend
Dares love you like Aurelio, that Aurelio,
Who 〈◊〉 and early; often said and truly,
Your marriage with Spinella would entangle
As much th'opinion due to your discretion,
As your estate, it hath done so to both.
 I find it hath.
 He who prescribes no law,
No limits of condition to the objects
Of his affection; but will merely wed
A face because tic round, or limbed by nature
In purest red and white, or at the best,
For that his mistress owes an excellence
Of qualities, knows when and how to speak,
Where to keep silence, with fit reasons why,
Whose virtues are her only dowre, else
In either kind, ought of himself to master
Such fortunes as as add fuel to their loves
For otherwise:—but herein I am idle,
Have foold to little purpose.
She's my wife.
And being so, it is not manly done
To leave her to the trial of her wits,
Her modesty, her innocence, her vows.
This is the way that points her out an art
Of wanton life.
Sir, said ye?
You form reasons,
Just ones, for your abandoning the storms
Which threaten your own ruin; but propose
No shelter for her honour; what my tongue
Hath utterd, Auria, is but honest doubt,
And you are wise enough in the construction.
Necessity must arm my confidence,
Which if I live to triumph over friend,
And ere come back in plenty, I pronounce
Aurelio heir of what I can bequeath.
Some fit deduction for a worthy widow,
Allowed with caution, she be like to prove so.
Who? I your heir? your wife being yet so young,
In every probability so forward
To make you a father? leave such thoughts.
Believe it,
Without replies Aurelio: keep this note,
A warrant for receiving from 〈◊〉
Two hundred Ducats; as you find occasion
Dispose them in my absence to Spinella.
I would not trust her uncle▪ hee good man,
Is at an ebb himself, another hundred
I left with her, a fourth I carry with me,
Am I not poor, Aurelio, now? exchange
Of more debates between us, would undo
My resolution: Walk a little prithee,
Friends we are, and will embrace: but let's not speak
Another word.
Isle follow you to your horse.
With her own hand.
She never used my Lord,
A second means, but kissed the letter first,
Orelookt the superscription: then let fall
Some amorous drops, kissed it again, talked to it
Twenty times over, set it to her mouth,
Then gave it me, then snatched it back again,
Then cried, oh my poor heart, and in an instant
Commend my truth and secrecy, such medley
Of passion yet, I never saw in woman.
In woman? you are deceived; but that we both
Had mothers, I could say how women are,
In their own natures, modells of mere change:
Of change of what is nought, to what is worse,
She fed ye liberally.
Twenty ducats
She forced on me, vowed by the precious love
She bore the best of men, (I use my lord)
Her very words the miracle of men,
Malfato, (then she sighed) this mite of gold
Was only entrance to a farther bounty,
Tic meant (my lord) be like press money.
Devil! how durst she tempt thee, Futelli, knowing
Thy love to me?
There lies (my lord) her cunning,
Rather her craft: first she began what pity
It was, that men should differ in estates,
Without proportion some so strangely rich,
Others so miserable poor; and yet,
Quoth she, since tic very deed unfit
All should be equals; so I must confess
It were good justice that the properest men
Should be preferred to fortune, such as nature
Had marked with fair abilities of which
Genoa, for ought I know, hath wondrous few
Not two to boast of.
Here began her itch.
I answered, she was happy then, whose choice
In you, my lord, was singular.
Well urged.
She smiled, and said, it might be so, and yet
There stopped: then I closed with her, and concluded
The title of a lord was not enough,
For absolute perfection, I had seen
Persons of meaner quality, much more
Exact in fair endowments; but your Lordship
Will pardon me, I hope.
And love thee for it.
Phew: let that pass (quoth she) and now wee prattle
Of handsome gentlemen, in my opinion,
Malfato is a very pretty fellow,
Is he not, pray Sir, I had then the truth
Of what I roved a•••nd with more then praise,
Approved her judgement in so high a strain,
Without comparison (my honoured Lord)
That soon we• both concluded of the man,
The match and business.
For delivering
A letter to Malfato.
Whereto I
No sooner had consented, with protests,
(I did protest my Lord) of secrecy,
And service, but she kissed me (as I live)
Of her own free accord—(I trust your lordship
Conceives not me amiss) pray rip the seal
(My lord) you'll find sweet stuff, I dare believe,
Present to the most accomplished 
Of men, Malfato with this
Love a service.
Kind Superscription, prithee find him out,
Deliver it with complement, observe
How ceremoniously he does receive it.
will not your lordship peruse the contents?
enough I know too much be just, and cunning
A wanton Mistress is a common sewer
Much never project labours in my brain—
Y•ur friend here is now the Gemini of wit
What od conceit is next on foot, some cast 
Of neat invention, ha sire.
Very fine,
I doe protest my lord.
Your lordships ear shall share in the plot.
As how?
You know my lord
Young Amoretta, old Trelcatio's daughter
An honest man, but poor.
And my good lord,
He that is honest, must be poor, my lord,
It is a common rule.
Well Amoretta,
Pray one at once my knowledge is not much,
Of her instruct me.
Speak Futelli.
Spare me.
Piero has the tongue more pregnant.
Fie play on your creature.
Shall be yours.
Nay good.
Well keep your mirth, my dainty hones agree
Some two days hence, till when—
By any means,
Partake the sport, my lord, this thing of youth.
Handsome enough, good face, quick eye, well bred.
Is yet possessed so strangely.
With an humour of thinking, she deserves—
A Duke, a Count.
At least a Viscount, for her husband that—
She scorns all mention of a match beneath
One of the foresaid nobles; will not ride
In a carriage without eight horses.
Six, she may be drawn to four—
Are for the power▪
But for two horses in a coach—
She says,
They are not for creatures of heavens making fitter—
Fitter for litters to convey hounds in,
Then people christian yet herself—
Herself walks evermore a foot, and knows not whether
A Coach dothtrot or amble.
But by heare-say.
Stop gentlemen, you run a gallopboth▪
Are out of breath sure, tic a kind of complement
Scarce entered to the times, but certainly
You coin a humour, let me understand
Deliberately your fancy.
In plain troth,
My Lord, the she whom we describe is such,
And lives here, here in Genoa, this City,
This very city, now, the very now.
Trelcatios daughter.
Has refused suitors
Of worthy rank, substantial and free parts▪
Only for that they are not Dukes, or Counts,
Yet she herself, wi h all her fathers store,
Can hardly weigh above four hundred Ducats▪
Now your design for sport.
Without prevention,
Guzman the Spaniard late cashiered, most gravely
Observes the full punctilios of his nation,
And him have we beleagred to accost
This shee-peece, under a pretence of being
Grandee of Spain, and cousin to twelve Princes.
For rival unto whom we have enraged
Fulgoso, the rich cox-combe lately started
A gentleman out of a Su•lers hut,
In the late Flemish wars, we have resolved him
He is descended from Pantagruel,
Of famous memory by the fathers side,
And by the mother from Dame Fusti-Bunga,
Who troubled long time with a strangury,
Vented at last salt-water so abundantly,
As drowned the land twixt Sirixia and V•re,
Where steeples tops are only seen▪ hee casts
Beyond the Moon, and will be greater yet
In spite of Don.
You must abuse the maid
Beyond amends.
But countenance the course
My Lord, and it may chance beside the mirth,
To work a reformation on the maiden,
Her fathers leave is granted, and thanks promised,
Our ends are harmless trials.
I betray me secrets of such use.
Your Lordships humblest.
A Melancholy grounded, and resolved,
Received into a habit, argues love,
Or deep impression of strong discontents,
In cases of these raritles a friend
Upon whose faith, and confidence, we may
Vent with security, our grief becomes
Oft times the best Physician, for admit
Wee find no remedy, we cannot miss
Advise in sted of comfort, and believe
It is an ease, Malfato, to disburden
Our souls of secret clogs, where they may find
A rest in pity, tho not in redress.
Let all this sense be yielded to
Perhaps you measure what I say, the common nature
Of an officious couriosity
Not I Sir.
Or that other private ends
Sift your retirements—
Neither.
Under favour
Signior Malfato, I am sent to crave
Your leisure, for a word or two in private.
To me! your mind
This letter will inform ye.
Letter? howes this? whats here?
Speak ye to me sir?
Brave riddle: ▪Isle endeavour to unfold it.
How fares the Lord Adurni?
Sure in health sir.
He is a noble Gentle-man; withal
Happy in his endeavours: the general voice
Sounds him for curtsy, behaviour, language,
And every fair demeanour, an example:
Titles of honour add not to his worth,
Who is himself an honour to his titles.
You know from whence this comes.
I doe.
Do ye laugh!
But that I must consider such as Spaniels,
To those who feed and cloth them, I would print
Thy panderism upon thy fore-head: there
Bear back that paper to the hell from whence
It gave thee thy directions, tell this Lord,
He ventured on a foolish policy,
In aiming at the scandal of my blood,
The trick is childish, base, say base.
You wrong him.
Be wise Malfato.
Say, I know this whore.
She who sent this temptation, was wife
To his abused servant, and divorced
From poor Benatzi, senseless of the wrongs
That Madam Levidolche and Adurni
Might revel in their sports without control,
Secure, unchecked.
You range too wildly now,
Are too much inconsiderate.
I am
A gentleman free borne, I never wore
The rags of any great mans lo•kes, nor fed
Upon their after-meales; I never crouched
Unto the offal of an Office promised
Reward for long attendance, and then mist.
I read no difference between this huge,
This monstrous big word Lord, and Gentleman,
More than the Title sounds; for ought I learn,
The latter is as noble as the first,
I'm sure more ancient.
Let me tell you then,
You are too bitter, talk you know not what,
Make all men equals, and confound all course
Of order, and of Nature: this is madness.
Tic so; and I have reason to be mad:
Reason Aurelio, by my truth and hopes.
This wit Futelli brings a suit of love
From Lenidolche, one however maskt
In colourable privacy, is famed
The Lord Adurnies pensioner, at least.
Am I a husband picked out for a strumpet,
For a cast suit of bawdry? Aurelio,
You are as I am, you could ill digest
The trial of a patience so unfit.
Be gone Futelli, doe not mince one syllable
Of what you h•are: another fetch like this
May tempt a pe•ce •o rage: so say, be gone.
I shall report your answer. 
What have I
Deserved to bee so used? in colder blood
I doe confess nobilit•e requires
Duty and love, it is a badge of virtue,
By action 〈◊〉 •acquired, and next in rank
Unto anointed royal ie wherein
Have I neglected distance, or forgot
Observance to superiors? sure my name
Was in the •o•e mistook.
We will consider the meaning of this mystery.
Not so,
Let them fear bondage who are sl•ves to fear,
The sweetest freedom is an honest heart. 
Dexterity and sufferance, brave Don,
Are Engines the pure politic must work with.
We understand.
In subtilties of war,
(I talk t'ee now in your own occupation,
Your trade, or what you please) unto a Soldier,
Surprise of an enemy by stratagem,
Or down-right cutting throats is all one thing.
Most certain: on, proceed.
By way of parallel,
You drill or exercise your company,
(No matter which for terms) before you draw
Into the field, so in the feats of Courtship▪
First choice is made of thoughts, behaviour, words,
The set of looks, the posture of the beard,
Besol as manus, cringes of the knee,
The very hums and he's, thumps, and ay mees.
We understand all these: advance.
Then next,
Your enemy in face, your mistress (mark it)
Now you consult either to skirmish slightly,
Thats careless amors, or to enter battle,
Then fall to open treaty, or to work
By secre• spies or gold: here you corrupt
The Chamber-mayd▪ a fatal engine, or
Place there an Ambusesdo, thats contract
With some of her near friends, for half her portion,
Or offer truce, and in the interim,
Run upon slaughter, tic a noble treachery,
Thats swear and lye, steal her away: and to her
Cast caps, and cry Victoria, the field's
Thine own (my Don) shoe's thine.
We doe vouchsafe her.
Hold her then fast.
As fast as can the arms
Of strong imagination hold her.
No, sh'as skipped your hold, my imaginations eyes
Perceives she not endures the touch or sent
Of your war-over-worne habiliments,
Which I forgot in my instructions
To warn you of, therefore my warlike Don,
Apparel speedily your imagination
With a more courtly out-side.
Tic soon done.
As soon as said, in all the clothes thou hast,
More than that walking wardrobe on thy back.
Imagine first our rich Mockado doublet,
With our cut cloth of gold sleeves, and our quellio,
Our Diamond buttond Callamancho hose,
Our plume of Ostrich, with the embroidered scarf
The Duchess Infantasgo rolled our arm in.
I this is brave indeed.
Our Cloak whose cape is
Larded with pearls, which the Indian lackeys
Presented to our countrey-man De Cortez,
For ransom of his life, rated in value
At thirteen thousand pistolets, the guerdon
Of our achievement, when wee received
The Infant from the Bore in single duel,
Near to the Austrian forest with this rapier,
This only, very, naked, single rapier.
Top and top-gallant brave,
We will appear
Before our Amoretta like the issue
Of our progenitors.
Imagine so,
And that this rich suit of imagination,
Is on already now (which is most probable
As that apparel) here stands your Amoretta,
Make your approach and court her.
Lustre of beauty,
Not to affright your tender soul with horror,
We may descend to tales of peace and love,
Soft whispers fitting Ladies clossers, for
Thunder of cannon, roaring smoke and fire,
As if hells maw had vomited confusion,
The clash of steel, the neighs of barbed Steeds,
Wounds spouting blood, towns capering in the ayre,
Castles push• down, and Cities plowd with swords,
Become great Guzmans Oratory best,
Who tho victorious, and during life
Must be: yet now grants parley to thy smelts.
S'foot, Don, you talk too big, you make her tremble,
Doe you not see it imaginarily?
I doe as plainly as you saw the death
Of the Austrian Bore, she rather hears
Of feasting then of fighting, take her that way.
Yes we will feast my queen, my empress saint,
Shall it taste no delicates but what are dressed
W•th costlier spices then the Arabian bird
Sweetens her funeral bed with, we will riot
With every change of meates; which may renew
Our blood unto a spring, so pure, so high,
That from our pleasures shall proceed a race
Of scepter-bra•ing princes, who at once
M•st reign in every quarter of the globe.
Can more be said by one that feeds on herring
And garlic constantly?
Yes we will feast.
Enough, shes taken, and will love you now,
As well in buff, as your imagined bravery,
Your dainty ten times dreft buff, with this language
(Bold man of arms) shall win upon her, doubt not
Beyond all silken puppetry, think no more
Of your mockadoes, calaminchaes, quellios,
Pearl larded capes and diamond buttond breeches,
Leave such poor out-side helps to puling lovers,
Such as Fulgoso your weak rival is,
That starveling braind-companion appear you
At first (at least) in your own warlike fashion:
I pray be ruled, and change not a thread about you.
The humour takes (for I sir, am a man
Affects not shifts) I will adventure thus.
Why so you carry her from all the world,
Ime proud my stars designed me out an instrument
In such an hie employment.
gravely spoken,
You may be proud ont—
What is lost is lost,
Money is trash, and Ladies are et caetera's,
Ploy's play; luck's luck, fortunes an I know what,
You see the worst of me, and whats all this now?
A very spark (I vow) you will be styled,
Fulgoso the invincible, but did
The fair Spinella loose an equal part
How much in all do ye say?
Bare threescore ducats,
Thirty a piece, we need not care who know it
She plaid, I went her half walked by and whistled
After my usual manner thus—unmoved 
As no such thing had ever been as it were,
Although I saw the winners share my money
His lordship, and an honest gentleman
Pursed it, but not so merrily as I
Whistled it off—whistles
A noble confidence.
Dee note your rival.
With contempt I doe.
I can forgo things nearer then my gold,
Allied to my affections, and my blood;
Yea honour, as it were, with the same kind.
Of careless confidence, and come off fairly
Too as it were.
But not your love, Fulgoso.
No, shees inherent, and mine own past loosing.
It tickles me to think with how much state▪
You, as it were, did run at tilt in love
Before your Amoretta.
Broke my lance.
Of wit, of wit.
I mean so as it were
And laid flat on her back, both horse and woman.
Right as it were.
What else man, as it were.
Did you doe this to her, dare you to vant 
Your triumph we being present? um, ha, um.
What think you Don, of this brave man?
A ma?
It is some truss of reeds, or empty cask,
In which the wind with whistling spores it self
Beat up Sir, hes your rival, budge not from him
An inch, your grounds are honour.
Stoutly ventured, Don, hold him too't.
protelt a fine conceit,
A very fine conceit, and thus I told her,
That for mine own part, if she liked me, so,
If not, not; for my duck or do said I,
It is no fault of mine, that I am noble,
Grant it; another may be noble too,
And then wee'r both one noble better still
Habs-nabs good wink and choose, if one must have her,
The other goes without her, best of all,
My spirit is too high, to fight for woman,
I am too full of mercy to be angry,
A foolish generous quality, from which
No might of man can beat I'm, ime resolved.
Hast thou a spirit then ha? speaks thy weapon
Toledo language, Bilbo, or dull Pisa?
If an Italian blade, or spanish mettle,
Be brief, we challenge answer.
Famous Don.
What does he talk? my weapon speaks no language,
Tic a dutch iron truncheon.
Dutch?
And it need be,
Twill maule one's hide, in spite of who says nay
Dutch to a Spaniard, hold me.
Hold me too
Sirrah if you are my friend, for I love no fighting,
Yet hold me least in pity I fly off,
It I must fight, I must; in a scutvie quarrel
I de fie hes and shees, twit me with dutch?
Hang dutch and french, hang spanish and Italians,
Christians and Turks pew-waw; ell's one to me,
I know whats what, I know on which side
My bread is butterd.
Butterd? dutch again?
You come not with intention to affront us.
Front me no fronts, if thou beestangrie squabble
Hears my defence, and thy destruction—whistles a charge
If friends shake hands, and go with me to dinner.
We will embrace the motion, it doth relish,
The Cavalier treats on terms of honour,
Peace is not to be baulkd on fair conditions.
Still Don is Don the great.
He shows the greatness
Of his vast stomach in the quick embrace
Of thothers dinner.
It was the ready means to catch his friendship.
Yare a pair of worthies,
That make the nine no wonder.
Now since fate
Ordains that one of two must be the man,
The man of men which must enjoy alone
Loves darling Amoretta, both take liberty
To show himself before her, without cross
Of interruption, one of tother: he
Whose sacred mystery of earthly blessings
Crowns the pursuit; be happy.
And till then, live brothers in society.
We are fast.
I vow a match: Isle feast the Don to day
And fast with him to morrow.
Fair conditions.
Futelli and Piero, follow speedily.
My Lord we wait ye.
We shall soon return.
Whats that? I saw a sound.
A voice for certain.
It named a Lord.
Here are Lords too, we take it,
We carry blood about us, rich and haughty,
As any the twelve Caesars.
Gulls or Moguls,
Tag, rag, or other, Hoger-Mogen vanden
Skip-Iacks, or Chooses. Whoo! the brace are flinched,
The pair of shavers are sneaked from us, Don.
Why? what are we?
The valiant will stand too't.
So say I, we will eat and drink, and squander,
Till all doe split again.
Match on with greediness.
You cannot answer what a general tongue
Objects against your folly, I may curse
The interest you lay claim to in my blood,
Your mother my decree niece did die, I thought
Toosoon, but she is happy, had she lived▪
Till now, and known the vanities of your life
Hath dealt in, she had wished herself a grave
Before a timely hour.
Sir, consider,
My sex, were I mankind, my sword should quit
A wounded honour, and reprieve a name
From injury, by printing on their bosoms
Some deadly Character, whose drunken surfeits
Vomit such base aspersions, as I am
Scorn and contempt is virtue: my desert
Stands far above their malice.
Levidolche, hypocrisy puts on a holy robe,
Yet never changes nature: call to mind,
How in your girls days you fell forsooth
In love, and married, married (hark ye) whom▪
A trencher-waiter, shrewd preferment: but
Your childhood then excused that fault: for so
Footmen have run away with lusty heirs,
And stable-grooms reached to some fair ones chambers.
Pray let not me be bandied sir, and basfaild
By your intelligence.
So touched to the quick,
Fine mistress, I will then rip up at length
The progress of your infancy, in colour
Of disagreement you must be divorced,
Were so, and I must countenance the reasons
On better hopes I did, nay took you home,
Provided you my care, nay justified
Your alteration, joyd to entertain
Such visitants of worth and rank, as tendered
Civil respects; but then, even then—
What then?
Sweet uncle doe not spare me.
I more shame
To fear my hospitality was bawd
And (name it so) to your unchaste desires,
Then you to hear and know it.
Whose whore am I?
For thats your plainest meaning.
Were you modest,
The word you utterd last would force a blush.
Adurni is a bounteous Lord, tic said,
He parts with gold and jewels like a free
And liberal purchaser, a' wriggles in
To Ladies pleasures by a right of pension;
But you know none of this:
You are grown a Tavern talk,
Matter for Fiddlers songs, I toil to build
The credit of my family, and you
To pluck up the foundation, even this morning
Before the common Council, young Malfato
Convented for some lands he held; supposed
Belonged to certain Orphans, as I questioned
His tenure in particulars, he answered,
My worship needed not to flaw his right:
For if the humour held him, he could make
A jointure to my over-living Niece,
Without oppression, bad me tell her too,
She was a kind young soul, and might in time
Be sued to by a loving man, no doubt.
Here was a jolly breakfast.
Uncles are privileged
More than our parents, some wise man in state
Hath rectified, no doubt, your knowledge sir,
Whiles all the policy for public business,
Was spent—for want of matter, I by chance
Fell into grave discourse; but by your leave,
I from a strangers table rather wish
To earn my bread, than from a friends by gift,
Be daily subj•ct to unfit reproofs.
Come, come, to the point.
All the curses
Due to a ravisher of sober truth,
Dambe up their graceless mouths.
Now you turn rampant,
Just in the wenches trim and garb, these prayers
Speak your devotions purely.
Sir, alas,
What would you have me do? I have no Orators,
More than my tears, to plead my innocence,
Since you forsake me, and are pleased to lend
An open ear against my honest fame.
Would all their spite could harry my contents
Unto a desperate ruin; Oh dear goodness,
There is a right for wrongs.
There is, but first
Si• in commission on your own defects,
Accufe your self: be your own Jury, Judge,
And executioner, I make no sport
Of my vexation.
All the short remains
Of undesired life, shall only speak
Th▪extremity of penance: your opinion
Enjoynesit too.
Enough; thy tears prevail
Against credulity.
My miseries,
As in a glass, present me the rent face
Of an unguided youth.
No more—Trelcatic,
Some business speeds you hither.
Happy news,
Signior Martino, pray your care; my nephew
Auria hath done brave service: and I hear
(Lets be exceeding private) is returned
High in the Duke of Florences respects,
Tic said, but make no words that a' has firk
And mumbled the roguie-Turkes.
Why would you know
His merits so unknown?
I am not yet
Confirmed at full, withdraw, and you shall read
All what this paper talks.
So; Levidolche, you know our mind,
Be cheerful, come Trelcatio,
Causes of joy or grief, do seldom happen
Without companions, nacre thy resolutions
Have given an other birth to my contents▪
Even so, wise uncle, much good doe ye—discovered!
I could fly out, mix vengeance with my love,
Unworthy man Malfato, my good Lord
My hot in blood, rare Lord, grows could too, well
Rise dotage into rage, and sleep no longer;
Affection turned to hatred, threatens mischief.
In the next gallory you may behold
Such living pictures Lady, such rich pieces,
Of Kings, and Queens, and Princes, that you'd think
They breath, and smile upon ye.
Ha, they crownthes,
Great crownthes oath gold upon their heads.
Pure gold,
Drawn all in state.
How many horthes pray
Are ith their Chariots?
S•xteene, some twenty.
My sister wherefore left we her alone?
Where stays she gentlemen?
Viewing the rooms,
Tic like you'll meet her in the gallery.
This house is full of curiosities,
Most fit for Ladies sights.
Yeth, yeth, the thight
Of printhethes ith a fine thight.
Good, let us find her.
Sweet Ladies this way; see the doors sure.
Doubt not.
 PLeasures, Beauty, Youth attend ye.
Whiles the spring of nature lasts,
Love and melting thoughts attend ye
Ʋse the time, ere winter hastes.
Active blood, and free delight,
Place and privacy invite.
Doe doe! be kind as fair,
Loose not opportunity for ayre.
She is cruel that denies it,
Bounty best appears in granting,
Stealth of sport as soon supplies it,
Whiles the dues of love are wonting.
Here's the sweet exchange of bliss,
When each whisper proves a kiss.
In the game are felt no pains,
For in all the looser gains.
Plead not fair creature without sense of pity
So incompassionatly against a service,
In nothing faulty more then pure obedience,
My honours and my fortunes are led captives
In triumph by your all-commanding beauty,
And if you ever felt the power of love,
The rigour of an uncontrolled passion,
The tyranny of thoughts consider mine▪
In some proportion, by the strength of yours,
Thus may you yield and conquer.
Doe not study
(My Lord) to apparel folly in the steed
Of costly colours, henceforth cast off far
Far from your noblest nature, the contempt
Of goodness, and be gentler to your fame,
By purchase of a life to grace your story.
Dear, how sweetly
Reproof droopes from that balmy spring your breath,
Now could I read a lecture of my griefs
Un-earth a mine of Jewels at your foot,
Command a golden shower to rain down,
Impoverish every Kingdom of the east,
Which trafficks richest clothes, and filkes; would you
Vouchsafe one, unspleend chiding to my riot,
Else such a sacrifice can but beget
Suspicion of returns, to my devotion,
In mercenary blessings, for that saint
To whom I vow my self, must never want
Fit offerings to her altar.
Auria, Auria,
Fight not for name abroad, but come my husband,
Fight for thy wife at home.
Oh never cank
(Dear crulty) one that is swo•no your creature,
Amongst your countries enemies, I use.
No force, but humble words, delivered from
A tongue thats secretary to my heart.
How poorly some, tame to their wild desires,
Fawn on abuse of virtue, pray my Lord,
Make not your house my prison.
Grant a freedom,
To him who is the bondsman to your beauty.
Keep back ye close contrivers of false pleasures,
Or I shall force ye back—can it be possible
Locked up and singly too, chaste hospitality
A ba•quet in a bed-chamber; Adurni!
Dishonourable man.
What sees this rudeness,
That can broach scandal here.
For you hereafter,
Oh woman, lost to every brave report,
Thy wronged Auria is come home with glory,
Prepare a welcome to uncrowne the greatness
Of his prevailing fates,
Whiles you belike,
Are furnis•d with some news for entertainment
Which must become your friendship to be knit
More fast betwixt your souls, by my removal,
Both from his heart and memory.
Rich conquest,
To triumph on a Ladies injured fame,
Without a proof or warrant.
Have I life Sir,
Faith, Christianity?
Put me on the rack,
The wheel, or the galleys, if—
Peace factors,
In merchandise of scorn, your sounds are deadly,
Castanna, I could pity your consent
To such ignoble practice, but I find.
Course fortunes easily seduced, and herein
All claim to goodness ceases.
Use your tyranny.
What rests behind for me, out with it.
Horror,
Becoming such a forfeit of obedience,
Hope not that any falsity in friendship
Can palliate a broken faith, it dares not
Leave in thy prayers (fair vow-breaking want on)
To dress thy soul new, whose purer whiteness
Is sullied by thy change, from truth to folly.
A fearful storm is hovering, it will fall,
No shelter can avoydit, let the guilty
Sink under their own ruin.
How unmanly
His anger threatens mischief!
Whom, I prithee,
Doth the man speak to?
Lady, be not moved,
I will stand Champion for your honour, hazard
All what is dearest to me.
Mercy heaven!
Champion for me, and Auria living? Auria?
He lives, and for my guard my innocence
As free as are my husbands clearest thoughts,
Shall keep off vain constructions, I must beg
Your charities; sweet sister, yours to leave me,
I need no fellows now: let me appear,
Or mine own lawyer, or in open court
(Like some forsaken client) in my suit
Be cast for want of honest plea—oh misery.
Her resolution's violent, quickly follow,
By no means (sir) you've followed her already▪
I fear with too much ill success in trial,
Of unbecomming courtesies; your welcome
Ends in so sad a farewell.
I will stand
The roughness of th'encounter, like a gentleman,
And wait ye to your homes, what are besal me.
I Say, Don, brother mine, win her and wear her.
And so will I; if it be my luck to loose her,
I loose a pretty wench, and theres the worst on it.
Wench said ye, most mechanically? faugh!
Wench is your trull, your blow•, your dowdy, but
(Sir brother) he who names my Queen of love
Without his bonnet veiled, or saying grace,
As at Some paranymphall feast, is rude,
Nor versed in literature, Dame Amoretta,
Lo, I am sworn thy Champion.
So am I too.
Can as occasion serves, if she turn scurvy,
Vnsweare my self again, and ne'er change colours.
Pish man, the best, though call em, ladies, madams,
Fairs, fines, and hones, are but flesh and blood,
And now and then too, when the fi•s come on 'em,
Will prove themselves but flirts, and tirliry pufkins.
Our choler must advance.
Dost long for a beating?
Shalls try a slash, here is that shall do it: Isle tap
A gallon of thy brains, and fill thy hogshead
With two of wine for it.
Not in friendship brother,
Or whistle thee into an ague; hanged,
Be sociable: drink till we roar and scratch;
Then drink our selves asleep again. The fashion!
Thou dost not know the fashion.
Her fair eyes,
Like to a pair of pointed beams drawn from
The Suns most glorious Orb, does dazzle sight,
Audacious to gaze there; then over those
A several bow of jet securely twines
In semicircles under them two banks
Of roses red and white, divided by
An arch of polish Ivotle, surveying
A temple from whence Oracles proceed,
More gracious than Apollos, more desired
Than amorous songs of Poets, softly tuned.
Hey day, what's this?
Oh, but those other parts, all—
All: Hold there, I bar play under board,
My part yet lies therein; you never saw
The things you wier-draw thus.
I have dream't
Of every part about her, can lay open
Her several inches, as exactly (mark it)
As if I had took measure with a compass,
A rule, or yard, from head to foot.
Oh rare,
And all this in a dream.
A very dream.
My waking brother Soldier is tumd
Into a sleeping Carpenter or Taylor,
Which goes for half a man—whats he? bear up?
Death of reputation, the wheel, strappado, galleys,
Rack, are ridiculous fopperies; goblins to
Fright babies: poor lean-sould rogues, they
Will swoon at the scarre of a pin: one tear
Dropped from their harlots eyes, breeds earth-quakes
In their bones.
Bless us, a monster patched of dagger bombast,
His eyes like Copper-basons, a' has changed
Hair with a shag dog.
Let us then avoid him,
Or stand upon our guard; the foe approaches.
Cut-throats by the score abroad, come home, and rot in fripperies, brave man at arms. Go turn pander doe, stalk for a mess of warm broth: damnable, honourable cuts are but badges for a fool to vaunt, the raw rib'd Apothecary poisons cum privile∣gio, and is paid. Oh the common-wealth of beasts is most politic∣lie ordered.
Brother, we'll keep aloof, there is no valour
In tugging with a man fiend
I d. fie him.
It gabbles like I know not what, believe it,
The fellows a shrewd fellow at a pink.
Look else; the Lion roars, and the spaniel fawns. Down Cur, the Badger bribes the Unicorue,
That a Jury may not pass upon his pillage: here the Bear fees the Wolf, for he will not howl gratis, beasts call pleading howling. So then, there the Horse complains of the Apes rank-riding: the Jockey makes mouths, but is fined for it: the Stag is not jeered by the Monkey for his horns: the Ass by the hare for his burden: The Ox by the Leopard for his yoke, nor the Goat by the Ram, for his beard, only the Fox wrappes himself warm in Beaver, bids the Cat mouse, the Elephant toil, the Boar gather akorns, whiles he grins, feeds fat, tells tales, laughs at all, and sleeps safe at the Lions feet.—Save ye people.
Why save thee too, if thou be of heavens making:
What art?—Fear nothing Don, we have our blades,
Are mettle men our selves, try us who dare.
Our brother speaks our mind, think what you please on it.
A match: observe well this switch; with this only switch have I poshed out the brains of thirteen Turks to the dozen for a breakfast.
What man? tirteen? is it possible thoulyest not?
I was once a Scholar, then I begged without pity: from thence I practised law, there a scruple of conscience popped me over the bar: a Soldier I turned a while, but could not procure the letter of preferment. Merchant I would bee, and a glut of land∣rats gnawd me to the bones; would have bought an office, but the places with reversions were catch up: offered to pass into the Court, and wanted trust for clothes; was lastly, for my good parts pressed into the Galleys, took prisoner, redeemd amongst other slaves by your gay great man, they call him AURIA: and am now I know not who, where, or what. How d▪ee like me? say.
A shaver of all trades; what course o f life
Doest mean to follow next? ha? speak thy mind.
Nor be thou daunted fellow: we our selves
Have felt the frowns of fortune in our days.
I want extremely, exceedingly, hideously.
Take that, enjoy it freely, wisely use it. 
Th'advantage of thy fate, and know the giver. 
Hoy d•, a purse in troth wh o dropped, stay, stay,
Vmh; have we gipsies here? oh mine is safe
First your purse, brother Don?
Not mine, I seldom
Wear such unfashionable trash about me.
Hast any money in it, honest blade?
A bots on empty purses.
Wee defy them.
Stand from about me, as you are mortal, you are dull clod-pated lumps of mire and garbish. This is the land of Fairies, Imperial Queen of Elves, I do crotch to thee, vow my services, my blood, my sinews to thee, sweet sovereign of largess, and liberality—a French Taylor neat; Persian Cooke; dainty! Greek Wines; rich Flanders Mares; stately Spanish Salads, poi∣nant, Venetian, wanton, ravishing, English Bawd unmatchable sirs I am fitted.
All these thy followers, miserable pigmies
Prate sense and don't be mad, I like thy humour,
Tic pretty odd, and so as one might say,
I care not greatly if I entertain thee,
Dost want a master? if thou dost I am for thee
Else choose, and sneak up; pish I scorn to flinch man.
Forsake not fair advancement, money certes
Will fleet and drop off, like a cozening friend,
Who holds it, holds a slippery Eel byth' tail,
Unless he gripe it fast, be ruled by counsel.
Excellent, what place shall I be admitted to?
Chamber, wardrobe, cellar, or stable.
Why one and all, you are welcome, lets shake hands on it,
Thy name?
Parado Sir
The great affairs
I shall employ thee most in will be news,
And telling whats a clock, for ought I know yet.
It is sir to speak punctually some hour and half
Eight three thirds of two seconds of one minute over at most, Sir
I doe not ask thee now, or if I did
We are not much the wiser, and for news—
Auria, the fortunate is this day to bee received with great
 solemnity at the city counsel house, the stre•tes are already thronged
 with lookers on.
Thats well remembered, brother Don let's trudge,
Or we shall come too late.
By no means, brother.
Waite close my ragged new-come.
As your shadows.
Your favours with these honours, speak your bounties
And tho the low deserts of my success
Appear in your constructions fair and goodly,
Yet I attribute to a noble cause,
Not my abilities, the thanks due to them,
The Duke of Florence hath too highly prized
My duty in my service, by example,
Rather to cherish and encourage virtue,
In spirits of action, then to crown the issue
Of feeble undertakings. whiles my life
Can stand in use I shall no longer rate it
In value then it stirs to pay that debt,
I owe my country for my birth and fortunes.
Which to make good, our state of Genoa
Not willing that a native of her own,
So able for her safety, should take pension
From any other Prince; hath cast upon you
The government of Corsica.
Adds thereto
Besides th'allowance yearly due, for ever
To you and to your heirs, the full revenue
Belonging to Savona; with the office
Of Admiral of Genoa.
Presenting
By my hands, from their public treasury,
A thousand Ducats.
But they limit only
One moves of stay, for your dispatch, no more.
In all your great attempts, may you grow thrifty,
Secure, and prosperous.
If you please to rank,
Amongst the humblest one that shall attend
Instructions under your command, I am
Ready to waite the charge.
Oh still the state
Engages me her creature with the burden
Unequal for my weakness, to you gentlemen
I will prove friendly honest, of all mindful.
In memory (my Lord, such is your stile now)
Of your late fortunate exploits, the counsel
Amongst their general acts, have registered
The great Dukes letters, witness of your merit
To stand in characters upon record.
Load upon load let not my want of modesty
Trespass against good manners, I must study
Retirement to compose this weighty business
And moderately digest so large a plenty.
For fear it swell unto a surfeit.
May I
be bold to press a visit?
At your pleasure,
Good time of day, and peace,
O•s: health to your Lordship.
What of Spinella yet?
Quite lost no prints,
Or any tongue of •racing her, how ever
Matters are huddled up: I doubt my Lord
Her husband carries little peace about him.
fall danger what fall can, she is a goodness
Above temptation, more to be adored
Then sifted; I'm too blame sure.
Levidolche.
For her part too▪ laughed at Malfatos frenzy
(Just so she termed it) but for you (my Lord)
She said she thanked your charity, which lent
Her crooked soul, before it left her body,
Some respit, wherein it might learn again
The means of growing straight.
She has found mercy,
Which I will seek, and sue for.
You are happy.
Count of Savona, Genoas Admiral,
Lord governor of Corsica, enroled
A Worthy of my country, sought and sued to
Praised, courted, flatterd; sure this bulk of mine,
Tails in the size a timpani of greatness
Puffs up too monstrously my narrow chest,
How surely dost thou malice, these extremes,
Uncomfortable man? when I was needy,
Cast naked on the flats of barren pity,
Abated to an ebb so low, that boys
A Cocke-horse frisked about me, without plunge
You could chat gravely then, in formal tones,
Reason most paradoxically; now
Contempt and wilful grudge at my uprising
becalms your learned noise.
Such flourish Auria,
Flies with so swift a gale, as it will wast
Thy sudden joys into a faithless harbour.
Can mutter mischief, I observed your dullness
Whiles the whole ging crowd to me hark my triumphs
Are echoed under every roof, the ayre
Is streightend with the sound, there is not room
Enough to brace them in, but not a thought
Doth pierce into the grief that cabins hear,
Here through a creek a little in-let crawls,
A flake no bigger than a sisters thread,
Which sets the region of my heart a fire.
I had a kingdom once, but am depose▪d
From all that royalty of blessed content,
by a confederacle twixt love and frailty.
glories in public view, but add to misery,
Which travails in unrest at home.
At home?
That home Aurelio speaks of, I have lost,
And which is worse, when I have rolled about,
Toild like a pilgrim, round this globe of earth,
Wearied with care, and overworn with age,
Lodged in the grave, I am not yet at home,
There rots but half of me, the other part
Sleeps, heaven knows where, would she and I my wife,
I mean, but what alas talk I of wife,
The woman, would we had together fed
On any out-cast parings, course and mouldy,
Not lived divided thus, I could have begged
For both, for it had been pity she should ever
Have felt so much extremity.
This is not
Patience required in wrongs of such vile nature,
You pity her, think rather on revenge.
Revenge! for what? (uncharitable friend)
On whom? lets speak a little pray with reason,
You found Spinella in Adurnies house,
Tic like a' gave her welcome very likely,
Her sister and another with her, so
Invited, nobly done; but he with her
Privately chamberd, he deserves no wife
Of worthy quality, who dares not trust
Her virtue in the proofs of any danger.
But I broke op the doors upon em.
Marry, it was a slovenly presumption,
And punishable by a sharpe rebuke.
I tell you sir, I in my younger growth,
Have by the stealth of privacy enjoyd
A Ladies closet, where to have profaned
That shrine of chastity and innocence,
With one unhallowed word, would have exiled
The freedom of such favour into scorn.
Had any he alive then ventured there,
With foul construction, I had stamped the justice
Of my unguiltie truth upon his heart.
Adurni might have done the like, but that
The conscience of his fault in coward blood,
blushed at the quick surprise.
O fie, fie.
How ill some argue in their sour reproof,
Against a party liable to law:
For had that Lord offended with that creature,
Her presence would have doubled every strength
Of man in him, and justified the forfeit
Of noble shame, else it was enough in both
With a smile only to correct your rudeness.
Tic well you make such use of neighbours curtsy,
Some kind of beasts are tame, and hug their injuries:
Such way leads to a fame too.
Not uncivilly, though violently, friend.
Wherefore th•n, think ye,
Can she absent her self, if she be blameless?
You grant of course, your triumphs are proclaimed,
And I in person told her your return.
Where lies she hid the while?
That rests for answer
In you, now I come t'ee, we have exchanged
bosoms, Aurelio, from our years of childhood,
Let me acknowledge with what pride I own
A man so faithful, honest, fast, my friend:
He whom if I speak fully, never failed
by teaching trust to me, to learn of mine,
I wished my self thine equal; if l aymd
A wrong, it was in an envy of thy goodness,
So dearly witness with me my integrity,
I laid thee up to heart, that from my love,
My wife was but distinguished in her sex,
Give back that holy signature of friendship,
Concealed▪ defaced, plucked off, or I shall urge,
Accounts scored on the tally of my vengeance,
Without all former complements.
Do ye imagine
I fawn upon your fortunes, or intrude
Upon the hope of bettering my estate,
That you cashier me at a minutes warning?
No, Auria, I dare vie with your respects,
Put both into the balance, and the poise
Shall make a settled stand, perhaps the proffer,
So frankly vowed at your departure first
Of settling me a partner in your purchase,
Leads you into opinion of some ends
Of mercenary falsehood, yet such wrong
Lest suites a noble soul.
By all my sorrows,
The mention is too course.
Since then th'occasion
Presents our discontinuance, use your liberty:
For my part I am resolute to die
The same my life professed me.
Pish, your faith
Was never in suspicion; but consider,
Neither the Lord nor Lady, nor the bawd,
Which shuffled them together, opportunity
Have fastened stain on my unquestioned name,
My friends rash indiscretion was the bellows
Which blew the cole now kindled to a flame,
Will light his slander to all wandering eyes.
Some men in giddy zeal ore-doe that office
They catch at, of whose number is Aurelio:
For I am certain, certain it had been
Impossible, had you stood wisely silent,
but my Spinella, trembling on her knee,
Would have accused her breach of truth, have bg'd
A speedy execution on her trespass,
Then with a justice lawful as the magistrates,
Might I have drawn my sword against Adurni,
Which now is sheathed and rusted in the scabbard;
Good thanks to yonr cheap providence, once more
I make demand—my wife—you—si•.
Roar louder
The noise affrights not me, threaten your enemies,
And prove a valiant tongue man—now must follow,
by way of method, the exact condition
Of rage which runs to mutiny in friendship.
Auria come on, this weapon looks not pale
At fight of that again hear and believe it,
What I have done, was well done and well meant;
Twenty times over, were it new to doe.
I de do it and do it, and boast the pains religious;
Yet since you shake me off, I slightly value
Other save•rity.
Honour and duty
Stand my compurgators, never did passion
Purpose ungentle usage of my sword,
Against Aurelio, let me rather want
My hands, nay friend, a heart then ever suffer
Such dotage enter here, if I must loose
Spinella, let me not proceed to misery,
by loosing my Aurelio, we through madness,
Frame strange conceits, in our discoursing brains,
And prate of things as we pretend they were,
Join help to mine (good man) and let us listen
After this straying soul, and till we find her,
bear our discomfort quietly.
So doubtless,
She may be soon discovered.
Thats spoke cheerfully.
Why theres a friend now,—Auria and Aurelio
At odds oh't cannot be, must not, and shanot—
But look Castannas here,—welcome fair figure
Of a choice Jewel, locked up in a cabinet,
More precious then the public view should sully.
Sir how you are informd, or on what terms
Of prejudice against my course, or custom▪
Opinion sways your confidence, I know not
Much anger, if my fears persuade not falsely,
Sits on this gentleman's sterne brow, yet sir,
If an unhappy maids word may find credit,
As I wish harm to no body on earth,
So would all good folks may wish none to me.
None does sweet sister.
If they doe, dear heaven
Forgive them is my prayer, but perhaps,
You might conceive (and yet methinkes you should not)
How I am faulty in my sisters absence,
Indeed tic nothing so, nor was I knowing
Of any private speech my Lord intended,
Save civil entertainment, pray what hurt
Can fall out in discourse, if it be modest?
Sure noble men will show that they are such
With those of their own rank, and that was all
My sister can be charged with.
First not friend, an excellent maid?
Deserves the best of fortunes;
I ever spoke her virtuous.
With your leave,
You used most cruel language to my sister,
Enough to fright her wits, not very kind
To me my self, she sighed when you were gone,
Desired no creature else should follow her;
And in good truth, I was so full of weeping,
I marked not well which way she went.
Staid she not
Within the house then?
Pass not she—Aurelio
Was passing rough.
Strange! no where to be found out▪
Not yet, but on my life, ere many hours,
I shall hear from her.
Shalt thou? worthy maid,
Thast brought to my sick heart a cordial—friend
Good news—most sweet Castanna.
May it prove so.
The paper in the purse for my directions appointed this the place, the time now, here dance I attendance—she is come already.
Parado, so I over heard you named.
A mushrome sprung up in a minute, by the sun-shine of your benevolent grace, liberality and hospitable compassion (most magnificent beauty) have long since lain bed-rid in the ashes of the old world till now, your illustrious charity hath raked up the dead embers by giving life to a worm inevitably devoted yours as you shall please to new shape me.
A grateful man (it seems) where gratitude
Has harbour; other furniture becoming
Accomplished qualities must needs inhabit,
What country claims your birth?
None, I was borne at sea, as my mother was in passage from cape Ludugory to cape Clagliaty toward Africa in Sardinia, was bred up in Aquilastro, and at years put my self in service un∣der the Spanish Viceroy: till I was taken prisoner by the Turks. I have tasted in my days handsome store of good and bad, and am thankful for both.
You seem the issue then of honest parents.
Reputed no less: many children oftentimes inherit their lands who peradventure never begot them: my mothers husband was a very old man at my birth, but no man is too old to father his wives child, your servant I am sure I will ever prove my self entirely.
Dare you be secret?
Yes.
And sudden.
Yes.
But withal, sure of hand, and spirit.
Yes, yes, yes.
I use not many words, the time prevents 'em,
A man of quality has robed mine honour.
Name him.
Adurni.
A' shall bleed.
Malfato contemned my proffered love.
Yoke 'em in death—whats my reward?
Propose it, and enjoy it.
You for my wife.
Ha!
Nothing else, deny me.
And isle betray your counsels to your ruin;
Else doe the feat courageously—consider.
I doe dispatch the task I have enjoined,
Then claim my promise.
No such matter, pretty one,
Weal marry first—or—farewell.
Stay, examine
From my confession what a plague thou draw
Into thy bosom, tho I blush to say it,
Know I have without sense of shame, or honour,
Forsook a lawful marriage bed, to dally
Between Adurnis arms.
This Lords.
The same; more not content with him I courted,
A newer pleasure, but was there refused by him I named so late.
Malfato.
Right, am henceforth resolutely bent to print
My foal es on their hearts, then change my life
For some rare penance, can thou love me now?
Better I doe believe tic possible you may mend,
All this breaks off no bargain.
Accept my hand, with this a faith as constant
As vows can urge, nor shall my haste prevent
This contract, which death only must divorce.
Settle the time.
Meet here to morrow night,
We will determine further, as behoves us.
How is my new love called?
Levidolche, be confident, I bring a worthy portion;
But you'll sly off.
Not I, by all thats noble,
A kiss—farewell—dear fate.
Love is sharpe sighted
And can pierce through the cunning of disguises,
False pleasures I cashier ye, fair truth welcome.
HEre you are safe, (sad cousin) if you please
May over-say the circumstance of what
You late discoursed, mine ears are gladly oper,
For I my self am in such hearty league
With solitary thoughts, that pensive language
Charms my attention.
But my husbands honours,
By how much more in him they sparkle clearly
by so much more they tempt belief to credit
The wrack and ruin of my injured name.
Why cousin should the earth cleave to the roots,
The seas and heavens be mingled in disorder,
Your purity with unaffrighted eyes
Might waite the uproar, tic the guilty trembles
At horrors, not the innocent, you are cruel
In censuring a libertle allowed.
Speak freely, gentle cousin, was Adurni
Importunately wanton?
In excess
Of entertainment, else not.
Not the boldness
Of an uncivil courtship.
What that meaht,
I never understood, I have at once
Set bars between my best of earthly joys,
And best of men, so excellent a man
As lives without comparison, his love
To me was matchless.
Yet put case, sweet cousin,
That I could name a creature, whose affection
Followed your Auria in the height: affection
To you; even to Spinella▪ true and settled,
As ever Auria's was▪ can, is, or will be.
You may not chide the story.
Fortunes minions
Are flattered, not the miserable.
Listen to a strange tale, which thus the author sighed,
A kinsman of Spinella (so it runs)
Her fathers sisters soune, some time before
Auria the fortunate possessed her beauties,
Became enamoured of such rare perfections,
As she was stored with, fed his idle hopes
With possibilities of lawful conquest,
Proposed each difficulty in pursuit
Of what his vain supposal styled his own,
Found in the argument one only flaw
Of conscience, by the nearness of their bloods,
Unhappy scruple, easily dispensed with,
Had any friends advice resolved the doubt▪
Still on a' loved, and loved, and wished, and wished,
Eft-soone began to speak, yet soon broke off,
And still the fondling durst not, cause a' durst not.
It was wonderful,
Exceeding wonderful,
Beyond all wonder, yet tic known for truth,
After her marriage, when remained not ought
Of expectation to such fruitless dotage.
His reason then, now, then could not reduce
The violence of passion, tho a'vowd
Never to unlock that secret, scarce to her
Herself, Spinella, and withal resolved,
Not to come near her presence, but to avoid
All opportunities how ever proffered.
An understanding duld by th'infelicitie
Of constant sorrow, is not apprehensive
In pregnant novelty, my ears receive
The words you utter, cousin, but my thoughts
Are fastened on another subject.
Can you embrace, so like a darling, your own woes,
And play the tyrant with a partner in them?
Then I am thankful for advantage, urged
By fatal and enjoynd necessity,
To stand up in defence of injured virtue,
Will against any, I except no quality,
Maintain all supposition misapplied,
Unhonest, false, and villainous.
Dear cousin, as you're a gentleman,
Isle bless that hand,
Whose honourable pity seals the passport
For my incessant turmoils, to their rest.
If I prevail, (which heaven forbid) these ages
Which shall inherit ours, may tell postericie
Spinella and Malfato for a kinsman,
By noble love made jealons of her fame.
No 〈◊〉 I dare not hear it.
All is said:
Henceforth shall never syllable proceed, 
From my unpleasant voice, of amorous folly—
Your summons warned me hither, I am come
Sister, my sister it was an unkind part,
Not to take me along w'ee.
Chide her for it,
Castanna, this house is as freely yours,
As ever was your fathers.
we conceive so,
Tho your late strangeness hath bred mervalle in us,
But wherefore, sister, keeps your silence distance?
Am I not welcome t'ee?
Lives Auria safe?
Oh prithee doe not hear me call him husband,
before thou can resolve what kind of wife
His fury terms the run away, speak quickly,
Yet doe not stay Castanna, I am lost,
His friend hath set before him a bad woman,
And hee, good man, believes it.
Now in truth—
Hold, my heart trembles, I perceive thy tongue
Is great with ills and hastes to be delivered,
I should not use Castanna so, first tell me,
Shortly and truly tell me▪ how he does.
In perfect health.
For that my thanks to heaven.
The world hath not another wife like this,
Cousin you will not hear your sister speak,
So much your passion rules.
Even what she pleases: go on Castanna.
Your most noble husband
Is deaf to all reports, and only grieves
At his souls love, Spinellas causeless absence.
Why look ye cousin now?
Indeed.
Will value no counsel, takes no pleasure in his greatness,
Neither admits of likelihood at all,
That you are living: if you were hoe's certain
It were impossible you could conceal
Your welcomes to him, being all one with him,
But as for jealousy of your dishonour,
Hee both laughs at and scorns it.
Does a'.
Therein he shows himself desertfull of his happiness,
Methinks the news should cause some motion sister.
You are not well.
Not well.
I am unworthy▪
Of whom? what? why?
Go cousin, come Castanna.
The state in counsel is already set,
My coming will be 'late; now therefore gentlemen,
This house is free as your intents are sober,
Your pains shall be accepted.
Mirth sometimes falls into earnest signior.
Wee for our parts aim at the best.
You wrong your selves &amp; meals, good success t'ee▪ 
Futile tic our wisest course to follow
Our pastime with d scretion, by which means
Wee may ingratiate as our business hits,
Our undertakings to great Aurias favour.
I grow quite weary of this lazy custom
Attending on the fruitless hopes of service,
For meat and rags, a wit, a shrewd preferment
Study some scurrill jests, grow old and beg
No let em be admitted that love foul linen.
Isle run a new course.
Get the coin we spend,
And knock 'em ore the pate who jeers our earnings—
Hushed man, one suitor comes.
The tother follows.
Be not so loud—here comes Madonna sweet lips.
Mithtreth, inthooth for thooth, will lithpe it to uth.
Dentlemen then ye ith thith muthicke yourth, or can ye tell what great manths fidleth, made it with vedee petty noyth, but who thold thend it.
does not your self know Lady.
I doe not uth
To thpend lip labour upon quethtionths,
That I my thelfe can anthwer.
No sweet madam,
Your lips are destind to a better use,
Or else the proverb fails of lisping maids.
Kithing you mean pey come behind with your mockths then,
My lipthes will therve the one to kith the other —
How now whath necked?
what hoe we come to be merry,
Open the doors a Jovial crew,
Lusty boys and free, and very,
Very, very lusty boys are wee,
We can drink till all look blew,
Dance sing and roar,
Never give ore.
As long as we have ne'er an eye to see
Pithee, pithee▪ leths come in▪
Ove thall all oua favous win,
Dently, dently, we thall pass,
None kithed like the lithping lass.
What call ye this a song?
Yeth a delithious thing, and wondroth pretty;
A very country catch—doubtless some prince
Belikehath sent it to congratulate
Your nights repose.
Think ye tho thignior,
It muth be then thome unknown obthcure printh
That thuns the light.
Perhaps the prince of darkness.
Of darkens what ith he?
A courtier matchless
A'woes, and wins, more beauties to his love
Then all the kings on earth.
Whea thandeth his court pey—
This gentleman approaching I presume,
Has more relation to his court then I,
And comes in time t'informe ye.
Think ye tho time thure you know him,
Lady you'll perceive it▪
She seems in my first entrance to admire me,
Protest she eyes me round; Fulg▪ shees is thine own.
Noble Fulgoso.
Did you hear the musique?
It was I that brought it, was it not tickling? ah ha
Pay what pinth thent it.
Prince, no Prince but we,
We set the ditty and composed the song,
Theresnos a note or foot in it, but our own,
And the pure trodden mortar of this brain,
We can doe things and things.
Do it thing't youa thelfe then.
Nay, nay, I could never sing
More then a gibe cat, or a very howler,
But you shall heareme whistle it.
Thith thingth thome jethter,
Thure he belongs unto the printh of darkneth.
Yes, and isle tell you what his office is,
His Prince delights himself exceedingly
In birds of divers kinds, this gentleman
Is keeper and instructor of his black-birds, he took his skill first
from his fathers carter.
With wonderful to thee by what throng means
Thome men are raised to plathes.
I doe hear you,
And thank ye heartily for your good wills,
In setting forth my parts, but what I live on,
Is simple trade of money from my lands.
Hang sharks, I am no shifter.
Ith pothible—
Bleth uth whoth thith?
Oh it is the man of might.
May my address to beauty lay no scandal
Upon my martial honour, since even Mars
Whom as in war, in love I imitate,
Could not resist the shafts of Cupped, therefore
As with the god of War, I deign to stoop▪
Lady vouchsafe loves goddess like to yield
Your fairer hand unto these lips, the portal
Of valiant breath, that hath ore-turnd an army.
Fay'a weather, keep me, what a thorme ith thith?
Oh Don keep off at further distance yet
A little farther, doe you not observe
How your strong breath hath terrified the Lady?
Isle stop the breath of war and breath as gently
As a perfumed pair of sucking bellows
In some sweet Ladies chamber, for I can
Speak Lyon-like, or sheep like, when I please.
Stand by then, without noise a while brave Don
And let her only view your parts, they'll take her.
〈◊〉 publish them in silence.
Stand you there
Fulgoso the magnificent.
Hear?
Just there,
Let her survey you both; you'll be her choice
Ne'er doubt it, man.
I cannot doubt it, man.
But speak not till I bid you.
I may whistle.
A little to your self, to spend the time.
Both foolth you thay.
But hear them for your sport.
Don shall begin,—begin Don, she has surveyed
Your outwards and your inwards through the rents,
And wounds of your apparel.
She is politic,
My out-side Lady shrouds a prince obscured;
I thank ye for your muthicke printh.
My words
Are musique to her.
The muthicke and the thong
You thent me by thith whithling thing, your man?
She took him for my man, love thou were just.
I wonot hold, his man, tic time to speak
Before my time, oh scurvy, I his man?
That has no means for meat or rags, and seame-rents.
Have I with this one rapier.
He has no other.
Past through a field of pikes, whose heads I lopped
As easily as the bloody minded youth
Lopped off the poppy heads.
The puppit heads.
Have I—have I—have I?
Thou lie thou hast not,
And isle may not.
Have I—but let that pass,
For tho my famous acts were dimbed to silence,
Yet my descent shall crown me thy superior.
That I would lithen to.
List and wonder,
My great, great Grandsire was an ancient Duke,
Stilt Dis? fire di Gonzado.
Thats in Spanish
An incorrigible rogue, without a fellow,
An unmatched rogue, he thinks we understand not.
So was my grandfather height Argozile.
An arrant, arrant thief leader, pray mock it.
My grandsire by the mothers side a Condee,
Condee Scrivano.
A crop-eard Scrivener.
Whose son, my mothers father was a Marquis,
H••io di puto.
Thats the son of a whore.
And my renowned sire Don Piccace.
In proper sense a rascal—O brave Don.
Huio di una pravado—
A'goes on,
Son of a branded bitch—high spirited Don,
Had honours both by sea and land, to wit.
The Galleys and Bride-well.
Isle not endure it,
To hear a canting mongrel—Hear me lady,
Tic no fair play.
I care not fair or foul,
I from a King derive my pedigree,
King Oberon by name, from whom my father
The mighty and courageous Mounti-banco,
Was lineally descended, and my mother
(In right of whose blood I must ever honour
The lower Germany) was a Harlekine.
He blow up
The Spaniard presently by his mother side.
Her father was Grave Hansvan Herne, the son
Of Hogan Mogen, dat de droates did sneighen
Of veirteen hundred Spaniards in one neict.
Oh Diabolo.
Ten thousand Devils, nor Diabolos
Shall fright me from my pedigree, my uncle
Yacob van Flagon drought, with Abraham Snorten fert
And yongster Brogan foh with fourscore hargubush,
Managed by well-lin'd Butter-boxes, took
A thousand Spanish Iobber-nowles by surprise,
And beat a sconce about their ears.
My fury
Is now but justice on thy forfeit life.
Lath they thall not fight.
Fear not, sweet Lady.
Be advis▪d great spirits.
My fortunes bid me to be wise in duels,
Else hanged, who cares?
Mine honour is my tutor,
Already tried and known.
Why there's the point,
Mine honour is my tutor too, Noble men
Fight in their persons, scorn't, tic out of fashion,
Theres none but hare-brain'd youths of metal use it.
Yet put not up your swords, it is the pleasure
Of the fair Lady, that you quit the field,
With brandished blades in hand.
And more to show
your suffering valour, as her equal favours,
you both should take a competence of kicks.
How?
Thus and thus, away you brace of stinkards,
Pheugh, is it were.
Why since it is her pleasure, I dare and will endure it.
Pheugh.
A way, but stay below.
Budge not, I charge ye,
Till you have further leave.
Mine honour claims
The last foot in the field.
Isle lead the van then.
yet more, be gone, are not these precious suitors—
What tumults fright the house?
A brace of Castrels,
That flattered sir, about this lovely game
your daughter, but they durst not give the souse
And so took hedge.
Me Haggards, Buzzards, Kites.
Ith korne, thuch trump and will thape my luffe,
Henth forth ath thall my father betht direct me.
Why now thou sing in tune, my Amoretta▪
And my good friends, you have likewise Physicians,
Prescribed a healthful diet, I shall think on
A bounty for your pains, and will present ye
To noble Auria: such as your descents
Commend, but for the present we must quit
This room to privacy: they come—
Nay predee,
Leave me not Dentlemen.
We are your servants.
You're welcome, be assured you are, for proof,
Retrive the boldness (as you please to term it)
Of visit to commands, if this mans presence
Be not of use, dismiss him.
Tic (with favour)
Of consequence my Lord, your friend may witness
How far my reputation stands engaged
To noble reconcilement.
I observe
No party here amongst us, who can challenge
A motion of such honour.
Could your looks
Borrow more clear severity and calmness,
Than can the peace of a composed soul;
Yet I presume, report of my attempt
(Trained by a curiosity io youth)
For scattering clouds before 'em, hath raised tempests
Which will at last break out.
Hid now (most likely)
In the darkness of your speech.
you may be plainer.
I shall my Lord, that I intended wrong,
Ha? wrong? to whom?
To Auria, and as far
As language could prevail, did—
Take advice,
(Young Lord) before thy tongue betray a secret
Concealed yet from the world; hear and consider
In all my flight of vanity and giddiness,
When scarce the wings of my excess were fledged,
When a distemperature of youthful heat,
Might have excused disorder and ambition,
Even then, and so from thence till now the down
Of softness is exchanged for plumes of age▪
Confirmed and hardened, never durft I pitch
On any howsoever likely rest,
Where the presumption might be consterd wrong,
The word is hateful, and the sense wants pardon:
For as I durst not wrong the meanest, so
He who but only aimd by any boldness,
A wrong to me, should find I must not bear it,
The one is as unmanly as the other.
Now without interruption.
Stand Aurelio,
And justify thine accusation boldly,
Spare me the needless use of my confession,
And having told no more, then what thy jealousy
Possessed thee with again before my face,
Urge to thy friend the breach of hospitality
Adurni trespassed in, and thou conceavst
Against Spinella; why proofs grow faint,
If barely not supposed, Isle answer guilty.
You come not here to brave us.
No Aurelio.
But to reply upon that brittle evidence,
To which thy cunning never shall rejoin.
I make my Judge my Jury, be accountant
Whither withal the eagerness of spleen
Of a suspicious rage can plead, thou hast
Enforced the likelihood of scandal.
Doubt not
But that I have delivered honest truth,
As much as I believe, and justly witness.
Loose grounds to raise a bulwark of reproach on,
And thus for that; my errand hither is not
In whining trewant-like submission,
To cry I have offended, pray forgive me,
I will doe so no more: but to proclaim
The power of virtue, whose commanding sovereignty,
Sets bounds to rebell-bloods, and check restrains,
Custom of folly by example teaches
A rule to reformation; by rewards,
Crowns worthy actions, and invites to honour▪
Honour and worthy actions, best beseem
Their lips who practice both, and not discourse 'em.
Peace, peace, man, I am silent.
Some there are,
And they not few in number, who resolve
No beauty can be chaste, less unattempted;
And for because the liberty of courtship
Flies from the wanton, on the her comes next.,
Meeting oft times, too many soon seduced,
Conclude, all may be won by gifts, by service,
Or complements of vows; and with this file
I stood in rank, conquest securd my confidence,
Spinella (storm not Auria) was an object
Of study for fruition; here I angled
Not doubting the deceit could find resistance.
After confession follows—
Noise observe him.
Oh strange: by all the comforts of my hopes
I found a woman good; a woman good,
Yet as I wish belief, or doe desire
A memorable mention, so much majesty
Of humbleness, and scorn, appeared at once
In fair, in chaste, in wise Spinellas eyes,
That I grew dull in utterance, and one frown
From her, could every flame of sensual appetite.
On sir and doe not stop.
Without protests,
I pleaded merely love, used not a syllable,
But what a virgin might without a blush,
Have listened to, and not well armed have pitied,
But she neglecting, cried come Auria, come
Fight for •hy wife at home, then in rushed you sir
Talked in much fury, parted, when as soon
The Lady vanished, after her the rest.
What followed?
My commission on mine error,
In execution whereof I have proved
So punctually severe, that I renounce
All memory, not to this one fault alone
But to my other greater, and more irksome,
Now he who ever owns a name, that consters
This repetition, the report of fear.
Of falsehood, or imposture, let him tell me
I give my self the lye, and I will clear
The injury, and man to man, or if
Such justice may prove doubtful, two to two,
Or three to three, or any way reprieve
The opinion of my forfeit, without blemish.
Who can you think I am? did you expect
So great a tameness as you find, Adurni,
That you cast loud defiance? say—
I have robed you
Of rigour (Auria) by my strict self-penance,
For the presumption.
Sure Italians hardly
Admit dispute in questions of this nature,
The trick is new.
I find my absolution,
By vows of change from all ignoble practice.
Why look ye friend, I told you this before
You would not be persuaded,—let me think.
You doe not yet deny that you solicited
The Lady to ill purpose.
I have answered,
But it returned much quiet to my mind,
Perplexed with rare commotions.
Thats the way
It smoothes all rubs.
My Lord.
Foh I am thinking
You may talk forward, if it take tic clear
And then and then, and so and so.
You labour with curious engines sure▪
Fine ones, I take ye
To be a man of credit—else,
Suspicion is needless, know me better.
Yet you must not part from me sir.
For that your pleasure.
Come fight for thy wife at home my Auria—yes
We can fight my Spinella, when thine honour
Relies upon a Champion—now.
My Lord
Castanna with her sister, and Malfato
Are newly entered.
Be not loud▪ convey them
Into the gallery—Aurelio, friend
Adurni Lord, we three will sit in counsel
And piece a hearty league, or scuffle shrewdly.
RUffan out of my doors, thou come to rob me,
An officer, what ho! my house is haunted
By a lewd pack of thieves, of harlots, murderers,
Rogues, vagabonds, I foster a decoy here,
And she trowles on her ragged customer,
To cut my throat for pillage.
Good sir hear me,
Hear or not hear▪ let him rave his lungs out,
Whiles this woman hath abode under this roof,
I will justify my self her bedfellow in despite
Of denial, in despite, those are my words.
Monstrous! why sirrah, do I keep a bawdy-house,
An hospital for panders? Oh'; thou monster,
Thou she-confusion! are you grown so rampant,
That from a private wanton thou proclaimst thy self
A baggage for all gamesters, Lords or Gentlemen,
Strangers, or home-spun yeomen, foot-posts, pages,
Rorers or hangmen, hey day, set up shop,
And then cry a market open, toot, and welcome.
This is my husband.
Husband!
Husband natural, I have married her,
And whats your verdict on the match signior?
Husband, and married her!
Indeed tic truth.
A proper joining, give ye joy great mistress
Your fortunes are advanced, marry are they,
What jointure is assured pray? some three thousand
A year in oaths and vermin? fair preferment.
Was ever such a tattered rag of mans flesh,
Patched up for Copesmate to my Nieces daughter.
 Sir,
for my mothers name forbear this anger,
If I have yoked my self beneath your wishes,
Yet is my choice a lawful one, and I
Will live as truly chaste unto his bosom,
As ere my faith hath bound me.
A sweet couple.
We are so, for mine own part, however my out-side
Appear ungay, I have wrestled with death,
Signior Martino, to preserve your sleeps, and such
As you are untroubled, a soldier is in peace
A mockery, a very towne-bull for laughter, unthrifts,
And landed babies, are prey-curmudgeons,
Lay their baits for, let the wars rattle about
Your ears once, and the security of a soldier is
Right honourable amongst ye then, that day
May shine again: so to my business.
A soldier! thou a soldier, I doe believe
You are lowfre; that's a pretty sign I grant:
A villainous poor Bandits rather, one
Can man a queen, and cant, and pick a pocket▪
Pad for a cloak, or hat, and in the dark
Pistol a straggler for a quarter Duca•e.
A soldier! yes, a looks as if a had not
The spirit of a herring, or a tumbler.
Let age and dotage rage together, Levidolche thou art mine, on what conditions the world shall soon witness: yet since our hands joined, I have not interested my possession of thy bed, nor till I have accounted to thy injunction, doe I mean: kiss me quick and resolute. So adieu Signior.
Dear, for loves sake, stay.
Forbear entreaties. 
Ah thou: but what? I know not how to call thee,
Fine would I smother grief, and out it must▪
My heart is broke, thou hast for many a day
Been at a loss, and now art lost for ever:
Lost, lost, without recovery.
With pardon,
Let me retain your sorrows.
Tic impossible,
Despair of rising up to honest fame,
Turns all the courses wilde, and this last action
Will roar thy infamy, then you are certainly
Married forsooth, unto this new-come.
Yes, and herein every hope is brought to life,
Which long hath lain in deadness▪ I have once more
Wedded Benatzi my divorced husband,
Benatzi, this the man?
No odd disguise
Could guard him from discovery; tic he,
The choice of my ambition, heaven preserve me
Thankful for such a bounty; yet he dreams not
Of this deceit, but let me die in speaking,
If I repute not my success more happy
Then any earthly blessing; oh sweet uncle,
Rejoice with me, I am a faithful convert,
And will redeem the stains of a foul name,
By love and true obedience.
Force of passion
Shows me a child again, doe Levidolche,
Perform thy resolutions, those performed,
I have been only steward for your welfare,
You shall have all between ye.
Join with me sir,
Our plot requires much speed▪ we must be earnest,
Isle tell ye what conditions threaten danger,
Unless you intermediate; let us hasten,
For fear we come too late.
As thou intend
A virtuous honesty, I am thy second
To any office, Levidolche witty,
My Niece, my witty Niece.
Let's slack no time sir. 
Kinsman and Ladies, have a little patience▪
All will be as you wish, Isle be your warrant,
Fear nothing, Augia is a nobe fellow,
I leave ye; but be sure I am in hearing:
Take courage. 
Courage, they who have no hearts,
Find none to lose; ours is as great as his,
Who defy danger most▪ sure state and ceremony
In habit here like strangers we shall wait
Formality of entertainment, Cousin,
Let us return, it is paltry.
Gentle sir, 
Contine your passion, my attendance only
Commends a duty.
Now for heavens sake sister—
A' comes, your husband comes, take comfort sister
Malfato.
Auria.
Cousin, would mine arms
In their embraces might at once deliver
Affectionately what interest your merit
Holds in my estimation, I may chide
The coyness of this intercourse betwixt us,
Which a retired privacle on your part
Hath pleased to show; if ought of my endeavours
Can purchase kind opinion, I shall honour
The means and practice.
Tic your charity.
Worthy Malfato.
Provident Aurelio.
Castanna, virtuous maid,
Your servant, brother.
But who's that other, such a face mine eyes
Have been acquainted with, the fight resembles
Something which is not quite lost to remembrance;
Why do's the Lady kneel? to whom? pray rise;
I shall forget civility of manners,
Imagining you tender, a false tribute,
Or him to whom you tender 〈◊〉 counterfeit.
My Lord, you use a borrowd bravery,
Not suiting fair constructions, may your fort unease
Mount higher than can apprehension reach 'em,
Yet this waste kind of antique sovereign 〈◊〉
Unto a wife who equals every best
Of your deserts, archievements, or posterity,
Betrays a barrenness of noble nature,
Let upstarts exercise uncomely roughness,
Clear spirits to the humble will be humble:
You know your wife no doubt.
Cry ye mercy Gentleman,
Belike you come to tutor a good carriage,
Are expert in the nick ont, we shall study
Instructions quiently, wife you said, agreed.
Keep fair, and stand the trial.
Those words raise
A lively soul in her, who almost yielded
To faintness and stupidity, I thank ye,
Tho prove what judge you will, till I can purge
Objections which require belief and conscience,
I have no kindred sister, husband, friend,
Or pity for my plea.
Call ye this welcome? we are mistook Castanna.
Oh my Lord, other respects were promised.
Said ye Lady,
No kindred, sister, husband, friend.
Nor name,
With this addition, I disclaim all benefit
Of mercy from a charitable thought,
If one or all the subtilties of malice,
If any engineer of faithless discord,
If supposition for pretence in folly,
Can point out, without injury to goodness,
A likelihood of guilt in my behaviour,
Which may declare neglect in every duty,
Required fit, or exacted.
High and peremptory,
The confidence is masculine.
Why not, an honourable cause gives life to truth,
Without control.
I can proceed, that tongue,
Whose venom by traducing spotless honour,
Hath spread, th'infection is not more mine enemy,
Then theirs, or his weak and besotted brains are,
On whom the poison of its cankered falsehood
Hath wrought for credit to so foul a mischief.
Speak sir, the churlish voice of this combustion,
Aurelio speak, nor (gentle sir) forbear
Ought what you know, but roundly use your eloquence
Against a mean defendant.
Hoe's put too't,
It seems the challenge gravels him▪
My intelligence,
Was issue of my doubts, not of my knowledge.
A self confession may crave assistance,
Let the Ladies justice impose the penance.
So in the rules of friendship, as of love,
Suspicion is not seldom an improper
Advantage for the knitting faster joints
Of faithfullest affection by the fevers
Of casualty unloosd, where lastly error
Hath run into the toil.
Woeful satis faction for a divorce of hearts.
So resolute,
I shall touch nearer home, behold these hairs,
(Great Misters of a spirit) yet they are not
By winter of old age quite hid in snow,
Some messengers of time I must acknowledge
Amongst them took up lodging, when we first
Exchanged our faiths in wedlock, I was proud,
I did prevail with one whose youth and beauty
Deserved a choice more suitable in both.
Advancement to a fortune could not court,
Ambition either on my side, or hers:
Love drove the bargain, and the truth of love
Confirmed it, I conceived, but disproportion
In years, amongst the married, is a reason
For change of pleasures, whereto I reply
Our union was not forced, it was by consent;
So then the breach in such a case appears
Unpardonable; say your thoughts.
My thoughts in that respect are as resolute as yours,
The same, yet herein evidence of frailty
Deserved not more a separation,
Then doth charge of disloyalty objected
Without or ground or witness, women's faults
Subject to punishments, and men's applauded,
Prescribe no laws in force.
Are ye so nimble.
A soul sublimed from dross by competition,
Such is mighty Aurias famed; descends
From its own Sphere, when injuries profound ones
Yield to the combat of a scolding mastery.
Skirmish of words hath with your wife lewdly ranged
Adulterating the honour of your bed.
Hold dispute, but execute your vengeance,
With unresisted rage we shall look on,
Allow the fact, and spurn her from our bloods,
Else not detected, you have wronged her innocence
Unworthily, and childishly, for which
I challenge satisfaction.
Tic a tyranny
Over an humble and obedient sweetness,
Ungently to insult—
That I make good,
And must without exception find admittance
Fitting the party who hath herin interest,
Put case I was in fault, that fault stretched merely
To a misguided thought, and who in presence
Except the pair of sisters fair and matchless,
Can quit an imputation of like folly?
Here I ask pardon (excellent Spinella
Of only you) that granted he amongst you,
Who calls an even reckoning, shall meet
An even accountant.
Baited by consederacie,
I must have right.
And I, my Lord, my Lord,
What stir and coil is here? you can suspect,
So reconciliation then is needless,
Conclude the difference by revenge, or part,
And never more see one another: sister,
Lend me thine arm, I have assumed a courage
Above my force, and can hold out no longer,
Auria unkind, unkind.
She faints.
Spinella, regent of my affections, thou hast conquered,
I find thy virtues as I left them, perfect,
Pure, and unflaw'd, for instance let me claim
Castannas promise.
Mine?
Yours, to whose faith
I am a guardian, not by imposition,
But by you chosen, look ye, I have fitted
A husband for you, noble and deserving,
No shrinking back, Adurni I present her
A wife of worth.
Howes that?
So great a blessing
Crowns all desires of life, the motion, Lady,
To me, I can assure you, is not sudden,
But welcomed &amp; forethought, would you could please
To say the like.
Castanna doe—Speak dearest,
It rectifies all crookes, vain surmises,
I prithee speak.
The courtship's somewhat quick,
The match it seems agreed on, doe not sister
Reject the use of fate.
I dare not question
The will of heaven.
Unthought of and unlooked for.
My ever honoured Lord.
This marriage frees
Each circumstance of jealousy.
Make no scruple
(Castanna) of the choice, tic firm and real,
Why else have I so long with tameness nourished
Report of wrongs, but that I fixed on issue
Of my desires, Italians use not dalliance
But execution; herein I degenerated
From custom of our nation: for the virtues
Of my Spinella rooted in my soul,
Yet common form of matrimonial complements,
Short lived, as are their pleasures, yet in sooth,
My dearest, I might blame your causeless absence,
To whom my love and nature were no strangers,
But being in your kinsmans house, I honour
His hospitable friendship, and must thank it.
Now lasting truce on all hands.
You will pardon
A rash and over-busie curiosity.
It was too blame, but the success remits it.
Sir, what presumptions formerly have grounded
Opinion of unfitting carriage to you,
On my part I shall faithfully acquit
At easy summons.
You prevent the nicety,
Use your own pleasure—
Whats the matter?
Matter?
Adurni and Malfato found together!
Now for a glorious vengeance.
Hold, oh hold him.
This is no place for murder, yield thy sword.
Yield it, or force it; set you up your shambles
Of slaughter in my presence.
Let him come.
What can the Russian mean?
I am prevented.
The temple or the chamber of the Duke,
Had else not proved a sanctuary Lord,
Thou hast dishonourably wronged my wife.
Thy wife! I know not her, nor thee.
Fear nothing.
Yes, me you know, heaven has a gentle mercle
For penitent offenders: blessed Ladies,
Repute me not a cast-away, though once
I fell into some lapses, which our sex
Are oft entangled by; yet what I have been,
Concerns me now no more, who am resolved
On a new life. This Gentleman Benatzi,
Disguised as you see, I have re-married,
I knew you at first sight, and tender constantly
Submission for all errors.
Nay, tic true sir.
I joy in the discovery, am thankful
Unto the change.
Let wonder hence forth cease,
For I am partner with Benatzis couns•ls;
And in them was director, I have seen
The man doe service in the wars late past,
Worthy an ample mention; but of that
At large hereafter, repetitions now
Of good or bad, would straighten time presented
For other use.
Welcome, and welcome ever.
Mine eyes sir, never shall without a blush
Receive a look from yours; please to forget
All passages of rashness, such attempt
Was mine, and only mine.
You have found a way
To happiness, I honour the conversion,
Then I am freed.
may stile your friend your servant,
Now all thats mine, is theirs,
But let me add
An offering to the altar of this peace.
How likes Spinella this? our holy day
Deserves the Calendar.
This Gentlewoman
Reformed must in my thoughts live fair and worthy,
Indeed you shall.
And mine, the novelty
Requires a friendly love.
You are kind and bountiful.
By your leaves Lords and Ladies, to your jollities,
I bring increase with mine too, here's a yongster
Whom I cll son-in-law, for so my daughter
Will have it.
Yeth in sooth thee will.
Futelli hath weaned her from this pain.
Stand forth stout lovers.
Top &amp; Top-gallant pair, and for his pains,
She will have him, or none, hoe's not the richest
In the parish; but a wit, I say Amen,
Because I cannot help it.
With no matter.
We'll remedy the penury of Fortune,
They shall with us to Corsica, our cousin
Must not despair of means, since tic believed
Futelli can deserve a place of trust.
You are in all unfellowed,
Withly thpoken.
Think on Piero sir.
Piero, yes,
But what of these two pretty ones?
Isle follow.
The Ladies, play at cards, make sport and whistle,
My purse shall bear me out, a lazy life,
Is scirvy, and debauched; fight you abroad,
And weal be game whiles you fight at home,
Run high, run low, here is a brain can doo•,
But for my martial brother Don, prithee make him
A what dee callt, a setting dog, a sentinel
Isle mend his weekly pay.
Hee shall deserve it.
Vouchsafe employment honourable
Marry.
The Dons a generous Don.
Unfit to loose him,
Command doth limit us short time for revels,
Wee must be thrifty in them, none I trust,
Ripens at these delights, they are free and harmless,
After distress at sea, the dangers ore,
Safety and welcomes better taste a shore.
THe Court's on rising; tic too late
To wish the Lady in her fate
Of try all now more fortunate.
A verdict in the Juries breast,
Will be given up anon at least,
Till then tic fit we hope the best.
Else if there can be any stay,
Next sitting without more delay,
We will expect a gentle day.

PRINCES of sweet and humane
Natures have ever both amongst
the Ancients and Modernes in the
best times, presented spectacles,
and personal representations, to
recreate their Spirits wasted in
grave affairs of State, and for the
entertainment of their Nobility, Ladies, and Courts.
There being now past three years of Intermission,
that the King and Queens Majesties have not made
Masques with shows and Intermdij, by reason the
room where formerly they were presented, having
the seeling since richly adorned with pieces of painting
of great value, figuring the acts of King Iames of
happy memory, and other inrichments: lest this
might suffer by the smoke of many lights, his Maje∣sty
commanded the Surveyor of his works, that a
new temporary room of Timber, both for strength
and capacity of spectators, should bee suddenly built
for that use; which being performed in two months,
the Scenes for this Masque were prepared.
BRitanocles, the glory of the Western world,
hath by his wisdom, valour, and piety,
not only vindicated his own, but far distant
Seas, infested with Pirates, and reduced the land
(by his example) to a real knowledge of all good
Arts and Sciences. These eminent Acts Bolero∣phone
in a wise pity willingly would preserve
from devouring time, and therefore to make them
last to our Posterity, gives a command to Fame,
(who hath already spread them abroad) that she
should now at home (if there can bee any malice∣ously
insensible) awake them from their proton∣ded
sleep, that even they with the large yet still
increasing number of the good and loyal, may
mutually admire and rejoice in our happiness.
THe Queens Majesty being seated under the State,
and the room filled with Spectators of quality, at
the lower end of the room was a Stage raised of a con∣venient
height, and an Oval stair down into the
room: That which first presented it self to the eye,
was the Ornament that enclosed the Scene.
In the under part of this were two pedestals of a
solid order whereon captives lay bound, above sate two
figures in neeches; on the right hand a woman in a
watchet drapery, heightened with silver, on her head a
Corona Rostrata, with one hand holding the rudder of a
ship, &amp; in the other a little winged figure with a branch
of Palm, and a Girland; this woman represented
Naval victory. Opposite to this in the other neech sate
the figure of a man bearing a Sceptre with a hand and
an eye in the Palm, and in the other hand a book,
on his head a Girland of Amaranthus, his Curace was
of gold, with a Palludamentum of blue and Antike ba∣ses
of Crimson, his foot treading on the head of a
Serpent; by this figure was signified right govern∣meant:
above these were other composed ornaments
cut out like cloth of silver, tied up in knots with scar∣fings
all touched with gold.
These Pilasters bore up a large Freeze with a Sea
triumph of naked children, riding on sea horses &amp; fish∣es,
and young Tritons with writhen trumpets, and other
maritime fancies. In the midst was placed a great com∣partiment
of gold, with branches of Palm coming
out of the scrolls, and within that a lesser of silver
with this inscription, VIRTVTIS OPUS, proper to
the subject of this Masque, and alluding to that of
Virgil—Sed famam extendere facts, &amp;c. from this
came a drapery of Crimson, which tied up with great
knots in the corners hung down in folds on the sides
of the Pilasters.
A curtain flying up discovered the first Scene,
wherein were English houses of the old and newer
forms, intermixed with trees, and a far off a prospect
of the City of London, and the River of Thames,
which being a principal part, might bee taken for all
great Britain.
From several parts of the Scene came Action and
Imposture. Action a young man in a rich habit down to
his knees, with a large guard of purple about the skirt,
wherein was written with silver letters, MOTION
TVTISSIMA, on his head a girland of Laurel, and
in one hand a branch of willow: Imposture in a coar
with hanging sleeves and great skirts, little breeches,
a high crowned hat one side pind up, a little ruff, and
a formal beard, and an angling rod in his hand with a
fish at the hook, with a bag and a horn at his girdle.
My variable Sir; In the name of Heaven,
What makes your falsehood here where fame intends
Her triumphs all of Truth? her Trumpet she
Hath chosen new and clean, lest it should taint
Her breath; Thou art so useless to the World
That thou art impudent, when thou dost share
What is most cheap, and common unto all
The Air and Light; I doe beseech thee my
Fine, false Artificer, hide both thy faces
(For thou art double every where) steal hence
And I'll take care, thou shalt no more be missed
Than shadows are at night.
Be patient Sir!
This valiant humour of disdain works not
So powerfully as you believe, I hide my self?
The reasons must bee strong, that shall persuade
Me under ground: The Badger loves his hole,
Yet is not so bashful, but dares look out
And show himself, when there is prey abroad:
Then strangely arrogant, I pity thee
As Politickes doe men too humble, for
Their care, much more for their redress; that is,
I smile at thee (the Graver way of scorn)
For should I laugh, I fear it would make thee think
Thy impudence had somewhat in it of wit,
Did ever hope to be so useful in
The manage and support of humane works
As I?
Proceed, Proceed, make up your History.
Wisely the jealous sceptickes did suspect
Reality in every thing, for every thing but seems,
And borrows the existence it appears
To have: Imposture governs all, even from
The gilded Ethnic Meter, to the painted staff
Of the Christian Constable, all but pretend
The resemblance of that power which inwardly
They but deride, and whisper merry questions to themselves
Which way it comes.
Y' have cunningly observed
This is a pleasant new Philosophy:
Right Sir, and what is pleasant unto all
Is generally good, Troth I could wish
Our reason were as certain as our sense
Would alter in dispute, as little bee
As soon confirmed, but since it is not so,
That universally shall take, which most
Doth please, not what pretends at profit, and
Imaginary good, Is it not fit
And almost saf'st to cousin all, when all
Delight still to bee cozened.
These Lectures would
Subdue a numerous sect, were thou to preach
To young soft Courtesans, unpractised heirs
Of over practised Usurers, silken
And fine feathered gallants, whose easy ears
Still open to delights, and shut at truths:
But Fate takes not so little care of those
For whom it doth preserve the Elements:
That what is chief within us should bee quite
Depraved, as we were only borne to aim
At trifles here, like children in their first
Estate of using legs, to run at sight
Of bubbles, and to leap at noise of bells.
Even so believe it, and in their chiefest growth
They follow but my Grandsire Mahomets
Divinity, who doth allow the good a handsome Girl
On earth, the valiant two in Paradise.
Thou art so read in humane appetites
That were the Devil licenced to assume
A body, thou might bee his Cooke, yet know
If you endeavour it, you may persuade
Your self, there are some few amongst men
That as our making is erect, look up
To face the Stars, and fancy nobler hopes
Than you allow, not downward hang their heads
Like Beasts to meditate on earth, on abject things
Beneath their feet.
It is a thin number sure,
And much dispersed, for they will hardly meet
In Councels and in Synods to enact
Their Doctrine by consent, That the next age
May say they parted friends.
It is possible
'Lesse you steal in amongst them to disturb
Their peace, disguised in a Canonick weed,
Nor are these such, that by their reasons strict
And rigid discipline, must fright nice Court
Philosophers from their belief, such as impute
A tyrannous intent to heavenly powers,
And that their tyranny alone did point
At men, as if the Fawn and Kid were made
To frisk and caper out their time, and it
Were sin in us to dance, the Nightingale
To sing her tragic tales of love, and wee
To recreate our selves with Groans, as if
All perfumes for the Tiger were ordained
Cause he excels in scent: colours, and gaudy tinctures for
The Eastern birds, whilst all our ornament
Are russet robes, like melancholy Monks.
There are Sir of this rigid sect, and much
They govern too, that think the Godwit and
The Rail were meant the Eagles food, and men
Designed to feed on Salads in a mead,
As if we were created but a great
And larger kind of Frogs.
It is confessed;
There are some sullen Clarks that love
To injure and to scant themselves, yet you
May find a few whose wisdoms merit greater sway
That will allow us pleasures 'bove our cares,
Yet these wee must not compass with our guilt,
But every Act bee squared by virtues rule.
Virtue, it is a mere name, Virgins that want
A dowry, learned by rote, to raise the price
Of old unhansome looks: admit, ther's one
Or two allow in nature such a thing,
And that it is no dream: These mighty Lords
Of reason have but a few followers,
And those go ragged too, the prosperous, brave
Increasing multitude pursue my steps.
The great devourer of mysterious books
Is come, Marlin, whose deep Prophetic Art
Foretold that at this particle of Time
He would forsake's unbodied friends below
And waste one usual circuit of the Moon
On earth, to try how Natures face is changed
Since his decease.
Marlin the Prophetic Magician enters apparelled
in a gown of light purple, down to his ankles, slack∣lie
girt, with wide sleeves turned up with powdered Er∣mines,
and a roll on his head of the same, with a tippet
hanging down be hind, in his hand a silverd rod.
Your eyes encounter him
As you would make great use of's visit here.
With reason Sir, for he hath power to wake
Those that have many ages slept, such as
When busy in their flesh, were my Disciples.
Hail thou most ancient Prophet of this Isle,
I that have practised superstitious rites
Unto thy memory, beg thy immortal aid,
To raise their figures that in times forgot
Were in the world predominant; Help to
Confute this righteous fool, that boasts his small
Neglected stock of wisdom, comes from Heaven, and show
How little it prevailed on earth, since all
The mighty here, are of my sect.
It is long
Since this my Magic rod hath struck the Air
Yet loss of practice can no Art impair,
That soars above the reach of natures might,
Thus then I charm the Spirits of the night,
And unto Hell conjure their wings to steer,
And straight collect from dismal corners there
The great seducers of this Isle, that by
Their baits of pleasure strove to multiply
Those sad Inhabitants, who curse that truth below
Which here on Earth they took no pains to know,
Appear! Appear! nimbly obey my will
To express I died to increase my Magic skill.
The apparel of these in part showed their base pro∣fessions,
mixed with some soldier-like Accoutre∣mints.
These Antimasques being past, Bellerophon entered
riding on Pegasus, in a cote armour of silver scales, and
on his head an Antique Helm with Plumes, his Bases
watchet with labels of gold, a golden Javelin in his
hand, the point of lead.
The Pegasus was covered all with white close to his
skin, his main and tail of silver, with large white
wings, his reins and saddle of carnation trimd with
silver. Hee riding up into the middle of the room
with an attendant alighted.
Bellerophon? Thou that the of-spring art of Heaven,
Most timely, and by Inspiration sure,
Thou come to help me to despise and scorn
These Airy mimic Apparitions, which
This cozening Prophet would present as great
Examples for succeeding times to imitate.
Through thick assembled clouds, through mists that would
Choke up the Eagles eye, I in my swift
And sudden journey through the Air, have seen
All these fantasticks objects, which but show
How dull the Impious were to be so sillily
Misled, and how the good did ever need
But little Care, and less of Brain, to scope
The apparent baits of such gross Fools.
I Sir,
To were easy to subdue if Choleric scorn
Might make up confutation without help
Of Arguments, the virtuous Sir of la•e
Have got a fine Feminine trick to rail
At all they will dislike, refer what is
Not easily understood unto a kind
Obedient Faith, and then call reason but
A new and saucy Heretic, those that
My reverend Prophet raised, which you Sir in
A virtuous fury have called Fools, In me sure
Did govern when alive, and by
Imposture made their estimation thrive.
Monster! thou know it is not thy strange defence
Of Reason that provokes my rage, but thou
Would cunningly disguise thy sense
In Reasons shape, cozening thy willing self,
And giving seeming pleasures, real Attributes:
These taking tunes, to which the numerous world
Doe dance (when your false-sullennesse shall please)
You may compare, to th dangerous Musique of
The swan, a merry preparation still
To Melancholy death.
Cry mercy, Sir!
You are Heroic virtue, who pretend
An Embassy from Heaven, and that you're sent
To make new lovers here on Earth, you will
Refine the ways of wooing, and prescribe
To valour, nobler exercise, than what
The Ancient Knights Advent'rers taught, but first
See these of th'old Heroic race, Marlin
Assist me once more with thy charming rod,
To show this strict Corrector of delights
What Ladies were of yore, and what their Knights,
Although their shapes and manners now grow strange,
Make him admire, what he would strive to change.
Alas, how weak and easy would you make
Our intellectual strength, when you have hope
It may be overcome with noise and shows.
Yes, and this moral Magistrate; your strict
O'er solemn Friend, that in such comely Phrase
Disputes for active virtue, and declares
Himself the mark of all unrighteous opposites,
His Magnanimity shall yield at last,
Straight take my Angle in his hand, then bait
The hook with gilded Flies, to fish in troubled Seas:
For all the world is such, and in a storm;
Where the Philosopher (that still swims in
Profoundest depths) will (Sir) as easily
Bee snapped, as fools that float on shallow streams
And taken with a Lyne, no stronger sir, than what
Will tear a little Gudgeons Jaws.
The Knight Adventurer that you intend
To raise, must then adventure far, and make
His valour captivate, surer and soon
As his lamenting Ladies looks, I'll not
Be taken else.
Most reverend Lord of Dark
Unusual sciences begin thy charm.
Like furious Rivers meeting under ground,
So hollow and so dismal is the sound
Of all my inward murmurs, which no ear
But with a wild astonishment can hear;
Though not so loud as Thunder, Thunders are
A slower noise, and not amaze so far.
Which to express, that distant spirits hear,
And willingly obey: Appear, Appear!
At this the Hell suddenly vanishes, and there ap∣pears
a vast Forest, in which stood part of an old
Castle kep• by a Giant, proper for the Scene of the
Mock Romance which followed: Out of this Forest
comes running and affrighted, a Dwarf and a Damsel;
The Dwarf in blue and white, the Damsel in a
straight bodied gown and wide sleeves of changeable,
with a safeguard of Silver stuff, and a past and partlet
like a Moral figure in old hangings: to these a Knight
in old fashioned Armour, with Spear and Shield, his
Squire apparelled in a yellow Coat, with wide sleeves,
and strossers cut in pains of yellow and watchet; Af∣la
them a Giant in a Coat of Mayle, his bases red
and silver, with a Fashion hanging in a Chain, and
in his hand an iron mace, a great roll of black and white
on his head: A Saracens face with great black musta∣choes.
FLy from this Forest, Squire! Fly trusty spark!
I fear like child, whom maid hath left in the dark.
O Coward base! whose fear will never Lynne
Till't shrink thy heart as small as head of Pynne!
Lady, with pretty finger in her eye
Laments her Lamkin Knight, and shall I fly?
Is this a time for blade to shift for's self,
When Giant vile, calls Knight a sneaking Else?
This day, (a Day as fair as heart could wish)
This Giant stood on shore of sea to fish,
For Angling rod hee took a sturdy Oak,
For line a Cable that in storm ne'er broke;
His hook was such as heads the end of Pole,
To pluck down house ere fire consumes it whole.
This hook was baited with a Dragons tail,
And then on Rock he stood to bob for Whale:
Which straight he caught and nimbly home did pack,
With ten Cart load of dinner on his back:
Thus homward bent, his eye too rude and cunning,
Spies Knight and Lady by an hedge a sunning.
That Modicum of meat he down did lay
(For it was all he eat on fasting day)
They come, in's rage he spurn's up huge tree roots,
Now stick to Lady Knight, and up with boots.
Bold recr'ant wight! what Fate did hither call thee,
To tempt his strength, that hath such power to maule thee?
How durst thy puling Damsel hither wander?
What was the talk you by yon'd hedge did maunder?
Patience sweet man of might! alas Heaven knows
We only hither came to gather sloes,
And Bullies two or three; for truth to tell ye
I've longed six weeks with these to fill my belly:
In fecks if you'll believe it, nought else was meant sure
By this our Iaunt, which Errants call Adventure.
Shall I grow meek as Babe when every Trull is
So bold to steal my sloes and pluck my bullies?
Fear not! let him storm on, and still grow rougher,
Thou that art bright as candle cleared by snuffer,
Can ne'er endure a blemish or Eclipse
From such a hooked nose foul mouthed Bobber lips:
Ere he shall boast, he used thee thus to's People,
I'll see him first hanged high as any steeple.
If I but upward heave my •akin Twig,
Isle teach thee play the Tom-boy, her the Rig,
Within my Forest bounds: what doth she ail
But she may serve as Cooke to dress my whale?
In this her Damsels tire and robe of sarcenet
She shall souse bore, fry tripes, and wild hogs harsnet.
O monster vile, thou mighty ill bred Lubber,
Art thou not moved to see her whine and blub ber?
Shall Damsel fair (as thou must needs confess her)
With Canvas apron, dress thy meat at dresser?
Shall she that is of soft and pliant mettle,
Whose Fingers silk would gaul, now scour a Kettle?
Though not to scuffle given, now Isle thwart thee,
Let Blowze thy daughter serve for shillings forty.
It is meeter (I think) such ugly baggages
Should in a Kitchen drudge for yearly wages,
Than gentle She who hath been bred to stand
Near chair of Queen with Island shock in hand.
At Questions and commands, all night to play,
And Amber Posits eat at break of Day,
Or score out Husbands in the charcole ashes.
With Courtly Knights, not roaring country swashes,
Hath been her breeding still, and's more fit far
To play on Virginals, and the Gittar,
Than stir a seacole fire, or scum a Cauldron,
When thou shalt break thy fast on a bulls Chaudron.
Then I perceive I must lift up my Pole,
And deal your love-sick noddle such a dole
That every blow shall make so huge a clatter,
Men ten leagues off shall ask, Ho! what's the matter?
Kind grumbling youth! I know that thou art able,
And want of breeding makes thee prone to squabble,
Yet sure thy Nature doth compunction mean
Though (alas) thy mother was a sturdy Queen:
Let not meek lovers kindle thy fierce wrath,
But keep thy blustering breath to cool thy broth.
Whine not my love, his fury straight will waste him,
Stand off a while and see how Isle lambaste him.
Now look to it Knight, this such a desperate blade is,
In Gaul he swinged the valiant sir Amadis!
With bow, now Cupped shoot this son of Puncke
With crosse-bow else, or pellet out of trunk!
Isle strike thee till thou sink where the abode is
Of wights that sneak below, called Antipodes.
My Art will turn this Combat to delight
They shall unto fantastic Music fight.
How trivial and how lost thy visions are!
Did thy Prophetic Science take such •are
(When thou were mortal) with unlawful power
To recollect thy ashes, against this hour,
And all for such import? surrender strait
This usurpation of thy warmth and weight,
And turn to Air, thy Spirit to a wind:
Blow thine own dust about, until we find
No small remainder of ill gatherd thee
And like to it, so waste thy memory.
Thou Imposture to some dark Region steal
The light is killing, cause it doth reveal
Thy thin disguise, In the dark thou ne'er wilt fade,
For dismal plants still prosper in the shade;
Thou art a shadow, and observe how all
Vain shadows to our eyes stretch and grow tall,
Just when the Sun declines to bring in night,
So thou dost thrive in darkness, waste in light.
Away! Fame (still obedient unto Fate)
This happy hour is called to celebrate
Britanocles, and those that in this Isle
The old with modern virtues reconcile.
Away! Fems universal voice I hear,
Tic fit you vanish quite when they appear.
In the further part of the Scene, the earth opened
and there rose up a richly adorned Palace, seeming all
of Gold smiths work, with Portico's vaulted on Pilla∣sters
running far in: the Pilasters were silver of rue∣stick
work, their bases and capitels of gold, in the
midst was the principal entrance, and a gate; the
doors leaves with figures of Basse-relieve, with Jambs
and frontispiece all of gold, above these ran an Archi∣traue
Freeze and Coronis of the same; the Freeze
enriched with Jewels; this bore up a Ballestrata, in the
midst of which, upon an high Tower with many win∣dowes
stood Fame in a Carnation garment, trimd
with gold, with white wings and flaxen hair, In one
hand a golden Trumpet, and in the other an Olive
Girland.
In the lower part leaning on the Rail of the Bal∣lesters
were two Persons, that on the right hand per∣sonating
Arms with a Curace and plumed Helm, and
a broken Lance in his hand.
On the left hand, a woman in a watchet robe trimmed
with silver, on her head a Bend, with little wings like
those of Mercury, and a scroll of parchment in her
hand, representing Science.
When this Palace was arrived to the height, the
whole Scene was changed into a Peristilium of two
orders, Doric and Ionic with their several Orna∣mints
seeming of white marble, the Basesxs and Capi∣tals
of gold; this joining with the former having so
many returns, openings, and windows, might well
be known for the glorious Palace of Fame.
The Chorus of Poets entered in rich habits of seve∣viral
colours, with Laurels on their heads guilt.
Break forth thou Treasure of our sight,
That art the hopeful morn of every day,
Whose fair example makes the light,
By which Heroic virtue finds her way.
O thou, our cheerful morning rise
And strait those misty clouds of error clear,
Which long have overcast our eyes,
And else will darken all this Hemisphere:
What to thy Power is hard or strange?
Since not alone confined unto the land;
Thy Sceptre to a trident change,
And strait unruly Seas thou can command!
How hath thy wisdom raised this Isle?
Or thee, by what new title shall we call
Since it were lessening of thy stile,
If we should name thee natures Admiral!
Thou universal wonder know
We all in darkness morn till thou appear,
And by thy absence dulled may grow,
To make a doubt if day were ever here!
The Masquers came forth of the Peristilium, and
stood on each side, and at that instant the gate of the
Palace opened, and Britanocles appeared.
The habit of the Masquers was close bodies of Car∣nation,
embroidered with silver, their arming sleeves
of the same; about their waste two rows of several fa∣shioned
leaves, and under this their bases of white, rea∣ching
to the middle of their thigh, on this was an under
basis with labels of Carnation embroidered with silver,
and betwixt every pain were pufts of silver fastened in
knots to the labels, the trimming of the shoulders
was as that of the Basis, their long stockings set up were
Carnation with white shoes, and roses, their bands
and cuffs made of purls of Cutworke, upon their
heads little carnation caps embroidered as the rest,
with a slit turned up before, out of the midst came
several falls of white feathers diminishing upwards in
a Pyramidal form.
This habit was beautiful, rich, and light for dancing,
and proper for the Subject of this Masque.
The Palace sinks, and Fame remaining hovering
in the Air, rose on her wings singing, and was hid∣den
in the Clouds.
Britanocles, the great and good appears,
His Person fills our eyes, his name our ear,
His virtue every drooping spirit cheers!
Why move these Princes of his train so slow
As taking root, they would to Statues grow,
But that their wonder of his virtue turns them so!
It is fit you mix that wonder with delight,
As you were warmed to motion with his sight,
So pay the expectation of this night.
Move then in such a noble order here,
As if you each his governed Planet were,
And he moved first, to move you in each sphere.
O with what joy you'll measure out the time?
Each breast like his still free from every crime,
Whose pensive weight might hinder you to clime!
The song ended, the Scene returns to that of
Britain:
Which ended, a new Chorus of our own modern
Poets raised by Marlin, in rich habits differing from
the rest, with Laurels on their heads guilt, make their
address to the Queen.
Our eyes (long since dissolved to Ayre)
To thee for Day must now repair,
Though raised to life by Marlins might,
Thy stock of Beauty will supply
Enough of Sun from either eye,
To fill the Organs of our sight!
Yet first thy pity should have drawn
A Cloud of Cypress or of Lawn,
To come between thy radiant Beams:
Our eyes (long darkened in a shade)
When first they so much light invade
Must ache and sicken with extremes.
Yet wiser reason hath prevailed
To wish thy beauties still unvailed,
It is better that it blind should make us,
Than wee should want such heavenly Fire,
That is so useful to inspire
Those Raptures which would else forsake us.
Who knows but Homer got his Flame
From some Refulgent Grecian Dame
Whose beauty gave his Muse supplies:
And would not trust in humble Prose
His noble thoughts, but rather chose
High numbers, though with loss of eyes?
Here the Scene changed, and in the farthest part
the sea was seen, terminating the sight with the Ho∣reason;
on the one side was a Haven, with a Citadel,
and on the other broken grounds and Rocks; from
whence the sea-Nimph Galatea came waving forth,
riding on the back of a Dolphin, in a loose snow white
garment, about her neck chains of Pearl, and her
arms adorned with bracelets of the same; her fair
hair dishevelled and mixed with silver, and in some part
covered with a veil which she with one hand graci∣ously
held up, being arrived to the midst of the sea, the
Dolphin stayed, and she sung with a Chorus of mu∣sick.
So well Britanocles o'er seas doth Reign,
Reducing what was wild before,
That fairest sea-Nymphs leave the troubled maine,
And haste to visit him on shore.
What are they less than Nymphs since each make show
Of wondrous Immortality?
And each those sparkling Treasures wears that grow
Where breathless Divers cannot Pry?
On ever moving waves they used to dance
Unto the whistling of the wind;
Whose measures hit and meet byerring chance,
Where Music can no concord find.
But now for their Majestic welcome try
How even, and equally they'll meet,
When you shall lead them by such Harmony,
As can direct their ears, and feet.
Which done, she gently past away, floating on the
waves as she came in. After this some ships were dis∣corned
sailing afar off several ways, and in the end a
great Fleet was discovered, which passing by with a side
wind tacked about, and with a prosperous gale entered
into the Haven, this continuing to entertain the sight
whilst the dancing lasted.
Wise Nature, that the Dew of sleep prepares
To intermit our joys, and ease our cares,
Invites you from these Triumphs to your rest.
May every whisper that is made be chaste,
Each Lady slowly yield, yet yield at last;
Her Heart a Prisner to her Lovers breast!
To wish unto our Royal Lover more
Of youthful blessings than he had before,
Were but to tempt old Nature have her might,
Since all the Odor, Musique, Beauteous Fire,
We in the spring, the spheres, the stars, admire
Is his renewed, and bettered every night!
To Bed, to Bed, may every Lady dream
From that chief beauty she hath stolen a Beam,
Which will amaze her Lovers curious Eyes!
Coach lawful Lover to advance his youth,
Dream he hath stolen, his Vigour, Love, and Truth;
Then all will haste to Bed, but none to Rise!

Tragedy. Blessed Theatre: how fair, and glorious shine
Hathfild thy several spaces! how divine,
And heavenly Lustre! all the lights above,
Leaving their mansions where they nightly move
To shade, and darkness. Have in this one Sphere
Combined their aspects, and consented here.
Never was Roof (as at these Nuptial ties)
•eld with so bright auspicious Deities,
Such glad presages; all they once did mean
By Hymens, Cupids, all their Genial seen
Of loves, and laughters, that were wont to appear
To make an union fortunate are here,
All in this presence; from you Royal Throne
They fly throughout this Round, on every one
That here beholds, with hovering wings they light,
And breed in all a cheerful appetite
To what we shall present, which if you deign
Still to send forth (great Princes) and maintain
Twill make even Tragedy her self to smile,
Even me grow jocund, and forget the while
My dreadful person to prevaricate
From what I am, and change my sadder cries
To Peans, and to Epithalamies.
It will from those two lovers by its sway
Ravish their plighted hearts another way,
From them to their great guests, when they shall spy
The powers, that formerly vouchsaf't to tie
Their lasting knot again with the same grace
With which they once encouraged their embrace,
To smile upon their service, twill bring on
In their dear Breasts a Rare contention
Of zeal to your delight — Such grace commands,
A strife of duty though from joined hands.
SO, dispatch, dispatch, what wines are those?
The late present from the Merchants.
Tic well.
Are all things ready fellows? the King' son entering. 1 They are my Lord.
Ha, ha, ha, no happiness like the Fools, Comastes?
No, none Sir, hes mirth it self, and the cause of it in others, they say all pleasure is a shadow, then that which wee enjoy is but the shadow of a shadow, hardly the Picture of what he embraces; our Delights are faint, thwarted by the Conscience, started with fears, and after an hour of pleasure a week of repentance; in which time wee live by rule, and not by custom, laugh not though the jest bee good, nor rage though at a just cause; but sickly whisper out our sayings, as though they were our last and eat our chickens with the curtains drawn, when the Fool lusts with his whole soul too, and sins till hoe's weary, knows no Conscience but his want that way; nor remorse but disability.
Ho, ha, ha.
Nature never showed her liberality more than to those she was sparing of her best gifts to, she houses wisdom in a body full of decays, and requires her whole strength to bear off the ruin, measures his legs with the spiders, gives him pale and wan looks, scarce altered from the earth hee was made of, where to the Idiot she bestows a body equal with the bulk of trees, and arms as Thunder-proofe, makes him a strong, a large, and healthy fool.
Ha, ha; ha.
Fit Lectures for such a Sholler.
Well Comastes, thou shalt not want for a coat, if that will do it.
Send me a mind to with it, and you have not a gre∣la present for your neighbour Princes.
Come my Lords, let's sit and fill up our cups,
Make them like our joys, still full, and flowing,
Thus it should be my Lords in a State that
Knows no troubles, let unhappy Princes,
Whom losses doe afflict, and fears affright,
Make yearly feasts: But wee, whose even affairs
Doe follow one another, and doe keep
There just Periods, though the reins are loose
And their guide sleep, seeming rather, so to
Have fallen out, than so cause; each day shall
Bee a triumph, each hour a feast.
Wee may chance to find one out for Funerals.
A health to all, and a long peace.
You are melancholy Aratus.
You are rude Comastes, and let me tell you—
His Lordship is one of those which say their Prayers backward for the State, and ends in black wishes.
You are the Foxes that thrive by it.
Phro. Aratus your anger is unseasonable, and the King marks it.
How now Aratus, whats the matter? our table should know no frowns, then least of all when we our self forbears them.
Royal Sir I ask your pardon, hee waked me something rudely, and got a froward answer.
What, all dead, fill another round, our wine moves not,
here Polyander, to thee, what think thou of Comastes happiness?
I think Sir, it is as dull as foolish, there cannot bee a sense of pleasure, where there is so little sense. Greatness is the center of all happiness, and felicity like our lands, at first is tie∣ed to the Crown, kings come ne'er unto the gods, and are like them both in power and pleasure, doe command all, enjoy all, are miserable only in too much, and want but what to wish for, this is the dazzling happiness. Tic vain therefore to pre∣far private joys before the Crowne-pleasures, the King may throw by his greatness when he please, and be poorly happy, the beggar will ne'er sigh unto a Sceptre.
Why I Polyander ther's some life in this, a little heaven even in the apprehension. Aratus art not thou of this opinion?
Not I Sir, nor of my Lord the Foole's there,
Kings are more miserable than they seem
Happy, flattered by themselves and others
Into a Joy that is not, and what they
Feel, they rather doe believe, than find so.
Yet I grant too, a King may be happy
But never as a King. Felicity
Is a purchase, and no inheritance,
Nor hath the prerogative more than one
Life in it neither, it dies still with the buyer,
Troubles are the good kings profession,
In the wars the first dart is thrown at him,
Where his happiness is in a glorious death,
Or else his God-like rays plucked from him
By some accursed hand, and so falls less
Happy, being but wished so by a poor
Revenge hee knows not.
Very grave and unseasonable, thus your Lordship gets the reputation of singularity, which the vulgar suspect to be wisdom.
Sir, you see how this place and my freeness are injurd.
Mirth, only mirth Aratus, he means it would better become a counsel than a banquet.
Timeus welcome, nay, keep your seats, would thou had been partaker of our sports.
When that my actions or mine age shall make me worthy of your ease
and pleasures, I shall be a thankful sharer, but till then, your troubles will become me better than your sports, and cares will sit more lovely on my brow than roses. Sir, those that are a∣bout you seek to drown your virtues.
Your Lordship means none here?
I name none here my Lord.
Nay Timeus thou ne'er look friendly on our pleasures
I must confess Sir, I had rather see you bloody than thus wet, nor are my wishes impious: Poliander?
My Lord:
How basely that smile becomes thee: I had
Rather thou had answered me with a blow,
Than such a look: I thought to have asked thee
Something, but I see thou art unworthy
Of a brave demand. Thy skill lies only
In the curiosity of a meal.
To say at the first touch a th tongue, this is
A Chian, this a Falernian wine.
Straight by the colour of the flesh to know
Whether the foul were cram d, or whether fed:
Prithee Polyander how sat the wind
When this Bore was slain? were not these apples
Pulled the Moon increasing? Degenerate,
I have seen thee put thy face into a frown,
And were it so constant in that look, as if
Thou had no other.
Sir, when you shall find or make a cause, Isle put them on again, here theyle but sour the entertainment.
You see, my Lord, they are not drowned, they live still under water.
Like thine, beast.
Prithee Timeus let us enjoy our mirth while the gods give it, the time will come that we shall wish for it, and not have it; on my Conscience thou wish for enemies that thou might cut them off.
I am sorry I have offended against your mirth, it was not my intent, I came to bring you news.
News, what is it good?
Tic as you shall esteem on it, Sir, Theres a Stranger
Prince arrived.
Hither?
Yes Sir, his visits forced by a storm as he pretends.
What ere the occasion bee, hee shall bee welcome. The time's far spent. Aratus it shall be thy employment, from us fairly salute the Prince, and tell him though the Seas have been unfriendly, the land shall court him.
Great sir you highly honour me.
So, now we have time to speak, what think thou Aratus of these passages?
Well, bravely well.
Your speech struck desperately at the King, hee will not swallow it without some touch of Jealousy.
Tic no matter, hee cannot cross us now,
None but the Gods can do it, nor they without
a miracle, great as was their providence
Which hitherto hath saved us, we have not
Taken so many years to build a work up
And then to have it ruined with a push:
No, he that will shook, must first orethrow
A Kingdom, a Prince, a Law, so large
The extents are, ne'er did plot thrive like it:
It has infected with the holy sore
The greatest part of the Realm, and catches daily
Like some unheard of new opinions
Streigthned at first, and prisoned in the breasts
Of two or three, gains strength by time, and ears,
And daily fed by curiosity,
Thrusts out at last the old and most received,
And grows the whole religion of the place.
When we have called our party forth, the work
Will seem done, the thin numbers which are left
Not deserving the name of enemies.
The Tyrant then will see himself no more
A Klng, only the wretched cause of war
His power being ravished from him.
While the fruit• thus ripe, why doe we let it grow?
And spoil perhaps.
We will not longer, only a little ceremony detains us, to crown our King, that past, our actions, and our thoughts shall then contend in motion.
How sped your visit to the young Prince?
Most happily,
Oh had you seen with me there the dear cause
Of this our danger, you would have thought it
So no more, but stood contemning life,
Thinking your blood ill stord within your veins,
When that his service called it. Sure it was some such
Shape and sweetness, which first slaved men
And gained a Rule before there was a kingdom.
You forgot your message to the Prince.
O tic true, our next part is to delight our selves in do∣ing something, pray bear me company, we may get thanks for it another day.
Devil, whether wilt thou hurl me? the ship
Sunk under so much ill, nor can the earth
Bear us both together, the greatest hills
Press not her face with half that load; one thought
Of goodness made me lighter than the waves
And at an instant taught me how to swim.
Harpists?
Melampus?
Are wee only escaped?
I hope so.
Then the storm has plaid the hangman, and saved us innocent.
Innocent? what's that? it has saved us so much labour and a broken head perhaps.
The wrack was great and full of horror.
How the rogues pried, and rored above the waves, vowed whole herds of offerings for their safety. But Nep∣tune saved em charges and took the verger beasts.
Wee escaped miraculously.
I hope you'll burn no bullocks to the Sea.
No, my vows were of another nature, I vowed
To live well, and changed my bloody purpose.
Thou did not mean in earnest?
I did then, but I no sooner touched the shore and safety but my old thoughts returned.
Come weal go claim our hire, and swear wee kilt him before the storm, our fellows dead pay will fall to us, weal demand for losses, I, and our dangers too.
If mine eyes deceive me not, here comes one will deny the payment.
Tic he, be resolute and follow me.
How now friends, amazed at what's past: dangers ore∣blown are dreams, no more to bee esteemed of, within this hour you would have given a world to stand thus, were it yours, let not smaller losses then afflict you, the greatest goods are trifles after such deliverance, our birth day was not half to us so happy as is this minute, then wee had no sense of life, now we perceive and joy in it.
What moved these villains hatred? sure they know me not, nor did I ere see them before this voyage, they could not hope for money, there's more in it, here is a paper which  may chance to tell me something, by this I see they are mur∣therers, what's here, a beard and hair? black patches, sure tic their trade they are so furnished, both of the same pro∣fession.
I am glad to hear you have found Pallantus, receive this man the bearer into your company and council, and if your secret practises fail you, assault him openly, and by violence perform the murder: let the one or other bee done speedily, my employments here for you, are many and instant.
Art thou the Lord? my wonder then is done,
Thy treacheries is greater than thy hate,
And that too is something more than malice
Above the search of innocence, a knot
Unto the subtilest Traitors, a riddle
To thy self; were not thy home villainies
Enough, but thou must maintain thy Factors
Out for lives in foreign Kingdoms? bloody
Merchant. I have lain hid so long, am now
So new formed by time, no friend can know me.
Hate, thine eyes are more perceiving far than
Friendship; I have not dared to name my self,
Because with it I doe name my Father,
And yet thou hast it perfect; him with
Many more, who were too good to look on
So much ill, as thine and thy fathers lives,
Were made away — ease; my breast, or too much
Rage, instead of a Revenger, will turn me
A stock, a fool; Hear me you banished gods,
For I may justly fear, if that your Powers
Are absent any where, it is from this place
Where tyranny doth reign; on this Altar
I doe vow to be your Martyr, if not
Your surviving instrument, ne'er to let
Fall your vengeance, till it light on those which
Slew the King, your King, the image of your
Goodness, which killed the Prince, and dared to say
That he was lost, lost indeed; which on the
Princess doe intend a rape, their marriage is
No better, which killed my father, and last
Resolved on me:
Had I a thousand lives I'd gage them here
And think your Indgement yet not bought too dear.
In the name of wonder what art thou?
Why? what am I Sir?
Nay, I know not, not does any but an Antiquary or a Conjurer, certainly thou art no man, or if be, I am sure, none of the last Edition.
Were your troop absent I'd make you find, I were without those helps, it was so long since you saw a man, a true one, that you know not when you meet one, your Lordships glass showed you none this morning.
Whence came thou?
I, that i'd fine know, hears no hole open In the earth.
From Sea.
From the bottom of it I think, theres nothing like thee above water.
Of what profession art thou, a Soldier?
Yes.
Thou should be hanged for thy very looks, if thou were not, they are excusable in no calling else.
These are some insolent scoffers which breath their wits on all they see weaker then themselves against they meet the fool next, I wrong my self to talk with 'em.
Dost hear?
None of your wit yet.
Thou bleedest!
Was it that made me such a wonder? I doe so.
And much blood is spilt upon the ground know thou the cause?
Yes, I was assaulted by two rank rascals which I let blood and cured?
Hast thou not killed, and robed 'em?
Sr. your thoughts are base, and you doe ill thus to insult upon mine innocence. Robbed 'em? monies more be∣low my thoughts then Earth, my education hath been noble, and though the Mid-wife lapped me not in Purple, nor Princes gossipped at my birth, I have dard to bee as honest as the richest, my word hath commanded more then all your Land or money. Those deeds which I have donne, dishonestly dard not to have looked on, they would have frighted your Lordship if but told you towards bed time.
I never saw such fierceness.
I begin to admire this fellow.
Where hast thou bestowed 'em?
Behind there, if you search 'em you may find more, if they had any money the Sea washed them clean on it before their deaths.
Why, were they cast away?
Yes, but it seems they had a land-fate.
 What's here; a roges Limbs, Beards: their two heads a piece.
Her's a Paper confirms them most notorious Vile∣loins.
Sure I have seen some faces like them.
They were proper men.
They were so, did kill them both alone,
I told you once so, Jam no proud on it, to boast it ore again, and tell you how I did it.
Trust me, thou art a brave fellow, and I admire thy stoutness, thou look as if thou had been nursed in perils: dare thou withstand a bold one, but as honest as tic great? what say thou, can thou like of us?
Thou shalt not find us as we appeared at first.
While you talk thus I can, and in your business if ho∣nasty go yoked with danger: it cannot fright me then though it have more terror then Seamen feign at their return, or Cowards fears suggest, horrid even unto a lie. I dare face it, and wager a life i'll conquer it.
Thy words go high as Thunder.
Pardon my words if my actions prove as fatal.
I believe thee, and dare promise thou wilt doe won∣ders, let me embrace thee, thou art welcome to our friendship; mine eyes did look on thee unworthyly before, methinks thart comely now, thy scars are so many graces, not set by an effeminate but by a manly and warlike Skill Business calls us hence, thou shalt not part one minute from me, thy wound needs help, Come, thou shalt heal before me.
Have you commanded all the Mariners aboard each Captain to his charge; bid the Soldiers fill the decks with their full numbers, and display their colours. Let nothing wanting that may add to the glory of the Navy.
Sr there is not, all things are in their pride and height, the Captains seem to lend brightness to the day, and like the Sun throws rays, and light about them; nor looks their gold less awful then the Soldiers Steel, on the Ships ap∣pear the joy and riches of a conquest, and yet keeps the strict∣ness of a joining battle, there wont's nothing to make a war∣like
like, princely and well commanded, Navy but your presence, Sr.
I would not have them think us such poor men that we are drove to seek for their relief, to due for bread, and water, but rather that wee come like Noble wooers, full of rewards and presents able to return all favours wee receive, and equally to honour them which honour us. As great as they, It shall appear hee that is master of such a Fleet, may Stile himself King, though Lord of nothing else.
The people flock upon the shore, and with one voice say you come to fetch their Princess, you have more then their consents already you have their wishes too.
I marry Haimantus such a Jewel would
Make the rest look dim, there are two Ladies in this
Isle, if fame say true, the wonders of the World.
When nature made 'em she summoned her whole
God-head, and unwearied wrought till she
Had don, formed each limb as if she had begun there,
She seemed to practise on the
World till now, and what like beautiful she
Framed before, were but degrees to this height,
These the assent from which she now must fall
They made her older then the labour of
A thousand years.
What's the matter?
Ther's a great Train, it seems from Court coming to your grace.
How nigh are they?
They are on entering my Lord.
Weal meet 'em.
Sr. the King congratulates your safety and is glad of your arrival, though the cause were dangerous, you would have obliged him much, Sr. if you had been bound for Creta.
The King is royal and chides me kindly, he binds a stranger ever to his Service.
His Majesty expects you'll honour him with your
presence this night at Court.
I shall wait upon him, but my Lord I must first desire, you'll honour me with your company a Ship-board, I shall not need to excuse a Soldiers entertainment, I doubt not but your Lordship knows it well, plainness is half the praise on it.
Sir, you are the envy of our neighbour Princes, you so far exceed them in a brave command. I ne'er was happy in the like sight before, and my Lord, they that can boast the strangest, have not seen one so common and so rare; your Navy looks as if she wore the spoils of a whole Land, or came to buy them.
My Lord, you'll make me proud, your presence yet will add unto its glory.
Found dead upon the Shore?
I my Lord, thrown into a cliff by certain Fishermen.
Were they drowned?
No my Lord, there were many wounds found upon their bodies, and yet their clothes were wet.
Tic strange, were there but two?
No my Lord.
That's stranger yet, reward the men, and command them make no further search, nor speak of it, let it die with you too, doe ye hear?
The villains have robbed at their return, and got their Deaths that way, I near could spare them worse, the State stands in greater need of theirs, than of the sword of Justice. Rodeo?
My Lord.
Is your Lady to be spoke with?
Always my Lord by you, but now shoe's coming forth.
Save you sweet sister.
O you are welcome Sir.
Sure Eudora, Venus and the Graces had their hands
to day about you, you look fairer than your self, and move in the Sphere of love and beauty. Cupped has taken his stand up in your eyes, and shoots at all that come before him; pray Venus he miss me.
When begins your serious?
These are the sweet looks that captivate the Prince in a free country, and this the dress that must enchant him, ha?
There is no charm in it certainly, it pleased me the least of many, no, tic your fair Mistress which bears those Love-nets about her, if the Stranger scope her hoe's safe.
Had better kill his father, and then gaze upon the spe∣ctacle, than look upon her with the eyes of love.
Nay then you are cruel, would you have him strong∣ger then your self was? if he be guilty the same doom must light on you too.
But I have prevailed so far that he shall be free from the Danger both of love and seeing, she'll not bee there; nor must you make up his entertainment.
I was commanded to be ready and attend there.
But now the Commissions altered and runs in a∣another sense.
I shall bee content to obey either. May I not know the cause?
You may, wee would not feed the Prince here with hopes to get a wife, this was the storm that drove him in, nor must you only for this time forbear his presence, but while he stays; he is unworthy of you.
If you know him so, I shall then without
Excuse deny his visits, But I think
This business may be borne a nobler way,
Nor will the end fail though the means be fair
Leave it with me, if he sue with honour,
He will take an honourable answer.
Though he gain none from me, Isle get his love,
And send him home, no less a friend, than if
Hee were a husband, by my restraint you'll
Only gain unto your self the marks of
Jealousy and malice, and fouler staines
If that the crime were named to the desert.
Besides it does proclaim in me too, such
A weakness as I am much ashamed of;
Had he a face adorned with the graces
Of both Sexes, beauty and manliness,
And these ingrafted on the body of
A god, I could look on, converse, I, and
Neglect him too, when I have reason; fear
Not me then.
I doe not, I know thee strong, the honour of a King∣dome may lean with safety on thee, but hee will linger here too long, besot the State with feastings, and in this ease give safety to treacherous undertakings, he must be used ill, ther's rea∣son for it.
Is there then a policy in rudeness?
Why don't you rather send a defiance
To him, proclaim him enemy; this were
Nobler far, than to receive him in your arms
And then affront him, say health and wish
Poison in the cup, are you so much below him?
Theres greater thoughts in hand than curious rules of Ceremony, if he send any present to you, return it back with scorn.
Pride is ill becoming, and hated by the next proud man.
Then take um and laugh at him.
No, where my thanks are too much, Isle rather return gifts for gifts; I would be loath to have my faults reach further than my goodness.
He will wear those gifts for favours.
They will not prove so, yet hee will deserve some as he is a stranger.
Not from you, rewards the State will give him, you hear my fathers will, you must not see him while he stays.
I doe, and shall easily keep that I doe not care to break.
Farewell.
Must you be gone?
There's a little business calls me.
If be but a little stay.
Only the welcome of the Stranger.
Tic too much to hinder,
I see a causeless and a no lesserage
Hid in your breast the Prince may be noble,
Valiant, if you receive him then with scorn,
He will prove a stronger enemy than those
Unworthy ones you fear at home, whose own
Actions daily ruin, and whose ill made
Knots will loosen faster than they tie them;
You have prevailed with me, Isle not be won
To see him now: but let it not appear
By your default, and that my retirement
Is only in scorn to him, which will be
Made plain, if that you change not this face you
Have put on, it becomes you at no time;
A Prince should always smile or look indifferent,
He has no need of frowns, as other men,
All lives are in his breath, and if they doe
Offend, his revenge is known, and need not
Be declared by face expressions, where ther's
Power to punish tic tyranny to rage,
Anger is no attribute of Justice;
Tic true, shoe's painted with a sword, but looks
As if she held it not, though war be in
Her hand, yet peace dwells in her face; learn once
Of me, and when you have no cause of a
Distemper, express none; now you have made
All sure, doubt not, but receive the Stranger
With fearless and confident embraces.
I will, or at least Isle tell theeso when thou perswadst me thus. Farewell.
Thy subtle plots will ruin thee at last,
Valour and policy doe seldom meet,
Yet here they are in their extremes in one,
But doe most strangely divide the owner,
Makes him dread none, and yet confirms him not
Within a guard.
What can our wishes deprecate.
When vice is made both Law and fate!
When for the good of the Commonwealth
The counsels called to Plot a Meal,
And Beasts brought in with solemn cry.
As spoils got from the enemy.
Chorus. Whose life's the Table and the Stage,
He doth not spend but loose his age.
The Kings eyes, like his Jewels, be
Set to Adorn, not to foresee:
And as his Crown: he thinks each thing
Runs round in a continued Ring.
But Sacrifices crowned bee
And Gardlands fit for Destiny.
Chorus. Fates then we fear, have writ this lot
That Wine shall loose what blood hath got.
Is this your royal entertainment? a Common host would have given one as civil; shown his guests their quarter, and then left them to stumble out again; my receivers are all vanished — An undeserving scorn will trouble me— neither of the two Princes were in the train; they might have trusted 'em, I could have gaged a Kingdom for their security. The meanest things displease me not, if they are the fullest offerings of the place, and gratefully I can submit to the necessity: but where they are afforded I can relish nothing but the choicest, and look on ought but what invites the gene∣rall and first eye, here a continual Spring and Harvest make but one season, no scarcity doth dwell but in their minds, and then I think my self neglected with the best things.
Was not the fellow drunk?
Now they begin to muster up again, here I stand like one that learns to make his first honour.
When comes the fourth? three of the Elements have past by simple and unmixed, Water, Earth and Ayre, livelier expressed than in a Masque: the fourth was in the Prince, hee singd my face with a complement. I am arrived among a stranger peo∣ple, than ever I heard lyde of yet, at my return I shall have undiscoverd story enough to fill a map, though the Land bee known, I have past some two degrees, and may lawfully ex∣tend my lines to twenty, and fill the vacuity with monsters and Fish-heads.
Sir, by your favour, if your business call you not, pray let me entreat your company awhile.
Troth, an't like your Grace, I am in hast, in very great hast, the King has sent for me, and I know hoe's thirsty till I come; I would your Grace were as resolute, and as well armed this way as I  you'd be the wellcomst man— Hee loves a royal Drunkard with admiration, hee never saw one yet but in a glass. Sir, have you any business with him? you need no other Orator, than such as this, such a mouth, without a tongue, will persuade any thing; yet this is of the least, fit only for Phisicke-daies, when hee would not surfeit, a mere toy that troubles the waiters with often filling, but I have one as high—hears nothing to measure it by; it was that made me so inward with him. I always use to petition with it, tic bigger than any of his own, and pleased him a∣bove measure; the first time hee saw it, hee commended the largeness of my mind, and said it was a noble emulation in me: hee has a Daughter Sir, a beautiful Lady, my hopes, unless some neighbour Prince doe reel betwixt us, your Grace comes the right way, hee hates a dry Inland traveller, but that you kiss the cup, and have too much bounce, and down with him in you, which were things hee surseited on some fifteen years since, and still the very names turn his
Stomach, besides your Navy and attendants are too great, he would have esteemed more on you, had they been fewer, enough only to lean on, when you are oretaken, or if you had wan∣ted those, and borrowed his unto your chamber it had been better where hee finds worth, the pomp delights him not, your pardon Sir.
This is stranger than all, with what licence this fell∣low abuses his Master, or speaks truths altogether, as unpar∣donable; sure he has a patent for it: I see I shall want names for all the monsters.
Though your grace are here a Strangor, I may de∣mand of you where the King is?
If none know more than I, my Lord, you have lost your king.
Sure hee is not well, I hope hee is not, with a safe loyalty I may wish hee hath a dangerous cause rather than none, to take him from a Prince the first night of his arrival in Court.
My Lord, I have found much honour in you, one that knows to show more civility to a Stranger than hee can de∣serve, and only are unhappy at this time in an unworthy choice, but if you still can continue this nobleness, though the King frown, I shall gladly make some stay, at least till I have satisfied a strangers curiosity, and may seem rather to have left the place, than to have been thrust from it.
Believe me (my Lord) both your entertainment, and this necessity, that you are drove to use so mean a service as mine, doth shame me much. Tic not the nature of this place to be thus uncivil, nor is tour custom, as it hath been this day, to coop our Ladies up as if the sight were dangerous, their beau∣ties will endure the Test: and we will put them too't; it was unkindly done, I know one look of theirs would have given a welcome to a young man above the greatest cost.
My Lord, you know to speak a pleasing language.
Wee have two Princesses Sir, few Kingdoms can show such Jewels, but only one is oriental, the other's art∣ficiall, but an excellent Gem too; one of them, the true one,
I doubt not but I have credit for to show you, but tic not to bee purchased, that happy opportunity is already past, and the now owner esteems it above his wealth, his life, I, and his honour too.
Yet my Lord bless me with the sight, I can rejoice at so much excellence, though another doe possess it, and no doubt as much of the owners felicity lies in others admiration, as in his own possession.
All but jealous men think so, and they count them∣selves robbed of all happiness in their wives another doth re∣ceive, are as covetous of their beauties as many husbands of their persons, think themselves cuckolded by a women's commendation. But, my Lord, Isle leave you, I was going to the Princess before I met your grace. I know few words will gain so easy a request, to morrow and daily Isle wait upon your Lordship.
Sir you have engaged Me your servant beyond my hope of freedom.
Nay, you must bear it patiently, my dominion ex∣tends no further than these rooms, and beyond them I grant nothing: how will you endure the Strangers delays, that thus hardly brooke his coming, the King in complement will not admit the winds to servesooner than a month, were that all his stay; but here must be Masques and triumphs before he goes, and the Subject yet not known for the one, nor orna∣mints made for the other; perhaps a league must be concluded, and then I would not live to bee so old as to see the end on it, the meanest persons will require a month to fit themselves, a Prince cannot turn in less than a season.
May you not see the Garden, Madam?
No, nor the day, but through a window.
We'll petition to him under the title of distressed Damsels, that must pass the flower of their age in imprison∣meant, unless he will travel to his own, or some other Country, to gain 'em freedom.
Madam, he will think wee are held by enchantment, that his absence, and not his sword must gain our liberty. Faith wenches, what would you doe with such a servant
that will lay commands on you, and be your Lord before Hi∣men hath made him so?
Madam, I'd change him.
Leave him I would but change hem's a harder matter, and will require more consideration, I have not the faith that I can work so great a miracle as to persuade mine, to any thing he has not a mind to, and yet he swears he loves me, as he loves a Kingdom.
You may believe him, Madam, you are his best Title were the Sword away.
Melissa broke loose, and gone to the show.
No Madam, shees returned.
Is she so, and what hath she seen?
The scurviest entertainment, I did not think it pos∣sible so short a time could have prepared one so ill, it was thought on before, and pains taken to order it so much for the worse: This was the first day that ever me thoughts the King and my Lord Timeus looked like the Father and the Sun, The King had on his old council face, which all hope• he had forgot and this was the only time these many years he should not have worn it, they both embraced the Stranger, as cold, and carelessly as if they had been to fight after, this behavi∣our in the great ones, was presently observed like a new fashion, and in an instant the whole train was in, from the bravest to those which follow a fashion only, when tic to leave off something, and then look not as if they were hot: but wanting a cloak. Marry their wit's were not so change∣able, as their faces, and having but one Sure of Complement, and that now unfashonable, they were fine to supply it with Legs, and Silence.
How looked the Prince on their behaviour?
He looked much above it in my opinion, two foot higher then my Lord Timeus though not altogether so tall, these sower looks were all the without-dore show, which indeed in a solemn March, they returned all into the Pal∣lace,  the Strangers seemed rather to follow with a silent con∣fent then an invitation; there the press shook me off to find this out for your graces mirth, and at my return, as I least
expected, I found the Prince all alone where any body might have seen him for nothing, the Grecian, and the Trojan Captains in the hangings were all his company, with whom hee seemed well suited, had they been alive his looks were as challenging as theirs, and standing so, bred much comparison.
Know you the reason of this behaviour?
No Madam, yet if I would I might have learnt of many, indeed all could give a reason, those which only from this occasion knew what belonged to any the whole company were Politicians, there was one Yeoman, Statesman informd most about him, and left them to write his letters for certain news into the Country.
Well, now turn your wit unto our mirth, we have more need of that, what have you got there?
That which shall save my wit blameless that is un∣practised it is a rare piece of Poetry, which I have been Patronise of from the first nonsense in it, that is, from the first line, there much mirth intended in it, and I doubt not, but your grace will find it, the Author, himself is an Emblme of the first Comedies, where one acted all, and will make you laugh though you saw him every day, I have brought him along with me, he stays but without till his ad∣mittance be granted.
No, prithee Melissa, twill be too much.
I beseech your grace, and do but smile upon his learning. Domino, Domino.
Look, look, I told you what you'd doe, you are so forward.
I can presume most humble Lady.
Ladies ha, ha, ha.
Hold your peace, with your presuming, you should let the Princess speak. This is the author Madam.
Ladies. ha, ha, ha,
What think you your Play will doe when
One Scene of your self breeds all this mirth?
Ham.
Melissa?
Your Grace?
Prithee discharge him I am not able to look so much laughter in the face and keep it in to save my Modesty.
So, tic well Sir, the Princess hath taken notice of your worth, and commanded me to reward your. Attend tomorrow and you shall receive it, and pray see that her grace have all your labours (as you call 'em) and your foo∣ling.
O tic well we dress us not, but was this a Poet, Mel. believe it Madam but I hope his work will satisfy that Que∣stion her's rare stuff i'll warrant it.
Will your grace examine it?
Who were they past by?
But certainly they know what they doe They are so confident.
Where are we now?
Certainly in no danger Sir.
The Prince.
Madam, our bold mistake hath thrust us on too far, to retire without excuse, which we shall hardly make unless, your favour meet us, wee are Strangers that thus have er'd, unfortunately I must not say, that were a sin great as our rudeness, yet we ought to esteem a fault, though it is to us a blessed one, and hath conferred a happiness, our best deeds could not have deserved.
This entrance was something abrupt, and beyond the intent of our Poet.
A strange accident, was it the Prince that spoke?
I Madam, but it was impropper here.
Art thou sure it was he?
I am Madam, does your grace incline, I see a Prince is too high a personage and spoils a Commedy, shall not our Play go on?
We have had too much on it.
Nay, Madam, take us along with you, we cannot main∣taine the Stage without our parts.
Madam, a little of your company I beseech you.
My Lord Aratus, save you.
A good salutation for a fair Lady whose beauties so destructive.
Your Lordship's very conceited, on my conference tic the first left hath been made on that poor saying this thousand years.
What doe you look at? doe you want a servant?
Bless me, my Lord, what pale man have you got there?
Why pray? because hoe's black; the sitter for a Lady.
For a Lady? I never saw such a Devils play-fellow.
Hoe's white within, all snow and milk.
They are put into an inke-bottle.
What, would you have one that spends more milk about his face than he sucked in his childhood, that dresses him∣self in gloves as if one part were too good to doe service for the other, and dares not show his hands for shaming of his Mi∣stress, nor commend hers because his own are whiter, and when he is a bed, none can distinguish whether hee be the hus∣band, nor hardly she herself. This is one neglects his outside beyond a common cleanness, and bestows that care upon his mind, there wastes his four hours of dressing, and what the
other doth exceed in sprucenes he will make good in service, pay respects unto his Ladies person, and not unto her muff, and if at any time danger doe approach her, fearless he dares beat it back, or make it welcome by his noble fall, himself in presence guards her, and his memory in his absence. Come, pray spoil not his hopes among the Ladies hoe's a young Courtier and wants a Mistress.
I am turned when I hear reason. I beseech, my Lord, let me be she.
I thought it would come to this, you make the furthest way about, the nighest to your ends, love by discommending, pray let him salute you then.
Not unless you'll▪ stand by me.
Well, I warrant you; my friend?
My Lord?
Pray draw near, hears a fair Lady gladly would sa∣lute you, now you are at Court you must lay by your warlike thoughts, and plot how you shall overcome in complement and conquer in civility.
My Lord, I shall bee a shamed to pretend so much un∣to the Soldier, as to make my self incapable of so great an honour this Lady does me by her fair salutation, though I am unworthy, I can be proud to be her Servant.
What think you?
I know not what to think of so much wonder, what rarities shall I be mistress of, and none envy me.
Well, to leave you in that rapture, May I speak with the Princess?
Yes, she went hence but now.
May I adventure to go in?
You may, but call my servant along with you.
You are a longing again, but not a bit, tic sweet meat, not a bit.
Why should I fear to entertain a guest
So honourable as love is, that fills
The mind with noble thoughts, and strengthens men
To act such deeds themselves stile gods. Pallas
Mars and Mercury, are but the proper names
For virtues, loves effects, without some kind
Of which there could be no society,
The world is held up with Loves Deity,
But it appears most god-like, when beauty
Is its sphere. I will embrace thee therefore
Gentle spirit. Fools doe profane thy fires
And call thee a Disease. Thou were the old
And first Religion, not taught, but borne
Within us, the only and first law, which
None that loved could err in, thou hast too long
Been absent, and unkindly never would
Vouchsafe a Dart till now. Dwell in my breast
And teach me all thy laws. Let not thy shades
And flowery banks withdraw thee, when thou moist
Inhabit here, make Paphies but thy refuge,
The heart's thy native soil, thy mothers lap's
A banishment to it. How well thou hast
Already taught me, each Lover is thy Priest
And speaks thy Power, without thy aide
Beauty appears dead, and cold to all, as it hath
Hitherto to me, nor sinks it deeper than
the eye. Thou art the Organ that bears
The species inward.
When thou set multiply de in every part,
Thou make each limb as sensible as the Heart.
And Madam, I doubt not but shortly I shall bring you news of greater joys, and see you in that height you were borne, a Queeue, not to be approached but by ceremony, and the humblest services.
My Lord, that happiness you wish me through my Lord Timeus will come too soon upon me. But as I said be∣fore, my Lord, the Princes coming, if it be known, will cause much jealousy and danger.
Madam, leave that to me, none but my self, and this
Gentlemen (which I beseech your Grace to know) shall be ac∣quainted with it, and we will waite upon him.
Amongst those many voices, and knees which day∣lie do you honour. I gladly would receive an humble place, and pay my duties at your feet too, you may demand what they are. A heart and careless life to doe you ser∣vice just so, what was Incense on an Alter to a Dei∣tie that had no sent: or a Cake and Wine to a power that had not Stomach? yet they harkened to those which offered such trifles, and liked and approved the worcester∣ship, with the same hopes I present my flight but most devo∣ted Services.
Sr. your Love is welcome.
We are both your humble creatures.
While Morpheus thus doth gently lay
His powerful charge upon each part,
Making thy spirits even obey
The silver charms of his dull Art:
I thy good Angel from thy side,
As smoke doth from the Alter rise,
Making no noise as it doth glide
Will leave thee in this soft surprise.
And from the Clouds will fetch thee down
A holy vision to express,
Thy right unto an earthly Crown:
No power can make this Kingdom less.
But gently, gently least I bring
A start in sleep by sudden flight,
Playing a loose, and hovering,
Till I am lost unto the sight.
This is a motion still, and soft
So free from noise or cry,
That Jove himself who hears a thought
Knows not when we pass by.
There he sits, and sleep hath seized on him, which seldom does so at a seasoned hour, but still he takes it when it comes, not when tic due, when weariness and not the warnings of the night doe prompt him to it. Hee says to sleep because the day is gon, is to perform a duty not a no∣cessity, and to eat at a certain hour to satisfy the time, and not his hunger. Nature is the Mistress of his faculties and no custom, which are rude and stubborn and will admit not Laws but what themselves enact, nor strictly observe them neither. Tic a strange distraction for 16. years, a deeper dis∣content possesses him then doth the memories of those, which have run the miseries, and sins of a long life. This desolate happiness is all that he enjoys, and this I am commanded to break from him.
Why are you thus cruel in your care? did you but know the felicities you have waked me from, you would have rocked my sleep for ever, thought it a greater mercy to have killed, then thus to have divor'st me, I was wrapped into the company of men, of gods, if compared with those we here converse with, enjoyed the most excellent things, there more, excellent, and glorified, was Crowned a King o'er all and with a traitorous push you have deposed me. Alas how fading is my happiness, which a small noise or motion can dis∣solve, nay turn to nothing.
Let that reason make you scorne'em, and aim at lasting ones.
Were their longest life but three minutes, and that time uncertain, they were to be preferred before the reallest, and most continuing you could think on, these are pure and celestial pleasures, to be fed on only by the fantasy, I'll in and again invite them with a slumber.
I must forbear my remedies it is dangerous applying Physic in a fit.
Poliander, Menetius, well met; what have you seen
the thing yet?
What thing?
The thing that haunts the Court, it has something like a man, and pretends to be one, he comes among the Ladies like a Rough water Dog to a Flock of Foul, and flutter as fast from him, scattering feathers as they pass, I mean their Fanns and such movables, he has done no hurt yet, the Guard dare not mingle with him, hoe's too boisterous for their company, one glance of him as he past by broke the Kings draught, which a cubit Cup could nee'r doe.
See, see, here he comes, with as many patches and such like properties as would furnish a whole cashiered Company to beg with, sure he was Scarr-bearer to some Army let's observe it what it will doe, look, look, it is pleased with the hangings.
He cannot be thus by nature, nor by accident, he has studied to appear horrid.
Danger is not so dreadful in it self as it appears in him.
I cannot forbear, for curiosity sake, i'll enter parley with it, what rare things shall I know if I can get him speak, I'll inquire the fortune of the Kingdom for the next thou∣sand years, that's not worth the asking. I'll inquire the age of the World and where her treasure lies, he cannot choose but know the very heart of the earth. If I cannot persuade, I'll conjure something from him.
Bow, bow, O Bull-begger! what art thou? who let thee loose? where is any gold hid? my fears were just, nothing but a charm will doe it.
This was not terrible enough.
This won't doe it, it must bee more terrible yet, I adjure thee by those Boots, thy Velvet eye, by all the Taylors
work about thee—
Peace Fool—
Ooh.
The King will hear thee and thou wilt be whipped for balling.
Prithee good devil something of the other World.
Ha, ha, ha.
I hope hee has satisfied your curiosity Comastes, Ha, ha, ha.
Nay, I'll not leave him thus, be bafled by a Goblin? I'll follow it to the place where it shakes the Chain, that certain.
Ha, ha, ha, come let's see the end of the Conjuration.
My Lord, Cupped put his hood-winke on you that he used to aim with, and than you could not miss the mark, I fear the second view will not be so delightful, the most ex∣cellent things scarce please twice.
My Lord, think not so, for were the World dark a∣bout her, or I blind to all things else, in her I could find variety enough, and so long as she were not eclipsed I could not envy him that were so placed, that he at once could see the whole earth as in a Map.
These habits then my Lord will bring you thither, me thinks your Grace becomes them really well, now you are a Person most Sacrosanct, twice holy, made so by your Majesty and order. Tic time that you were going, the guide is ready to attend you to the place from whence you must seem to come, I with a private guard will waite you at the Princess lodgings for fear of any sudden danger.
My Lord, I shall ever owe my life to you, as much as if you had saved it, and that I lived wholly by your gift, but here can be no danger where she wishes safety.
When this is past, then for the great work, this is but a flourish to recreate the Senses inrespect of that, it now grows toward an end, and heavier like many things
at first light in themselves, and hardly to bee caught for every air, being condensed and thickened to a bottom, doe press the shoulders and make the veins groan under.
Aratus?
How now friends, me thinks your looks are lively, how succeeds your undertakings?
Too well to fail a minute of the time.
All the places we named, are sided with us, and those parts which Pallantus heretofore commanded are ready to sa∣crifice their new Lords to any that can but say hee knew their old.
Why this is the life of every action, and makes it plea∣sant, when fortune is no enemy to industry, nor turns her wis∣dome into folly, makes not that a ruin which was a well or∣dered safety, when they both consent the burden's light, and labour but a serious sport.
The young Prince is come, but wee have given com∣mand to keep him close, least his face discover what his for∣tune is, a Gentleman at the first sight started at him, and called him the Prince's Picture.
You must look to that. The time now grows pre∣tious, we must weigh each dram, and till this be over, count all lost wee spend in sleep or eating: come, every man to his charge. I doubt not on the day, to have a Prince help us to set the Crown upon our King.
But these are things for the following age, wee are hedged in beyond all fear, if loyalty may prove destructive, there is yet some danger.
Because you see a calm enwrap all round
About ye, you conceive it will be
As lasting as tic pleasing. Tempests, sir,
May contradict you even whiles you think so,
Evils are silent now, not done away,
They couch and lyein waite. Sedition walks
With claws bowd in, and a close mouth, which only
She keeps for opportunity of prey.
Your ruin yet appears not and you think
Because it lurks, you are safe,
Hee that will be truly secure must found
A peace on the destruction of all things
That can impeach it: enemies reconcild
Are like wilde beasts brought up to hand, they have
More advantage given them to be cruel.
Can the grave
Quicken her ashes into Soldiers? shall
Stench and corruption yield us enemies?
We are safe from those that live, they will not hurt,
And those that sleep in the forgotten dust
Cannot. There is nothing now remaining
To our care, but to give thanks wee are safe
Enough, if that we can rejoice. Thou letst
Thy best days pass without receiving fruit
That should be cropped from them. I did expect
Thou should have urged me to thy Nuptials,
Such cares befit thee best; how the Triumphs
Should be ordered, and Hymens torch well lighted.
Pray Heaven no other flames break out
But such as mirth show forth, when treason laughs
Upon your sports you call it piety,
Cause it looks smoothly on your strength when't runs
Out in an idle pomp, suffering your vigour
To wast it self in triumph, and diminish
In a continued jollity, that so, Sir,
Ruin may be quiet, and you perish
Without disturbance, nor are all things yet
So free from our suspicion as you make 'em,
You doe suppose that all close eyes must sleep,
When they are ne'er more watchful, than when thus
They counterfeit neglect. Severely prying
Into the depth of things, by seeming not
T'observe the face and outside; Treason doth
Walk in a whisper yet, their hate is busy
And makes no noise; think not that it is their fear,
But their advice and council makes it silent.
Doe you expect a Proclamation, or
A Herald from Sedition? tic too late
To say you were deceived, when that the Trumpet
Shall summon to your ruin, you doe slumber,
Girt you, before the fire hath gained your Cabin,
And doe not trust your preservation to
A Miracle, or a chance; you have an heir,
Yet hee is none of yours, hee that begot me
Did perish long ago. I was the child
Of Vigour, not of Luxury.
I must tell you, Sir,
A few flattering Lords gild ore the defects
And ruins of your State, they make you call
A Lethargy, Security; and that a Kingdom
Which, like to childrens houses on the sand,
Reared up in sport and toying, will become
A Prey unto the wave that first approaches,
They can perhaps judge well of meates and wines,
Good Table States-men, Soldiers at a banquet,
Strong, to overcome a Goblet, or a Charger:
But Kingdoms safeties are not owed unto
The Palate, and the Stomach; if that these
Were State affairs, your Council were most found,
And every breast a Synod; if that Musique could now
Raise Walls and Cities as of old,
Your Realm would be impregnable.
Hast thou yet done?
Not all the Ghosts that I have made, have been
Thus cruel to me, nor, as yet, their graves
Have threated half these evils, thy mothers
Labour was a conception to these pains
Thou hourly bring upon me.
Sir, I am sorry, it was my love, my love
That so did dictate to me, my desire
That your sports might follow one another,
And succeed so just that they may seem to
Bring the season on, and not the season,
Them, that thus they might continue ever,
But it was that they might continue, and not
Fall by treason. But Sir, I will no more,
I shall hereafter think it more piety
Hand in hand to fall in perils with you,
Then my self to bring them.
What would thou have?
The power I have is wholly thine, if that
I never did deny, was not thought given,
Now I doe, take all the means thou can by
Law or Majesty to remove thy fears.
Sir, I thank you, humbly thus low I thank you,
Nor will I in a complement return
It back again, till I have made you safe;
I shall go to work like a resolute,
But skilful Surgeon, that dares feel and search
A wound, and if hee find dead flesh dares cut
It off, or more corruption will not spare
A limb.
May I hope to see such happiness?
To enjoy it hourly, and to the end, or I shall curse my self else.
It is the power of Princes for to change
The place the come in to a Court, but this
Lady bears such divinity about her,
That where she comes, she consecrates the place
A Temple, me thinks a sacred awe doth
Fill the room resulting from her presence.
How happy were those times which saw a King
And Council of the same blessed temper,
Informd with souls like hers; that knew no vice
But what they punished, nor learnt it further
Than the law and common place instructed;
In that great Massaker (I may rathersay)
Of virtues than of men, all that fled not
To this holy Sanctuary were crushed to nothing.
Can I no way be a helper?
Only with your prayers, the men will overcome, and the Gods, who must with piety bee conquered, we'll leave to your goodness, but madam you must yet conceal your joys, and not speak them with a look.
This is the hardest task, the first is so just and righ∣teous that in it self it is both prayer and sacrifice.
There are but a few days now, as I may truly say, to crown our labours, our greatest care is how we shall provide for your grace before the time, your stay here may bee dangerous.
Take no care for me, my Lord, which way so ere the fortune goes, I shall be safe from all, but from my self.
Madam the Prince.
So fell the cloud from off the Trojan Lord,
Not able to embrace such rays within,
But being pierced, turned all at once to ayre,
And left thin closed as dazzling as the Sun.
Sure I was rude and barbarous; before
This softer fire did touch my heart, and from
The wild inhabitants of the wood, differed
In passion only, and not reason; that
Without more respect, my dull eyes could gaze
Upon such brightness, and with a ready rudeness
Could excuse the fault committed.
The unhewne Clown not faltering with his tongue
Or in his looks abashed, could answer to
The Emperor of the world, when he that's
Better taught and nearer to the Majesty
That speaks, beats for a word, and answers but
With looks: although at other times his learned
Soul can dictate such as would be: if that the god of
Wit his Deity were called in question,
And forced to show some excellent
Piece above all was ever writ, as the
Tenure by which he holds his God-head:
Pardon that, like the ascendants of the
Alter thus by degrees I come, and pause
At each step, and bend unto that nearness,
Rashness was my fault before, and brought me
Into shame. Though no adoration,
Yet there is a duty to be paid at
Your fair shrine.
Sir, It was not yours, but the rudeness of the Court that would leave you to so unhappy a mistake.
If I would set a spectacle to the
World, it should be such a close, where beauty
Adored beauty and greatness bowd to greatness,
Me thinks the heavens doe open, and the clouds
Are spun into a thread, to let down some
God unto this contract. Let us withdraw,
The Power is now descended, and all
Within is sacred and mysterious,
And if we doe pry into these secrets,
Our curiosity will bee punished.
This honourable admittance you have granted me shall hereafter be my only glory, the sweet meditation that accompanies my old age, nor shall the much envied youth, make me wish one day back to bee partaker of their lesser pleasures, when I shall call these greater unto mind, what cordial will it bee; when I can silently boast within my self, my younger days were graced by a Princess, the fairest in the world; so I may say.
O my Lord, when you talk thus, though I am loath, you doe compel me to turn my face away.
I humbly crave your pardon. Tic strange so much seriousenesse can produce such follies, yet I have fair grounds for what I said, which most excellently show themselves in every part.
They show but to the fantasy, ther's no such beauty here, tic borrowed from your speech and fair esteem, which thus Isle pay you back again; you are all that you have said, and when I first saw you, so you did appear to me, and I think to all the world, the first sight promises all virtues, and the next performs 'em, nothing seemed then so low in you as this passion.
What honours you have laid upon me, I may bleed for, but cannot purchase any like 'em; nor return such back again, there all must submit, your gifts, as your beauties, are excelling. But away vain words, I will endeavour to grow strong in those virtues, and not melt
in the passion you have named, I'll set new Laws to all noble Lovers, that shall make all their idle passions ap∣pear as fond unto themselves as others, make them throw by their Pen, and with their Sword to act those Fictions nor daring to name nor think upon the Saint they worcester∣ship, but when they have an offering some virtuous in∣crease to bring them near. Thus is a Love that's free to all, none is injured by it Himens. Torch burns brighter by such flames, and Vistas fires more lasting and more pure, who can complain the want of beauty, when any (any that dares be good) may adore any, and she like her Picture though she truly look one way may, seem to cast a gracious eye o'er all.
How his soul labours to soar above the pitch of honour.
How glad, how much greater should I grow, if I could promise to my self, but one of those seeming looks from you.
My Lord, I have not heard you without admiration and wish I could bestow favours rich, and lovely worthy your acceptance; but seeing that I cannot: I'll strive to honour you, not with peevish and womanish commands, but such as shall be worthy of your valour, and make you yet more a Prince. The bravery you have shown hath not raised a vain passion in me, but a confidence, a noble confidence, that all those ver∣tues were not name d by you but spoke in you, which thus i'll show my Lord, my Lord, Aratus.
But I must leave you to an instructor, it is fit for your Sword, and therefore above my power to utter, shame not, Sir, that I put a tutor to you, you are but to ground with him, you may build to what height you please. Come my Lord, you must lay off all Strangeness here, and receive a noble helper whole bring both Strength, and honour to your Cause.
I may stand amazed at the nobleness
in you both, but not at this agreement
in you, I know virtues are still a kin
though the persons are strangers they are in.
Whiles this old Puppy thus doth sleep
And doth in vice, as age grow deep
Benumbing all these Plants are nigh
Into a drowsy Let barge,
Behold a nobler Branch appears,
As far from his manners as his years,
O shed thou then thy influence,
And weal return fresh beauties thence.
The fiercer sweetness of his face
Presents a rigour mixed with grace.
And though there were, a want of blood
His worth would make his Title good.
Virtues so grown in so few years
Make him even such, become their fears,
On then, and make the Sceptre be
Thought but reserved, not snatched from thee.
Are all things ready for the ceremony; the Crown, and robes?
They are, ther's nothing wanting if the Prince were come.
Hoe's come now.
Your grace is welcome, but it may seem to a Strange place and person; what think you my Lord, are not you fall∣len into the company of so many traitorous and lost men.
Sir, say not so, you have not warrant, though you rank your self within the number. The place, and per∣sons rather appear to me, as if there were some Religion towards.
My Lord, you understand it right, there is a Religion towards, and I may truly say that this our
private meeting and close Counsel is more just, and glo∣rios then the loudest deed in Court, that all our pub∣like Acts, edicts, and forms of Law, are dark and impious compared to it; nay, that this time and place made holy by our purposes hath the gods more manifest and present, then the Sacrifice and Temples, long since made void and empty of a Deity, by those which sue for favours and request for him, who justly hear deserves their horridst vengeance, we are not met here to plot a general ruin for a private injury, we know and teach the greatest Donne by the King unto the Subject, can not give him cause to throw off his faith. Kings are petty gods and may tempt us, nor is it want or desire of Innovation that thus Stirs us, wee are in the best ill State already, nor ambition to Strike at that Law∣rell which the Thunder spares, no we reverence it, and know that as men are the works of nature, so Kings of Jove. But it is our oath the Sacrament we took, which still holds us though our Lord be dead, until his successor doe quit us from it, by taking of a new one, we are not subjects, but slaves to him we now obey, and therefore as slaves we ought to hate our Master; he was borne less then we, and hides the private man under the public gown; the purple which he wears was dipped deep in the blood of Innocents to collour't so. But I vainly wast my self in words, here are no minds to be persuaded, nor ears to be instructed; the sins we are to punish, we all know, and the gods remem∣ber, our Strength then is all we are to speak of, which is the greatest half of the Jsle 16. years undisturbed pro∣vision, so carelessly was that provided for which was got by blood, there is but one Lordship, small in respect of others, the Tyrants own possession that will stand strong for him, but they are so besotted with their fortunes that their greatest aide will be but in their will to doe him service. They may offer up their lives, like so many Sacrifices for his sake, but not like Soldiers, they are unworthy of that name: They may die but never conquer, war is never talked of but in their banquets, nor dare they fight beyond a Brawl.
And if we would count part of our Strength in their weakness, we have no opposition. In the City where
they and their vices are daily seen, nothing is to contemptible; and in the remoter parts, where Majesty is no more reve∣renc'd, being known only by the Power and laws, and where the name of King hears like the name of God, even there those sons of the earth (as I may so call them) dare mi∣nace at him, and pile hills on hills to set their bodies equal to their hates.
Here we are three, can each of us raise such forces, which, though they could not, yet could make the Kingdom fear a conquest.
You are a Soldier my Lord, and though but young perhaps have seen already what others whole lives have not shown them, yet we'll play a game we dare invite you to, though you were accompanied with all the ancient Heroes, who had they leave but in their airy shapes to sit on a Tri∣bunall, spectators of the war, this their second leaving of the earth, should bee more grievous to them than their former deaths, and they would wish this Kingdom might bee their Elizium.
You see, my Lord, how each can bring his forces in and prompt the other, those which have none on earth can bring them down from heaven; in stead of men bring manly spirits, words and looks confirming more than Armies.
If you have not yet done, I can hear you still, and with such lectures bee content to have my self persuaded to that thing, whose embraces I would leap into; would I could lend aides equal to yours, but theres none so good, yet if you can stay so long, I can command worthy helpers.
My Lord, it shall not need, all that wee desire is to have you not our enemy.
Are you ready for the Priest yet?
Yes, pray call him in. Though wee need
 nothing to strengthen our resolutions, yet we'll take an oath, tic good to have the Gods along with us, a Sacrament is the tie no less of loyalty than of treason.
Here let us all before the sacred witness of faith and
perjury, make a holy vow of loyalty to our selves and cause, and as we draw near to so divine an Essence, consider tic not gold or marble that wee touch, but a modle of a sensible and living Power, which has vouchsafed to be imbracd by one hand, when the vastness of our thoughts could not comprehend it.
Now we are ready for the Prince, Eurilochus prithee doe thou conduct him in.
Your grace shall see a stronger perswation than any you have yet heard, the lively image of her you so much serve, he knows not yet his fortunes, but I dare warrant he will bear them bravely, hee has read the lives of kings though hee never acted any, and you shall perceive he's princely borne, though not bred in Court.
This way, Sir.
Royal Sir you are welcome. Start not at the name, it is your due, you were borne to that title, and I doubt not, though you never heard it thus applied before, tic not altoge∣there a Stranger to you, there was a spark which in the first womb after a special manner was insufd into you, and is as another soul within you, as the one informs your body, so this informs that soul, we may call it the difference of a King, that will tell you we are all here your subjects, and this no strange Philosophy I teach, and though this rich per∣sum hath hitherto been wrapped in this disguise of learning, and defended from the air oath court, tic not decayde, but grown stronger by such keeping, which when it shall bee opened will cast a fragrant smell ore all the Kingdom, and cure the infections of the former age; to open it we are met, it is a me∣dicine we too long have languished for. And Sir, though it bee a short warning to so great a matter, you must presently pre∣parè to bee a King; wee have no time now to instruct you in your right, and how you lost it, it was years a doing, and will require years for to relate it. In the mean time, let what you see persuade you, our serious looks, respects, and the presence of these holy rights.
I need not excuse my want of answer to you, there is nothing fit for me to say, which way so ever I op my mouth to this purpose will appear foolish, when∣there I refuse, or grant both are alike ridiculous. I can∣not turn my self in this place, without committing shame, it is not with me as with elder years they may deny such offers and be admired for their modesty, or accept them and bee honoured for that Nobleness, I have nothing yet at my dispose, obedience is my best part; here I am; you may use me as you please, command me, even to wear a Crown, and make me submit unto the highest honours, set me on the Throne you speak of, and when I have had it long enough, take it again from me like other toys I play with, yet my Lords, I am not so young, but that I know I am a subject, and that I have a King; that thus, though but a sport, to use his titles is a fault, or for any to acknowledge such a spirit as you my Lord have spoken, is no less a traitor then he which strikes the Crown from off his head.
You have been heavenly taught, and shall be ever instructed in such Lectures. But the treason which is com∣meted is committed against your self, your spirit is usurped, and he that holds it is your servant as I am, or at least should be so, please you to aslend. Sir yond place is provided for you.
My Lord, set me not such a spectacle of shame.
It must be so.
Submit now, and command ever. My Lord', will you honour us with your help.
The gods preserve the King.
We have now performed the one half of our duty, which was to seat you thus, the other is with our lives to keep you at this height.
If I may yet take confidence to speak, and it will
become me to say something of my self. I could tell you how this day hath been familiar to me, and in a dream I have seen things so often, that did not these shouts confirm me, which were then Still the concluders of my happiness, I could not yet believe but all that I have now suffered is only airy, and these shapes I see, merely phantastique.
It was a good and prosperous Omen; which prefag'd your quiet here. The gods would not suffer you to rest in a wrong place.
May it be so.
And shall I alone in such a glorious Action walk unseen? and as a fault perform my duties in disguise? I rather will proclaim it, here fall my mist away, now thou only barrest me from my joys, to which I am not near enough unless I can embrace. Give me leave my Lords that as my life, so I may throw my body at his feet; I have a share in him, I, though a Stranger to you, it was my Fathers purchase, with his life, he bought it, nor desire I to hold it by another patent, may such be the noted end successively of all our name, no disease but our Mistress cause to die on. Here let me kneel and pray all happiness and the best things may fall, and then rise, and with my Sword pro∣cure those blessings I have pried for, know me my Lords, I am Pallantus.—
Pallantus?
Pallantus! My dearest friend proved my dearest kinsman? could I be so dull as to imagine such valour could be in a shape so low as thy outside promised, or so com∣mon as to be met by chance. That I could love thee so, and yet have no interest in thee? where hast thou been thus long dead? Sr. look upon this man that turns our joys thus from you, your party is made strong by his discovery, he has brought such unexpected aide within himself.
My Lord, I am yet as in a new World, and know no more then if I now began to live, the most common things are wonders to me, you must excuse me therefore if I know not how to entertain such accidents as these, yet I can love, if you point me where I should, and being that I want art, and reason I'll lay on the more.
Sir as I; new friend, let me embrace you, but this al∣teration shall not give me leave to forget those former fa∣vours I am to serve you for, what I receive in your disguise, I shall be ever ready to pay unto your self.
How it greeves me to see thy beauties thus blasted in thy youth, war hath been too rough a Mistress to thee, and set thy glories in too eminent a place: had Venus been in the Camp she would have covered thee with Marses Shield, al∣though the god himself had wanted it, I can remember when the loveliest face compared with thine, could not have taken from thee, when in the brightest ring of beauty thou ap∣appears but well set, and had thou been attired like one of them thou mighst have won the Prize of Fairness from a Court of Ladies.
My Lord, they are well lost, both those which were the causers of it, shall receive wounds as Deep though not so disfiguring, and afford their blood to wash the scars they have made.
They shall, and we will help to bath thee. It is time that wee broke up, our longer stay my prove dangerous, Phronimus and Euril. you must post this night to your com∣mand, your Majesty must bear them company, and now without more delay show your selves, we will be ready here upon the first news, my Lord, your Navy will require a Strict watch and guard on the first motion that will be at∣tempted.
Haimantus you shall presently away, and take the whole charge upon your self.
Pray doe so my Lord, all we have to doe is to mingle our selves in the Court again, when these troubles are once o∣ver a perpetual ease will follow.
My Lord, I never enjoyed safety like these dangers.
My Lord,
Now to leave suspicions, I can write certain news of the conspiracy we have a long time feared, the swarms are now flown out, the Hives are grown too narrow for their numbers, and they keep their murmurings abroad, every petty Jnmate upon his Country grievance dares threaten a State-revenge, and what the Law takes from him, will repay with ruin. Aratus, Phronimus, Eurild∣choose the three great diseases—
But not incurable. I know which way
To handle them: there must be some sudden
Remedy applied, that will work strongly;
This night Isle send it. Be absent all ye
Lazy medicines that the Law doth bring,
Ye are more treacherous than the villain
You examine, and where there was none, give
Time for to act mischief: the summons are
The traitors watchword, and drive him to take
That opportunity, which otherwise
His fears would have let slip; my self will be
The accuser and the Judge; when public
Means are dangerous, each Prince hath the Courts
Of Justice in his breast.
What fiend is this that causes such antipathy within me? the midnight ghost take not shapes so horrid. I have not slept since first he crossed me.
Wee are both alone, the Gods have given this time for my revenge.
What does hee mutter to himself?
Isle not loose this opportunity.
Coracinus, Argestes?
Kill that Dog.
My Lord?
Kill that Dog. cowardly  Villains, it were a mercy to leave You to the worrying.
Hee was a Devil, the power of hell was in his arm, Night threw her shades about him to defend him: hee could not have escaped unless he had vanished. Is he oretaken yet.
No my Lord, but tic impossible he should pass the Court, sure he has taken covert in lodgings thereabout.
Let there bee search made, and give command that when hee appears again, hee that first meets him without more delay doe kill him. Promise a reward for him that brings his head.
How doe you, my Lord?
Well.
Is your Grace hurt?
And may be again, if I look not warily, would your Lordships sword were sheathed.
Sir, it was drawn in your defence, and if you are jea∣lous, you wrong it, and a ready hand to doe you service.
Sir, is not the Traitor known that did it?
No doubt he is.
My Lord, you speak very doubtful. I hope you doe not think but I am sorry for the accident.
I know not what to think, your disposition is as great a stranger to me as your self.
I see my Lord, you know to bestow injuries, though no courtesies, to a stranger.
Injuries are deserving to an intruding guest.
You are unworthy—
And though I am encompassed with all the dangers I may justly fear from so barbarous a place, which dares doe any thing it lusts unto, without regard of laws or hospitality, I'd tell you so, and were you from the Dung-hill that you stalk on (it is no better) I'd pull down that unmannered pride within you.
Let me go, nothing shall privilege him to talk thus.
They hold you in your safety, nor is the distance twixt your life and death longer than this space that parts us. If you dare, oretake me, Isle stay you out a days sail at Sea. I chal∣lenge you to a princely combat, where come with all your Power, that I may destroy so many bruit beasts from of the earth.
Shall I bee tied while I am baited? Isle send those that shall oretake you, and cut you off before your shipping yet. Coracinus hast unto the City presently, and in my fathers name command them to raise all speedy Power to stop the Prince, bid them fire his ships in the Haven.
O my Lord, consider a little more before you lay a scandal on the Kingdom, which future ages cannot wipe off, no story can parallel such a fact; your grace moved him much and gave him cause of choler.
Does hee help your Lordship with ships, that thus you plead his cause? shall I be tutored by a Traitor?
Sir, you are happy if you can find a Tutor, when you thus much need one, and for your other language, if I under∣stood it I'd give you an answer, in the mean time it must return upon you.
Well Sir, I shall find other ways than words to an∣swer you.
How now Timeus, what bloody?
No more than you see Sir, the sword rather left it on me then drew it out.
Who is the traitor that durst attempt such outrage?
He's escaped unknown.
Unknown? that cannot bee, when he has past thus far in the court some must take notice of him. Can you de∣scribe him?
Hee was habitat like a Soldier, but his looks had more of Devil than of man.
Upon my life I saw him: but tic some two days since, he must be known in all this time, enquire who brought
in any such man, or was seen with him.
This can be no body but my Hobgoblin. An't please your grace, was hee not in a buff Coat, and his face all to bee dab'ld with patches?
Yes he was so.
Then doe I know him, hee belongs to my Lord A∣ratus there, no body durst speak to him but hee, hee showed his teeth at every body else, he had like to have bit me once.
Aratus doe you hear? they say hee that committed this outrage belongs to you.
To me Sir? hee wrongs me that thinks so, I main∣taine none that dare commit such insolence.
My Lord, I saw him with you.
Who? pray make me know the man.
A black sterne Soldier that followed you.
I fear I understand you now, there is such a one does follow me, but I never discovered any disloyal spirit in him; his outside, tic true, was as you describe, not moulded after the common frame of men, but threatened more than any I have seen; yet it was but his outside that threatened so, within hee was gentle, all a Courtier, to be wound and turned by the small∣lest curtsy. I must confess, if he were injurd, then hee was proud, and Lordly storms rose within his looks, and thunder was in his voice.
And you knowing this, how durst you turn such a wild beast loose into the Court, whom had I met and chanced to have angered my fortune had been the same. Lay hands up∣on him, you shall find that such a Spirit lodges in my breast too, and when tisstird will raise Tempests as great; we shall find other matters to examine you of. Through this seeming nag∣lect we doe put on, we can observe all your actions, and with a half and sleeping eye see into your darkest plots.
Then the Gods send their aid or all is lost, yet Sir hear me speak, the jealousies you have on me, I shall not bee able to clear, but will leave them to the trial of my innocence and your favour: Yet Sir, to show you in this last accident how much I am guiltless, I will relate unto you how first I met the actor of it. It was on that day I was employed on
an honourable message from your Majesty, to the Stranger Prince, on the shore I found him having lately escaped a Ship∣wrack, and as great a danger on the Land, for he was as∣salted by two Villains that were in the same voyage with him, but the cause of their hate himself he could not tell, he had no acquaintance with them but in the Ship, but as he had before the waves, so in this Tempest too (as I may call it) he bore himself above and left them both as calm as death upon the shore, In the instant when he was yet hot in his anger and, their blood we came upon him —
Pray Sir, let me speak to you, there is a wonder dis∣covered to me by his relation, and under this Monster he hath spoke of a greater doth lie hid, one that you would rather have in Chains, then all the list of Traitors I have named, Sir commit the uncasing him to me, and suffer me to free A∣ratus, let it suffice I am an eye upon him, and the rest, and will suddenly by their destruction, destroy their Plot.
Take your way, I'll leave him to you.
My Lord, with the persuasion of your innocence, I have procured your freedom of my father, and doe desire in requital of this kindness (if it be such) to let me see the face of this my enemy once more: if your acquantance as appears by your words, be not too late to know his abode, My Lord, I shall receive him otherwise then you expect, the relation you have made of him, and what my self was wit∣ness on, hath turned my hate into admiration, and if I can move his Love, as I have donne his anger: I shall be happy in his valour. It is no strange thing that the valour of enemies have made them friends, and that wounder have been the first seal of Love. I doe consider how much 〈◊〉 him, and that on such occasion, he could not have don least, at first sight I called him dog, and without more circumstance com∣manded for to kill him.
Now, Sir, I must kneel to you, you have the mercy of a Prince; he shall submit for his offence, or suffer for it, and if you find not that noble spirit in him, I have told you of in the most dangerous business you shall implory him. Let
him be punish't for this his ill placed valour.
My Lord, I'll take no other surety but your word, ever engage me thus.
But my •ord, though I can answer, I cannot give credit to your smooth tongue, this last accident had like to have broke all, and had there not been help above, there had been none beneath. I must be no more so venturous, our Con∣spiracy begins to be discovered, and that we are suspected is the least fear, we must not longer defer our breaking out; there is no safety now but in a public danger.
I am come to tell you, the infection.
That caused this your retirement, is now
Vanished, and abroad you may easily bless
Us with your beauties. It shames me to say this
I can pronounce, you may do something that
May command all.
I ever as a servant did approach
You, but now as an offender, as one
That is guilty of a sin of so high
A nature as this your sadness is. Can
I doe less then condemn my self that would
Have kilt the man that would have don it? yet
I hope this my action hath not made me
Appear, to throw of that honourable name
As servant to you, it is a title I am most
Ambitious of, and never did
Engage my self a more humble one
Then by my last command. Before I was
A votary to your beauty, now to
Your goodness, there is no earthly thing I
So much reverence (if I may call that
Earthy that's so divine) I bend but at
Two places the Alter, and your virtues.
My Lord, though your complement be such, as to esteem this my retirement for your sake so great a favour. I must not so account it, nor think I have laid so deep engagements on you, in granting that I voluntary, &amp; unask't perform: your respects may
claim greater services, and your last words had been requi∣tall to a Stranger.
Ther's a Gentleman desires access unto your grace, from Prince Clearchus, and my Lord Aratus.
Prithee go stay him within, as soon as this troubles o'er, I will come to him. Sure it is to warn me of their break∣ing out.
The time of their great birth is now complete.
The hours are finished. O let it not you
Which look down, which favourably look down
Upon this Isle, want your power which first
Did strengthen it, let the same hands that hid
Disclose it too, shame not at so glorious
An off-spring, when it is heavenly, and doth
Confess the father, when none but gods dare
Call it their's, nor without blasphemy can
Own it, you were kind fathers at the first,
Show your self still so, and breed the child you
Have gotten, where humane strength shall fail, there
Hold it up, and make that want the Strongest,
Yet when I look this way it doth distract
My prayers, and makes me wish a conquest
Without destruction of the enemy.
O it is pity that so much nobleness
Should fall to earth, although no love, I can
Afford him tears.
Why, well said Timeus, now I like thee, here thy ears and services are bent the right way would I could see thee once look pale in these, but thou art so worldly that thou ap∣appears still as if thou were it not in it. Can a young man when he may have leave to breath in such a Paradise as this, draw a common ayre, an ayre of the people? Madam, I don't think but you find him a rude servant, one that pays his courtship as a business, and not as a delight, that has one eye upon the door to be gone, when the other's fixed on you.
My Lord, I was never witness of any others courtship
and therefore can compare it only with what I can imagine: and it is above my highest fantasy.
Why dost thou not answer? I am ashamed to see thee, O my conscience at these years, I could ont woo thee my self; I think we had best change business, neither will go forward else, i'll court for thee, and thou shall rule for me: thoul't never get a wife without the help of a commission.
Though nothing is more just then a Noble
Love, yet nothing ought to be more secret,
None are to be admitted to the rights
Of it, but the god, and the two parties,
Sir, you are not acquainted with the laws,
Of a diviner love, that may imagine
The progress of it a tedious Pilgrimage,
And that they languish which doe live in hope
The means is more delightful then the end,
Then is the bloom and spring of joy when it
Is greene: as it grows riper, the blossom
Falls and turns to profit, the perfection
Is the first decay of love, there is a
Marriage of the Soul, proceeds the other
In time, and excellence, and is performed
By a Hymen of a more extracted
Deity, whose Torch is purer then the
Element of Fire, these are laws unknown
To your unfashioned Cupped, who perhaps
May wound a breast among those ruder Souls,
Who think they ought to exchange heart for heart,
And love only in requital, but here
A nobleness must tip the Shaft as well
As goodness, or else it pierces but to pity.
Ha, ha, ha, say thou so? thar't kilt in a Philosophy, I thought thou had never dreamt of, I am loath to put it out of thee with other thoughts: but I think this business I am to tell thee of will confirm thee more: and remove all thy jealousies. The suspicion thou had of a Treason was not in vain, since it hath broken out, but it is already cured, the two chief of them are taken in their passage as they went to raise commotions. And I have commanded that they be set
so as they may have a full view of that earth they were so am∣bitious of, and then to Strangle them at that height.
Were there but two, Sr, flatter not your self, had they been thousands they had yet left more behind, you account that a victory which they scorn to account a loss, and think you are safe when they are not endangered. Is Aratus, Phronimus or Eurylochus among them?
No, nor suspected by any but your self.
How now, what's the matter?
Sr, yonder are two fellows wee have laid hold on, that call themselves messengers from Aratus to your Majesty. But they have behaved themselves so traitorously that we have used them accordingly, and clapped bolts upon 'em, till they shall be further determined of, what their business is, they will declare to none but to your self, and they have spoke those things which they are sure would bring them thither. They answered when they were urged, they came to defy the King, and us, and if they are not mad, they are the most des∣pirate villains I ere heard speak.
These were the evils I was a Prophet of, I saw them when they were yet disguised.
Where are they?
They are under guard here in the Court, ther's a mes∣senger too from the Governor of the City, desires admit∣tance to your Majesty, he says a broad are many signs of tumults.
Sr, this is no time to delay, if we believe not yet, the next news will bee brought us home by the Traitors themselves, you may perceive their Strength, and ready∣nes in this, that they dare make such bold declarations and in the open day produce their black Plots. If we haste not to o're-take them now; our greatest speed hereafter will not reach them.
Madam, we must entreat your pardon, that thus we have offended against your quiet, and made you the first witness of our Troubles, that ought to have known them last.
Sr, The trouble is too sad to be excused.
Whiles he that should be eye, and ear,
Through sloth doth neither see nor hear,
Behold like Thunder comes a Sound,
Which doth at once amaze and wound:
That dart sure hits what clouds did hide,
And safely kills, cause undiscride.
Chor. Where dangers urge, he that is slow,
Takes from himself and adds to's foe.
They're come beyond a whisper now,
And boldly dare proclaim their vow,
When the prey's sure, to show the snare,
Begets not Council, but despair,
Like Lightning it awakes the sense,
Only to see, and grow blind thence.
Chor. Tic Love, not Faction, where the good
Conspire to spill usurping Blood.
OUr message you say, is returned again upon us.
In a manner, the same words, accompanied only with a few threats more.
Wee expected no other, yet it was fit to neglect no part that belongs to the justice of our cause, though it were but merely formal, we ought to claim the right wee had, before we use the means to conquer it; the same circumstance is to be observed as well in the Court of war, as in the Courts of Law, no trial till the demand be past.
There is but one of the messengers returned: the other for his stout demanding of the Crown lost his head, there his fellow reports he delivered those words you put into him, with such resolution, that hee appeared not to denounce, but bring those evils on him. The Tyrant grew pale, and seemed to feel them in his threats, nor could hee think himself safe en∣compassed with his friends and guard, till hee had silenced
that voice that so could wound him through all their swords.
Alas poor man, yet hee fell nobly, his sword might have purchased him a higher name in war, but not in honour. In our days of triumph he shall not be forgotten, nor his glory though he perceive it not, be defend behind those that live.
Doe ye hear the news my Lord?
No, my Lord, what is it?
Ell's lost.
Bless us, my Lord, how?
Yet it may be but a rumour and scattered by the enemy, Phronimus and Eurilochus in their convoy with the young King are taken. The Camp is ready to mutiny on the report.
There cannot be such an evil, it is a sin to give cre∣dit to it. Pray, my Lord, relate some particulars of the report, was there any made mention of the kings age?
No, The rumour goes that two Lords were taken on the way by a Troop of horse of the adverse party, the young King being in his disguise, and not yet known, past undiscove∣red as one of their followers.
O tic most likely.
Where are all our great words now? those
Mighty sounds that made a trembling in the air,
And caused no less a deafness with their fall,
Then if thunder, the voice of heaven were turned
Articulate, and spake the threats of Jove
Unto the world? changed to as great a silence,
Such when a Tempest ceases is the calm
That follows, no noise is heard, as if the
Wind with blasts were breath less grown, and the Seas
Sat down, and after so much toil required ease.
Not able for to lift that from a Rock,
Whose Keel struck hell, and Mast the Clouds did knock,
Why had we not bodies equal to our minds?
That when we durst meet Perils, we might
Bear them too, and not with a fading trunk
Lose thoughts invincible: yet I will doe
Something, and where the gods have given a will
We ought not in their service to sit still.
My Lord, raise your self, the news may be false, and all the danger they are in may be by this your belief, give not your self cause to morn hereafter, that all perished on a mi∣stake, if that this the worst of evils be befallen, it ought not to be the reason of your neglect, but greater care and vigilance.
My Lord, I thank you, and will take your advice; Pardon me that I was stupefied at the greatest amazement that could befall, and appeared dead when that the life of all my action was taken from me; yet it was not a slumber I was lost in, but a confusion of various thoughts, not knowing which to choose, until you pointed me one out, wee will doe some∣thing presently, and not give them leave to put their black in∣tents in practice. hark.
The Soldiers are in a mutiny.
Demophilus, what news?
What news, my Lord?
Such as is not to be named without a Sacrifice. O see, my Lord, though we have lost, we are not yet undone; theres a Relapse, but not a total ruin of our fortunes; the King, Phronimus, and Eurilochus are all safe, and never were in dan∣ger, this night they will be here with their full power, the oc∣cession of the mistake is now plain.
Till this fell out wee had no sense of the hap∣pines wee were in. Pray my Lord, what are they which are taken?
Two that stood strongly for our party, more be∣sides their names here, and that they were virtuous I am not to instruct you, you may perceive they which have no such cause of joy as wee have, doe lament them much: wee shall have a time too to morn their deaths, then, when wee have leave to laugh at theirs which slew them, in the mean time fare'em well; such a leave, were I in their misfortune, I would have expected, they have only out-stript us in the payment of a debt we all owe unto our Master, ours is due, though not yet
called for. And how fares the young King?
As one the gods take care on, his words and looks have gained many unto his party, and put courage in all the rest.
And weal make use of it while it is yet hot, after this nights rest they shall give battle to the enemy, hark the Mutiny increases let us away, least we loose all here,
Sr, though there are troubles in your affairs
Let none be in your countenance: your eyes
Should like those blessed twin fires upon the Ship
Display a vigorous flame. A light of joy,
And comfort round about, that they which toil
In the rage and fury of this tempest
May from thence foresee a calm, and nourish
Hopes of safety. Thus you wrong your Kingdom
Destroying it your self cause others would.
The people groan just as you groan, their Pulses
Have the same motion, and their hearts doe beat
Both hope or fear, according as yours doth
Either dilate or else contract it else.
All omen comes from you, your Passion is not,
A single sadness, it is your Subjects too.
When you confess a fear, who dares bebold?
They doe account it a disloyalty to have a
Thought that shall run cross to yours.
Your mirth were now discretion, and a face
Cheerful as at a Feast, were policy,
T'wouldbe one kind of succour.
Why Timeus, I thank thee, but these joys come
From above, are not to be taken
When we please, no man can resolve he will
Be happy, yet I will struggle with my
Thoughts, and endeavour to force that quiet
They have taken from me. But let not this thing
Discomfort you, it is but a course of humours
Perhaps a little Physic will remove it.
Now Sir, you put a new life into me,
And I dare say we shall be victorious,
Nay, we will, no power doth stand against us,
Now that is favourable which attends upon
Your person, to whose protection I will leave you,
And go see how the Camp fares.
Shall I bear any of your commands thither?
Only my love, the care of all things else doe thou take upon thee, and to morrow, if this fit leave me, before the battle Isle visit you.
How every thing is irksome to me: clouds
And darkness are before mine eyes, all things
Dissenting one from the other yet conspire
In this, that they present death to my view,
I have that idle comfort only, that
He that despairs of all, ought to fear nothing
When things cannot grow worse, all fortune then
Is on his side that suffers. But my injustice
Strengthened with murder, doth forbid success,
A Kingdom got by blood, is built upon
A slippery foundation. I have been
Nourished in peace thus long, that being grown
Specious and great, I may at last fall down
A Sacrifice worth slaughter. Thoughts urge thoughts,
Suspicion gets suspicion, Danger, danger;
I have not that small setlednesse of mind,
As to think one thing twice: were I but innocent,
I would provoke misfortune, call for Fate
With as undaunted courage as the Lord
And ruler of it doth—
Stay.
What a nothing tic that I have thus much feared
And laboured to escape, when it was my good:
Childishly dreading every thought of cure,
Then most offended when my health was near?
How well I'am after this little wound?
Quiet of mind and peace of Conscience,
Those blessed companions doe possess me now,
I see nothing but blood can appease blood
In sacrifice, that to the guilty theres
No ease like death, no mercy like the cross.
Oh, oh.
Hold in your rage, have you not already
Acted mischiefs enough by my command.
But thus you seek to pull more upon ye?
Ye are deceived, though I have been hitherto
A Tyrant, now I am merciful, and can
Command things that are just and innocent.
He faints the villain must not live.
I command you hold, my power is yet good
You are the villains, the first causers of
This my misery, and you should lay hands
Upon your selves; how ridiculous is this
Your rage? suppose I should give way to
Your desires, what were you the safer,
Or I the better? you would have one foe
The less, and I one sin more that am already
Laden. Does not this judgment affright you
Rather? I am not only guilty, your
Hands were dipped in the same blood and performed
Such things I often durst but wish: that you
Were commanded will not excuse you, your
Loyalty to me was but at best a
Broken faith unto another; and when
You observed it most, you were most periurd.
What can you expect? you see when that I
Was guarded by an host, needed not fear
What the power of earth, or men could doe
Unto me, one man (as I may say) one
Handful of that earth broke through them all, and
With a single arm forced what a million
Could not keep, and when there was no means left,
Yet there was a miracle to conquer me.
To you I turn now, no more my ternor,
In return of this favour you have found,
Show the like to these, and others, that shall
Be guilty of that name, as friends to me,
Though you are nothing yet, this deed
Will make you powerful and you that have given them all
May demand so small a share: now you have been
So much my enemy change something
To a friend. How vainly I take care for
Lesser things neglecting my greatest charge.
O my Timeus! my poor Eudora!
Leave me not yet, my soul, thou can not mount
Until the load be taken from thy wing,
Thou could inhabit here when it was Hell,
Now it is Paradise, — O stay — and dwell —
Though the fall be great it cannot shake me
When I know it is just. The malefactors
Penitence, takes not the justice of his
Doom a way, though he be changed that remains
Unstained, he may die with pity, but not
With innocence. They mind me not Isle endeavour
To escape while they are thus stupefied with grief,
I will not trust their obedience to a dead command.
Leave your sad embraces,
They'll bring no comfort to you, though you persisted in them till you were such as thus you hold. Death, like a coy mistress, makes no return of love for all that is bestowed, you may wast your selves but not your sorrows here. This ground will afford a perpetual supply of moisture; which your eyes, like two Suns, may draw up and power down for ever.
Let's to the Prince, and to him
Offer up our lives and griefs together,
Th'ones the only medicine for the other.
The Traitor's escaped.
We were to soft to obey a dying speech.
His scope's as Strange as was his entrance
We had power to hinder neither.
Give me a power mighty as my rage,
That my revenge may reach unto the Clouds
And unthrone those gods that joined hands with men
To commit so black a deed: it were but
Justice they should loose their deity that
So would throw it off. O my father! did
I unload thy shoulders of the Kindgome
That thou might fall under a less weight,
And bereft thee of all thy jealousies, to
Ruin thee with more assurance only?
Where are all those flattering tongues that when
There was no need would in a complement
Hourly suffer for thee? not one to die
In thy defence, or by his fall to make
Thine more decent? how dismal is this place?
The graves where death inhabits are not so
Dreadful. I'll fly thee though I run amongst
The thickest of my foes, they can present
No dangers like this lonenesse the cries, the
Sword, the Trumpet in the battle strike not
So deep amazement, what ho, Clitus
Charisius, Erastus, Amends, Not one voice?
I walk like Aeneus among the shades.
All is hell about me: I see nothing
But what my Fantasy frames in horrid shapes,
O the vain fears of guilty men! all are
Unreasonable, but yours ridiculous,
When you have contemned the greatest powers
On earth, threatening with strength, and hatred,
You tremble at a ghost, a thing less then is
A man, and when the substance could not, the
Shadow frights you. There is no way but this
To set me above my fears, when I am
Less I shall be equal to them—
O hold my Lord, offer not up your self
A sacrifice when there are so many
That gladly would relieve you with their lives;
Let that thought prevail with you, hat you ought
To live for them, that so willingly would
Die for you, you're the prop of thousands, and
If you fall, you sink a Kingdom with you.
Take the Sword by the other end, and so
Holding it, seek to appease this Sacred
Ghost: such a will exceeds this performance
If you can't confirm the Crown, yet confirm
Your memory by the loss of it. This
Object makes your grief a burden to your
Honour. Lean on me my Lord, I'll bear you
To the Camp.
What shout is that among the enemies?
Tic the acclamation of the Camp, at the receiving of their fellows, this night they expected their other forces, and it seems they are now arrived.
I am glad on it, I hope we shall have command to try the fortune of the Field to morrow, would the whole knot of them were there, that we might make quick work; and like Alexander, untie it with a blow.
I, and a wall round about 'em to keep them to the slaughter, that we may not be troubled to kill a thousand in a thousand places: I don't like this pursuing it is the greatest evil next to the being pursued, the wine near tastes well when it is so jumbled. Give me a Standing Camp that florishes like a peaceful City, and wont's hoe necessaries, here stand your Engines, there your beef, on this hand a Palisade defends you, on the other, a Barricade of Porke-Tubs impregnable, before a Ditch is cut of some two hundred paces, and the Soldiers tippling in it, behind a Coop runs out of the same length, &amp; the
Poultry tippling in their Trenches, whose body are too delicate and tender for bare travel, here a man may even among the Tents forget to be a Soldier.
Ha, ha, ha,
O, my conscience Comastes thou art weary of the Camp already.
Yes, faith as your selves are, if you'd confess the truth.
Why, me thinks there is no pleasure to be compared with it, every man hath his delights here as if he took his leave on 'em: and if he chance to return at night, like friends which parted in the morn two dangerous and hopeless ways of ever seeing, they meet with a multiplied and unexpected joy, these very wounds are pleasures, and Elizium comes faster on them then their deaths.
When honour is the prize, and wronged Justice
The cause that thrusts them on, they throw of one
That they may get a better life, a life
Of fame, which is eternal even on earth,
That they enjoyed before was fading
Sustained only by the infirmities
Of one weak body; now it is supported
By the memories of all, the charge of it
Is committed unto a world of men,
Nor first extinguished before the fame of the
Whole universe, none are so surviving
As the Sons of glorious War. Jove gave
Life to Hercules, and Theseus; but Mars
Eternity, they breathed from one, but gained
Heaven by the other, these were the great thoughts
Which when I was yet young, and not able
To embrace them, did dwell in me: they did
Suggest unto my soul, that I ought to raise, my hand
Against the gods, if they slept.
At perjury and favoured injustice.
Hello. what aylst thou?
What meanst thou Comastes?
To show you how easy a thing it is, to talk like a Soldier, and be as brave a fellow as either of you.
Ha, ha, ha,.
Thou would make an excellent runne-away Soldier, such a speech on the high-way were greater vio∣lence than bidding stand a long staff, would not get an alms so soon.
What wilt thou say now Comastes to a jovial round or two beyond the Court healths, those at the Kings own Table?
I think I shall say more than you at this, as well as in the other.
Captain prithee command um to bring some wine in, Come let us sit in the mean time, and take away these fearful things from Comastes.
And why from me, me I pray?
Why they'll fright thy mirth away, look, it gapes upon thee, but won't bite.
No more than your Lordships sword. Is this the la∣rible thing? I know not what it may doe in a dark night with a candle in it, but in the day, and your Lordship looking through it, I shall never turn my back unless it be to laugh. Pray God the enemy think of no such stratagem with a pitcher in the Progenerall-ship, it may be as much as the Kings Army lies on.
Ha, ha.
Take this away too, is not this a Devils hand Coma∣stes?
Yes, Theres a couple, pray remove 'em both, and his wit that is so devilish, that we may fall a little to our business.
if we must, let's to itstoutly, and like Soldiers, what say ye? shall wee drink a battle? the trial of to morrows victo∣rye, Isle take the Kings part against you all. I am the strongest, and when I have overcome, Isle send him word of the good omen, tic worth a thousand of your paltry birds, and ox entrails, tic a piece of service will gain the favour from you all.
Come, we'll undertake you begin, that honour belongs to your side.
Here is—how now, what's this? what does such a boy doe in the war? disroole him, I scorn to bee Captain
of such a youngster.
O whilst you live, begin with your light Armature, the Legionaries follow.
•s that the trick on it? Here then for the King I throw the first reed, this boy can manage no greater weapon.
I marry, there stands a rank of lusty fellows, a man may rely upon such valours, their very looks will overcome common stomachs. I long to see them buckle to it, this is too much sport.
Reach them down then.
Give it me, and found an assault? Pallas and victory for the King—why I, this was a tall fellow. I don't think but Alexander had always a Guard of such attending on his Person; He have a dozen of them, and call them my twelve Labours.
O for a shout, a little noise would gain the conquest.
In good time, but not so easily.
You doe but dream a victory yet.
No? help me then old Soldier.
Hold up Comastes for the greatness of your cause, hold up, you show signs of fainting, how now?
Ho, goody ways, ne'er a Goblet the King has ere got the honour to struggle so long with me.
I fear wee must lose in loyalty, you'll ne'er overcome else.
I warrant you, I retired but to an ambush. But who keeps the door all this while? Say the enemies should come and cut all our throats. I can tell you I have read such pretty stories.
How now Comastes, what words are these? does Wine breed fears in you?
A pox on this War twill bee my undoing, I shall come out with some such roguish question or other at the Kings Table and have my bones broken by the Guard.
The Wine works not at all, Comastes you begin not fast enough.
Fill another—So now bring me the Armour again
What will you doe with it?
Bring it again I say, I'll put mirth into you all, pray let him help me that has nothing to doe.
Here will you take this?
No I shall have no need of that.
O I had forgot, thy Face is always armed enough.
Well Sr, when I return I'll pay you that.
O the King's kilt!
The King!
Thou look distractedly, speak it again.
Hoe's slain, my self was present at his fall.
By what accursed hand?
That devil that wounded the Prince, hath murderd him, he was before his terror, and was now his death.
O the heavy hand of Justice. Is the Prince safe?
Slain too, if report be true, but by what hand I know not, he left the King just before his fall to come hither, and be∣ing that he is not here, we have much cause to fear the worst.
Fear not now, you have past the greatest danger, when we have made an end of these theres none left to punish us, the King and Prince are killed, and those which remain, we doe the business for, and will reward us richly according to the service, and their great promises. We have no other way to gain ought by this alteration, our pardons all that we can hope for, if we still, let us on presently least some others doe prevent us, follow me, I'll give the first blow.
How now? what gaze you at? know you where you are? does your feet lead you without the council of your head? get you to your quarter or i'll stretch you up in it.
These Villains dare doe any thing, Captain follow 'em and see 'em punish't.
What shall we doe? here we stand like so many trunks of men, headles, and liveless, none to obey, nor able to command, there is no way can present us safety, but this we are now in is the most unworthy danger: So beasts when they have been fed unto the slaughter, submit unto it, let us not stand still, but resolve to turn our Swords upon our enemies, or bend them against our own breasts; either ways a victory, and will bring us happiness and glory.
I am for the last, it is the safest way, and in our griefs the noblest.
Sr, These fellows came to kill us, one of the weakest on 'em, when he saw himself laid hold on for his other fault, suss∣pecting he was discovered out of mere guiltiness confessed, that unwillingly he was brought into the plot, by the perswation of his fellows, who in hope of preferment from the enemy had decreed on all our deaths, he says too that himself, and many more were attempted by some of the adverse party with promises, and threats to lay down their Arms, and that the Camp is full of such commotors.
This then will confirm our former resolutions, come let us number up our selves, and if we are equal each man set his sword against his fellows breast, and with a friendly wound (in spite of Fate or Fortune, being our selves Lords of a greater power) give happiness to either. Then these wild Beasts will deplore the loss of that they so endeavour to throw away, and leap like head-lesse bodies into flames, and ruin.
O! my Lord, let us embrace you with such a love, as dead, and revived friends would express to either, to us you were dead, and are alive again. And have bestowed this life we now enjoy, we must not owe it to another Parent. So is the Judge a Father to the guilty, your sentence was past upon us, and the hand held up to put it into practise, when you, as if from heaven you had fallen, set all right that was in such confusion, what trifles will the greatest dangers appear to us.
Rise, you have no less quickened me, that was as
nigh my end as you your selves were, but now I live, and again can think of life and vengeance to our enemies, which presently weal put in practice, and seeing that our spirits are redoubled, our losses shall no longer fright us.
Tic time Sr, you showed your self unto the Army, there you are dead still, and their faith on the belief little better, but your presence, will enliven it again, and make them fight on hatred of their former fault, and shame of their present desperation.
Let us away.
Never did Justice appear so eminent this was a deed, as if her own hand had wrought it, who can complain the want of providence, or say the guilty, and the innocent make one heap, when this is told. A Tyrant in the height of all his glory guarded with friends, and crewelty what either power or violence could make him safe with, by a mortal hand Strengthened with Justice, was snatched from the midst of all, the lightning melts not the enclosed gold with half that wonder: leaving that's more combustible, nor doth the plague in a multitude of men make a choice so curious.
Where is the great worker, of it?
Again departed to perform greater things, If be pos∣sible, I did prophecy, though not the nature of them, that he could act us wonders, weal strive to second his first blow, and now the gods and he have done, play our parts. I could almost give him divine honours, and say when he is in the Camp, there is no need of any other power, Soldiers are but charge, and troubles only.
Tic time, that my troops were gone, that wee may reach the place of ambush, ere the break of day.
Tic true you shall presently away, Phronimus is already gone with his Forces to stop the passage between the enemy, and the City, we in front will stand against them, so that in the morning when they rise it shall appear to them as if they were inhabited with foes, not being able to turn away they shall not loose their sight in our large number.
Some of those which were sent to corrupt the en∣mies are returned, and say their words were harkened to, beyond their expectation: and if a present assault were given, there were no doubt of victory, all is in such a tumult.
Such evils increase by delay, we'll let 'em grow un∣till the morning, and then our sight will gain the conquest; if it be possible we'll order't so, that wee may rather show um war than bring it on them, though they are given into our hands wee ought not to show our mercy, and not our power.
Oh, O!
Madam they break in upon us.
O my father! when thou art slain I cannot fear what after does befall me, the same that was their cruelty to thee, will to me be pity.
Hold, I command you hold, hee that takes a life shall pay one back again.
My rage hath blindly led me on to violate a place, no less sacred then the Temples and rudely, ere I looked about, hath thrust me on the Deity. Like those which being led to see some glorious thing, eager, and longing, ask still as they pass, which is the sight, and how near, until they are engaged within its splen∣dour, which opening suddenly upon them, makes them retire as fast again with reverence.
What stays thee monster, and makes thee pant thusore the prey? here I stand ready and doe invite thy fury, come and save my hand a labour, if thou art surfeited Isle whet thy thine appetite. Thou art a Murderer, a villain, These name thee not, nor drawn in the same Table would express thee, such offenders the Magistrates can punish,
They are but diseases of the State, thou the death, the Law comprehends them within her virge, thy giant faults doe so much oretop her, that justice cannot reach thee. And if there were no gods thou then were innocent, and would stand safe because thou art so wicked. Thou hast killed thy King; O no, thou had no share in him, hee was a King of men, thou a beast, the bloodiest in the Forest, yet he was they Sovereign too, the herds were under him, and the wildest knew no other Lord.
My revenge how false thy beauty was?
How monstrous thou appear, thou represenst un∣to me all ill I ever heard of.
And thou all that ever I heard of good.
Thou move like so many living mischiefs, had the Priests beheld thee, they might have divinde all these future evils so exactly in thy feature, that what they told would rather seem a Story than a Prophecy, and saved us from thee. Nature was never guilty of such a Work, some hellish power hath given the birth, and Spy∣rit, and sent thee on earth to destroy all that's fair and holy.
Sir, raise your self, can you endure such words as these? Soldiers on, and make them feel those evils she hath uttered.
Hold villains dare you make an offer to such a deed, and not in that thought expect a bolt upon your breasts? hee that heaves his hand shall know I have that thunder here. Thou worse than she hath named, unhallowed Traitor, can thou command such Sacrilege? if that thy faults were told thee from above, thou'ldst blaspheme the voice that spoke to thee. If shalt dare to speak such things as these, Isle make thy soul pass faster than thy words, think not to wrong me with a seeming show. Isle not take your bitterness, though gilded in the name of friendship, withdraw and show your love this way.
Sir, will you stay? there may be treachery in the place.
Still you injure me with your kindness.
What next intendst thou? what master-peace of
wickedness wilt thou glory in alone? know thou can not force me, here within thy reach I am as safe as if an army all re∣solute to death divided us. This hand something weaker than a women's, can resist all thy strength, were in as great mischief as thy will.
Though I seem all that you have named, and fouler yet, this is a sin blacker than all; such as I dare not doe. O think me not worse than you have said already, and then I may again be happy. The beasts are noble, meek to Chastity, and humbly like the feet of Majesty. Judge me not by show, our eyes deceive us, and as oft persuade us to the wrong, as doe the blind mans feet, falsely doe prompt us. All that is white is innocent, and all that's black is sinful, without exception. Should those which look on you be led so by the sconce, they must kneel down before you, and adore you as some Deity, not being able to fantasy so much god, as they doe see in you; such forms their power have given you, that you may become a rival in their worships.
Why talk thou thus? thy tongue hath no more Power than hath thy hands.
Neither intend violence, would you could entertain of me one thought of goodness, as hopeless as you think me, I de undertake to make it good, and better't daily.
Why delayest thou? what would thou have?
Forgiveness, I dare not say love.
Love? thy thoughts are more misshapen than thy self, even in thy hopes you are cruel. This base imagination hath wronged me more than all thy actions, before thou only soughtst my ruin, now the ruin of my name, that thou intendst a rape it was a glory to me, and though I had lost it, would have got me same, the honour of a ravished virgin. Did thou woe me with the greatest services, as thou come in my fathers blood, I could reward thee, but could never yield thee love; I was too long a Princess, and lost the name too late to enter∣taine so low a thought.
The world of causes that part me and happiness.
Love is soft, and full of courtesy a greater opposite to lust than hate; the flames thou feelst are more preposterous than those which burn the breasts of Satyrs, and of beasts, which
kill the young and in that blood enjoy the Damme. Think thou that any is so bold in lust to embrace such fears thy love bring with it.
My youth and comeliness whither are you fled?
My miseries have put a new nature in me, changed that calmness I had wont t'enjoy, into the looks and language of a fury: how ill doth rage become a virgins breast? I will sup∣press it, and if it must break forth, dissolve it into tears. An age worn out in thought cannot present one comfort to me, I am so wretched.
Oh, my solo's more earthly than my body.
This war that is within me, will gain a victory ore me.
I find decays already.
Accursed that I am, to be the Author of such misery, is there no way to restore that peace which you have lost? if there be any, despair not of it, though it be held in the jaws of death, Isle snatch it for you; though it were lost in the darkest mass of things, my love would distinsh't in a Chaos: if it have no being but what your thought gives life too, Isle wish it for you. So strong my fantasy is to serve you; let it be any thing to be done Isle do it, can I, the wretched cause removed bring ease unto you, here on my knee I yield my life unto your taking, or if you had rather, Isle offer't up my self.
No, and yet there is a way, and thou moist doe it.
Is there a way? O my joys, the gods are merciful, name it, name it to me.
If thou'lt vow to doe it presently.
Need I an oath to confirm I would be happy? tic my own happiness I thus eagerly pursue in yours, every sigh you give doth make me breathless, and every tear which you let fall doth bow me nearer to the earth, than all the years and wounds that I have suffered; yet I will swear by all things holy, all that I fear and reverence, to refuse no labours, deaths, to gain your ease—
Then—
And restore joy unto your life again.
Now thou can not, thy last words have rendered thee unable. The ease was death, which yet I beg from thee.
From what a heaven of happiness am I fallen?
Assist me all my Strength, the gods this way you have ordained I should come to you, pardon that Fate then which your selves did give me.
O my Lady.
Stay, O; stay that hand, let that goodness in you which would spare things fair, and holy, preserve the fairest, and the holiest. The angels would be proud to take such shape upon them when they visit earth, it is such as your self ought to look with reverence on.
Ther's a weapon hid within my heart, which none can take away: it wounds deeply. Now Death thou art a lover, and dost court me mildly.
O my Lady, help, help, O my Lady.
Give her more ayre.
Shees gone, my times no longer, our lives were woven on the same web, the destinies condemned me to see her death, and then to follow.
She breathes, stand off.
My Brother, O my Father.
How do you Madam?
Too well, my Strength returns too fast upon me.
Were my Soul fled, that voice would call it back a∣gain, it self would return: and choose this Paradise on earth, I'll not disturb her with my longer stay.
If that your Lady shall need any thing, you may have it with a thought, a long peace shall not present it with more care, and speed: she shall not find less tenderness, and honour then if her Father still ruled all.
The Guards at your command, and shall stay only for your safety.
Soldier, thart noble, may the gods reward thy good∣ness, Madam, you had best go in.
Fortune, glory, Victory, all are fled
Unto their several habitations,
And have left Dishonour, Losses, Danger
In their Stead, not so much praise to all our
Dead Story, as that we lost one man to
Save a Kingdom, not bleed a drop for the
Whole bodies safety.
My Lord, let not the treachery of such Villains trouble you more then your thought of safety, show your hate unto their false-hood by seeking to revenge it, you have yet hopes left, if timely you put your former Re∣solution into practise, when wee have gained the Forte, there's means to escape the I'sle, and seek foreign aide, you have many friends that you may trust too. This our obscure flight will make our return more glo∣rios, which shall bee in the face of the whole Kingdom, nor will we choose another way, but what passes o'er Cities, Armies, and through a general ruin to our Revenge.
He who injustly swayed the State
Lives no where now, but in their Hate.
Ther's nothing left of him but shame.
Which both preserves, and Clouds his name.
When civil Beasts fall, Let it be
Called slaughter, and not Victory.
Cho. When that he dies, that lived a shade
His sleeps continued then, not made.
Arise thou Star of honour there
And in his stead shine round our Sphere
Grace thou the Throne, and let us see
Thy father once more Reign in thee.
Weal now in nought but love conspire,
And no breast burn, but with true fire.
Cho. While that such manners rule the Throne
Live all by his, he by his own.
This quiet we enjoy doth strike amazement in me, sure they have slain the body with the head, which makes this general calm.
Madam, it is more innocent, I had news brought by one I sent to learn that did astonish me, that the people knew no cause of grief or gladness, but rose to their affairs as in a time when neither enemies, nor holidays doe distract them from their labours. The Kings death was news this morning in the City, such care the Victors took least, the many headed but unbrained multitude, should pull a slaughter on them.
Their piety is too late, nor will it satisfy the gods, when they have spilt so much blood, that they will spill no more.
The Soldiers, though their charge was gone, kept their Guard Still, they of the party durst not disclose it for their own safety. Some there were which whispered it, but they seemed rather curious in the State, then those dull which knew it not.
Can a Kingdom fall, and the ruin not wake the people.
The messenger with this doubted what he had seen and heard; nor durst hee bee confirmed least his question might seem Treason, the first opening of it was by Procla∣motion, with such secrecy the plot was carried, that now it was a labour to discover it. After this Aratus, and the rest of the Conpirators went into the Market-place, where the •eople were commanded to attend by public voice, and there to the assembly when they had declared the Justice of their action, they produced the young Prince, which in the last alteration of the State was lost. But by all supposed to have been murdered, which that hee was the Kings
Son was confirmed by Aratus his conferring the King∣dome on him: himself being the next heir unto the Crown, if the Kings Issue failed. The Story of the Prin∣ces life bred much Love, and Pity, and his looks were able to have led them to a civil War, had he been Coun∣terfet.
This may be true, they who can believe there is a providence, may easily give credit to this Justice, our sins were mightier then our sufferings, and had wee a greater debt then life, we ought to pay it, my Miseries are due to me. I was a party, and enjoyed my Fathers violence.
Madam you are as Innocent, as at that time your age was, and only doe offend in your tears, and too much love, which on this occasion spent excessively, is not to greeve but to rapine, the King was old, and taking his latest leave, and was hastened only a little sooner to show the Justice of the gods; it is true, my Lord Timeus was young, yet had no patent for his life, but as all brothers, was an uncertain joy.
How ill these words become thee, and me to hear, think thou my Fathers faults can bring a comfort to me.
Madam, twould be no glory to you that an unworthy grief should be your death, your enemies no doubt are noble, sure they chose the crewellest to execute their business, and him though his churlish out-side promised not, we found more courteous, then they which doe profess it, his words were the laws of Complement. One that simpathizd in all your suffer∣ings, and though his manliness would not suffer him faint, he died together with you.
See who it is disturbs us. Who first?
Madam, I know not, nor did I ere see any like him, his beauties beyond all similitude, he speaks like the Soldier we were talking of, but him it cannot be, he was the terror, this the darling of mankind.
Whether wilt thou loose thy self in commendation? in men beauties the least part.
Madam, it appears so in him, yet such fea∣tures lay a necessity of nobleness on the mind, hee hum∣bly craves admittance, nor would hee take it before that it were granted.
Call him in, wee must endure their pleasures, it will not become our state to deny commands, much less when they entreat.
The Kingdom owes a Sacrifice for your life, all will joy to hear it, which had it failed, would have pulled more guilt upon us, than the sins of a whole age.
It is my fault you tell me of, and a great share of my grief that thus I stay to grieve.
My offensive tongue can utter nothing pleasing to you, so great are your misfortunes, and your honour so tender to you, the wounds that I have given you are beyond my cure.
Thou art not hee that gave um.
If my repentance can make me clear, I am not, other∣ways tic I that partially hearing my own cause, believed and judged for it, that hastily without examining what I did, de∣creed on all your woe.
Thart strangely altered, if thou be hee.
Nothing so strangely as my hopes are, at first they did appear in a divine and holy form, beyond all that I can fantasy, such a mind though ravished with the beauty, could not express then, and promised all should bee as heavenly as their shape, called me the instrument of Justice, the saver of my Country: set all the sins before me, I was to punish, told me there was no heaven, but what their clouds did veil; thus they crept into me, and won me with the most specious shows unto their service, on my bare re∣solution gave me part of that happiness I was to aim at. Then they clothed me in a body, foul as the Tra∣giddy I was to act, and made me dote on those deformities which all did loath, when they had bewitched me with these false, yet glittering names, and I obeyed their black commands, in a moment they changed into Repentance, a mournful figure: and sadly left me as they first did find
me, and as I now appear to you.
Thou had no cause for all that thou hast done, the faults were general, and concerned not thee, but thou were ready, for all ill; as well as goodness.
Yet, I had a cause (Pardon me that I say) and being that I saw not you before I did it, a just one. I lost a Sove∣reign, as ne'er to me in blood, as love; and if this cause may seem remote, I had a father murdered, whose death, as it be∣comes you thus to morn, so it did me for to revenge, my self was banished, loyalty was both our faults, and when they had heaped these sorrows on me, left me not one hope to lean on; they were not yet content with my despair, but sought my life, which was so poor, it could not be distinguished then from death; their injuries forced a new one in me, and blew the spark until the flame consumed um. But had I be∣held you before their danger, it would have turned my soul within me, changed me from a Foe unto their party. I cannot now believe I had a Justice, that there could bee any where you were iniurd in it, so much my love doth mount above my grief, that it makes me think I have only lost your father. Why weep you thus? Could that recall him, I'd bear you company, and break those stub∣borne gates, which from my childhood to this present hour hath kept them back, and spend my whole store here. But nothing can redeem him, let that common reme∣die which all apply, and helps all, give ease unto you, that nothing can redeem him. O learn a strength of me (that is the worst name for it) to bear a fathers loss. Let the inno∣cence of mine excuse my violence to yours, wee are the wret∣chedst two alive, made so by our selves, and can be only happy in our selves.
Oh, O.
Look on this, it may bring you comfort, with making out of love with the subject of your grief.
Ha?
Falls not my deformities away?
Pallantus? art thou Pallantus?
This is the first time I dared to be so.
And to all this villainy is signed Tymeus, could thou be thus cruel, thus basely cruel? unworthy brother. This hath made a mercy of all that hath befallen thee, thou dost deserve to have thy punishments out-live thee, to have engraven on thy Tomb, Here lies the treacherous, bloody, and to make thee monstrous, have thy age add to it, The young Timeus, that was subtle in his youth, what remains for me? that happiness the most wretched doe enjoy, is taken from me, a worthy cause of grief. Now I can neither live, nor die, without a stain.
Can you yet read a resemblance but of Justice in my Actions.
I know not how to answer. The tongue must bee as wicked as the will that did commit 'em, that can defend such deeds, had equity pointed all your Actions out, given you Rules to work by, told you how much, how far you must have gone, you could not have done more justly, there wants not any thing to crown your judgment but my death, the only issue of that sinful race. I have a long time loathed my life, and now I loath my self too. I find I know not how, a guiltiness within me, my fathers faults flow like his blood within me.
You are not at all elide unto his vices. Profane not then your goodness, it is a sin though you your self commit it; that you was a Princess was not your ambition but obe∣audience, you are only guilty in thinking of your self so, why then doe yue talk of death thus?
Can any life be noble after such losses?
My self, and the many which have suffered them doe think so, and are received of all with pity, and with honour, can you expect to find less humanity? you are not fallen so low, but the greatest Prince would be proud to do you service. Tic vainenes to profess, all civility is your due.
You reward me good for bad, before that I was cer∣taine of a cause, I slandered your virtues with those names foul deeds deserve, or a worse nature could invent, I falsely did apply to you that which was true in me.
You are a Judge too cruel to your self, I did deserve them at the least from you, it was a noble passion, and owed unto your friends, had they been worse, yet if you'd make a∣mends, where there was no wrong, give one comfort to your self, and I shall receive a million: ample and satisfactory.
You have given me many, more than I did hope, or wish for, and removed those killing doubts within me. I shall remember you no more the cause, but mourner of my fathers death. O that name of father, how ever thou deserve, thou dost deserve these tears of me.
Fall not to a relapse again, I dare not leave you thus.
You may there is no danger in it, they were but tears, and are already wiped away.
All about you does minister to your grief. The King would gladly comfort you, can you admit his visit?
I find hereafter that I may, yet tic too soon, Pray excuse me.
May peace and quiet return to their home, again to this place.
People Jove, Neptune, Apollo, and the gods of Greece; pre∣serve, and bless the King.
Through the happiness of my people, may I know no other joy or sadness, but what passes you, still the middle way of blessings twixt the gods and me.
The gods preserve your Majesty.
Sir, give us leave too, to ease our selves of that joy that doth oppress us, how hath these your virtues rewarded all our travel, made our deed honourable, and to our faith have joined discretion, in showing your self thus worthy of the place you are chose too, you have made it plain, as none ought, so none but your self can rule: what praises will after∣ages give us for this our loyalty? Had you been brought in with fire, with blood, with desolation, as you, with wonder, are given a gift of peace in the height of war, yet your endow∣mints would have made all innocent, and like a year of good things made the bad forgotten. Sir I hope you doe not think I flatter.
My Lord, I doe not, you that have so many virtues for to live by, need no dishonest Arts, nor by such ways seek to endear me, when you have already so really engaged me, that I am not able to give you a thanks, much less a return that's equal not to say if I could what I would do deserving you, and if you cannot in some kind reward your self, tic not in my power to doe it: These praises you have given me, doe tell, if not what I am, yet what I should be, they shall not make me proud, but good, nor will I glory in them, but make them still my aim. Isle first offer them to the gods, and humbly from their hands pray for them again, and at the second gift account them mine.
These men wrought hard too for, you.
My Lord, I know it, and could I thank them in it, Id stoop lower than the place from whence they raised me.
See Sir, what joys approach you, your royal Sister.
This way let me express a brothers love
Before I speak it—O my Sister, you're
My Throne, my Sceptre, and my Crown, or what
Is more dear and estimable with me,
The Grace, the Majesty that rises from them.
Pardon, if my much love make me a rude
Brother, and too credulously soon I
Proudly call my self by that honourable
Name, when so lately I had leave to do it:
Yet had it not been before declared
Unto me, I could not so easily
Consent to the belief; your face before
Did joy me, but then an Angel wore it,
And appeared more heavenly in your borrowed
Shape than in his own. I cannot blame the
Troubles of my former life, when I was
Barred from such felicities as these.
The gods were not so favourable to me
As in a Dream, faintly and a far off
To show the Blessings I was to hope, how
Gladly J would have changed my greatest joys
For such your troubles; This I may call my
Birth-day, I walked, and breathed, and spoke before.
But lived not till this hour. I had a being
Then, but not a life till now.
Tic so to both of us. And we will ever celebrate it, as the first day that we were borne Brother and Sister, before we were Strangers, now we are twins of love. My Lord, I un∣derstand the holy League betwixt you, and though I lay my hand thus on it, I Intend not for to break it, nor make a di∣vorse, though thus I part you: pardon me that I seem covetous of so great a happiness; and show a loathnes to part from it, be∣fore I have my self enjoyed it. She must sit some time my Queen, before she be crowned yours.
It were a creuelty to wish it other, I will not be guilty of such desires, if after a brother, I an humble servant shall be thought on, it is the time and place I am ambitious off. I will withdraw Sir, and though there is no happiness, I can enjoy so great, as beholding yours, I will deny my self the view.
O my Lord, say not so, though I am kind I am not fond, I'll give up my interest, or any thing rather then you shall leave us; I spoke it as a means to stay you make it not then a parting word: help me to persuade him.
My Lord.
Tic enough, I obey, my business is much below my love, and I will rather destroy the one, then offend the other, yet now I have granted I'll entreat again, as for a new favour. I may persuade, though deny nothing. My voyage was bound to another place, before happily I was cast upon this shore, and though I call my self a Prince, I am a servant to my employ∣mints, and obey the Commission of a Father, the expense, and expectation of a Kingdom,
My Lord, if your employments are so great, we would not make you guilty of a dishonourable Stay.
If with your leaves I shall depart, as a man that is pulled from his delights, with a strong hand, being freed recoils a∣gain to them, so speedy shall be my return, and in my absence account al violence, that does detain me, by that time too, your first troubles will be settled, &amp; you more fit to receive an idleman.
Our passion ought to give way unto your reason.
Aratus you are in a maze.
Ho, I must confess I am so. These Princes play their parts so rarely, that there is nothing left for us, but wonder.
My Lord, shall we entreat you to bear us company unto the Temple: thither we're a going; to give that perfection to our joys which yet is wanting, and for unusual benefits offer unusual thanks.
Sr, I humbly crave your pardon, that thus tardily af∣la the people and your enemies, I present my service to you, and wish you happiness.
I cannot be deceived, thou must be my Pallantus, ther's none can speak, or look like thee, thy least resemblance is a∣bove all men, it is no wonder to see thee Changed, thy deed has thus transformed thee, it sits upon thy brow and Casts a glory round about thy face.
Me thinks the times had such a visor on, and till this day showed not a true face, Sr, you shall see him each day make new discoveries of virtues.
My Lord, you promise too highly for me.
Thou look sadly after all thy Honours.
So me thought, what can be the cause? A King they soy's the best Physician for a discontent. If I cannot bring you comfort, I sacrifice in your behalf.
Sr, I bow to you. But that which is my grief will be no longer mine alone, then while I doe conceal it, all that hearsed will also have their share in it, it is a disease that good men catch merely by the fantasy. Justice could never yet with all her care so carve out her punishment, but that the In∣nocent were wounded with the blow, and felt the Judgement of another sin, while with her Sword she cuts off the offen∣ding parent the child is made an Orphan in the Cradle, and mourns hereafter because he had no fault.
Whether doth this sad beginning tend?
To this Sr, as we have slain withal religion a bloody tyrant, one that was greater in his sins then in the King∣dome he purchased by them. So too we have causeless slain the father of a Lady, that knew not so much guilt as to satisfy
her, why she lost him: for want of whose life she now con∣temnes her own, a Jewel of inestimable value with all that does behold it but her self, Sr, you cannot call her an enemy, though her goodness hath stood against you, and preserved her Father so many years in spite of all his sins, she ought to resist all piety if it were an enemy to her own.
Her cause of grief is mighty, and if care be not taken, as their faults have donne the rest, her goodness will destroy her, we that beheld the past deformities, can bear witness of her virtues, she was the only mine of honour, and when we have been wearied in seeking one grain, in her we could find a treasure, nor wast a beauty set of only with the blemishes of others, or foiled by general vices, but a real, and a native excellence, which as it could not be obscured with thickest darkness: so neither could it be outshind by other lights.
Her grief concerns us all, and ought to be considered before our joys, bear these tears to her, we wish the ex∣cesse of ours may lessen her's, and say that comfort which is left we will preserve, and carefully offer to her. Her brother with many of her friends are fled unto the Fort, and are there shut up — would I could give them life, what say you my Lord? may I doe this? Is not mercy in this place folly?
Sir, it is so at no time; you may doe this or any thing you have a mind too, even in your fantasiy there is a se∣cret council, and seeing that all your actions, nay all your pleasures, are in some exercise of virtue, we will not cross you, but make it our greater care to preserve you in them, and have a more diligent eye least your pity may prove cruel to your self
You have given me resolution, hast presently unto 'em (it was their desire this morning to have conference with one of note) and if you find 'em fit for mercy or to be made fit, offered to um.
No answer yet returned?
Not yet, Sir.
One Look out again.
Polyander, I remember I heard thee once say, when I condemned thee for thy smiles, that if I had a cause thou would frown, why look thou sadly then? our fortunes ought rather to stir our anger than our grief.
Were they Sir, my misfortunes alone, and not yours, I would not now fall below my words, the greatest should not move any affection in me, unless it were some glory.
Theres now one arrived Sir, who certainly hath brought us news.
Let us seat our selves before he enters, that he may see on what strength we doe demand, every man put on a face of mirth, now we are at a Banquet that will refresh us after all our toil.
Now retire, but on the least call bee ready for to enter.
Who's this? doe any of you know him?
Not I my Lord.
Sir, you're welcome, but wee invite you only to look on, these cates are not easy of digestion; the gods give not life more certain than this gives death, doe you think you can endure the sight? would Aratus himself were here, that once hee might bee satisfied with a spectacle of blood. You look pale on us already, sure they have a plot upon you, and sent you hither to see your death, had they none to send us to behold our resolutions but such a trifle.
What shape can I put on, and thou not injure me in it. I never yet appeared to thee in any form, but that I suffe∣red by thee, at first I was thy fear, as all that were innocent did fright thee, because thou were guilty I was banished, not to remove me, but my death, which with treachery thou soughtst. And when I had, with wonder escaped thy intone∣ded mischiefs, by chance thou would have slain me when thou had no cause of hatred, my disguise wronged thee not, it was as much a stranger to thee, as an inhabi∣tant
of remotest Africa —
I know thee now, thou needs not further de∣clare thy self, and you are come past all my wishes to satisfy my revenge.
Hold, I came to bring peace and not destruction, doe you yet perceive how vain is all your malice?
If thou art that man thou would seem to bee, and equally with me dost honour a dead father, yet (setting by these helpers) let us singly try our hatred; the grant of this will please above all our demands, I had rather see thee dead, or by this means not see thee live, then again be Master of the fortunes I have lost, I am unfit for life. I shall but curse the givers of it.
If I thought so, I'd grant to your request, and kill you; I could doe it, I have strength, and justice enough to make me able, but you are not so bad, as you suppose, these are despairing, and not malicious thoughts; yet ere I go one way or other Isle give you satisfaction, I came for that intent. Let me see your Articles —
And if these may not be granted, that thus accompanied, wee may depart the Isle. How poor are these requests? without more commission I dare grant you greater. Why, these are de∣mands within the compass of a subjects breast, deceive not your selves, you were not so safe in your own reign, as in your e∣nemies. The State is not translated from one tyranny to another, but to a kingdom. A Prince governs now, which is the name of mercy, as well as power, which he truly knows, and in his first deeds desires to show on you; he does not think he's then like Jove when he can thunder, but when he can hold it in, not when he is the voice of death, but when he sits harmless, with the power of death about him. Revenge, Torments, Executions, are not expressions of a king, but a destruction, he rivals not the im∣mortal powers in Temples, statues, adoration, but transcendent
virtues, divine performances, these are the additions by which he climbs heaven, and appears a god on earth.
Why should I bee a stranger to these virtues, more than this man? I was not borne for less things than he, certain∣lie when nature made this frame, she intended it for the noblest actions.
Have you yet resolved on any thing?
If you will go on, I can hear you still.
I will go on in mercy, tic my commission, and if you will not dam against its streams, it may flow to you: yet the way is even; why look you strangely at the word? tic no wonder to the sender of it, nor they which live about him. Though the dangers may seem great, it were not worthy of the high name of his mercy, if the offence were not such. This is but the least of his expressions, that his enemies were courted for to live, but presently you think tic not to save you, but to defer your death. A vain thought, when can it be done more safely, and more justly, you are now as far from those to help you, as to pity you. None but himself has any care of you. Tic true, there is a Lady that had a share in you, but with your honour you threw her off, nor can you claim an interest, when you have neglected her in all her miseries; not in your flight, your articles, no, not in your thoughts providing for her. And, had she not fallen into the hands of enemies that were servants too, to honour; you had thrown away a Jewel that had a first thought, even among the gods.
O Sir, you have underminde my pride, and removed me from that advantage ground I stood on, to my own low height. These your last words comes near unto me, and makes me with reverence believe all that you have spoken; before your virtues only stirred my hate and envy, this deed first taught me to admire, and cannot doubt there is a want of any nobleness, when you have shown such passionate care in preserving a distressed Virgin, whom I durst not think of, least I should think too, of her dishonour.
Sir, keep in your joy, wee doe not think our selves such high deservers, in doing that which barbarous people would have done, they which would have burnt the Temples, would have kneeled to her, and what duties they neglected to
the Altar, would have paid at her feet. Think you wee could desire to save such enemies as you, and not adore an enemy of her virtues.
Give me not scorn and honour in the same breath, you have made me leave my self, hate me not now I am nothing.
Now I meet you: and first give me leave with this to throw away all danger that does threaten you.
Next my request is (if you dare trust me) to leave this place, and presently go with me whether I shall lead you.
I breath, am warm—all alive—The Sun shines too, I have not heard of any of his rays in the other world. Tic earth I tread on at least, if I am not mounted higher, and yet I hope I am not in heaven, for let them say what they will, tic to bee dead to be there; and I like not the society, though they be Angels; what doe I see? I begin to mis-doubt, I doe behold some such shapes here. Faces heavenly, and di—Di∣vine, or else my fantasy abuses me, if I be alive and on the earth, then there was poison in that cup. A pox o my curiosity,
 what need I have cared whether I had been, so long as I found my self well? I should have got fearful honour if I had drunk my share. By this I see it was not a dream, nor swooned I was in, but all true story. I did not think before, it had been in the power of all the Kings in the world to have given me life, when I was yet living; but these thoughts shall pass. And now Isle look before me presently, Isle to the new Court, and though the King be changed, not despair to be the same man.
My father, my brother, why doe you fly me? your welcome, and loved shapes. O my sad fantasy!
Madam, The King wishes you joy and comfort.
The King, what King? oh.
And desires to visit you.
Return all duty and service to the King.
Joy attend you Madam.
My Comforter.
Your unfortunate one, to see that little he had wrought with much care so soon decayed again, yet I hope I shall this time be more happy in my cure, before I brought but Phy∣sick for your grief, but now I bring you joy it self, it makes me bold and assures me of my welcome, though thus without leave I enter. He needs no ceremony that can say your brother lives.
My brother? O where? and how? alas it cannot be, why doe ye mock my sadness? thus such false hopes as these make more wretched.
I dare not play with holy things, nor would I defer your hopes, much less delved 'em; he came along with me, and stayed but till I had thus prepared his way: I know to have given him you, as you imagine, had been twice only to have taken him away, no danger threatened him but his own discontent. The King among his first cares provided for his safety: he shall himself confirm my words.
Pray stay, I doe believe and ask you pardon, but now I am certain of him. I would not at first show any signs of joy, I have thought a way to entertain him, Rodeo, fetch the paper that lies within upon the Table, so: now Sr, you may admit him.
Here let me alone be happy, without a covetous wish of what I have lost. O Eudora! wonder not at my excessive passion, misery lays stronger bonds of love then nature, and they are more one whom the same misfortune joined together, then whom the same womb gave life.
But stay my brother, I knowledge that you say most true, and was no less surprised at first to hear of this your safety, for when I once believed you dead that you were alive again, was a greater good then I could give credit to. But when I consider the cause of my greese and gladness: and
found it was merely the name of brother, nay not so much the dishonour of our name only, with tears I threw a∣way, what with tears I sought for, look on this unwor∣thy man.
Here you are dissected, and see if I ought to morn for any part being lost, or rejoice for any that safe in the whole Anatomy.
O be not too severe, but suddenly give that joy you have prepared for him.
Now I meet your love, pardon me my brother, I was to rejoice at this your sadness, before I could share with you in another joy.
Madam, the King's hard by.
The King?
Yes, he sent before that he would visit me, what will you doe?
Not see him willingly at this time.
Sir, you need not, he understands the nature of, your losses, and will not expect so suddenly to see you.
Stay within till he be gone.
Madam, I'll meet the King, and meet upon him in.
Did you say this was the King's mercy?
I did Madam.
And does she know of it yet?
She lives only by the favour.
Madam, fall not so low, we have already too much dejected you, and would our selves gladly submit in recompense, you're still in the esteem of all, that which you have been, not by the sins of others but by your own
endowments, admired Princess, and may a curse light, light on those, who shall dare to unthrone a Majesty which the gods themselves have seated; we are come confident in these your virtues, that you will not disdain when nobly we endeavour it, to have your grief lessened by your enemies, Madam, though unpropper, yet we are willing comfor∣ters, and have as true a sense of what you suffer as those, who in a nearer name doe share their losses with you.
Sr, admit me to kneel before you, I ought not to stand an equal height with Majesty, and virtue, so much a∣bove me, what undeserving name is due to me, when you are pleased to call your self an enemy, if you are one, it is to your self, in thus preferring your mercy before your safety, you have given my brother life, to bring your own in danger, and removed my grief, which hereafter may be the cause of it to your self. Sr, think me unworthy, but not a scorner, of these favours, were my sorrows hoover. (Thus offered) it were but religion to bow, and to receive 'em,
You make us all happy, and show a virtue above your sex, in being able so much to love, and yet to loose a Father, if still you can resist this passion, and rejoice with us, with you we will observe your days of mourning. We are now going to pay some Funeral duties to our dead predecessor, for your sake so we will ever call him. Spare these tears, and we will weep them for you, morn all as if we had lost a general parent.
Sir, there is much joy in them, which the softenesse of your words, and not my grief causes to flow from me.
Fame, thou spokst loudly of these Ladies, and yet thy voice was narrow in their Praise.
I have past hitherto, and perceive no great alteration, I thought the subversion of a State would have made such a clatter among the houses, and ther's no such matter, it has not changed a suite of hangings here, yonders our Princess too, I am among friends, now fortune direct me, which is the King — The least change that ever I saw, nay then I perceive I may doe even what I list.
My Lord Comastes?
Your servant my Lord, I hope you have forgot all those little unkindness that past betwixt us, and will speak a noble word in my behalf unto the young King.
Ha, ha, ha, would thou be fool again.
No my Lord, you know I was never called so in the last reign.
Ha, ha, ha, why I tell thee the King's too serious, he no∣ver laughs nor smiles, but very seldom, and then it is still at something excellent, he hates a jest, look, twice he hath cast his eye upon thee, and yet keeps his countenance, despair of ever pleasing him, ther's no mirth that thou can make, worthy to be compared with this thy misery.
My Lord, who's that?
One Sr, that was master of the dead King's mirth, he never laughed without his allowance. It was in his power to have jested any head off in the whole Kingdom, but I think he was never guilty of any other sin, but Lux∣ury.
What does he expect?
To hold the same place under you.
Sr, we understand you, and your desires, go leave the Court upon your life, be not seen in it after this day, and look hereafter warily to your actions, if you deserve a light judge∣meant you shall feel the Heaviest
Stay my Lord, you have doomed him as if you had been witness of his follies, and if there were not hopes, that he might redeem hereafter what he has so ill spent, he does deserve a greater punishment; I beseech you Sir, let me entreat for him, he is yet young, and if he have leave, may be virtuous, continue as you have begun, to change the men, and not destroy 'em: he thrust him∣self with confidence on your mercy, let it not be said that was a Snare to any, besides you have made this place a Sanctuary to all those who can claim an interest in that ex∣cellent Lady.
My Lord, I would be ever taught thus by you. Sir, I recall what I have said, and wish to see those virtues we see in you.
Isle not despair to be Master of them:
 It was the desire of favour with my King, that made me what I was before, and shame now for to remember. But seeing I am to please another way, and make virtue my endeavour, un∣wearied in those ragged ways, Isle toil to gain your smiles.
My Lord, do'e still intend to leave us so suddenly, as tomorrow. If I durst presume so much of you• ill entertain∣meant, I would persuade you to a longer stay.
Sir, I have found a royal welcome, such as cannot be bettered but by your own wishes, which are the only things above your actions. Yet ere I go, I have a request to you, but it is such as I must not receive, unless another will bee content to ask it for me, you are the man, my Lord, and your company I desire, which if I can obtain, I dare promise to my self a vi∣ctorious enterprise.
Sir, you much honour me, and entreat me to that I am most ambitious of, my will I freely offer, but the greater part is wholly devoted to your service Sir, and none besides ought to dispose of it.
I thus give it with the rest, by this request, My Lord, I perceive you'll keep your word, and suddenly return, you would not else at once bereft us of your self, and so near a servant.
How gladly I would think my self so much con∣cernd, as to ask a leave of you, but I have ever made my self a stranger to you or whats worse, a known enemy, and can expect only ill wishes from you.
Sir, I think not so, you have deserved better from me, and if I give you not a leave, tic because I am loath to have you go, it was you confirmed my life, when I thought it not in the power of Art, or heaven to have done it, and that before I made not these large expressions, it was because they then became me not, if I had owed less, I would have said more.
You have given me a happiness, which neither envy, malice, nor the worst of fortune can take from me. I stand the only man above the stroke of Fate, may I hope to see that joy dwell in your face again, which I was never yet so blessed as to behold?
You may.
And will you leave off these mourning Habits?
I will: I will doe that that's noble.
I hope I understand you, and that I may yet expect a happiness, equal to the happiness of this day. Hitherto our Kingdom hath been like the Kingdom of the gods. Felicity upon felicity, joy crow'nd with joy; and though this day concluded what it hath begun. I have reigned a perfect reign, having beheld in few hours the numerous changes of an age.
Sacred Peans to Mars sing
Notes of Triumph, not of woe,
Hence your Ewe, and Cypress fling,
Who adorns a Trophy so?
These are the spoils of our great Enemy,
Hang Garlands on them of the Laurel tree.
Hence impure and bloody voice,
Far be from our Mysteries,
Bidentalls are Joves proper choice,
Holier then the Sacrifice.
Each unskillfull hand, and rude,
At his Altar dares obtrude.
Touch not then with lips profane
What Heavens Fire hath purifide,
Whose tears have washd away his stain,
Whose black deeds in his blood are died.
Hee for his sins hath paid, with death and sorrow,
His Credits more that pays, than doth not borrow.
Hee for his sins, &amp;c.
None hear after of thy faults,
But that thou ought's
To die, remembered be,
The rest shall sleep with thee.
Least our too partial favour this way bent,
Excuse the ill, and blame the innocent.
Least our too partial favour, &amp;c.
GReat and good Powers,
That from your reared, and exalted Throne,
Have deigned to visit your Creation,
And bless what once you fashioned; we know
That what you please to breath on, and bid grow,
Shall once prove fruitful, and its glory spread
To many branches, from one single bed;
Still teeming new, and Noble Families,
Great as the Stock from whence themselves did rise.
Tic true; but this is future, and far less
Then this their present richer happiness,
Which now they have enjoyed, by your long pains,
And mercy showed unto these humble strains.
And since their service and their thanks doe please,
They'll count their joyfull'st issues such as these.

HA, louder a little; so, that burst was well:
Again, ha, ha; house, house your heads you fear▪
Stroke mortal fools; when Calibs consort plays
A Huntse-up to her, how rarely doth it languell
In mine ears? these are mine Organs,
The Toad, the Bat, the Raven, and the fell whisling bird,
Are all my anthum singing Choristers;
Such sapless roots, and liveless witherd woods
Are pleasanter to me, than to behold the jocund
Month of May, in whose greene head of youth,
The amorous Flora strowes her various flowers,
And smiles to see how brave she has de•knight her girl:
But pass we May, as game for fangled fools,
That dares not set a foot in Arts dark secret,
And bewitching path as Calib has.
Here is my mansion, within the rugged bowels of this Cave,
This c• egg, his Cliff, this den, which to behold
Would freeze to Ice the hissing trammels of Medusa:
Yet here enthroned I sit, more richer in my spells
And potent charms, than is the stately mountain
Queen, dressed with the beauty of her sparkling jams,
To vie a lustre against the heavenly Lamps:
But we are funk in these Antipodes, so choked
With darkness in great Calibs Cave, that it can
Stifle day, it can and shall, for we doe loath
The light, and as our deed es are black we hug the night.
But wheres this boy, my George, my love, my life,
Whom Calib lately dotes on more than life:
I must not have him wander from my love, further than
Sommons of my eye or beck can call him back again:
But it is my fiend gotten, &amp; deformed issue that misleads him,
For which, Isle rap him in a storm of hail, and dash him
Against the pavement on the rocky den:
He must not lead my joy astray from me;
The Parents of that boy begetting him,
Begot and boar the issue of their deaths, which done,
The child e Istole, thinking alone to triumph in his death,
And bathe my body in his popular gore:
But Dove-like nature favoured so the child, that Calibs killing
Knife fell from her hand, and stead of stabs I kissed
I kissed there I leapt boy, and since have brought him up,
Cope mate, and fellow with my own sweet son:
And now the boy desires to know, what Calib
Hath so long concealed from him, his parentage,
Which still I must, as I have done, put off,
And cast some pleasing game to file that question
Out of his thoughts:
His heart soars high, fame on his temple plays,
And Calib fears her death by Autumes day,
For which my light winged spirit of the Air
Grand Tarpax, prince of the gristy North:
What, ho Tarpax, obey my charms,
And with the steel tipped pinions of thy wings,
Cut through the Clouds and fly unto thy Calib.
No more my Calib, see thy Tarpax comes,
More swifter than the motive of an eye,
Mounted on wings swift as a thought
I fly unto my Mistress: now, what would thou?
Be full resolved of fear, struck sudden doubts:
Age makes my span of days seem but an inch,
And snows, like cold December, on my heart:
See how I tremble Tarpax, as doth the listening Hart,
When he hears the feathered arrows sing his funeral dirge.
Name what afflicts my love.
But will my Tarpax tell me?
Both must and will.
When must I dye then? when must Calibs life
Be back surrenderd by the hands of death?
Age can no longer to me subsistence give:
My Taper hath watched long, when will it out?
Perform no flattering part for to delude me:
When? ha, when my Tarpax?
Fates keep unknown from spirits those last times
Of days and hours: yet can I riddle out a prophefie,
Which if my Calib well observe and keep
Thy time may farther run, death stay his sleep.
Say on sweet Tarpax.
Whilst Calib in her powerful hand
Holds fast her powerful art,
So long may Calib by her power,
Command Death hold his Dart.
But when fond Love by dotage shall,
Blindfold wise Calibs eyes,
With that great power she did command,
The great Enchantress dies.
Ha, ha, ha; and when will that be Tarpax?
Vanish like smoke, my fear, come kiss me my Love,
Thou hast earned thy breakfast Chuck; here suck thy fill.
Illo ho, ho Illo.
What mortall's that disturbs us?
Shall I blast him?
Hold my Love, it is Suckabus our son; fall off.
The fool ne'er saw his Father yet,
Make us acquainted.
So ho, ho; Mother, Mother.
Defend me Tarpax: what doth aisle the boy?
Ale? no mother; I am neither in Ale nor Beer,
Nor no such graine-tub, peasanticall Element:
My Hogshead runs Elegant, and your Nursling broached it.
Hath George done this? Slave, thou lie:
Go call him hither.
Mother, no more such words, my blood's up,
And I am apt for Rebellion; and you know
A Soldiers Latin for the Lye, is the stab.
Hold villain, what resist thy mother?
Oh Lord, help me George, George, nursling George.
Villain come back,
l'le toss thee in a whirlwind in the ayre else:
Come back I say, and learn to put on duty.
There stands your sire, you Cur; kneel for a benediction.
Hold your hand Mother, I have no mind to be made
a Buzzard, nor fly like an Owl in the ayre, or mount like a
Kite over Towns and Cities for carrion, without any bi∣ding
place. Where my father is I know not, but the like∣ness
of our persons shows me a Pig of your own farrow.
I am thy Father Suckabus.
You may be the Devil for ought I know,
For you are neither like my Mother, nor me.
Cast fear and wonder off my boy,
This is thy Father, and a potent spirit,
Prince of the grisly North, that muffles us, and ties,
And also unties the fiery rude band og Bores:
Then, as becomes thee, show thy reverence to him.
Why now I am satisfied; could not you have said
this before, Pray father, pray the devil to bless me, and make
me a man like my mother: So be it.
Our blessings on our Child.
But doe you hear Father, if you be a Prince, I must
be a Lord, or an Earl, or a devilish Duke, or somewhat.
Thou art by birth Duke of Styx, Sulphur, &amp; Helvetia.
O brave, o brave, Duke of Styx, Sulphur, &amp; Helvetia?
Pray father, what Title hath my Mother?
Queen of Limbony, and Duchess of Witchcordia.
I thought so, I told my Mother she looked like a
Witch a great while ago: a pox on it, I knew it: but doe
you hear mother, were not you one of the Cats that drunk
up the Millers Ale in Lancashire Wind-mills?
Peace sir, begone, go seek out George,
And bring him to me presently.
Must I call George again? Then (I fear) I shall get
another broken pate, before I get a plaster for this: for wee
doe nothing in the world but fight; he kills me two or three
times in an hour: he plays a Knight in Armour, and I a
Lady; that he fights with a great Tree for, and wins me
from it: then I play a Giant, and he kills me; then a Boar,
and he kills me again; then an enchanted Castle, and then my
stones go to 'rack; then a Lyon, and then hee pulls out my
heart.
Then an Ass sir.
Right, and there he kills me again:
But Mother, George is come, I hear his Horn.
Into my Cave my Tarpax, take my some with thee,
I'll have a little conference with George.
Welcome my George, my joy, my love, my life,
My souls sole darling, and my fancies dotage
Commander of great Calib, and her power;
Why does those eyes, the lights of Calibs Cell,
Shoot their illustrious splendour on the Earth,
And not shine upwards as they were wont to doe?
Why doe those Arms thus twine into a locke,
As if despair had seized upon thy thoughts,
And b'lasted quite the flower of thy youth?
Speak my loved Nursling, can Calib give thee ease?
You may, you can.
Why then besure I will:
Let day-light shine then, and expel those clouds,
For here I vow, by that infernal power,
By whom I may command to grant what ere it be,
Thy full demand, not dangering of our self.
I wish it not, but so much love
To my kind Nurse, as shows a tender mother
To her Child, when she first blesses him
After a long absence.
This stronger ties our love; thy demand?
Then thus: Although I want no Parent in your self,
By your kind fostring and indulgence:
Be not offended, that I here renew my former suite,
Which though so long put by,
Your Oath stands now unto me for to grant.
Say on.
The knowledge of my Parents, that by them
I may not be a stranger to my self.
That string's not out of Tune, yet still it is touched,
And I no longer now can put him off:
George, you shall, your suit is granted;
But this condition I must have ye s•ale to,
And then we will deliver eiders deed.
It is granted.
Then know sweet boy that Calib loves thee dear,
Witness my pity on thee at thy birth,
When thy adultrous mother cast thee off,
As fearful least their close lascivious sin
Should play the tell-tale of them to the world:
Wherefore thy Mother strove by Art to kill thee,
Even in thy first conception, but still my charms
I mixed amongst her drugs, whose greater poison
Proved thy Antidotes, kilt what should kill,
And in the Casket safe preserved my gem.
O my unhappy Fate! am I a Bastard then?
Gived not so gross a title, but list a little more:
Thy mother saw the more she strove to kill,
The more thou quicknest, and grewst stronger still,
Gave ore the child-bane pills, and from the worlds
Quick censuring, screend up the knowledge by obscurity,
Save unto me the closet of her thoughts,
And an attendant hand-maid. But to be brief,
Maturity being to ripeness grown,
I plaide Luci•aes part, and snatched thee
From the knife, aimed at thy heart; thus having saved
Thee, going from thy unnatural Damme
I bore thee to lifes safety; and since
Thou hast a tongue to speak how I have used thee.
Both Nurse and Mother, my duty,
With my thanks gives it acknowledgement:
But could my mother, finding painful throws,
Through which I hastened to give her ease,
Before my tender eyes did op to see the world,
Seek to entomb me up again?
Urge it no more she did.
Were they ashamed of their own work?
How were they titled, Base or Noble pray?
Base, and Noble too:
Both base by thee, but noble by descent;
And thou got base, yet moist thou write true gent:
No further satisfaction seek to know,
I call thee George, thy sur-name I must not show.
I have enough:
Ime glad I soar above the common wing,
Both base and noble too, they are bloods that keep
Two currents in my veins, but they must meet:
Smile honour and assist me,
Let me thy foote-steppes trace,
My noble deeds shall purge the blood that's base.
I fear I have said too much:
Come George for me.
I am ready mother; farewell the name of Nurse:
Speak, and I grant.
Then thus my George;
Thou yet art but an April tender bud:
Before that Month in thee be quite expired
Look for thy Mother here, an Autumn shaken
Leaf, and fallen to the earth, dead and forgot;
Now if thou love me, as I hope thou dost,
Stay but a little, next puff of wind makes me but kiss the earth,
And thou hast freedom; say, is it done?
My tears deliver't as my deed; it is done.
That's my sweet boy; and now to give thee further
Trial of my love, to thee alone the ransom shall belong
Of six obscured Champions in my cave, a sight
Thou never yet behold, my loving boy:
Tarpax bring forth those daring Champions
That were sent to kill great Calib,
And confound my charm.
Oh they are come: This is, my George, the fiery youth of Spain,
Called by the name of Iames: this Anthony of Italy:
This the brave Northern Knight, brave Andrew:
This Irelands Patrick: Britains David this:
And this the lively brisk cross capering French man Denis:
There take 'em to thee, use em as thou please;
Their armour and their weapons too are thine:
With which the scare-crowes came to fright us hence.
A sight would pierce a rock,
Goodly shaped persons, how I suffer for them?
But yet I must dissemble love and pity:
Are these 'em Mother? take them away,
They have been used too well; we'll think
Of harder pain and courser fare.
Thats my best George, take this charming wand;
Make trial of it then against this rock,
And with once waving it about thy head,
The mortise sinnewed stones shall cleave in sunder,
And gape like an insatiate grave, to swalow up what's thereon:
And doe but wish that it should close again,
Give but the other wave, and it is done:
There George I give it thee.
Thanks loving Mother.
Ha, it was Tarpax voice.
Fool, fool, Calib fool.
O my fear struck shaken heart.
What ails my mother?
Nay, nothing George: I must a while retire;
Be not you absent, a minutes
Space shall send me back again.
Though borne in bastardy, how happy was my fate,
In this good Calib; she's cruel unto others,
And few or none, whose foot doe chance to stray
Near the abiding of this great enchantress,
But deaths therein, to which they travail to.
A world of fancies dance about my brains.
And shapes me thoughts, which says I am no bastard:
Or what a war my self hath with my self,
And spurs me on to know what Fate denies me:
She told me too my Parentage was noble,
But name and Title she obscured from me:
How, or which way; oh I hav't, I will make trial
Of her sorcery: she said, what I desired to see or know,
This rod wave about my head should amplify:
Take courage George then, though they loved not thee,
Yet thus I doe desire their shapes to see.
Defend me all you ministers of grace.
J answer to that name: say on.
Then first to settle these thy wandering thoughts,
Thou art our son, truly legitimate;
Vomit the thought of Bastard, thou art none,
But heir to the Earl of Coventry.
O say, resolve me complete shadows of my Parents,
Upon my knees with Reverence I bow, tell me, oh tell me,
Since from your airy shapes I hear both sound &amp; voice
Add to distressed George a second birth and life,
In saying that ye live.
O no.
O No.
How soon fresh flowers fall, which now did grow.
Delay not long thy Parents rest my George,
Hear a brief story, and then send me hence:
Know then that cursed Calib, which now dotes on thee,
Did not at first doe so, but poisoned us,
And fled with thee away unto that Cell of honour,
Secured by her enchantments from all danger,
Then his intents not satisfied with both our lives,
Began to prey on thine; but pity, spite of Hell,
Flew from thine eyes, and overthrew the Murdresse black in∣tent▪
That since you have lived in love and favour with her.
But now be wise, her power is in thy hand.
Oh then be swift, be swift to execute
Thy Parents murder on the damned witch:
That done, redeem the Christian Champions, go with them,
Her Cave is not unfurnished of rich Arms;
Fame holds the Christian Trophy thou must bear,
Englands Red Cross shall George, then St. George wear,
That summoned us, back sends us: George waft thy wand.
Farewell.
Farewell dear son.
Go rest, go rest sweet shadows, be no more disturbed,
All my sick passions, that late were scattered with
My troubled thoughts, are re-united in this little Orb:
But for this Calib, this accursed Hag,
Whose deeds are blacker than her tempting tutors,
Revenge hath filled her cup unto the brim,
And she shall quaff her foul souls black perdition.
Protract not George, we rest not till she dies.
No more, no more, revenge like lightning flies.
Shield me my Tarpax from the furious boy,
That hurries to my death more swifter
Than the hot fiery Steeds, that threw
Ambitious Phaeton from his pride: defend me then.
Calib, we cannot.
Thy power's extinct, and thou thy self must fall:
Did dotage on thy Deaths-man blind thee so,
To give thy safe protection and thy power to him?
Now armed with both, comes to destroy thee.
Fie Calib, fie, could not the Riddle which I read to thee,
When thou desired'st the knowledge of thy doom,
Forewarn thee then? Prepare, he comes.
Hell and confusion.
I, confusion comes.
How comes he? armed?
One hand thy power, the other bears a Falchion.
Oh gentle Tarpax, numb his senses so,
That he forget the power of his wand, we may be safe.
He comes, he comes.
Circle me round, and keep him off a while,
Whilst on the outside of this Rock I climb
Up by the crags unto the top.
Have I found thee witch?
I'll not be long from thy accursed heart;
The bastard, hag, is proved legitimate heir
To great Coventry, whom thou, thou devil,
Worse than those that guard thee, murdered.
But in despite of all thy hellish host,
Who faint against the justice of my cause,
I thus assay thee.
Thus we defend her.
Fight sweet spirits, fight, kill but that boy,
I'll let op Rivers of my blood to you,
And you shall drink your fill.
This instrument is not of power to deal with fiends.
Destroy him Tarpax, let not the villain breath.
I will make trial of this other tool.
Calib farewell, we can no longer stay,
We'll meet thee strait in flames, our jovial day.
Now cleaves the Rock, and I doe sink to Hell;
Roar wind, clap Thunder for great Calibs knell.
Sink down unto thy black infernal fellows hag.
This messenger assures me Heaven's pleased,
At whose sweet ayre the other ayre dissolves,
And all the black enchanted vapours hell cast up,
Descends to make her night more horrid there:
And now those woods that were so long choak't up
With Hells black sulphur and disastrous fumes,
Give welcome to the golden eye of day,
As a most cheerful and blessed visitant.
But stay a little, all is not firmly finished,
There is an unlickt lump of hers remains,
Suckabus her son: oh are ye there sir? Come, prepare ye.
Alas sir, what to doe?
To make a brand for the devils fire:
I'll cut your throat, and send you thither strait.
I doe beseech you sir, have no compassion on me,
And let me live with you:
There be Cooks enough in hell without me,
Their roast-meate is too hot for my fingers,
I shall never be able to like 'em; I had rather be
Your Scullion here, than Cooke Ruffian there:
I beseech you take pity on me a Motherless child,
Let me live with you sir, and Suckabus shall suck
Out his own heart to doe you any pleasure.
Well, take thy life, be faithful in my service,
Thy Mothers sin hath perished with her life:
Learn thou by her example then to shun it,
Be my attendant still and follow me.
I thank you sir, and for this life that you have saved,
Think it no life, for it is not; you may command,
And have it when you please; and I'll be as firm to you
As fire in water, as tender as the Fox o'er the Goose,
Or the Wolf o'er the Lamb; when you are most
In any danger, I'll be farthest off from ye;
Disobey your commands, and keep your secrets like a crier,
Or any thing else I can doe for you.
Well sir, we'll construe your good meaning,
I long to be in armour, mounted on a Steed,
To scuffle with black danger and her bug-beares:
First Isle set free those Knights, and cherish them;
Then see how long lost armour sits upon their backs,
That done to Arms, to hunt out Honours game,
For George is no George till I purchase fame.
Illo hist, Suckabus come hither.
I cannot; doe not you see my Master gone before?
I am now bound, and must obey, must follow after:
You have fried my mother in stekes by this time,
And you would have my Lamb stones and sweet-bread
To inch out your commons.
Come back, or I will force thee.
Sfoote Isle set all the prentices in the house about
your ears if you strike me, besides the Law my Master shall
take of ye; but now I remember Club Law is better: for
they love your Angels so well there's no pleading against you.
My Angels slave?
Why any bodies, yours, or the Devils, ell's one
to them, so they have 'em: but now the humour has took me
to come back; what is your pleasure?
Only a short remembrance of your duty,
With an acknowledgement you have a father, and al's done:
My blessing shall attend thee.
Let me first know, whether I have a mother or no,
for mothers have so often belide the childes father, that I am
very doubtful whether ever I had any.
Cast off those doubts then, I am thy Father,
was thy mother, was? nay is,
Though strange it seems to thee,
Earth was too base to hold so great a Queen:
Did thou not note the love twixt George and she?
Nay truly Father I did note something, but I can∣not
say directly what it was.
It was love, great love betwixt 'em boy,
But in the bottom of their honey cup I mixed
A little dregs of bitter gall, which straight
Converted all their love to hate, and in that hate,
That George, thy master, sought her death:
But by my power I clave the rock in twain,
Whose careful subjects underneath were ready
To catch her in their arms, who when they had her;
Those flames ascending up, which put such horror into her,
Were Bone-fires of their joy and loving hearts.
O that I were there to leap over one of them.
I, they would make thee leap.
And I am old dog at that in faith.
And now thy mother's in my Kingdom, boy,
By this time crowned with their applausive
Shouts, Queen of Helvetia.
O my sweet Mother:
Well, Isle but serve my time out, and come home to you: you
have staid me some thing long Father, I must go eat a dish
of Trotters to my breakfast, I shall hardly overtake my
Master else.
Observe this fatherly instruction first:
Thou art to travail with thy Master, boy,
Through perilous adventures, all sorts of
Countries, fashions, garbs and manners,
Thou must observe thou art effeminate in shape and favour,
Just thy sweet mothers, sweet hued fair Effigies,
Framed to make women do ate and fly
To thee; refuse 'em not, take all that comes,
Increase the world like one of Tarpax sons.
As long as my back will hold let me alone.
And when thou come in company of men,
What ere they be, refuse not what they do;
If they quaff Wine by Gallons, do so too:
Or cloud the air with India's precious weed,
Kindle that fuel; let thy Chimney smoke too.
Like a Fury.
Swallow no wrong, stab if they give the lie;
Swear and forswear; the rules of gallantry.
If ever a Knight of the Post mend me for that,
hang me.
Lye to get profit; borrow, pay no debts,
Cheat and purloin, thy are gaming Decors bets.
If Cottington out doe me Isle be whipped.
Love ease and sleep, it ripes the memory:
But in each sleep have several sleepers by thee:
Females, no men, I charge thee on my blessing.
Isle take my choice here if you will.
No, no, go travail farther first;
These rules if thou observ'st and keep,
Thou soon shalt see thy mother.
It shall be my daily practice Father:
Farewell if I see you no more.
O we must meet again ne'er feare't:
Obey but my commands; so farewell son,
Blessing on my boy.
Father farewell:
I were an ungracious boy if I would not obey.
Now wenches look to yourselves.
Renowned Christian Knights welcome to liberty,
The black Enchantress, by whose hell-bred power,
Bright honour was subdued, and pinniond up dark,
Is now her self fettered and manicl'd in the store-house
Where her accursed crimes can never
Pay the sum that ransoms her.
Our loves, our honours, and our lives
Rest pawns to George of England for this favour.
Which we acknowledge with a general thanks.
Thus doe I cancel all those bonds but love,
There rest my debtor still, as I will yours:
The lazy dust, that long hath hid your guilt,
Is now brush't off, and you new polished to the world again:
Sift the dead Ashes ere they kill the sparks,
And let Fems wings fan 'em to glorious flames;
Shine bright my Christian Comets of the world,
And English George, whom these your loves hath made
Seventh brother with you, in the School of Arms
Shall prove no truant, Noble Christian Knights.
Let Scotlands Andrew be the mount, brave youth,
From whence thy beams may take a prospective,
To see, to wish, to have, to rule the same.
Brave maiden Knight, raise me another hill
Upon his mount, a Beacon upon that,
Which kindled, all the world may see the flame,
And Fame cry out, I'm wearied with thy Fame.
The Sybels have fore-told no more but seven,
The odd man now is come, and all is even.
Even in our loves, even in what heaven us sends;
Still Pagans scourges, and still Christians friends:
Then let us seven defend the Christians name:
And let George bear the Trophy of our fame.
Advance it youth; let thy white standard bear
A bloody Cross, to fill the world with fear.
I crave a general voice, are all so pleased?
We are.
Let us embrace, and seal it with each breast:
And here behold your maiden Knight doth draw
Defence to all that wrong insultion treads on:
First in our cause against those fell miscreants,
That trample on the Christians sacred Cross,
Lifting aloft the Mohammedan Moon,
Dishonour both to heaven and Christendom:
Next to maintain by force and dint of Arms
Oppressed Ladies wrongs, widows, &amp; Orphans, or who else,
Which wrongfully dares tread within a List;
And further let this Christian power extend
Against black Enchantments, witchcraft, and the like,
That Arts foul potency may meet us with.
All this we swear too on thy maiden sword.
It shall suffice; the Brazen Pillar's not far,
Unto whose circuits knits the heads and paths
Of seven fair several ways:
Honour we altogether win, is not to one;
Then let us part, and as we part proclaim,
Whose Champions we go forth to purchase fame.
George for brave England stands.
Denis for brave France.
The bony Scotland Andrew will advance.
Iames stands for Spain.
Patrick for Ireland.
And David will the Britains name defend.
The Rear is brought up by Anthony,
Who goes a Champion forth for Italy.
Bravely resolved, at all the world we will play,
But Christendom that is our tiring house,
The rest our stage.
On which our buskin seames must wade in blood,
But time no trifling loves, nor stays for none,
Lets mount, and part, honour is yet unwonne.
The Gods are angry with us, and their arrows
Stick in our bosoms, though we have inhausted
The glory of our Isles, and paid oblations on their Altars,
We remain regardless and forsaken.
O Sacred Pallas, protector of the Virgin votary;
Thou in whose well mixed soul
Judgment and worth holds equal balance;
From those Sphere-like eyes that shoot forth terror
To the amazed world, send piercing lightning
To consume these Monsters that o're-whelme our kingdom.
Incites are our Proclamations forth,
And a reward proposed to those bold men
Dare undertake their ruin?
They are my Lord; and unto him, by whose
Unequalled power the monstrous Dragon falls,
There is allotted the glorious shield,
Whose Verdge is studded round with Pearl,
Diamonds, Rubies, and Sapphires, Carbuncles,
And other stones fetched from the Orient:
That Shield which from the Indian Provinces
Was sent as tribute to abate your wrath,
And stay your army from invasion.
Tic well.
And to his valour that shall quell the pride
Of that fierce Lyon foraging these fields,
That doth devour the harmless passengers,
Great Mars his Armour, and his Ebon Lance,
A hot Barbarian Steed, whose fiery pace
Darts terror through the trembling enemies,
With such majestic footing strikes the earth,
As if he did disdain the touch of it;
This as a donative is freely given
To him whose valour shall confound that beast.
How many Knights, even in their spring of youth,
The pride and riches of this populous land,
Has his vast bowels made their Sepulchre?
Tears not avail, but gives woes balance weight,
Which of himselfe's too heavy: this last Edict
Will spur our youthful Gallants to the Chase
Of this untamed Monster: oh we want those
Gretian youths those former Ages bred;
A bold Alcides, whole unequalled strength
Tired a Step-mothers sharpe invention:
Deeds, whose relation frighted other men,
Were but his pleasure and his pastime then:
What Knights this morning are prepared
To encounter the dreadful Dragon?
The sprightly youths, Niger, Pallemon, &amp; Antigonus;
Niger well mounted on a sable horse,
His armour of the same resemblance,
Discovered in him actions sterne, and high,
Past through the City with Magesticke pace:
His outward form prefigured to the eye,
Future presages of bold victory.
Next Pallemon gave our eyes view
Of Knightly prowess, his armour russet,
Round beset with flames; though artificial,
Seemed to consume the youthful wearer,
True emblem of unpitied light brain pride;
A fiery Sorrel bore the noble youth,
Who chewed the ringlet bit, as in disdain,
To be o're-master'd by so weak a Rain:
And as the Sun forsook his Mistress lap,
He left the City. Last of all appeared
Antigonus, in a sure armour clad;
A milk white Courser bare him through the streets:
His Plume agreed with it, and at all points
White, like the cause he went for:
When he set forth, me thought he looked like Justice
Dropped from heaven, to take revenge on wrong
And cruelty, the peoples prayers
Went with him, and their eyes
Dropped tears, o're-masterd with their ecstasies.
Oh be propitious heaven to their designs,
Give double vigour to their able nerves,
Inflame their hearts with matchless charity.
Incites haste you to the Temple strait,
Give order to Apollo's sacred Priests,
To make his Altars smoke with hallowed fumes,
Let neither prayers nor Sacrifice be scant,
To move the Gods to hear our just complaint,
I shall my Lord.
Good daughter be it your charge to summon all
The Virgin Votaries of Dianaes train,
Attired in all the choice habiliments,
To gratulate these warlike youths return,
It is our last hazard, and like Gamesters now,
We venture all at one uncertain throw:
If we prevail, immortal Verse shall crown
And memorise their happy victory;
But if they fall, their ruins shall be song
In Elegiacke strains, recorded fit
For such untimely fatal overthrows:
How ever, honour shall adorn their Hearse,
And they still live by never dying Verse.
1 Sue. Wit must not be advanced then?
2. No, ell's dust.
3. Must not the May-pole up?
What will this come to at length?
1. God Pan will never endure it.
2. He must endure it, an he were a god of Tustaffety:
I am in a fustian-fume to see it,
But all will doe no good.
Well fellow well-braine, doe I live to see,
The May-pole slighted, I could be drunk
By privilege in those days, and had
A stay to lean on: now it is past,
And who can help it?
3. That we shall presently know:
Here comes the Priest of Pan,
And he will dissolve us, it is all to nothing else.
Lay by your idle sports and vanities,
And send up vows and sad repentant tears:
These offend, and pull down ruins on us,
To provoke the gods, ready to destroy us.
1. What news Baptisto there?
Oh sir, I cannot speak and tell ye,
Let me weep out mine eyes first,
And then I may chance find the way too't.
Prithee whither, out with it?
Betimes this morning unfolding my sheep,
Some half a mile off the Dragons den:
For hoe's no night-walker, take that by the way,
And in the day time I'll keep out of's company.
2. Come forward.
Comes me a Gentleman all in black armour,
To inquire of me where was the Dragons lodging:
I told him where he kept house, but wished him,
If he would be welcome, to bring his stool with him;
For he was very churlish, and as most
Of our great men now a days, devour all his neighbours:
He smiled, and on he rode; I followed to see
What would follow, and into a tree I got me:
The trampling of his Horse awaked the Monster,
And forth comes the devil out of his den,
The Knight runs at him with his Lance,
Pierced through one of his ugly wings,
But by fatal chance his Courser stumbled,
And by unfortunate hap threw him between
The Monsters jaws, who in a trice
With his large devilish teeth crushed him in pieces.
Alas poor Gentleman!
He had not hardly breathed himself a little,
When suddenly two gallant Knights assailed him,
Who long held combat with him, till the Lyon,
His devilish dear companion, came to help him;
Who presently then sent 'em
To accompany their fellows fate.
Unhappy chance!
They having done their work, went to their dens,
To like their wounds, I think for want
Of better Surgeons: I took the opportunity,
And hither stole to relate the news.
But soft, what Musick's this? surely there are
Some great ones abroad, and here they come:
Let's stand aside awhile.
Incites, thou hast told us deeds of wonder,
And, but our eyes convince our doubtful thoughts,
We could not give belief too't: Now their deaths,
That ran on danger for their Countries good,
Have ample recompense: what power, for none
But a Celestial one, could arm your hands,
And give your spirits vigour to overcome
So much of danger?
No other sir, but our true borne loves
To noble actions, pity of others wronged,
And fair renown, are all the spurs
Should put on noble spirits to warlike actions,
And in that to fall, or rise with glory:
Who would not venture this weak piece
Of flesh, which every Ague beats?
Nor ever held I life at such a rate,
But to get fame, I dare and will tempt Fate.
What a bold spirit he moves with!
Noble youths; we glory that our Countries earth
Now bears so much of man upon her.
Sir, by my fathers leave I doe pronounce
You're freely welcome, not to us alone, but to all,
All faithful subjects to my Father, and their loud joys
Shall speak it; one work of gratitude
We owe the gods, the other to your valours.
What remains, but that you bless our eyes
With the true figures of our dear lives preserver?
Therefore unarme your selves, your dangerous combat,
The heate and dust, and the fast closure of
Your Armours strictness may much impair your healths;
Let me prevail with you.
Bright Lady, where necessity implies an act of duty,
Manly virtue should clap on spurs to hasten piety:
These goodly parts, they were not made alone to serve
Our selves, but like pure fountains, freely to dispense
Our streams to others wants: and so fair Lady,
Urgent affairs call on our swords and valours,
To revenge the wrongs of some few Virgins,
That have long expected our wished for presence.
This, I hope, may plead in our excuse,
And no way render us discourteous or unworthy
For departing unarmed, or else unmanned
From this fair presence, and so we take our leaves.
Make me not so unworthy by your absence,
To my own subjects, and to foreign Nations,
Who shall read the story of your deeds,
And my requital, but they will brand me with ingratitude.
Can you maintain the good of charity
In your own actions, yet tie mine in bonds,
When she should stretch her silver wings,
And pay back thanks for so large benefits:
No, take the meed your valours have deserved,
And let us crown our hopes, in that we long
Have wished your fair aspects:
Nor shall your stay exceed our one nights welcome,
And then a fair farewell.
Where Majesty and beauty both command,
In vain were our resistance: Brother, your hands
And mine shall be employed; to unbuckle yours
I'll quickly ease your shoulders of a burden.
Nay, we'll be helpers all.
You make sure work sirs,
Every light justly leaves you not defenceless,
And I commend your care in it.
He that encounters danger, must not think
His skin of Armour proof: tho but young scholars,
We have learned that discipline.
Of goodly presence both, and far exceeds
The youths our Country breeds, in form and stature;
Speak my Carintha, what judge ye of them?
Madam, so well, that had I leave to wed,
One of these Knights should bless my Marriage-bed.
Then you are indifferent, your love is equal?
In troth it is.
So is not mine; but thoughts a while conceal,
What passion might unwisely now reveal.
They are both unarmed.
Now worthy Knights, mine eye is pleased
In viewing your fair presence,
I would gladly know what Country owes ye,
For the place is happy that first gave ye being.
Not one my Lord:
We owe our lives first light to several Nations,
An Island far removed from Grecian shores,
Whose lovely waste proud Neptune circles round,
Her craggy clefts ambitiously threat Heaven,
And strikes pale terror to the Mariner,
When unadvisedly he falls on them.
The inhabitants proportioned like our selves,
Well skilled in Science, and all humane Arts;
A government of peace and unity,
For plenty, far exceeding all the Isles
Europes vast bounds or wealthy Asia yields,
The name Britannia, which includes within it
Fair England, Wales, and Scotland;
The last of which I fetched my birth from.
Thus have you heard at full
What I can give you of relation.
It pleases us: but now sir we must crave
The like from you, and then to Court we hie
To gratulate your welcome.
Then know my Lord, Italian earth I claim,
Mother of Arts, and Nurse of noble spirits;
And in that Country, Rome, my place of birth,
Great Mistress of the world, whose large-stretcht arms
O'er Land and Sea holds domination:
Renowned for government in peace or war
Even to the shore of scorching India,
Their arms strike terror through the world:
Kings were their vassals, and their awful swords
Brought the known world to their subjection.
Nor wonder not great King, that we should leave
A Court that's fraughted with such happiness,
For Christians glory and our Countries fame
We have adventured life and honour too.
And both are lost I fear, unhappy men:
Whom in my piety I should respect,
The gods in justice causes me reject.
Lay hands on 'em.
On us? for what?
Perform our will, in the delay is death.
Is this your welcome, love, and gratitude?
Your honour or your valour now will be of small issue∣rance:
What ill-fated star guided your haplesse feet
Into this land? these eyes that shot forth welcome,
Now must send Ambassadors of death to your cold hearts,
No acclamations now must fill your ears
With joyful conquest: Apollos Garland,
That should grace your brows,
Must deck your Coffins, the grave your chambers,
And the worms must be
The sad companions of your destiny.
Boldly then prepare,
For in your journey you have equal share.
We mist your aims in this;
It is a strange turning from courteous welcome,
To black threats of death.
Isle ease your doubts, though not your misery;
You both are Christians?
We are.
In being so, you post to your own ruin:
The holy Gods, whom piety commands us to obey,
Have from their Oracles sent this decree,
What ever Christian sets his haplesse foot
On this forbidden ground unless he instantly
Recant his faith, let him be made
A bloody sacrifice to appease our wrath:
Now here lies before ye the riches
Of our kingdom, glory, and honour,
The benefits of sweet and happy life,
All the most choice delights, that with our love
May be proposed to you; even these our beauties,
Turn your amorous eyes, please your own fancies,
And enrich your selves where you best affect,
Only relinquish the religion which now you hold,
And turn unto our Gods; that done,
As we are Emperor of Trebizon,
All these shall be performed: but if through
Pride, and hated wilfulness, you shall refuse
Our proffer, a present death attends you.
We are prepared.
Then in your death this favour we will show,
Because your valour hath so showed you both,
To be borne High and Noble, we give this privilege,
To choose your executioners.
Thou hast redeemed thy honour, and this sentence
Speaks thee a royal Tyrant: Come my friend,
We two, like Travellers that are enforced
To venture on a lodging filled with horrors in outward show,
Threatening no way but ruin, the black preparatives
Of sad decay, being Ushers to the entrance;
But once being in, then think, my constant partner,
What endless welcome follows; pleasures unspeakable,
Beyond the sublimary thoughts of our poor natures:
If but the thought of this advance the soul,
And drives our sense to admiration:
Oh then how glorious is that wished for seat,
Where all these benefits shall be complete.
I need no armour, but my constant heart,
And thou hast given new life to it
In our deaths; our innocence shall make our
After story be worth all knowing judgements:
Nor shall our bloods be shed by vulgar hands,
Since we have power in the disposing it.
Come beauteous Ladies, now express your arts,
Make your Apollo wonder at your skill,
And with more glory than he did ascend
Olimpus top, after black Pythons fall:
With more shall you salute your peoples eyes,
Rejoicing in our haplesse Tragedies.
Unhappy Violeta.
Lost Carintha.
Bind them fast: Now Violeta, arm thy feeble hand,
Strike sure and fearless, for thou sendst the gods
A pleasing Sacrifice.
O unhappy maid, lost in my best of wishes!
Was I borne to ruin virtue, and gain by it a name
Hateful to all posterity? Royal Sir,
Have you no other to employ, than her
That you gave life too? must I become an executioner?
Or doe you think me Marble? oh that I were,
That I might ever weep for your injustice:
For ever may my hand forget its motion
If it give way to this: Know I dare dye,
Rather than act this mischief.
Are you of that opinion too Carintha?
Sir I am, and rather will I choose a noble death,
Than live with such dishonour.
Oh my unbounded passions, give 'em vent,
The flame will else consume me:
Fall from me all respects of nature;
I will forget that I had such a thought,
As to believe thee mine: farewell the hours
I often spent in contemplation of thy beauty,
Youth, and breeding; thou and these shall be like things
Forgotten, and if thy hand refuse to act our will,
Expect the utmost of all sad afflictions
Our hate can cast upon thee.
I am prepared, and glory in my sufferings.
Bind them then, since you are so resolved,
We'll give you cause to express your fortitude:
They shall suffer first.
Give us a hearing Sir:
We doe not wish to pull on others ruins
With our own; nor would we make you guilty
Of a crime so soul, least after ages should traduce
Your name for this impiety; give us then
Your first and voluntary promise that your
Tongue aloud, and we will quit these
Ladies from the act.
We agree to it, and by our Gods I swear my promise
To perform without all doubt or fraud.
Unbind us then, and give us in our hands
Our well tried swords, and you shall see how quickly
We will charm a passage to our wished
For expirations, we will embrace in steel:
And worthy friend, doe but strike home,
And thou shalt soon perceive how quickly weal have
Freedom; thou shalt see how I will meet thy wishes,
And woe thy backward sword to give to me
A passage to yon blessed Kingdom.
Unbind 'em strait, and arm 'em.
This is cruel; sink mine eyes into your
Hollow caverns, doe not see an act so full of horror.
Are ye prepared?
Yes, for your eternal ruins.
We are free, and like untamed Lyons,
We now will forage, and bath us in your bloods.
So, they are all dispersed and fled; never before
Stood life on such a fickle point with us:
Lets leave this cursed Kingdom,
Mount our Steeds, which through negligence,
Our enemies have failed to seize on;
Leave them to curse their stars;
And still be sure, in all our actions,
That heavens mighty hand,
Can men's devices easy countermand.
No more, no more, your words are feathers
For the wind to play with.
Will you not join with me to be revenged?
When was it known that Lenon and Almona
Parted with victories triumphant, which now flies
With a disdained applause from us unto a stranger?
When did these Bulwarks which hath stood till now
The shock of all the Knights our parts hath seen,
Ere shrink under the sinews of an Army?
Why now, just now we have;
Have we not still by daring challenges opposed our selves
The round worlds opposites? Have not our prowesses
In stately lifts tossed up the golden ball, and won it?
Is not bright honour free in Princes Courts?
We have overcome, and now we are overcome,
And shall we envy what we ever loved,
And were loved for? so thinks the Adder,
When his sting is gone, his hissing has the power to venom too.
Cast off that coat, it not becomes thee Lenon;
Twill wear thy honour thread-bare to the bones,
And make death seize on thee with infamy.
Let Death come how he will,
And doe you tamely suffer what you will,
This British Knight shall never boast in Wales,
That ere he triumphed Victor over me.
Another charge:
A charge and a shout cry Arbasto.
What over desperate and life-weary fool
Dares meet the couched Lance of this brave Knight,
Seeing the foil we took?
The cry went in our Prince Arbasto's name:
Hark another charge gives 'em a second meeting:
It is well he kept his saddle at the first:
Look to the Prince there some, and take him:
For fallen I'm sure he is before this time.
I now admire and love this venture in him:
Well done young twig of a most Royal bough,
Thou hast won our losses, which we must allow.
Hark, the third charge is begun.
I doe not like that sound, what ever accident
Betides, Arbasto hath not lost but won renown:
Now, what news bring thou?
Set op your ears to entertain sad news,
I sing the latest Requiem of our Prince, hoe's slain.
Fallen I believe, but yet I hope not slain.
This whet-stone makes revenges edge more keen:
Go forward good mischance.
Twice met this brave young Prince the British Knights,
And bore his body stiff against his shock,
Vnmov'd of either stirrup or of saddle,
Their shivered Lances quarrelled as they brake,
And as they upward flew, clasht strong together,
And he unmoved, undaunted twice appeared
As fair for Victor as his stout opponent,
And had he rested there, he had equal shared
The days bright honour with him.
Well, the disaster.
Bowing his plumed head unto his Sire,
Who sent him smiles of joys encouragement,
Addressed him for the third, and last Career:
The Christian Knight likewise 'gan couch his Lance,
But as he grasped it in his manly fist,
An angry fire circled about his eyes,
And from the furrows of his brows Revenge
Leapt forth, and seizes on the Prince:
They charged, he fell, and in the fall his neck
He broke; so ends my heavy Nuntius.
The Prince!
So Honour sprung a bud, and blasted it
Before it grew to his maturity;
Noble Prince, I pity thy misfortune, more, the Knights;
And I for this condemn nimble mischance,
But not the Knight at all.
Murderous villain, if my brains can invent torture
Sufficient, sufficient; here begins thy hell,
And I thy first devil.
And I will second be how to prevent ye.
Set down the broken column of mine age,
The golden Anchor, Hope, once showed to me,
Hath split and sunk the vessel held my wealth:
Oh my Arbasto.
Take comfort Royal sir,
Fame stories few are living; more the dead,
Death hath but rocked him then on honours bed:
Then let him sleep.
Hoe's a good Physician that can quite kill grief,
That hath but newly made his patient of me:
Tear•s must give vent first to the oppressed heart,
And Time lay drawing plasters to the sore,
Before he can find ease, but yet I thank ye.
Most Noble Sir,
Tears shows effeminate in noble spirits,
Those aged sluices want that Rain that falls,
Bewail him not with tears, but with revenge;
If drops must needs be spilt, let 'em be blood.
His blood that wilfully sheds blood,
The Law of Nations wisely did allow
All Justs and Tournaments in Princes Courts,
For honours cause to break a friendly staff,
But not to make a butchery or shambles in Court lists:
Therefore if I might of his jury be,
My Verdict should be given up, he must dye.
Lord Lenon, it is most certain he must dye:
I love my Sovereign well, I loved his son,
But dare not say that he deserves to dye:
This stranger here, came here in honours cause,
Stak't honour down, and bravely bore it hence:
Your self, silence but envies tongue, can witness with me,
I have spoke but truth: where lives the Nobleness
But in the mind? wild beasts have strength, irrational
And rude, but want the sense of reasons government:
Let rage hot rains bite upon temperance:
The Iron handed Fates wars hard at game,
And threw a cast at brave Arbastoes life;
But let your sentence pass my Lord, have done,
Spoke like no lover of his Sovereigns son
Replied not like a lover unto either:
Your valours's horse-like, and it must be tamed,
Twill break the Riders neck dares but to back him▪
Forbear I say, on your allegiance:
Had my Arbasto dyed in our defence,
Against the pride of the hot Persian Host,
That seeks to pale his Temple with our wreath,
And name Tartary new Persia,
Our cares had been but slight, but in a friendly
Breathing exercise, when honour goes a feasting but for show,
A jesting practice in the School of Arms,
There for to lose him.
An ill intent armed Executions hand.
I know not that; why should he ruin him,
Showing more kind innated friendship to him,
Than brother shows to brother.
Remus and Romulus, my Lord, one sucked more
Harder on the Wolf than tother,
Think what a game Hope lost.
Upon my soul, my Lord, the Knight is clear
Of any foul intent against your son.
Why Almaine, Almaine, dare you stand to this?
Lenon I dare, and in thy venom blood write
He's not guilty.
No more I say, upon your lives no more:
Too hard it is for me to give a true dissidence to the cause,
The Knight was ever courteous, fair, and free,
And against the Persian in my just defence,
Ransomed my son from multitudes of loss,
And brought home conquest to our very gate,
I cannot then in honour take his life,
Our neighbour Kings would say, I dealt not fair,
And quite disclaim in us all brother-hood:
To banish him, were but the more to enlarge his fame;
All kingdoms are but Knight errands native home.
In private be it spoke my Liege, I like not
Almonas love to this same Knight:
It little shows love to the deceased Prince:
What was he but a young strait tender plant;
The sturdy Ok might well have spared him then:
His toward hopes were ruined and cut down:
Had he done this in any other Court, to any Prince
So toward as your Son, he had ere this been atoms:
Your son has suffered, let him suffer too,
Who ever wilfully committed murder,
And was without excuse? but can that save?
No more should this my Liege, I have but said.
And wisely Lenon, go bring forth the Knight;
We are determined that he shall not live;
Nor shall he suffer here within our Courts,
We'll kill him in a nobler gentile way:
O here he comes.
You're gone; false Lenon hath betrayed ye to your death.
Welcome my Fate.
Sir Knight, you have not fairly dealt with us;
Though against my foes you brought me honour home,
My dear sons life you have took for your reward;
But you shall find it is treasure stole, not bounty given,
And for that theft your life must satisfy.
King of Tartary, hear sad David speak.
Now the excuse my Lord.
Those honours I have brought you home,
It seems this accident hath canceled,
And stifles all my merits in your love:
Yet let 'em hang like pendants on my hearse,
That I did love the unfortunate deceased,
These drops of tears, true sorrows, testify;
And what hath happened to that lifes dear loss,
Was not by will, but fatal accident:
I hold my hand up at the hand of heaven, not guilty:
King, think not I speak to have thee spare my life,
For half my life lies dead there with thy Son,
And here the other half is ready too, to testify,
How well I loved the Prince, though now I dye.
A Heads man and an Axe there.
For him that calls him.
I that was well said King; Spannell no more.
Thy hand once more brave English Knight,
We are at peace, and will not what we may:
But let me now one thing enjoin you to,
Not as a penance for my dear sons loss,
But as a further safety of my Kingdom,
And larger interest of your love to me.
Give me the danger, I can meet but death.
My hopes are better of thee, noble Knight;
Hear then thy task, thou shalt then hence
In Knightly order ride, against him, not only
Aided Persia against our power, but shakes our
Kingdom with the power of hell, blake Ormandine,
The enchanted Garden-keeper; if that thou dare
Attempt, and bring his head, I will not only
Quittance this mischance, which makes me wretched,
But half my part of this large Crown
Is thine, and when I dye,
David of Wales reigns King of Tartary;
Speak comfortable words of the attempt.
It is the oath of Knight-hood I have tan, and here
Again before you I will take, from hence being
parted, ne'er to make stay more than a nights
Repose till I am there, and being there,
By all the honours of a Knight I vow
Black Ormandines head, and lay it at your feet:
This, by the honour of a Knight, Isle do, or dye in the attempt.
It is enough; rise noble David,
So, n•w shall I be revenged for my sons life,
Without the clamour of the world for it:
Thou bring his head, poor Knight, thou moist as well
Rob love of lightning, or clasp a hand Garnado,
Being fired: to morrow morning you shall forward set;
On with the Hearse till you return
We sorrows path shall tread,
And bury grief when thou bring Are•ands head.
Our Britain Knight we leave in his hard journey
But more hard attempt, yet all the other have not idle been,
For since their parting at the brazen Pillar,
Each hath shared strange and perilous adventures,
Which here in several acts to personate, would in the
Meanest fill a larger Scene than on this Stage
An Action would contain;
But to the shortness of the time we'll sort,
Each Champion in it shall bear a little part
Of their more larger History:
Then let your fancies deem upon a stage,
One man a thousand, and one hour an age.
And now with patience bear your kind attents to the
Red Cross bearer, English George, your high renowned
Knight, who since the hand of Christendom parted her
Seven fair Knights, the dangers he hath seen and past,
Would make the brightest day look pale and tremble,
Nay death himself, that ends mortality,
To think of death, and that himself must dye.
After renowned George from the fell Dragons jaws,
Redeemed Sabrina, P•mils only heir, with slaughter
Of the Hell-produced fiend; his wife he won,
Had Pommel promise kept; but in a large requital
Of her life, incensed by the Moroco King, our Champions rival,
Cast George in prison, in a hateful Dungeon;
He that deserved his Crown, and daughters bed,
He ingratefully with bran and water fed 7 years together,
Which time expired, the miserable Knight found once
That opportunity showed him a little favour,
For by the breaking of the Laylers neck,
He gained the keys which gave him liberty:
When being freed, and out of dangers port,
You his kind Countrymen shall see
For Englands honour, Georges Chivaldry.
Oh most astonishable hunger! thou that dost pinch
worse than any Fairies, or the gummes of old women: thou
that dost freeze the mortal gouts of a man more than the R•∣zom'd
stick of a Base Viol, what shall be said? what shall
be done to thee? Oh my glorious Mother, what a time of
eating had I in thy days, nay, my magnanimous Master,
whom I lost in the devils arse of Peak: what a plentiful
progress had I with thee, when we did nothing but kill Go∣ants
and wild beasts, then the golden gobbets of Beef and
Bacon, whose shining fat would cry clash in spite of my
teeth, now I may compare with Ploydens law, the case is al∣••red;
A shepherd, a sheep-biter; nay, I were happy then,
I would wish no better bitings than Mutton; the Cobs of
Herring, and parings of Cheese is now a Sundays diet, and
yet they cry out of my abominable feeding, my unsatisfied
gut, with a Wolf at the end on it: I have eat up my Tar∣box
for hunger already, what will be next trow? Soft, who
comes here, my fellow Swain withsome pitiful provant
for my dinner?
Suckabus, where art thou?
Here, where the bare bones of him will be very
shortly: what hast thou brought me there?
A feast, a feast; here's princely cheer for thee: here's
two Carrots and a Turnip, and a little morsel of Bean∣bread,
that I stole to hearten thee up withal.
Sweet fellow Coridon, give me't, I shall grow a Phi∣osopher
shortly if I fare o'this fashion: O the very steam
of the three fat Oxen that my Master found boiling for the
Giants dinner, which we killed, would have filled both our
bellies for a Fortnight.
Ha, three Oxen for one Giants dinner?
Thou art mistaken sure; thou art not old enough to see a Giant,
And could thy Master and thee kill him?
Why there's the wit of a Bell-weather; one? we
killed a hundred: but talk I to thee, that were never no Tra∣veller
since thou wilt not believe a truth, Isle hold my tongue,
and fall to my teeth.
Nay good fellow Suckabus be not angry,
I doe believe: What are those Giants? Prithee tell me?
No Iackalents, no Pigmies, no Dwarfs.
Nay, I doe believe they are lusty fellows,
And men of tall stomachs, they could never eat so much else,
Three Oxen at one meal.
Tush, a Fasting-dayes Modicum; but when he makes
a Feast to stuff his abominable gut, three hundred Acres
of Oats will scarce make Oate-meale to thicken his pore∣ridge-pot.
Now the Devil choke him,
For hoe's fitter farrefor hell, than to live here.
Hell? what should he doe there? he would peace out
their fire, and drown all the devils in his urine.
O monstrous! marry bless me from him, I had thought
They had not been much taller than some of our Guard.
The Guard? Hum, still like a Bell-weather? why
he will chop up two yeomen of the Guard like poshed eggs at
a spoonful: there's not a meal that he makes, but hee will
load ye two Dung-carts with the picking of his teeth.
Bless us!
Bless thee? why dost thou know what thou speak?
No hurt I hope good fellow Suckabus:
But how could you two kill this monstrous man?
Why as we killed a great many more of 'em; wee
rid a Horseback into their bellies, made a Quentin of their
hearts, and rod out at the But-hole end.
That may be done indeed, this carries some show of
truth.
Why, did thou think the rest were lies?
No, no; Lord, what indiscretion people learn by
Travail! I have heard my Master say, hee was Page to a
Knight erant they called old Dick, who he's bin six days
together in the bottom of the Sea, and took Tobacco
amongst the sharks and such adventures, but none like this
you speak of: Travelled you ever with him?
I had more wit in faith; I deal in no water-workes.
But pray tell me now, what stature might this man
be you killed?
His stature? Let me not lye, he was not the biggest
that ever we killed, let me tell ye that, he was just about that
stature that Tuttle-field would fitly make a Grave for: I have
told ye of a place before; it is near London in England,
where men go a Training to get 'em good stomachs.
That's more than ever I heard of in faith, that soldiers
want stomachs: what enemies doe they meet with there?
Why Barrels of Beer, bottles of Sack, Costerd∣mongers,
Cakes, and Cream, and their wives that bring
'em their dinner.
I marry sir, I would willingly be put into such ser∣vice;
sure, their Commanders are brave fellows.
The bravest can be picked out in each parish, and the
ablest too, yet I heard one man in the shape of a Monster, put
a Captain and his Company to slight.
O monstrous!
Come, no more of that; let me entreat thy absence
till I have eat my vittails, and I will tell thee more.
Good Suckabus doe, and I'll see if I can tell thee of
a Dwarf shall be all as little.
Well, say and hold; come master Carret and mistress
Turnup, I want but Beef and Pork for sauce to ye, but
•unger bids me fall to merrily, and I shall not want for
•awe.
Thanks to my great preserver, by whose sacred power
Poor George of England is set free again•
From death, danger, and imprisonment;
I bow with duty to thy Deity; seven years
Hath Famine under bolts and bars dungeoned me up,
Accompanied with my tears in the dark bowels
Of a loathsome Den, a place so far remote from comfort,
That not the smallest chink or crony
Could let the Sun-beames in to point on me;
Yet thou, in whose foundation stands my building,
Hast given me freedom and my hope again,
Those sweet companions that despair shut out.
Now George again may wear a plumed crest,
And wave the Standard of great Christendom
In the defiance of her opposites: I'm poor in show,
Yet since my freedom hath thus long lain rusty,
And unoyl'd loins unarmed, are grown a strength immutable
And from the pinching pangs of famines jaws
A second time ransomed my pining life;
But since I have left those desert woods behind,
Let me behold this goodly prospective.
So my pannier's pretty well sussifi'de, and the
whelps in my belly muzzeld from barking any more this two
hours: How now what proper stripling's this stands ga∣ping
about him? let me survey him.
A goodly place, pleasant, and full of ayre.
I cannot for my guts call to mind where I have seen
this fellow.
Enriched with plenties hand.
But that he had a horse and Armour, hee doth re∣semble
my long lost Master George of England.
Ha? what Eccho's that gives me my name,
Without a summons which it answers to?
What fellow's this that walks and stares about me?
I am no wonder that I know of;
And but that time makes me to doubt, I should suppose
Him for to be my servant Suckabus I lost.
The same, the same; I am your servant, and fellow
Suckabus: Oh my sweet Master ▪ have we found one another?
I could even kiss thee round about for joy.
In me glad to see thee;
It seems you have altered fortune with your Master:
Where hast thou lived and wandered since I lost thee?
Oh sir, I have had such a company of Masters in law
since I left you: First sir, I served a Lord till he entertained a
Cooke, and then I must stay no longer: Then I was Gentle∣man
Usher to a young Lady, but she hating new fashions, I
hated her service. Then sir, I served a young Heir newly
come to his Living, and because he opened his gates, and let
Hospitality enter, I bid •lanlet to him: then I served a Vsu∣rer,
and because he would often be drunk, and let his An∣gels
fly gratis, I gave him the bag too: Then I dwelt with a
Proctor, and he every day would bid conscience to dinner,
so there was no staying with him: Then I served a Scrivener,
but he was so taken up with his Orator the Pillory, that I was
fine to leave him too; and then I came here a sheep-biting,
as you see sir.
It is very well sir; but will you leave your sheep &amp;
your sheepe-hooke, and follow me without leasing?
Follow thee? that I will, till I find no land to tread
on, nor water to swim on: Shepherd farewell, Fox, look
to the Lambs, Wolf, keep the sheep safe: now shall we
kill Giants, and eat meat again.
Be true to me, once more you're entertained,
'T shall not be long before thou see
This low dejected state shining in complete steel:
He that in pursuit of adventures goes,
Must not shun danger, though he meet with blows:
Come Suckabus.
This is the state of Princely Ormandine;
Tho once dejected, and low trodden down
Under the feet of Fortunes petty Kings,
Above her envy re-advanc'd again; and you my friends
And partners in her frowns, shall now deride her petty Deity,
Laugh at those Kings, which like to gilded moats!
Dance in the Sun-beame of her various smile:
And when we have laughed our fills, my fury then
Shall rise, and like a Torrent in the Ocean raised
By swelling spring-tides driven from their bounds,
So shall the rage of Oxmandines swift vengeance
At once o'reflow the cruel Tartar and Arabian Kings.
Great Ormandine has given us satisfaction;
We were your subjects first, so are we now,
Yet never lived in that tranquillity,
When we did bow under your Sceptre as now we doe:
Then cares of Countries safety, and your person,
Care of our wives, our substance, and our selves, expelled
Our stomachs, took our sleeps away, and made our eyes
Fears watchmen; here art thou crowned with Arts
Rich, potent, and commanding power;
There sate a golden hoop tempered with fear,
That tatt or 'd on thy head, here with a wand thou call,
And art obeyed; there by the Tartars cruelty dismayed,
Thy pleasures mixed with store of misery,
Vndor the pride of Tartars tyranny.
Then let me speak, but far from contradiction,
Your hand hath laid her actions waite on well.
Rest you contended with content, our will admits
No counsel but our own; here lives no pity of our Enemy▪
We have bought vengeance at a mightier rate,
Than you, or can, or must be privy to.
Learning by time and industry are bought,
But he that barters for revengeful Arts,
Must with his best pri'zd jewel from depart:
I have yet showed tricks to make 'em laugh,
But long it shall not be ere I smite home
To make us pastimes by their general ruins:
And now my friends and subjects shall behold
The indented time and riddle of our safety: Ho Tarpax,
The chiefest which attends upon our acts.
What would my Master? Tarpax must obey.
Set forth my brazen pillar.
It is done.
Now wonder at the Tablet I shall read,
Which while it comes to pass, live in more pleasures
And voluptuous state, than doth the Roman Potentates.
ORmand be bold, seer, and free,
Revel thou in Arts potency,
Till from the cold and Northern Clime,
A Knight post on the wings of time,
Being lighted on Tartaries ground,
Of Fame spoke loud by honour crowned:
From Brute descended, and his breast
Is with a sanguine Cross be blessed:
Then shall this Sword, thy Art here closed,
By him be drawn, thy Art opposed;
Thy life, thy Arts, thy potent power
Expire, dissolve that instant hour.
This bug-beare frights us not, and yet my fall must come
From Brute descended, and on his breast
The Emblem of our hate, a sanguine Cross:
Must Ormandines great power be shaken down
By a chill Northern Ague-shaken Knight,
A lump of snow, a frosty I sickle? this saying damps me,
And the thin pure blood, which but even now
Flowed through the azure branches of my veins,
Is run to cherish my feare-trembling heart,
Who, there affrighted at its horrid ruin,
Mixed with cold comfort, is congealed to clods,
And I a blood less substance doe remain.
Why is our King and governor dismayed?
Walk in I pray, I'm very much disturbed:
Aswarthy passion harrows up my sense: Ho Tarpax.
Your call must be obeyed: I'm here.
Fetch me my Characters, my calculation, &amp; my glass.
They are here.
My ever-ready servant, fly to the first Aëriall degree,
Snatch thee a cloud, and wrap thy self intoo't;
Fly to Tartaria, look within his Court, confines, &amp; Country,
If any Christian Knight there be arrived,
I fear me Tarpax; bring me answer swift,
Whilst I survy my Book and magic glass.
I'm gone; ten minutes hence expect me back.
Ha? what's here?
The Tartars son slain by a British Knight,
Who, as a penance for this heinous fact,
Sent here to fetch my head, by Oath enjoined too't:
A British Knight, the same my Tablet speaks of:
Now Ormandine must fall. Ho Tarpax!
What sees my Tarpax?
Great Ormand, haste unto thy powerful charms,
We will assist thee in what Hell can doe,
With strength, with horror, and detested shapes,
To daunt the courage of this Northern Knight,
That comes to fetch the head of Ormandine.
I read the same here too; be swift my Tarpax,
Summon up Hells host to be my Guardians
Against this Northern Knight: put out the golden Candle
Of the day with horrid darkness from the night below:
Vnchain the winds, send out our fiery rains,
Break Atlas back with Thunder through the clouds,
And dart your quick-past lightning at his face:
Raise Earthquakes shaking round about his steps,
To bandy him from one place to another;
Let horror empty all her store-house:
If Ormandine can vanquish but this Knight,
Secure and firm still stand our power and might.
How shall I style this Tartar?
I cannot say hoe's noble, nor yet base: he has given me life,
But with that strange adventure,
That he himself is confident I perish:
My Knighly Oath assures him I will on, and setting on,
Am sure enough to fall: unhappy David in that Princes death,
Whom Fates, no will of mine, gave so unkind a meeting;
For which the sable plume and Corslet I doe wear,
As a true Emblem of my inward sorrow:
Rest Princely ashes in a golden Urn,
Whilst wretched David in a work is sent,
To his own sad Requiems betterment,
And be mine own destroyer: take courage yet,
Let not base fear steal from thy heart the name of man away,
Death cannot dress himself in such a shape,
But I dare meet him; on then in pursuit of a Knightly vow,
If 't chance Dice run so, that we must fall,
Fame shall wear black at Davits Funeral.
Hoe's now within a Mile and less of us;
Spirits away, each fall unto his task,
Whilst I raise storms which may dismay the Knight.
Yonder's the place, mine eye hath reached it:
Now Ormandine, our bloody game begins,
Heads are our stakes, and there's but one can win.
Protect me Heaven, what sudden strange Eclipse do I behold
The golden Sun that now smiled in my face,
Draws in his beams, and robes himself in black:
In what a dark veil is the clear azured sky!
You do begin to entertain me Ormandy,
But we'll have better welcome ever we part:
I, let your thunder come, we dread it not;
What send ye Fire-drakes too to meet with us?
Your worst of horror is best welcome to me:
Your ministers rather invite me on, than like to bug-beares
Fright me back again: more visitants of hell-bred sorcery?
I must needs through, or sink.
There's nothing we can doe,
Can quell the valour of this Christian Knight.
My fears divine this is the man,
By whom great Ormand falls: hoe's come unto the gates,
And now stick fast my sword, and we are yet secure:
So, in spite of all the tampering of your Arts
We are got something near you now.
This is the gate; what have we here? a Brazen Pillar,
In it a golden sword, immured and riveted;
A golden Tablet with inscriptions on it,
Let me discourse with you a little first.
Ormand be bold, secure, and free,
Revel in arts strong potency,
Till from the cold and Northern Clime,
A Knight post on the wings of time.
Ha, what's here? Till from the Northern Clime,
A Knight post on the wings of time.
A Northern Knight! why that's my self:
Let's see a little farther.
Being lighted on Tarta y's ground,
Of fame bell•v'd by honour crowned.
I am arrived here in Tartary, a Northern Knight,
And for my same and deeds of Chivaldry, with honour
Hath been crowned in Princes Courts: a little farther yet.
From Brute descended, and his breast
Is with a sanguine Cross be blessed.
I have enough; David of Wales from Brute descended is,
A Christian Knight, that we res the sanguine Cross,
That must dissolve this black Enchantment here:
Come let me clutch thy temper in my hand,
Thus draw thee forth, and thus: will you not come?
O you are not the man, ha, ha,
Fear Vanish once again; go Spirits, seize that Knight,
And bring him straight.
Ormand and all laugh: Spirits with fiery Clubs, they fight.
Knight, Knight forbear,
In vain thy strokes are dealt against our power:
Thou moist as well number those briny drops,
As cope with these, or scope with life, did not we pity thee;
Spirits away.
Art not thou Ormandine?
The same; thy friend and Ormandine.
That head I come for, and must have it.
Runs at him with his sword, he puts it by with his wand.
The body will not yet so part with it;
This is the Tartars cruelty not thine;
I know thy oath stands gaged to bring this head,
Or not return; thus shalt thou save thy oath,
Here shalt thou live, with Ormandine thy friend,
Here spend thy days, crowned with delight and mirth,
Pleasure shall be thy vassal to command,
With new inventions, fresh varieties,
And when thy dalliance would consort with love,
Queens shall enfold thee in their Ivory arms,
Which to affirm, and give thee love and liking,
This waving of my wand above thy head,
Dissolves this horror, and does give thee cause
To change thy mind.
What alteration's here! your pardon mighty Sir;
Oh let me never, never part from hence.
Be Master of your wish: come sit here by me,
Isle rape your care, and captivate your eye.
How happy now is Ormandine in this; I will no more
Credit the Tablet I shall for ever rain, as now I doe:
Eternity shall seal my habitation here,
The Britain Knight is now within my power,
Charm hangs a drowsy rest upon his eyes,
And he shall sleep his youth to a full age.
As for the Arabian bird, and the proud Tartar,
Revenge armed with destruction to them slies;
Who seeks my life, without my pity dyes.
Come on sir Suckabus, how doe you like this altar∣tion?
Nay, we are come to wear good cloth again, and
we fill our bellies at other folks cost: marry we part with
cracked Crowns for our Ordinaries. They that in the low
Countrey-garrisons kill men for three shillings a week, are
punies to us; by that time I have served but half my time, I
shall be able to play with all the Fencers in Christendom.
Leave your folly sir.
Leave your prating sir, and then we'll leave our li∣vings
both together.
Villain no more;
How pleasant is this place, how fresh and clear,
As when the last of April offers to sweet May
The pride and glory of the youthful Spring,
The lovers coupling time! the farther that I go,
The more Elizium like it doth appear.
Good Master let's go back again: I doe not like this
talking of Elizium; it is a place where good and honest men
come in, and for mine own part, I am in the mind never
to trouble it.
I think so too:
What's here the platform of a Garden?
If that the Sun robed in his brightest glory,
Dazzle not mine eyes, it is the richest that I ever saw,
The Paradise of some Deity:—Music too.
Ey, two Tailors are a dancing for a buttered bun.
List Suckabus, hear thou no Music?
I think I hear the Horse-head and the Tongs.
Most heavenly Music, follow me close,
We'll see the guitar of this heavenly sphere,
For sure no mortal owns it.
Pray Sir lets back again, I have no mind to 't,
the Sun shines so hot, I fear we shall have some rain.
What's here, a wonder past the other beauties far?
A Brazen Pillar, through whose impregnable body
Sticks a Sword, a Tablet, and Inscriptions
Writ upon it, wonder falls on me!
Be thou enchantment, you are the loveliest shape
That ever hells Art strove to tempt withal:
By your leave a little, it seems these are no secrets,
You're open breasted, I must know your mind:
We will not stand on doubts.
I am the man, for England, oh you're welcome Sir.
Did not I tell ye? now shall I be roasted for Di∣veals,
and my bones scorched into small-coales: Whore's the
goodly weather that we had even now? whore's the tongs
and the Tailers a dancing.
Follow me slave, we'll in, and with this
Immured blade, that I set free, cut out my passage through the
Gates of horror: the enchantment's done, and Georges happy fate
Some Christians may redeem from Tyrants hate.
Well, I were best run away, while I have legs
to carry me: he's a good loving Master, this same honest
George, but he does lead me into more quarrels and dangers
than all the roaring Davits in the world; but they are co∣wordly
rascals, &amp; I will stay no longer, my accounts are made
even, and I will back again; hay day, they are at it.
Come, we are freed, lets now prepare his death,
That being done, give welcome to him in confusion.
O brave, that by his likeness and voice should be
my Sire Suckabus, it is he; Isle take acquaintance of him.
Who's that, the issue of my Calib?
Begone before I'll follow.
He sees me, and stays a purpose to talk with me:
I will put on my mothers good face, and salute him: pray
sir, hoping that the like is the same, Father give me your bless∣sing.
What Suekabus? O let me kiss my boy:
A blessing on my Princely son and heir.
Thank you Father, I have not known my self a
long time: but now your blood royal begins to plump up
my veins. Have you brought me never a Letter from my
Mother Queen?
None my sweet son.
Why that shows now, shoe's in her Pontificalities,
in my kingdom after your decease, she never minds the
sweet heir of her body, she casts me backward, as if I were
unworthy to be Prince of her joys: but I shall think on it.
Be patient son.
You talk you know not what; have you no Carri∣ers
in your kingdom?
Yes, divers.
Is Hobson there, or Dawson, or Tom Long?
I know not till I make inquiry.
Well, doe so Father;
And if you find 'em, send to me by 'em; they are honest men.
Not a Letter? Can Limbonias Queen, and Duchess of
Witchfordia so much forget her self, and that royal blood
of hers, as not to send a Letter to me?
List to me my son, and Isle show thee the cause,
Why so thy mother and our royal self sent not unto thee:
For had thou but obeyed the charge I left,
Just at the parting of thy mother from thee,
Thou had ever this been with us gentle boy,
Enthroned and honoured as thy Mother is:
Welcomed with triumphs, shows, and fireworks:
Of what we want, we shall be furnished shortly.
I would you had 'em, they'd give much content;
Oh I doe love those things a life i'faith. Have you any squibs
in your Country? any Green-men in your shows, and Whi∣zers
upon lines, Jack Pudding upon Rope, or Sis in fireworks?
But pray father let me know why you did not send.
Then thus: I did not bid thee unsolace thy mind
Like a dejected low-begotten slave,
But revel, drink, laugh, and carouse, quarrel, and stab,
Game, wench, swear and curse, and if thy master offend thee,
Watch him asleep, and kindly cut his throat;
So doing, had thou long ever this come to us.
Forgive me this, and if the obeying of your will, will
bring me to you, let me alone; I'll not be long from home:
But Father, what, no trick, no invention to make me famous
ever I come to you? why, my Mother could juggle as well
as any Hocus Pocus i'th'world, and shall I doe nothing?
Here, take this paper, learn these nino words in it;
At reading the first three, I will appear to thee,
To satisfy what ever thou demand'st.
The virtue of the other three is this:
Look, in what place so ever thou wish thy self,
Or company should meet thee to thy mind,
Speak but the middle three, it is done:
The best and last three words carry this property;
Which once rehearsed by thee,
Whom thou shalt please, shall straightwaies dote on thee,
Love thee entirely, nay, would dye for thee,
If that in pity thou not comfortst them:
There's a jewel for my princely boy.
Oh sweet father, now thou love thy boy: but you
know father, I never was so well learned, as to say God by
my speed.
The better, I would not have thee boy:
I will infuse that learning in thy brain,
That thou shalt read that whensoere thou please.
Pray read em over to me father.
Observe the first three words: Hulcha, pulch, palcha;
These three being spoke, I straight appear.
The next is Runi•, rant, runto; then art thou
Where thou please, and in what company,
The last and best Plagmanitis, squirtis, pampistis,
Thy love lies in thine arms.
What a gift is here! I will Cuckold the great
Turk, love all his Concubines, and lye with all over and o∣ver:
I will beget a thousand of Giants, fill the world full of
Bastards, march with an Army Royal of 'em into my King∣dome,
depose my Father, and live like a Monarch.
Come bring me a little on my way my son,
Isle tell thee braver things than these that thou shalt doe.
Oh my sweet father, what a man art thou!
What is the cause, you ten times worse than devils,
That thus, like Traitors, you deface and spoil
So fair a stamp as your great Makers is?
Why have you sold your endless bliss for bane?
Had they the hopes man has shining on them,
Worlds would not gain a life of thousand years,
And in those lives reign Kings and Emperors,
Change those Celestial joys you might have had:
Ever lost wretches, whore's your power now?
Vanquished by thee: that sanguine Cross my Tablet foretold,
Blood-sheds mine eyes for to behold it worn
And thou that Christian Knight confounds my state:
Yet as thou honourst what I fear to see,
As thou art hopeful of what's past in me,
And as thou art a Knight sworn to honour,
Grant me one small request.
If thy request in honours grant stands fair,
Give us the knowledge, we will see it performed,
Then spare the lives of these two harmless men.
Which I secured by safety of my charms.
Are they not practised in thy horrid Art?
Christian no.
The happier men: rise, we have no hate against ye.
Live still in honour, courteous Christian Knight.
Now Ormandine quit this my grant▪
With one request from me.
it is yours; say on.
I crave the knowledge of your former being,
Before you found the path of your destruction.
Know then▪ that Island seated in the Maine,
Whose crosticke sides points to Barberries kingdom,
Was I once Duke of, the nearest parts to it is this
Of Tartary, the other is Arabia, whose Kings disturbed
My peace and government: Briefly, by flight we saved our
Lives; and to revenge those wrongs I practiced on this Art,
And since have lived scourges to both those Kings:
My Tablet and Pillar then erected, through whose hardness
Stuck that tempered blade; the riddles date on it did so strange appear,
That I thought ever, ever to live here.
And now you shall behold another Christian Knight,
Sent from the Tartar King, by oath enjoynd to fetch my
Head, this did I deem the man, hath brought what you have,
My confusion, but missing of my fears, I entertained him fair,
Yet dreading still least he might prove the man,
My Art hung on his eyes these charms of sleep,
Which till I expiate, can never wake:
His name is David, and a Britain Knight.
Ha, my brother! Prepare thee Ormand, this shall wake him.
Hold, do not with crimson purple your white blade
With such a hancell: give me but leave to mount
Yon storied steps, and you shall see brave Archers hit me sure:
Think not that I must live, would you life give,
Be good unto my friends: I fallen, take up your friend &amp; hence.
Well to your Fate: farewell.
Oh are you aiming, it was time I came, you had
Fetched me else: so, so, we are met.
He that sells bliss, and would in this Art shine,
At last shall pay for it, as did Ormandine.
So, farewell Ormandine; wake David, wake.
Is the Enchantment past? where is this fiend, this devil?
Ormandine, your charms no longer shall prevail on me.
No more, they shall not noble Britain Knight,
See who with joy embrace thee in his arms.
Brother of England, farre-renowned George,
Am I a second time enlarged by thee?
I shall pay Time a death indebted to thy valour.
Doe not engage so far,
Who knows what haps attend our next adventure?
Brother, whore's Ormand?
Dead!
Oh I am lost, for ever lost and gone,
For ever bearing Knightly Arms again: oh, oh—
Brave Britain Knight with patience hear,
Isle tell o'er your own Story.
Say on my Oracle, I will attend.
This Sword you see is mine, enchantments done,
You wakened from deaths sleep, think it not strange,
Ormand did declare before his death,
Your Oaths adventure for to fetch his head:
By the Tartarian King, your Oath shall be performed,
We'll take it off; these harmless men
That hither fled, only to save their lives,
Shall you get favoured of their King again;
Isle bear you company unto the King,
Where we again must part: you shall be further satisfied
In all what appears dark, Isle open as we ride.
Come brother David, we the world that range,
Must not admire at accidents or change.
Come dear Leonides, My loves sole minion,
That like the powerful ruler of the Fates,
Turns my restless Negro•mantick charms
Into what form best fits thy apperite:
Speak my Leonides, prithee smile, and speak it,
Could Earth or Hell invent a guard
To shield black crimes from direful punishment?
Walls are by Wars strong Engines razed and torn,
And Center-reaching caverns of the earth,
Have oft bin made the inhabitants sad graves:
But to build thee a stronger Barricade,
I have fetched force from underneath the Poles,
The slimy mists of dark Avernus Lake,
Cocitus pitchy steams are mixed with that,
And black compounded smoke the Cyclops send
From the foul sulphur of hot Aetna's Forge,
All which I have compounded in a lump,
To make this Isle obscure and tenebrous.
I'll tell thee friend, those furious Giants that did war with heaven,
Had they effected their great enterprise,
Could not more glory in their usurpation,
Than I doe in this Master-piece of Art.
True great Argalio,
Yet here I live as a reprieved prisoner,
In hope of life, sure of imprisonment,
Losing the benefit of lifes repast.
In what?
In the grand loss of the all-pleasing light,
Without the which life is a misery too hard to be inflicted.
Wrong not thy judgment with that fond opinion,
Night, why it is the proper sphere, the Orb of pleasure;
When doe those heirs of pleasure, Cupids Lords,
The active Courtiers and attractive Dames,
Choose to express their quintessence of mirth
In sports and revels, is it not in the Night?
Night and the pleasures that she brings with her,
Shall make thee scorn day, as unnecessary:
My several spirits in an active dance
Shall now present themselves.
Why are these terrors mixed with our delights?
The angry heavens with common destiny, Thunder,
Reprove my sports.
As they'd oppose my sins:
See, see where those poor souls,
Their murdering hands pulled from the mortal
Motion of their flesh, come back to give
The Ferry-man his hire, I am behind hand in that
Fatal debt: but now in spite of his black churlish Oar,
We'll waft ourselves unto the hoped shore.
Correct thy fear affrighted fantasy
Against these fond illusions, see they are vanished;
Come unto pleasures turn, they but abuse thy thoughts.
O great Argalio, call thy ablest charms,
Never had Art more need to help her Mistress:
Three bold adventurous Knights prepare themselves
To ruin thee▪ and thy Leonides:
Aurela, Queen of this unhappy Kingdom,
Has given her best advice to further them.
Be careful of your charge,
Down to the infernal vaults, call up
The Legion of the lower World, and throw
Hells vengeance on them:
Come my Leonides, away with fear,
Should these charms fail, which to mistrust were poor,
My Art should help thee with ten thousand more.
Sure I have lost mine eyes, or else am walked
Into eternal darkness: I have read how wise
Vlysses saw the under world, conversed with bold
Achylles and the Greeks, and then returned alive
To earth again, but Fables help but weakly,
Imitate what really I feel I have lost,
My fellows in this endless night; till now
Their voyees kept me company. Ho Denis, Denis.
Here, here.
Where art thou man?
Wading through fire, and buffeting with air.
Whore's Patrick?
Here, here.
Whore's my noble Spaniard?
Here, my friend.
We all came several ways then?
But a worse than I have ventured, never
Man set foot to: first through a Lake that
Lybias Deserts yield not more hot contagions,
Venom that has struck confused terror
Throughout all my limbs, and pierced my armours
Closure, then was I fine to interpose my shield,
Betwixt me and that ponderous weight, that fell,
As if some Castles ruins had fallen down,
To crush me into nothing.
Mulciber like I walked through fire,
And as the Salamander bathed in the flames,
Winding his body in a stream of sulphur,
So the devouring heate encompassed me.
But I had music in my passage friends,
The Whistler and the Screech-Owle joined their songs,
The boding Ravens made the consort up,
And with their multitudes pressed me to earth;
But here the ayre breaths cold and gently on us:
Is not yon light? or being inured to darkness,
Have not our eyes forgot their faculties?
It is light; what's here, a Pillar, and a Tablet on it?
The lively Taper, which not only clears our eyes,
So long invaded with Cimerian mists, but gives
Vs light, by viewing this Inscription, thereby
For to unfold this dark Enigma.
Read Denis.
Read, and wonder, you that be not be
Not borne to end this prodigy.
The golden Fleece, which Iason sought,
In emblem must be hither brought,
The Flower de Luce and Harp must join,
Before the Riddle you untwine.
Iberi•s earth must yield a Knight,
That must extinguish this great light.
By the same water must be found,
That borne was on unvenom'd ground.
A galleon Helmet, that must hold
The water that these Charms unfold;
That done, this land resumes her rest,
And all Enchantments here depressed.
Either my Genius flatters my best thoughts,
Or else we three were borne to consummate
This great adventure.
It is most plain, Spain gave me birth,
The Golden Fleece mine Arms,
The figure of that prize which Iason brought,
And to make perfect the Inscription,
Here is a Helmet framed in Normandy,
Which I have worn in all my travails since.
No more of doubts; Argalio and Leonides
Prepare to meet your ruin, your all potent Charms,
Me thinks I see them fly from room to room,
Searching the Caverns and obscurest Vaults
To hide their guilty heads from vengeance:
And this strong Charm, once thought invincible,
When it shall vanish like an idle dream,
Their confidence will plague their Conscience more,
Than if they had mistrusted it before.
No more delays, but boldly lets assail,
Our cause is good, and justice must prevail.
It clears, it clears:
What does thy Art avail thee,
Thou that hast said for to obscure the Sun,
Where are they fled? hide thy self now Argalio,
And hide my errors with thee, they are vain,
As my beliefs are, that thou hast a knowledge
Above my mischiefs: horse us on the Clouds,
For nought else can prevent our imminent ruin.
Art thou yet doubtful, unbeleeving boy?
Remember the large stretched thoughts
I have employed to arm thee, could I cause
Darkness? could my powerful Art hide the
Bright Sun in his most royal progress?
And shall it be confined by these opposers?
I cannot have a faith in these delusions:
Let me despair and dye; here is a sword
Can quickly ease my torments, and set free
A burdened Conscience: how freely will my spirit
Greet the air of hells black kingdom:
There the Thracian sits, hard by the sullen
Waters of black Styx, fingering his Lute;
To hear whose pleasing strains, hells Ministers
Forget their offices, the wearied souls their torments,
The whole Vault resounds his echoes;
Thither will I hie, and lay my troubled head
Upon his lap, and he shall charm me
Into endless slumbers.
Hold brainsick man, look up for thy safety;
See thou this Throne by sable spirits borne,
In it we'll mount, so unbeleev'd a height,
Earth shall appear an atom to thine eye:
Thou shalt view Cynthia in her silver sphere,
Couched by Aurora on her Rosie bed; and make
The Sunne-God jealous of your loves:
We'll progress over the Celestial Orbs,
Thence to the Winds, and view the hollow cave,
Where Aeol fetters up the unruly brood;
Then by descentions pleasing to our thoughts,
We'll take survey of Neptunes watery rule,
Ride o'er the bosom of the Ocean
On crooked Dolphins,
Amphion like, striking a well tuned Harp,
And then to the earth again.
Thou hast given me a new life,
I feel a new unwonted joy assail me,
And all my sorrows vanish like those clouds,
That even but now invirond us with darkness.
Mount then my Son, and as we reach the sky,
My Spirits shall salute us with sweet baize,
Jove shall bow down his head to hear their lays,
And wish himself commander of their skill:
Will this delight thee?
Oh my happy friend.
Earth, nor her strongest hold shall not secure 'em.
O act of wonder, we in vain pursue:
Look how they raise themselves unto the clouds:
Oh had I wings but to ore'take
The Villain, Devil, Enchanter.
Ha, ha, ha; fools to imagine you could wrong Argalio,
I pity you, or else my powerful hand
Should crush you into ayre:
Stand, and admire, whilst we ascend a height
'Bove your weak thoughts.
Yet are we happy, though they escaped
Our justice, that we have freed
The Country from contagion. The people
Find this benefit already;
And hark, with shouts applaud this act
Of wonder: Lets to the Queen,
And fully give relations of all these accidents,
Then are we free for other Warlike deeds.
Virtue should still be active, apt to right
Those which are wronged, and good deeds to requite.
Ah sirrah, the world is pretty well amended with
me now, thanks to my Kingly father, and his Charms,
it was time for me to leave the domineering Rascal, and
his beggarly crew of wanderers, Grooms I may term
them, for if they had been Knights they would never
have used a Prince amongst 'em so. I have travailed five
times through the world, and not a Town, City, or Bur∣rough
in England but I carried the marks on my should∣ders
to show for it. The best days that ever I saw with
'em, was when we hired Charles Wane, and rid about the
elements, that was the best twelve days journey that ever
I had: and I remember we had good lodging at the twelve
Signs, and nobly used, for they would not take one
Penny, and to say the truth we had no money to give:
but how we got up, or how the devil we got down
again I know not: and then we fell to our old course
again, to kill every one that wee met: which course I
not liking, in regard wee must fight for our victuals, I
begged this charm of my Father, where hearing of a
famous Castle of Brandrons, and what a brave house hee kept
for Victuals, I out with my Spell, and straight wished
me there; which being no sooner uttered, but a Hawk
or a Buzzard flew betwixt my legs, mounted me in the
Air, and set me down here, where I find whole
Oxen, boiled in a Pottage-pot will hold more water
than the Thames, and now having pretty well stuffed my
Pannier, Isle even take a He sleeps. nap, and so wish my self some∣where
else.
How weary am I with this foraging,
Yet cannot find my hunted prey come in:
Have I a truce granted to a fruitful Kingdom,
And her chief City, not a mile from hence
Upon condition I should spare his City,
Self, and people, to have my quick provision hunted
Into my Iron nets, and doe they break and baffle thus?
Is Bear and Lyon food too good for me?
Why then I see I must take pains to march,
And with my Iron Mace, pound, posh, and mortar them
And City too: oh the net is fallen,
It is well you keep your league.
How now, what scare-Crow's that?
A sleeping Dormouse in my Castle walls: how got he in?
I have no other Porter than my self,
And through the key-hole sure he could not craule;
How or which way should this small spy get in?
Sirrah awake, or with one phillip of my Iron Mace,
Isle send eternal sleep to seize on thee:
Awake you dog.
I, I, you say very well Father, it is true indeed,
And then watch him asleep, and kindly cut his throat.
How? cut my throat? I shall prevent ye slave:
Wren of deformity awake I say.
I hear a rumbling noise, Isle even pack up my trin∣kits,
and begone: Oh Lord what will become of me! I have
wished my self to have my brains beat out.
What art thou worm?
An't please you Sir, I am a Prince, a sweet young
Prince, my Fathers name is Tarpax, Prince of the grisly
North, my mothers name was Calib, Queen of Limbonia,
and Duchess of Witchfordia.
Perish thy father and thy mother, as thy self shall:
Slave how gotst thou in?
I flew over the Castle wall.
Bird of the Devil, whore's your wings to fly?
If you will give me leave, you shall see me fly the
same way back again.
No my fin• Pigeon, I will clip your wings:
Come to my Cauldron, come Isle see how finely you can
Flutter there, it reekes and bubbles, there
Isle plunge thee in, there shalt thou play my Pige.
Till thou art fine, soft, plump, and tender sod▪
And then Isle pick thy bones my dainty bird.
O Lord, what shall become of me? boiled, O Lord,
the very terror of that word, hath thrust the charm quite
from my head, that Charm would save me; oh sweet father
now or never help me, and save a Prince from boiling, a
boiled Prince is his meat else.
Dispatch my bird.
O sweet father, now, now, now I go else,
Boiled: oh the thought of that word: O •have it,
Sweet Father I thank thee,
Has put that Charm into my head
Shall make 'em all in love with me:
Now I care not.
Why when I say?
Splagnalis squirtis p•mpistis.
The Giant in a maze lets fall his Club.
Ha! The beams of wonder shoots into mine eyes,
And love and pity hath surprised my heart.
Oh sweet father, now he's mine sure, and I will
domineer.
The mornings majesty doth not so fresh break forth,
When she doth usher the Altitionate from forth his bed
Of spices, here to shine: how were mine eyes deluded,
My sweet boy, when that I thought
Deformity hung here? for which upon my knees
I beg thy gracious pardon, and with submission,
And contrition, doe desire that favour,
But to kiss thy foot.
My foot? no you shall kiss somewhere else,
My back-side of this hand is yours.
I merit not that favour, heavenly boy.
Go too, Isle have my will, my hand is yours I say.
And for that hand my whole heart is thy slave;
Demand, and take the life of Brandron.
Then say, my dotage darling, can thou love me?
As well as I love roast Beef:
Hast any victuals love? I am a hungry.
Enough, my dainty boy; the banquet of the Gods,
To which flew Saturn, once in thirty years,
Tastes not there of more delightsome Cates,
Than Isle have for my love: come in my boy,
Walk with me hand in hand,
Thou shalt not ask, but have thy full demand.
Brothers, you are welcome all to Brandrons Castle.
Not Brandron nor his Castle
Long shall bear that name.
A strong and sumptuous habitation.
To good a Palace for a Tyrants rain.
What, shall we knock, and rouse the Monster up?
Lets walk the round, and take a view
Of this strong Castle first; happily we may find
A passage in, for to surprise him
Ever he think of us; lets strike upon occasion,
But advantage, in Law of Arms, deserves this
Hateful Traitor.
Your counsel we'll allow, on, let be so:
Come Gentlemen, lets walk, but not too near
The Castle pray, least treasons bounty
Should drop down upon us.
What if we find no entrance,
And he refuse our summons, and not come?
That cannot be, we then might starve the fiend;
His food is daily hunted to these nets,
And once a day we are sure to meet with him:
Then let us careful pass about these walls.
How lik'st thou Brandron, and his Castle boy?
As I am a Prince,
I was never better pleased in all my life.
Music to Brandrons ear that thou art so.
Now you talk of Music, will you hear me sing?
A contradiction to thy will, were poison
To my thoughts: on my souls harmony.
I have a Love, as white as a Raven,
Excelling for blackness the snow,
She will scold, scratch, and bite
Like a Fury or Spright,
And yet she was counted no shrove.
The hair of her head was like Cobblers thread,
Which Sow-haires doe draw through so,
Her Legs on each foot
Is so swelled with the gout,
That my love is not able tog•e.
Her face bares a front, like to Wear water-spout.
Which brought was from thence by great cunning,
With a Mill in her bum,
That did roar like a drum,
Which did set her fair nose still a running.
Orion, that o're-strid the Dolphin with his Harp,
Ne'er song nor plaid such chanting melody:
Thou hast made me drowsy love with thy sweet air.
I carry air at both ends of my Pipe,
But this is the sweeter: come what shall we doe?
Walk with thy Jove, my lovely Ganymede,
And once a day survey my Castle round,
Then will I play with these thy silken locks,
Kiss that sweet Venus Mole upon thy Cheek,
And smell unto thy sweet Sabean breath,
Then will we walk and view my silver fountain,
And my silver Swans, whom next to thee,
I take most pleasure in.
I like that Fountain very well,
And the three Swans that swims about it:
I was wishing for a Goose-pye made
Made of one of 'em but the tother day.
Little dost thou know what those Swans be.
Why, what are they?
List, and Isle tell thee:
Those Swans are daughters to the King of Macedon,
Whom I surprised, and kept within my Castle,
Till at the length, so scorched with loves hot flames▪
That Brandron needs must dye, if not enjoy:
So thinking to deflower 'em one by one,
Each by her prayers converted to a Swan,
And flew for safety in my golden fountain,
And there for ever shall my Ledas Birds
Remain, unharmed by Brandron, or any.
Oh monstrous, I have heard indeed that wenches
have turned pretty Cones, Ducks, or Pigeons; but Swans, O
brave: Come whither shall we go now love?
Up to the promontory top of my fair Castle,
There take thy pleasure of the mornings air,
Breathed from Aurora's care the Sun doth wake,
From thence to banquet upon Lyons hearts,
Isle feast the hye and strong, my Ganymed:
Come let us mount, pleasure's to us a toy,
My happiness consists in thee my boy.
As yet we cannot find a sitting place,
Where we may make a breach for entrance.
What shall we rouse him then?
A little stay, we have not yet begirt the Castle walls,
The time of his approach will not be long,
For all his Iron nets are stored you see.
I long to see, and grapple with the monster.
Here's no man here but hath the same desire.
Come let us walk.
Where art thou love?
Here, here, as close as beggary to a Prodigal,
Isle ne'er forsake ye Isle warrant.
It is well; now we have attained the highest top: ha!
Whats the matter Sir?
See, see, six straggling spies, wandering fugitives
Are lurking about my Walls to make a breach,
And steal my Swans away; but I will down,
And with my Iron Mace send 'em a welcome,
That their powder bones shall seem a pastime
For the wind to play with.
Go to love, no more such words,
No more I say, I know 'em well enough.
Dost thou my love?
Yes, and I am afraid you will know 'em to your
Cost: there's not a man of these, but is able to cope
With a whole army.
Ha, ha, ha.
You were best tell me I lye:
Have you not heard of seven roaring boys,
That made such a damnable thunder through the world,
Making Gallimafries of all came in their way?
O the Christian cures, what then?
These are six of 'em, and I'm afraid the seventh,
And that's my Master, George of England.
Are these the men? beshrew me heart
The largeness of their fame makes Brandron shrug.
Doe not you fear for all this;
What will you say if I betray all these Champions to ye,
And bring 'em all unarmed unto your mercy?
I cannot love thee dearer if thou dost,
But I am loath to venture thee my love.
Take you no care for that, Isle do it,
Give me the keys, and Then when i have got them in
Unarmed, if we cannot make our parties good with 'em,
Would you were hanged y'faith.
Go and befortunate, I long till thou returnst.
There is no hope of entrance till hee comes.
Shall we obscure our selves till then,
Or face the Monster at his coming out?
Obscure, no brother Andrew, here's not a man of us
But singly dares both meet and cope with him:
But soft, I hear the gates unlock,
Each stand upon his guard, the Giant comes.
Who this?
This the mighty Brandron?
If black Enchantments doe not blind mine eyes,
I well should know that habit and that person:
Send me your judgements, know you not that face?
It is Suckabus, our brother Georges man.
You are not deceived Sir, I'm the very same.
What Suckabus?
Gentlemen, it is no wonder for us that are Cham∣peons
to meet at tho worlds end: my master's in the Castle.
How?
It is as I tell ye; we saw ye out of a window
look about the Castle walls, and laughed heartily at ye, and
•o did the Ladies too.
How, Ladies?
Yes faith Ladies: my master hath kilt the Giant,
a foul great lubberly knave he was I'm sure a that: wee
had much a doe with him ere he fell: but now have wee the
bravest life with the Ladies, we doe nothing but dance with
'em al day long. You must come up unto my Master presently.
With all our hearts;
Lead the way good Suckabus.
Nay not so hasty neither: my Master doth earnest∣lie
desire you, that you would deliver all your weapons to
me, for fear of frighting the Ladies; there must no
sign of a Soldier now appear, all must be lovers that doe
enter there.
With all our hearts; take 'em, and lead the way.
Why now it is as it should be;
Isle bring you sweet linen and water to refresh you, and then
into your pantables, and pump up the Ladies.
Excellent Suckabus.
Ha, ha, ha; how happy am I in this faithful boy?
I have beheld through a chink, the Knights
Brought in unarmed and weaponless:
Oh my prosperous politician how I love thee:
These were the Knights whom I did ever fear,
And now I have 'em all mine own but one:
Oh here comes my boy; the news, the news?
My eyes best object; what are they spring'd my love?
I, they are my own, fast locked in a pitfold:
But I have stranger news to tell thee than this.
Say on, we are secure frhm fear and danger now.
After my slight had fetched 'em in unarmed,
And Caged my birds fast under locke and key,
I went to fetch some weapons that I left
Behind me at the gate porch: where peeping
Through a key-hole, by more chance I spied my Master
George of England, prancing his steed about the walls.
What's he the seventh?
I, and the veriest kill-cow of 'em all,
These are but very punies to him.
Go and betray him as thou did the rest.
Nay soft, some wiser than some: hoe's no such
fellow as ye take him for; he may hear me, but he'll
see me hanged ere he trust me; for indeed I have been
so trusty to him, that he'll be sure to truss, if he catch me.
I will not venture thee▪ come, lets to these Knights,
If they will yield unto our fair demands,
And by that Christian power they doe adore,
Swear fealty and faithful love to us,
To fight our battles, and our Champions prove,
Against those that shall oppose our might and power,
We are their friends, and they shall live in favour;
But if denial breath from ones lip,
He and the rest shall perish instantly:
Follow me love.
Through black Enchantments, misbeleeving men,
Wild beasts and monsters, and through death himself,
Hath George of England made his passage, to the desire
Of my longing thoughts; and by my
Tedious travails have I now obtained,
And here I am arrived, where ends my fame,
Or deeper shall insculp my honoured name.
The Castle bears a foul usurped title,
Which I will read out of the Tyrants heart,
And back deliver injured honours due,
Or dye in the attempt.
A rich and stately building▪
How fast it is riveted into the Rock,
As if the sure foundations and the walls were one,
How gaind'd the monster such a policy to vanquish,
And still hold it as his own?
I have no other way but one, and this is it,
This sword must play the Pioner for me,
Which through Brandrons platted coat of brass,
Shall cut his passage to his heart:
And thus I ring deaths larum at his gate.
Ha, what hare-braind frantic Vrchin have we there?
Dost come to meet the Crows and chatting Pies?
They'll make a banquet of thy carcass:
Reserve your smooth-fac'd brow to play with Ladies,
Begone I say, and doe not make reply,
For if thou urge me to a Porters pains,
The strong nerved Cyclops, who by ponderous weight,
Forged out the gates of steel, near laid such strokes,
〈◊〉 I will on thy childish Burgonet.
〈…〉 thou see I'm pitiful.
〈…〉 be accepted at thy hand by such as fear
Thy bug-beare terms, were thy deeds as much:
Therefore descend, and to my hands deliver up the keys,
With it those Virgins, undeflowr'd and wronged,
The daughters to the King of Macedon,
Or by the sacred Cross of Christendom,
Under whose Banner George of England fights,
Isle pitch thy head upon the wall thoustandst,
And Traitor like thy hateful limbs beside.
O, we have heard of you before, but since you are so hot▪
Isle fetch a Iulip for to cool your blood,
You shall be fought, and fought, and fought with too:
Betake you to your tools, that valour tries,
For ne'er till now you plaid your Master-prize,
I doe accept it: Brandron in this alone
Doe I find thee honourable: mean time,
I will prepare to entertain them.
Hollow once more, look up and see,
If these thou conquerst, then thou copsed with me,
But not before: nay, never start, I know thou know 'em well,
You ne'er so strange were, as you must be now:
I keep those bonds which yoked your amities,
And I have broke those bonds:these, once what ere they were,
Are now my subjects, and all sworn to fight
In Brandrons quarrel, be it wrong or right.
I, and to dye in it: question them I pray.
Amazement throws his wonders on my head:
Brother resolve me, is it so, or no?
I see you're prisoners to his power and will,
But let me know the means that makes you so,
Lives there no foul enchantment in this place?
Brother not any.
Monster, I know thou took 'em not in fight;
The meanest of them them there that stands by thee,
But with the quick flames of his resolution,
Had scorched thee into ashes: give reason then
How this should come to pass?
One of you tell him, if you please you may.
We all arrived at one Court, the Macedonian Kings,
And coming hither in his wrongs behalf,
Met with your Hell-borne Suckabus,
Who was before by Brandron entertained;
No sooner we approached the Castle here,
And made a gentle walk about the walls,
But running to us with great signs of joy, that slave
Came to us, told us your self was here,
And how the mighty Brandron by your hand was slain.
Ha, ha, ha; oh my dainty boy, stand near my love,
Here's none dares injure thee.
Look how Master George on foote-backe frowns
on me, but I care not.
Further he told us it was your fair request,
Having sweet Music and fair Ladies with you,
We should come in unarmed and weaponless:
We being joyful, thinking truth he spake,
Were all betrayed, and so to Brandron led,
And so our lives were granted, on condition,
His wrong or right to guard against the world.
Brood of the Devil thou shalt pay for this.
Thy worst, I defy thee.
What we must fight then?
Brother we must.
Well then, what remedy?
But tell me Brandron, ere we begin,
Since thou hast set this quarrel on our heads,
Shall I have fair and single opposition?
Champion thou shalt.
Seal it with your oath, and then it is firm.
Why by the Ethiopes stamp, yon burning ball,
I vow; and this I furthermore will promise,
That each several Combatant shall bear several arms;
And to thy self, from our rich Armoury,
Weapons Isle send complete, although mine enemy:
Here, take the keys, my boy, and see each weapon fitted
Both for him and them: mean time, hear will we sit
Spectators of their deeds: Oh they are met.
You're welcome to our castle: I'm your first man brother
You are welcome.
For Brandron, and his right.
For England, and the Britains doe I fight.
Brother you're mine, your quarrel is not good.
What I have lost, then call it Brandrons blood.
You are noble. Come the next.
That's I for Brandron.
I stand for Scotland now.
You have won it fairly; take it as your own.
You're welcome home.
And I am glad it is so well fallen out.
Let us unite our brother-hoods again.
You are welcome to your liberty.
We joy to see it.
There are the keys▪ enter, and seize on Brandron.
Am I betrayed?
Each hath the best done to defend your state,
Then yield thee to the mercy of our brother.
First will I head long throw me from this Tower,
And dash my brains against the craggy rocks,
That murmurs at the fall of Brandron:
No, Christian slaves, you shall not write
Your glories in my blood, to say,
The mighty Brandron fell by you:
Brandron wins glory to himself to yield,
And thus will conquer Brandron in the field,
One ruin ends for to begin another:
Enter the Castle, seek the slave his man.
And give his guerdon for his treachery.
That will we doe; follow me Anthony.
What drum is that? lets in, and stand upon our guard,
It is our friend, the King of Macedon.
That comes to gratify our victory.
We'll greet him with a token of our loves.
I come in loving quest of you, brave Christian Knights,
Who since your absence from our mournful Court,
In this adventure took in our behalfes,
Fear made us doubt your safety and your lives:
Wherefore resolved, in quittance of your loss,
More than the wrongs I did sustain before,
Made us thus change our mournful black for steel,
And armed with dread less danger of our lives,
Came thus resolved, to fight, and dye for you.
You have out-done us in your noble mind:
Brother of England, embrace this aged King:
And reverend Sir, doe you the like by him;
This the seventh, which in this enterprise,
Redeemed us from the hateful hands of treachery.
I joy to see such worth abound in man,
May honours spring send Garlands for thy brow,
And victory still dwell on thy triumphant arm:
I glory in your conquest.
Which glory once more shines upon thy head;
The hateful monster, that usurped so long,
And kept poor Tenopas in dread and awe,
Hath Justice from his own hand done himself,
And you are honour of your loss again:
Therefore reserve it as our loving deed,
And wear it as our favour.
You so enrich me with your love and bounty,
My life and kingdom is too poor to thank ye.
Were I assured of my daughters lives,
I were ascended to my height of joy.
Of that these gentlemen can more resolve ye.
We never knew, nor saw no Ladies there.
Why then they are dead:
Sweet peace rest with their souls.
As you are gentlemen use not a Prince so hardly:
what I have done was merely out of love; because I would
have you staid men, men of biding, to be forth coming,
though not every hour coming forth: Master George, for
my Queen mothers sake, that kilt your father and mother,
and kept you in a Cave, have compassion upon me.
Dispatch, and hang the slave.
What shall I do now? I have been calling to my fa∣there
for help, and he does nothing, but stands and laughs
at me, and will not put my charm in my head.
Nay come away good Suckabus.
Which is the King of Macedon, I pray?
I am my friend, but cannot save thy life,
Because thou did betray these gentlemen.
I doe beseech thy Kingly worship to save my less, &amp;
I will bring you where your daughters are.
Thou powrest fresh blood into our empty veins,
And melts the snow that lay upon my heart:
Victorious Knights, as much renownd for pity,
As for valour, upon my aged knees I beg the life
Of this condemned wretch.
You must not kneel:upon condition that thou dost perform,
Thy words, we will not only give thee life,
But guard on thee with rich rewards, and love:
But if thy fear delude us, hoping to save thy life—
Why you may hang me then, that's all the care I take.
And wilt thou bring me to my daughters friend?
Come follow me, Isle lead you a dance.
Three whitings they cockle, and set in their luddle,
Sing bay Cock without a comb, sing cock a duddle.
Look you, doe you see those three Swans? these Swans were
once the Daughters, Ducks and Darlings to the King of Ma∣cedon.
Those were the Swans that in the fountain lived:
Did not I tell you what this slave would do?
Dispatch and hang him straight.
I doe beseech ye spare him;
And noble Knights, thus for to let you know,
I doe give faithful credit to his words;
Hear me relate what once my daughters told me;
The eldest having privilege of Birth,
Came to me first for to relate her dream,
And asked me if I could interpret it;
I answered, as I had small faith in dreams,
So I had less knowledge to expound the meaning.
Yet went she on; I dreamt, said she, my sisters and my self
Were playing round about your golden fountain,
When suddenly we all three were-surpris'd,
By a fierce savage and inhumane Monster,
And as his flaming Lust did us pursue,
We turned to Swans, and in the fountain flew.
As she related so did both the rest,
And all three had one dream.
Isle assure you, the Giant that is dead told me the self
same tale, and how he would have done something to 'em, but
having three Eels by the tail they slipped out of his fingers, &amp;
flew like Swans into the golden fountain.
This doth confirm it more: oh my Swans, my girls!
Come shall we sing our Requiem together?
And at the stretching out your silver wings,
Your aged father falls and dies with you.
Take comfort, royal Macedon, as heaven for to preserve
Their honours, changed their shapes it may be pleased
For to restore't again, for after prescripts to believing men,
And would you but become—
In that Isle interrupt ye: hold I pray,
Let me embrace you all; nay, take sure hold:
Though clouds of darkness did my clear shine smother,
I am converted to each here a brother.
A happy conversion.
Blessed Macedon, thou hast sent a gift to heaven,
Borne upon Angels wings;
And is by us on earth here ratified,
Which without this could never have been done.
O father, father, happy are we now.
My blessing on my Swans, my new found joys:
We all are Christians now.
Oh happy state!
Each Lady doth deserve a Monarchs bed.
Renowned Knights, may we desire to know,
Which of you are unmarried?
We are.
Then here's three Ladies, take 'em to your beds.
George highly honours aged Macedon.
But can the Ladies love accord with us?
Most willingly.
We thus then seal our contracts.
Which thus we ratify:
Sit with the Brides, most noble Macedon,
And since kind fortune sent such happy chance,
We'll grace your Nuptials with a soldiers dance.
True noble Knights, how am I honoured in you?
No more good Macedon: pray lead the way,
We'll see your Nuptial Rites,
That task once done,
We must abroad for same of Christendom.

THe Kings Majesties Masque being per∣formed,
the Queen commanded Inigo
Iones Surveyor of her Majesties works,
to make a new subject of a Masque
for her self, that with high and hearty
invention, might give occasion for variety of Scenes,
strange apparitions, Songs, Music and dancing of seve∣rall
kinds; from whence doth result the true pleasure
peculiar to our English Masques, which by strangers and
travellers of judgement, are held to be as noble and
ingenious, as those of any other nations: This being
suddenly done and showed her Majesty, and she ap∣proving
it, the work was set in hand, and with all ce∣lerity
performed in shorter time, than any thing here
hath been done in this kind.
The invention consisting of darkness and light,
the night presents the first Antimasques and sleep
with his three principal children, the Antimasques of
dreams: The subject of the maine Masque of light, was
thus introduced. The Muses being long since drawn
out of Greece by the fierce Thratians, their groves
withered and all their springs dried up, and out of
Italy by the barbarous Gods and vandals, they
wandered here and there indecently without their or∣naments
and instruments: The Arch-Flamines
and Flamines their Prophetic Priests being con∣strained
either to live in disguises, or hide their
heads in caves, and in some places, whenever they
began to appear, they were together with peace driven
out by war, and in the more civilised parts, where
they hoped to have taken some rest, envy and ava∣rice
by clipping the wings of Fame drave them into
a perpetual storm, till by the divine minds of these
incomparable Pair, the Muses and they were received
into protection, and established in this monarchy, to
the encouragement and security of those well-borne
wits represented by the Prophetic Priests of the
Britanides. The Scene where this goddess of brightness
was discovered, was stiled the garden of the Brita∣nides,
or Muses of great Britain, not inferior in
beauty to that of the Hesperides, or that of Alcinous,
celebrated by Homer. The conclusion of all was
an applause and confirmation of those Deities or se∣cond
causes by whose influence at this prefixed time,
the Britanides and their Prophetic Priests were to
be established in this garden, by the unanimous and mag∣nificent
virtues of the King and Queens Majesties
making this happy Island a pattern to all Nations,
as Greece was amongst the Ancients.
The ornament which served as a Bordure to enclose
the Scene, was raised on two round Basements, on
which were Satyrs bigger than the life, bearing
baskets of fruits, and knots of young Satyrs clean∣ging
about their legs in extravagant postures: above
these ran comicements, which made the ground of
a second order, wherein were terms of women fained
of silver, and children in their natural colours stan∣ding
on arches, some wantonising about those
terms, and others holding great vizards before their fa∣ces:
On the heads of the Terms were cushions which
served for capitals, that bore the finishing of composed
frontispices of great scrolls with frutages, from
whence hung lighted Lamps.
In the Freeze above was other young Satyrs, which
seemed oppressed with the burden of great festons,
the husks of which were tied up in knots to a double
compartment composed of scrolls, quadratures,
and Masque heads, in the midst hung a drapery
fained, of cloth of silver, and in it was written
LVMINALIA: under all this ran a large valence
of gold embroidered with flowers and great Tassels.
The Kings Majesty being seated under the State, the
curtain in an instant disappeared discovering a Scene
all of darkness, the nearer part woody, and farther off
more open with a calm River, that took the sha∣dowes
of the Trees by the light of the Moon, that ap∣pear'd
shining in the River; there being no more light
to lighten the whole Scene than served to distinguish
the several grounds, that seemed to run far in from
the eye, with this Scene of darkness was heard the
voices of Birds of Night.
This strange Scene having a while entertained the
sight of the spectators, there arose out of the hollow
caverns of the earth a dusky cloud, and on it a Cha∣riot
enriched and drawn by two great owls, on this
sate a matron in a purple robe, with stars of gold
and large black wings displayed, her browne hair loose,
and on her head a veil of russet cyprus, with a picked
crown and a golden Sceptre in her hand; Represen∣ting
night: she tells she came to give repose to the la∣bours
of mortals: but seeing all things here tending to
feasts and revels, she with her attendants will give her
assistance, though it serve but as a foil to set off more
nobler representations.
In wet and cloudy mists, I sloowly rise,
As with mine own dull weight oppressed.
To close with sleep the jealous lovers eyes,
And give forsaken Virgins rest.
The adventurous Merchant and the Mariner,
(Whom storms all day vex in the deep)
Begin to trust the winds when I appear,
And lose their dangers in their sleep.
The studious that consume their brains and sight,
In search where doubtful knowledge lies,
Grow weary of their fruitless use of light,
And wish my shades to ease their eyes.
The ambitious toiling Statesman that prepares
Great mischiefs ere the day begins,
Not measures day by hours, but by his cares;
And night must intermit his sins.
Then why, when my slow Chariot used to clime,
Did old mistaking Sages weep?
As if my Empire did usurp their time,
And hours were lost when spent in sleep.
I come to ease their labours and prevent
That weariness which would destroy:
The profit of their toils are still miss-spent
Till rest enables to enjoy.
There came out from the sides of the Scene six
persons, Oblivion, Silence, and the four nocturnal
hours or vigils, all attendants on the night.
Oblivion a young man naked, and a greene mantle
tucked about his shoulders, and upon his head a cuc∣koe.
Silence an old man in a skin coat close to his body
set full of eyes, his mantle tawny, and a girland of
Peach-tree about his head.
The first vigil in a robe of blue, with a red mantle,
her hair hanging down in locks, and a bat setting be∣fore.
The second habitat as the former, but the colours
somewhat darker, on her head a scritch-owle.
The third in purple, and black, on her head a dor∣mouse.
The fourth in watchet and carnation, her hair mixed
with silver like dew, and a little Swan on her head, all
these colours were appropriated to the several noctur∣nil
hours.
The Chariot of Night being arrived to the middle
of the air, staid, and after some dialogue with her atten∣dants,
she ascends singing, and is hidden in the clouds.
Why dreadful Queen dost thou appear,
So early in this Hemisphere?
Where all to triumphs are addressed,
As they did need as little rest
As wandering Planets have above;
Who ne'er are tired, yet ever move.
As little weary as are they;
As free from sufferings and decay,
Or fear of fleeting times expense;
Not tired, with weight, or vexed with sense.
Why would Oblivion mix with these that strive,
To raise new joys, and keep the old alive?
What is the use of silence here?
Thou see (great Empress) every eye,
Doth watch for measures, every ear
Doth hearken after harmony.
Why are we come to give their labours ease?
That reckon sleep a death, rest a disease:
And all this Isle their triumphs now express,
Not to beget, but show their happiness:
A precious sign, they know their own estate,
And that makes Nations chiefly fortunate:
For it alike should often valued be,
To know, as to deserve felicity.
You just, and careful Registers of hours,
And you whose several ever useful powers,
Dispose and make me pleasing whilst I sway,
Produce fantastic creatures of the night,
Though not to advance, yet vary their delight;
Perhaps these triumphs may defer the day.
All that our striving mystery presents
Will be but foils to nobler ornaments,
Yet I so trust the causes of their joy,
And am so envious of those glistering shows
The Sun in pride, not favour doth disclose,
That I would lengthen what I can't destroy.
These Antimasques being past, the scene of night va∣nished;
and a new and strange Prospect of Chimeras
appea'rd, with some trees of an unusual form, Moun∣taines
of gold, Towers falling, Windmils, and other
extravagant edifices, and in the further part a great City
sustained by a Rain-bow, all which represented the City
of Sleep.
One of the Vigils in song called forth Sleep, who
appeared coming out of a dark cave, with three of
his principal sons.
Morpheus the presenter of humane shapes.
Iceles, of fearful visions.
And Phantaste, of any thing that may be imagined.
Sleep, a fat man in a black robe, and over it a white
mantle, on his head a girland of Grapes, with a Dor∣mouse
sitting before, in his hand a golden wand.
Morpheus in a robe of cloth of gold, his mantle
Blue, on his head a girland of Poppy.
Iceles, in a brownish flesh colour close to him, like
the naked, a red mantle, great Bats wings on his should∣ders;
on his head a bend set with flames.
Phantaste, in a white robe of cloth of silver, a greene
mantle, and on his head a dressing of several coloured
feathers.
 Why (as if guilty) dost thou hide thy head
(Dull sleep!) in gloomy shades with Poppy spread?
If thou dost steal our hours, is it a crime?
Thou dost but lay them by for men's relief,
And art at worst a profitable thief;
Pay'st Nature double what thou steal from Time.
Invoke thy chiefest sons, and straight appear,
To make these pleasures sit to last a year!
 I come! I come! and that I more may please,
My Morpheus I have brought, and Iceles,
With wilde Phantaste; each of them hath power
To raise Ideas from my shady Bower:
Those dreams of humane forms; of worse estate
That reason want, and things inanimate.
 How we shall fill each mortal with delight,
To show the souls fond business every night;
When she doth inwardly contract her beams,
To figure out her influence in dreams!
How they will smile, that mans immortal part,
Works things less perfect than if ruled by Art!
The song ended, the sons of Sleep bring in these
Antimasques of dreams.
An Ignis Fatuus, leading
4. Clowns that seem to walk in their sleep.
4. Witches.
1. Devil in the shape of a Goat.
Robin-goodfellow.
1. Dairy-maid.
1. Kitchin-maid.
Of five feathered men, inhabitants of the City of
Sleep.Presented by
Master Thomas Howard.
Master Henry Murray.
Master Charles Murray.
Master Charles Bruno.
Here an Antique ship was seen far within the
Scene, sailing in the air.
From the Temple of the Cock, seated by the
haven of the City of Sleep, the principal Mariners
or Masters Mates in rich habits, but proper to the sub∣jest,
come forth and make their entry. Presented by
The Duke of Lenox.
Earl of Carlisle.
Lord William Hamilton.
Lord Russell.
Five Sentinels guardians of the Ivory gate of the
City of Sleep: Presented by
Earl of Devonshire,
Lord Philip Herbert,
M. De la Vieuville,
Mr. Francis Russell,
Mr. Thomas Weston.
A cavilier in a dream being enamord of a beauti∣full
Gentlewoman, seeks by his Page to win her to
his love, which she seems to entertain, but hee com∣ming
near to court her she suddenly is turned into a
fury, which much affri'ghts them. Represented by
The Earl of Ant•um, and
Mr. Bartholomew de Mountacut
his Page.
These Antimasques being past, the Heaven began
to bee enlightened as before the Sun rising, and the
Scene was changed into a delicious prospect; where∣in
were rows of Trees, Fountains, Statues, Arbors,
Grotto's, walks, and all such things of delight, as might
express the beautiful garden of the Britanides.
The morning Star appears in the Air, sitting on
a bright Cloud, in form of a beautiful youth naked,
with a mantle of watchet Cyprus, on his head a Star.
On the other side of the Heaven came forth Aurora
in a Chariot touched with gold, borne up by a rosie
coloured cloud, her garment white trimmed with gold,
loosely tucked about her, and cut down on the sides;
her arms bare with bracelets of gold, with a veil of
Carnation flying, as blown up by the wind, her wings
white spotted with gold, her fair hair dishevelled, and
on her head a Girland of Roses.
Hesperus asks Aurora, why the Sun is so long in
coming, and whether being weary of his last journey,
he is gone to take his rest. Aurora answers, that her
brother the Sun hath for this time given up his
charge of lightning this Hemisphere to a terrestrial
Beauty, in whom intellectual and corporeal bright∣ness
are joined, and therefore bids him descend and
summon the Arch-Flamines and Flamines to celebrate
with divine hymns: this Goddess of brightness
with those fair Nymphs dependants on her splendour.
 The bright perpetual Traveller
Doth now too long the day defer,
Can he grow old,
Or, in his fiery chariot cold,
Or weary cause he still one course doth run?
 Bold Hesperus thou dost mistake the Sun:
Though's journeys never can be past,
But must for ever last,
Though it is not limited how far,
Because it still is circular,
Yet sure he cannot tire,
Nor mortally wax old,
Nor's universal beams grow cold,
Since fed with immaterial fire.
 What is the cause he then so long doth stay?
 He hath resigned the power of making day
Throughout this Hemisphere,
To a terrestr' all beauty here.
 Now I perceive why Poets call him wise
He knows the way how to preserve his eyes,
This earthly Star (long since the boast of Fame)
Is both become his envy and his shame.
It is true, should he appear, he were undone,
And eclipsed though in his pride of noon.
 Yet in her looks he'll least of danger find,
She darkens those with beauties of her mind.
 If thou wilt ever shine above,
And in thy Sphere still safely move,
Descend, and summon strait
Apollo's Priests that wait
In the garden of the Britanides.
 Enough, Isle rouse them from their ease,
That they with Hymns may celebrate
Her virtues ever blessed estate.
 Her Nymphs (whose beauties can't expire,)
Because daily kindled by her fire,
Must needs be ravished with those lays,
Since as their own they love her praise.
The Song ended, the morning Star descends sing∣ing,
and Aurora passes through the Air: As he de∣scended
the Chorus of Arch-Flamines and Flamines of
the Britainides come forth, they were habitat in rich ha∣bits
ofseverall colours, as they are described by the An∣cients.
Hesperus leads them down into the room near
to the State.
Wisely did Arts great Lord
That ruled Mythology,
No vest for Truth afford,
But to each eye
Ordained her body naked still, to show
Some kind of truths men bashfully should know;
Thy praises being truths are silenced so.
Yet mighty spirits raise
Their actions up to Fame,
When lifted high with praise:
Then who will blame
Great virtue for ambition when it strives
To feed on praise (the food by which it thrives?)
Who earn'st, yet hat'st, himself of truth deprives. 
We know it is more lawful far
Than possible to sing your praise,
Who shows how gentle, wise, and just you are,
Must trace wide measures, not in common ways.
As some in war near a defeat,
Confess betimes the are overcome,
To save their desperate honours byretreat;
so wee retire, lest wonder strike us dumb.
After this song they return back in a measure, and
mount the degrees, and stand on each side of the
Scene.
How dull and uneffectuall is that rage,
Which swells our Poets when their numbers flow?
Resembling sillily, in every ago,
Things excellent, to what they least doe know.
How poorly have they done, when they compare
A beauty that can rule severest eyes,
Unto some pretty twinkling senseless Star?
Yet think they mend her by such similes.
If it be safe to gaze on beauty in extremes,
Look there, correct your judgements by your sight!
Those beauties near her, are made up of beams,
They gathered from her useless scattered light.
Now judge (if fairest Stars no more contain
Than what is certain to the Astrologer)
Whether compared to Stars she so much gain,
As Stars have gotten when compared to her?
Here the further part of the Garden opened, and
the Masquers are seen, the Queens Majesty being
seated high, and the Ladies somewhat lower on two
degrees, the figure of the seat was half an Oval,
about which were Terms, the upper parts like Cupids,
and the under part enriched with leaves. At the two ends
of this seat were figures of women like Sirens con∣verted
into Foliage and Scrolls, all which seemed
to be enchased of Gold-smiths work; behind all
was a bright sky, and in the midst about the Queens
Majesties seat was a Glory with Rays, expressing her
to be the Queen of Brightness.
The habit of the Masquers was close bodies, open
before the breasts, of Aurora colour, richly embroi∣dered
with silver, about the waste ran a short Basis, cut
in starre-like beams of white, and under these were
lower labels, large at the bottom, and cut in a Tree∣foil,
tacked together with small twists of gold, the
ornament at the shoulders coming down to the bow∣ing
of the arm, was of the same colour and form as
the Basis, their arming-sleeves and skirts of their
gowns as that of the bodies; they wore well-pro∣portioned
ruffs, and on their hair stood a small bend
or diadem of jewels and starts between, which in the
hinder part had a scroll, large at the bottom and nar∣row
toward the top, to which their false of white fea∣theirs
were fastened.
The song being ended, the Masquers came down
from their seat into the room and made their entry,
betwixt this and the second dance was this song.
Was there no other way
Our wonder to allay
But thus to falsify relief?
For seeing quickly tired,
What moving we admired,
You turn our wonder into grief.
Renew your measures now
Though but awhile, to show
This respite was not weariness;
But you by thee did please
To give our pleasures ease,
Which if continued, had grown less,
The Masquers dance their second dance, which en∣ded,
and her Majesty seated under the state by the King,
in the further part of the Scene appeared a heaven full
of Deities or second causes, with instruments and
voices, which together with the Muses of Great Bri∣taine
and Chorus of Arch-Flamines and Flamines
sing this last song.
You that are chief in souls, as in your blood,
And nothing bettered by your high descent,
Even in your passions as in reason good,
To whom vast power can add no ornament.
Though Men the blessed estate of Angels praise,
Because not perplexed with what we sexes call;
Yet you by such a humane difference raise
Your virtue more, because it is conjugal.
Be long expected in your Thrones above!
And stay on earth until our judgements know
The noble use of that we so much love;
Thus heaven still lends what we would ever owe.
After this song, the upper part of the heaven op∣ned,
and a bright and transparent cloud came forth far
into the Scene, upon which were many Zephyr and
gentle breasts with rich, but light garments tucked
about their wastes, and falling down about their knees,
and on their heads girlands of flowers: These to the
Violins began a sprightly dance, first with single pas∣sages,
and then joining hands in rounds several ways.
Which Apparition for the newness of the Invention,
greatness of the Machine, and difficulty of Engi∣ning,
was much admired, being a thing not befo••
tempted in the Air.
The Masquers dance the Revels with the Lords▪

DOe not expect the abuses of a Place;
Nor th'ills sprung from a Strumpets painted face
To be expressed. Our Author doth not mean
With such vile stuff to clothe his modest Scoene.
Nor doth he brand it with a Satyrs mark;
But makes a Justice wiser then his Clerk.
His Rustics likewise will pretend to Wit:
So all the Persons which wee counterfeit.
He justifies that it is no borrowed Strain,
From the invention of another brain.
Nor did he steal the Fancy. It is the same
Hee first intended by the proper Name.
It was not a toil of years: few weeks brought forth
This rugged Issue, might have been more worth
If he had licked it more. Nor doth he raise
From the imitation of authentic Plays
Matter or words to height: nor bundle up
Conceits at Taverns where the Wits doe sup.
His Muse issolitary, and alone
Doth practise her low speculation.
He hath no faction in a partial way,
Prepared to cry it up, and boast the Play,
Swelling your expectations: hee relies
Merely upon your ingenuities.
The Matter's weak: how can the Building stand?
Yes; if supported by a gracious Hand.
_〈◊〉 we are come to London, fellow Ralph
what shall we doe? or what course will our
Master take with us?
Why, Dobson; he may doe what
he will, and wee will doe what we list. A
little instruction and practice will make
us wicked enough, I dare warrant thee.
I hope we are not to learn that. But all this while
the Plough stands still.
Sha, Dobson; thy mind's upon nothing but dirt.
Indeed heir's store of it, ankcle deep.
What place is this Ralph? thou know London.
It should be COVENT-GARDEN; but it is
much altered since I was here last.
A Garden call you it! It is a very barren one.
I would I were at home again, amongst the
Creame-bowles.
I could be content to have the tother sm•cke at o•r
Gillian the Dayry-Maids sugar-candy—
How, fellow Ralph! you kiss my Sweet-heart
Gillian! pronounce it again, and by the faith of a new
made Serving-man, that puts his whole trust in his Live•y
and the Quarter-dayes, I will kill thee presently, and chal∣lenge
thee the next Holi-day before the Congregation.
Kill me fi•st, and then challenge me! for a kiss
or two! nay, good Dobsox; she has lips big enough to serve
us both. Prithee lets not fall o•t and beat one another:
these people would but laugh at us for it.
Indeed it is a jolly company. Dwell they all here
abouts?
I scarce think they are all of one Parish, neither
doe they go to one Church. They come only for an eve∣ning
recreation •o s•e COVENT-GARDEN.
Blessings on their hearts for it. It is a goodly place.
And a god•y one too if rumour lie not.
What are all these things with rails?
I think mews for hawks, or airings for gen∣tles.
Other hawks are not here in any request.
Mews for hawks, thou would make me a
Buzzard.
Dost think we shall dwell hereabouts?
I hope so: we shall then be n•ere the Cock-p•t,
and see a Play now and then.
But tell me Ralph, are those Players the ragged
fellows that were at our house last Christmas, that bore∣rowed
the red blanket off my bed to make their Major a
gown; and had the great Pot-lid for Guy of Warwicks
Buckler?
No, Dobson; they are men of credit, whose act∣once
are beheld by every one, and allowed for the most part
with commendations. They make no yearly Progress
with the Anatomy of a S•mpter-horse, laden with the
sweepings of Long-lane in a dead Vacation, and purchased
at the exchange of their own whole Wardrobes. They
buy not their Ordinary for the Copy of a Prologue; nor
insinuate themselves into the acquaintance of an admiring
Ningle, who for his free coming in, is at the expense of
a Tavern Supper, and rinses their bawling throats with
Canary.
But I would I had stayed still in the Country,
now Sports are tolerated, in despite of Justice, Trouble∣some's
malicious Authority. I had rather see a Morris∣dance
and a May-pole, then ten Plays: what care I for
wit which I understand not?
The duller Ass tho•.
How, Ass to my face! provoke me no more
with such foul language, lest I enter and act thy Tragedy.
Nay, prithee fellow Dobson; if we abuse our
selves sometimes, twill be the better taken when wee a∣b•se others.
To morrow Isle have you acco•tred in liveries,
and put my self into a gentile garb. I am resolved to for∣sake
the Country profession of mine Ancestors; and
mean to turn Gallant. Isle sell some few dirty Acres, and
buy a Knighthood: Isle translate my Farm of Dirt-all in∣to
the Manor of No-place. Would I were acquainted
with an honest Scrivener.
You wish an impossibility, unless the Pillory
were more terrible.
But doe you mean to sell your Land?
Yes indeed; I shall be the likelier to go to hey∣ven
when I forsake earth.
But it is a dangerous way through a Scriveners
conscience.
What dost tell me of danger! It is the Cowards
bug-beare; a scar-crow to City gulls, that dare not wear
swords for fear of being challenged.
Nay, my Master is as tall a man of his inches.
Yes, Dobson; thou hast seen me doe something.
But sirrah, let it be your charge to find out a good Inn;
see Crop eat his meat.
Isle warrant Sir, he will cat his meat, and it were
Good-friday.
Had he but cares then, hee might make a very
good Puritan horse.
Indeed, their best virtue is to hear well.
But their doing sometimes, begets a hotter zeal
in the Sister-hood.
I'll have a lodging here. Prithee ask that
Gentlewoman; she seems an inhabitant.
Pray Master, know you hereabouts any conve∣nient
Lodgings?
Many Sir, for convenient persons.
Of credit, and unsuspicious.
It is not in my understanding; wherefore the
satisfaction I can give you will be doubtful. I know none
of my neighbours better then my self. I have as hand∣some
Lodgings as any are in Covent Garden: my fore∣rooms
have a fair prospect, and my back-roomes a
sweet ayre.
Which is not usual backwards.
May we see them?
If you please to let that Tavern receive you
till I have made them ready, I will return and give you
notic•.
I'll sup there: shall I entreat your company?
I shall be ready to fulfil your desires.
And we our bellies: hitherto, we have had but
a hungry journey of it.
My friend, pray what's your Masters name?
What if it be not in my Commission to tell you?
My demands are civil and for no hurt. I must
know before my house can give him entertainment.
But I must not tell you, till I have a mind to 〈◊〉.
You may be the agent to an Informer: doe you not cor∣respond
with the Summer and Apparitour, to keep your
self off some deserved punishment.
I am a patient bearer.
Not unlikely, I have heard there are many such
in Covent-Garden.
I mean with your unmanerlinesse.
If a downright▪ Country thing will please
you.
A downright! you make me blus•.
This interest then, and—
So Sir, the terms are not equal for such fami∣liaritie.
Why then you must seek you a more proporti∣on it
Schoolmaster to enter you farther, and teach you
my Masters name. The Wine stays, and I want it.
Good friend stay a little, and tell me thy Ma∣sters
name.
What again! Fare you well, I have forgot it.
Nay, prithee friend: my knowledge of it may
much concern his, or (if not) thy good. My daughter
Iynny's a handsome girl, he that pleases me best shall
have her.
I rather think hee shall have her that pleases
her best, else I shall doubt her for a woman. But how
can s•e concern our goods? your instance.
Nay, credit me upon my word, it is earnest.
A Women's word! it is not worth an ounce of
feathers. Besides, you may be under covert barn. Have
you not a Husband?
Yes indeed.
What's his profession?
An under-Lawyer, an Attorney.
His word may be taken in the term for a gown-facing
or so: but to doe any man good, is worth a double
fee, if he perform it. Mistress, if you must know my Ma∣sters
name, go to Carterton in the County of Sussex, and
there in the Church-Register you shall find, that Roger
the son of Rowland Dungworth of Dirtall Farm in the
Parish of Carterton aforesaid, was baptised—But stay,
I'll know first if he be resolved to continue a Christian;
it is ordinary to change names with religion. Besides, hee
means to be a Knight; and Dungworth will stink in the de∣licit
nostrils of a Lady: it may make the heraul•••s give
him a mock-coate with three kennell-rakers. Farewell
sweet Mistress, and if my Master chance to lie at your house,
I should be glad if I might lie over your Daughter.
Farewell good friend. The Gentleman to lye at
my house! very good. I must project a profit out of
the accident; a new Gown, or a Beaver, or some com∣position
with a bond of assurance, when I procure him a
good Wife. Perhaps hee shall have my Daughter Iynny.
Who would think this little body of mine were so busy
in stirring actions, Master Theodore Art-love!
Mistress Tongall, you are delighting your self
with these new erections.
Fair erections are pleasing things.
Indeed they are fair ones, and their uniformity
adds much to their beauty.
How like you the Balconee's? They set off a
Ladies person well, when she presents her self to the view
of gazing passengers. Artificial fucations are not dis∣corned
at distance.
Pray which is Sir Generous Worthie's house?
Your desires (I believe) are bent towards his
fair Daughter. Let me aid you: my neighbour-hood
hath interested me in her acquaintance; I can make way;
and truly Mr. Art-love I like you so well, that (were she
worthy) you should have my daughter Iynnye. But doe
you love Mistress Dorothy?
I have seen her beauty, and her nimble eyes
Have shot a fire into me, that inflame•'s
My cold desires. I that have resisted
The assaults of passion to a perfect conquest;
And called it (justly too) the height of folly
To give that wanton Power the attribute
Of a false Deity: I, that have out-gone
The example of Zenocrates, am captived;
But by a Beauty, such as would review
Heat in the frozen bosom of an Anchorite,
Who hath spent his age even to decrepitnesse
In such austerities as would mortify
The strongest pamperd wantonness. I cove•
A good success, but fail in it. Never yet
Could I be blessed with opportunity
To show her my desires, and to try
The fortune of persuasion.
And would you not use me! hath so long pra∣ctise
in match-making made me politic to contrive, and
my conversation with your self and the rest of the Wits
made me complemental, and doe you think I cannot fa∣cilitate
your entrance to Mistress Dorothy?
Should I be fortunate in my attempts
To win her liking; should my person please her,
Or that annexion to my better part
Of education, yet the disparity
Betwixt our states, checks me from hoping
That the design can prosper. The lighter fire
Ne'er mixes with the earth, but to confusion:
Or from their several natures bringing forth
Events prodigious.
Why, you are an Heir to a thousand pound a
year. An officious lye may be dispensed with.
But simple honesty
Clad in the naked livery of truth
Is a most glorious virtue, that preserves
White innocence unstained with falsehood.
Good means as well as good intention
Must make an act good.
If you have such a tender conscience, so religi∣ously
scrupulous, you'll never be a Politician.
Let those that study mischief
To satisfy their sensualties
Practise such wickedness. I'd not abuse
A noble goodness to possess the Indies.
But heere's one will, and I must aid him int▪
Mr. Littleword.
Friend Art-love, the good fortune of a petticoat
light upon thee, in the name of Venery what make thou
here? art' in quest of a smock-bedfellow.
Thy old humour still friend.
Prithee salute this little gentleman my Cousin:
he hath more age and wit then his small proportion doth
promise.
I shall be ready to serve him.
Your acquaintance will add much to my hap∣pines.
He hath gotten leave of his Uncle to live here in
my tuition. Hee thrive's well in his conceit, a right Ier∣kerr;
he begins to love a wench already.
Thy instruction and example will soon enable
him that way.
Is not that a wench Cousin?
Try Cos. and satisfy your self.
My Little-word, if your salute be ended, pray re∣sign.
Nay, Mistress, I can kiss you without the help
of a joined stool: please you to walk, and let my hand
support you.
Whither pray you little sir?
To the next vaulting•school.
Alas, you cannot get up without a stirrup.
Yes, and ride too without falling; please you to
try my activenesse.
Prithee recall thy wonted goodness home,
And with a virtuous scorn shake off this habit
Of loose desires; it hath infection in it.
Nothing comes from thee but documents. I
swear I should love thee much better if thou had less
virtue. I prithee leave thy Stoicism, and become an Epi∣cure
with me. My little Cos. here shall prove with unde∣nyable
arguments that drinking and winching are the one∣lie
virtues in a gentleman of the last edition: to be excel∣lent
at them is a master-piece of education. Besides, they
are the only acumens of wit.
Yes, to disease it.
Take heed thy judgment be not brought in que∣stion.
Why diseased wits are—
Better play at small game then sit out. A young
gamester may throw in and in.
Very seldom with three dice. Can your littleness
cog?
Fair play is a gamesters glory. I love to shake the
box well, and than let them run their length.
Yes, I confess it; where there is an union
Of loving hearts, the joy exceed's expression.
That love is virtuous whose desires doe never
End in their satisfaction, but increase
Towards the object. When a beauteous frame
Garnish't with all the lustre of perfection
Invite's the eye, and tells the searching thoughts
It holds a richer mind, with which my soul
Would rather mix her faculties.
Judge not of a man by his outward dimensions:
My shape is not so defective to make you doubt perfor∣mance:
let's find out a convenient place and try.
Alas little one, you'll lose your self: you'll never
hit the way home.
It is a bliss above the feigned Elysium
To clasp a dainty waste; to kiss a lip
Melts into Nectar; to behold an eye
Shoot amorous fires, that would warm cold Statues
Into a life and motion; play with hair
Brighter then that was stellifyed.
And when the wanton appetite is cloyed
With thousand satisfactions of this kind,
Then follow's the absolutenesse
Of all delight. But were desire restrained
From variation, soon it would satiate,
And glut it self to loathing.
Please you to drink a pint or two of wine? there
may be provocation in it.
Preserve your curtsy child, and your money:
Lent's at hand, and then every street will afford boys re∣creation.
Why how now impudence! do you slout a man?
How, a man Cousin!
I want not so much of my full age to bee called
a boy.
But you must not fall out with the Gentlewoman.
I desire rather to have fallen in with her.
I would not have you so forward Cousin. You
must be sure to deal with sound ware.
What care I? it is but the loss of a mans hair;
an excrementall ornament: wit consists not in it. A man
may cover his baldness with a periwig, and the fashion
take's away the suspicion. I hope I came to London to
learn wit and the fashion.
Come Mr. Little-word.
Adieu Mistress Tongall.
I took her rather for a Wag-taile.
What silent Gentleman's that?
His Character in his own language is I and no;
yet he speaks well in paper. He is a wit, but somewhat
a dull one.
What serious affair have they together?
There are hidden policies in the world. Thou
hast a bookish humour; I a winching one; and why may
not his dullness dream of some rich match! Mris. Tongal's
the only match-maker in the Town.
Those words create a hell of torment in me.
Is there no love
But what's attended by vain jealousy!
Art thou in love?
Yes, passionately.
My dreamings, wakings, thoughts and actions
Are nothing but desire.
I can as soon credit an impossibility. Thou in
love! why it is more improbable then the projection of
draining Marsh-land with a wind-mill. But prithee what
is she?
See where my comforts Sun
Breaks through a cloud. Oh that this unkind distance
Might be contracted into lesser ayre:
I'd then convey my whispers to her ears;
And teach her understanding what delight
Society hath in it.
Sure thou hast not boldness enough to speak to
her. Thou would blush, and fall into some pathetic
book discourse, or tell her the story of Hero and Lender,
to make her tenderness whine. Tic not the way. Get
access to her; and after one mannerly salute, double and
treble thy kisses; tumble her a little, and if opportunity
serve, offer the rest: Magic hath not a Philter like it.
Is not that a house (Cousin) where the Wen∣ches
are?
Yes, questionless.
I mean in the sense of—
Yonder Gentlemen observe us: let's be gone.
Not yet (Mistress Dorothy.) Now I have drunk
a cup of Sack, I must be in love with one of them, him
that seems most worthy of a gentleuman.
You have fallen my glove.
I'll fetch it.
Blessed accident;
Why doe you stop my hast? let me embrace it.
Thus with religious worship doe I kiss
What your white hand hath hallowed. Ha! shoe's gone▪
What envious mischief intercepts the means
Of my desired happiness! or have mine eyes
Wasted their beams in gazing on the place
Where I first saw her, to imagination
Fancying her figure.
Sure Cousin the gentleman is in love; he talks
very madly.
Where are the powers of my intellect?
Reason and understanding have forsaken
Their proper seats, and left strong passions
To triumph o'er this captived Microcosm.
Now I see thou art mad: but prithee strive to
conceal it; the place is public.
Pray you Sir, did you take up a Gentleumans
glove?
It was my happiness, and it would be much in∣creased,
if I might kiss the hand that wore it.
As I am a Gentleuman I shall be most careful
to give your deservings their due commendations.
May I be bold to enter with you?
You are a stranger Sir, and it may give occasion
of jealousy. But I am my Ladies Gentleuman: I keep
the key of her secrets, and if you please, her closet shall
conceal you; where you may dispose of Suckets and
Eringoe's for your refreshment. I pray Sir, call not a gen∣tleumans
freeness immodesty.
My behaviour shall deserve your good opinion.
Truly Sir, a man could not stand better in the
conceit of a gentleuman at first sight, then you doe in mine.
I hope your goodness will not misconstrue my readiness to
humble my desires to your disposing.
You teach me language which my self should use:
But if my gratitude doth seem to want
Verbal expression, I had rather act
Then promise what I owe you.
This is pretty foolery, Cousin.
Sir, you appear so replete with goodness, that
I presume you cannot but answer the desires of a gentle∣woman,
who proft•ates her love at the feet of your ac∣ceptance.
Doth she love me? what greater secret
Hath Nature in her Works then sympathy!
I do• conceive a thousand fond expressions,
Which throng so fast, they choke the passage up,
That none can find an issue.
Out of fools Paradise: thou art in it. But pray
you Gentleuman protract not his satisfaction with these
circumstantial delays. Whilst Mris. Dorothy and he are
busy, you and I will taste the sweet-meats in your Ladies
Closet.
I understand you not.
He means you should lie under him.
Fie little one, that you should so offend the chaste
ears of a Gentleuman. But to you Sir, the Load-stone of
my heart, that turns it self at your motions pointing still
to the North of your Love.
Indeed Mistress it is a cold corner, pray turn it to
the South, and let my needle run in your Dial.
And since the ardor of my desires have urged my
blushes to discover them; let not your appearing worth
suffer such a disparagement to conte•no a Gentleumans
willingness.
How's this! why friend, did she not seem to come
instructed (by direction) with ••embassy
As to prepare my love?
No, no, she loves thee her self. Take her. Me
thinks shoe's very beautiful; what pinken-eyes; what
a sharpe chin! Why her features transcend Mopsa's in
the Arcadia.
Hath she not studied it Cousin, think you? and
is transported to a humour of loving every man she sees.
I have known it in the Country in an age-d•cayed wai∣ting-woman.
I cannot answer her; my heart is big
With other thoughts; which till I am delivered of,
I suffer torments.
Unfortunate Gentleuman as I am, to be thus re∣jested.
Will you resign your interest? I'll court her folly.
Take it,
But not t'abuse the others innocence.
Whilst I with sighs draw in the unwilling ayre
Which she perfumed at distance.
Pray Gentleuman could you love me a little? I'm
very sportive.
Truly young Gentleman, I doe not know what
I may doe when you come to your full growth.
Blirt my Ladies Gentleuman, who taught you to
scoff at a mans person?
Cry ye mercy little Sir; you may be the father
of dwarfs. The sack begins to leave working and by this
time my Lady expects her gentleuman. Farewell, un∣kind
Sir.
Farewell loving Gentleuman. She hath proven∣ted
me. Sure friend she came but to mock thee. It was
little less then downright impudence.
Let's to the Tavern Sir, and drown this passion
in a cup of Canary.
Come, come; I was ordained to doe thee good.
Thou know I had a Mistress, whose friends disliking my
wildness, married her to the Father of the Gentlewoman
whom thou love (horns be his punishment for it.) She
loves me still; and I doe not despair of making him Cuc∣kold.
We'll arm our selves with a quart or two, and
then I'll bring thee to her.
Aid me love, wit and fate; that my desires
Burn not themselves without her equal fires.
More passions yet! It thou the mark would hit,
Let Sack inspire thee: it is the Soul of Wit.
Sack that makes Prophets; gives a Poet birth:
And then a wench; Elysium upon Earth.
NOw I protest Mr. Warrant, you wrong the love of a
Gentleuman, in not imparting the cause of your dis∣content.
Come not fees in roundly? Doe not the Delin∣quents
understand, I'll speak a good word for you?
You are the only object of my thoughts. It is
your beauty hath animated my presumptuous weakness to
express how much my desires are yours.
Alas Mr. Warrant how can a poor Gentleuman
deserve it?
Yes, you have power of my Lady, and she much
acquaintance at Court. A pardon might be got.
A pardon! bless me, for what?
Not for murder; but for killing (yet not a Man)
fairly in the field.
Are you earnest?
It is not yet done; only I am resolved to doe it,
were I but sure of my pardon.
If not a man, what then is it?
A mere superfluous complement of state for∣mality.
One of my Ladies raising. A fellow that hath cross
cape•'d himself out of a Taylor into a gentleman Usher.
Who Mr. Spruce? but have you charng'd him?
Yes, with all 〈…〉 and circumstance. The
weapon single Rapier; the place the P•azz•; the time
this mooneshine night presently before supper.
And your quarrel my love. Well• Mr. Warrant; I
know a Gentleuman hath interest in a Lord at Court, who
hath long been inward with her. I'll warrant your par∣don.
But my Lady expects me.
Dearest part of my self: to get my pardon, here's
Spruce, now will I affront him.
Our being my Lady•s Gentleman Usher, her 〈…〉
not protect you in the com∣pet•••on
〈…〉.
Warrant, 〈…〉 shred of baseness
to 〈…〉 favours, and mine own de∣servings.
Mr. S. Secretary is my Ladies gentle•woman, and
〈…〉 by privilege.
By privilege Spruce! Thou art a Baboon of
form••tie, and an ap• of 〈◊〉-ship. When I have killed
thee, and get my pardon, I will have thy skin stuhh't; and
with a protection show the• at country Fairs and Mar∣kits
for a Ginney Pygmy.
Warrant, thou art the Epitome of my Masters au∣thority,
and the abridgement of 〈◊〉 justiceship.
Spruce, thou art a very 〈◊〉, bred in thy cross∣leg•d
profession; that having sucked a little blood of Gen∣tility,
instead of thy usual bread bre•kfast, art grown to a
fancy familiarity, with thy maintainers. T•ou buy'st thy
laundry in Long-lane or Hounsditch with the impute•c
of a cheater.
Warrant, thou lie.
How •lie. That some-body were here to stand
betwixt us. Come not near me, lest I blast thee with the
breath of my just indignation.
Keep at distance Warrant, lest I •am thee, and
send thee from Constable to Constable in a Wheel∣barrow.
For this Spruce I will not compassionate the good
parts which my Lady commends in thee. Thy Fiddle∣stick
shall not save thee; nor thy capering lift thee an inch
from the ground which I have laid for thy destruction.
Warrant, thou art the very parings of a Pardon∣tick
to flout the compleatnesse of education. Because thy
dullness is capable of no more then to frame Hetroclites
from men's names, and scribble a warrant or a mittimus by
a president; yet thou art a Justices Clerk.
And thou a Ladies Gentleman Usher, a bundle
of complemental follies stitched up with how-dee's. I
will send thee anon upon a visit to the Devil.
Fie Mr. Spruce and Mr. Warrant, how loud you
are • my Lady hears your noise, and is offended.
Yes, my Rapier and mine arm shall maintain
it upon his life, I love you best.
Indeed Mr. Spruce and I love you.
I'll maintain it against the life of all the world,
I love you best.
Truly Mr. Warrant and I love you.
He that offers to love her besides my self, dies.
Mr. Spruce and Mr. Warrant, send but for one
bottle of Sack, and be friends; I'll love you both.
I'll brooke no Rival.
Nor I; death must determine it.
Remember then, I must to the Cutlers.
Though I am but a waiting-uman, I have more
wit then to believe this is earnest. As if I did not know
them to bee as arrant Cowards, as a Justices Clerk or
Gentleman Usher can be; and deserve rather to be whipped
by a Satire, then rewarded for their valours with the
love of a gentleuman. But Mr. Spruce doe you mean to
fight?
Yes, and kill him too. I fear nothing but death
and the Gallows; from which you may save me.
As how? the means.
Beg me, I say beg me. Let not my good parts
be made unuseful by an untimely turn at Tyburne. Me
thinks I see the pitiful spectators condoling me. The
fish-wives drowning their dead soles with salt water from
their eyes; the Oyster-wives weeping for me in most la∣mentable
pickle. An hundred Chamber-maids running
stark mad, and as many more falling into the greene sick∣ness
with longing for me. Beg me therefore (I say) re∣solve
to beg me, and make great hast. It is my fear a∣bove
death, that otherwise some rich City Heir will
prevent you. Resolve therefore to be the first that shall
beg me.
As I am a Gentleuman Mr. Spruce, if you kill
him fairly in a duel; and upon no base advantage I'll
doe it.
Confirm it then with a kiss, and inspire an
Herculean valour into me.
By no means at this time. I'll kiss you at the
gallows. My Lady.
You see how my obedient youth
Hath j•yn'd it self with an unequal mate;
You ag•d father, only to satisfy
The Provident will of Parents. Doe you so.
Fortune hath made me now your Mother.
Had nature don't, my care could not be greater,
Nor more my providence to dispose your good.
Mother, the duty which I owe my Father
You (being his) must share: and this expression
Of more then common love, I must repay
With more then common gratitude.
There. tell me,
Now time hath given your age perfection;
Your roses are full blown, and fit for gathering,
Doe you not long for a husband?
Not with much earnestness: I have as yet
No passionate desires; as yet no breath
Poisoned with Hyperbolical flatteries
Hath courted my poor beauty; no deep vows
Have paid idolatrous sacrifice of service
To my fair hand, whose whiteness if but kis't
Can purify a soul. Believe me yet
The ma•'s a stranger to my knowing memory
That ever said he loved me.
But take heed:
There are a sort of fond effeminate men,
Deep studied in discoursive complement,
That many times will wast more aerie language
To take a solemn leave, then would make up
A City Orator.
Beware that no such oyle-tongu'd amorist
Sigh forth his passions in thy credulous ears,
And captivate thy weakness. It is their practise
To glory in diversity of Mistresses:
And when one frowns or chides their over-daring
With a repulse, will not stick to revenge it
With a foul defamation of her honour.
Neither can a Gentleuman be in love now and
then out she is censured.
Let not thine ears drink in their Rhetoric charms,
Lest they bewitch thy glorious understanding
To dote on their pretences, which perhaps
Shall be chaste love for it's Creations end:
When but their c•vetous hopes prefer a portion
Before your beauty, birth or education;
And yet perhaps there is disparity
Twixt lower fortunes, and their weak desert.
Deceit's a cunning baud, and many times
Makes virtue prostitute it self to misery.
There is a power
Called Fate, which doth necessitate the will,
And makes desire obedient to it's rule.
All the resisting faculties of reason,
Prevention, fear and jealousy are weak
To disanull what in it's firm decrees
Is once determined. Yet my heart is free;
Unbounded by the stricter limits of
Particular affection: so I'll keep it.
No proud ungrateful man shall ever triumph
O'er the captived sweets of my Virgin love.
Nor a vain-glorious gull that offers service
To every noted beauty, boast my favour.
I'll cloth my thoughts in humorous observation;
And if on any that solicits love
I fix a liking, I'll refer my self
To what is destined for me.
The resolution's noble; I commend it.
Welcome Mistress Tongall; welcome. You are
the only company in the neighbour-hood. A Lady can
ill be without you.
This Gentleman Madame, whom I presume to
commend to your Ladyships acquaintance, is of worthy
birth and education: the Littlewords are not modern; be∣sides
their Ancestors were great Philosophers.
And the latter great fools.
Go, and talk to her. I'll tell your Ladyship a
strange thing of the Little-words. In seven generations
there was but one girl, and she dyed an infant. Country∣riwise
of the Tongalls there's but one man left, that's my
Husband, and he's a Lawyer: now your Ladyship knows
hee gets nothing but wenches. Speak to her Mr. Little∣word.
Is the Gentleman of so good education?
Extraordinary Madame; hoe's a wit. I would
my Iynny were worthy of him, he should seek no further.
I pray Mr. Littleword speak to her.
Can he Poetise Mris. Tongall?
Excellently Madame; hee hath things in print.
His next dedication shall be to your Ladyship. Why doe
you not go and talk to her?
What estate hath he?
Five hundred a year present possession, more in
reversion. This Gentleman, Mris. Dorothy, is my friend,
and desire's to bee your servant. I have made way now,
why doe you not speak to her? I am bold to commend
him to your liking.
Pray you Mris. Tongall, what wages takes he?
You mistake Mris. Dorothy; it is your love hee
would serve you for.
That's a cold reward; a Livery would keep
him warmer.
Fie, that you will not speak to her. And how
doth your Ladyship like an old man?
A cold bed fellow. But Religion and Conscience.
Now it is done I must love him. Would hee were not
jealous.
None are so confident (Madame) as cuckolds.
But your Ladyships known virtue will soon put out the
eyes of his suspicion. Speak to her Mr. Littleword.
I would not now for all the Sack in Spain my
loving humour were upon me. This dumb Gentleman
would make me forswear the quality.
Sure Mris. Tongall your friend would make an
excellent midwife; he can keep secrets.
It is his modesty Mris. Dorothy. Bless me that
you would not speak to her.
Madame, I am bold to commend this Gentleman,
who will deserve your acquaintance.
As far as my power will extend to expression.
You are welcome Mr. Ierker and this Gentleman,
and shall bee whilst your visits are seasonable. But you
know I have a jealous husband.
There are medicines to cure it Madame.
May not I salute the Lady Cousin?
It is but curtsy and manners.
I am bold with your Ladyships lip.
It is marvel you blush not. So bold and so young!
By that time you come to your full growth pretty Gentle∣man,
you'll make up the number of the ten Worthies.
Madame, I am neither Infidel, Jew• nor good
Christian; though I am little, I dare be your L•d•ships
Champion in an active skirmish.
This it is to be backward: you'll never thrive in
any thing unless you are more forward. Lose such an op∣portunity
with not speaking to her!
Secretary.
Madame.
Go, and direct the Cooke.
How on a sudden my resolves are numbed,
And frozen into silence, that confirms
The first distrust of my known indeservings,
I dare not speak.
Shall I have another dumb servant! Are you
not well Sir?
Well Lady! yes. Health it self
Is a disease in others, if compared
With the absolute state of mine. Where you are present
Sickness can have no power over frailty.
The b•ames which you• bright e•es shoot, purify
Th• most infectious air•. Your words distill
A B•l•re more pr•cious then that Miracle
The Chymicks d•eame of.
At distance I have •ften seen your beauty;
And thence received a fire, whose quickening flames
Did animate my soul, that else was earthy,
A lump of passive dullness; now it is active:
And if you please to cherish it, shall pay
All it's derivative abilities
Unto your lowest service.
You too much flatter my unworthiness:
And in that likewise derogate
From your own fullness of admired merit.
The vnskilful'st Physiognomist may read
In your bright forehead, and your forms exactness,
A man replete with all perfections.
Whose very superfluities might be
Additions to the barren words of others.
And can there be greater disparity?
Would it not seem a Prodigy in nature,
To have greene Summer with her rose-crown'd head
Kiss the white icicles from Winters beard?
Extinguish her bright fires in his cold bosom?
Madame, I know your sportive Youth desires
A more proportioned mixture. Come, let's try.
Fire put to fire increases active Flames;
Contraries dull each other with confusion:
Such are the frozen kisses of your Husband,
Unto your warm delights—
Lady, if any worth appear in me
It must derive it's fullness from your liking:
Had I in•u•'d into me all the excellence
Of those Heroics whom the Poets feigned;
Were I made up with all Perfections
That Fiction ever painted, to express
Desert in freshest colours;
Unless you called it worth, it were but a subject
For base contempt, though popular admiration
Gived divine Attributes. Since you commend
The faculties your whiteness must dispose of—
Ask your husband leave! by this hand I would
not ask an Alderman leave to Cuckold him. So he might
take example from a City kind one, whose Wife longed
to kiss a Lord: upon which he grew so proud for being
exalted above the rest of his neighbours, that he would
suffer none to Cuckold him ever after but Lords.
By no means Sir.
Wrong not your judgement, which must needs bee ab∣solute.
The choice of me
Is too inferior to your richer value.
The Cyprian Queen had she but seen your face,
Would ne'er have died the roses with her blood,
Wept on their paleness for Atones loss:
But circled in a ring of all her graces
Court your celestial form upon the bosom
Of some more fragrant Tempe.
She mocks me sure.
Did Sirens hear your voice they would give o'er
Their own malicious charms: and through the witchcraft
Of it's more powerful music, rage with madness:
Leaving their proper element to dye
In the pursuit of sweeter melody.
This gross flattery, Lady,
Commends your wit, rather then your good nature.
My heart is a plain heart, and my desires
Are truly virtuous, not to be contemned.
Fie, Mr. Ierker! besides the words incivility,
I did not expect such absurdity in a reputed wit. Could
you not have couched it better; shall I have leave to doe
your Ladyship a piece of night service; or so. Come,
come, forbear these wicked solicits, or I shall disclaim
the promise of my favours reversion when my old Hus∣band
die's, if nature be not merciless, and I go first.
Ha! what's here! Courtship on all hands?
My Husband.
My Father, and my Brother.
I like not this.
Mr. Ierker, you are welcome, I hope; having
failed in his old, hee hath not a new suit; that as I made
her a Lady, she should bestow an hornourable Crest up∣on
me.
Let his jealousy construe it into truth.
He shall never be but a Unicorn.
Madame, however I appear in my wildness, I
shall continue to your Ladyship in my first desires. So with
this tribute of my devotion.
I would first kiss your hand.
My lip being too unworthy.
I take my leave Madame.
Farewell Mistress Tongall.
Son, school your Sister. Come with me Wife.
Sister, I can but wonder much, that you
Should make your self the object of their Courtship,
Who bear perhaps but the empty names of Gentlemen,
Without the real fullness.
What mean you (Brother) by this intro∣duction?
Sister, to take the privilege of discretion,
And school your ignorant curtsy, that upon
The shadows and appearances of Men
Confer your favours.
Brother, you may pretend your love
In this distrust; but it is an ill expression.
Think not my judgement subject to such weakness,
That I can build a faith on Complements,
Or (with rash passion) run into an error.
Nothing but known desert shall tie my thoughts
To a staid liking, if I may distinguish it.
And when my choice is fixed, it shall be such
As your fraternal love must not dispute.
Sister, my counsel's mild.
Nor would I have you violent in defence
Of a suspected folly. Guilt is aptest
To make excuse. But if your resolution
Be bent thus wilfully to persist in actions
Of feared dishonour, be assured my Spirit
Shall rage with such an anger, plays ne'er painted.
Dishonour Brother, I have a spirit too,
That scorns as much an Act of foul dishonour,
As you, or any Masculine pretender
To noble Virtues. Guilt is aptest still
To be suspicious. If a maid be free
In her discourse, and courteous entertainment,
She straight is censured. But let a man appear
Stuck few•l of apish Courtship; light, inconstant,
As talkative as Parrots, that are taught
A voices imitation; one that courts
Every tamed beauty with a seeming zeal;
As if his souls devotion were restrained
Only to her Divinity; this man's called
A well-bred complemental Gentleman.
Men's greatest follies, if compared with ours,
Are virtues, fit for our imitation.
Sister, your Satyr smart's not:
The lashes reach not me.
They are but suppositions Brother.
And pray suppose the Gentleman that seemed
To court my beauty, were indeed a man,
Not gilded imperfections; one whose words
Were full of weighty judgement, not mere sound;
Whose real virtues did beget an envy,
Perhaps an emulation in all others;
And from the freedom of his richer mind
He gave himself and them to be my servants;
What gratitude in me might equal this?
I know you are free.
And rather then a complemental servant
Should be discouraged in his serious wantonness,
You'll give it countenance to make him bold
In's amorous pursuit; perhaps to the impudence
Of a lascivious charge upon your modesty;
Because you scorn ingratitude.
Brother, did not the ties
Of love and nature check my forward aptness,
I'd tell you you're not noble, and suspect
Whether your mind hold that derivative goodness
Which generous blood communicates, to suspect
Her re•olute constancy whom you call Sister.
Think not your being a man prerogative
To be the only Counsellor in manners
Brother, though to your person I am partial.
Through confidence of your appearing virtue;
The general vices noted in your sex,
Such as with public ostentation
You glory to be guilty of, which in
Our very thoughts raise blushes—
Sister no more.
Leaving these circumstantial arguments,
Pray let a Fathers care and Brothers love
Commend him first whom you intend for Husband:
You'll find us tyrants else. Nature is kind;
But if provoked, she hath a Tigers mind.
Isle find him out and satisfy my self
How far he is deserving.
How is our weakness trodden and insulted on
By these imperious men! Aid me resolves
Against their threats and counsels, unless grounded
On stronger reasons then suspicion.
As the pure Oar refined exceeds in value
Treble proportions of the courser dross;
So true desert in Man an outward gloss.
Come Mris Dorothy; here's a Moon would
make a great bellied woman long for greene chief. Me
thinks it is pleasant taking the ayre by Moone-shine.
But it is not so healthful The night infects the
ayre with unwholesome vapours.
A fig for these Physical observations. I have
known a Doctors prescriptions cast down a Gentleuman
for three quarters of a year. But if ever I lie under any of
them for the greene sickness.
Fie upon thee.
Why I doe not mean naughtiness. But what
doe you think made me so earnest to have you hither?
Some wanton humour. You have d•unke a
cup of Sack, and want a handsome Ge••lemon to bee in
love with.
No such matter. Isle not drink a drop more till
towards supper. I brought you to see a Duel.
Bless me; betwixt whom?
My Ladies Gentle-man, and Mr. Warrant.
They are unequally weapon'd. Mr. Spruce,
though hee be a Tailor wears a—the foolish rime runs
in my head. I had almost said a dagger, but it is a sword;
and my Fathers Clerk hath only his inkhorn.
And that's a terrible one. But I saw the Cutler
bring him a sword; I saw it naked, which was enough
to fright many a gentleuman. I saw him try it on a bar of
iron in the kitchen; and many more fearful preparations.
But will not you prevent them?
By no means, unless there were more dan∣ger.
Twill be mirth for this twelve-month, if our eyes
(through this imperfect Moone-light) can but reach the
sight of them. What confident daring will be betwixt
them at some great distance?
And what's their quarrel?
The love of a Gentleuman, I assure you.
Your self perhaps.
No otherwise indeed. My beauty is the object
of their valour. The Combatants will enter presently. The
Knight of the Inkhorue, and the Knight of the Spanish
Needle.
Both affecting the Lady of the Closet. But Mris.
Secretary, what if my Lady Mothers Chamber-maid and
Join in the Kitchen were here?
For you to make them Ladies, as you have done
me. Indeed they might serve by Moone-light; the day
perhaps would discover a greasy Gentry.
Fie; now you forget your self.
It is ordinary for a waiting-Gentleuman but
newly made a Lady to forget her self. But see, I am pre∣vented
from proceeding. Let us observe.
It is a good sword; it cost me two pieces. No
matter. Many a mans death hath cost more at the Phy∣sitians.
Who would be afraid to kill a man; when hee is
sure of his pardon?
Hee is now in some deep meditation of your
beauty.
See Mistress, there's the other.
That sure is Warrant. I'll go this way. It
shall never be said I went after a man to kill him, though
I am confident Mistress Secretary will beg me.
They go contrary ways. Wee shall not see
the fight. They mean to meet and end it at the An∣tipodes.
But what should I think of killing him? I
know hee dare as well take the wall of a drunken Consta∣ble,
or justly a Buffe-coat leading a wench, as meet me.
Me thinks I perceive them stand.
Yes, yes; it is Warrant: I smell him hitherto.
Is not that Spruce? certainly it is hee. Me thinks
I see him tremble hitherto. Hee dare not come near me;
and I scorn to go to him to kill him: It may hinder my
pardon. Therefore he shall assault me first.
Why, they are fixed. Hath not fear congealed
them into stones?
Dissolved them rather into gelley.
That some good fellow would but come and
beat the cowardly Rascal.
That some Shark would come now and take
away his hat or cloak.
Now could I fancy in my imagination what they
say. Mr. Warrant. O that I had this Coward Spruce here:
I would dismember him; and then what Gentleuman
would care a rush for him? Now Mr. Spruce hath studien
the Arcadia. He says. Oh that I had this Warrant here
It would cut him into atoms; that wheresoever the Sun
shines, the trophces of my renowned victory might bee
visible.
That he would but come a little nearer.
That hee were but within twice my swords
length.
I would I had but a leg or an arm of him, since
he will not come, that I may kill him.
That I had but his head here; how I would shave it.
This is the virtue of Sack boy. Who would
toil in dirt for whey and butter-milke, or the windy
juice of Pome-waters upon Sundays? Now could I be as
valiant as—nothing.
I could fight with an Army of Polecats, so they
were not Women.
I could take the wall of three times three Tay∣lors,
though in the morning, and at a Bakers stall.
That were a way to have thy skin bodkind full
of ilet holes.
If I should throw down three or four posts.
What then?
What then! why, I would not stay to take
them up.
Who are these? observe.
Give me an armour of Sack; I am shot-free.
Whilst my Master paye's the reckoning.
Mistress Dorothy, I have fastened on a design for
rare sport. My friends.
Will you talk to strangers in the street?
What say you pretty pair of Wag-tailes? doe
you want Play-mates?
Will you doe a curtsy for a Gentleuman?
Within doors, or without?
You seem to be valiant.
They that try us shall find our mettle.
Perceive you not two men yonder in several
places?
Wee see something, but they may as well be
flocks.
For any manhood that's in them. If you will but
beat them a little, besides a Gentleumans thanks, some o∣there
reward shall attend it.
How are we sure they are Cowards?
You may trust the word of a Gent•euman.
Come, come, thou stand doubting like a cow∣ardly
foo•e, These may bee Gentlewoemen of good fa∣shion,
and apt to take fire at valour. Who knows what
preferment's near us? We have persons.
Why then forwards: call upon sack, Dobson, sack.
Who are these come towards me? my courage
begins to have an ague.
Who may these be? my wish (I hope) some
good fellows to rob him.
What was our Commission Ralph? to beat them,
and not kill them.
To kill them and not hurt them? Call upon
Sack, Dobson: I begin to be afraid. I can perceive his
sword; he shakes it fearfully.
Draw thine-then; and sack, sack the walls
of Troy.
The rogue Spruce hath sent them to beat me.
It is so. I must shift for my self.
Sirrah, thou man of fear and trembling. Call
upon Sack, Dobson.
Alas, what mean you Gentlemen?
Not so gentle neither. Wee are fiery furious,
and command thee in the name of Sack, resign thy wea∣pone,
and submit to be corrected by our valour.
Kind Gentlemen, I hope you'll not kill me. I'll
doe any thing, rather then be killed.
A handsome beating shall assuage our fury.
Sweet Gentlemen, I'll doe any thing rather then
be beaten.
It is so; they are robbing him, and I scorn to
aid him. Teach the rogue to be such a coward: he might
have come to me.
Are you prepared Sir?
Merciful Gentlemen; I have some money, a
Cloak and a good Beaver: I'll give you all, and forgive
you too, so you'll not beat me.
This was beyond our expectation.
Our mercy may bee brought to a composition.
But should we be pitiful, could you be content, since you
cannot fight in your own defence, to lye in our defence.
I'll say or swear any thing, rather then be killed
or beaten.
That we did beat you?
That you left me dead. I'll lye at a Surgeons
these two months; and pretend that my skull was bro∣ken
in twelve places: that half my brains were putri∣fied
and taken out. I'll be mad all my life after to con∣firm
people in the belief of it.
Depart then, and praise us.
Yes, at the gallows. I'll have you hanged for
to••ing me: I shall teach you to attempt any thing on a
Ju•••ces Clerk.
Nay: pray you stay a little longer.
I am weary; we'll imagine the rest done. I'll
send my Brother forth to make them friends.
It is done sure. Now will I home, proclaim
him a coward, and triumph. Ha•l doe they way-lay me!
the rogue hath hi•'d them to beat or rob me. An ague of
fear is upon me. Now could I wish my self transformed
into a beast, and have four legs. These two which have
been my most useful members will surely fail.
Sirrah, you Rascal.
You mistake Sir, I am a Gentleman Usher.
Then thou abuser of wit and good clothes, be
mannerly, and uncover to thy betters.
I hope Gentlemen you d•e not mean to rob
me? Trust me, I have no money, but a few farthings of
my Ladies to give poor people.
We will be satisfied with a small diminution of
your plentiful Wardrobe. Wee know you have more
Cloaks and Beavers at home.
No I protest Gentlemen. I have but this only
case for my Carcass: and twill not be quite paid for till
the next quarter.
Why then Sir, we will beat you handsomely, and
that shall allay our fury.
Nay kind Gentlemen, I had rather stand to my
Ladies bounty, then be beaten.
Why then thank our mercy and depart, whilst
we like honest thieves share our booty.
And I find out the Constable.
How glorious shows heaven with trembling lights
Sparkling their distant beams! The full orbed Moon
Borne on nights dewy wings, rides in her Sphoere;
And throws the shine which from her brothers rays.
She borrows to illuminate the earth
Through thinner ayre, where no condensed vapours
Are interposed to let her piercing eye
From seeing that which she gives sight to. Yet
My heart is wrapped in clouds of leaden sadness.
Love is not that in me which others feign it.
I dream not of delights; my busy fancy
Presents no fabulous heaven. A hell of torment
Darken's my mind's bright faculties; and reason
suffers it self to be eclipsed by passion.
Now with are entered Ralph. what if wee made
this our profess•n? many a one lives by it.
And many a one is hanged for it.
Oft have these instruments of heavens influence
Seen my contemplative watchings;
When with profound and an unwearied search
I have scened the causes of their great effects;
And waded through the most inscrutable secrets
Both of the mediate and immediate nature▪
But coming once to read a Women's face,
There were so many heavens, that every thought
In me, required a several understanding,
To give each several grace a several name,
And definition.
Thou art afraid of the gallows?
Not much of the gallows without a hangman.
The Chaos and the earth were loves first Parents;
And yet the child did give the Parents form.
What Riddles are in nature!
Man's a disordered Mass, a mere confusion
Of rude, inanimate sense and understanding.
Until inspired with loves diviner soul.
The sense is tired, unless it varye's objects.
Knowledge would be finite, were not the mind
Delighted with diversity.
But love's a subject for eternal study;
And one fair book preserved so, a full library.
I am resolved; I'll nor spare man, woman nor
child, whilst the sack works.
For women and children let me alone: if I fall
upon the one, Isle soon get the other.
What fabulous errors learning is attended with!
Plato's five Worlds; their sempiternitie;
Pythagoras transmigration; and opinions
Judgement would blush to father. But a woman,
Did men contemplate such a one as I doe,
They'd Make her all those Worlds: and then include
All the famed excellence of former beauties
In her more perfect frame.
Is it possible such show of resolution
Should appear in Cowards! I'll make them friends.
And that being done mine own intentions
Must be pursued to find that Gentleman
Courted my Sister. Love of all sorts bends
It self to courses for it's several ends.
Now for a daring Constable.
Without his staff of authority, or a fortifica∣tion
of Sack. A Constable may be valiant when hee com∣mands
others what he cannot doe himself.
What! my pair of valiant Cowards! friends
already.
How! Cowards! swallow that word, or it shall
choke thee.
These fellows have out-gone their Commission
and robed them. I was a wise man to come abroad with∣out
a sword.
Hee hath never a sword. Sirrah, thou man of
presumption, that hast profaned our incomparable valour,
redeem thy forfeited life of our mercy with some gold
or silver pictures out of thy silken pockets.
They'll rob me too: Why, Gentlemen; silk
clothes have not money in them at all times.
He looks terribly Dobson. Call upon Sack.
I will cleave him at one stroke.
Doe you mean to murder a Gentleman?
Murder a Gentleman the voice came thence.
Isle rescue him, though danger and destruction
Met me with open mouths. Villains, desist.
You have done a benefit I must acknowledge.
That's to reward it sir; from which base ends
Good actions should be free. I'd gladly hear
A short relation of the Accident.
Why dost thou quake so Ralph?
Why dost thou tremble so Dobson? I dare bee
whipped if these bee not some kin to the Gentle woman that
sent us hither from the thing at yonder house.
Were you sent to rob or kill me?
Alas Gentlemen, we are very ingrums.
Mere Country Animals. Wee have valour to
steal a May-pole, or rob the Person•s Hens-nest: but to
kill a man as far from our intents or daring, as pity from
an Executioner, or bashfulness from a Jingo.
Forbear the rest. This affords me matter: Re∣turn
to that house, there leave your booty and receive
your reward; only this I'll keep.
With all our hearts: wee had rather any body
should have them, then the hangman both them and us
for them. Come Dobson, we have got the money yet; and
a little sack will animate us again. My soul's under foot;
I must raise it: But if ever I quarrel again by Moon∣shine
unless I am drunk, valour forsake me.
Blessed Accident! it is surely the same.
After a stricter view, my memory
Unless it erres, tells me I have seen your person
Before this at my fathers.
If you are the son of Sir Generous Worthy.
It was the blessing
Nature and Fortune did bestow on me.
It is indeed a blessing, when the virtues
Of noble Races are hereditary;
And doe derive themselves from the imitation
Of virtuous Ancestors. You have a fair Sister.
Her beaurie is not worth your commenda∣tions.
Your modesty is too severe
In your restraint from praising her pure excellence,
Which should be Poets study; not with fiction,
And common figures, but diviner attributes:
Then they must call it nothing but it self.
Have I found you? I shall search you deeper.
The subjects weight would make a Poem weighty;
And take away the imputation
Which seeming solidness would throw upon it
Of a light fancy.
It seems you love my Sister?
He were a Devil did not love such goodness.
It is the only virtue: frailty boasts of,
To love fair sensual objects: but my soul
Hath noted inward beauty in her mind,
Which makes me glory (though it be presumption)
That I doe love her.
Call it not presumption sir, you doe deserve her,
In that you have endeared me for my life
Who am her Brother. And I commend you wit,
Which I presume my Sisters love hath whetted.
It was a quaint Plot. Were the Actors here again,
I'd pay their wages.
Your Riddle needs some Oedipus to solve it.
Why sir, ridiculous fables
May sometimes serve for imitation.
Though it were a mere appointment in this rescue,
To show your love and valour.
What base suspicion
Poisons his jealous thoughts! It is injury
Beyond all patience.
Alas sir, you are moved?
Yes, to an indignation, whose just heat
Burns me almost to rage. But there are charms
And spells about you conjure down my spirit.
You are her Brother.
It seems your guilt dare not deny the
truth?
Dare not deny it!
Were thy hands armed with Thunder;
Had thou a Gorgons look, were it not her Brother,
Ringed in the terror of a thousand Jibbets
And executioners, I have a point
Should find thy hart out.
But I must tell you sir,
Seldom high spirits that pursue their honours,
With earnest flights, will stoop at weak respects:
But prey upon the opinion of those men
That scan their actions; tearing their reputations
Out of suspicions bowels. Hoe's not a Gentle man
Will not preserve his honour.
Your speech, Sir,
Savours of strange severity. My honour
Is that part of my self, without which
The man that's in me can have no subsisting.
Honour's the greatest of exterior goods,
And must be still pursued as the reward
Due unto virtue, through the greatest dangers.
Yet fortitude is not the appetite
Of formidable things, nor inconsult
Rashness; but virtue fighting for a truth;
Derived from knowledge of distinguishing
Good or bad causes. Think me not a Coward
Because I am not rash: nor through defect
O• better counsel, doe not resist the force
Of will or passion; how so ever your jealousy
Proceeding from our better thoughts infection
Hath been a provocation. And perhaps
The love I bear your Sister, will appear
Your chiefest safety.
In an attempt of right
I have more safety here then your pr•••ences
Can arm m• with But if you love my Sister,
It must be honourable and not wanton:
She will find Champ•s •eise.
I must be honourable!
Those words include a doubt works strangely in me.
Love must not wrack my reputation.
Sir, I begin to scan the circumstance,
And construe your intention. You would try me:
Bu• your temptations have been too abusive.
And now my resolution is prepared
To doe my credit justice.
You will not fight with me that am her Brother?
There's Magic in those words.
I doe presume my Sister will reward you
For these expressions. She is free to pay
Her servants promised wages; be it kisses,
Or any other dalliance.
What a profane breath from his black mouth flies,
Would poison all the idolatrous religions
That ever awed wicked mortals.
He is not sure her brother, but some impostor,
That only counterfeit's his worthier person,
I could be patient at the lye, or Coward,
Or any thing that can make passion violent.
But her bright honour staind's a cause of justice
To arm a Nation. Draw, if you are a man;
And with the plea of valour, (if you have any)
Defend thy errors: Draw thy sword.
Not against him that loves my Sister.
Is my just anger mock't! love made ridiculous!
Draw; lest I make my self an Executioner.
And doe an act of justice on thy guilt.
Never against your bosom, where a spirit
So truly noble duel's, that hath converted
All my feigned jealousies to useful love.
I am confounded to amazement.
Pray reconcile all your distractions.
Let not the least distrust abuse your confidence
Of what I undertake. My Sister's yours,
If the advise of me that am her Brother,
And interested in her good or ill,
Can be prevailing.
Then requesting Sir,
That you'll presume no more upon the privilege
Of that pure love I bear your virtuous Sister
To admit a jealousy of any action,
Or thought of mine which tends not unto nobleness,
Next unto her my bosom holds you dear,
And shall doe ever.
So mine the like. Thus noble causes
Put fire into the spirits of full men.
Though sometimes seeming valour may arise
Through lust or wine, from hateful cowardice.
ANon, anon Sir, by and by.
Some more wine Boy. Is Mr. Art love returned?
Not yet Sir.
Poor Gentleman; hoe's complaining to the
Moon, or studying the event of his love in the Stars.
Me thinks I could make a counterfeit expression of his
passions to the life.
〈…〉 Ministresse
〈…〉 light; dance 〈…〉 quall motions
On thy four orbs; bu• qu•ch thy paler fires
In Lovers tears, that 〈◊〉 constancy
M•y so be drowned. I would I were in love Cousin.
Before you are capable of it.
Why Cousin, is it not defined to be youth's folly!
Indeed, all things in Youth are folly.
Not so Cos. all folly may be in Youth:
But many times it is mixed with grave discretion,
That tempers it to use; and mike's it judgement
Equal if not exceeding that which Palseys
Hath almost shaken into a disease.
But why would you be in love Cos.
That I might Poetize: you know it is the only
dancing Master to teach the Art of Measures; though I
have known Poets scarce able to stand on their feet.
Then you would write Satyrs Cos?
It is your dancing conceit. But the Grinkums
Cousin cleaves not the feet.
Mr. Dasher, this freeness hath doubled the favour;
visit us of your own accord!
Gentlemen my self, and all that depends on my
self, or on any thing that hath dependence on my self,
is at your service.
I should desire your wife then.
Sweet young Gentleman, you are the Epitome of
a fair body, and shall command the Commander of my
self and family. I will but present a glass of Greek
Sack to the hands of a noble Lord, and return to serve
you.
You have a virtue Sir, I could wish commune∣cated.
What's that Cousin?
To cozzen Cousin.
And would you learn it?
The Theory, but not the Practicke. I converse
much in Taverns; and the use should only be a thrifty
prevention.
As my observation hath taught me something in a
bawdy house, where they cannot change money.
Now Gentlemen dispose of your servant.
Indeed Mr. Dasher our Wine's nought.
How I nought I who drew it? name but your
drawer; he is punish't whilst you pronounce it. I'll not
keep an offensive mouse that eats the crumbs under my ta∣ble,
but shall pay his life to doe you service.
Why Cousin, the Wine's good.
I only gave him matter for a complement.
It is pity to abuse him that is so apt to abuse him∣self.
But what doe you muse on Cousin?
I am studying a conceited health.
Why to the long standing of Banbury May-pole.
No Puritan will pledge that.
Yes, the Good-wives: they'll find dancing a
more wholesome exercise for the body, then some of their
Doctrines for the Soul.
Ar't come friend, and Mr. Worthy?
Our mutual loves.
I am bound to serve you Gentlemen, and I wish
my roof were worthier, and my disordered household
ordered to your content.
We are bound to thank your readiness.
Gentlemen, your servant will send his servants
to wait upon you presently.
What accident brought you two together?
The mercy of my Starts: but what event
Their influence will direct, I cannot prophecy.
•re•hee be careful, hoe's a Cynic noter
Of men and of their manners
If he bite.
Here's that shall blunt his fangs.
Good friend be mild;
Temper thy passions here. Scandal may grow
From low foundations to an height of infamy.
Thou know my temperance doth not oft frequent
These public places.
Sir, the relation twixt a son and father
May make you jealous of my partial nature.
Trust me, I never yet was so indulgent
To mine own weakness, that until my judgement
Had made a full distinguishment of causes,
I could bee violent in his defence
Farther then fisiall duty; which sometimes
Hath stretched it self to counsel and advice
Against suspicion. For though your wild behaviour
In some particular actions might provoke him,
She whom new duty makes me now call mother
Hath given large testimony of her virtue
Even to satisfaction of all goodness;
Although his age (in other things judicious)
Cannot so easily admit belief,
And safer confidence.
Though I appear
In outward carriage apt to make distrust
Condemn me vicious; yet my Soul retains
(Besides a generous disposition
Derived from noble blood) some scrupulous sparks
Of better conscience. Call it not selfe-flattery
In that I am mine own defences instrument.
Report sufficiently may inform your knowledge,
(Nor is it error) that my interest
In her you now call Mother
Was beyond all dispute: our equal loves
Moved in one circle; and our thoughts were fixed▪
Nor can I vary; shoe's the object still
Of my desires. I confess I use
Wanton solicits; and should scarce resist
My wishes satisfaction she consenting.
But those delights would end in such a loathing,
That I should never more have merciful thought
There can be any goodness left in Woman.
This jars upon my heart-strings.
Dos't distaste you Sir,
That I defend my self?
You must not wrong my Father.
I doe abhor the thought of injury.
Nor shall my spirit fall in the just plea
Of mine own right.
But not to wrong my Father.
If he bee abusive, Cousin challenge him. I'll bee
your second.
Hoe's not a Crane Cos.
Nor I a Pygmy; you mock my love.
Your forwardness is dangerous.
Why, he can never have wit, that is not valiant.
I'll try him my self, if not to disturb you Sir.
I thank you little one.
How little one I Is not that an affront Cousin?
It is as you take it Cos.
Fill some Wine boy: never a Drawer here?
What Gentlemen, none to attend you? (whooh)
An unlooked for happiness• that my unworthy self is
preferred.
An inferior servant may serve, Mr. Dasher.
I am the servant of my servant that shall serve
you. And unless hee serve you he is not my servant. I'll
tunre them all away presently for this neglect of your
worthy Persons.
Men wear swords Sir.
And boys too sometimes.
You'll answer it?
Answer what Child?
Little one! Boy! Child! I shall bee degraded
next to an infant.
Fie Cousin, contain. The Gentleman cannot
brooke it.
Yes Sir, hee can brooke any thing but wronging
of his Father.
I pray no more, the subject is too harsh
To make good music in society.
Then here's a health to her that best deserves
The attribute of Fair: whose white and red
Prove what's lifes mixture. From whose forms exactness
Rules of Proportion might be better drawn
Then from Arts Principles. To her whose Youth
Warmes Winters icy bosom with her Spring;
Yet will not wrong your Father. As it goes round,
Each give his Mistress some comm•nding Character.
Why then a health to her whose beauties are
Not a gross Earth, with painted superficies;
But a more spright•y Element of pure •ire.
Within whose Sphere a glorious M•nde doth move
All the orbs of virtue with celestial flame.
Whose active climbings carry her d•si•es
To the utmost height of nobleness and honour:
To her that calls you Brother.
Let not your love appear so full of flattery.
Nay, Cos; 〈…〉.
Then here's a health to her will freely put
Her sweets to use. Kiss, and be kissed again
Without a fie. Whose boldness will not blush
At an assault, or any wanton touch.
And if a man persist to farther doing,
Accounts it loss of time, a tedious wooing.
To her that I call Mistress.
Bravely come off Sir.
I can come on Sir.
Now Sir, it is yours.
This Sack shall then have my Encomium.
Which had the youthful Father ever tasted
He would have left his rites to Poetize;
And changed his Yvy Chaplets into Baize:
Vnchain'd his spotted Lynxes, and supplied
His Chariots loftier course with Pegasus.
And with bewitching numbers charmed the gods
To be his Bacchanals, that they might feast
With this most heavenly Nectar.
Mr. Dasher, your Wine•s highly commended.
I can assure you Gentlemen, the Grape from
whence this Sack was pressed—
Grew in Spain.
I would have fetched it farther Gentlemen to doe
you service. A voyage to the Indies should bee no more
then a descending into my cellar, and up again.
You have handsomely contracted your journey.
But Mr. Dasher, you have an eminent House, ex∣traordinary
Wine and entertainment; but no Sign at first
to distinguish it.
Me thoughts Cousin, the Logger-heads was a
pretty conceit.
Had there not been a third.
Gentlemen; I intended a pair of Scales with a
glass of Wine in one Balance, and a piece of gold in the
other, or a jewel.
An excellent conceit, to show the value of
good Wine.
Sweet Gentlemen, I am the servant of your noble
wits. I must kiss the •a•re hand of an honourable Lord,
who is now departing: I will then return to be disposed
by you.
Sir it is my father.
Ha! my son here, and Mr Ierker!
I came in the person of authority,
Invited by your noise. But that put off,
Out of my love borne to the general good,
I doe advise you to be temperate:
That the fair hopes conceived of growing virtues
Might not be lost. It is pity that your wits,
Which (joined with some experience) might deserve
To fill the seats of Magistracy, and be
A speaking law) should spend themselves in places
And acts of sin and shame; wherein severity
Of law and government must not be partial.
Therefore I pray no more of these disorders.
Pray Sir, take nothing ill. It is the necessity
Of his place: his disposition else is milder.
Sir, we are Gentlemen; and by that privilege
Though we submit to politic Government
In public things may be our own law-makers
In moral life. If we offend the law
The law may punish us; which only strives
To take away excess, not the necessity
Or use of what's indifferent, and is made
Or good or bad by 'ts use. We doe not drink
To a distemper, and from thence derive
The original of mischiefs: nor is pleasure
Our law but temperance. Creation made
Every thing good, if we abuse it not.
Then good Sir, (though you find enormitles
Amongst the rabble) be not so suspicious
Of our more careful carriage, that are gentlemen.
You have said to satisfaction
And more then I expected. Hark you son.
I did not think th'adst been so good an Oratou•.
Why friend? because wanton familiarity
Mike's us less serious when we are alone,
Must it necessitate we cannot speak
In a high cause! Cousin, you must be careful
Of your behaviour: you are before a Justice.
Why Cousin, have Justices power over a mans
will?
Some busy ones have arrogated much;
But being told their own have ever since
Given Gentlemen a due respect.
I'll make a trial here. Please you a little
To put off this severer gravity;
And drink a glass of Sack. Your age is Privilege
In what the law of moderation,
Denies our hotter blood.
Pretty sweet Gentleman. Is it possible
That one so young, should have so gray a wit;
It is wanting many times in graver beards.
Please you Mr. Ierker, to bring these Gentlemen to my
house to supper. You'll find some empty dishes.
We know your table's plentifully furnished.
This was very good Sack, neighbour. Pray
send me home a dozen Bottles. And keep good orders.
The best orders that can be kept in my house••
or any office of my house shall bee at your Worships ser∣vice.
•ogh; that complem•ned stinks.
You are very cou•t•ou, neighbour. Will you
go along with me Gentlemen!
We are your servants. It is a blessed opportunity.
You shall now make trial of my professed love.
The reckoning M. Dasher
We'll take the Barr••• our way.
You'll doe me honour to pay it there. Ten
thousand welcomes wait upon you Gentlemen (whoo••)
Come sirrah, be the Mercury of neatness, and nimbly set
this disordered room in order. Then give the gentleman
below notice, that it is now ready to doe him service:
Hoe's like to be a bountiful guest. He talks of selling his
Land, and being a Wit: but how can that agree together I
yes, very well. A country Gentleman to s•ll his land, is
as it were to change his copy: leave his known trade to
project a better profit. Which changing of Copy here
with us, ends many times in the city freehold at Lute∣gate.
Worthy Sir, I have now made ready a room to
entertain your worthy person. My house was so cramd
with Lords; and this especially with most choice gentle∣men,
some of the admired wits, to which very name I owe
respect and service.
It is a fine Chamber, it shines like a Gold-smiths
shop in Cheap-side.
It would much inde•re me to your kindness
to bring me acquainted with some of those Wits: you
say they keep their rendezvous here many times. If I may
mold my self capable I should gladly add to their number.
Indeed, I have had but Country breeding.
City bringing up forsooth.
Yes; for we rid like mad men.
Questionless, Sir, there are of the wits some
mercenary ones, whom your money may command to be
your servants. But these are of a nobler strain. Howsoe∣ver,
I will upon the next occasion show my desire to doe
you service.
Prithee Ralph, what be those Wits? A family?
No Dobson, they be of all tribes. Some are Jaws,
and some are Gentiles. Some are noble both in blood
and condition, and some in neither. Some study Arts
of use; some of delight; some conceive well, but talk
wickedly.
Those be the Women Ralph.
No interruptions. Some break jests; some break
pates; some break Tailors; and some break their
fasts with Duke Humphrey.
A wise house-keeper belike.
Some wear Plush that others pay for. Some
love Sack, and some love wenches. Few will dye of the
Aldermans Gout, and some will never bee cured of their
own—
I understand thee Ralph. But how come thou
to know all this?
Tut man; I lived in London before now; was
servant to one that conversed much with the wits, and kept
an Academy of Music. I tell thee Dobson, I have picked
up mo•e learning among the crumbs of a broken biscuit,
after one of their meetings at a Tavern, then would
make twenty Ballad-makers commence Po•tasters; and
with the over-plus indoctrinate ten Justices Clerks, and
an under-Sheriffe.
Sweet Mistress, you are welcome to my ex∣pectation.
If my presumption to bring a worthy acquain∣tance
along with me, seam's not unmannerly.
You rather express kindness to a stranger
that desires worthy company.
Sweet Mr. Dasher, you are the best Woman Vine∣tener
that ever loved a Gossips tale. You have so many
good things to pleasure a woman with. You were wont to
have an excellent neat tongue.
Sweet Mris. Tongall, my best tongue, and all is
at your service.
Kind Master Dasher.
To your welcome Mistress.
My humbleness receives your favour thankfully.
My service to you Mr. Dasher.
I kiss the hand of your servant.
And make a leg. This Vintener sure hath had
very mannerly breeding. he came not from the Banks
side, where the surly Watermen live.
Noble sir, I presume to present my desires to doe
you service.
This Gentleman hath less manners. Hee an∣swears
nothing.
My friend (Sir) though he be of few words,
is a fine wit, and a great observer.
A Wit, Mistress; I shall be the prouder of his ac∣quaintance.
But when I am a Wit, I shall prefer my
talking before my observation.
I thank you Mr Little-word.
Mr. Littleword and Mris Tongall! very good.
Sure this woman had a French-man to her Father.
Indeed Mr. Dasher, it is excellent Sack. If you
were unmarried you should have my daughter •inny, for
keeping such good Wi•• in your house.
I retribute all due thanks for your kindness, that
you would doe me so great an honour.
Mistress, you said I should have your daughter.
My friend, why so thou shalt. This Sack makes
my heart merry.
Who then shall my Master have?
Why my Daughter linny.
A right woman: so her tongue go, no mat∣la
what she says.
What will that Gentleman with his table-booke!
Let's have a health to some body.
Please you Sir, to my daughter Iinny.
Let it go round then.
And hee that will not pledge it, shall not
have her.
I hope we shall drink now Ralph.
Else we lose both our share of the Sack, and our
hopes of her daughter Iinny.
Some more Wine.
(Whooh) be nimble sirrah; and bring of my
kingdom (that's my word for good wine) that it may
wait on these Gentlemen.
William, thou art an honest fellow; and if thou
bring us good wine, thou shalt have my daughter Iinny
from them all.
Sure this Gentleman write's what I speak. I
hope it was not treason to say my Kingdom. I would I
knew what he were.
The Vi•tener seam's troubled at this Gentle∣mans
table-booke.
It is his practise of observation. Hee is taking
a humour for a Play: perhaps my talking of my daugh∣la
Iinny.
I'll hatch some mirth from it. Sir, you must not
take it ill, if I tell you of your errors. You have spoken
something rashly.
Kind and worthy Sir, my life is your servant for
this noble care.
That silent Gentleman is an intelligencer; a state
spy. Hee'• inform against you. Therefore comply with
him to prevent it. It is his policy to say nothing him∣self,
that his observation may be the more, and his own
danger the less.
Sir, I owe your goodness all that ever I have
been, am, or shall be. He writes again.
Now Mr. Little-word, you have some fine mat∣la
there to work upon.
To undo me. Sir, I desire you will command
all that is to bee commanded in my house to doe you ser∣vice.
Yes, yes; he writes again.
That word command is a word of great dan∣ger,
I would you had not used it.
Alas Sir, Mris Tongall, it was not neighbourly
done of you to bring an informer into my house•.
How, I bring an Informer! as I am a Matron, he's
a Gentleman, a wit, and a rare Projector.
I believe it, to undo a poor Vintener, that
cannot complement a Gentleman into a ten pounds ex∣pence;
but his neck must be in danger. Sir, if I were a
King I would be your servant. He writes again.
Bless me Sir, you have spoken treason.
Alas, Sir, I, am undone then.
Master, the Constable and other officers are com∣ming
up.
Yes, yes; to apprehend me.
It is for us, Dobson.
The Constable▪ I hope wee are not suspected
persons.
If I thought you were, you should never have my
daughter Iinny.
By your leave Gentlemen.
You are welcome Sir, and I pray be gone.
But not without you Sir. You are suspected, and
must answer—
Answer what? here are neither Traitors nor
〈◊〉.
I fear I shall be proved both.
No Sir, nor night-walkers that are taken up, and
cast down I have declared my self of as good carriage
as any in the neighbour-hood; and my daughter Iinny
waits upon an honourable Lady.
Mr. Constable, I am your servant, I hope you
suspect no Traitors in my house. If you doe, they shall
wait upon you into the Cellar; and there commit what
treason you will against as good Sack as is in the King of
Spaines Dominions. The Gentleman writes still. I am ut∣terly
lost.
There are two suspected to be here, that have
broken the peace, and committed a robbery.
Deny it Ralph.
I tell you Constable, there are none here,
but can break the peace, as well as you that are a Con∣stable.
They shall obey your authority, and in the Vine∣tenors
phrase wait upon you.
I fear I must wait upon the Gallows.
Being my servants, Ple go likewise along
with you.
Yes, yes; a mere plot to go along, that hee
may witness against me.
Fear nothing Ralph, the Gentlewomen will
not see us hanged.
But they may suffer us, and that's a word for
hanging.
You seem apprehensive of your own danger.
There's a reckoning to pay; if you but forgive it, •'le free
you from this Gentleman's information.
Most gladly Sir, and bee your servant. But how
shall I be sure of it?
You shall hear it from his own mouth. You
will not (Sir) inform any thing against this man! I pray
say no.
No.
I am satisfied: and will be your servant in any
thing but treason.
But be sure you speak to Mistress Dorothy. Nay
I'll along with you too, and perhaps speak a good
word.
I have acquaintance with the Justice, and his Clerk
knows my daughter Iinny.
Let me bee your servant Mr. Constable, and
light you down. I hope my house will receive no scan∣dall
by this.
It was a beginning yet, and more may hit.
Thus in the abused sense cheating is called wit.
THanks honest Nicholas. It is time to cover: my La∣die
will to supper so soon as my Master comes home.
He brings strangers with him. This Butler is the kindest
fellow to a Gentleuman; and deserves my love more for
this bottle of Sack, then Warrant or Spruce for fighting.
Come thou inspirer of a diviner soul, that teach my∣steries,
of which without thee none are capable: to bee
valiant; to love; to Poetise: suffer a thirsty gentleuman
to delight her dry palate with thy sweet moisture, and re∣fresh
her spirits with thy comfortable operation. (Drinks)
Excellent Sack, as I am a Gentleuman. Now am I in love
with my old Master for buying it; with the Vintener for
selling it; with the Drawer for drawing it; nay, with the
very Porter that brought it home: but most of all with
kind Nicholas for bestowing it upon me; good heart,
hee hath v•ned••'d a chiding if it should be mist. (Drinks.)
What foolish Poets were they that made the more foo∣lish
gods drink Nectar! Had Apollo presented Daphne
but with a cup of such Sack, sh•e would have loved him,
as I d•e Nicholas: but not to lye with him. A gentle∣woman
must not humble her self to a Butler. (Drinks.)
My Lady.
What is it should make my Husbands jealousy
Rage •o within him to suspect the visits
Of every friend! Cannot my careful carriage
Kill his distrust, and make him confident!
Many a young Lady that had such excuses
As I may well pretend, his age, diseases,
And all the cold defects are incident
To a decaying strength, would privilege
Her rasher wills dispense with young desires.
Such are in me; but not to satisfaction:
I must not wrong my fame: though my hot blood
Should dance• a lustful measure. But hoe's jealous;
And I must practise some strange cure upon it.
Secretary.
Madame.
Why doe you gaze upon me?
I would not for th'exchange your Ladyship were
a man.
And why so?
I should run mad, for love of your La∣diship.
What humour have you got? you have sure been
tippling. Fie Secretary.
I hope your Ladyship hath a better opinion of
your woman, then to be earnest because she jests.
You know Mr. Ierker?
A very handsome gentleman. I wonder no worcester∣thy
Gentleuman is in love with him:
No Secretary; what think you of me?
Doth your 〈…〉 truly and so
doe.
But not as I doe▪
I could betray mine honour to his l•ve;
And s•ll my fame for his 〈…〉 embraces▪
Give those delights which are my Husbands due
To his enjoying.
And w•ll your Ladyship discover this to me?
Truly I mean not to bee degraded from your Ladyships
woman, to hold the door, and cry, my Master's coming.
Thy employment shall be
When• wee are closely set at dalliance
Blush not what ere thou see; but call thy Master;
The service may be worth a new gown.
How, call my Master! Did ever any Lady en∣joy
a friend in a corner, and wish her Husband (who is
sufficiently jealous already) to see it! Now as I am a
Gentleuman, and had rather bee a Lady, it is not my
mind.
But it is mine;
His knowledge of't would add to the delight,
And make the offence less. City Dames can practise
Slights to deceive their Husbands, mine shall know it.
But is your Ladyship earnest?
As earnest as resolves can make me.
But I am resolved not to obey your Ladyship.
Shall I that am my Ladies Secretary as it were, be treache∣rous
to her secrets? Then let me not be counted a gentle∣woman.
If it please your Ladyship Isle tell him you intend
such a thing that he may prevent it.
Dispute not my commands, but doe them:
O• I shall stop the current of my favours.
That hitherto have flowed so fully on thee.
I have brought you some guests Wife. Send
your entertainment be worth their labour.
I could wish it much better for Master Ierkers
sake.
I fear you are too free that way.
I am yet a man, and my declining age
Hath not so weakened judgement in me,
That passion should betray my jealous thoughts.
Nor can I but suspect, and must be satisfied.
Her woman is the instrument. Mris. Susan.
Pray Sir, let me prepare her. No more will I
In the severer Person of a counsellour
Instruct your care. But since by curious search
I have informed my knowledge
Even to satisfaction of his worth,
Let me commend this noble gentleman
Unto your best desires; let him possess them.
Brother, without mature consideration
I dare not doe an act; on which depends
Such dangerous events.
My love's your warrant.
Have not I searched him thoroughly? have not I
Found him deserving all that's due to man,
Though malice were his judge. View but his person,
Art could not shape a m•re exact prep•rtion:
And through his Crystal bosom read his heart
Wherein such noble thoughts are character'd—
You shall command a poor Gentleuman any
thing; neither doe I expect reward. I only desire you
will accept it as an act of my love. But why should you
be jealous of my Lady.
Ask me no idle questions, but doe it. Thou
may bee a Lady thy self, if it lie in my power to raise
thee.
Alas Sir, an old man raise a Gentleuman.
We have a father (Brother) to whose care
We owe another duty, then that only
Which Nature hath enjoined us for receiving
Our beings from him. Let not our rash wills
Swayed only by desire, run any course
Agrees not with his liking: Yet I'll tell
The Gentleman how much he owes your love
For thus commending him.
How now Sir Generous?
Courting my woman? am not I warm enough
To thaw your frozen appetite?
Truly Sir, if my Lady knew how much I loved
you, it would make her jealous.
Indeed it would not.
Revenge should be a remedy.
That's my fear.
Nay, to her again; you are not the first
That hath abused his Lady.
Wife, forgo these fond thoughts, and with
care apply your self to entertain these gentlemen.
I'll to my closet.
I want but the opportunity of their absence,
Which I must straight contrive.
I am now animated
To come the nearest way without more circumstance;
And tell you how your beauty and your virtues
Have won on my desires to make them yours.
I thank you Sir, and could mine own eyes see
But half that worth my Brother says is in you,
My equal thoughts should answer.
What said she Sir?
It seems you did commend me!
Yes by my hopes of good, no otherwise
Then I desire to have my self commended
Upon the like occasion.
I must thank you Sir.
I doe interpret it; and have thought upon
Another trial. Let me entreat you Sister
To construe my intentions right. Though I
Commended him, it was only to distinguish
Your passion and your reason. Now I find
The latter strongest, that you refuse the love
Of one so much defective.
How! defective!
Brother, my judgement hath as searching eyes
Can see the fullness of his manly worth
Through all the veils of your detraction.
And now to show how much I doe prefer
The freedom of my will before your counsel;
I'll tell him I doe love him.
Sister, I hope
You are not earnest!
As earnest as my love;
Which since I first beheld him took possession
Of all my though•s, though customary niceness
Restraind me from discovering them; but now—
Pray daughter oversee the servants.
Mother beshrew your heart, she was in a good
•eine. But come sir, wee•l pursue it.
It hath been no small punishment for me to
hold my peace all this while. My Cousin is moral be∣fore
company and counsel's my manners. But now I hope
my tongue shall have liberty; and her's my Ladies gen∣tleuman
to exercise it with.
Your little Cousin may stay. How like you the plot?
As the end proves it. And since your constancy
Hath held out against my lewd temptations,
Which have as well been trials of your virtues
As acts of wantonness, I here desist.
Henceforth my tongue shall never uttor sound
Offensive to your modesty.
Pray let's sit,
And enter on the project, though it be nice
When wit masks virtue in a cloak of vice.
They are going to it, and heir's a little one will
tell. Pray sir, can you keep counsel?
As well as a woman.
Indeed they and children are kin.
You need not fear your secrets.
Then I shall love you heartily. But pray Sir, no
meddling with a gentleumans apron. Here's that will help
your growth: Please you to partake.
She abuses me, I must fit her. What is it Mistress?
Sack I assure you Sir; and I hope you will love
• poor gentleumans as she loves you.
If the Butler be not too deeply interested.
Secretary.
Madame.
You forget your employment.
I saw your Ladyship doe nothing yet.
Doe we not kiss!
I run then, and dare not look back for fear
of blushing.
What strange contrivement's this?
Nay, blush not Mr. Ierker, ours is no act of
shame, but to be gloried in; youth to youth. Sir Generous
are your horns so lop-heavy they make you hang the
head. Never droop at it man. A Lord may bee a Cock∣old
and never the wiser: you have gotten the knowledge
of what o• did but suspect before.
Out of my warring thoughts discretion
Ha• horder'd a resolve, whose practise shall
Preserve my credit. Though I much wonder
A women's smooth hypocrisy should make
Even her secret'st actions to appear
Most virtuous; yet in this to stain her whiteness.
I did it Sir to cure your jealousy
More then for satisfaction of desire,
Which I have often satiated, when
Your cold abilities were comforted
With down and sileuce; when your dreams presented
The quiet of a grave.
I did it Sir,
In gratitude for your hospitality.
Please you to take my counsel. Be divore't.
You need no proofs, since shees her own accuser.
I'll then procure a dispensation
And we'll be mar•ed.
It is assented to.
Nay more, I'll give you all her portion back:
Nor shall the least disquiet in my thoughts
Make me remember it. Think not (young man) mine age
So weak▪ but I can conquer passion.
My act sh•l instantly have confirmation;
And be a president where such inequality
Of years are joined.
Pray good Sir Generous stay.
I have not yet consented; and I think
The Law cannot dispense whilst either live.
If you resolve divorce, you•l only force me
To an unwil•ing widowhood; and how little
My innocence deserves, the least suspect,
Though I did feign a guilt for better ends,
Just heaven can witness. There was no necessity
To tempt my woman to discover us.
It was my first command.
I hear strange words
Which must be scanned and construed.
Here my solicits cease. But I desire
I may •em•in the servant of your virtues,
And wear your favours livery, whose example
H••h won on my resolves to reconcile
My ••lder soul.
Whilst you persevere in it,
I shall preserve you in my purest thoughts;
But never to infect them.
The World reputes me
A man of full discretion; and mine age
Is not so rotten yet, to betwice child.
Hence ye vain jealousies, that in love diseased
Are peccant humours: therefore must be purged.
Come to my bosom pattern of true goodness.
Ne'er more those bug-beares to the minds blessed quiet
Shall fright thee thence.
Then will my joys be settled.
Good Sir forgive
The rashness of my passion. I'll no more
Be jealous of your visits; but desire
The love I bear your person may beusefull
To all g•od ends.
Nay, blush not Sister;
Though it be virtues colour. Say it again.
Here are more witnesses.
Whence growe's this exultation?
From in ward joy that she affects this gentleman,
Whose Virtues won
Upon my love to be his Orator;
And not respects infected with the mixture
Of any worse condition.
Doe you love him?
I hope to your kind judgement twill appear
A virtuous truth.
If he be found deserving
In the dependences on blood and fortune
I shall consent, and then may mutual love
Render you happy.
How am I blessed that your white soul
Hath bounded it's desires within the circuit
Of my too narrow worth!
Supper not ready yet • my servants are muse∣call;
please you Gentlemen to dance a little. It is a health∣full
exercise; bid them prepare their instruments. Come,
come, settle to it.
I love to see a nimble activenesse
In noble youth; it argues active minds
In well shaped bodies, and begets a joy
Dancing within me.
Welcome neighbour Tongall: what mean
these people?
I have brought them, an't please your Worcester∣ship.
Whom, and't please you, Master Con∣stable.
The thieves, and't please your Worship, that
robed your worships Clerk.
Now Warrant.
How! I robed! the Constable is surely drunk.
I was not robed.
How's that! did not you bring me to the Ta∣verne;
show me the fellows, and direct me to appre∣hend
them? Did you not promise me a share if they might
be brought to a composition?
Who? I? verily I say I know thee not.
How! not know the Constable! Come Mr.
Warrant, let me understand the mystery without being
farther abused. You forget the place where wee had re∣creation
for nothing, only promising the wenches favour
upon occasion: against whom wee afterwards informed
to get fees.
Is it no otherwise? it shall raise some
mirth.
Did not I tell thee Ralph, the Gentlewomen?
Well, it is a rare thing to bee a Justice. Were
I but swel'd with a little authority, me thinks I could
cry, you Rogue, you Rascal, or you Constable, most
gravely.
And it is as rare a thing to bee a Constable; to
command in the name of authority, and bee drunk at
midnight, without danger of the st••ks.
I shall respect him Mris. Tongall. Mr. Con∣stable
I doe conceive an abuse done to my person, in that
you here traduce two strangers, pretending appointment,
when none will accuse them; nor can I suddenly disco∣ver
the error.
Now by all the painted authority of my
staff—
No swearing Constable; I have determined
to confer a power upon the accused, to judge both
it and you; and the most offenders shall suffer what shall
be due.
Whither shall I fall! from my Empire of com∣mand,
to obey a mock-Constable! 〈◊〉 danger of exam∣ple
forbid it, that Clowns and fools b• not made Justi∣ces
in earnest.
No more of this modesty: I'll have it so;
and exercise your wit. I have known a Country fellow
full of knavish clinches.
Yes Sir, it is ordinary in a Smith.
Then if I fit you not for a Justice.
And I for a Constable. You shall hear my
tone.
And I for an offender.
Can you write and read young gentleman?
Like a gentleman.
Then you shall be my Worships Clerk. And
so I assume authority. (hem, hem)
Now shall we be jeered out of our skins.
Set a good face on it.
(hem, hem,) what are you sirrah?
I am Dobson, the Constable and• please your
Worsh•p.
He lies and't please your Worship, I am the
Constable.
You were the Constable; but your dignity is
justly taken from you, and conferred upon honest Iohn
Dobson. Thou hast been a rascal sirrah, a corrupt Con∣stable.
Thou hast conversed with deeds of darkness, ha∣ting
the all light, but wenches and a lantern: which a
married Constable can never want at midnight. Thou
hast watched little and prayed less: thou shalt therefore
fast thy self into amendment. And so I commit thee
with thy guard of Bill-men to the mercy of a Shrove-Tuesdayes
rebellion. (hem, hem.)
Here's an other refendant, and't please your
Worship.
N•w Sir, what are you?
A Justices Clerk.
Oh, I know you sirrah.
You write true Latin, not to be understood by the Worcester∣shipfull
bench.
Your Worship is misinformed. I cannot write
true Orthography without a Copy; and for Latin, I
have less then the Dean• of Dunstable. I have read Igno∣ramus:
but finding hard words which were not in the
Dictionary; I swear I understand it no more then Igno∣ramus
himself.
Make his Mittimus and send him to school;
(hem, hem,) what are you Sir?
A Gentleman Usher.
You are a Malki• of mock-Gentry; made up
of silk and vaine-glory. You begin to grow out of fa∣shion.
I will therefore have you stitched into a case of com∣plements,
and commended to some thrifty house-keeping
Lady in the Country, where you may save her Ladyship
the charge of a Taylor; and if you can read, serve for a
house-Chaplaine in rainy weather. (hem, hem.) Bring
that Country Gentleman before me.
You'• grow saucy sirrah.
Pray let's uphold the jest. I'll not spare mine
own person. Your servant's witty.
You are a Country Gentleman; a Gallant out
of fashion all the year; but especially at Se•sions, and
upon high Holi-dayes, when your satin doublet draws
away the eyes of the simple, and distracts their devoti∣on
almost into Idolatry: giving it more worship then the
Heralds ever gave your Ancestors. You intend as I
understand to come forth in a new Edition: and when•
the Mercers and Tailors have new printed you; and that
some gentile wit may be read in your Character to marry
a Wife in the City. You shall then have a pass sealed up∣on
her by a Courtier; be ship't at Cuckolds haven, and
so transported into Cornwall. (Hem, hem.) Now Sir,
what are you? never a wise word to answer a Ju∣stice?
He is my friend Sir; and if you abuse him, you
shall not have my daughter Iinny.
There is a tempest in her tongue able to shake
the foundation of the wisest Justice-ship.
My Lady Sir.
Madame, I have heard complaints of your La∣diship,
that you rise early every morning before noon,
and are ready before night, unless there bee a mask at
Court. You are likewise a great frequenter of the balls,
merely out of charity to the poor Fiddlers.
He hits you home Wife.
And this is my Ladies Gentleuman.
Stop your ears Gentlewomen, here's a foul
business towards. But you may tell the man, the time
and place, though not the manner.
Truly Sir, if I am with child, 〈◊〉 but with a
bottle of Sack.
Give it me; I'll keep it. Many a Justi•• in the
City keeps children are none of his own. (Drinks.)
A right Sack Justice.
And now for you Gentlemen. You are of the
wits that give Poets Sack and old Beavers, and vent their
conceits in Taverns for your own.
Please you Sir, these Gentlemen are my friends.
How's that! a Justice take bribes! the exam∣ple
is too frequent, and I will have it mended.
You begin now to overdo.
Bribes have purchased more then the whole
race of A•aldermen since Luds time.
You are bitter now: it is time to resign.
It is time indeed, when I will not take bribes
to be a Justice Quondam.
When Wit makes not abuse it's exercise,
The users of it then are truly wise:
But it is a foolish Vanity, not Wit,
When Conscience bounds are broke to practise it.
Y' Ave seen a Play, wherein was no disguise;
No Wedding; no impro•able devise:
But all an easy matter, and contained
Within the time of action. It is arraigned;
And doubtful stands before your judgements bar,
Expecting what your several censures are.
Some that pretend commission to the Stage,
As th'only Cato's of this Critic Age;
Condemning all not done by imitation,
Because this new Play hath a new foundation
Wee fear will cry it down: our hope is then
That your fair hands will raise it up again.

WIthout good meat and drink must Venus freeze?
Must I derive my flames and my desire
From Ceres and from Bacchus? shall the fire
That burns in hearts, and pays me solemn rites
Kindle from fullness and gorge•d appetites?
It shall not Son. Learn of thy Sea-borne mother
Never to borrow power from any other.
The virtue that's our own, who dares to claim?
Are not both Gods and men by thy sure aim,
When at their bosoms thou direct'st a Dart.
Wounded with passion past the cure of art?
Did not the god of Medicine himself want;
(When he was s•rusk by thee) a sovereign plant
To heal his hurt? nor did it rancor by
Abundance of choice cates and luxury?
It was merely thy effect. Why then should we
To Ceres or to Bacchus deity
Assign our rights?
In part we must; for they
Are eiders in our work, and therefore may
Share in the attributes of power. If wine
Did not the spirits and the blood refine,
Making them warm and active, I should throw
My shafts at rocks of ice, and from my Bow
The winged arrows of desire would fly
With empty and succeslesse battery.
If Ceres bounties flowed not, where should I
Find any flame to light my torches by?
Fullness and ease assist me more then all
The helps I have besides.
And therefore shall
They be preferred? Thou art a foolish boy.
Their base effects are lust; they love to joy
In what is sensual only. Our pure heate
Borrows no activenesse from drink or meat;
It moves more in the soul. God Bacchus shall
Have his due attributes, and Ceres call
The plough, crooked sickle, flail and many more
Her own admired inventions, and the store
She gathers for men's use. But should the mind
Make these her only objects, what a blind
And dangerous issue of effects would grow
From such a seed! high spirits strive to know
More then a common eye sees, and aspire
Still upwards like the Pyramid of fire,
When earth tends to its centre. We must move
More then the sense; else it is not perfect love.
Here's Ceres and Lyaens.
Wee are told
By Maia's son that you intend to scold
With me and Bacchus.
I have cause to chide.
You'd rob me of my titles, and beside
Make it a gluttons tenant, there can be
No love without you.
And your Deity
Hath summoned us for this: it is very good.
I must confess you made your father wood
To ravish fair Europe. Having seen
Trains of Arcadian Virgins on the greene
Tread their chaste measures, or with nimble pace
Through the Parthenian groves, and thickets chase
A well-breath'd Stag, one of them straight-wayes must
Be tempted to her ruin by his lust:
And this employment Venus still is thine.
Ceres is mad still for her Proserpine:
Whose rape hath made her queen of the Abyss.
Who to be so rewarded would not kiss
The black lips of hells king? and to his bed
Bring the short pleasures of a Maidenhead?
Rapine not at it then.
I must whilst day
Hath any light, or heavens bright eye a ray.
It was your sons great act to boast of; he
That suffers not th•infernals to go free
Of his diseases.
Rather Ceres mine:
For if the God had never tasted wine,
Not all the heate of his infernal fire
Could ever have thawed him into one desire;
Or kindled the least flame in his cold breast
Without my virtue.
It is an idle jest.
Doth Bacchus think he can with heate of wine
Light the bright flame of love, that is divine,
And burns not from such causes, but takes fire
From th'elementall part of pure desire
Unmixed with grossness? Thy effects are foul;
And motions of the sense, not of the soul.
Subscribe then to our power; my son and I
Must have the attributes.
Let him lay by
His quiver rather. Ceres means to be
The Queen of Love, and Bacchus deity
Include all that is Cupids.
First I'll leave
To be immortal, and my self bereave
Of all that I can claim above the sky,
Or under heavens arched roof, if destiny
May give it confirmation. Take a Dart
And aim it at her proud imperious heart
To show in thy revenge what thou can doe.
I must not Mother. We'll refer it to
Another trial, and if Bacchus can
Confirm what he so saucily began
To argue, by example, we'll deny
Nothing that's due unto his deity.
Content.
And see occasion hath complied
Even with our wish. It cannot be denied
But these share both our bounties; have free use
Of all our gifts: and if you'll not refuse
A trial from them—
Let them speak, whilst we
To their dispose refer the victory.
I say Christmas you are past date, you are out of the Al∣manic. Resign, resign. Let the Oven give place to the Frying-pan, and Mine't-pies yield superiority to pancakes and Fritters.
Resign to thee! I that am the King of good cheer and feasting, though I come but once a year to reign over baked, boiled, roast, and plum-porridge, will have being in despite of thy lard-ship. Thou art but my fagge-end, and I must still be before thee.
But thou wilt never be before-hand. Thou art a prodigal Christmas; and Shrovetide hath seen thee many times in the Poultry.
Dost scorn my liberality, thou resty bacon, tallow-faced scullion? Though thou be as fat as a Flemming, I'll have Lent choke thee with a red-herring.
I'll arm my self for that. In three days I can victual my garrison for seven weeks: and it shall go hard but I will domineer in Lent despite of the thin-chapt surgeon that makes men skeletons.
As how?
At any Nobleman's house, I can like my fingers in a privy kitchen. Though I bee out of commons in the hall, there's flesh to be had sometimes in a chamber besides a Lan∣dress. The very three-penny ordinary will keep me in an upper gallery, and I can be invisible even in the pye-house. Should all fail, the wenches I got with child shall long, and have the Physicians ticket.
Thou get children!
Yes more then Christmas, and better too: for thine are all unthrifts, whores, or murderers. Thy son In and in, undid many a Citizen. Thou hast a Daughter called my La∣dyes hole, a filthy black slut she is; and Put is common in every Bawdy house. It is thought Noddy was none of thine own getting, but an Aldermans, that in exchange cuckolded thee, when thou wast a Courtier. Thou hast one son bred up in the Country called Christmas gambols, that doth nothing but break men's necks; and many more that would undo the Common-wealth, were it not for the Groom porter.
Dost see these sirrah?
Ceres and Bacchus: I am their worshipper. Were Stews tolerated, and Venus the Grand Bawd of them, without good meat and drink, your young Factors would never be able to break their Masters or Mistresses, nor your shee-silke-worme in Cheap care a button for her foreman.
Venus being overcome, I hope will yield,
Now she is vanquished in the open field,
And her weak forces scattered: nor can they
Gather new head to make a second fray.
Yes: with this champion; and his fresh supply
I'll wage new war, and call back victory.
This leave thin-gut starveling, begot by a Spaniard▪ and nursed at the lower end of Friday-street.
Why thou Helluo of hens and bakon, th•• ••rder houst of collops and eggs; thou that make the kitchen proclaim
its employment through the neighbourhood, with the se•t of thy Lard and crumpets, what can thou boast oft?
Children, children, thou parcht starveling: thou can•t g•t nothing but Anatomies.
Children! I get more (I maintain not their lawfulness) then Christmas and Shrovetide. Oh the virtue of Oysters, Lobsters, Sturgeon, Anchovies, &amp; Caveary. Why thou grout-headed bladder, puffed with the windiness of pared apples coffered in batter: for every Brawn or hog, either Christ∣mas or thy self have demolished; I have a thousand Her∣rings, despite of the Dutchmens wasteful theft, let them rob the four Seas never so often. Besides, I couple more then the Parson of Pancrace: I mean City woodcocks, with Suburb-wagtailes.
Thou couple!
Who more? Is not S. Valentines day mine? are not Codds mine, thou codds-head, and Maids mine? put them toge∣there thou wilt find they are things—
Thou art a thing of emptiness, and Lent was ever a Jack by conversion.
Such a Jack as can come aloft, and doe Venus more credit then thy fullness. Doe not I share of Aries, Taurus, and Gemini; the Innes I lye at in my progress. Yet no cuckold can deny but Aries and Taurus should follow Gemini. And it follows, or should, that I having two fathers my self, should get most children.
Who were thy fathers prithee?
Devotion and Policy; and I have begotten Hypocrisy on a holy sister, that despite of all Informers would have flesh, her belly full. Let Christmas and Shrovetide eat and drink; I'll be for Venus, though I feed upon nothing but herring-cobbs.
Who's now the conqueror? Will Ceres now
Subscribe unto my power? and Bacchus bow
To Cupids awful strength?
Not till it is
Confirmed by better evidence then his.
Then mine • Observe.
See you these good fellows, that prefer the warm Sun, before the scrapps which niggardly Christmas and Shrovetide feast them with; and would get a better race under a hedge to people New England, then the Separatists that possess it. Whilst they entertain ye, Isle summon the Spring, and she shall moderate.
See, see a Metamorphosis,
The late gray field now verdant is.
The Sun with warm beams glads the earth,
And to the springing flowers
He gives a new and lively birth
By th'ayde of gentle showers.
The Lambs no longer bleat for cold,
Nor cry for succour from the old:
But frisk and play with confidence
Like Emblems of true innocence.
The cheerful birds their voices strain•
The Cuckow's hoarse for want of rain.
The Nightingale doth sweetly sing,
To welcome in the joyful Spring.
Thus break my glories forth that late lay hid
Within the icy earth, and were forbid
By Winters nipping cold to show their heads
Above the snowy covering of their beds.
The winds not rugged now, but calm and fair,
Sweep flowery Gardens, and perfume the ayre.
The woods shrill Choristers (whose frozen throats
Late wanted motion,) now have found their notes;
Straining their little organes to sound high,
And teach men art from Natures harmony.
Come you to welcome me?
Yes lovely Maid;
And to have judgement from you, who most aide
In Loves great work.
Is there a strife between
The goddess of desire, and plenties Queen?
Will they subscribe, Isle moderate.
Content.
First hear my reasons; then my sentence: bent
Against neithers honours, for I must comply
Wi•• ••th as virtue••. Venus Deity
Is powerful over all; and Ceres gives
Each that hath being that by which he 〈◊〉
Yet many times excess perverts the end
Of pure intentions; and extremes extend
Their powers to undo those acts are free
In their own natures from impurity▪
Love ought to be Platonic, and Divine▪
Such as is only kindled, and doth shine
With beams, that may all dark effects con•roll
In the refined parts of the glorious soul.
Men doe abuse your gifts, when they delight
Only to please their sensual appetite,
And heat the blood from •ulnesse; whencethere grows
No perfect love, but such as only knows
The coursest difference, and therefore must
Presume to own no other name but lust.
In me let Temperance teach you to apply
Things to their best ends; and to rectify
All motions that intend effects, beside
What may run clear and currant with theside
Of purest love: in which let all your jars
Be reconciled, and finish your sterne wa•res.
Thus we embrace in p••ce.
And I 〈◊〉 Spring
Will lead a moderate measure. Chirpers sing
Your choicest airs; and as our ears they great,
Unto the Music we will apply our feet.
• That of all the seasons am the least,
Though first in time, and usher in the rest,
Impart my pleasures freely, •ut desire
You'll not abuse them with excess. My quire
Shall sing as every fair one do•h •ecome
A chaste Bride, her Epithal a•i•m.
Though they are short be plea•'d with these, to you
I yearly will return and bring you new.
The Spring being received into the Scene it closes.

ANd must I still be vexed! shall my gray age
Be played upon, as if I were a Page
To your fond Art, not Nature: did not live
But by the stipend which you yearly give.
Your owne's but forty shillings, and that price
Binds you to order me by sage advice
With Ticho Brach, and Ptolomy, so far
You dare out-doe a learned Albumazar.
And with Predictions cheat the faith of men,
That make your books their gods; and from your reign
Or drought foretold enhance the price of grain,
This is the end of your high practise.
Wee
Doe all by just rules of Astrology.
Starre-gazing idiots, you Astrologers!
That understand not what the name infers.
You have not enough Grammar to conceive
The words true Etymon; and therefore leave
Your vain replies, lest I apply them to
Another use.
What would Time have us doe?
Not fright credulity with this years wonders;
Eclipses; tempests; frosts; snows; storms and thunders.
And you that sad fates sadly doe report
In borrowed Latin from the Innes a court;
Let not great Princes; Statesmen, and whole Nations
Suffer this year by your Prognostications:
As if you could the fates of all men teach,
When your conjecture hath obtained the reach
Of probability: for which your ears
May stand in time as fixed stars on the spheres
Of some round pillory. Twill teach you how
It is judgement to be silent, though you know.
Why Astraregunt homines.
It is true:
Stars govern men; but Time shall govern you;
And regulate your studies: or he'll be
No longer ruler o'er his Pentarchie.
You shall not stuff your annual books with rimes
Bought of the Ballad-mongers of the times;
In which (and that shows little Poetry)
He must inveigh against wine and venery.
Prescribe the fittest time for cutting corns:
And when the Pigs •hold fear the guilders horns.
These are your •abours; and by such as these
Each of you shows hi•self Philomates.
You likewise think it is grace your years works are
Fixed on the backside of some chalky bar,
Whore's your own score, perhaps for Ale or Beer
You will not pay 'till the Platonic year.
Time Satyrs me.
Indeed Time cannot lye:
You know his Motto: 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉.
It is well that you can make the country Squire
For two pence yearly a Chronologer.
Tell him how long it is since the world began;
And since the Conquest every Monarchs reign.
Then with this store enabled hoe's complete;
Can welcome friends with talk as well as meat.
Before poor tenants have their rent to pay
The Landlord's skilful in the quarter day:
Knows every Terms returns, and when he's ti'de
By a Subpoena on his mare to ride
To London; where he only learns to boast
How much his journey, and his law-sutes cost.
Time knows that we are scholars.
So you are;
And learned ones too: whose speculations dare
Reach at sublime things, when you cannot spy
What snakes of folly at your own feet lye.
What would Time have us then?
I'd have you be.
Not vain prescribers of men's destiny;
But Registers of actions, such as may
Challenge deservedly a peculiar day
To every owner. You me thinks should show
The executions done by th'English bow,
When black Prince Eaward bravely did advance
His Ensigns through the very heart of France.
I will have all the world observe this day,
So glorious by the birth of him, that may
Fill volumes with his acts, and challenge more
Then all the great Heroes went before.
Such things as those Historians ought to day.
Be nothing, or be you Historians too.
Practise a reformation, or (fond Elves)
Changed into Satyrs you shall lafh your selves. 
Is the gray dotard gone?
Wee are then alone:
Good fellows every one
Let's call my hostess Join.
Well said rithmer▪ thy halting verses will hardly sup∣port the fat cripple any longer that begs with them. Would wee had some Ale.
Hang this Time that would alter our profession, which is of equal antiquity with him. Suppose wee have abilities; must we use them as he please? No: let us inspire our selves with Ale, and compile an everlasting Ephemerids.
Whore's the stock-boy?
Doe not mock boy:
Lest I knock boy
Your learned block boy▪
Hast thou none left of thy six years before hand? If the Stationers refuse to trust, our books shall never more credit the Company with rubricks in the title.
We'll try all the houses in the Zodiac; and if they will not trust, we'll pull'downe the signs.
Here is the sign of the Moon, the rendezvous of our fraternity. If the worst comes to the worst, we'll pawn Time for the reckoning.
By your favour we may more easily spend him.
Here comes she will fill us the comfortable liquor.
By the dozen?
By the score boy. Wilt not Hostess?
No indeed sir. I'll hazard no more upon your next years Almanac. You say there's a man in the Moon drinks Claret; keep him company. The woman at the Moon will keep her Ale for better customers.
Shall wee have no Ale then?
Not a cockle-shell full without money before-hand.
Here's two groats; fetch every man his pot, and before we drink a health we'll curse thee.
The Fox will fare the better. 
Moist thou have always penniless guests like us, 'till thou pawn thy petticoat to pay the Brewer, and thy glorious shelves shine not so much as with an earthen platter. Instead of Shoelane hangings may the walls of thy house be pain∣ted with chalk; and the figures of no more value then cy∣phars. May thou weekly be subject to informers, and thy forfeited licence be put to the last use of wast paper.
Stop your mouth sir.
Hast thou brought Ale? cry thee mercy. Here's a health to the Prince, whose Birth-day Time would have should be the whole subject of an Almanac.
Let him give the conceit to a Poet; it may be worth a day to him.
Ha! hath Circes given us an enchanted cup; or are our wives turned City Witches? These are fine jests.
It is your own idle humour makes you beasts.
Forgive us Time.
Nay dance a Horne-pipe now.
That done perhaps I'll crop your well-growne brow.
Ha! wee are men again.
Hence: since you slight all counsel that is mine,
I'll employ others in my great design.
On, gently on; the sky is fair:
Arabian winds perfume the ayre,
As they the Eastern gardens sweep,
Or Amber floating on the deep.
Such sweets doe here the sense bewitch.
The Phoenix pile is not so rich.
Here is a presence, from whose 〈◊〉
An influence awes all destini•s.
A Su•ue that can with on• bright ••y
Make where it shines 〈…〉
Sing, sweetly sing. The chirp•g bi•••
Have got new notes, and better words.
What Nature wants Are• doth supply,
And makes it perfect harmony.
Such •ounds do• here enrich the ears▪
Above the Music of the Sp•••••s.
Here are presented to the tuft
Ripe fruits and early, that will last.
For such we banish Nest•r hence,
Here's perfect May in every sense.
Welcome to Time thou comfort of the earth,
T••t •ith th• warm do we give a lively birth
To all her glories, which cold win•er late
Wrapped in his clouds of ice: she desolate
Vngarnisht then, wore nothing on her head
But snow and barrenness, nor was her bed
Covered with greene: then heavens crystal eye
Seldom peep out of his bright canopy.
But now thou hast unto the infant Spring
Given perfection; and thy blessings bring
The •••mers hopes on. Thou Times Queen shalt be
Whilst Flora and Vertum•us waite on thee.
Thou own'st a glory yet tran•e• 〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉
Of these, as day light doth th• 〈◊〉 •ime of rest.
This day, that makes Time young, in hope to see
A thousand revol•tio• 〈◊〉 be 〈◊〉
Dissolved, to gaze o• Trophies shall ado•••
The Princes life•, •nd 〈◊〉 wa• this day home▪
Go my delig•• 〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉
Of all thy pleasures; to his graciou• •ye
Present the 〈…〉
I 〈◊〉 that are
Worthy his high acceptance• they are far
Inferior to the things that should set forth
The fullness of his glory and his worth.
The pastimes which belong to me are rude,
Fitter for course ones, and the m•ltitude•
Yet (so the 〈◊〉 may be pardoned) they
Shall enter to delight him as they ••y.
Hoe's pleased with this Greatness• and goodness 〈◊〉
At such proportion in his Pri•cely frame,
That every part of hi•, his heart, his eyes,
Express them in a due equality.
I have another to present him, then
We'll yield •o change.
I'll never change whilst more•
Keep registers of Time. And though it b•
Custom, that they doe chiefly welco•e 〈◊〉
At my first entrance, this shall be my day
As th'onely one that trownes the pride of May.
I'll wear no other flowers upon my head
But the Deluce; with Roses, white and red;
And the stout Thistle: each of which implies
An Emblem full of sacred Mysteries.
The Lilly and the Rose are beauties flowers:
They deck; the Thistle shall defend his bowers.
The white and red Rose thornelesse, signify
A gentle rule: The Lilly, sovereignty.
The Thistle strength and power to quell his foe•
That rudely dare attempt to gather those▪
Besides, these several flowers doe appertain
To Nations subject to his future reign.
And this is all poor May can strame her powers
To doe; to make her Garland of his flowers.
And cause men yearly on this day to see
His name preserved unto posterity.
Time hath some rich thing to pre•ent.
I have
(As Time is powerful) summoned from the grave
Eight Princes all of Wales, whose histories
Shall be instruction, and their memories
Present Heroic actions so this mind,
That though their fortunes were not always kind,
Their virtues he shall strictly imitate,
And make those virtues awful over Fate.
Vertumnus you, and Flora you be gone.
And if their airy forms are quite put on
Let them appear; whilst lovely May and I
Listen to th'Birds and Natures harmony.
From th'Earth whom• honour long hath slept▪
And •oblest dust (as treasure• h••e)
By hallowing clay hath made it shine
More glorious then an Indian mine,
These brave Heroic shadows come
To sport in this Elizium.
For theirs and this doe both agree
In all but the Eternity.
From the air, or from the Spheres above
As they in perfect concord move.
Let Music sound, and such is may
Equal his hope that rules the day.
Thus doe we welcome you to night
Unto our Mansion of delight.
For yours and 〈◊〉 doe both agree
Inall but the Eternity.
OLd Time leaves all his blessings that he may
Here with this presence; and will every day
Confirm possession. Sadly sets the Sun
After his days course cheerfully was run.
The Moon looks pale; the Tapers dimnly burn:
The fear of your departure makes them morn.
Sweet rest attend ye all: Good night it is late,
Many birth-dayes may you thus celebrate.
Time being received into the Scene it closes.

SIr, I hope Lord LYSICLES is not yet retired.
No Sir, he commanded immediate notice
Should be given of your coming.
I fear my stay at the Castle, hath made my
Duty seem unmannerly, but till this minute I had not
My dispatches from the Governor.
Let it not trouble you, he never shuts his eyes
Till all this other World opens theirs, nor does he
Sleep then, but with distracted thoughts
Labours his fancy, to present him objects that may
Advance his grief.
What may the monstrous cause be?
'T was monstrous indeed, he lost his Mistress,
Barbarously murdered by her perfidious Uncle:
Her Urn is in CIRRHA, which my Lord nightly
Visits and presents it, all his contracted
Sighs of the fled day; but at his parting
Reassumeth more, by thinking she is not: to
Whose dear memory his tears and griefs are
Offered, he's now alone, and the religious awe
Which makes our Priests retire, before they
Doe adore the incensed powers, is seen in him,
Who never dares approach her honoured tomb,
Till a just contemplation of his loss, hath
Made his sorrow eloquent.
See he comes, if when he parts your hast will
License you, I will relate the story of his
Unequalled sufferings.
Doe you depart to night?
This hour my Lord.
I will not wrong you to entreat your care in suddenly
Delivering these small packets, but least you
Should believe they are merely ceremonious,
And so bear any date, I now inform you,
I am concerned in nothing nearer, my griefs excepted.
I wish your Lordships happiness.
First, wish me a captivity, for as I am
Ith'instant, if heaven should power his blessings
On me, their quality would alter. Sir, good night.
Sir, you are sad.
He has no heart to joy that can be otherwise,
That sees this glorious youth greane under his harsh fate.
What a sad accent had each word he uttered?
I could not mark them much, but his whole
Frame is of such making, as if despair had bin the Architect,
We may wish, not hope a long life in him.
Sir, will you now take horse?
I should, had you not promised the original of
This misfortune, and trust me it is a bold
Curiosity, that makes me search into it, for if
The silent presentation hath struck amazement
In me, how shall I guard my heart, when sad
Disasters violence my passions.
Thus then in short,
These noble Kingdoms THESSALY and SPARTA,
Have from the time, two Kings commanded all,
Under both Titles, still bin emulous,
And jealous of th'advantages which each,
Suspected might be in the adverse party:
This cause a lasting war, but the fierce storm
Threatened not till the reign of these two Kings,
Both crowned young, both of an equal age,
Both having all the passions of their subjects,
Their fears excepted: the Ambassadors
That should congratulate the new made Kings,
As if one spirit had inspired both,
Came with this message little varied,
That each were joyed in such an enemy:
No more the fearful wisdom of old men
Should rust their swords, that fate had given to one
Command of all. In short, their forces met,
And in ten bloody days none could decide
Which had the better cause:
The virtues of each Prince so prevalent.
Fortune was but spectator, to conclude,
Urgent affairs at home compelled each King
To leave their Armies, ours committed his
To STRIMON father of Prince LYSICLES.
The Duke of ARGOS did command the SPARTANA,
Who swollen with the great name of General.
Before his King had hardly left the sight
Of his great Army, draws his forces out.
And faced us in our Trenches: it is not yet
Unquestioned, whether fear or policy
Made STRIMON keep in his: but certainly this,
That Virtue sharpened by necessity,
Procured our Triumph: here LYSICLES
Anticipated years unto his fame,
And on the wounds of his brave Enemy,
Did write his Story, which our Virgins sing.
But from this conquest did begin the cause of all his misery.
How from this? unless the King should judge
It, too dangerous an honour to be given to one.
Hoe's Lord of so much Virtue,
He cannot fear it in a Subject.
And as the common voice reached him in ETHOS,
There's none he looks on with greater
Demonstration of his love.
I know not that, but this I am persit in,
His judgment is directed by the Kings so powerfully,
He cannot think his virtues injured,
Though many should be nearer in his graces,
It would inflict him strangely if any should be thought,
To love his Prince better than he.
Pardon my interruption, pray proceed.
The Duke defeated, posts unto the Court,
Where he designed, unto his dire revenge,
Th'obscurest path that ever time revealed
Since her first glass: procures his King to throw
Neglects upon him, and to seem in doubt
Of his obliged faith: a severe search
Made on his papers, his treasure valued
By the public Officer, and is himself,
Twice deprehended in a seeming flight,
Calumniated, libeld, and disgraced,
By his own seeking, and belief of others,
Who judging him to be their honours ruin.
First raze his house, and then demand his life
As sacrifice, unto their brothers, sons,
Nephews, and public loss: sedition
Had now the face of piety, which once
Received as just, can hardly be repealed.
The King with difficulty doth assure his life,
With promise of his banishment.
This he fore-saw and sought, and did disguise
Himself, in fear of the incensed people:
Parts in the night, and partner of his fate
Hath his fair Niece, who is so innocent,
She cannot think there is a greater crime,
Practised by men than error, which does make
Us seem more vicious, than in act we are.
I want a perspective for this dark Mystery;
And but your knowledge doth dissolve my doubts;
T would seem a Riddle, that a Gentleman
Of his known valour, reputation,
Should strive to lose both for some secret end,
I cannot yet arrive too.
Sir, you know
Revenge doth master all our passions,
That are not servants to her rage.
But how unfriended, banished the reproach
Of Traitor fixed upon him, he could find
The way unto't more easy, I am ignorant.
This story will resolve you, to this Court he comes,
Is brought to th'King, then with a modest freedom
Relates his sufferings, hopes that same hath taught
His story ere his coming, else he should
Continue miserable, as believed,
Both by his friends and enemies a Traitor:
Delivers that he sought protection
From him, because none else could vindicate
His innocence, which many mothers here
Saith, he hath wept that day when fortune
Consulted Eat, who should be Conqueror:
You brave Lords (saith he) that were present, did my sword
Parley? did you receive wounds on condition?
Were these by compact? all my blood is lost
Since tic discredited, what before was spent,
Ran in my name and made that live: but now
Great King, you only repeal my honours fall,
By giving death unto your enemy.
Our Prince resents his fate, confirms him his
By a large pension, and too soon entrusts
With all his secrets, gives him means to view
His forts, which he designs, and learns the strength
Of each particular province, and informed
Of all, makes his escape, and is received.
Of the SPARTANA King with all remonstrances
Of love, and confessed service; but before
He parted, did that horrid act which
LYSICLES must dye for.
Indeed this story doth not much concern
Him, if I mistake not.
At his arrival here, he left his Niece
With this design, that when his plots were ripe,
Without suspect he might come to the borders:
Hither he comes, and at his entrance, is
By a base traitorous Servant certified,
Of the great love twixt her and LYSICLES,
The compact of their vows, with divers Letters
The Lovers had exchanged: he storms and cries,
If thou dost love young LYSICLES, my hate
Shall strike thee dead, thy hand plucked back my honour
When it was mounting, be constant, and this hand
Shall by her death give thee a lingering one,
And my revenge in thy own house begin.
Then with a barbarous unheard of cruelty
Murders his Niece, and the same instant flies:
Fame had the next Sun blown this through the City,
His house was searched, the trunk of the dead Lady
Found in the Hall, the head he carried with him,
In honour of his cruelty.
Sure he was mad.
I would say so too, but that I would not make
Him less guilty of this inhumanity.
What furies govern man? we hazard all
Our lives and fortunes to gain hated memories:
And in the search of virtue, tremble at shadows.
But how are you ascertained that he did
This horrid act?
He sent the bitter summons of her death,
By her that had betrayed her; the report
Did make her spirits throng unto her heart,
And sure had kilt it, had not Heaven decreed
His hand should be as black as his intent.
She begged sometime for prayer, and retired:
In her own blood did write her Tragedy,
And parting, wishes to her dear bethroth'd.
Now hear the strangest mistook piety,
That ever entered in a Virgins breast:
She so much loved this barbarous Homicide,
She would not have him guilty of her death,
And therefore with her own hand wounds her self,
And as she bled, she writ unto her Lord:
At last concludes.
They will not let me make them innocent:
I'm called unto my death, and I repent
My wound, because I would not hurt
That which I hope you loved: this bloody note
Was found the next day in her pocket.
And came it to the Lord LYSICLES?
It did, and if you ever had seen
A hundred parents at one time deplore
The unexpected deaths of their lost Children:
The fathers sorrow, and the mothers tears,
Would Emblemize, but not express his grief.
Sometimes he shrieked, as if h'ad sent his soul
Out in his voice: sometimes stood fixed, and gazed
As if he had no sense of what he saw:
Sometime he'd sound, and if the memory
Of his dear Mistress, even ith'gates of Death
Had not pursued him, he had certain dyed:
Torment did now give life, at last he drew
His sword, and ere he could be staid, did fall
Upon the point. This I think did preserve him,
For not being mortal, and he fainting with
The loss of blood, had not then strength enough
To end himself; until he was persuaded
To live, to celebrate her memory,
Which nightly he doth doe upon her Tomb,
Whither he now is gone.
I have not heard of such a love as this!
Nor never shall of such a beauty as did cause it.
It is late, and I'll not trouble you with her story:
When you are at Court, all tongues will speak
Her merit to your wonder. I'll bring you to your horse.
And will you marry now?
Indeed will I.
And what shall be done with all those lockes of hair
You have?
Why I'll make buttons of'em, and had they half
The value that I swore they had, when I did beg'em,
Rich orient Diamonds could not equal them:
Some came easily, and some I was forced to dig for in the Mine
And your prized liberty, what shall become of that?
You swore you would not marry till there were
A Law established, that married men
Might be redeemed as Slaves are.
I was an Ass when I talked so:
Those dimbed books of Chastity I read
In my minority corrupted me; but since
I'm practised in the World, I find there are
No greater Libertines than married men.
It is true it was dangerous, this knot in the
First Age, when it was a crime to break vows:
But thanks to VENVS, the Scene is altered,
And we act other parts. I'll tell thee,
The privileges we enjoy when we are married.
First, our secrecy is held Authentic,
Which is assurance will take up any woman at
Interest, that is not peevish, then the acquaintance
Which our wives bring us, to whom at times I carry
My wives commendations, and if their husbands be
Not at home, I doe commend my self.
For what I prithee?
For a good Dancer,
A good Rider, a good ??? any thing
That I think will please 'em.
Thou'lt have a damnable conceit of thy wife
By thy knowledge and opinion of all other
Women, unless you think her a Phoenix.
Twill be my best resolution. But hark in thy
Ear Rogue, I could be content to think, and
Wish mine and all ??? for the public good,
And wear my horns with as much confidence,
As the best velvet head of'em all, and paint
Them in my Crest, with this Inscription;
These he deserved for his love to the Common-wealth.
A rare fame you would purchase.
A more lasting one than any Monument you can
Repeat the Epitaph of, and would it not be
Glorious to be commemorated as the first founder
Of the Commonalty of undisparag'd Cuckolds?
Yes, and prayed for by bastards that got better
Fathers than they were destined to by their mothers marriages.
And cursed by Surgeons that were undone by
Honest women's practices.
And this done voluntarily, which you will
Hardly avoid, though you have a thousand
Guards to prevent it. I that, have been your
Play-fellow, shall be first suspected,
And first banished.
By JUPITER never; no, though't would preserve
A thousand smooth fore-heads: if she be honest
Your Arts cannot alter her, and if otherwise,
Had I not rather adopt a son of thine
Than a strangers: and confess truly CLEON,
Would not you for this public benefit be
Content to sacrifice a Sister, that we might
Love no longer by obligations, but affection; and
Seeing, liking, and enjoying, finished in a meeting.
Unless I had means to appropriate one, you
Cannot suspect but I should wish a title unto all:
But what hopes have you of your Mistress?
No airy ones of liking and affection, but mine
Are built on terrafirma already, which her father
Looks on greedily, and proportions
This to that grand-child, to the second this.
Is he not somewhat startled at the report of
Thy debauchery? for though your thick set woods,
And spreading Vineyards make excellent shades
To keep away the Sun, I mean the piercing eye
Of censure; yet some suspicious common fame will raise.
Indeed it was my enemy whilst my elder brother lived.
But since his death you are altered I must
Confess it, for then the slenderness of your
Annuity allowed you but the election of some
One sin: I mean a cherished sin, whilst
The others repined that thought themselves
Of equal dignity, in time they had their turns,
Yet singly still; but since your brothers Death
You have shown your self a grateful
Gentleman, and recompensed those that have
Suffered for you to the full.
A pretty Satire this, to whip boys of nine:
Yet still I tell thee, I am another in the opinion of the world.
Another Heliogabalus thou would be,
Had thou his power; but by what conjuration can
You bring me to think it?
By reason, which is a spirit will hardly be
Raised in you, but thus it is: whilst my brother
Lived, my wildness was observed by ???
But now you walk in shades, recluse, and shut
Up in your Coach, your painted Liveries
Supposed Faries, and she that you were wont to
Visit by the name of Madam Ruffiana, is now
Your Aunt, all this I am perfect in; yet cannot
Reach the mystery of your supposed disguise,
You say doth Masque you.
Hear me and be converted; I say I was
Observed by those that were nearest in blood to me,
And with fear too, least the ruin of my
Fortune might force them to supply my wants.
This cause the Ague,; this the admonitions, and
Frequent counsels; sometimes severe reproofs,
Every one curling himself from any hopes of mine,
They would assist me, and those gave largest counsels,
That would give nothing else.
Of this I am yet a sad party, and a witness too.
Since n y brothers death, the names of things
Are changed, my riots are the bounties of my nature,
Carelessness the freedom of my soul,
My prodigality an easiness of mind proportioned
To my fortune: believe me CLEON, this proverty
Is that which puts a multiplying-glasse upon our
Faults, and makes'em swell, and fill the eye;
Our crimes cry highest then, when they have brought us low.
I have not known any condemned for playing,
But for loosing.
True, and let it be thy rule for all things else.
It this be certain, twill be long ere I be reputed virtuous.
Thou'lt never be, unless it be this way.
I prophecy, good CLEON.
'T is a sad story, pray let us leave it. Have you no Rivals?
None present that I can fear, having her
Fathers firm consent
EVGENIO, your Rival still continues banished.
And I hope will, till I am full possessed of HERMIONE.
Did you give him cause to draw upon you in th'garison?
Nor knew then any of offence, or his pretences,
Which his folly looked I should divine; he met me on the guard,
And drew upon me; we had a little scuffle,
Were parted, and he banished for the insolence.
Prince LYSICLES labours to recall him.
By all means, he was by in the noised battle, saw the
Prince cleave this man to the twist, divide a second, overthrow
A third, he is his Trumpet.
His actions need none.
Wilt thou be happy CLEON, believe not Fame
So far, as to make thy self less than another man,
There were thousands that served for six Sestersce,
That did more than both; yet sleep forgotten: It is
Now time to meet the Ladies on the walk.
I doe profane this place, for were my griefs
As great as I would boast'em, I could not live
To tell them to the World:
Or is the passage which my soul should make
Shut up with sorrow? It is so, and a joy,
A hopeful joy, to meet her must give freedom
To my sad prisoner, when my hand shall lead
This dagger to his heart, that parred ours.
And Heaven that hears this vow, power on my head
Dire thunder, if I shrink in what I promise:
And sacred'st Saint, if from thy place ofrest,
Thou turn thy eyes upon thy holy Relics,
Accept my vows, and pardon me the life
Of the cursed Homicide, a full revenge
Of thy Death, and my lives misery,
Shall make him pay the time he has outlived
My happiness; and when he is fallen,
Present thy self in all thy glories to me,
That my freed soul may owe her liberty
To no force but impatient longing
Of re-injoying thee; and holy Tomb,
The Altar where my heart is nightly offered,
Let my winged love have passage through thy marble,
And fan the sacred ashes, knowing no heate,
But what he takes from them; so peace and rest
Dwell ever with thee.
Dear HERMIONE, pinch me or I shall sink with laughter.
What said the stranger? PHILLIDA, I did not hear it?
Nothing madam.
Then he did talk by signs, he was long about it:
What was it, IRENE?
He long importuned her to show her face, which
After many urgings she consented to; and he in
Recompense made a low Revernce to her, and
Then thanks her for the great favour, and
Concludes he never did receive so great a one
From any woman, since all else have done with them
A reference to themselves: but hers was merely
Goodness, for before he saw her be might
Have suspected her face handsomely hid, for a
Piece of beanty, if her virtue would have
Suffered him to be longer in that error.
I would I were a man for his sake.
So you told him, and he still courteous for
All your anger, promised to give you what you
Wanted of a Man, or teach you how to make one.
Thou wilt never be old wench, if thou still
Keep this humour.
Not a sigh older these seven years if it
Please Sir CUPID, for he blows our bellows.
But look, yonders your servant, there's no
Starting now; you must stand too't, but before
He comes to interrupt us, observe with me,
How in that deep band, short cloak, and his
Great boots, he looks three stories high, and
His head is the garret, where he keeps nothing but lists of
Horse matches, and some designs for his next clothes.
Where is his cellarage?
He'll show it thee himself dear PHILLIDA, and
Thine too, if thou wilt have him: but they make to us.
Madam will you honour me, and this Gentleman,
With a sight of that which doth enrich the World?
You will not take our excuses, if we should say
You find us now with more advantage to our beauties.
So breaks the morning forth, but the Suns
Rays, are not so quick and piercing as your eyes,
For they descend even to our hearts.
Heaven defend: my heart would tremble if they should.
Why Madame?
See such impieties as are lodged there in a
Man, and not be stuck with horror, it is impossible.
Your wit doth make you cruel: but Madam, I
Have something to deliver unto you, which your
Father commanded no ear should hear but yours.
What have you there CLEON?
Verses Madam.
Whose?
Of Lord ERGASTO'S,
Written in celebration of the fair HERMIONE.
Did he buy them, or found them without a father,
And has adopted them for his own?
They are his own.
Here.
I pray read them.
What have I deserved of you good CLEON, that
You should make me read his Verses in his own presence?
If you think I have not already as an ill opinion
Of him, as I can have, you lose your labour.
Read them, and Isle assure you you'll find things
Well said and seriously, and you will alter your opinion of him.
Pray give them me, I long to be working wonders.
Rubies???Peases???Roses???Heaven.
Doe you not think he has done my Cozen a
Simple favour comparing of her voice to that of Heaven?
It is his love makes him doe it, not finding any
Thing on Earth fit to express her, he
Searches Heaven for a similitude.
Alas good Gentleman, it is the first time he
Ever thought on it; what frequent thunders
Should I hear, if'twere as he would have it?
Let me counsel you, lay them aside till
They have contracted an inch of dust, then with
Your finger write their Epitaph, expressing
The mutual quiet they gave men, and received
From them; or as all poisons serve for some use,
Give them your Physician, and let him
Apply them to his Patient for a Vomit,
This way they may be useful.
How ever you esteem them, such an Elegy
Would make you think your glass had not yet flattered you.
It cannot, I prevent it, and accuse it, for
Not showing the Hills of Snow, the Rubies
And the Roses, they say, have being from me:
But stay, Heaven opens, and I see a Tempest coming,
Your Po??t is a Prophet.
I'll call an oath to be my witness.
Madam?
My own fears light upon me, if the might that
Eve's the day of Marriage doth not shut me from the World.
Why Madam, this intemperance?
It is a just anger.
If you are augry Madam with all that love you,
There lives none that has more enemies,
Every eye that looks upon you, you must hate.
Sir CLEON, our friends are engaged, pray let
Vs be of the party: what has called up this
Choler in my sweet Cozen? My Lord you have
Been begging favours.
Yes of Heaven, that it would furnish me
With merits fit to deserve your Cozen.
When it has granted you, return to her, and
Renew your suite; but if you stay till then,
You must get spectacles to see her beauty with.
Why should you hinder you repose and mine?
You know I never loved you.
Then he has no reason to accuse you of inconstancy.
Why are you fair? or why has my scars
Enforced me to love nothing else?
If your love were considerable, what an
Obligation had my Cozen to your Stars?
Then these remonstrances of yours are
Impulsive, and not voluntary.
I cannot tell, but when I seriously direct them to you,
I'll swear I am bewitched.
Madam, this is repugnant to your other virtues,
That you should hate a man for loving you,
Before he did profess himself your servant.
I know you did receive him with indifference
At least: whence then proceeds your hate?
From his expression of his love.
A cruel Son sprung from so mild a Father, if he did
Urge you to any thing might blast your honour.
She would not hear him, and as it is, how
Much does he obliege her, he's now her servant,
And would entreat her to let him be her Master,
A request strangely modest.
If I were he, I'd take an honourable composition,
Let her choose whom she pleased for husband,
And continue her secret servant still.
You are uncivil.
Pardon me Madam, this mirth's a liberty:
Your cozen doth allow me???Here comes your father.
How long first you have undertaken to be your
Own disposer?
Sir.
After my cares had sought you out a man that brings
All blessings that the world calls happy; you must refuse him.
Sir, I have tan an oath.
I know the priest that gave it. Doe you not blush,
Being so young, to know how to distinguish the difference
Of desires, and this so wildly? that you will put off your
Obedience rather than loose one that you dare not say
Hath interest in you; but by my hopes of rest,
I'll use the power custom and nature gives me,
To force you to your happiness.
How now my Lord? what miracle can raise a
Tempest here, where so much beauty reigns?
My Lord, you are not practised in the cares of
Fathers. I thought to have seen this Gentleman
My son to morrow; and she does not refuse him: but ???
It must not be, pardon me virtue, that I begin
An act, will set a stain upon my blushing brow:
Yet I must thorough. Lord PINDARVS, my
Fortunes carry a pardon with them, when
They make me err in acts of ceremonial
Decencies, they have bin so heavy and so mighty,
They have bent me so low to th'earth,
I could not cast my face upwards to hope a blessing,
The cause you are perfect in.
It is a noble sorrow, but your deep Melancholy
Gives it too large a growth.
Thus all doe press it; yet had my grief relation
Only to my self, I would not part them from
My heart and memory they justly doe possess:
But my father hath no more issue save my self,
For to couferre his name and fortunes on.
Our Greece would morn if such a glorious
Stock should end in the most flourishing branch.
If you doe wish it a continuance, it is in your
Power to make it lasting to ages. Since my
MILESIA'S death, I have not loved a Lady equal
With your HERMIONE, in her I hope to lose
My swollen mis-fortunes, and find out a joy
That may extinguish them: it is now no time
To tell her how much I am her servant: for
This Lord here that does pretend to her fair
Graces, before I had declared my self his
Rival, perchance you would believe me, if
I had said, he no way doth deserve her.
Where you pretend who can, but Heaven
That designed a blessing to my child, it had
Been pride to hope for, hath made her still
Averse to his pretences; but giving her the
Liberty of refusing, I know he is removed.
Thus then to morrow I'll waite on yon,
Ladies I am your servant.
My Lord ERGASTO, you see with how much candor
I have embraced your love, yet though I doe
Put on a fathers strictness in my daughters presence,
I cannot force her to an act whereon
For ever will depend her happiness.
My house shall still be open to you as my heart.
My business calls me, get you home, your servant.
ERGASTO my Lord ERGASTO, what have you left
Your tongue with your heart?
Is she not strangely fair?
You'll not believe me, if I should say the contrary.
Do ye think that there are such faces in Elizium?
I'm sure many better go t'other way, if they
Be not marred in the Voyage; but doe you
Remember where you are to meet with PHORMIO?
Nor any thing else, her beauty makes me forget
All things that has no Reference to it.
Hey day, if within these two hours, if you doe
Not forget the cause of this forgetfulness, I'll
Be an Eunuch, what if the Prince should be your
Rival? I cannot tell, but my Lord PINDARVS on a
Sudden fell from his anger, to his daughter, to a
Ceremony, to you might be suspected.
It is a fear that makes me tremble.
Courage man, if you have not lost your
Memory, your remedy is certain: there
Are more handsome faces will recompense this loss.
Let us meet PHORMIO.
HAve you sent for the Egyptian Lady?
I have, and she'll be here within this half hour.
She speaks our Language.
Her father was of Greece, a wealthy Merchant,
And his business enforcing him to leave his
Country, he married a Lady of that place where he lived,
Who excellent in the Mystery of divination,
Hath left that knowledge to her daughter,
Enriched with thousand other modest virtues,
As is delivered to me by those are frequent with her.
Doe you believe what PHILLIDA saith,
Is the voice of all your friends?
What first?
That you shall marry with Prince LYSICLES.
I heard your Uncle say, the Governor did
Receive it with all appearances of joy, in hope
This match will free him from this deep Melancholy:
And'tis determined the next feast joins your hands.
The Grave must be my bed then:
With what harsh fate doth Heaven afflict me,
That all those blessings which make others happy,
Must be my ruin? but if this Ladies knowledge
Shall inform me, that I shall nee're enjoy EVGENIO,
Darkness shall cease me 're Tapers light,
My blushes to the fore-swome HYMENS rights.
Why should you labour your disquiet Cozen?
Anticipating thus your knowledge, you will make
Your future sufferings present, and so call
A lasting grief upon you, which your hopes
Might dissipate till Heaven had made your mind
Strong enough to encounter them.
Dear IRENE, our Stars, whose influence doth govern us,
Are not malignant to us, but whilst we 
Remain in this false earth: he that hath courage
To divest himself of that, removes with it
Their powers to hurt him; and injured love
Who sees that Fortune would usurp his power,
I know will not be wanting.
See, the Lady comes.
Madam, the excuse that justifies sick men that
Send for their Physician, must beg my pardon,
That did not visit you to have this honour. Here you see
A Virgin, that hath long stood the mark of Fortune,
And now's so full of misery, that though the gods
Resented what I suffer, yet I fear
That they have plunged me to extremes exceed
Their own assistance.
Fear not their power.
I doe not, but their will to help me I must doubt,
For those that know no reason of their hate,
Must fear it is perpetual.
And let the Ensigns of their wrath fall on me,
If ere by any willing act I have
Provoked their justice: to you now, in whom
It is said, as in their Oracle they speak. I come to
Know what mighty growth of dangers are decreed me.
First, dearest Lady, doe not think my power
Greater as my will to serve you, it is so weak
That if you should reley on it, I shall seem
Cold in your service, when it does not answer
What is expected from it, all I know,
Is but conjectured, for our Stars incline,
Not force us in our actions. Let me observe your face.
Doe, and if yet you are not perfect in your Mysteries,
Observe mine well, and when you meet a face
Branded with such a line, conclude it miserable:
When an eye that doth resemble this,
Teach it to weep betimes, that so being lost,
It may not see those miseries must be his only object.
Are my misfortunes of that horrid shape,
That the mere speculation doth affright
Those whose compassion only it concerns?
I that must stand the strokes then, what defence
Shall I prepare against them? yet a hope
That they be ripened now to fall on me,
Lightens a desperate joy to my dark soul.
For the last dart shall be embraced
As remedy, to cure my former wounds.
It is not that, I was surprised in considering I must
Partake of all your fortunes, for our ascendants
Threaten like danger to us both.
Are then my miseries grown infections too,
Must that be added? pardon me gentle Lady this sad crime.
I must account amongst my secret faults:
I me ant no more but to communicate,
Not part my sorrows with you.
Would you could, with what great willingness
Should I embrace a share of what afflicts you.
I'd hast to meet and ease you of your fears.
Now if to one whose interest doe force her
To advance your hopes, you dare deliver
The cause of your disquiet, you shall find
A closet, if not a fort, to vindicate your fears.
You shall know all. I have exchanged my heart
With a young Gentleman's now banished
His Country and my hopes, his rival labours
To make me his, my Father resolute,
I should consent, till Fortune changed, but
Lessened not my sufferings; for our Prince
LYSICLES ruins me with the honour of his search.
Does EVGENIO know you love him?
No.
Why does he doubt it?
A womanish scorn to have my love revealed,
Made me receive his declaration of it,
As an affront unto my honour.
And when he came to take his leave,
I left him in the opinion I would obey my Father.
I've heard as much; but contradictions
In the Princes actions doe amaze me:
They say he loves your friend, and labours now
For to recall him, and that every Night
He courts his former flame, hid in the ashes
Of his lost Mistress.
By this judge how miserable I am?
That my malignant Stars force them to change
Nature and Virtue too, that else would shine,
Unmoved like the Star, that does direct
The wandering Sea-men: must then Nature change,
And will not Fortune cease to persecute?
Good gods; I will submit to all but breach of faith.
They will not hear us Madam, unless we
Contribute to their aide our best endeavours.
I have thought a way may for a time secure you;
You must dissemble with the Prince, and seem
To love ERGASTO.
It is not impossible, but he seeing you
Prefer one so beneath him, may provoke
A just neglect from him; then for ERGASTO,
Besides the time you gain, there may succeed
A thousand ways to hinder his pretence.
Can my heart ever consent my tongue should say,
I am to any other but EVGENIO?
No my dear Love, though cruel Fate hath severed
My vowed embraces, yet hath Death Ice enough
To fright all others from them.
I see Love is a Child still, what a trifle
Doth now disturb him: You will not get your health
Of the price of saying you are sick; I know
There is another remedy more proportioned for your disease,
But not for you that suffer, which is this:
Tell the Prince that you're engaged, but he
That broke with vows and friendship, for your love,
Will not desist for such supposed slight lets,
And then your Father will force you to his will.
If the Prince leave me, it is most certain
He'll use his power to make me take ERGASTO.
Those that in dangers that doe press them nearly,
Will not resolve,
Upon some hazard, and give leave to chance
To govern what our knowledge cannot hinder,
Must sit still, and waite their preservation from a miracle.
I am determined; for knives, fire, and Seas shall lose
Their qualities, here Fate shall make me his:
And if Death cannot be shunned, I'll meet it boldly.
Cozen, the Prince is come to see you.
Good Madam use some means that I may speak
With him before he goes; my heart doth promise
I shall doe something in your service, and
Be sure when he first speaks of love, seem not
To understand him.
Madam, I have begged leave of your Noble Father,
To offer up my self a servant to your virtues.
It is a grace our family must boast of,
That you descend to visit those that stile
Themselves your creatures, made such by your goodness,
Which we can only pay by frequent prayers,
That your Line may last, as glorious to
Posterity, as your now living fame is.
Madam, you were not wont, by a feigned praise,
To scorn those that admire you; or would you thus
Insinuate what I should be, by telling
Me I am, what I must ever aim at.
Were there proportion twixt our births my Lord,
'I would ill become a Virgins mouth to utter
How much you doe deserve, that will excuse,
When I shall say, our Greece ne'er saw your equal.
I did not think I ever could be moved
With my own praise, but now my happiness
So much depends, that you shall truly think
What now you utter of me; that I glory
My actions are thus favoured by your judgement.
We must forget our safeties, and the gods,
Whose Instrument you were of our deliverance,
When we are silent of the mighty Debt
This Kingdom owes your courage.
This declaration of your favouring me, will plead
My pardon, if I doe omit the Ceremonial circumstance,
Which usually makes way for this great truth
I now must utter. Madam, I doe love
Your virtues with that adoration,
That the all-seeing Sun does not behold
A Lady that I love with equal ardour.
Our friends have most power over us, both
Doe second my desires of joining us
In the sacred tie of Marriage.
My Lord, I thought at first how ill my words
Became a Virgins but give'em the right sense
They were designed, which was to speak you truly,
Not with a flattering ambition:
They might engage you to the love of one
So far unequal, if I have ever gained
Any thing on your goodness, I'll not lose it
By foolishly aspiring to that height,
You must in honour dispossess me of
When I was seated: Marry you my Lord!
The King, our neighbour Princes, all good men
Must curse me as a stain to those great virtues
You're the single Lord of; if you speak this to try
What easy conquest you can make of all,
You faintly but pretend to, I'll confess
The weakness of our Sex, who would be prouder
Only to have the shows of your affection,
Than real loves of any they can hope
With Justice to attain to.
What ever I deserve,
The gods have largely recompensed my intent
Of doing virtuously, if it hath gained so much
Upon your goodness, as to make a way for my affection.
My Lord, I doe not understand you.
Pardon me dearest Lady, if my words
Too boldly doe deliver what my actions
And frequent services should first have smoothed
The way they are to take, my Happiness
So nearly is concerned, you shall approve
Me for your Servant, that I trembling hast,
To know what rigours or what joys expect me.
But ere you doe begin to speak my Fate,
Know whom you doe condemn, or whom make happy:
One, that when misery had made so wretched,
That it ravished his desires to change,
Whose eyes were turned inward on his grief,
Pleased with no object but what cause their tears,
Your beauty only raised from his dark seat
Of circling sorrows, lighting me a hope
By you I might receive all happiness,
The gods have made my heart capacious of.
Good my Lord, give me leave again to say,
I dare not understand you, you are too noble
To glory in the conquest of a heart
That ever hath admired you, and to think
You can so far forget your Birth and Virtue,
As to believe me fit to be your Wife,
Were a presumption, that swelling pride
Must be the father of, which never yet
My heart could be allied to: continue Prince,
Be the example of a constant love,
And let not your MILESIA'S ashes shrink
With a new piercing cold, which they will feel
In the instant, that your heart shall be consenting
To any new affection, and give me leave to say,
Your mind can ne'er admit a noble Love,
If it hath banished hers your memory.
Must that be argument of cruelty,
Which should be cause of pity? And will you
Assume the Patronage of envious Fortune
By adding torments unto her affliction?
Must I be miserable in loosing you,
Because the gods thought me unworthy her?
Did I so easily digest her death,
That I want pity, and am thought unworthy
Of all succeeding love?
Witness my loss of joys, if sorrow could
Have killed me, I had not lived to show you mercy.
Protect me Virtue,
Pardon me my Lord, I know your griefs
How great and just they are, and only meant
By mentioning MILESIA, to confess
How much unworthy I am to succeed her
In your affection, which though you bent
As low as I durst raise my self to reach,
'T were now impiety for me to grasp,
I being no more my own disposer.
Ha, what Fate hath taken you from your self:
The Lord ERGASTO'S importunity,
Whom though at first no inclination
Of mine made me affect his vows,
Hath vanished my determination,
I finding nothing in my self deserving
The constancy of his affection to me,
Besides my Fathers often urging me
To make my choice obeying his commands,
And threatening misery, if I declined the least,
Knowing his violent nature, I consented
To a contract twixt me and the Lord ENGASTO.
Oh the prophesies of my unjust fears how true
My heart fore-told you!
Madam, it cannot be you should affect
One that hath no desert, but what you give,
By making him a part of you, my hopes
Though always blasted, could not apprehend
A fear from him: I should be happy yet,
If any worthy love shadowed my shame
Of being refused by you.
Give not my want of power to serve your Grace,
The cruel Title of refusing you.
Your merits are so great, you may affire
Your self of all you can desire that's possible
To grant, whom thousand worthier than my self
Would kneels to.
By my life, if my Faith were not given, I would
Here offer up my self to be disposed by you.
Though no ambitious pride could flatter me,
You could descend to raise me to your height.
Must this be added to my former griefs?
That in the instant you profess to pity
What I must suffer in your loss; your virtue,
For which I admire you, must exclude
My hopes of ever changing your r solves:
Yet let my vows gain thus much of you,
That for a Month you will not marry him;
I know your Father will not force you to it,
For he not knowing what hath passed between you,
Consented to this visit.
By all things holy this I swear to doe,
Though violent Diseases should enclose me
Till the Priest joined our hands; yet if you please
Let not my Father know, but he's the cause,
I dare not look upon the mighty blessing
Your love doth promise.
May I not know the reason?
That he may know, that this unquestioned power
Hath forced me to that error, which himself,
And I, must ever morn unpitied.
Now you throw Oil upon the wound you make:
I may be ignorant of all things else,
But of my want of merit to deserve
I am most perfect in: be happy Lady,
He that enjoys you shall not need that prayer:
My Fathers business calls me.
Let me entreat you, that you'll see a Lady,
Whose virtues doe deserve the honour of our knowledge.
What is she?
An Egyptian Lady, lately come to Cirrha.
I have heard of her; they say she knows our
Actions past, and future.
When you know her, you will believe me,
That virtue chose that dark inhabitation,
To hide her Treasure from the envious world.
Isle call her to your Grace.
Madam, this is the Prince.
You need not tell me it, though this be the first
Time that I saw him since I came to Cirrha,
His Fame doth make him known to all that are
Remotest from him.
My miseries indeed have made it great;
For all things else I should be more
Beholding unto silence, than the voice
Of my most partial friends: Why doe you gaze upon me so?
Have you not lately lost a Lady that did love you dearly?
If you doe measure time by what I suffer,
My undiminished grief tells me but now:
But now I lost her, if the sad Minutes,
That have oppressed me since the fatal stroke,
It is an age eternity of torments I have felt.
Good Sir, with-draw a little, I shall deliver
What you believe, none know besides my self.
Most true it is, what god that heard our
Vows hath told it you?
But if your eyes pierce farther in their secrets
Than our weak fancies can give credit to,
Tell me if where she is, she can discern and know my actions?
Most perfectly she does, and mourns your loss of faith,
That now begin after so many vows,
So many oaths you would be only hers,
To think of a new choice.
This may be conspiracy. Isle try it further.
Had you been snatched from her, and for her sake
Murdered, as she for you, your Urns cold ashes
Should have hid her fire of faithful love.
Pardon me my Lord.
Her injured spirit inspires me with this boldness.
I am certain, this is no inspiration of the gods,
It cannot be she should consent, my faith
Should be the ruin of my name and memory,
Which necessarily must follow, if virtuous love
Did not continue it to future ages.
Fame of a constant lover will eternize it
More than a numerous issue; would you hear
Her self express her sorrow?
If I should desire it, it were impossible.
You conclude too fast: if this night you'll come
Unto her Tomb, you there shall see her. 
Though she bring Thunder in her hand, I will not fail to come.
And though I cannot credit that your power can procure it,
My hope's it should be so, will overcome my reason.
Ladies, I am your servant.
Madam, I cannot stay to know particulars,
Of what hath passed betwixt you and the Prince:
Only tell me how he relished your saying, you
Were promised to ERGASTO?
Respects to one I seemed to have made choice of,
Made him forbear his Character:
But shall not I be punished seeming to prefer,
One so unworthy both to EVGENIO, and this noble Prince?
The gods give us permission to be false,
When they exclude us from all other ways,
Which may preserve our faith.
Longer I dare not stay, I am your servant.
Now we are met, what shall we doe to keep us together?
Let's take some argument may last an hour of mirth.
If you'll have ERGASTO be of the parley, it must
Be of the Ladies, for he is desperately in love.
If the disease grow old in him, I'll pay the physician;
But be it so, and let it be lawful to change as often as we will.
What the Ladies?
The discourse of them, and themselves too, if we
Could arrive to it: but what is she you love?
One that I would sacrifice half my life,
To have but a weeks enjoying of.
At thesegames of love we set all; but the best is,
We cannot stake, and there's no loss of credit in the breaking.
CLEON, hast thou seen him with his Mistress?
Yes; and he stands gazing on her, as if he were begging
Of an Alms.
It is not ill done; but does he not speak to her?
Never, but in Hyperboles; tells her, her eyes are Stars,
Which Astronomers should only study to know our Fate by.
It is not amiss, if she have neither of the extremes.
What doe you intend?
I mean, neither so ill favoured, as to have
No ground for what we say, for their belief
Will hardly enter; nor so handsome, as to have
It often spoken to her: For your indifferent beauties
Are those whom slattery surprises, there being
So natural a love and opinion of our selves,
That we are adapted to believe that men are rather
Deceived in us, than abuse us.
Your limitation takes away much of my answer:
But grant all that you say, I have no hope of
Obtaining my Mistress.
Then thou hast yet a year of happiness:
But why I prithee?
She is so deserving, she thinks none worthy
Ofher affections, and so can love none.
You have more cause to doubt, that she will never
Affect you, than that already she is not in love:
What a young handsome Lady, that carries the flame of her heart in her cheeks, not have yet seen any one to desire? it is impossible.
I was of your mind, till I had experience
Of the contrary.
Conceits of your self, makes you of the opinion
I mentioned: You think it is impossible for all men,
What you cannot attain to; what Arts
Have you used to gain her?
He knows none but distilling sighs
At the Altar of her beauty.
Ifhe be subject to that frenzy, I will
Counsel him to take any Trade upon him
Rather than that of Love.
And doe you think there is any thing fitter
To call down affection than submission?
Nothing more opposite for languishing transports;
Whinings and Melancholy makes us more laughed at,
Than beloved of our Mistresses; and with reason:
For why should we hope to deserve their favours,
When we confess we merit not a lawful esteem of our selves?
I have known some their Mistresses have forsaken,
Only because they were certain the world took notice
They were deeply in love with them.
And they did wisely; for the victory being got,
They were to prepare for a new Triumph, and
Not like your City Officers, ride still with the
Same Liveries. Some I confess, have miscarried
In it, but it was because their provision of
Beauty was spent before they came to composition.
Thou were it an excellent fool in a chamber, if you
Continue, you'll be so in a Comedy: Dost believe
Thau can swagger them out of their loves?
Sooner than soften their hearts by my tears,
And though a River should run through me,
I would seal up my eyes, before a drop should
Come that way: for our unmanly submissions
Raise them to that height, that they think
We are largely favoured, if they hearken to us with contempt.
It is safer they should do so, than hate us for our insole??ce.
If thou hast ever been used to talk sense,
I should wonder at thee now: why I should
Sooner hope to gain a Lady after the Murder
Ofher family, than after she had an opinion
I deserved to be slighted by her.
Before VENVS he talks with Authority: I know
Not well what he has said, but methinkes
There is something in it: prothee let's hearken to him.
Doe; and if I doe not dispossess you of all your
Opinions, let me be ???
You must deal by enchantment then; for I am
Resolved to stick to my conclusions.
It is the best hold-fast your foolish Devil has,
But strong reasons shall be your Exorcism.
Tell me first what is she you love?
Would I could.
Then for all thy jesting, there's some hope
Thou art yet in thy wits.
You mistake me; I mean I could not tell, because
No Tongue can speak her to her merit.
Heyda, if the Ballad of the Rose and the Honey-combe
Doe not doe it more than she deserves, or almost any woman,
Let me be condemned to sing the funerals of Parrots.
Would the Ladies heard you.
They would believe me, though they would be
Sorry your Honours should: but what, this love
Has it transformed us all? CLEON, you can tell
Who it is he thus admires?
Yes, and will; it is HERMIONE, PINDARVS his heir.
PH, What EPICTETVS in a petticoat? she that disputes love into nothing, or what's worse, a friendship with a woman?
The same, and I know you'll confess shoe's deserving
Yes, but the mischief is, she'll ne'er think so
Of him: If POLYGAMY were in fashion, I would
Persuade him to marry her, to be Governess to the rest,
But not till then, would thou be content
To lye with a Statue, that will never confess more of love,
Than suffering the effects of thine?
And have his liberties in the discourse of her friends,
That her retiredness may be more magnified.
Believe me ERGASTO, these severe beauties, that
Are to be looked on with the eyes of respect,
Are not for us: we must have them that love to
Be praised more for fair Ladies, than judicious.
You mistake me gentlemen, I choose for my self, not for you.
Faith for that, who ever marries, must sacrifice
To Fortune, and she, whose wisdom makes her
Snow to you, may be Fire to another: Some odd
Wrinkled fellow, that conquers her with wit,
May throw her on her back with reason. Take
This from the Oracle, that for the general
Calamity of Husbands, all women are reputed
Vicious, and for the quiet of particulars,
Every one thinks his wife the Phoenix.
You have met with rare Fortunes.
Calumny is so general, that Truth has lost
Her credit: But to th'purpose, what Rivals? what hopes?
A potent Rival takes away all; LYSICLES does woe her.
Good night, I will dispute it no more, whether thou
Should have her, or no; for now I conclude, it is impossible.
I had her Fathers firm consent before he declared himself.
Though thou had hers too, be wise, and despair
Betimes: In this point Women are Commonwealths,
And are obliged to their faiths no farther
Than the safety and honour of the State is
Concerned: If thou were it the first example, I
Would excuse thee for being the first cozened.
But stay, who's here?
O'my conscience, an Embassage from some of
Your kind Mistresses, that would fine take their
Leaves before you go to captivity.
Is it possible?
She desires you to see her, and believe that ambition
Cannot gain more upon her than your affection.
Take this Ring, and this.
I dare not Sir.
Tle pay thy Dowry then within this half hour;
I'll waite on her.
From what part of the Town came this fair day
In a Cloud, that makes you look so cheerfully?
A las Gentlemen, I was borne to know nothing
Of love, but sighs and despairs.
I can be servant to none that have the election of two.
Unriddle, unriddle.
'T was the servant of HERMIONE that came to
Have no waite upon her Lady.
PHORMIO, what doe you think of this?
I wo'not think at all, for fear I judge amiss.
The Mazes of a woman are so intricate, no
Precept can secure us: yet this I am resolved on,
She will not love you.
Why sent she for him then?
The Devil that advised her can tell you, they
Will not lose a servant whilst he lives,
Though they command him to be murdered: it is the
Woman Art, if they perceive a lover to desist
Through fear, distrust, or harsher usage, they
Open him the Heaven of their beauty, in smiles,
And yielding looks, and with their eyes doe melt
The ice of doubts their fears contracted: perhaps
Prince LYSICLES spurs coldly, whilst he rides
Alone, and you must strain to make him go
The faster: EVGENIO too was servant to your
Mistress, and LYSICLES and he parted good friends.
Should I think all the ways they have to cozen
Us, it were endless: but Isle along with you,
And guess at more.
Tell my Lord LYSICLES, I will attend him in the walks.
Whore's this ungrateful child, whom the just gods
Have cursed so much, they will not let her take 
The blessings they doe offer? 
Here Sir, on her knees, begging your pardon, or your pity.
Can thou hope either from my injured patience,
Vexed by thy folly into rage and madness,
What colour now to cover disobedience?
Is LYSICLES unworthy? or your knowledge,
Does it pierce farther than the eyes of all
Into EVGENIO'S virtues? I tremble
When I think thou moist have cause
To know him to thy shame: doe not confess it,
By the just gods if I doe come to know it,
Isle sacrisice thee on thy Mothers Tomb.
What secret sin calls down this punishment?
That I should be accused of a fault
I dare not hear the sound of. Add not Sir
Suspicions of new crimes unto your rage;
The faults I have committed are enough to arm
Your Justice; bring me to the Tomb,
And kill me there, my Mothers Ghost will smile
To see my blood shed to preserve my faith.
Your faith?
Yes Sir:
Nor is my disobedience so swollen,
As you endear it by your passion:
I now obey your general commands,
Of doing vertuonsly in loving him
You did applaud, whilst my poor brother lived.
But you are not the same, it was never meant
He should enjoy you if your brother died.
I was not made acquainted with so much,
But strengthened by your approbation,
Gave up my will to his, and vows to heaven
Toknow no other man for husband.
Nor I no child, if you continue thus:
Nor will I argue more to make you doubt,
I am not resolute in my intents:
A live or dead Isle give thee in the hands of LYSICLES.
Good gods, if you are moved with tears, grant
This a trial only of the weak proportion
Of virtue you have lent me, not the overthrow.
How is it dearest Cozen?
As with a Martyr, almost as much pleased with
Knowledge what I dare to suffer for EVGENIO,
As grieved with my affliction: Fortune in her
Malice has given me yet a field to exercise
My faith and love to him I doe adore.
Whilst you believe you have such cause to grieve,
All comforts seem importunate; but yet Prince LYSICLES???
But what? Forbear, I fear thy thoughts
Are poisoned, which thou would fine infuse
To wound my constancy.
Sure there is Magic in that mystic name,
It could not else divide us from our reason:
What Law, what faith can bind us to remove
Love of our selves, and reverence to our parents?
You must forgive this; your EVGENIO,
If he were here, must speak as J doe now,
Granting his love be great as his profession,
For that must have reflection on your peace,
Not bargaining for his own happiness
With the price of the entire destruction
Of yours: what first you fear report?
It will reproach your being obstinate,
Or breach of faith: Do ye fear?
The gods for you have made it not a fault,
Proposing such an object as Prince LYSICLES.
Who ever had a misery like mine?
All that are grieved have yet the liberty
And ease of their complaints, or pitying friends,
J am excluded both; for my misfortune
Is masked with happiness, and if I grieve
Such comforts as we give to those complain
Of being too rich, have I smiles of contempt.
If it be thus, retire into your reason,
And for a time forget your passion.
D'ec think that all the names of virtue shrink
Into the sound of constancy? Must this
Make you forget the debt that you doe owe
Unto your Father, friends, and to your self;
Their houses honour, and your happiness,
Is LYSICLES less worthy than his Rival?
No more, their virtues that exceeds all other men's,
In them are equal.
But yet their fortune is not.
It is confessed: nor never any man had juster claim
Than he against her; rich in all virtues,
That make men desired: her narrow hand
Excludes him, unwonted to bestow
Her treasure there where an excess of merit
Would make her gifts but seem the pay of virtue,
Not favours of her partial love.
Oh you are welcome. Here behold a Rock
That stands the shame of the impetuous winds,
And the swollen Seas.
Has there been any new storms since I went?
O yes, and more endangering songs of Sirens:
A flourishing Land proposed, on which I might
Have shipwrecked with delight.
I think I understand you.
You must needs:
It was Prince LYSICLES presented in his lustre,
Against whom I armed the virtues of my friend,
And my own faith irresolute to whom
The victory should yield: at last I left
My heart, the prize, to both divided.
To both divided?
Yes, the Prince hath the adoration of my heart,
EVGENIO the love.
What Fires, what Seas must your EVGENIO pass,
To make him worthy you? me thinks I feel
His soul sigh for a trial of his faith.
We both have had satiety of that:
But can you bring no comfort? have the gods
Shut up their Oracles, as well as mercy?
Though they will give no ease, they might advise,
That we may put off misery by death.
They seldom let us know what is to come,
That we may still implore their aide to help us:
Yet something I can tell, if hope or force
Shall make you deviate from your resolve,
You are the subject of their hate: or if
You measure your or their affection
By merit, or advantages of fortune,
You are the mark of all disasters.
I have complained unjustly of the gods,
They favour me so much, they doe applaud
My resolution for EVGENIO.
Merits in others, I will close my eyes
From the blessed Sun, before they shall take in
An object that may startle my firm faith.
Be constant, and be happy, when you meet
With opposition that may shake your judgement.
Remember what affliction it is to weep
A fault irrepairable, and think not
Reason can pacify your fathers rage:
You must oppose your passion unto his,
And love will be victorious, being the noblest:
To morrow I will bring more certain council.
Where cannot virtue dwell? what a still shade
Hath she found out to live securely in
From the attempts of men? Come my IRENE,
Though thou hast spoken treason against my love,
Because thine did produce it, I must thank thee.
Let's in, and fortify our selves with some sad tale
Ofthose, whose perjured loves have made them live
Hated, and dye most miserable.
If J should weep as my Lady does, for all the
Servants I have lost?
Thou would weep in thy grave PHILLIDA: yet the
Worst is, thou wilt lose more within this seven
Years, than thou hast got in ten: for men are
Changeable sweet PHILLIDA.
And our faces were not it were no matter,
They should make haste, or we she should overtake them,
Or prevent them; a commodity of beauty that
Would last forty years would bear a good price Madam.
By Venus would it PHILLIDA, as high as that of honour.
But is not my Lady a strange woman to weep
Thus for one servant, when she has another in
His place? for my part, I could never find such
Differences in men to be sad when I had any.
And thy word may be taken as soon as any wenches
In Greece, or there be slanderers in the world:
But she affects constancy.
Some ill-favour'd woman, that meant to preserve
Her last purchase which her want of beauty
Forfeited, invented that name.
You are in the right PHILLIDA, this inconstancy is
A Monster without teeth, for it devours none,
Make no Son wear happy mourning, nor
Mother childless: and for my part, I am of
Opinion that the gods give a blessing to it, for
None live happier, than those that have greatest
Abundance of it.
What is got by this whining constancy, but the loss
Of that beauty for one servant, which would procure us
The Vows, Sacrifice, and service of a thousand?
Enough of this; were it thou with Ergasto?
Yes, and told him that my Lady sent for him:
But to what intent did you make me lye?
Thou art so good natured, that thou wilt pardon
Such a trifle for one Reason, but I have two:
The first is, I would fine speak with him,
The other knowing my Cozen to be in an ill humour,
If he press to see her, I hope she will give him such an answer,
That he shall never dare to speak to her more.
These men have less reason than Mice, they would
Know else how to shift places, and shelter themselves
From a storm. If I were a man, and lost the happiness
Of seeing my Mistress two days, I should
Lose the desire the third: Doe you sigh
Madam? you are in love too?
As far as goes to sighing, but no dying for their breeches.
I'll be your Compurgator for the handle of a Fan:
I know many love has brought into the world,
But let out none: has he pierced you, ha?
Oh no, my skin was always proof against his Dart;
But he once found me laughing, and so thrust it
Down to my heart.
Look to it, though it is but a little weapon, but
I have known it make greater swellings than
The sting of a Bee. Doe you long for a man?
Yes, a Husbandman, and let the gods after take care
For my children.
You'll find enough to doe it: is the Moore still with
My Lady?
I left her with her.
It is a shame such people should be suffered
Near the Court.
Why prithee?
As it is, there be so many inquisitive Rascals,
That we have much ado to keep matters secret;
But if in despite of our care they be devulged,
We shall be defamed on the exchanges. 
Thou hast reason, but she is secret as the night she re???sembles.
Is she? I would fine ask her one question:
But, tic no matter, it is but taking Physic at the worst.
If thou talk a little longer, I shall guess as much
As she knows: but who's here?
Ne'er fright me with the lightning of her eyes:
On me she may open or shut her eyes as she please,
But my happiness is not at her disposing.
If thou prov'st a Lover, my next Song is begun.
I will not deny but I may love her if she please:
But if she be not pleased with my love, if it continue
Two Hours, I'll give her leave to tie me to her Monkey.
Look, Ergasto has found two of the Ladies,
And has set his face to begin to them.
In Verse, or prose?
We shall hear, if we draw nearer: a good evening Ladies.
We thank you my Lords, but if we were superstitious,
Your company were no good Omen.
Why I beseech you?
Nay, I am no Expositer; you come my Lord,
To see my Cozen Hermione?
I doe Madam,
And should be proud to hear I live in her memory.
Can you doubt it? I'll assure you, you doe, shoe's
Never troubled with any thing, but you presently
Are called into the comparison with it; her Teeth
Cannot ache, but she swears it is almost as great a vexation
As your love: if any dye out of her pity to save the tears
Of a few mourners, she wishes it were you.
If I heard her desire it, she should quickly have her wish.
She would be glad on it o'my conscience, though
The scruple of having you doe any thing for her sake
Would trouble her a little, yet I can teach you
To make advantage of all this.
What advantage my delicate sweet Lady?
A very great one Six: For first believe
He desires nothing more, than to be assured
She esteems him for her Servant.
Right; but does this usage show it?
Most evidently: for being thus severe to none else,
Tic manifest she confesses a power over him, and pays
His Services with this coin of scorn and contempt,
And having her stamp upon it, he is bound to accept it.
What think you of this Phormio?
A most excellent Girl, would she were poor.
Why poor?
She would live rarely by her ???
What?
Wit, I would be a good customer.
'T would please you to hear with what Arguments
She justifies this cruelty, and swears it is not
Revenge enough for spoiling her good nature.
I, her good nature.
Nay, let her go on, I'll hearken an Age.
Yes, you, by suthing her undeserved scorn, have bred
Such a delight and habit of it in her, that she
Can hardly forbear it, when she strives to be
Complaisant to her best friends; and to say truth,
We are all endangered by such as you, when we see
That frowns procure us knees, and kind usage
Scarce gets us two good morrows.
If ever there were a Sibyl at sixteen, this Lady is one
By this day you have a high place in my heart.
In your heart?
Nay, despise it not, you'll find good company there.
But I love to be alone.
And I would sane meet you when you are so.
Will you give me leave to speak with your Scholar?
If you be his friend, teach him to be wife.
For your sake I will doe all I can: ERGASTO,
Wilt thou be happy? Marry this Lady: Wilt thou be
Revenged on thy proud Mistrosse? marry her:
Wilt thou be sure to Father, wife, children doe as I bid thee.
I will deal truly with thee; she has taken
My heart out of HERMIONES keeping.
Be thankful, and bestow it upon her in recompense:
She will accept it, doubt not; she has taken such pains
To redeem it: look how she casts her eyes upon thee:
Shoe's thine own for ever, and has been long.
I am desperately in love.
Marry, and get out of it; there may be some little straining
At the first offer of the present, but if she send not for it
Before you get home, Isle ne'er trust my eyes more.
Isle attempt it, let what will follow.
Be confident, and prosper.
Madam, what would you expect from him
You had redeemed from captivity?
The disposing of his liberty.
It is just, but this may be no great favour to the slave,
If his misery be only altered, not lessened.
You are little curious; why doe you ask who
This concerns? well, I'll tell you, you have redeemed
ERGASTO, and he kneels to know your commands.
Whilst he kneels, Hermione and the Moore look down from the window.
You may believe her Madam, she loves him,
Now you may revenge her, persuading you to leave
EVGENIO, by smiling on Ergasto; twill advance 
Your Cozens ends too, if you doe as I le advise you, whilst we descend.
It is festival to day my Lords, and so I admit
This mirth: but to morrow I will tell you; I am no more
Inclined to love than my Cozen Hermione.
But you can suffer your self to be beloved?
I think I can.
He'll ask no more,
But leave the rest to his respects and services.
But you consider not whom you may offend in this mirth.
I'll no re consider whom I offend in loving you:
I wish her beauty centupled, that my first Obligation
To you might be, leaving her: by this fair hand
I'll never name any but you for Mistress.
I may believe you, when Time and your actions
Shall tell it me as well as your words.
You wrong your beauty, to expect an assurance
From time, ordinary faces require it, to perfect
The Impressions they make: yours strikes like lightning,
In an instant; if he did not adore you till now,
You must attribute it to some fascination:
But his judgment cleared, he will be forced
To continue the adoration he has begun.
Who's that?
The Moore you heard of.
I have a strange Capriccio of love entered me:
I must Court that shade.
How now my Lord,
Courting another Mistress? I see I must locke up my winds,
Or you will seek the nearest harbour.
Excluded by your rigour, Madam, I was entreating
Your foire Cozen to present my vows.
Was it no more?
No more, you cannot doubt it Madam, turn in
Your eyes upon your beauties and perfections, and they
Will tell you, how impossible it is to lose the Empire
They have gained upon our hearts and wills:
Fortune and want of merit may make me lose
The hope of your fair graces, but never so much Traitor,
As to pay homage to any other beauty, or change
The resolution I have fixed to be your servant only.
I thank you Sir: my Sex will be my pardon
If I return not equal thanks; we think if any
Manumit before we license them to part,
They doe usurp a power is ours by nature: the posture
I found you in, was more than ordinary courtship gives.
You might condemn it, had not you been the
Cause on it: I never think your Name, but with
A Reverence great as I pay the gods; and they
Allow us bending to their Images when we
Transfer our vows: The fair Irene is worthy all,
Have not the hope of you, but whilst you give me leave
To cherish that ambition; I must not own
So great an injury, as to admit the proffered love of those
Who are so distant from your merit.
'T was unkindly done to undermine me.
In her presence I will confirm this to you.
You shall oblige me since she has wronged me:
Irene hark you.
In the name of darkness, do ye think I am not
In earnest, that you coy it thus?
Forbear uncivil Lord.
Dost thou not see that all the fire is out of the coal?
If thou would have it burn, lay thy lips
To the spark that's left, and blow it into flame.
What would thou have me doe?
Kiss her.
Not for five hundred Crowns.
Would lye with her, and not kiss her?
Yes, and can give reasons for it besides experience,
And when this act is known, this resolute
Encounter, rich widows of threescore will
Not doubt my prowess.
As I live he swore all this to me.
Hide thee inconstant man, thou art so false
Thy oaths doe serve thee for no other use
But to condemn thee, not to get belief:
Be gone, and leave to love, till thou hast found
The way to truth, and let not vanity cozen you
To believe that I am moved, because you change.
A thousand other imperfections
Have made me hate thee: yet I chose this way
To let thee know it, that deprehended with the
Black mark upon thee, thou moist not dare
To trouble me again.
Madam.
There may be some, that for their secret sins
The gods will punish making them love you,
Choose amongst them, Irene, I will hope, though she
Be credulous, will learn by this, how far'tis safe to trust you.
This was well managed.
What Mountain
Have you pierced, that hath sent forth this wind since I left you?
I have undone my self for ever.
As how?
I told Hermione I never loved Irene.
Did she hear it?
Oh yes, it mought have been for sworn else.
The Devil thou hast?
Ask him, he made me do it.
What course will you take to redeem your fault?
A precipice, as being ashamed to live any longer.
A halter you shall as soon: come, come, Isle intercede
And be your surety: Look, she stays to pardon
You; down on your knees.
Oh my sweet Lady, be merciful like the gods you re???semble; they have as often pardon in their hands as Thunder: And the truth is, if they will not forgive this fault of incon???stance, they must live alone, or atleast without men. This was the last gasp of his dying friendship to her, And now he is entirely yours.
He has not wronged me.
Fie, say not so, that's as great an injury as not
Pardoning him: he has, and shall come naked
To receive his punishment. See he dares not look
For comfort, let him take it in at his ears.
Pray content your self with the time you have
Made me lose, and let me go.
Never till you pardon him.
I will doe any thing for my release, if he has
Offended me, let him learn hereafter to
Speak truer than he swears; and in time
He may get credit.
It is enough.
Is she gone?
Yes.
How did she look?
Faith ashamed, she loved you so well, and sorry she
Had no reason to love you better.
It is an excellent Lady.
If I could make Joynters, I would not take this
Pains for your honour. Cleon whither slip you?
After Phillida.
And what success?
POX on it, these waiting women will not deal unless
They have earnest in their hands, and I was unprovided.
Away unthrift.
This is the hour powerful Acanthe promised,
I should once more behold my lost Milesia.
Pardon me reason, that my withered hopes
Rebel against thy force, a happiness
So mighty is opposed unto thy doubts,
That Isle divest my self for ever of thee,
Rather than not believe impossibles,
That bring such comforts to my languished soul.
Hail holy Treasurer of all the wealth
Nature ever lent the world, be still the envy
Of the proud Monuments that doe enclose
The glorious Titles of great Conquerors.
Let no profane air pierce thee but my sighs,
Let them have entrance whilst my tears doe warm
Thy colder Marble.???Ha, what Miracle,
Are the gods pleased to work to ease affliction?
The Phoenix is created from her ashes,
Pure as the flames that made'em: still the same,
The same Milesia! Heaven does confess in this,
That she can only add unto thy beauty,
By making it immortal.
Let it be lawful for thy Lysicles,
To touch thy sacred hand, and with it guide
My wandering soul unto that part of Heaven,
Thy beauty does enlighten.
Forbear, and hear me: if you approach, I vanish,
Impious inconstant Lysicles, cannot
This miracle of my resuming
A mortal shape, persuade thee there are gods
To punish falsehood, that thou still persists
In thy dissembling: doe not I know
Thy heart is swollen with vows thou hast laid up
For thy Hermione, whom thou would persuade,
Thy narrow heart is capable of love
By mocking of my ashes, and erecting Tombs to me, which are
Indeed but Trophies of thy dead conquered love and virtue.
No more blessed shape:
I shall not think that thou descant from Heaven,
If thou continue thus in doubt of me;
Nor can there be a Hell where such forms are.
The knowledge how thou come here, doth disturb me;
Yet such a reverence I doe owe thy image,
That I will lay before thee all my thoughts
Spotless as Truth, then thou shalt tell the shades,
How Fortune, though it made my love unhappy,
Could not diminish it, nor press it one degree
From the proud height it was arrived to:
How I did nightly pray to this sad Tomb,
Bringing and taking fire of constant love
From the cold ashes, how when encompassed
With thousand horrors Death had been a rest,
I did prefer a loathed life to revenge my self,
And her upon the murderer.
I shall desire to live if this be true;
Nothing can add a comfort where I am,
But the assurance of your love: I know
Faith is not tied to pass the confines
Of this life, yet Hermione's happiness
Does trouble me: You'll think I loved
Youliving, when dead, I am jealous of you.
Milesia, again blessed Saint, now I am sure thou art
What thou resembles, and dost know my secret'st thought.
But as the gods, of which thou art a part,
Art not content with our hearts sacrifice,
Unless our words confess it: hear me then,
If my thoughts ever consented to replant
My love, may your dire Thunder light
Upon my head, and sink it down so low,
I may not see thy glories: I confess
My words have sacrificed to Deities,
I ne'er adored those staines of love,
My tears and friendship to the best of m??n,
I hope I have cancelled for my Eugenio:
I did pretend a love unto Hermione,
Who else had sold her self unto the rage
Of her offended Father; had you lived,
You would have pardoned, when infidelity
But personated did preserve a faith
So holy as theirs was, this is my fault.
My glory and my happiness.
Yet this as oft I wept as I was forced
(For his dear cause) to injure sacred love,
Yet durst not but decline his severe Laws,
When my friends life excused the pious error.
Did you suspect her, that you concealed this from her?
There is but one MILESIA, besides,
Iftrue, I meant her fears should aide
My false disguise, which her quick-sighted Father
Would else have pierced, who hates EVGENIO,
And loves no virtue but what shines through wealth.
My best, best LYSICLES, I am again in love,
Thy holy flame doth lend me light to see
My closed fires; why did not Fate give me
So large a field to exercise my Faith?
I envy thee this trial, and would be
Exposed to dangers, that have yet no name,
That I might meet thy love with equal merit.
The cause takes all away, and want of power
Excuses what I cannot yet express too much of me,
But how our loves came to sosad a period,
As yet in clouds I have only seen,
My Uncles cruelty and hate of you procured our separation.
But how knew he our loves? though torment since
Have wrung it from me, my joys ever flowed silent and calm.
I know it, but we were betrayed
By one that served me, and the doubts confirmed
By the Moore youspake with yesterday.
Ha? How came she to know it, she was not here.
All that I ever did shoe's conscious of,
And jealous of your love unto HERMIONE,
Did place me here, to search into your thoughts,
And now is prouder of this discovery,
Thanifa Crown were added to her.
To what strange Laws does Heaven confine it self,
That it will suffer them that dare be damned
To have power over those it has selected,
My tears and sacrifice could never gain
So much upon its mercy, as to lend
Thy happy sight for one faint minutes comfort:
Yet those that sell themselves to Hell, can force
Thy quiet rest for inquisition on innocence,
And to what purpose serves faith and religious secrecy
When Magic mocks and frustrates all our vows?
This Moore then was confederate with your Uncles passion.
She is the cause that I doe walk in shades.
And I will be, that she shall walk in Hell:
With her I will begin, then seek revenge
Under the ruins of thy Uncles house:
All men that dare to name him, and not curse
His memory, shall feel the power
Ofmy despised hate and friendship.
My dearest Lysicles, promise to be
But temperate in your anger, and I will
Discover more than you yet hoped to know.
As justice that's concerned to punish crimes,
I will.
Then know I was betrayed.
Oh love, here's company, I must retire.
Talking to graves at night, and making love in the day:
My Lord, I, nor my daughter have deserved this.
Pardon me Sir, I could doe no less,
Being to take an everlasting farewell, but give this
Visit to her memory: reserve your censure
Till ten days be over, and if I doe not
Satisfy you, condemn me.
W Here did you borrow that last sigh, and that relenting groan?
For those that sigh, and not for love,
Usurp what's not their own.
Loves arrows sooner armour pierce,
Than your soft snowy skin,
Y our eyes can only teach us love,
But cannot take it in.
Another sigh then I may hope
The Song being ended,
Oh Madam, call all your sorrows to you, you are
Not sad enough to hear the news I bring.
Would it were killing, that my death might end
My fears, as my life has my hopes.
You mistake me Madam, Eugenio is returned.
Eugenio returned? thou hast reason, Phillida, I
Should be dead with sorrow: It is not fit we hear his name
Without a miracle: where is he? send to bring him hither.
He waits on your commands without.
Bring him in.
Good gods, if you can suffer me one minutes joy,
Give it me now, and let excess ofhappinesse
Finish what sorrow cannot. But whore's this happiness
I fine would dream of? Eugenio is returned,
That I may look on him, and not be his,
And call our faiths in vain to aide our loves.
May the gods give you, Madam, a content
As high, as you have power to bestow
On those you favour, and then your happiness
Will be as great as is your beauty.
Oh my best Lord, you now behold a face
Too much acquainted with my sad hearts grief,
Not to be stained with it: sure you cannot know it.
I pray say you doe not, you will wrong
Two things I am most proud of, my just grief,
And your young love, which could not grow,
Nourish't with such poor heate as now it gives.
I have a story that will break your heart
When you have heard it, and mine ere I
Deliver it. Prince Lysicks to morrow marries me,
Or I must leave my duty, or my life:
Forgive me that I dare to utter this.
Madam, forbear your tears, they are a ransom
Too mighty to redeem the greatest faith
The gods were ever witness to. I know
Whereto you tend, you woudl have me untie
The knot that bound our loves, and I will do it,
Though it be fastened to my strings of life:
Be happy in your choice, give to his merit,
What once you promised to my perfect love,
By which I only did pretend my claim:
I doe release you, as I know heaven has;
Who in his justice cannot have consented
To a longer faith in you; you must not be
The conquest of a miserable man,
O'er whom their cruellest influences reign.
Some saving power close up my drowned eyes,
Which death had long since shut, had not the love
And hope of seeing you preserved them open.
Have I been false for this to all my friends,
That you should think I can be so to you?
Add not by your suspicions a crime to our mis-fortune.
Of you I can have none, but what excuse you:
You had made me miserable, had not your faith
Yielded to those assaults; as worth and greatness
Titles your fathers rage, and your own judgement
Did shake and raze it, with what disturbed mind
Should I have looked on you my heart adored,
And love made miserable? still you weep,
But these are tears your fortune did lay up
To ease your misery: had you continued mine,
And your Suns cleared from their last clouds,
They will more freely shine upon your Lysicles:
For my self, my love in his last act shall recompense
The injuries 't as done to your repose
By killing me, then must injustice fly,
And hale inconstancy along with her,
From your fair conquered soul they now possess.
Oh my griefs!
Now I perceive the gods decreed you endless,
Since they have made him add unto my torment,
Whose memory before did make the sharpest, glorious:
Tears, and sighs, and groans farewell:
They ne'er were spent but when I feared for you;
And you being lost I have no use of them.
Here, take this paper, it is the last Legacy
My love shall ever give you: it was defign'd
When I conceived you worthy.
If you believe her words, whose faith was never lost,
Though you ungratefully have flung it off,
If so, you be not that you accuse me for, you there shall find
A story that will punish your suspicion.
You that by powerful prayers have diverted
An imminent ruin, inspire me with fit words
To appease my injured Mistress; hear me, doe not kneel for mercy, but to beg
Your leave to dye: I must not live
When pardons make my oftence most horrible,
And hell is here without them; take a middle way
If you incline to mercy, and forget me.
Rise, this is worse than your doubts were.
Turn not your face away; would you revenge,
Then let my eyes dwell on it: what punishment
Can there be greater, than for me to see the beauty I have lost
By my own fault? look then upon me.
No, I must yet keep my anger to preserve my honour,
And I dare not trust that, and my eyes at once,
If they behold you.
Then hear a wretched man, that has outlived
So much his hopes, he knows not what to wish,
Whether to live or die; yet life for this
I only seek, that you may find I shrink not
To punish him your Justice has condemned.
Rise, I can hold out no longer, the bare sounds
Of your death dissolve my resolutions:
Forget my anger, as I will the cause.
Never, it shall live here to honour me,
Since pirty of my love made you decline it:
But must??? ???
Yes, the virtuous Lysicles, for his respects to me,
How'ere unhappy, challenged that name,
In your absence labours to marry me: yet death???
Wretched Eugenio, did thy coward Fate
Not dare to strike thee, till thou turn'dst thy back:
Must I return from banishment to find
My hopes are banished? Did I for this love Virtue,
Purtued her rugged paths, when danger made
Her horrid to the valiant, to be ruined
By him that is most virtuous? Ye gods,
Was envy, malice, Fortune impotent
To injure me, but you must raise up Virtue
To suppress me???If I suffer it, I shall deserve it.
Oh my Eugenio, we are miserable,
Yet must not quarrel love, to take or give
A seeming comfort: go try all your power
Of hate or friendship to undo this match,
Isle give you leave to die first: any thing,
But let not me have so much leave to change,
As to believe you think it possible.
The Physician you sent for waits without.
Bring him in, and stay in the next room.
You are welcome: I must employ your trust and
Secrecy in something that concerns me. You must
Procure me instantly a powerful poison.
My Lord!
Nay, no ceremonies of denial. I give you
My Intents, not to be disputed, but obeyed. I know
You walk not frequently in these rongh ways;
But it is not want of knowledge, but your will,
Makes you decline them.
My Lord, I have observed you long, and see you
Wear your life like something you would fine
Put off. I will not undertake to counsel you, in
That your nearest friends have oft attempted,
Without success: yet if my life should issue
With the words I now will utter, Isle boldly tell
Your Grace, I will not be a means to cut your
Days off, to make mine happy ever.
I did expect this from you; and to inform you
Briefly, know, though I doe loath my life, I will
Not part with it willingly, till it does serve
Me to revenge my wrongs: and to'assure you more,
I will not use your Art against my self: Let
Your composition procure the greatest torture
Poison can force, for I must use it upon one
Our Laws cannot condemn; because the circumstance
That makes him guilty cannot be produced, but
With expense of time, and my revenge will not admit it.
By my honour this is the cause.
If I were sure your enemies should only try
The effects of what I can doe in your service,
The horridest tortures Treason ever justified,
Should not exceed the sufferings of those
Should take the poison I can bring you.
Bring it me instantly; and if the pains of Hell
Can be felt here, let your ingredients call them up.
If his life were only my aim and end, whilst
I doe wear this, I'd not implore your aide;
But I must set him on the rack, that there he
May confess my inquisition justice.
An hour returns me with your commands
Performed???yet I'll observe you farther.
So, this is the first degree to my revenge,
Which I will prosecute till I have made
All that were guilty of my loss of peace,
Wash their impiety in their guilty blood.
All places where I meet them shall be Altars,
On which I'll sacrifice the Murderers,
To appease the spirit of my injured Mistress:
And the last Victim I will fall my self
Upon her sacred Tomb, to expiate
The crimes I have committed in deferring
Justice thus long. This cursed Magician
Shall be the first, she did reveal our loves;
MILESIA said she did; and if it were
Her blessed spirit, nothing but truth dwells in it.
Iftwere a fantosme raised by her foul spells;
She pays the fault of her abusing me,
Insidiating with my MILESIA'S form,
To search, and then betray my resolution
Of serving my best friend: how now?
Sir, Lord PINDAR vs would speak with you.
Where is he?
Sir, I have waited as you commanded,
Near the house of the Egyptian Lady:
Something is done, that disturbs them all,
Divers run in and out, Physicians are sent for:
At last, I went in my self, and entered her
Chamber, found her on her bed almost distract
With torture, cries she is poisoned, curses her
Jealousy and curiosity, calls upon your name,
Desires, and then forbids you should be sent for.
But I will come to her confession: courage my soul,
Let no faint pity hinder thee the joys
Thou art receiving, triumph in their sufferings
That have attempted thine: Look down MILESIA,
Applaud my piety, that snatched the sword
From sleeping Justice, to revenge thy death.
What means my Lord to be pleased with this
Sad news? how can this stranger have offended him?
I'll follow, learn the issue, and the cause.
Oh, oh, oh, gods! if I have merited your hate,
You might have laid it on until my name
Had been a word to express full misery,
And I had thanked you, if you had forborne
To make his innocence the instrument
Of your dire wrath. HERMIONE, IRENE,
I have conjured my servants not to tell you
When I am dead, who I was: but if
Their weakness shall discover't, let it be hid
From the best Lysicles: I burn, I burn,
And death dares not to cease me, frighted
With the furies that torment me.
Mysterious powers! instruct us in the way
You would be served, for we are ignorant;
Your Thunder else would not be aimed at those
That follow virtue, as it is prescribed,
Whilst thousand others scope unpunished,
That violate the Laws we are taught to keep.
What mean these sad expressions of sorrow?
Oh my Lord, Nature had not made our hearts
Capable of pity, if we forbear it here:
The virtuous Acanthe has been tormented
With pains, nothing is able to express
But her own groans: she fears shoe's poisoned,
Talks of you, of Tombs, and of Milesia,
And in the midst of all her torture
Says, her distrust and jealousy deserves a greater punishment.
And I believe it, nor should you pity her:
Those that doe trace forbidden paths of knowledge
The gods reserve unto themselves, doe never do it,
But with intent to ruin the believers,
And venterers on their Art: Something I know
O'th'curs'd effects of her commanding Magic,
And she (no doubt) is conscious to her self
Of infinite more mischiefs than are yet revealed.
I am confident she is fled her Country
For the ills she has done there, and now
The punishment has overta'ne her here:
And for her shows of Virtue, they are Masks
To hide the rottenness that lies within,
And gain her credit with some dissembled acts
Of piety, which levels her a passage
To those important mischiefs, Hell
Has employed her here to execute.
Oh gods, deny me not a death, since you
Have given me the tortures that devance it:
If I deserve this, your inflicting hands
Doe reach unto the shades, lay it on there,
Hermioue, Jrene, is Eysicles yet come?
Yes, to counsel you to pacify
The gods you have offended by your cursed Arts:
The blessed Ghost you sent me too, has told me
Some sad effects on it, and in her name,
And cause, have the gods hurled this punishment
On thy foul soul, and made my grief enraged
To madness, the blessed instrument of thy destruction,
Which does but here begin.
You then did send the poison, with the Present I received?
Yes, I did; and wonder you durst tempt
My just revenge, unless you did believe
You could confine the Revelations
Of the best spirits, your cursed Charms
Betrayed first, and then enforced to leave
Their happy seats, to perfect the designs
Your malice laboured in.
What unknown ways have the gods invented
To punish me! I feel a torment
No tyranny e'reparalell'd, yet must confess
An obligation to him that imposed it.
Good gods! if I doe bow under your wills,
Without ripening at your sad decrees,
Grant this to recompense my Martyrdom,
That he that is the Author of my sufferings,
May never learn his error.
Sir, if torments ever could expiate the crimes
We have committed, mine might challenge your pardon
And your pity: I feel Death entering me;
Love the memory of your Mylesia, and forgive???
Help, help, she dyes.
If it be possible, call life into her for some minutes,
Her full confession will obsolve my Justice.
Bring some water here, she does but swoon:
So chafe her Temples,???Oh Heavens! what prodigy
Is here! her blackness falls away: My Lord, look on
This Miracle, doth not Heaven instruct us in pity
Ofher wrongs, that the opinions which prejudice
Her virtue, should thus be washed away with the
Black clouds that hide her purer form?
Heaven hath some further ends in this
Than we can pierce: More water, she returns to life,
And all the blackness of her face is gone.
PALLAS, APOLLO, what may this portend? My Lord,
Have you not seen a face like this?
Yes, and horror ceases me: It is the Idea
Of my Milesia. Impenetrable powers,
Deliver us in Thunder your intents,
And exposition of this Metamorphosis.
She stirs.
Hold her up gently???He kneels.
Oh, oh; why doe you kneel to me:
Are not you MILESIA?
Why doe you ask?
Oh then you are.
My Lysicles, I am by miracle preserved,
Though since the gods repent them of their succours.
Knowing me unworthy of thy firm constant love:
I never thought that death could be a terror
Too long acquainted with the miseries
Pursue our lives, but now the apprehension
My grave should swallow thee, makes me to welcome it
With a heaviness that sinks despairing sinners.
Power down your Thunder gods, upon this head,
And try if that can make me yet more wretched:
Was not her death affliction enough,
But you must make me be the murderer?
Is this a punishment for adoring her
Equal with you, you made so equail to ye?
Pardon the fault you forced me to commit:
So visible a Divinity could not be loo'd on
With less adoration.
If ever I did expect a happier death,
May I dye loathed: what Funeral pomp
Can there be greater, than for me to hear
Whilst I yet live, my dying Obsequies
With so much zeal pronounced by him I love?
Tortures again doe seize me.
Eyes, are you dry where such an object calls
Your tears forth???My blood shall supply your place.
For heavens sake hold his hands: O my best Lysicles,
Doe not destroy the comforts of my soul;
What a division doe I feel within me!
I am but half tormented, my soul in spite
O'th'tortures of my body, doe feel a joy
That meets departed spirits in the blessed shades???
What unexpected mischiefs circle me,
What Arts hath malice, armed with Fortune, found
To make me wretched? could I ever have thought
A Miracle could have restored thee to my eyes,
But they should see the joys of Heaven in thee?
Yet now the height of my affliction is,
That they behold thee guilty of the close
Of thine for ever: see HERMIONE,
The countenance Death should put on, when Death
Would have us throng unto her Palaces,
And court her frozen Sepulchres.
Sure she is dead: how pale she is!
No: she is white as Lilies, as the Snow
That falls upon PARNASSVS; if the Red were here,
As I have seene't enthroned, the rising day
Would get new excellence by being compared to her:
ARGOS, nor CYPRVS, EGYPT never saw
A beauty like to this; let it be lawful for me to usurp
So much on Deaths right, as to take a kiss
From thy cold Virgin-lips, where she and Love
Yet strive for Empire: the flames that rise from hence,
Are not less violent, though less pleasing now,
Than when she did consent I should receive
What now I ravish.
Dares not Death shut those eyes where love
Hath entered once, or am I in the shades
Assisted with the Ghost of my dear Lysicles?
She speaks again: good Heaven, she speaks again!
You are yet living.
And therefore dying, but before I go
Let me obtain your pardon for the wrongs
My jealousy hath thrown upon your innocence.
'T was my too perfect knowledge of my want
Of merits to deserve, made me doubt yours:
I mean your constant love, which I will teach
Below, and make them learn again to love,
Who have dyed for it.
Doe not abuse your mercy and my grief,
By asking pardon of your murderer,
But curse your sufferings off, on this devoted head,
To save the beauty of the world in you.
Why should your grief make me repent the joys
I ever begged of heaven? the knowledge
Of your love, could there be added more
Unto my happiness, than to be confirmed
By my own sufferings how much you did love me,
And prosecuted those that desired my ruin?
Like Simile I dye, who could not take
The full god in her arms.
I have but one wish more, that I may bear
Unto the shades the glorious title of your wife:
If I may live so long to hear but this
Pronounced by Lysicles, I dye in peace.
Hear it with my vows, not to behold
The Sun rise after you are gone.
O say not so, live, I command you live;
Let your obedience unto this command,
Show you have lost a Mistress.
Can I hear this, and live?
My Lord, our cares will be employed better,
In seeking to avert this Ladies death,
Than in deploring it.
You advise well: run all to the Physician:
I Will my self to Arnaldo, who gave
This poison to me. Let me have word sent to the
Cypress grove, the minute she is dead.
If Life be given as a blessing to us,
What Law compels us to preserve it longer,
Than we can see a possibility
Of being happy by it? But we must expect
Till the same power that placed us here, commands
A restitution of his gift: This is indeed a rule
To make us live, but not live happily.
It is true, the slave that frees himself by death
Doth wrong his Master: but yet the gods are not
Necessitous of us, but we of them.
Who then is injured if I kill my self?
And if I durst to hear their voice, they call
Men to some other place, when they remove
The gust, and taste of this, we should adore thee death,
If constant virtue, not enforcement built
Thy spacious Temples.
Welcome Eugenio, welcome worthy friend,
How long are you arrived?
Time enough to revenge, though not prevent
The injuries you have done me.
What means my friend?
I must not hear that name now, you have lost
The effects and virtue of it: I come to punish
Your breach of faith.
Is Hell afraid my constancy should conquer
The mischiefs that are raised to swallow me,
That it invents new plagues to batter me?
By all that's holy, I never did offend my friend,
Not in a thought.
Those that by breach of vows provoke their justice,
Doe seldom fear profaning of their names,
To hide their perjuries will put it on them.
You have attempted my Hermione,
And forced her father to compel her voice
Unto your Marriage.
All this I doe confess; but it was for both your goods,
As I will now inform you.
Hell and furies: because your specious titles,
Your spreading Vineyards, and your gilded house
Doe shine upon our Cottage, must our faiths,
Which Heaven did seal, be cancelled; it was my virtue
Won her fair graces, which still out-shine
Your flames of vice.
It hath not light enough to let you see your friend.
Gods! Could that man have lived, that dared to say,
Eugenio did suspect his Lysicles?
And now in pity you doe show him me,
That I may fly the world without regreet,
Not leaving one of worth behind me in it.
Begone, and learn your errors.
I have don't already: they were trusting you
With my lifes happiness: draw, and restore the vows
You made Hermione, or I will leave you dead,
And tear them from your heart.
Fond man, thou dost not know how much it is in
My power to make thee miserable:
I could now force thee execute my wish
In killing me; and thou would fly the light,
When it had showed thee whom thy rage offended:
But till I fall by my own hand, my life
Is chained unto my honour, which I will wear
Upon my Sepulchre: nor must I die,
Being guilty of Milesia's murder,
For any cause but hers, else were my breast,
Since you have wronged me, open to your point.
Can you deny but that you have attempted
The faith of my Hermione?
I can, with so strong circumstance of truth
Would make you blush for have doubted mine;
But he that was my friend, and suspects me,
Must attend less satisfaction than a stranger.
Proceed, and let your case be both your judge and guide.
What should I doe? I dare not trust my sense,
If he should tell me that it does deceive me:
Virtue it self would lose her quality
Ever he forsook her, and his words doe fall
Distorted from him; his soul doth labour
Under some heavy burden, which my passion
Did hinder me from seeing. Sir forgive,
Or take your full revenge; let your own griefs
Teach you to pity those are distract with it:
I will not rise until you pardon me.
Oh my Eugenio, thy kindness hath undone me,
My rage did choke my grief, which now did spread
It self over my soul and body: up, and help
To bear me till I fall eternally.
Who can hear this, and not be turned to Marble?
Good Sir impart your sorrows, I may bring comfort.
Whilst they were capable thou did, but now
They are too great and swollen to let it in.
Milesia, Whom you and J supposed dead,
By me to day is poisoned, and lies dying in her torment;
Is not this strange?
What have you said that is not?
But heaven avert this last.
It is too late now; let me beg thy kindness
Would doe that for me, J forbad thy passion.
What is it?
Kill me.
You cannot wish me such an hated office:
Call up your reasons and your courage to you,
Which was not given you only for the wars,
But to resist the batteries of Fortune.
People will say, that Lysicles did want
Part of that courage Fame did speak him Lord of,
When they shall hear him sunk below her succour.
You will not kill me then?
When I believe there is no other means to ease you,
I will do it.
All but death are fled.
Then draw your sword, and as J lift my arm
To sheath this in your breast, let yours pierce me,
On this condition J may doe your will.
J may not for the world: why should you die?
See how your passions blind you; is Death
An ease or torment? if it be a joy,
Why should you envy it your dearest friend?
Our causes are not equal.
They will be when you are dead: How you mistake
The Laws of Friendship and commit those faults
You did accuse me of! J would not live so long
To think you can survive your dying friend.
Eugenio I am conquered, yet I hoop thy kindness
Will doe that for me, which thy sword refuses:
Love thy Hermione, she deserves it friend:
Leave me alone a while.
Your griefe's too great for me to trust your life with it:
I dare not venture you beyond my help.
Within. Whore's Prince Lysicles? whore's Prince Lysicles?
Hark, I am called, the fatal news is come.
Fie; how unmanly's this? Can sounds affright you,
Which yet you know not whether they doe bring
Or joys, or sorrows? when remedies are despaired of,
You have still leave to dye; perhaps she lives,
And you'll exhale her soul into your wounds,
And be the death of her you morn for living.
Within. Whore's Prince Lysicles? whore's Prince Lysicles?
It is the voice of comfort, none would strive
To be a sad relator; Isle call him, holla, here he is.
The strange Lady kisses your hands, my Lord: Arnaldo
Has restored her; she bad me say, your sight can only
Give perfection to what he has begun.
Will you dye now?
Softly, good friend, gently let it slide
Into my breast; my hearts too narrow yet
To take so full a joy in: You're sure this news is true?
On my Life.
Why should you doubt it?
My comforts ever were like Winter Suns,
That rise late, and set betimes, set with thick Clouds
That hide their light at noon: but be this true,
And I have life enough to let me see it:
I shall be ever happy. 
So, it is well, at length his hope hath taught despair to fear.
Madam, my innocence will plead my pardon; I could
Not guess for whom my Lord intended it; the truth is,
I feared, considering his deep melancholy, he
Intended to use it on himself, and therefore meant to
Make him out of love with death, by suffering the pains
Our souls doe feel when they are violenced from us.
I had provided Antidotes, but could not, till this hour,
Learn on whom it was employed: sure I was, it could
Be death to none, though full of torment.
Till I have farther means, thank you; receive this ring.
But Madam, what did your poor Hermione deserve,
That you should hide your self from her?
Or are you the Milesia that were pleased
To call me friend? or is she buried
By Pallas Temple? truly belief and memory
Opposing sense, makes doubt which to credit:
I wept you dead, the Virgins did entomb you:
Were we then or no deceived?
My fair dear friend, you shall know all my story.
Tic true, my Uncle did design my death
For loving Lysicles, for at his coming hither
He charged me by all ties that were between us,
To hate him as the ruin of his honour,
And yet for some dark ends I understood not,
Resolved to leave me here. I swore obedience,
But knew not what offence it was to keep
An oath so made, till I had seen the Lysicles,
Which at your house I did; when he came wounded
From hunting of the Boar, all but his name
Appeared most god-like to me; you all did run
To stop his wounds, and I thought I might see
My enemies blood; yet soon did pity cease me
To see him bleed: thus, love taking the shape
Of pity, glided unseen of me into my heart,
And whilst I thought my self but charitable,
I nursed my infant love with milk of pity
Till he grew strong enough to take me prisoner.
I found his eyes on mine, and ere I could
Remove them, heard him say, he'de thank his fortune
For this last wound: if'twere the cause
Of seeing me; then took his leave,
But left me speechless that I could not say,
My heart farewell: after this visit our loves
Grew to that height that you have heard of.
The Groves, and Temples, and dark shade have heard
Them mourned, and celebrated by your friend.
I had a servant unsuspected of me,
For none I trusted that observed our meetings,
And guessing by my sighs that love had made them,
Betrayed them to my Uncle; on PALLAS Eve
He rushed into my Chamber, his sword drawn,
And snatched me by the arm: I fell down,
But knowing yet no fault, could beg no pardon.
A while our eyes did only speak our thoughts;
At length out of his bosom he pulled out
A paper, it was the contract twixt my Lord and me:
And asked me if I would avow the hand.
Heaven said I, has approved it, and the gods
Have chose this way to re-unite our houses;
Stain of thy kindreds honour, he exclaims:
Was there no other man to ease your lust
But he that was our greatest enemy.
Resolve to dye, thy blood shall hide the staines
Of our dishonour.
He could not be so cruel to intend it.
He was: for leaving me oppressed with sighs
And tears; yet not of sorrow and repentance,
But fear that I should lose my dearest servant,
Commands his cruel slaves to murder me
As I descended: and least pity should
Create remorse in their obdurate hearts,
The lights were all put out: then hastily
My name was heard; I then entreated her
That betrayed me, tell them I was coming,
And took this time to write unto my Lord:
She went, but by the way was ceased,
And strangled by those murderers
That expected me. My Uncle heard
Her latest groans; and now the act was past,
His power to help, he wished it were undone:
Brings lights to see the body, and perceived
The strange mistake: by signs and lifted eyes
Confessed Heavens hand was in it; yet would not leave
His revenge here, commands his slaves to change
My clothes with hers was slain; then takes the head off,
And on the Trunk did leave a note, which told
My death for loving LYSICLES, in hope my ruin:
Knowing his noble nature would be his.
At mid-night quits this Town, leaving none behind
Were conscious of the fact, immures me in his house
Till I escaped in that disguise I wore,
When I first came to you. 
Why did you not declare your self when you came hither?
You were the cause on it: at my arrival here,
I heard my LYSICLES should marry you,
And therefore kept the habit I was in,
To search unknown the truth of this report,
And practised in the private actions of some near friends,
Got an opinion I could presage
The future: thus was I sought by you,
Thus found the faith of my dear LYSICLES,
When at the Tomb I did appear his ghost,
And had revealed my self, had not the shame
Of doubting such a faith, kept my desires in.
Then he dissembled when he made love to me?
He did: forgive it him, it was for his friend.
I am sorry for it.
How my dear friend?
Nay, it is true,
EVGENIO and he are of such equal tempers,
I shall suspect he has dissembled too.
Oh you are pleasant;
Here comes my Lord.
Is there a wish beyond this happiness,
When I embrace thee thus? I will not ask
Thy Story now, it is enough to know
That you are living.
The gods have made this trial in my sufferings,
If I deserved so great a blessing:
I have but one grief left.
Is that word yet notearth?
Yes, but it springs from an excessive joy
Of finding such admired worth in you.
What I hereafter shall doe in your service,
Must wear the name of Gratitude, not Love.
No my MILESIA,
Mine was the first engagement, and the gods
Made thee so excellent to keep on earth
Love that was flying hence, finding no object
Worthy to fix him here.
No more EVGENIO, if your words could add
Expressions to your love, you had not had
So much of mine; and after I have tried
Your faith so many ways, it would appear
Ingratitude not modesty to show a Mistress coldness.
May I believe, all advantageous words,
Or may I doubt them, seeing they come from you
Who are all truth? I will not speak
How undeserving I am of these favours,
Because I will not wrong the Election
Your gracious pity forces on your Judgment.
Our joys doe multiply; but my dear friend,
I have yet something that will add to yours:
My Father's called to Court, and you are left
Governor in his place; this (I know) will make
Lord PINDARVS consent to both your wishes,
Your pardon Madam, and when you lye embraced
With your EVGENIO, tell him, if my faith
Had not the double tie of Friend and Mistress.
A single one had yielded to the hopes
Of the enjoying you: Here comes my Lord???PINDARVS.
Oh my good Lord, I must entreat your pardon
For a fault my love unto my friend engaged me in:
Let your consent complete the happiness
Of these two perfect Lovers; I am confident
You ever did approve his virtue: his fortune now
Can be no hinderance, since our gracious King
In contemplation of his merits,
Hath made him Governor in my Fathers place.
Most willingly I give it, since I have lost
The hopes of being allied to you,
Heaven bless you both.
Sir, your own love of my HERMIONE,
And yours now, will teach you to admit
An easy satisfaction for the troubles
My love unto my Child hath thrown upon you.
You are all goodness, and my services
Ever directed by your will, shall show,
Though I can never merit this great honour,
I will doe nothing shall deprive me of
The honour of your love and favour.
Your virtue promises more than I may hear
From you: once more Heaven bless you.
If my Lord ERGASTO now were satisfied,
I shall be at peace; for having promised
My Daughter to him, I would not have him
Think that by me hoe's injured.
It is in your power Sir, to satisfy him.
I would doe any thing.
Persuade my Cozen to confess she loves him,
Which I doe know she does, and he already
Has made profession of his, unto my prejudice:
Nay blush not Cozen, since you would not allow me
This secret as a friend, you may excuse
The inquifitivenesse of a rival.
This is all truth my Lord, I can assure you.
Is it possible, IRENE, doe you love ERGASTO?
Me thinks your experience, Uncle, should teach you,
That such a question was not to be asked:
Well, if I did love him, it was because I thought
That he loved me; but if he does not, I pardon him:
For I am certain he once believed it himself.
If ever love make any deep impression
In you, I am deceived.
His Dart may strike as far into me
As into another for ought you know Uncle.
You have ill luck else Niece.
Nay, it is most certain the Town is full of it:
MILESIA, I know not how, is alive again:
EVGENIO is made Governor; though you were constant,
You can have no longer hopes of HERMIONE:
Therefore let me advise you, make that seem
Your own Election, which will else be Enforcement:
Quit your Interest in HERMIONE, and renew
Your suite to IRENE.
Observe me.
Welcome my Lords, doe you know this Lady?
Most perfectly, and came to congratulate
With the Prince, for her double recovery.
I thank you my Lord, and when my friend and you
Are reconciled, you may assure your self
I am your servant.
What's in my power to give him satisfaction:
He may command.
Your friendship does it.
my Lord, this reconcilement will make way unto my
Pardon, I have not been wanting in my promise
To you; but my daughter thinks she has chosen
So well, that without any leave, she hath made her
Self, her own disposer.
Ages of happiness attend them: If I may hope to
Gain the graces of the fair IRENE, I shall be happy too.
If I have any power, she shall be yours.
Let me beg the honour of interceding: your fortunes
And condition are so equal, it were a sin to part you.
Pray Sir, let him doe it himself: the task is not
So hard, to require a Mediator.
Have you such skill in perspective?
As good as any Chyromancer's in Egypt Madam.
He has reason, for I have opened my breast to him,
And he has seen my heart, and you enthroned in it.
He tells you true Lady.
Indeed Sir: and pray what did it look like?
Faith to deal truly, much like the wheel of Fortune,
Which turning round, puts the same persons
Sometimes at top, sometimes at bottom: but at last
Love shot his dart thorough the Axel-tree,
And fixed you Regent.
Well, I have considered, and my Cozens
Example shall teach me.
What in the name of doubt?
To avoid the infinite troubles you procured her by your
Fruitless solicitations: do ye think your tears shall cost
Me so many tears, as they have done her?
You may excuse them by consenting
To your friends desires.
Sweet Madam, let me obtain this for him:
He dyes if you deny him.
Dear IRENE, perfect the happiness of this day.
You have great reason to persuade me
To take him you abhorred.
I was engaged.
Well, if any here will pass their words
He can continue constant a week, I will
Be disposed by you.
We all will be engaged for him.
On this condition I admit him to a Months service,
And my self to a perpetual servitude.
I ever shall be yours.
My father said so, till my mother wept.
A notable wooing this.
And as notably finished.
Let's now unto my father,
Who expects you to deliver his Commission to you.
Come my MILESIA, tell my wounded heart
No more, her sighs shall wander through the air
Not knowing where to find thee: nor no more
Shall the mistaken Tomb of false ONONE
Be moistened with my tears; yet since she dyed
To save thy life, her ghost could not expect
A cheaper sacrifice: this I'll only add
In memory of us, All Lovers shall
Repute this day, as their great Festival.

Colonel
Signior Alerzo.
Here.
Signiors well met:
The lazy morn has scarcely trimmed her self
To entertain the Sun; she still retains
The slimy tincture of the banished night:
I hardly could discern you.
But you appear fresh as a City Bridegroom,
That has signed his wife a warrant for the
Grafting horns; how fares Belinda,
After the weight of so much sin? you lay with her
To night; come, speak, did you take up on trust,
Or have you pawned a Colony of Oaths?
Or an embroidered Belt? or have you tan
The Courtiers trick, to lay your sword at mortgage?
Or perhaps a Feather? twill serve in traffic,
To return her Ladyship, a Fan, or so.
Y' are merry.
Come be free,
Leave modesty for women to gild
Their pretty thriving Art of plentitude,
To enrich their Husbands brows with cornucopias:
A Soldier and thus bashful!
Pox be open.
Had I the Pox good Colonel, I should stride
Far opener then I doe:
But pox of the fashion.
Count Antonio.
Tho he appear fresh as a bloom
That newly kissed the Sun, adorned with pearly
Drops, flung from the hand of the rose fingered morn,
Yet in his heart lives a whole Host of valour.
Hee appears
A second Mars.
More powerful since he holds Wisdom
And Valour captive. 
Let us salute him.
Hallow close they strike,
As if they heard a winged thunder-bolt, threatened his death
And each ambitious were to lose his life;
So it might purchase him a longer being:
Their breath engenders like two peaceful winds,
That join a friendly league, and fill the ayre
With silken music.
I may pass by and scarce be spared a look,
Or any else but young Antonio.
Rise from thy scorching Den thou soul of mischief.
My blood boils hotter then the poisoned flesh
Of Hercules clothed in the Centaurs shirts:
Swell me revenge, till I become a hill
High as Olimpus cloud dividing top;
That I might fall, and crush them into ayre.
He observe. 
Commandy the all
This little World I'm Master of contains,
And be assured tic granted; I have a life,
I owe to death; and in my Countries causes I should—
Good sir no more,
This ungrateful Land owes you too much already.
And you still bind it in stronger Bonds.
Your noble deeds, that like to thoughts out-strip
The fleeting clouds, dash all our hopes of payment:
We are poor but in unprofitable thanks;
Nay that cannot rehearse enough your merit.
I dare not hear this; pardon bashful ears
For suffering such a scarlet to overspread
Your burning Portals.
Gentlemen your discourses taste of Court,
They have a relish of known flattery;
I must deny to understand their folly:
Your pardon, I must leave you,
Modesty commands.
Your honours vassales.
O good Colonel be more a Soldier,
Leave complements for those that live at ease,
To stuff their Table Books; and o'er a board,
Made gaudy with some Pageant, beside custards,
Whose quaking strikes a fear into the eaters,
Dispute 'em in a fashionable method.
A Soldiers language should be as his calling,
(Ruff) to declare he is a man of fire.
Farewell without the straining of a sinew,
No superstitious cringe; adieu 
I'st not a hopeful Lord?
Nature to him has chained the peoples hearts;
Each to his Saint offers a form of prayer
For young Antonio.
And in that loved name pray for the Kingdoms good.
Count Matchvill.
Let's away.
Heart wilt not burst with rage, to see these slaves
Fawn like to whelps on young Antonio,
And fly from me as from infection? Death,
Confusion, and the list of all deseases, waite upon your lives
Till you be ripe for Hell; which when it gapes
May it devour you all: stay Machvile,
Leave this same idle chat, it becomes woman
That has no strength; but what her tongue
Makes a Monopoly, be more a man,
Think, think; in thy brains mint
Coin all thy thoughts to mischief:
That may act revenge at full.
Plot, plot, tumultious thoughts, incorporate;
Beget a lump how ever deformed, that may at length
Like to a Cub licked by the careful Dam,
Become like to my wishes perfect vengeance.
Antonio, I Antonio; nay all
Rather then loose my will, shall head-long fall
Into eternal ruin; my thoughts are high,
Death sit upon my brow; let every frown,
Banish a soul that stops me of a crown. 
The Taylor yet returned Nurse?
Madam not yet.
I wonder why he makes gowns so imperfect
They need so many says.
Truly, insooth, and in good deed law Madam
The stripling is in love deep, deep in love.
Ha,
Does his soul shoot with an equal Dart
From the commanding Bow of loves great God,
Keep passionate time with mine? or has 
She spied my error to reflect with eager beams
Of thirsty love upon a Taylor, being my self
Borne high?—I must know more.
In love good Nurse; with whom?
Hey-hoe, truly madam it is a fortune,
Cupped good lad, praised be his god-head for it
Has thrown upon me, and I am proud on it;
O it is a youth joccond as sprightly May,
One that will doe discreetly with a wife,
Board her without direction from the stars,
Or counsel from the Moon to doe for Physic;
No, he's a back;—O it is a back indeed.
Fie this becomes you not.
Besides, he is of all that conquering Calling,
A Taylor madam; O it is a taking Trade:
What Chamber-maid, with reverence may
I speak, of those lost Maiden heads,
Could long hold out against a Taylor?
You're uncivil.
What aged Female, for I must confess I am
Worn threed-bare,
would not be turned and live a marriage life
To purchase Heaven?
Heaven—
Yes my dear Madam Heaven, whither
My most sweet Lady but to Heaven? hell's a
Taylors ware-house; he has the Keys, and sits
In triumph cross legged o'er the mouth:
It is no place of horror.
There's no flames made blew with Brimstone;
But the bravest silks, so fashionable:
O I doe long to wear such properties.
Leave your talk,
One knocks, go see. 
O it is my love. I come. 
A Taylor, fie, blush my too tardy soul,
And on my brow place a becoming scorn,
Whose fatal sight may kill his mounting hopes.
Were he but one that when it was said hoe's borne,
Had bin borne noble, high,
Equal in blood to that our House boasts great;
I'd fly into his arms with as much speed,
As an ayre cutting arrow to the stake.
But O he comes, my fortitude is fled.
Yonder she is and walks, yet in sense strong e∣nough to maintain Argument, she's under my cloak; for the best part of a Lady as this age goes is her Clothes; in what reckoning ought we Tailors to be esteemed then, that are the master workmen to correct nature? You shall have a Lady in a Dialogue with some gallant, touching his Suite, the better part of man, so suck the breath that names the skilful Tailor as if it nourished her. Another Dona fly from the close embraces of her Lord, to be all over measured by her Tailor. One will bee sick forsooth, and bid her maid deny her to this Don, that Earl, the other Marquess, nay to a Duke; yet let her Taylor lase and unlase her gown, so round the skirts to fit her to the fashion: here's one has in my sight made many a noble Don to hang the head, Dukes and Marquesses, three in a morning break their fasts on her denials; yet I, her Tailor, blessed bee the kindness of my loving stare, am ushered; she smiles and says I have staid too long, and then finds fault with some slight stitch, that eye-let holes's too close, then must I use my Bodkin twill
never please else; all will not doe, I must take it home, for no cause but to bring it her again next morning. Wee Taylors are the men spite of the Proverb, Ladies cannot live without. 
It is wee
That please them best, in their commodity:
There's magic in our habits, Taylors can
Prevail 'bove him, honour stiles best of man.
Bid him draw near.
Come hither love, sweet chuck
My Lady calls.
What means this woman? sure she loves me too,
Taylors shall speed had they no tongues to woo:
Women would sue to them.
What have you done it now?
Madam your gown by my industry
Is purged of errors.
Lord what a neat methodical way you have
To vent your Phrases; pray when did you commence?
What mean you Madam?
Doctor I mean, you speak so physical.
Nay Madam it is a youth, I praise my stars
For their kind influence, a woman may be proud on,
And I am.
O it is a youth in print, a new Atones,
And I could wish, although my glass tells me
I'm wondrous fair, I were a Venus for him.
O Lady, you are more fairer by far.
La you there Madam.
Where art thou man? art thou transformed?
Or art thou grown so base that
This ridiculous witch should think I love her?
Leave us.
I go
Duck, Isle be here anon,
I will Dove. 
At your best leisure.
Protect me man-hood, least my glutted sense
Feeding with such an eager appetite on
Your rare beauty, breaking the sluices,
Burst into a flood of passionate tears;
I must, I will enjoy her, though a
Destroying clap from Ioves Artillery were the reward:
And yet dull-daring fir by your favour no,
He must be more than savage can attempt 
To injure so much spotless innocence:
Pardon great Powers the thought of such offence.
When Sabastiano clad in conquering steel,
And in a phrase able to kill, or from a cowards heart
Banish the thought of fear; wo'd me,
Won not so much upon my captive soul
As this youths silence does:
Help me some power out of this tangling maze,
I shall be lost else.
Fear to the breast of women,
Build thy throne on their soft hearts;
Mine must not be thy slave.
Your pleasure Madam.
I have a question must be directly answered
No excuse, but from thy heart a truth.
Command me Madam, were it a secret
On whose hinges hung the casements of my life,
Yet your command shall be obeyed; to the least
Scruple.
I take your word,
My aged Nurse tells me you love her,
Answer; i'st a truth?
She's jealous, Isle try;
As Oracle.
(Ha)
it is so, isle further; I love her Madam,
With as rich a flame as Anchorits
Doe Saints they offer prayers too:
I hug her memory as I would embrace
The breath of Jove, when it pronounced me
Happy; or Prophet, that should speak my
After life great, even with adoration deified.
My life, like to a bubble in the air,
Dissolved by some uncharitable wind,
Denies my body warmth: your breath
Has made me nothing. 
Rather let me lose all external being.
Madam, good Madam.
You say you love her.
Madam, I doe.
Can any love the beauty of a stone,
Set by some curious Artist in a Ring,
But he must attribute some to
The File that adds unto the lustre?
You appear like to a Gem, cut by the
Steady hand of careful Nature, into such
Beauteous Tablets, that dull Art,
Famous in skilful flattery, is become
A Novice in what Fame proclaimed him Doctor;
He cannot express one spark of your great lustre.
Madam, 'those Beauties that, but studied on
By their admirers, are deified, serve
But as spots, to make your red and white
Envied of Cloisterd Saints.
Have I ungrateful man, like to the Sun,
That from the Heavens sends down his
Cherishing beams on some religious plant,
That with a bow the worship of the
Thankful, pays the preserver of his life,
And groth: But thou, unthankful man,
In scorn of me, to love a Calendar of many
Years.
Madam, upon my knees, a superstitious Rite,
The Heathens used to pay their gods, I offer up.
A life, that until now ne'er knew a price;
Made dear because you love it.
Arise; it is a Ceremony due unto none but heaven.
Here Isle take root, and grow into my grave,
Unless dear god less you forget to bee
Cruel to him adores you with a zeal,
Equal to that of Hermits.
I believe you, and thus exchange a devout vow,
Humbly upon my knees, that though the
Thunder of my brothers rage should force divorce,
Yet in my soul to love you; witness all
The winged inhabitants of the highest heaven.
If sudden lightning, such as vengeful Jove
Clears the infectious ayre with, threatened to
Scorch my daring soul to Cinders, if I
Did love you, Lady, I wo'd love you, spite
Of the dogged Fates, or any power
Those cursed Hags set to oppose me.
Be thy self again.
Madam, your Brother.
Fie, you have done it ill, our brother, say you?
Pray you take it home and mend it.
Madam, it shall be done; I take my leave.
Love I am made thy envy; I am he
This Votaress prays unto, as unto thee:
Tailors are more than men; and here's the odds,
They make fine Ladies; Ladies make them gods:
And so they are not men, but far above them:
This makes the Tailers proud; then Ladies love them. 
What's he that past?
My Tailor.
Theres something in his face I sure should know.
But sister to your Beads; pray for distressed Scivel;
Whilst I mount some watch tower,
To o're-looke our enemies, religious laws
Commands me fight for my loved Countries cause. 
Love bids me pray, and on his Altars make
A Sacrifice, for my loved Tailors sake. 
Stand.
Stand.
Stand.
Give the word through the Army, stand there.
Stand, stand, stand, stand hoe.
Bid the Drum cease, whilst we embrace our love:
Come my Philippe, like the twins of war,
Laced in our freely Cornets, we're become
The envy of those brain begotten gods,
Mouldy Antiquity lifted to Heaven:
Thus we exchange our breath; 
My honoured Lord,
Duty commands, I pay it back again,
Twill waste me into smoke else,
Can my body retain that breath, that would
Consume an Army, dressed in a rougher habit.
Play deliver (come I'm a gentle thief)
The breath you stole.
Restore back mine—So, go pitch our tent, we will
Have a Combat in the field of love, with thee
Philippe, ere we meet the foe: thou art
A friendly enemy. How say my Lords,
Does not my Love appear,
Like to the issue of the brain of Jove,
Governess of Arms and Arts, Minerva?
Or a selected beauty from a troop of Amazons.
She is a Mine of valour.
Lords spare your praises till like Bradament,
The mirror of our Sex, I make the foe.
Of France and us, crouch like a whelp,
Awed by the heaving of his Masters hand;
My heart runs through my arm, and when I deal
A blow, it sinks a soul:
My sword flies nimbler than the bolts of Jove,
And wounds as deep: Spain; thy proud host shall feel
Death has bequeathed his office to my steel.
Ray. Come on brave Lords, upon your Generals word,
Philippe loves no parley, like the sword. 
Come bullies, come; wee must forsake the use of nimble shears, and now betake us to our Spanish needles, Stiletto blades, and prove the Proverb lies, lies in his throat: one Tailor can erect sixteen, nay more, of upstart Gentlemen, known by their Clothes, and leave enough materials in hell to damn a broker.
We must to the wars my boys.
How Master, to the wars?
I to the wars Vermin, what say thou to that?
Nothing, but that I had rather stay home: O the good penny bread at breakfasts that I shall lose! Master, good Master let me alone, to live with honest Iohn, noble John Black.
Wilt thou disgrace thy worthy calling, Vermin?
No, but I am afraid my calling will disgrace me: I shall be gaping for my mornings loaf, and dram of Ale; I shall; and now and then look for a Cabbich leaf, or an odd remnant to cloth my bashful buttocks.
You shall.
Yes marry; why I hope poor Vermin must bee fed, and will be fed, or Isle torment you.
Master I take privilege from your love to hearten on my fellows.
I, I; doe, doe good boy. 
Come my bold fellows, let us eternize,
For our Countries good, some noble act
That may by time be Registered at full;
And as the year renews, so shall our fame
Be fresh to after times: the Tailors name,
So much trod under, and the scorn of all
Shall by this act be high whilst others fall.
Come Vermin, come.
Nay if vermin slip from the back of a Tailor, spit him with a Spanish Needle; or torment him in the louses Engine: your two thumb nails. 
The City seig'd, and thou thus chained
In airy fetters of a Ladies love;
It must not be, stay, it is Evadne's love;
Her life is with the City ruined, if the
French become victorious:
Evadne must not dye, her Chaster name
That once made cold, now doth my blood inflame. 
HEll take their spacious throats, we shall ever long
Be pointed as a prodigy;
Antonio is the man they load with praise,
And west and as a Cipher to advance
Him by a number higher▪
Now Machvile plot his ruin, 
It is not to be borne; are not you our
Masters subsitude? then why should he
Usurp a privilege without your love,
To preach unto the people a Doctrine
They ought not hear:
He incites 'em not to obey your charge,
Unless it be to knit a friendly league
With the opposing French; laying before 'em
A troop of fained dangers will ensue,
If we doe bid 'em battle.
Dares he doe this?
It is done already;
Smother your anger and you shall see, here
At the Counsel board he'll break into a
Passion;—which isle provoke him to.— 
Never more need, my worthy partners, in
The dangerous brunts of Iron war, had we
Of Counsel: the hot rained French, led by that
Haughty Moore, (upon whose sword sits
Victory enthroned) daily increase;
And like the Army of another Xerxes,
Make the o'er burdened earth groan at their weight.
We cannot long hold out; nor have we hope
Our Royal Master can raise up their Siege
Ever we beforc't to yield:
My Lord your counsel it is a desperate grief.
And must my Lord find undelaid release?
Noble Commanders since that wars grim god,
After our sacrifice of many lives,
Neglects our offerings, and repays our service
With loss; it is good to deal with policy.
He's no true Soldier that deals needless blows
With the endangering of his life; and may
Walk in a shade of safety, yet o'rethrow
His towering enemy.
Great Alexander made the then known world
Slave to his powerful will, more by the help
Of politic wit,
Than by the ruff compultion of the sword.
Troy that endured the Gracious ten years Siege,
By policy was fired, and became
Like to a lofty Beacon all on flame.
Hum, hum.
Suppose the French be marked for conquerors:
Stars have bin crossed, when at a natural birth
They dart prodigious beams; their influence
Like to the flame of a new lighted Tapor,
Has with the breath of policy bin blown
Out, even to nothing.
Hum, hum.
This has bin studied.
He's almost out.
Good,
But to the matter;
Your counsel.
It is this my Lord;
That straight before the French have pitched their Tents,
Or raised a work before our City walls;
As yet their ships have not o'er spread the sea,
We send a Regiment that they with speed
Land on the Marshes, and begirt their backs,
Whilst we open our Gates, and with astrong assault
Force 'em retreat into the arches of death
So the revengeful earth shall be their tomb,
That did ere while trample her teeming womb.
Machvile speaks Oracle;
What says Antonio?
Nothing.
How?
Nothing.
It takes: revenge,
I hug thee; young Lord though art loft. 
Speak, Antonio your counsel.
Nothing.
How?
So;
And could my wish obtain a sudden grant
From you Tribunal, I would crave, my senses
Might be all steeped in Lethe, to forget
What Machvile has spoken.
Ha, it takes unto my wish. 
Why Antonio?
Because you speak
Not like a man, that were possessed with a
Mere Soldiers heart; much less a soul guarded
With subtle sinews: O madness, can there be
In nature such a prodigy so senseless,
So much to be wondered at,
As can applaud or lend a willing ear
To that my blushes doe betray I've bin
Tardy to hear? your childish policy.
Antonio you're too bold; this usurped liberty
To abuse a man of so much merit, is not
Seemly in you: nay Isle term it sauciness.
Nay then my Lord, I claim the privilege
Of a Counsellor, and will object.
This my Prophetic fears, whispered my heart:
When from a watch Tower I beheld the French
Erect their spears; which like a migthy Grove
Denied my eyes any other object:
The tops shout by a stolen reflection from
The Sun like Diamonds, or as the glorious
Guilder of the day, should deign a lower visit,
Then my warm blood; that used to play like
Summer, felt a change; Gray-bearded winter
Froze my very soul, till I became
Like the Pyrenian Hills, rapt in a robe of Ice:
My Attic fears froze me into a statue.
Cowardly Antonio.
I have lost my faith,
And can behold him now without a wonder.
Antonio, you're too long and wrack our patience;
Your counsel?
I feared, but what? not our proud enemies,
No, did they burden all our Spanish world:
And I, poor I; only survived to threat defiance
In the Mounsiers teeth, and stand Defendant
For my Countries cause; naked, unarmed.
I'd through their bragging Host, and pay my life
A Sacrifice to death, for my loved Countries safety.
Fulgentio thou hast not lost
Thy faith?
No, i'm reformed he's valiant.
Antonio your counsel.
I your counsel.
Our foes increase to an unreckon'd number:
We less then nothing, since we have no hope
To arrive a number, that may cope with
Half their Army.
It is my counsel we strike a league:
It is wisdom to sue peace, where powerful Fate
Threatens a ruin: least repent too late.
It is god-like Counsel.
And becomes the tongue of young Antonio.
Antonio let me tell you, you have lost
Your valiant heart; I can with safety now
Term you a Coward.
Ha.
Nay more,
Since by your Oratory, you strive
To rob your Country of a glorious conquest;
That may to after times beget a fear,
Even with the thought should awe the trembling
World: you are a Traitor.
Ha my Lord, Coward and Traitor, tic a damned lye,
And in the heart of him dares say it again
Isle write his error.
It is as I would hav't.
Noble Antonio.
Brave spirited Lord.
The mirror of a Soldier.
O are you moved sir, has the deserved name
Of Traitor pricked you?
Deserved?
Yes.
Yes.
Machvile thou lie; had thou a heart
Of hardened steel, my powerful Arm
Should pierce it.
The Governor
Slain by Antonio's hand?
No, by the hand of Justice; fly, fly my Lord.
Send for a Surgeon to dress Count Machvile,
He must be now our Governor; the King
Signed it in the dead Governors Commission. 
Now I repent too late my cash contempt,
The horror of a Murderer will still
Follow my guilty thoughts, fly where I will. 
I'm wounded, else Coward Antonio
Thou should not fly from my revengeful Arm:
But may my curses fall upon thy head
Heavy as thunder; moist thou dye
Burdened with ulcerous sins, whose very
Weight may sink thee down to Hell:
Beneath the reach of smooth-fac'd mercies arm.
Confusion choke your rash officious throats,
And may that breath that speaks his loathed name
Beget a Plague, whose hot infectious air
May scald you up to blisters, which foretell
A purge of life: up Machvile,
Tho'st thy will, how ere cross Fate
Divert the peoples hearts; they must perforce
Sue to that Shrine our liking shall erect.
The Governor is dead, Antonio's lost
To any thing but death; it is out glad fate,
To gripe the staff of what wee looked for state.
My bloods ambitious, and runs through my veins
Like nimble water through a Leaden Pipe
Up to some barren Mountain: I must have more,
All wealth in my thoughs to a Crown is poor.
It is a near Gown and fashionable
Madam; i'st not love?
Upon my Virginity wonderful handsome:
Dear, when we are married Isle have such a one;
Shall I not chicken? ha.
What else, kind Nurse.
Truly you Tailors are the most sanctified members
Of a Kingdom:
How many crooked and untoward bodies have
You set upright, that they go now so straight in their
Lives and conversation, as the proudest on them all?
That's certain, none prouder.
How mean you sir?
Faith Madam your crooked movables in artificial bodies, that rectify the deformity of natures over-plus, as bunching backs, or scarcity, as seanty shoulders, are the proudest creatures; you shall have them jet with it an un∣daunted boldness; for the truth is, what they want in sub∣stance they have in ayre:
They will scold the Tailor out of his Art,
And impute the defect of nature to his want
Of skill, though his labour make her appearance
Pride worthy.
Well said my birds eye, stand for the credit of
Tailors whilst thou livest; wilt thou not Chuck?
Ha, say thou my dear?
I were ungrateful else.
Nurse pray leave us, your presence makes your
Sweet heart negligent of what he comes about;
Pray be won to leave us here.
Madam your will's obeyed:
Yet I can hardly pass from thee my love.
At such a sudden warning.
Your eager love may be termed dotage,
For shame confess your self to less expressions:
Leave my Lady.
A kiss and then I go, so; farewell my Duck. 
Death she has left a scent to poison me;
Love her said she, is any man so mad, to hug a disease,
Or embrace a colder Image the Pigmalions
Or play with the bird of
Frosty antiquity, not I:
Her gumms stink worse then a Pest-house,
And more danger of infecting.
As I'm a mortal Tailor; and your servant Madam,
Her breath has tainted me I dare not salute
Your Ladyship.
Come you are loath to part with it it is so sweet.
Sweet say you Madam, a muster of diseases
Can't smell worse, than her rotten teeth.
Excuse my boldness, to defer your longing;
Thus I am new created with your breath. 
My gaping pores will ne'er be satisfied.
Again—they still are hungry.
My dear friend, let not thy lovely person
March with the scolding peace affrighting Drum:
War is too cruel: come isle chain
You here, here in my arms; and stiffle you
With kisses; you sha' not go—by this you sha' not go,
By this I must.
Isle smother that harsh breath. 
Again I countercheck it.
O sister, ha!
What killing sight is this! cannot be she.
Sister.
O my dear friend, my brother, w'are undone.
Degenerate girl, lighter than wind or ayre;
Can thou forget thy birth? or because you're fair
Art privileged, dost think with such a zeal
To grasp an under shrub? dare you exchange
Breath with your Tailors, without fear of vengeance
From the disturbed ghosts of our dead Parents,
For their bloods injury? or are your favours
Grown prostitue to all? my unkind Fate
Grieves me not half so much, as thee forgetful.
Sir if on me this language, I must tell you,
You are too rash to censure. My unworthiness that makes
Her seem so ugly in your eyes, perhaps
Hangs in these clothes, and's shifted off with them.
I am as noble, but that I hate to make
Comparisons, as any you can think worthy
To be called her husband.
Shred of a slave though lie.
Sir I am hasty too; yet in the presence of my
Mistress can use a temper.
Brave; your mistress.
Lay hold on him,
Ere we presume to meet the enemy
Weal purge the City; lest the wrath of heaven
Fall heavy on us: Antonio I arrest thee
Of Capital treason, against the King and Realm.
To prison with him.
O my lost brother!
It is but an error, treason do ye call it; to kill
The Governor in heate of blood, and not intended?
For my Evadne's sake, something Isle doe
Shall save his life. 
To prison with him.
Farewell Evadne, as thou love the peace
Of our dead Ancestors, cease to love
So loathed a thing; a Tailor,
Why? it is the scorn of all; therefore be ruled
By thy departing Brother, doe not mix
With so much baseness:
Come Officers, bear me even where you please,
My oppressed conscience no where can have ease. 
Lady we here enjoin you to
Your Chamber as a prisoner, to
Waite a further censure; your brothers
Fault has pulled a punishment upon your head,
Which you must suffer.
'Ene what you please, your tyranny can't bear
A shape so bad to make Evadne fear:
Strong innocence shall guard my afflicted soul,
Whose constancy shall tyranny control. 
A troop of Tailors by force have tan
Antonio from us, and have borne him (spite
Of the best resistance we could make) unto some
Secret place, we can not find him.
Screech owl dost know what thou hast said?
Death, find him or you dye: O my cross stars,
He must not live to torture our next sense,
But dye; though he had no fault but innocence. 
Can this kindness merit your love?
Doe I deserve your sister?
My sister! worthy Tailor; it is a gift lies not in me to give: ask something else, it is thine, although it bee gained with the quite extinguishing of this; this breath you gave me.
Have not I—
Speak no further, I confess you have bin all unto me, life, and being; I breath but with your licence: will no price buy out your interest in me, but her love? I tell thee Tailor, I have blood runs in me, Spain cannot match for greatness, next her Kings. Yet to requite thy love Isle call thee friend, be thou Antonio's friend; a fa∣four nobles have thirsted for: will this requite thee?
Sir this may, but—
My sister thou would say most worthy Tailor, she is not mine to give; honour spake in my dying Father, it is a sentence that's Registered here, in Antonio's heart, I must not wed her, but to one in blood calls honour Father: Prithee be my friend, forget I have a sister; in love Isle bee more than a brother; though not to mingle blood.
May I not call her mistress?
As a servant, far from the thoughts of Wedlock.
I'm yours, friend I am proud on it; you shall find,
That though a Tailor, I'ave an honest mind.
Pray Master help my Lord unto a Suite, his life
Lies at your mercy.
Isle warrant you.
But for thy men.
O they are proud in that they rescued you,
And my blood of honour; since you are pleased
To grace the now declining Trade of Tailors,
By being shrouded in their homely clothes,
And deck a Shop-board with your noble person;
The taunting scorns, the foul mouthed
World, can throw upon our needful Calling
Shall be answered:
They injure honour, since your honour is a
Noble practitioner in our Mystery.
Cheer up Antonio, take him in,
The rest will make him merry; Isle go try
The temper of a sword upon some Shield
That guards a foe.
Pray for my good success. 
Come, come my Lord leave melancholy
To hired slaves, that murder at a price:
Yours was—
No more, flatter not my sin.
You are too strikt a convertite, let's in. 
What means this capering Echo?
Or from whence did this so lively Counterfeit
Of Thunder, break out to liberty?
It is from the City.
It cannot be, their voice, should out-roare Jove;
Our Army like a Basilisk, has struck
Death through their eyes; our number like a wind,
Broke from the Icy prison of the North,
Has froze the Portals to their shivering hearts;
They scarce have breath enough to speake't:
They live.
'Ts certainly from thence.
You're deceived, poor Spaniards fear
He's changed their elevated Gate to a dejection
Their Planet struck.
It is from our jocund Fleet, my Genius prompts me;
They have already ploughed the unruly seas,
And with their breats, proof against the battering
Waves dashed the big billows into angry froth,
And spite of the contentious full mouthed gods
Of Sea and wind, have reached the City frontiers,
And begirt her Navigable Skirts.
Again: it is so. 
My Creeds another way;
I have no faith but to the City.
Here's one,
Now we shall know: ha! he appears
Like one composed of horror.
What speaks thy troubled front?
Speak crimson Motor.
Speak Prodigy, or on my sword thou fallst.
The bold Spaniards, setting aside al cold acknowledge∣meant
Of any odds, or notice of the number our Army
Is made proud with, sends from their Walls
More lightning, than great Jove afrights
The trembling world with, when the air
Is turned to mutiny.
Villain thou lie;
It were madness to believe thee.
Foolish Spain, may like those Giants, that
Heaped hill on hill, mountain on mountain,
To pluck Jove from heaven, who with
A hand of vengeance flung 'em down beneath
The centaur, and those Cloud contemning Mounts,
Heaved by the strength of their ambitious Arms,
Became their Monuments: so Spaines rash
Folly, from this arm of mine, shall find their
Graves amongst the rubbish of their
Ruined Cities. 
What another! thy hasty news?
The daring enemies have through their gates
Made a victorious falley; all our troops
Have jointly like the dust before the wind,
Made a dishonoured flight: Hark 
The Conquering foe makes hitherward.
Run to my Tent, fetch my Philippe:
Slave why move thou not?
The enemy's upon us.
Shall I send thy coward soul down the 
Vaults of Horror: fly Villain, or thou die.
Let one post to my Castle, and conduct my Lady,
Tell her I have a prisoner would become proud
In her forced captivity to waite upon her beauty:
Fly, let not the tardy clouds out-saile thee.
Can thou proud man think that Philipa's
Heart, is humbled with her fortunes, (no did thou
Bring all the rough tortures
From the worlds Child-hood) to this hour invented,
And on my resolute body, proof against pain,
Practised Scicilian tyranny.
My Giant thoughts should like a cloud of wind,
Contemning smoke, mingle with heaven:
And not a look so base, as to be pitied, shall
Give you cause of triumph.
Before heaven a fiery girl.
A Masculine spirit.
An Amazon.
See my Phillipa, her rich colour's fled and like that foul
The furrow fronted Fates have made an Anvil
To forge diseases on, she's lost her self
With her fled beauty; yet pale as she stands,
She adds more glory to our churlish foe,
Than bashful Tycan to the Eastern world.
Spaniards, she is a Conquest; Rome,
When her two necked Eagles, awed the world
Would have swum through their own blood to purchase:
Nor must you enjoy that gem, the superstitious gods
Would quarrel for, but through my heart.
Courage brave friends, they're valiant that can fly
In the mouth of danger; it is they win, though dye.
This Moore speaks truth,
Wrapped in a voice of thunder.
Speak, my Philippe, what untutored slave
Durst lay a rugged have upon thy softness?
It was the epitome of Hercules:
No big Colossus, yet for strength far bigger:
A little person great with matchless Valour.
What pains thou take to praise
Thine enemy.
It were sin to rob him, that has wasted so
His blood for praise: this noble Soldier, he
It was made me captive; nor can he boast
It was in an easy combat; for my good
Sword, now ravished from mine arm, forced crimson
Drops, that like a goary sweat, buried
His manly body in oblivion: those that were
Skilled in his Effigies, as drunk with Lethe, had
Forgot it was hee; till by the drawing of the
Rueful curtain they saw in him their error.
A common Soldier owner of a strength worthy
Such praise? Dares he cope with the
French General single?
My Lord, you must strike quick and sure
Why pause you? my Philippe must not stay,
Captivity's infection.
We have the day.
Not till you conquer me: which if my arm
Be not by Witch-craft robed of his late strength,
Shall spin your labour to an ample length.
Upon him then.
Odds is dishonourable combat: my lads
Lets one to one; I am for the Moore.
Thee.
Tailor, you are too saucy.
Saucy?
Vntutor'd groom, Mechanic slave.
You have protection, by the Governors presence,
Else my plumed Estrages, it is not your feathers,
More weighty than your heads, should stop
My vengeance, but I'd text my wrong
In bloody Characters upon your pamperd flesh.
You would?
By Heaven I would.
You'd be advised, and render up your life a Sacrifice to patience.
Musk-Cat, I'do make your Civet worship stink first in your perfumed Buff.
Phlegmatic slave.
Blood less Commanders.
How.
So.
Let's reward his boldness. 
Whence this rashness?
Blessed occasion: lets on 'em. 
All the Tail. A Tailor, a Tailor, a Tailor.
Raimond you're now my prisoner:
Blind Chance has favoured where your thoughts,
And hope she meant to ruin
From our discord, which heaven has made victorious,
You meant to strike a harmony should glad you.
It is not to be borne: a Tailor!
It was an affront gales me to think on it:
Besides his saucy valour might have ruined all
Our forward fortunes, had the French been
Stronger: let him be banished.
It shall be so;
My fears are built on grounds
Stronger than Atlas shoulders: this same Tailor
Retains a spirit like the lost Antonio;
Whose sister we will banish in pretence of
Love to Justice; it is a good snare, to trap the
Vulgar hearts: his, and her goods, to guild my
Lawless doings, Isle give the poor, whose tongues
Are i'their bellies: which being full,
Is tipped with heartless prayers; but empty,
A falling Planet is less dangerous; they'll down to
Hell for curses. You Tailor.
My Lord.
Deliver up your prisoner.
You're obeyed.
So: now we command on forfeit of thy
Life, you be not seen in any ground our
Masters Title circles, within three days,
Such a factious spirit we must not nourish:
Least like the Fables Serpent, grown warm
In your conceited worth, you sting
Your Countries Breasts, that nursed your valour.
This my reward?
More then thy worth deserves.
Pomander box thou lie.
Go purge your self; your Country vomits you.
Slaves you're not worth my anger.
Go vent your spleen amongst Satyrs, pen a
Pamphlet, and call it the Scourge of greatness.
Or Spaines ingratitude.
Ye are not worth my breath,
Else I should curse you; but I must weep,
Not that I part from thee unthankful Spain,
But my Evadne, well, it must bee so:
Heart keep thy still tough temper spite of woe. 
My house shall be your prison,
Attend 'em Colonel. 
Please you walk?
My servant banished.
Famist master? nay saith and a Tailor
Come to be famished, it is a hard World:
No bread in this world here hoe, to save
The renowned Corps of a Tailor from famishing?
It is no matter for drink, give me bread.
Thou hast a gut would swallow a peck Loaf.
I marry would it with vantage; I tell truth,
And as the Proverb says: shame the Devil;
If our Hell afford a Devil, but I see none
Unless he appear in a delicious remnant of
Nim'd Satin, and by my faith that's a courteous
Devil, that suffers the Brokers to hang him
In their ragged Ward robe; and used to sell his
Divelship for money: I tell truth, a Tailor
And lye, faith I scorn that.
Leave your discovery.
Master, a Traveller you know is famous for lying,
And having travelled as far as hell;
May not I make description of the unknown Land?
My brain is busy,
Sebastiano must not tread an unknown Land
To find out a Grave; unfortunate Sebastiano,
First to lose thy self in a disguise, unfitting for thy
Birth, and then thy Country for thy too much valour:
There's danger in being virtuous, in this Age
Led by those sinful Actors, the plunged stage,
Of this vice-bearing World, would head-long fall
But charitable virtue bears up all.
I must invent, I have it, so:
As he's a Tailor; he is banished Spain,
As Sebastiano it is revoked again. 
How subtle are my springes, they take all?
With what swift speed unto my Chafe bait
Doe all Fowls fly, unto their hasty ruin?
Clap, clap your wings, and flutter greedy fools,
Whilst I laugh at your folly; I have a Wier
Set for the Moore, and his ambitious Consort;
Which if my wife wo'd second, they are sure. 
What must she second?
Art thou there my love? we're in a path
That leads us to a height, we may confront
The Sun, and with a breath extinguish common
Stars; be but thou ruled, the light
That does create day to this City
Must be derived from us.
You are my soul, and to my airy
Wings, add quicker Feathers: what task
Wo'd not I run, to be called Queen?
Did the life blood of all our Family
Father and Mother, stand as a quick wall
To stop my passage to a Throne,
I'd with a Puniard op their Azure veins,
And squeeze their active blood up into Clods,
Till they become as cold as winters snow;
And as a bridge upon their trunks i'd go.
Our souls are twins, and thirst with equal heat
For Deity: Kings are in all things Gods
Saving mortality.
To be a Queen, what danger wo'd I run?
I'd spend my life like to a Bare-foot Nun;
So I might sit above the lesser stars
Of small Nobility, but for a day.
It is to be done sweet love an nearer way;
I have already with the sugared baits
Of Justice, liberality, and all
The Fox like gins, that subtle Statse-men
Set to catch the hearts of the giddy multitude:
Which if it fail, as cautious policy
Forbids, I build too strongly on their drunk
Uncertain Votes, I'd have thee break with
My great Prisoners Wife, as I will
Doe with him; promise the states equal
Divided half himself shall rule:
So that if need compel us to take Arms,
We may have forces from the Realm of France,
To seat us in the Chair of Government.
I never shall endure to walk as equal
With proud Philippe, no; ambitious soul
Boils in a thirsty flame of total glory:
I must be all, without a second flame
To dim our luster.
Still my very soul, think thou I can endure
Competitor, or let an Ethiope sit by Machvils side,
As partner in his honour? no, as I have seen
In the Common-wealth of Players, one that did act
The Thebane Creon's part; with such a life
I became ravished, and on Raimond mean,
To plot what he did one the caveling boys of Oedipus.
Whilst we grasp the whole dignity.
As how sweet Machvile?
It is not ripe my love,
The King I hear applauds my justice:
Wherefore I have sent order that Count Antonio
Once being taken, be sent to Fill-ford Mill;
There ground to death.
What for his wife?
Thy envy: she I have banished,
And her goods to guard a shower of curses
From my head, I'ave given the poor.
Good policy, let's home to our designs:
I hate to be officious, 'yet my frown
Shall be dissolved to flattery for a Crown. 
Attend your Lady—so her forward spleen, Tickled with thought of greatness makes the Scene attempts run smooth: the haughty Moore shall bee the La∣der, on whose servile back Isle mount to greatness, If calm peace deny me easy way.
Rough War shall force it, which done, Raimond
And his Philippe must go seek an Empire in
Elizium; for to rule, predominance belongs
Alone to me: slaves are unworthy rule,
What state wo'd set a Crown upon a a Mule? 
My soul is heavy, and my eye-lids feel
The weighty power of lazy Morpheus:
Each element that breathes a life within me
Runs a contrary course, and conspire
To counterfeit a Chaos: whilst the frame
And weak supporters of my inward man
(Crack) as beneath the weight of Atlas burden:
A sudden change, how my bleared eye-lids strive
To force a sleep against nature. O you Powers
That rule the better thoughts, if you have ought
To act on my frail body, let it be with eagles
Speed; or if your wills so please,
Let my fore past and undejested wrongs
O'er wh•lme my thoughts, and sink me to the ground
With their no less then deaths remembrances.
Cease bastard slave, to clog my senses
With the leaden weights of an unwilling sleep; unless
Thy raw-bon'd brother join his force, and make
A separation twixt my aerie soul,
And my all earthly body:
I am o'er come, heaven work your wills, my breath,
Submits to this us it would submit to death.  
Sleep entranced man, but be
Wakeful in thy fancy; see
Love hath left his Palace fair,
And beats his wings against the ayre,
To ease thy panting breasts of ill:
Loves a Physician, our Will
Must be obeyed; therefore with hast
To Flanders fly, the echoing blast
Of Fame shall usher thee along,
And leave thee pestered in a throng
Of searching troubles, which shall be
But Bug-beares to thy constancy. 
What this same shadow seems to be,
In Flanders thou shalt real see;
The Maid that seemed to conquer Death,
And give thee longer leaf of breath,
Dotes on thy air; report hath bin
Lavish in praising thee unseen.
Make hast to Flanders, time will be
Accused of slothfulness, if she
Be longer tortured: doe not stay,
My power shall guide thee on the way. 
He is asleep.
See how he struggles, as if some visions
Had assumed a shape fuller of horror
Then his troubled thoughts.
His conscience gripes him to purpose: see he wakes;
Let us observe.
Stay gentle power, leave Hostage that thy promise
Thou'lt perform,
And I will offer to thy Deity
More then my lazy heart has offered yet.
But stay Antonio, can thy easy faith
Give credit to a dream? an aerie vision,
Framed by strangling fancy, to delude weak
Sense with a gay nothing? recollect thy self,
Advise thee by thy fears, it may force hence
This midnights shade of grief;
And guild it with a morn as fall of joy.
As do's bright Phoebus to our Eastern World,
When blushing he arises from the lap
Of Sea-greene Thetis to give a new day birth.
Why how now friend, what talking to thy self?
O Giovanno it is my unpartiall thoughts,
That rise in war against my guilty conscience;
O it stings me!
Be more a man, shrink not beneath a weight
So light, a child may bear it; for believe me,
If my Prophetic fear deceive me not,
You had done an act, Spain should for ever praise
Had you kilt Machvile to.
As how good Master? I must call you so;
This is your Livery.
O you're noble Tailor. But to Machvile
It was my chance, being sent for, by his wife
To take the measure of their noble prisoner;
Who when I came was busy, being placed
Into a room, where I might easily hear
Them talk of Crowns, and Kingdoms;
And of two that should be partners in this
End of Spain.
Who were they?
Machvile and Raimond, at last Machvile laughed
Saying, for this I made the Governor
To cross Antonio at the Counsel board:
Knowing that one must, if not both sho'd dye.
Did he say this?
He did, and added more under a feigned show
Of love to Justice, banished your sister.
Is Evadne banished?
She is, and as I guess to Flanders, her woman too has left her.
Nay droop not friend; Host, pray tell proud
Machvile, I have a sword left to chastise
A Traitor: come, let's go seek Evadne.
O Antonio, the sudden grief almost, distracts
Thy friend; but come, let's go each several1,
And meet at Fill-ford: if thou find Evadne,
Bear her unto the Castle. 
Farewell good master. 
O you honour me.
Bootless were all persuasions, they'll not stay.
I'll to the King; this treason may become
Like a disease, out of the reach of Physic:
And may infect past care if let alone. 
Erect thy head my Raymond, be more tall
Then daring Atlas, but more safely wise:
Sustain no burden but the politic care:
Of being great; till thou achieve the Cities
Axeltree, and wave it as thou list.
Hast thou no skill in Magic, that thou hits
So just upon my thoughts, thy tongue is tipped
Like Natures miracle; that draws the steel
With unresisted violence: I can not keep
A secret to my self, but thy prevailing
Rhetoric ravishes and leaves my breast
Like to an empty Casket, that once was blessed
With keeping of a Jewel I durst, not trust the
Ayre with, it was so precious: pray be careful.
You doe not doubt me?
No, were you a woman made of such course ingre∣diances as the common, which in our trivial phrase we call mere women; I would not trust thee with a Cause so weighty, that the discovery did endanger this, this hair; that when it is gone a Linxe cannot miss it: but you are—I want expressions, it is not common words can speak you truly, you are more than woman.
My Lord you know my temper, and how to
Win upon my heart.
I must be gone, and post a messenger,
France must supply what wants to make thee great;
An Army my Philippe, which these people
Snoring in pride of their last victory,
Doe not so much as dream on?
Nor shall, till they be forced to yield their voices
At our election; which will be ere long.
O it is an age, I'd rather have it sed,
Philippe then a prisoner were dead. 
Captain Petruchio, take this condemned man
Into your charge, it is Antonio once a
Spanish Count, till his rash folly, with his
Life made forfeit of his honour; he
Was found travelling to your Castle,
It was Heavens will that his own feet
Should with a willing pace conduct him to his ruin:
For the murder he must be ground to death
In Filford Mill, of which you are the Governor:
Here my Commission in its end give strength to yours,
He's your charge: farewell,
His death must be with speed. 
Deceive me not good glasses, your lights
In my esteem never till now was precious,
It is the same, I it is the very same
I sleeping saw.
Is this the man Fame speaks so nobly of?
O love, Aurelio never until now
Could say he knew thee; I must dissemble it.
Come sir to my Castle.
Fie on you sir, to kill a Governor it is a fact
Death cannot appear too horrible to punish.
Can this be truth? O shallow, shallow man
To credit air, believe there can be substance
In a cloud of thickened smoke, as truth hid in a dream;
Yes there is truth, that like a serowle fetched from
An Oracle, betrays the double dealing of the gods;
Dreams that speak all of joy doe turn to grief,
And such bad 〈◊〉deludes my light belief.
Away with him 
Oft have I heard my brother with a tongue
Proud of the Office, praised this lovely Lord;
And my trapt soul old with a eager hast
Draw in the breath, and now: O Aurelia,
Buried with him must all thy joy thou hast
For ever sleep; and with a pale consumption,
Pitying him wit thou thy self be ruined?
He must not dye, if there be any way
Revealed to the distressed, I will find it:
Assist a poor lost Virgin some good power,
And lead her to a path, whose secret tract
May guide both him and me unto our safety.
Be kind good wits, I never until now
Put you to any trouble; it is your Office,
To help at need this little world you live by:
Not yet! O dullness! doe not make me mad—
I hav't blessed brain; now shall a women's wit
Wrestle with Fate, and if my plot but hit:
Come off with wreaths, my duty nay may all,
I must forsake lest my Antonio fall. 
NOt find Evadne I sure some wanton wind
Has snatched her from the earth into the air;
Smooth Zephers fains the tresses of her hair,
Whilst slick F•venio•s plays the fawning slave;
And hourly dyes, making her breasts his grave:
O false Evadne, is Giovanno's love
That has out-done all merit for thy sake
So light, that wind out-weighs it?
No, no; no; Evadne is all virtue,
Sweet as the breath of Roses; and as chaste,
As Virgin Lilies in their infancy:
Down you deluding Ministers of Ayre:
Evadne is not light, though she be fair:
Dissolve the counterfeit: ha, ha, ha, ha.
See how they shrink: why so, now I will love you:
Go search into the hollows of the earth,
And find my love, or I will chain you up
To eternity: see, see; who's this? O I know him now.
So, ho, ho: so, ho, ho, not hear?
It is Phoeton: no, it is an heir got
Since his fathers death, into a Cloak of gold
Out-shines the Sun; the head-strong horses
Of Licentious youth have broke their Reins
And drawn him through the Signs of all libidinousnes,
See, from the whorish front of Copra,
He's tumbling down as low as beggary.
O, are you come grimm Tartors Radamonte
Go ask of Pluto if he have not tan
Evadne to his smoky Common-wealth,
And ravished her? begone, why stir you not?
Ha, ha, ha, the devil is afraid.
Help, a Rape. 
Stop her mouth.
Who calls for help? tic my Evadne; I
It was her voice that gave the Echo life;
That cried a Rape: Devil dost love a wench?
Who was thy Pander, ha? What saucy friend
Durst lay his unpard Fangs on my Evadne?
Come Isle swim unarmed o'er Acheron,
And sink grimm Charon in his fiery Boat.
Murder: a Rape. 
I come, I come. 
I cannot find her yet,
The King of Flames protests she
Is not there: but hang him Rogue,
They say he'll lye; O how my glutted spleen
Tickles to think how I have paid the slave?
I made him lead me into every hole:
Ha, ha, ha, what crying was there there?
Here on a Wheel, turned by a Furies hand,
Hangs a distracted States-man, that had spent
The little wit Heaven to strange purpose lent him,
To suppress right, make beggars, and get means
To be a Traitor. Ha, ha, ha, and here
A Usurer fat with the curses of so many heirs
His Extortion had undone, sate to the Chin
In a warm bath, made of new melted gold;
And now and then a draught past through his throat:
He fed upon his god; but he being angry
Scalded his Chops. Right against him
Stood a fooled Gallant, chained unto a post,
And lashed by Folly for his want of wit.
The reeling drunkard and plump glutton stood
Making of faces, close by Tantalus:
But drank and fed on Air.
The whore-master tied to a painted Punk,
Was by a Fury termed insatiate Lust,
Whipped with a blade of fire. And here—
What's here! it is my Evadnes vale; it is hers I know it:
Some slave has ravished my Evadne: Well,
There breaths not such an impious slave in hell:
Nay, it is hers, I know it too too plain:
Your breath is lost, it is hers, you speak in vain. 
Come, bring her forward, tie her to that tree,
Each man shall have this turn: Come Minion,
You must squench the raging flames of my
Concupisence: what doe you weep, you
Puritanical Punk: I shall tickle mirth
Into you by and by: Trotter, good Trotter post
Unto my Cell, make compound of Muskadine
And eggs; for the truth is, I am a Giant in my
Promises but in the act a Pygmy: I am old, and
Cannot doe as I have done; good Trotter
Make all convenient speed.
Faith Master if you cannot, here's them that can fer∣rit in a Cunny burrow without a provocative, Isle warrant you: good Master let me begin the health.
No more I say: it is a parcel of excellent Mutton:
Isle cut it up my self: come Minion. 
Kill me; Oh kill me: Rather let me dye,
Than live to see the jewel that adorns
The souls of virtuous Virgins ravished from me.
Doe not add sin to sin, and at a price
That ruiues me, and not enriches you,
Purchase damnation: doe not, doe not do it:
Sheath here your sword, and my departing soul,
Like your good Angel, shall folicit heaven
To dash out your offences: let my flight
Be pure and spotless: doe not injure that,
Man-hood would blush to think on. it is all
A maids Divinity: wanting her life
She's fair Coarse: wanting her chastity,
A spotted soul of living infamy.
Hang Chastity.
A very voice. 
O Captain, Captain, yonder's the mad Orlando the furious, and I think he takes me for—What doe you call him?
What Meder?
1, 1, Meder: the Devil Meder him, he has so nud∣led me—O here he comes; Isle be gone. 
Stay Satire; stay; you are too light of foot,
I cannot reach your paces, prithee stay.
What Goddess have you there? sure it is Evadne:
Are you the Dragons that ne'er sleep but watch
The golden fruit of the Hisperides:
Ha, then I am Hercules; fly ye?
Sure that face dwelt on Evadnes shoulders.
O thou preserver of near lost Evadne,
What must my weakness pay?
It is, it is she; she must not know I'm mad.
Assist me some good power, (it is my friend)
Make me but wise enough to resolve my self.
It may be it is not she; Isle ask her name.
What are you called sweet goddess?
They that know me mortal, term me Evadne.
Tic she: I, I, tic she.
Pray you sir, unto the bond of what I owe you,
Which is a poor distressed Virgins life, add
This one debt: what are you?
Not worth your knowledge: I am a poor,
A very, very poor despised thing: but say
I pray, are you sure your name's Evadne?
Tic questionless my Tailor. I am she,
(Receive me to your arms) not altered
In my heart, though in my clothes.
I doe belelieve you, indeed I doe; but stay I don't
Are you a Maid, a Virgin, pray tell me?
For my Evadne could not tell me a lye; speak,
I shall love you, though that Jewel's gone.
I am as spotless, thank your happy self
That saved me from those Robbers, as
The child which yet is but a jelly, it is so young.
No more, no more, trust me I doe believe you.
So many slaves, whose flaming appetites,
Would in one night ravish a throng of Virgins,
And never feel digression in their heate.
Isle af•er and murder all.
How doe you?
Well, very well: be like you think I'm mad.
You look distractedly.
Tic but your thoughts, indeed I me wondrous well.
How fair she looks after so foul a deed?
It cannot be she should be false to me:
No, you're mad to think so. Fool, O fool,
Think thou those slaves, having to fair a mark
Would not be Shooting? yes, they would, they have,
Evadne is flye-blowne, I cannot love her.
What say you sweet?
The innocence that sits upon the face
Says she is chaste, the guilty cannot speak
So evenly as she does: guilty, said, I!
Alas it were not her fault, were she ravished.
O madness, madness, whither wilt thou bear me?
His fences are unsettled; Isle go seek
Some holy man to rectify his wits.
Sweet will you go unto some Hermits Cell?
You look as you lacked rest.
She speaks like to an Angel, she's the same
As when I saw her first, as pure, as chaste.
Did she retain the substance of a sinner,
For she is none, her breath wo'd then be sower,
And betray the rankenesse of the 〈◊〉 but
Her chaste sighs beget as sweet a 〈◊〉
As that of May.
Why weeps Evadne, truly I'm not mad?
See, I am tame, pray lead me where you please. 
The drink has done its part effectually,
It was a strong powder that could hold his senses
So fast that this removing so full of noise,
Had not the power to wake him.
Good Father let Aurelia, your daughter,
Doe this same act of Justice, let me tread the pin:
The fact of his being so foul, so hateful,
Has lent me through a maid such fortitude.
Thou hast thy wish, do it boldly, it is a deed
That in the ignorance of elder ages,
Would be thought full of merit:
Be not daunted.
I have a thought teal's me it is religious,
To sacrifice a murderer to death;
Especially one that did act a deed,
So generally accounted odious.
By holy (Iaques) I'm a governor.
And should my life; (though, by the hand of him
My duty does call King) be stroke in the air;
My injured corps should not forsake the earth
Till I did see it revenged: be resolute; thy foot
Is guided by a power, that though unseen,
Is still a furtherer of good attempt.
Pray sir lend me the Key of the back ward,
For though my conscience tells me it is an act
I may hereafter boast off; yet isle pass unto our
Ladies Chapel when•• tic done, to be confessed
Ere I am seen of any▪
I am proud to see thee so well given.
Take 'em girl, and with 'em take my prayers.
He wakes, pray leave me sir. 
So Isle make fast the door,
Goodness bear witness it is a potent power
Out-weighs my duty.
Amazement! oh what tentors doe you stretch?
O how this alteration wrecks my reason, i'm
To find the Axeltree on which it hangs?
Am I asleep▪
Shake thy wonder off, and leave that seat,
It was set to sink thy body for ever
From the eyes of humane sight;
To tell thee how would be a fatal means
To both our ruins—briefly my love
Has broke the Bands of nature with my father,
To give your being.
Happy, happy vision, the blessed preparative
To this same hour, my joy wo'd burst me else.
Receive me to thy arms.
I would not wish to live but for thee, life were
A trouble; welcome to my soul.
Stand, I have a Ceremony, to offer to our
Safetryere we go.
Had not my love like a kind branch
Of some o'er looking tree, caught thee,
You would fallen, never to look upon the world again.
What shall I offer to my life, preserver?
Only thy heart, Crowned with a wreath of love,
Which I will ever keep; and in exchange
Deliver mine.
Thus I deliver, in this kiss receive't.
In the same form Aurelia yields up hers.
What noise is that?
I fear my Father.
What's to be done?
Through the back ward, of which I have
The Key; weal suddenly make scope,
Then in two Gowns of which I am provided,
Weal cloth our selves till we be past all fear.
Be it as you please, it is my good genius will
Thee I obey: command, isle follow still. 
She's gone unto her prayers, may every bead
Draw down a blessing on her; that like seed
May grow into a Harvest: it is a girl
My age is proud of, she's indeed the Model
Of her dead Mothers virtues, as of shape.
Bear hence this Banquet. 
Thou silent god, that with the leaden Mace
Arrested all (save those prodigious birds)
That are Fates Heriulds to proclaim all ill;
Deaf Giovanno, let no fancied no•se
Of ominous Screech owls, or night Ravens voice
Affright his quiet senses: let his sleep
Be free from horror, or unruly dreams;
That may beget a tempest in the streams
Of his calm reason: let 'em run as smooth,
And with as great a silence, as those doe
That never took an injury; where no wind
Had yet acquaintance: but like a smooth Crystal,
Dissolved into a water that never frowned,
Or knew a voice but music.
Holy Hermits, for such your habits speak you,
Join your prayers with a distressed Virgins;
That the wits of this distracted young man
May be settled.
Sure it is my sister, and that sleeping man
She loves him still. 
O what a blessedness am I bereft of!
What pleasure has the least part of a minute
Stolen from my eyes: me thought I did embrace
A Brother and a friend; and both Antonio.
Blessed be those gentle powers that—
What Evadne—have deceived my eyes,
Take heed Evadne, worship not a dream,
It is of a smoky substance, and will shrink
Into the compass of report; that it was:
And not reward the labour of a word
Were it substantial: Could I know but see
That man, of men; i'd by my practice
Of Religious prayers, add to the Calendar
One Holy-day, and keep it once a year.
Behold Antonio.
Brother. 
Brother. 
What earth-quake shakes my heart,
With what a speed she flew into his arms!
Some power that hearkens to the prayer of virgins,
Has bin distilled to pity at my Fortunes;
And made Evadne happy.
Now my longing that was grown big,
Is with your sight delivered of a joy,
That will become a Giant; and overcome me.
Welcome, thrice welcome brother.
Ha, her brother! Fortune has bound me
So much in their debts, I must despair to pay 'em:
Twice has my life bin by these twins of goodness
Plucked from the hand of death; that fatal enmity
Between our houses here shall end,
Though my Father at his death commanded me
To eternity of hatred:
What tie binds stronger then Reprieve from death?
Come hither friend; now brother, take her,
Thou hast bin a noble Tailor.
Be moderate my joys, doe not o'er whelm me
Here take Aurelia, may you live happy:
O Antonio this, this was the cause of my disguise;
Sebastine could not win Evadne's love,
But Giovan•o did; come now to our fathers Castle.
Pardon me; there is a bar that does
Concern my life forbids you as a friend,
To think on going to any place
But to, the Tailors house, which is not far:
Come, as we go I will relate the cause.
Doe good brother.
Go good Sebastiano.
Sebastine is your Page, and bound to follow,
Lead on.
O noble temper I admire thee! may
The world bring forth such Tailors every day. 
Come, come let's work;
For if my guesses point the right, we sha'nt
Work long.
I care not how soon, for I have a notable
Stomach to bread.
Dost hear, I suspect that Courtier my master
Brought in last night, to be the King;
Which if it be bullies, all the bread in the
Town sha'nt satisfy us, for we will eat
Cum Privelegio.
Come let's have a device, a thing, a song Boy
Come an air—
It is a merry life we live,
All our work is brought unto us;
Still are getting, never give;
For their Clothes all men doe woe us:
Yet unkind they blast our Names,
With aspertions of dishonour:
For which we make bold• with their Dames,
When we take our measure on her.
For which wee, &amp;c.
Old Tay. You see the life we live, cease.
O it is a merry one.
It is no news to me, I have bin used to it.
Now for discovery, the King as yet
Is ignorant of your names, and shall be
Till your merits beg your pardon.
My Lord you are for Machvile; take this gown.
Pray for ••ecesse:
You in this French disguise for proud Philippe;
This is her garment. I hear the King, be gone:
The French mans folly sit upon your tongue. 
Believe me Tailor you have out-stript the Court,
For such perfections lives not every where,
Nature was vexed as she's a very shrew,
She made all others in an angry mood;
These only she can boast for Master-peeces:
The rest want something or in mind or form,
These are precisely made: a Critic Jury,
Of cavilling Arts cannot condemn a scruple.
But that your entrance in this formal speech
Betrayed you are a Courtier; I had bin angry
At your Rank flattery.
Can you say so?
Sir, she has spoke my meaning.
Friend, what are those beauties called?
Your graces pardon.
Are they Oracle, or is the knowledge fatal?
But that I know thy faith, this denial
Would conjure a suspicion in my breast;
Use thy prerogative, it is thy own house
In which you are a King; and I your guest.
Come ladies. 
This habit will doe well, and less suspected;
Rapt i'this cover lives a Kingdoms plague,
They kill with licence; Machviles proud dame
It is famed is sick, upon my soul, how ere
Her health may be the Aguesh commons cry;
She's a disease they groan for: this disguise
Shall sift her Ebon soul, and if she be
Infectious, like a Meagrome, or rot limb▪
The sword of Justice must divide the joint
That holds her to the States endangered body.
She comes.
Look up my Auristella;
Better the Sun forsake hi• course to bless,
With his continuing beams the Antipodes,
And we grovel for ever in eternal night,
Then death eclipse thy rich and stronger light.
Seek some physician, horror to my soul, she faints;
I'd rather lose the issue of my hopes, than Auristella.
Issue of his hopes, strange; 
The Crowns injoynement can yield no content,
Without the presence of my Auristilla.
Crowns enjoyment, O villain,
Why stir you not? fetch me some skilful man,
My Kingdom shall reward him; if his Art
Chain her depart••g soul unto her flesh,
But for a day, till she be crowned a Queen:
Fly, bring him unto this walk.
Stay,
Most honoured Count, (now for a forged link 
Of flattery to chain me to his love;)
Having with studious care gone o'er the Art
Folly terms Magic, which more sublime souls
Skil'd in the Stars, know is above that mischief;
I find you're borne to be 'bove vulgar greatness,
Even to a Throne: but stay, let's fetch this Lady.
All greatness without her is slavery.
Use modest violence.
Oh.
Stand wider, give her air.
God-like Physician, I and all that's mine,
Will at thy feet offer a sacrifice.
Fore send it goodness; I, nay all;
Ever many hours makes the now young day
A type of sparkling youth; shall on their knees
Pray for your highness.
Look up my Auristella, and be great;
Rise with the Sun, but never to decline,
What have you done?
Waked thee to be a Queen.
A Queen▪ O don't dissemble; you have robed me
Of greater pleasure, than the fancied bliss
Elizium owns: O for a pleasure real, that
Wo'd appear in all unto my dream: that I may
Frown, and then kill; smile, and create again.
Were there a Hell, as doting age wo'd have,
To fright from lawless courses heed less youth:
For such a short lived happiness as that,
I wo'd be lost unto eternity.
The day grows old in hours:
Come Auristella to the Capital;
The Gray-beard Senate shall on humble knees,
Pay a Religious Sacrifice of praise
Unto thy demi Deity: the Stars
Have in a general Senate made thee Queen
Of this our world: Great master of thy Art,
Confirm my love.
Madam—
Nay hear him love, believe me he's a man
That may be Secretary to the gods;
He is alone in Art, it were sin to name
A second; all are dunces to him.
How easy is the faith of the ambitious.
Follow me to the Counsel. 
Are you the man my husband speaks so high of?
Are you skilled in the Stars?
Yes Madam.
Your habit says, or you abuse the custom,
You're a Physician?
Madam i'm both.
And dee' find no let that stops my rising.
Not any.
Away, your skill is dull, dull to derision.
There is a Star fixed in the heaven of greatness,
That sparkles with a rich and fresher light,
Than our sick and defective Taper.
It may be so, the horiscope is troubled;
Confusion take your horiscope and you.
Can you with all your Art advise my fears,
How to confound this constellation.
Death how she conjures;
Madam I must search into the Planets.
Planet me no planets; be a Physician,
And from your study of industrious poisons,
Fetch me your best experienced speedy one,
And bring it to me straight: what it is to doe,
Like unresolved riddles hid from you. 
Planet said I; upon my life no planet
Is so swift as her ne'er resting evil,
That's her tongue: well i'll not question
What the poisons for, if for her self,
The common Hangman's eased the labour of a blow,
For if she live her head must certain off;
The poison isle go get, and give it her,
Then to the King:
If Sebastiano's Frenchified disguise
Purchase the like discovery, our eyes
Will be too scanty; we had need to be
All eye, to watch such haughty villainy. 
Begare Madam me make de gown so brave; O, de hole vorle vorke be me patron, me ha vorke for le grand Duchess le Shevere, le Royne de Frenzy, Spanea de Angleter an all d'fine Madamosels.
Nay Monsier to deprive desert of praise, is unknown Language, troth I use it not▪ nay it is very well.
Be me trot a Madam •ever doe ill, de English man do ill, de Spanere doe, de Duch, de all doe ill, but your French man, and begare he doe incomparable brave.
You're too proud on it
Begare me no proud id vorle, me speak be me trot de trut, ang me no lye; metra Madam begare you have de find bode a de vorle, O de fine brave big ting me have e∣ver
measure, me weir fit it so pat.
Welcome my Lord,
Shall I still long, yet lose my longing still?
Is there no Art to mount the lofty seat?
No Engine that may make us ever great?
Must we be still styled Subjects, and for fear
Our closest whispers reach the owing care,
Not trust the wind? Ray. Be calm my love,
Ha, who have we here an eves dropper.
Me Signior, Be povera i•nile home a French
A votre commandment.
My Tailor,
We Monsier de Madam Tailor.
Some happy genius does attend my wishes,
Or spirit like a Page conducts unto me
The Ministers, whose sweet must sent me easy.
Come hither French man, can thou rule thy tongue?
Art not too much a woman?
No begar me show someting for de man.
Or can thou be like a perverse on, profess dogednes?
Be as a dead man dumb, briefly be this:
A friend to France, and with a silent speed,
Post to our now approaching armed friends:
Tell them that Raimond ever the hasty Sand
Of a short hour be spent, shall be impaled,
And on his brow a Deputy for France,
Support a golden wreath of Kingly cares:
Bid 'em make hast to pluck my partner down
Into his Grave; be gone, as thou nurse
In thy breast thoughts that doe thirst
For nobleness: be secret and you're made;
If not, you're nothing. Mark, it is Raimond says it:
And as I live, I breath not, if my deeds
Appear not in a horror 'bove my words.
Begar me no no•de threaten; me be as close to your secret, or my Ladies secrets as de skin to de flesh; de flesh to
de bone: if me tell me de—vat, de ye call de modero de Dog, de Bich; call me de son o de Bich.
Count Machvile waits your honour in the Hall.
Do it, and be more then common in our favour;
Here take this Ring for thy more credit:
Farewell, be quick and secret. 
Folly go from my tongue, the French so nigh,
And thou half ruined Spain, so wretchedly provided;
Strange, yet not, all Countries have bread monsters:
It is a Proverb as plain as true, and aged as it is both:
One tainted Sheep mares a whole flock.
Machvile that tainted beast, whose spreading ills
Infects all; and by infecting kills.
Isle to the French, what he intends to be
Our ruin; shall confound their villainy. 
FOr this discovery be still Antonio,
The frowning Law, may with a furrowed face
Hereafter look upon; but ne'er shall touch
They condemned body. Here from a Kings hand,
Take thy Aurelia; our command shall smooth
The rising billows of her Fathers rage,
And charm it to a calm: let one be sent
To certify our pleasure, we wo'd see him.
Your graces Will shall be in all obeyed.
Thy loyal love, makes thy King poor.
Let not your judgement, Royal sir, be questioned,
To term that love, was but a subjects duty. 
You sent the poison, did you?
Yes, and it like your grace, the Apothecary
Called it a strong provocative to madness.
Did not he question what you used it for?
O my disguise saved him that labour, sir,
My habit, that was more Physician than my self,
Told him it was to dispatch some property
That had been torter'd with five thousand drugs
To try experiment: another man
Sha'nt buy the quantity of so much Rats-bane
Shall kill a Flea, but shall be had forsooth
Before a Justice, be questioned; nay, perhaps
Confined to peep throw an Iron grate:
When your Physician may poison, who
Not, cum privilegio: it is his trade.
O my Sebastine.
Peace my Avadne, the King must not yet know me.
My brother has already made you known.
Will it please your Highness?
What Sabastiano, to be still a King
Of Universal Spain, without a Rival?
Yes, it does please me, and you ministers
Of my still growing greatness, shall ever long
Find I am pleased with you, the boldly durst
Pluck from the fixed arm of sleeping Justice
Her long sheathed sword; and whet the rusty blade
Upon the bones of Machville, and his
Confederate Rebels.
That my Lord is yet to doe, let him mount higher.
That his fall may be too deep for a resurrection;
They're gone to the great Hall, whither wilt please your
Grace disguised to go, your person by our care shall be
Secure. Their French troops I have sent as useless into
France, by virtue of Raimonds Ring, which he gave
Me to bid the General by that token
To march to this City.
What say the Colonels will they assist me?
Doubt not my Lord.
Come then, lets go guarded, with such as you
It were sin to fear, were all the world untrue. 
Now for the credit of Tailors.
Nay, Master and we doe not act as they say,
With any Players in the Globe of the world,
Let us be baited like a Bull for a company of
Strutting Coxecombes: nay we can act I can tell you.
Well I must to the King; see you be perfect,
Isle move it to his Highness. 
Now my Masters are we to doe; d'e mark me, doe—
Doe; what doe? Act, act, you fool you, do said you, what doe? you a Player, you a Plasterer, a mere dirt dauber; and not worthy to bee mentioned with Vermin, that exact Actor: doe, I am ashamed on it, fie.
Well said Vermin, thou tieklest him y'faith.
Doe, pha.
Well play; we are to play a play.
Play a play a play, ha, ha, ha; O egredious nonsen∣sensicall wigeon, thou shame to our crosse-legg'd corpora∣tion; thou fellow of a sound, play a play; why forty pound golding of the beggars Theater speaks better, yet has a mark for the sage audience to exercise their dexterity, in throwing of rotten apples whilst my stout Actor pockets, and then eats up the injury: play a play, it makes my worcester∣ship laugh in faith.
To him Vermin, thou bitst him in faith.
Well, act a Play before the King.
What play shall we act?
To fret the French the more, we will act strange but true, or the straddling Monsieur, with the Neopolitan Gentleman between his legs.
That wo'not act well.
O giant of incomparable ignorance: that wo'not act well, ha, ha, that wo'not doe well, you Ass you.
You bit him for saying doe: Vermin leave biting you'd best.
What say you to our Spanish Bilbo?
Who Ieronimo?
I.
That he was a mad rascal to stab himself.
But shall wee act him?
I let us doe him.
Doe again, ha.
No, no, let us act him.
I am content.
Who shall act the Ghost.
3 Why marry that will I, I Vermin.
1 Thou dost not look like a Ghost.
3. A little Players deceit: flower will do it; Mark me,
I can rehearse, mark me rehearse some:
When this eternal substance of the soul
Did live imprisoned in my wanton flesh,
I was a Tailor in the Court of Spain.
Courtier Vermin in the Court of Spain.
I, there's a great many Courtiers Vermin indeed:
Those are they beg poor men's livings;
But I say, Tailor Vermin is a Court Tailor.
Who shall act Ieronimo?
That will I:
Mark if I doe not gape wider than the widest
Mouthed Fowler of them all, hang me:
"Who calls Ieronimo from his naked bed: haugh!
Now for the passionate part—
"Alas it is my son Horatio.
Very fine: but who shall act Horatio?
I, who shall doe your son?
What doe, doe again: Well I will act Horatio.
Why you are his father.
Pray who is fitter to act the son, than the father
That begot him.
Who shall act Prince Balthazar and the King?
I will doe Prince Balthazar too: and for the King
Who but I? which of you all has such a face for a King,
Or such a leg to trip up the heals of a Traitor?
You will doe all I think.
Yes marry will I; who but Vermin? yet I will
Leave all to play the King:
Pass by Ieronimo.
Then you are for the King?
I bully I.
Lets go seek our fellows, and to this gear.
Come on then. 
Men of our needful profession, that deal in such com∣modities as men's lives, had need to look about 'em 're they traffic: I am to kill Raimond, the Devils cozen ger∣man, for he wears the same complexion: but there is a right Devil that hath hired me, that's Count Machvile. Good Table conceal me, here will I wait my watch-word: but stay, have I not forgot it (Then) I then is my arm to enter. I hear them coming.
Pray take your seats.
Not well, prithee retire.
Sick, sick at heart.
Well wrought poison, O how joy swells me.
You see my Lord the poison is boxed up. 
Health waste upon this Royal company.
Knows she we are here?
O no my Lord, it is to the twins of treason:
Machvile, and Raymond.
Royal there's something in it.
It smells rank of the Traitor.
Are you in the wind on it?
Will you leave us?
I cannot stay; O I am sick to death. 
Or Isle ne'er trust poison more.
Pray seat your selves
Gentlemen, though your deserts have merit 
And your word's have deserved nobly;
But ingratitude, that should be banished
From a Princes breast, is Philips favourite.
Philip Traitor, why not King? I am so.
Patience good my Lord; isle down. 
It lives too near him:
You that have ventured with expense of blood,
And danger of your lives, to rivet him
Unto his Seat with peace: you that in War
He termed his Atlases, and pressed with praises
Your brawny shoulders; called you his Colossuses,
And said your looks frighted tall war
Out of his territories: now in peace,
The issue of your labour: this bad man,
Philip I mean, made of ingratitude,
Wo'not afford a name, that may distinguish
Your worthy selves from Cowards:
Civet Cats spotted with Rats dung,
Or a face like white Broth, strewed o'er with Currants
For a stirring Caper, or itching Dance; to
Please my Lady Vanity, shall be made
A smock Knight.
Villain, must our disgrace mount thee?
To what tends this?
What means Count Machvile?
To be your King; fie on this circumstance,
My longing will not brooke it: say,
Will you obey us as your Kings and Queens. 
My Lord Antonio.
Confine your selves, the King is within hearing; therefore make show of liking Machviles plot: let him Mount high, his fall will bee the deeper: my life you shall bee safe.
Say, are you agreed?
If not weal force you to it:
Speak French man, are our forces in the City?
Wee Monsieur.
We acknowledge you our King.
King More Traitors.
Why then. 
Ha, from whence this sudden Mischief?
Did you not see a hand armed with the fatal
Ruin of my life.
None paw Signior.
Ha, ha, ha; lay hold on those French Soldiers,
Away with them. 
Wast thy plot Machvile? go laughing to thy grave.
Alas my Lord is wounded. 
Come hither French man, make a dying man
Bound to thy love; go to Philippe,
Sickly as she is bring her unto me;
Or my flying soul will not depart in peace else:
Prithee make hast: yet stay, I have not breath
To pay thy labour.
Shrink ye, you tweene-borne Atlases, that bear
This my near ruined world; have you not strength
To bear a curse, whose breath may taint the air,
That this Globe may feel a universal plague.
No, yet bear up, till with a vengeful eye
I out-stare day, and from the dogged sky
Pluck my impartial Star: O, my blood
Is frozen in my veins—farewell revenge—me —dyes.
They need no Law.
Nor Hang-man.
They Condemn, and execute without a Jury.
I come, I come; nay fly not, for by Hell
Isle pluck thee by the Beard, and drag thee thus
Out of thy fiery Cave. Ha, on yonder hill
Stand troops of devils waiting for my soul:
But Isle deceive 'em, and instead of mine,
Send this same spotted Tigers. 
Oh.
So, whilst they to hell
Are posting with their prize, Isle steal to Heaven:
Wolf dost thou grin? ha, is my Raymond dead?
So ho, so ho: come back
You sutty Fiends that have my Raymonds soul,
And lay it down, or I will force you do it:
No, won't you stir? by Styx Isle bait you for it:
Where is my Crown? Philippe was a Queen,
Was she not ha? Why so, where is my Crown:
O you have hid it—ha, wa'st thou 
That robed Philippe of her Raymonds life?
Nay I will nip your wings, you shall not fly;
Isle pluck you by the guarded front: and thus
Sink you to hell before me. 
Oh, oh.
What down, ho, ho, ho:
Laugh, laugh, you souls that fry in endless flames;
Ha, whence this chillness—must I dye —nay then,
I come, I come, nay weep not for I come:
Sleep injured shadow, O death strikes dumb. 
Machvile thy hand, I can't repent, farewell:
My burdened conscience sinks me down to hell. 
I cannot tarry long, farewell; weal meet
Where we shall never part: if here be any
My life has injured, let your charity
Forgive declining Machvile: I am sorry.
His penitence works strongly on my temper.
Of disguise, see falling Count: Antonio forgives thee.
Antonio, O my shame,
Can you whom I have injured most pardon my guilt?
Give me thy hand yet nearer, this embrace
Betray's thee to thy death: ha, ha, ha. 
So weeps the Egyptian monster when it kills,
Washed in a flood of tears; coldest ever think
Machviles repentance could come from his heart;
No, down Colossus Author of my sin,
And bear the burden mingled with thine own, 
To finish thy damnation.
Accursed villain, thou hast murdered him
That holds not one small drop of loyal blood:
But what is worth thy life.
O my brother.
Give him some ayre, the wound cannot be mortal.
Alas he faints, O my Antonio:
Cursed Machvile, may thy soul—
Peace, peace Aurelia; be more merciful:
Men are apt to censure, and will condemn
Thy passion, call it madness, and say thou
Want Religion: nay weep not sweet,
For every one must dye: it was thy love,
For to deceive the Law, and give me life:
But death you see has reached me, O, I dye;
Blood must have blood, so speaks the Law of Heaven:
I slew the Governor, for which rash deed;
Heaven, fate, and man, thus make Antonio bleed. 
Sleep, sleep great heart, thy virtue made me ill
Authors of vice, it is fit the vicious kill:
But yet forgive me, Oh, my great heart
Dissolves like snow, and lessons to a Rheum,
Cold as the envious blasts of Notherne wind:
World how I loved thee, it were a sin to boast;
Farewell, I now must leave thee; my life
Grows empty with my veins: I cannot stand, my breath
Is as my strength, weak; and both seized by death:
Farewell ambition catching at a Crown,
Death tripped me up, and head-long threw me down. 
So falls an exhalation from the sky,
And's never mist because unnatural;
A birth begotten by incorporate ill:
Whose usher to the gazing World is wonder.
Alas good man, you're come unto a sight
Will try thy temper, whether joy or grief
Shall Conquer most within thee; joy lies here
Scattered in many heaps: these when they lived,
Threatened to tear this balsam from our brow,
And rob our Majesty of this Elixir:
I'st not my right? was not I heir to Spain?
You are our Prince, and may you live
Long to enjoy your right.
But now look here, it is plain grief has a hand
Harder than joy; it presses out such tears.
Nay rise.
I doe beseech your Grace not to think me
Contriver of Antonio's scope from death,
It was my disloyal daughters breach of duty.
That's long since pardoned.
You're still merciful.
Antonio was thy son, I sent for thee
For to confirm it, but he is dead:
Be merciful, and doe not curse the hand
That gave it him, though it deserve it.
O my griefs, are you not strong enough
To break my heart? pray tell me, tell me true;
Can it be thought a sin? or is it so,
By my own hand to ease my breast of woe?
Alas poor Lady; rise, thy Father's here.
Look up Aurelia, ha, why doe you kneel?
For a blessing.
Why she is not Aurelia, doe not mock me.
But he is Sebastiano and your son;
Late by our hand made happy by enjoying
The fair Evadne dead Antonio's sister:
For whose sake he became a Tailor,
And so long lived in that mean disguise.
My joy had bin too great if he had lived,
The thrifty heaven's mingle our sweets with gall;
Least being glutted with excess of good,
We should forget the giver. Rise Sebastiano
With thy happy choice, may thou live crowned
With the enjoyment of those benefits,
My prayers shall beg for: rise Aurelio,
And in some place blessed with religious prayers,
Spend thy left Remnant.
You advise well: indeed it was a fault
To break the bonds of duty, and of law;
But love, O Love; thou whose all conquering power,
Builds Castles on the hearts of easy maids,
And makes 'em strong unto attempt those dangers:
That but rehearsed before, wo'd fright their souls
Into a Jelly. Brother, I must leave you;
And Father, when I send to you a note, that shall
Desire a yearly stipend to that holy place
My tyred feet has found to rest them in;
Pray confirm it.
And now great King Aurelia begs of you,
To grace Antonio in the mournful March
Unto his grave, which be where you think fit:
We need not be interred both in one Vault.
Blessed Virgin, thy desires I will perform.
Then I leave you, my prayers shall still attend you
As I hope yours shall accompany me.
Father your blessing, and ere long expect
To hear where I am entertained a Nun
Brother, and Sister, to you both adieu;
Antonio dead, Aurelia marries new. 
Farewell girl, when I remember thee,
The Beads I drop shall be my tears. 
She's to all virgins a true mirror;
They that wo'd behold true love, reflect on her:
There it is engrossed.
Great King, our Grace—
The King is sad, you must not act.
How? not act?
Shall not Vermin act?
Yes you shall act, but not now;
The King is indisposed.
Well then, some other time; I Vermin
The King will act before the King.
Very good, pray make your 
Isle muster up all the Tailors in the 
Town, and so tickle their sides.
Nay you're a right Vermin, go be not
Troublesome. 
Upon my truth and loyalty great King,
What they did was but feigned, merely words
Without a heart: it was by Antonio's Counsel.
Thou art all truth: rise. 
Long live King Philip in the calm of peace,
To exercise his Regal Clemency.
Take up Antonio's body, and let the rest
Find Christian burial: mercy befits a King,
Come trusty Tailor,
And to all Countries let swift Fame report,
King Philip made a Tailors house his Court.
Your grace much honours me.
We can't enough pay thy alone deserts,
Kings may be poor, when Subjects are like thee,
So fruitful in all loyal virtuous deeds:
March with the Body we will perform all Rights,
Of sable Ceremony: that done,
We will to our Court, since all our own is won.

AWay, stand off, prop not a falling Castle with
Your weak strength, tic sinful Charity, and
Desperate folly to meet a mischief, whose
Entertainment is assured destruction: leave me
I pray safeguard your own lives.
Oh Royal Sir, tic you that doe despair,
Wounds are not always mortal.
Dear sir let them be dressed:
You tire me out of breath with vain delays, as well
May you give life unto a stone, a senseless statue;
My lifes but lent to bid you shun your deaths, and in that too
Heavens mercy is miraculous, yet you will not hear me:
Again I charge you as a King; yet none regards
Declining Majesty; then as a husband, and a Father here;
Dost thou love me?
Approve it in my death, if thou mistrust it Allured.
Have you duty, you Phoenix of my age, for though
Two persons be distinguishable, yet ought there be but one
Combined heart in your fraternal union, your knees promise.
Our duties are much lower.
Then here I charge ye for to leave the Field,
Fly from death, hoe's now in pursuit of ye:
Fly from the Tyrant, for this unhappy day
Those bloody Persecutors Maximinus, and Dioclesian,
Display their by necked Eagle over Britain,
While she lies under as a bleeding prey,
One Talent here is fastened.
Fly Noble Princes, wee have stood out the utmost
Of the day, till hope had lost his anchorage,
Therefore fly, and seek some other day for victory.
How fares the King?
En one the Virge of Bliss, O dear Amphiabell.
Noble Sir Hugh, what more could I have wished, then breath
To thank your kind assistance in this haplesse day:
Oh take an equal jonyter with my Sons, from this cold Oracle
All I bequeath is Counsel for your safety, fly the slaughter,
For dying men are half Prophetical, if you abide
A longer stay you fall: oh doe not make me guilty of your deaths
That drew you hither to expire your breaths, this path I
Progress but avoid my way, you need not haste
To an assured danger: Farewell my love, my blessing here
Shall fall, perform my will, else Fate avert it all:
Thou can not boast grim death: I did not yield,
Nor fell by Agues, but like a King in the field.
Aye me distressed Queen.
Your griefe's incurable, remember the will of your dead Lord,
And be a good Executrix, fly from pursuing danger:
And you Royal youths must seek some shelter to secure
Your lives; away, tic all our Fates.
I could better dye on him that slew my Father.
Take my company in that, dear Brother.
So make a Mother prove unnatural, I will defend the foe
Through this breast you pass unto him, have ye forgot your Father?
No, we'll revenge his death:
And kill your Mother first.
What think ye Princes, that we left behind
The smallest atom of a seeming hope, when wee
Forsook the field, you'll not think so?
Whats your Counsel?
Take on some course disguise, what poverty first
But will be rich, being your lives protection.
Instruct and aid us some superior power,
Which dost behold our forced necessity
Brother, it shall be thus; some poor Soldier slain in the
Battle will we change habits with: so it may be thought
That wee are slain, and stay the bloody Inquisition.
Tic well advised, weal not assay to mend it:
This effected Mother, weal come and take our leaves.
What for your self Madam?
Here will I stay, until my eyes like briny Pyoners
With their continual Cadence, have dug up
A woeful Sepulchre, for these sweet Corps;
And if these sterrill Founts prove weak, and dry,
Here will I kneel till death has cloyed his Gorge,
And left the putrefaction, the mortal damp
Shall kiss me to his company for ever.
Oh Madam, these are but fruitless apprehensions,
And savours not of that discreet virtue hath been ever in you:
Your story hath been filled with Temperance, Care, and Patience,
And all these forbid this barren Sacrifice, loose not your self
In the great loss of your dear Husband,
Madam, if you dare trust your person to my protection,
I will Conduct you safe into North Wales,
Where Powes my Lord, and Father, yet maintains
A petty Royalty: Thither if please you wend,
Weal either keep or loose our selves with you.
Alas Sir Hugh, little can you promise of safety there,
For from fair Winifred, the only Daughter, and Heir
To Dun-wallis, I have received too true intelligence;
The Barbarous Romans have supplanted peace,
Putting to sword, and torture all, that bear the
Name of Christians: Nay, even the right Amphiabell
Did hold is now so ruinate, I have not left
One Subject to command.
Heard you this from virtuous Winifred?
Much more of woe, the virtuous Maid her self
Hath left off State, forsaken Royalty,
And keeps a Court so solitary, as it seems 
More like a Cloister, then a Royal Palace.
Hark, our enemies pursue us, if we stay
Wee must resolve for death.
Madam, either enjoin us for your safe Conduct along
With us, or here defend your life to the last breath?
Neither I beseech you gentlemen, will ye accept a poor widows
Thanks, for all your loves, tic a thin gratitude;
But tic all I have; I beseech ye haste away,
If you doe other, Isle not thank you for it.
For here isle stay, and warm this cold remainder,
Until some fiend, sent from the infernal pit,
Doth separate by force, what Heaven hath knit.
Then to the best protection of the Heavens,
Wee leave you to be comforted. 
That shelter cover you.
Come dear Brother, these poor habiliments may find
Surer footing, than the rich Robes which Royalty is clad in:
If they doe, weal bless the happy Transformation.
Mother, your blessing; nothing else wee want
To further the issue of our unknown fate,
Take it, O take it in an hour of sorrow, but leave that all with me,
So you have all I can bestow upon you: 
But mentally, Isle still be blessing of you, and never cease
Hark, tic time you're gone, away; I charge ye on your duties.
But wheres your own safety?
Leave me, and haste you hence I say,
Isle take my blessing oft if you delay,
And plant my curse instead; Altered, and Off, you're my Sons,
I charge you to obey me.
Altered and Off are already gone, for with our habits we
Have changed our names, when such you hear of,
Oh let your prayers still bless them, with happy memory.
Isle never part with that remembrance:
Obey me and bee gone.
With constant hope, that though veiled honour bear an
Ecliptic stain, our sun will pass it, and shine bright again
So, now come you Tyrants, here you shall find me
Praying for curses on your cruelty.
Now equal Caesar, brave Dioclesian, the days at leisure
To return thee thanks for aiding Maximinus in these wars,
In happy time thy succour came from France,
To make us Conquerors of Britain, which else might
Yet have been a doubtful day: when thou want aid,
Bid Maximinus come with this joint force,
Weal make the world our own.
Rome shall not loose its name, the worlds Commander,
Till this knot unties; perpetual be it, till Rome erects
Our golden Statues, placed by Saturn, and great Iupiter,
And there be deified, to bless all those which may succeed
But in these designs, let us remember high deserving
Albon, whose valuor was not seconded this day
By any single Arm.
It was the best, the shout and full applause
Was only Albons, for which unto thy Knighthood late
Given in Rome, we add the stewardship of Great Britain
Under Maximinus, and Dioclesian: go to thy Barony
Of Verrolam, two legions there shall still attend one thee,
To quell and persecute these Christians:
Who will not stoop unto our Roman God,
Shall feel the stroke of our revengeful Rod.
Albon shall still as substitute to Rome
Observe, and keep her high imperial Doom.
Bassianus, be you Competitor with Lord Albon,
And with severity, through the conquered Cities pursue
The Christians to their Martyrdomes: ??? Whose that?
Isle answer for my self; Tyrant a Christian, a husbandless
And Childless Christian, yet one so daring unto misery,
She throws a Challenge, to the worst thou can,
Defiance to thee thus; Oh were it poison to swell this
Tyrants bosom till it burst, and fall thus low.
Ha ha ha, misery makes her desperate, thou add a
Triumph woman to our state, to brandish forth such
Fruitless Menaces; to Prison with her, weal think of
Further torments: Isle prostitute thy body to some Slave,
And if the issue prosper, make him a Hang-man.
And such an other may thy Daughter have.
Choose for your self Lady, I have an eye to pleasure
My self?
Weal hold no dispute with women, away with her:
Rochester Castle shall be your palace? you're like to keep
A hard House on it.
Like the Court thou keepst.
No more words, away with her.
My words Isle better spend in Prayers to Heaven,
But if I chance to Curse, Isle think on thee:
My Royal Plants, Heaven guard from their full gripe,
Fall Fate on me, my time and days are ripe. 
Oh Brother Caesar, in this British calm weal pas again
Over to stormy France, the Gothes, and Vandals have outpost
The bounds, and o'er the Rhine past into Burgandy, our work
Must be to reverberate, and drive them to Confined
Germany, while you persevere, with an awful hand,
To keep our conquered foes beneath your feet; give not those
Frighted Welch-men time to breath:
But if again you doubt of what you can, you know your
Friend called Dioclessan?
Your words are mine if you have need in France, weal Feast,
And bring you to the British shore, then part unto our work.
Our Daughter Leodice, weal leave to keep her court at Canter???bury,
Rutullus, take it to your charge, to see erected one the
Conspicuous promonts of our Land, Beacons, which may stand
In ken of other, by whose sudden fierce on the least invasion, we may be called to Arms.
It shall be done.
A careful Policy, bee my Tutor to teach me Military Discipline,
Fly Brason Oratrix, all lingued fame,
And tell at Rome of Maximinus name:
Say Dioclesian too will bring a Crown,
To bind thy seven fold Head with high Renown: 
Say like two Ioves, when our Dread Thunders burl'd,
Our sable Eagle strikes through all the world. 
Good boys, fine knaves, yerk it home, good ware will away,
When bad lies dead on our hands, there's no thrift in that;
Spin in a fair thread Sisly, let not my journimen want,
The Wars has lamed many of my old Customers, they cannot
Go a hie lone, bad world for us, but a wet winter, will wear
Out Shoo-leather, and make amends,
Weal cut it out if it doe Boys?
Your journimen shall mount then Master, for my foots in the Stirrup
Already, ply your work Mistress, we always bring
Your labours to good ends Isle warrant ye.
Why Barnaby, thouseest I am at des???ance with my work
Till it be done, for I am always spitting on my toe.
Good wench Sisly, there shall no Corns grow on thy toes
For that, thy shoes shall be large enough,
Finely shalt thou go, and tread upon Neates Leather.
Isle eat the feet if she doe Master;
Eat my feet goodman knave?
Misconstruction Sis, thou mistakes Barnaby, heel eat
Neates feet, none of thine; but Beef shall be thy food boy,
As good as the Major of Feversham cuts on's Trencher,
And Drink as strong as the Statute affords.
Statutes are strong, Master, therefore we should have strong drink:
I had rather wear Lace by the Statute, than drink if it be small.
Good drink in thy throat if thou speak in earnest:
But Ralph, what price bears Ballets? no Music in Feversham?
Faith sir your statute Beer has taken my pipe
A hole too low, it cannot reach Ela.
Isle have that fault mended boy, but we must drink strong drink, as we show our Religion, privately.
It is dangerous to be good Christians now a days.
I am afraid there will be too many Christians sir,
Because many use to go a Pilgrimage Bare-foot;
And that's an ill wind for our profit.
No more talk of ill winds Barnaby, weal sing away sorrow
Strike up Ralph, Isle wash thy whistle anon boy.
Well sir, Isle scour it first if I can then, 
Brother, heir's a life to mock at state, and stain her surly
Greatness: who would venture to walk upon the Icy path
Of Royalty, that here might find a footing so secure:
Heir's harmony indeed, a fearless sport,
A joy our young years seld, has at Court.
I Brother, would we were of this Fellowship.
Dost think we could forget our former ease
And fall to labour?
Why not? that was not without troubles of the mind,
And methinkes to exchange for the bodies labour, were a far
Freer good; to sing with homely cheer,
Were sweeter far then to feed fat with fear.
Weal put it then in practice, heaven grant we may
Find entertainment: good speed unto your labours Gentlemen.
Gentlemen, we are good fellows no Gent. yet if gentleness
Make Gentility we are Gentlemen: My pretty youths,
Would you ought with us you speak so friendly?
No more then we shall deserve sir.
And you are worthy of that in faith.
Sir, wee are youths whom the rough hand of War hath ruined,
And made desolate, our friends and means are parted from us,
Our friend's in Heaven, our means within the gripe of enemies
Both in accessuble thus much we are, Fatherless, friendless;
Succourless and forlorn, what we may be, lies yet within
The grant of some kind Master, that may instruct us in
Some honest Trade, to get our living by.
Pretty spoken youths by Saint Anthony,
How dost thou like them Sisly?
Yes truly husband, if they will doe as well as they say,
I like 'em very well; good faces as faces goes now a days,
Prithee sweet heart be kind to 'em, and entertain 'em
If they like our Trade.
Oh good Master entertain 'em, we want junior prentices
For under work.
Doe sir, keep good faces in your shop?
Twill draw the Custom of pretty wenches the better.
House-keeping's chargeable, men must have good meat.
They will work and earn their meat Isle warrant ye.
What are ye, Brethren?
In love and nature sir, the nearest Brethren.
Tic pity they should be parted then, if they love so well.
Your Names?
Chrispianus mine.
Mine Crispinus.
Good names, good names, well boys on this condition
I will entertain you, I need not doubt your truths, and
Honesty, you have such fair and promising out sides:
But I must have you bound for seven years, and then
You are your own men, and a good trade to get your livings by.
Withal our hearts,
And happy are we in your kind acceptance.
You shall be mine, then give 'em entertainment Barnaby.
New Aprons and Caps here, for a Couple of Gent.
So on with your Breast plate, this Cap makes thee a graduate,
You are come amongst Bacularious, beare-up your heads boys,
Weal teach ye to bristle, wax better and better, last to
The 12, then set foot in the stirrup and have at all.
Show them their tools, and give them entrance Barnaby
Sir, I have not been used to this hard travel,
If you dare mitigate your Masters Cruelty,
And let me rest a little, isle thank you for it.
Tic not in our Commission, but Isle dispense a little.
Who is this I pray sir?
The Queen going to Prison, to Rochester Castle,
Doe you not know her?
Alack, alack.
My eyes are not deceived, they are my Children.
Tic our Mother Off, take heed our tears do not discover.
Pray heaven they do not, I fear my eyes will be kind traitors.
Dare ye be so kind, to afford a distressed woman a stool?
I dare doe that Madam, Crispinus, reach a stool.
On thy knee Child, why dost thou kneel to me?
Tic my duty Madam, misery hath not changed your name,
Tho bated of your power, you are my Queen still.
Heaven bless thee for it, I have stolen thee a blessing.
Would thou add something too?
I would bee as Dutiful as my Brother, Madam.
Is he thy Brother, blessing on you both:
This was a happiness beyond my hope, that I should once more Bless
My Children really, keep in thou women's frailty,
Grief Chain my Tongue, least thou betray the utmost
Of my hopes, my tears may find excuse.
Why weeps those boys?
Alas Sir, it is oft times the barren fruits of subjects
Loves, when they behold their Prince; but much more
Will the Flux of sorrow sir abound, when they behold
Them thrown to misery.
You're very kind
Kind boys they are, indeed they shall fare near the worse,
I could even weep my self, to see my boys so kind hearted.
Madam, you doe but trouble 'em, and win some drops
From them, that they would spare if you were absent.
Tic your trouble sir, they could be content with this kind
Expense, a longer sojourn, but you instruct me well:
Farewell, I can but thank ye, that's all I have
To give for your kind youths ??? what will my tongue doe,
Pray use them well, so much the more cause
They were kind to me.
Madam will you go?
We talk of no stay, let not your hast make me
Unthankful pray, and bar my thanks for kindness,
But I have done: On to my house of woe, yet since we must,
Delay the more annoys this comfort, yet heaven to my sorrows gives,
In midst of Tyranny my children lives. 
The world treads not upright, methinkes
It had need of a good workman to mend it.
Peace Sisly, no problems, no figures, no women's Rhetoric,
The tongue may undo the whole body, Tausume, there
Is Greek for ye wife, let us keep good consciences with in doors
How ere the wind blows abroad, tic honester deceit
To seem bad and be good, than to seem pure and be a knave,
Go too, good soles will carry out bad upper leathers,
Tic a bad time I can tell ye, but why were my boys
So passiionate, to weep at the Queens distress.
Alas sir, who could choose, passion me thought
Did make me apprehend strange fautasies, I made
The case mine own, supposed my Mother had bin
Hauled to Prison; some would have pitied her, though
But a mean woman, much more at such a Sovereigns fall.
I Brother, and suppose her Sons, though Royal,
Had seen our mother as we saw her, in Princely compassion
Perhaps they would have done the like.
No doubt, nay Master without offence, it was your fault too,
For in your eye I spied a pearl of pity.
Good faith thou say true, I could doe no less, neither
Doe I discommend ye for it, tic a good bosom where mercy dwells.
I, their Compassion of women shall loose 'em nothing,
If they be but dutiful to their Master, and just to their Dame.
Enough of Ceremony: Whats a clock Barnaby?
The chimes of my belly has gone, it should be past twelve.
Provide dinner Sir, Master, journimen, and Prentices,
One Table serves for all; wee feed as all fellows;
Shut up shop, this is afternoone's holy-day in honour of
My two new Prentices, and this caveat for all, keep your
Bosoms locked, we may be good Christians, but not show it
Abroad, less in our Charity in times of blood
When tyrants Reign, tic dangerous to be good. 
Ce se, cease, it is too loud, thistel-talenoise betrays
Our privacy, which we desire more than thronging Visitants,
What is it you would have of me, isle give my state to any of ye all,
Take it away, and give me here only my self to Govern;
More is too much to impose on my poor weakness.
That is too much Sweet Lady, doe not task your happy virtues
To so hard a proof, there is no strict injunction sealed,
To bar the passage to a Nuptial Bed, that is a statute by
Self will decreed, to make Hymen a bond slave.
O good Sir Hugh, how long have you laid a fruitless siege
Unto a Port that is impregnable; I thank ye, and must needs
Acknowledge my love, if I had such a Lunacy, to be a debt
To you, you have deserved it were it worth Receipt.
Then give desert his due? leave of these nice points of cold
Virginity, and warm affection in the sweet embraces
Of a Noble Hue???band, fitter for your state than this Cloister habit.
So shall you win a second po???er to yours, this Noble Prince
Will with a husband be a strong defence
Against your enemies.
Add to necessity, a proved Loyalty, a love that will not
Claim equality, but bound unto.
No more, no more I pray, while sure my foes would not
This Cruel be, to encounter me at such unequal odds,
So many Soldiers against a silly woman, you cannot call
This Conquest if ye win: I claim the Law of Arms,
A friendly parley ere the Battle join, the time
Let it be now; I crave the friendly Respite of a month,
Mean time, let me hear no more Love Alarms, then will
I either yield ye up the Fort, or stand in the defiance.
So so sir Hugh, there is now some hope.
A promising fair hope, more than my three years service
Had before, a month sweet Beauty, O let it be more to show
My love wears humble Constancy, let it be two, or three.
I take you at your word, it shall be three sir Hugh, in which time,
I locke, by virtue of this hand and tongue, your hand from any
Suite that founds but love, you shall not name the word
Within my Presence, tic breach of peace if ye doe.
You have locked the Closet and keep the Key of it.
Come then sir Hugh, since you have trust with love,
Lets deal with Arms another while, that when our foes
Come, they may perceive that we expect 'em.
My Lifes my Countries, and Isle offered for them:
Three months I go a banished man from hence,
yet this Isle borrow from beauteous excellence,
When my white Plume shall in the field be spread,
My word of courage shall be Winifred. 
Alas good Prince, I can but pity thee,
And grieve because my pittie's pitiless;
Like a misers Alms, God help; without Charity:
For I shall never quite thy labouring love.
No Prince Amphiabell, you have wedded me to a Celestial
Bridegroom, you have taught my ignorance a knowing intellect:
Tic well begun, and who would not persevere
To Love that love that lives, and lasts for ever?
I come to strengthen you fair Winifred, so to continue
I hope I need not, yet not so strictly to Virginity
As to the Christian Faith; for Wedlock is an ordinance from Hey???ven,
Though Junior to the single purity
In this chaste Wedlock, doth the Conquest win,
She knows the tree forbid, it will not sin.
But I have made a vow, think then what danger a relapse
Would be, and you will grant my best Virginity;
And I will further show what Heaven hath done,
To aid my female Resolution, you then will bid
Me cross the book of love, and Read of nothing
But that text above.
You promised me no less.
Isle make it good:
See you this spring, here a pretty stream begins his head,
So late it was a parching drought had ceased our verdant grass,
Here did I sit in Contemplation, lifting to Heaven my Orisons
For present succour, but swifter then my thought,
All Potent Heaven a Miracle had wrought:
That Ba???ren seeming Ground brought forth a Spring
Of such sweet waters, as it had not been cursed in the old worlds
Deluge, I cause it then thus to be dug and framed
By hand of men, and coming still to see it as before,
A Heavenly shape appeared, and blessed it more;
Gave it that power as heaven had so assigned,
To cure diseases, help the lame and blind:
For which poor people their poor thanks to tell, 
Calls as I would not, Winifreds Well.
Tic wonderful!
Hark, these sounds did I hear when that Celestial
Body did appear, let us with Reverence attend aloof,
Your eye or ear shall have a further proof.
With this the sign that holy Christians wear,
When in the Field their Standers they up Rear
Against the foes of Heaven; with this Tip,
That when they receive the Seal Regenerate,
Gives them their Christian name, with this I bless again
This hallowed spring, who seeks Redress with a believing heart,
Here he shall find ease, take power to cure the
Leprous disease, give legs unto the Cripple, blind their Sight,
So that their blessings be received aright:
To misbeleevers turn into a curse,
Who seeks a Cure in scorn, disease him worse;
This Heaven hath done for truth, it is but young,
And needs a Miracle to make her strong,
The time will come when men shall here not see,
Then let the world express fidelity:
Good Prayers have power to fetch an Angel down,
And give a mortal an Immortal Crown.
I need no more confirm ye beauteous Maid,
My self isle task unto some dangerous end,
Isle take disguise, and straight to Verolome
And to the face of persecuting Albon
Our friend and fellow Knight, isle tell his curse
If he persist in Barbarous Cruelty,
Isle throw my life in hazard, if I fall,
Tell Christians keep my true memorial.
Which first leave here with me, you shall doe well,
Here will I keep my Court, here will I dwell,
Here let the Roman Tyrant shed my blood,
Here they shall find me doing all the good
A poor wretch can, what heaven has blessed before,
I as a second means will help the poor.
To that I leave thee most virtuous maid,
Oh might it of Amphiabell bee said;
His good intendment had so happy end,
To make a Christian of a bloody fiend,
I come to try thee A???bon.
Oh may it prove.
Thus wee depart Lady.
Where meet, it is decreed above. 
Nurse?
Madam?
Are the shoo-makers gone that brought my Shopes?
I know not Madam; shall I see?
My shoe wrings me so it goes to the heart of me.
Marry the Gods forbid Lady.
How? does the Gods forbid to Marry wench?
I hope not Madam, I should be sorry they should.
For the hopes that I have yet as old as I am,
Shall I go call your Shoo-maker?
Pre???hee doe, but stay a little;
A little stay may make me look too late.
Thou sai'st true, call 'em then, yet hark, it were as good not,
The fault cannot be mended now:
But you may let him know his fault,
And heel mend it another time.
I thou say true in that, doe, hark are thou goosed.
Venus bless us, what cross measures are in your head!
How's that, you'll not control your Princes will ye?
Is it not stately to be Fantastical, go call the
Shoo-maker yet you shall not neither.
En as you please, Madam, both either, or neither.
You shall doe all, go, yet answer to me first.
Was this young Shoo-maker ere here before?
I think not Madam, tic some young Prentice
Your old shoo-maker of Feversham hath got.
Wast not a pretty youth?
I have seen a worse face in better clothes.
He drew my shoes on finely, quietly.
He would doe well if he knew the true length
Of your foot Madam.
Tic that he wants, he must know it
Call him again.
I will: If you doubt call me back. 
The length of my foot, a pretty figure
If he be a good Anatomist, he may by one quantity
Guess at another, and in the end take the whole bodies length
Ha, some strange fantasies are crept within me, I'm not
Acquainted with, tic a pretty youth if I may credit my
Judgement at the first sight, and whats that to me, and
Why not to me as well as to another: I am alone, and why
Should I fear to tell my self my thoughts, I could love him,
This tastes well of my tongue; Oh, but the coursenes of his condition
Offends my stomach, when I should digest it, some Sectarist
Now to scrwe and wrest a Text from his native sense, would
Help me well in this, what am I, a woman, whats he a men???
Whore's the inequality? my blood Royal, his perhaps ignoble,
Whence springs that fount that runs all Royalty, tic the Sea
It self, the lesser Rivulets and running Brookes are those of
Common sense, yet all doe mix and run in one another,
What are Titles, Honours bestowed ad Regis placitum, should
My Father make that shoo-maker a Lord, then were he Noble,
Yet whore's his blood refine, tush tush, greatness is like a
Glistening stone, more precious in the esteem than in the virtue:
So, I am well called out of my contemplation.
Come sir, you must answer a default to my Lady.
Who made my shoes sir, they pinch me?
Indeed sweet Lady you must pardon this young man, it is
His fault, he has not yet the true handling of his work, hee
Cannot go through stich yet, I hope your Ladyship knows that
I have yorkt as well for you, as any Cordwainer in Kent
Or Canterbury could doe, and for a tunable heel I think
I have plaid my part.
A tunable heel, I prithee English it.
A creak Madam, for a Musical creak, ne'er a boy in Feversham
Yet went beyond me: in time my Junior will doe pretty well,
Hee'??? raw yet, at the change of his voice heel creak far
Better than he does yet.
And why was the creak of shoes first devised sir?
O for great cause for sooth, to hide faults, for if a gentlewoman
Such as your self, should chance to play too loud of her wind
Instrument, the creak of the shoe will cover the noise.
You're pleasant sir, and what is this a Prentice?
Alas Madam, I would be loath to discredit the young man,
Hoe's but a col??? yet, a subsi??????r as they say, I brought him along to the
Court to show him fashions, and to instruct him how to handle a
Ladies Leg, to draw home his work, and teach him his nill ultra
How far he may go.
And how fir's that, which are your bounds?
Non ultra crepitum as they say, this once learned, hee
Shall come alone hereafter.
You have done well sir, and so no doubt will he by my
Instructions; whats thy name?
Crispinus Madam.
Were thy Parents of this profession?
I have forgot Madam
Is it so long since thou lost them?
But since these last wars Lady, yet as I remember they were
Better then my present profession.
He speaks well, sure there is some hard characters which I
Understand not: I like not these shoes, you must make an easier part?
I'll doe my best to mend it Madam.
You promise well, let them be of your making then, that I
May see how near you'll come to your promise.
Alas Madam, heel pinch your toes if I doe not instruct him,
Hoe's but a cobbler yet.
No matter, Isle hazard his good will, to morrow let me have
An other pair, and bring them your self.
I shall attend your Highness.
Come hither view my foot well, you must be better
Acquainted with it.
Is it not here they pinch you Madam?
No it is a little higher.
Away, away for shame, did I teach you that carriage?
Now sir what will you doe?
Teach him the true behaviour, hear, level me a leg
Here, now stretch him out-right upon your thigh, and then
You may come to your work finely, I have found the fault now
You are pinched in the very cranny.
You have hit it Sir.
I told you so, a man of a longer standing will do
Always better then a puny, he shall mend it I ????????? you Ma???
I hope he will: well, fail ????????? ???omorrow,
I will not Madam, my duty to your Highness.
If he doe Madam, you know your old man, for ya???ke and Seam, and handling ware in his kind, you cannot put your egg in a better workman's hands though I say it sweet Lady. Due gat a whee. 
There is an Idol or bed in his eye, that I could ever worship
And if I should, sure he would bless me, love and folly,
Inseperate and joint companions, you are too violent upon
Me now; to beat affection with such down right strokes
On a Mechanic drudge, a base, how base? how base? is there no President
That great Ladies have yoked their underlings in fellowship?
I take some counsel, on it Nurse.
Shall I call the shoo-maker again Lady?
Out witch, dost know my thoughts: the shoo-maker, and why
The shoo-maker? I thought of him, why call him?
Nay I know not Madam.
Thor't in love with him, I believe thou art, if I were certain
That thou were so base, I'd banish thee my presence; nay,
My Father should banish thee the bounds of Brittany, out old doting fool.
Madam why chide you me? I will not love your shoo-maker.
My shoo-maker minion.
Does he not make your shoes? therefore your shoo-maker:
But think not Lady I can be so base being so near your presence,
To love such a groom, if but for your credit sake.
Yet as great as you have doted on as base as he.
Yet that's no president for me, I have known Ladies remove
Their stable grooms into their bed-chambers, and lower offices then
That too: o'twas a policy, and hereafter may be in fashion for
Great Ladies to match with their inferiors, because the woman
Adding no dignity to the man, nor loosing her own, still keeps
Supremacy, he waits as dutiful on her trencher as when
He was her servant.
Hast thou History for this?
Twenty of mine own knowledge, that I have seen in my days.
????????? my closet, then thou shalt tell me some, if thou
P????????? ????????? again, if I find president Isle
Follow it, (Isle else begin my self,) if there be none
Let after Ladies coat me down for one. 
Thou constant friend what title shall I give, due to thy merit;
It is more then a friendly part to fetch from hell, friends turn
At misery, they abide long that part at prison doors, the
Best lasts but till death, but thou hast stood the renovation of
A second life; what may be given him for an epithet
That of a tyrant makes a profelite?
You cannot add unto the happiness Amphiabell hath found
In honoured Albon, joint with my own Salvation, I desire your
Partnership Christianity, which as a second means
I have confirmed.
I am your poor Disciple, my tutor Mr. but friend I call you by
No other name, although I derogate from your Princely Office
Cause I will follow you, if not proceed, ever through the
Jaws of persecution; I will not trust your person to the danger:
Let this help your haste, although Prince of Wales, yet in the
Course you take you may chance need
This drudging god of fools to help you speed.
He take your love for what I shall not need I shall bestow where
There is need enough, with this memorial I leave you Sir.
????????? but this Emblem of a Christian, not as a thing material
????????? wail you, but for the strengthening of your memory, you shall
At sight of this still keep in mind, all those instructions I have
Read to you; and verueous Lord, what in your power and greatness
You may afford unto distressed Christians: be free in Charity.
Let me approve without a boast, the action of my love; this in the
Open face of tyranny, Isle daring wear: and in approbation of
Such an Alter, Sacrifice my blood: but sweet friend hear of me,
Behold it not: I wo'd not have you lost.
You shall prevail.
Put me in your prayers, that mercies white hand may cross
The debt book wherein I stand above my height in gore, this
Hand hath done an act of bloody persecution.
Trouble not your bosom, your end shall crown
The bad that's past, with a more full renown. 
Where is Lord Albon?
Here Maxeminus.
What, thy Sword sleeping in thy scabbard Knight? thou are???
Too gentle in thy Stewardship, these Hidra headed Christians
More increase thy persecution; speak Prince of Knights, for
Such an honour we bestowed on thee: why art not wading in a
Sreame of blood? true Romans use to swim in such a flood.
But I am an English man.
Yet substitute to Rome.
Not.
Is this Albon?
Not persecuting, but Christian Albon.
See great Emperor, in your face he wears, the daring
Badge of Christianity.
Yes Emperor, read in this book, if by this abstract
Thou can understand, the Volume is within.
It is as we suspect, that painful Schoolmaster Am. is heer???,
Make swift and careful search through Virulome,
Lop him and the head is perished.
You'll search too late.
Where is he traitor?
Gone, I have conveyed him hence.
Why did thou not fly for thine own safety?
No, I have deserved to feel a Tyrants sword, because my sword
Was glazed in tyranny; I am in debt for blood, make thou it even,
Tyrants and fiends are officers to heaven.
Hale him to the Temple, or force him kneel unto our Roman god, or kill the henticke.
Kill me first, or I shall spurn thine Idol.
If he recant not, torture, no mercy show.
A recreant friend worse than an open foe.
I am blessed in curses, now Albon shall be tried,
Man is gold oar, when he is purified 
A second limb is from our body cut, in Albons relapse; it is
That pedant Prince, that seminary Knight Amphiabell, that
Poisons thus the current of our State: Bassianus, with two Roman
Legions pursue that Cambriam sectarist Amphi: his flight
Will be to Wales, lay desolate the confines of that superstitious
Virgin, that with her sorceress devotion works miracles,
By which she draws Christians, faster then we can kill 'em:
Let her feel our vengeance.
As Max. wills, where Caesar bids strike Bassianus kills.
What means this?
A messenger from Dioclesian.
Fair and Royal greetings, with them entreating great Max.
Some present succour in this Galley Wars, Alaric King of
Goaths hath entered France, with odds of strength against Dioclesian;
A breathing truce is yet concluded on, until the Callends of
The following month, in which there is a day prefixed for battle,
For this he craves thy aid from Brittany, that Romans still
May write victory???.
We, or our best of help he might command, by virtue of that
Love he lent to us: Rutullus, collect 10000. ablest Britains
By our express command, let them be mixed with two Roman Bands,
With both pass the Sea, and in our name greet Di???whole: Say we
Doe wish our personal Arm with him, did not increasing troubles
Stay us here: so should it be; the rest weal write to him,
Rutullus haste, this must not be delayed: Bassianus to thy charge,
My self to mine, our works are one to scourge the Christians,
Blood is the theme we treat in Roman hand,
Weal write the comment large o'er all the Land. 
Nay prithee tell it on Nurse.
Good faith I am weary Madam, I never knew my tongue
Would tire before: you have not let me close mine eyes to night.
Did not I watch with thee?
But I am old, when I was young, love would have kept me waking.
So could a young Bachelor yet, widow, I prethe finish but
Thy last discourse amongst all thy Cotations of men made;
Great that were ignoble borne, this I most desire; was
Dioclesian joint caesar with my Father, that oft hath made
Rome gorgeous with his triumphs, but of so mean descent
As thou reports?
A Scriveners son, no better verily, there's many Bonds yet in Rome uncanceld, where hoe's subscri'd a public notary.
And yet is that no blemish to his son?
Not at all Madam, nay I could come nearer were I sure it
Would not offend your Grace.
My Grace be pledge, out, prithee speak freely?
As I have heard great Maximinus Father, your Fathers
Father Madam, was but even a Smith, that with his labour
Hammered out his living.
It is true, I have heard my Father boast it, yet had I forgot it.
Oh Majesty! thou may mest the memory, it loses all Records
That are beneath us, now no more: prithee see if my
Shoo-maker be come yet, Isle walk abroad perhaps to take the air.
It is now my every mornings work to watch the coming of
Your shoo-maker: pray Venus my Lady tread not her shoes awry,
She changes her shoes so often. 
I have not slept to night, I shall be tame if I be if I be kept th?????? ???2+ pages missing???
My former words, I say thou art a Suitor to my woman?
Madam, in this revived memory I protest.
Thou shalt not swear and lye, Isle make it plain
To thy confession; art not her shoo-maker?
Yes Madam.
Then her Suitor; I am a Roman sir, and speak that tongue;
Is not a Suitor a Shoo-maker?
My trade, in that sense I confess it Lady,
And so far I am a Suitor to your Highness.
I would thou were, in the plain English sense,
Thou should have then few nays.
I trouble you Madam.
Not: since I am so far in discourse with you, Isle bring it
To some end: suppose shoo-maker my woman did love you, and
Would have me to speak for her, what answer should I have?
Madam, this intercourse, you have vouchsafed so kindly with
Your Servant, somewhat inboldens me.
Be bold, and say what answer shall I have?
Shoe's old.
Old! this is a new answer; will not her dignity, wealth,
And Estate, make her young again?
I could not choose by supposition so, if I durst speak freely.
You would have one young then I perceive?
Since I am free to speak, I would Lady; young for my eye, and
Rich to mend my state: but alas Madam, I am a prentice and must
Not wed.
For doubling of your prentiship?
Nay, I might treble that doubling, for to a wife
I bind me to a perpetual prentiship.
So it were one you loved, it were pleasing servitude?
I think it were Madam.
Dare you venture on a wife of my choosing?
If both parties were agreed Lady.
That's no venture, Isle promise she shall be young, good
Parentage, honest, let her beauty commend it self.
It pleases Majesty some times to make sport with humble
Vassalage, so doe you with me Lady.
You are too hard of belief, I mean plainly, I have???
Some skill in Magic, what would you give
To see her amply personated in a glass, that must be your wife?
I would venture a chiding to stay so long: what my this mean?
I could by Metroposcopie read thy fate here in thy fore-head;
By Chyromancie find it in thy Palm, but these are petty
Arts, no Isle show thee by speculatory magic, her face
In this glass; kneel sir, for it must be done with reverence
I tell you: now tell me what thou see?
I see a shadow Madam.
It is but a shadow, hold up thy right hand and look again,
What see thou now? any substance yet?
I know not Madam, I am enchanted with your Magic
How lik'st her now, has she a good face?
Tic very well made Madam.
Who does she resemble?
Your self, I think Lady.
I, shees very like me.
I would she were not.
Why would not have her like me?
Because no like's the same.
It is too long to dally, away with shadows, and imbra??????
The substance, in truth I love thee; nay, doe not fear???Isle
Share all dangers with thee.
Danger Madam, were she browed like Nemesis,
Tuskt with Scorpions stings, as keen for spoil as an
Incensed fury, I would stand in this quarrel against her
Open throat: but doe you not dally with a poor wretch?
Wrong not my love with doubt, look Isle pay thee back
Thy duty given to me, you are my better by virtue of my
Honourable love, I make thee here my head: Thou shalt
No more descend unto my foot, here thy work shall be,
Whilst in thine eyes two wanton Cupids skip,
Thou shalt lay Velvet touches on my lip.
Faith Madam, your lips deserve better than your foot,
That's two pild velvet, this must needs be three:
Nay since you have raised me above the instep
Isle reach at the highest now.
Yet ell's not done, two pair of Rosie cheeks shall tie them on:
Shall I not need to fear thee?
Not, Isle quell your fears, for now Isle put my life
Into your hands, to manifest the virtue of my love, for
Heaven hath been a motive to your love: For know sweet,
It is no base contract, but of the Royalst Blood in Brittany:
Love would not so have forced you to an error, Crispinus
Is but borrowed, a poor shroud to keep my life in, Off is my
Own, the youngest Son to the late vanquished Alured,
Altered my Brother, both supposed slain, yet live within a
Parallel disguise; I am no richerthan I was before,
But in that clouded Title.
If I could love thee better than I did I should, but in truth
I cannot, but for the safest guardian of thy life, it is in my
Heart, and that shall be plucked out ere it be found to harm thee.
What's then to be done?
Our instant Marriage, that's the surest way, hazard a
Chiding for thy negligence, and linger here about the
Court to night, to morrow morning in some humble
Habit weal steal the guardian; it shall be my task
????????? provide the Church-man.
There shall not want a Bridegroom.
May I ever lye alone if there want a Bride, and that's a
????????? that I should be loath to endure, mean time be this the contract,
????????? the word of troth.
The morning and a Priest shall make one of both.
There goes my heart.
Isle keep it till to morrow.
Shut night, sweet Phebe on thy swiftest Arrow. 
What pretty flies in loves sweet web doe lurk,
I must be Married, then unto my work. 
My three months banishment I have observed,
And now the dated limit gives me leave to re-aproach my
Interdicted Saint; once more sweet love I doe invoke thy
Power, to bless my poor unspotted Sacrifice, the offering
Of a loving loyal heart: This is the customary retirement
Where daily she frequents, this speaks her name, and speaks
Her virtues in a bubbling murmur, which many ages after her
Ascent up to that glorious Asterisine above, shall keep
And tell to long Posterities, within this liquid Oracle shall be
Read, heaven wrought a miracle for Winifred, here Isle 
Await, and while my tongue takes rest, solace my thought.
Return and give notice to Amphiabell, that I am walked
Abroad, as he entreated.
I will Madam.
His company is sweet fellowship; wanton folly, thou hast
No harbour in Amphiabell, but high and holy meditations,
Rare virtues in a Prince, the example's good, and I will follow
It; yea if thou goosed into the Militant Field of Martyrdom.
Ha, who's that? this is not the company that my desires doe with???
Nay stay sweet Virgin, rather let me leave the place,
Whose presence offends the place; yet, if you vouchsafe,
Offend I may by your construction, but not by willing heart.
I fear your method sir, would I might err in false
Supposition, speak and Isle tell you.
My three months exile is expired.
And you have well observed it?
Then give me leave to re-atempt my suite, which I have
Kept a painful sojourner in my unquiet bosom.
It was your own tyranny to add to my injunction, I craved
But one month, and you would proffer three.
It was folly in my duty.
Which still you doe persi???t in, for since you left me
I am contract and wedded.
Am I out rivaled?
War not with heaven sir, to that is tied my Nuptial
Gordian, within you house ofstarres the Bridegroom sits,
And there the Spousal chamber is prepared, you are the
Golden Himoneall flames, whose spherick Music,
Chaste Hallelujahs sing, to celebration of my Virgin rights:
Oh labour not then to divorce me thence, since all the fruit
Will be but vain expense: my love is fixed, and we have
But one love; you seek for that below that's gone above.
You are too obstinate.
O chide your self sir, it is your own sin, you are too obstinate
To persevere against a decree of Fate: be this the final answer to
Your suite; if ever mortal man have attribute of Winifreds Husband,
'T shall be Sir Hugh, if it be debt to any'tis your due.
A desperate debt, hopeless of recovery.
And as the test to your fair seeming love, whether it Noble
Were or counterfeit, by its best virtue here I charge you Sir,
To move no further questions at this time, for if you speak
I will not answer you; you may in silence stay:
Thus doe I turn setting the world a part,
Here fix mine eyes, and with mine eyes my heart.
Thou gilded poison, my tongue is silent, but my unquiet
Thoughts will still take leave, to think of thy perverse
Unkind disdain; Isle think thee peevish, and blame all
Thy Sects for thy self sin, for thou were all to me;
Vanish all State, and Wales bow to the yoke of Tyrants
Servitude, no defensive stroke shall this Arm lift
To save me from thy thrale: rest there regard less honour,
And take a fall before thy pride; hence forth some
Humble mean, that will afford but merit to my pain,
Shall be my lives traffic, Isle never mind
This, or too fickle, or too cruel kind,
But thus conclude, for thee I prove accursed,
Extreme in both, thou art both best and worst. 
Whose there Amphiabell?
Yes virtuous Lady.
Thou abidest still.
To death: Christians tire not till they be out of breath,
Life labours here, at death the wage doth come,
Which Tyrants pay in Crowns of Martyrdom.
We forage unresisted: soft who are these?
Cease first, and then examine.
Two, that will neither fly, nor resist your force.
Then you will surely dye Amphiabell.
Yes.
And the holy Virgin.
So, unhappy Tyrant.
The Triumphs of our Wars; here pursuit shall stay,
In your surprise we have achieved the day.
Ring out your triumphs loud, it is a large boast,
You have gained much, and we have nothing lost.
Thou art a traitor Capital to Rome, from whence thy
Knightly honours were derived, it was thy seditious
Heresy that wrought the wrack of honoured Albon, even
This Lady hast thous seduced, a merciful sommons now calls
His last to thee, turn unto Rome, and worship give unto
Our Golden gods.
No, I will not; when I crave mercy, give it.
Thou debuty tyrant, this place is hallowed; doe not awake
the thunder, if it strike, the bolt will fall down
Perpendicular, and strike thee under mercy.
Ha, ha, ha; what pretty dreams these Christians
Apprehend: They say your well is very Sovereign to cure the
Itch, I have got a scab, to day Isle try the virtue of your
Virgin water, it is good for sore eyes too, first not? mine
Are some thing Rhumaticke.
Doe, play with Lightning till it blasts thee.
Oh! here's hell, witchcraft, my eyes are lost, this sorceress
Poole hath tan away my sight: witch He find thee out,
And break thy Magic, by drawing of thy blood.
Has wounded me.
Lay hold upon him, he will doe more mischief else.
Guide me to the devil.
Thou art going right blind-fold, hold fast his hands, I will be
Charitable unto my persecutors: now see the change,
Virtue, abused turns unto damage more,
By help of heaven thus I thine eyes restore.
Ha, is it day again?
Wilt thou understand from whence thy succour comes?
From Apollo, and Iupiter, the gods of Rome,
Who would not see a witch abuse their creature, away with
Her to the fire till she be burnt and dead, mine eyes
Will stand in fear within my head.
Let them be guarded unto Verolome, where first they shall
Behold the dreadful sufferings of revolted Albon,
As you look on, and see his tortures please, follow destruction.
Come constant friend, now comes the wished day,
The path to bliss is through a thorny way. 
One out of my house my Lord? I am the Princes Shoo-maker,
Will not that excuse me?
My Commission's strict, let me see your house-hold.
I know not which to part with believe me sir,
But you shall see them all, Ralph, Barnaby, Crispinus,
Crispianus, appear my boys?
Look, here's most of my store.
The worst of these will serve; but here's not all.
Barnaby, whore's Barnaby?
That knave will still be backward: why Barnaby.
Oh, oh, oh.
Why how now Barnaby, what fallen sick of the sudden Ba???? Oh Master, I have such a singing in my head, my toes are Cramped too.
What from head to foot already, where lies thy pain? Here, here about my heart Mr. I have an Issue here too,
Oh Master, if you did but feel what a breath comes out, You would stop your nose in it.
Come, come, you are a lazy knave, you must be pr??????t for a Sold?????????
Oh dame, Isle confess and be hanged rather then Isle bee pressed.
The Drums and Trumpets will revive thee man.
Alas, if I hear any noise I'm a dead man.
Ralph, what say thou, wilt thou serve the King?
I cannot serve a better Mr. if the King does entertain me, Isle doe him the best service that I can.
I beseech you sir let me excuse the rest: I have a mind
To meet a foe in the field, meethinks I could perform
Some worthy act, that at my back return,
You should be proud to say my Servant did it.
Ye, say thou so boy? I like thy forwardness,
But I'd be loath to leese thee yet.
Alas man the boys young, his tender limbs are scarce Well jointed yet, let Ralph, or Barnaby, undertake that task, It is sitter for either.
Oh a little aqua-composita???: good dame, I have a quaking Ague come upon me.
A fever lurden have you not? you lazy knave you,
Wilt thou let a boy out dare thee?
Good dame persuade him not against his heart, such brave designs As Soldiers undergo, should not be forced, but free and voluntary.
A Coward in a Camp more spoils an Army by faint example of his frozen blood, than a full Squadron of the daring'st foes Surprising ???t advantage.
A forward spirit,
Such a fair promise cannot want performance:
Thou shalt be my choice; accept thy presse-money, and for the hopes
That I expect from thee, thy Rank shall not be common.
Alack, alack, the Boy is forward, but far unable; Sir pray spare him and take either of these.
Oh, I have a stitch in my Elbow here; a little Parmacadi???s.
A false stitch I warrant thee, the Wars will pick it out.
Peace Sickle???; Boy, since thou art so forward, I will not stay
The freedom of thy spirit; so I might hinder thee from better hopes
Than my poor substance could endow thee with: go,
And good fortune keep thee company; if thou return, thou shalt
Be welcome still. I must be willing though against my will,
To leave thee Boy.
And welcome shalt thou be to thy Dame boy; if there come but a leg on thee back, the worst member thou hast, shall be welcome to me; lame or blind, if thou come back, thou shalt want no Hospi???tall-pention as long as I live.
Gramercy for that Sis; Isle fell all the shoes in my Shop Before my lame Soldier shall be kept in an Hospital.
Your loves are Parent-like, not as to a servant, but a child:
The Heavens in safety keep you; my prayers in duty shall be
Here at home, when my bodie's distant. I beseech you Sir,
Commend me to my Brother ??? Raph, Barnaby farewell.
Farewell good Crispian. I shall never see thee more.
Tush, fear not; nay, if ever I doe return, Isle bring home Stories that we will turn to Meeter, &amp; sing away our work with 'em.
Farewell Crispianus.
Master and Dame, once more I bid farewell, It is brave to dye where Trumpets ring the Knell.
Come Crispianus.
Well, go thy ways, and take the kindest youth with thee, that ever set foot in the stirrup.
How now Barnaby, art any thing better yet?
I am somewhat better than I was Master; I doe begin to feel my self better and better.
Oh you are a cunning counterfeit knave sirrah.
O Mistress, there is always policy in Wars as well as blows: if it be good sleeping in a whole skin, it must needs be bad sleeping in a broken one; and he that cannot sleep well, it is a sign he cannot drink well; and he that does not drink well, never digests his meat well; and he that digests not his meat well, it is a sign he he has not a good stomach; and hee that he has not a good sto???macke, is not fit for the Wars. I did think it better to stay at home truly Master.
The end is, thou had rather work than fight Boy: I had rather thou should too: but I wonder I hear not of Crispinus yet.
Truly man I am afraid hoe's pressed at Canterbury.
All the way twixt this and Canterbury will not afford me
An excuse sufficient for tarrying so long out of my Masters house:
The truth I dare not tell, it were better lye than confess my
Lying with the Emperors Daughter, though the case be honest,
Being my Wife: Well, somewhat it must be, I know not what yet;
If I endure a rough chiding for my pains, it is but sauce to sweet Meates.
Look, look Wife, hoe's come: why how now Crispinus, How comes it you have stayed so long?
O you are a fine loitering youth, what, lye out of your Ma???sters house!
Your pardon once good Dame, I was in no bad company.
Who knows that sir? you frighted both your Master &amp; me ??? We thought you had been pressed for a Soldier, as your Brother is.
So now my Dame he has helped me to an excuse: Why truly Dame that was my fear; I was sane to shroud my self??? in the Court all night for fear of the press.
Nay then it was well done Boy, I would not have lost thee too.
I, I, the flower's plucked, but the weed remains; thy brother that's gone, would not have served me so.
Peace good Eve, no more words, the excuse is honest.
I, I, you'll mar 'em all: but he had better been a sleep.
Well Cozen Hugh, I will doe my best to instruct thee:
But you must take heed there be no Turky-cocks in your work.
When I understand the English Sir, Isle observe you.
Your Turky-cock is as much as to say, Coble, coble, coble; You must take heed of cobbling.
Come on good fellow, Isle teach thee a good Trade:
A Gentleman, if he want better means, may live well by it;
And this Isle promise thee after some term of years to make thee free:
Or if thou dye, and that's a Christians best
Isle see thy bones laid quietly to rest. 
Advance the Roman Eagle, and command
Our armed Legions to troop close, and stand.
The Romans are in fight, Drums beat a parley.
Death blur their parley, we'll not answer
The thunder of their Drums: our Eagle shall not nasal by base
Ravens, but to peck out their eyes; our Swords shall answer
The Thunder of their Drums, the Roman Caesar holds scorn
To parley with such servile Nations, as you the barbarous Vandals
And Gods, poor frozen Snakes, that from the Northern cold
Creep to the warmth of the Suns Western fires,
Troubling our fertile Lands, and like starved sheep,
You spoil the Countries with a line you keep in Regions beggarly.
Dioclesian, hear me.
What croaks the Raven?
Proud Roman this: if here thou longer stay,
He will peck thine Eagles eyes out, make thee a prey
To his sterne Gripe, whose dismal beak now sings the sudden ruin
Of two barbarous Kings.
Insulting Tyrant, stop thy scandalous breath,
Thy blood shall find us Kings and Soldiers both:
We are a swelling Sea, and our own Barks,
Not large enough to bound us, are broke forth
Like a resistless Torrent to o'rewhelme and drown
In blood all Nations that withstand us.
Thou see already Germany is ours; so shall fair France be,
At least those parts that lye upon the Rhine, and fertile Burgundy ???
Which if thou grant before the Battles join,
We will retire, and leag???e with thee and Rome.
Ha, ha, ha; must Lyons be enforced to league with Wolves.
If thou deny it,
By the glorious Sun, and all the Deities our men adore,
We'll forage up to Rome and Italy, and fit
In triumph in your Capitol: the Vandals and the Goaths shall carve
Their fems as deep as now the Romans doe their Names:
Raise up as many Trophies, and as high,
In brazen pillars of their victory.
Poor Flies, behold the Eagle, and give o'er;
Strive not to cope with strength beyond your power,
For us she spreads her wings as far and bright,
As in a Day the Sun rides with his light,
And that's the universal Globe of Earth:
Europes proud throat we tread on:
Africa and Afia our Eagles talents gripe,
The Lords of Rome fathom both Land and Deep.
New Lords new Laws renew,
As you of others, we'll be Lords of you.
We'll hear no more; call up the Britain Soldiers
Our Brother Maximinus sent unto our aide, let 'em begin the battle,
Fight like Romans: Remember this, your enemies are base;
Let your Swords work like Sides confound these swarms,
And sweep these Locusts hence with conquering Arms. 
These Romans fight like devils.
Spirits infernal could not charge so hotly;
Disgrac't in the onset: Counsel Roderick, what's to be done?
Our men sly, not able to endure 'em.
Knit all our Nerves in one;
Renowned Huldricke hye to thy Troops,
And with thy vali???ned Goth??? assail the Romans
In their hinmost Flanks, and break into their maine Battalion;
Whilst here I stay, and hold the Britains play.
I like it well; divided Arms thrive best,
This day weal climb the losty Eagles nest. 
Turn thee base Vandal.
Roman it is thee I seek.
And thou hast found me;
He teach thee speak the Roman Language.
And thou shalt learn from me the Art of War,
And Discipline of Arms the Vandals teach.
A Fencer tic agreed.
The School trick thou shalt learn at first blow. 
What art thou that hast saved me?
A Soldier: What art thou so faved?
An Emperor.
Thou art saved then by a Warlike Britain soldier:
And had ???as many lives as drops of blood,
???de spend them all to doe great Caesar good.
I thank thee: follow thy fortunes, and go on;
The gods of Rome fit on thy weapon still:
The battle ended, see me in my Tent.
I will. 
Immortal gods!
How crept a Kingly spirit into a breast so low!
How now, how goes the day? 
Bloody and dismal; Huldrick K. of Gods entered our Ranks,
And like a Whirlwind, sweeps, and beats down our maine,
Battalion, ferzing by force the Roman Eagle.
How Traitor?
Believe it fir it is lost, and now in triumph
O'er his Plume she claps her wings on high,
With echoing shout of present victory.
The Roman gods forbid: Let a Trumpet call up the Britains to recover it. 
Yield thee proud Roman, the sable Ravens plume ???ath struck thy Eagle blind, and blasted Rome.
Hand of thou barbarous slave;
I still can boast my state's Imperial.
Tut, that Title's lost, thou art now
Within my power: fly to King Roderick,
And glad his ears with news of what you see,
And with our Drums proclaim the victory.
Base Goth look up, and see here hovers Eagle Winged victory, recovered from thy troops.
S'death lost again.
Fight Warlike Britains, free your Emperor.
We shall, or dye:
This holds the Gods death; this thy liberty.
Twice is my life indebted to thy valour:
Admired Soldier, if I win the day,
Never had Britain Soldier such a pay
As thou shalt have.
Talk not of debts, or pay, let's hence and fight;
As long as I have breath Isle hold your right.
Soldiers troop close, our task is not yet done;
Isle keep your Eagle till the battaile's won.
Keep it with fame.
Even to my latest breath. 
The glory's thine, thou hast saved me twice from death.
This Britains are all Devils,
And amongst them there's one master Devil,
That bears the face of a base Common soldier;
Yet on his horns he tosses up our Vandals.
Now, what News? 
Roderick fly, and save thy life;
Huldrick the King of Gods is slain.
I out go him in life, he me in fame:
In spite weal after him with glorious wings,
A bloody field is a brave Tomb for Kings.
Hazard not all at one cast, since you see
The Dice runs high against ye; but give way,
Set not the board when you see fortune play:
Winning the maine no safety it is to fight.
How then?
Over the Rhine my Lord make speedy flight;
The wheel of Chance may turn, and the dice run
For us to get, what now our foes have won.
Now to the Royal hand of Caesar I resign
The high Imperial Ensign of great Rome;
And with it, this wilde ???usked Boar, the stubborn Vandal,
Snar'd in the toils, and conquered by this sword;
I could have served his head up at your board:
But since for glory, more than blood we strive,
I'd rather have a Lyon ???an alive.
Noble thou art, as valiant,
And this day thy only sword the greater half
Hath won, and we must pay thy merits.
Whats thy name?
Crispianus sir.
Of what birth or fortunes.
You may read them here, writ on my bosom sir:
A common Soldier, yet were my Parents
Good and generous, they dead, and I down sinking in my state,
As others doe, I swore to cross the Fate
that crossed me: and when all hopes else did fade,
I got my living by an honest trade:
A Shoemaker my Lord, where merrily,
With frolic mates, I spent my days, till when,
Being pressed to wars amongst my Countrymen,
Hither I came, and here my prize is played,
For Britains honour, and my Masters trade:
This Vandal is my Prisoner: frown not sir,
Great looks can ne'er put down a Shoemaker.
Your fortune rises sir, and I must bow:
I was ne'er in the Shooemakers stocks till now.
Renowned Crispianus, royal thanks shall to our brother
Maximinus fly, for sending such a Soldier.
Kneel down, and rise a Britain Knight;
Hence forth bear Arms and Shield;
Thou hast won thy honour truly in the field.
Besides our gift, the ransom of this King
I freely give; and that thy same may sing a lofty note,
Back to thy Country lead these Britain Soldiers,
Over whom I make thee head; and to the Emperor
Maximinus thou shalt bear such Letters from our self,
As he shall rear and swell thine honours,
And when we in France have laid
These Whirle-windes that now shake the State,
Weal cross the seas to Britain after thee.
The gods with Garlands crown thy victory.
What ransom you set down Isle truly pay,
And drow my forces back to Germany,
There to confine our selves; the Vandals knee
Now humbly bows to the Roman Empery.
And that obedience Roderick weal embrace.
Lead Crispianus to receive the Ransom:
Vandal and Gods; nay, Rome her self shall swear,
She never met so brave a Shoemaker. 
Be comforted my dear Leodice.
How can I want sweet comfort, having thee? alack, that
Pleasure stolen, being back returned, should taste so sower:
It seems a shallow Ford, when first it is tried;
But when the depth we found,
It is a gulf of raging whirlpools found.
I know it Princely Love, and fear the event;
Love in the paths of danger ever went:
The morning flames of our desires burn bright,
And shall doe still in scorn of fortunes spite,
If you but feed the fire.
O me! it is this I fear,
The burden in my womb our deaths doe bear.
Why should thou fear the knot our hearts hath tide?
Had heavens strength to it; and heaven will sure provide
For those??? whose names and faiths are written there.
What veil can now be drawn to hide our cares,
Or keep this secret from our Fathers ears.
Of our stolen marriage?
Stay, lets devise.
It must be a thick cloud darkens the Sun:
This day my Father sits to cast deaths doom
Upon the Christians: and that doom I know
The fruit this Land brings next, must be my woe.
I prithee peace, the clock of misery goes always
Too true: yet let me f?????? it now.
Dearest I will.
Doe this then; if the Emperor call for thee,
Besicke and keep thy chamber,
Until I get some place for thy delivery.
Swear to me one thing first.
What ever thou desire.
Then as thou art Princely bred, I charge thee swear,
That as above the world I hold thee dear,
Thou wilt not leave me, whatsoever Thunder
My Father throws at thee:
Kings frowns can be but death:
From thee Isle never part unto my latest breath.
By all the truths that man ere swore by,
No force of strength shall part us.
Peace, no more, Isle ask thee pardon for this base
Mistrust: kiss thy gentle cheek, loving and mild:
I know thou can not leave thy wife and child.
O me, I shall forget my present safety:
Dear heart stand by.
Nurse, Who's within there? Nurse.
Anon sweet mouse.
Sweet honey Nurse,
If the Emperor my father asks for me,
Say I am not well, and keep my chamber.
You Shoemaker a word,
Yet more work for your Shoemaker, well, well, You play the wag, and I the lye must tell.
I fear me there's a shoe wrings her in the instep, of my young Shooe-makers making: such fellows as hee cannot choose but bee slippery companions; for first they know the length of a Ladies foot, and then they have such tricks to smooth her shoe, and tickle her sole; as I protest, if I were a Shoemaker my self, it would make my teeth water: what a sweet thing it is, to have a round sweet, plump, de???licit Calve of a Ladies leg lye rolling on his thigh, whilst he lies smoothing her fine silk stocking, slips his hand to her garters, and sometimes higher byr'lady; I have been served so my self: there's ma???ny a Gallant, I can tell you, would give all the shoes in's shop to have a shooe-makers office in a morning: Well, well, I say nothing, but I suspect something: Pity of me, shoe's as broad behind as I am, and round enough before: I doubt me he has made her a pair of
short-heel'd shoes with a turne-over: Come sweet Mouse, have you given instructions to your Shoemaker? Why what a fellow art thou, can not find a Last to fit her yet?
Yes Nurse, he has fitted me now.
That's well:
You must be careful sirrah, you must take true measure,
And fit her to ahaire, I charge you.
I warrant you Mistress.
Mistress! gods me; I am a Madam sir knave, though I am a Nurse, I can tell you: Go too, learn your duty, and you shall work to me too: when you have done with my Lady, you shall take up my leg too: Come sweet honey. 
Ade??? my comfort.
Even so my heart goes from me:
O what waves swim Lovers in ??? of fears, of hopes, of cares,
Of discontents, terrors, and despairs.
A thousand fears doe now my poor heart shake,
What medcine's best? Counsel, and that Isle take.
Come, come, an you be men, make haste:
You it is a hanging matter; the Emperor and all the Prisoners
Are gone by already.
Stay, stay, here's our fellow Crispin, let's take him with us. Wilt thou go along Crispin?
Whither should I go? prithee tell me,
What make you all at Canterbury?
Not to buy the Cat a Bell Crispin, but to make loyter-pins.
For this day Boy, we have made holy at Feversham,
Shut up shop, thrown by our shooe-thred, and washed our faces:
And now my Master and Dame, and all of us are come
To see the Emperor, and the Christians that must dye to day.
They say there's a fine young Queen amongst them:
Prithee go along with us.
In sadness I cannot.
In madness now I care not:
For our shoes are made of running leather,
And therefore we'll gallop no man knows whether.
Farewell Crispine: shalt see my Dame come chasting this away anon,
Because we ran away from her: Come fellow Hugh,
Thou art so sad now, I prithee be merry. 
Isle follow straight, although to meet my ruin;
The Princess Winifred is doomed to die,
And I in death will bear her company. 
Misery of times when Kings doe kill,
Not armed by Law to doe it, but by will.
From these deep woes that my poor Country bears
Heaven save the Queen my Mother, Fates are just,
And till the thread be spun, none turn to dust.
Fie, fie, fie;
Heaven for thy pity how am I used to day!
Here be youths indeed to run away, and leave me in this order.
Doe I keep one, two, three, four, and five journey-men,
Besides Prentices, uprising and downe-lying,
And doe they all bob me of this fashion?
How now, art thou there Crispine? that's well:
Did you see your fellows?
Yes my good Dame; they are all before you.
Then Isle have you before me too, but not so far as they are:
Fie, fie, see how I sweat with following them:
Come sir, though they gave me the slip, you'll not serve me so I hope.
Go before, and man me.
O my good Dame!
How now Crispine, what's the matter Boy?
Why are so many Chancery Bills drawn in your face?
Now, where sits the wind that you blow so?
What ail thou?
I have ever found you a kind loving Dame, nay, a good Mother
Both to my self, and my poor Brother Crispianus.
Bless him good Heaven, upon what ground so ever he tread:
He was an honest fellow, and a good servant,
And so he shall find, if ever he come
From the wars again.
Oh my go???d dame, I to your ears must now unlock
A secret, which, if ere you blab abroad ???
Never by my Holy dame;
Yet I have much ado to keep my ownesecrets,
But Isle keep thine Isle warrant thee.
Nay look dame, my life and death lies on it.
Let what will lie on it,
?????? shall ne'er be talked of by me.
Isle thank ye then;
This it is, but you will say nothing?
Dost think I am a woman or a beast?
Nor be angry with me?
Here's a doe indeed,
Thou hast not got a wench with child hast?
You have found my grief,
Good dame, indeed I have.
Out upon thee Villain.
Nay good Dame.
Hence you Whore-master knave,
Gods my passion, got a wench with child,
Thou naughty pack thou hast undone thy self for ever:
Precious coals, you are a fine youth indeed,
Can you cut out no shoes but of Ducks leather,
With a wanion? has your Master so little doings,
Your tools must be working abroad in a foreigners shop?
Sweet Dame, you swore
You would say nothing.
Nothing, hang thee villain, Isle cry it at the Market Cross:
I'faith, is your Aul so free for smocke-leather?
Good Dame.
By these ten fingers Isle double thy years for it:
Oh that I knew the Queen, I'd slit her nose,
And tear her eyes out of her head y'faith.
How now, what's the matter that it thunders so?
Oh, you are as good a Master too of the to the side: you look to your Prentices well; one of your men has been at greene-goose fair; but he shall pay for the sauce Isle warrant him.
What Fair? what Sauce, goody gander-goose?
Nay, it is no matter, as he likes this, let him dance the sha???king of the sheets another time.
What sheets dame Guiniver? what dance I pray ye?
Marry uptailes all: doe you smell me now?
I smell an Ass head of your own: what's all this trow?
Pardon me Sir.
Unless you stand my friend,
Alas I am but dead.
Dead, hang ye Rascal, hang ye; you were quick enough when you laid your Whore on her back, to take measure of her new shoes: Would you think it Husband, this young knave has got a wench with child.
Hoyda, and is this the shaking of the shoots you talk of, goodwife Snipper Snapper: s'foote I like him the better fort: he is of your husbands trade, you old whore, and he has mettle in him: dost scold for that, hold your tongue with a pox.
I, I, one Whore-master will take part with another still.
Peace Walflit, leave gaping.
A wench with child? s'fut in my my capering days I have done as much my self Sis.
I, beshrow your heart for your labour.
Peace Sisley, I shall sow up your lips else;
Let me talk with my Prentice:
Hast got a maid with child say?
A maid, marry hang her whore.
Yet again, keep your Clack, Isle slit your tongue else. Speak my young Cock-Sparrow, what merry wagtail hast thou been b???lling with?
O Sir, if any but my dame and you should know it,
I were lost for ever.
Mum, mum for my part Boy; and you Margery Magpie, Keep your tongue from chattering, or by the mary maskins Isle tickle your gaskins: Come, say, what Didapper was it?
The Emperors Daughter Sir.
Who, the Princess?
Out upon thee Traitor.
Sfoot will Bow-bell never leave ringing? will the perpetu???all motion of your old chaps never leave sounding? I shall beat your clapper out anon for it: Ah sirrah, go too boy, no Court-mustard serve your turn but the Emperors Daughter? This is fine in faith.
He will smoke for it I warrant him.
Why Wiperginie, prating still I say? you have drawn on her shoe handsomely by the Mass: Prithee tell me, how could thou being but a poor Shoemaker, climb up to a Court-bed-sted?
He will climb to the Gallows for it.
Why Knipperdolin, is the Devil in thee?
I have climbed farther Sir; shoe's now my Wife,
And I have married her.
Hoyda.
Hush madge Howlet, leave hollowing.
That very day my Brother was pressed forth???
You pressed her at night, did you?
G???unting still you Sow-guelder?
Thou art a Coxcomb and a Claperdudgion: ???oct thou see now, I was never so called in my life as thou call me. Thou moist be ashamed on it: this it is to let thy Prentices have their swing, and lye out at nights thus.
Sweet Pigsny, let me entreat thy patience:
Alas poor youth, we must needs help him.
W???y I commend him that he shoots at the fairest mark:
What an excellent show an Emperors Daughter will make in a
Shooemakers shop!
She'll spin a fair thread I warrant you:
How will he maintain her trow ye?
She knew my fortunes ever she married me,
And now your selves shall know them:
I and my Brother that thus have served you like Prentices,
Are Princes both, and Sons to Alured, late King of Britain.
How! my right Worshipful Prentice! 
Ha, is he a Kings son Husband?
Make curtsy to your man you whore.
The Emperor Maximinus slew my Father,
And put the Queen my Mother into Prison:
What mean you gentle Master, pray be covered.
No by my faith Sir,
You are a better man than the Master of my Company.
And seeing all my hopes lye dead save in her self,
I loved, revealed my self, and married her;
Yet I entreat you both???Nay gentle Master,
I am your Prentice still, pray stand not bare.
Well, well, for this once I will boy; now you old Gigum???bob, you ne'er had two such men to man you.
Nay truly Husband, I ever thought they were some worcester???shipfull mans sons, they were such mannerly boys still.
All I entreat of you, is some advice
To get my fair Leodice from Court, and then some secret place
Where she might be in safety till her sweet delivery,
And then Isle dare misfortune.
Blessing of thy heart, I like thee well you have such a care of thy Wife: therefore if thou could but steal her from the Court, and bring her hither, she should lye in, and be brought to bed at my house??? and no body know it I warrant you.
I marry Tib-tattle basket, how should we doe that wench?
That's all my care indeed, to steal her thence.
Come, come, leave it to me Boy, I see, a women's wit must help at a pinch still Boy: Mark this device, and if you like it, doe it, and thus it is: Soon at night thou shalt hire some friend to fire ??? Tree upon the Coast at Dover, as near the Beacons as can be possible, by which means the men that watch the other Beacons, seeing that in flames, and supposing some Enemy landed, will presently fire all the rest, and so on a sudden set both Court, City, and Country, an??? all in an uproar, in which time if you and she cannot bestir your stumps, and run both away, would you were whipped in faith.
An excellent pate to trouble the whole Commonalty;
The plot is good in faith Boy.
I like it well, and will acquaint the Princess with it.
O Master and Dame, Dame and Master;
O lamental le day! now or never.
How now Knaves, told one Bell at once, and leave jangling.
O pitiful Master, intolerable Dame, I am the fore-bell, and ??????'as ???ung all in many a time and often with you Dame: but now I must ???ing out mine own eyes in tears, in dolor, and most dole???full k???ells: My fellow Hugh is taken, And condemned like a Christian.
O horrible!
Peace Bag-pipe: my man Hugh condemned,
How comes that?
O Master, your man Hugh is not the man you took him for; not plain Hugh, but Sir Hugh, a Knight of fame.
How? a Knight of the Worshipful Company of the Cord???wieners?
Nay, by St. Dave, hoe's more, hoe's a Welch Prince,
And son to the King of Powes in South Wales,
Though he but a Shoemaker here.
Passion of me, what a brood of Princes have I brought up!
And why is my right honourable Servant to be put to death?
As we were going to see the Christians, he spied his old Love Queen Winifred amongst them, and at the very sight hee looked as greene as a leek, an??? so rushed in amongst them; took the Lady by the Lilly-white hand, railed on the Roman gods, defied the Empe???roar, and swore he would dye if she did.
Is there no help to save him?
None in the World, except he leave to be a Christian.
It is true Sir, all the Sergeants and Officers that came to arest him, pitying his case, persuaded him to be no good Christian, as they were: then there was a Broker said hee would lay his soul to pawn, he could not prosper if he were a Christian; nay, the Jailer cries out on him, and says, if he continue a Christian, he will use him like a Dog.
Alack the day;
I'm sorry for my honourable boot hailer:
Go and comfort him; Isle see him anon tell him.
Nay, stay sweet Master,
It was never seen that a Shoemaker and his men
Were base Bassilomions, but true bonus socius,
Up se freeze, though we cannot get him from prison,
Isle sell my coat from my back, ere a Shoemaker
Shall want: Let us show our selves Cavaliers
Or Cobblers: come every man his twelvepence
A piece to drink with him in prison.
A good motion: boon boys, fine knaves;
I like you well when you hang together:
Hold my brave Journey-men,
There's a double share for me.
And mine with all my heart y'faith.
And cause he's a Knight, thou shalt have my shilling too.
I thank you Dame:
Nay, weal never leave a brother of our
Company, as long as flesh and bones
Will hang together.
Away boys, go you before;
Joane jumble breech your Dame and I will follow,
Cherish him up, tell him he shall not want;
He lives not in the world could ever say,
A Shoemaker from his friend did flinch away. 
Resolve me yet, you stubborn Christians,
Cannot the several tortures which we doe inflict,
Yet melt the Iron of your hardened hearts,
To make you bow unto our Roman gods?
Speak, will you obey our hest?
None but the hests of heaven.
A thousand deaths have not the bitter stings
As are the pains we have felt in torturing;
Yet Tyrant we'll endure ten thousand more,
And laugh in deaths face, ever we our faiths give o'er.
Renowned Albon, on thy head Isle set
A Crown of gold.
To make me heaven forget: Never.
Never.
Let me yet win thee foolish man:
Remember what honours we, and Dioclesian
Heaped upon thee: giving thee the stile
Britains Stewardship,
The Prince of Knights,
Lord of Varlome.
And in thy Rackes, thy Irons, Gibbets, and thy Wheel,
Doe I more honour, and more comfort feel,
Than all those painted smokes by thee bestowed
Of me: my Country may thus much boast: Albon
Stood firm and fixed, in spite of tyrants wrath,
Britains first Martyr for the Christian faith.
But not the last:
For to thy scorn Isle add millions of
Christian flames, to death and tortures.
Dispatch these first.
I will drag them hence in Chains to
H???lnurst Hill, three miles ???rome Verolome,
Where Albons Lord, there after blows,
And spiteful buffettings, for honour of his
Knight-hood, once held the chief,
He shall have a Knight to be his Heads-man.
That stroke shall well be given,
That makes room for a soul to fly to heaven.
This fiend Amphiabel,
From whose damned Teat he sucked this poison,
Shall there be bound by a fixed stake,
To which nailed fast, the Navel of his belly
Being opened, then with your sword prick him,
And force him run about like a wheel,
Till he has spun his Guts out: and that dispatcht,
Saw off his traitorous head.
Caesar in greater triumph ne'er was led.
Away with them; Albon's the first shall dye:
Thou honour'st me amidst thy tyranny: come on dear friend,
Eternity protect us to our end:
Fight nobly then.
To my latest breath:
I go to a wedding (friend) and not to death.
Go drag 'em hence; this day weal
Quaff the blood of Christians: call forth more:
So perish all will not our gods adore.
Nay fellow Hugh, or noble Sir Hugh, remember it is not every mans case to dye a Christian; prithee leave it then, and save thy life; the Roman gods are as good gods as ever trow???e on a shoe of leather: and therefore sweet Hugh wee may get their custom, and bring 'em to our shop, and so we sh???ll be Shooe-makers to the gods.
You trouble me, I pray leave.
Leave thee, not as long as thou liv'st I'faith.
What are all these?
Men that respect a Christian no more than you doe, Sir you need not fear, there's not a good Christian among us.
Honest fellows:
Back, and give the Prisoners room.
Come my constant friend:
Noble Sir Hugh at last farewell join hand???
We never shall touch one another more,
When these we sever; thou long hast
Loved me; truer ne'er was found,
That both in life and death keeps faith so sound:
All that my love can give thee for thy pains
Isle marry thee, but death must bid the banes:
Never to wedding was such honour given,
Our weding dinner must be kept in heaven.
At which Angels shall waite:
Saints be our guests, our souls the wedding couple,
And the feast joy and eternity; our bridal room
The Hall of heaven, where hand in hand weal come,
Martyrs to dance a measure, which begins
Unto the music of the Cherubins.
Mean time, even here you both shall dance with death;
Yet if our Gods you'll serve, prolong your breath.
It is life we seek to loose; Tyrant strike home,
They are but walls of clay which thou beast down.
Call a Hangman, flea that
Villain straight, and tear that women's
Flesh with burning Pincers.
We both are ready Sir,
Yet hear me Maximinus: by all the Rites
Of honour I conjure thee, in Law of woman-hood,
Let not my body be a Villains prey;
But since I am a Queen and spotless Virgin,
Let me choose my death.
Because thou once were daughter to a King
Enjoy thy wish, so death may forth with strike,
Meet him in any shape thou best shall like.
Be sure it shall:
Be thou the chief mourner at my funeral.
My earthly love farewell; thy cheek Isle kiss,
We'll meet anon within the land of bliss:
Follow my footsteps thou shalt soon be there:
Courage good heart, to dye I cannot fear.
Isle be the first, and teach thee how to dye,
Leading the way to sweet felicity.
Come Tyrants launch my arm, to death Isle bleed,
Sweet blood was shed for me, and mine Isle sheede.
Dispatch and launch her arm, but save the blood
The which this day to holy Iupiter Isle sacrifice.
My dearest friend farewell,
In one house shortly we'll for ever dwell.
The storm of death now comes,
Bear up brave sail.
I feel no storm; but oven the merriest gail
That ever life was driven with: Oh how sweet a
Dream me thinks I now am in;
Angels doe run to meet and welcome
Me unto the Land of bliss,
Singing I have spun a golden thread
That thread of gold weave still.
I doe; farewell: make haste to meet??? 
In faith I will, in a whole Camp of Martyrs; blessed Fate
Shoe's gone for ever to an Angels state.
Dispatch him; and drag her body hence.
It is sister to the Saints; oh give it reverence.
Why doe I linger here, my love being gone?
A right Shoemaker, he loves a woman.
Merciful Tyrant set me on deaths wings,
That I may bear a part where my love sings
Eternal Hymns of joy; blessed love I come, as soon
As I can set forth out of this house of earth and clay:
When shall this stroke be given,
That I may mount and meet my love in heaven?
Flea him alive:
Yet stay, because you are so love-sicke, we'll give
You a drink to cure it: Power into a Cup
His sweete-hearts blood, and give it us.
It is precious Wine, holy, and good.
And you shall quaff your fill:
So, put in Poison, spice it well;
There drink thy last, and sink with her to hell.
Oh let me kiss this heavenly cup of all my happiness:
Dear Love to thy blessed souls eternal goodness,
I drink this health, filled to the brim:
Two hearts did never so in one stream swim,
As thine and mine shall now; and though thy blood
Be poisoned, this our loves keeps firm and good.
My Country men and fellow Shoo-makers,
As of my best of friends I take my leave:
We many times together have drunk healths,
But none like this: yet Isle begin to you all;
But here you shall not pledge me.
Yes, and it were Aquavitae we would pledge thee.
The love which I so found in you,
Even in my latest hour, Isle not forget,
But to you all begin my lasting love,
Never did fair society of men more please me: you are a trade
Of fellowships best mixture, nobly made.
We are Shooe-makers, and so.
My being amongst you, thus shall you prefer,
To say a Prince was once a Shoemaker.
For which you now shall raise your skill aloft,
And be called gentlemen of the Gentle craft.
Oh noble Sir, Hugh.
Could I give Indian Mines, they all were yours;
But I have nought to give, nor ought to take,
But this my farewell; therefore for my sake,
When Death has seized my flesh,
Take you my bones, which I bequeath
Amongst you to be buried.
Take no care for thy winding sheet, sweet Hugh, for no???ver was gentleman of the Gentle craft so buried as thou should bee, if thou had drunk thy last.
Now trouble me no more:
Upon this stage of death I set my foot??? to all farewell,
Angels shall clap their wings to ring my knell,
And bid me welcome to the land of rest,
Where my immortal love lives ever blessed:
A health dear soul Isle drink to thee: so, so,
H???w soon he fades, that now so fresh did grow!
Fly up my soul to heaven, my sins sink to the earth;
Thus doe I s??????le my holy Christian faith.
O noble Sir Hugh, oh lamentable Hearing.
Convey that other body hence, and give it
???uriall as befits her state: for this, bestow
It on these shooemakers, as he bequeathed it.
No Shooemakers now Sir, but the gentle Craft
Shall see it buried in state and pomp.
Use your own pleasures; whore's Bassianus?
How chanced our Daughter, bright Leodice,
Came not to see these slaughtered Christians?
She keeps her Chamber Sir.
Is she not well? let her be kept with care,
And to the gods of Rome these Trophies rear. 
Well my Masters, I could fi???de in my heart to rail upon this Emperor Mr. Minus, but that I doubt he will make us all die like Christians, and that he shall never doe as long as we live I warrant him.
We'll watch him for that in faith.
So let him pass then, and let us lay our sinodicall heads to???gether, to know what shall become of Sir Hugh.
Let's all join together, and bury him.
How like a Christian thou talk: what before hee be cold? then we should use him as many rich heirs desire to use their fathers: No, because he was a Prince, and did such honour to our Trade, we will bury him like a Prince and a Shoemaker.
Agreed, agreed.
You know he gave us the name of the Gentle Craft, and if we should give him an ill word now, it were a shame in faith.
That's true; how shall we doe then to honour him?
Marry thus fellow-gentlemen, of my fellow Hughs making, to requite his kindness, because he dyed a Christian, he shall no more??? be called Sir Hugh, but St. Hugh, and the Saint for ever of all the Shooemakers in England.
O brave, brave Bar???aby: St. George for England,
And St. Hugh for the Shooemakers.
An you be Gentlemen, hear me: you know besides, he has go???ven his bones amongst us. Now you must not think as if a Butcher had given us a dozen of maribones to be picked.
Well, well, how then?
Marry thus; in memory of his gift, all our working-tool??????, from this time for ever, shall be called St. Hughs bones.
Brave, brave, that shall stand for ever in faith.
I, but which of our tools shall we call so?
Marry even all fellow Raph, all the tools we work with: as for example, the Drawer, Dresser, Wedges, Heele-block, hand and thumb-lethers, Shooe-thrids, Pincers, pricking-aule, and a rub???bing-stone, Aule, Steel, and Tacks, shoo???-haires, and Stirrups, whet???stone, and stopping-sticke, Apron, and Paring-knife, all these are Sir Hughs bones. Now sir, whatsoever he be, that is a Gentleman of the Gentle Craft, and has not all these at his fingers ends, to reckon them up in Rime, shall presently up with him, and strapado his bum.
An everlasting Law renowned Barnaby.
Nay, hear me sing like a Swan, or a Sowter: Furthermore, if any Journey-man shall travel without these tools, now called St. Hughs bones, at his back, and cannot slash, cut, and crack coxcombs, with brave Sword and Buckler, long sword, and quarter-staffe, sound a Trumpet, or play of the Flute, 'or bear his part in a three mans Song, he shall forfeit a Gallon of wine, and be coun???ted a Colt as long as his shoes are made of running leather: Speak, is it agreed on?
Agreed, agreed, agreed.
We'll take up the body then.
Isle have a leg of him.
And I another.
And I another.
And Ilo help thee Raph.
With reverence and with silence then: For as we have made these Laws in remembrance of him, so it shall not be a miss to make it the sweeter, to reckon up our tools, and put them in meeter, and instead of a Deirge, I think it fit time and reason to reckon Sir Hughs bones in Rime:
The Drawer first, and then the Dresser,
Wedges and Heele-blocks, greater and lesser;
Yet tic not worth two Ganders feathers,
Unless you have the hand and thumb-lethers:
Then comes your short-heeles, Needle, and Thimble,
With Pincers and pricking Aule, so neat and nimble:
Rubbing-stone next, with Aule, Steel, and Tacks,
Which often will hold when the shooe-leather cracks:
Then Stirrup, stopping-stick, with good Sow-haires,
Whet-stone, and cutting-knife which sharply pares;
And lastly, to clap Saint Hughs bones in
An Apron that's made of a jolly sheep skin,
And thus to all Shooemakers we bid adieu,
With triumph to bury the famous St. Hugh. 
Arm, arm, arm; what shall we doe neighbours?
The Beacons are on fire, and my heart freezes in my belly.
They are fired round about us, and all the Country in an uproar;
My very nose drops with fear.
If our Enemies find us in these cold sweats,
We are all sure to go to th pot for it.
Therefore let's go to the pot first;
For when the Drinke's in, the Wit's out:
And when the wit is out, we shall fight like mad men.
Content, and as we go, let's raise the Country.
Arm, arm, arm.
What Alarum's this?
Why cry ye so like mad men?
Because we have no weapons in our hands Sir.
Why are the Beacons fired?
We are all afraid to think on it;
They say the Enemy is landed Sir.
Stand you here like sheep,
When danger beats so rudely at your doors?
There let 'em beat, he shall not be let in for me.
The Enemies are landed men, and therefore we'll go by water:
Come neighbours.
Arm, arm, arm.
The cry is still raised, let's put the Court in Arms,
And certify the Emperor.
With all the speed that may be,
Arm, arm, arm 
Let us be wise neighbours,
And whilst they cry Arms, 
Let us cry legs, and trust unto our heals.
The stratagem takes rarely, come fair Leodice,
This tumult in the Court gives means to fly.
Thus folded in thine Arms I wish to dye.
Talk not of Death, live, and be blessed for ever,
No frown of Fate two faithful hearts can fever. 
Arm, arm, arm.
My Horse and Armour villains:
High Jupiter protect us; what neglect is this,
The Beacons fired, and a whole Land asleep,
When Foes come armed in Thunder?
Guard the Court, see to our Daughters safety,
I fear these sudden tumults have disturbed her. 
Arm, arm, arm.
An you be men, show your selves so.
Why do ye cry thus? say, whither run ye?
Out of our wits I think Sir;
The Beacons all along the Sea-coast burn most horribly.
And what's the cause on it?
Because they are a fire Sir: Ten thousand Kentish men
Which woeful taile's to tell, are knocked down like sheep Sir:
The Enemy is landed at Sandwitch, set a shore at Dover,
And arrived at Rumny Marsh: hark, I hear the Drums already. 
I am amazed, what Drum is this?
Stand on your guard.
I would your Guard were here for us to stand upon,
That we might reach the further: Come, fear nothing Sir;
Let your Lords and you stand by, and see
How we Shoemakers will thrash 'em.
Health to the Emperor from the Roman State.
These are our Britain friends, new come from France.
Whom at your landing saw you up in Arms,
That fright the Country thus?
None my good Lord, not any;
From France and Dioclesian thus I bring
These Britain Soldiers back triumphant home:
The black storm there is laid, and sure these fears
That bring these home-bred terrors, all are fa???s???:
And as I guess, the firing of the Beacons,
Was at the fight of Dioclesians Fleet,
That with himself now rides in Dover-rode,
And is by this on shore: and how in France the die of War hath run
His ???aj???sty in these Imperial Letters certifies.
Thanks for thy news,
We'll read them straight.
By St. Hugh bones we were all afraid of our own shadows, we shall have no cussing now I see. 
What news brings Lutius?
Comfort my Lord, the error's found;
The sudden fire that kindled all this fear,
Is now quenched out; the cloud that threatened storms,
Is turned to drops of heate: some knavish fellow
Hard by the Sea-coast set a Tree on fire,
Which seen, men thought that Dover Beacon flamed,
And so fired all the rest, and raised the Alarm.
I am glad it is no worse; run Bassianus,
And sing this comfort to our Daughters ears,
I shall my Lord. 
These Letters of your noble Victories
Are as your self most welcome, on whose head
Our brother Dioclesian lays the glory of the
Conquest o'er the Vandals and the Gods:
He writes, he gave unto thy manly Thigh
The sword of Kight-hood, wishing us to add more
Honours on thee, which at his arrival,
His, and our hand shall doe with royal bounty.
I am your lowly Vassal, royal Sovereign,
Dost hear fellow Ralph,
Me thinks I should know this Captain;
He looks as like Crispianus as can be?
Now Bassianus, speak, how fares our daughter?
Alas my Lord, the Court is all in mourning,
The Princess with this sudden fear
Is fled the Court, not to be found by any.
Not to be found, why whore's her Nurse?
See here she comes.
Speak doting Beldam; whore's my daughter.
Fie, fie, fie, I have not so much wit left
As to tell ye where I am my self, O my side,
Pray let me breath a little;
When this hurly burly began in the Court,
She ran, and I ran; she held, and I pulled;
She cried, and I roared; but her fear being
Stronger than my old bones, away whipped she
Out at the Court-gates, and I fell in a found,
Stark dead y'faith; had not a Gentleman Usher
Come by and clapped me soundly, I'd been
Past telling Tales by this time. Oh my Back.
Oh dismal chance
Search every room; This dismal clamour
May so fear her blood, that death may
Seize her haste: if in the Court you miss her;
See it proclaimed, that whosoever brings me
Her alive, goes laden with rewards;
If nobly borne, we give her him to wife:
Make haste, slip not an hour,
While I set on to meet the Emperor. 
I say it is he; Isle speak to him what ere come on it.
Crispianus?
My honest fellow Barnaby!
O Rumps and Kidneys, did not I tell you so?
Honest Crispianus, welcome from France.
I thank you: how does my Master?
In health, and brave as Holly:
So art thou me thinks.
The fortune of the wars: is my Dame well too?
The old wench still: she keeps the mark in her mouth
And how does my brother Crispine?
Oh he is the fore-man of the shop since you went???
Nay, we have news to tell thee anon when we are
Drinking; we have given o'er the Shooe-makers
Cloaks now, and are become Gentlemen
Of the Gentle Craft, and all our working
Tools are called Saint Hugh's bones.
That's excellent.
How now my tall trencher men,
What make you amongst Courtiers?
What my Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, virorum,
The Basseius manus, my noble Crispianus:
And how does the brave Monsiers in France,
My brave Shevaleere? As I am a Gentleman
Of the Gentle Craft, thou art welcome.
I thank your love and kindness Sir.
Away my strong Beer drinkers;
There's a Noble in English, go drink a health
To Saint Hugh's Bones; I must have
Some speech in private, and enter parley
With my Man of War.
As long as this Drum will strike,
We'll fight it out with pike and pot:
We'll drink a health to you both Master. 
Away my fine leather sellers,
Shrink awhile in the wetting; whilst thus
I salute my right worshipful Cordwainer:
For I hear say the Knightly Dub a Dub
Has been laid on thy shoulders.
It pleased the Emperor so to honour me.
He honours me and all my company by it ???
By Saint Hughs Bones thou shalt take the
Wall of thy Master now in faith boy.
The Wall, not so Sir.
And the Kennel too by the Spreech-awles???
Nay Sir, I know more than you think I doe:
Your Brother has song the three mans song,
And told all in faith: you were
Once my Princely Prentice.
Sir If my brother has disclosed
To you our Births, I doe conjure you,
As my dearest friend, for to conceal it.
Mum, mum boys,
As close as my Currier and I in a Tavern
On a monday morning: tut, my Princely
Print???se, thy brother knows that I am leather
That will hold all waters when he trusts
Me with a secret: Hark in thine ear boy,
Has got a Wench with child byth' mass.
How, a wench with child?
Yes, and a great one too:
No less than the Emperors daughter,
And shoe's as big as she can tumble:
Has entered the best Chamber in the Court,
Has tickled her shooesole for a girl or a boy
By this time; and hark once more,
She lies in at my house too, but mum; no more words boy.
Pray heaven you catch no hurt by it,
For the Emperor sends forth wondrous search to find her.
No matter,
She shall be welcome home when ever she comes,
I hope shoe's delivered too by this time,
For I heard such a Caterwauling,
And my wife stirs up and down that she stinks:
Nay more, the Beacons were fired on purpose
To steal her from Court, and only
By the knavery and policy of
Gillian Ginger-taile my wife.
The accident is strange;
See, here comes my Dame and Brother.
Gods me shoe's delivered:
Ha boy, art come? come hither Crispine,
Know ye this Shevaleere?
My dearest Brother.
I am glad to see you:
I hear strange news brother.
If from my Master Sir the news did come,
Tic true, and Isle with life maintain.
Look here old Sis,
Your other Prentice is come.
My gentle Dame.
Sweet Crispianus, welcome home from the wars;
Nay sir, your brother has been in Arms too:
Doe you you see what exploits has done?
Is it a boy wife?
A boy I'm sure,
Has a Purse and two pence in it:
Nay come Sir, you shall kiss your kinseman:
Here's his Fathers own nose in faith.
A Princely babe,
The eye of Heaven look on thee,
And moist thou spread like to the
Bay Tree, which the whole year springs,
And through this land plant a whole race of Kings.
Nor shall he scorn,
Till that race be run,
To call himself a Prince,
Yet a Shooe-makers son.
Of the Britains blood, Royal in faith boys:
Let no man therefore henceforth take it scorn,
To say a shooe-makers Son was a Prince borne.
Good Fate succeed it:
Brother my Master hath told all your strange proceedings:
Have you heard of the Proclamations?
Yes, and mean ere long
To use it for my profit.
Till when, muf???e this Son
In some dark Cloud, whilst I at Court
Waite on the Emperor, that's gone to
Meet great Dioclesian; Fortune
May turn her Wheel, and wee
May stand as erst wee did,
And with our own beams shine.
Play you your game at Court, the next trick's mine.
And by Saint Hugh,
Though I neither shuffle nor cut,
Isle hold Cards too.
And Isle not fit out, though I turn up Noddy.
Work wisely then, and part.
Doe so till time ripen, which being known,
A Shooe-makers subtle wit shall then be shown. 
Great Dioclesian, our renowned Brother,
In France your happy and triumphant deeds
We here in Britain thus congratulate:
The Vandal and the Goth we hear, have paid
The price at full for daring insolence.
Even with their bloods they have:
Their daring and their downfalls fill one grave,
And yet our Conquest had not spread such wings
But for those Britain forces you sent o'er:
They from the French Field plucked the noblest Flower,
And of them all, a Soldier too, whose Fame
I cannot sing too much, carried the name
Of Honour from us all: his good sword flew like Lightning,
And where it went, o'rethrew: the King of Gods
Called me his prisoner, but then this brave Opponent
Fetched me off in ransom with his blood, and that being done,
He like a Lyon on the Vandal run:
Took him, and closed the battle in his fall,
The work was bloody, rough, and Tragical;
And therefore for my love pray crown his head
That twice saved mine: It is a man, whose Fate
Upheld the glory of the Roman State.
The man you sent, and praise so Royal Sir,
Shall ever live within our Princely favour;
One call the Captain hither.
Here he comes. 
Brave Soldier, your high spoken merit
Breathed from an Emperors love, claims due regard
From his and our hands: cast therefore but your eye
On all the Kingdom, what you can espy to please you,
Ask, and take it.
Which we'll confirm brave Crispianus,
Make thy princely boon worthy thy fame,
And such as may beseem great Maximinus and Dioclesian,
The Masters of the triple world, to give,
And by our gods thou shalt the same receive.
I humbly thank my Lords;
Isle ask no Gold, nor Lands, nor O???feces; but thus high,
To beg a prisoners life and liberty.
A prisoner noble Sir, what is he?
It is a sad Queen, my Mother Royal Sir,
Imprisoned by your Grace at Rochester.
King Allureds Queen thy Mother?
Yes my good Lord, my Kingly Father slain,
I and my brother did disguised remain,
Till I was pressed for France.
This wonder doth amaze me:
Is Crispianus then a Kings son found?
It was voye'd abroad, thou and thy brother dyed in the battle.
Fame speaks not always troth: I ??????ve,
But of my brother what's become, as yet I have not heard.
Thou here shalt live right dear in our regard;
Lutius by this our Signet free the Queen from Prison,
And give her knowledge of her Princely son:
O were our Daughter found, so much I love thee,
Thou should enjoy my bright Leodice.
We thank our Brothers love to grace our friend,
For to his worth we can no gift extend.
What shouts are these? Look out. 
Out of my way Sir: oh my heart!
Why what's the matter?
The matter say ye? pray let me gape a little;
???was out of my wits before with fear, and now for joy.
Oh my heart, I think in my conscience I have not so much wind left in my belly as will blow out a Candle:
The Princess, the Princess Sir.
Ha? my Daughter?
Say, where is she?
O my sweet Lambkin's found,
And come to Court too.
Where? who found her?
A pretty handsome stripling by my Holydame;
Her own Shoemaker belike, poor duckling:
She was wandering, and he met with her;
And belike she had worn out her shoes, and he fitted her finely:
So drew on her shoes first, and drew her to Court after;
And he and all the Company of the Gentle Craft Sir,
Brings her home most sumptuously.
With ???usicks sweetest strains conduct 'em in,
Our sorrows wither, as our joys begin.
Life cannot be more welcome; which is he
Doubles my joys in my Leodice?
This is the youth that doubles 'em:
O my sweet Honey???uckle, have I found thee again?
Isle treble his rewards for finding her:
And to be sure my Daughter, not to loose thee more,
Great Emperor see
To doe all honour unto this Prince, and thee,
I give my only daughter for his wife.
His wife my Lord?
By my Daughter:
Though a stranger to thee, hoe's a Prince borne,
Son to a King, and well deserves thy love.
Here's one deserves it more, he saved my life
When I was almost dead with grief;
These can witness it.
It is very true Sir; when she was the lost sheep,
He was the Shepherd that found her;
When she was a cold, he covered her;
Nay more, when she was hungry, he filled her belly:
Here's one, if it could speak, would be a witness to that.
And by the Proclamation, your self are bound
To let this young man marry me:
Isle swear Isle wed with none, except this Shoemaker.
Sure her sudden fright hath made her mad:
Was she not frantic when thou foundst her first?
Nay, shoe's mad still; how dare you stand this scorn?
This is a Prince, that but a beggar borne.
A Beggar? look on this Babe:
It is his own; it is Princely borne,
And a Shoemakers son.
Fond Girl.
Good Father hear,
You know not what brave men these shoemakers are.
It is known we can get Children Sir.
How am I vexed with fools and mad men!
I doe beseech you Sir, my Royal Father,
Take this lovely Child to kiss, and bless it.
Defend me Iupiter, shoe's mad,
Stark mad.
Why does the fair Leodice
So vex her Kingly Father
With so base a brat?
Zoonds base?
Peace knave, peace:
What wilt thou doe?
Base Brat?
Alas, had the poor fool a tongue or power to speak,
He would swear you did him wrong:
By all our gods it is as nobly borne
As the proudest here.
Strange frenzy,
Why does my Daughter so dishonour me?
I take but this poor Child's part, and so should you:
For look you Father, this base Brats Mother
Lay in my Mothers belly; were she alive,
She would acknowledge it, and comfort give,
And it shall call you Grandsire if it live.
Here's strange and dark Enigmas,
Speak plain, whose Child is it?
This shoemakers.
And yours?
'Slife he has lain with her,
Shoe's his Whore; attach the Villain,
Tortures shall force his baseness to confess it.
Most Royal Sovereign,
Suffer not wrath to kindle in your bosom,
His baseness and mine run even in one stream:
It is my brother, Princes by birth, the King of Britains sons;
Our names Altered and Off; for these names
Of Crispine and Crispianus we but borrowed
To keep our lives in safety.
Can this be true?
Father it is, and this long since I knew,
Loved, and then married, a twelve Month since:
This token, could it speak, would tell you all.
Whom Heaven would save from danger, ne'er can fall.
My blessing compass both:
Nurse, what say you to this?
Nay, I was asleep when it was done in faith.
She winked a purpose. 
The Queen my Lord.
Most welcome, and most wished for,
Royal Princess, your fetters off,
Imprisonment wee here take off,
Go, embrace your sons.
O my dear sons!
With them receive your Daughter
To your love: Wonders hath fallen
Since you have a Prisoner been;
You, and your Sons, and we are grown a kin.
Fame spread abroad the wonder,
And the fame of our dread Lords the
Emperors, which in stead of death
Hath given an happy passage to our lives.
But Royal Sir, should I forget this shoemaker,
We break a bond, wherein we all stand bound:
My sons of you hath loving Parents found.
Faith Madam,
I did the best I could for 'em:
I have seen one married to the Emperors daughter.
Would you had married me no worse.
You all have done your best
To make our comforts full: for which we'll pay
Rewards to all, and crown this happy day.
Wee have a boon my Lord the Emperor.
What is it?
That seeing these two Princes,
Fellow servants with us, being of the Gentle Craft,
May have one Holy-day to our selves.
What Month would you have it kept in?
The five and twentieth of October,
That none of our Trade may go to bed sober.
Take it:
These lines of Fate thus in one circle met,
If Dioclesian please shall here close up.
In what circumference?
Thus; it is more honour to make Kings,
Than be such: then let these twain,
Being English borne, be Britain Kings again.
This in the North shall rule.
This in the South:
Brave Crispianus, to requite thy deed,
Great Dioclesians hand shall Crown thy head. 
To Crispine this:
And this rich gift beside;
The fair Leodice to be his Bride.
I have an humble suit unto your Highness.
What is it my Son?
It is this;
A Church then, and a beauteous Monastery
On Holmhurst-Hill, where Albon lost his head,
Off shall build; which Isle St. Albons name,
In honour of our first English Martyrs fame.
Build what Religious Monuments you please,
Be true to Rome, none shall disturb your peace.
Set forward Princes, Fortunes Wheel turns round;
We Kingdoms lose, you the same hour sit Crowned.
And thus about the World she spreads her wings,
To ruin, of raise up the Thrones of Kings.

AWay, leave off your golden Flatteries,
I know I cannot live; there's one lies here
Brings me the news, my glories &amp; my greatness
Are come to nothing.
Be not your self the Bell
To toll you to the Grave; and the good Fates,
For ought we see, may wind upon your bottom
A thread of excellent length.
We hope the gods have not such rugged hands
To snatch ye from us.
Cosmo, Damianus, and Anthony; you upon whom
The Vandal State doth lean, for my back's too weak;
I tell you once again, that surly Monarch,
Who treads on all Kings throats, hath sent to me
His proud Ambassadors: I have given them Audience
Here in our Chamber Royal; nor could that move me
To meet Death face to face, were my great work
Once perfected in Africa by my son,
I mean that general sacrifice of Christians,
Whose blood would wash the Temples of our gods,
And win them bow down their immortal eyes
Upon our offerings: yet I talk not idly,
Yet Anthony I may; for sleep I think
Is gone out of my Kingdom, it is else fled
To the poor; for sleep oft takes the harder bed,
And leaves the downy pillow of a King.
Try Sir if Music can procure your rest.
Cosmo, it is sin to spend a thing so precious
On him that cannot wear it: No, no, no Music;
But if you needs will charm my o're-watcht eyes,
Now grown too monstrous for their lids to close:
If you so long to fill these Musick-roomes
With ravishing sounds indeed, unclasp that book,
Turn o'er that Monument of Martyrdomes:
Read there how Genzerick he has served the gods,
And made their Altars drunk with Christians blood:
Whilst their loathed bodies, flung in funeral piles,
Like Incense burnt in Pyramids of fire,
And when their flesh and bones were all consumed,
Their ashes up in Whirle-winds flew in the Ayre,
To show that of four Elements, not one had care
Of them, dead or alive; Read Anthony.
It is swelled to a fair Volume.
Would I lived to add a second part too't, read, &amp; listen,
No Vandal ere writ such a Chronicle.
Five hundred broiled to death in Oil and Lead,
Seven hundred flayed alive, their Carcasses
Thrown to King Genzericks hounds.
Ha, ha, brave Hunting.
Upon the great day of Apollo's Feast,
The fourth Month of your Reign.
On, give me more,
Let me dye fat with laughing.
Thirty fair Mothers big with Christian brats,
Upon a scaffold in the Palace placed,
Had first their dugs seared off, their wombs ripped up,
About their miscreant heads their first borne Sons
Tossed as a Sacrifice to Iupiter
On his great day, and the Ninth Month of Genzerick.
A Play, a Comical Stage our Palace was:
Any more, oh let me surfeit.
Four hundred Virgins ravished.
Christian Whores; common, it is common.
And then their trembling bodies tossed on the Pikes
Of those that spoiled 'em, sacrificed to Pallas.
More, more, hang Mayden-heads, Christian Maiden∣heads.
This leaf is full of tortured Christians.
Some paunched, some starved, some eyes and brains bored out,
Some whipped to death, some torn by Lyons.
Damianus, I cannot live to hear my service out,
Such haste the gods make to reward me.
Look to the King.
What shouts are these? see Cosmo.
Good news my Lord; here comes Hubert from the wars
Long life and health: wait ever on the King.
Hubert, thy wishes are come short of both:
Hast thou good news? be brief then, and speak quickly,
I must else hear thee in another World.
In brief then know, Henrick your valiant son,
With Bellizarius and my self, come laden
With spoils to lay them at your feet:
What lives the Sword spared, serve to grace your Triumph,
Till from your lips they have the doom of death.
What are they?
Christians, and their Chief a Church-man:
Fugenius, Bishop of Carthage, and with him
Seven hundred Captives 〈◊〉, all Christians.
Hold Death, let me a little taste these joys,
Then take me ravished hence: glad mine eyes Hubert
With the victorious Boy.
Your Star comes shining.
Lift me a little higher, yet more:
Doe the Immortal Powers power blessings down,
And shall I not return them?
See they come.
I have now lived my full time;
Tell me my Henricke thy brave success,
That my departing soul
May with the story bless another world,
And purchase me a passage.
Oh great Sir,
All we have done dyes here, if that you dye;
And heaven, before too prodigal to us,
Shedding beams over-glorious on our heads,
Is now full of Eclipses.
No boy, thy presence
Has fetched life home to hear thee▪
Then, Royal Father, thus;
Before our Troops had reached the Africa bounds,
Wearied with tedious Marches, and those dangers
Which waite on glorious War: the Affricans
A far had heard our Thunder, whilst their earth
Did feel an earth-quake in the peoples fears,
Before our Drums came near them: yet spite of terror
They fortified their Towns, clothed all their fields
With wars best bravery, armed Soldiers:
At this we made a stand; for their bold troops
Affronted us with steel; dared us to come on,
And nobly feared our resolution▪
So hasten; there's in me a battle too,
Be quick, or I shall fall.
Fore-fend it heaven.
Now Bellizarius come; here stand, just here,
And on him I beseech you fix your eye;
For you have much to pay to this brave man.
Nothing to me?
Isle give you him in wonder.
Hang him out in a painted cloth for a monster.
My Lord, wrong not your self to throw on me
The honours which are all yours.
Is he the Devil? All.
Cast not your eyes on me Sir, but on him,
And seal this to your soul, never had King
A Son, that did to his Crown more honours bring.
Stay Bllezarius, I'm too true to honour,
To scant it in the blazing: though to thee
All that report can render leaves thee yet.
A brave man, you are so too, you both fought,
And I stood idle?
No Sir.
Here's your battle then, and here's your conquest;
What need such a coil?
Yet Hubert it craves more Arithmetic,
Than in one figure to be found.
Hubert, thou art too busy.
So was I in the battle.
Prithee peace.
The Almarado was on point to sound,
But then a Herald from their Tents flew forth,
Being sent to question us for what we came,
And which, I must confess, being all on fire,
We cried for war and death: Back rode the Herald
As lightning had pursued him: but the Captains
Thinking us tired with marching, did conceive
Rest would make difficult, what easy now
Quick charge might drive us too:
So, like a storm, beating upon a wood of lusty Pines,
Which though they shake, they keep their footing fast;
Our Pikes their horses stood: hot was the day,
In which, whole fields of men were swept away;
As by sharpe Sides are cut the golden corn,
And in as short time: it was this mans sword
Hewed ways to danger; and when danger met him,
He charmed it thence, and when it grew again,
He drove it back again: till at the length
It lost the field; four long hours this did hold,
In which more work was done than can be told.
But let me tell your Father how the first feather,
That Victory her self plucked from her wings,
She stuck it in your Burgonet.
Brave still.
No Bellizarius, thou can guild thy honours
Horn from the reeking breasts of Affricans,
When I aloft stood wondering at those Acts
Thy sword writ in the battle, which were such,
Would make a man a soldier but to read 'em.
And what to read mine; is my book clasped up?
No, it lies open, where in Taxed letters read
Each Pioner, that your unseasoned valour
Had thrice engaged our fortunes and our men
Beyond recovery, had not this arm redeemed you.
Yours?
For which your life was lost, for doing more
Than from the Generals mouth you had command.
You fill my praise with froth; as Tipsters fill
Their cut-throat Cans; where give me but my due,
I did as much as you, or you, or any.
Any?
Yes, none excepted.
The Prince was there.
And I was there, since you draw one another,
I will turn Painter too, and draw my self:
Was it not I, that when the maine Battalion
Tottered, and four great squadrons put to rout,
Then relieved them; and with this arm, this sword,
And this affronting brow put them to flight,
Chased 'em, slew thousands, took some few, and dragged 'em
As slaves, tied to my saddle bow with Halters.
Yes Sir, it is true, but as he says your fury
Left all our maine Battalion well-nigh lost:
For had the foe but re-inforc't again,
Our Courages had been seized, any Ambuskado
Cut you, and your rash troops off; if—
What if?
Envy not honour still infers these ifs:
It thrived and I returned with victory.
You?
I Bellizarius, I, I found your troops
Reeling and pale, and ready to turn Cowards,
But you not in the head; when I (brave sir)
Charged in the Rear, and shook their battle so,
The Fever never left them till they fell;
I pulled the Wings up, drew the rascals on,
Clapped 'em, and cried follow, follow: this is the hand
First touched the Gates, this foot first took the City,
This Christian Church-man snatched I from the Altar,
And fired the Temple: it was this sword was sheathed
In panting bosoms, both of young and old,
Fathers, sons, mothers, virgins, wives, and widows,
Like death I havoc cried, so long, till I
Had left no monuments of life or buildings,
But these poor ruins; what these brave Spirits did
Was like to this, I must confess it is true,
But not beyond it.
You have done nobly all:
Nor let the General think I foil his worth,
In that I raise this forward youth so near
Those honours he deserves from Genzericke,
For he may live to serve my Henrick thus,
And growing virtue must not want reward:
You both allow these deeds he so much boasts of?
Yes, but not equal to the Generals.
The spoils they equally shall both divide;
The General choose, it is his prerogative:
Bellizarius be Vicegerent over all
Those conquered parts of Africa we call ours:
Hubert the Master of my Henricks Horse,
And President of what the Gods possess:
Let this our last will stand.
We are richly paid.
Who earns it must have wages.
Isle see you embraced too.
With all my heart.
And Bellizarius
Make him thy Scholar.
His Scholar!
There's stuff in him,
Which tempered well, would make him a noble fellow.
Now for these Prisoners, it is my best sacrifice
My pious zeal can tender to the gods:
I censure thus; let all be naked stripped,
Then to the midst of the vast Wilderness
That stands twixt us and wealthy Persia
They shall be driven, and there wildly venture
As Famine, or the fury of the Beasts
Conspires to use them: which is that Bishop?
Stand forth; this is Eugenius.
I stand forth,
Daring all tortures, kissing Racks and Wheels,
And Flames, to whom I offer up this body.
You keep us from our Crowns of Martyrdomes
By this delaying; dispatch us hence.
Not yet Sir;
Away with them, stay him, and if our gods
Can win this Christian Champion now so stout
To fight upon their sides, give him reward,
Our gods will reach him praise.
Your gods, wretched souls.
My work is done, and Henrick as, thou love
Thy Fathers soul, see every thing performed;
This last injunction ties thee, so farewell:
Let those I hated, in thy hate still dwell,
I mean the Christians.
Oh what a deal of greatness is
Struck down at one blow!
Give me a battle,
It is brave being struck down there.
Henrick my Lord,
And now my Sovereign; I am by office bound
To offer to your Royal hands this Crown,
Which on my knees I tender, all being ready
To set it on your head.
Ascend your Throne:
Long live the King of Vandals
And of Gods, the mighty Henrick.
What mus• now be done?
By me each Officer of State resigns
The Patten that he holds his office by,
To be disposed as best shall please your Grace.
And I return them back to all their trusts.
I rise in clouds, my Morning is begun
From the eternal set of a bright Sun.
My Lord returned, prepare a costly banquet
To gratulate his safe and wished Arrival:
Let Music with her sweet-tongu'd Rhetoric
Take out those horrors which the loud clamours
Of Wars harsh harmony hath long besieged
His tender senses with: your Father's come Bellina.
I feel the joy of it with you sweet Mother,
And am as ready to receive a blessing from him,
As you his chaste embraces.
So, so, bestir,
Let all our loves and duties be expressed
In our most diligent and active care.
Here comes my comfort-bringer,
My Bellizarius.
Dearest Victoria,
My second joy, take thou a Fathers blessing.
Not wounded Sir I hope?
No Victoria;
Those were Rewards that we bestowed on others:
We gave, but took none back; had we not you
At home to hear our noble Victories,
Our Fame should want her Crown, although she flew
As high as yonder Axle-tree above,
And spread in latitude throughout the world.
We have subdued those men of strange belief
Which Christians call themselves; a race of people,
This must I speak of them; as resolute
And full of courage in their bleeding falls,
As should they triumph for a Victory:
When the last groans of many thousand met,
And like commixed Whirlewindes filled our ears:
As it from us raised not a dust of pity,
So did it give no terror to the rest,
That did but live to see their fellows dye.
In all our rigours and afflicting tortures,
We cannot say that we the men subdued,
Because their joy was louder than our conquest,
And still more work of blood we must expect,
Like Hydra's Heads, by cutting off they double,
As seed that multiplies, such are their dead,
Next Moon a sheaf of Christians in ones stead.
This is a bloody Trade my Bellizarius,
Would thou would give it over.
It is work Victoria that must be done,
These are the battles of our blessing,
Pleasing gods and goddesses, who for our service
Render us these Conquests.
Our selves and our affairs we may neglect,
But not our Deities, which these Christians profane,
Deride, and scoff at; would new Laws
Bring in, and a new god make.
No my Lord;
I have heard say, they never make their gods▪
But they serve 'em they say, that did make them:
All made-gods they despise.
Tush, tush Victoria, let not thy pity
Turn to passions, they'll not deserve thy sorrow.
How now, what's the news?
Strange my Lord, beyond a wonder;
For it is miraculous: Since you forsook
The bloody fight, and horror of the Christians,
One tortured wretch, whose sight was quite extinct,
His eyes no farther seeing than his hands,
Is now by that Eugenius, whom they call
Their holy Bishop, clearly restored again,
To the astonishment of all your Army,
Who faintly now recoil with fear and terror,
Not daring to offen'd so great a power.
Ha? it is strange thou tell me.
Oh take heed my Lord,
It is no warring against heavenly Powers,
Who can command their Conquest when they please:
They can forbear the Giants that throw stones,
And smile upon their follies; but when they frown,
Their angers fall down perpendicular,
And strike their weak Opposer into nothing;
The Thunder tells us so.
Pray leave me all, I shall have company
When you are gone, enough to fill the room.
The holiest powers
Give thee their best direction.
What power is that can fortify a man
To joy in death, since all that we expect,
Is but fruition of the joys of life.
If Christians hoped not to become immortal,
Why should they seek for death?
Oh then instruct me some Divine power,
Thou that can give the sight unto the blind,
Open my blind judgement,
That I may see a way to happiness.
Ha, this is a dreadful answer; this may chide
The relapse in my blood, that gins to faint,
The further persecution of these people:
Or shall I back, and double tyranny?
A louder threatening; oh mould these voices
Into articulate words, that I may know
Thy meaning better: shall I quench the flames
Of blood and vengeance, and my self become
A penetrable Christian, my life lay down
Amongst their sufferings?
Ha, these are sweet tunes.
Bellizarius?
It names me too.
Sheath up thy cruelty; no more pursue
In bloody forage these oppressed Christians;
For now the Thunder will take their part,
Remain in peace, and Music is thy banquet;
Or thy self number amongst their martyring groans,
And thou art numbered with these blessed ones.
What heavenly voice is this? shall my ears only
Bell le•t with raptures, not mine eyes enjoy
The sight of that Celestial presence
From whence these sweet sounds come?
Yes, thou shalt see: Nay then it is lost again.
Rise, this is enough: be constant Soldier,
Thy heart's a Christian; to death persevere,
And then enjoy the sight of Angels ever.
Oh let me fly into that happy place:
Prepare your tortures now, you scourge of Christians,
For Bellizarius the Christians torturer,
Centuple all that ever I have done,
Kindle the fire, and hack at once with swords,
Tear me by piece-meales, strangle, and extend
My every limb and joint; nay, devise more
Than ever did my bloody Tyrannies:
Oh let me ever lose the sight of men,
That I may see an Angel once again.
For look you Damianus, though Henricke, now King,
Did in the battle well and Bellizarius enough for
A General, did not I tell 'em home?
I heard it.
They shall not make bone-fires of their own glories,
And set up for me a poor wax Candle:
To show mine I am full of gold now;
What shall I doe with it Damianus?
What doe Mariners after boon voyages?
But let all fly:
And what Soldiers, when wars are done?
But fatten peace.
Pox of Peace, she has churls enough to fatten her:
Isle make me a Shamoyes Doublet, embroidered
All over with flowers of gold: in these days
A woman will not look upon a man
If he be not brave: over my Doublet a
Soldado Cassock of Scarlet, larded thick with
Gold Lace, Hose of the same Cloak of the same too,
Lashed up this high, and richly lined:
There was a Lady before I went, was working
With her needle a Scarf for me,
But the Wagtail has left her nest.
No matter, there's enough such birds every where.
Yes, women are as common as glasses in Taverns,
And often drunk in, and more often cracked;
I shall grow lazy if I fight not:
I would fine play with half a dozen Fencers;
But it should be at sharpe.
And they are all for foils.
Foiled let 'em be then.
You had fencing enough in the field, and for women,
The Christians field your markets.
Yes, and those markets were our Shambles, flesh enough,
It made me weary of it: Since I came home
I have been wondrous troubled in my sleeps,
And often heard to sigh in dead of night,
As if my heart would crack; you talk of Christians,
Isle tell you a strange thing; a kind of melting in
My soul, as it were before some heavenly fire,
When in their deaths (whom they themselves call Martyrs)
It was all rocky: nothing they say can soften
A Diamond but Goats blood, they perhaps wet Lambs,
In whose blood I was softened.
Pray tell how.
I will: after some three hours being in Carthage,
I rushed into a Temple, Starred all with lights;
Which with my drawn sword, rifling in a room,
Hung full of Pictures, drawn so full of sweetness,
They struck a reverence in me; found I a woman,
A Lady all in white; the very Candles
Took brightness from her eyes, and those clear Pearls,
Which in abundance falling on her cheeks,
Gave them a lovely bravery; at my rough entrance
She shrieked, and kneeled, and holding up a pair
Of Ivory fingered hands, begged that I would not
(Though I did kill) dishonour her, and told me
She would pray for me: never did Christian
So near come to my heart-strings; I let my Sword
Fall from me, stood astonished, and not only
Saved her my self, but guarded her from others.
Done like a Soldier.
Blood is not ever
The wholsom'st Wine to drink; doubtless these Christians
Serve some strange Master, and it needs must bee
A wonderful sweet wages which he pays them:
And though men murmour, get they once here footing,
Then down goes our Religion, down our Altars,
And strange things be set up—I cannot tell,
We held so pure, find ways enough to hell:
Fall out what can, I care not, Isle to Bellizarius.
Will you? pray carry to him my best wishes.
I can carry any thing but Blows, Coals, my Drink, and that clapper of the Devil, the tongue of a Scold: Farewell.
They swarm like Bees about us: insomuch
Our People cannot sacrifice, nor give Incense,
But with interruptions, they still are buzzing thus,
Saying, Their Gods delight not in vain shows,
But intellectual thoughts, pure and unstained:
Therefore reduce them from their heresies,
Or build our Prison walls with Christians bones.
What thinks our Bellizarius? he that was wont
To be more swift to execute, than we to command:
Why sits not Bellizarius?
I dare not.
Protect me Jove,
Who dare gain say it?
I must not.
Say we command it.
Truth is, I neither can, nor will.
Hoe's mad.
Yes I am mad,
To see such Wolfish Tyrants, as you are,
Pretend a Justice, and condemn the just:
Oh you white souls that hover in the air,
Who through my blindness were made deaths prey:
Be but appeased, you spotless Innocents,
Till with my blood I have made a true atonement,
And through those tortures, by this brain devised,
In which you perished, I may fall as you,
To satisfy your yet fresh bleeding memories,
And meet you in that garden, where content
Dwells only; that in blood did glory,
Will now spend blood to heighten out your story.
Why Bellizarius—:
Hinder me not,
I'm in a h•ppy progress, would not change my guest,
Nor be deterred by Moles and Worms that cannot see,
Such as you are: alas I pity you.
The King's in presence.
I talk of one that's altitude's 'bove him,
That owes all Principalities: he is no King
That keeps not his decrees; nor am I bound
In duty to obey him in unjust acts.
All leave the room.
We obey your highness.
Sir, nay sir good Bellizarius.
In that I doe obey.
Doe you make scruple then of our command?
Yes Sir, where the act's unjust and impure.
Why then are we a King, if not obeyed?
You are placed on earth, but as a Substitute
To a Diviner being, as subjects are to you,
And are so long a King to be obeyed,
As you are just
Good Bellizarius, wherein doe I digress?
Have not I made thee great? given thee authority
To scourge those mis-beleevers, those wild Locusts,
That thus infect our Empire with their Scismes?
The World is full of Bellizarius deeds:
Succeeding times will Canonise thy Acts,
When they shall read what great ones thou hast done
In honour of us, and our sacred gods,
For which next unto •ova they gave a Laurel
To Bellizarius; whose studious brain
Framed all these wrecks and tortures for these Christians.
Hast thou not all our Treasure in thy power?
Who but your self commands as Bellizarius?
Then whence my Bellizarius comes this change?
Poor King, I sorrow for thy weakened sense,
Wishing thy eye-sight clear, that Eagle-like,
As I doe now, thou might gaze on the Sun,
The Sun of brightness, Sun of peace, of plenty:
Made you me great? in that you made me miserable,
Thy self more wretched far, in that thy hand
The Engine was to make me persecute
Those Christian souls, whom I have sent to death;
For which I ever, ever shall lament.
Ha? what's this, within there?
Nay, hear me Henrick, and when thou hast heard me out,
With Bellizarius, think that thou art blessed,
If that with me thou can participate.
Thou art mad.
No; it is thou art mad,
And with thy frenzy makes this Kingdom frantic.
Forgive me thou great Power, in whom I trust,
Forgive me World, and blot out all my deeds
From these black Kalends: else, when I lye dead,
My Name will ever lie in oblique.
Is it a Sin that can make great men good?
Is profanation turned to sanctity?
Vices to Virtues? if such disorder stand,
Then Bellizarius Acts may be held just:
Otherwise nothing.
Some Fury hath possessed my Bellizarius
That thus he rails: Oh my dearest,
Call on great Iupiter.
Alas poor Idol,
On him! on him that is not, unless made:
Had I your Jove, I'd toss him in the Ayre,
Or sacrifice him to his fellow-gods,
And see what he could doe to save himself.
You call him Thunderer, shaker of Olympus,
The only and dear Father of all gods:
When silly Jove is shook with every wind,
A fingers touch can hurl him from his Throne:
Is this a thing to be adored, or prayed too?
My love turns now to rage: Attendance there,
And help to bind this mad man, that's possessed:
By the powers that we adore, thou die.
Here me thou ignorant King, you dull-braind Lords,
Oh hear me for your own sakes, for your souls sake,
Had you as many gods as you have days,
As once the Assyrians had, yet have ye nothing:
Such service as they gave, such you may give,
And have reward, as had the blind Moloffians.
A Toad one day they worship: one of them drunk
A health wed's god, and poisoned so himself:
Therefore with me, look up, and as regenerate souls—
Can you suffer this?
This his affront will sear up the devotion
Of all your people: he that persecuted,
Become a convertite!
It is joy above my joy: oh had you seen
What these eyes saw, you would not then
Dissuade me from it; nor will I leave that power
By whom I find such infinite contentments.
Epidophorus, your ear: see it done.
It shall my Lord.
Then by the gods,
And all the powers the Vandals doe adore,
Thou hast not been more terrible to the world,
Than to thy self I now will make thee.
I, dare thy worst; I have a Christians armour
To protect me.
You cannot act so much as I can suffer.
Isle try your patience.
It is done my Lord as you directed.
They are come:
Make signs you'll yet deny your Christianity,
And kneel with us to sacred Iupiter:
No; make them then a Sacrifice to Iupiter,
For all the wrongs by Bellizarius done:
Dispatch I say, to the fire with them.
Alas good men, Tongueless? you'll yet be heard;
The sighs of your tuned souls are musical;
And whilst I breath, as now my tears I shed,
My prayers Isle send up for you: it was I that mangled you.
How soon the bodies Organ leaves the sound!
The Life's next too't, a Needles point ends that,
A small thing does it; now you have quiet rooms,
No wrangling, all hushed: now make me a fellow
In this most patient suffering.
Bear them unto the fire, and place him near,
To fright him.
On fellow Soldiers,
Your fires will soon be quenched: and for your wrongs,
You shall above, all speak with Angels tongues.
You that are borne Pagans both by father &amp; mother,
The true sons of Infidelity, sit down by me your Official:
Or to come nearer to the efficacy of the word,
Your undermost Jailer, or staller;
The word is Lordly and significant.
Oh brave Master y'faith.
Therefore sit down,
And as by virtue of our place, we have Authority given,
So let us as Officers doe, knaves of our function,
As of others; let us I say, be unbounded in our Authority,
Having the Laws, I mean the Keys, in our own hands.
Friend, friend, you are two forward in your Ado∣rity,
Your command is limited where I am in place:
For though you are the Lieutenants man, know sit that I
Am Master of the work, and Constable Royal
Under the Kings Majesty.
Marry is hee.
If their testimony will not satisfy here my Title
At this place, in this time, and upon this occasion,
I am Prince over those Publicans, Lord over these Larroones,
Regent of these Rugs, Viceroy over these Vagabonds,
King of these Caterpillars; and indeed, being a Constable,
Directly Sovereign over these my Subjects.
If all these stiles, so hard to climb over, belong
To the Office of a Constable, what kin is he to the Devil?
Why to the Devil my friend?
Isle tell you; because a Constable is King of Nights,
And the other is Prince of Darkness.
Dark as it is, by the twilight of my Lantern,
Methinks I see a company of Woodcocks.
How can you discern them?
Oh excellent well
By their bills: see, see, here comes the Lieutenant.
Well said my friends, you keep good watch I see.
Yes Sir, we Officers have breath as strong as Garlic
No Christian by their good wills dare come near us.
It is well, for bear:
Oh Madam. had you seen with what a vehemence
He did blaspheme the Gods,
Like to a man perched on some lofty Spire,
Amazed which way to relieve himself,
You would have stood as did the King, amazed.
God grant him liberty,
And with that give us privacy:
I doubt not, but our sweet conference
Shall work much on him.
Jove grant it: Isle leave the room.
A Jailer seldom looks for a bribe,
But hoe's prevented.
My Lord, your Lady,
And her most beauteous daughter,
Are come to visit you, and here attend.
My Wife and Daughter, oh welcome love;
And blessing Crown thee, my beloved Bellina.
My Lord pray leave us.
Your will be your own Law.
Why study you my Lord, why is your eye fixed
On your Bellina, more than on me?
Good, excellent good:
What pretty shows our fancies represents us:
My fair Bellina shines like to an Angel,
Has such a brightness in her Crystal eyes,
That even the radiance dulls my sight.
See, my Victoria, looks she not sweetly?
She does my Lord; but not much better than she was wont.
Oh she but begins to shine as yet,
But will I hope ere long be stellified:
Alas, my Victoria, thou look nothing like her.
Not like her? why my Lord?
Mark, and Isle tell thee how:
Thou art too much o'er grown with sin and shame,
Hast prayed too much, offered too much devotion
To him and those that can nor help, nor hurt,
Which my Bellina has not:
Her years in sin are not as thine are, old:
Therefore me thinks she's fairer far than thou.
I my Lord, guided by you, and by your precepts
Have often called on Iupiter.
I, there's the point:
My sins like Pulls still drew me downwards:
It was I that taught thee first to Idolise,
And unless that I can with-draw thy mind
From following that, I did with tears entreat,
I'm lost, for ever lost, lost in my self and thee:
Oh my Bellina.
Why Sir, shall we not call on Jove that gives us food,
By whom we see the heavens have all their Motions?
Shoe's almost lost too, alas my Girl,
There is a higher Jove that rules 'bove him:
Sit my Victoria, sit my fair Bellina,
And with attention hearken to my dream:
Me thought one evening, sitting on a fragrant Virge,
Close by there ran a silver gliding stream;
I past the Rivulet, and came to a Garden,
A Paradise, I should say, for less it could not be;
Such sweetness the world contains not, as I saw;
Indian, Aromatics, nor Arabian Gummes,
Were nothing scented unto this sweet bower:
I gazed about, and there me thought I saw
Conquerors and Captives, Kings and mean men,
I saw no inequality in their places:
Casting mine eye on the other side the Palace,
Thousands I saw my self had sent to death;
At which, I sighed, and sobbed, I grieved, and groaned,
Ingirt with Angels, where those glorious Martyrs,
Whom this ungentle hand untimely ended;
And beckoned to me, as if heaven had said,
Believe as they, and be thou one of them;
At which my heart leapt, for there me thought I saw,
As I supposed, you two, like to the rest:
With that I waked, and resolutely vowed
To prosecute, what I in thought had seen.
It was a sweet dream, good Sir make use of it.
And, with Bellizarius, am resolved
To undergo the worst of all afflictions,
Where such a glory bids us to perform.
Now blessings crown ye both,
The first stout Martyr has his glorious death,
Though stony-hard, yet speedy; when ours comes,
I shall triumph in our affliction.
This adds some comfort to my troubled soul,
I that so many have deprived of breath,
Shall win two souls to accompany me in death.
Ho, rise sluggards: so, so, ho; so, ho.
So, ho, ho, we come.
Morrow jolly Wood-men.
Morrow, morrow.
Oh here▪s a Morning, like a grey eyed Wench,
Able to entice a man to leap out of his bed,
If he love Hunting: had he as many corns on his toes
As there are Cuckolds in the City.
And that's enough in conscience to keep men from going
Were his Boots as wide as the black Jacks,
Or Bombards tossed by the Kings Guard.
Are the swift Horses ready?
Yes, and better fed than taught;
For one of'em had like to have kick't
My jigumbobs as I came by him.
Where are the Dogs?
All coupled as Thieves going to a Sessions,
And are to be hanged if they be found faulty.
What Dogs are they?
A pack of the bravest Spartan Dogs in the world,
If they doe but once open, and spend there
Gabble, gabble, gabble, it will make the Forest ecchoo
As if a Ring of Bells were in it; admirably flood by their ears,
You would take 'em to be singing boys;
And for Dewlaps, they are as big as Vintners bags,
In which they strain Ipocras.
There boy.
And hunt so close and so round together,
That you may cover 'em all with a sheet.
If it be wide enough.
Why as wide as some four or five Acres that's all,
And what's the game to day?
The wilde Boar.
Which of'em, the greatest? I have not seen him.
Not seen him? he is as big as an Elephant.
Now will he build a whole Castle full of lies.
Not seen him? I have.
No, no; seen him; as big as an Elephant.
The back of him is as broad, let me see,
As a pretty Lighter.
A Lighter!
Yes: and what doe you think the Brisells are worth?
Nothing.
Nothing? one Shoemaker offered to find me and the Heire-male of my body, 22. years, but to have them for his own ends.
He would put Sparabiles into the soales then?
Not a Bill, not a Sparrow;
This Boars head is so huge, that a Vintner but drawing that picture, and hanging it up for a Sign, it fell down, and broke him,
Oh horrible!
He has two stones so big: let me see, (a Pox) thy head is but a Cherry-stone to the least of'em.
How long are his Tusks?
Each of them as crooked, and as long as a Mowers sith.
There's a Cutler.
And when he whets his Tusks, you would swear there were a sea in's belly, and that his chops were the shore, to which the Foam was beaten: if his Foam were frothy Yest, it were worth ten groats a pail for Bakers.
What will the King doe with him if he kill him?
Bake him; and if they put him in one Pasty, a new O∣ven must be made, with a mouth as wide as the gates of the City.
There boy, there boy.
Cosmo had like been kilt, the Boar recovering,
A Spear full in the Flank from Cosmo's hand,
Foaming with rage, he ran at him, unhorsed him;
And had, but that he fell behind an Oak of admirable
Greatness, torn out his bowels,
His very Tusks striking into the tree.
Made the old Champion shake.
Where are the Dogs?
No matter for the Cures:
I escaped well, but
Cannot find the King.
When did you see him?
Not since the Boar tossed up
Both horse and rider.
A Liter for the King; the King is hurt.
How?
No man knows; some say stung by an Adder,
As from his horse he fell; some cry by the Boar.
The Boar never came near him.
The Kings Physicians.
Run for the Kings Physicians.
Conduct us to him.
A fatal hunting when a King doth fall:
All earthly pleasures are thus washed in gall.
Is this my diet?
Yes marry is it; though it be not Diet bread, it is bread, it is your dinner: and though this be not the root of all mischief, yet it is a Carret, and excellent good meat, if you had powderd Beef to it.
I am content with this.
If you bee not I cannot help it; for I am threatened to be hanged if I set but a Tripe before you, or give you a bone to gnaw.
For me thou shalt not suffer.
I thank you, but were not you better be no good Christian, as I am, and so fill your belly, as to lie here and starve, and be hanged thus in Chains?
No, it is my triumph, all these Chains to me
Are silken Ribbons; this course bread a banquet:
This gloomy Dungeon is to me more pleasing
Than the Kings Palace; and could I win thy soul
To shake off her black ignorance, thou, as I doe,
Would feel thirst, hunger, stripes, and Irons, nothing,
Nay, count death nothing; let me win thee to me.
Thank ye for that; win me from a Table full of good meat to leap at a crust; I am no Scholar, and you they say are a great one; and scholars must eat little, so shall you: what a fine thing is it for me to report abroad of you, that you are no great feeder, no Cormorant? what a quiet life is it when a women's tongue lies still? and is it not as good when a mans teeth lies still.
Perform what thou art bidden:
If thou art charged to starve me, Isle not
Blame thee, but bless heaven.
If you were starved, what hurt were that to you?
Not any, no not any.
Here would be your praise when you should lie dead, they would say, he was a very good man, but alas had little or nothing in him.
I am a slave to any misery
My Judges doom me too.
If you bee a slave, there's more slaves in the world than you.
Yes, thousands of brave fellows, slaves to their vices,
The Usurer to his gold, drunkards to Wine,
Adulterers to their lust.
Right Sir, so in Trades, the Smith is a slave to the Iron∣monger, the itchy silke-weaver to the Silke-man, the Cloth∣worker to the Draper, the Whore to the Bawd, the Bawd to the Constable, and the Constable to a bribe.
Is it the Kings will I should be thus chained?
Yes indeed Sir: I can tell you in some countries they are held no small fools that go in Chains.
I am heavy.
Heavy, how can you choose having so much Iron upon you.
Deaths brother and I would have a little talk,
So thou would leave us.
With all my heart, let deaths sister talk with you too, and she will, but let not me see her, for I am charged to let no body come into you: if you want any water, give me your Chamber pot Isle fill it.
No, I want none, I thank thee:
Oh sweet affliction, thou blessed book being written
By Divine fingers: you Chains that bind my body,
To free my soul: you Wheels that wind me up
To an eternity of happiness, mustre my holy thoughts, and as I
Write, Organ of heavenly Music to mine ears,
Haven to my shipwreck, balm to my wounds,
Sunne-beames which on me comfortably shine,
When Clouds of death are covering me; so gold,
As I by thee, by fire is purified; so showers
Quicken the Spring; so rough Seas
Bring Mariners home, giving them gains and ease:
Imprisonment, gives, famine, buffettings,
The Gibbet and the Rack, Flint stones the Cushions
On which I kneel; a heap of Thorns and Briers
The Pillow to my head, a nasty prison,
Able to kill mankind even with the smell:
All these to me are welcome, you are deaths servants,
When comes your Master to me? now I am armed for him:
Strengthen me that Divinity that enlightens
The darkness of my soul; strengthen this hand
That it may write my challenge to the world,
Whom I defy, that I may on this paper
The picture draw of my confession:
Here doe I fix my Standard; here bid Battle
To Paganism and infidelity:
Mustre my holy thoughts, and as I write,
In this brave quarrel teach me how to fight.
This is no common Alms to prisoners.
I never heard such sweetness—O mine eyes,
I that am shut from light, have all the light
Which the world sees by; here some heavenly
Fire is thrown about the room,
And burns so clearly, mine eye-bals
Drop out blasted at the sight.
What are earthly honours,
But sins glorious banners?
Let not golden gifts delight thee,
Let not death nor torments fright thee
From thy place thy Captain gives thee;
When thou faintest he relieves thee.
Hark how the Lark
Is to the Morning singing,
Hark how the Bells are ringing,
It is for joy that thou to Heaven art flying:
This is not life, true life is got by dying.
The light and sound are vanished, but my fear
Sticks still upon my forehead: what's written here?
Go, and the bold Physician play,
But touch the King, and drive away
The pain he feels: but first assay
To free the Christians; if the King pay
Thy service ill, expect a day
When for reward thou shalt not stay.
All writ in golden Letters, and cut so even,
As if some hand had hither reached from Heaven
To print this Paper.
Come, you must to the King.
I am so laden with Irons,
I scarce can go.
Wyer-whips shall drive you.
The King is counselled for his health, to bath him
In the warm blood of Christians, and you I think,
Must give him ease.
Willingly; my fetters
Hang now methinks like feathers at my heals;
On, any whither I can run sir.
Can you? Not very far I fear.
No winds my Faith shake, nor rock split in sunder;
The poor ship's tossed here, my strong Anchor's yonder.
My Lord.
Ha?
Afraid in a close room, where no foe comes,
Unless it be a Weasel or a Rat,
And those besiege your Larder, or your Pantry:
Whom the armed Foe never frighted in the field.
It is true my Lord, there danger was a safety; here
To be secure, I think most dangerous.
Or what could famine, wounds, or all th'extreames
That still attend a Soldiers actions,
Could not destroy one syllable from a Kings breath,
Can thus, thus easily win.
Oh, it is their long observed policy,
To turn away these roaring boys,
When they intend to rock licentious thoughts
In a soft room, where every long Cushion is
Embroidered with old Histories of peace,
And all the Hangings of War thrust into the Wardrobe,
Till they grow musty or moth-eaten.
One of those rusty Monuments am I.
A little oil of favour will scour thee again,
And make thee shine as bright as in that day
We won the famous battle against the Christians.
Never Hubert, never.
What news now Girl,
Thy heart so great it cannot tell me?
Sfoot why should thou be troubled,
That art thus visited?
Let the King put me into any room,
The closer, the better, and turn but such a Keeper to me,
And if ever I strive to run away, though the doors be open,
May the Virgins curse destroy me,
And let me lamentably and most unmanly
Dye of the Greene-sicknesse.
My blessing bring thee patience gentle Girl;
It is the best thy wronged Father can
Invoke for thee: it is my Bellina, Hubert,
Know her honoured Sir, and pity her.
How sweetly she becomes the face of woe!
She teaches misery to court her beauty,
And to affliction lends a lovely look: happy folks
Would sell their blessings for her griefs
But to be sure to meet them thus.
My honoured Father, your grieved Daughter thus
Thrice every day to Heaven lifts her poor hand,
And pays her vows to the incensed Powers
For your release and happy patience,
And will grow old in vows unto those Powers,
Till they fall on me laden with my wishes.
Thou art the comfort of my Treasure Girl;
We'll live together if it please the King,
And tell sad Stories of thy wretc'ed Mother:
Give equal sighs to one another grief▪
And by discourse of happiness to come▪
Trample upon our present miseries.
There is a violent fire runs round about me,
Which my sighs blow to a consuming flame.
To be her Martyr is a happiness,
The sainted souls would change their merit for it.
Methinkes grief dwells about her purest eyes,
As if it begged a pardon for those tears
Exhausted hence, and only due to love:
Her Veil hangs like a Cloud over her face,
Through which her beauty, like a glimmering Star,
Gives a transparent lustre to the night,
As if no sorrow could Eclipse her light.
Her lips▪ as they discourse, methinks look pale,
For fear they should not kiss again; but met,
They blush for joy as happy Lovers doe,
After along divorce when they encounter.
Noble Lord, if you dare lose so much precious time,
As to be companion to my misery but one poor hour,
And not esteem your self too prodigal
For that expense, this wretched Maid my Child,
Shall waite upon you with her sorrows stories,
Vouchsafe but you to hear it.
Yes, with full ear.
To your best thoughts I leave you.
I will but read, and answer this my Letter.
Why doe you seem to loose your eyes on me?
Here's nothing but a pile of wretchedness,
A branch that every way is shook at root,
And would (I think) even fall before you now,
But that Divinity, which props it up,
Inspires it full of comfort, since the Cause
My Father suffers for, gives a full glory
To his base fetters of Captivity:
And I beseech you Sir, if there but dwell
So much of virtue in you, as your looks
Seem to express, possess your honoured thoughts,
Bestow your pity on us, not your scorn,
And wish for goodness sake, and your souls weal,
You were a sharer in these sufferings,
So the same Cause exposed your fortunes too't.
Oh happy woman, know I suffer more,
And for a cause as just.
Be proud then of that triumph; but I am yet
A stranger to the Character of what
You say you suffer for:
Is it for Conscience?
For love divine perfection.
If of Heavens love, how rich is your reward!
Of Heavens best blessing, your most perfect self.
Alas sir, here perfection keeps no Court,
Love dresses here no wanton amorous bowers,
Sorrow has made perpetual winter here,
And all my thoughts are Icy, past the reach
Of what Loves fires can thaw.
Oh doe but take away a part of that
My breast is full of, of that holy fire,
The Queen of Loves fair Altar holds not purer,
Nor more effectual, and sweet: if then
You melt not into passion for my wounds,
Effuse your Virgin vows to chain mine ears,
Weep on my neck, and with your fervent sighs
Infuse a soul of comfort into me:
Isle break the Altar of the foolish god,
Proclaim them guilty of Idolatry,
That sacrifice to Cythereas son.
Did not my present fortunes and my vows
Registered in the Records of Heaven,
Tie me too strictly from such thoughts as these,
I fear me I should softly yield to what
My yet condition has been stranger to:
To love my Lord, is to be miserable.
Oh to thy sweetness Envy would prove kind,
Tormentor humble, no pale Murderer;
And the Page of death a smiling Courtier.
Venus must then, to give thee noble welcome,
Perfume her Temple with the breath of Nuns,
Not Vista's, but her own, with Roses strew
The paths that bring thee to her blessed shrine:
Cloth all her Altars in her richest Robes,
And hang her walls with stories of such loves
Have raised her Triumphs, and 'bove all at last
Record this day, the happy day, in which
Bellina proved to love a Convertite:
Be merciful, and save me.
You are defiled with Seas of Christians blood,
An enemy to Heaven, and which is good,
And cannot be a loving friend to me.
If I have sinned, forgive me you just powers,
My ignorance, not cruelty has don't:
And here I vow my self to be hereafter
What ever Bellina shall instruct me in.
For she was never made but to possess
The highest Mansion amongst your dignities,
Nor can Heaven let her err.
On that condition thus I spread my arms,
Whose chaste embraces ne'er touched man before,
And will to Hubert all the favour show
His virtuous love can covet;
I will be ever his: go thou to War,
These hands shall arm thee, and Isle watch thy Tent,
Till from the battle thou bring victory.
In peace Isle sit by thee, and read, or sing
Stanzas of chaste love, of love purified
From desires drossy blackness: nay, when our clouds
Of ignorance are quite vanished, and that a holy
Religious knot between us may be tied,
Bellina here vows to be Huberts Bride,
Else doe I swear perpetual chastity.
Thy vows I seal, be thou my ghostly Tutor,
And all my actions levelled to thy thoughts,
I am thy Creature.
Let Heaven too but now propitious prove,
And for thy soul thou hast won a happy love.
Come, shall we to my Father?
Are you Physicians?
Are you those men that proudly call your selves
The helps of Nature?
Oh my good Lord, have patience.
What should I doe? lye like a patient Ass,
Feel my self tortured by this diffused poison,
But tortured more by these unsavoury drugs.
Come one of you yourselves, and speak to him.
How fares your Highness?
Never worse: what's he?
One of your Highnesse-Doctors.
Come sit near me,
Feel my pulse once again, and tell me Doctor,
Tell me in terms that I may understand:
I doe not love your gibberish; tell me honestly
Where the Cause lies, and give a Remedy,
And that with speed; or in despite of Art
Of Nature, you, and all your heavenly motions,
Isle recollect so much of life into me,
As shall give space to see you tortured.
Some body told me that a Bath of mans blood
Would restore me; Christians shall pay for it:
Fetch the Bishop hither, he shall begin.
Hoe's gone for.
What's my disease?
My Lord, you are poisoned.
I told thee so my self, and told thee how:
But what's the reason that I have no help?
The Coffers of my Treasury are full,
Or if they were not, tributary Christians
Bring in sufficient store to pay your fees,
If that you gape at.
Wilt please your Highness then to take this Cordi∣all?
Gold never truly did you good till now.
It is gone.
My Lord, it was the perfectst tincture
Of Gold that ever any Art produced:
With it was mixed a true rare Quintessence,
Extracted out of Oriental Bezar,
And with it was dissolved the Magisterial,
Made of the Horn Armenia so much boasts of:
Which though dull Death had usurped Natures right,
Is able to create new life again.
Why does it good on men, and not on Kings?
We have the selfsame passages for Nature
With mortal men, our pulses beat like theirs:
We are subject unto passions as they are.
I find it now, but to my grief I find,
Life stands not with us on such ticklish points.
What is it because we are Kings, Life takes it leave
With greater state? No, no; the envious gods
Malign our happiness: Oh that my breath had power
With my last words to blast their Deities.
The Cordial that you took requires rest:
For healths sake good my Lord, repose your self.
Yes, any thing for health; draw round the Curtains:
We'll watch by him, whilst you two doe consult.
What guess you by that Urine?
Surely death.
Death certain, without contradiction:
For though the Urine be a whore, and lies,
Yet where I find her in all parts agree
With other Symptoms of apparent death,
Isle give her faith: Pray Sir, doe but mark
These black Hypostacies, it plainly shows
Mortification generally through the spirits,
And you may find the Pulse to show as much
By his uncertainty of time and strength.
We find the spirits often suffisticated
By many accidents, but yet not mortified;
A sudden fear will doe it.
Very right;
But there's no malicious humour mixed
As in the King sir, you must understand:
A Scorpion stung him; now a Scorpion is
A small compacted creature, in whom Earth
Hath the predominance, but mixed with fire,
So that in him Saturn and Mars doe meet.
This little Creature hath his several humours,
And these their excrements, these met together,
Inflamed by anger, made a deadly poison:
And by how much the creatures body's less,
By so much is the force of venom more:
As Lightning through a windows Casement
Hurts more than that which enters at the door.
But for the way to cure it.
Know none:
Yet Ancient Writers have prescribed us many,
As Theophrastus holds most excellent.
Diophoratick Medicines to expel
Ill vapours from the noble parts by sweat:
But Avices and also Rabbi Roses
Doe think it better by provoking Urine,
Since by the Urine blood may well be purged,
And spirits from the blood have nutriment;
But for my part, I ever held opinion,
In such a case the ventosies are best.
They are indeed, and they doe far exceed.
All the great curious Cataphlasmes,
Or the live tail of a deplumed Hen,
Or your hot Pige once, or your quartered Whelps,
For they by a mere forced attractive power,
Retain that safely which by force was drawn;
Whereas the other things I named before,
Doe lose their virtue, as they lose their heat.
The ventosies shall be our next intentions.
Pray Gentlemen attend his Highness.
Your next intentions be to drown your selves,
Dogge-leaches all; I see I am not mortal,
For I with patience have thus long endured,
Beyond the strength of all mortality;
But now the thrice heate furnace of my bosom
Disdains bounds: doe not I scorch you all?
Go, go, you are all but prating Mountebanks,
Quacksalvers, and Imposures; get you all from me.
These Ventosies my Lord will give you ease.
A vengeance on thy Ventosies and thee.
The Bishop Sir is come.
Christian thy blood
Must give me ease and help.
Drink then thy fill;
None of the Fathers that begot sweet Physic,
That Divine Lady, comforter to man,
Invented such a medicine as mans blood,
A drink so precious should not be so spilt;
Take mine, and heaven pardon you the guilt.
A Butcher; see his throat cut.
I am so far from shrinking, that mine own hands
Sall bare my throat; and am so far from wishing
Ill to you, that mangle me, that before
My blood shall wash these Rushes,
King, I will cure thee.
You cure him.
Speak on fellow.
If I doe not
Restore your limbs to soundness, drive the poison
From the infected part, study your tortures,
To tear me peece-meale, yet be kept alive.
Oh reverent man come near me, work this wonder,
Ask gold, honours, any, any thing,
The sublunary treasures of this world
Can yield, and they are thine.
I will doe nothing without a recompense.
A royal one.
Name what you would desire.
Stand by, you trouble him,
A recompense can my Crown buy thee, take it;
Reach him my Crown, and plant it on his head.
No, here's my bargain.
Quickly, oh speak quickly—
Off with the good-mans Irons.
Free all those Christians, which are now thy slaves,
In all thy Citadels, Castles, Fortresses,
Those in Bellanna, and Mersaganna,
Those in Alempha, and in Hazaneth,
Those in thy Galleys, those in thy Iayles and Dungeons.
Those, any where; my Signet, take my Signet,
And free all on your lives, free all the Christians.
What dost thou else desire?
This: that thy self trample upon thy Pagan gods.
Sir.
Away.
Wash your soul white by wading in the stream
Of Christian gore.
I will turn Christian.
Better wolves worry this accursed—
Better
Have Bandogs worry all of you, than I
To languish in a torment, that feeds on me,
As if the Furies bit me: Isle turn Christian,
And if I doe not, let the Thunder pay
My breach of promise; cure me, good old man,
And I will call thee father; thou shalt have
A King come kneeling to thee every Morning,
To take a blessing from thee, and to hear thee
Salute him as a Son:
When, when is this wonder?
Now; you are well Sir?
Ha!
Has your pain left you?
Yes, see else Damianus, Antony,
Cosmo, I am well.
He does it by enchantment.
By mere Witch-craft.
Thy payment for my cure?
What?
To turn Christian,
And set all Christian slaves at liberty.
Isle hang and torture all;
Call back the Messenger sent with our Signet;
For thy self, thou fool, should I allow
Thee life, thou would be poisoned by our
College of Physicians; let him not touch me,
Nor ever more come near me; and to be sure
Thy sorceries shall not strike me, stone him to death.
When?
Now, here presently.
Ungrateful man.
Dispatch, his voice is horrid in our ears,
Kill him, hurl all, and in him kill my fears.
I would thy fears were ended.
Why thus delay you?
The stones are soft as spunges.
Not any stone here
Can raze his skin.
See Sir.
More Conjuring?
Thanks heavenly preservation.
Mocked by a hell-hound?
This must not be endured Sir.
Unbinde the wretch;
Nail him to the earth with Irons: Cannot death strike him?
New studied tortures shall.
New tortures bring,
They all to me are but a banqueting.
But are you well indeed Sir?
Passing well,
Though my Physician fetched the cure from hell:
Ell's one, I am glad I have it.
You noble Hubert, are the men chosen out
From all our Vandal Leaders to be chief
O'er a new Army, which the King will raise,
To root out from our land these Christians,
That over-runne us?
It is a glory Hubert,
Will raise your fame, and make you like our gods.
To please whom, you must doe this.
And in doing,
Be active as the fire, and merciless
As is the boundless Ocean, when it swallows
Whole Towns, and of them leaves no Monument.
When shall mine eyes be happy in the sight
Of this brave Pageantry?
The King says, instantly.
And must I be the General?
Only you.
I shall not then at my returning home
Have sharers in my great acts: to the Volume
My Sword in bloody Letters shall text down,
No Name must stand but mine, no leaf turned o'er
But Huberts works are •ead, and none but mine.
Bellizarius shall not on his Clouds of fire
Fly flaming round about the staring World,
Whilst I creep on the earth. Flatter me not,
Am I to go indeed?
The King so swears.
A Kings word is a Statute graven in Brass,
And if he breaks that Law, I will in Thunder
Rouse his cold spirit: I long to ride in Armour,
And looking round about me, to see nothing
But Seas and shores, the Seas of Christians blood,
The shores tough Soldiers: Here a wing flies out
Soaring at Victory, here the maine Battalion
Comes up with as much horror, and hotter terror,
As if a thick-growne Forest by enchantment
Were made to move, and all the Trees should meet
Pell mell, and rive their beaten bulks in sunder,
As petty Towers doe, being flung down by Thunder.
Pray thank the King, and tell him I am ready
To cry a Charge; tell him I shall not sleep,
Till that which wakens Cowards, trembling with fear,
Startles me, and sends brave Music to mine ear,
And that's the Drum and Trumpet.
This shall be told him.
And all the Gods and Vandals shall strike Heaven
With repercussive Echoes of your name,
Crying a Hubert.
Deaf me with that sound,
A Soldier though he falls in the Field, lives crowned.
We'll to the King, and tell him this.
Doe: Oh my Bellina,
If ever, make me happy now; now tie
Strong charms about my full-plum'd Burgonet
To bring me safe home: I must to the Wars.
What wars? we have no wars but in our selves:
We fighting with our sins, our sins with us,
Yet they still get the victory: who are in Arms
That you must to the Field?
The Kings Royal thoughts
Are in a mutiny amongst themselves,
And nothing can allay them but a slaughter,
A general massacre of all the Christians
That breath in his Dominion: I am the Engine
To work this glorious wonder.
Fore-fend it Heaven:
Last time you sate by me within my bower,
I told you of a Palace walled with gold.
I doe remember it.
The floor of sparkling Diamonds, and the roof
Studded with Stars shining as bright as fire.
True.
And I told you one day I would show you
A path should bring you thither.
You did indeed.
And will you now neglect a lease of this,
To lye in a cold field, a field of murder?
Say thou should kill ten thousand Christians,
They go but as Ambassadors to Heaven
To tell thy cruelties, and on you Battlements
They all will stand on rows, laughing to see
Thee fall into a pit as bottomless,
As the Heavens are in extension infinite,
More, prithee more; I had forgot this Music.
Say thou should win the day, yet art thou lost,
For ever lost; an everlasting slave,
Though thou come home a laure'ld Conqueror.
You courted me to love you, now I woe thee
To love thy self, to love a thing within thee
More curious than the frame of all this world,
More lasting than this Engine o'er our heads,
Whose wheels have moved so many thousand years:
This thing is thy soul,
For which I woe thee.
Thou-woest, I yield, and in that yielding love thee,
And for that love Isle be the Christians guide:
I am their Captain, come both Goth and Vandal,
Nay, come the King, I am the Christians General.
Not yet, till your Commission be fair drawn,
Not yet, till on your brow you bear the Print
Of a rich golden seal.
Get me that seal then.
There is an Aqua fortis, (an eating water)
Must first wash off thine infidelity,
And then you are armed.
O let me then be armed.
Thou shalt:
But on thy knees thou gently first shalt swear
To put no Armour on but what I bear.
By this chaste clasping of our hands I swear—
We then thus hand in hand will fight a battle
Worth all the pitch-fields, all the bloody banquets,
The slaughter and the massacre of Christians,
Of whom such heaps so quickly never fell,
Brave on set be thy end not terrible.
This kindled fire burn in us, till as deaths slaves
Our bodies pay their tributes to their graves.
Come fellow Pagans, death means to fare well to day, for he is like to have rost-meate to his supper, two prin∣cipall
dishes; many a Knight keeps a worse Table. First, a brave General Carbonadoed, then a fat Bishop broiled, whose Rochet comes in fried for the second course, according to the old saying, A plump greazie Prelate fries a faggot daintily.
Oh the General Bellizarius for my money: hee has a fiery spirit too, hee will roast soakingly within and with∣out.
Methinks Christians make the bravest Bonfires of a∣ny people in the Universe; as a Jew burns pretty-well, but if you mark him, he burns upward: the fire takes him by the Nose first.
I know some Vintners then are Jaws.
Now as your Jew burns upward, your French-man burns downward like a Candle, and commonly goes out with a stink like a snuff, and what socket soever it light in, it must be well cleansed and picked before it can be used again: But Bellizarius, the brave General, will flame high and clear like a Beacon, but your Puritan Eugenius will burn blew, blew▪ like a white-bread sop in Aqua vitae. Fellow Pagans, I pray let us agree among our selves about the sharing of those two.
I, it is fit.
You know I am worshipful by my place, the under∣keeper may write Squire if he list, at the bottom of the paper: I doe cry first the Generals great Scarf to make me a short Summer-cloake, and the Bishops wide sleeves to make me a Holy-dayes shirt.
Having a double voice we cannot abridge you of a double share.
You that so well know what belongs to reverence, the Breeches by yours, whether Bishops or Generals: but with this Proviso, because we will all share of both parties, as I have lead the way, I claiming the Generals and the Bi∣shops sleeves, so he that chooses the Generals Doublet, shall wear the Generals Breeches.
A match.
Nay, twill be far from a match that's certain, but it
will make us to be taken for men of note, what company so∣ver we come in:
The Soldier and the Scholar peekt up so,
Will make tam Mart, quam Mercurio.
As you are Vice-gerent to that Majesty,
By whom Kings reign on earth, as you would wish
Your heirs should sit upon your Throne, your name
Be mentioned in the Chronicle of glory,
Great King vouchsafe me hearing.
Speak.
My husband;
The much, too much wronged Bellizarius,
Hath not deserved the measure of such misery
Which is thrown on him; call, oh call to mind
His service, how often he hath fought,
And toiled in wars to give his Country peace:
He has not been a flatterer of the Time,
Nor Courted great ones for their glorious Vices;
He hath not soothed blind dotage in the World,
Nor capered on the Commonwealths dishonour;
He has not peeld the rich, nor flayed the poor,
Nor from the heart-strings of the Commons drawn
Profit to his own Coffers; he never bribed
The white intents of mercy, never sold
Justice for money, to set up his own,
And utterly undo whole families:
Yet some such men there are that have done thus,
The mores the pity.
To the point.
Oh Sir, Bellizarius has his wounds emptied of blood,
Both for his Prince and Country; to repeat
Particulars, were to doe injury
To your yet mindful gratitude—His Life,
His liberty, it is that I plead for—that:
And since your enemies and his could never
Captive the one, and triumph in the other,
Let not his friends,
His King commend a cruelty,
Strange to be talked of, cursed to be acted;
My Husband, oh my husband Bellizarius,
For him I beg.
Lady rise up, we will be gracious
To thy suit: cause Bellizarius
And the Bishop be brought hither instantly.
Now all the blessings due to a good King
Crown you with lasting honours.
If thou can
Persuade thy husband to recant his errors,
He shall not only live, but in our favours
Be chief; wilt undertake it?
Undertake it Sir,
On these conditions, you shall your self
Be witness with what instance I will urge him
To pity his own self, recant his errors.
So doing he will purchase many friends.
Life, love, and liberty.
But tell me, pray Sir,
What are those errors which he must recant?
His hatred to those powers to which we bow,
On whom we all depend; he has kneeled to them,
Let him his base Apostasy recant,
Recant his being a Christian, and recant
The love he bears to Christians.
If he deny to doe all this,
Or any point of this,
Is there no mercy for him?
Could thou shed
A Sea of tears, to drown my resolution,
He dyes; could the fond man lay at my foot
The Kingdoms of the earth, he dyes; he dyes
Were he my son, my father, bid him recant,
Else all the Torments cruelty can invent
shall fall on him.
No spark of pity?
None.
Well then, but mark what pains Isle take to win him:
To win him home; Isle set him in a way,
The Clouds shall clap to find what went astray.
Doe this, and we are all his.
Doe this, I swear to jewel him in my bosom.
See where he comes.
And whither now, is Tyranny grown ripe,
To blow us to our graves yet?
Bellizarius,
Thy wife has sued for mercy, and has found it:
Speak Lady tell him how.
Victoria too:
Oh then I fear the striving to express
The virtue of a good wife, hath begot
An utter ruin of all goodness in thee:
What would thou say, poor woman?
My Lord the King,
Nothing can alter your incensed rage,
But recantation.
Nothing.
Recantation, sweet
Music; Bellizarius thou moist live;
The King is full of royal bounty—like
The ambition of mortality —examine
What recantation is—a toy.
None hinder her: now ply him.
To lose the portage in these sacred pleasures,
That knows no end; to lose the fellowship
Of Angels, lose the harmony of blessings,
Which crown all Martyrs with eternity:
Wilt thou not recant?
I understand her not.
Nor I.
Thy life hath hitherto been, my dear husband,
But a disease to thee; thou hast indeed,
Moved on the earth, like other creeping worms,
Who take delight in worldly surfeits, heate
Their blood with lusts, their limbs with proud attires;
Fed on their change of sins; that doe not use
Their pleasure, but enjoy them; enjoy them fully,
In streams that are most sensual, and persevere
To live so till they dye, and to dye never.
What means all this?
Art in thy right wits woman?
Such beasts are those about thee; take then courage,
If ever in thy youth thy soul hath set
By the Worlds tempting fires, as these men doe,
Recant that error.
Ha?
Hast thou in battle tan a pride in blood?
Recant that error: hast thou constant stood
In a bad cause? clap a new armour on,
And sight now in a good: oh lose not heaven
For a few minutes in a Tyrants eye;
Be valiant, and meet death; if thou now lose
Thy portion laid up for thee yonder, yonder,
For breath or honours here, oh thou dost sell
Thy soul for nothing:
Recant all this,
And then be raised up to a Throne of blis.
We are abused, stop her mouth.
Victoria,
Thou nobly dost confirm me▪ hast new armed
My resolution, excellent Victoria.
Oh happy daughter, thou in this dost bring,
That Requiem to our souls, which Angels sing.
Can you endure this wrong Sir?
Be out-brav'd by a seducing Strumpet?
Bind her fast;
Weal try what recantation you can make,
Hag, in the presence of of your brave holy Champion,
And thy Husband,
One of my Cammell drivers shall take from thee
The glory of thy honesty and honour:
Call in the Peasant.
Bellizarius,
Eugenius, is there no guard above us,
That will protect me from a rape? it is worse
Than worlds of tortures.
Fear not, Victoria, be
Thou a chaste one in thy mind, thy body
May, like a Temple of well tempered steel,
Be battered, not demolished.
Tyrant be merciful,
And if thou hast no other virtue in thee,
Deserving memory to succeeding ages,
Yet only thy not suffering such an out-rage,
Shall add praise to thy name.
Where is the Groom?
Oh sure the Sun will darken,
And not behold a deed so soul and monstrous.
Here is a Cammell driver.
Stand forth sirrah.
Be bold, and shrink not, this is she.
And I am hee:
Is it the Kings pleasure I should mouse her, and before all these people?
No, it is considered better; unbinde the fury.
And drag her to some corner, it is our pleasure,
Fall to thy business freely.
Not too freely neither; I save hard, and drink wa∣la, so doe the Indians; yet who fuller of Bastards? so doe the Turks, yet who gets greater Logger-heads? come wench, Isle teach thee how to cut up wild foul.
Guard me you heavens.
Be mine eyes lost for ever?
Is that her husband?
Yes.
No matter; some husbands are so base, they keep the door whilst they are Cuckolded; but this is after a more manlier way, for he stands bound to see it done.
Hail her away.
Come Pusse: hail her away, which way? you way? my Camels backs cannot climb it.
The fellow is struck mad.
That way, it looks into a Mill-pond; whirre, how the Wheels go, and the Devil grinds? no this way.
Keep the slave back.
Back, keep me back; there sits my wife kom∣binge her hair, which curls like a witches feltlocks, all the Neets in it are Spiders, and all the Dandruff the sand of a Scriveners Sand-boxe: Stand away, my whore shall not be lousy, let me come noynt her with Stavesucre.
Defend me, lop his hands off.
Hew him in pieces.
What has he done?
Sir, beat out his own brains.
You for his soul must answer.
Fetch another.
Tempt not the wrath superhall to fall down,
And crush thee in thy Throne.
Peace sorceress slave:
Sir, take hence this Witch and ravish her.
A Witch, VVitches are the Devils sweet∣hearts.
Doe it, be thou Master of much gold.
Shall I have gold to doe it? in some Countries I hear whole Lordships are spent upon a fleshly device, yet the buyer in the end had nothing but French Repentance, and the curse of Surgery for his money; let me finger my Gold; Isle venture on, but not give her a penny; women's flesh was never cheaper, a man may eat it without bread, all Trades fall, so doe they.
Look you Sir, there's your gold.
Isle tell money after my Father: oh I am struck blind!
The fellow is bewitched Sir.
Great King, impute not
This most miraculous delivery
To witch-craft; it is a gentle admonition
To teach thy heart obey it.
Lift up the slave,
Though he has lost his sight, his feeling is not:
He dyes unless he ravish her.
Force her into thy arms, or else thou die.
I have lost my hearing too.
Fetch other slaves.
Thou must force her.
Truly I am hoarse often with driving my Cam∣mells, and nothing does me good but syrup of Whore∣hound.
Here are two slaves will doe it indeed.
Which is she?
This creature, she has beauty to entice you,
And enough to feast you all: seize her all three,
And ravish her by turns.
A match.
Hang up these slaves,
I am mock't by her and them:
They dance me into anger:
Heard you not music?
Yes sure, and most sweet melody.
It is the heavens play,
And the Clouds dance for joy thy cruelty
Has not tan hold upon me.
Hunger then shall:
Lead them away, drag her to some loathed dungeon,
And for three days give her no food;
Load them with Irons.
They shall.
Come fellow soldiers, half the fight is past,
The bloodiest battle comes to an end at last.
Have any Christian soul broke from my Jail
This night, and gone in the dark to find out heaven?
Are any of my hated prisoners dead?
Dead, yes,
And five more come into the world, in stead of one;
These Christians are like Artichoaks of Jerusalem,
They over-runne any ground they grow in.
Are they so fruitful?
Fruitful?
A Hee Christian told me, that amongst them the young fell∣lowes
are such Earing rioted Rascals, that they will run into the park of Matrimony at sixteen: are Bucks of the first head at eighteen, and by twenty carry in some places their horns on their backs.
On their backs?
What kind of Christians are they?
Marry these are Christian Butchers, who when their Oxen are flayed, throw their skins on their should∣ders.
I thought they had been Cuckolds.
Amongst them, no, there's no woman, that's a true Christian, will horn her husband: there dyed to night no less than six and a half in our Jail.
How? six and a half?
One was a girl of thirteen with child.
Thy tidings fats me.
You may have one or two of' em dressed to your Din∣ner to make you more fat.
Unhallowed slave, let a Jew eat Pork,
When I but touch a Christian.
You are not of my diet: would I had a young Loin of Pork to my Supper, and two Loins of a pretty sweet Christian after Supper.
Would thou might eat and choke.
Never at such meat; it goes down without chaw∣ing.
We have a task in hand to kill a Serpent,
Which spits her poison in our Kingdoms face,
And that we speak not of: lives still
That Witch Victoria, wife to Bellizarius?
Is Death afraid to touch the Hag? does hunger
Tremble to gnaw her flesh off, dry up her blood,
And make her eat herself in Curses, ha?
Ha? your mouth gapes as if you would eat me: the King commanded she should be laden with Irons; I have laid two load upon her, then to pop her into the Dungeon, I
thrust down as deep as I could: then to give her no meat; Alas my cheeks cry out, I have meat little enough for my self: Three days and three nights has her Cupboard had no victuals in it: I saw no less than Fifty six Mice run out of the hole she lies in, and not a crumb of bread or bit of cheese amongst them.
It is the better.
I heard her one morning cough pitifully, upon which I gave her a mess of Porridge piping-hot.
Thou Dog, it is death.
Nay but sir, I powered 'em down scalding as they were on her head, because they say, they are good for a cold, and I think that killed her: for to try if she were alive or no, I did but even now tie a Crust to a packe-threed on a pin, but she leapt not at it; so that I am sure shoe's worms meat by this.
Rewards in golden showers shall rain upon us:
Be thy words true? fall down and kiss the earth.
Kiss earth, why? and so many wenches come to the Jail?
Slave down, and clap thy ear to the caves mouth,
And make me glad or heavy;
If she speak not, I shall crack
My ribs, and spend my spleen in laughter;
But if thou hear her pant, I am gon.
Farewell then.
Breaths she?
No sir; her wind instrument is out of tune.
Call, cal.
Doe you hear, you low woman, hold not down your head so for shame, creep not thus into a corner, no honest woman loves to be fumbling thus in the dark: hang her she has no tongue.
Would twenty thousand of their sex had none.
Fox, Fox, come out of your hole.
Horror, what's this?
Alas I know not what my self am.
Fly darnesse fly, in spite of Caves,
Truth can thrust her arms through Graves,
No Tyrant shalt confine
A white soul that's divine,
And does more brightly shine
Than Moon or Sun,
She lasts when they are done.
I am bewitched;
Mine Eyes fail me; lead me to King.
And tell, we heard a Mermaid sing.
Go fools, and let your fears
Glow as your sins and cares,
The goodhowe're trod under,
Are Lawreld safe in thunder:
Though locked up in a den,
One Angel frees you from an host of men.
Where is this piece of witchcraft?
It is vanished Sir.
It was here, just at the Caves mouth, where she lies.
What manner of thing was it?
An admirable face, and when it sung
All the Clouds danced methought above our heads.
And all the ground under my heals quak't like a Bog.
Deluded slaves, these are turned Christians too.
The prisoners in my Jail will not say so.
Turned Christians? it has ever been my profession to fang and clutch, and to squeeze: I was first a Varlet, then a Bumbaily, now an under Jailer turned Christian?
Break up the Iron passage of the Cave,
And if the forceresse lives, tear her in pieces.
See, it is come again.
It staggers me.
Amazement; look to the King.
She comes, she comes, she comes:
No banquets are so sweet as Martyrdomes:
She comes.
It is vanished Sir again.
Mere Necromancy.
This is the apparition of some devil,
Stealing a glorious shape, and cries, she comes.
If all devils were no worse, would I were a∣amongst 'em.
Our power is mocked by magical impostures,
They shall not mock our tortures: let Eugenius
And Bellizarius fright away these shadows,
Rung from sharpe tortures; drag them hither.
To the stake?
As Bears are?
And upon your lives,
My longings feast with her, though her base limbs
Be in a thousand pieces.
She shall be gathred up.
What's the Kings will? I am here
Are your tormentors ready to give battle?
I am ready for them, and though I lose
My life, hope to win the day.
What art thou?
An armed Christian.
What's thy name?
Victoria;
In my name there's conquest writ;
I therefore fear no threatenings; but pray,
That thou moist dye a good King.
This is not she Sir.
It is; but on her brow some Deity sits:
What are those Fairies dressing up her hair,
Whilst sweeter spirits dancing in her eyes,
Bewitches me to them?
Oh Victoria, love me,
And see thy Husband, now a slave, whose life
Hangs at a needles point, shall live, so thou
Breath but the doom.
Traitors, what forcerous hand
Has built upon this enchantment of a Christian,
To make me dote upon the beauty of it?
How comes she to this habit?
Went she thus in?
No Sir, mine own hands stripped her into rags.
For any meat she has eaten, her face needs not make you dote, and for clean linen, Isle swear, it was not brought into the Jail, for there they scorn to shift once a week.
Bellizarius,
Woe thy wife that she would love me,
And thou shalt live.
I will—Victoria,
By all those chaste fires kindled in our bosoms,
Through which pure love shined on our marriage night;
Nay with a holier conjuration:
By all those thorns and briars which thy soft feet
Tread boldly on, to find a path to heaven,
I beg of thee, even on my knee I beg,
That thou would love this King, take him byth' hand,
Warm his in thine, and hang about his neck,
And seal ten thousand kisses on his cheek,
So he will tread his false gods under foot.
Oh horrible!
Bring tortures.
So he will wash his soul white as we doe,
And fight under our Banner, (bloody red)
And hand in hand with us walk martyred.
They mock you.
Stretch his body up byth' arms,
And at his feet hang plummets,
He shall bee well shod for stroveling I warrant you.
Eugenius, bow thy knee before our Jove,
And the King gives thee mercy.
Else stripes and death.
We come into the world but at one door,
But twenty thousand gates stand open wide,
To give us passage hence: death then is easy,
And I defy all tortures.
There fasten the Cative;
I care not for thy wife:
Get from mine eye, thou tempting Lamia:
But Bellizarius, before thy bodies
Frame be pulled in pieces, and every
Limb dis-joynted, wilt thou forsake
The errors thou art drenched in?
Errors?
Thou blasphemous and god less man,
From the great Axis moist thou as easy, with one arm,
Pluck the Universal Globe,
As from my Center move me—
There's my figure, they are waves
That beat a rock insensible,
With an infatigable patience
My breast dares all your arrows; shoot—shot all;
Your tortures are but struck against the wall;
Which, back rebounding, hit your selves.
Up with him.
Lay on more weights:
That hangman which more brings,
Adds active feathers to my soaring wings,
Victoria yet save him.
Keep on thy flight,
And be a bird of Paradise.
Give him more Irons.
More, more.
Let him then go:
Live thou, and be my Queen.
Deign but to love me.
I am going to live with a far greater King.
Bind the coy strumpet, she dyes too.
Let her brains be beaten on an Anvil:
For some new plagues for her.
Vex him.
Doe more.
Heaven pardon you.
And strengthen him in all his sufferings.
Come, oh come, oh come away,
A Quire of Angels for thee stay:
A Rome where Diamonds borrow light,
Open stands for thee this night.
Night, no, no, here is ever day,
Come, oh come, oh come, oh come away.
This battle is thy last, fight well, and win
A Crown set full of Stars.
I spy an arm plucking up to heaven:
More weights you are best,
I shall be gone else.
Doe, Isle follow thee.
Is he not yet dispatcht?
Yes King, I thank thee;
I have all my life time trod on rotten ground,
And still so deep been sinking,
That my soul was oft like to bee lost;
But now I see a guide, sweet guide,
A blessed messenger, who having
Brought me up a little way
Up yonder hill, I there am sure to buy,
For a few stripes here, rich eternity.
Victory, victory, hell is beaten down,
The Martyr has put on a golden Crown;
Ring Bells of Heaven, him welcome hither,
Circle him Angels round together.
Follow.
I will:
What sacred voice cries follow?
I am ready: Oh send me after him.
Thou shalt not,
Till thou hast fed my lust.
Thou fool thou can not;
All my mortality is shaken off,
My heart of flesh and blood is gone,
My body is changed, this face
Is not that once was mine;
I am a Spirit, and no rack of thine
Can touch me.
Not a rack of mine shall touch thee:
Why should the world loose such
A pair of Suns as shine out from
Thine eyes: why art thou cruel to make away
Thy self, and murder me?
Since whirle-winds cannot shake thee,
Thou shalt live, and Isle fan gentle
Gales upon thy face: fetch me a day bed,
Rob the earths perfumes of all
The ravishing sweets, to feast her fence;
Pillows of roses shall bear up her head▪
O would a thousand springs might grow in one,
To weave a flowery mantle o'er her limbs,
As she lies down.
Oh that some rock of Ice,
Might fall on me, and freeze me into nothing.
Enchant our ears with Music:
Would I had skill to call the winged
Musicians of the air into these rooms,
They all should play to thee,
Till golden slumbers danced upon thy brows,
Watching to close thine eye-lids.
These Stars must shine no more; soul fly away:
Tyrant enjoy but a cold lump of clay.
My charms work,
She sleeps, and looks more lovely
Now she sleeps, against she wakes:
Invention grow thou poor, studying
To find a banquet, which the gods might
Be invited to: I need not court her now
For a poor kiss; her lips are friendly now,
And with the warm breath sweating
All the Air draw me thus to them—ha!
The lips of Winter
Are not so cold.
She's dead Sir.
Dead?
As frozen as if the North-winde had in spite
Snatched her hence from you.
Oh I have murdered her:
Perfumes, some creature kill:
She has so long in that dark Dungeon
Sucked pestiferous breath, the sweet has
Stflled her: take hence the body;
Since me it hated, it shall feel my hate:
Cast her into the fire, I have lost her,
And for her sake all Christians shall be lost,
That subjects are to me: massacre all:
But thou, Eugenius, art the last shall fall
This day: and in mine eye, though it ne'er see more,
Call on thy helper which thou dost adore.
The King is struck with thunder.
Thanks Divine Powers,
Yours be the triumph, and the wonder ours.
Unbinde him, till a new King fill the Throne;
And he shall doom him.
A Hubert, a Hubert, a Hubert.
What means this cry, a Hubert?
Whore's your King?
Struck dead by thunder.
So I hear:
You see then there is an arm more
Rigorous than your love; an arm
Stretched from above to beat down Giants,
The mightiest Kings on earth, for all their
Shoulders carry Colossi heads:
The memory of Genzericks name dyes here:
Henricke, gives burial to the
Successive glory of that race,
Who had both voice and title to the Crown,
And means to guard it: who must now be King?
We know not, till we call the Lords together▪
What Lords?
Our selves and others.
Who makes you Lords?
The Tree upon whose boughs your honours grew;
Your Lord ships and your lives
Is fallen to the ground.
We stand on our own strength.
Who must be King?
A Hubert, a Hubert, a Hubert.
Deliver to my hand that reverent man.
Take him, and torture him,
For he called down vengeance
On Henricks head.
It was his own black soul that called it;
It was thou that caldst it.
Good Eugenius, lift thy hands up,
For thou art saved from Henricke,
And from these: you hear what echoes
Rebound from earth to heaven, from heaven to earth,
Casting the name of King only on me.
This golden Apple is a tempting fruit;
It is within my reach: this sword can touch it,
And lop the weak branch off, on which it hangs:
Which of you all would spurn at such a Star,
Lay it in the dust, when it is let down from heaven?
For him to wear?
Who then must wear that Star?
Hubert, Hubert, Hubert.
The Oracle tells you;
Oracle, it is a voice from above
Tells you; for the peoples tongues,
When they pronounce good things, are tied to chains
Of twenty thousand links; which chains are held
By one supernal hand, and cannot speak,
But what that hand will suffer: I have then
The people on my side, I have the soldiers,
I have that army which your rash young King
Had bent against the Christians, they now are mine:
I am the Center, and they all are lines
Meeting in me; if therefore these strong sinews,
The Soldiers and the Commons have a virtue
To lift me into the Throne, Isle leap into it:
Will you consent, or no; be quick in answer;
I must be swift in execution else.
Let us consult.
Doe, and do it quickly.
O noble Sir, if you be King, shoot forth
Bright as a Sunne-beame, and dry up these vapours
That choke this kingdom; dry the seas of blood,
Flowing from Christians, and drink up the tears
Of those alive, half slaughtered in their fears.
Father Isle not offend you; have you done?
So long choosing one Crown?
Let Drums and Trumpets proclaim
Hubert our King.
Sound Drums and Trumpets.
I have it then as well by voice as sword;
For should you hold it back it would be mine:
I claim it then by conquest, fields are won
By yielding, as by strokes; yet noble Vandals,
I will lay by the Conquest, and acknowledge,
That your hands and your hearts the pinnacles are,
On which my greatness mounts unto this height;
And now in sight of you and heaven I swear,
By those new sacred fires kindled within me,
It is not your hope of Gold my brow desires;
A thronging Court to me is but a Cell:
These popular acclamations, which thus dance
In the Air, should pass by me, as whistling winds
Playing with leaves of trees: I'm not ambitious
Of Titles glorious, and majestic:
But what I doe is to save blood, save you:
I mean to be a husband for you all,
And fill you all with riches.
It is that we thirst for,
For all our bags are emptied in these wars,
Raised by seditious Christians.
Peace thou fool;
They are not bags of gold, that mel•• in fire,
Which I will fill your coffers with, my treasury
Are riches for your souls, my arms are spread,
Like wings, to protect Christians▪ what have you done?
Proclaimed a Christian King? and Christian Kings
Should not be bloody.
How? turned Christian?
O blessed King, happy day.
Must we forsake our gods then?
Violent streams
Must not bee stopped by violence; there's an art
To meet, and put by the most boisterous wave:
It is now no policy for you to murmur,
Nor will I threaten: a great counsel by you
Shall straight be called, to set this frame in order
Of this great state.
To that we all are willing.
Are you then willing this noble maid
Shall be me Queen?
With all our hearts.
By no hand but by thine will we be Crowned:
Come my Bellina.
Your vow is past to me, that I should ever
Preserve my Virgin honour, that you would never
Tempt me unto your bed.
That vow I keep:
I vowed so long as my knees bowed to Jove,
To let you be your self: But excellent Lady,
I now am sealed a Christian, as you are;
And you have sworn oft, that when upon my fore-head
That glorious Star was stuck you would be mine
In holy wedlock; come sweet, you and I
Shall from our loins produce a race of Kings,
And ploughing up •a•e gods •et up one true▪
Christians unborn, crowning both me and you
With praise, as now with gold.
A fortunate day;
A great power prompts me on, and I obey.
Long live Hubert and Bellina, King and Queen
Of Gods and Vandals.
Two royal Jewels you give me, this, and this.
Father your hand is lucky, I am covetous
Of one Gift more; after your sacred way
Make you this Queen a wife; our Coronation
Is turned into a bridal.
All joy and happiness.
To guard your lives will I lay out mine own,
And like Vines plant you round about my throne.
AS in a Feast, so in a Comedy,
Two Senses must be pleased, in both the Eye.
In Feasts, the Eye and Taste must be invited,
In Comedies, the Eye and Ear delighted:
And he that only seeks to please but either,
While both he doth not please, he pleases neither:
What ever Feast, could every guest content:
When as t'each man, each Taste is different?
But less a Scene, where nought, but as it is newer,
Can please, where Guests are more, and Dishes fewer:
Yet in this thought, this thought the Author eased;
Who once made all, all •ul•s all never pleased:
Fine would we please the best, if not the many,
And sooner will the best be pleased, then any:
Our rest we set in pleasing of the best:
So we wish you, what you may give us: Rest.

NAy, let's not part so heavily.
For mine own part
It does not trouble me so much, that you
Have broke up house; for hospitality
Went out of fashion with crop-doublets
And cod-peeces: but I that have worn out
So many liveries under the worshipful
Old Gentleman your father.
My father had an office, which brought in
A fair revenue; I inherit but
His little land, whose annual profits wo'not
Encourage me to live at the same height:
Ye may meet better fortunes, there's enough
Preferment in the world; my love and best
Assistance promise to your selves.
I do not
Stand upon wages, Sir, I will not leave you.
How wooed thou live?
As other mortals do; yet I'll not play
The thief, that is a course by which a man
May soon ascend the ladder of preferment:
But I ne'er loved these climbing trees. I cannot
Cheat, though I have heard there is an art,
A devilish deal of knowledge in the dice;
And if men wonot part with money, some
Will fetch it out of the bones: but the best casting
Is in a Tavern, when the wine and reckoning
Come up together; some doe spin a living by it:
And there are many secret ways for Serving-men
To live, it is not wages does maintain
All of our Tribe, Sir; and especially
Those that have Mistresses.
But I am a Bachelor.
I pray let me be one of your buttons still then,
I am not half worn out; you know what mould
I'm made off, I did ever honest service;
And though my fellow Vermin can forsake
Your falling house, I doe not fear the rafters;
By this hand, Sir, I'll wait upon you, though
Like great men's servants, I do live on nothing
But looks, and the air of commendations.
Well, since you are so resolute, attend me,
The rest I here discharge, there's somewhat more,
Not worth the name of bounty, I wish all
A happier entertainment.
And there be
No remedy, heaven bless you, Sir.
Pray give me leave to wet my lips with these
My fellows, sorrow has made but a dry proverb,
I must to the Tavern, and condole a quart.
Meet me at Mistress Bellamies then.
I shall, Sir.
How now Masters.
You speak not
To me, Sir, I am a servant still indeed;
With them the case is altered, they are masters,
For they want services.
Oh, Master Playfare.
It is not now as when Andrea lived,
This place was made for pleasure, not for death.
There was a time when mortals whetted knives.
In time of yore, when men killed brutish beasts.
Oh cruel Butcher, whosoe're thou were.
Do not you know what all this signifies?
Not I.
My master 〈…〉 house-keeping.
He has committed Burglary, broke up the cellar,
And thrown the kitchen out at the hall window.
His house, Sir, has a superscription,
And is directed to his loving friend
Will pay the rent, you'll hardly know me now,
I have no fellow.
You are very merry, Sir.
He has some cause, we are discharged.
For certain, my master only
Belongs to me, if you would speak with him,
He's gone to Mistress Bellamies, Sir;
In the mean time, please you to understand,
I Close follow my master, and shall feed still,
Although my fellows here are become blanks,
And do want filling.
Lads, I have known you long:
Although you be at loss, in confidence
Of all your future honesties, I'll employ ye
In a device, which if it hit, may
Reward your pains.
All?
Your Master only, Sir, belongs to you,
Follow him still, and if there be occasion,
I shall enquire for you; you will be faithful.
Doubt not, M. Playfaire.
I have a project,
Follow me for instructions; farewell Close,
Commend me to your master.
Buoy Close, buoy honest Close, we are blanks, blanks.
Roll up your selves in paper-liveries, and
Be drawn at the next Lottery; I wo'not
Forsake my certainty for all your projects,
If it should fail I shall find some of you
Sneaking in Pals behind a pillar, with
A zealous prayer, some Gentleman would read
The bed-roll of your commendation,
And pity a very serviceable fellow,
That would fine wait on him, but wants a cloak:
Go, prosper with your project.
Widow, be ruled by me, I know the world,
And I have studied it these fifty years:
There's no man to be trusted.
Without good.
Security, you mean.
No young man, widow,
That talks, and says he loves you, writes you verses,
And swears he shall go hang himself, unless
You pity him; take me an old man.
So, take you an old man.
Seasoned with care and thrift, not led away
By vicious conversation, nor corrupted
With pride and surfeit, one that knows the use
Of money; Do ye mark the use?
Yes, Sir:
Use upon use, you mean.
And dares not spend it prodigally, knowing
The principal end it was ordained to, was
To relieve our necessity, and lay up
What is above.
To help the poor.
You may,
If you be so disposed, but it is as commendable
To give it in your will, to build an Hospital,
And so our charity comes altogether:
I would not have your state be eaten up
By Caterpillars, but preserved and made
Greater, by marrying some discreet old man.
And such an one you show your self.
You happily
Interpret me.
I would not tell you, Sir,
Till our next meeting, how much you have won,
By your good counsel, on me.
She inclines.
It is your good nature, I am plain, and have
No tricks, I'll tell you all my fault, I am
Addicted very much to gather wealth;
I have no children to devour my state,
Nor kindred, only a Niece left to my trust,
One that is never like to marry.
Why?
She never thrived since she came to me.
I easily believe it.
Melancholy
Will kill her, and yet I pursue all ways
That promise her delight: I spare no cost
Of Physic, what her Doctor says, is done.
It is lovingly performed.
What's he?
A Gentleman that bears my daughter much
Affection.
Sure I have seen him.
Master Hartwell.
Oh, he's a beggar, or must be very shortly.
Have you his lands in mortgage?
Not yet, not yet; but he'll want money, widow.
He has had good breeding.
Hang breeding, it is unlucky,
They never keep their state that have too much on it,
Counsel your daughter, Mistress Bellamy,
To throw him off betime.
You direct well.
When we are married, I'll provide a match for her.
You have care on's.
It will become me.
Is he Suitor to your mother, Lady?
He would be such a thing: Were not I blessed
In such a jolly father in law?
He looks like some cast money-bag, that had given up
The stuffing, and for want of use grown mouldy:
He dares not keep much fire in's kitchen, lest
Warming his hands, which rather look like gloves,
So tanned and thin, he let em scorch, and gather
Into a heap. I do not think he ever
Put off his clothes, he would run-mad to see
His own anatomy, that such a wretch
Should have so vast a wealth.
I wot not be his
Niece for all his fortune.
I presume
Your mother is more noble, than to encourage him
In his pretence, and her estate would mix
But ill with his ill-gotten wealth, extorted
From widows and from or plans, nor will all
His plenty keep his soul one day from famine:
It is time ill spent to mention him, let's talk
Of something else.
Of what?
Of love again,
Whose flame we equally divide.
Your table
Is a devourer, and they shut up doors
First, that keep open house and entertainments:
This Lord is feasted, and that young Ladies
Sweet tooth must have a banquet; t'other old
Madam with ne'er a tooth must have some marchpane
Coral to rub her gums withal; these are
Ridiculous expenses.
Far from thrift.
This room has too rich furniture, and worse
Hangings would serve the turn; if I may be
Worthy to counsel, costly pictures are
Superfluous, though of this, or t'other masters
Doing: Hang Michael Angelo and his oils.
If they be given, you're the more excused
To let 'em show; but have a care you let not
Appear, either in Arras, or in picture,
The story of the Prodigal, twill fright▪
Young Gentlemen that come to visit you
From spending o'their portions, whose riot
May enrich you with their forfeited estates;
I have a thousand precepts more.
But do not
Think all this while of heaven.
It is in my chest,
And multiplied in every bag.
Or hell.
A fable to fright fools, or children; but
I cannot stay, my Scrivener doth expect me,
I'll visit you another time, sweet widow,
And give you more instructions.
Spare your travel▪
I sha'not practise these in haste, and must
Declare these precepts make not for your welcome:
My patience was a virtue all this while,
If you but think you have a soul; repent;
Your rules I am not covetous to follow,
Good master Hornet.
Live and be undone then:
You'll tell me another tale hereafter widow.
Letters from Master Startup, the country Gentleman.
What's he?
A Suitor of my Nurses commendations.
Now heaven deliver me, what have I seen?
This monster once was shown in the fair, or such
Another furred Baboon for all the world,
Dost know him? Why do I ask such a question?
He's such a thing the Devil would not owne's
Acquaintance.
Master Hornet, the great Usurer.
Hornet? Nay then, my wonder's over, and the
Devil be but such another, they
May be sworn brothers; yes, and divide hell
Betwixt em.
Who is that you talk on, Sir?
The beast, that Heaven be thanked, has left you,
Hornet▪ but I ha news for you.
Frances.
I'll hear it in the garden.
Do you love
That Master Hartwell? do not blush, but answer.
I hope you move not this, as if you doubted;
I took him first, upon your character,
Into my good opinion.
But things alter:
What then I thought, I delivered ye;
Nor since hath he deserved a less esteem
In his own person, but the circumstance
Is not the same, his fortune I have examined,
Which rises not to such a value, I
Did apprehend; and it becomes my care,
Being at one gift to depart with thee
And my estate, to look for one whose purse
May carry a proportion.
Make me not
Imagine you would wed me to a heap
Of shining dust, a golden bondage.
Nor
To penury; his birth, and education
Are not unworthy, he's a handsome man too;
But be not governed by your eye too much:
Children and age pursue, and many storms
Hover about our frail conditions:
All these must be provided for, they are not
Kisses will arm you against winter, therefore
Confident of your obedience, I propound
Another to your best thoughts,
Oh my unhappiness.
A Country Gentleman of spreading fortunes,
Young too, and not uncomely; for his breeding,
It was not spun the finest, but his wealth,
Able to guild deformity, and make
Even want of wit a virtue, when your life
Renders it self more sweet by your command;
His name is Master Startup, whom I expect
Our guest to morrow, that's his letter, read it.
This may seem strange at the first coming toward you;
But when discretion comes to examine what
A fruitful consequence attends it, you
Will thank me for it.
But with your pardon, mother,
Although I could dispense with my own thoughts,
And frame them to obedience, will this change
Be for my honour, or my fame? when such
A noble Gentleman shall boast he had,
With your consent, my love? or pray admit
That which we gain by riches of the second,
Seem to authorize, and may justify
The act with some; how can it cure the wound,
Which the poor heart, which loves, shall find too soon,
When it is neglected, and so cruelly,
Where it did hope for cherishing? Oh think
How you did love my father first, and be
More gentle to your daughter, your estate
Is above needy providence, or grafting
Into a new stock; it doth grow already
Fair from his own root, and doth want no piecing:
Nor are the means of Hartwell so contemptible.
No more: you've considered well, you'll shape
Another answer; in the mean time dispose
Your countenance to entertain this new
And able Lover: leave the satisfaction
Of Hartwell to my care:
He's here, to your chamber.
I know not what's the trick on it, nor themselves yet;
But he has a project to employ 'em all▪
I wish it well; but do you work your self
Into the opinion of her Nurse, she is
The Major Domo, and has all the intelligence.
Let me alone, I'll work her Sir like wax,
To print what form you please upon her, it is
A Loving Crone already to me, I
Will speak her fair, and in my drink may marry her.
Master Hartwell.
About your business.
There is a matter, Sir, which I must open,
And you perhaps will wonder at.
You prepare my attention.
You do love my daughter,
At least I think so.
If you knew my heart,
You might be confident, in her I sum
All my desires on earth.
Be not so fixed.
How Lady?
When you have heard me out, you'll find
Your consent easy to call back a promise
Made to your disadvantage.
I acknowledge;
This makes me wonder, pray interpret Lady,
And speak the dialect I understand:
I love your daughter.
But must never glory
In the reward which you expect should be,
Her marriage.
In the number of my actions
There is not one that's guilty of so much
Offence to you, that I should be so soon
Lost to your favour.
Have no thought so poor
You can deserve less, my opinion
Is richer laden with your merit.
Now I fear again, this violent turn of praise
Makes me suspect my state; if I be fallen,
Teach me to know my trespass.
I ne'er looked
With such clear eyes into your worth, and it were
A sin to general goodness, to delay
The free resign of that your worth may challenge.
If this be meant, pray pardon my mistake
Of something went before, love made me fear;
You said I never should enjoy your daughter
In marriage, which your self so late inclined to.
And must again repeat, you cannot call
Her Bride.
Can you forbid this happiness,
And love me?
Yes, so dearly, Hartwell, I
Present my self to thy affection.
You fright my understanding.
Does the name
Of widow sound displeasing, I have learned
Already to obey; my years are not
So many, with the thought, to freeze your blood,
I wear no print of time deep in my brow:
Have my hairs the innocence of age,
To speak me twice a child? Gentlemen active,
And of great birth, have courted my affection•
And if they flatter not, commend my person.
Add unto this my wealth, no narrow fortune,
And without competition, my daughter,
Depending on my love, whose portion must
Flow from my bounty, or be nothing; make
A sober apprehension of this tender,
And think I was not able to suppress
My silent flame, increased still by your virtues:
This minute give all hopes up for my daughter,
I can admit no Rival; it is within
Your election to be happy, Sir:
My love accepted comes with fair attendance,
Denied, you hasten your own exile, think on it,
I will expect your answer.
I am destroyed:
Was it her mother that spake all this while?
As pilgrims, by mistake of some small path,
Having told many weary steps, at night,
When their hopes flatter em, they are not far
From some kind entertainment, find themselves
Lost in a wilderness; so am I miserable:
Thus love delights to wound, and see us bleed,
He were a gentle god to kill indeed.
A word of thy mouth does it, I am weary
Of these indentures, like a fool, I was
In hope he should have married Mistress Frances.
A beggar, she his wife; no, Master Startup,
Whom I preferred, must carry her, he's a man
Of lands and money; I must tell you by
The way, he is little better than a fool.
The fitter for her husband, and my master.
You're in the right, he's innocent to your hands,
You may soon come to manage his estate.
Which if I do, thou shalt have all.
All what?
Why all that I can beg, borrow, or steal
From him; what should he do with so much riches?
I'll prompt my mistress, after the first year,
To put him to his pension; he should pay
For's very diet, and after a month or two,
For every time he comes al oft.
Nay, I would wish her to begin betimes,
If she doe mean to rule the roast, I can
Give her some documents; and be you sure
To stick close to your Mistress, there is something
To be got that way.
My most exquisite Varges,
How I doe love thy documents; but he's here,
I'll not be seen with thee, farewell, we'll talk
The rest at night over a Sack-posset.
I will use this advantage to oreheare 'em.
You tell me strange things; Is it possible
The widow her self loves you?
Would I had
But reason to suspect.
Possible!
Turned Colt again? This love will kill us all:
And can she make no choice, but where her daughter
Has the same longing? not her dancing days
Done yet? why there's no remedy, you must love her.
And violate my faith made to her daughter.
Thou wot not be so much an Infidel,
To think I mean thou should forsake the wench;
Tell me the mother a fine tale of love,
Print kisses on her paper-lip, and hug
Her reverend body; any thing but lye with her:
Write sonnets on the ivory tooth before,
Swear she does cough distinctly, get a rime
To bless her when she sneezes, and cry up
The method of her nose, which sweats and false
So perpendicular upon her face:
Admire the wart upon her chin, and motion
Of her blew eyes, that look three ways at once:
Praise her above thy reason, or her daughter;
And then she will believe thou may be mad for her.
Is this the way to doe me good? she comes
Too fast on me already.
Let her fly to thee,
Thou may clip her wings the sooner, this secures thee;
Should you hold off, and play the modest creature;
Nay, but deny as Maids do when they love it,
And bending of your hams, cry, No forsooth;
Profess with Coxcomb-like civility,
You are not worthy of her carnal favours:
She may believe it, and in very spite
Marry her daughter to a Citizen:
Or should you be so mad, to think to win her
To your first choice, with howling out your passion
For Mistress Frances, plaining how Don Cupped
Hath scarified your heart, you may go hang your self:
Go to the Barbers, let him firk your hair up,
Or get a periwig; wash your sullen face,
And starch your infant upper lip, to look
Like one that would run desperate on a widow.
Precious conspiracy.
This is the way:
At leisure you may tell your Maiden Mistress,
Like Jove you have put another shape on,
To cheat the Beldam Iuno.
Foul mouthed Rascal.
I apprehend: you have given me good counsel,
I'll watch the first occasion, to assure
I have preferred her in my heart already.
I'll conjure up a cross plot, and that quickly,
Shall mar your mirth, and pay your fine dissembling
As it deserves, my confident Love-gamester.
I'll take my leave then, you've no other service
To use my stay? I have a project, Hartwell,
That must not be neglected.
May not I communicate?
Thou art engaged to wait
Upon thine own affairs, or I should trouble thee
To be an Actor in it; thou know old Hornet?
He is a Suitor to the widow,
And after the rate we cast the plot, my Rival.
I'll rival him; he smothers a poor Gentlewoman
At home with sea-cole, and allows her no
More light than serves to read in painted cloth
The exposition of the harlots story:
Hartwell, I love her, and before her father
Died we interchanged our hearts; it is here,
To free her from that slavery she lives in
Under the iron-hearted •aylor, else
I shall repent my aim, he broods upon
Her portion still; but I have a trick may spoil
His hatching of young bags, thou shall it know all
Hereafter; to the Widow, Hartwell, I am
For state affairs, be faithful and pray for me;
We must be bold, farewell, if something hit
We'll laugh in spite of Dives and the Devil.
This is the thing, Sir, that must carry away
The garland, they have given him a cup
Or two of Sack, and has the prettiest humour,
He does so whistle out his complement:
He wears his feather like the Captain of
A Country Team, and would become a horse-collar
Rarely; I do not think, but were he put to 't,
With little switching, he would draw the cart well.
Sweet Lady, I'm your humble servant, it is
Well known what I am, where I live, my father
Died since I was of age; and left me, thank him,
A younger brothers portion:
A younger brother.
I know, sweet Lady, what you'd say, My father
Had no more children, but I must speak modestly
Of my estate, I have land I know enough
For two or three wives; I have a horse in town,
Your daughter, if we please, shall ride behind me,
Sweet Lady, did you ever see the Country?
What Country, Sir?
Why any Country living,
Sweet Lady, I am your humble servant, if
You affect hawking, hunting, or drinking,
There be good fellows will bear you company; but you have
better Sack, sweet Lady, is there good Tobacco in London?
Virginia Tobacco grows here, Sir.
Sweet Sir, I am your humble servant, you
Seem to be a Gentleman, will you fetch me a pipe?
There's half a piece, and I be not troublesome:
Perhaps, sweet Lady, twill offend you, then
Let it alone.
A very precious Widgin: Gramercy Sack.
Ta la la la lero, &amp;c.
You dance well, Sir.
He has a strong back, I warrant him.
Sweet Lady, is this your daughter?
Ask that now?
I was her mother, Sir.
That may be too: what Gentleman is that?
Sweet Sir, I am your humble servant likewise.
You are too humble, Sir, to stoop so low,
It would become my duty.
Sweet Sir, it is all one,
A leg or an arm is not cast away
Among friends, I am a Country Gentleman
All the world knows, sweet Sir, I ha no business
In town.
I thought you came to see my daughter.
That may be too, sweet Lady, pray uncase me,
I honour your fair daughter; for I know,
As well as another, what belongs to a Gentlewoman:
She's not the first, sweet Lady, I'have loved
In the way of matrimony.
Were you 〈◊〉 married?
Sweet Sir, no▪ all men are not alike.
For some are fools.
Sweet Sir, I do confess it:
But wit is never goodwill it be bought.
They say there are good wits in town,
I ha brought money a purpose 〈◊〉 me for it;
If any will sell me a penny-worth, I'll
Give him a hundred pieces, because I would carry
A little down into the Country.
Is there
A dearth, Sir, in your Country?
Sweet Sir, no;
There's plenty.
Of wild oats; I heard you had much
To sow still.
My servants have, sweet Sir; but it is all one;
This Lady shall be Lord of the Soil: I wo'not
Give any man six pence for a bushel of money;
I am a Gentleman, my father was
A Yeoman; but sweet Lady, howsoever
I'm yours, and every limb is at your service;
My hands shall walk, my feet shall run.
Away, away.
By this gold they shall.
He keeps his oath.
Not run? my Grandfather was a Nobleman Foot-man, and indeed he run his country; my father did out〈◊〉 the Con∣stable.
And he, sweet Lady, being his fathers issue, must run na∣turally.
If I live.
He'll run himself out of all.
Not run, sweet Lady▪
If you have occasion to use me, I wo'not stand upon my feet.
No, Sir.
Nay, I wo'not stand upon my head, sweet Lady, to doe you curtsy.
That were the clean contrary way.
Please you, a sorry dinner stays for you.
Sweet Lady, I am your servant: will this Gentleman dine with us?
I'll prevail with Master Hartwell.
Do ye know what you ha done? he's you rival, invite him?
Sweet Sir, I invite no body, if you love any body here?
What then?
Sweet Sir, I shannot take it kindly, I do not use to quarrel.
But when you're beaten: lay him o'er the face, hee sha'not wrong you.
Sweet Sir, it is dinner time: fair Lady:
I had a great mind to have him beaten;
But he's not valiant, but at meals; would I
Were hired to beat him handsomely after dinner,
And make him thank me for it; I'll have a plot
Upon your precious body, my sweet Sir.
You tell me wonders, Sir.
I tell you truth:
Alas, you know I have no ends of profit,
I practise not for wealth.
You're virtuous;
For that you were commended, Sir, to me:
You have a conscience, and wo'not take
Fees for a complement, nor make poor your friends,
To enrich Apothecaries.
I have cured her melancholy; but she's a t'other side
Now extreme merry, dance and sing, all air.
It is strange, methinks, nothing but extremities:
Good Master Doctors could you not ha par'd
Her t'other leaden humour.
Sir, I could not
Kill the malignity of her melancholy
Another way; extremities must be cured
With extreme applications: my next work
Shall be to abate this levity of her brain,
And qualify her spleen, Sir, by degrees;
So state her body in that modest temper
She was possessed of.
I complained before
Of quietness, now she's all noise and madness,
By your description.
You must have patience
A month or so, she is not mad, but merry,
Some few vagaries; you must understand
I have opend, Sir, her fancy, wherein lay
All her imaginations confused,
And on a heap, smothered for want of vent;
And now the spirits that were imprisoned
Rush out, which causes all her faculties,
Before oppressed, to exercise so strangely,
As the agitation of her tongue will manifest▪
Shoe's here.
Uncle, how does your body? you appear
As lean as Lent, I've a great mind to dance
About a May-pole, shall we?
She is mad.
This Doctor has for •ec led me,
I cannot choose but laugh, ha, ha.
Uncle, if you'll procure a dispensation
To marry me your self, deduct the charge
Out of my portion, I could love an old 〈◊〉
Rarely, An old man with a bed full of 〈◊〉 &amp;c.
Uncle, when did you put on a clean shirt?
Do ye hear, I dreamt of the Devil last night,
They say it is good luck; doe you know him, Uncle▪
I know the Devil?
He's a fine old Gentleman,
And something like you, no such Bug-beare as
The world imagines, you an he'll keep house
Together one day; but you'll burn Sea-〈◊〉
To save charges, and stink the poor souls so.
Uncle, you are not merry, I pray laugh
A little: imagine you'd undone a widow,
Or turned an Orphan begging; ha, ha, &amp;c.
Faith how many Churches doe you mean to build
Before you dye? six bells in every steeple,
And let'em all go to the City tune,
Turn again Whittington; who, they say,
Grew rich, and let his land out for nine lives,
Because all came in by a Cat: but let me counsel you
To dye at all adventures, great men do it in policy.
Why does she talk of dying? she's stark mad.
Could you not put into the next receipt
Something to make her sleep well? Opium
In a good quantity, they say, will do it.
I'll so proportion it, she shall never wake:
I did it for a Merchants wife last week,
Which loved a Knight: a great man, not long since
Was weary of his Countess, and I cured him
So artificially of his disease.
She hears.
But collects nothing; all her senses are scattered.
Stay, you shall give towards the building of a Church
Nothing, see the money first laid out,
That's given already; it were sin and pity
To abuse the dead: but it is no matter, Uncle,
You'll be as famous for pulling down the parish,
The Church will fall of it self, With ding dong bell.
Why did they put the poor fellow in prison?
Whom? what fellow?
Why the Corne-cutter:
Poor Gentleman, he meant no hurt to the City,
His feet were very weary, and that made him
In every street cry out; Ha ye any corns
In your head or toes? that head spoiled all.
Which is Master Hornet?
Ha, with me?
A word, Sir.
Prithee, what's he? he comes to borrow money
On his wives wedding-ring, or his child's whistle:
You may see by his nose he has no laud, he looks
As a Hawk; what do you dream on?
What Ladies timpani is your next cure?
Or whose stale body must be rectified
Next with a glister?
There is no disputing, I must attend you.
I am sent for by a Pursevant to his Highness;
Alas, I am undone, I never saw him,
How should he know me, a poor wretch?
Is it not some complaint, think you?
That's my fear, there be
Too many knaves in the world, and a man cannot
Grow rich; but one State-Surgeon or other
Must practise on his purse; before this Judge
A vein is opened in the other Court,
So many ounces he must bleed again:
Let me see, all the treason I committed
Is that I shifted houses; for I took
Delight to cousin him of his subsidies;
I always live obscurely, to avoid
Taxations, I never pay the Church
Her superstitious tithes, nor come to trouble
Sermons, for fear of homilies before,
That beg for burning.
Why how now, Uncle, is your Scrivener broke,
You talk such lamentation?
I am sent for the King, Niece, &amp; shall be made a beggar
As I was borne; I see my chattel ceased,
This chest is ransacked, and that bag deflowered,
My door sealed up, and with this hungry Messenger,
I am already marching to the Fleet.
Nay, and you be at that ward, I must leave you,
Fare well, pray do not lift my Uncle too hard;
And so I leave you both to the mercy of the Bear-garden.
Best make fast her Chamber.
I, I, cursed dog.
Wo' not some money qualify your haste?
Deal in your own affairs; Will you go sit?
Go, I must go.
I'll take my leave;
Have comfort, sir, this cloud may soon blow over.
Yes, when I am blown up;
I read imprisonment in his very looks,
And all my gold confiscate.
I heard her say she would walk up to her chamber,
The trick was but to teach him whither he
Should follow; who as nimbly apprehended,
To acquaint her with his new affections:
I do this for your good, that Mistress Frances,
Whom I'll send to you presently, may be
Convinced in Hartwell's falsehood, and transplant
Her love on you.
This will be excellent;
So we shall strangle him in his own noose,
And he ne'er know who hurt him.
I'll loose no time, you know my instructions.
I had almost forgot, there is a cast of angels more.
They are not cast away.
If thou dost fear they'll drown, Nurse, I can give thee
Lighter, I have some want weight.
If you have an evil angel about you,
Your business will thrive better when it is departed.
There.
Now all the good ones wait upon your worship.
These things that go to and again, must have
Their fees, they'll never speak in cause else.
Save you sweet Lady.
Kind Mr. Startup.
Yes, I am kind if you knew all, but you are
Deceived in some body; love, and love your heart out,
The party does not care a button for you.
What party?
No, I am a fool, a country clod, sweet Lady,
Not worth one of your Shooe-tyes, no not I;
I do not know who makes an ass of you.
How sir?
A gull, a coxcomb, I am ashamed you have
So little wit; Tell me, and tell me truly,
Who loves this face of yours besides my self.
Although it were immodest to commend it,
I must thus far, in gratitude to nature,
Acknowledge it no monster, I have seen
One more deformed.
Sweet Lady I know that;
A worse face would become the Country, nay,
There are but fifteen women in the parish
I live in, of which, twelve are counted witches,
And wear beards: But it troubles me, sweet Lady,
You should be such an owl.
This is course language.
Not to see who abuses you; Oh I could
Now find in my heart to baste you, baste you soundly:
You think Mr. Hartwell loves you.
I
Believe he hates me not.
You lye.
Good words.
You lye most basely, he affects your mother.
My mother? this fool's mad.
I would it were
The fashion for women to wear swords.
What then?
I'd breath you into a little understanding,
I say again, and she is the son of darkness
Denies it; Mr. Hartwell loves your mother.
I hope he does.
Oh I could kick your ignorance:
He does love her in the way of Matrimony,
And makes a property of you; I'll justify it.
It is impossible.
Do ye know that couple?
Step behind the hangings, and you may
Both hear and see: I say no more, sweet Lady,
I am a rustic puppy, and know nothing.
I have considered perfectly, and if
You will vouchsafe me hearing, dare pour forth
My heart, which, full of love, tenders it self
To your acceptance; I acknowledge Lady,
My passions are but young, for could I hope
You should with so much favour look upon me?
But may I credit this?
But suspect were an injustice to my faith, which looks
Upon your virtue with as much religion
As love is able to receive; your age
Hath struck a reverence into my eye;
And what you want of youth and spring upon you,
Your wisdom richly satisfies: Those characters
Which time hath writ upon your careful forehead,
Are but his virtue and your ornament,
When it shall come to pass by your example,
That youth shall be esteemed an infancy,
And women never ripe for love or Marriage
Without your age upon 'em; it is a fault,
That men not guided by the tract of reason,
But heat and wantonness of blood, run giddy
To seal such weighty Covenants, better it were
The world should end in our virginities,
Than spin it self more length by inconsiderate
And hasty marriages.
Have you already
Retrieved the affection that pursued my daughter?
Shall I believe no seed of love remains,
Which may grow up and ripen, with repentance
For this exchange; I do allow you, sir,
The consideration of my fortune, which
Might of it self, incline you to accept me.
That is but an attendant, as you use it,
I must confess a welcome one; although
The mind is the first beauty, which true lo•e
Aspires to, when it is waited on with person
And estate, it comes with greater privilege
To win upon's; I do not wish you, Lady,
Rashly believe what I profess, but measure
My service by the trial; I'll expect
And write your smiles a competent reward,
Till time and your command, demonstrate me;
Although not equal to your full deservings,
Yet one that has ambition to bethought
Not too unworthy.
And I gh•sse ere long,
Such an occasion will present it self.
Till then, have Hartwell in your loving memory,
Who wishes no more happiness of life,
Than to be called yours.
What have I understood?
Will you believe me another time, sweet Lady?
If I loved you not, what would become on you?
It is not he, some devil does but cozen us,
And mock our sense with these fantastic bodies,
Hartwell.
Nay it is the man; I hope you'll be converted,
And think a Country Gentleman worth favour,
That brought you to this knowledge•; I deserve—
My curses for this black discovery,
When as before it was not impossible,
In time I might be brought to pity thee;
Henceforth I'll look upon thee as my •ins,
And beg as much forgiveness that I knew thee.
Nay do ye but hear.
Die quickly, and be forgotten.
This is very fine in faith, sweet Lady.
My mother, oh my fate, see me no more,
And Isle forgive thee.
Thank you, most sweet Lady,
Is my discovery come to this? I'd better
Ha'been tongue-tied; Curse me, and call me her sins,
And see her no more? why this is worse and worse;
I must suck better counsel from the Nurse.
Fie, fie, I am ashamed of you, a Gentleman
Of your high promising, and be put off
So slightly?
Why Nurse, what would you have me do?
Do? I would have you do something; a man
Of your ability, and cannot turn
And wind a woman?
You wo'd not have wished me
To have put her to it behind the hangings?
You should have been round with her.
I was round with her▪ I called her ass and coxcomb,
And twenty more names, unless I should
Have called her whore, I could not be more round with her.
I do not mean that way.
And she called me,
I thank her.
What?
Why no worse than her sins, heaven forgive her,
She has the more to answer; nay she did
Not stick to bid me die too, in that desperate
Estate.
Come, you shall take another course.
What ails my Masters sweet-he•rt, she frighted?
I met and asked her for my Master, and
She turned tail like a hound had lost the scent;
There's something in the wind, my three piled worship
Are you there with my Lady of the Larder,
Now in that posture? do not they two look like
A fine Brick house and a thatched Barn in the Country,
Laying their heads together? they have spied me.
Come hither Close, nay he's faithful, and one that
Has a desire to serve you; you may trust him▪
Your worship may trust me a bed with— I
Have had a itch this great while, si•, a kind
Of longing to be one of your appurtenances:
I have some faults, and I'll confess 'em; I have
A humour now and then, when I am asked
A question, to tell true, though I be chid for it;
And I do not love blows; you may sooner beat
My brains out, than a word of flattery:
I cannot batten upon commendation,
Without my wages, nor be valiant
Upon small Beer; I am not overmuch
Given to be drunk, but I've a trick of the Dutchman,
To do your business as well drunk as sober:
I have not impudence enough to pimp
For you, but I have a gift I can say nothing:
I was borne upon Shrovetuesday, and shall be
Now and then given to rebellion:
My flesh will once a year rise at a Chamber-maid;
If none such take me down, I shall in malice
And deep revenge, fling out upon May-day,
Among the Prentices, without fear or wit.
I like this humour.
Nay he has a sconce,
And shall be of our counsel: Look you Close,
There is a plot to help this Gentleman;
At night when they're a bed, and if you went
To bed betimes, to avoid suspicion,
It were ne'er the worse; I'll say you are not well:
Do ye mark? this honest, honest Gentleman shall be
Let into Mistress Francis Bed-chamber.
Without her knowledge?
You shall only attend,
To give him notice from me when to come,
And watch about the house, he may get off
Without discovery; this is all.
So, so, I sha' not keep the door.
I can do that.
Let me alone to give you notice who
Stirs about house.
Away, it is Mr. Hartwell;
We'll not be seen together.
Go your ways,
A foolish Knave and Bawd, that do want nothing
But carting; I would sooner see that triumph,
Than all the Pageans, a day after Symon
And Iude, when the fine City goes a feasting.
Oh Sir, I have news; yes, they are gone, brave news;
Your Gentlewoman can hold out no longer;
This night there will be a stratagem:
Old Madam Hump a pomp, the Nurse, has promised
To admit the Country Gentleman, when all
Are a bed, into her chamber; yes, your Mistress:
I'm of the plot, to lye Perdue, and give
The word, if any Fire-lock approach
The rest; imagine if he have not art to
Persuade her to the feat with him, yet there
Be tricks, and he may be surprised in the Chamber,
And she may be compelled to marry him in
Her own defence; there have been such devises.
Does he consent?
She is betrayed to it, sir.
Then thou wo't be so base?
And I had meant it,
I ne'er had told you this: can you make use
Of this intelligence?
Thou art my honest servant.
I promised to be his.
I have it; Can
By any means procure me but his clothes?
With ease, he'll go to bed betimes, to avoid
Suspicion; that's a part of our design.
I could not wish a happy opportunity,
To try how she affects this gaudy fool,
And clear my faith to her, which her mothers watch
Will not permit; she has, I fear, perceived
My new familiarity with her mother,
Which I am compelled too, and must clear this way:
Fail me not, Close, and propound thy own
Reward.
Tell me your purpose, and let my wit
Dispose of him.
Prosper me love in this.
And you fall to prayers
With good love, look about us, I shall suspect
You wo'not thrive; you should go to a wench,
As Gentlemen to Oysters, without ceremony
Or saying grace; devotion will spoil all.
Right as an Arrow Couze.
Witty enginere;
But was she taken with the plot?
I was compelled to frame the outside of a reason,
Lest our own mirth should play the Traitor with us,
Her spleen was so dilated, he believed
I have made her mad, which change makes for us.
Excellent.
And he that we employed, the Pursevant,
Showed such a fiery Rascal, the poor Usurer
Trembled, as Bawds beneath the lash.
He comes then?
With as much joy, as to receive a hanging:
He would be whipped, and say his prayers in the Church
In a white sheet.
That were no penance to him.
Nay, he would pay as much as he should fine
For Alderman, though half his soul went with it,
For his quietness; he doth apprehend
Nothing but earth-quakes.
How am I rampant
With the imagination? bid the music
Be ready, they know all their flourishes;
But shift you quickly for your other part,
My honourable Lords;
How they doe look like States-man, whore's your tooth-pick?
Excellent; bear your staff handsomely, contract
The brow, and look more superciliously.
I warrant you for my part.
We came now
From practise.
Can ye do it with confidence?
These very clothes have made me proud already,
It was some Lords cast suit, I'll lay my life.
And mine, it smells of honour.
So, so, how now man?
He looks pale: My Lord, how do ye?
Well, well, I hope it is but 〈◊〉 it.
Of what?
Will the pox lye in clothe•? I can not tel•,
I find some alteration in my body▪
Sinbe I shifted.
It is a mere conceit,
They were an honest mans, upon my knowl•dge,
A Captain of the train Band in the Country,
They were brought against the general Mast• l•st▪
He were 'em that day, and to Church the Sunday
Following, and moss• carefully •en• 'em up,
To taste our London Lavender.
Sir, you have satisfied me.
Be sprightly; whore's this Prince?
See and attend him in fit state.
He's here.
Now by that sprig, a pretty Majesty;
But wo't thou not be out of thy Kings part?
And when the Wine is wanting at the Banque•,
Call upon drawers, quarrel with your Nobles,
Or when we shall present our man of mortgages,
Take him aside, and borrow half a crown,
To give your whore benevolence, which 〈◊〉
For you last tilting, or be 〈…〉
And leave our project in the dirt.
My Lords,
This fellows insolence must be corrected;
Dispose him in what prison you think fit.
He's mad, I think.
To Bedlam with him then,
Is this a place for fools or madmen, who
Admitted him? take him, see you
He be well whipped, and let him thank our mercy,
Bandog.
I quake already, excellent Wa••e•k,
Cool, cool thy lungs, and whisper with some Lord,
Thou wo't be a key too high else, good Sr. Clement,
Master of the house, at whose cost we are entertained.
My part is rotten
In my head, doubt not.
Is he come?
He waits in the first chamber.
Let the Lutes
Begin, and their best voice, and then admit him.
Here's revelling, my purse must be squeezed for it:
That's the King, the rest are bare; how •upple they are
In the hams, that Courtier has Oiled his joints,
He looks this way, they point at me; a rot
O'that knay•s finger.
What fellow's this? who waits?
It was his graces pleasure, he was sent for,
My good Lord.
Mr. Hornet?
Let me have the honour to present him.
Is this the man whom all so much commend
For his ability.
I smell no good from that word, ability.
Discreet and read i'th'Common-wealth, a man
Fit for employment in the State.
The very same.
His countenance is promising.
If the King of Spain
Had but his head, that politic head,
I know who might go fish for the Low-Countreyes.
His garments are ••t course.
His mind is rich.
They praise me, I am a thousand pound the worse for'•.
Wilt please your Majesty?
Kneel down; Thy name?
Giles Hornet, your poor creature.
Rise up, Sir Giles Hornet.
But am I Knighted?
We congratulate your honour.
What must I pay for it?
I'll sell it any friend of yours again,
For half the money.
Some have care to give
His body more becoming ornaments;
He shall be like himself, and then we will confer
More honours on him.
Do you make •aste, his Grace
Will have you new thatched; you must have clothes
Fitting your State and honourable title.
These will be good enough for me, alas I am not able.
Nay, you must have 'em from his Wardrobe, sir,
They'll cost you nothing; You'll not look in those,
Like a poor Knight of Windsor.
When he is ready, give us knowledge.
Yes, sir.
What will become of me?
You were best prepare,
Your clothes will be here presently, the King
Will send for you before you be ready; Cast
Your old skin off: Do you not to 〈◊〉 sheets
And trouble, wrap your selves a night• in the blankets?
Or are they ashamed to show the Linings?
Hum? if this be but preparative to a whipping,
What case am I in?
Well said, now they are come;
Be nimble now, and help to fit Sr. Giles.
Alas, must I wear this doublet? it would yield
Heaven knows how much to burn.
You may be d•sparate
When it is on, and burn your body with it, sir,
I sha'not know my self.
Be that time we have done wi'ye.
Fit as they were made, sir.
Which is Sir Giles?
I am the man you please to call Sir Giles.
Then I congratulate your happy fortune;
You're like to be exalted, his Grace talks
Much on you, I'll be proud to be your servant:
My Lord, a word.
What Gentleman is that?
The Bridegroom, Sir, in great favour, I can tell you,
And new created by his Highness, Baron
O• Landscape; his living is far off.
My very good Lord, my breeches are almost on.
There be the Keys.
His Grace has pleased to shine upon
A piece of barren earth.
You are too modest;
The King has been informed, Sir Giles, you are
One of the ablest men in his Dominion:
Should virtue still be clothed in rags? Advance it
To honour, and regard you waste your brain
At home, in cheap and low engagements, sweat
Your soul out, for a poor and paltry living;
Old houses, let 'em fall to the dull Lord
Of the Manner; switch me up a Town together,
Or meddle not; This or that straggling Acre's
Not worth your care; Study some Monopoly,
May sweep the Kingdom at a stake; Despise
A project wo'not bring in half the City;
Find out a way to forfeit all the Charters;
Have an Exch•quer of your own, and keep
The Princes round about in pension:
These are becoming businesses, and speak
An active State-man.
You do talk strange things,
My Lord.
His keys are things very
Material to our business.
And I have 'em.
So, so:
I will account it one of my •elicities,
To be a witness of your Honour, Sir.
Oh, my good Lord of Landscape.
How shall we dispose these?
The Hang-man will not have them, and I fear•,
They will corrupt a well; faith give them stable room.
My Lord, the King asks for you; Good Sir Giles
Write me in the number of your faithful friends.
We must attend.
Do not yet say he's ready,
The Barber has a duty to dispatch,
He will be hours a rubbing, washing, powdering.
Then I'll attend him to his Presence.
We shall excuse him so long, still your servant.
The Barber, sir, attends in the next room.
I wo'not shave.
He fears his throat.
I never give above three-pence.
Talk not you of charge,
You have but yet your welcome: do not you
Think, good sir Giles, but we can shave you too.
Where is he, Close?
I told him, sir,
You lay in a chamber of the t'other side,
The house, whither he is gone with his sword drawn,
And curses of themselves able to kill you:
You did affront him once, and now his Mistress
Has quite neglected him, for your love, he thinks:
He'll make you an example to all Rivals;
I'll bring your clothes hereafter, yet your fear
And running, sir, will keep you warm enough.
Honest Close, thou hast saved my life.
Death, is he not behind you? this way, good sir.
Ha• you not made a fine choice, I did ever
Think he was false; your mother did but counterfeit
The love-sick widow all this while, to try him.
Try him, Nurse.
She told me so her self,
Assuring him the state was hers, and you
At her devotion; put him to his choice,
To take her with the wealth, or you with nothing:
What followed, you have heard, come be wise yet,
And love the Country Gentleman that dotes on you;
He's rich, and half a fool, I'll fetch him to you.
My mother counterfeit? why may not Hartwell
Pretend as well as she, fearing her anger
And policy, if he refused her love?
I have observed some sorrow in his gestures,
As he were willing to deliver something,
If opportunity would give him leave▪
He cannot be so fall••, now I suspect
He does obey some dire necessity:
It would puzzle a wise lover to be so
Severely put to it.
On like a bold Captain,
Give her a broad side, she's within your shot,
I'll leave you.
It is the fool, Why Nurse?
Nay, fly not before you hear.
It is Hartwell.
If my voice
Betray me not.
Why in this shape? some trick in it,
He hides his face, I'll put him to it however,
Although the hour be unseasonable, any time
We may express our joy: my Nurse once told me
You were not well, and gone to bed, your health
Is welcome as my own; I dare not, sir,
In modesty presume to bid you stay,
And to requite your pains, kind Mr. Startup.
She knows me not.
Forgive me if I blush,
I have no other way, but to declare
My eyes that late frowned on your love shall smile.
On me?
On none but you: I have been too
Unkindly dealt withal by Hartwell, whom
How dearly I affected, good Heaven knows:
But I have read discretion to my fancy,
And were he here, he should be witness of
My vows to you, if you accept my heart,
And can with equal truth embrace it, I
Will choose my husband here; you, only you,
This faith be registered in Heaven, shall challenge from me a wives obedience.
Planet-struck.
Away, your mother's up; I wo'd not for
A thousand pound she find you in this chamber.
I have undone my self.
Sweet Mr. Startup, to your own lodging,
Take that close lantern with you:
Passion of me, what makes her rise?
I will discover yet.
Discover; what?
Ha, Mr. Hartwell.
You have midnight plots.
Oh, we are wretched, miserable, what have I done?
Oh, who shall lead me to a world where are
No women? Farewell all, I'll be above
Your charms, and find out death, a cure for love.
Where are we now? it is very cold, why dost not
Lead me to some house?
What, at this time a night?
All people are a bed, the very Owls
Are in their dead sleep; or if we could
Be admitted, would you venture a this fashion,
And publish your disgrace, proclaim your self
Coward, and lay some imputation
Upon the place you came from, where your hopes
May yet be fair for marriage? This brunt over.
To meet some Drunkard now were comfortable,
Whose eyes inflamed might serve for torches,
Or he might spit flapdragons from his fire
Of Sack, and light us: But no sober man,
Considering what case you are in, sir,
By my consent should see you.
Ha, what's that?
Where, where? a fire-drake.
Now it is gone: it is bright
Again, Is it not a spirit? Oh deliver me.
I have heard some such things use to walk the fields.
What shall I do?
Pray, pray with as much strength
As if you had no land, or were confined
To my annuity: Now I fear no spirits;
This riches makes us cowards; Hide your self,
I will go nearer.
Dost know the devil if thou see him, Close?
A pox of love, if this be the reward on it;
Some call it fire, but I find no such matter;
I am frozen to the Blanket, and my teeth
Strike one another, and keep time like hammers
That beat a Psalm upon the virtuous Anvil;
I do believe if they were beaten out,
They would make false Dice, there's quicksilver in 'em,
I know already by their dancing.
Sir, where are you?
Here I am still.
You're a dead man.
More terror? what's the matter?
It is my Master with a dark
Lantern, that pursues us: By
This darkness, it is his voice, wrap your self up,
And roll into some ditch, flight will betray us.
I had as good be killed, but yet I'll venture.
It is he indeed, and more than I expected:
The matters do not fadge well with his Mistress.
What a sweet thing is night? how calm and harmless?
No whispering, but of leaves, on which the breath
Of heaven plays Music to the birds that slumber;
Here are no objects to betray our sense
To repentance, nor can women, thus
Advantaged by the Tapers of the night,
Spread their temptations to undo poor man:
What a fine book is heave•? which we may read
Best now, when every Star is a fair letter:
How much they wrong the• night, which call thee guilty
Of rapes and murders: It is the day, that like
A glorious whore, engages men to act 'em,
And taking then the darkness to obscure 'em:
We unjustly lay the shame upon thy brows,
That art so innocent; Thou never saw them
Befriended with this silence; I begin
To wander: There's no wilderness abroad,
To him that's lost at home.
Sir.
Who's that?
One that has taken pains for you to night:
I am Close.
What make thou here?
I wait upon
My charge; I led your Rival a procession
In's shirt, persuading him you had resolved
To cut his throat else; he's hard by it's prayers,
And thinks you have pursued him.
Ha, I'll do it;
Show me the fool, by all my hopes I'll kill him,
And send his base heart as a present to her:
Fate has preserved me with this revenge,
And I will not delay his death a minute.
You wo'not kill him basely?
No.
Why then
There is no fear but he'll live long enough;
I'll undertake he ne'er shall go provided
To fight w'ee; and for other satisfaction,
Name it, and take it; so I'll fetch him to ye.
Stay, I have been too passionate, let him live
To be her punishment; that's revenge enough,
While I pursue my own ways.
Whither now?
Whither thou must not follow, by thy honesty,
I charge thee come not after me.
That binds my attendance, sir.
But not when I command
The contrary, if thou dost move this way,
Thou draw my anger; Mind the preservation
Of the tame thing you undertook; Farewell,
If thou dost love me, follow not, nor question
It is in my power to loose thee or my self.
I cannot see i'th'darke with spectacles,
And mine own eyes have lost him of the luddaine;
Well, I must hope the best; What shall I do
With my hen-hearted lover, that would give
Half his estate his cold fit were well over:
I shall make work for the Phys•teens:
Candles and Cullices will ne'er restore him;
If he but scope with life, I am not sorry,
He may be a soldier, and endure the trenches;
I put him first to the becoming sufferance:
But what are these? an army of horns and Halberds?
Upon my conscience, the Watch; I thought
The fields had not been haunted with these goblins:
I cannot run; If I should squat, and they find me▪
There were no mercy but Bride-well,
Or some such lovely place; I am resolved
To cast away a few good words upon 'em,
A leg and worshipping; the Constable
That leads the rusty Regiment will quit me,
I pass the gates wo't often, and so may
The devil if he pay the Porter; bless you:
My masters what a clock is it?
Who's theere?
I charge you stand.
Your worship may do much.
Where have you been?
At Islington, and please you, about business.
Some thief, I warrant him, no honest man,
I know by his basket hill•, some rogue that watches,
The fields are pestered with such sturdy robbers.
He is a rogue that watches, for my part.
He calls my watchmen rogues.
How Mr. Constable? you are one your self.
A way with him.
Good Sir.
We will provide you a lodging.
Where?
New prison.
But are you in earnest, Gentlemen?
If there be no remedy.
We'll humble you.
I have a companion hereabouts: where are you Sir?
Here in the ditch.
They seldom go alone:
We'll find him out; ha sir.
I thank you honest men: where art thou Close?
Here; these good men will help us to a lodging.
Blessing on their hearts, I am almost starved.
Yes, we'll do you that favour; Come away, sir.
Whether shall we go now?
To prison.
How, Close?
You shall be close enough.
Do ye hear, sweet Gentlemen?
I follow, Sir, I cannot leave you in adversity;
All this is for your health, clean straw is warm, sir;
You have the benefit of being naked:
I shall have work to morrow in the woollen.
Away, away; bring them away.
I heard some noise; look, •al• up the servants,
See if the Gentle•m•n be a bed; I'm troubled.
Oh Mistress?
What's the matter?
Mr. Startup is not a bed, and here is all is left
Of Mr. Hartwell.
This is very strange.
I dare not tell her of his shift, they're gone,
The doors I found left open, and no sign
Which way they are bestowed.
This puzzles me:
Pray Heaven there be no mischief in this absence:
Is Frank abed?
Yes.
What should move'em
To leave my house so late, and Mr. Hartwell
Without his clothes? Some knock there:
Beshrew me but I trembled.
It is a stranger,
And says he would speak with you.
At this late hour?
What accidents are these? from whence?
I know not.
Has he no name? what should this mean?
He says he is a Countrey-man of Mr. Startups.
Admit him, he perhaps does bring some news.
By your leave Mistress, pardon my importunity
At so unfit an hour.
You're welcome, sir.
I met with fortunate directions,
Though I came late; I understand you have
A guest, one Startup of Northampton-shire,
That comes a wooing to your daughter.
Such an one there was that supped with us, and went
To bed; but since, as I have faith, I know not
Which way he has conveyed himself; another
Gentleman too is missing, and his Rival.
Pray do not mock me, Lady, I ha rid
A great way, and the business much concerns him.
You may believe me, he is no such treasure
I should conceal him.
Then I see you dally:
Know, Mistress, you may slack your preparations,
Your daughter must look out another husband,
He is contracted.
How?
And something more,
Gotten with child one, that without blushing
I cannot call my daughter; he shall make
Her credit straight again, although my fortunes
Have no equality with his, I shall
Find Law to force him.
You preferred this suitor,
This news returns my blood.
Sir, you shall find
All truth I have delivered, I am not sorry,
To hear this news, this is no time to seek him:
Please you accept the lodging that was his,
My servant shall attend you in the morning,
To help your search.
You seem a noble Gentlewoman,
I take your curtsy.
Nurse, a light; pray walk, sir.
I was unkind to Hartwell, he not wise;
But love still apprehends too much, or nothing.
Frances, a word: do not you know what is
Become of these Gentlemen.
Not I, their absence
Is strange to me.
Oh, Frank, I am undone.
Good Heaven, forbid.
This Gentleman, Mr. Hartwell,
Whom we shall never see again, I fear.
How, mother? are you acquainted
With any cause to fear thus.
It is in vain
To tell thee how I loved him.
Bless my senses! you love him?
'Bove all the world, affectionately placed him
Too near my heart.
I heard you made pretence
Of Love, to try him for my sake; and pardon me,
If yet I dare not believe more.
Oh Frank—
My heart doth thrill, I feel a coldness run
Through all my veins already.
I had no other thought,
At first; but wisely to distinguish whether
His heart was fixed on thee, or my estate;
With resolution, if I found him more
A Courtier of thy fortune than thy person,
To punish him with loss of both: But Love
Hath changed both scene and title in our Comedy,
And what I meant should shipwreck all his hopes,
Hath ruined us, his modest and calm answer:
To accept my tender, with such force and reason
Directed to my fancy, turned my purpose,
And made me his indeed, his perfect Lover:
But now we have both lost him.
All the piety
That ever taught childen to love their mother,
Will but suffice to keep my heart obedient.
Was ever Maid so miserable? Was there
No other, in my fate, to rival me
I live too long; oh break, break my poor heart;
For she that gave me life, hath took it from me.
Why do you weep?
I do not weep, or if
I do, I know not why.
Now I perceive
Thy duty was but counterfeit, you love him,
Upon my life you love him still; Have my
Commands no more respect? My care and love
So ill rewarded, that my heart desiring
One comfort in the world, and shall my child
Rise up to take it from me?
Alas I knew not
You loved him too, indeed I had rather die
Than you should call me rebel.
Now I see
The cause of his departure in this fashion,
Pray heaven he have not made away himself:
Did ever child deceive a mother so?
I have a sad presage, you may to bed,
And rise without my blessing, yet
You may stay, wherefore should I despair
Of his return? You say you could not tell
That I affected him.
Indeed not I,
And do believe it now against my will;
But I am your daughter.
Show it, in confirming
Your self to my desires, and what is past,
I can forgive you, if he come again:
Will you be ruled, and show no favour to him?
For it is in you, I see, to make me happy;
I will not tie you to affect the other,
Choose any for your husband but this man,
My love and prayers shall go along with you;
Answer.
Indeed I dare not, yet could I
Put off the knowledge that you are a mother—
What then?
Though in imagination I allow you
The greatest woman in the earth, whose frown
Could kill, and eyes at pleasure make alive
Again; I could say—
Pray let's hear.
I durst tell you,
In confidence of my cause, that you betray
Two innocents to sorrow; and though heaven
Look on, and seem to smile upon your cruelty,
Yet there is punishment for divorcing those
Whose hearts that hath conjoined: I durst tell you,
Though all your terrors were prepared to punish
My bold defence; you were a tyrant.
How?
A most unjust, a sacrilegious tyrant.
You would not be so violent.
That thus,
Not only ruin and deface the Altar,
But steal away the very Sacrifice▪
And I durst add and smile upon your anger.
Though as you frowned death stood in every wrinkle,
My soul's above your tyranny, and would
From torturing flame, receive new fire of love,
And make your eye faint to behold the brightness
Of my poor bodies Martyrdom; and if ever
Love showed a miracle, my heart should bear
The Characters of him you have torn from it,
With beams about it like a Saint that suffered:
But as you are my mother, thus I kneel
And beg a pardon for my innocence,
If that offend you; Live you happy still,
And be the Mistress of your vows, live to
Enjoy whom you affect, may every hour
Return new blessings on you both; renew
Your spring, and let him think you young again,
And let me beg but this for all my duty;
Against that day you marry him to provide
My Co••m, for I fear• I•sha, not have
〈…〉 after, to pray for you.
The herbs that shall adorn your Bridal chamber,
Will serve my Funeral, and deck my Merse;
Beneath which you should say, there lies your daughter
That dies to show obedience.
Why should thou
Continue thus to him?
I know he loves me, yet hereafter your affections
May not.
But never procure thee one sad thought;
Now I have tried you both; assure my child,
I loved him but for thee, dispose thy self
To be his Bride: This news, at his return,
Will make all well to rest.
Can this be true?
It were sin to mock thee any more: To bed.
I'll spend all night
In prayers for you, mother: Oh my Hartwell
I am bound ever to thee.
Does she not become her rich clothes too?
The morning never looked
So fresh, nor Venus with more charms upon her:
Adon would melt before her eye, and woo her
Her kisses, at expense of his last breath:
Cupped himself, could he but see, would fall
In love with her, and throwing away his shafts,
Offer the empty quiver to her eyes,
Ambitious to fill it with her beams;
The least of which, would wound more hearts, than 〈◊〉
His stock of golden Arrows.
No more Raptures.
Did thou not know before, that love is able,
Without the help of Sack, to make a Poet,
My nimble Mercury, Io•es Herald in
Reversion?
I must confess
I had a trick of Mercury when I picked
His pocket for the Keys.
He never mist 'em?
His eyes were drenched in futz, and I returned em
Ere they recovered light.
It was excellent;
He walks in darkness still.
Do ye think he'll know her?
His clothes already have
Made him forget himself, or if he have
But the remembrance of such a woman;
The more he sees her now, the more he'll think
The change impossible.
Where have you left him?
In the Gallery, where with much patience,
He does expect his highness will send for him.
Then all runs smooth, his wonder still continues.
I fed that humour artificially;
He is half persuaded ell's but a dream,
To which imagination his clothes
Are a great help, because he paid not for 'em:
Sometimes he is very merry, then again
He struts about with such a scurvy pride,
As some new crept into Nobility;
When men of their first Livery come to see 'em;
His honour has so chang'him, that he now
Knows not of what Religion he is;
Or if he chance to think of his first faith,
He spits of the hangings, and excused with,
I do not like the Story, it is apocryphal:
Sometimes he'll offer at a jest, and talk
Non-sense with him that has been seven years Lorded;
Frown upon any man that will pre•um
To have more knowledge, in worse clothes; I told him
It was his Graces pleasure he should be
Controller of the Masque, and he did sweat,
As he were studying for some mighty oaths
To clear the presence: he is here; away.
And you are Master of the house, Sir Clement,
For so I heard you called.
It is my name,
Sr. Giles, unworthy of this grace his Highness
Is deigned to show in honouring of my daughter.
And was she married this morning, say you?
This morn she lost her Virgin name.
I have not seen her yet, nor any of the Ladies,
You have but little noise methinkes in the house.
It would offend his Grace.
Who, as you say, came hither privately, with a small trai••
Of Lords; Would I might see his face again;
I am not sent for yet, I have been ready,
Sr. Clement, these three hours, and I do wonder
His Grace forgets himself so much.
That Music speaks him on entrance.
I, that garb becomes him;
How was his person lost within that shape
He was first presented to me?
Indeed the case is somewhat a
Altered, by your highness bounty
To your poor subject, Hornet.
Now he looks
As he did scorn the quorum, and were hungry
To eat a Statesman; Alas an office in
The household is too little for a breakfast:
A Baron, but a mornings draught, he'll gulp it,
Like a round Egg in Muscadine: Me thinks
At every wiping of his mouth, should drop
A golden saying of Pythagoras;
A piece of Machiavell; I see already
Hang on his Beard (which wants but stroking out)
The Statutes and the Magna Charta have
Taken a lease at his tongues end.
I will think on it;
He shall be — but to the banquet,
Then let the masque be ready, there we shall
Employ your worthy diligence.
Heaven bless your mighty Grace.
You'll follow.
I attend you presently:
I know not what to think of these things yet,
It is very strange I should be thus exalted
Without desert; best known unto my self.
Princes I see are mortal, and may be
Deceived in placing of their honours, I
Am little better than a favourite,
If this be true: If? it is a question,
Let me consider wisely, it may be
I am not I. No, no, I am a Knight:
Are these my clothes? I did not use to wear such
A pocket in my sleeve and velvet hose,
Six times translated since they were a Mid-wives
Fore-part, were things I wore on holidays.
The price of these would break a Camels back,
And yet some men walk under 'em like Elephants,
And have variety, as the Devil were
Their Taylor, who best knows where all their land lies.
Then why this cost on me? it is a dream,
And I am very glad on it, it is impossible
I should be true, it does not hang together,
I will have patience till i wake again,
And care not what becomes on it.
It is his Highness
Pleasure now the banquet's done.
How, the banquet done? I was coming to it,
You could hardly say grace by this time.
That's a ceremony grown out of use;
It was a running banquet.
A running? so it seems, it made great haste:
I doe dream certainly, there's no sense nor reason
In any thing they say.
You know your place,
The masque will straight begin, and his Grace wo'not
Have any one admitted, he resolves,
If the conceit affect him, it shall be
Performed in the Court hereafter, in the mean time
He does command all privacy: There are
Some set to guard the door; but your care must
Provide his Highness be not interrupted.
Back, they are rude already.
Let me alone:
What turbulent Knave is that?
I am a Country Gentlemen, Sr. Giles;
And if I may presume upon good clothes,
You may before his Grace call me your Cousin,
And not be ashamed; here is a Lady too.
A Lady too? Is she with child? What makes she
Here, and she be with child already?
Tell thee none such shall be admitted, while
I am in place: More rapping? Keep the doors,
If I do fall a swearing once, look to it.
I beseech you, for my wives sake.
Thy wives?
What's he that pleads In form pauperise?
A Citizen, and like you.
Like me? thou lie: I am more like a Lord.
Thou shalt fare ne'er the better for that word:
Knock down the women, and there be a hundred.
And make their husbands drunk; the Guard are lazy:
These women's insolence will force a Statute,
I will petition to the King my self,
They may have liberty but once a year
To see the Gally foist, then be confined
To their Chamber, and one Prentice—yet again.
Sir Giles, Sr. Giles, you know me well enough.
But while I am in office I'll know no body.
I am your Scrivenor.
Draw thy purse, wherein
Thou keep thy ears, and leave 'em at the door;
The Guard trust none without a pawn; they'll serve,
If they be ne'er redeemed, to seethe in milk
For a sore throat: Jewes ears I know they are.
Sir Giles, here's your Niece.
My Niece? the devil she is.
Pray Uncle let me in.
Her very voice: Ha? open the doors there;
Where is she?
Whom?
My Niece that called to me.
None called: nor was there any woman here.
No, nor my Scrivener bawling out, Sir Giles,
Not at any hand your worship.
Then I dream,
And I am a fool to make a question on it.
Ha, ha, ha.
The knaves laugh at me, but let 'em, I
Shall be as merry with this tale to morrow:
What fancies men have in their sleep sometimes?
His Highness.
Where be the Ladies?
They are all in the Masque.
Nay, it is no matter, why do I ask the question?
You'll see 'em, Sir, anon.
Wilt please your Grace?
And you Sir Giles, the subject of the Masque.
What's here, the three Goddesses
Contention for the golden ball?
This is Paris; So.
These are the three Goddesses;
Iuno, Pallas, Venus.
Iuno doth woo him with her State and Kingdoms.
But he refuses, more fool he.
He is not for her service, though she offer
To make him Scholar and a Soldier:
A complete man.
No, no, that fairy must win the ball.
Ha? that's my Niece.
Which, Sr. Giles?
That whom Dame Venus and her Dandiprat
Are busy withal.
Why that's the Bride.
Bride, quoth?
Married this morning; It is my daughter, sir.
Nay, if she be my Niece, I am sure she was not
Married this morning.
She's saf• enough at home,
And has but half her wits, as I remember:
The devi•l cannot juggle her from my custody.
Ha, ha, I do d•eame still.
It is time to break off revels: How like you this, Sr. Giles?
A very fine dream, in faith.
I see you'd be a bed; You are not used
To these late hours.
Lights for his Highness•.
I humbly beg your license
I may return to my own lodging.
Well, sir, it is easily granted.
Lights for Sir Giles: One shall attend you home.
Ha, ha, ha.
Why do you laugh?
At a conceit, at a conceit:
What did I eat last night, to make me dream thus?
You have done well?
Would you had done no worse.
These are his clothes, and you must give account
How you came by 'em, and produce him safe
Ere you acquit your self; We may suspect
You have killed him.
Then I obey my destiny;
Justice I see pursues the guilty person:
Dispose me where you please.
He does confess•.
What ere you be, you can but have my life
For his; all your revenge can reach no higher:
And to the law I yield my self.
My hopes are cold
As his blood whom thou hast slain: Thou hast
Been cruel in this act, to me and mine;
Whose f•m•s in him are miserably wounded:
But look for the reward.
I must expect it;
I• the m•a•e tim• I do not beg your mercy:
Life is a burden, I would fine be rid on it.
Does he weary me to carry it?
I'll acqu•i•t my Mistress.
Do so: To the next Justice; come away
She's gone, she's gone, I shall run mad; My Niece,
Robed of three thousand pound in her escape,
I find too late, I am awake and gull•d,
Nor know I whom to accuse for my tormentors;
Devils or men, but sure they were not men,
But very fiends I revelled with last night.
That I could meet the prince of devils that knighted me,
The Poets call him Pluto, god of riches;
I and my learned Council would undo him
In Law, in very Law, which he should find
Hotter ere I had done, than hell it self,
And call his place of torment, in three Terms,
But a refreshing to it: Yet let me see,
I have the portion still, though she be vanished,
That's better than my Niece, but if she marry,
I lose it all there; there's the vexation.
Save Mr. Hornet.
It is too late, away,
I do not love unnecessary complement.
This he?
Yes, I am he; am I not very fine?
What do you think this trim will cost me, ha?
Three thousand pounds, no more?
The Broker wo'not
Lend half the money.
Will you, sir, be gone,
I have no money to lend now, it is not,
You know, in fashion, with rich clothes.
I came for other purpose, and with news perhaps,
You would be willing to receive; You have
A Niece?
No; such a creature was in my possession:
Do you know where she is?
Faith I imagine.
Ha, good sir? pray forwards:
You shall have money upon good security.
I thank you, sir, for nothing; I do owe you
Too much already, on these terms.
My Niece, as you were saying.
Were you knighted lately?
Is that talked abroad?
No general rumour; By a chance I came
Where such a thing was whispered only whispered;
Just as he was described: In my opinion
You're very handsome, and do look as like a reverend—
Ass.
Why, you shall have it, sir.
But touching my Niece, good sir,
That most ungracious giglet,
That's run or stolen away, juggled last night
Out a my doors.
Did not she leap the casement?
Do not increase my agony; you came—
With civil meaning to discover how
You may be abused.
What money do you want, sir?
Your own bond shall suffice.
I ha sworn never
To write my name or mark; But I can tell—
Where I may find this girl.
More I can do, if need require;
Tic in my power to give
Her back to your possession, and I am willing.
An honest man.
On reasonable conditions, and such
As shall not trench on borrowing money.
Honester yet.
For you shall give it freely and get by it;
For you must understand if I do this,
I shall betray a friend of mine, that has
Put me in trust, one that intends to marry her,
(For truth to tell, they are not yet contracted)
To marry her, do ye mark? and yet ever morning
Three thousand pounds upon her, Is it not so much?
One that has lent me sums too without parchmon.
Or foolish circumstance, to be repaid;
Which you were never yet so much a Christian,
As to be guilt of, in your Usurers gallon
Of conscience melting Sack; This deserves something,
But cause some expedition is required;
You have a Bond of mine.
For fifty pound.
I had but forty, and your Scrivenor paid,
With whom, perhaps, your worship too divided;
If you remember, there were precious dinners,
Ere I could count my Chickens altogether,
Which was your thrift and my expense; You shall
First cancel that Bond, nay this wo'not dot,
And give, do ye mark, give me a hundred pieces,
Perhaps I'll drink your health: This shall retrive
Your Niece, and give her into your hands,
Though for my treachery, I be sung in ballads,
And have the town curse if ever I marry.
It is too much for no more labour, sir.
If I consider,
Three hundred will not bring me to• again;
Thus fair I'll deal with you; I'll not touch your money
Till I have don't, but then I will be sure:
Fetch, fetch the business.
The Bond is ready.
I will have ready money too: You have
B•gs of all sizes and denominations.
I, these things promise well; now I'll attend you.
Do this fear for me, and it is all thine own.
Now we may wish you say, the Pr••st has tied
That 〈◊〉 no subtity nor malice can
Dissolve; And repent not I have been
An actor in your Comedy, though I should not
Be tempted easily to such another
Engagement; For your sake I have dispensed with
My person and my place.
You always were
My loving Uncle.
Sir, you have, in this,
Deserved our lives and fortunes.
It was good mirth
To hear him confident all our device
Was but a dream.
He is awake by this time;
Should your Cousin fail, we'll have another way
To invite him; And if honesty prevail not,
Force him till he consent.
Some offenders are brought to be examined.
Nephew, withdraw, and you, fair Bride; These troubles
Are incident to my place, I'll soon dispatch 'em.
How now my Masters? Mr. Hartwell? ha!
Look on me; Sir, as a delinquent; These
Are able to accuse me.
What offence?
Nothing, but for killing of a man.
What proof?
He has confessed it, Sir.
Mistress Bellamy,
You are come in a sad time: Here's Mr. Hartwell
Accused for killing.
It is not possible.
Good sir believe it not.
He does confess.
I am not worth your prey, gentle lady
In vain I should •••enuate my fact,
To have the troubles of examinations;
Here I confess again, my hand is guilty
Of killing him whose feeble arm durst not
Lift up a weapon to defend himself.
That was not manly.
I but slew a coward
Startup, and could I call his life again,
As soon I should destroy it; you perhaps
Know not my provocation: He has
My Rival, sir, pardon me: Mistress Bellamy,
To whom I only seemed a Proselyte
In love, I had no heart to give from her:
And in my study to decline your anger;
I fell upon her scorn, which in few minutes,
Engaged me to this Fate; Not am I troubled
That I must dye, when she upon whose faith
I durst have laid the hopes of my eternity,
Hath violated all the trust of woman.
Wilt please you, sir—
Forbear a little.
Tell me, most unkind, if thou did love
At all? How could thou think I should be such
A desperate Atheist, that thou so soon,
And with a strange Apostasy should revenge it?
These swelling drops which in thy innocence
Might have prevailed to have restored the dead,
Heaven now doth look on, and despise: And though
Thou shed moist tribute on this Tomb, 't shall slide,
Neglected o'er the Marble, and be lost,
As if the stone had sense to punish thy
Disdain of me: I can behold that weeping,
And not be moved to wish I were not guilty
Of killing him whose love had been thy triumph;
And I dare boldly, still in the contempt
Of what I am to suffer, and the justice
Of my own truth, challenge thy soul to answer
In what I was beneath that gaudy fool,
Excepting that he had more earth than I
To help his scale, which yet he may be indebt for
To his fathers sins: Alive, he could not merit
One cold disdain from thee; And dead, how comes it
He should be worth thy tears? But let thy eyes
Chide this unruly sorrow; dress thy cheeks
With their fresh blood again, and let thy face
Open a book of smiles, in the assurance
I have not long to live; When I have numbered
A few sad minutes, thou shalt be revenged,
And I shall never trouble thee: If this
Be not enough, extend thy malice further:
And if thou find one man that loved me living,
Will honour this cold body with a grave,
Be cruel, and corrupt his charity.
So fare ye well.
Yet you must stay and hear me:
He sha'not suffer, if my friends or state
Can purchase him a pardon: Whore's the body
Of him that's slain?
We know not; But you hear
His free confession of the fact.
This may
Proceed from discontents; Life to some man
Is but their torment in whose pain they will,
As on the Wrack, confess what never
Was in their thought.
Speak it again, and I
Dare promise thee to live.
My heart was ever
Constant, my mothers love was but thy trial,
As mine a seeming change in thy disguise,
Which was not able to secure thee from 〈◊〉
The words were, I would choose my 〈…〉
But what will this avail us?
Mr. Justice, I here discharge you.
How?
My joys obeys
No limits; I accused my false unjustly,
The fool's alive.
Startup, Where?
I know not that,
My servant's with him, but if he have plaid
The hang-man, starved or smothered him in a ditch,
I have made fair work.
This were a welcome truth.
Sir, the Constable.
I had rather it had been my Kinsman and the Usurer;
But wait and give me knowledge when they come.
Whore's Mr. Justice?
It is he and Close;
Then I am secure, your pardon, and thy love.
You have it freely, and a mothers prayers
For both your happiness.
Please your worship, these
We took last night i'th'fields suspiciously,
And by my own authority I condemned 'em.
Shall we be hanged, Close, we are condemned already.
This is the Gentleman was killed.
Sweet sir, no;
Not killed out right, but I was almost starved
With cold: These Gentlewoman know me,
And I should know that Hose and Doublet too;
Those garments which you wear, I have oft seen, sweet sir.
Well said Ierouinte.
I was fine to borrow
These of a prisoner that lies in, upon
My Diamond Ring.
You are discharged.
And we too?
Yes, and joy in every bosom.
Close, you must know this your Mistress: Sweet Lady.
How?
It is enough for you to know her, sir,
And me to acknowledge.
Do you know me, sir?
Hum; yes, who brought you to town? And your daugh∣la too, sweet sir?
And you shall right her.
Is she grown crooked? I knew her too well.
Peace, not a word more, I know your meaning,
Do not discredit me, sweet sir, and we'll steal down
And marry her ere any be aware on it;
I wo'not stay to shift me, take no leave;
The jest will be when I am in the Country,
How like an ass he'll look in my apparel.
Sir, Mr. Playfaires Cousin and the tother Gallant.
I must entreat your patience a little,
You'll meet with friends in the next room.
Excuse my boldness, sir, this Gentleman.
Mr. Hornet, you are very welcome.
Good •ir no ceremony; We are come
About business: I have lost my No•ce, and would
Know where she is.
Do ye take me for a Wizard?
Sir, our desires are modest; That you would
Be witness to a bargain, and receive
Some trifles, sir, in trust to be delivered
To me, If I restore his Kinswoman.
Not else; On that condition I deposit
These hundred pieces, and a bond, if he
Deliver me my Niece, they are his fraught,
If not, they call me owner.
Pardon, sir,
That I presume to bring this trouble to you.
It is none at all.
You sha'not long expect: So rest you merry.
How fare you, sir?
As you see, fallen away an inch since morning,
But this will physic me; If I possess
This harlotry again, I'll make her sure:
Trust not a woman, they have found the herb
To open locks; not brazen Towers can hold'em.
Or if they get not loose, they have the virtue
Of Loadstones; Shut up in a box, they'll draw
Customers to them; Nay, being dead and buried,
There is a suspicion they will break the grave,
Which puts so many husbands to the charge
Of heavy stones to keep their bad wires under.
You are moved?
Oh Mr. Justice you are honest,
I ha'been abused, so miserably cheated,
I am ashamed to think on it, Stay, what, 〈…〉▪
Ha, it is my Niece; the very same.
There, sir, you have her, and I must have these.
Take'em: But you shall go with me; have I found you?
How Uncle? a reveller? you'll lead mea Co••anto.
You shall dance homewards.
What make you so familiar with my wife?
How, wife? is she married?
It is upon record,
I'll bring a Parson that shall take his oath 〈◊〉
Give me my hand and money, Mr. •ustice.
Where? where?
Here, here, but not to be recovered
By law: I have a judgement, sir, against you.
You have conspired to rob, cheat, and undo me;
I'll have you all Star-chamber'd.
Sir, be calm, and hear us.
I'll hear nothing.
Yes, you shall;
It will be necessary, I am bold,
Presuming on her favour, to demand
A parcel of three thousand pound, the sum
belongs to me, by virtue of a marriages
And I must have it.
Tell me of a marriage?
I saw the Priest conjoyne'em:
He will deserve your love.
Perhaps you may continue
A thousand, or two thousand, for six months,
Upon security.
Persecution.
Faith sir consider,
It is more safe to see her thus bestowed,
Than trust a jury; If the Doctor had
Given her too much Opium, or purged
Her soul away, things might so worse; But I
Keep counsel.
Ha've mortified me ye•?
For your own sake, and as you are true Knight.
Now, ha ye done? The widow;
Not a word more, take her, I'll pay you sir,
Three thousand pounds to morrow: Noble widow
You were in the first list to be invited;
My Niece I told you of, is married to
This worthy Gentleman.
You look like a Bridegroom.
It is in your power to make it good; What say you,
Shall we have issue? Now the word of comfort.
I will never marry.
You are resolved why, so: Come hither Nephew,
Shalt be my heir, I love thee for thy wit;
But charm thy friends, they do not laugh at me:
I'll be a Knight too, if I live, and build
An Hospital for twenty more of the Order,
Which I'll reduce my self out of the Suburbs;
It is a shame such men should lose their spurs
In women's Petticoats, and turn Squires again
To Whores, or Parasites to Noble men,
For want of fit provision.
An excellent foundation.
But whore's Startup?
Sunk, I think.
Ne'er co•jure for him; we are ungrateful to
Our bliss: But wasting of these precious minutes,
Which are so many ages, till the Church
Hath made us perfect.
Is there any more
Work for the Priest? Then give you joy before hand,
And let us celebrate the day together.
I'm glad of your conversion; Ye are the first
Jew that in my remembrance has turned Christian.
Walk on to joys.
Twixt Love and Fortune, now the accounts are even:
A chain of hearts, and the first link in heaven.

I'Ve thought upon it; and cannot tell which way
Ought I can say now, should advance the Play.
For Plays are either good, or bad; the good,
(If they doe beg) beg to be understood.
And in good faith, that has as bold a sound,
As if a beggar should ask twenty pound.
—Men have it not about them:
Then (Gentlemen) if rightly understood,
The bad doe need less Prologue than the good:
For if it chance the Plot be lame, or blind,
Ill clothed, deformed throughout, it needs must find
Compassion,—It is a beggar without Art:—
But it false out in penny words of Wit,
As in all bargains else. Men ever get
All they can in; will have London measure,
A bandfull over in their very pleasure.
And now ye have it; hee could not well deny'ee,
And I dare swear hoe's scarce a saver by ye.
THose common passions, hopes, and fears, that still,
The Poets first and then the Prologues fill
In this our age, hee that writ this, by me,
Protests against as modest foolery.
Hee thinks it an odd thing to be in pain,
For nothing else, but to be well again.
Who writes to fear is so; had hee not writ;
You •…ere had been the Judges of his wit;
And when hee had, did hee but then intend
To please himself, hee sure might have his end
Without th'expence of hope, and that hee had
That made this Play, although the Play be bad.
Then Gentlemen be thrifty, save your dooms
For the next man, or the next Play that comes;
For smiles are nothing, where men doe not care,
And frowns as little, where they need not fear.
THis (Sir) to them, but unto Majesty.
All hee has said before, hee does deny.
Yet not to Majesty: that were to bring
His fears to be, but for the Queen and King,
Not for your selves; and that hee dares not say:
You're his Sovereigns another way:
Your souls are Princes, and you have as good
A title that way, as ye have by blood
To govern, and here your powers more great
And absolute, than in the royal Seat.
There men dispute, and but by Law obey,
Here is no Law at all, but what ye say.
MArried? and in Diana's Grove!
So was th'appointment, or my Sense deceived me.
Married!
Now by those Powers that tie those pretty knots,
it is very fine, good faith it is wondrous fine:
What is, Brother?
Why? to marry Sister—
t'injoy twixt lawful and unlawful thus
a happiness, steal as it were ones own;
Diana's Grove, say thou?—Scratcheth his head.
That's the place; the hunt once up, and all
engaged in the sport, they mean to leave
the company, and steal unto those thickets,
where, there's a Priest attends them;
And will they lye together, think thou?
Is there distinction of sex think you?
or flesh and blood?
True; but the King, Sister!
But love, Brother!
Thou say well;
it is fine, it is wondrous fine:
Diana's grove—
Yes, Diana's grove,
but brother if you should speak of this now,—
Why thou know a drowning man holds not a thing so fast:
Sema•…he! she shuns me too:
The wound festered sure!
the hurt the boy gave her, when first
she looked abroad into the world, is not yet cured.
What hurt?
Why, know you not
she was in love long since with young Zorannes,
(Aglaura's brother,) and the now Queens betrothed?
Some such slight Tale I've heard.
Slight? she yet does weep, when she but hears him named,
and tells the prettiest and the saddest stories
of all those civil wars, and those Amours,
That, trust me, both my Lady and my self
turn weeping Statues still.
Pish, it is not that.
It is Ziriff, and his fresh glories here
have robbed me of her.
Since he thus appeared in Court,
my love has languished worse than Plants in drought.
But time's a good Physician: come, lets in:
the King and Queen by this time are come forth.
Yonder's a crowd without, as if some strange sight
were to be seen to day here.
Two or three with Carbonadoes before in stead of faces
mistook the door for a breach, and at the opening of it,
are striving still which should enter first.
Is my Lord busy?
My Lord, there are some Soldiers without—
Well, I will dispatch them presently.
Th'Embassadours from the Cadusians too—
Show them the Gallery.
One from the King—
Again? I come, I come.
Gre•…ness, thou vainer shadow of the Princes beams,
begot by mere reflection, nourished in extremes;
first taught to creep, and live upon the glance,
poorly to fare, till thine own proper strength
bring thee to surfeit of thy self at last.
How dull a Pageant, would this States-play seem
to me now; were not my love and my revenge
mixed with it?—
Three tedious Winters have I waited here,
like patient Chemists blowing still the coals,
and still expecting, when the blessed hour
would come, should make me master of
the Court Elixir, Power, for that turns all:
it is in projection now; down, sorrow, down,
and swell my heart no more, and thou wronged ghost
of my dead father, to thy bed again,
and sleep securely;
it cannot now be long, for sure Fate must,
is it has been cruel, so, a while be just.
I say they shall not live; our mercy
would turn sin, should we but use it ever:
Pity, and Love, the bosses only be
of government, merely for show and ornament.
Fear is the bit that mans proud will restrains,
and makes its vice its virtue—See it done.
So early, and so curious in your dress, (fair Mistress?)
these pretty ambushes and traps for hearts
set with such care to day, look like design:
speak, Lady, is it a massacre resolved?
is conquering one by one grown tedious sport?
or is the number of the taken such,
that for your safety you must kill out-right?
Did none doe greater mischief (Sir) than I,
heaven would not much be troubled with sad story,
nor would the quarrel man has to the Stars
be kept alive so strongly.
When hee does leave't
woman must take it up, and justly too;
for robbing of the sex and giving all to you.
Their weaknesses you mean, and I confess, Sir.
The greatest subjects of their power or glory.
Such gentle rape thou act'st upon my soul,
and with such pleasing violence dost force it still;
that when it should resist, it tamely yields,
making a kind of haste to be undone,
as if the way to victory were loss,
and conquest came by overthrow.
Pretty!
Is it the child of nature, or of some fair hand?
It is as the beauty Madam of some faces,
Arts issue only.
Thersames,
This concerns you most, brought you her picture?
Something made u•… for her in haste I have.
If she does owe no part of this fair dower
unto the Painter, she is rich enough.
A kind of merry sadness in this face
becomes it much.
There is indeed, Aglaura,
a pretty sullenness dressed up in smiles,
that says this beauty can both kill, and save.
How like you her Thersames?
As well as any man can doe a house
by seeing of the portal, here's but a face,
and faces (Sir) are things I have not studied;
I have my duty, and may boldly swear,
what you like best will ever please me most.
Spoke like Thersames, and my son,
come! the day holds fair,
let all the Hunts-men meet us in the vale,
we will uncouple there.
How odd a thing a crowd is unto me!
sure nature intended I should be alone,
had not that old doting man-mid-wife Time
slept, when he should have brought me forth, I had
been so too—
To be borne near, and only near a crown—
How now my Lord?
what? walking o'th'tops of Pyramids?
whispering your self away
like a denied lover? come! to horse, to horse,
and I will show you straight a sight shall please you
more than kind looks from her you dote upon
after a falling out.
Prithee what is it?
Isle tell you as I go.—
Which way? which way?
This is the grove, it is somewhere here within.—
Gently! Gently!
No hurt, my Lord, I hope.
None, none,
Thou would have warranted it to another,
if I had broke my neck:
what? dost think my horse and I show tricks?
that which way soever he throws me
like a Tumblers boy I must fall safe?
was there a bed of roses there? would I were Eunuch if I had not as lief h'a fallen in the state, as where I did, the ground was as hard, as if it had been paved with Ply∣tonicke Ladies hearts, and this unconscionable fellow asks whether I have no hurt; whore's my horse?
Making love to the next mare I think.
Not the next I assure you,
〈◊〉 galloped away, as if all the spurs in the field
were in his sides.
Why there's it: the jade's in the fashion too.
Now he has done me an injury, he will not come near me.
Well when I hunt next, may it be upon a starved cow,
without a saddle too.
And may I fall into a saw-pit, and not be taken up, but with suspicion of having been private, with mine own beast there. Now I better consider on it too, Gentle∣men, it is but the same thing we doe at Court; here's every man striving who shall be foremost, and hotly pursuing of what he seldom overtakes, or if he does, it's no great matter.
He that's best horsed (that is best friended) gets in soonest, and then all hee has to doe is to laugh at those that are behind. Shall we help you my Lord?—
Prithee doe—stay!
To be in view, is to be in favour,
is it not?
Right,
and he that has a strong faction against him, hunts upon a cold sent, and may in time come to a loss.
Here's one rides two miles about, while another leaps a ditch and is in be∣fore him.
Where note the indirect way's the nearest.
Good again—
And here's another puts on, and false into a quagmire, (that is) follows the Court till he has spent all (for your Court quagmire is want of money) there a man is sure to stick, and then not one helps him out, if they doe not laugh at him.
What think you of him, that hunts after my rate and never sees the Dear?
Why hee is like some young fellow, that follows the Court, and never sees the King.
To spur a horse till he is tired, is
To importune a friend till he be weary of you.
For then upon the first occasion you're thrown off, as I was now.
This is nothing to the catching of your horse Orsames.
Thou say true, I think he is no transmigrated Philosopher, and there∣fore not likely to be taken with morals.
Gentlemen—your help, the next I hope will bee yours, and then twill bee my •…urn.—
Fear not my Dear, if when Loves diet
was bare looks and those stolen too,
he yet did thrive! what then
will he doe now? when every night will be
a feast, and every day fresh revelry.
Will he not surfeit, when he once shall come
to grosser fare (my Lord) and so grow sick,
and Love once sick, how quickly will it dye?
Ours cannot; it is as immortal as the things
that elemented it, which were our souls:
nor can they ere impair in health, for what
these holy rites doe warrant us to doe,
more than our bodies would for quenching thirst.
Come let's to horse, we shall be mist,
for we are envies mark, and Court eyes carry far.
Your prayers and silence Sir:—
If it succeed? I wear thee here my Iolas—
If it succeed? will night succeed the day?
or hours one to another? is not his lust
the Idol of his soul? and was not she
the Idol of his lust? as safely he might
have stolen the Diadem from off his head,
and he would less have mist it.
You now, my Lord, must raise his jealousy,
teach it to look through the false optic fear,
and make it see all double: Tell him the Prince
would not have thus presumed, but that he does
intend worse yet; and that his crown and life
will be the next attempt.
Right, and I will urge
how dangerous it is unto the present state,
To have the creatures, and the followers
of the next Prince (whom all now strive to please)
too near about him:
What if the male-contents that use
to come unto him were discovered?
By no means; for it were in vain to give
him discontent (which too must needs be done)
if they within him give it not nourishment.
Well, Isle away first for the print's too big
if we be seen together.—
I have so fraught this Bark with hope, that it
dares venture now in any storm, or weather;
and if hee sink or splits, ell's one to me.
"Ambition seems all things, and yet is none,
"but in disguise stalks to opinion
"and fools it into faith, for every thing:
It is not with th'ascending to a Throne,
As it is with stairs, and steps, that are the same;
For to a Crown, each humor's a degree;
and as men change, and differ, so must wee.
The name of virtue doth the people please,
not for their love to virtue, but their case,
and Parrot Rumour I that tale have taught.
By making love I hold the women's grace,
it is the Court double key, and entrance gets
to all the little plots; the fiery spirits
my love to Arms hath drawn into my faction;
〈◊〉, but the minion of the Time, is mine,
and he shall be, or shall not be at all.
He that beholds a wing in pieces torn,
and knows not that to heaven it once did bear
the high-flowne and selfe-less'ning bird, will think
and call them idle Subjects of the wind:
when he that has the skill to imp and bind
these in right places, will thus truth discover;
That borrowed Instruments doe oft convey
the Soul to her proposed Intents, and where
our Stars deny, Art may supply—
Think you it is not then
the little jealousies (my Lord) and fears,
joy mixed with doubt, and doubt revived with hope
that crowns all love with pleasure? these are lost
when once wee come to full fruition;
like waking in the morning when all night
on fancy has been fed with some new strange delight.
I grant you, Madam, that the fears, and joys,
hopes, and desires, mixed with despairs, and doubts,
d•…e make the sport in love; that they are
the ve•…ie dogs by which we hunt the hare;
but as the dogs would stop, and straight give o'er
were it not for the little thing before;
•…o would our passions; both alike must be
fleshed in the chase.
Will you then place the happiness, but there,
where the dull plow man and the plow-mans horse
can find it out? Shall souls refined, not know
how to preserve alive a noble flame,
but let it die, burn out to appetite?
Love's a Chameleon, and would live on air,
ph•…sick for agues, starving is his food.
Why? there's it now! a greater Epicure
lives not on earth; my Lord and I have been
in•… prev•…e kitchen, seen his bills of Fare.
And how, and how my Lord?
A mighty Prince,
and full of curiosity—Harts newly slain
served up entire, and stuck with little Arrows
in stead of Cloves—
Sometimes a cheek plumped up
with broth, with cream and claret mingled
for sauce, and round about the dish
Pomegranate kernels, strewed on leaves of Lilies.
Then will he have black eyes, for those of late
•…e feeds on much, and for variety
the gray—
You forget his covered dishes
of •…ene-stra•…es, and Marmalade of lips,
p•…rfum'd by breath sweet as the beans first blossoms.
Rare!
And what's the drink to all this meat, my Lord?
Nothing but pearl dissolved, tears still fresh, fetched
from Lovers eyes, which if they come to be
warm in the carriage, are straight cooled with sighs.
And all this rich proportion, perchance
we would allow him:
True! but therefore this is but his common di•…r;
only serves
when his chief Cooks, Liking and Opportune•…e,
are out of the way; for when hee feasts indeed,
it is there, where the wise people of the world
did place the virtues, in the middle—Madam.
My Lord, there is so little hope we should convert you;
and if we should, so little got by it,
that we'll not lose so much upon it as sleep.
Your Lordships servants—
Nay Ladies we'll wait upon you to your chambers.
Prithee lets spare the complement, we shall doe no good.
By this hand Isle try,
they keep me fasting, and I must be praying.
Undress me:—
Is it not late, Iolina?
it was the longest day, this—
Softly, as Death it self comes on,
when it does steal away the sick mans breath,
and standers by perceive it not,
have I trod the way unto these lodgings.
How wisely doe those Powers
that give us happiness, order it?
sending us still fears to bound our joys,
which else would over-flow and lose themselves:
see where she sits,
like Day retired into another world.
Dear mine! where all the beauty man admires
in scattered pieces, does united lye.
Where sense does feast, and yet where sweet desire
lives in its longing, like a misers eye,
that never knew, nor saw society:
tell me, by what approaches must I come
to take in what remains of my felicity?
Needs there any new ones, where the breach
is made already? you are entered here—
long since (Sir) here, and I have given up all.
All but the Fort, and in such wars, as these,
till that be yielded up, there is no peace,
nor triumph to be made; come! undo, undo,
and from these envious clouds slide quick
into Loves proper Sphere, thy bed:
The weary traveller, whom the busy Sun
hath vex't all day, and scorched almost to tinder,
ne'er longed for night, as I have longed for this.
What rude hand is that?
Go Iolina, see, but let none enter—
It is Z•…if, Sir.
—Oh—
Something of weight hath fallen out it seems,
which in his zeal he could not keep till morning.
But one short minute, Dear, into that chamber.—
How now?
thou start'st, as if thy sins had met thee,
or thy Fathers ghost; what news man?
Such as will send the blood of hasty messages
unto the heart, and make it call
all that is man about you into council;
whore's the Princess, Sir?
Why? what of her?
The King must have her—
How?
The King must have her (Sir)
Though fear of worse makes ill, still relish better,
and this look handsome in our friendship, Ziriff,
yet so severe a preparation—,
there needed not: come, come! what first?
A Guard! Thersames,
thou art lost; betrayed
by faithless and ungrateful man,
out of a happiness:—
the very thought of that,
will lend my anger so much noble justice,
that were thou master of as much fresh life,
as you have been of villainy, it should not serve,
nor stock thee out, to glory, or repent
the least of it.
Put up: put up! such unbecomming anger
I have not seen you wear before.
What? draw upon your friend,
doe you believe me right now?—
I scarce believe mine eyes:—Zorannes.
The same, but how preserved, or why
thus long disguised to you, a freer hour must speak:
That you're •…etraid is certain, but by whom,
unless the Priest himself, I cannot guess
more•… than the marriage, though he knows not of:
if you now send her on these early summons
•…fore the sparks are grown into a flame,
you doe redeem th'offence, or make it less;
and (on my life) yet his intents are fair,
and he will but besiege, not force affection.
So you gain time; if you refuse, there's •…ut
one way; you know his power and passion.
Into how strange a labyrinth am I
now fallen! what shall I doe Zorannes?
Doe (Sir) as Sea-men, that have lost their light
and way: strike sail, and lye quiet a while.
Your forces in the Province are not yet
in readiness, nor is our friend Zephines
arrived at Delphos; nothing is ripe, besides—
Good heavens, did I but dream that she was mine?
upon imagination did I climb up to
this height? let me then wake and dye,
some courteous hand snatch me from what's to come,
and ere my wrongs have being, give them end:
How poor, and how unlike the Prince is this?
this trifle woman does unman us all;
robs us so much, it makes us things of pity.
Is this a time to loose our anger in?
and vainly breathe it out? when all wee have
will hardly fill the sail of Resolution,
and make us bear up high enough for action.
I have done (Sir) pray chide no more;
the slave whom tedious custom has inured
and taught to think of misery as of food,
counting it but a necessary of life,
and so digesting it, shall not so much as once
be named to patience, when I am spoken of:
mark me; for I will now undo my self
as willingly, as virgins give up all first nights
to them they love:—
Stay, Sir, it were fit Aglaura yet were kept
in ignorance: I will dismiss the Guard,
and be my self again.
In how much worse estate am I in now,
Than if I ne'er had known her; privation,
is a misery as much above bare wretchedness,
as that is short of happiness:
So when the Sun does not appear,
It is darker because it once was here.
Nay, Gentlemen:
there needs no force, where there is no resistance:
Isle satisfy the King my self.
—Oh it is well you're come,
there was within me fresh Rebellion,
and reason was almost unking'd again.
But you shall have her Sir—
What doubtful combats in this noble youth
passion and reason have!—
Here Sir—
What means the Prince, my Lord?
Madam, his wiser fear has taught him to disguise
his love, and make it look a little rude at parting.
Affairs that doe concern, all that you hope from
happiness, this night force him away:
and lest you should have tempted him to stay,
(Which hee did doubt you would and would prevail)
he left you thus: he does desire by me
you would this night lodge in the little tower,
which is in my command; the reasons why
himself will shortly tell you.
It is strange, but I am all Obedience—
I told him so, Sir, urged it was no common knot,
that to the tying of it two powerful Princes,
Virtue and Love were joined, and that
a greater than these two was now
engaged in it; Religion; but it would not doe,
the cork of passion boyed up all reason so
that what was said, swam but o'th'top of th'eare
ne'er reached the heart:
Is there no way for Kings to show their power,
but in their Subjects wrongs? no subject neither
but his own son?
Right Sir:
no quarry for his lust to gorge on, but on what
you fairly had flown at, and taken:
well—were not the King, or were indeed
not you, that have such hopes, and such a crown
to venture, and yet—
tic but a woman.
How? that but again, and thou arr more injurious than hee, and woul't provoke me sooner.
Why Sir?
there are no altars yet addressed unto her,
nor sacrifice; if I have made her less
than what she is, it was my love to you:
For in my thoughts, and here within, I hold her
the noblest piece Nature ere lent our eyes,
and of the which, all women else, are but
weak counterfeits, made up by her journey-men:
but was this fit to tell you?
I know you value but too high all that,
and in a loss we should not make things more,
tic miseries happiness, that wee can make it less
by art, throw a forgetfulness upon our ills,
Yet who can doe it here?
when every voice, must needs, and every face,
by showing what she was not, show what she was.
Isle instantly unto him—
Stay Sir
Though't be the utmost of my Fortunes hope
to have an equal share of ill with you:
yet I could wish we sold this trifle life,
at a far dearer rate, than we are like to doe,
since' tic a King's the Merchant.
Ha!
King, 〈◊〉 it is indeed,
and there's no Art can cancel that high bond:
—Hee cools again.—
True Sir, and yet me thinks to know a reason—
for passive nature ne'er had glorious end,
and he that States preventions ever learned,
knows, it is one motion to strike and to defend.
Some of the Lords without, and from the King.
they say, wait you.
What subtle State trick now?
but one turn here, and I am back my Lord.—
This will not doe; his resolution's like
a skilful horse-man, and reason is the stirrup,
which though a sudden shock may make
it loose, yet does it meet it handsomely again.
Stay, 'tmust be some sudden fear of wrong
to her, that may draw on a sudden act
from him, and ruin from the King; for such
a spirit will not like common ones, be
raised by every spell, it is in loves circle
only twill appear.
I cannot bear the burden of my wrongs
one minute longer.
Why! what's the matter Sir?
They doe pretend the safety of the State
now, nothing but my marriage with Cadusia
can secure th'adjoyning country to it;
confinement during life for me if I refuse
Diana's Nunnery for her—And at that Nunn'rie, Iol•…s,
allegiance in me like the string of a watch
wound up too high, and forced above the nick,
ran back, and in a moment was unravelled all.
Now by the love I bear to Justice,
That Nunn'rie was too severe; when virtuous love's a crime
what man can hope to scope a punishment,
or who's indeed so wretched to desire it?
Right!
What answer made you, Sir?
None, they gave me till to morrow,
and ere that be, or they or I
must know our destiny:
come friend let's in, there is no sleeping now;
for time is short, and we have much to doe.—
Judge you, Gentlemen, if I be not as unfortunate as a gamester thinks himself upon the loss
of the last stake; this is the first she
I ever swore to heartily, and (by those eyes)
I think I had continued unperjur'd a whole month,
(and that's fair you'll say.)
Very fair—
Had she not run mad betwixt.—
How? mad?
who? Semanthe?
Yea, yea, mad, ask Philan else.
people that want clear intervals talkenot
so wildly: Isle tell you Gallants; it is now, since first I found my self a little boat, and quivering about the heart, some ten days since, (a tedious Ague) Sirs; (but what of that?)
the gracious glance, and little whisper past,
approaches made from th'hand unto the lip,
I came to visit her, and (as you know we use)
breathing a sigh or two by way of prologue,
told her, that in Loves Physic it was a rule,
where the disease had birth to seek a cure;
I had no sooner named love to her, but she
began to talk of Flames, and Flames,
neither devouring, nor devoured, of Air,
and of Chameleons—
Oh the Platonic.
Those of the new religion in love! your Lordship's merry, •…oath, how doe you like the humour on it?
As thou would like red hair, or leanness
in thy Mistress; scurvily, 'tdoes worse with handsomeness,
•…han strong desire would doe with impotence;
a me•…re trick to enhance the price of kisses—
Sure these silly women, when they feed
our expectation so high, doe but like
ignorant Conjurers, that raise a Spirit
which handsomely they cannot lay again:
True, it is like some that nourish up
•…young Lions till they grow so great, they are afraid of themselves, they dare not grant at last,
for fear they should not satisfy.
Who's for the Town? I must take up again,
This villainous Love's as chargeable as the Philosophers Stone, and thy Mistress as hard to compass too!
The Platonic is ever so; they are as tedious
before they come to the point, as an old man
fallen into the Stories of his youth;
Or a widow into the praises of her first husband.
Well, if she hold out but one month longer,
if I d•…e not quite forget, I ere beleaguered there,
and remove the siege to another place, may all
the curses beguiled virgins lose upon their perjured Lovers
fall upon me.
And thou woult deserve'em all.
For what?
For being in the company of those
that took away the Prince's Mistress from him.
Peace, that will be redeemed—
I put but on this wildness to disguise my self;
there are brave things in hand, hark i'thy ear:—
Some severe plot upon a maiden-head.
These two young Lords make love,
as Embroyderers work against a Mask, night and day;
They think importunity a nearer way than merit,
and take women as Schoole-boyes catch Squirrels.
hunt 'em up and down till they are weary,
and fall down before'em.
Who loves the Prince fails not—
And I am one: my injuries are great as thine,
and doe persuade as strongly.
I had command to bring thee,
fail not and in thine own disguise
Why in disguise?
It is the Princes policy and love;
for if wee should miscarry,
some one taken might betray the rest
unknown to one another,
each man is safe, in his own valour;
And what Mercers wife are you to cheapen now in stead of his silks?
Troth; it is not so well; it is but a Cozen of thine—come Philan let's along:—
What is it thus within whispering remorse,
and calls Love Tyrant? all powers, but his,
their rigour, and our fear, have made divine!
But every Creature holds of him by sense,
the sweetest Tenure; yea! but my husbands brother:
and what of that? doe harmless birds or beasts
ask leave of curious Heraldry at all?
Does not the womb of one fair spring,
bring unto the earth many sweet rivers,
that wantonly doe one another chase,
and in one bed, kiss, mingle, and embrace?
Man (Natures heir) is not by her will ti'de,
to shun all creatures are allied unto him,
for then hee should shun all; since death and life
doubly allies all them that live by breath:
The Air that does impart to all lifes brood,
refreshing, is so near to it self, and to us all,
that all in all is individual:
But, how am I sure one and the same desire
warmes Ariaspes: for Art can keep alive
a beddred love.
Alone, (Madam) and overcast with thought,
uncloud—uncloud—for if wee may believe
the smiles of Fortune, love shall no longer pine
in prison thus, nor undelivered travel
with throes of fear, and of desire about it.
The Prince, (like to a valiant beast in nets)
striving to force a freedom suddenly,
has made himself at length, the surer prey:
the King stands only now betwixt, and is,
just like a single tree, that hinders all the prospect:
it is but the cutting down of him, and wee—
Why would it thou thus embark into strange seas,
and trouble Fate, for what wee have already?
Thou art to me what thou now seek, a Kingdom;
and were thy love as great, as thy ambition;
I should be so to thee.
Think you, you are not Madam?
as well and justly may you doubt the truths,
tortured, or dying men doe leave behind them:
but then my fortune turns my misery,
when my addition shall but make you less;
shall I endure that head that wore a crown,
for my sake should wear none? First let me lose
th'exchequer of my wealth, your love; nay, may
all that rich Treasury you have about you,
be rifled by the man I hated, and I look on;
though youth be full of sin, and heaven be juft,
so sad a doom I hope they keep not from me;
Remember what a quick Apostasy he made,
when all his vows were up to heaven and you.
How, ere the Bridal torches were burnt out,
his flames grew weak, and sicklier; think on that,
think how unsafe you are, if she should now,
not sell her honour at a lower rate,
than your place in his bed.
And would not you prove false too then?
By this—and this—loves break-fast:
by his feasts too yet to come, by all the
beauty in this face, divinity too great
to be profaned—
O doe not swear by that;
Cankers may eat that flower upon the stalk,
(for sickness and mischance, are great devourers)
and when there is not in these cheeks and lips,
l•…ft red enough to blush at perjury,
when you shall make it, what shall I doe then?
Our souls by that time (Madam)
will by long custom so acquainted be,
they will not need that duller truch-man Flesh,
but freely, and without those poorer helps,
converse and mingle; mean time we'll teach
our loves to speak, not thus to live by signs,
and action is his native language, Madam,
this box but opened to the Sense will do it.
I undertake I know not what,
Thine own safety (Dearest)
let it be this night, if thou dost;
love thy self or me.
That's very sudden.
Not if wee be so, and we must now be wise,
For when their Sun sets, ours begins to rise.—
Then all my •…ears are true, and she is false;
false as a falling Star, or Glow-wormes fire:
This Devil Beauty is compounded strangely,
It is a subtle point, and hard to know,
whether't has in it more active tempting,
or more passive tempted; so soon it forces,
and so soon it yields—
Good Gods! she seized my heart, as if from you
sh'ad had Commission to have used me so;
and all mankind besides—and see, if the just Ocean
makes more haste to pay
to needy rivers, what it borrowed first,
then she to give, where she ne'er took;
me thinks I feel anger, Revenges harbinger
chalking up all within, and thrusting out
of doors, the tame and softer passions;—
It must be so:
To love is noble •…railtie, but poor sin
When wee fall once to Love, unloved again.
It were fit your Justice did consider, (Sir)
what way it took; if you should apprehend
the Prince for Treason (which hee never did)
and which, unacted, is unborn; (at least will be believed so)
lookers on, and the loud talking crowd,
will think it all but water colours
laid on for a time,
and which wiped off, each common eye would see,
Strange ends, through stranger ways:
Think thou I will compound with Treason then?
and make one fear another Advocate?
Virtue forbid Sir, but if you would permit,
them to approach the room (yet who would advise
Treason should come so near?) there would be then
No place left for excuse.
How strong are they?
Weak, considering
the enterprise; they are but few in number,
and those few too, having nothing but
their resolutions considerable about them.
A Troop indeed designed to suffer what
they come to execute.
Who are they are thus weary of their lives?
Their names I cannot give you.
For those hee sent for, hee did still receive
at a back door, and so dismissed them too.
But I doe think Ziriff is one.—
Take heed! I shall suspect thy hate to others,
not thy love to me, begot this service;
This Treason thou thy self dost say
has but an hours age, and I can give account
of him, beyond that time.—Brother, in the little Tower
where now Aglaura's prisoner,
you shall find him; bring him along,
hee yet doth stand untainted in my thoughts,
and to preserve him so,
hee shall not stir out of my eyes command
till this great cloud be over.
Sir, it was the Prince who first—
I know all that! urge it no more!
I love the man;
and it is with pain, wee doe suspect,
where wee doe not dislike:
you are sure hee will have some,
and that they will come to night?
As sure as night will come it self.
Get all our Guards in readiness, we will our self
disperse them afterwards; and both be sure
to wear your thoughts within: Isle act the rest:
Well.—If there be not some great storm towards,
ne'er trust me; Whisper (Court Thunder) is in
every corner, and there has been to day
about the Town a murmuring
and buzzing, such as men use to make,
when they doe fear to vent their fears;
True, and all the States-men hang down their heads, like full eared corn; two of them
where I sup't, asked what time of night it was,
and when it was told them, started, as if
they had been to run a race.
The King too (if you mark him,) doth feign mirth and jollity, but through them both,
flashes of discontent, and anger make escapes:
Gentlemen! it is pity heaven
designed you not to make the Almanacs.
You guess so shrewdly by the ill aspects,
or near conjunctions of the great ones,
at what's to come still; that without all doubt
the Country had been governed wholly by you,
and ploughed and reaped accordingly; for me,
I understand this mystery as little
as the new Love, and as I take it too,
it is much about the Time that every thing
but Owls, and Lovers take their rest;
Goodnight, Philan—away—
It is early yet; let's go on the Queens side
and fool a little; I love to warm my self
before I go to bed, it does beget
handsome and sprightly thoughts, and makes
our dreams half solid pleasures.
Agreed: agreed:
Could thou not find out Ziriff?
Not speak with him my Lord;
•…et I sent in by several men.
I wonder Iolas meets us not here too.
It is strange, but let's on now how ere,
when Fortunes, honour, life, and ell's in doubt
bravely to dare, is bravely to get out.
Betrayed! betrayed!
Shift for your self Sir, and let us alone,
wee will secure your way, and make our own.
Follow Lords, and see quick execution done,
leave not a man alive.
Who treads on fire, and does not put it out,
Disperses fear in many sparks of doubt.
Stand friends, an equal party—
Brave Orsames, it is pleasure to dye near thee.
Talk not of dying Philan, we will live,
and serve the noble Prince again; we are alone,
off then with thy disguise, and throw it in the bushes;
quick, quick; before the torrent comes upon us:
wee shall be straight good Subjects, and I despair not
of reward for this nights service: so.—
wee two now killed our friends! it is hard,
but 'tmust be so.
Follow! Follow!
Yes; so you may now, you're not likely to overtake.
Orsames, and Philan, how came you hither?
The nearest way it seems, you followed (thank you)
as if 'thad been through quicksets:
's Death have they all escaped?
Not all, two of them wee made sure;
but they cost dear, look here else.
Is the Prince there?
They are both Princes I think,
they fought like Princes I am sure.
Stephines, and Odîris—we trifle.
Which way took the rest?
Two of them are certainly here abouts.
Upon my life they swam the river;
some straight to horse, and follow ore the bridge;
you, and I my Lord, will search this place a little better.
Your Highness will I hope remember, who were
the men were in—
Oh! fear not, your Mistress shall know you're valiant.
Philan! if thou love me, let's kill them upon the place.
Fie: thou now art wild indeed;
thou taught me to be wise first,
and I will now keep thee so.—Follow, follow.
Madam!
What wretch is this that thus usurps
upon the privilege of Ghosts, and walks
at mid-night?
Aglaura.
Betray me not
my willing sense too soon, yet if that voice
be false.—
Open fair Saint, and let me in.
It is the Prince—
as willingly as those
that cannot sleep doe light; welcome (Sir,)
welcome above.—
Bless me, what means this unsheathed minister of death?
if, Sir, on me quick Justice be to pass,
why this? absence alas, or such strange looks
as you now bri•…g with you would kill as soon:
Softly! for I, like a hard hunted Dear,
have only hearded here; and though the cry
reach not our ears, yet am I followed close:
ô my heart! since I saw thee,
Time has been strangely Active, and begot
a Monstrous issue of unheard of Story:
Sit; thou shalt have it all! nay, sigh not.
such blasts will hinder all the passage;
Do •…t thou remember, how wee parted last?
Can I forget it Sir?
That word of parting was ill placed, I swear,
it may be ominous; but dost thou know
into whose hands I gave thee?
Yes into Z•…riffi Sir.
That Ziriff was thy brother, brave Zorannes
preserved by miracle in that sad day
thy father fell, and since thus in disguise,
waiting his just revenge.
You doe amaze me, Sir.
And must doe more, when I tell all the Story.
The King, the jealous King, knew of the marriage,
and when thou though thy self by my direction,
thou were his Prisoner;
unless I would renounce all right,
and cease to love thee, (o strange, and fond request 〈◊〉)
immured thou must have been in some sad place,
and locked for ever, from Thersames sight.
For ever—and that unable to endure
this night, I did attempt his life.
Was it well done Sir?
O no! extremely Ill!
for •…o attempt and not to act was poor:
here the dead-doing Law, (like ill-paid Soldiers)
leaves the side it was on, to join with power.
Royal villainy now will look so like to Justice,
that the times to come and curious posterity,
will find no difference: weep thou Aglaura?
come, to bed my Love!
and wee will there mock Tyranny, and Fate,
those softer hours of pleasure, and delight,
that like so many single pearls, should have
•…orn'd our thread of life, wee will at once,
by Loves mysterious power, and this nights help
contract to one, and make but one rich draught
of all.
What mean you Sir?
To make my self incapable of misery,
by taking strong preservative of happiness:
I would this •…light enjoy thee:
Doe: Sir, doe what you will with me,
for I am too much yours, to deny the right
however claimed—but—
But what Aglaura?
Gather not roses in a wet and frowing hour,
they'll lose their sweets then, trust me they will Sir.
What pleasure can Love take to play his game out,
when death must keep the Stakes—
hark Sir—grave bringers, and last minutes are at hand,
hide, hide your self, for Loves sake hide your self.
As soon the Sun may hide himself, as I.
The Prince of Persia hide himself?—
O talk not Sir; the Sun does hide himself
when night and blackness comes—
Never sweet Ignorance, he shines in the other world then;
and so shall I, if I set here in glory:
Enter
ye hasty seekers of life.
Soranne•….—
My brother!
If all the joy within me come not out,
to give a welcome to so dear an o•…jest,
excuse it Sir; sorrow locks up all doors.
If there be such a Toy about you, Sister,
keep't for your self, or lend it to the Prince;
there is a dearth of that Commodity,
and you have made it Sir. Now?
what is the next mad thing you mea•…e to doe?
will you stay here? when all the Court's beset
like to a wood at a great hunt, and busy mischief hastes
to be in view, and have you in her power—
To me all this—
for great griefe's deaf as well as it is dumb,
and drives no trade at all with Counsel: (Sir)
why doe you not Tutor one that has the Plague,
and see if hee will fear an after ague fit;
such is all mischief now to me; there is none left
is worth a thought, death is the worst, I know,
and that compared to shame, does look more lovely now
than a chaste Mistress, set by common woman—
and I must court it Sir?
No wonder if that heaven for sake us, when wee leave our selves:
what is there done should feed such high despair?
were you but safe—
Dear (Sir) be ruled,
if love, be love, and magic too,
(as sure it is where it is true;)
wee then shall meet in absence, and in spite
of all divorce, freely enjoy together,
what niggard Fate thus peevishly denies.
Yea: but if pleasures be themselves but dreams,
what then are the dreams of these to men?
that monster, Expectation, will devour
all that is within our hope or power,
and ere wee once can come to show, how rich
wee are, wee shall be poor,
shall wee not Sorannez?
I understand not this,
in times of envious penury (such as these are)
to keep but love alive is fair, wee should not think
of feasting him: come (Sir)
here in these lodgings is a little door,
that leads unto another; that again,
unto a vault, that has his passage under
the little river, opening into the wood;
from thence it is but some few minutes easy business
unto a Servants house of mine (who for his faith
and honesty, hereafter must
look big in Story) there you are safe however;
and when this Storm has met a little calm,
what wild desire dares whisper to it self,
you may enjoy, and at the worst may steal:
What shall become of thee Aglaura then?
shall I leave thee their rages sacrifice?
and like dull Sea-men threatened with a storm,
throw all away, I have, to save my self.
Can I be safe when you are not? my Lord!
knows love in us divided happiness?
am I the safer for your being here?
can you give that you have not for your self?
my innocence is my best guard, and that your stay
betraying it unto suspicion, takes away.
If you did love me?—
Grows that in question? then it is time to part:—
when wee shall meet again Heaven only knows,
and when wee shall I know we shall be old:
Love does not calculate the common way,
Minutes are hours there, and the hours are days,
each day's a year, and every year an age;
what will this come to think you?
Would this were all the ill,
for these are pretty little harmless nothings;
Times horse runs full as fast, hard borne and curbed,
as in his full career, loose-rain'd and spurred:
come, come, let's away.
Happiness, such as men lost in misery
would wrong in naming, it is so much above them.
All that I want of it, all you deserve,
Heaven send you in my absence.
And misery, such as witty malice would
Iay out in curses, on the thing it hates,
Heaven send me in the stead, if when you're gone
I welcome it, but for your sake alone.—
Stir not from hence, Sir, till you hear from me so goodnight dear Prince.
Goodnight dear friend.
When wee meet next all this will but advance—
Joy never feasts so high,
as when the first course is of misery.
BY this light—a brave Prince,
hee made no more of the Guard, than they would of a Taylor on a Mask night, that has refused trusting before.
Hoe's as Active as he is valiant too;
did mark him how hee stood like all the points
of the Compass, and as good Pictures,
had his eyes, towards every man.
And his sword too,
all the other side walk up and down the Court now,
as if they had lost their way, and stare,
like Grey-hounds, when the Hare has taken the furze,
Right,
and have more troubles about'em
than a Serving-man that has forgot his message
when hoe's come upon the place.—
Yonder's the King within, chafing, and swearing
like an old Falconer upon the first flight
of a young Hawk, when some Clown
has taken away the quarry from her;
and all the Lords stand round about him,
as if hee were to be baited, with much more fear,
and at much more distance,
than a Country Gentlewoman sees the Lions the first time:
look: hoe's broke loose.—
Find him; or by Osiris self, you all are T•…aitours;
and equally shall pay to Justice; a single man,
and guilty too, break through you all!
Confidence!
(thou paint of women, and the States-mans wisdom,
valour for Cowards, and of the guilties Innocence,)
assist me now.
Sir, send these Stirrers off:
I have some business will deserve your privacy.
Leave us.
How the villain swells upon us?—
Not to punish thought,
or keep it long upon the wrack of doubt,
know Sir,
That by corruption of the waiting woman,
the common key of Secrets, I have found
the truth at last, and have discovered all:
the Prince your Son was by Ag•…aura means,
conveyed last night unto the Cypress Grove,
through a close vault that opens in the lodgings:
hee does intend to join with Carimania,
but ere hee goes, resolves to finish all
the rites of Love, and this night means
to steal what is behind.
How good is Heaven unto me!
that when it gave me Traitors for my Subjects,
would lend me such a Servant!
How just (Sir) rather,
that would bestow this Fortune on the poor.
and where your bounty had made debt so infinite
that it grew desperate, their hope to pay it—
Enough of that, thou dost but gently chide
me for a fault, that I will mend; for I
have been too poor, and low in my rewards
unto thy virtue: but to our business;
the question is, whether wee shall rely
upon our Guards again?
By no means Sir:
hope on his future fortunes, or their Love
unto his person, has so sicklied ore
their resolutions, that wee must not
trust them.
Besides, it were but needless here;
hee 〈◊〉 through the vault alone, and I
my self 〈◊◊〉 dertake that business,
if that were all, 〈◊〉 •…t there is something else,
this accident doth prompt my zeal to serve you in.
I know you love Aglaura (Sir) with passion,
a•…d would enjoy her; I know besides
•…hee loves him so, that whosoere shall bring
the ti•…mgs of his death, must carry back
the news of hers, so that your Justice (Sir)
must rob your hope: but there is yet a way—
Here! take my heart; for I have hitherto
to •…amly spent the treasure of my love,
•…e have it coined •…eight into friendship all,
and make a present to thee.
If any part of this rich happiness,
(•…ortune prepares now for you) shall owe it self
unto my weak endeavours, I have enough.
〈◊〉 without doubt this night expects
the 〈◊〉, and why
you should not then supply his place by stealth,
and •…n disguise—
I apprehend thee Ziriff,
but there's difficulty—
Who trades in Love must be an adventurer, (Sir)
but here is scarce enough to make the pleasure dearer:
I know the Cave; your Brother and my self
with 〈◊〉, (for those w'are sure doe hate him,)
with 〈◊〉 few chosen more betimes will wait
the Princes passing through the vault; if hee
comes first, hoe's dead; and if it be your self,
we•… will conduct you to the chamber door,
and 〈◊〉 twixt you and danger afterwards.
I have conceived of Joy, and am grown great:
Till I have safe deliverance, time's a cripple
and 〈◊◊〉 crutches.—as for thee my Ziriff,
I doe here entertain a friendship with thee,
shall drown the memory of all patterns past;
wee will oblige by turns; and that so thick,
and fast, that curious studiers of it,
shall not once dare to cast it up, or say
b•… way of guess, whether thou or I
remain the debtors, when wee come to die.
Is the Queen ready to come out?
Not •…et sure, the Kings brother is but newly entered;
Come my Lord, the Song then.
The Song.
A vengeance take this love, it spoils a voice
worse than the losing of a maiden-head.
I have got such a cold with rising
and walking in my shirt a nights, that
a Bittorne whooping in a reed is better music.
This modesty becomes you as ill, my Lord,
as wooing would us women: pray, putt's not to it.
Nay Ladies, you shall find me,
as free, as the Musicians of the woods
themselves; what I have, you shall not need to call for,
nor shall it cost you any thing.
WHy so pale and wan fond Lover?
Prithee why so pale?
Will, when looking well can't move her,
Looking ill prevail?
Prithee why so pale?
Why so dull and mute young Sinner?
Prithee why so mute?
Will, when speaking well can't win her,
Saying nothing do it?
Prithee why so mute?
Quit, quit, for shame, this will not move
This cannot take her;
If of her self she will not Love,
Nothing can make her,
The Devil take her.
I should have guest, it had been the issue of
your brain, if I had not been told so;
A little foolish counsel (Madam) I gave a friend
of mine four or five years ago, when he was
falling into a Consumption.—
Which of all you have seen the fair prisoner
since she was confined?
I have Madam.
And how behaves she now her self?
As one that had entrenched so deep in Innocence,
she feared no enemies, bears all quietly,
and smiles at Fortune, whilst she frowns on her.
So gallant! I wonder where the beauty lies
that thus inflames the royal blood?
Faces, Madam, are like books, those that doe study them
know best, and to say truth, it is still
much as it pleases the Courteous Reader.
These Lovers sure are like Astronomers,
that when the vulgar eye discovers, but
a Sky above, studded with some few Stars,
find out besides strange fishes, birds, and beasts.
As men in sickness scorched into a raving
doe see the Devil, in all shapes and forms,
when standers by wondering, ask where, and when;
So they in Love, for ell's but fever there,
and madness too.
That's too severe Semanthe;
but wee will have your reasons in the park;
are the doors open through the Gardens?
The King has newly led the way.
Thou art a Tyrant, Ziriff: I shall die with joy.
I must confess my Lord; had but the Princes ills
proved •…eight, and not thus dangerous,
hee should have owed to me, at least I would
have laid a claim unto his safety; and
like Physicians, that doe challenge right
in Natures cures, looked for reward and thanks;
but since it was otherwise, I thought it best
•…o save my self, and then to save the State.
It was wisely done.
Safely I'm sure, my Lord! you know it is not
•…ur custom, where the Kings dislike, once swells to hate,
there to engage our selves; Court friendship
is a Cable, that in storms is ever cut,
and I made bold with it; here is the warrant sealed
and for the execution of it, if you think
wee are not strong enough, wee may have
〈◊〉, for him the King did name.
And him I would have named.
But is hee not too much the Prince's (Sir?)
Hee is as lights in Scenes at Masques,
what glorious show so ere hee makes without,
I that set him there, know why, and how;
but here hee is.—
Come Iol•…s. and since the Heavens decreed,
the man whom thou should envy, should be such,
That all men else must do it; be not ashamed
thou once we•… guilty of it;
but bless them, that they give thee now a means,
to make a friendship with him, and vouchsafe
to find thee out a way to love, where well
thou coldest not hate.
What means my Lord?
Here, here hee stands that has preserved us all!
that sacrifi•…'d unto a •…u lique good,
(the dearest private good wee mortals have)
Frien•…hip: gave into ourarmes the Prince,
when nothing but the sword (perchance a ruin)
was left to doe it.
How could I chide my love, and my ambition now,
that thrust me upon such a quarrel? here I doe vow—
Hold, doe not vow my Lord, let it deserve it first;
and yet (if Heaven bless honest men's intents)
it is not impossible.
My Lord, you will be pleased to inform him in particulars,
I must be gone.—
the King I fear already has been left
too long alone.
Stay—the hour and place.
Eleven, under the Terrace walk;
I will not fail you there.
I had forgot:—
•…may be, the small remainder of those lost men
that were of the Conspiracy, will come along with him:
it were best to have some chosen of the Guard
within our call—
Honest, and careful Ziriff:
how now Planet struck?—
This Ziriff will grow great with all the world.
Shallow man! short sightedder than Travellers in mists,
or women that outlive themselves; dost thou not see,
that whilst hee does prepare a Tomb with one hand
for his friend, hee digs a Grave with the other for himself?
How so?
Dost think hee shall not feel the weight of this,
as well as poor Thersames?
Shall wee then kill him too at the same instant?
And say, the Prince made an unlucky thrust.
Right.
Dull, dull, hee must not dye so uselessly.
As when wee wipe of filth from any place,
wee throw away the thing that made it clea•…e,
so this once done, hoe's gone.
Thou know the People love the Prince, to their rage
something the State must offer up; who fitter
than thy rival and my enemy?
Rare! our witness will be taken.
Pish! let me alone.
The Giants that made mountains ladders,
and thought to take great Jove•… by force, were fools:
not hill on hill, but plot on plot, does make
us sit above, and laugh at all below us.—
Madam, twill make you melancholy,
Isle sing the Prince's Song, that's sad enough.
What you will Sir.
NO, no, fair Heretic, it needs must bee
But an ill Love in me,
And worse for thee.
For were it in my Power,
To love thee now this hour,
More than I did the last;
I would then so fall,
I might not Love at all;
Love that can flow, and can admit increase,
Admits as well an Ebb, and may grow less.
True Love is still the same; the torrid Zones,
And those more frigid ones,
It must not know:
For Love grown cold or hot,
Is Lust, or Friendship, not
The thing wee have;
For that's a flame would die,
Held down, or up to high:
Then think I love more than I ca•… express,
And would love more, could I but love thee less.
Leave me! for to a Soul, so out of Tune
as mine is now; nothing is harmony:
when once the maine-spring, Hope, is fallen into
disorder; no wonder, if the lesser wheels,
Desire, and Joy, stand still; my thoughts like Bees
when they have lost their King, wander
confusedly up and down, and settle no where.
Orithie, fly! fly the room,
as thou would shun the habitations
which Spirits haunt, or where thy nearer friends
walk after death; here is not only Love,
•…ut Loves plague too—mis-fortune; and so high,
that it is sure infectious!
Madam, so much more miserable am I this way than you, that should I pity you, I should forget my self:
my sufferings are such, that with less patience
you may endure your own, than give mine Audience.
There is that difference, that you may make
yours none at all, but by considering mine!
O speak them quickly then! the marriage day
to passionate Lovers never was more welcome,
than any kind of ease would be to me now.
Could they be spoke, they were not then so great.
I love, and dare not say I love; dare not hope,
what I desire; yet still too must desire—
and like a starving man brought to a feast,
and made say grace, to what he ne'er shall taste,
be thankful after all, and kiss the hand,
that made the wound thus deep.
It is hard indeed, but with what unjust scales,
thou took the weight of our mis-fortunes,
be thine own Judge now.
thou mourn for loss of that thou never had,
or if thou had a loss, it never was
of a Thersames.
would thou not think a Merchant mad, Orithie?
if thou should see him weep, and tear his hair,
because hee brought not both the Indies home?
and would not think his sorrows very just,
if having fraught his ship with some rich Treasure,
hee sunk in the very Port? This is our case.
And doe you think there is such odds in it?
would Heaven we women could as easily change
our fortunes as (it is said) wee can our minds.
I cannot (Madam) think them miserable,
that have the Princes Love.
Hee is the man then—
blush not Orithie, it is a sin to blush
for loving him, though none at all to love him.
I can admit of rivalship without
a jealousy—nay shall be glad of it:
wee two will sit, and think, and think, and sigh,
and sigh, and talk of love—and of Thersames.
Thou shalt be praising of his wit, while I
admire he governs it so well:
like this thing, said thus, the other thing thus done,
and in good language him for these adore,
while I want words to do it, yet doe it more.
Thus will wee doe, till death it self shall us
divide, and then whose fate 'tshall be to die
first of the two, by legacy shall all
her love bequeath, and give her stock to her
that shall survive; for no one stock can serve,
to love Thersames so as he will deserve.
What have wee here impossibility?
a constant night, and yet within the room
that, that can make the day before the Sun?
silent Aglaura too?
I know not what to say:
•…s't to your pity, or your scorn, I owe
the favour of this visit (Sir?) for such
my fortune is, it doth deserve them both:
And such thy beauty is, that it makes good
all Fortunes, sorrow looks lovely here;
and there's no man, that would not entertain
his griefs as friends, were hee but sure they'd show
no worse upon him—but I forget my self,
I came to chide.
If I have sinned so high, that yet my punishment equals not my crime,
doe Sir; I should be loath to die in debt
to Justice, how ill soar I paid
the scores of Love.—
And those indeed thou hast but paid indifferently to me, I did deserve at least fair death,
not to be murdered thus in private:
that was too cruel, Mistress.
And I doe know thou dost repent, and wilt
yet make me satisfaction:
What satisfaction Sir?
I am no monster, never had two hearts;
One is by holy vows another now,
and could I give it you, you would not take it,
for'tis alike impossible for me,
to love again, as you love Perjury.
O Sir! consider, what a flame love is.
If by rude means you think to force a light,
that of it self it would not freely give,
you blow it out, and leave your self in the dark.
The Prince once gone, you may as well persuade
the light to stay behind, when the Sun posts
to the other world, as me; alas! wee two,
have mingled souls more than two meeting brooks;
and whosoever is designed to be
the murderer of my Lord, (as sure there is,
has angered heaven so far, that 'tas decreed
him to increase his punishment that way)
would hee but search the heart, when hee has done,
hee there would find Aglaura murdered too.
Thou hast •…come me, moved so handsomely
for pity, that I will dis-inherit
the elder brother, and from this hour be
thy Convert, not thy Lover.—
Ziriff, dispatch away—
and hee that brings news of the Prince's welfare,
look that hee have the same reward, wee had decreed
to him, brought tidings of his death.
'Tmust be a busy and bold hand, that would
unlinke a chain the Gods themselves have made:
peace to thy Thoughts: Aglaura—
What ere he says believe him not Aglaura:
for lust and rage ride high within him now:
hee knows Thersames made th'escape from hence,
and does conceal it only for his ends:
for by the favour of mistake and night,
hee hopes t'enjoy thee in the Prince's room;
I shall be mist—else I would tell thee more;
But thou may guess, for our condition
admits no middle ways, either wee must
send them to Graves, or lie our selves in dust:—
Ha! it is a strange Act thought puts me now upon;
yet sure my brother meant the self same thing,
and my Thersames would have done it for me:
to take his life, that seeks to take away
the life of Life, (honour from me;) and from
the world, the life of honour, Thersames;
must needs be something sure, of kin to Justice.
If I doe fail, th'attempt howere was brave,
and I shall have at worst a handsome grave—
What? are we grown, Semanthe, night, and day?
Must one still vanish when the other comes?
Of all that ever Love did yet bring forth
(and 't has been fruitful too,) this is
the strangest Issue.—
What my Lord?
Hate, Semanthe.
You doe mistake, if I doe shun you, it is,
as bashful Debtors shun their Creditors,
I cannot pay you in the self same coin,
and am ashamed to offer any other.
It is ill done, Semanthe, to plead bankrupt,
when with such ease you may be out of debt;
In loves dominions, native commodity
is currant payment, change is all the Trade,
and heart for heart, the richest merchandise.
It would here be mean my Lord, since mine would prove
In your hands but a Counterfeit, and yours in mine
worth nothing; Sympathy, not greatness,
makes those Jewels rise in value.
Sympathy! ô teach but yours to love then,
and two so rich no mortal ever knew.
That heart would Love but ill that must be taught,
such fires as these still kindle of themselves.
In such a cold, and frozen place, as is
thy breast? how should they kindle of themselves
Semanthe?
Ask? how the Flint can carry fire within?
it is the least miracle that Love can doe:
Thou art thy self the greatest miracle,
for thou art fair to all perfection,
and yet dost want the greatest part of beauty,
Kindness; thy cruelty (next to thy self,)
above all things on earth takes up my wonder.
Call not that cruelty, which is our fate,
believe me Iolas, the honest Swain
that from the brow of some steep cliff far off,
beholds a ship labouring in vain against
the boisterous and unruly Elements, ne'er had
less power, or more desire to help than I;
at every sigh, I die, and every look,
does move; and any passion you will have
but Love, I have in store: I will be angry,
quarrel with destiny, and with my self
that it is no better; be melancholy;
And (though mine own disasters well might plead
to be in chief,) yours only shall have place,
Isle pity, and (if that's too low) Isle grieve,
as for my sins, I cannot give you ease;
all this I doe, and this I hope will prove
it is greater Torment not to love, than Love.—
So perishing Sailors pray to storms,
and so they hear again. So men
with death about them, look on Physicians that
have given them o'er, and so they turn away:
Two fixed Stars that keep a constant distance,
and by laws made with themselves must know
no motion eccentric, may meet as soon as wee:
The anger that the foolish Sea does show,
when it does brave it out, and roar against
a stubborn rock that still denies it passage,
is not so vain and fruitless, as my prayers.
Ye mighty Powers of Love and Fate, where is
your Justice here? It is thy part (fond Boy)
when thou dost find one wounded heart, to make
the other so, but if thy Tyranny
be such, that thou wilt leave one breast to hate,
If wee must live, and this survive,
how much more cruell's Fate?—
A Glorious night!
Pray Heaven it prove so.
Are wee not there yet?
It is about this hollow.
How now! what region are we got into?
Th'enheritance of night;
Are wee not mistaken a turning Ziriff,
and stepped into some melancholy Devils Territory?
Sure it is a part of the first Chaos,
that would endure no change.
No matter Sir, it is as proper for our purpose,
as the Lobby for the waiting women's.
Stay you here, Isle move a little backward,
and so wee shall be sure to put him past
retreat: you know the word if it be the Prince.
Here Sir, follow me, ell's quiet yet.—
Hee is not come then?
No.
Whore's Ariaspes?
Waiting within.
I doe not like this waiting,
nor this fellows leaving us.
This place does put odd thoughts into thee,
then thou art in thine own nature too, as jealous
as either Love, or Honour: Come, wear thy sword in readiness,
and think how near wee are a crown.
Revenge!
So let's drag him to the light, and search
his pockets, there may be papers there that will
discover the rest of the Conspirators.
Iol•…s, your hand—
Whom have wee here? the King!
Yes, and Zorrannes too, Illo! hoe!—
Unarme them.
Do ye stare?
This for my Fathers injuries and mine:
half Love, half Duties Sacrifice,
this—for the noble Prince, an offering to friendship:
Basely! and tamely—
What hast thou done?
Nothing—killed a Traitor,
So—away with them, and leaves us,
Pasithas be only you in call.
What dost thou pause?
hast thou remorse already murderer?
No fool: it is but a difference I put
betwixt the crimes: Orbella is our quarrel;
and I doe hold it fit, that love should have
a nobler way of Justice, than Revenge
or Treason; follow me out of the wood,
and thou shalt be Master of this again:
and then, best arm and title take it.
There—
Extremely good! Nature took pains I swear,
the villain and the brave are mingled handsomely.
It was Fate that took it, when it decreed
wee two should meet, nor shall they mingle now
wee are brought together strait to part.—
Some Devil sure has borrowed this shape.
my sword ne'er stayed thus long to find an entrance.
To guilty men, all that appears is Devil,
come Trifler, come.—
Whither, whither, thou fleeting Coward life?
Bubble of Time, Natures shame, stay; a little, stay!
till I have looked my self into revenge,
and stared this Traitor to a carcass first.
—It will not be:—
the Crown, the Crown, too
now is lost, for ever lost—oh!—
Ambition's, but an Ignis fatuus, I see
misleading fond mortality,
That hurries us about, and sets us down
Just—where—wee—first—begun—
What a great spreading mighty thing this was,
and what a nothing now? how soon poor man
vanishes into his noone-tide shadow?
but hopes o'er fed have seldom better done:—
Take up this lump of vanity, and honour,
and carry it the back way to my lodging,
there may be use of States-men, when they are dead:
So.—for the Citadel now, for in such times
as these, when the unruly multitude
is up in swarms, and no man knows which way
they'll take, it is good to have retreat.
The Dog-star's got up high, it should be late:
and sure by this time every waking ear,
and watchful eye is charmed; and yet me thought
a noise of weapons struck my ear just now.
It was but my Fancy sure, and were it more,
I would not tread one step, that did not lead
to my Aglaura, stood all his Guard betwixt,
with lightning in their hands;
Danger! thou Dwarf dressed up in Giants clothes,
that show far off, still greater than thou art:
go, terrify the simple, and the guilty, such
as with false Optics, still doe look upon thee.
But fright not Lovers, wee dare look on thee
in thy worst shape, and meet thee in them too.
Stay—These trees I made my mark, it is hereabouts,
—Love guide me but right this night,
and Lovers shall restore thee back again
those eyes the Poets took so boldly from thee.
How ill this does become this hand, how much worse
this suits with this, one of the two should go.
The she within me says, it must be this—
honour says this—and honour is Thersames friend.
What is that she then? it is not a thing
that sets a Price, not upon me, but on
life in my name, leading me into doubt,
which when 'tas done, it cannot light me out.
For fear does drive to Fate, or Fate if wee
doe fly, oretakes, and holds us, till or death,
or infamy, or both doth cease us.—
Ha!—would it were in again.
Antiques and strange mishaps,
such as the Porter to my Soul, mine Eye,
was ne'er acquainted with, Fancy lets in,
like a distracted multitude, by some strange accident
pieced together, fear now afresh comes on,
and charges Love to home.
—Hee comes—hee comes—
woman, if thou would be the Subject of mans wonder, not his scorn hereafter,
now show thy self.
Sudden and fortunate.
My better Angel sure did both infuse
a strength, and did direct it.
Aglaura!
Brother—
The same.
So slow to let in such a longed for Guest?
must Joy stand knocking Sister, come, prepare,
prepare.—
The King of Persia's coming to you strait!
the King!—mark that.
I thought how poor the Joys you brought with you,
were in respect of those that were with me:
Joys, are our hopes stripped of their fears,
and such are mine; for know, dear Brother,
the King is come already, and is gone—mark that.
Is this instinct, or riddle? what King? how gone?
The Cave will tell you more—
Some sad mistake—thou hast undone us all.
The Prince! the Prince! cold as the bed of earth
hee lies upon, as senseless too; death hangs
upon his lips,
like an untimely frost, upon an early Cherry;
the noble Guest, his Soul, took it so ill
that you should use his old Acquaintance so,
that neither prayers, nor tears, can ever persuade
him back again.—
hold, hold! wee cannot sure part thus!
Sister! Aglaura! Thersames is not dead,
It is the Prince that calls—
The Prince, where?—
Tell me, or I will strait goeback again,
into those groves of Gessemine, thou took me from,
and find him out, or lose my self for ever.
For ever.—I: there's it!
for in those groves thou talk of,
there are so many by-wayes, and odd turnings,
leading unto such wild and dismal places,
that should weegoe without a guide, or stir
before Heaven calls, it is strongly to be feared
wee there should wander up and down for ever,
and be benighted to eternity!—
Benighted to eternity?—What's that?
Why it is to be benighted to eternity;
to sit in the dark, and doe I know not what;
unriddle at our own sad cost and charge,
the doubts the learned here doe only move—
What place have murderers brother there? for sure
the murderer of the Prince must have
a punishment that Heaven is yet to make.—
How is religion fooled betwixt our loves,
and fears? poor Girl, for ought that thou hast done,
thy Chaplets may be fair and flourishing,
as his in the Elysium:
Doe you think so?
Yes, I doe think so.
The juster Judges of our Actions,
would they have been severe upon
our weaknesses,
would (sure) have made us stronger.—
Fie! those tears
a Bride upon the marriage day as properly
might shed as thou, here widows do it
and marry next day after:
To such a funeral as this, there should be
nothing common—
We'll morn him so, that those that are alive
shall think themselves more buried sar than hee;
and wish to have his grave, to find his Obsequies:
but stay—the Body.
Again! Sister—Aglaura—
ô speak once more, once more look out fair Soul.—
Shoe's gone.—
Irrevocably gone.—And winging now the Air,
like a glad bird broken from some cage:
poor Bankrupt heart, when 'thad not wherewithal
to pay to sad disaster all that was its due,
it broke—would mine would doe so too.
My soul is now within me
like a well mottled Hake, on a blind Faulk'ners fist,
me thinks I feel it baiting to be gone:
and yet I have a little foolish business here
on earth; I will dispatch:—
Let me bee like my burden here, if I had not as lieve kill two of the Bloud-royall for him, as carry one of them; These Gentlemen of high actions are three times as heavy after death, as your private retired ones; look if hee be not re∣duc'd to the state of a Courtier of the second form now? and cannot stand upon his own legs, nor doe any thing without help, Hum.—And what's become of the great Prince, in prison as they call it now, the toy within us, that makes us talk, and laugh, and fight, I! why there's it, well, let him be what hee will, and where hee will, Isle make bold with the old Tenement here. Come Sir—come along:—
Ell's fast too, here—
They sleep to night
i'their winding sheets I think, there's such
a general quiet.
Oh! here's light I warrant:
for lust does take as little rest, as care, or age.—
Courting her glass, I swear, fie! that's a flatterer Madam,
in me you shall see trulier what you are.
What make you up at this strange hour my Lord?
My business is my boldness warrant,
(Madam)
and I could well afford to have been without it now,
had Heaven so pleased.
It is a sad Prologue,
what follows in the name of virtue?
The King.
I: what of him? is well is hee not?
Yes.—
If to be free from the great load
wee sweat and labour under, here on earth
be to be well, hee is.
Why hoe's not dead, is hee?
Yes Madam, slain—and the Prince too.
How? where?
I know not, but dead they are.
Dead!
Yes Madam.
Did see them dead?
As I see you alive.
Dead!
Yes, dead.
Well, wee must all die;
the Sisters spin no cables for us mortals;
they are thread; and Time, and chance—
trust me I could weep now,
but watery distillations doe but ill on graves,
they make the lodging colder.
What would you Madam?
Why my friends, my Lord!
I would consult and know, what's to be done.
Madam it is not so safe to raise the Court;
things thus unsettled, if you please to have—
Whore's Ariaspes?
In's dead sleep by this time I'm sure.
I know hee is not! find him instantly.
I'm gone.—
But Madam, why make you choice of him, from whom
if the succession meet disturbance,
all must come of danger?
My Lord, I am not yet so wise, as to be jealous;
pray dispute no further.
Pardon me Madam, if before I go
I must unlock a secret unto you; such a one
as while the King did breathe durst know no air,
Zorannes lives.
Ha!
And in the hope of such a day as this
has lingered out a life, snatching, to feed
his almost famished eyes,
sights now and then of you, in a disguise.
Strange! this night is big with miracle!
If you did love him, as they say you did,
and doe so still; it is now within your power!
I would it were my Lord, but I am now
no private woman, if I did love him once
(and it is so long ago, I have forgot)
my youth and ignorance may well excuse't.
Excuse it?
Yes, excuse it Sir.
Though I confess I loved his father much,
and pity him, yet having offered it
unto your thoughts: I have discharged a trust;
and zeal shall stray no further.
Your pardon Madam:
May be it is a plot to keep off Ariaspes
greatness, which hee must fear, because hee knows
hee hates him: for these great States-men,
that when time has made bold with the King and Subject,
throwing down all fence that stood betwixt their power
and others right, are on a change,
like wanton Salmons coming in with floods,
that leap o'er wires and nets, and make their way
to be at the return to every one a prey.
Ha! murdered too!
treason—treason—
But such another word, and half so loud,
and you are.—
Why? thou wilt not murder me too?
wilt thou villain?
I doe not know my temper—
Look here vain thing, and see thy sins full blown:
There's scarce a part in all this face, thou hast
not been forsworn by, and Heaven forgive thee for it!
for thee I lost a Father, Country, friends,
my self almost, for I lay buried long;
and when there was no use thy love could pay
too great, thou made the principle away:
had I but staid, and not began revenge
till thou had made an end of changing,
I had had the Kingdom to have killed:
As wantons entering a Garden, take
the first fair flower, they meet, and
treasure't in their laps.
Then seeing more, doe make fresh choice again,
throwing in one and one, till at the length
the first poor flower o're-charg'd, with too much weight
withers, and dies:
so hast thou dealt with me,
and having killed me first, I will kill—
Hold—hold—
Not for my sake, but Orbella's (Sir) a bare
and single death is such a wrong to Justice,
I must needs except against it.
Find out a way to make me long a dying;
for death's no punishment, it is the sense,
the pains and fears before that makes a death:
To think what I had had, had I had you,
what I have lost in losing of my self;
are deaths far worse than any you can give:
yet kill me quickly, for if I have time,
I shall so wash this soul of mine with tears,
make it so fine, that you would be afresh
in love with it, and so perchance I should
again come to deceive you.
So rises day, blushing at nights deformity:
and so the pretty flowers blubbered with dew,
and ever washed with rain, hang down their heads,
I must not look upon her:
Were but the Lilies in this face as fresh
as are the roses; had I but innocence
joined to their blushes, I should then be bold,
for when they went on begging they were ne'er den•…de,
It is but a parting kiss Sir—
I dare not grant it.—
Your hand Sir then, for that's a part I shall
love after death (if after death wee love)
cause it did right the wronged Zorannes, here—
Sleep, sleep for ever, and forgotten too,
all but thy ills, which may succeeding time
remember, as the Sea-man does his marks,
to know what to avoid, may at thy name
all good men start, and bad too, may it prove
infection to the Air, that people dying of it
may help to curse thee for me.
Could I but call thee back as eas'ly now;
but that's a Subject for our tears, not hopes!
there is no piecing Tulips to their stalks,
when they are once divorced by a rude hand;
all wee can doe is to preserve in water
a little life, and give by courteous Art
what scanted Nature wants Commission for,
that thou shalt have: for to thy memory
such Tribute of moist sorrow I will pay,
and that so purified by love, that on thy grave
nothing shall grow but Violets and Primroses,
of which too, some shall be
of the mysterious number, so that Lovers shall
come thither not as to a Tomb, but to an Oracle.
Come! come! help me to weep my self away,
and melt into a grave, for life is but
repentance nurse, and will conspire with memory,
to make my hours my tortures.
What Scene of sorrow's this? both dead!
Dead? I! and it is but half death's triumphs this,
the King and Prince lye somewhere, just
such emptietruncks as these.
The Prince?
then in griefs burden I must bear a part.
The noble Ariaspes—valiant Ziriff too.—Weeps.
Weep thou for him, fond Prodigal? dost know
on whom thou spend thy tears? this is the man
to whom wee owe our ills; the false Zorannes
disguised, not lost; but kept alive, by some
incensed Power, to punish Persia thus:
Hee would have killed me too, but Heaven was just,
and furnished me with means, to make him pay
this score of villainy, ere hee could doe more.
Were you his murth'rer then?—
Ah me! the Queen.—
How doe you Madam?
Well,—but I was better, and shall—
Oh! she is gone for ever.
What have wee here?
a Church-yard? nothing but silence, and grave?
Oh! here has been (my Lords)
the blackest night the Persian world ever knew,
the King and Prince are not themselves exempt
from this arrest; but pale and cold, as these,
have measured out their lengths.
Impossible! which way?
Of that wee are as ignorant as you:
for while the Queen was telling of the Story,
an unknown villain here has hurt her so,
that like a sickly Taper, she but made
one flash, and so expired:
Here hee is, but no confession.
Torture must force him then:
though twill indeed, but weakly satisfy
to know now they are dead, how they did die.
Come take the bodies up, and let us all
go drown our selves in tears, this massacre
has left so torn a state, that twill be policy
as well as debt, to weep till wee are blind,
For who would see the miseries behind?
Our Play is done, and yours doth now begin:
What different Fancies, people now are in?
How strange, and odd a •…ingle it would make,
If ére they rise; •…ere possible to take
All votes.—
But as when an authentic Watch is shown,
Each man winds up, and rectifies his own,
So in our very Judgements; first there sits
A grave Grand Jury on it of Towne-wits;
And they give up their verdict; then again
The other Jury of the Court comes in
(And that's of life and death) for each man sees
That oft condemns, what the other Jury frees:
Some three days hence, the Ladies of the Town
Will come to have a Judgment of their own:
And after them, their servants; then the City,
For that is modest, and is still last witty.
Twill be a week at least yet ever they have
Resolved to let i•… live, or give it a grave:
Such difficulty, there is to unit•…
Opinion; or bring it to be right.
SIR:
THat th'abusing of your ea•…'s a crime,
Above th'excuse any six lines in Rhyme
Can make, the Poet knows: I am but sent
T'intreat hee may not be a President,
For hee does think that in this place there hee
Many have done it as much and more than hee;
But here's, hee says, the difference of the Fates,
Hee begs a Pardon after't, they Estates.
FOre Jove, a mighty Sessions: and I fear,
Though kind last Sizes, twill be now severe;
For it is thought, and by judicious men,
Aglaura escaped only by dying then:
But it would be vain for me now to indear,
Or speak unto my Lords, the Judges here,
They hold their places by condemning still,
And cannot show at once mercy and skill;
For wit's so cruel unto wit, that they
Are thought to want, that find not want in the play.
But Ladies you, who never liked a plot,
But where the Servant had his Mistress got,
And whom to see a Lover dye it grieves,
Although it is in worse language that he lives,
Will like't w'are confident, since here will bee,
That your Sex ever liked, variety.
Tic strange perchance (you'll think) that she that died
At Christmas, should at Easter be a Bride:
But it is a privilege the Poets have,
To take the long-since dead out of the grave:
Nor is this all, old Heroës asleep
Twixt marble coverlets, and six foot deep
In earth, they boldly wake, and make them doe
All they did living here—sometimes more too,
They give fresh life, reverse and alter Fate,
And yet more bold, Almightie-like cry•…:
And out of nothing onelyto deify
Reason, and Reasons friend, Philosophy,
Fame, honour, valour, all that's great, or good,
Or is at least'mongst us, so understood,
They give, heavens theirs, no handsome woman dies,
But if they please, is strait some star in the skies—
But oh—
How those poor men of Meetre doe
Flatter themselves with that, that is not true,
And cause they can trim up a little prose,
And spoil it handsomely, vainly suppose
They are Omnipotent, can doe all those things
That can be done only by Gods and Kings.
Of this wild guilt, hee fine would bee thought free,
That writ this Play, and therefore (Sir) by me,
Hee humbly begs, you would be pleased to know,
Aglaura's but reprieved this night, and though
She now appears u•…on a Poets call,
Shoe's not to live, unless you say she shall.
A Glorious night!
Pray Heaven it prove so.
Are wee not there yet?
It is about this hollow.
How now! what region are wee got into?
the inheritance of night;
have wee not mistaken a turning Zirisf,
and stepped into the confines of some melancholy
Devils Territory?
Sure it is a part of the first Chaos,
that would not suffer any change,
No matter Sir, it is as proper for ou•…
purpose, as the Lobby for the waiting women's:
stay you here, E's move a little backward,
and so wee shall be sure to put him past
retreat, you know the word if it be the Prince.
Here Sir, follow me, ell's quiet yet.
Is hee not come then?
No.
Whore's Ariaspes?
Waiting within.
I doe not like this waiting,
nor this fellows leaving of us.
This place does put odd thoughts into thee,
then thou art in thine own nature too
as jealous, as Love, or Honour; wear thy sword
in readiness, and think how near wee are a Crown.
Revenge!—
Ha! what's this?
Bring them forth.—
The King.
Yes, and the Princes friend—
Do you know this face?
Zorannes.
The very same,
the wronged Zorannes,—King—
Do you stare,—
away with them where I appointed.
Traitors, let me go;
villain, thou dare not doe this—
Poor Counterfeit,
how fine thou now would act a King, and art not:
stay you,—
Unhand him,—
Leave us now.—
What does this mean?
sure hee does intend the Crown to me.
Wee are alone,
follow me out of the wood, and thou shalt be
Master of this again,
and then best arm and title take it.
Thy offer is so noble, in gratitude I cannot
but propound gentler conditions,
wee will divide the Empire.
Now by my fathers soul,
I doe almost repent my first intents,
and now could kill thee scurvily, for thinking
if I had a mind to rule,
I would not rule alone,
let not thy easy faith (lost man)
fool thee into so dull an heresy;
Orbella is our quarrel, and I have thought it fit,
that love should have a nobler way of Justice,
than Revenge, or Treason.
If thou dare dye handsomely, follow me.
There,—
Extremely good; Nature took pains 〈◊〉 swear,
the villain and the brave are mingled handsomely:—
It was Fate that took it, when it decreed
wee two should meet, nor shall they mingle now,
wee are but brought together strait to part.—
Some Devil sure has borrowed this shape,
my sword ne'er staid thus long to find an entrance.
To guilty men, all that appear is Devil;
come trifler, come,—
Dog, thou hast it.
Why then it seems my star's as great as his,
I smile at thee,
thou now would have me kill thee,
and it is a curtsy I cannot afford thee,
I have bethought my self, there will be use
of thee,—Pasithas—to the rest with him.
The Dog-star's got up high, it should be late:
and sure by this time every waking ear,
and watchful eye is charmed; and yet me thought
a noise of weapons struck my ear just now.
It was but my Fancy sure, and were it more,
I would not tread one step, that did not lead
to my Aglaura, stood all his Guard betwixt,
with lightning in their hands.
Danger, thou Dwarf dressed up in Giants clothes,
that show far off still greater than thou art,
go, terrify the simple, and the guistie, such
as with false Optics still doe look upon thee:
but fright not Lovers, wee dare look on thee
in thy wo•…st shapes, and meet thee in them too.—
Stay, these trees I made my mark, it is hereabouts,
—Love guide me but right this night,
and Lo•…ers shall restore thee back again
those eyes the Poets took so boldly from thee.
How ill this does become this hand? much worse
this suits with this, one of the two should go:
The she within me says, it must be this,—
honour says this—and honour is Thersames friend.
What is that she then, is it not a thing
that sets a price, not upon me, but on
life in my name, leading me into doubt,
which when 'thas done, it cannot light me out?
For fear does drive to Fate, or Fate if wee
doe fly, ore-takes, and holds us, till or death,
or infamy, or both doe seize us.
Ha!—would it were in again. Antiques &amp; strange mishaps,
such as the Porter to my Soul, mine Eye,
was ne'er acquainted with, fancy lets in,
like a disrouted multitude, by some strange accident
pieced together; fear now afresh comes on,
and charges Love too home.
—Hee comes, hee comes.—
woman, if thou would be the Subject
of mans wonder, not his scorn hereafter,—
—now show thy self.
Unkindly done—
The Princes voice, defend it Goodness?
What art thou that thus poorly
hast destroyed a life?
Oh sad mistake, it is hee?
Hast thou no voice?
I would I had not, nor a being neither.
Aglaura, it cannot be?
Oh still believe so, Sir,
for it was not I indeed, but fatal Love.
Loves wounds used to be gentler than these were,
the pains they give us have some pleasure
in them, and that these have not.
Oh doe not say it was you, for that does wound again:
guard me my better Angel,
doe I wake? my eyes (since I was man)
ne'er met with any object gave them so much trouble,
I dare not ask neither to be satisfied,
she looks so guiltily—
Why doe you stare and wonder at a thing
that you your self have made thus miserable?
Good gods, and I of the party too.
Did you not tell me that the King this night
meant to attempt my honour, that our condition
would not admit of middle ways, and that wee must
send them to graves, or lye our selves in dust?
Unfortunate mistake!
I never did intend our safety by thy hands:
Pasithas, go instantly and fetch Andrages
from his bed; how is it with you Sir?
As with the besieged:
my soul is so beset it does not know,
whether't had best to make a desperate
sally out by this port or not?
Sure I shall turn statue here.
If thou dost love me, weep not Aglaura:
all those are drops of blood, and flow from me.
Now all the gods defend this way of expiation;
Think thou thy crime, Aglaura would be less,
by adding to it? or can thou hope
to satisfy those powers, whom great sins
doe displease, by doing greater.
Discourteous curtsy!
I had no other means left me than this,
to let Thersames know I would doe nothing
to him, I would not doe unto my self,
and that thou take away.
Friend, bring me a little nearer,
I find a kind of willingness to stay,
and find that willingness something obeyed.
My blood now it persuades it self
•…ou did not call in earnest,
makes not such haste—
Oh my dearest Lord,
this kindness is so full of cruelty,
puts such an ugliness on what I have done,
that when I look upon it, needs must fright
me from my self, and which is more insufferable,
I fear from you.
Why should that fright thee, which most comforts me?
I glory in it, and shall smile •…the grave,
to think our love was such, that nothing
but it self could ever destroy it.
Destroy it? can it have ever end?
will you not be thus courteous then in the other world?
shall wee not be together there as here?
I cannot tell whether I may or not.
Not tell?
No:
The Gods thought me unworthy of thee here,
and when thou art more pure,
why should I not more doubt it?
Because if I shall be more pure,
I shall be then more fit for you.
Our Priests assure us an Flies•…m,
and can that be Elysium where true Lovers
must not meet? Those Powers that made our loves,
did they intend them mortal,
would sure have made them of a courser stuff,
would they not my Lord?—
Prithee speak still,
this musique gives my soul such pleasing business,
takes it so wholly up, it finds not leisure to
attend unto the summons death does make,
yet they are loud and peremptory now,
and I can only—
Some p•…ying Power inspire me with
a way to follow 〈◊〉: heart wilt thou not
break it of thy self.
My griefs besot me:
his soul will sail out with this purple tide,
and I shall here be found staring
after't, like a man that's come too short of the ship,
and's left behind upon the land.
Oh welcome, welcome, here lies, Andrages,
alas too great a trial for thy art.
There's life in him: from whence these wounds?
Oh it is no time for story.
It is not mortal my Lord, bow him gently,
and help me to infuse this into him;
the soul is but asleep, and not gone forth.
Oh—oh:—
Hark, the Prince does live.
What ever thou art hast given me now a life;
and with it all my cares and miseries,
expect not a reward, no not a thanks.
If thou would merit from me,
(yet wh'would be guilty of so lost an action)
restore me to my quietness again,
for life and that are most incompatible.
Still in despairs:
I did not think till now it was in the power
of Fortune to have robbed Thersames of himself,
for pity, Sir, and reason live;
if you will die, die not Aglaura's murdered,
that's not so handsome: at least die not
her murdered, and her murderer too;
for that will surely follow. Look up, Sir,
this violence of Fortune cannot last ever:
who knows but all these clouds are shadows,
to set off your fairer days, if it grows blacker,
and the storms doe rise, this harbour's always open.
What say thou, Aglaura?
What says Andrages?
Madam, would Heaven his mind would admit
as easy cure, as his body will,
It was only want of blood,
and two hours rest restores him to himself.
And by that time it may be Heaven
will give our miseries some ease:
come Sir, repose upon a bed,
there's time enough to day.
Well, I will still obey,
though I must fear it will •…e with me,
but as it is with tortured men,
whom States preserve only to wrack again.
All fast too, here
They sleep to night
i'their winding sheets I think, there's such
a general quiet.
Oh! here's light I warrant you:
for lust does take as little rest, as care, or age.
Courting her glass, I swear, fie! that's a flatterer Madam,
in me you shall see trulier what you are.
What make you up at this strange hour my Lord?
My business is my boldness warrant,
(Madam)
and I could well afford to have been without it now,
had Heaven so pleased.
It is a sad Prologue,
what follows in the name of virtue?
The King—
I: what of him? is well is hee not?
Yes,—
If to be on's journey to the other world
be to be well, hee is.
Why hoe's not dead, is hee?
Yes, Madam, dead.
How? where?
I doe not know particulars.
Dead!
Yes (Madam).
Art sure hoe's dead?
Madam I know him as certainly dead,
as I know you too must die hereafter
Dead!
Yes, dead.
Wee must all die,
the Sisters spin no cables for us mortals;
they are threads; and Time, and chance—
trust me I could weep now,
but watery distillations doe but ill on graves,
they make the lodging colder.
What would you Madam?
Why my friends, my Lord;
I would consult and know, what's to be done.
(Madam) it is no•… so safe to raise the Court,
things thus unsettled, if you please to have—
Whore's Ariaspes?
In's dead sleep by this time sure.
I know hee is not! find him instantly.
I'm gone.—
But (Madam) why make you choice of him, from whom
if the succession meet disturbance,
all must come of danger?
My Lord, I am not yet so wise, as to be
jealous; pray dispute no further.
Pardon me (Madam) if before I go
I must unlock a secret to you; such a one
as while the King did breathe durst know no air,
Zorannes lives.
Ha!
And in the hope of such a day as this
has lingered out a life, snatching, to feed
his almost famished eyes,
sights now and then of you, in a disguise.
Strange! this night is big with miracle!
If you did love him, as they say you did,
and doe so still' it is now within your power:
I would it were, my Lord, but I am now
no private woman, if I did love him once,
(as it is so long ago, I have forgot)
my youth and ignorance may well excuse•….
Excuse it?
Yes, excuse it Sir.
Though I confess I loved his father much,
and pity him, yet having offered it
unto your thoughts: I have discharged a trust;
and zeal shall stray no further.
(Your pardon Madam:)
May be it is but a plot to keep off Ariaspes
greatness, which hee must fear, because hee knows
hee hates him: for these great States-men,
that when time has made bold with the King
and Subject, throwing down all fence
that stood betwixt their power
and others right, are on a change,
like wanton Salmons coming in with floods,
that leap o'er wires and nets, and make their way
to be at the return to every one a prey.
Look here vain thing, and see thy sins full blown:
There's scarce a part in all this face, thou hast
not been forsworn by, and Heaven forgive thee for it!
for thee I lost a Father, Country, friends,
my self almost, for I lay buried long;
and when there was no use thy love could pay
too great, thou made the principle away:—Prompt.—
As wantons entering a Garden, take
the first fair flower they meet, and
treasure't in their laps.
Then seeing more, doe make 〈◊◊◊〉,
throwing in one and one, till at the length
the first poor flower o're-charg'd, with too much weight
withers, and dies:
so hast thou dealt with me,
and having killed me first, I will kill—
Hold—hold—
Not for my sake, but Orbella's (Sir) a bare
and single death is such a wrong to Justice,
I must needs except against it.
Find out a way to make •…ee long a dying;
for death's no punishment, it is the sense,
the pains and fears before that makes a death:
To think what I had had, had I had you,
what I have lost in losing of my self;
a•…e deaths far worse than any you can give:
yet kill me quickly, for if I have time,
I shall so wash this soul of mine with tears,
make it so fine, that you would be afresh
in love with it, and so perchance I should
again come to deceive you.
So rises day, blushing at nights deformity:
and so the pretty flowers blubbered with dew,
and over-washt with rain, hang down their heads,
I must not look upon her.
Were but the Lilies in this face as fresh
as are the roses; had I but innocence
joined to these blushes, I should then be bold,
for when they went a begging they were ne'er denied,
•…is but a parting kiss Sir—
I dare not grant it.—Pasithas—away with her.
A bed put out: Thersames and Aglaura on it, Andrages by.
She waked me with a sigh,
and yet she sleeps her self, sweet Innocence,
can it be sin to love this shape,
and if it be not, why am I persecuted thus?—
she sighs again, sleep that drowns all cares,
cannot I see charm loves? blessed pillows,
through whose fineness does appear
the violets, lilies, and the roses
you are stuffed withal, to whose softness
I owe the sweet of this repose,
permit me to leave with you this,—
see if I have not waked her,
sure I was borne, Aglaura, to destroy
thy quiet.
Mine, my Lord,
call you this drowsiness a quiet then?
belee•…e me, Sir, it was an intruder I much
struggled with, and have to thank a dream,
not you, that it thus left me.
A dream! what dream, my Love?
I dream't (Sir) it was day,
and the fear you should be found here.
Awake; how is it with you, 〈◊〉?
Well, extremely well, so well, that had I now
no better a remembrancer than pain,
I should forget I ever was hurt,
thanks to Heaven, and good Andrages.
And more than thanks I hope wee yet shall
•…iv to pay him. How old's the night?
Far-spent I fear, my Lord.
I have a cause that should be heard
yet ere day break, and I must needs entreat
you Sir to be the Judge in it.
What cause, Zorannes?
When you have promised—
It were hard I should deny thee any thing.—
Know thou, Andrages, what hee means?
Nor cannot guess, Sir,—
I read a trouble in his face, when first
hee left you, but understood it not.
Have I not pitched my nets like a good Huntsman?
Look, Sir, the noblest of the Herd are here.
I am astonished.
This place is yours.—
What would thou have me doe.
Remember, Sir, your promise,
I could doe all I have to doe, alone;
but Justice is not Justice unlesse't be justly done:
here then I will begin, for here began my wrongs.
This woman (Sir) was wondrous fair, and wondrous
kind,—I, fair and kind, for so the story runs,
she gave me look for look, and glance for glance,
and every sigh like eccho's was returned,
wee sent up vow by vow, promise on promise,
so thick and strangely multiplied,
that sure we gave the heavenly Registers
their business, and other mortals oaths
then went for nothing, wee felt each others pains,
each others joyces, thought the same thought,
and spoke the very same;
wee were the same, and I have much ado
to think she couldbe ill, and I not
be so too, and after this, all this (Sir)
she was false, loved him, and him,
and had I not begun revenge,
till she had made an end of changing,
I had had the Kingdom to have killed,
what does this deserve?
A punishment hee best can make
that suffered the wrong.
I thank you, Sir,
for him I will not trouble you,
his life is mine, I won it fairly,
and his is yours, hee lost it foully to you—
to him, Sir, now:
A man so wicked that he knew no good,
but so is it made his sins the greater for it.
Those ills, which singly acted bred de•…pair
in others, he acted daily, and ne'er thought
upon them.
The grievance each particular has against him
I will not meddle with, it were to give him
a long life, to give them hearing,
Isle only speak my own.
First then the hopes of all my youth,
and a reward which Heaven had settled on me,
(if holy contracts can doe any thing)
hee ravished from me, killed my father,
Aglaura's father, Sir, would have whored my sister,
and murdered my friend, this is all:
and now your sentence, Sir.
We have no punishment can reach these crimes:
therefore it is justest sure to send him where
they are wittier to punish than we are here:
and cause repentance oft stops that proceeding,
a sudden death is sure thegreatest punishment.
I humbly thank you, Sir.
What a strange glass th'have showed me now my 〈◊〉
in; our sins like to our shadows,
when our day is in its glory scarce appeared,
towards our evening how great and monstrous
they are.
Is this all you have to say?—
Hold:—now go you up.
What mean you, Sir?
Nay, I denied not you,—
That all thy accusations are just,
I must acknowledge,
and to these crimes, I have but this t'oppose,
hee is my Father, and thy Sovereign.—
It is wickedness (dear Friend) wee go about
•…o punish, and when w'have murdered him,
what difference is there twixt him and
our selves, but that hee first was wicked?—
Thou now would kill him' cause he killed thy Father,
and when th'hast killed, have not I the self same
quarrel?
Why Sir, you know you would your self
have done it.
True: and therefore it is I beg his life,
there was no way for me to have
redeemed th'intent, but by a real
saving of it.
If hee did ravish from thee thy Orbella,
remember that that wicked issue had
a noble parent, Love,—Remember
how he loved Zorannes when he was Ziriff,—
ther's something due to that.—
If you must needs have blood for your revenge,
take it here—despise it not Zorannes:
The gods themselves, whose greatness
makes the greatness of our sins,
and heightens 'em above what wee can doe
unto each other, accept of sacrifice
for what wee doe against them,
why should not you, and it is much thriftier too:
you cannot let out life there, but my honour
goes, and all the life you can take here,
posterity will give me back again;
see, Aglaura weeps:
that would have been ill Rhetoric in me,
but where it is, it cannot but persuade.
Th'have thawed the ice about my heart;
I know nor what to doe.
Come down, come down, I will be King again,
there's none so fit to be the Judge of this
as 〈◊〉; the life you showed such zeal to save,
I here could willingly return you back;
but that's the common price of all revenge.
Ha, ha, ha: how they look now?
Death: what's this?
Betrayed again;
all th'ease our Fortune gives our miseries is hope,
and that still proving false, grows part of it.
From whence this Guard?
Why Sir, I did corrupt, while we were his prisoners,
one of his own to raise the Court; shallow souls,
that thought wee could not countermine;
come Sir, you're in good posture to dispatch them.
Lay hold upon his instrument:
Fond man, dost think I am in love with villainy?
all the service they can doe me here
is but to let these see the right I doe
them now is unconstrained, then thus I doe proceed.
Upon the place Zorannes lost his life,
I vow to build a tomb, and on that tomb
I vow to pay three whole years penitence,
if in that time I find that heaven and you
can pardon; I shall find again the way
to live amongst you.
Sir, be not so cruel to your self, this is an age.
It is now irrevocable, thy Fathers lands
I give thee back again, and his commands,
and with them leave to wear the Tiara,
that man there has abused.—
To you Orbella,
who it seems are foul as well as I,
I doe prescribe the self same physic
I doe take my self:
but in another place, and for a longer time,
Diana's Nunnery.
Above my hopes.
For you, who still have been
the ready instrument of all my cruelties,
and there have cancelled all the bonds of brother,
perpetual banishment: nor, should
this line expire, shall thy right have a place.
Hell and Furies.—
Thy crimes deserve no less, yet cau•…e thou were
Heavens instrument to save my life,
thou only hast that time of banishment,
I have of penitence.—
May it be plague and famine here till I return.
No: thou shalt not yet forgive me:
Aglaura, thus I freely part with thee,
and part with all fond flames and warm desires,
I cannot fear new agues in my blood
since I have overcome the charms
thy beauty had, no other ever can
have so much power, Thersames, thou look pale,
is it want of rest?
No Sir; but that's a story for your ear—
A strange and happy change.
All joys wait on you ever.
Orithie,
how for thy sake now could I wish
Love were no Mathematick point,
but would admit division, that Thersames might,
though at my charge, pay thee the debt hee owes thee.
Madam, I loved the Prince, not my self;
since his virtues have their full rewards,
I have my full desires.
What miracles of preservation have wee had?
how wisely have the stars prepared you for felicity?
nothing endeares a good more than the contemplation
of the difficulty wee had to attain to it:
but see, Nights Empire's out,
and a more glorious auspitiously does begin;
let us go serve the gods, and then prepare
for jollity, this day Isle borrow from my vows,
nor shall it have a common celebration,
since 't must be,
a high record to all posterity.—
Plays are like Feasts, and every Act should bee
Another Course, and still variety:
But in good •…aith provision of wit
Is grown of late so difficult to get,
That doe wee what wee can, w'are not able,
Without cold meats to furnish out the Table.
Who knows but it was needless too? may bee
It was here, as in the Coach-mans trade, and hee
That turns in the least compass, shows most Art:
How ever, the Poet hopes (Sir) for his part,
You'll like not those so much, who show their skill
In entertainment, as who show their will.

Mad feet, ye have been traitors to your Master:
Where have you lead me? sure my truant mind
Hath taught my body thus to wander too;
Faintness and fear surprise me; Ye just gods,
If ye have brought me to this place to scourge
The folly of my love, (I might say madness)
Dispatch me quickly; send some pitying men
Or cruel beast to find me; let me bee
Fed by the one, or let me feed the other.
Why are these trees so brave? why doe they wear
Such greene and fresh apparel? how they smile!
How their proud tops play with the courting wind!
Can they behold me pine and languish here,
And yet not sympathize at all in mourning?
Doe they upbraid my sorrows? can it bee
That these thick branches never seen before
But by the Sun, should learn so much of man?
The trees in Courtiers gardens, which are conscious
Of their guilt Masters stateliness and pride,
Themselves would pity me; yet these— Who's there?
Rise up thou mournful Swain,
For it is but a folly
To be melancholy
And get thee thy pipe again.
Come sing away the day,
For it is but a folly
To be melancholy,
Let's live here whilst wee may.
I marry Sir, this fellow hath some fire in him,
Me thinks a sad and drowsy shepherd is
A prodigiein Nature, for the woods
Should bee as far from sorrow, as they are
From sorrows causes, riches and the like.
Hail to you swain, I am a Gentleman
Driven here by ignorance of the way, and would
Confess my self bound to you for a courtesy,
If you would please to help me to some lodging
Where I may rest my self.
For it is but a folly, &amp;c.
Well; if the rest bee like this fellow here;
Then I have travelled fairly now; for certainly
This is a land of fools; some Colony
Of elder brothers have been planted here,
And begot this fair generation.
Prithee, good Shepherd, tell me where thou dwelst?
For it is but a folly, &amp;c.
Why art thou mad?
What if I bee?
I hope it is no discredit for me Sir?
For in this age who is not? I'll prove it to you,
Your Citizen hoe's mad to trust the Gentleman
Both with his wares and wife. Your Courtier
Hoe's mad to spend his time in studying postures,
Cringes, and fashions, and new complements;
Your Lawyer hoe's mad to sell away
His tongue for money, and his Client madder
To buy it of him, since it is of no use
But to undo men, and the Latin tongue;
Your Scholars they are mad to break their brains,
Out-watch the Moon, and look more pale then she,
That so when all the Arts call him their Master,
Hee may perhaps get some small Vicaridge,
Or be the Usher of a School; but there's
A thing in black called Poet, who is ten
Degrees in madness above these; his means
Is what the gentle Fates please to allow him
By the death or marriage of some mighty Lord,
Which hee must solemnise with a new song.
This fellows wit amazes me; but friend,
What doe you think of lovers?
Worst of all;
Is it not a pretty folly to stand thus,
And figh, and fold the arms, and cry my Coolie,
My soul, my life, my Calia, then to wring
Ones state for presents, and ones brain for Sonnets?
O! it is beyond the name of Frenzy.
What so Satyricke Shepherd? I believe
You did not learn these flashes in the Woods;
How is it possible that you should get
Such near acquaintance with the City manners,
And yet live here in such a silent place,
Where one would think the very name of City
Could hardly Enter.
Why, I'll tell you Sir:
My father dyed, (you force me to remember
A grief that deserves tears) and left me young,
And (if a Shepherd may be said so) rich,
I in an itching wantonness to see
What other Swains so wondered at, the City,
Straight sold my rural portion (for the wealth
Of Shepherds is their flocks) and thither went,
Where whilst my money lasted I was welcome,
And lived in credit, but when that was gone,
And the last piece sighed in my empty pocket,
I was contemned, then I began to feel
How dearly I had bought experience,
And without any thing besides repentance
To load me, returned back, and here I live▪
To laugh at all those follies which I saw.
The merry waves dance up and down, and play,
Sport is granted to the Sea.
Birds are the choristers of th'empty ayre,
Sport is never wanting there.
The ground doth smile at the Springs flowery birth,
Sport is granted to the earth.
The fire it's cheering flame on high doth rear,
Sport is never wanting there.
If all the elements, the Earth, the Sea,
Ayre, and fire, so merry bee;
Why is mans mirth so seldom, and so small,
Who is compounded of them all?
You may rejoice; but sighs befit me better.
Now on my conscience thou hast lost a Mistress;
If it be so, thank God, and love no more;
Or else perhaps she'has burnt your whining letter,
Or kissed another Gentleman in your sight,
Or else denied you her glove, or laughed at you,
Causes indeed, which deserve special mourning,
And now you come to talk with your God Cupped
In private here, and call the Woods to witness,
And all the streams which murmur when they hear
The injuries they suffer; I am sorry
I have been a hindrance to your meditations,
Farewell Sir.
Nay, good Shepherd, you mistake me.
Faith, I am very chary of my health,
I would be loath to be infected Sir.
Thou neatest not fear; I have no disease at all
Besides a troubled mind.
Why that's the worst, the worst of all.
And therefore it doth challenge
Your piety the more, you should the rather,
Strive to be my Physician.
The good Gods forbid it; J turn Physician?
My Parents brought me up more piously,
Then that I should play booty with a sickness,
Turn a consumption to men's purses, and
Purge them, worse then their bodies, and set up
An Apothecaries shop in private chambers,
Live by revenue of close-stooles and urinals,
Defer off sick men's health from day to day
As if they went to law with their disease.
No, I was borne for better ends, then to send away
His Majesties subjects to hell so fast,
As if I were to share the stakes with Charon.
Your wit erres much:
For as the soul is nobler then the body,
So it's corruption asks a better medicine
Then is applied to Gouts, Caters, or Agues,
And that is counsel.
So then: I should bee
Your souls Physician; why, I could talk out
An hour or so, but then I want a cushion
To thump my precepts into; but tell me 'pray,
What name bears your disease?
A fever, shepherd, but so far above
An outward one, that the vicissitudes
Of that may seem but warmth, and coolness only;
This, flame, and frost.
So; I understand you,
You are a lover, which is by translation
A fool, or a beast, for I'll define you; you're
Partly Chamaeleon, partly Salamander,
You're fed by the air, and live in the fire.
Why did you never love? have you no softness,
Nought of your mother in you? if that Sun
Which scorched me, should cast one beam upon you.
T'would quickly melt the ice about your heart,
And lend your eyes fresh streams.
Faith, I think not;
I have seen all your beauties of the Court,
And yet was never ravished, never made
A doleful Sonnet unto angry Cupped,
Either to warm her heart, or else cool mine,
And no face yet could ever wound me so,
But that I quickly found a remedy.
That were an art worth learning, and you need not
Be niggard of your knowledge; See the Sun
Though it have given this many thousand years
Light to the world, yet is as big and bright
As ever it was, and hath not lost one beam
Of his first glory; then let charity
Persuade you to instruct me, I shall bee
A very thankful scholar.
I shall: for it is both easily taught and learned,
Come sing away the day, &amp;c.
Mirth is the only physic,
It is a way which I have much desired
To cheat my sorrow with; and for that purpose
Would fine turn shepherd, and in rural sports
We are my lifes remnant out; I would forget
All things, my very name if it were possible.
Pray let me learn it first.
It is Callidorus.
Thank you; if you your self chance to forget it
Come but to me I'll doe you the same courtesy,
In the mean while make me your servant Sir,
I will instruct you in things necessary
For the creation of a Shepherd, and
Wee two will laugh at all the world securely,
And fling jests'gainst the businesses of state
Without endangering our ears.
Come, come away,
For'tis but a folly
To be melancholy,
Let's live here whilst we may.
I see I am undone.
Come no matter for that, you love my Daughter? By Pan; but come, no matter for that; you my Hilace?
Nay good Duck, doe not vex your self; what though he loves her? you know she will not have him.
Come, no matter for that; I will vex my self, and vex him too, shall such an idle fellow as he strive to entice away honest men's children? let him go feed his flocks; but alas! he has none to trouble him; ha, ha, ha, yet hee would marry my daughter.
Thou art a malicious doting man,
And one who cannot boast of any thing
But that she calls thee father, though I cannot
Number so large a flock of sheep as thou,
Nor send so many cheeses to the City,
Yet in my mind I am an Emperor
If but compared with thee.
Of what place I pray?
It is of some new discovered Country, is it not?
Prithee good Wintor if thou wilt be talking,
Keep thy breath in a little, for it smells
Worse then a Goat; yet thou must talk,
For thou hast nothing left thee of a woman
But lust, and tongue
Shepherd, here's none so taken with your wit
But you might spare it; if you be so lavish,
You'll have none left another time to make
The song of the forsaken Lover with.
I'm dumb, my lips are sealed, sealed up for ever
May my rash tongue forget to be interpreter,
And organ of my senses, if you say,
It hath offended you.
Troth if you make
But that condition, I shall agree to it quickly:
By Pan well said Girl; what a fool was I
To suspect thee of loving him? but come
It is no matter for that; when ever thou married
I'll add ten sheep more to thy portion,
For putting this one jest upon him.
Nay now I must needs tell you that your anger
Is grounded with no reason to maintain it,
If you intend your Daughter shall not marry him,
Say so, but play not with his passion,
For it is inhumane wit which jeers the wretched.
Come it is no matter for that; what I doe, I doe;
I shall not need your counsel.
I hope my husband and I have enough wisdom
To govern our own child; if we want any
Twill be to little purpose, I dare say,
To come to borrow some of you.
It is very likely pretty Mistress Maukin,
You with a face looks like a winter apple
When it is shrunk up together and half rotten,
I'd see you hanged up for a thing to scare
The crows away before Isle spend my breath
To teach you any.
Alas good shepherd!
What doe you imagine that I should love you for?
For all my services, the virtuous zeal
And constancy with which I ever wood you,
Though I were blacker then a starless night,
Or consciences where guilt and horror dwell,
Although splay-legd, crooked, deformed in all parts,
And but the Chao's only of a man;
Yet if I love and honour you, humanity
Would teach you not to hate, or laugh at me.
Pray spare your fine persuasions, and set speeches,
And rather tell them to those stones and trees,
Twill be to as good purpose quite, as when
You spend them upon me.
Give me my final answer, that I may
Bee either blessed for ever, or die quickly;
Delay's a cruel rack, and kills by piece-meales.
Then here it is, you're an ass,
(Take that for your incivility to my mother)
And I will never love you.
You're a woman;
A cruel and fond woman, and my passion
Shall trouble you no more; but when I'm dead
My angry Ghost shall vex you worse then now
Your pride doth me, Farewell.
Nay stay Sir, have you found her?
How now? whats the matter?
For I will have her out of you, or else
I'll cut thee into atoms, till the wind
Play with the shreeds of thy torn body. Look her
Or I will do it.
Whom; or where?
I'll tell thee honest fellow; thou shalt go
From me as an Ambassador to the Sun,
For men call him the eye of heaven, (from which
Nothing lies hid) and tell him—doe you mark me—tell him
From me—that if he send not word where she is gone,
— I will — nay by the Gods I will.
Alas poor Gentleman!
Sure he hath lost some Mistress; beauteous women
Take notice of him, (pray) your speaking is
Worth more then all the rest.
You're very welcome
Thank you fair Nymph, this is indeed a welcome Salutes her,
I never saw, beauty and affability
So well conjoined before; if I stay long
I shall be quite undone.
Nay come, put on too.
You are most kindly welcome.
You bless me too much;
The honour of your lip is entertainment
Princes might wish for.
Bless me how hee looks!
And how he talks; his kiss was honey too,
His lips as red and sweet as early cherries,
Softer then Beavers skins
Bless me, how I envy her!
Would I had that kiss too!
How his eye shines! what a bright flame it shoots!
How red his cheeks are! so our garden apples
Look on that side where the hot Sun salutes them.
How well his hairs become him!
Just like that star which ushers on the day.
How fair he is! fairer then whitest blossoms?
They two have got a kiss;
Why should I lose it for want of speaking?
You're welcome shepherd.
Come on: For it is but a folly, &amp;c:
Doe you hear? you are welcome.
Oh! here's another must have a kiss:
Go you're a paltry knave, I, that you are,
To wrong an honest woman thus.
Why hee shall kiss thee, never fear it, alas!
I did but jest, he'll do it for all this,
Nay, because I will be a Patron to thee
I'll speak to him.
You're a slandering knave,
And you shall know it, that you shall▪
Nay, if you scold so loud
Others shall know it too; He must stop your mouth,
Or you'll talk on this three hours; Callidorus
If you can patiently endure a stink,
Or have frequented ere the City Bear-garden,
Prithee salute this fourscore years, and free me,
She says you're welcome too.
I cry you mercy Shepherdess,
By Pan I did not see you.
If my husband and Alupis were not here
I'd rather pay him back his kiss again,
Then be beholding to him.
What, thou hast don't?
Well if thou dost not dye upon it, hereafter
Thy body will agree even with the worst
And stinking'st ayre in Europe.
Nay, be not angry Shepherdess, you know
He doth but jest as it is his custom.
I know it is his custom; he was always
Wont to abuse me, like a knave as he is,
But I'll endure't no more.
Prithee good Callidorus if her breath
Be not too bad, go stop her mouth again,
She'll scold till night else.
Yes marry will I, that I will, you rascal you,
I'll teach you to lay your frumps upon me;
You delight in it, doe you?
Prithee be quiet, leave but talking to me
And I will never jeer thee any more,
We two will be so peaceable hereafter.
Well upon that condition.
So, I'm delivered, why how now Lads?
What have you lost your tongues? Isle have them cried,
Palaemon, Aegon, Callidorus, what?
Are you all dumb? I pray continue so,
And i'll be merry with my self.
It is better to dance then sing,
The cause is if you will know it,
That I to my self shall bring
A Poverty
Voluntary
If once I grow but a Poet.
And yet me thinks you sing,
O yes, because here's none doe dance,
And both are better far then to be sad.
Come then let's have a round.
A match; Palaemon whither go you?
The Gods forbid that I should mock my self,
Cheat my own mind, I dance and weep at once?
You may: Farewell.
It is such a whining fool; come, come, Melarnus.
I have no mind to dance; but come no matter for that, rather then break the squares.—
By your leave, fair one.
Would I were in her place.
Come Hilace, thee and I wench I warrant thee,
You and your wife together. God bless you; so—
For it is but a folly, &amp;c.
So there's enough, I'm half a weary,
Come no matter for that,
I have not danced so much this year.
So farewell, you'll come along with me.
Yes, farewell gentle Swains.
Farewell good Shepherd,
Your best wishes follow you.
Pan always guide you.
It's no matter for that, come away.
Nay, she is lost for ever, and her name
Which used to be so comfortable, now
Is poison to our thoughts, and to augment
Our misery paints forth our former happiness,
O Callidora, O my Callidora!
I shall ne'er see thee more.
If cursed Aphron
Hath carried her away, and triumphs now
In the destruction of our hoary age
It were better she were dead;
'T were better we were all dead; the enjoying
Of tedious life is a worse punishment
Then losing of my Daughter; Oh! my friends,
Why have I lived so long?
Good Sir be comforted: Brother speak to them.
Would I had dyed, when first I brought thee forth
My Girl, my best Girl, then I should have slept
In quiet, and not wept now.
I am half a statue
Freeze me up quite ye Gods, and let me be
My own sad monument.
Alas! you doe but hurt your selves with weeping;
Consider pray, it may be she'll come back.
Oh! never, never, it is impossible
As to call back sixteen, and with vain Rhetoric
Persuade my lifes fresh April to return,
Shoe's dead, or else far worse, kept up by Aphron
Whom if I could but see, me thinks new blood
Would creep into my veins, and my faint sinews
Renew themselves, I doubt not but to find
Strength enough yet to be revenged of Aphron.
Would I were with thee, Girl, where ere thou art.
For shame good Brother, see if you can comfort them,
Me thinks you should say something.
Doe you think
My griefs so light? or was the interest
So small which I had in her? I a comforter?
Alas! she was my wife, for we were married
In our affection, in our vows; and nothing
Stopped the enjoying of each other, but
The thin partition of some ceremonies.
I lost my hopes, my expectations,
My joys, nay more, I lost my self with her;
You have a son, yet left behind, whose memory
May sweeten all this gall.
I, we had one,
But fate's so cruel to us, and such dangers
Attend a travelling man, that it were presumption
To say we have him; we have sent for him
To blot out the remembrance of his sister:
But whether we shall ever see him here,
The Gods can only tell, we barely hope.
This news, alas!
Will be but a sad welcome to him.
Why doe I play thus with my misery?
It is vain to think I can live here without her,
Isle seek her where ever she is; patience in this
Would be a vice, and men might justly say
My love was but a flash of winged lightning,
And not a Vestal flame, which always shines
His wooing is a complement, not passion,
Who can if fortune snatch away his Mistress,
Spend some few tears, then take another choice,
Mine is not so; Oh Callidora!
Fie Brother, you're a man,
And should not be shaken with every wind,
If it were possible to call her back
with mourning, mourning were a piety,
But since it cannot, you must give me leave
To call it folly:
So it is;
And I will therefore shape some other course,
This diolefull place shall never see me more,
Unless it see her too in my embraces,
You sister may retire unto my Farm,
Adjoining to the woods;
And my estate I leave for you to manage,
If I find her, expect me there, if not
Doe you live happier then your Brother hath:
Alas! how can I if you leave me? but
I hope your resolutions may be altered.
Never, farewell: good Demophil,
Farewell Spodaia, temper your laments;
If I return we shall again be happy.
You shall not want my prayers.
The Gods that pity Lovers (if there bee any) attend upon you.
Will you needs go?
I knit delays; it were time I were now ready,
And I shall sin if I seem dull or slow
In any thing which touches Callidora,
Oh! that name wounds me; we will bear you com∣pany
A little way, and Clariana look
To see us often at your Country Farm,
We'll sigh, and grieve together.
Come, come away, &amp;c.
Now where are all your sonnets? your rare fancies?
Could the fine morning music which you waked
Your Mistress with, prevail no more then this?
Why in the City now your very Fiddlers
Good morrow to your worship, will get something,
Hath she denied thee quite?
She hath undone me; I have ploughed the Sea,
And begot storming billows,
Can no persuasions move her?
No more then thy least breath can stir an oak,
Which hath this many years scorned the fierce wars
Of all the winds.
It is a good hearing; then
She'll cost you no more pairs of Turtle Doves,
Nor garlands knit with amorous conceits,
I doe perceive some rags of the Court fashions
Visibly creeping now into the woods,
The more hee shows his love, the more she slights him,
Yet will take any gift of him, as willingly
As Country Justices the Hens and Geese
Of their offending neighbours; this is right;
Now if I loved this wench I would so handle her,
I'd teach her what the difference were betwixt
One who had seen the Court and City tricks,
And a mere shepherd.
Lions are tamed, and become slaves to men,
And Tigers oft forget the cruelty
They sucked from their fierce mothers; but, a woman
Ah me! a woman! —
Yet if I saw such wonders in her face
As you doe, I should never doubt to win her.
How pray? if gifts would doe it, she hath had
The daintiest Lambs, the hope of all my flock,
I let my apples hang for her to gather,
The painful Bee did never load my hives,
With honey which she tasted not.
You mistake me Friend; I mean not so.
How then? if Poetry would do it, what shade
Hath not been Auditor of my amorous pipe?
What banks are not acquainted with her praises?
Which I have sung in verses, and the shepherds
Say they are good ones, nay they call me Poet,
Although I am not easy to believe them.
No, no, no; that's not the way.
Why how?
If show of grief had Rhetoric enough
To move her, I dare swear she had been mine
Long before this, what day did ere peep forth
In which I wept not dulier then the morning?
Which of the winds hath not my sighs increased
At sundry times? how often have I cried
Hylace, Hylace, till the docile woods
Have answered Hylace; and every valley
As if it were my Rival, sounded Hylace.
I, and you were a most rare fool for doing so,
Why it was that poisoned all; Had I a Mistress
I'd almost beat her, by this light, I would,
For they are much about your Spaniels nature,
But whilst you cry dear Hylace, ô Hylace!
Pity the tortures of my burning heart,
She'll always mince it, like a Citizens wife,
At the first asking; though her tickled blood
Leaps at the very mention; therefore now
Leave off your whining tricks, and take my counsel.
First then be merry; For it is but a folly, &amp;c.
It is a hard lesson for my mind to Iearne,
But I would force my self, if that would help me▪
Why thou shalt see it will; next I would have thee
To laugh at her, and mock her pitifully;
Study for jeers against next time you see her,
I'll go along with you, and help to abuse her,
Till we have made her cry, worse then ever you did;
When we have used her thus a little while,
She'll be as tame and gentle. —
But alas!
This will provoke her more.
Isle warrant thee: besides, what if it should?
She hath refused you utterly already.
And cannot hurt you worse; come, come, be ruled;
And follow me, we will put it straight in practise.
For it is but a folly, &amp;c.
A match; Isle try always; she can but scorn me,
There is this good in depth of misery
That men may attempt any thing, they know
The worst before hand.
How happy is that man, who in these woods
With secure silence wears away his time!
Who is acquainted better with himself
Then others; who so great a stranger is
To City follies, that he knows them not.
He sits all day upon some mossy hill
His rural throne▪ armed with his crook, his sceptre,
A flowery garland is his country crown;
The gentle lambs and sheep his loyal subjects
Which every year pay him their fleecy tribute;
Thus in an humble stateliness and majesty
He tunes his pipe, the woods best melody,
And is at once, what many Monarchs are not
Both King and Poet. I could gladly wish
To spend the rest of my unprofitable,
And needless days in their innocuous sports,
But then my father, mother, and my brother
Recurs unto my thoughts, and straight pluck down
The resolution I had built before;
Love names Philistus to me, and of the sudden
The woods seem base, and all their harmless pleasures
The daughters of necessity, not virtue.
Thus with my self I wage a war, and am
To my own rest a traitor; I would fine
Go home, but still the thought of Aphron frights me.
How now? who's here? ô it is fair Hylace
The grumbling shepherds daughter.
Brightest of all those stars that paint the woods,
And grace these shady habitations,
You're welcome, how shall I requite the benefit
Which you bestow upon so poor a stranger
With your fair presence?
If it be any courtesy, it is one
Which J would gladly doe you, I have brought
A rural present, some of our own apples,
My father and my mother are so hard,
They watched the tree, or else they had been more,
Such as they are, if they can please your taste,
My wish is crowned.
O you're too kind,
And teach that duty to me which I ought
To have performed; I would I could return
The half of your deserts! but I am poor
In every thing but thanks.
Your acceptance only is reward
Too great for me.
How they blush?
A man may well imagine they were yours,
They bear so great a show of modesty.
O you mock my boldness
To thrust into your company; but truly
I meant no hurt in it; my intents were virtuous.
The Gods forbid that I should nurse a thought
So wicked, thou art innocent I know,
And pure as Venus Doves, or mountain snow
Which no foot hath defiled, thy soul is whiter
if there be any possibility of't)
Then that clear skin which clothes thy dainty body.
Nay my good will deserves not to be jeered,
You know I am a rude and country wench.
Far be it from my thoughts, I swear I honour
And love those maiden virtues which adorn you.
I would you did, as well as I doe you,
But the just Gods intend not me so happy,
And I must be contented — I'm undone.
Here's Bellula; what is she grown my rival?
Bless me! whom see I? Hylace? some cloud
Or friendly mist involve me.
Nay Bellula; I see you well enough.
Why doth the day start back? are you so cruel
To show us first the light, and having struck
Wonder into us snatch it from our sight?
If Spring crowned with the glories of the earth
Appear upon the heavenly Ram, and straight
Creep back again into a grey-hayr'd frost,
Men will accuse its forwardness.
Pray heaven
Hee be not taken with her, shoe's somewhat fair;
He did not speak so long a speech to me
I'm sure of't, though I brought him apples.
I did mistake my way; Pray pardon me.
I would you had else.
I must thank fortune then which lead you hither,
But you can stay a little while and bless us?
Yes (and Love knows how willingly) alas!
I shall quite spoil my garland ere I give it him,
With hiding it from Hylace, 'Pray Fan
She hath not stolen his heart already from him,
And cheated my intentions.
I would fine be going, but if I should leave her
It may be I shall give her opportunity
To win him from me, for I know she loves him,
And hath perhaps a better tongue then I,
Although I should bee loath to yield to her
In beauty or complexion.
Let me speak
In private with you; I am bold to bring
A garland to you, it is of the best flowers
Which I could gather, I was picking them
All yesterday.
How you oblige me to you!
I thank you sweetest, How they flourish still!
Sure they grow better, since your hand hath nipped them.
They will doe, when your brow hath honoured them,
Then they may well grow proud, and shine more freshly.
What perfumes dwell in them?
They owe these odours to your breath.
Defend me ye good Gods, I think he kisses her,
How long they have been talking? now perhaps
Shoe's wooing him; perhaps he forgets me
And will consent, I'll put him in remembrance;
You have not tasted of the apples yet,
And they were good ones truly.
I will doe presently best Hilace.
That's something yet, would he would speak so al∣ways.
I would not change them for those glorious apples
Which give such fame to the Hesperian gardens.
She hath out-gone me in her present now,
But I have got a Beechen cup at home
Curiously graven with the spreading leaves,
And gladsome burden of a fruitful vine,
Which Demon, the best Artist of these woods
Made and bestowed upon me, I'll bring that tomorrow
And give it him, and then I'll warrant her
She will not go beyond me.
What have you got a chaplet? oh!
This is I see of Bellula's composing.
Why Hylace? you cannot make a better,
What flowers' pray doth it want?
Poor souls I pity them, and the more,
Because I have not been my self a stranger
To these love passions, but I wonder
What they can find in me worth their affection
Truly I would fine satisfy them both,
But can doe neither; it is fates crime, not mine.
Weeder go you shepherd?
You will not leave us will you?
Indeed I ought not,
You have both me bought with your courtesies
And should divide me.
She came last to you.
She hath another love,
And kills Palaemon with her cruelty,
How can she expect mercy from another?
In what a Labyrinth doth Love draw mortals
And then blindfolds them! what a mist it throws
Upon their senses! if he be a God
As sure he is (his power could not be so great else)
He knows the impossibility which Nature
Hath set betwixt us, yet entangles us,
And laughs to see us struggle. Do ye both love me?
I doe I'm sure.
And I as much as she.
I pity both of you, for you have sowed
Upon unthankful sand, whose dried up womb
Nature denies to bless with fruitfulness,
You are both fair, and more then common graces
Inhabit in you both, Bellula's eyes
Shine like the lamp of Heaven, and so doth Hylaces.
Hylaces cheeks are deeper died in scarlet
Then the chaste mornings blushes, so are Bellula's,
And I protest I love you both. Yet cannot,
Yet must not enjoy either.
You speak riddles.
Which times commentary
Must only explain to you; and till then
Farewell good Bellula, farewell good Hylace,
I thank you both.
Alas! my hopes are strangled.
I will not yet despair: He may grow milder,
He bade me farewell first; and looked upon me
With a more steadfast eye, then upon her
When he departed hence: it was a good sign;
At least I will imagine it to be so,
Hope is the truest friend, and seldom leaves one.
I doubt not but this will move him,
For they're good apples, but my teeth are gone,
I cannot bite them; but for all that though
Isle warrant you I can love a young Fellow
As well as any of them all: I that I can,
And kiss him too as sweetly. Oh! here's the mad-man.
Hercules, Hercules, ho Hercules, where are you?
Lend me thy club and skin, and when I ha'done,
Isle fling them to thee again, why Hercules?
Pox on you, are you drunk? can you not answer?
Isle travel then without them, and doe wonders.
I quake all over, worse then any fit
Of the palsy which I have had this forty years
Could make me doe.
So I have found the plot out,
First I'll climb up, on Porter Atlas shoulders,
And then craule into Heaven, and I'm sure
I cannot choose but find her there▪
What will become of me if he should see me?
Truly he's a good proper Gentleman,
If he were not mad, I would not be so afraid of him.
What have I caught thee fairest of all women?
Where hast thou hid thy self so long from Aphron?
Aphron who hath been dead till this blessed minute?
Ha, ha, ha, whom doth he take me for!
Thy skin is whiter then the snowy feathers
Of Lode's Swans.
Law you there now,—
I thought I was not so unhandsome, as they'd make me
Thy hairs are brighter then the Moons,
Then when she spreads her beams and fills her orb
Beshrew their heart that call this Gentleman mad,
He hath his senses Isle warrant him, about him,
As well as any fellow of them all.
Thy teeth are like two Arches made of Ivory,
Of purest Ivory.
I for those few I have,
I think they're white enough.
Thou art as fresh as May is, and thy look
Is picture of the Spring.
Nay, I am but some fourscore years and ten
And bear my age well; yet Alupis says
I look like January, but I'll teach the knave
Another tune Isle warrant him.
Thy lips are cherries, let me rift them sweet?
You have begged so handsomely.
Ha! ye good Gods defend me! it is a Witch, a Hag.
What am I?
A witch, one that did take the shape
Of my best Mistress, but thou could not long
Belie her pureness.
Now he's stark mad again upon the sudden;
He had some sense even now.
Thou look as if thou were some wicked woman
Frighted out of the grave; defend me, how
Her eyes doe sink into their ugly holes,
As if they were afraid to see the light.
I will not be abused thus, that I will not
My hair was bright even now, and my looks fresh:
Am I so quickly changed?
Her breath infects the ayre, and sows a pestilence
Where ever it comes; what hath she there?
J! these are apples made up with the stings
Of Scorpions, and the blood of Basilisks;
Which being swallowed up, a thousand pains
Eat on the heart, and gnaw the entrails out
Thou lie; J, that thou dost,
For these are honest apples, that they are;
I'm sure I gathered them my self.
From the Stygian tree; Give them me quickly, or I will—
What will you doe? pray take them.
Get thee gone quickly, from me, for I know thee;
Thou art Tisiphone.
It is false; for I know no such woman.
I'm glad I am got from him, would J had
My apples too, but it is no matter though,
J'le have a better gift for Callidorus
To morrow.
The fiend is vanished from me,
And hath left these behind for me to taste of,
But I will be too cunning; Thus I'll scatter them,
Now I have spoiled her plot; Unhappy hee
Who finds them.
THe Sun five times hath gone his yearly progress,
Since last I saw my Sister, and returning
Big with desire to view my native Sicilie,
I found my aged parents sadly mourning
The funeral (for to them it seems no less)
Of their departed Daughter; what a welcome
This was to me, all in whose hearts a vein
Of marble grows not, easily may conceive
Without the dumb persuasions of my tears.
Yet as if that were nothing, and it were
A kind of happiness in misery
If it come without an army to attend it,
As I passed through these woods I saw a woman
Whom her attire called Shepherdess, but face
Some disguised Angel, or a Sylvan Goddess;
It struck such adoration (for I durst not
Harbour the love of so divine a beauty)
That ever since I could not teach my thoughts
Another object; (In this happy place
(Happy her presence made it) she appeared,
And breathed fresh honours on the smiling trees,
Which owe more of their gallantry to her
Then to the musky kisses of the West wind.
Ha! sure it is she; Thus doth the Sun break forth
From the black curtain of an envious cloud.
For it is but a folly, &amp;c.
Wee did not send for you; pray leave us.
No, by this light, not till I see you cry;
When you have shed some penitential tears
For wronging of Palaemon, there may be
A truce concluded betwixt you and me.
This is uncivil
To thrust into our company; doe you think
That we admire your wit? pray go to them
That doe, we would be private.
To what purpose?
You'd ask how many shepherds she hath struck,
Which is the properest man? which kisses sweetest?
Which brings her the best presents? And then tell
What a fine man woos you, how red his lips are?
How bright his eyes are? and what dainty sonnets
He hath composed in honour of your beauty?
And then at last, with what rare tricks you fool him?
These are your learned discourses; but were all
Men of my temperance, and wisdom too,
You should woo us, I, and woo hardly too
Before you got us.
Oh profaneness!
Can hee so rudely speak to that blessed virgin,
And not be stricken dumb?
Nay, you have both a mind to me; I know it,
But I will marry neither; I come hither
Not to gaze on you, or extol your beauty;
I come to vex you.
Ruder yet? I cannot,
I will not suffer this; mad fellow, is there
No other Nymph in all these spacious woods,
To fling thy wilde, and saucy laughter at,
But her, whom thy great Deity even Pan
Himself would honour, doe not dare to utter
The smallest accent if not clothed with reverence,
Nay, doe not look upon her but with eyes
As humble and submissive as thou would
Upon the brow of Majesty, when it frowns,
I speak but that which duty binds us all to,
Thou shalt not think upon her, no not think,
Without as much respect and honour to her
As holy men in superstitious zeal
Give to the Images they worship.
Oh! this is the Gentleman courted me the other day.
Why? have you got a Patent to restrain me?
Or doe you think your glorious suit can fright me?
It would doe you much more credit at the Theater,
To rise betwixt the Acts, and look about
The boxes, and then cry, God save you Madame,
Or hear you out in quarrelling at an Ordinary,
And make your oaths become you; have you shown
Your gay apparel every where in town,
That you can afford us the sight oft, or
Hath that Grand Devil whose eclipped sergeant,
Frighted you out of the City?
Your loose jests
When they are shot at me, I scorn to take
Any revenge upon them, but neglect,
For then it is rashness only, but as soon
As you begin to violate her name,
Nature and conscience too bids me be angry,
For then it is wickedness.
Well, if it be so,
I hope you can forgive the sin that's past
Without the doleful sight of trickling tears,
For I have eyes of pumice; I'm content
To let her rest in quiet, but you have given me
Free leave to abuse you, on the condition
You will revenge it only with neglect,
For then it is rashness only.
What are you biting?
Where did you pick these fragments up of wit.
Where I paid dear enough a conscience for them,
They should be more then fragments by their price,
I bought them sir, even from the very Merchants,
I scorned to deal with your poor City peddlers, that sell
By retayle: But let that pass; For it is but a folly:
Then you have seen the City.
I and felt it too, I thank the Devil; I'm sure
It sucked up in three years the whole estate
My father left, though he were counted rich,
A pox of forlorn Captains, pitiful things,
Whom you mistake for soldiers, only by
Their sounding oaths, and a buff jerkin, and
Some Histories which they have learned by rote,
Of battles fought in Persia, or Polonia,
Where they themselves were of the conquering side,
Although God knows one of the City Captains,
Armed with broad scarf, feather▪ and scarlet breeches,
When he instructs the youth on Holy-dayes,
And is made sick with fearful noise of Guns,
Would pose them in the art Military; these
Were my first Leeches.
So, no wonder then you spent so fast.
Pish, these were nothing:
I grew to keep your Poets company
Those are the soakers, they refined me first
Of those gross humours that are bred by money
And made me straight a wit, as now you see,
For it is but a folly.
But hast thou none to fling thy salt upon
But these bright virgins?
Yes now you are here;
You are as good a theme as I could wish.
It is best for me to go, whilst they are talking
For if I steal not from Alupis sight,
He'll follow me all day to vex me.
What are you vanishing coy Mistress Hylace?
Nay, I'll be with you straight, but first I'll fetch
Palaemon, now if he can play his part
And leave off whining, we'll have princely sport,
Well, I may live in time to have the women
Scratch out my eyes, or else scold me to death,
I shall deserve it richly: Farewell Sir:
I have employment with the Damsel gone
And cannot now intend you.
They're both gone,
Direct me now good love, and teach my tongue
The enchantments that thou woo'dst thy Psyche with.
Farewell Sir.
Oh! be not so cruel,
Let me enjoy my self a little while,
Which without you I cannot.
Pray let me go,
To tend my sheep, there's none that looks to them,
And if my father miss me, he'll so chide.
Alas! thou neatest not fear, for the Wolf himself
Though hunger whet the fury of its nature,
Would learn to spare thy pretty flocks, and be
As careful as the shepherds dog to guard them,
Nay if he should not, Pan would present be,
And keep thy tender lambs in safety for thee,
For though he be a God he would not blush
To be thy servant.
Oh! you're courtly Sir.
But your fine words will not defend my sheep,
Or stop them if they wander; Let me go.
Are you so fearful of your cattels loss?
Yet so neglectful of my perishing,
(For without you how can I choose but perish?)
Though I my self were most contemptible,
Yet for this reason only, that I love
And honour you, I deserve more then they doe.
What would you doe, that thus you urge my stay?
Nothing I swear that should offend a Saint,
Nothing which can call up thy maiden blood
To lend thy face a blush, nothing which chaste
And virtuous sisters can deny their Brothers,
I doe confess I love you, but the fire
In which Jove courted his ambitious Mistress,
Or that by holy men on Altars kindled,
Is not so pure as mine is; I would only
Gaze thus upon thee; feed my hungry eyes
Sometimes with those bright tresses, which the wind
Far happier then I, plays up and down in,
And sometimes with thy cheeks, those rosy twins;
Then gently touch thy hand, and often kissed it,
Till thou thy self should check my modesty
And yield thy lips, but further, though thou should
Like other maids with weak resistance ask it,
(Which I am sure thou wilt not) I'd not offer
Till lawful Hymen join us both, and give
A licence unto my desires.
Which I
Need not bestow much language to oppose,
Fortune and nature have forbidden it,
When they made me a rude and homely wench
You (if your clothes and carriage be not liars,)
By state and birth a Gentleman.
I hope
I may without suspicion of a boaster
Say that I am so, else my love were impudence
For doe you think wise Nature did intend
You for a Shepherdess, when she bestowed
Such pains in your creation? would she fetch
The perfumes of Arabia for your breath?
Or ransack Pestum of her choicest roses
To adorn your cheeks? would she bereave the rock
Of coral for your lips? and catch two stars
As they were falling, which she formed your eyes of?
Would she her self turn work-woman and spin
Threads of the finest gold to be your tresses?
Or rob the Great to make one Microcosm?
And having finished quite the beauteous wonder,
Hide it from public view and admiration!
No; she would set it on some Pyramid,
To be the spectacle of many eyes:
And it doth grieve me that my niggard fortune
Raised me not up to higher eminence,
Not that I am ambitious of such honours
But that through them I might be made more worthy
To enjoy you.
You are for ought I see
Too great already; I will either live
An undefiled virgin as I am
Or if I marry, not belie my birth,
But join my self to some plain virtuous shepherd
(For Callidorus is so, and I will be either his or no bodies.)
Pray hear me.
Alas! I have Sir, and doe therefore now
Prepare to answer, if this passion
Bee love, my fortune bids me to deny you;
If lust, my honesty commands to scorn you,
Farewell.
O stay a little! but two words: she's gone,
Gone like the glorious Sun, which being set
Night creeps behind and covers all; some way
I must seek out to win her, or what's easier
(And the blind man himself without a guide
May find) some way to dye; would I had been
Borne a poor shepherd in these shady woods.
Nature is cruel in her benefits
And when she gives us honey, mingles gall.
She said that if she married, the woods
Should find a husband for her. I will woo her
In Sylvan habit, then perhaps she'll love me —
But yet I will not, that's in vain; I will too,
It cannot hurt to try.
Nay come, she's just behind us, are you ready?
When she scolds, bee you low deft, if she cry
Then laugh abundantly, thus we will vex her
Into a good conceit of you.
I'll warrant you; you have instructed me enough,
She comes.
Is it possible that Bellula—
Fair creature—
Sure thou were borne to trouble me, who sent for thee▪
Whom all the Nymphs (though women use to be)
As you know, envious of another beauty)
Confess the pride and glory of these woods.
When did you make this speech? it is a most neat one
Go, get you gone, look to your rotting cattle,
You'll never keep a wife, who are not able
To keep your sheep.
Good! she abuses him
Now it is a miracle he doth not cry.
Thou whom the stars might envy because they are
Outshone by thee on earth.
Pray get you gon,
Or hold your prating tongue, for whatsoever
Thou say, I will not hear a syllable,
Much less answer thee.
No; I'll try that straight
I have a present here—
Which if you'll give me leave, I shall presume
To dedicate to your service.
You're so cunning,
And have such pretty ways to entice me with,
Come let me see it.
Oh! have you found a tongue?
I thought I had not been worth an answer?
How now; what tricks are these?
Give it me quickly, or —
Pray get you gon, or hold your prating tongue;
For whatsoever thou say I will not hear
A syllable, much less answer thee.
Good boy'faith: now let me come.
This is some plot I see, would I were gone,
I had as lief see the wolf as this Alupis.
Here's a fine Ring, I faith, a very pretty one,
Doe your teeth water at it Damsel? ha?
Why we will sell our sheep, and oxen, girl,
Hang them scurvy beasts, to buy you pretty knacks
That you might laugh at us, and call us fools
And jeer us too, as far as your wit reaches,
Bid us be gone, and when we have talked two hours,
Deny to answer us; Nay you must stay
And hear a little more.
Must I? are you
The master of my business? I will not.
Faith but you shall; hear therefore and be patient.
I'll have thee made a Lady, yes a Lady,
For when thou'st got a chain about thy neck
And comely bobs to dandle in thine ears;
When thou'st perfumed thy hair, that if thy breath
Should be corrupted, it might scope unknown,
And then bestowed two hours in curling it,
Vncovering thy breast hither, thine arms hither,
And had thy Fucus curiously laid on;
You would be the finest proud thing, Isle warrant thee
Thou would outdo them all. So, now go thee to her
And let me breathe a little; For it is but a folly, &amp;c.
Oh! is it your turn to speak again? no doubt
But we shall have a good oration then,
For they call you the learned shepherd; well
This is your love I see.
Ha, ha, ha,
What should I love a stone? or woo a picture?
Alas! I must be gone, for whatsoever
I say, you will not hear a syllable
Much less answer; go, you think you are,
So singularly handsome, when alas,
Galla, Menalca's daughter, Bellula,
Or Amaryllis overcome you quite.
This is a scurvy fellow; Isle fit him for it,
No doubt they are; I wonder that your wisdom
Will trouble me so long with your vain suite,
Why doe you not woo them?
Perhaps I doe;
I'll not tell you, because you'll envy them,
And always be dispraising of their beauties.
It shall appear I will not, for I'll sooner
Embrace a Scorpion, then thee, base man.
Ha, ha, ha.
Alupis dost thou hear her? she'll cry presently,
Doe not despair yet girl, by your good carriage
You may recall me still; some few entreaties
Mingled with tears may get a kiss perhaps.
J would not kiss thee for the wealth of Sicily
Thou wicked perjured Fellow.
Alupis, oh!
We have incensed her too much! how she looks?
Prithee Alupis help me to entreat,
You know we did but jest, dear Hylace,
Alupis, prithee speak, best, beauteous Hylace,
I did but do it to try you, pray forgive me,
Upon my knees I beg it.
Here's a precious fool.
Dost thou still mock me? hast thou found more ways?
Thou need not vex thy wit to move my hate,
Sooner the Sun and stars shall shine together,
Sooner the Wolf make peace with tender lambs
Then I with thee; you're a disease to me
And wound my eyes.
Eternal night involve me! if there be
A punishment, (but sure there is not any)
Greater then what her anger hath inflicted,
May that fall on me too? how have I fooled
Away my hopes? how have I been my self
To my own self a thief?
I told you this,
That if she should but frown, you must needs fall
To your old tricks again.
Is this your art?
A lovers curse upon it; Oh! Alupis
Thou hast done worse then murdered me: for which
May all thy flocks pine and decay like me,
May thy cursed wit hurt all; but most its Master,
May thou (for I can wish no greater ill)
Love one like me, and be, like me, contemned.
Thou'ast all the darts my tongue can fling at thee,
But I will be revenged some other way
Before I dye, which cannot now be long.
Poor Shepherd, I begin to pity him.
I'll see if J can comfort him; Palaemon,—
Nay, doe not follow me, grief, passion
And troubled thoughts are my companions,
Those I had rather entertain then thee,
If you choose this way let me go the other,
And in both parts distracted error, thee
May revenge quickly meet, may death meet me.
Well, I say Pan defend me from a lover
Of all tame mad-men certainly they're the worst,
I would not meet with two such creatures more
For any good, they without doubt would put me,
If it be possible into a fit of sadness,
Though it Be but a folly, &amp;c.
Well; I must find some plot yet to salve this
Because I have engaged my wit in the business,
And it would be a great scandal to the City
If I who have spent my means there, should not be
Able to cheat these shepherds. How now, how now,
Have we more distressed lovers here?
No, I'm a mad man.
I gave a shrewd guess at it at first sight
I thought thee little better.
Better? why?
Can there be any better then a mad-man?
I tell thee, I came here to be a mad-man,
Nay, doe not dissuade me from it, I would bee
A very Madman.
A good resolution!
It is as gentile a course as you can take,
I have known great ones have not been ashamed of't,
But what cause pray drove you into this humour?
Why a Mistress,
And such a beauteous one—dost thou see no body?
She sits upon a throne amongst the stars
And outshines them, look up and bee amazed
Such was her beauty here,—sure there doe lye
A thousand vapours in thy sleepy eyes,
Dost thou not see her yet? not yet, nor yet?
No in good troth.
You're dull and ignorant,
Not skilled at all in deep Astrology.
Let me instruct thee?
Prithee doe, for thou
Art in an admirable case to teach now,
I'll show thee first all the celestial signs,
And to begin, look on that horned head.
Whose is it? Iupiters?
No, it is the Ram!
Next that, the spacious Bull fills up the place.
The Bull? it is well, the fellows of the Guard
Intend not to come thither; if they did
The Gods might chance to lose their beef.
And then,
Yonder's the sign of Gemini, dost see it?
Yes, yes, I see one of the zealous sisters
Mingled in friendship with a holy Brother▪
To beget Reformations.
And there sits Capricorn.
A Welshman is it not?
There Cancer creeps along with gouty pace,
As if his feet were sleepy, there, Doe you mark it?
I, I, Alderman-like a walking after dinner,
His paunch orechargd with capon and with white broth.
But now, now, now, now, gaze eternally
Had thou as many eyes as the black night
They would be all too little; see thou Virgo?
No by my troth, there are so few on earth,
I should be loath to swear there's more in heaven,
Then only one.
That was my Mistress once, but is of late
Translated to the height of deserved glory,
And adds new ornaments to the wondering heavens.
Why doe I stay behind then, a mere nothing
Without her presence to give life and being?
If there be any hill whose lofty top
Nature hath made contiguous with heaven,
Though it be steep, rugged as Neptunes brow,
Though armed with cold, with hunger, and diseases,
And all the other soldiers of misery,
Yet I would climb it up, that I might come
Next place to thee, and there be made a star.
I prithee doe, for amongst all the beasts
That help to make up the celestial signs
There's a Calfe wanting yet.
But stay —
Nay, I have learned enough Astrology.
Hunger and faintness have already seized me,
It is a long journey thither, I shall want
Provision; can thou help me, gentle shepherd?
And when I am come thither I will snatch
The Crown of Ariadne, and fling't down
To thee for a reward.
No doubt you will;
But you shall need no victuals, when you have ended
Your toilsome journey, kill the Ram you talk of,
And feed your self with most celestial mutton.
You're in the right, if they deny me that
I'll pluck the Bear down from the Artique Pole,
And drown it in those waters it avoids,
And dares not touch; I'll tug the Hyades
And make them to sink down in spite of Nature;
I'll meet with Charles his Wayne, and overturn it
And break the wheels of 't, till Böotes start
For fear, and grow more slow then ever he was.
By this good light he'll snuff the Moon anon,
Here's words indeed would fright a Conjurer
It is pity that these huge Gigantic speeches
Are not upon the stage, they would doe rarely
For none would understand them, I could wish
Some Poet here now, with his table-booke.
I'll cuff with Pollux, and out-ride thee, Castor,
When the fierce Lyon roars I'll pluck his heart out
And be called Cordelion; I'll grapple with the Scorpion,
Take his sting out and fling him to the earth.
To me good Sir,
It may perhaps raise me a great estate
With showing it up and down for pence apiece
Alcides freed the earth from savage monsters,
And I will free the heavens and bee called
Don Hercules Alcido de secundo.
A brave Castilian name.
It is a hard task,
But if that fellow did so much by strength,
I may well do it armed both with love and fury.
Of which thou hast enough.
Farewell thou ratte.
The Cedar bids the shrub adieu.
Farewell
Don Hercules Alcido de secundo.
If thou scar'st any, twill be by that name.
This is a wonderful rare fellow, and
I like his humour mightily—who's here?
The Chronicle of a hundred years ago!
How many crows hath she outlived? sure death
Hath quite forgot her; by this Memento more
I must invent some trick to help Palaemon.
I am going again to Callidorus,
But I have got a better present now,
My own ring made of good Ebony,
Which a young handsome shepherd bestowed on me
Some fourscore years ago, then they all loved me,
I was a handsome Lass, J woes in those days.
I so thou were I'll warrant; here's good sign of't
Now Isle begin the work, Reverend Truga,
Whose very Autumn shows how glorious
The spring-time of your youth was—
Are you come
To put your mocks upon me?
I doe confess indeed my former speeches
Have been too rude and saucy; I have flung
Mad jests too wildly at you; but considering
The reverence which is due to age, and virtue,
I have repented, will you see my tears?
And believe them? Oh for an onion now!
Or J shall laugh aloud; ha, ha, ha!)
Alas good soul I doe forgive you truly;
I would not have you weep for me, indeed
I ever thought you would repent at last,
You might well,
But the right valuing of your worth and virtue
Hath turned the folly of my former scorn
Inro a wiser reverence, pardon me
If I say love.
I, I, withal my heart,
But doe you speak sincerely?
Oh! it grieves me
That you should doubt it, what I spoke before
Were lies, the off-spring of a foolish rashness,
I see some sparks still of your former beauty▪
Which spite of time still flourish.
Why, I am not
So old as you imagined, I am yet
But fourscore years. Am I a January now?
How doe you think? I always did believe
You'd be of another opinion one day;
I know you did but jest.
Oh no, oh no, (I see it takes)
How you belly your age— for— let me see—
A man would take you—let me see— for—
Some forty years or thereabouts (I mean four hundred)
Not a jot more J swear.
Oh no! you flatter me,
But I look something fresh indeed this morning.
I should please Callidorus mightily,
But I'll not go perhaps; this fellow is
As handsome quite as he, and I perceive
He loves me hugely, I protest I will not
Have him grow mad, which he may chance to doe
If I should scorn him.
I have something here
Which I would fine reveal to you, but dare not
Without your licence.
Doe in Pans name, doe; now, now.
The comely gravity which adorns your age,
And makes you still seem lovely, hath so stricken me—
Alas good soul! I must seem coy at first,
But not too long, for fear I should quite lose him.
That I shall perish utterly, unless
Your gentle nature help me.
Alas good Shepherd!
And in troth I fine would help you
But I am past those vanities of love.
Oh no!
Wise nature which preserved your life till now
Doth it because you should enjoy these pleasures
Which doe belong to life, if you deny me,
I am undone.
Well you should not win me
But that I am loath to be held the cause
Of any young mans ruin, doe not think it
My want of chastity, but my good nature
Which would see no one hurt.
Ah pretty soul!
How supple it is like wax before the Sun▪
Now cannot I choose but kiss her, there's the plague of 't,
Let's then join our hearts, and seal them with a kiss
Well, let us then:
'T were incivility to be your debtor,
I'll give you back again your kiss, sweetheart,
And come in th'afternoone, I'll see you;
My husband will be gone to sell some kine,
And Hylace tending the sheep, till then
Farewell good Duck
But doe you hear, because you shall remember
To come I'll give thee here this Ebon ring
But doe not wear it, lest my husband chance
To see it: Farewell Duck.
Lest her husband chance
To see it; she cannot deny this, here's enough;
My Scoene of love is done then, is she gone?
I'll call her back; ho Truga; Truga hô:
Why doe you call me Duck?
Only to ask one foolish question of thee:
Had not you a husband?
Yes, you know I have.
And doe you love him?
Why doe you ask? I doe.
Yet you can be content to make him cuckold
Rather then to see you perish in your flames.
Why art thou now two hundred years of age,
Yet hast no more discretion but to think
That I could love thee? ha, ha, were it mine
I'd sell thee to some gardiner, thou would serve
To scare away the thieves as well as crows.
Oh, you're disposed to jest I see, Farewell.
Nay, I'm in very earnest; I love you?
Why thy face is a vizard.
Leave off these tricks, I shall be angry else,
And take away the favours I bestowed.
It is known that thou hast eyes by the holes only,
Which are crept farther in, then thy nose out,
And that's almost a yard; thy quarrelling teeth
Of such a colour are, that they themselves
Scare one another, and doe stand at distance.
Thy skin hangs loose as if it feared the bones
(For flesh thou hast not) and is grown so black
That a wilde Centaur would not meddle with thee.
To conclude, Nature made thee when she was
Only disposed to jest, and length of time
Hath made thee more ridiculous.
Base villain, is this your love?
Give me my ring again?
No, no; soft there:
I intend to bestow it on your husband;
He'll keep it better far then you have done.
What shall I doe? Alupis, good Alupis,
Stay but a little while, pray doe but hear me.
No, I'll come to you in the afternoon
Your husband will be selling of some kine
And Hylace tending the sheep.
Pray hear me, command me any thing
And be but silent of this, good Alupis;
Hugh, Hugh, Hugh.
Yes, yes, I will be silent,
I'll only blow a trumpet on yon hill,
Till all the country swains are flocked about me.
Then show the ring, and tell the passages
Twixt you and me.
Alas! I am undone.
Well now it is ripe; I have had sport enough
Since I behold your penitential tears
I'll propose this to you, if you can get
Your Daughter to be married to Palaemon
This day, for I'll allow no longer time;
To morrow I'll restore your ring, and swear
Never to mention what is past betwixt us,
If not— you know what follows— take your choice.
I'll doe my best endeavour.
Go make hast then,
You know your time's but short, and use it well:
Now if this fail the Devil's in all wit.
I'll go and thrust it forward, if it take,
I'll sing away the day,
For it is but a folly
To be melancholy,
Let's live here whilst wee may.
Pray follow me no more, me thinks that modesty
Which is so lively painted in your face
Should prompt your maiden heart with fears and blushes
To trust your self in so much privatnesse
With one you know not.
I should love those fears
And call them hopes, could I persuade my self,
There were so much heate in you as to cause them;
Prithee leave me; if thou dost hope success
To thine own love, why interrupt thou mine?
If love cause you
To follow him, how can you angry bee?
Because love forces me without resistance
To doe the same to you?
Love should not grow
So subtle as to play with arguments.
Love should not be an enemy to reason.
To love is of it self a kind of Folly,
But to love one who cannot render back
Equal desire, is nothing else but madness:
Tell him so; it is a lesson he should learn.
Not to love is of't self a kind of hardness,
But not to love him who hath always wooed you
With chaste desires, is nothing less then tyranny.
Tell him so; it is a lesson he should learn.
Why doe you follow him that flies from you?
Why doe you fly from him that follows you?
Why doe you follow? Why doe you fly from me?
The Fates command me that I must not love you.
The Fates command me that I needs must love you.
The Fates impose the like command on me,
That you I must, that you I cannot love.
Unhappy man! when I begin to cloth
My love with words, and court her with persuasions,
She stands unmoved, and doth not clear her brow
Of the least wrinkle which sate there before;
So when the waters with an amorous noise
Leap up and down, and in a wanton dance
Kiss the dull rock, that scorns their fond embraces,
And darts them back; till they with terror scattered,
Drop down again in tears.
Unhappy woman!
When I begin to show him all my passion,
He flies from me, and will not clear his brow
Of any cloud which covered it before;
So when the ravishing Nightingale hath tuned
Her mournful notes, and silenced all the birds,
Yet the deaf wind flirts by, and in disdain
With a rude whistle leaves her.
We are all three
Unhappy; borne to be the proud example
Of Loves great God-head, not his God-like goodness.
Let us not call upon our selves those miseries
Which love hath not, and those it hath bear bravely,
Our desires yet are like some hidden text,
Where one word seems to contradict another,
They are Loves nonsense, wrapped up in thick clouds
Till Fate be pleased to write a Commentary,
Which doubtless twill; till then let let us endure,
And sound a parley to our passions,
We may join hands though, may we not?
We may, and lips too, may we not?
We may; come let's sit down and talk.
And look upon each other.
Then kiss again.
Then look.
Then talk again,
What are we like? the hand of Mother Nature
Would be quite posed to make our simile.
We are the Trigon in Loves Hemisphere.
We are three strings on Venus dainty'st Lute,
Where all three hinder one another music,
Yet all three join and make one harmony.
We are three flowers of Venus dainty garden,
Where all three hinder one another odor,
Yet all three join, and make one nosegay up.
Come let us kiss again.
And look.
And talk.
Nay rather sing, your lips are Natures organs,
And made for nought less sweet then harmony.
Pray doe.
Though I forfeit
My little skill in singing to your wit,
Yet I will do it, since you command.
It is a punishment to love,
And not to love a punishment doth prove;
But of all pains there's no such pain,
As it is to love, and not be loved again.
Till sixteen parents we obey,
After sixteen, men steal our hearts away
How wretched are we women grown,
Whose wills, whose minds, whose hearts are ne'er our own!
Thank you.
For ever be the tales of Orpheus silent,
Had the same age seen thee, that very Poet,
Who drew all to him by his harmony,
Thou would have drawn to thee.
Come shall we rise?
If it please you, I will.
I cannot choose
But pity these two Lovers, and am taken
Much with the serious trifles of their passion.
Let's go and see, if we can break this net
In which we all are caught; if any man
Ask who we are, we will say we are Loves riddle.
Thou art my better Genius, honest Aegon,
And what am I?
My self, my soul, my friend,
Let me hug thee Alupis, and thee Aegon,
Thee for inventing it, thee for putting it
In act; But doe you think the plot will hold?
Hold? why I'll warrant thee it shall hold,
Till we have tied you both in wedlock fast,
Then let the bonds of Matrimony hold you
If twill, if that will not neither, I can tell you
What will I'm sure; A Halter.
Then sing, &amp;c. —
Come, shall we knock?
I doe; For it is, &amp;c. —
Ho Truga; who's within there?
You, Winter, Ho, you that the grave expected
Some hundred years ago, you that intend
To live till you turn Skeleton, and make
All men weary of you but Physicians,
Pox on you, will you come.
Did you command the servants to withdraw?
I did forsooth.
And have you shut the doors?
Yes.
Is there none can over-heare our talk?
Your curious enquiry much amazes me,
And I could wish you would excuse my boldness
If I should ask the reason.
Thou know well
That thou hast found me always liker to
Thy Kinswoman then Mistress, that thy breast
Has been the Cabinet of all my secrets,
This I tell thee, not as an exprobration,
But because I must require thy faith
And counsel here. And therefore prithee swear—
Swear? to doe what?
To be more silent then the dead of night,
And to thy power to help me.
Would my power
To assist you were as ready as my will,
And for my tongue that Mistress I'll condemn
Unto perpetual silence, ere it shall
Betray the smallest word that you commit to it.
By all —
Nay doe not swear, I will not wrong thy virtue
To bind it with an oath. Isle tell thee all;
Doth not my face seem paler then it was wont?
Doth not my eye look as it borrowed flame
From my fond heart; could not my frequent weepings,
My sudden sighs, and abrupt speeches tell thee
What J am grown?
You are the same you were,
Or else my eyes are liars.
No, I'm a wretched Lover; coldest thou nor
Read that out of my blushes? fie upon thee;
Thou art a novice in Loves school I see;
Trust me I envy at thy ignorance,
That can not find out Cupids characters
In a lost Maid, sure thou did never know him.
Would you durst trust me with his name,
Sure he had charms about him that might tempt
Chaste Votaries, or move a Scythian rock
When he shot fire into your chaster breast.
I am ashamed to tell thee, prithee guess him,
Why it is impossible.
Thou saw the gentleman whom I this morning
Brought in to be my guest.
Yes, but am ignorant, who, or from whence he is;
Thou shalt know all;
The freshness of the morning did invite me
To walk abroad, there I began to think
How I had lost my Brother, that one thought
Like circles in the water begat many,
Those and the pleasant verdure of the fields
Made me forget the way, and did entice me
Farther then either fear or modesty
Else would have suffered me, beneath an oak
Which spread a flourishing Canopy round about,
And was it self alone almost a wood,
I found a Gentleman distracted strangely,
Crying aloud for either food, or sleep,
And knocking his white hands against the ground,
Making that groan like me, when I beheld it,
Pity, and fear, both proper to us women,
Drave my feet back far swifter then they went,
When I came home, I took two servants with me
And fetched the gentleman, hither I brought him,
And with such cheer as then the house afforded,
Replenished him, he was much mended suddenly,
Is now asleep, and when he wakes I hope
Will find his senses perfect.
You did show
In this, what never was a stranger to you,
Much piety; but wander from your subject;
You have not yet discovered, who it is
Deserves your love.
Fie, Fie, how dull thou art,
Thou dost not use in other things to be so;
Why I love him; His name I cannot tell thee;
For it is my great unhappiness to bee
Still ignorant of that my self. He comes,
Look, this is hee, but doe not grow my rival If thou can thuse.
You need not, fear't forsooth.
Leave me alone with him; withdraw.
I doe.
Where am I now? under the Northern Pole
Where a perpetual winter binds the ground
And glazeth up the floods? or where the Sun
With neighbouring rays bakes the divided earth,
And drinks the rivers up? or doe I sleep?
Is it not some foolish dream deludes my fancy?
Who am J? I begin to question that.
Was not my country Sicily? my name
Called Aphron, wretched Aphron?
Ye good Gods
Forbid; is this that man who was the cause
Of all the grief for Callidora's loss?
Is this the man that I so oft have cursed?
Now I could almost hate him, and me thinks
He is not quite so handsome as he was;
And yet alas he is, though by his means
My Brother is gone from me, and heaven knows
If I shall see him more, Fool as I am,
I cannot choose but love him.
Cheat me not good eyes,
What woman, or what Angel doe I see?
Oh stay, and let me worship ever thou goosed,
Whether thou be a Goddess which thy beauty
Commands me to believe, or else some mortal
Which I the rather am induced to think,
Because I know the Gods all hate me so,
They would not look upon me.
Spare these titles
I am a wretched woman, who for pity
(Alas that I should pity! it had bin better
That I had been remorseless) brought you hither,
Where with some food and rest, thanks to the Gods
Your senses are recovered.
My good Angel!
I doe remember now that I was mad
For want of meat and sleep, thrice did the Sun
Cheer all the world but me, thrice did the night
With silent and bewitching darkness give
A resting time to every thing but Aphron.
The fish, the beasts, the birds, the smallest creatures
And the most despicable snored securely.
The aguish head of every tree by Aeolus
Was rocked asleep, and shook as if it nodded.
The crooked mountains seemed to bow and slumber,
The very rivers ceased their daily murmur,
Nothing did watch, but the pale Moon, and I
Paler then she; Grief wedded to this toil
What else could it beget but franticknesse?
But now me thinks, I am my own, my brain
Swims not as it was wont; O brightest Virgin
Show me some way by which I may be grateful,
And if I do it not, let an eternal Frenzy
Jmmediatly seize on me.
Alas! it was only
My love, and if you will reward me for it,
Pay that J lent you, J'le require no interest;
The Principall's enough.
You speak in mists.
You're loath perhaps to understand.
If you intend that I should love and honour you,
I doe by all the Gods.
But I am covetous in my demands,
I am not satisfied with wind-like promises
Which only touch the lips; I ask your heart
Your whole heart for me, in exchange of mine,
Which so I gave to you.
Ha! you amaze me.
Oh! you have spoken something worse then lightning,
That blasts the inward parts, leaves, the outward whole,
My gratitude commands me to obey you,
But I am borne a man, and have those passions
Fighting within me, which I must obey.
Whilst Callidora lives, although she bee
As cruel, as thy breast is soft and gentle;
It is sin for me to think of any other.
You cannot love me then?
I doe I swear,
Above my self I doe: my self? what said I?
Alas! that's nothing; above any thing
But heaven and Callidora.
Fare you well then,
I would not doe that wrong to one I love,
To urge him farther then his power and will;
Farewell, remember me when you are gone,
And happy in the love of Callidora.
When J doe not, may I forget my self,
Would I were mad again; then I might rave
With privilege, I should not know the griefs
That hurried me about, it were better far
To lose the senses, then be tortured by them.
Where is she gone? I did not ask her name,
Fool that I was, alas poor Gentlewoman!
Can any one love me? ye cruel Gods,
Is it not enough that I my self am miserable,
Must I make others so too? Isle go in
And comfort her; alas! how can I though?
Isle grieve with her, that is in ills a comfort.
Before when you denied your Daughter to me
It was Fortunes fault, not mine, but since good Fate
Or rather Aegon, better far then Fate
Hath raised me up to what you aimed at, riches,
I see not with what countenance you can
Coin any second argument against me.
Come, no matter for that:
Yes, I could wish you were less eloquent,
You have a vice called Poesy which much
Displeases me, but no matter for that neither.
Alas! he will leave that straight
When he has got but money; he that swims
In Tagus, never will go back to Helicon.
besides, when he hath married Hylace
Whom should he woo, to praise her comely feature,
Her skin like falling snow, her eyes like stars,
Her cheeks like roses (which are common places
Of all your lovers praises) oh! those vanities,
Things quite as light, and foolish as a Mistress,
Are by a Mistress first begot, and left
When they leave her.
Why doe you think that Poesy
An art which even the Gods—
Pox on your arts,
Let him think what he will; what's that to us?
Well, I would gladly have an answer of you,
Since I have made Palaemon here my son,
If you conceive your Daughter is so good,
Wee will not press you, but seek out some other
Who may perhaps please me and him as well.
Which is impossi' —
Rot on your possibles —
Thy mouth like a cracked fiddle never sounds
But out of tune; Come, put on Truga
You'll never speak unless I show the ring.
Yes, yes, I doe, I doe; Doe ye hear sweet heart?
Are you mad to fling away a fortune
That's thrust upon you, you know Aegon's rich.
Come, no matter for that,
That's thrust upon me? I would fine see any man
Thrust ought upon me; butt's no matter for that,
I will doe that which I intend to doe,
And it is no matter for that neither, that's thrust upon me?
Come, what say you Melarnus?
What say I? it is no matter what I say,
I'll speak to Aegon, if I speak to any,
And not to you; but no matter for that;
Hark you, will you leave all the means you have
To this Palaemon?
I Duck, he says he will.
Pish, it is no matter for that, Isle hear him say so.
I will, and here doe openly protest,
That since my Bellula (mine that was once)
Thinks her self wiser then her father is,
And will be governed rather by her passions,
Then by the square that I prescribe to her,
That I will never count her as my Daughter.
Well acted by God Pan, see but what it is
To have me for a tutor in these rogueries.
But tell me now, good neighbour, what estate
Doe you intend to give him?
That estate
Which Fortune and my care hath given to me,
The money which I have, and that's not much,
The sheep, and Goats.
And not the oxen too?
Yes; every thing.
The Horses too?
I tell you, every thing.
By Pan he will make him promise him particularly
Each thing above the value of a Beanes-straw.
You'll leave him the pails too, to milk the Kine in,
And harness for the horses, will you not?
I, I, what else; but it is no matter for that,
I know Palaemon's an ingenious man,
And love him therefore; Butt's no matter for that neither
Well, since we are both agreed, why do we stay here
I know Palaemon longs to embrace his Hylace.
I, I, it is no matter for that, within this hour
Wee will be ready, Aegon, pray be you so,
Farewell my son in Law that shall be,
Butt's no matter for that: Farewell all:
Come Truga.
Come on then, let's not stay too long in trifling,
Palaemon go, and prepare your self against the time.
I'll go acquaint my Bellula with your plot,
Lest this unwelcome news should too much grieve her,
Before she know my meaning.
Doe, doe; and I'll go study
Some new-found ways to vex the fool Malernus.
For it is but a folly,
To be melancholy, &amp;c.
Whilst Callidorus lives, I cannot love thee.
These were her parting words; Isle kill him then;
Why doe I doubt it Fool? such wounds as these
Require no gentler med'cine; me thinks Love
Frowns at me now, and says I am too dull,
Too slow in his command: and yet I will not,
These hands are virgins yet, unstained with villainy,
Shall I begin to teach them?—me thinks Piety
Frowns at me now, and says, I am too weak
Against my passions. Piety! —
'T was fear begot that Bugbear; for thee Bellula
I durst be wicked, though I saw Ioves hand
Armed with a naked thunderbolt: Farewell,
If thou be any thing, and not a shadow
To fright boys and old women) Farewell conscience,
Go and be strong in other petty things
To Lovers come, when Lovers may make use of thee,
Not else: and yet,—what shall I doe or say?
I see the better way, and know it is beteer,
Yet still this devious error draws me backward.
So when contrary winds rush out and meet,
And wrestle on the Sea with equal fury
The waves swell into mountains, and are driven
Now back, now forward, doubtful of the two
Which Captain to obey.
Ha, ha, Isle have such excellent sport
For it is but a folly, &amp;c.
Why here's a fellow now makes sport of every thing,
See one mans fate how it excels another,
Hee can sit, and pass away the day in jollity,
My music is my sighs, whilst tears keep time.
Who's here? a most rare posture!
How the good soul folds in his arms! he dreams
Sure that he hugges his Mistress now, for that
Is his disease without all doubt, so, good,
With what judicious garb hee plucks his hat
Over his eyes; so, so, good! better yet;
He cries; by this good light, he cries; the man
Is careful, and intends to water his sheep
With his own tears; ha, ha, ha, ha.
Dost thou see any thing that deserves thy laughter,
Fond swain?
I see nothing in good troth but you,
To jeer those who are Fates May-game
Is a redoubled fault; for it is both sin,
And folly too; our life is so uncertain
Thou can not promise that thy mirth shall last
To morrow, and not meet with any rub,
Then thou may act that part, to day thou laugh as
I act a part? it must be in a Comedy then,
I abhor Tragedies: besides, I never
Practised this posture; Hey ho! woe, alas!
Why doe I live? my music is my sighs
Whilst tears keep time.
You take too great a licence to your wit;
Wit, did I say? I mean, that which you think so.
And it deserves my pity, more then anger.
Else you should find, that blows are heavier far
Then the most studied jefts you can throw at me.
Faith it will be but labour lost to beat me,
All will not teach me how to act this part;
Woe's me! alas! I'm a dull rogue, and so
Shall never learn it.
You're unmannerly
To talk thus saucily with one you know not,
Nay, hardly ever saw before, be gone
And leave me as you found me, my worst thoughts
Are better company then thou.
Enjoy them then,
Here's no body desires to rob you of them.
I would have left your company without bidding,
It is not so pleasant, I remember well,
When I had spent all my money, I stood thus
And therefore hate the posture ever since.
Do ye hear? I'm going to a wedding now;
If you'ave a mind to dance, come along with me,
Bring your hard-hearted Mistress with you too,
Perhaps I may persuade her, and tell her
Your Musick's sighs, and that your tears keep time.
Will you not go? Farewell then, good Tragical actor.
Now have at thee Melarnus; For it is but a folly, &amp;c.
Thou art a Prophet, Shepherd; She is hard
As rocks which suffer the continual siege
Of Sea and wind against them; but I will
Win her or lose (which I should gladly doe)
My self: my self? why so I have already:
Ho! who hath found Florellus? he is lost,
Lost to himself, and to his parents likewise,
(who having missed me, doe by this time search
Each corner for to find me) oh! Florellus,
Thou must be wicked, or for ever wretched,
Hard is the Physic, harder the disease.
The Gods convert these omens into good:
And mock my fears; thrice in the very threshold,
Without its Masters leave my foot stood still,
Thrice in the way it stumbled:
Thrice, and thrice
You were a fool then for observing it.
Why these are follies the young years of Truga
Did hardly know; are they not vanished yet?
Blame not my fear: that's Cupids Usher always;
Though Hylace were now in my embraces,
I should half doubt it.
If you chanced to stumble.
Let him enjoy his madness, the same liberty
he will grant to you, when you're a Lover too.
I, when I am, he may; yet if I were one
I should not be dismayed because threshold—
Alas! that was not all, as I came by
The oak to Faunus sacred, where the shepherds
Exercise rural sports on Festivals,
On that trees top an inauspicious Crow
Foretold some ill to happen.
And because Crows
Foretell wet weather, you interpret it
The rain of your own eyes; but leave these tricks
And let me advise you.
Well come, no matter for that; I doe believe thee; Girl
And would they have such sport with vexing me!
Butt's no matter for that; Isle vex them for it.
I know your fiery lover will be here strait,
But I shall cool him; but come, no matter for that!
Go get you in, for I doe see them coming.
Here comes Melarnus.
Hee looks cheerfully, I hope ell's well?
Melarnus, opportunely: we were a coming
Just now unto you.
Yes, very likely; would you have spoken with me?
Spoken with you?
Why, are you mad? have you forgot your promise?
My promise? oh! it is true, I said indeed
I would go with you to day to sell some kine,
Stay but a little, Isle be ready straight.
I am amazed; Good Aegon speak to him.
By this good light,
I see no likelihood of any marriage,
Except betwixt the Kine and oxen. Hark you hither;
A rot upon your beasts; is Hylace ready?
It's no matter for that! who's there? Alupis?
Give me thy hand faith, you're a merry fellow,
I have not seen thee here these many days,
But now I think on it, it's no matter for that neither.
Thy memory's fled away sure with thy wit.
Was not I here less then an hour ago
With Aegon, when you made the match?
Oh! then you'll go along with us,
Faith doe; for you will make us very merry.
I shall, if you thus make a fool of me.
Oh no! you'll make you sport with vexing me,
But mum; no matter for that neither: there
I bobbed him privately, I think.
Come, what's the business?
The business? why hoe's mad, beyond the cure
Of all the herbs grow in Anticyra.
You see we have not failed our word Melarnus,
I and my son are come.
Your son! goodlack!
I thought, I swear, you had no other child
Besides your Daughter Bellula.
Nay, then
I see you are disposed to make us fools,—
Did not I tell you that it was my intent
To adopt Palaemon for my son and heir?
Did not you examine
Whether he would leave him all, lest that he should
Adopt some other heir to the cheese-presses,
The milking-pailes, and creame-boules? did you not?
In troth it is well; but where is Bellula?
Nay; prithee leave these tricks, and tell me
What you intend, is Hylace ready?
Ready? what else? shoe's to be married presently:
To a young shepherd, butt's no matter for that.
That's I, hence fears;
Attend upon the infancy of love,
She's now mine own.
Why I; did not the crow on the oak foretell you this?
Hylace, Hylace, come forth,
Here's some are come to dance at your wedding,
And they're welcome.
The light appears, just like the rising Sun,
When o'er yon hill it peepes, and with a draught
Of morning dew salutes the day, how fast
The night of all my sorrow flies away,
Quite banished with her sight!
Did you call for me?
Is Damaetas come? Fie, how slow he is
At such a time? but it's no matter for that;
Well get you in, and prepare to welcome him.
Will you be gone so quickly, oh! bright Hylace
That blessed hour by me so often begged,
By you so oft denied, is now approaching.
What, how now? what doe you kiss her?
If Damoetas were here, he would grow jealous,
But it is a parting kiss, and so in manners
She cannot deny it you; but it's no matter for that.
How?
What doe you wonder at?
Why doe you think as soon as they are married,
Damoetas such a fool, to let his wife
Be kissed by every body?
How now? Damoetas?
Why what hath he to doe with her?
Ha, ha!
What hath the husband then to doe wed's wife?
Good: it is no matter for that though; he knows what.
You mean Palaemon sure, ha, doe you not?
It is no matter for that, what I mean, I mean,
Well, rest ye merry gentlemen, I must in,
And see my Daughters wedding, if you please
To dance with us; Damaetas sure will thank ye;
Pray bring your son and heir Palaemon with you,
Bellula's cast away, ha, ha, ha, ha!
And the poor fool Melarnus must be cheated,
But it's no matter for that; how now Alupis?
I thought you would have had most excellent sport
With abusing poor Melarnus? that same coxcomb,
For hoe's a fool; but it's no matter for that,
Aegon hath cheated him, Palaemon is
Married to Hylace, and one Alupis
Doth nothing else but vex him, ha, ha, ha!
But it's no matter for that; farewell gentles,
Or if yee'le come and dance, ye shall be welcome,
Will you Palaemon? it is your Mistress wedding.
I am a fool, a coxcomb, gulled on every side,
No matter for that though; what I have done, I have done▪
Ha, ha, ha!
How now? what are you both dumb? both thun∣der-strooke?
This was your plot Alupis.
I'll begin.
May his sheep rot, and he for want of food
Be forced to eat them then; may every man
Abuse him, and yet he not have the wit
To abuse any man, may he never speak
More sense then he did now; and may he never
Bee rid of his old wife Truga, may his son
In Law be a more famous Cuckold made
Then any one I knew when I lived in the City.
Fool as thou art, the Sun shall lose his course▪
And brightness too, ere Hylace her chastity.
Oh no! ye Gods, may she be happy always,
Happy in the embraces of Damoetas;
And that shall be some comfort to my Ghost
When I am dead; and dead I shall be shortly.
May a disease seize upon all his Cattle,
And a far worse on him; till he at last
Bee carried to some Hospital in the City,
And there killed by a Surgeon for experience.
And when hoe's gone, Isle wish this good thing for him,
May the earth lye gently on him— that the dogs
May tear him up the easier.
A curse upon thee!
And upon me for trusting thy fond counsels!
Was this your cunning trick? why thou hast wounded
My conscience and my reputation too,
With what face can I look on the other Swains?
Or who will ever trust me, who have broke
My faith thus openly?
A curse upon thee,
This is the second time that thy persuasions
Made me not only fool, but wicked too;
I should have dyed in quiet else, and known
No other wound, but that of her denial;
Go now, and brag how thou hast used Palaemon,
But yet me thinks you might have chose some other
For subject of your mirth, not me.
Nor me.
And yet if this had prospered (as I wonder
Who it should be, betrayed us, since we three
And Truga only knew it, whom, if she
Betrayed us, I—) if this, I say, had prospered,
You would have hugged me for inventing it,
And him for putting it in act; foolish men
That doe not mark the thing but the event!
Your judgements hang on Fortune, not on reason▪
Dost thou upbraid us too?
First make us wretched,
And then laugh at us? believe, Alupis,
Thou shalt not long have cause to boast thy villainy.
My villainy? doe what ye can: you're fools,
And there's an end; Isle talk with you no more,
I had as good speak reason to the wind
As you, that can but hiss at it.
Wee will doe more; Palaemon, come away▪
He hath wronged both; and both shall satisfy.
Which he will never doe; nay, go and plod,
Your two wise brains will invent certainly
Politic gins to catch me in.
And now have at thee Truga, if I find
That thou art guilty; mum,—I have a ring.—
Palaemon, Aegon, Hylace, Melarnus
Are all against me; no great matter: hang care,
For it is but a folly, &amp;c.
This way my Callidorus went, what chance
Hath snatched him from my sight? how shall I find him?
How shall I find my self, now I have lost him?
With ye my feet and eyes I will not make
The smallest truce, till ye have sought him out.
Come, now your business.
It is a fatal one,
Which will almost as much shame me to speak,
Much more to act, as twill fright you to hear it.
Fright me? it must be then some wickedness,
I am accustomed so to misery,
That cannot do it.
Oh! It is a sin young man,
A sin which every one shall wonder at,
None not condemn, if ever it be known?
Me thinks my blood shrinks back into my veins,
And my affrighted hairs are turned to bristles.
Doe not my eyes creep back into their cells▪
As if they seemed to wish for thicker darkness,
Then either night or death to cover them?
Doth not my face look black and horrid too?
As black and horrid as my thoughts? ha! tell me.
I am a novice in all villainies,
If your intents be such, dismiss me, pray,
My nature is more easy to discover
Then help you; so, Farewell.
Yet stay a little longer; you must stay▪
You are an actor in this Tragedy.
What would you doe?
Alas! I would doe nothing; but I must—
What must you doe?
I must.—Love thou hast got the victory—
Kill thee.
Who? me? you doe but jest,
I should believe you, if I could tell how
To frame a cause, or think on any injury
Worth such a large revenge, which I have done you.
Oh no! there's all the wickedness, they may seem
To find excuse for their abhorred fact;
That kill when wrongs, and anger urges them;
Because thou art so good, so affable.
So full of graces, both of mind and body,
Therefore I kill thee, wilt thou know it plainly,
Because whilst thou art living, Bellula
Protested she would never be another,
Therefore I kill thee.
Had I been your rival
You might have had some cause; cause did I say?
You might have had pretence for such a villainy:
He who unjustly kills is twice a murderer.
He whom love bids to kill is not a murderer.
Call not that love that's ill; it is only fury.
Fury in ills is half excusable:
Therefore prepare thy self; if any sin
(Though I believe thy hot and flourishing youth,
As innocent as other men's nativities)
Hath flung a spot upon thy purer conscience
Wash it in some few tears.
Are you resolved to be so cruel?
I must, or be as cruel to my self.
As sick men doe their beds, so have I yet
Enjoyed my self, with little rest, much trouble:
I have been made the Ball of Love and Fortune,
And am almost worn out with often playing.
And therefore I would entertain my death
As some good friend whose coming I expected;
Were it not that my parents—
Here; see, I doe not come
Like a foul murderer to entrap you falsely,
Take your own choice, and then defend your self.
It is nobly done; and since it must be so,
Although my strength and courage call me woman
I will not dye like sheep without resistance,
If innocence be guard sufficient,
I'm sure he cannot hurt me.
Are you ready? the fatal Cuckoo on yon spreading tree
Hath sounded out your dying knell already.
I am.
It is well, and I could wish thy hand
Were strong enough; it is thou deserve the victory,
Nay, were not th'hope of Bellula engraven
In all my thoughts, I would my self play booty
Against my self; But Bellula—come on.
This is the wood adjoining to the Farm,
Where I gave order unto Clariana
My sister, to remain till my return;
Here it is in vain to seek her, yet who knows?
Though it be in vain Isle seek; to him that doth
Propose no journeys end, no path's amiss.
Why how now? what doe you mean? for shame part Shep∣herds,
I thought you honest shepherds, had not had
So much of Court, and City follies in you.
It is Philistus; I hope he will not know me,
Now I begin to see how black and horrid
My attempt was; how much unlike Florellus,
Thanks to the juster Deities for declining
From both the danger, and from me the sin.
It would be a wrong to charity to dismiss ye
Before I see you friends, give me your weapons.
It is he; why doe I doubt? most willingly,
And my self too, best man; now kill me shepherd—
What doe you mean?
Rise, prithee rise; sure you have wounded him.
Deceive me not good eyes; what doe I see?
My Callidorus dead? It is impossible!
Who is it that lies slain there? are you dumb?
Who is it I pray?
Fair Mistress—
Pish, fair Mistress,—
I ask who it is; if it be Callidorus—
Was his name Callidorus? it is strange.
You are a villain, and you too a villain,
Wake Callidorus, wake, it is thy Bellula
That calls thee, wake, it is thy Bellula;
Why Gentlemen? why shepherd? fie for shame,
Have you no charity? ô my Callidorus!
Speak but one word —
It is not well done to trouble me,
Why doe you envy me this little rest?
No; I will follow thee.
O help, help quickly,
What doe you mean? your Callidorus lives.
Callidorus!
And will be well immediately, take courage,
Look up a little: wretched as I am,
I am the cause of all this ill.
What shall we doe? I have a sister dwells
Close by this place, let's hast to bring them thither.
But lets be sudden.
As winged lightning is.
Come Bellula in spite of Fortune now
I doe embrace thee.
I did protest without my Callidora
Ne'er to return, but pity hath overcome.
Where am I?
Where I could always wish thee: in those arms
Which would enfold thee with more subtle knots,
Then amorous Ivy, whilst it hugges the oak.
Where doe ye bear me? is Philistus well?
How should he know my name? it is to me a riddle
Nay Shepherd find another time to court in,
Make hast now with your burden.
With what ease should I go always were I burdened thus!
She told me she was sister to Philistus▪
Who having mist the beauteous Callidora,
Hath undertook a long, and hopeless journey
To find her out; then Callidora's fled,
Without her parents knowledge, and who knows
When she'll return, or if she doe, what then?
Lambs will make peace, and join themselves with wolves
Ere she with me, worse then a wolf to her:
Besides, how durst I undertake to court her?
How dare I look upon her after this?
Fool as I am, I will forget her quite,
And Clariana shall hence-forth— but yet
How fair she was! what then? so's Clariana▪
What graces did she dart on all beholders?
She did; but so does Clariana too,
She was as pure and white as Parian marble,
What then? She was as hard too; Clariana
Is pure and white as Ericina's Doves,
And is as soft, as galls too as they,
Her pity saved my life, and did restore
My wandering senses, if I should not love her,
I were far madder now, then when she found me,
I will go in and render up my self,
For her most faithful servant.
Wonderful!
She has locked me in, and keeps me here her prisoner.
In these two chambers; what can she intend?
No matter, she intends no hurt I'm sure,
I'll patiently expect her coming to me.
My Daughter found again, and son returned!
Ha, ha! me thinks it makes me young again.
My Daughter and my Son meet here together!
Philistus with them too! that we should come
To grieve with Clariana, and find her here.
Nay, when we thought we had lost Florellus too
To find them both, me thinks it makes me young again.
I thought I never should have seen thee more
My Callidora; come wench, now let's hear,
The story of your flight and life in the woods.
Doe happy Mistress for the recordation,
Of fore past else, makes us the sweetlier relish
Our present good.
Of Aphrons love to me, and my antipathy
Towards him, there's none here ignorant, you know too.
How guarded with his love, or rather fury,
And some few men he broke into our house
With resolution to make me the prey
Of his wild Just.
I, there's a villain now; oh! that I had him here.
Oh! say not so:
The crimes which Lovers for their Mistress act
Bear both the weight and stamp of piety.
Come girl; go on, go on. His wild lust—
What sudden fear shook me, you may imagine,
What should I doe? you both were out of town,
And most of the servants at that time gone with you.
I on the sudden found a corner out,
And hid my self, till they wearied with searching,
Quited the house, but fearing lest they should
Attempt the same again ere your return,
I took with me money and other necessaries;
And in a suit my Brother left behind
Disguised my self, thus to the woods I went,
Where meeting with an honest merry Swain,
I by his help was furnished, and made Shepherd.
Nay, I must needs say for her, she was always
A witty wench.
Pish, pish: And made a Shepherd—
It happened that this gentle Shepheatdesse,
(I can attribute it to nought in me
Deserved so much) began to love me.
Why so did all besides Isle warrant you,
Nor can I blame them, though they were my rival.
Another Shepherd with as much desire
Wooed her in vain, as she in vain wooed me,
Who seeing that no hope was left for him,
Whilst I enjoyed this life t'enjoy his Bellula,
(For by that name she's known) sought to take me
Out of the way as a partition
Betwixt his love and him, whilst in the fields
Wee two were struggling, (him his strength defending.
And me my innocence.)
I am ashamed to look upon their faces.
What shall I say? my guilt's above excuse.
Philistus; as if the Gods had all agreed
To make him mine, just at the nick came in
And parted us, with sudden joy I sounded,
Which Bellula perceiving (for even then
She came to seek me) sudden grief did force
The same effect from her, which joy from me.
Hither they brought us both, in this amazement,
Where being straight recovered to our selves,
I found you here, and you your dutiful Daughter.
The Gods be thanked.
Go on.
Nay, you have all Sir.
Whore's that Shepherd?
Here.
Here, where?
Here, your unhappy sonne's the man; for her
I put on Sylvan weeds, for her fair sake
I would have stained my innocent hands in blood,
Forgive me all, it was not a sin of malice,
It was not begot by lust, but sacred love;
The cause must be the excuse for the effect.
You should have used some other means, Florellus.
Alas! it was the Gods will Sir, without that
I had been undiscovered yet; Philistus
Wandered too far, my Brother yet a Shepherd,
You groaning for our loss, upon this wheel
All our felicity is turned.
Alas! you have forgot the power of love, sweet-heart.
Be patient Son, and temper your desire,
You shall not want a wife that will perhaps
Please you as well, I'm sure befit you better.
They marry not, but sell themselves t'a wife,
Whom the large dowry tempts, and take more pleasure
To hug the wealthy bags then her that brought them.
Let them whom nature bestows nothing on
Seek to patch up their want by parents plenty;
The beautiful, the chaste, the virtuous,
Her self alone is portion to her self.
By your leave; I come to seek a Daughter.
O! are you there, it is well.
This is her Father,
I doe conjure you Father, by the love
Which parents bear their children, to make up
The match betwixt us now, or if you will not
Send for your friends, prepare a coffin for me
And let a grave be dug, I will be happy,
Or else not know my misery to morrow;
You doe not think what ill may happen husband,
Come, let him have her, you have means enough
For him, the wench is fair, and if her face
Be not a flatterer, of a noble mind,
Although not stock.
I doe not like this straggling, come along,
By your leave Gentlemen, I hope you will
Pardon my bold intrusion.
You're very welcome.
What are you going Bellula? pray stay,
Though Nature contradicts our love, I hope
That I may have your friendship.
Bellula!
My father calls; farewell; your name, and memory
In spite of Fate, I'll love, farewell.
Would you be gone, and not bestow one word
Upon your faithful servant? doe not all
my griefs and troubles for your sake sustained.
Deserve, Farewell Florellus?
Fare you well then.
Alas! how can I, Sweet, unless you stay,
Or I go with you? you were pleased ere while
To say you honoured me with the next place
To Callidorus in your heart, then now
I should be first: doe you repent your sentence?
Or can that tongue sound less then Oracle?
Perhaps I am of that opinion still,
But must obey my Father.
Why Bellula? would you have ought with her Sir?
Yes, I would have her self; if constancy
And love be meritorious, I deserve her.
Why Father, Mother, Sister, Gentlemen,
Will you plead for me?
Since't must be so, I'll bear it patiently,
Shepherd you see how much our son is taken
With your fair Daughter, therefore if you think
Him fitting for her husband speak, and let it
Be made a match immediately, we shall
Expect no other dowry then her virtue.
Which only I can promise; for her fortune
Is beneath you so far, that I could almost
Suspect your words, but that you seem more noble.
How now, what say you Girl?
I only doe depend upon your will.
And Isle not be an enemy to thy good fortune.
Take her Sir, and the Gods bless you.
With greater joy then I would take a Crown.
The Gods bless you.
They have don't already.
Lest you should think when time, and oft enjoying
Hath dul'd the point, and edge of your affection
That you have wronged your self and family,
By marrying one whose very name, a Shepherdess,
Might fling some spot upon your birth, I'll tell you,
She is not mine, nor borne in these rude woods:
How! you speak misty wonders.
I speak truths Sir,
Some fifteen years ago, as I was walking
I found a Nurse wounded, and groaning out
Her latest spirit, and by her a fair child▪
And, which her very dressing might declare,
Of wealthy parents, as soon as I came to them
I as'kd her who had used her so inhumanly:
She answered Turkish Pirats; and withal
Desired me to look unto the child,
For it is, said she, a Nobleman's of Sicily,
His name she would have spoke, but death permitted not.
Her as I could, I caused to be buried,
But brought home the little Girl with me,
Where by my wives persuasions wee agreed,
Because the Gods had blessed us with no issue,
To nourish as our own, and call it Bellula
Whom now you see, your wife, your Daughter.
Is it possible?
Her manners showed her noble.
I call the Gods to witness, this is true.
And for the farther testimony of it,
I have yet kept at home the furniture,
And the rich mantle which she then was wrapped in,
Which now perhaps may serve to some good use
Thereby to know her parents.
Sure this is Aphrons sister then, for just
About the time he mentions, I remember,
The governor of Pachinus, then his Father
Told me that certain Pirats of Argier
Had broke into his house, and stolen from thence
With other things his Daughter, and her Nurse,
Who being after taken, and executed,
Their last confession was, that they indeed
Wounded the Nurse, but she fled with the child,
Whilst they were busy searching for more prey.
Whom since her father, neither saw, nor heard of.
Then now I'm sure Sir, you would gladly pardon
The rash attempt of Aphron, for your Daughter,
Since fortune hath joined, both of you by kindred.
Most willingly:
I, I, alas! it was love:
Where should wee find him out?
Isle save that labour.
Whore's Hylace pray shepherd? and the rest
Of my good Sylvan friends? me thinks I would,
Fine take my leave of them.
I'll fetch them hither.
They're not far off, and if you please to help
The match betwixt Hylace and Palaemon,
It would be a good deed, Isle go fetch them.
Ha! whether have you led me Clariana?
Some steepy mountain bury me alive,
Or rock entomb me in its stony entrails,
Whom doe I see?
Why doe you stare my Aphron?
They have forgiven all.
Come, Aphron, welcome,
We have forgot the wrong you did my Daughter,
The name of love hath covered all; this is
A joyful day, and sacred to great Hymen
It were sin not to be friends with all men now.
Methinks, I have much ado to forgive the rascal.
I know not what to say; doe you all pardon me?
I have done wrong to ye all, yea, to all those
That have a share in virtue. Can ye pardon me?
Most willingly.
Doe you say so fair Virgin?
You I have injured most: with love,
With saucy love, which I henceforth recall,
And will look on you with an adoration,
Not with desire hereafter; tell me, pray,
Doth any man yet call you his?
Yes; Philistus.
I congratulate it Sir.
The Gods make ye both happy: fool, as I am,
You are at the height already of felicity,
To which there's nothing can be added now,
But perpetuity; you shall not find me
Your rival any more, though I confess
I honour her, and will for ever doe so.
Clariana, I am so much unworthy
Of thy love. That—
Go no farther Sir, it is I should say so
Of my own self.
How Sister? are you two so near upon a match?
In our hearts Sir,
Wee are already joined, it may be though
You will be loath to have unhappy Aphron,
Stile you his Brother?
No Sir, if you both
Agree, to me it shall not be unwelcome.
Why here's a day indeed; sure Hymen now
Means to spend all his torches.
It is my Son Sir,
New come from travail, and your Brother now.
I understand not.
Had you not a sister?
I had Sir; but where now she is none knows,
Besides the Gods.
Is it not about some fifteen years ago
Since that the Nurse escaped with her from the hands
Of Turkish Pirates that beset the house?
It is Sir.
Your sister lives then, and is married
Now to Florellus; this is she, you shall be
Informed of all the circumstances anon.
It is impossible.
I shall be made too happy on the sudden.
My Sister found, and Clariana mine!
Come not too thick good joys, you will oppress me.
Shepherds you're welcome all; though I have lost
Your good society, I hope I shall not
Your friendship, and best wishes.
Nay, here's wonders;
Now Callidorus is found out a woman,
Bellula not my Daughter, and is married
To yonder Gentleman, for which I intend
To doe in earnest what before I jested,
To adopt Palaemon for my heir.
Ha, ha, ha!
Come it's no matter for that; doe you think
To cheat me once again with your fine tricks?
No matter for that neither. Ha, ha, ha!
Alas! shoe's married to Demotes.
Nay, that was your plot Melarnus,
I met with him, and he denies it to me.
Henceforth I must not love, but honour you—to Cal∣lidora▪
By all the Gods I will.
He will, he will; Duck.
Of everything?
Of every thing; I call
These gentlemen to witness here, that since
I have no child to care for; I will make
Palaemon heir to those small means the Gods,
Have blessed me with, if he doe marry Hylace.
Come it's no matter for that, I scarce believe you.
We'll be his sureties.
Hylace
What think you of Palaemon? can you love him?
He has our consents, but it's no matter for that,
If he doe please you, speak, or now, or never.
Why doe I doubt fond Girl? shoe's now a woman.
No matter for that, what you doe, doe quickly.
My duty binds me not to be averse
To what likes you.—
Why take her then Palaemon; she's yours for ever.
With far more joy
Then I would doe the wealth of both the Indies,
Thou art above a father to me, Aegon.
W'are freed from misery with sense of joy,
Wee are not borne so; oh! my Hylace,
It is my comfort now that thou were hard,
And cruel till this day, delights are sweetest?
When poisoned with the trouble to attain them.
For it is but a folly, &amp;c
By your leave, I come to seek a woman,
That hath outlived the memory of her youth,
With skin as black as her teeth, if she have any,
With a face would fright the Constable and his watch
Out of their wits (and that's easily done you'll say) if they
should meet her at midnight.
O! are you there? I thought I smelt you somewhere;
Come hither my she Nestor, pretty Truga,
Come hither, my sweet Duck.
Why? are you not ashamed to abuse me thus,
Before this company?
I have something more;
I come to show the ring before them all;
How durst you thus betray us to Melarnus?
It is false, it was Hylace that over-heard you;
She told me so; but they are married now.
What doe you think to flame me? why ho! here's news.
Alupis art thou there? forgive my anger,
I am the happiest man alive, Alupis,
Hylace is mine, here are more wonders too,
Thou shalt know all anon.
Alupis, give me.
Well, rather then be troubled.
Alupis welcome, now w'are friends I hope?
Give me your hand.
And me.
With all my heart,
I'm glad to see ye have learned more wit at last.
This is the Shepherd, Father, to whose care
I owe for many favours in the woods,
You're welcome heartily; here's every body
Paired of a sudden; when shall's see you married?
Me? when there are no ropes to hang my self,
No rocks to break my neck down; I abhor
To live in a perpetual Belfary;
I never could abide to have a Master,
Much less a Mistress, and I will not marry,
Because, I'll sing away the day,
For it is but a folly to be melancholy,
Isle be merry whilst I may.
You're welcome all, and I desire you all
To be my guests to day; a Wedding dinner,
Such as the sudden can afford, we'll have,
Come will ye walk in Gentlemen?
Yes, yes,
What crosses have ye borne before ye joined!
What seas past through before ye touched the port!
Thus Lovers doe, ere they are crowned by Fates
With Palm, the tree their patience imitates.
THe Author bid me tell you—faith, I have
Forgot what it was; and I'm a very slave
If I know what to say; but only this,
Bee merry, that my counsel always is.
Let no grave man knit up his brow, and say,
It is foolish: why? it was a Boy made the Play.
Nor any yet of those that sit behind,
Because he goes in Plush, be of his mind.
Let none his Time, or his spent money grieve,
Bee merry; Give me your hands, and I'll believe.
Or if you will not, I'll go in, and see,
If I can turn the Authors mind, with me
To sing away the day,
For it is but a folly
To bee melancholy,
Since that can't mend the Play.

THis turn was not expected, Prince Leo∣nario
Is much perplexed.
I cannot blame his Highness,
So near an expectation of a blessing,
To be thus crossed.
The Day of Marriage safe,
With the applausive Vote of both the Kingdoms,
By an unlooked for War to be put of,
Would vex a royal spleen.
It is but deferred.
I doe not like the hope on it.
I pity
The Princely lover, worthy (without blemish
To the excelling virtues of the Queen)
Of as much goodness as her sex contains,
So Noble in his Nature, Active, bountiful
Discreet, and valiant, if we may believe
What his young fame proffers to every knowledge.
This character is not flattery, and yet
The Queen our Mistress is not lost in this
Just praise of him.
I have no thought so Impious,
My duty never taught me to commend
But to obey, her Virgin sweetness makes me
Her just admirer but when I observe
Her prudent manage of the State, a strength
Would become many years, her pious Laws,
But that without example, made to advance
Her sexes Chastity, I forget all
Beside worth praise, though every least of her
Desert would ask a volume. It is his Excellence.
Ther's one not sorry for these Wars.
It is his
Profession; Soldiers batten in a Tempest.
And he deserves employment; yet I think
He will never purchase with his pay.
Be confident;
Your worth will plead alone; the Queen expects me.
Your Highness humble creature;—so, ther's hope yet
After a time of ease, and surfeit, we
May cure our selves by letting others Blood.
My Noble Lords.
Morrow Captain, you look blithe, and bright.
I'll put my Sword to scouring that shall shine.
I thank Heaven my prayers are heard.
What prayers?
That honest men may cut knaves throats, and bid
Defiance to the Hangman; Musk, and Civet
Have too long stifled us, ther's no recovery
Without the smell of Gunpowder.
But Captain—
It is he, we must not lose him,
He has credit with the Lords it seems.
He has spied us.
My honest friends, welcome to Court. My Lords
〈◊〉 these honest Gentlemen, they will
D•erv• to kiss your Hands.
O•r business
Is to you Captain.
Doe you think what these brace of Baboons come for?
Not I.
By this day for money, moneys that I owe 'em.
Is it possible•
I have moved your suit Gentlemen. 1 C. What suit?
Touching the Masque. Which you two in the name
Of the whole City, offered to present
At the Town charges to congratulate
The Queens intended Marriage; I know
This Egg was long a hatching, and expected,
But that your Heads could not agree, they being
Of several sizes, some upon the shoulders
Of your long-winded Officers, whose purse
Was made of the Leather with their conscience.
Does he talk to us of a Masque?
Good Captain put your Masque off, and give us.
The money that you owe us.
Was it not meant nobly?
But you my good Lords know how much
The Queen and Prince are sorry, that so rare
A President of their duty should not be
Upon record; this villainous War distracts
All civil mirth, but you will be remembered.
We know not what you mean, we have no antics
In agitation; if your Captain-ship
Will pay your debts so; there is Law and courses
To be taken, and you will find that Justice
Can deal Sir with the Sword as well as Balance.
The Puppies talk Philosophy; nay then
I must be plain, would I could tice 'em to
A little treason, they I ner hang for felony.
Why, whither doe you think I am going now?
We care not whither• so you pay us first.
Let their own Fathers swing, so they have money.
May be you are going to the Wars.
Yes Mongrels,
To fight for your chamlet Faces, while you stay at home
And catch the cramp with telling money,
Putting your Guts to Pension every Day,
And roots, until the wind cry out again you,
And with your belching backwards stifle Men
That walk the Street, until the Air be purged;
Must we Eat Bullets without Butter, Whelps?
Have our Throats cut, or drop like Sheep by the hundred,
Of the rot, to buy your Peace you boding Screechowls?
And have your confciences so course a Nap
To ask money of us?
You had the conscience
To take up our commodities.
Reason good;
Should I go naked leeches?
No but there is reason
That you should pay good Captain for your warmth.
Pay you? for what? for Clothes, such things as these?
Your tribe is bound to keep us.
How?
Yes, and desire us to accept your wares,
To recompense our sufferings; it is we,
It is we that keep your Worships warm and living,
By Marching, Fasting, Fighting and a thousand
Dangers. (you o'er grown moths) you that love gold,
And wo'not take an Angel sent from Heaven
Unless you weigh him, you that spend the Day
In looking o'er your debt—Book, and at Night
Can lap and lecher in your Feather Beds,
Then snort, and dream of fourscore in the hundred,
Afraid of nothing but the You•, or what
Is a more just reward for your hard hearts
The stone, which puts you to the charge of Physic
To make you piss out your last Usurers Gallon,
Or of a Surgeon, to cut you for
The Pebbles which (if you survive Incision)
You keep in penny Boxes, like deer re•iques,
And show your friends, when you intend to visit 'em.
And beg a Dinner.
Let not passion
Make you too much abuse their qulaity;
The City does contain brave fellows Captain,
As generous, as bountiful, discreet,
And valiant too, as any boast themselves
In Court or Camp.
I grant you my good Lord,
And honour all the Noble souls within it,
But these are walking sicknesses, not Citizens;
Two such prodigious things with crooked consciences,
Though Young, yet Old in Usury—
All this Captain
Wo 'not pay us our money, which we must
Have▪ or Petition for to your disgrace.
Well since there is no remedy, will you take
These two Nobleman's words for what I owe you?
Withal our Hearts.
That bargain is to make.
Good Captain, at this time you may excuse us,
Why, doe your Lordships think I'd let you suffer,
Come, you're my honourable friends; pass, pass
Your word, Isle pay the money; hang 'em dottrels
Isle not be beholding to 'em.
We had rather you should good Captain.
No,—come hither Capons
Will money content you; shall I walk the Street
Without a Head ache, with your bawling for
The debt when I have paid you?
It is but reason.
I'll fetch you money presently,—you may follow
If you please, but these Noblemen shall see
And witness what I pay you, I'll not trust
Your Memorandums.
Withal our Hearts Sir.
We desire no more.
I'll wait on you again.
Fortune de la guerre.
My Lord Leandro? what papers that
He so intentively peruses?
I like it, and could willingly allow
The change; the Queen grows mighty in her spirit,
And this match with the Prince, would swell her State
Too much; my Lords. Rod. We are yours.
See what dangerous Papers have been scattered
To wound the Title of our Royal Mistress;
My servant brought me this; our Enemy
Who calls himself Prince Ferdinand would fain
Have us believe him Cousin to the Queen,
She an usurper of his Crown.
We all know him dead.
I'm sure I did attend his Funeral.
I think I waited too.
This paper says he was conveyed away,
And so escaped his Uncles cruelty.
To whose protection he was left an Infant;
He dying we translated our obedience
To his Daughter, now our Queen.
Here's an Impostor.
Heaven aid the Innocent say I; he has
Valentias aid and comes not to Invite
But force a resignation; I wish things
Were calm again.
Prince Leonario, if she prosper not,
Is like to be a loser too.
For him
It matters not, we have more to think on now,
Than love and complement.
I thought he would be General
Against this pretended Ferdinand.
What else?
Her sweet Heart▪ that gives Cupped in his crest.
Alas! there needs no art, nor strength of War
To advance her cause Justice will fight for her
In the Clouds, and victory sent from Heaven, without
Her soldiers sweat, will gloriously descend
To Crown his Head with Laurel.
May it prove so.
I could say things would stagger your belief,
But I forgot the Queen sent for me; to
You both a servant—
I do not like my Lord Leandros winding,
He has been faithful.
Always honourable. The Queen.
I take this as the greatest honour Madam
You could confer; my name is young in War,
But my affection to your royal person,
Armed with the virtue of your cause, shall make me
Doe something worth your name.
It was your request,
Nor could we place our chief command, but where
It is equalled with your Interest in us
And your own merit.
Sure my Stars did mean
This way to make you know, how much my heart
Dares in your service; and if Ferdinand,
For so he calls himself, possess a soul
Above the vulgar making, we shall spare
The Blood of many, and conclude the War
In single opposition.
With your Highness pardon,
It not becomes you should Engage your Person,
And so great a cause so dangerously;
It will be too much honour to the Impostor,
And in the supposition of the World,
A strength to his pretence, to bring your Birth
So low, to humble both your self and fortunes
To his unworthy Level• a thing grown
Up in the Night. a Meteor hanging in
The Air▪ prodigiously, fed with vapor, and
Black Influence, ambitious to deceive
The World, and challenge kindred with the Stars;
It is too great a venture Sir.
Since there must be a War
Let the armies meet in Battle, theres more hope
After the worst to reinforce, and prosper,
Than when the kingdoms put upon one stake,
And one Mans chance to assure it.
I allow
Your Counsel Lords; but have more argument
Convincing me, not to run such a hazard
Of what must make Olivia rich hereafter;
A kingdoms loss may be repaired, but your
Life made a Sacrifice to tyrant War,
May find a welcome to the other shades,
But no tears can Invite you back, to share,
Or grief, or Joy with me; Isle have no Duel.
It is a command, and my obedience
Shall meet it, though I fear twill be a sin
To be too careful of my self but I
Shall still remember I am your Soldier,
And this considered shall not make me rash,
But wisely teach me to deserve this title
Which lives but in your honour.
I'll pray for you.
And not so much for what concerns the State,
As what your merit hath already gained
Upon my Heart.
Blessings upon 'em both,
A curse upon these Wars, that spoil their mirth.
My Lord Leandro.
Ther's your Commission Captain, I suppose
You have found ways to empty your Exchequer.
My Bags are not brimful my Lord. I have
Defalk'd, and made an ebb for Wine, and Women,
And other things that keep poor men alive
To doe their country service.
Please you walk
With this Gentleman Captain he shall pay you
Five hundred pieces that I owe you.
Me, your Grace owes me nothing,
I could not pay the debt in better time Sir.
Umh! I will take the money, and allow the miracle.
Did you observe the Princes nobleness?
Although the act become him. Yet the manner
Takes me especially, Heaven preserve the Captain
From being Mad.
I prosper in your Vote,
But shall I Madam, if that power, which Crowns
With victory, guides me with fair success
In this your War, and triumph smile upon us,
Shall I at my return have that reward
My soul next Heaven affects? shall no delay
(Colder than Frost to lovers blood,) afflict
My expectation of our Marriage?
Although to doubt this be a sin, yet where
The ambition is so Just. I shall but right
My Heart, to have it oft assured• nor can
It make your eye less rich in smiles, when it is
Only my love Encourages me to make
The busy harmless question.
It does please me,
Nor can you ask so often, as I have
A cheerfulness to answer, that I love you,
And have propounded nothing dearer to me,
Than that which perfects chaste affection,
And chains two Hearts; the Priest with sadness will
Expect you safe again, but from this War
When you return, he shall not in his Register
Of Lovers, find one with more wing hath met
The bosom of her friend, than glad Olivia
To make one soul with you.
I have enough,
And thirst for action in the Field, from whence
I will bring Harvest home, or leave my self,
Happy in life or death to doe you service.
Well, I'm afraid if Hymen should set up
His Tapers now, they would not last to light
His Priest, at their return to say his Office.
Hope fairly.
I allow his spirit, but
The Prince hath not been practised in
The School of War, where stratagems prevail
Above all personal resolution.
He cannot want fit counsel to direct
His early valour, besides
Ferdinand by computation as young as he
May poise the scale. See, the Captain.
We always thought you Noble, and we hope
You'll take no offence, that our occasions
Prevailed above our modesty.
I know
You two are very modest; well I'm glad
I am furnished for you: my good Lords I must
Int•eat you to be witnesses of what money
I pay these Gentlemen, that have trusted me.
And will again; command our Shops.
No• sit there, and starve,
Or if you like it better take a swing
At your own sign Post.
Good words Captain.
They expect good money, and both good are too much.
We alwa•es loved you.
And doe so still most virtuously.
It does appear.
And you shall find us ready—
I'll make but one fair motion, it will be
Sufficient trial of your honesty;
I have five hundred pounds▪ you see me tell it,
Faith make it up a thousand twixt you both
Till I come back, you will be Aldermen.
Ne'er a whit the sooner.
Alas Sir, if it were at another time—
Hereafter, upon good occasion you shall find—
You both in the Pillory, for selling Copper
Lace by a wrong name; well ther's no remedy,
I'll keep my word; the money's ready for you.
You are noble Captain.
May you kill all the Queens Enemies.
You would not scope,
That Cousin her liege people every day, then.
This payment Captain will come most seaso∣nobly.
And doe us as much good, as you had given us
The sum twice told, another time.
Before
These Noblemen, have you such want
As you profess? you have no Wives nor Children.
I protest upon my credit, I am to pay
This day two hundred pound, or be endangered
To an arrest.
And I must go to Prison
If before Sun-set—
Then twill doe you a pleasure.
Above expression.
Here is twelve pence a piece for you you're fit Men
To serve the Queen:
How Captain?
Why in the Wars, choose either Pike or Musket,
You shall have that favour.
We are both undone.
Ha, ha, but will you use 'em so?
Have they not ready money? why do ye stare?
No thanks for my protection?
Protection?
Did you not protest you should to prison else?
Why you unthankful sons of false light, Sergeant
Take 'em to thei'r Rendezvous
Captain, a word-we are content—
I'm glad on it, Why do ye stay then.
To abate half our money.
All, all good Captain, he shall have all, rather
Than be sent a soldiering; do ye know what it is?
It is no Artillery Garden, where you come off
With as you were.
This was his Project.
Umh'. You will forgive me both your debts?
And pray Heaven to forgive you too.
My Lords, bear witness,
These two would bribe me to abuse the Queen
And the present service, is this less then Treason?
Oh.
Nay▪ nay Captain.
There are not two more able Men in the Army,
I mean for bulk; ram me into a Cannon
If you shall buy your selves with your estates
From this Employment; Il not cousin you,
Your money is good debt still, you may live,
And ask me for it again, and I may pay you.
But shall they serve indeed?
That's at their peril
When they come to 'th, field, but go they shall,
And they were my Cosen-germans.
Good my Lord speak for us.
You doe not know my Lords, but a little suf∣fering
May save their souls, and teach 'em, if they come
Off, with a quarter of their limbs, compassion
To other Men, that venture their lives for 'em,
Their consciences are tough, and must be supplied,
When they shall fast, and march ten months in armour,
Sometimes through Rivers, sometimes over Mountains,
And not have straw at Night, to keep their Breech
From growing to the Earth, in storms, in heats;
When they have felt the softness of a trench
Thigh deep in water, and their dung to fatten it;
When they shall see no meat within a month,
But chaw their Match like Liquorish, and digest
The Bark of trees like Salads in the Summer;
When they shall live to think theres no such thing
In Nature as a thirst, and wonder why
A Taylor was created; when they have
As much in ready shot, within their flesh,
As would set up a Plummer, or repair
A Church with Lead, beside ten thousand more
Afflictions, which they are sure to find,
They m•y have Christianity, and not put
A Soldier to the payment of his debts.
It is a Mad Captain, come my Lord lets leave
him.
You shall have time and place to send for money,
Or make your Wills; set on, who knows but you
Hereafter may be honest, and prove Captains;
You may have preferment in the Wars for money,
And so my Gentle Creditors, march on.
THe hope, and care of many years, are in
One day destroyed; hath Heaven no stroke in War?
Or is old providence asleep? Leonario
Is coming home with victory, and brings
Young Ferdinand, whom I expected to
Salute a King, his Prisoner, and the Queen
With her new Conqueror, glorious in the spoils,
By putting out this light, will mix their beams
And burn our eyes out with their shine; there is
No talk but of this triumph, and the people
Whom I by art and secret murmurs had
Made doubtful at the first noise of this Conquest,
As they had borrowed souls from fear, and folly,
Adore the rising Star, and in the praise
Of him and his great fate, wonder that Heaven
Should hold a Sun, and he so bright; nor with
This flattery content, but they condemn,
(As low as all their sins shall one day them)
Him whom the chance of War hath made a Prisoner.
There is no trust to policy or time,
The things of State are whirld by destiny,
To meet their period, Art cannot repair 'em.
My Lord, the Queen hath sent for you,
She is going forth to meet the Prince, and hath
Commanded none be wanting to attend
With all the State that may become her• to
Congratulate the triumph now brought home.
I shall obey▪ I must attend this glory;
It is not safe to wear a brow, but what
The Queens example first forms into smile.
I here contract my knowledge, and seclude
My wishes, since they prosper not. I am
Her Chancellor as great Offices, and high
Employments, do expose us to most danger,
They oft teach those possess 'em a State-wisdom,
And by Inherent virtues of the place,
Our fear to lose, makes us secure our selves,
By art more often, than by conscience;
But I may be endangered to suspicion;
I like not things; but I delay my attendance.
Lieutenant.
Captain.
Ancient, what think you of the Wars now?
We are come off with Honour.
And our Limbs, Captain.
Is that all? who made you a Lieutenant?
And you Ancient? these titles were not born w'e,
You did not wear these Buffs and Feathers in
The memory of Man, when you received
The binding twelve-pence, it was otherwise.
But you received, if you remember Captain,
Beside what we releast in honest debt
Sums for this great Instalment, we have paid
I take it for our names.
And it became you,
Now you are Gentlemen my Comrades of honour,
And I dare walk and drink at Taverns w'e,
Your oaths become you now, and your splay feet;
You looked before like Magots, City Worms,
I have made you both brave fellows, fellows to Knights.
You may be Squires to Ladies too.
I think so. Capt. We are all now of a trade,
For Mars is Master of our Company,
Our Shop is the Field, Resolution our Stock,
Honour our Purchase, and Fire and Sword
The Tools we work withal.
But now the Wars are done, I think
We may shut up our Shop, there is no more
Pay, is there?
Pox upon you; I see your souls bleat after
Profit still, a bullet in the right place would
Have knocked out this humour of getting money;
But fear not, though you come off with more
Limbs than you deserve, you shall have pay.
Shall we, and not be troubled to fight for it?
Yes• it will be necessary you fight, you will
Have your throats cut else, and be sent off like Sheep,
Doe not fear payment here be Mandrakes,
That will roar, and cudgel you to your hearts content,
You sha'not walk the Screets now you are
Officers without a quarrel: pay enough.
A Man had as good be no Lieutenant, as be
Beaten when he comes home what think you Ancient?
For my part I can endure beating as well
As another, if that be all.
Will you to your Shops again?
I have no mind to Wasted Stockings again,
And Shoos that Shine, I would were colours still.
Well said Ancient, come I'll take your fears off;
Doe not confess you are a Lieutenant, or you an
Ancient, and no man will quarrel w'ee, you
Shall be as secure as Chrysome Children.
Shall we? they shall rack me ever Isle confess I am
A Lieutenant or ever see the Wars.
Or I an Ancient. Isle tak't upon my death
I was never a Soldier in my life.
It is well done; now because I love you,
And see you have an Itch after honour, so
It may come without blows, Let me advise you,
You have moneys at command.
And good debts too.
You shall both turn Courtiers.
Shall we?
I say it; for if my physiognomy deceive me not,
You two are born to be—
What?
Coxbombs. I'll help to make you too;
You shall presently kiss the Queens hand;
You have moneys you say, You shall never turn
To your vomit of small Wares. I have friends
At Court, you may in time be great; And when I come
With a Petition to your honours, for moneys in arrear,
Or knocking out some rascals brains, such as you were
When you wore a girt under your chops, you two
May stand between me and the Gallows.
Hang us if we do not.
You shall buy places presently. But stay,
Have you a mind to be Officers to the Queen
In ordinary, or extraordinary?
Extraordinary by all means.
We scorn to be ordinary Courtiers.
I commend your judgement, that will be more
Chargeable: But—
Hanged, we will find money enough, but I
Resolve to be extraordinary.
I'll bring you to a Court-Merchant pre∣sently;
You will get infinite estates.
A ha Captain.
And so command the Ladies, if you be bountiful.
A ha Boy.
For I know you do love Wenches;
You will have all the business and the Country
Come tumbling in upon you like the tide,
After a month: You must keep twenty men
Between you, night and day to tell your money.
Oh it is unknown what will become on you,
If you be rue••d, and take this course: Had I
Moneys like you, I would be—
Come, we will lend thee moneys too here∣after.
Will you, come on, no more Lieutenant now.
Nor Ancient.
Do ye think we long to be beaten.
Pray do not grieve for me, I have a heart
Tha• can for your sake suffer more; and when
The tyranny of your fate calls me to die,
I can as willingly resign my breath,
As go to sleep.
Can I hear this Rosania
Without a fresh wound? That thy love to me
Should be so ill rewarded, you have engaged
Thy self too much already; it is within
Thy will, yet to be safe, reveal thy self,
Throw of the cloud that doth eclipse that brightness,
And they will court thy person, and be proud
With all becoming-honor to receive thee,
No fear shall rob thy cheek of her cha•te blood.
Oh leave me to my own Stars, and expect
What ere become of wretched Ferdinand,
A happy fate.
Your Council is unkind,
This language would become your charity
To a stranger, but my Interest is more
In thee, then thus with words to be sent off;
Our vows have made us one, nor can the names
Of Father, Country, or what can be dear
In Nature, bribe one thought to wish my self
In Heaven without thy company; it were poor then
To leave thee here. Then by thy faith I charge thee,
By this—the first and last seal of our love.
By all our promises, when we did flatter
Our selves, and in our fancy took the world
A pieces, and collected what did like
Us best, to make us a new paradise,
By that, the nob est ornament of thy soul,
Thy honour, I conjure thee, let me still
Be undiscovered; What will it avail
To leave me, whom thou love, and walk alone
Sad pilgrim to another world? We will
Converse in soul and shoot like Stars, whose Beams
Are twisted, and make bright the sullen Groves
Of Lovers as we pass.
These are but dreams
Of happiness, be wise Rosania,
Thy love is not a friend to make thee miserable,
Society in death, where we affect,
But multiplies our grief; Live thou, Oh live.
And if thou hast a tear, when I am dead,
But drop it to my memory, it shall
More precious then embalming dwell upon me,
And keep my ashes pure, my spirit shall
At the same instant in some innocent sh•pe
Descend upon that earth thou hast bedewed;
And kissing the bright tribute of thy eye,
Shall after wait like thy good Angel on thee.
There will be none to speak of Ferdinand
Without disdain, if thou die too: Oh live
A little to defend me, or at least
To say I was no Traitor to thy love,
And lay the shame on death and my false Stars
That would not let me live to be a King.
Oh Ferdinand,
Thou dost not love me now.
Not love Rosania?
If wooing thee to live, will not assure thee,
Command me then to die, and spare the cruelty
Of the fair Queen: Not love Rosania?
If thou wilt but delig•t to see me bleed,
I will at such a narrow passage let
Out life, it shall be many hours in ebbing,
And my soul bathing in the Crimson stream,
Take pleasure to be drowned. I have small time
To love, and be alive, but I will carry
So true a Faith to woman hence, as shall
Make poor the world, when I am gone to tell
The story yonder.—We are interrupted.
You must prepare your self for present trial;
I have command to attend you to the Judges.
That Gentleman, and all that did adhere
To your Conspiracy, are by the Queens
Most gracious Mercy pardoned.
In that word
Th'hast brought me more then life; I shall betray,
And with my too much joy undo thee again.
Heaven does command thee live, I must obey
This Summons, I shall see thee again Tiberio,
Before I die.
I'll wait upon you Sir,
The Queen will not deny me that poor office;
I know not how to leave you.
Death and I
Shall meet, and be made friends; but when we part,
The world shall find thy story in my heart.
Is that the prisoner at the Bar?
He that pretended himself Ferdinand,
Your Uncles son.
Proceed to his Arraignment; my Lord Leandro,
You know our pleasure.
Although the Queen in her own Royal power,
And wit•out violating Sacred Justice, where
Treason comes to invade her, and her Crown
With open war, need not insist upon
The Forms, and Circumstance of Law, but use
Her Sword in present execution;
Yet such is the sweet temper of her blood,
And calmness of her Nature, though provoked
Ino a storm, unto the greatest offender
She shuts up no defence, willing to give
A satisfaction to the world how much
S•e doth delight in mercy. Ferdinand,
For so thou dost pretend thy self, thou art
Indicted of High Treason to Her Majesty,
In that thou hast usurped relation to
Her blood; and under name of being her Kinsman,
Not only hast co•triw'd to blast her Honour
With Neighbor Princes, but hast gathered arms
To wound the precious bosom of her Country,
And tear the Crown, which Heaven and just Succession
Hath placed upon her Royal Head: what can
Thou answer to this Treason?
Boldly thus.
As I was never with the height of all
My expectation, and the aid of Friends,
Transported one degree above my self,
So must not Ferdinand, though his Stars have frowned
And the great eye of Providence feem to slumber
While your force thus compelled, &amp; brought me hither
With mockery of my Fate, to be arraigned
For being a Prince, have any thought beneath
The Title I was born to; yet I'll not call
T•is cruelty in you, nor in the Queen,
(If I may name her so without injustice
To my own right) a Kingdom is a Garland,
Worth all Contention; and where right seals not
The true Possession, Nature is forgotten,
And blood thought cheap •o assure it; there is some∣thing
Within that excellent Figure, that restrains
A Passion here, that else would forth•like lightning.
Tic not your shape, whi•h yet hath so much sweetness,
Some pa•e re•igious Her•it meg•t suspect
You are the blessed Saint he prayed too; no,
The magick's in our nature, and our blood;
For both our veins full of one precious purple
Strike harmony in their motion, I am Ferdinand,
And you the fair Olivia, brothers children.
What insolence is this?
Oh my Lord set him
Be free to plead; for if it be no dream,
His cause wi•l want an Orator: By my blood,
He does talk bravely.
These are flourishes.
Speak to the treason you are charged with▪
And confess a guilt.
He justifies himself.
If it be treason to be born a Prince,
To have my Fathers Royal Blood move here;
If it be treason, in my infancy
To have escaped by Divine Providence,
When my poor life should have been sacrificed
To please a cruel Uncle, whose Ambition
Surprised my Crown, and after made Olivia
His Daughter Queen; if it be treason, to
Have be•n a stranger thus long from my Country,
Bred up with silence, of my name, and birth,
And not till now mature to own my self
Before a Sun-beam; if it be treason
After so long a banishment to weep
A tear of joy upon my Countries bosom,
And call her mine▪ my just inheritance,
Unless you stain my blood with bastardy;
If it be treason, still to love this Earth,
That knew so many of my race, her Kings,
Though late unkindly armed to kill her Sovereign,
As if the effusion of my blood were left
To make her fertile, if to love Olivia,
My nearest pledge of blood, although her power
Hath chained her Prince, and made her Lord her pri∣sooner,
Who sits with expectation to hear
That sentence that must make the golden Wreath,
Secure upon her Brow, by blasting mine.
If this be treason, I am guilty Ferd•nand.
Your King's become a traitor, and must die
A black, and most inglorious death.
You offer
At some defence, but come not home; by what
Engine were you translated hence, or whether
Conveyed? There was some trust, deceived, when you
Were carried forth to be preserved, and much
Care taken since, in bringing of you up,
And giving secret Fire to this Ambition.
There wants no testimony here, of what
Concerns the story of my Birth and Infancy,
I• one dare speak, and be an honest Lord.
Hows that?
Whose love and art secured me from all tyranny,
Though here my funeral was be•iev'd, while I
〈◊〉 to an honourable Friend his Kinsman,
•few safely to the knowledge of my self
At last, till fortune of the War betrayed me
To this captivity.
I blush at thee
Young man, whose fate hath made thee desperate,
And care not what mans blood thou draw along
In thy b•ack stream, or what mans fai•h thou make
As hateful as thy crimes.
That confederate
Sure has some name, declare him, that he may
Thank you for his reward, and lose his head for it.
We always see that men in such high nature
De•orm'd▪ and guilty, want not specious sh••es
To gain their practice friendship, and compassion,
But he shall feel the punishment; do you smile?
A women's anger is but 〈◊〉 it Madam;
And if I may have freedom, I must say▪
Not in contempt of what you seem, nor helped
By overcharge of passion, which but makes
A fruitless noise; I have a sense of what
I am to lose, a life, but I am so fortified
With valiant thoughts, and innocence, I shall,
When my last breath is giving up to lose
Its self in the air, be so remote from fear,
That I wi•l cast my face into one smile,
Which shall when I am dead, acquit all trembling,
And be a story to the world, how free
From paleness Ferdinand took leave of earth.
Alas my Lord, you forget me, that can
Part with such courage.
I forget indeed,
I thought of death with honour, but my love
Hath found a way to chide me; O my Boy▪
I can weep now.
A sudden change, he weeps.
What Boy is that?
I prithee take thy self away.
Your Spirit
Does melt it seems, and you begin to think
A life is worth preserving, though with in•amy.
Goodness thy aid again, and tell this great
Proud woman, I have a Spirit scorns her pity.
Come hither Boy, and let me kiss thee; thus
At parting with a good, and pretty servant,
I can without my honour stained shed tears:
I took thee from thy Friends, to make thee mine;
Is it not truth Boy.
Yes my Lord.
And meaned when I was King to make thee great,
And shall I not, w•en I can live no longer,
To cherish thee at farewell, drop a tear?
That I could weep my soul upon thee,—But
You are to slow me thinks, I am so far
From dread, I think your forms too tedious.
I expect my sentence.
Let it stay a while.
What secret flame is this? Honour protect me!
Your Graces fair excuse, for you—I shall
Return again—
And I, with better guard
After my silence in the Grave, to meet
And plead this cause.
He is distracted sure;
His person I could pity, but his insolence
Wants an example; what if we proceed
To sentence?
I suppose the Queen will clear
Your duties in it.
But I'll acquaint her.
My Lord Leandro's gone.
His censure will
Be one with ours.
Yet shall I publish who
Thou art? I shall not die with a calm soul
And leave thee in this cloud.
By no means Sir.—The Queen.
Whose service is so forward to our State,
That when Our pleasure's known, not to proceed,
They dare be officious in his Sentence? Are
We Queen, or do we move by your Protection?
Madam, the Prince—
My Lord▪ you have a Queen.
I not suspect his wisdom Sir, but he
Hath no Commission here to be a Judge,
You were best circumscribe our Regal power,
And by your selves condemn, or pardon all,
And we sign to your will▪ The offence, which you
Call treason strikes at us, and we release it,
Let me but see one curl in any Brow:
Attend the prisoner hither;—Kiss our hand.
Are you so m•rciless to think this man
Fit for a Scaffold. You shall Sir be near us,
And if in this confusion of your Fortunes
You can find gratitude, and love, despair not.
These men that now oppose, may find your title
Clear to the Kingdom too: Be Sir collected,
And let us use your arm.
What change is here?
What think you of this Lords?
I dare not think.
Affronted thus? O my vexed heart.
Isle follow still, and if this be no dream,
We have escaped a Brook, to meet a greater stream.
THough I believed her passionate, and like
A Sea, tempestuous in her anger, I
Never thought she would marry him.
She's the Queen▪
But with what honour she could quit the Prince,
Who (without treason) did deserve her too,
Comes not within my reach.
If you consider
He has been valiant for her to great purpose,
And brought a prisoner home, to mount his Gannet:
It was a pretty service.
How does he bear it.
He's here you may enquire it.
B• swift and faithful, Arragon bleeds here,
Nothing but W•r can right my cause and honour.
Expect an army great as your own thoughts
To cut the way to your revenge.
My Lords Rodriguez and Ernesto.
Your Graces servants.
A man m•y take the benefit of this Garden,
Without a Court off•ce, you have had the day
Of triumph, and the Queen already teeming,
To bless the Kingdom with an Heir; and yet
You see I walk like a poor Neighbor Prince,
And have my heart still.
I am glad you bear it so.
Not have I a meaning
To run my self into despair, or strangle
My better hopes, out of pure melancholy.
I praise the influence of my Stars; there is
A fire in Cupids Quiver, that will siorch
Through armour; and what's women's flesh and blood
To make resistance, though I d•d not dance
Upon the marriage night, I wished her joys
In the morning.
Her heart showed she was pleased
With what she had done; she was as active as
The air before she went to Bed.
But I
O•served a declination in the King,
And as the night approached which should have more
Enlarged his mirth, he grew more melancholy.
Strange! And such a Bride that took him from
So great a loss, to place him in her bosom;
But he was marked for the Queens thoughts, and I
By destiny to bring this pair of Pigeons
Together. I expect no more reward,
The Willow Garland Crowns me, but the Prince
Is here still.
Your highness hath a noble temper.
How ere he seem to cover it, his soul
Hath a deep apprehension of the affront.
Let's leave him, our discourse may be displeasing.
We are servants to your Grace.
You've honoured me.
Think I am tame still? let the inconstant Queen
Secure her thoughts, and glory in my silence;
This heart is laboring a revenge.
Captain, what news? the Court is merry sty•l?
Not altogether •o merry as it was hoped for.
Can there be an eclipse already?
I have not read the Almanac for this year,
But by my Court Astronomy, I find
Our Sun and Moon are in no Conjunction;
They take their fit by turns, the King was cold
And full of phlegm last night, and they that wait
Near both, report the Queen this morning looked
As she had wept.
O, tears of joy.
Of anger rather, if you saw her fullenness.
She frowns on every man, she turned away
One of her servants but this morning for
Presenting her with Verses, that did praise
The King, and wish her fruitful. Her own Page
Was whipped for saying the King lay with the Queen
And might for ought he knew▪ get her with child ere morning▪
Thou art humorous.
And so are they.
This begins well; and what
Do people talk abroad of me, and my
Affront?
Why, they say they are sorry for you,
Especially the women.
Thou art pleasant.
Some that are chief in counsel, privately
Suspect it but a trick of State; and that
You had discovered underhand the Queen
Was not—
Leave this mirth; let me indear thy care
For my intelligence at Court; I must
Not off so tamely; and expect me here,
After a small dispatch, I have more to impart.
Your humble creature still Sir. Alas poor Gent'
Were • has capable to be entertained now, in revenge
I would mount all the Madams in the Court,
There should be nothing like a woman in it,
But I would touse and tumble: Who are these?
Save you Sir.
It may be so.
Pray Sir take no offence, we have been en∣quiring
About the Court for two Gentlemen.
And cannot your four eyes see two Gentlemen
In the Court?
Excuse us Sir, we have seen many, you
May guess we have relation to the City Sir,
And would be glad to meet two of our old acquain∣tenses,
A brace of our Tribe,
We hear, translated first out of the City,
To be Sons of the Sword, are since turned Courtiers.
Pray do ye know 'em?
Yes children of the Gown, but their employment
Wo •ot give 'em leave to attend such vulgar confe∣rinse,
And here comes one of the Moon-calves, does he look
Like a Haberdasher, that's one of the Maids of Honour,
The Weasel loves a Hens-Nest, and I have settled
This persuasion, That no woman can hold out,
Now he is sworn a servant extraordinary.
Sir do you know us?
. No.
We were your neighbours, and of the same trade.
They'll make him sweat; how the Rogue gloats upon 'em.
We were of your acquaintance, when you sold Garters.
Go hang your selves.
And Statute-lace.
What are these?
Poor me• that had some losses late by fire,
And wou•d become my Clients to procure
Some Letters Patents to beg by; alas, they are half distracted.
He's proud—I have a parcel of Periwigs
Please you▪ for old acquaintance, put 'em off for me,
Among some friends of yours at Court, whose skulls
Are but thinly furnished; the hair is of a
Gentlewoman's spinning.
I could love this Citizen, and ow him any money
For his confident abusing him.
He has bribed her absence with some Ring or Bracele•,
Least she should taste the discovery now.
Methinks you need not be so proud.
I would have you to know that I am an ex∣traordinary—
Proud Coxcomb.
Servant to the Queen. What I was,
I am willing to forget;
What you are, is apparent, I defy the
Dunghill I came from, and it is scandalum
Magnatum to be so saucy.
I will not leave your worship so.
What will this Rascal do with himself?
Here comes the other Fool to make up the Gemini.
Hum, I will not know him—Let me see—
The humble Petition of—
Save you Master—
Prithee fellow do not trouble me—
Humbly praying—The Queen shall sign it.
Let me see this other—
Who the devil will bring him a Petition,
This Whelp has discovered him, and now would
Pretend himself most busily employed
About Petitions to the Queen.
Hum, shall daily pray for—Hum.
More wit and money a your side; for your
Extraordinary place will not hold out.
Sir I have a suit to you.
Is it Embroidered Satin Sir, or Scarlet?
Yet if your business do hold weight and consequence,
I may deserve to wear your thankfulness
In Tissue or cloth of Bodkin; Ermines are for Princes.
Alas my Suite is not worth your wearing.
Good faith Sir you must excuse me, at this time
My attendance is expected at the Counsel, come
To my Chamber by five a clock in the morning
Four days hence, and you shall be sure to find
Me—
A sleep.
But do you not know me?
Hum. Yes I have seen your physiognomy, were you
Never in a conspicuous place, called the Pillory.
How the Pillory?
A skirmish, and it be thy will.
If it were not in the Court Guard•,
I would beat out thy brains.
Take heed, for I am an extraordinary—
Ratcatcher.
You may beat out his brains here as securely Sir,
As if you met him in the market; Marry if you do
Not kill him outright, it is but the loss
Of your hand.
I would it were but the loss of my left hand
To beat one of thy eyes out—Are you an Ancient?
Thank you for that, so I might deserve
To be beaten. I am an extraordinary Sir.
And deserves to be beaten accordingly.
You may kick him without danger.
May I?
Look, your friend will show you a president'
He is acquainted with the Court latitude.
This is no striking.
I know it is not.
They are subtle knaves, and know the Law.
A pox upon 'em, I feel it.
At their peril say I, these poor things
Do not believe that we are extraordinary men,
I shall know you another time, I shall.
If you had known him now it had been better
For your honchos. Well, I have not done with
These whelps yet, till they are undone.
I shall never be sufficiently revenged for their affront
At Court. The Prince commanded me to
Expect his return here, I'll not leave
The Garden. Who's this?
Is perjury no sin? or can Heaven be
So busy or a sleep? Such crimes of men
Pass with impunity? Let this wake your anger:
This; Ferdinand is married, all his vows
Scattered in the air, dispersed like witherd leaves,
And hurried on the wings of some rude Wind,
Whose pride was to deflower the Spring; Oh Ferdinand,
Could thou, whilst yet thy breath was warm with love,
With love of me, call back thy faith, and tear
Thy Heart from mine to plant it in her Bosom?
How's this?
What though she be a Queen? could any thirst
Of present title flatter thy Soul from me?
I that left all for thee, and would have called
Death for thy cause a triumph, now must live
The scorn of my own thoughts, despised by thee.
Here's a new business; this obscures me quaintly.
The King commands you not to leave the Garden.
He espied you from the Gallery Window, and
Would have you here atrend him.
Sir, may I
Without offence▪ ask if the King be merry?
We are scarce yet acquainted with his nature,
But we observe no Jubilee in his eyes,
Nor is the Queen so pleasant as our hopes
Did promise after Marriage.
Pray excuse this boldness.
You'll expect his pleasure here?
It is my ambition once more to see,
And speak with him, and if his language break not
My Heart, I'll take my leave—the Queen.
He is a Servant to whom the King
Was pleased to show affection▪ when he had
No expectation of your Royal favour.
I do remember, I observed him once
Use more than common passion to this servant,
And if we may build any confidence
Upon a fair aspect, he may deserve it.
Say we would speak with him; my Heart's oppressed
With melancholy, something tells my spirit
I am too tame; have I advanced a thing
Without a name to perch on the same Cloud
With me and for his sake slighted a Prince,
My Honour, and his Faith transported with
My folly and his charms of tongue and person?
And dares he pay me with neglect and coldness?
Oh my vexed soul! but he shall find I have
A sense of my dishonour; and yet open
Ways become trivial and poor revengers,
I will doe something that shall sting him to
Repentance; my Lord you now may leave us.
Sir of what Country are you?
Of Valentia.
Your name?
〈◊〉.
My Parents not ignoble, yet too hasty
In the apprehension of P•ince Ferdinand;
His Fortune (if I may yet call him so)
Gave me to be his page I must confess
My diligence thrived so well since I came to him,
That he did value me above his servant.
Yet I've not seen you wait since we were married.
It was no want of duty Madam, I
Had late some wrast•ing with a Fever that
Compelled me to my Chamber, and disabled me
For fit attendance.
Why dost weep?
I Madam?
I see the tears.
They are not sorrow then to see my Master
Possessed of so much happiness in your love,
And I am confident his soul so full
Of Honour and regard to your great virtues
Will seal him worth your gracious favours Madam,
And the worlds Envy.
I'll not blame him now
For loving thee; and so much hath thy faith
And innocence prevailed, thou shall it translate
Thy service, and be mine, he shall consent.
I am to both most humble.
Prithee tell me,
Making so much of thee, he do's impart
Sometimes the secrets of his bosom to thee.
Tell me what fault he has, for thou know all.
Alas Madam I know none,
Or if I did, it ill became the trust
And duty of a servant to reveal'em
Thou were it his bed-fellow?
Gracious Madam—
Do's he not wanton in the night, and talk
Of M•stresses.
By truth not to me Madam.
Dissemble not
I know he has a Mistress.
If love were ever so unkind to him—
Unkind? why I'st a sin to love? I shall
Suspect thy Youth has not been free, thy looks
Betray some seeds of Love.
By all that's good
I never was in love but with my Master.
Good.
He is not worth it.
Madam.
Be wise, and govern well thy hopes. I'll help
Thee to a Mistress; you have no Mistress yet?
But you self Madam.
It shall be no other.
Thy Master is ungrateful
Goodness aid him.
And wisdom thee, thou art a pretty youth,
I will reward thee better, if thou can
Be faithful and obey.
In all things Madam
That shall become your creature.
It is not safe
To play with a Queens favours, you shall wa•t
Near us, forget thy Master, and be happy.
What clue can guide me in this Labyrinth?
I would when I had lost Ferdinands Heart
I had lost my understanding. She returns.
The King is coming this way; now be free,
Thou shall it have reason afterwards to bless
Thy fate, this cannot chose but vex him.
The Queen so pleasant? she has lost her •ullenness,
Plays with his Hair, and smiles.
Madam, the King
Observes us.
Strokes his cheek too, she does want
A Ganimed•; my poor Rosania
Art thou the path she walks on to revenge,
All is not well within her Heart▪ but mine
Sinks with the heavy pressure—she is gone.
The Queen does grace you much Tiberio,
Those favours are not common.
She is pleased
For your sake Sir to cast some smile upon me.
I know it was your request she should be kind,
To keep my Heart a live.
You are not discovered.
Did not you discourse
My story to her?
I?
Take heed, yet this
Will add but a thin Feather to the scale
Of my misfortune, she knows all▪ and in
The pity of my sufferings says you are
Not worth my love, and calls you most ungrateful
We are both lost, till now there was some hope
How to repair thy sorrow.
Do not mock me;
It is a worse tyranny than to kill, to laugh
At what you have made wretched, it is as possible
To call past ages back.
Take heed Rosania,
And be not Judge of what thou know not, dearest.
I know too much.
That I am Married.
Ther's no truth in Man.
You are too rash; for there is truth in me,
In Ferdinand, though in thy thoughts held black
And stained prodigiously with breach of faith,
I have not broke my vow, do not compel me
By thy unbelief to do a Sin I hate
As much as I love thee.
Have you a Soul?
Yes, and thy Eye shall read it, be but calm,
That Soul, thou once did love, white with his first
Simplicity and faith; I wo'not urge
In my excuse the beauty of the Queen
Enough to melt a Scythian into love,
But call to mind my dear Rosania,
And do but put upon thee Ferdinand
So late forgotten by his Stars, a prisoner,
Slaved like a villain at the bar, expecting
At every breath his sentence, nay admit
Rosania, the best part of his Soul
Stood like a weeping fountain to take leave
Of what she never must salute again:
In this extreme, to preserve Ferdinand
And save Rosania, would thou scorn the breath
Of mercy, that did Court thee from the Lips
Of a great Queen? could thou love Rosania,
If thou were Ferdinand to lose thy self?
Whom she would follow in a stream of tears,
And when she had made an •land of thy tomb,
Striving to swim to thee, she could not choose,
But drown her self in her own waves. I prithee
Take reason to thee▪ and when you have considered—
Persuade me I am not Rosania,
And I will say it is virtue and that yet
Your heart may grow with mine; is not the Queen
Possessed of that which should have been my title,
A Wife to Ferdina•d?
It is confessed the world
Doth think it so, I did consent to ceremony.
Call you enjoying of the Queen but ceremony?
Pause there, and if thou hast but so much charity
To think I dare not blaspheme Heaven, I'll call
That, and the Angels boldly to my witness,
The Queen's to me a stranger yet.
A miracle.
Retain but love, as thou preserv'st thy sweetness,
And that will teach thee to believe that Ferdinand,
How ere saluted King is still thy subject,
And though her Husband▪ in my faith to thee
The Marriage-Bed hath still our Virgin sheets;
A Brother might embrace a Sister, with
The heat I brought; that this is truth, the power
And name I have, shall only serve to make
Our flight secure into another Kingdom,
And when I part with these new shining glories▪
Thy faith will be confirmed, and thou acknowledge
I ventured much to keep my Heart thy servant.
I know not what to say; is not the Queen
Displeased?
She is, but cunningly disguises
Her passion to the World; but I forgot
What must enlarge my fears of her revenge
If thou be known Rosania.
Lose that fear,
I am still safe, and now I see the cause
Makes her repent her favours, and thy greatness;
Forgive me Ferdinand▪ and yet I know not,
All is not well ther's poison in this Balsam
Prepared for thee.
From whom?
Rosania.
When she shall but consent to have me dye,
She shall not trouble poison to send off
My despised life, my soul in just obedience
To her command will take a cheerful flight
In hope to serve her in the other World.
You shall know more hereafter, and let this
Secure your thoughts, she yet believes me what
This shape presents, but without wise prevention,
I fear I shall not live too long concealed;
I dare not say her honour is a bleeding▪
But a Queen thus distasted may not find
That Ice within her blood; we are interrupted.
Your pardon Sir; it is the Queens pleasure
This Gentleman attend her in the Gallery.
He shall wait her commands—
I know not what to counsel, it is not safe
Sweet to neglect her, yet my fears of some
Ill fate, are round about me like a mist,
And dark my understandings; let a kiss
And silence teach our souls some new discourse.
Why here's a volume of Intelligence.
I'll stay no longer to expect the Prince,
But seek him out immediately; disguises?
King by your leave, I shall untruss your Mistress.
I know not what I feel▪ nor what to fear,
If love ever meant a Tragedy; it is here.
If we ne'er meet again, one more salute
Shall fortify our lives by joining breath,
Nor shall our last hard fate deny us this,
To change our faithful Souls at our last kiss.
I know not what to think on it, but if I
Have any sense, there is some new state madness
Crept into Court.
Are we not all a sleep,
And these fine dreams perplex us?
No it is waking.
Show me the renth part of a reason why
The Queen did Marry him.
It was destiny.
Why since should he be melancholy?
Or she so humorus?
Not lie together? pray Heaven the Gentleman
Be found with no defective title in him.
Obe•erve her favours to that Boy, he was
His servant, now her minion. I like not
These violent wheels; the whole frame may be soon
Endangered, if these passions be not cured.
New lodgings for him, near her own, and he
Given free access to the Bed chamber.
It is nought
Or will be so, I pity the good King;
Though she have raised him to the highest glory
Her power extended too, yet to make this height
His precipice, and throw him into scorn,
Nay poison the best hopes he had of honour,
And love from her, and in his sight to Court
A Boy, his servant? It would vex the best
Of all our tempers, if we felt the sting on it.
He's here, that Lady is the Queens Cabinet.
They are merry about the Mouth.
Another summons?
It is possible the Queen may Marry him too.
There is some mystery we cannot reach.
If we doe well remember, ther's a Law
Made by her self, as soon as she was Queen,
To keep Wives Pulses temperate, and correct
The insolent Blood of Women that had Husbands.
And Men were not exempted.
I say no more.
But Heaven maintain the Law, and the Law-makers,
And conjure down that Devil,
It is the King and the smooth Boy, lets leave 'em.
Was this the Ladies Message? does the Queen
Take thee into such favour?
I tell truth,
And though it found but ill on the Queens part,
Because she thinks me wh•t I seem my Lord,
You need not to wear one Cloud upon your Face
When you remember who I am, my fears
Are thick upon my Heart, how to secure
This shadow any longer.
That afflicts
Me most Rosania, for it pleases me
To hear she can affect thee; but what way
To keep her expectation high, and thee
(My dearest) safe? her passions may be violent.
They are already Sir, if I mistake not;
I wish to Heaven that you were reconciled
To do the office of a Husband to her▪
That peace would keep her Bosom clear, and I
Should live to all the World except your self
A stranger still.
What language speaks Rosania?
Ther's death in every syllable▪ should I
Obey what thou desire, and do the office
Of a Husband, ha?
I'll wait upon you still,
And hope you will vouchsafe me now and then
A harmless smile; her beauty will deserve
Your whole heart, and ther's something in the memory
Of what she has advanced you to, will help
To make you kind.
Should I enjoy the Queen?
Because the misery of my fate compelled
A ceremonious si•? shall I betray
The essence of my faith, and leave a curse,
When thou art known, upon my name for ever?
If thou hast taken new resolves against me,
Punish my hear• some other way; had she
More ornament than ever met in woman,
Mistress of more perfection▪ than Poets
Invented for the Queen of love to this
Were the proud Empire of the World her own,
And she would make me Lord of her, and these,
It would not buy me to the pleasure of
One Nights embrace, my body shall not carry
My soul so far astray; the Man condemned
To live in a perpetual Snow, hath not
A purer Frost within his blood.
This but
Engenders a new grief▪ although it bind
Rosanias Heart there is yet one way left
And that ere I pronounce you must forgive;
There is a trembling in my tongue▪ and I
Already feel such Winter in my breath,
My timorous Lips do wither.
Do not fright
My Soul too much, ther's something threatens me
So like a loss of these, that I am left
A piece of shaking Earth death cannot look
To make me tremble so; can thou forsake me?
Not in my Heart, but give my body leave
To seek some other place my Lord to dwell in.
When I am gone into some wilderness,
You will find ease at Heart, and love the Queen,
And perfect all; I'll pray you may live happy,
And hold Intelligence with some gentle Winds
That shall convey my wishes and return
What joys do follow you; the purling Rivers
I'll teach your name and they which g•id this way
Shall bring thee something Ferdinand of mine;
My tears I know will not be lost, which I
Will send thee daily by the courteous stream,
Clear pledges of my faith; consent my Lord
I may depart and you shall choose your way,
To every blessing here.
Not till we meet
With one embrace, and take our flight together;
And I have thought a way to perfect it,
Observe my sweet Rosania, the Queen
Thou say affects thee, cherish it, with all
The softness of her creature; if she allow,
Kiss her, and promise what young lovers doe,
Examine not, but by thy love to me
Be free in amorous language, if she have
Heat to a private meeting in her Chamber,
Obey, this shall secure our loves ambition.
Enquire not, but resolve, and let me know
The time.
You will attempt no violence
Upon the Queen?
By this—
What if she have commanded me
This Night?
To meet?
In her Bed-Chamber.
Ha▪ obey it.
At a late hour.
It shall beget our comfort
If thou consent.
But shall I not expose
My self to danger, if her love pursue
Immodest ends, since you advise I should
Apply my self to her desires?
If she
Take too much flame, by some soft art delay her,
Till I come to close all; keep still thy person
Secret, the least discovery will destroy
Us both; the Evening with much hast prepares
Thy visit and our happiness.
I'll obey,
But be you sure to come.
Lose thou no time
Now to indear thee to her, let us part
Love will find balm to cure the wounded Heart.
Was he not cheerful when he promised thee?
He was, and he was not.
I have a strange apprehension, and this doth feed it.
I told him it was an honour worth his joyful
entertainment.
If it should prove successful, my revenge
Were perfect, I'm resolute to pursue—
It makes well
For your contrivement that the King and you do
Lodge at distance—stay, I hear a tread.
I hope it is he.
Prince Leonario Madam.
What comes he for?
Although I have small expectation
For my own sake, that you can pardon Madam
This bold access, and at so dark an hour,
Yet when you have heard my business, You will know
Your self so much concerned, I'll not despair
To find your mercy.
You prepare me for
Something of consequence.
Please you to dismiss
Your Lady, I have something to deliver
Wo'not become her knowledge.
Leave us—now,
Our conference is free, your Graces pleasure?
It must be matter of much essence, that
Could not expect till morning▪ but you're welcome.
This time and darkness Madam best becomes him,
Who for your sake blushes to see the Day,
But I came not to chide my wrongs have learned
A modest silence, my approach is not
To name a suffering of mine, but to
Discover what already is prepared
Against your peace and honour.
Is it treason?
It is, but threatens not your life, you may
Live many years upon the wound.
You fright me.
Lose not the beauty of your cheek so soon,
Hide not beneath that cold and killing Snow,
One Rosie blush▪ and yet that pale would show
Like Innocence which you have lost; oh Madam
Had you not made a forfet of your truth
To me, no storm could shake you, but your soul
That made no change▪ could know no fear; I come
To tell you what just providence hath done
In my revenge, your breach of vow is punished
With loss of faith in him, to whom you gave
The Heart you promised me, the King, whose pride
You built on my dishonour, is as false,
As you were.
This is passion but be
Not yet too rash in censuring him. Whom I
Have placed so near, I must defend, nor will
He need my strength, to make their blood account
That dare traduce his honour; he has a Heart—
A false one. I was born without a fear,
And dare upon his bosom (wear he worth
The manly contestation▪) write him perjured.
I would this were not envy; but admit
He be thus guilty, it is a fault in him.
No Madam, it is yours; that sin that poisoned
The expectation of my joys in you.
Hath made him false and will excuse his story,
When you are named that broke your faith to me;
I can have no hope now to be repaired,
But if it be worth memory to know
The triumph waits on Innocence, the World
Shall say the Queen deserved to meet a scorn
Deep as her wrongs to me.
It cannot be.
Think so, and help to make the revenge greater,
Till the winds catch the black report, and multiply
The shame, by scattering it about the Kingdom,
Sit still, and careless of your fame, encourage
His private lust, his Mistress now in Court.
A Mistress in the Court?
Yes Madam, in the Court,
And may one day think any second place
Too narrow to contain her greatness▪ she—
As you're a Prince no more; I have done ill,
And find the penance here, It does agree
With his neglects, and adds new flame to my
Young jealousy; I feel a tempest rising;
By all your goodness leave me Sir; I cannot
Now right you more than mourn, and give belief to you.
No more I pray you, by all your love to honour.
I have done,
And take my leave, my everlasting leave,
It is time; how like the day, that flatterd us
With cheerful light, are my desires fled hence,
And left me here a prodigy of darkness,
A walking Hearse, hung round about with night,
Whose wings must one day cover all? farewell.
If any Star look forth, it is to call
Me hence, and light me to another World.
Our Lips are never like to meet again.
Farewell, if I but stay, I shall forgive her.
A Mistress in the Court? something is busy
About my Heart.
The Prince is gone.
No matter.
Affronted thus? but I forgot to ask
Her name that rivals me; how this passion
Befools our understanding, and prevents
The knowledge, and the cure of what afflicts us!
The Morning will assure all, but shall this
Strike me to ashes? I may find a way
To my revenge.
Tiberio is come Madam.
Wait carefully.
I know my duty.
Rise,
This meeting was not meant for ceremony,
Ther's something in this presence will deserve
We should put off all state, and speak like friends.
You must be covered too. I'll have it so.
We are private now.
These graces will
Undo a youth, whose birth, and careless Stars
Ordained him to be humble, and with duty
Wait on your meanest servant.
Thou shalt soon have cause
To think thy Stars are careful of thee, if
Thou can be wise.
Alas! my years are few.
Thy knowledge is not wanting to distinguish
Whose favours Court thee, and apply thy self
To understand, and thank the kind bestower;
It is in my power to make thee great.
You may
Advance this worthless walking shadow Madam,
And when you like the free and bounteous Sun
Have blessed me with your rays, it is but like
His glorious warmth bestowed upon a piece
Of rude and barren Earth, which takes not from
The lustre of your Beams, but shows more clearly,
By your own light, what poverty you shined on.
This modesty becomes you not, look in
My eye, and read what's there.
Some thing like anger,
Enough to strike me dead.
What now?
A smile,
And such attending sweetness—
Thus it shall
Invite thee still to gaze, and love, Tiberio,
No frown shall point on thee; I find my eyes
Were meant for thee, and all they graced before,
But objects of mistake. Here here, O turn
Thy lovely face away, lest I be seen
To b•u•h, my heart hath chose to place my love
And the reward; this would become thy tongue
A great deal better, Come sit down Tiberio.
What still an Infants understanding? Think
I am the man, and learn a little better,
What beauty dwells upon this hand, What softness,
How like the Snow, or Innocence it shows,
Yet fires my heart with every gentle touch.
Dear Madam; would the King would come.
This is a happiness that Kings should sue for,
And yet there are poor comforts in these Kisses;
Let hands preserve Society with hands,
And with their change of whiteness, and of Balm,
Make wealthy one another: But let what
Was meaned for kisses meet, and find out pleasure
By warm exchange of souls from our soft lips.
Madam, how like you this?
Madam.
I suppose you a Lady all this while,
And I the man, our lips must meet again,
Will this instruct thee nothing?
Gracious Madam.
And yet this recreation comes short,
Dear Lady, of what love might well allow us.
Admit you are a Queen, you are not bound
To thin your Royal Blood with frost, but as
Your power, your pleasure should exceed; nay grant
You have a man (a man said I) that can
Keep love alive, and warm a yielding bosom,
Yet where from the invitement of your eye,
And amorous choice, I am become your servant,
You may be a little kinder.
Madam, I know not
How with the safety of my self, my duty,
And your own name and power, to understand you,
(Yet this to some would need but little Comment)
Can you place such a value on a thing
That not deserves to breath your name? Or should
I hope these charms of Language you have spread
To catch my heart, which hath no wings, but where
It can believe; For you transcend so much
In wonder of your love, a willing Faith
Not easily can reach it. But dear Madam,
I know all this is but to try my duty,
And you have pleased to choose me forth, to make
These silent hours more grateful, by the mirth
My weak replies may raise you,
Miracle!
I but imagined thee a woman, now
I shall believe thee one indeed; this coldness
Becomes no masculine habit. Come, we'll in,
And change our Sexes; Thou shalt wear my clothes,
And I will put on these, help on with thine,
And I will dress thee handsomely, and then
We'll act again.
Not for the world dear Madam. Not yet come?
The world? This confirms my jealousy.
I'll search you to the soul, Atones come,
I'll call thee so, and court thee with more charm
Than Venus did, when in the Italian Groves
To buy a kiss, she offered the proud Boy
Her flaming Chariot, and her Doves of Snow.
It is in thy power to make thy fate and heart
More happy by consent to meet with mine;
Tempt not the anger of a Queen despised,
Whose breath can like a whirl-wind snatch thee up,
And drop thee in a Wilderness, where with sorrow
For thy neglect, thou by degrees moist sigh
Thy self into a Mist, which no Sun-beam
Shall pity or take up into a Cloud.
But love me, and compose thy heart to mine,
We'll live with more delight, than fancy can
Enrich Elizium with. The soft hours shall stay
Till we allow 'em Wings, and while we kiss
And on each others Lips breath Incense thus,
We'll have ten thousand Capids for our guard,
Whose Bows shall awe the destinies, and we write
The King and Queen of Fate.
Will this deserve your faith?
We must believe.
We are undone, the King.
False Keys?
It was time to come.
Had I not cause, my Lords, to appear sad,
When I suspected this so great affront?
My melancholy all this while was but
A mourning for this shame: Look but my Lords
Into your •elves, and make this suffering yours.
Madam be raised again, I have an art
To fetch you off with honour▪ and the youth too.
I will persuade him there can be no cure
In this extreme but to pretend himself
A woman; I will dress him in your Gown
Before they can be ware on it; they all know
This way he cannot fly, mean time put on
A confidence, and let them know you are
The Queen, not to be shaken with their power;
This will gain time.
Prosper in this.
I will
Redeem my fault, or never sleep again.
She blushes not.
Were she not Queen, what names could we bestow
〈…〉 modesty?
〈◊〉. It is plain.
We came in time.
Most happily to prevent
Some further act of shame; 〈◊〉 she look on us
Without a blush?
I •ee no such attraction
In your state faces that I should desire
Much to look on 'em. Who made you King I pray?
Your power I dare not call it love, presuming
That I wa• fit to be your property,
Without a 〈◊〉 to see, o• have a sense
Of these dishonours; This rank hey• of blood,
Madam, what penitence can make this clear?
Admit your thoughts were wanton, and your flame,
Too great to be suppressed, could you find none
For your adulterate embrace, but one
That was my servant? my own hound devour me?
As if your lust had not enough of shame
And mischief to me, but your malice must
Appear in it too; with what security
Can I expect to live, when she begins
So soon to poison me?
We heard her say
They two would write themselves the King and Queen.
So we did all.
You may consider these.
It is impious
Madam with what grief do we
Remember now that Law you made
After your Coronation to preserve
The name of your sex chaste which gave our Hearts
Hope of your blessed progress; you made it death
To stain the Marriage-bed; where shall we expect
The life of that good act, when •ou begin
A breach of chastity by so black example?
If the King urge an Execution
Of what our vo•e 〈◊〉 by yours imposed
Upon the kingdom 〈◊〉 should prove your self
More innocent o• give us cause to mourn
This fall from fire•ue
Madam we g••eve for you.
So, so, have your great wisdoms said all yet?
I laugh at you (poor things) and am so far
From trembling at your thunder, that I pity you,
And first I'll let you know you selves, you are
I take it all my subjects, I will not
Exempt you Sir▪ since Marriage takes not off
My Interest, and Essence here▪ all strength
Flowing from me▪ and your Derivative sh•no
Extinct, when I frown you to darkness; by
What power dare you take an account of me?
That am above your Laws, which must obey
Me, as their Soul, and Dye when I forsake 'em?
But I will reason coolely, and admit
They live in force; against whom? are you so shallow,
To think we that created, and decreed 'em
For vulgar reformation, must be squirt
And Levelled by 'em, as we meant to lose
Our Character and distinction, and stoop
To the common file of subjects? this were policy!
I speak not this with sense of any guilt,
So to decline it, for I here defy you,
And bring an Innocence shall strike a blush
Upon your Souls; that sinned in my suspicion.
Where is the Boy? Ernesto take him to
Your custody, and bid him not despair,
I have contrived the rest.
He's here.
Take it upon you, if it come to searching
We'll find a Jury.
You are deceived my Lord, with your good pardon,
He is not here.
Who is not here?
The he you do expect;
And your Officious Ladyship might well
Have spared your pains, to put on all this trim.
What means the fellow?
It is no news to your Sir.
I could have told the Queen before and you
My honourable Lords, this was no Boy,
Though now he would but seem of the tother sex,
I knew her name.
My name?
Are not you called Rosania?
Ha! betrayed?
Yes indeed is she, you were present Sir
In the Garden when this fine Hermophrodite
Declared what sex was hid behind the Breeches,
And this I certified the Prince before.
Now it is clear.
There are some tokens too I can remember,
As kisses, and excuse for marrying with
The Queen, a Virgin still, &amp;c.
A Woman?
But are you a Woman indeed?
And now my Lords, if you have Hearts that are
Honest and daring▪ come about again,
For this is but a cunning piece of treason,
Against your Faith, and the Queens honour.
We are both lost Rosania.
It is truth, or take my Head off.
You do believe this transformation,
And know this Lady, my good Lord, I did
Suspect before the cause of your neglects,
And meeting with some dark Intelligence
From the Prince, to perfect this discovery,
Did in my Chamber woo with aptest forms
Of Love, to try how long the sex would be
Concealed; you heard a part, and see us kiss,
And came in time with these wise Noblemen
To prevent further acts of shame.
I'st possible?
It was an ill contrivement to make me
Proof of the Queens dishonour.
An apparent Plot
Against the life and honour of the Queen,
Since he would urge that Law maliciously
Against her, knowing this to be a Woman,
And his close strumpet.
The same Law must be
Their trial.
What a change is here already?
You must not Lords deny me Justice.
It is insufferable
Against a common person.
Let his first
Treason, if you think good Madam, be urged
In accusation.
So, so.
You did us service Captain.
I am bound too't, here is more news for the Prince.
Use your pleasures.
What need we circūstance, let him dye to morrow.
Death will be mercy to so much ingratitude,
Command them both to several custodies.
The morning shall behold 'em dead—
Now more lost then ever.
Pray lets take
Short leave of one another, it is in vain
To reason against providence, or say
We might have lived; though I must dye, and after
Be hid in my obscurest name, and shade,
I must declare whose blood they will profane
In bleeding thee; farewell, our last, last kiss.
My heart would fain come to thee, I will make it
My humble suit with my last breath it may
Be quickly sent thee.
We shall both meet, when
This dust falls off, and our souls kiss again.
MY Lord you tell us wonders, it is high time
To open such a mystery.
This change
Will exceed all, and to convincing are
The circumstances of this great discovery
They do command our faith.
And you sha 〈◊〉 steer us.
Then let us lose no time; oh my good Lords,
Did you but feel the torment of my bosom,
Till I discharge the duty, which so long
Hath slept in his concealment you would call
For wings to fly, and think all motion tedious;
For Heavens sake lets make hast▪ that we prevent
The morning, which will rise upon this knowledge
With cheerful beams, and put on all his glory.
Most gladly we attend.
I have no Heart to think of any thing
But my Rosania, all devotion,
When I remember her, flies off, and leaves
My soul no contemplation but her safety;
They were too cruel to divide us, night
It self looks now more black by this dim taper;
Rosania's eyes would brighten all▪ but they
Weighed down with sleep, and sorrow, are perhaps
At rest, a thousand Angels watch about 'em;
And let some one who•e office is to wait
On harmless love, present me to her dreams;
O let her hear me often call upon her,
As I am led to death, and when the stroke
Divides me from my self, and from the World,
My Heart shall pay her tribute, and my blood
Do miracles, when every Crimson drop
My Body bleeds, shall not in vain be wept,
But fall into some Letter of her name,
To keep alive our story.
What lights are these?
This place sure is not wont to be thus visited.
They are spirits, ha! yet if I have a memory
Those Faces were but late familiar to me.
What mockery is this? if you be substances
Of things I know, go tell the Tyrant Queen
She might allow me death without this scorn,
This jeering Antimasque.
Long live the King.
What King?
Long live Ferdinand King of Murcia.
A dream, a golden dream. What fancies wait
Upon our slay•? and yet I wake, they are
Apparitions, I•l shut my eyes, and lose 'em.
They wo not vanish. Leandro, Rodriguez, Ernesto?
All your subjects.
Collect your scattered thoughts my Lord, and be
Assured, we now pay real duties to you,
You are our King▪ and must be.
Who says so?
I, whose cold fear, and frailty,
When fate of War had made you Prisoner,
Concealed the truth, and Justice of your title,
It was I that saved you from your Uncles fury
And sent you to Valentia, while I cozened
The kingdom with your death, till time might ripen
Your challenge to the sceptre; if you can
Find mercy to a treason, great as this,
I'll live, and study how to merit pardon.
Rise, rise all,
And if you be Leandro, pray come nearer.
Pray Heaven this unexpected happiness
Meet with no ecstasy, all senses are
Not armed for such extremes of Joy.
The Queen,
When she finds this, will fall into a Fever,
By instinct her Head must ache this very minute.
And shake too, for the Crown is tottering.
Pardon? thou should divide the kingdom
with me.
But do all these believe it, will you not,
When I make second claim, deny me again?
Call me Impostor?
Sir forgive that first,
And I'll not ask Heaven pardon for my next
Denial, let death threaten all his stings;
And I have satisfied these Lords so well,
They are confirmed in your just claim, and person.
We lay our lives and fortunes at your feet.
I may command you then, fetch me Rosania;
I'll be no King without her; do not stay
To hear how much I love her 'bove the Crown,
And all the glories wait upon it, she
That was my Page, my fellow Prisoner, Rosania.
It is that name next to Heaven I bow too.
Good my Lord follow him, and if she be
Awake, oh drop it gently by degrees,
(The joy is mighty, she a sad weak Virgin)
That I shall live to make her Queen.
Stay you, and if I play too much the wanton with
My fate, or swell with expectation,
Speak something to allay my hopes, and say
There may be crosses yet, the Queen may want
Faith or consent, or put case the people
(A dangerous torrent to oppose) like not
This Innovation, where is the King then?
Doubt not their Loves, you had their
Hearts before;
Let nothing shake you.
You are my better Angel.
Why then if my Rosania will be Queen,
The kingdoms ours again; she comes, she comes.
Thou make too little hast to be a Queen.
I am my self again, my name is found,
I shall live to, thus to embrace Rosania
Without a fear, these Lords are all thy subjects,
I am a King.
You are.
Then what must my
Rosania be?
Happy, if this be more
Than dream, my tears and sufferings are all paid for
If this be true.
Most true.
What a strong arm
Hath Heaven?
See how the Day hath made
Hast to salute Rosania, and to wait
Upon thy triumph, blushes like a Maid
When she is told she is in Love, the Stars
Are gone to tell the other World, thy beauty,
Till now Eclipsed with sorrow, hath thrown off
The imprisoning veil, and shines above their bright∣nos.
But how shall we Leandro now contrive
For our Court entertainment, where the Queens
Prepared to hear our Tragedy?
Leave me
To order your appearance; but first Sir,
We must secure this Fort.
The Captain is
My creature.
Thou shalt be all our direction.
Come my Rosania, time hath turned a gen
Our Glass, and his keen sith this comfort brings,
It cuts no scepters down but to make Kings.
So near?
We heard before of your affront
My Lord, and were prepared.
It hath outstripped my expectation,
These Letters say
Mendoza is their General new returned
With victory from the Moors; his fame I honour,
My knowledge never reached his person.
Sir, he brings old Soldiers with him, the
Commanders
Are such, whose faith and valour in those Wars
Already tried, he durst name to the King
To be employed here in your highness cause.
We will to Horse immediately. I long
To salute the Army.
Which but wants your person
The Soul of their design; you may soon reach 'em.
I will.
Your Grace.
That we had wings, away, to Horse to Horse.
Speed, and you be so hot of the spur, my business
Is but breath, and your design it seems rides post.
The Earth runs upon wheels; whom do I spy?
My extraordinaries, I'll have sport with them,
But first observe 'em.
I see no profit in these offices
That we have brought.
Not extraordinary, as the name did promise.
The Rogues are poor, and now repent.
We were told by the cheating Captain
That we should want Men to tell our money.
This it is to deal with Soldades.
We should command the Ladies too, and we
Were bountiful, a small Pox take their beauties,
It is the greater curse, I have undone
My self in giving away enameld Rings
And Bracelets.
Well, if I trust a Captain again.
Or I.
I'm glad they are paid; I wo'not leave 'em,
I feel my antipathy strong yet.
I would venture half my soul to be revenged
If I knew how.
True Rascals!
The Ladies love him.
They all Love Men of War.
Would his poop were a fire.
And Battles in Bed naturally.
Well, what Ladies give him hereafter to buy
new Feathers, may his body compel him to bestow
upon a Surgeon.
May Diseases undermine his Flesh like Gun∣powder,
And blow all his skin up into blisters.
May they that look for his Nose, go about for
want of a •ridge, and let him wear no Legs but what
he buys from the Carpenter.
May his face break out, and undo him in taf∣fata,
and may the patches at the laft be so many, till his
skin be invisible, and his goggle eyes look through
a Mask.
May he live to be as much coward as we have
been, and be beaten!
Abominably beaten, and may the miracle be
on our side, that we may be valiant, and be the Men to
doe it, oh I would have no more mercy.—
Save you Gallants, save you Courtiers.
My noble Captain.
It may be he did not hear us.
Hark you, what purchase have you two made lately?
Of what?
Of Lands and loggerheads, Lordships I would say,
I know you are both rich, you cannot choose,
But I will borrow no more of you, faith besatisfied
and leave off in time with the wealth you have.
Where is it Captain?
Can you tell where we may borrow as much
money upon our extraordinary places, as will set up
shop again? For this Court trade wo'not do.
How?
No indeed Captain, we have made little benefit
since we came to be extraordinaries.
Ye took not the right way then.
That may be.
Why, cannot you lie, and swear, and pawn
your souls for six pence, the Devil could not furnish
the City with two more hopeful Borachios. You have
a Carrot-colourd Beard, and that never fails, and your
worships face is a prognostication of preferment
Is a Prognostication of pre•erment, where
Beside Dominicall Letters you have all the
Conjuring Characters of the Planets.
But all this is your cunning, to dissemble your estates.
By this empty pocket, I have but one Shirt left.
You jest y'faith.
And by all my no money▪ I have but half a one
Come, come, you took up linen lately, I heard
You did.
I, smocks.
Why they are in fashion with extraordina∣rye
Courtiers.
But if you be in earnest, I can tell, where you
May furnish your selves richly.
Where? where?
W'y in the Shops for ready money, but you would
Save charges.
I marry Captain.
Venture to rob a hedge, it is but hanging,
And whats that to men extraordinary?
But if your wants be real, be not dejected,
I'll set you up again my self, I have been
Beholding to you two for your good words
And wishes Gentlemen.
It pleases you to say so, I begin
To smell.—
Not to us Captain, we have been beholding
to you.
And it happens, as if fortune had made you
miserable
A purpose▪ to bless you both with such a preferment,
as wo'not be offered again in a Coronation.
On good Captain, for we are extraordinary
miserable.
Then observe; you are not ignorant how
things go at Court, the King is in prison.
So.
And his wench with him that walked in Breeches;
The Queen resolves they shall both dye.
Good.
This morning too; now in regard the King is a
person of quality—
I think he be.
And the tother a Lady, as some imagine, you two
may do very well to undertake now—
Any thing.
To be a couple of Hangmen • do ye mark? to dis∣patch
the Queens enemies in what horrid way, her coun∣sell
shall think convenient▪ you will do service to the State,
and have extraordinary rewards; besides the honour and
reputation of your places; what say? it is my pure love to
make this first offer to you.
Do we look like a •ouple of Hangmen?
No you have not so good a complexion; and now
I think on it you sha' not live to have that preferment come,
draw you that wear your Sword like a Bum-baly, do as
I bid you▪ and that quickly.
It wo'not come out Sir—
Cap. No—this shall in then—
A•t. I will put more strength to it.
So now, do ye mark—kill one another.
Kill one another?
Yes and do it religiously, with as much alacrity
as you would devour an Orphan: and do it handsomely,
that you may not be ha•gd when you are dead.
I'll see it done he that is dull shall have my goad to quicken
him:— 
So, good good again. well offered—they fight by these Hilts
Furiously now could I forgive 'em-so, enough.
This is very fine sport.
Necessity has taught 'em the noble science, come,
if all fail, you shall fight challenges; ther's money and
broken Pates to be got that way you can make legs, and
gape like Gudg••s for benevolence, •ut scurvy capers,
to show your Legs are well, when your Head bleeds;
farewell; stay, you want money, I had forgot, there is
twelve pence apiece for you.
How Captain? I hope not.
T•ey are not hear•y yet, they think I serve 'em
with Press money again• no, tic my pure bounty.
Go, set up again, and trust Soldiers, without impertinent
asking for your debts; they'll pay you.
As you have done.
I'll hearken how you behave you selves farewell.
When you are rich, I'll visit you again, and borrow money.
Too much is too much: humh.
Now have I a great mind to fight with your
Captainship.
So have I, now my Hands in, methinks it is nothing.
You are not desperate?
We are a little better, as good be Hanged for kill∣ling
of you Captain, as live after the rate of our disgrace. I
am resolved.
Two Mas•eves at once may worry me. I am put too't.
Must we have tother about.
This is enough at once we may come too't in time.
Why now I love you, love you, as well as you
do Law.
Upon good terms we love you too.
Let's sh•ke Hands, you sha' not to your vomit again.
▪Now you dare sight, I'll tell you a hundred ways to get
moneys, come, we'll drink and divide fortunes,
Run not back into cows again.
I'll be Ancient now again.
And I Lieutenant.
Both my own Boys.
It is not so hard to fight I see, if a Man be but
desperate, and give his mind too•,
Pox a Cowards; come Captain.
Let me hug ye my b•ace of Mirmidons,
And drink a Tun of Wine to this conversion.
The Prince so eatly met upon the way
This morning say? and with a Soldier?
And in that hast too, Madam I was told
The speed of Wings was slow, their fiery Horse
Bathing in foam, yet fled as if they meant
To leave the Wind, and Clouds behind 'em.
Strange!
I could have wished him with less discont•ned
To have left us, but my stubborn fate designed it;
Having thus snatched away himself, it will
Become us to compose, and make the best
Of our State game; I sent a Messenger
With our command, to the Governor of the Fort,
He should attend the King by the Water gate
Leads to the Garden, we do purpose conference;
If Ferdinand wisely consent to break
The Magic that so chains his Heart to that
Idol Rosania, we'll be reconciled,
And Peace shall marry once again our Hearts.
Me thinks our Lords are cold in their attendance,
Where be our train of Ladies?—nay permit 'em,
A solitude becomes this sullen Day.
And our own thoughts; methinks thou dost not look
With thy own face upon me.
Not I Madam?
My eyes have lost their virtue, all I look on
Have not the shape and colour they presented,
What whispers that? have?
Here was none Madam.
I could be jealous of the Wind methinks,
And quarrel with the postures of those very
Shapes in the Arras; fie Olivia, call home thy reason.
O Madam!
What horror's in that voice? I see a treason
In's looks.
O Madam, I beseech your pardon.
Why? art a traitor?
Not I, but there are practices I fear
Against your royal person, the Court gates
Are shut▪ ell's in confusion within,
And I could hear abroad loud acclamations
And triumph for the King, as he were new proclaimed.
Which way come thou?
Over the Wall Madam; the gates are shut,
I'll tell you news; young •ordinand your Husband
Is in all stare attended, and proclaimed
King in his own right, he is proved to be
What he did first pretend himself, Leandro,
And all the Lords confirm't the Governor
Hath given him up the Fort, the wise City
Her K•y, and every officer on's knees
Is 〈◊〉 and drinking the Kings health,
Away▪ and let thy face be seen no more,
But when the fatal noise of fire, some blood,
Or burial calls thee forth.
This my reward
For bringing news the King's alive? take heed,
Do not talk treason in your own defence,—hark
From what an expectation am I fallen!
Long live Ferdinand King.
We thank you; and will study to be worth
Your prayers and duty; Madam, the Chancellor
Can clear, and bring your faith to allow the wonder,
We are no Impostor now nor need we borrow
A beam from you to make us shine, yet still
You are our Cousin, fair Olivia,
The Husband was a title long since due
To my Rosania, may it prosper here.
Our love and years grew up together, and
Our Souls by holy contract tied, when in
A'fonzo's House, her Father, and my Guardian
(To whose trust I was sent an Infant by Leandro)
We plighted faith; it is no blemish
To fair Olivia still to be a Virgin,
Though she have lost the Queen, she is a Princess.
And hath now found a Kinsman, that shall study
What shall become his love, her blood and honour.
Upon your Lip I print this fair assurance.
And mine shall be to do you service Madam.
If this be true, you must command my duty.
We hear Prince Leonario is depar•ed,
When he shall know the progress of our fortunes
He will quit his Stars, that hid their golden Heads
To mock him with a small Eclipse, of purpose
To light him with more glory to his happiness.
Ha? what clamours that? the frightful noise increases.
Fly, and save your selves, the Fort's surprised
By the Prince of Arragon, whose troops have seized the
City, reeling with Wine, and careless of their strength,
in their joys for you Sir.
The Prince of Arragon? the fates cannot
Be so injust, so envious of our blessing,
To snatch it from us in a minute; ha?
Help, help, quarter.
They are in the Court already.
We are all undone,
Lets yield and ask conditions honourable.
Dye he, that dares but think so yield? no, Ferdinand
Was here too late a P•isoner; let us sell
Our lives at glorious rates, the Evening puts
A Mask upon the horror, follow me.
To certain death; Ladies stay you, the danger
Will meet us here to soon, and yet your persons
In honour challenge safety.
Is there no end of my distractions?
Or hath my folly yet deserved more vengeance?
It cannot be Heaven will so soon destroy
The blessi•g it bestowed if thus you punish
Whom you advance, who will believe your gifts
Are more than flattery to betray our Peace?
This Lady is my prize.
How Sir your prize?
Mistake me not, ther's no dishonour meant
Your person; yet I boldly may pronounce
You are, and must be mine. I am not ignorant
You are a Virgin all but name, be wise
As you are fair, and I forget what's past,
And take this satisfaction; if I meet
Contempt, where I with honour once more Court you,
You will create a flame shall never dye
But in the Kingdoms ashes; you were mine
First by your own election▪ sealed above,
If I must lose what Heaven bestowed upon me
The quarrel is not mine
But virtues, whose right Hand is armed with Justice!
Punish not where you owe your Heart, but let
Both our revenges meet in that Impostor;
I find your noble Soul return; Lord General
While I retire with this fair Queen▪ whom not
One violent accent shall affright, much less
A rude attempt, take hence that counterfeit,
And cut his Head off.
O my dearest Lord?
The rest may if they please find mercy.
I were best be of this side.
Away with him.
Insulting Prince, thou dare not.
How Sir, dare not?
I said it,
Thy better, being a King, in my own right,
Without her charity, proclaimed and justified,
By Birth a Prince.
All this is truth Sir.
You must not Cozen thus my faith, away;
Cut off his Head.
Dispatch you with the Queen,
Let me alone to make his Head secure.
Nay take mine too. I'll wait on him in death,
It shall begin my service.
Cruel Prince.
What fate must I obey?
My death will add some lines
Unto thy bloody Chronicle; pray let us die together.
You shall speak, her sentence Madam.
She must live then.
To all we offer mercy, but to Ferdinand,
His doom is fixed; come Madam.
Whither Sir?
I know the way to your Chapel, he that loves us
Make hast, and bring the Priest.
That's I, I know
Her Chaplains, they are my friends, and all good fellows.
Pray can you tell me, where, or what I am
Or what I must do next?
Yes, you must dye.
Let not that grieve you Gentlemen, it is nothing
To part with life, and if but my Rosania would not weep
Methinks I could shake off this dust, and leap
To Immortality without a guide,
And in that cheerful flight prepare the blessed
With so much praise and wonder of thy virtue,
They sh•ll be more in love with thee, than I,
And double all their prayers to bring thee to 'em.
No we will dye together.
You shall.
How?
Both live, and love, and bless my age the witness.
Do ye know me?
Father?
Guardian.
Alfonso, my noble Kinsman.
How joys flow in my Heart, to see this constancy!
How came you to be his?
I have deceived the Prince, our forces are Valentia's,
Not Arragons, which he by Letters sent for
In his revenge, but we met the Intelligence
And arrived sooner, to pretend our selves
The Army he expected; you shall know more hereafter.
I want a knowledge where to begin my gratitude,
The joys you bring are mighty, and overcome us.
O my Ros••in?
This was beyond hope.
So, so, it is done, he has mumbled up the ceremony;
A compendious Priest may do much in few words;
They are fast enough; the Queen was wise to take him;
You are only like to be a loser Sir; they come.
All joys to the Prince of Arragon, and the
fair Olivia.
Why not the Queen Olivia?
Not while this Gentleman's Head is on,
believe it.
Where is Mendoza?
Hid within this bush—
But here's Alfonso General of the Army
Sent from Valentia to assist King Ferdinand
To his native right.
Valentia?
My Master having failed in his first aids
To Ferdinand, intende• not •it down
With so much loss but raised another Army,
Which in our march consulted our security
By Interception of all passage•;
Your m•ssenger by a party was surprised,
Him, stubborn to discover what he was,
Imperfect in his answer, we Interpreted
Some spy, and searc•ing f•not your Letters fraught
With mi•chief and revenge, these sent to our King
We had command to hasten our design,
And steer our course by Sea to Carthagena,
How after we arrived, we gained your faith
And purposes, Your highness knows.
Betrayed?
Sir, be a Prince, and just to your own honour,
And having perfected your fair desires
With her, we hope you will account your self
Most happy that you mist a power to serve
Further revenge upon a lawful Prince.
My Soldiers will obey me now, although
To help your Marriage I appeared no friend
To Ferdinand.
Who was the Prince preserved
By me, and sent an Infant to this Lord,
My noble Kinsman.
Him I bred, till time
And strength might arm him to return, and claim
His own.
Leandro denied this before.
To my dishonour, it was a coward fear
To lose my self unprofitably
I apprehend with wonder.
If you repent not• love and our alliance,
She shall be worth your best embrace, and we
Forgetful of your passion, entertain you
With all affection to our blood.
I meet it,
And satisfied in this story, Joy I was
Prevented; I congratulate your Stars Sir;
Nor is this treasure of less price to me
Than when her Temples were enchac'd with Empire.
This love will give my soul another form.
Our story hath been full of change, but love
Hath met a glorious victory, and tied
Our souls together with most firm embraces.
My Lord Leandro you shall to Valentia,
With our best thanks and greeting to the King;
His Armies charge is outs beside what else
We owe his Royal bounty. Once more welcome
Alfonso now my Father, witness I
Preserve my faith to my Rosania,
I hear the Priest call us to other rites,
His Altar doth expect another pair,
Make hast to light his Tapers with thine eyes
And make our hearts each others Sacrifice.
I Am no Epilogue, I come to pray
You'd tell me your opinion of the Play,
Is the Plot current? may we trust the wit
Without a Say-Master to autorise it?
Are the lines Sterling? do they hold conceit?
And every piece with your allowance, weight?
That when you come abroad, you'll not report
You are sorry to have given white money for it?
So, so, I know your meaning, now pray tell
How did the action please ye, was it well?
How did King Stephen do, and tother Prince?
Enough, enough, I apprehend, and since
I am at questions w'ee, tell me faith
How do you like the Captain? ha? he saith,
I'll tell you, y' are my friends, none here, he knows,
I mean you of the Gentry, t'whom he owes
No money, will enter a false action,
And let the rest look too't, if there be one,
Among his City creditors, that dares,
He hath vowed to press, and send him to the Wars.

Leave me my Lords until I •all you soorth,
For I am heavy and disconsolate.
So Baiazet, now thou remainst alone,
Unrip the thoughts that harbour in thy br•st,
And eat thee up, for arbiter here is none,
That may descry the cause of thy unrest,
Unless these walls thy secret thoughts declare,
And Princes walls they say, unfaithful are•
Why thats the profit of great regiment,
That all of vs are subject unto fea•es,
And this vain show and glorious intent,
Privy suspicion on each scruple reares,
I, though on all the world we make extent,
From the South-pole unto the North•en bears,
And stretch our reign from •as• to Western shore,
Yet doubt and care are with vs •u•rmore.
Look how the earth clad in her summers pride,
Embroidered her mantle gorgio•sly,
With fragrant herbs, and ••owers gaily did,
Spread•g abroad her spangled Tapestry:
Yet under all a loathsome snake doth hide.
Such is our life, under Crowns, cares do lie,
And fear the sceptre still attends upon,
Oh who can take delight in kingly throne•
Public disorders joined with private cark,
Care of our friends, and of our children dear,
Do toss our lives, as waives a silly bark.
Though we be •earelesse, tic not without •ear,
For hidden mischief lurks in the dark:
And storms may fall, be the day ne'er so clear.
He knows not what it is to be a King,
That thinks a sceptre is a pleasant thing.
Twice fifteen times hath fair Latonaes son
Walked about the world with his great light:
Since I began, would I had ne'er begun
To sway this sceptre. Many a careful night
When Cynthia in hast to bed did run.
Have I with watching vexed my aged spright?
Since when what dangers I have ouerpa•t,
Would make a heart of adamant aghast.
The Persian •ophi mighty Ismaell,
Took the Le•an•e clean away from me,
And Caraguis Bassa sent his force to quell,
Was kilt hims•lfe the while his men did flee.
Poor Hali Bassa having once sped well,
And gained of him a bloody victory,
Was at the last slain fighting in the field,
Charactering honour in his battered sh•old.
Ramirchan the Tartarian Emperor,
Gathering to him a number numberless,
Of bigbond Tartars in a haplesse thou•e
Encountered me, and there my chiefest bless
Good Alemsh•• (ah this remembrance sour)
Was slain the more t'augment my sad distress,
In leasing Alemsha• poor, I lost mo•e
Then ever I had gained theretofore.
Well may thy soul rest in her latest grave,
Sweet Alemshae the comfort of my days,
That thou might live, how often did I crave?
How often did I bootless prayers raise
To that high power that life first to thee gave?
Trusty wast thou to me at all assays,
And dearest child thy father oft hath cried,
That thou had lived, so he himself had did.
The Christian Armies, oftentimes defeated
By my victorious fathers valiancy,
Have all my Captains famously confronted,
And cracked in two our uncontrolled lance.
My strongest garrisons th•y have supplanted,
And overwhelmed me in sad mischance:
And my decrease so long wrought their increase,
Till I was forced conclude a friendly peace.
Now all these are but foreign damages,
Taken in war whose die uncertain is,
But I shall have more home-borne outrages,
Unless my divination aims amiss:
I have three sons all of unequal ages,
And all in diverse studies set their bliss.
Corcut my eldest a Philosopher,
Acomat pompous, Selm• a warrior.
Corcut in fair Magn•si• leads his life,
In learning Arts• and Mahounds dreaded laws:
Acomat loves to court it with his wife,
And in a pleasant quiet ••yes to pause:
But Selmi follows wa•res in dismal strife,
And snatches at my Crown with greedy claws:
But he shall miss of that he aims at,
For I reserve it for my Acomat.
For Acomat? Alas it cannot be,
St•earn Selimus hath won my peoples hart,
The Janissaries love him more then me:
And for his cause will suff•r any smart.
They see he is a friend to chiua•rye,
And sooner will they from my faith depart,
And by strong hand Baiazet pull thee down,
Then let their Selmi hop without the Crown.
Ah, if the soldiers ove••ule thy s•ate,
And nothing must be done wit•out their will,
If every base and upstart runagate
Shall cross• a Prince and overthwart him still.
If Corcut, Selimus, and Acomat,
With crowns and kingdoms shall their hungers fill?
Poor Baiazet what then remains to thee?
But the bare title of thy dignity.
I, and unless thou do dissemble all,
And wink at Selimu• aspiring thought:
The Bassaes cruelly shall work thy fall,
And then thy Empire is but dearly bought.
Ah that our sons thus to ambition thrall,
Should set the law of Nature all at nought.
But what must be, cannot choose but be done,
Come Bassaes enter, Baiazet hath done.
Dread Emperor, long may you happy live,
Loved of your subjects, and feared of your •os:
We wonder much what doth your highness grieve,
That you will not unto your Lords disclose.
Perhaps you fear least we your loyal Peers,
Would prove disloyal to your Majesty,
And be rebellious in your dying years.
But mighty Prince the heavens can testify•,
How dearly we esteem your safety.
Perhaps you think Mustaffa will 〈◊〉
And leave your grace, and cleave to Selimus,
But sooner shall th'almighties thunderbolt
Strike me down to the cau• tenebrious
The lowest land, and damned sp•••ts ho•t
Then true Mustaffa prove so treacherous:
Your Majesty then needs not much to fear,
Since you are loved of subject, Prince, and Peer.
First shall the Sun rise from the occident,
And loose his s•eeds benighted in the East,
First shall the sea become the continent,
Ere we forsake our sovereigns behest:
We fought not for you against Persians Tent,
Breaking our Lances on his sturdy creast.
We fought not for you gain•t the Christian host,
To become traitors after all our cost.
Hear me Mustafla and Cherseol•,
I am a father of a headstrong brood,
Which if I look not closely to my self,
Will seek to ruinate their fathers state,
Even as the vipers in great Neroes fen,
Eat up the belly that first nourished them.
You see the harvest of my life is past,
And aged winter hath besprent my head,
With a hoar frost of silver coloured hairs,
The haruingers of honourable old,
The•e br•nchl•ke va•nes which once did guide my arms
To toss the spear in battellous array,
Now withered up• have lost their former strength:
My sons whom now ambition gins to pric•e,
May take occasion of my weakened age,
And rise in rebel arms against my state.
But stay, here comes a Messenger to vs.
Health and good hap to Baiazet,
The great commander of all Asia,
Se•m• the Sold•no of great Tribes•nd,
Sends me unto your grace, to signify
His alliance with the King of T•rtary.
Said I not Lords as much to you before,
That mine own •ones would seek my overthrow?
And see here comes a luckless me••anger•
To prove th•t t•ue which my 〈◊〉 did foretell.
Does S•l•m m•ke so small account of vs,
Th•t he d•re m•try without ou• consent,
An• to that d•uell too of •art••e?
And could he then unkind, so soon forget
T•e miuries th•t •emir did to me,
Thus to con•ort himself with him against me?
Your m•jest misconsters Selimu•,
It cannot be, that he in whose high thoughts
A m•p of many valures is enshrined,
Should seek his fathers ruin and decay.
Selimus is a Prince of forward hope,
Whose only name affrights your enemies,
It cannot be he should prove false to you.
Can it not be? Oh yes Cher•eoli,
For Selimus hands do itch to have the Crown,
And he will have it, or else pull me down.
Is he a Prince? ah no he is a sea,
Into which run nought but ambitious reaches,
Sedition• compl•ts, murder, fraud and hate.
Could he not let his father know his mind,
But match himself when I least thought on it•
Perhaps my Lord Selimu• loved the dame,
And feared to ce•tifie you of his love,
Because her father was your enemy.
In love Mustaff•, Selimus in love?
If he be, Lording tic not Ladies l•ue,
But love of rule• and kingly sovereignty.
•or wherefore should he fear t•ask my consent•
Ti• •ie Mustaff•, if he had feared me,
He never would have lou•d mine enemy.
But t•is his marriage with the Tartars daughter,
Is but the prologue to his cruelty,
And quickly shall we have the Tragedy.
Which though he act with meditated bravery,
The world will never give him plaudit.
What yet more news?
Dread Emperor, S•limu• is at hand.
Two hundredth thousand strong Tartarians
Armed at all points dooes he lead with him,
Besides his followers from Trebisond.
I thought so much of wicked Selimus,
Oh forlorn hopes and haplesse Baiazet.
Is duty then exiled from his breast,
Which nature hath inscribed with golden pen,
Deep in the hearts of honourable men?
Ah Solemn, S limb, were thou not my son,
But some strange vnacqu•intent foreigner,
Whom I should honour as I honoured thee:
Yet would it grieve me even unto the death,
If he should deal as thou ha•t dealt with me,
And thou my son to whom I freely gave
The mighty Empire of great Trebisond,
Art too un•turall to requite me thus,
Good Ale•shae had thou liu•d till this day,
Thou would have blushed at thy brothers mind•
Come sweet Mustaffa, come Ch•rseoli•
And with some good advice recom•ort me.
Now •el•mu• consider who thou art,
Long ha•t thou marched in disguised attire•
But now unmask thy self and play thy part,
And manifest the heate of thy desire:
Nourish the coals of thine ambitious fire•
And think th•t then thy Imp•e •s most sure,
When men for fear thy tyranny endure•
Think th•t to thee there is no vvor•e reproach,
Then filial duty in so high a place,
Thou oughtst to set barrels of blood abroach,
And seek with sword whole kingdoms to displace,
Let Mahounds laws be locked up in their case.
And meaner men and of a base• spiri•,
In virtuous actions se•ke for glorious merit.
I count it sacrilege• for to be holy•
Or reverence this thred-bare name of good,
Leave to old men and babes that kind of folly,
Count it of equal value with the mud:
Make thou a passage for thy gushing flood,
By slaughter, treason, or what else thou can,
And scorn religion, it disgraces man.
My father Ba•azet is weak and old,
And hath not much aboue two years to live,
The Turkish Crown of Pearl and Ophi• gold,
He means to his dear Acomat to give.
But ere his ship can to her haven drive,
Isle send abroad my tempes•s in such sort,
That she shall sink before she get the port.
Alas, alas, his highness aged head
Is not sufficient to support a Crown,
Then Selimus take thou it in his ••eed,
And if at this thy boldness he dare frown,
Or but re•i•t thy will, then pull him down:
For since he hath so short a time t'enioy it,
Isle make it shorter, or I will destroy him.
Nor pass I what our holy votaries
Shall here object ag••nst my forward mind,
I wreak not of their foolish ceremonies,
But mean to take my fortune as I find,
Wisdom commands to follow tide and wind:
And catch the •ront of swift occasion,
Before she be too quickly ove•gone:
Some man will say I am too impious,
Thus to l•ie siege against my fathers life,
And that I ought to follow ve•tuous
And godly sons• that ve•tu is a glass
Wherein I may my errant life behold,
And frame my self by it in ancient mould.
Good sir, your •isedomes overflowing wit,
Digs d•epe with learnings wonder-working spade•
P•rhaps you think that now forsooth you sit
With some grave wizard in a prattling shade.
Avaunt such glasses: let them view in me,
The perfect picture of right tyranny.
I like a Lion• look no• worth a•leek,
When every dog dep•eves him of his pray:
These honest terms are far enough to seek.
When angry Fortune menaces decay,
My resolution treads a nearer way.
Give me the heart consp•ring with the hand,
In such a cause my father to withstand.
Is he my father? why I am his son•
I owe no more to him then h• to me,
I• he proceed as he hath now begun,
And pas•e from me the Turkish Seigniory,
To Acomat, then Selimus is free:
And if h• injure me that am his son,
Faith all the l•ue twixt him and me is done.
But for I see the schoolmen are prepared,
To plant against me their bookish ordinance,
I mean to stand on a sententious guard:
And without any far fetched circumstance,
Quickly unfold mine own opinion,
To arm my heart with irreligion.
When first this circled round• this building fair,
Some God took out of the con•used ma••e,
(What God I do not know, nor greatly care)
Then every man of his own dition was,
And every one his li•e in p•ace did pass.
War was not then, and ric•es we•e not known,
And no man said• this• or this is mine own,
The plough-man with a •urrow did not mark
How far his great possessions did reach:
The earth knew not the share, nor seas the bark.
The soldiers entered not the battered breach,
Nor Trumpets the tan••ra loud did teach•
There needed them no judge• nor yet no law,
Nor any King of whom to stand in awe.
But after Ninus, warlike ••lus son,
The earth with unknown armour did warray,
Then first the •acrid name of King begun:
And things that were as common as the day,
Did then to set possessors first obey.
Then they established laws and holy rites•
To maintain peace, and govern bloody fights.
Then some sage man, aboue the vulgar wise,
Knowing th•t laws could not in quiet dwell,
V•less they were observed did fir•t devise
The na•es of Gods, religion heaven and hell,
And began of pains, and faind rewards to tell.
Pains for those men which did negl•c• the law,
Rewards, for those that lived in quiet awe.
Whereas indeed they were mere fictions,
And if they were no•• •limb thinks they were:
And these religions obse•uations,
O•ely bug-beares to keep the world in fear,
And make men quietly a yoke to bear•
So that religion of it self a babble,
Was only found to make vs peaceable•
Hence in especial come the foolish names•
Of f•there, mother, brother• •nd such like:
For who so well his c•git•tion frames,
Shall find they serve but only for to strike
I•to our minds a certain kind of love.
For these names too 〈…〉 policy,
To keep• the qu•• of society•
Indeed I must confess they are not bad,
Because they keep the baser sort in •ear?
But we, whose mind in heavenly thoughts is clad,
Whose body doth a glorious spirit bear,
That hath no bounds, but flies every where.
Why should we seek to make that soul a slave,
To which dame Nature so large freedom gave.
Amongst vs men, there is some difference,
Of actions •earmed by vs good or ill:
As he that doth his father recompense,
Differs from him that doth his father kill.
And yet I think think other what they will,
That Parricides, when death hath given them rest,
Shall have as good a part as the rest.
And thats just nothing, for as I suppose
In deaths void kingdom reigns eternal night:
Secure of evil, and secure of foes,
Where nothing doth the wicked man affright,
No more then him that dies in doing right.
Then s•nce in death nothing shall to vs fall,
Here while I live, Isle have a snatch at all.
And that can never, never be attained,
Unless old Ba•aze• do die the death:
For long enough the gray-beard now hath reigned,
And lived at ease, while others lived vneath.
And now its time he should resign his breath.
It were good for him if he were pres•ed out,
T'would bring him rest, and rid him of his gout.
Resolved to do it, cast to compass•e it
Without delay or long procra•tination:
It argues an unmannered wit,
When all is ready for so s•rong invasion,
To draw out time, an unlooked for mutation
May soon prevent vs if we do delay,
Quick speed is good, where wisdom leads the way.
My Lord.
Lo fly boy to my father Ba•azet•
And tell him Solemn his obedient son,
Desires to speak with him and kiss his hands,
Tell him I long to see his gracious face,
And that I come with all my chivalry,
To chase the Christians from his Seigniory•
In any wise say I must speak with him.
Now Sinam if I speed.
What then my Lord?
What then? why Si•am thou art nothing worth,
I will endeavour to persuade him man,
To give the Empire over unto me,
Perhaps I shall attain it at his hands:
If I cannot, this right hand is resolved,
To end the period with a fatal stab.
My gracious Lord give Sinam leave to speak,
If you resolve to work your fathers death,
You venture life: think you the Janissaries
Will suffer you to kill him in their sight,
And let you pass f•ee without punishment?
If I resolve? as sure as he•uen is heaven,
I mean to see him dead, or my self King:
As for the Bassaes they are all my friends,
And I am sure would pawn their dearest blood,
That Solemn might be Emperor of Turks.
Yet Acomat and Corcut both survive,
To be revenged for their fathers death.
Sinam if they or twenty such as they,
Had twenty several Armies in the field,
If Selimus were once your Emperor•
Id dart abroad the thunderbolts of war,
And mow their hartlesse squadrons to the ground.
Oh yet my Lord after your highne••e death,
There is a hell and a revenging God.
Tush Sinam these are school conditions,
To fear the devil or his cursed damme:
•hinkst thou I care for apparitions,
Of Sisiphus and of his backward stone,
And poor Ixions lamentable moan?
Now I think the cave of damned ghoasts,
Is but a tale to terrify young babes:
Like devils faces scored on painted posts,
Or fained circles in our astrolabes.
Why theirs no difference when we are dead,
And death once come, then all alike are sped.
Or if there were, as I can scarce believe,
A heaven of joy, and hell of endless pain:
Yet by my soul it never should me grieve•:
So I might on the Turkish Empire reign,
To enter hell, and lean on fair heavens gain.
An Empire Sinam, is so sweet a thing,
As I could be a devil to be a King.
But go we Lords and solace in our camp,
Till the return of young Occhiali,
And if his answer be to thy desire,
Solemn thy mind in kingly thoughts attire.
Even as the great Egyptian Crocodile,
Wanting his pra•e, with artificial tears,
And •ained plaints his subtle tongue doth file,
T'entrap the •ely wandering traveller,
And move him to advance his footing near,
That when he is in danger of his claws,
He may deuou• him with his famished •awes,
So plays crafty Selimus with me,
H• h•ugh••e thoughts ••ll wait on Diadeins,
And not a step but treads to may••ie.
The Phoenix gazes on the Suns bright beams,
The Echinae is swims against the streams.
Nought but the Turkish •copter can him p•e•se,
And there I know lies his chief disease.
He sends his messenger to crave access,
And says he longs to kiss my aged hands•
But howsoever he in show profess,
His meaning with his word• but weakly stands.
And sooner will the Syrteis boiling sands,
Become a quiet road for •looting ships,
Then Selimus heart agree with Scl•ms lips•
Too well I know the Crocodiles •ai••ed tears,
Are but nets wherein to catch his pray:
Which who so moved with foolish pity hears,
Will be the author of his own decay•
Then hie thee Baiazet from hence away:
A fawning monster is false Selimus,
Whose fairest words are most pernicious.
Young man, would Solemn come and speak wi•h vs•
What is his message to vs, can thou tell?
He craves my Lord, another seigniory,
Nearer to you and to the Christians,
That he may make them know, that Selimus
Is borne to be a scourge unto them all.
Hoe's born to be a scourge to me &amp; mine,
He never would have come with such an host,
Unless he meant my state to undermine,
What though in word he bravely seem to boast,
The foraging of all the Christian coast?
Yet we have cause to fear when burning brands,
Are vainly given into a mad mans hands.
Well I must seem to wink at his desire,
Although I see it plainer then the light,
My lenity adds fuel to his fire,
Which now begins to break in flashing bright•
Then Baiazet chastise his stubborn spright.
Least these small sparkles grow to such a flame,
As shall consume thee and thy houses name.
A lass I spare when all my store is gone,
And thrust my sickle where the corn is reaped,
In vain I send for the physician,
When on the patient is his grave dust heaped.
In vain, now all his veins in venom slept
Break out in blisters that will poison vs,
We seek to give him an Antidotus.
He that will stop the brooke, must then begin
When summers heate hath dried up his spring,
And when his petering streams are low &amp; thin•
For let the winter aide unto him bring,
He grows to be of watery floe•ds the King.
And though you dam him up with lost ranks,
Yet will he quickly overflow his banks.
Messenger, go and tell young Selimus,
We give to him all great S•mand•in,
Bordring on Bulgrade of Hungry,
Where he may plague those Christian runnages,
And salve the wounds that they have given our states,
Go and provide a go•t,
A royal present for my Selimus,
And tell him messenger another time
He shall have talk enough with Baiazet.
And now what counsel gives Mustaffa to vs?
I fear this hasty reckoning will undo vs.
Make haste my Lord from Andrinople walls,
And let vs fly to fair Bizantium,
Least if your son before you take the town,
He may with little labour win the crown.
Then do so good Mustaffa, call our guard,
And gather all our warlike Janissaries,
Our chiefest aid is swift celerity,
Then let our winged coursers tread the wind,
And leave rebellious S•limus behind.
And is his answer so Occhiali?
Is Solemn such a cursive to his heart,
That he cannot endure the sight of him?
Forsooth he gives thee all Samandria,
From whence our mighty Emperor Mahomet,
Was driven to his country back with shame.
No doubt thy father loves thee Selimus,
To make thee Regent of so great a land,
Which is not yet his own: or if it were,
What dangers wait on him that should it stere.
Here the Polonian he comes hurtling in,
Under the conduct of some foreign prince,
To fight in honour of his crucifix!
Here the Hungarian with his bloody cross,
Deals blows about to win Belgrade again.
And after all, forsooth Basilius
The mighty Emperor of Russia,
Sends in his troupes of slaue-borne Muscouites,
And he will share with vs, or else take all.
In giving such a land so full of strife,
His meaning is to rid me of my life.
Now by the dreaded name of Termagant,
And by the blackest brooke in loathsome hell,
Since he is so unnatural to me,
I will prove as unnatural as he.
Thinks he to stop my mouth with gold or pearl?
Or rusty jade •et from Barbary?
No let his minion his philosopher,
Corcut and Acomat be entich'd with them.
I will not take my rest, till this right hand
Hath pulled the Crown from off his cowards head,
And on the ground his bastards gore-blood shed:
Nor shall his flight to old Bizantium,
Dismay my thoughts which never learned to stop.
March Sinam, march in order after him:
Were his light steeds as swift as Pegasus,
And trod the airy pavement with their heals,
Yet Selimus would overtake them soon.
And though the heavens do ne'er so crossly frown,
In spite of heaven shall Solemn wear the crown.
Is this thy duty son unto thy father,
So impiously to level at his life?
Can thy soul wallowing in ambitious mire,
Seek for to reeve that breast with bloody knife,
From whence thou had thy being Selimus?
Was this the end for which thou ioyndst thy self,
With that mischievous traitor Ramirchan?
Was this thy dressed to speak with Baiazet?
Well hoped I (but hope I see is vain)
Thou would•t have been a comfo•t to mine age,
A scourge and terror to mine enemies,
That this thy coming with so great an host,
Was for no other purpose and intent,
Then for to chastise those base Christians
Which spoil my subjects wealth with fire &amp; sword
Well hoped I the rule of Trebisond,
Would have increased the valour of thy mind,
To turn thy strength upon thy Persians.
But thou like to a crafty Polipus,
Doest turn thy hungry jaws upon thy self,
For what am I Selimus but thy self?
When courage first crept in thy manly breast,
Hnd thou began to rule the martial sword,
How o•t said thou the sun should change his course,
Water should turn to •arth, &amp; earth •o heave••
Ere thou would prove disloyal to thy father.
O Tita• turn thy breathless coursers back,
And enterprise thy journey from the East•
Blush S•l•m that the world should say of thee,
That by my death thou gaindst the Empery.
Now let my cause be pleaded Ba•azet,
For father I disdain to call thee now:
I took not Arms to seize upon thy c•own,
For that if once thou had been laid in grave,
Should sit upon the head of Selimus
In spite of Corcut and Acomat.
I took not Arms to take away thy life,
The remnant of thy days is but a span,
And foolish had I been to enterprise
That which the gout and death would do for me.
I took not arms to shed my brother• blood,
Because they stop my pass•ge to the crown.
For while thou liu'st Selimu• is content
That they should live, but when thou once art dead
Which of them both d•res S•limus withstand?
I soon should hew they• bodies in piecemeal,
As easy as a man wou•d kill a gnat.
But I took arms vnki•d to honour th•e,
And win again the fame th•t thou h•st •oct.
And thou thoughtst scorn S•limb should speak with thee.
But had it been your d•rling Acomat,
You would have met him half the way your se•fe.
I am a Prince, and though your yoonger son,
Yet are my merits better then both theirs:
But you do seek to disinherit me,
And mean t'inuest Acomat with your crown.
So he shall have a princes due reward,
That cannot show a scarre received in field,
We that have fought with mighty Proctor Iohn,
And stripped the Aegyhtian sultan of his camp,
Venturing life and living to lionour thee,
For that same cause shall now dishonoured be.
Art thou a father? Nay •al•e Ba•azet
Disclaim the title which thou doest not merit.
A father would not thus flee from his son,
As thou doest fly from loyal Selimus.
A father wo•lt not injure thus his son,
As thou doest injure loyal Selimus.
Then B••azet prepare thee to the fight,
Se•emus once thy son, but now thy foe,
Will make his fortunes by the sword,
And since thou fear as long as I do live,
Isle also fear, as long as thou doest live.
My heart is overwhelmed with fear &amp; grief,
What dismal Comet blazed at my birth,
Who•e influence makes my strong unbridled sons
In steed of love to render hate to me?
Ah Bassaies if that ever heretofore
Your Emperor ought his safety unto you,
Defend me now against my unnatural son:
Non timeo mortem: mortise mihi displicet author.
Yield thee Tartarian or thou shalt die,
Upon• my swords sharpe point stands pale death
Ready to rive in two thy caitiue breast.
Art thou that knight •hat like a lion fierce,
Tiring his stomach on a flock of lambs,
Hast broke our ranks &amp; put them clean to flight?
I and unless thou look unto thy self,
This sword ne'er drunk in the Tartarian blood,
Shall make thy carcass as the outcast dung.
Nay I have matched a braver knight then you,
Strong Alemshae thy masters eldest son,
Leaving his body naked on the plains,
And Turk, the selfsame end for thee remains.
They fight. He kills Cherseoli, and flies.
Shall Selims hope be buried in the dust?
And Ba•azet triumph over his fall?
Then oh thou blindfull mistress of mishap,
Chief pratronesse of Rhamus golden gates,
I will advance my strong revenging hand,
And pluck thee from thy overturning wheel.
Mars, or Minerua, Mahound, Termagant,
Or who so ere you are that fight against me,
Come and but show your selves before my face,
And I will rend you all like trembling reeds.
Well Baiazet though Fortune smile on thee,
And deck thy camp with glorious victory,
Though Selimus now conquered by thee,
Is fine to put his safety in swift flight:
Yet so he flies, that like an angry ram,
Heel turn more fiercely then before he came.
Thus have we gained a bloodi• victory,
And though we are the masters of the field,
Yet have we •o•t more then our enemies:
Ah luckless fault of my Chers•whole,
As dear and dearer were thou unto me,
Then any of my sons, the• mine own self.
When I was glad, thy heart was full of •oy,
And bravely hast thou died for Baiazet.
And though thy bloodless body here do lie,
Yet thy sweet soul in heaven for ever blessed,
Among the stars enjoys eternal rest.
What art thou warlike man of Tartarie,
Whose hap it is to be our prisoner?
I am a prince, Ottrant• is my name,
Chief captain of the Tartars mighty host.
Ottrante? Wast not thou that •lue my son?
I, and if fortune h•d but favoured me,
Had sent the •ire to keep him company.
Off with his head and spoil• him of his Arms,
And leave his body for the airy birds.
The unrevenged ghost of Alemshae,
Shall now no more wander on Stygian bank•s,
But rest in quiet in the Ely•ian fields.
Mustaffa, and you worthy men at Arms,
That left not Baiazet in greatest need,
When we arrive at Co•stantine• great Tour,
You shall be honoured of your Emperor.
Perhaps you wonder why prince Acomat,
Delighting heretofore in foolish love,
Hath changed his quiet to a soldiers state:
And turned the dulcet tunes of Him•ns song,
Into B•llonas horrible out••ies,
You think it st•ange, that whereas I have lived,
Almost a votary to wantonness,
To see me low lay off effeminate rob•s,
And arm my bod•e in •n iron wall.
I have enjoyed qu•e• long •nough,
And surfeited w•th pl•asures suq••d••e
A field of dainties I have passed through,
And been a champion to fair Cytheree.
Now since this idle peace hath wearied me,
Isle follow Mars and war another while,
And die my shield in dolorous vermeil.
My brother Solemn through his manly deeds,
Hath lifted up his fame unto the skies,
While we like earth worms lurking in the weeds,
Do live inglorious in all men's eyes.
What lets me then from this vain slumber rise,
And by strong ha•d achieve eternal glory,
That may be talked of in all memory?
And see how fortune favours mine intent,
Heard you not Lordings, how prince Selimu•
Against our royal father armed went,
And how the Janissaries made him flee
To Ramir Emperor of Tartarie?
This his rebellion greatly profits me,
For I shall sooner win my fathers mind,
To yield me up the Turkish Empire,
Which if I have, I am sure I shall find
Strong enemies to pull me down again,
That fine would have prince Selimus to reign.
Then civil discord, and contentious war,
Will follow Acomats coronation.
Solemn no doubt will broach seditious jar,
And Corcut too will seek for alteration,
Now to prevent all sudden perturbation,
We thought it good to muster up our power•
That danger may not take it unprovided.
I like your highness resolution well,
For these should be the chief arts of a king,
To punish those that furiously rebel,
And honour those that sacred coun•ell bring,
To make good laws, ill customs to expel:
To nourish peace from whence your riches spring,
And when good quarrels call you to the field,
T'excell your men in handling spear &amp; shield.
Thus shall the glory of your matchless name,
Be registered up in immortal lines:
Whereas that prince that follows lustful game•
And to fond toys his captive mind inclines,
Shall never pass the temple of true fame,
Whose worth is greater then the Indian mines.
But is your grace assured certainly
That Baiazet doth favour your request?
Perhaps you may make him your enemy,
You know how much your father doth detest,
Stout obedience and obstinacy.
I speak not this as if I thought it best:
Your highness should your right in it neglect,
But that you might be close and circumspect.
We thank thee Visir for thy loving care,
As for my father Baaizets affection,
Unless his holy vows forgotten are,
I shall be sure of it by his election.
By after Acomats erection,
We must forecast what things be necessary,
Least that our kingdom be too momentary.
First let my Lord be seated in his throne,
Enstalled by great Baiazets consent,
As yet your harvest is not fully grown,
But in the greene and unripe blade is pent:
But when you once have got the regiment,
Then may your Lords more easily provide,
Against all accidents that may betide.
Then set we forward to Bizantium,
That we may know what Baiazet intends.
A dues thee Acomat, whats best to do,
The Janissaries favour Selimus,
And they are strong undaunted enemies,
Which will in Arms against thy election rise.
Then will them to thy will with precious gifts•
And store of gold: timely largition
The s•edfast persons from their purpose lifts:
But then beware least Baiazets affection
Change into hatred by such premunition.
For then he think that I am factious,
And imitate my brother Selimus.
Besides, a prince his honour doth debase,
That begs the common soldiers suffrages,
And if the Bassaes knew I •ought their grace,
It would the more increase their insolen•ness.
To resist them were ove•hardiness,
And worse it were to leave my enterprise.
Well how so ere, resolve to venture it,
Fortune• doth favour every bold assay,
And it were a trick of an unsettled wit
Because the bees have stings with them always,
To fare our mouths in honey to embay.
Then resolution for me leads the dance,
And thus resolved, I mean to try my chance.
What prince so ere, trus•s to his mighty power,
Ruling the reins of many nations,
And •eareth not least fickle fortune lore,
Are thinks his kingdom free from alterations,
If he were in the place of Baiazet,
He would but little by his sceptre set.
For what hath rule that makes it acceptable,
Rather what hath it not worthy of hate:
First of all is our state still mutable,
And our continuance at the peoples rate,
So th•t it is a slender thread, whereon
Depends the honour of a princes throne.
Then do we fear, more then the child new borne,
Our friends, our Lords, our subjects, &amp; our sons.
Thus is our mind in sundry pieces torn
By care, by fear, suspicion, and distrust,
In wine, in meat we fear pernicious poison,
At home, abroad, we fear seditious treason.
Too true that tyrant Dionysius
Did picture out the image of a King,
When Daniocles was placed in his throne,
And ore his head a threatening sword did hang,
Fastened up only by a horses hair.
Our chiefest trust is secretly distrust,
For whom have we whom we may safely trust,
If our own sons, neglecting awful duty,
Rise up in Arms against their loving fathers.
Their heart is all of hardest marble wrought,
That can lay wait to take away their breath,
From whom they first sucked this vital ayre.
My heart is heavy, and I needs must sleep.
Bassaes withdraw your selves from me awhile,
That I may rest my ou•rburdned soul.
Eunuchs play me some music while I sleep.
Good Baiazet, who would not pity thee,
Whom thine own son so wildly persecutes.
More mildly do th'vnreasonables beasts
Deal with their dams, then Selimus with thee.
Mustaffa we are princes of the land,
And love our Emperor as well as thou:
Yet will we not for pitying his estate,
Suffer our foes our wealth to ruinate.
If Solemn have played false with Baiazet,
And ouerslipt the duty of a son,
Why he was moved by just occasion.
Did he not humbly send his messenger
To crave access unto his majesty?
And yet he could not get permission
To kiss his hands, and speak his mind to him.
Perhaps he thought his aged fathers love
Was clean estranged from him: and Acomat
Should reap the fruit that he had laboured for.
Tic lawful for the father to take Arms,
I and by death chastise his rebel son.
Why should it be unlawful for the son,
To levy Arms against his ini•rios •ire?
You reason Hali like a sophister.
As if it were lawful for a subject prince
To rise in Arms against his sovereign,
Because he will not let him have his will:
Much less first lawful for a mans own son.
If Baiazet had injured Selimus,
Or sought his death, or done him some abuse,
Then Selimus cause had been more tolerable.
But Baiazet did never injure him,
Nor sought his death, nor once abused him,
Unless because he gives him not the crown,
Being the youngest of his highness sons.
Gave he not him an Empire for his part,
The mighty Empire of great Trebisond?
So that if all things rightly be observed,
Solemn had more then ever he deserved.
I speak not this because I hate the prince,
For by the heavens I love young Selimus,
Better then either of his brethren.
But for I owe allegiance to my king,
And love him much that favours me so much.
Mustaffa, while old Baiazet doth live,
Will be as true to him as to himself.
Why brave Mustaffa, Hali and my self
Were never false unto his majesty••
Our father Hali died in the field,
Against the Sophi, in his highness wars.
And we will never be degenerate.
Nor do we take part with prince Selimus,
Because we would depose old Baiazet,
But for because we would not Acomat
That leads his life still in lascivious pomp,
Nor Corcut, though he be a man of worth,
Should be commander of our Empire.
For he that never saw his foe mans face,
But always slept upon a Ladies lap,
Will scant endure to lead a soldiers life.
And he that never handled but his pen,
Will be unskilful at the warlike lance.
Indeed his wisdom well may guide the crown,
And keep that safe his predecessors got•
But being given to peace as Corcut is,
He never will enlarge the Empire:
So that the rule and power over vs,
Is only fit for valiant Selimus.
Princes, you know how mighty Baiazet
Hath honoured Mustaffa with his love.
He gave his daughter beauteous Solima,
To be the sovereign mistress of my thoughts.
He made me captain of the Janissaries,
And too unnatural should Mustaffa be,
To rise against him in his dying age.
Yet know, you warlike peer, Mustaffa is
A loyal friend unto prince Selimu•,
And ere his other brethren get the crown,
For his sake, I my self will pull them down.
I love, I love them dearly, but the love
Which I do bear unto my countries good,
Makes me a friend to noble Selimus,
Only let Baiazet while he doth live,
Enjoy in peace the Turkish Diadem.
When he is dead, and la•d in quiet grave,
Then none but Selimu• our help shall have.
How now Mustaffa, what news have we there•
Is Solemn up in Arms against me again?
Or is the Sophi entered our confines?
Hath the Egyptian snatched his crown again?
Or have the uncontrolled Christians
Unsheathed their swords to make more war on vs?
Such news, or none will come to Baiazet.
My gracious Lord, here is an Ambassador
Come from your son the Sultan Acomat.
From Acomat? oh let him enter in.
Ambassador, how fares our loving son?
Mighty commander of the warlike Turks,
Acomat Sultan of Amasia;
Greeted your grace by me his messenger.
He gives him a Letter.
And gratulates your highness good success,
Wishing good fortune may be•all you still.
Mustaffa read.
He gives the letter to Mustaffa, and speaks the rest to himself•
Acomat craves thy promise Baiazet,
To give the Empire up into his hands,
And make it sure to him in thy life time.
And thou shalt have it lovely Acomat,
For I have been encombred long enough,
And vexed with the cares of kingly rule,
Now let the trouble of the Empirie
Be buried in the bosom of thy son.
Ah Acomat, if thou have su•h a reign
So full of sorrow as thy fathers was,
Thou wilt occurs the time, the day and hour,
In which thou was established Emperor.
Sound. A Messenger from Corcut.
Yet more news?
Long live the mighty Emperor B•iazet,
Corcut the Sultan of Magnesia,
Hearing of S•limbs worthy overthrow,
And of the coming of young Acomat,
Doth certify your majesty by me,
How joyful he is of your victory.
And there withal he humbly doth require
Your grace would do him justice in his cause•
His brethren both, unworthy such a father,
Do seek the Empire while your grace doth live,
And that by vndirect 〈◊〉 means.
But Corcuts mind free from ambitious thoughts,
And trusting to the goodness of his cause,
Joined unto your• h•ghnesse tender lou••
Only desires your grace should not inu st
Solemn nor Acomat, in the Diadem,
Which appertains unto him by right,
But keep it to your self the while you live:
And when it shall the great creator please,
Who hath the spirits of all men in his hands,
Shall call your highness to your latest home,
Then will he also sue to have his right.
Like to a ship sailing without stars,
Whom waives do toss one way and winds another,
Both without ceasing: even so my poor heart
Endure• a combat betwixt love and right.
The love I bear to my dear Acomat,
Commands me give my suffrage unto him,
But Corcuts title, being my eldest son,
Bids me recall my hand, and give it him.
Acomat, he would have it in my life,
But gentle Corcut like a loving son,
Desires me live and die an Emperor,
And at my death bequeath my crown to him.
Ah Corcut thou I see love me indeed,
Selimus sought to thrust me down by force,
And Acomat seeks the kingdom in my life,
And both of them are grieved thou liu'st so long.
But Corcut numbered not my days as they,
O how much dearer loves he me then they.
Bassaes, how counsel you your Emperor?
My gracious Lord, my self will speak for al,
For all I know are minded as I am.
Your highness knows the Janissaries love,
How firm they mean to cleave to your behest,
As well you might perceive in that sad fight,
When Solemn set upon you in your flight.
Then we do all desire you on our knees,
To keep the crown and sceptre to your self.
How grievous will it be unto your thoughts,
If you should give the crown to Acomat,
To see the brethren disinherited,
To flesh their anger one upon another,
And rend the bowels of this mighty reign.
Suppose that Corcut would be well content,
Yet thinks your grace if Acomat were king,
That Solemn ere long would join league with him?
Nay he would break from forth his Trebisond,
And waste the Empire all with fire and sword.
Ah then too weak would be poor Acomat,
To stand against his brothers puissance,
Or save himself from his enhanced hand.
While Ismael and the cruel Persians,
And the great Sultan of the Egyptians,
Would smile to see our force dismembered so,
I and perchance the neighbour Christians
Would take occasion to thrust out their heads.
All this may be prevented by your grace,
If you will yield to Corcuts just request,
And keep the kingdom to you while you live,
Mean time we that your graces subjects are,
May make vs strong, to fortisie the man,
Whō at your death your grace shall choose as king.
O how thou speak ever like thy self,
Loyal Mustaffa: well were Baiazet
If all his sons, did bear such love to him.
Though loath I am longer to wear the crown,
Yet for I see it is my subjects will,
Once more will Baiazet be Emperor.
But we must send to pacific our son,
Or he will storm, as erst did Selimus.
Come let vs go unto our council Lord,
And there consider what is to be done.
Thus will I rend the crown from off thy head,
False hearted and injurious Baiazet,
To mock thy son that loved thee so dear.
What? for because the head-strong Janissaries
Would •ot consent to honour Acomat,
And their base Bassaes vowed to Selimus,
Thought me unworthy of the Turkish crown,
Should he be ruled and overruled by them,
Under pretence of keeping it himself,
To wipe me clean for ever being king?
Doth he e••gem so much the Bassaes words,
And prize their favour at so high a rate,
That for to gratify their stubborn minds,
He casts away all care, and all respects
Of duty, promise, and religious oaths?
Now by the holy Prophet Mahomet,
Chief president and patron of the Turks,
I mean to challenge now my right by Arms,
And win by sword that glorious dignity
Which he injuriously detains from me.
Happily he thinks because that •elimu•
Rebutted by his warlike Janissaries,
Was ••in to she in ha•• ••om whence he came:
That Acomat by his example moved,
Will fear to manage Arms against his sire.
Or that my life forepassed in p•easures court,
Promises weak resi•tance in the fight•
But he shall know that I can use my sword,
And like a lyon seize upon my pray.
If ever Solemn moved him heretofore,
Acomat means to move him ten times more•
It were good your grace would to Amasia,
And there increase your camp with fresh supply.
Visir, I am impatient of delay,
And since my father hath incensed me thus,
Isle quēch those kindled flames with his hart blood.
Not like a son, but a most cruel foe,
Will Acomat henceforth be unto him.
March to Natolia, there we will begin
And make a preface •o our massacres.
My nephew Mahomet son to Alemshae,
Departed lately from Iconium,
Is lodged there, and he shall be the first
Whom I will sacrifice unto my wrath.
Lord Governor, what think you best to doo?
If we receive the Souldaine Acomat,
Who knows not but his bloodthirsty sword
Shall be disembowelled in our country-men.
You know he is displeased with Baiazet,
And will rebel, as Solemn did to fore,
And would to God with Selims overthrow.
You know his angry heart hath vowed revenge
On all the subjects of his fathers land.
Young prince, thy uncle seeks to have thy life,
Because by right the Turkish crown is thine,
Save thou thy self by flight or otherwise,
And we will make resistance as we can.
Like an Armenian tiger, that hath lost
Her loved whelps, so raves Acomat:
And we must be subject to his rage,
But you may live to avenge your citizens.
Then fly good prince before your uncle come.
Nay good my Lord, never shall it be said
That Mahomet the son of Alemshae,
Fled from his citizens for fear of death,
But I will stay, and help to fight for you,
And if you needs must die, isle die with you.
And I among the rest with forward hand,
Will help to kill a common enemy.
Now fair Natolia, shall thy stately walls
Be overthrown and beaten to the ground.
My heart within me for revenge still calls.
Why Baiazet, though thou that Acomat
Would put up such a monstrous injury?
Then had I brought my chivalry in vain•
And to no purpose drawn my conquering blade,
Which now unsheathed, shall not be sheathed again,
Till it a world of bleeding souls hath made.
Poor Mahomet, thou though thy self too sure,
In thy strong city of Iconium,
To plant thy Forces in Natolia,
VVeakned so much before by Selims sword.
Summon a parley to the citizens,
That they may hear the dreadful words I speak,
And die in thought before they come to blows.
All. A parley Mahomet, Belierbey, and soldiers on the walls.
What craves our uncle Acomat of vs?
That thou &amp; all the city yield themselves,
Or by the holy rites of Mahomet
His wondrous tomb, and sacred Alcoran,
You all shall die: and not a common death,
But even as monstrous as I can devise.
Uncle, if I may call you by that name,
Which cruelly hunt for your nephews blood,
You do vs wrong thus to besiege our town,
That ne'er deserved such hatred at your hands,
Being your friends and kinsmen as we are.
In that thou wrongst me that thou art my kinsman.
Why for I am thy nephew doest thou frown?
I that thou art so near unto the crown.
Why uncle I resign •y right to thee,
And all my title were it ne'er so good.
Wilt thou? then know assuredly from me,
Isle seal the resignation with thy blood:
Though Alemshae thy father loved me well,
Yet Mahomet thy son shall down to hell.
Why uncle doth my life put you in fear?
It shall not nephew, since I have you here.
When I am dead mote hindrers sh•lt thou find.
When ones cut off, the fewer are behind.
Yet think the gods do bear an equal eye.
Faith if they all were squint-ey'd, what care I.
Then Mahomet know we will rather die,
Then yield vs up into a tyrants hand.
Beshrew me but you be the wiser Mahomet,
For if I do but catch you boy alive,
It were better for you run through Phlegiton.
Sirs scale the walls, and pull the caitiues down,
I give to you the spoil of all the town.
Alarm. Scale the walls.
Now yoongster, you that brau'dst vs on the walls,
And shook your plumed crest against our shield,
What would thou give, or what would thou not give,
That thou were far enough from Acomat?
How like the villain is to Baiazet?
Well nephew for thy father loved me well,
I will not deal extremely with his son:
Then hear a brief compendium of thy death.
Reagan go cause a grove of steelehead spears,
Be pitched thick under the castle wall,
And on them let this youthful captain fall.
Thou shalt not fear me Acomat with death•
Nor will I beg my pardon at thy hands.
But as thou giu'st me such a monstrous death,
So do I freely leave to thee my curse:
O, that will serve to fill my fathers purse.
Alarm. Enter a soldier with Zonara, sister to Mahomet.
Ah pardon me dear uncle, pardon me.
No minion, you are too near a kin to me.
If ever pity entered thy breast,
Or ever thou wast touched with women's love,
Sweet uncle spare wretched Zonaras life.
Thou once wast noted for a quiet prince,
Soft-hearted, mild, and gentle as a lamb,
Ah do not prove a lyon unto me.
Why would thou live, when Mahomet is dead?
Ah who slew Mahomet? Uncle did you?
He thats prepared to do as much for you.
Doest thou not pity Alemshae in me?
Yes that he wants so long thy company.
Thou art not false groom son to Baiazet,
He would relent to hear a woman weep,
But thou wast borne in de•art Caueasus,
And the Hircanian tigers gave thee suck,
Knowing thou were a monster like themselves.
Let you her thus to rate vs? Strangle her.
They strangle her.
Now scour the streets, and leave not one alive
To carry these sad news to Baiazet.
That all the citizens may dearly say,
This day was fatal to Natolia.
Mustaffa, if my mind deceive me not,
Some strange misfortune is not far from me.
I was not wont to tremble in this sort.
Me thinks I feel a cold run through my bones,
As if it hastened to surprise my heart,
Me thinks some voice still whispered in my ears
And bids me to take heed of A•omit.
Tic but your highness overcharged mind
Which fears most the things it least desires.
Ah sweet Mustaffa, thou art much deceived,
My mind presages me some future harm,
And lo what doleful exequie is here.
Our chief commander of Natolia?
What caitiue hand is it hath wounded thee?
And who are these covered in tomblack hearse?
These are thy nephews mighty Baiazet,
The son and daughter of good Alemshae,
Whom cruel A•omit hath murdered thus.
These eyes beheld, when from an airy tour,
They hurled the body of young Mahomet,
Whereas a band of armed soldiers,
Received him falling on their spears sharp points.
His sister poor Zonara,
Entreating life and not obtaining it,
Was strangled by his barbarous soldiers.
Baiazet false in a sound, and being recovered say•
Oh you dispensers of our haplesse breath,
Why do you glut your eyes, and take delight
To see sad pageants of men's miseries?
Wherefore have you prolonged my wretched life,
To see my son my dearest Acomat,
To lift his hands against his fathers life?
Ah Selimus, now do I pardon thee,
For thou did set upon me manfully,
And moved by an occasion, though unjust.
But Acomat, injurious Acomat,
Is tentimes more unnatural to me.
Haplesse Zonara, haplesse Mahomet,
The poor remainder of my Alemshae,
Which of you both shall Baiazet most wail?
Ah both of you are wo•thie to be wailde.
Happily dealt the froward •ates with thee,
Good Alemshae, for thou did die in field,
And so preuentedst this sad spectacle,
Pitiful spectacle of sad dreeriment,
Pitiful spectacle of dismal death.
But I have lived to see thee Alemshae,
By Tartar Pirates all in pieces torn.
To see young Selims disobedience.
To see the death of Alemshaes poor seed.
And last of all to see my Acoma•
Prove a rebellious enemy to me.
Ah cease your tears unhappy Emperor,
And shed not all for your poor nephews death.
Six thousand of true-hearted citizens
In fair Natolia, Acomat hath slain:
The channels run like riuerets of blood,
And I escaped with this poor compendium,
Bemangled and dismembered as you see,
To be the messenger of •hese sad news.
And now mine eyes fast swimming in pale death,
Bids me resign my breath unto the heavens,
Death stands before ready for to strike.
Farewell dear Emperor and revenge our loss,
As ever thou doest hope for happiness. He dies.
Auernus jaws and loathsome Taenarus,
From whence the damned ghoasts do often creep,
Back to the world to punish wicked men.
Black Demogorgon, grandfather of night,
Send out thy furies from thy fiery hall,
The pitiless Erymnies armed with whips,
And all the damned monsters of black hell,
To power their plagues on cursed Acomat.
How shall I morn, or which way shall I tu•no
To power my tears upon my dearest friends?
Could thou endue false-hearted Acomat,
To kill thy nephew and thy sister thus,
And wound to death so valiant a Lord?
And will you not you albeholding heavens,
Dart down on him your piercing lightning brand,
Enroled in sulphur, and consuming flames?
Ah do not Jove, Acomat is my son,
And may perhaps by counsel be reclaimed,
And brought to filial obedience.
Aga thou art a man of peirsant wit,
Go thou and talk with my son Acomat,
And see if he will any way relent
Speak him fair Aga, least he kill thee too.
And we my Lords will in, and morn a while,
Over these princes lamentable tombs.
As Tityus in the country of the dead,
With restless cries doth call, upon high Jove•
The while the vulture tireth on his heart,
So Acomat, re••nge s•ill gn•we• thy soul.
In shedding blood, and murdering innocents.
I think my wrath hath been too patient,
Since civil blood quenches not out the flames
Which Baiazet hath kindled in my heart.
My gracious Lord, here is a messenger
Sent from your father the Emperor.
Let him come in: Aga what news with you?
Great Prince, thy father mighty Baiazet,
Wonders your grace whom he did love so much,
And thought to leave possessor of the crown,
Would thus requite his love with mortal hate,
To kill thy nephews with revenging sword,
And massacre his subjects in such sort.
Aga, my father traitrous Baiazet,
Detains the crown injuriously from me,
Which I will have if all the world say nay.
I am not like the unmannered land,
Which answers not his honours greedy mind:
I sow not seeds upon the barren sand,
A thousand ways can Acomat soon find,
To gain my will, which if I cannot gain,
Then purple blood my angry hands shall stain.
Acomat, yet learn by Selimus,
That hasty purposes have hated ends.
Tush Aga, Solemn was not wise enough
To set upon the head at the first brunt:
He should have done as I do mean to do,
Fill all the confines, with fire, sword, and blood▪
Burn up the fields, and overthrow whole towns,
And when he had endammaged that way,
Thē tear the old man piecemeal with my teeth,
And colour my strong hands with his gore-blood.
O see my Lord, how fell ambition
Deceives your senses and bewitcyes you,
Could you unkind perform so foul a deed▪
〈…〉 the 〈◊〉 that first gave life to you?
Do you not f••re the peoples adverse fame?
It is the greatest glory of a king
When, though his subjects hate his wicked deeds
Yet are they forced to bear them all with praise.
Whom fear constrains to praise their princes deeds,
That fear, eternal hatred in them feeds.
He knows not how to sway the kingly mace,
That loves to be great in his peoples grace:
The •urest ground for kings to build upon,
Is to be feared and cursed of every one.
What though the world of nations me hate?
Hate is peculiar to a princes state.
Where ther's no shame, no care of holy law,
No faith, no justice, no integrity,
That flate is full of mutability.
Bare faith, pure virtue, poor integrity,
Are ornaments fit for a private man,
Beseems a prince for to do all he can.
Yet know it is a •acrilegious will,
To slay thy father were he ne'er so ill.
Tic lawful gray-beard for to do to him,
What ought not to be done unto a father.
Hath he not wiped me from the Turks• crown?
Preferred he not the •ubborne Janissaries,
And heard the Bassaes stout petitions,
Before he would give ear to my request?
As sure as day, mine eyes shall ne'er taste sleep,
Before my sword have riuen his per•••d breast.
Ah let me never live to see that day•
Yes thou shalt live, but never see that day,
Wanting the tapers that should give thee light:
Pulls out his eye•.
Thou shalt not see so great felicity,
When I shall rend out Baiazets dim eyes,
And by his death install my •elf a king.
Ah cruel tyrant and unmerciful,
More bloody then the Anthropomphagi,
That fill their hungry stomachs with mans fl•h.
Thou should have slain me barbarous Acomat,
Not leave me in so comfortless a life
To live on earth, and never see the sun.
Nay let him die that lives at his ease,
Death would a wretched caitiue greatly please.
And think thou then to scope vnpuished,
No Acomat, though both mine eyes be gone,
Yet are my hands left on to murder thee.
T'was well remembered: Reagan cut them off.
They cur of his hands and give them Acomat.
Now in that sort go tell thy Fmperour
That if himself had but been in thy place,
I would have used him crueler then thee:
Here take thy hands: I know thou love them well.
Opens his bosom, and puts them in.
Which hand is this? right? or left? can thou tell?
I know not which it is, but tic my hand.
But oh thou supreme architect of all,
First mover of those tenfold crystal orbs,
Where all those moving, and vnmouing eyes
Behold thy goodness everlastingly:
See, unto thee I lift these bloody arms,
For hands I have not for to lift to thee,
And in thy justice dart thy smouldring flame
Upon the head of cursed Acomat.
Oh cruel heavens and injurious fates,
Even the last refuge of a wretched man,
Is took from me: for how can Aga weep?
Or ruin a brinish shower of pearled tears?
Wanting the watery cisterns of his eyes?
Come lead me back again to Baiazet,
The woefullest, and sadd'st Ambassador
That ever was dispatched to any King.
Why so, this music pleases Acomat.
And would I had my doting father here,
I would rip up his breast, and rend his heart,
Into his bowels thrust my angry hands,
As willingly, and with as good a mind,
As I could be the Turk•h Emperor.
And by the clear declining vault of heaven,
Whither the souls of dying men do •lee,
Either I mean to dye the death my self,
Or make that old false faitour bleed his last.
For death no sorrow could unto me bring,
So Acomot might die the Turkish king.
Is this the body of my sovereign?
Are these the sacred pilla•s that support
The image of true magnanimity?
Ah Baiazet, thy son false Acomat
Is full resolved to take thy life from thee:
Tic true, tic true, witness these handles arms,
Witness these empty lodges of mine eyes,
Witness the gods that from the highest hey•en
Beheld the tyrant with remorseless heart,
Pulled out mine eyes, and cut off my weak hands.
Witness that sun whose golden coloured beams
Your eyes do see, but mine can ne'er behold:
Witness the earth that sucked up my blood,
Streaming in •iuers from my tronked arms.
Witness the present that he sends to thee,
Open my bosom, there you shall it see.
Mustaffa opens his bosom and takes out his hands.
Those are the hands, which Aga once did use,
To •os the spear, and in a warlike gyro
To hurtle my sharpe sword about my head,
Those sends he to the woeful Emperor,
With purpose so cut thy hands from thee.
Why is my sovereign silent all this while?
Ah Aga, Baiazet fine would speak to thee,
But sudden sorrow eats up my words.
Baiazet Aga, fine would weep for thee•
But cruel sorrow dries up my tears.
Baiazet Aga, fine would die for thee,
But grief hath weakened my poor aged hands.
How can he speak, whose tongue sorrow hath tide?
How can he morn, that cannot shed a tear?
How shall he live, that full of misery
Calls for death, which will not let him die?
Let women weep, let children power •oo••
And cowards spend the t•me in bootless moan.
We'll load the earth with such a mighty host
Of Janissaries, sterne-borne sons of Mars,
That Phoebe shall fly and hide him in the clouds
For fear our javelins thrust him from his wane.
Old Aga was a Prince among your Lords,
His Councels always were true oracles,
And shall he thus unmanly be misused,
And he unpunished that did the deed?
Shall Mahomet and poor Zonaras ghoa••s•
And the good governor of Natalia
Wander in Stygian meadows vnreueng'•
Good Emperor stir up thy manly heart•
And send forth all thy warlike I•nizaries
To chastise that rebellious Acomat•
Thou know we cannot fight without a guide,
And he must be one of the royal blood•
Sprung from the loins of mighty Ottoman,
And who remains now, but young Selimu••
So please your grace to pardon his offence,
And 〈…〉
I good Mustaffa, send for Selimus,
So I may be revenged I care not how,
The worst that can befall me is but death,
That would end my woeful misery.
Selimus he must work me this good turn,
I cannot kill my self, he will do it for me.
Come Aga, thou and I will weep the while:
Thou for thy eyes and loss of both thy hands,
I for th'vnkindnesse of my Acomat.
Will fortune favour me yet once again?
And will she thrust the cards into my hands?
Well if I chance but once to get the deck,
To deal about and shuffle as I would:
Let Solemn never see the day-light spring,
Unless I shuffle out my self a king.
Friend let me see thy letter once again,
That I may read these reconciling lines.
Reads the letter.
Thou hast a pardon Solemn granted thee.
Mustaffa and the forward Janissaries
Have sued to thy father Baiazet,
That thou moist be their captain general
Against th'attempts of Sultan Acomat.
Why thats the thing that I requested most,
That I might once th'imperiall army lead:
And since its offred me so willingly,
Beshrew me but isle take their courtesy.
Soft let me see is there no policy
T'entrap poor Selimus in this device?
It may be that my father fears me yet,
Least I should once again rise up in arms,
And like Antaeus quilt by Hercules,
Gather new forces by my overthrow:
And therefore sends for me un•er ••etence
Of this, and that: but when he hath me there•
He will make me sure 〈◊〉 putting him i• •ear•
Distrust is good, when theirs cau•e o• d•struck•
Read it again, perehance thou doest mi•take.
O, heir's Mustaffa• 〈◊〉 •et there•o•
Then Solemn cast all fool•h •ear aside,
For hoe's a Prince 〈◊〉 fa•ours thy e•tate,
And hates treason worse then death it •el•e.
And hardly can I think he could be brought
If there were treason, to subscribe his name•
Come friend, the cause requires we •huld be gone,
Now once again have •t the Turkish throne•
Come mou•nfull Aga, come and •it by me,
Thou hast been sorely grieved for Baiazet,
Good reason then that he should gre•e for thee.
Give me thy arm, though thou ha•t lost thy hands,
And liu•st as a poor exile in this light,
Yet hast thou won the heart of Baiazet,
Your graces words are very comfortable,
And well can Aga bear his grievous loss,
Since it was for so good a Princes sake.
Father, if I may call thee by that name,
Whose life I aimed at with rebellious sword:
In all humility thy reformed son,
Offers himself into your graces hands,
And at your •eete lays his bloody sword,
Which he advanced against your may••ie.
If my offence do seem so odious
That I deserve not longer time to live,
Behold I open unto you my breast,
Ready prepared to die at your command.
But if repentance in un•ained h•are••
And sorrow for my gre•uous cr•me forepast,
May merit pardon at your princely hands•
Behold where poor inglorious Selimus•
Upon his knees begs pardon of your grade.
Stand up my son, I joy to hear thee speak,
But more• to hear thou art so well reclaimed.
Thy crime was ne'er so odious unto me•
But thy reformed life and humble thoughts•
Are thrice as pleasing to my aged spirit.
Solemn we here pronounce thee by our will,
Chief general of the warlike Janissaries•
Go lead them out against false Acomat,
Which hath so grievously rebelled against me•
Spare him not Solemn, though he be my son•
Yet do I now clean disinherit him•
As common enemy to me and •in.
May• Solemn live to show how dutiful
And loving he will be to Bays•t.
So now doth fortune smile on me 〈◊〉
And in regard of foe•mer in•uries•
Offer me millions of Diad•ms:
I smile to see how that the good old man,
Thinks Selims thoughts are brought to such an obb•
As he hath cast off all ambition• hope•
But soon shall that opinion be remove•d,
For if I once get amongst the Ianiz••s•
Then on my head the golden c•own shall sit•
Well Baiazet, I fear me thou wilt grieve,
That ere thou did thy •aining son• boleeue,
Now Aga, all the thoughts that troubled me•
Do rest within the center of my heart,
And thou shalt shortly joy a• much with me,
Then Acomat by Sell•ms consuming sword,
Shall leese that ghost which made thee loose thy sight.
Ah Baiazet, Aga looks not for revenge,
But will power out his prayers to the heavens,
That Acomat may learn by Selimus,
To yield himself up to his fathers grace.
Sound within, long live Selimus Emperor of Turks.
How now, what sudden triumph have we here?
Ah gracious Lord, the captains of the hos•e,
With one assent have crowned Prince Selimus,
And here he comes with all the •anizaries,
To crave his confirmation at thy hands.
Baiazet, we the captains of thy host,
Knowing thy weak and too unwildy age,
Unable is longer to govern vs•
Have chosen Selimu• thy yoonger son
That he may be our leader and our guide,
Against the Sophi and h•s Per•iahs,
Against the victorious Sold••e Tonumbey.
Their wants but thy consent, which we will have,
Or hew thy body peece-meale with our swords.
Needs must I give, what is •lreadie gone.
Here Selimus, thy father Baiaze•
Wearied with cares that wa•t upon a king•
Resigns the crown as willingly to thee,
As ere my father gave it unto me.
Long live Selimus Emperor of Tu•kes.
Live thou a long and a victorious reign,
And be triumpher of thine enemies•
Aga and I will to 〈◊〉
And live in peace the remnant of our days.
Now •it I 〈◊〉 •he 〈◊〉 strong son of lou•,
When after he had all his 〈◊◊〉
He was recein'd in h••uen amongst the gods,
And had fair Hebe for his lovely bride.
As many labours Selimus hath had,
And now at length 〈◊〉 to the crown,
This is my Hebe, and this is my 〈◊〉
Bays•t goat• to D•m• ••cum,
And there he •urposes to live at ea•e,
But Selimus, as long as he is on earth,
Thou shalt not •leep in rest without some broil•
For Baiazet i• inconstant as the wind•
To make that sure I have a platform laid.
Baiazet hath with him a cunning Jew,
Professing physic, and so skilled therein,
As if he had power over life and death.
Withal, a man so stout and resolute,
That he will venture any thing for 〈◊〉
This Jew with some intoxicated drink,
Shall poison Baiazet and that bl••d Lord,
Then one of Hydras heads is clean •ut off.
Go some and •etch •braham the Jew•
Corcut, thy pageant next is to be plaid.
For though he be a grave Philosopher,
Given to read Mahomets dread l•was,
And Razins toys, and Juice••es drugged•
Yet he may have a longing for the crown.
Besides, he may by devilish Necromancy
Procure my death or wo•ke my overthrow,
The devil still is ready to do h•rme.
Hali, you and your brother presently.
Shall with an army to Magnesia,
There you shall find the scholar at his book,
And hear thou Hali? strangle him.
Corcut once dead, then Acomat remains,
Whose death will make me certain of the crown.
These heads of Hydra are the principal,
When these are off, some other will arise,
As Amurath and Aladdin, sons to Acomat,
My sister Solyma, Mustaffaes wife,
All these shall suffer shipwreck on a shelf,
Rather then Solemn will be drowned himself.
Jew thou art welcome unto Selimus,
I have a piece of service for you sir,
But on your life be secret in the deed.
Get a strong poison, whose enuenoin'd taste
May take away the life of Baiazet,
Before he pass forth of Biz•ntiu••.
I warrant you my gracious sovereign,
He shall be quickly sent unto his grave•
For I have potions of so strong a force•
That whosoever touches the• shall die•
And wold your grace would once but taste of them
I could as willingly a•ford them you,
As your aged father Baiazet.
My Lord, I am resolved to •o the deed.
So this is well• for I am none of those
That make a conscience for to kill a man.
For nothing is more hurtful to a Prince,
Then to be scrupulous and religious.
I like Lysanders counsel passing well,
If that I cannot speed with lyons force,
To cloth my complots in a foxes skin.
For th'onely things that wrought our Empire•e,
Were open wrongs, and hidden treachery.
Oh, they are two wings wherewith I use to fly•
And soar aboue the common •or••
If any seek our wrong• •o remedy,
With these I take his 〈…〉
And one of these shall still maintain in• cause,
Or foxes skin, or lions r•nding paws.
Come Aga 〈◊〉 and morn a while,
For fortune never showed her self so cross,
To any Prince as to poor Baiazet.
That woeful Emperor first of my n•me,
Whom the Tartarians locked 〈◊〉 •age,
To be a spectacle to all the world,
Was ten times happier then I am.
For Tamberlaine the scourge of nations,
Was he that pulled him from his kingdom so.
But mine own sons, expel me from the throne,
Ah where shall I begin to make my moan.
Or what shall I first reckon in my plaint,
From my youth up I have been drowned in woe,
And to my latest hour I shall be so.
You swelling seas of never ceasing care,
Whose waives my weather-beaten ship do toss,
Your boisterous billows too 〈◊〉 are
And threaten still my ruin and my loss:
Like huge 〈◊〉 do your waters rear,
Their lofty tops, and •y weak vessel crosle.
Alas at length allay your stormy strife,
And cruel wrath within me rages ri•e.
Or else my feeble bark cannot 〈◊〉
Your slashing buffets and 〈◊〉 blows,
But while thy foamie flood dot• i• im•ur,
Shall soon be wr••knight upon the s•ndi• shallows
Grief my leaud boatswain stirs nothing sure,
But without stars against tide and wind he rows,
And cares not though upon so••e rock we 〈◊〉
A restless pilot for the ••arge v••r.
But out alas, the god that vales the sea,
And can alone this raging tempest slant,
Will never blow a gentle gale of case,
But suffer my poor vessel to be rent.
Then ô thou blind procurer of ••schance,
That staist thy self upon •turning wheel,
Thy cruel handieuen when thou wilt enhance,
And pierce my poor• hart with thy ch••llant steel•
Cease Baiazet, now it is Ages turn,
Rest thou a while and gather up more tears,
The while poor Ag• tell his Tragedy.
When first my mot•er brought me to the world,
Some blazing Gomet ruled in the sky,
Portending miserable ch•nce to me.
My parents were but men of poor estate,
And happy yet had wretched Aga been,
If Baiazet had not exalted him.
Poor Aga, had it •ot been ••ch more fair,
T'haue died among the cruel P•rsi•ns•
Then thus at home by barbarous tie•anni••
To live and never see the cheerful day,
And to want hands wherewith to feel the way.
Leave wee•ing Aga, we 〈◊〉 wept enough,
Now Baiazet will b•n another while•
And utter curses to the con•aueskie,
Which may infect the regions of the ayre,
And bring a general plague on all the world•
Night thou most ancient grand-mother of all,
First made by Jove, for rest and quiet sleep,
When cheerful day is gon from th'earths wide hall.
Henceforth thy mantle 〈◊〉 blak Lethe sleep,
And cloth the world in da•knees inf•r••ll•
Suffer not o••e the •oy full dailight peep,
But let thy pitchy steeds aye draw thy wane,
And coaleblack silence in the world s•ill reign•
Cu••e on my parents that f••st brought me v••
And on the cradle wherein I was rocked,
Cu••e on the day when •••st I was •reated•
The chief commander of all A•in.
Curse on my sons that d•i•e •no to this g••efe,
Curse on my self that can find no relief.
A•d curse on him, an e•erlasting c•rs,
T••t quenched those lamps of euerburn••g light,
And took a••y my Ages warlike hands•
A•d curse on all things under the wide sky,
Ah Aga, I have cursed my stomach dry.
I have a drink my Lords of noble worth,
Which soon will ••lme your stormi• passions,
And glad your hearts if•o you please to taste it.
•or who art thou that thus do•st pity v•?
Your highness humble servant Abrahā.
Abraham •it down and drink to Baiazet.
Faith I am old as well as Baiazet,
And have not many months to •ue on earth,
I care not much to end my life with him.
Heir's to you Lordings with a full carouse.
Here Aga, woeful Baiazet drinks to thee.
Abraham, hold the cup to him while he drinks.
Now know old Lords, that you have drunk your last:
This was a potion which I did prepare
To poi•on you, by 〈◊〉 instigation,
And now it is dispersed through my bones,
And glad I am that such companions
Shall go with me down to Pr•serpina.
Ah wicked Jew, ah cursed Selimus,
How have the destins de••t with Baiazet,
That none should cause my death but mine own son?
Had Is••ael and his warlike Persians
•ier•ed my body with their iron spears,
Or had the strong unconquered Tonumbey
With his Egyptians took me prisoner,
And sent me with his valiant Mammalukes,
To be pray unto the Crocodilus.
It never would have grieved me half so much.
But welcome death into whose calm port,
My sorrow-beaten soul joys to arrive.
And now farewell my disobedient sons,
Unnatural sons unworthy of that name.
Farewell sweet life, and Aga now farewell,
Till we shall meet in the Elision fields.
What greater grief had mournful Priamus,
Then that he lived to see his Hector die,
His city burnt down by revenging flames,
And poor Polites slain before his face?
Aga, thy grief is matchable to his,
For I have lived to see my sovereigns death,
Yet glad that I must breath my last with him.
And now farewell sweet light, which my poor eyes
These twice six months never did behold:
Aga will follow noble Baiazet,
And beg a boon of lovely Proserpine,
That he and I may in the mournful fields,
Still weep and wail our strange calamities.
Ha, ha, ha, married quoth you? Marry and Bullithrum∣ble were to begin the world again, I would set a tap abroach, and not live in daily fear of the breach of my wives ten-com∣mandemens. Isle tell you what, I thought my self as proper a fellow at wasters, as any in all our village, and yet when my wife begins to play clubs trump with me, I am fine to sing:
What hap had I to marry a shrew,
For she hath given me many a blow,
And how to please her alas I do not know.
From morn to even her tongue ne'er lies,
Sometime she laughs, sometime she cries:
And I can scarce keep her talēts fro my eyes.
When from abroad I do come in,
Sir knave she cries, where have you bin?
Thus please, or displease, she lays it on my skin•
Then do I crouch, then do I kneel,
And wish my cap were furred with steel,
To bear the blows that my poor head doth feel.
But our sir Iohn beshrew thy hart,
For thou hast joined vs we cannot part,
And I poor fool, must ever bear the smart.
Isle tell you what, this morning while I was making me rea∣die, she came with a holly wand, and so blessed my shoulders that I was fine to run through a whole Alphabet of faces: now at the last seeing she was so cramuk with me, I began to swear all the cress cross row over, beginning at great A, li•le a, till I cam to w, x, y. And snatching up my sheephooke, &amp; my bottle and my bag, like a despair•te fellow ran away, and here now isle sit down and eat my meat.
O hateful hellish snake of Tartary,
That feed on the soul of noblest men,
Damned ambition, cause of all misery,
Why doest thou creep from out thy loathsome fen,
And with thy poison animatest friends,
And gape and long one for the others ends.
Selimus, coldest thou not content thy mind,
With the possession of the sacred throne,
Which thou did get by fathers death unkind:
Whose poisoned ghost before high God doth groan.
But thou must seek poor Corcu•s overthrow,
That never iniu•ed thee, so, nor so?
Old Hales sons with two great company
Of birded horse, were sent from Sell•mus,
To take me prisoner in Ma•nosy,
And death I am sure should have befell to me,
If they had once but set their eyes on me.
So thus disguised my poor Page and •,
Fled fast to Smirna, where in a dark cave
We meant t'await they are•uall of some ship
That might trance••eit vs safely unto Rhodes.
But see how fortune crossed my enterprise.
Bostang• Bassa, Solemn• son in law,
Kept all the sea co•sts with his Br•gandines,
That if we had but ventured on the sea,
I presently had been his prisoner.
These two days have we kept vs in the cave,
Eating such he•rbes as the ground did afford:
And now through hunger are we both constrained
Like fearful snakes to creep out step by step,
And see if we may get vs any food.
And in good time, see yonder sits a man,
Spreading a hungry dinner on the grass.
Bull•ithrumble spies them, and puts up his meat.
These are some felonians, th•t •eeke to rob me, well, isle make my self a good deal more valiant then I am indeed, and if they will needs creep into kindred with me, isle betake me to my old occupation, and •un away.
Hail groom.
Good Lord sir, you are deceived, my names master Bull∣lithrumble: this is some cousoning conicatching crosbiter, that would fine persuade me he knows me, and so under a tence of familiarity and acquaintance, uncle me of victuals.
Then Bull•hrumble, if that be thy name:
My name sir ô Lord yes, and if you will not believe me, I will bring my godfathers and godmothers, and they shall swear it upon the •ont-stone, and upon the church book too, where it is written.
Mass, I think he be some Justice of peace, ad quorum, and omnium populorum, how he sameness me: a christian, yes mar∣rye am I sir, yes verily and do believe: and it please you isle go forward in my catechism.
Then Bullithrumble, by that blessed Christ,
And by the tomb where he was buried,
By sovereign hope which thou conceiu'st in him,
Whom dead, as euerliuing thou adore.
O Lord help me, I shall be torn in pieces with devils and goblins.
By all the joys thou hop'st to have in heaven,
Give some meat to poor hunger-starued men.
Oh, these are as a man should say beggars: Now will I be as stately to them as if I were moister Pigwiggen our consta∣ble: well sirs come before me, tell me if I should entertain you, would you not steal?
If we did mean so sir, we would not make your worcester∣ship acquainted with it.
A good well nutrimented lad: well if you will keep my sheep truly and honestly, keeping your hands from lying and slandering, and your tongues from picking and stealing, you shall be moister Bullithrumbles seruitures.
With all our hearts.
Then come on and follow me, we will have a hogs cheek, and a dish of tripes, and a society of puddings, &amp; to field: a society of puddings, did you mark that well used metaphor? Another would have said, a company of puddings: if you dwell with me long sirs, I shall make you as eloquent as our parson himself.
Now is the time when I may be enriched.
The brethren that were sent by Selimus
To take my Lord, Prince Corcut prisoner,
Finding him fled, proposed large rewards
To them that could declare where he remains.
Faith isle to them and get the portagues,
Though by the bargain Corcut loose his head.
Why thus must Solemn blind his subject eyes,
And strain his own to weep for Baiazet.
They will not dream I made him away,
When thus they see me with religious pomp,
To celebrate his tomb-blacke mortarie.
And though my heart cast in an iron mould,
Cannot admit the smallest dram of grief.
Yet that I may be thought to love him well,
Isle morn in show, though I rejoice indeed.
Thus after he hath five long ages lived,
The sacred Phoenix of Arabia,
Loads his wings with precious perfumes•
And on the altar of the golden sun,
Offers himself a grateful sacrifice.
Long did thou live triumphant Baiazer,
A fear unto thy greatest enemies,
And now that death the conqueror of Kings,
Dislodged hath thy never dying soul,
To flee unto the heavens from whence she came•
And leave her frail, earth pavilion,
Thy body in this ancient monument,
Where our great predecessors sleep in rest:
Thy woeful son Selimus thus doth place.
Thou were the Phoenix of this age of ours,
And died wrapped in the sweet perfumes,
Of thy magnifick deeds, whose lasting praise
Mounts to highest heaven with golden wings.
Princes come bear your Emperor company
In, till the days of mourning be ore past,
And then we mean to rouse false Acomat,
And cast him forth of Macedonia.
My Lords, if I bring you not where Corcut is, then let me be hanged, but if I deliver him up into your hands, then let me have the reward due to so good a deed.
Page, if thou show vs where thy moister is,
Be sure thou shalt be honoured for the deed,
And high exalted aboue other men.
That same is he, that in disguised robes,
Accompanies yon shepherd to the fields.
The sweet content that country life affords,
Passes the royal pleasures of a King:
For there our joys are interlaced with fears:
But here no fear nor care is harboured,
But a sweet calm of a most quiet state.
Ah Corcut, would thy brother Selimus
But let thee live• here should thou spend thy life,
Feeding thy sheep among these grassy lands.
But sure I wonder where my Page is gone.
Corcut.
A y-me, who names me?
H•l•, the governor of Magnesia.
Poor prince, thou thought•t in these disguised weeds,
To mask unseen: and happily thou might,
But that thy Page betrayed thee to vs.
And be not wrath with vs unhappy prince,
If we do what our sovereign commands.
Tic for thy death that Solemn sends for thee.
Thus I like poor Ampharaus, sought
By hiding my estate in shepherds coat,
T e•cape the angry w•ath of Selimus.
But as his wife false Er•phyle did
Betray his safety• for a ch•in of gold,
So my false Page hath vilely dealt with me,
Pray God that thou moist prospet so as she.
Hali, I know thou sorrow for my case,
But it is bootless, come and let vs go,
Corcut is ready, since it is must be so.
Shepherd.
Thats my profession sir.
Come, you must go with vs.
Who I? Alas sir, I have a wife and s•uenteene cra∣dles rocking, two ploughs going, two barnes filling, and a great heard of beasts feeding, and you should utterly undo me to take me to such a great charge.
Well there is no remedy.
The mores the pity Go with you quoth he, marry that had been the way to preferment, down Holburne up Ti∣bur•e: well isle keep my best joint from the strappado as well as I can hereafter, Isle have no more servants.
Sinam, we hear our brother Acomat
Is fled away from Macedonia,
To ask for aide of Persian Ismael,
And the Egyptian Sultan our chief foes.
Herein my Lord I like his enterprise,
For if they give him aide as sure they will,
Being your highness vowed enemies,
You shall have just cause for to war on them,
For giving succour against you, to your foe.
You know they are two mighty Potentates,
And may be hurtful neighbours to your grace,
And to enrich the Turkish Diad•me.
With two so worthy kingdoms as they are,
Would be eternal glory to your name.
By heavens S•name, you are a warrior,
And worthy counsellor unto a King.
Sound within. 
How now, what news?
My gracious Lord, we here present to you
Your brother Cor•ut, whom in Smirna coasts
Feeding a flock of sheep upon a down,
His traitrous Page betrayed to our hands.
Thanks ye bold brethren, but for that false part,
Let the vile Page be fa••ished to death.
Solemn, in this I see thou art a Prince,
To punish treason with condign reward.
O sir, I love the fruit that treason brings,
But those that are the traitors, them I hate.
But Corcut, could not your Philosophy
Keep you safe from my Janissaries hands.
We thought you had old• Gyges wondrous ring,
That so you were invisible to vs.
Sell•m, thou dealst unkindly with thy brother,
To seek my death, and make a jest of me.
Upbraid•st thou me with my philosophy?
Why this I learned by studying learned arts,
That I can bear my fortune as it falls,
And that I fear no whit thy cruelty,
Since thou wilt deal no otherwise with me,
Then thou hast dealt wi•h aged Baiazet.
By heavens Corcut, thou shalt surely die,
For slandring Solemn with my fathers death.
Thē let me freely speak my mind this once,
For thou shalt never hear me speak again.
Nay we can give such losers leave to speak.
Then Se••m, hear thy brothers dying words,
And mark them well, for er• thou die thy self,
Thou shalt perceive all things will come to pass,
That Coreut doth divine before his death.
Since my vain flight from fair Magnesia,
Solemn I have conversed with Christians,
And learned of them the way to save my soul,
And please the anger of the highest God.
Tic he that made this pure Crystalline vault
Which hangs over our unhappy heads,
From thence he doth behold each sinners fault:
And though our sins under our feet he treads,
And for a while seem for to wink at vs,
But is to recall vs from o•• ways.
But if we do like head-strong sons neglect
To hearken to our loving fathers voice,
Then in his anger will he vs reject,
And give vs over to our wicked choice.
Solemn before his dreadful majesty,
There lies a book written with bloody lines,
Where our offences all are registered.
Which if we do not hastily repent,
We are reserved to lasting punishment.
Thou wretched Selimus hast greatest need
To ponder these things in thy secret thoughts,
If thou consider what strange massacres
And cruel murders thou hast cause be done.
Think on the death of woeful Baiazet.
Doth not his ghost still haunt thee for revenge?
Solemn in Chiurlu did thou set upon
Our aged father in his sudden flight:
In Chiurlu shalt thou die a grievous death.
And if thou wilt not change thy greedy mind,
Thy soul shall be tormented in dark hell,
Where woe, and woe, and never ce•sing woe,
Shall sound about thy euer-damned soul.
Now Sell•m I have spoken, let me die:
I never will entreat thee for my life.
Solemn farewell: thou God of Christians,
Receive my dying soul into thy hands.
What is he dead? then S•limus is safe,
And hath no more corrivals in the crown.
For as for Ac•mat he soon shall see,
His Persian aide cannot save him from me.
Now S•name march to fair Amasia walls,
Where Acoma•s ••out Queen immures her self,
And ger• the city with a warlike •jig,
For •ince her hue•band i• my enemy,
I see no cau•e why she should be my friend.
They say young Amura•h and A lot••,
Her bastard brood, are come to succour her.
But ••e prevent this their officiousness,
And •end their soul down to their grandfather.
Mustaff• you shall keep Biza•tium,
While I and S•name girt Am•si•.
It grieve my soul th•t Baiaze•s fair line,
Should be eclipsed thus by Sell•mus,
Whose cruel soul will no•er be at rest
Till none remain of Ottomans fair race
But he himself: yet for old Ba•azer
Loved Mustaffa de••e unto his death,
I will •hew mercy to his family.
Go sir, post to Acoma•s young sons,
And bid them as they mean to save their lives,
To fly in ha••e from fair Amasia,
Least cruel Solemn put them to the sword.
And now Must•ffa, prepare thou thy neck,
For thou a•t next to d•e by Selims hands.
Stern S••am Bassa g•udgeth sty•l at thee,
And crabbed Hal• storms at thy life,
Al rapine that thou art honoured so,
To be the brother of their Emperor.
But wherefore comes my lovely Solyma?
Mustaffa I am come to se•ke thee out,
If ever thy distressed Solyma,
Found grace and favour in thy manly heart:
Fly hence with me unto some this•t land,
For if we tarry here we are but dead.
This night when fair Lucinaes shining wane,
Was past the chair of bright Cassiopey,
A fearful vision appeared to me.
Me thought Mustaffa, I beheld thy neck
So often •olded in my loving arms,
In foul disgrace of Bassaes fair degree,
With a vile halter basely compassed.
And while I powered my tears on thy dead corpse,
A greed•e lyon with wide gaping throat,
Seized on my t•ambling body with his feet,
And in a moment r•ned me all to nought.
Fly sweet Mustaffa, or we be but dead.
Why should we fly beauteous Solyma,
Moved by a vain and a fant•stique dream?
Or if we did fly whither should we fly?
I• to the farthest part of Asia,
Know'•t thou not Solyma, kings ha•e long hands?
Come, come, my joy, return again with me,
And banish hence these melancholy thoughts.
Messenger is it true that Selimus
Is not far hence encamped with his host?
And means he to disioyne the haplesse sons
From helping our distressed mothers town?
Tic true my Lord, and if you love your lives
Fly from the bounds of his dominions,
For he you know is most v•mercy•ull.
Here messenger take this for thy reward.
But we sweet Aladdin, let vs depa•t,
Now in the quiet silence of the night
That ere the windows of the morn be op,
We may be far enough from Selimus.
Isle to Aegyptus.
I to Persia.
But is it certain Hali they are gone?
And that Mustaffa moved them to fly?
Certain my Lord, I met the messenger
As he returned from young Alinda:
And learned of them, Mustaffa, was the man
That certified the Princes of your will.
It is enough: Mustaffa shall aby
At a dear price his pitiful intent.
Hali go fetch Mustaffa and his wife.
For though she be sister to Selimus,
Yet loves she him better then Selimus.
So that if he do die at our command,
And she should live: soon wold she work a mean
To work revenge for her Mustaffas death.
False of thy faith, and traitor to thy king,
Did we so highly always honour thee,
And doest thou thus requite our love with treason,
For why should thou send to young Alinda,
And Amurath, the sons of Acomat,
To give them notice of our secrecies,
Knowing they were my vowed enemies?
I do not seek to lesson my offence
Great Selimu•, but truly do protest
I did it not for hat•ed of your grace,
So help me God and holy Mahomet.
But for I grieved to see the famous stock
Of worthy Baiazet fall to decay,
Therefore I sent the Princes both away.
Your highness knows Mustaffa was the man
That saved you in the battle of Churlu,
When I and all the warlike Janissaries
Had hedged your person in a dangerous ring.
Yet I took pity on your danger there,
And made a way for you to scope by flight.
But those your Bassaes have incensed you,
Ripening at Mustaffas dignity.
Stern Sinam grinds his angry teeth at me.
Old Hales sons do bend their brows at me•
And are aggrieved that Mustaffa hath
Showed himself a better man then they.
And yet the Ianizars morn for me,
They know Mustaffa never proved false.
I, I have been as true to Selimus,
As ever subject to his sovereign,
So help me God and holy Mahomet.
You did it not because you hated vs,
But for you loved the sons of Acomat.
Sinam, I charge thee quickly strangle him,
He loves not me that loves mine enemies.
As for your holy protestation,
It cannot enter into Selims ears:
For why Mustaffa? every merchant man
Will praise his own ware be it ne'er so bad.
For Solimas sake mighty Selimus,
Spare my Mustaffas life, and let me die:
Or if thou wilt not be so gracious,
Yet let me die before I see his death.
Nay S•lima, your self shall also die,
Because you may be in the selfsame fault.
Why stai'st thou Sinam? strangle him I say.
Sinam 
Ah Selimus, he made thee Emperor,
And wilt thou thus requite his benefits?
Thou art a cruel tiger and no man,
That coul'st endure to see before thy face,
So brave a man as my Mustaffa was,
Cruelly strangled for so small a fault.
Thou shalt not after live him Solima.
It were pity thou should st want the company
Of thy dear husband: Sinam strangle her.
And now to fair Amasi• let vs march.
Acomats wife, and her unmanly host,
Will not be able to endure our sight,
Much less make strong resistance in hard fight.
Welcome my Lords into my native soil,
The crown whereof by right is due to me:
Though Solemn by the Janissaries choice,
Through usurpation keep the same from me.
You know contrary to my fathers mind,
He was enthronized by the Bassaes will,
And after his enstalling, wickedly
By poison made good Baiazet to die.
And strangled Corcut, and exiled me.
These injuries we come for to revenge,
And raise his s•ege from fair Amasia walls.
Prince of Amasia, and the rightful heir
Unto the mighty Turkish Diadem:
With willing heart great Tonombey hath left
Egyptian N•lus and my fathers court,
To aide thee in thy undertaken war,
And by the great V•ancassanos ghost,
Companion unto mighty Tamberlaine,
From whom my father lineally descends,
Fortune shall show her self too cross to me,
But we will thrust Selimus from his throne,
And reave•• Acomat in the Empirie.
Thinks to the uncontrolled Tonombey.
But let vs haste vs to Amasia,
To succoar my besieged citizens.
None but my Queen is overseer there,
And too too weak is all her policy,
Against so great a foe as Selimus.
Summon a parley sirs that we may know
Whether these Mushroms here will yield or no.
A parley: Queen of Amasi•, and her soldiers on the walls.
What craves thou bloud-thirstie parricide?
First not enough that thou hast foully slain,
Thy loving father noble Baiazet,
And ••ringlet Corcut thine unhappy brother
Slain brave Mustaffa, and fair S•lima?
Because they fauou•ed my unhappy sons,
But thou must yet seek for more massacres▪
Go, wash thy gui•tie hands in luke-warme blood.
En•ch thy soldiers with robberies:
Yet do the heavens still bear an equal eye,
And vengeance follows thee even at the heals.
Queen of Amasia, wilt thou yield thy self?
First shall the ouer-flowing Euripus
Of sue•t •ub•ea stop his restless•e course
And Ph•abc bright globe bring the day frō the west,
And quench his hot flames in the E•terne sea.
Thy bloody sword ungracious Selimus
Sheathed in the bowels of thy dearest friends:
Thy wicked guard which still attends on th•e,
Fleshing themselves in murder, lust, and rape:
What hope of favour▪ what security?
Rather what death do they not promise me?
Then think not Selimus that we will yield,
But look for strong resi•stance at our hands.
Why then you never daunted lanizaries,
Advance your shields and uncontrolled spears,
Your conquering hands in foe-mens blood embay,
For Selimus himself will lead the way.
Alarm, beats them off the walls. Alarm.
Now sturdy dame, where are your men of war
To guard your person from my angry sword?
What? though braved vs on your city walls,
Like to that Amanonian Menalip,
Leaving the banks of swift-stream'd Thermodon
To challenge combat with great Hercules:
Yet Selimus hath plucked your haughty plumes,
Nor can your spouse rebellious Acomat,
Nor Alinda, or Amurath your sons,
Deliver you from our victorious hands.
Solemn I scorn thy threatenings as thy self.
And though ill hap hath given me to thy hands,
Yet will I never beg my life of thee.
Fortune may chance to frown as much on thee.
And Acomat whom thou doest scorn so much,
May take thy base Tartarian concubine,
As well as thou hast took his loyal Queen.
Thou hast not fortune tied in a chain,
Nor doest thou like a wary pilot sit,
And wisely stir this all containing barge.
Thou art a man as those whom thou hast slain,
And some of them were better far then thou.
Strangle her Hali, let her scold no more.
Now let vs march to meet with Acomat,
He brings with him that great Egyptian bug,
Strong Tonombey, Vsan-Cassanos son.
But we shall soon with our fine tempered swords,
Engrave our prowess on their bugane•s,
Were they as mighty and as fell of force,
As those old earth-bred brethren, which once
Heap hill on hill to s•ale the starry sky,
When Briareus armed with a hundredth hands,
Flung forth a hundredth mountains at great Jove,
And when the monstrous giant Monichus
Hue•lt mount Olimpus at great Mars his targe,
And darted cedars at Mineruas shield.
What are the urchins crept out of their dens,
Under the conduct of this porcupine?
Doest thou not tremble Acomat at vs,
To see how courage masks in our looks,
And white-wing'd victory sits on our swords?
Captain of Egypt, thou that vant'st thy self
Sprung from great Tamberlaine the Scythia thief,
Who bad the enterprise this bold attempt,
To set thy fee•e within the Turkish confines•
Or lift thy hands against our majesty?
Brother of Treb•sond, your squared words,
And broad-mouth'd terms, can never conquer vs.
We come resolved to pull the Turkish crown,
Which thou doest wrongfully detain• •rome me,
By conquering sword from of thy coward crest.
Acomat, sith the quarrel touches none
But thee and me: I dare, and challenge thee.
Should he accept the combat of a boy?
Whose unripe years and far vnriper wit
Like to the bold foole-hardie Phaetun
That sought to rule the chariot of the sun,
Hath moved thee t'vndertake an Empirie.
Thou that resoluest in peremptory terms,
To call him boy that scorns to cope with thee:
But thou can better use thy bragging blade,
Then ••ou ca•st rule thy ove•flowing tongue,
Soon shalt thou know that Selims mighty arm
Is able to overthrow poor Tonombey.
The field is lost, and Acomat is taken.
Ah Tonombey, how can thou show thy face
To thy victorious sire, thus conquered.
A matchless knight is warlike Selimus.
And like a shepherd amongst a swarm of gnats,
Dings down the •lying Persians with their swords.
Twice I encountered with him hand to hand,
And twice returned foiled and ashamed.
For never yet since I could manage Arms,
Could any match with mighty Tonombey,
But this heroic Emperor Selimus.
Why stand I still, and rather do not fly
The great occision which the victors make?
Thus when the coward Greeks fled to their ships,
The noble Hector all besinear'd in blood,
Returned in triumph to the walls of Troy.
A gallant trophy, Bassaes have we won,
Beating the neuer-foyled Tonombey,
And hewing passage through the Persians.
As when a lyon raving for his pray,
Falls upon a droaue of horned balls,
And rends them strongly in his kingly paws.
Or Mars armed in his adamantiue coat,
Mounted upon his firie-shining wane,
Scatters the troupes of warlike Thracians,
And warmes cold Hebras with hot streams of blood.
Brave Sinam, for thy noble prisoner,
Thou shalt be general of my Janissaries.
And Belierbey of fair Natalia.
Now Acomat, thou monster of the world,
Why stoup'st thou not with reverence to thy king?
Solemn if thou have gotten victory,
Then use it to thy contentation.
If I had conquered, know assuredly
I would have said as much and more to thee.
Know I disdain them as I do thy self,
And scorn to stoup or bend my Lordly knee,
To such a tyrant as is Selimus.
Thou slew my Queen without regard or care,
Of love or duty, or thine own good name.
Then Solemn take that which thy hap doth give,
Disgra'st, displai'st, I longer loath to live.
Then Sinam strangle him: now he is dead,
Who doth remain to trouble Selimus?
Now am I King alone and none but I.
For since my fathers death until this time,
I never wanted some competitors.
Now as the weary wandering traveller
That hath his steppes guided through many lands,
Through boiling soil of Africa and End,
When he returns unto his native home:
Si•s down among his friends, and with delight
Declares the travels he hath overpassed.
So moist thou Selimus, for thou hast trod
The monster-garden paths, that lead to crowns.
Ha, ha, I smile to think how Selimus
Like the Egyptian Ibis hath expelled
Those swarming armies of swift-winged snakes,
That sought to overrun my territories,
When soultring heat the earths green childrē spoils
From forth the fens of venomous Africa,
The generation of those flying snakes,
Do band themselves in troupes, and take their way
To Nilus bounds: but those industrious birds,
Those Ibides meet them in set array,
And eat them up like to a swarm of gnats,
Preventing such a mischief from the land.
But see how unkind nature deals with them:
From out their eggs rises the basilisk,
Whose only sight kills millions of men.
When Acomat lifted his ungracious hands
Against my aged father Baiazet.
They sent for me, and I like Aegipts bird
Have rid that monster, and his fellow mates.
But as from Ibis springs the Basilic.
Whose only touch burns up stones and trees.
So Selimus hath proved a Cocatrice,
And clean consumed all the family
Of noble Ottoman, except himself.
And now to you my neighbour Emperors,
That durst lend aid to Selims enemies,
Sinam those Soldanes of the Orient,
Aegipt and Persia, Selimus will quell,
Or he himself will sink to lowest hell.
This winter will we rest and breath our selves:
But soon as Zephyrus sweet smelling blast
Shall greatly creep over the flourie meads,
We'll have a fling at the Egyptian crown,
And join it unto ours, or loose our own.

