Drink to day and drown all sorrow,
You shall perhaps not doe it to morrow.
Best while you have it use your breath,
There is no drinking after death.
Wine works the heart up, wakes the wi•,
There is no cure against age but it.
It helps the head-ach, cough and tissick,
And is for all diseases Physic.
Then let us swill boys for our health,
Who drinks well, loves the common wealth.
And he that will to bed go sober,
Falls with the leaf still in October.
They are, sir.
It is thought, they may be reconciled.
Tic rather wished, for such, whose reason doth direct their thoughts without self flattery• dare not hope it, Baldwin.
The fires of Love, which the dead Duke believed
His equal care of both would have united,
Ambition hath divided: and there are
Too many on both parts, that know they cannot
Or rise to wealth or honour, their maine ends,
Unless the tempest of the Princes fury
Make troubled seas, and those seas yield fit billows
In their bad arts to give way to a calm,
Which yielding rest and good, prove their ruin,
And in the shipwreck of their hopes and fortunes,
The Dukedom might be saved, had it but ten
That stood affected to the general good,
With that confirmed zeal which brave Aubrey does.
Hee is indeed the perfect character
Of a good man, and so his actions speak him.
But did you observe the many doubts, and c•ution•
The brothers stood upon before they met?
I did; and yet, that ever brother should
Stand on more nice terms, than sworn enemies
After a war proclaimed, would with a stranger
Wrong the reporters credit; they saluted
At distance; and so strong was the suspicion
Each had of other, that before they durst
Embrace, they were by several servants searched,
As doubting concealed weapons, antidotes
Tan openly by both, fearing the room
Appointed for the enter-view was poisoned,
The chairs, and cushions, with like care surveyed;
And in a word in every circumstance
So jealous on both parts, that it is more
Than to be feared, Concord can never join
Minds so divided.
Yet our best endeavours
Should not bee wanting, Gisbert.
Neither shall they.
But what are these?
They are without my knowledge;
But by their Manners, and Behaviours,
They should express themselves.
Since wee serve Role•o
The Elder brother, we•le be Rollians,
Who will maintain us, l•ds, as brave as Romans;
You stand for him?
I doe.
Why, then observe
How much the business, your so longed for business,
By men that are named from their swords concerns you.
Lechery, our common friend, so long kept under,
With whips, and beating fatal hemps, shall rise,
And bawdery, in a French-hood plead, before her
Virginity shall be catted.
Excellent!
And Hell but grant, the quarrel that's between
The Princes may continue, and the business
That's of the sword, t'outlast three suits in Law,
And we will make Attorneys lansprisadoes,
And our brave gown-men practisers of back-sword;
The pewter of all Sergeants maces shall
Be melted, and turned into common flagons,
In which it shall be lawful to carouse
To their most lousy fortunes.
Here's a Statesman.
A creditor shall not• dare, but by petition,
To make demand of any dept; and that
Only once every leap-yeere, in which, if
The debtor may be won for a French crown
To pay a Souls, hee shall be registered
His benefactor.
The Chancellor hears you.
Fear not, I now dare speak as loud as hee,
And will be heard, and have all I speak, Law;
Have you no eyes? there is a reverence due,
From children of the Gown, to men of Action:
How's this?
Even so; the times, the times are changed
All business is not now preferrd in parchment,
Nor shall a grant pass that wants this broad seal;
This seal do ye see? your gravity once laid
My head and heals together in the dungeon,
For cracking a scaled officers crown, for which
A time is come for vengeance, and expect it;
For know, you have not full three hours to live.
Yes, somewhat longer.
To what end?
To hang you; think on that Ruffian.
For you, schoolmaster,
You have a pretty daughter; let me see,
Near three a clock, (by which time I much fear,
I shall be•yrd with kill•ing some five hundred)
Provide a bath, and her to entertain me,
And that shall be your ransom.
Impudent Rascal.
More of the crew.
What are you? Rollians?
No; this for Rollo, and all such as serve him;
We stand for Otto.
You seem men of fashion,
And therefore I'll deal fairly, you shall have
The honour this day to be chronicled
The first men kilt by Grandpree; you see this sword•
A pretty foolish toy, my valour's servant,
And I may boldly say a gentleman,
It having made when it was Charlemaignes,
Three thousand knights; this sir, shall cut your throat,
And doe you all fair service else.
I kiss your hands for the good offer; here's another too, the servant of your servant• shall be proud to be scoured in your sweet guts; till when pray you command me.
Your Idolater, •ir.
That ever such should hold the names of men,
Or Justice be held cruelty, when it labours
To pluck such weeds up!
Yet they are protected, and by the great ones.
Not the good ones, Baldwin.
Is this a time to be spent thus by such
As are the principal ministers of the State?
When they that are the h•ads, have filled the Court
With factions, a weak woman only left
To s•ay their bloody hands? can her weak arms
Alone divert the dangers ready now
•o fall upon the Common-wealth, and bury
The honours of it, leaving not the name
Of what it was. Oh Gisbert, the fair trials
And frequent proofs which our late master made,
Both of your love and faith, gave him assurance,
To choose you at his death a Guardian; nay,
A father to his sons; and that great trust
How ill doe you discharge? I must be plain,
That, at the best, y' are a sad looker on
Of those bad practices you should prevent•
And whore's the use of your Philosophy
In this so needful a time? be not secure;
For, Baldwin, be assured, since that the Princes
When they were young, and apt for any form,
Were given to your instruction, and grave ordering;
Twill be expected that they should be good,
Or their bad manners will be imputed yours.
It was not in one, my Lord, to alter nature,
Nor can my counsels work on them that will •o.
Vouchsafe me hearing.
Doe these answers sort,
Or with your place, or persons, or your years;
Can Go•bert being the pillar of the Laws,
See them trod under foot, or forced to serve
The Princes unjust ends; and with a frown
Be silenced from exclaiming on th'abuse;
Or Baldwin only weep the desperate madness
Of his seduced pupils? see their minds,
Which with good arts he laboured to build up
Examples of succeeding Times, o'returnd
By undermining parasites; no one precept
Leading to any Art, or great, or good,
But is forced from their memory, in whose room
Black counsels are received, and their retirements,
And secret conference producing only
Devilish designs, a man would shame to father;
But I talk when I should doe, and chide others
For that I now offend in: See it confirmed,
Now doe, or never speak more.
We are yours.
You shall know whom I am.
I doe, my equal.
Thy Prince• give way,—were we alone, I'd force thee,
In thy best blood, to write thy self my subject,
And glad I would receive it.
Sir.
Dear Lord.
Thy subject?
Yes, nor shall tame patience hold me
A minute longer, only half my self;
My birth gave me this Dukedom, and my sword
Shall change it to the common grave of all
That tread upon her bosom, ere I part with
A piece of earth, or title that is mine.
It needs not, and I would scorn to receive,
Though offered, what I want not: therefore know
From me, though not delivered in great words,
Eyes red with rage, poor pride, and threatened action:
Our father at his death, then, when no accent,
Were it thou a son, could fall from him in vain,
Made us Coheires• our part of Land and Honours
Of equal weight; and to see this confirmed,
The oaths of these are yet upon record,
Who though they should forsake me, and call down
The plagues of perjury on their sinful heads,
I would not leave my self.
Nor will we see the Will of the dead Duke infringed.
Nor I the elder robed of what's his right.
Nor you?
Let me take place, I say, I will not see it;
My sword is sharpest.
Peace you tinder-boxes,
That only carry matter to make a flame
Which will consume you.
You are troublesome,
This is no time for arguments, my Title
Needs not your schoole-defences, but my sword,
With which the Gordian of your Sophistry
Being cut, shall show the Imposture. For your laws,
It is in me to change them when I please,
I being above them; Gisbert would you have me protect them•
Let them now stretch their extremest rigour,
And seize upon that traitor; and your tongue
Make him appear first dangerous, then odious;
And after, under the pretence of safety,
For the sick State, the Lands and Peoples quiet,
Cut off his head: and I'll give up my sword,
And fight with them at a more certain weapon
To kill, and with authority.
Sir, I grant the Laws are useful weapons, but found ou•
T'assure the Innocent, not to oppress.
Then you conclude him Innocent?
The Power your father gave him, must not prove a Crime,
Nor should you so receive it.
To which purpose,
All that dare challenge any part in goodness,
Will become suppliants to you.
They have none
That dare move me in this; hence, I defy you,
Be of his party, bring it to your laws,
And thou thy double heart, thou popular fool,
Your moral rules of Justice and her balance;
I stand on mine own guard.
Which thy injustice
Will make thy enemies; by the memory
Of him, whose better part now suffers for thee,
Whose reverend ashes with an impious hand
Thou throw'st out to contempt, in thy ripening
At his so Just decree; thou art unworthy
Of what his last Will, not thy merits, gave thee,
That art so swollen• within, with all those mischiefs
That ever made up a Tyrant, that thy breast,
The prison of thy purposes, cannot hold them,
But that they break forth, and in thy ow•e words
Discover, what a monster they must serve
That shall acknowledge thee.
Thou shalt not live to be so happy.
Nor your miseries begin in murder,
Duty, allegiance, and all respects of what you are, forsake me:
Doe you stare on? is this a Theater?
Or shall these kill themselves, like to mad fencers,
To make you sport? keep them asunder, or
By heaven I'll charge on all.
Keep the peace.
I am for you, my lord, and if you'll have me,
I'll act the Constables part.
Live I to see this?
Will you doe that your enemies dare not wish,
And cherish in your selves those furies, which
Hell would cast out? Doe, I am ready• kill me,
And these, that would fall willing sacrifices
To any power that would re•tore your reason,
And make you men again, which now you are not•
These are your bucklers boy.
My hindrances;
And were I not confirmed, my Justice in
The taking of thy life, could not weigh down
The wrong, in shedding the least drop of blood
Of these whose goodness only now protects thee,
Thou should feel I in act would prove my self
What thou in words dost labour to appear.
Hear this, and talk again? I'll break through all•
But I will reach thy heart.
It is bettes guarded.
Make way, or I will force it, who are those•
My sons? my shames; turn all your swords on me,
And make this wretched body but one wound,
So this unnatural quarrel find a grave
In the unhappy womb that brought you forth:
Dare you remember that you had a mother,
Or look on these gray hairs, made so with tears,
For both your goods, and not with age; an• yet
Stand doubtful to obey her? from me you had
Life, nerves, and faculties, to use these weapons;
And dare you raise them against her, to whom
You owe the means of being what you are?
All peace is meant to you.
Why is this war, then?
As if your arms could be advanced, and I
Not set upon the rack? your blood is mine,
Your dangers mine, your goodness I should share in•
I must be branded with those impious marks
You stamp on your own foreheads and on mine,
If you go on thus: for my good name therefore,
Though all respects of honour in your selves,
Bee in your fury choackt, throw down your swords;
Your duty should beswifter than my tongue;
And join your hands while they be innocent;
You have heate of blood, and youth apt to Ambition,
To plead an easy pardon for what's past:
But all the ills beyond this hour committed,
From gods or men must hope for no excuse,
Can you hear this unmoved,
No syllable of this so pious charm, but should have powe•
To frustrate all the juggling deceits,
With which the devil blinds you.
I begin to melt, I know not how.
Mother, I'll leave you;
And sir, be thankful for the time you live,
Till wee meeet next (which shall bee soon and sudden)
To her persuasion for you.
O yet, stay,
And rather than part thus, vouchsafe me hearing
As enemies; how is my soul divided?
My love to both, is equal, as my wishes;
But are returned by neither; my grieved heart,
Hold yer a little longer, and then break.
I kneel to both, and will speak so, but this
Takes from me the authority of a mothers power;
And therefore, like my self, Otto, to thee,
(And yet observe, son, how thy mothers tears
Outstrip her forward words, to make way for'em.)
Thou art the younger, Otto, yet be now
The first example of obedience to me,
And grow the elder in my love.
The means to be so happy?
This; yield up thy sword,
And let thy piety give thy mother strength
To take that from thee which no enemies force
Could ever despoil thee of: why dost thou tremble,
And with a fearful eye fixed on thy brother,
Observ'st his ready sword, as bent against thee?
I am thy armour, and will be pierced through,
Ten thousand times, before I will give way
To any peril may arrive at thee;
And therefore fear not.
It is not for my self,
But for you, mother; you are now engaged
In more that lies in your unquestioned virtue;
For, since you have disarmed me of defence,
Should I fall now, though by his hand, the world
May say it was your practise.
All worlds perish,
Before my piety turn treasons parent,
Take it again, and stand upon your guard,
And while your brother is, continue armed;
And yet, this fear is needless, for I know,
My Rollo, though hee dares as much as man,
So tender of his yet untainted valour,
So noble, that he dares doe nothing basely.
You doubt him; he fears you; I doubt and fear
Both; for others safety, and not mine own.
Know yet, my sons, when of necessity
You must deceive, or be deceived; it is better
To suffer treason, than to act the traitor;
And in a war like this, in which the glory
Is his that's overcome: consider then
What it is for which you strive: is it the dukedom?
Or the command of these so ready subjects?
Desire of wealth? or whatsoever else
Fires your ambition? This still desperate madness,
To kill the people which you would be lords of;
With fire, and sword, to lay that country waste
Whose rule you seek for: to consume the treasures,
Which are the sinews of your government,
In cherishing the factions that destroy it:
Far, far be this from you: make it not questioned
Whether you have interest in that dukedom,
Whose ruin both contend for.
I desire but to enjoy my own, which I will keep.
And rather than posterity shall have cause
To say I ruined all, divide the dukedom,
I will accept the moiety.
I embrace it.
Divide me first, or tear me limb by limb,
And let them find as many several graves
As there are villages in Normandy:
And it is less sin than thus to weaken it.
To hear it mentiond doth already make me
Envy my dead lord, and almost blaspheme
Those powers that heard my prayer for fruitfulness,
And did not with my first birth close my womb:
To me alone my second blessing proves
My first of misery, for if that heaven
Which gave me Rollo, there had stayed his bounty,
And Otto, my dear Otto, ne'er had been,
Or being, had not been so worth my love,
The stream of my affection had run constant
In one fair current, all my hopes had been
Laid up in one; and fruitful Normandy
In this division had not lost her glories:
For as tic now, tic a fair diamond,
Which being preserved entire, exceeds all value,
But cut in pieces (though these pieces are
Set in fine gold by the best work-mans cunning)
Parts with all estimation: So this Dukedom,
As it is yet whole, the neighbouring Kings may covet,
But cannot compass; which divided, will
Become the spoil of every barbarous foe
That will invade it.
How this works in both!
Prince Rollos eyes have lost their fire.
And anger, that but now wholly possessed
Good Otto, hath given place to pity.
End not thus Madam, but perfect what's so well begun.
I see in both, fair signs of reconcilement,
Make •hem sure proofs they are so: the Fates offer
To your free choice, either to live Examples
Of piety, or wickedness: if the later
Blinds so your understanding, that you cannot
Pierce through her painted out-side, and discover
That she is all deformity within,
Boldly transcend all presidents of mischief,
And let the last, and the worst end of tyrannies,
The murder of a mother, but begin
The stain of blood you after are to heighten:
But if that virtue, and her sure rewards,
Can win you to accept her for your guide,
To lead you up to heaven, and there fix you
The fairest Stars in the bright Sphere of Honour;
Make me the parent of an hundred sons,
All brought into the world with joy, not sorrow,
And every one a father to his country,
In being now made mother of your concord.
Such, and so good, loud fame for ever speak you.
I, now they meet like Brothers.
My hearts joy flows through my eyes.
May never women's tongue
Hereafter be accused, for this ones Goodness.
If we contend, from this hour, it shall be
How to overcome in brotherly affection.
Otto is Rollo now, and Rollo, Otto,
Or as they have one mind, rather one name:
From this atonement let our lives begin,
Be all the rest forgotten.
Spoke like Rollo.
And to the honour of this reconcilement,
Wee all this night will at a public Feast
With choice wines drown our late fears, and with music
Welcome our comforts.
Sure and certain ones.
Did ever such a hopeful business end t•us?
Tic fatal to us all, and yet you Grandpree,
Have the least cause to fear.
Why; what's my hope?
The certainty that you have to be hanged•
You know the Chancellors promise.
Plague upon you.
What think you of a Bath and a Lords daughter
To entertain you?
Those desires are off.
Frail thoughts, all friends, no Rollians now, nor Ottoes•
The several court•sies of our swords and servants
Defer to after consequence; let's make use
Of this nights freedom, a short Parliament to us,
In which it will be lawful to walk freely.
Nay, to our drink we shall have meat too, that's
No usual business to the men o'th'sword.
Drink deep with me to night, we shall to morrow
Or whip, or hang the merrier.
Lead the way then.
why should this trouble you?
It does, and must doe till I find ease.
Consider then, and quickly;
And like a wise man, take the current with you,
Which once turned head, will sink you; blessed occasion
Offers her self in thousand safeties to you;
Time standing still to point you out your purpose,
And resolution (the true child of Virtue)
Ready to execute: what dull cold weakness
Has crept into your bosom, whose mere thoughts
Like tempests, plowing up the sailing Forests,
Even with their swing were wont to shake down hazards.
What is it, your mothers tears?
Pry thee be patient.
Her hands held up? her prayers, or her curses?
Oh power of paper dropped through by a woman!
Take heed the •ouldiers see it not; it is miserable,
In Rollo below miserable; take heed your friends,
The sinews of your cause, the strength you stir by,
Take heed, I say, they find it not: take heed
Your own repentance (like a passing-bell)
Too late, and too loud, tell the world you're perished:
What noble spirit, eager of advancement,
Whose employment is his plough; what sword whose sharpness
Waits but the arm to wield it; or what hope,
After the world has blown abroad this weakness,
Will move again, or make a wish for Rollo?
Are we not friends again by each oath ratified,
Our tongues the Heralds to our hearts?
Poor hearts then.
Our worthier friends.
No friends sir, to your hono•r;
Friends to your fall: where is your understanding,
The noble vessel that your full soul sailed in,
Ribbed round with honours; where is that? it is ruined,
The tempest of a women's sighs has sunk it.
Friendship, take heed sir, is a smiling harlot
That when she kisses, kills, a soderd friendship
Pieced out with promises; O painted ruin!
Latorch, he is my brother.
The more doubted;
For hatred hatched at home is a tame Tiger,
May fawn and sport but never leaves his nature;
The jars of brothers, two such mighty ones,
Is like a small stone thrown into a river,
The breach scarce heard, but view the beaten current,
And you shall see a thousand angry rings
Rise in his face, still swelling and still growing;
So jars circling distrusts, distrusts breed dangers,
And dangers death, the greatest extreme shadow,
Till nothing bound 'hem but the shore their graves;
There is no manly wisdom, nor no safety
In leaning to this league, this pieced patch friendship;
This reared up reconcilement on a billow,
Which as it tumbles, totters down your fortune;
First not your own you reach at? Law and Nature
Ushering the way before you; is not hee
Borne and bequeathd your subject?
Ha.
What fool would give a storm leave to disturb his peace•
When he may shut the casement? can that man
Has won so much upon your pity,
And drawn so high, that like an ominous Comet,
He darkens all your light; can this touched Lyon
(Though now he licks and locks up his fell paws,
Craftily huming, like a catt to cozen you)
But when ambition whetts him, and time fits him,
Leap to his prey, and seizd once, suck your heart out?
Doe you make it conscience?
Conscience Latorch, what's that?
A fear they tie up fools in, Natures coward,
Paling the blood, and chilling the full spirit
With apprehension of mere clouds and shadows.
I know no conscience, nor I fear no shadows.
Or if you did; if there were conscience,
If the free soul could suffer such a curb
To the fiery mind, such puddles to put it out;
Must it needs like a rank Vine, run up rudely,
And twine about the top of all our happiness
Honour and rule, and there sit shaking of us?
It shall not, nor it must not; I am satisfied,
And once more am my self again:
My mothers tears and womanish cold prayers,
Farewell, I have forgot you; if there be conscience,
Let it not come betwixt a crown and me,
Which is my hope of bliss, and I believe it:
Otto, our friendship thus I blow to ayre,
A bubble for a boy to play withal;
And all the vows my weakness made, like this,
Like this poor heartless rush, I rend in pieces:
Now you go right, sir, now your eyes are open.
My fathers last petition's dead as he is,
And all the promises I closed his eyes with,
In the same grave I bury.
Now y' are a man, sir.
Otto, thou show my winding sheet before me,
Which ere I put it on, like heavens blessed fire
In my descent Isle make it blush in blood;
A Crown, A Crown, Oh sacred Rule, now fire me;
Nor shall the pity of thy youth, false brother,
Although a thousand Virgins kneel before me,
And every dropping eye a court of mercy,
The same blood with me, nor the reverence
Due to my mothers blessed womb that bred us,
Redeem thee from my doubts: thou art a wolf here,
Fed with my fears, and I must cut thee from me:
A Crown, A Crown; Oh sacred Rule, now fire me:
No safety else.
But be not too much stirred, Sir, nor to high
In your execution: swallowing waters
Run deep and silent, till they are satisfied,
And smile in thousand Curls, to guild their craft;
Let your sword sleep, and let my two edged wit work
This happy feast, the full joy of your friendships
Shall be his last.
How my Latorch?
Why thus, sir;
Isle presently go dive into the Officers
That minister at Table• gold and goodness,
With promise upon promise, and time necessary,
Isle pour into them.
Can thou doe it neatly?
Let me alone, and such a bait it shall be,
Shall take off all suspicion.
Go, and prosper.
Walk in then, and your smoothest face put on sir.
A Hot day, a hot day, vengeance hot day boys•
Give me some drink, this fire's a plaguy fritter•
Body of me, I'm dry still; give me the Jack boy;
This wooden Skiff holds nothing.
And faith master, what brave new meats? for here will be old eating.
Old and young, boy, let 'em all eat, I have it;
I have ballasse for their bellies, if they eat a gods name,
Let them have ten tire of teeth a peace, I care not;
But what new rare munition?
Pish, a thousand;
Isle make you pigs speak French at table, and a fat swan
Come sailing out of England with a challenge;
Isle make you a dish of calves-feet dance the Canaries,
And a consort of crammed capons fiddle to 'hem;
A calves head speak an Oracle, and a dozen of Larks
Rise from the dish, and sing all supper time;
Tic nothing boys: I have framed a fortification
Out of Rye paste, which is impregnable,
And against that, for two long hours together,
Two dozen of marrow-bones shall play continually:
For fish, Isle make you a standing lake of white broth,
And pikes come ploughing up the plums before them;
Orion, like a Dolphin, playing Lachrymae,
And brave king Herring with his oil and onion
Crowned with a Lemon pill, his way prepared
With his strong Guard of Pilchers.
I marry master.
All these are nothing: Isle make you a stubble Goose
Turn of the toe thrice, doe a cross point presently,
And sit down again, and cry come eat me:
These are for mirth. Now sir, for matter of mourning,
Isle bring you in the Lady Loin of Veale,
With the long love she bore the Prince of Orange.
Thou boy, thou.
I have a trick for thee too,
And a rare trick, and I have done it for thee.
What's that good master?
It is a sacrifice.
A full Vine bending, like an Arch, and under
The blown god Bacchus, sitting on a Hogshead,
His Altar Beer: before that, a plump Vintner
Kneeling, and offering incense to his deity,
Which shall be only this, red Sprats and Pilchers.
This when the Table's drawn, to draw the Wine on.
Thou hast it right, and then comes thy Song, Butler.
This will be admirable.
Oh sir, most admirable.
If you'll have the pasty speak, it is in my power,
I have fire enough to work it; come, stand close,
And now rehearse the Song, We may be perfect,
The drinking Song, and say I were the Brothers.
Well have you borne your selves; a red Dear Pie, Boys,
And that no lean one, I bequeath your virtues;
What friends hast thou to day? no citizens?
Yes father, the old Crew.
By the mass true wenches:
Sir, set by a chine of Beef, and a hot Pasty,
And let the Jowl of Sturgeon be corrected:
And doe you mark sir, stalk me to a Pheasant,
And see if you can shoot her in the Cellar.
God a mercy Lad, send me thy roaring bottles,
And with such Nectar I will see 'em filled•
That all thou speak shall be pure Helicon.
Monsieur Latorche? what news with him? Save you.
Save you Master, save you gentlemen,
You are casting for this preparation;
This joyful supper for the royal Brothers:
I'm glad I have met you fitly, for to your charge
My bountiful brave Butler, I must deliver
A Bevy of young Lasses, that must look on
This nights solemnity, and see the two Dukes,
Or I shall lose my credit; you have Stowage?
For such freight Isle find room, and be your servant.
Bring them, they shall not starve here Isle send'em victuals
Shall work you a good turn, though't be tend a yes hence, sir.
God-a-mercy noble Master.
Nay, Isle do it.
And wine they shall not want, let'em drink like Ducks.
What misery it is that minds so royal,
And such most honest bounties, as yours are,
Should be confined thus to uncertainties.
I, were the State once settled, then we had places.
Then we could show our selves, and help our friends, sir.
I, then there were some savour in it, where now
We live between two stools, every hour ready
To tumble on our noses; and for ought we know yet,
For all this Supper, ready to fa•t the next day.
I would fine speak unto you out of pity,
Out of the love I bear you, out of honesty,
For your own goods; nay, for the general blessing.
And we would as fine hear you, pray go forward.
Dare you but think to make your selves up certainties
Your places, and your credits ten times doubled,
The Princes favour, Rollos.
A sweet Gentleman.
I, and as bounteous, if he had his right too.
By the mass, a Royal gentleman, indeed Boys,
He`de make the chinmeyes smoke.
He would do`t friends,
And you too, if he had his right, true Courtiers;
What could you want then? dare you?
Pray you be short sir.
And this my soul upon it, I dare assure you,
If you but dare your parts.
Dare not me Monsieur:
For I that fear nor fire, nor water, sir,
Dare doe enough, a man would think.
Believe it, sir,
But make this good upon us you have promised,
You shall not find us flinchers.
Then Isle be sudden.
What may this mean? and whither would he drive us?
And first, for what you must doe, because all danger
Shall be apparently tied up and mussell'd,
The matter seeming mighty: there's your pardons.
Pardons? I'st come to that, gods defend us.
And here's five hundred Crowns in bounteous earnest,
And now behold the matter.
What are these, sir?
And of what nature? to what use?
I imagine.
Will they kill Rats? they eat my pies abominably•
Or work upon a woman cold as Christmas:
I have an old Jade sticks upon my fingers,
May I taste them?
Is your will made?
And have you said your prayers? for theyle pay you:
And now to come up to you, for your knowledge,
And for the good you never shall repent you
If you be wisemen now.
Wise as you will, sir.
These must be put then into the several meats
Young Otto loves, by you into his wine, sir,
Into his bread by you, Into his linen.
Now if you desire, you have found the means
To make you, and if you dare not, you have
Found your ruin; resolve me ere you go.
You'll keep your faith with us.
May I no more see light else
Why tic done then?
Tic done.
Tic done which shall be undone.
About it then, farewell, you're all of one mind.
All?
All: All: All.
Why then all happy.
What did wee promise him?
Doe you ask that now?
I would be glad to know what it is.
Isle tell you.
It is to be all villanes, knaves, and traitors.
Fine wholesome titles.
But if you dare, go forward.
Wee may be hanged, drawn, and quartered.
Very true, sir.
What a goodly swing I shall give the gallows? yet I think too, this may be done, and yet wee may be rewarded, not with a rope, but with a royal master: and yet wee may be hanged too.
Say it were done; who is it done for? is it not for Rollo?
And for his right?
And yet we may be hanged too.
Or say he take it, say wee be discovered?
Is not the fame man bound to still protect us?
Are we not his?
Sure, he will never fail us.
If he doe, friends, we shall find that will hold us;
And yet me thinks, this prologue to our purpose,
These crowns should promise more: tic easily done,
As easy as a man would roast an egg,
If that be all; for look you, gentlemen,
Here stand my broths, my finger slips a little,
Down drops a dose, I stir him with my ladle,
And there's a dish for a Duke: •lla Podrid•.
Here stands a baked meat, he wan•• a little seasoning,
A foolish mistake; my Spice-box, gentlemen,
And put in some of this, the matter • ended;
Dredge you a dish of plovers, there's the Art on it.
Or as I fill my wine.
Tic very true, sir.
Bl•ssing it with your hand, thus quick and neatly first, tic past
And done once, tic as easy
For him to thank us for it, and reward us.
But tic a• damned sin.
O, never fear that.
The fire's my play-fellow, and now I am resolved, boys.
Why then, have with you.
The same for me.
For me too.
And now no more our worships, but our lordships.
Not this year, on my knowledge, Isle unlord you.
PErfume the room round, and prepare the table,
Gentlemen officers, wait in your places.
Make room there,
Room for the Dukes meat. Gentlemen, be bare there,
Clear all the entrance: Guard, put by those gapers,
And gentlemen-ushers, see the gallery clear,
The Dukes are coming on.
Tic certainly informd.
Reward the fellow, and look you mainly to it.
My life for yours, sir.
Now am I straight• my lords, and young again,
My long since blasted hopes shoot out in blossoms,
The fruits of everlasting love appearing;
Oh! my blessed boys, the honour of my years,
Of all my cares, the bounteous fair rewarders.
Oh! let me thus embrace you, thus for ever
Within a mothers love lock up your friendships:
And my sweet sons, once more with mutual twinings,
As one chaste bed begot you, make one body:
Blessings from heaven in thousand showers fall on you:
Oh! women's goodness never to be equalled,
May the most sinful creatures of thy sex
But kneeling at thy monument, rise saints.
Sit down my worthy sons; my lords. your places.
I, now me thinks (the table's nobly furnish;
Now the meat nourishes; the wine gives spirit;
And all the room stuck with a general pleasure,
Shows like the peaceful bows of happiness.
Long may it last, and from a heart filled with it,
Full as my cup: I give it round, my lords.
And may that stubborn heart be drunk with sorrow
Refuses it; men dying now, should take it;
Shake off their miseries, and sleep in peace.
You are sad, my noble brother.
No, indeed, sir.
No sadness my son this day.
Pray you eat.
Something is here you have loved; taste of this dish
It will prepare your stomach.
Thank you brother: I am not now disposed to eat.
Or that.
You put us out of heart man, come, these baked meats
Were ever your best diet.
None, I thank you.
Are you well, noble child?
Yes, gracious mother.
Give him a cup of wine, then, pledge the health,
drink it to me, Isle give it to my mother.
Doe, my best ehilde.
I must not, my best mother,
Indeed I dare not: for of late, my body
Has been much weakened by excess of diet;
The promise of a fever hanging on me.
And even now ready, if not by abstinence
And will you keep it in this general freedom;
A little health preferrd before our friendship.
I pray you excuse me, sir.
Excuse your self sir,
Come tic your fear, and not your favour brother,
And you have done me a most worthy kindness
My Royal mother, and you noble Lords;
Here, for it now concerns me to speak boldly;
What faith can be expected from his vows,
From his dissembling smiles, what fruit of friendship
From all his dull embraces, what blessed issue,
When he shall brand me here for base suspicion,
He takes me for a poisoner.
Gods defend it son.
For a foul knave, a villain, and so fears me.
I could say something too.
You must not so sir,
Without your great forgetfulness of virtue;
This is your brother, and your honoured brother.
If he please so.
One noble father, with as noble thoughts,
••got your minds and bodies: one care rocked you•
•nd one truth to you both was ever sacred;
Now fie my Otto, whither flies your goodness,
Because the right hand has the power of cutting,
Shall the left presently cry out tic maimed?
They are one my child, one power, and one performance,
And joined together thus, one love, one body.
I doe beseech your grace, take to your thoughts
More certain counsellors than doubts or fears,
They strangle nature, and disperse themselves
(If once believed) into such fogs and errors
That the bright truth her self can never se•er:
Your brother is a royal gentleman
Full of himself, honour, and honesty,
And take heed sir, how nature bent to goodness,
(So straight a Cedar to himself) uprightness
Be wrested from his true use, prove not dangerous
Nay my good brother knownes I am too patient.
Why should your Grace think him a poisoner
Has hē no more respect to piety!
And but he has by oath tied up his fury
Who durst but think that thought.
Away thou firebrand.
If men of his sort, of his power, and place
The eldest son in honour to this Dukedom.
For shame contain thy tongue, thy poisonous tongue
That with her burning venom will infect all,
And once more blow a wilde fire through the dukedom.
Latorche, if thou be honest, or a man,
Contain thy self.
Go too, no more, by heaven
You'll find you've played the fool else, not a word more.
Prithee sweet son.
Let him alone sweet mother, and my Lords
To make you understand how much I honour
This sacred peace, and next my innocence
And to avoid all further difference
Discourse may draw on to a way of danger
I quit my place, and take my leave for this night,
Wishing a general joy may dwell among you.
Shall we waite on your grace?
I dare not break you, Latorche.
Oh mother that your tenderness had eyes,
Discerning eyes, what would this man appear then,
The tale of Synon when he took upon him
To ruin Troy; with what a cloud of cunning
He hid his heart, nothing appearing outwards,
But came like innocence, and dropping pity,
Sighs that would sink a Navy, and had tales
Able to take the ears of Saints, belief too,
And what did all these? blew the fire to Illium,
Hi• crafty art (but more refined by study)
My brother has put on: oh I could tell you
But for the reverence I bear to nature,
Things that would make your honest blood run backward.
You dare tell me?
Yes, in your private closet
Where I will presently attend you; rise
I am a little troubled, but twill off.
Is this the joy I looked for?
All will mend,
Be not disturbed dear mother, Isle not fail you.
I doe not like this.
That is still in our powers,
But how to make it so that we may like it.
Beyond us ever; Latorche me thought was bu•ie,
That fellow, if not looked to narrowly will doe a sudden mischief.
Hell look to him,
For if there may be a devil above all, yet
that rogue will make him; keep you up this night,
And so will I, for much I fear a danger.
I will, and in my watches use my prayers.
You wonder Madam, that for all the shows
My brother Rollo makes of hearty love
And free possession of the Dukedom twixt us;
I notwithstanding should stand still suspiscious,
As if beneath those veils, he did convey
Intents and practises of hate, and treason?
It breeds indeed my wonder.
Which makes mine,
Since it is so safe and broad a beaten way,
Beneath the name of friendship to betray.
Though in remote and further of affections,
These falsehoods are so common, yet in him
They cannot so force nature;
The more near
The bands of truth bind, the more oft they sever,
Be•ng better cloaks to cover falsehood over.
It cannot be, that fruits the tree so blasting
Can grow in nature; take heed gentle son
Least some subbornd suggester of these treasons,
Believed in him by you, provoked the rather
His tender envies, to such foul attempts;
Or that your too much love to rule alone
Breed not in him this Jealous pas•ion;
Th•re is not any ill we might not bear
Were not our good held at a price too dear?
So apt is treachery to be excused,
That innocence is still aloud abused,
The fate of virtue even her friends perverts,
To plead for vice oft times against their hearts,
Heavens blessing is her curse, which she must bear
That she may never love.
Alas, my son, nor fate, nor heaven it self,
Can or would wrest my whole care of your good
To any least securenesse in your ill:
What I urge issues from my curious fear;
Least you should make your means to scope your snare,
Doubt of sincerenesse is the only mean
Not to incense it, but corrupt it clean.
I rest as far from wrong of sincerenesse,
As he flies from the practice, trust me Madam,
I know by their confessions, he suborned,
What I should eat, drink, touch, or only have scented,
This evening feast was poisoned, but I fear
This open violence more, that treacherous odds
Which he in his insa•iate thirst of rule
Is like to excute.
Believe it Son•
If still his stomach be so foul to feed
On such gross objects, and that thirst to rule
The state alone be yet unquenched in him,
Poisons and such close treasons ask more time
Than can suffice his fiery spirits hast:
And were there in him such desire to hide
So false a practise, there would likewise rest
Conscience and fear in him'of open force,
And therefore close nor open you need fear.
Good Madam, stand not so inclined to trust
What proves his tendrest thoughts to doubt it just,
Who knows not the unbounded flood and sea,
In which my brother Rolloes appetites
Alter and rage with every puff and breath,
His swelling blood exhales, and therefore hear,
What gives my temperate bro•her cause to use
His readiest circumspection, and consult
For remedy against all his wicked purposes;
If he arm, arm, if he strew mines of treason,
Meet him with countermines, it is justice st•ll
(For goodness sake) t'encounter ill with ill.
Avert from us such jnstice, equal heaven,
And all such cause of justice.
Past all doubt
(For all the sacred privilege of night)
This is no time for us to sleep or rest in;
Who knows not all things holy are prevented
With ends of all impiety, all but
Lust, gain, ambition.
Perish all the world
Ere I but loose one foot of possible Empire,
Be slights and colour used by slaves and wretches
I am exempt by birth from both these curbs,
And since above them in all justice, since
I sit above in power, where power is given,
Is all the right supposed of earth and heaven.
Prove both sir, see the traitor.
He comes armed, see Mother, now your c•nfidence.
What rage affects this monster?
Give me way or perish.
Make thy way viper, if thou thus affect it.
This is a treason like thee.
Let her go.
Embrace me, wear me as thy shield, my son;
And through my breast let his rude weapon run,
To thy lives innoscence.
Play not two parts,
Treacher and coward both; but yield a sword,
And let thy arming thee be odds enough
Against my naked bosom.
Loose his hold.
Forbear base murderer.
Forsake our mother.
Mother, dost thou name me, and put off nature thus?
Forsake her traitor.
Or by the spouse of nature through hers,
This leads unto thy heart.
Hold.
Hold me still.
For twenty hearts and lives I will not hazard
One drop of blood in yours.
Oh thou art lost then.
Protect my innocence, heaven.
Call out murder.
Be murdered all, but save him.
Murder, murder•
Cannot I reach you yet.
No fiend.
Latorche, rescue, I'm down.
Up then, your sword cools sir,
Ply it in the flame, and work your ends out.
Ha, have at you there sir.
Author of prodigies, what sights are these?
Oh give me a weapon, Aubrey.
Oh part'em, part'em.
For heavens sake no more.
No more resist his fury, no rage can
Add to his mischief done.
Take spirit my Otto,
Heaven will not see thee dye thus.
He is dead, and nothing lives but death of every goodness.
Oh he hath slain his brother, curse him heaven.
Curse and be cursed, it is the fruit of cursing•
Latorche, take off here, bring too, of that blood
To colour ore my shirt, then raise the Court
And give it out how he attempted us
In our bed naked, shall the name of brother
Forbid us to enlarge our state and powers?
Or place affects of blood above our reason?
That tells us all things good against another,
Are good in the same line against a brother.
What affairs inform these out-cries?
See and grieve.
Prince Otto slain I
Oh execrable slaughter I
What hand hath author'd it?
Your Scholars, Baldwin.
Unjustly urged, Lord Aubrey, as if I,
For being his Schoolmaster, must own this doctrine,
You are his Counsellours, did you advise him
To this foul parricide?
If rule affect this licence, who would live
To worse, than dye in force of his obedience?
Heavens cold and lingering spirit to punish sin,
And humane blood so fiery to commit it,
One so outgoes the other, it will never
Be turned to fit obedience.
Burst it then
With his full swing given, where it brookes no bound,
Complaints of it are vain; and all that rests
To be our refuge (since our powers are strengthless)
Is to conform our wills to suffer freely,
What with our murmurs we can never master;
Ladies, be pleased with what heavens pleasure suffers,
Erect your princely countenances and spirits,
And to redress the mischiefs now resistless,
Sooth it in show, rather than curse or cross it;
Which all amends, and vow to it your best,
But till you may perform it, let it rest.
Those temporizings are too dull and servile,
To breath the free ayre of a manly soul,
Which shall in me expire in execrations,
Before, for any life I sooth a m•rtherer.
Pour lives before him, till his own be dry
Of all lives services and human comforts:
None left that looks at heaven is half so base
To doe those black and hellish actions grace.
Haste Latorche
And raise the City as the Court is raised
Proclaiming the abhorred conspiracy
In plot against my life.
I haste my Lord.
You there that morn upon the justly slain,
Arise and leave it if you love your lives,
And hear from me what (kept by you) may save you.
What will the Butcher doe? I will not stir.
Stir, and unforc't stir, or stir never more:
Command her, you grave Beldam, that know better
My deadly resolutions, since I drew them
From the infective fountain of your own,
Or if you have forgot, this fiery prompter
Shall fix the fresh impression on your heart.
Rise daughter, serve his will in what we may
Least what we may not he enforce the rather,
Is this all you command us?
This addition only admitted, that when I endeavour
To quit me of this slaughter you persume not
To cross me with a syllable for your souls;
Murmur, nor think against it, but weigh well,
It will not help your ill, but help to more,
And that my hand wrought thus far to my will,
Wi•l check at nothing till his circle fill.
Fill it, so I consent not, but who soothes it
Consents, and who consents to tyranny, does it.
False traitoress die then with him.
Are you mad, to offer at more blood, and make your self
More horrid to your people? Isle proclaim,
It is not as your instrument will publish.
Doe, and take that along with you —so nimble,
Resign my sword, and dare not for thy soul
To offer what thou insolently threaten;
One word, proclaiming cross to what Latorch
Hath in Commission• and intends to publish.
Well sir, not for your threats, but for your good,
Since more hurt to you would more hurt your country,
And that you must make virtue of the need
That now compels you, Isle consent as far
As silence argues to your will proclaimed:
And since no more sons of your Princely father
Survives to rule but you, and that I wish
You should rule like your father, with the love
And zeal of all your subjects; this foul slaughter
That now you have committed made ashamed
With that fair blessing, that in place of plagues,
Heaven•ies our me••ing disposition, which
Take here your sword, which now use like a Prince,
And no more like a Tyrant.
This sounds well, live and be gracious with us.
Oh Lord Aubrey.
He flatters thus?
He temporises fitly.
Wonder invades me• doe you two think much,
That he thus wisely, and with need consents
To what I author for your Countries good?
You being my Tutor, you my Chancellor.
Your Chancellor, is not not your Flatterer •ir.
Nor, Is it your Tutors part to shield such doctrine?
Sir, first know you•
In praise of your pure Oratory that raise you.
That when the people, who I know by this
Are raised out of their rests, and hastening hither•
To witness what is done here, are arrived
With••• Latorch, that you extemp•r•
Shall fashion an Oration to acquit
And justify this forced fact of mine;
Or for the proud refusal lose your head.
I fashion an Oration to acquit you?
Sir, know you then, that tic a thing less easy
To excuse a parricide than to commit it.
I doe not wish you sir, to excuse me,
But to accuse my brother, as the cause
Of his own slaughter by attempting mine.
Not for the world, I should power blood on blood•
It were another murder to accuse
Him that fell innocent.
Away with him, hence, hail him straight to executio•
Far fly such rigour your amendfull hand.
He perishes with him that speaks for him•
•uard doe thy office on him, on your lives-paine.
Tyrant, twill has•e thy own death.
Let it wing it,
No threatens me; Villains t••re him piece, meal 〈◊〉.
Avaunt sir.
Force him hence.
Dispatch him Captain,
And bring me instant word he i• dispatched.
And how his re••eke takes it.
Isle not fail sir.
Captain, besides remember this in chief;
That being executed you deny
To all his friends the ritz of funeral,
And cast his carcass out to dogs and •oules.
Tic done my Lord.
Upon your life not fail.
What impious daring is there here of heaven?
Sir now prepare your self against the people,
Make here their entry to discharge the Oration,
He hath denied my will.
For fear of death? ha, ha, ha,
Is death ridiculous with you?
Works misery of age this, or thy judgement•
Judgment false tyrant.
You'll make no Oration then?
Not to excuse, but aggravate thy murder if thou wilt;
which I will so enforce, Isle make thee wreak it
(With hate of what thou win'st by it) on thy self,
With such another justly merited murder.
Isle answer you anon.
The citizens are hasting sir in heapēs, all full resolved
By my persuasions of your brothers Treason•:
Honest Latorch.
See sir, here's Gisberts head.
Good speed; wast with a sword?
An axe fir.
An axe, it was vildely done, I would have had
My own fine Headsman done it with a sword:
Go, take this dotard here, and take his head
Off with a sword.
Your School•master•
Even he.
For teaching thee no better; tic the best
Of all thy damned justices; away
Captain, Isle follow.
Oh stay there Duke, and in the midst of all thy blood and fury,
Hear a poor maids petitions, here a daughter,
The only daughter of a wretched father•
Oh stay your haste as you shall need this mercy.
Away with this fond woman.
You most hear me,
If there be any spake of pity• in you,
If sweet humanity and mercy rule you;
I doe confess you are a Prince, your anger
As great as you, your execution greater.
Away with him.
Oh Captain, by thy manhood
By her soft soul that bear thee, I doe confess sir,
Your doom of justice on your foes most righteous;
Good noble Prince look on the••
Take her from me.
A curse upon his life that hinders me;
May fathers blessing never fall upon him,
May heaven never hear his prayers: I beseech you,
Oh sir, these few tears beseech you; these chaste hands woo you
Th•• never yet were heaved but to things holy,
Things like your self, you are a God above us;
Be as a God then, full of saving mercy;
Mercy, oh mercy, for his sake mercy;
That when your stout heart weapes shall give you pity;
Here I must grow.
By heaven Isle strike thee woman.
Most willingly, let all thy anger seek me,
All the most studied torments, so this good man,
This old man, and this innocent escape thee.
Carry him away, I say.
Now blessing on thee, oh sweet pity,
I see it in thy eyes. I charge you soldiers
Even by the Princes power, release my father;
The Prince is merciful, why doe you hold him?
He is old, why doe you hurt him? speak, oh speak sir;
Speak, as you are a man; a mans life hangs sir,
A friends life, and a foster life upon you:
Tic but a word, but mercy, quickly spoke sir;
Oh speak Prince, speak.
Will no man here obey me?
Have I no rule yet? as I live he dies
That does not execute my will, and suddenly.
All that thou can doe, takes but one short hour from me.
Hew off her hands.
Lady hold off.
No hew'm,
Hew off my innocent hands as he commands you,
They'll hang the faster on for deaths convulsion;
Thou seed of rocks, will nothing move thee then:
Are all my tears lost? all my righteous prayers
Drowned in thy drunken wrath? I stand thus then
Thus boldly, bloody Tyrant,
And to thy face in heavens high name defy thee;
And may sweet mercy when thy soul sighs for it,
When under thy black mischi••es thy flesh trembles,
When neither strength, nor youth, nor friends, nor gold
Can stay one hour, when thy most wretched conscience
Waked from her dream of death like fire shall melt thee,
When all thy mothers tears, thy brothers wounds,
Thy peoples fears and curses, and my loss,
My aged fathers loss shall stand before thee.
Save him I say, run, save him, save her father
Fly and redeem his head.
May then that pity,
That comfort thou expect'st from heaven, that mercy
Be locked up from thee, fly thee, howling find thee,
Despair, oh my sweet father, storms of terrors,
Blood till thou burst again.
Oh fair sweet anger.
I am two late sir, it was dispatched before•
And his head is hear.
And my heart there; go bury him.
Give him fair rites of funeral, decent honour•.
Wilt thou not take me monster? heighest heaven
Give him a punishment fit for his mischief.
I fear thy prayer is heard, and he rewarded•
Lady have patience, it was unhappy speed;
Blame not the Duke, it was not his fault, but fates,
He sent, you know to stay it, and commanded
In care of you, the heavy object hence
Soon as it came? have better thoughts of him.
Whore's this young Traitor?
Noble citizens• here;
Any here the wounds he gave your sovereign Lord.
This Prince of force must be
Beloved of heaven, whom heaven hath thus preserved.
And if he be beloved of heaven, you know,
He must be just, and all his actions so.
Concluded like an Oracle, oh how great
A grace of heaven is a wise ••••zen?
For heaven tic makes them wise, as 't makes me just,
As it preserves me, as I now survive
By his strong hand to keep you all alive;
Your wives, your children, goods and lands kept yours,
That had been else preys to his tyrannous power,
That would have preyed on me, in bed a•salted me
In sacred time of peace; my mother here,
My sister, this just Lord, and all had felt
The curtian gulf of this conspiracy,
Of which my Tutor and my Chancellor,
Two of the gravest and most counted honest
In all my Dukedom) were the monstrous head•;
Oh trust no honest men for their sakes ever
My politic Citizens, but those that breathe
The names of Cut-throats, usurers an Tyrants;
Oh those believe 〈◊〉, for the •whole mouthed world
Can give no better terms to •imple goodness:
Even m• it dares blaspheme, and thinks me tyrannou•
For saving my own life, sought by my brother:
Yet those that sought his life before by poison
(Though my own servants, hoping to please me)
Isle lead to death fort, which your eyes shall see.
Why, what a Prince is here?
How just?
How gentle?
Well, now my dearest subjects; or much rather
My nerves, my spirits, or my vital blood;
Turn to your needful rest, and settled peace,
Fix in this root of steel, from whence it sprung
In heavens great help and blessing: but ere sleep
Bind in his sweet oblivion your dull senses,
The name and verme of heavens King; advance
For yours, in •hiefe for my deliverance.
Heaven and his King save our most pious sovereign.
Thanks my good people: mother and kind sister,
And you my noble kinsmen, things borne thus,
Shall make you all command what ever I
Enjoy in this my absolute Empery,
Take in the body of my princely brother;
For whose death, since his fate no other way,
Would give my eldest birth his supreme right;
We will morn the cruel influence it bears,
And wash his sepulchre with kindly tears.
If this game end thus, heavens will rule the se•.
What we have yielded to, we could not let.
Good Lady rise, and raise your spirits withal,
More high than they are humbled; you have cause,
As much as ever honoured happiest Lady;
And when your ears are freer to take in
Your most amendfull and unmatched fortunes,
Isle make you drown a hundred helpless deaths
In sea of one life powered into your bosom;
With which shall flow into your arms, the ri•hes,
The pleasures, honours, and the rule• o• P•in•••;
Which though death stop your ea•es, me thinks should ope'm
Assay to forget death.
Oh slaughtered father.
Taste of what cannot be redressed, and bless
The fate that yet you curse so; sin•e for that
You spake so movingly, and your sweet eyes
With so much grace filled, that you set on fire
The Dukes affection, whom you now may rule
As he rules all his Dukedom, is it not sweet?
Does it not shine away your sorrows clouds•
Sweet Lady, take wi•e heart, and hear, and tell me•
I hear no word you speak.
Prepare to hear then,
And be not barred up from your self, nor add
To your ill fortune with your far worse judgement•
Make me your servant to attend with all joys
Your sad estate, till they both bless and speak it:
See how they'll bow to you, make me waite, command m•
To watch out every minute, for the stay
Your modest sorrow fancies, raise your graces,
And doe my hopes the honour of your motion,
To all the offered heights that now attend you:
Oh how your touches ravish? how the Duke
Is slain already with your flames embraced?
I will both serve and vi•ite you, and often.
I am not fit sir.
Time will make you Lady.
COme bring in these fellows, on, away with them.
Make room before there, room for the prisoners•
Let's run before boys, we shall have no places else•
Are these the youths?
These are the youths you look for,
And, pray my honest friends, be not so hasty,
There will be nothing done till we come, I assure you.
Here's a wise hanging, are there no more?
Doe you hear sir? you may come in for your share if you please.
My friend, if you be unprovided of a hanging,
You look like a good fellow, I can afford you
A reasonable peny-worth.
Before, before boys, here's enough to make us sport.
Pox take you,
Doe you call this sport? are these your recreations?
Must we be hanged to make you mirth?
Doe you hear sir?
You custard pate, we go to it for high treason,
An honourable fault: thy foolish father
Was hanged for stealing sheep.
Away, away boys.
Doe you see how that sneaking rogue looks now?
You, chip, Pantler, you peaching rogue, that provided us these
necklaces: you poor rogue, you costive rogue you.
Pray, pray, fellows.
Pray for thy crusty soul? whore's your reward now,
Goodman Manchet, for your fine discovery?
I doe beseech you sir, where are your dollars?
Draw with your fellows, and be hanged.
He must now.
For now he shall be hanged first, that's his comfort,
A place too good for thee, thou meal mouthed rascal.
Hang handsomely for shame, come leave your praying
You peaking knave, and die like a good courtier;
Die honestly, and like a man; no preaching,
With I beseech you take example by me,
I lived a lewd man, good people; pox ont:
Die me as if thou had dined, say grace, and God be with you,
Come, will you forward?
Good Mr Sheriff, your leave to, this hasty work
Was ne'er done well: give us so much time as but to sing
Our own Ballads, for weal trust no man,
Nor no tune but our own; it was done in Ale too,
And therefore cannot be refused in justice.
Your penny pot Poets are such pelting thieves,
They ever hang men twice; we have it here sir,
And so much every merchant of our voyage,
Heal make a sweet return else of his credit.
One fit of our own mirth and then we are for you.
Make haste then, dispatch.
There's day enough, sir.
Come boys, sing cheerfully, we shall ne'er sing younger•
We have chosen a loud tune too, because it should like well.
Come, Fortune's a whore, I care not who tell her,
Would offer to strangle a page of the Cellar,
That should by his oath, to any mans thinking,
And place, have had a defence for his drinking;
But thus she does still, when she pleases to palter,
In stead of his wages, she gives him a halter.
Three merry boys, and three merry boys, and three merry boys are we,
As ever did sing in a hempen string, under the gallow-tree.
But I that was so lusty,
And ever kept my bottles,
That neither they were musty,
And seldom less than pottles,
For me to be thus stopped now,
With hemp in stead of cork sir,
And from the gallows lopped now,
Shows that there is a fork sir,
In death, and this the token,
Man may be two ways killed,
Or like the bottle, broken,
Or like the wine, be spilled.
Three merry boys, &amp;c
Oh yet but look on the master Cook, the glory of the kitchen,
In sowing whose fate at so lofty a rate, no Taylor ere had stitching•
For though he makes the man, the Cooke yet makes the dishes;
The which no Taylor can, wherein I have my wishes,
That I who at so many a feast have pleased so many tasters,
Should now my self come to be dressed, a dish for you my masters•
Three merry boys, &amp;c.
There's a few copies for you; now farewell friends:
And good Mr Sheriff, let me not be printed
With a brass pot on my head.
March fair, march fair, before good Captain Pantler.
Pant. Oh man or beast, or you at least,
That wear or brow or antler,
Prick up your ears, unto the tears
Of me poor Paul the Pantler,
That thus am clipped because I chipt
The cursed crust of Treason
With loyal knife: Oh doleful strife,
To hang thus without reason.
LAtorch, I have waited here to speak with you,
And you must hearken: Set not forth your legs
Of haste, nor put yonr face of business on;
An honester affair than this I urge too,
You will not easily think on; and twill be
Reward to entertain it: Tic your fortune
To have our Masters •are above the rest
Of us that follow him, but that no man envies:
For I have well con••dered, truth sometimes
May be conveyed in by the same conduits
That falsehood is: These courses that he takes,
Cannot but end in ruin; Empire got
By blood and violence, must so be held;
And how unsafe that is, he first will prove,
That toiling still to remove enemies,
Makes him self more; it is not now a Brother
A faithful Councellor of estate or two,
That are his danger, they are far dispatched
It is a multitude that begin to fear,
And think what began there, must end in them,
For all the fine Oration that was made 'em;
And they are not an easy monster quelld.
Princes may pick their suffering Nobles out;
And one by one employ 'em to the block; but when they once grow formidable to their clowns, and cobblers, ware then, guard themselves; if thou durst tell him this, Lotorche, the service would not discredit the good name you hold with men, be∣sides the profit to your master, and the public.
I conceive not so, sir.
They are airy fears; and why should I object them unto his fancy?
Wound what is yet •and? your counsels colour no•,
With reason of state, where all thats necessary still is just?
The actions of the prince, while they succeed,
Should be made good, and glorified; not questioned,
Men doe but show their ill affections, that —
What? speak out.
Doe murmur against their masters.
Is this to me?
It is to whosoever mislikes of the Dukes courses
I, first so? at your stateward, sir?
I'm sworn to hear nothing may prejudice the prince.
Why doe you? or have you, ha?
I cannot tel, men's hearts show in their words sometims.
I everthought thee
Knave of the chamber, art thou the spy too?
A watchman for the state, and one that's known
Sir, to be rightly affected.
Baud of the state;
No less than of thy masters lusts. I now
See nothing can redeem thee; doest thou mention
Affection, or a heart that ne'er had any?
Know not to love or hate, but by the state,
As thy prince does`t before thee? that dost never
Wear thy own face, but put on his, and gather'st•
Baits for his •ares: liv'st wholly at his beck,
And ever thou dare utter a thought's thine own,
Must expect his; crep'st forth and wad'st into him
As if thou were to pass a ford, there proving
Yet if thy tongue may stop on safely, or no:
Then bring his virtue asleep, and stayst the wheel
Both of his reason, and judgement, that they move no•.
Whet over all his vices; and at last
Dost draw a cloud of words before his eyes,
Till hee can neither see thee, nor himself?
Wretch; I dare give him honest counsels, I;
And love him while I tell him truth: old Aubrey
Dares go the straightest way, which still`s the shortest,
Walk on the thorns thou scatter'st, Parasite,
And tread 'em into nothing: and if thou
Then let a look fall, of the least dislike,
Isle rip thy crown up with my sword at height,
And pluck thy skin over thy face: in sight
Of him thou flatter; unto thee I speak it,
Slave, against whom all laws, should now conspire,
And every creature that hath sense, be armed,
As against the common enemy of mankind;
That sleepst within thy masters ear, and whisp'erst
Tic better for him to be feared, than lovd:
Bid him trust no mans friendship, spare no blood,
That may secure him; tic no cruelty
That hath a spacious end; for sovereignty
Break all the laws of kind; if it succeed
An honest, noble, and prayse-worthy deed;
While hee that takes thy poisons in, shall feel
Their virulent workings in a point of time,
When no repentance can bring aid, but all
His spirits shall melt, with what his conscience burned
And dying in flatterers arms, shall fall unmournd.
Theres matter for you now.
My lord, this makes not, for loving of my master.
Loving? no.
They hate ill Princes most that make them so.
Isle hear no more.
Alas, tic for my brorher. I beseech your highness.
How, a brother? had not I one my self? did title
Move me when it was fit that hee should dye? away.
Brother, loose no word more, leave my good cause
T`upbraid the tyrant, I`me glad, •`me fallen,
Now in those times that willed some great example
To assure men wee can die for honesty.
Sir, you are brave; pray that you hold your neck
As bravely forth anon unto your headsman.
Would hee would strike as bravely, and thou by.
Rollo, t'would make thee quake to see me die.
Whats his offence?
For giving Gisbert burial; who was sometimes his master,
Yes: lord Aubery.
My gratitude, and humanity, are my crimes.
Why bear you him not hence?
My lord (stay soldiers)
I doe beseech your highness, doe not loose
Such men for so slight causes. This is one
Has still been faithful to you, a tried soul
In all your fathers battles; I have seen him
Bestride a friend, against a score of foes,
And look, he looks as hee would kill his hundred
For you, sir, were you in some danger.
Till hee killed his brother, his chancellor, then his
Master, to which he can add nought to equal Narrow,
But killing of his mother.
Peace, brave fool;
Thou valiant ass, here is his brother too, sir,
A captain of your guard, hath served you long,
With the most noble witness of his truth
Marked in his face, and every part about him,
That turns not from an enemy. But view him,
Oh doe not grieve him sir, if you doe mean
That hee shall hold his place: it is not safe
To tempt such spirits, and let them wear their swords,
You'll make your guards your terrors by these Acts
And throw more hearts of from you then you hold:
And I must tell you sir, (with my old freedom
And my old faith to boot) you have not livd so
But that your state will need such men, such hands
Of which here is one, shall in an hour of trial
Doe you more certain service with a stroke,
Than the whole bundle of your flatterers
With all the unsavoury unction of their tongues•
Peace, talker.
One that loves you yet, my lord.
And would not see you pull on your own ruins•
Mercy becomes a Prince, and guards him best,
Awe and affrights are never ties of Love;
And when men begin to fear the Prince, they hate him.
Am I the Prince, or you?
My Lord I hope I have not utterd ought should urge that question.
Then practise your obedience, see him dead.
My Lord,
Isle hear no more.
I'm sorry then; theres no small despair, sir, of their safety, whose ears are blocked up against truth; come Captain.
I thank you, sir.
For what? for seeing thy brother dye a man, and honest?
Live thou so Captain, I will I assure thee,
Although I die for it too: come—
Now Latorche, what doe you think?
That Aubreys speech and manners sound somewhat of the boldest
Tic his custom.
It may be so, and yet be worth a fear.
If we thought so, it should be worth his life, and quick∣lie too.
I dare not, sir, be author
Of what I would be, tic so dangerous;
But with your highness favour and your licence.
He talks, tic true; he is licenced: leave him,
We now are Duke alone, Latorche, securd;
Nothing left standing to obscure our prospect,
We look right forth, beside, and round about us,
And see it ours with pleasure: only one
Wished joy there wants, to make us to possess it,
And that is Edith, Edith, she that got me
In blood and tears, in such an opposite minute,
As had I not once set all the flames
And shaft of Love shot in me (his whole armoury)
I should have thought him as far off as death.
My Lord, expect a while, your happiness
Is nearer than you think it, yet her griefs
Are greene and fresh; your vigilant Latorche
Hath not been idle: I have leave already
To visit her, and send to her•
My life.
And if I find not out as speedy ways
And proper instruments to work and bring her
To your fruition; that she be not watched
Tame to your Highness wish, say you have no servant
Is capable of such a trust about you,
Or worthy to be secretary of your pleasure.
Oh my Latorche, what shall I render thee
For all thy travails, care and love?
Sir, one suit, which I will ever importune, till you grant me•
About your Mathematitians?
Yes to have
The Scheme of your nativity judged by them,
I hav't already erected; Oh my Lord,
You doe not know the labour of my fears,
My doubts for you are such as cannot hope
Any security, but from the Stars;
Who, being rightly asked, can tell man more
Than all power else, there being no power beyond them•
All thy petitions still are care of us,
Ask for thy self.
What more can concern me, than this?
Well, rise true honest man, and go then,
We'll study our selves a means how to reward thee.
Your grace is now inspired; now, now your Highness
Begins to live, from this hour count your joys:
But, Sir, I must have warrants, with blanks figurd,
To put in names, such as I like.
You shall.
They dare not else offer, Sir, at your figure•
Oh I shall bring you wonders; ther's a Friar
Rusee, an admirable man, another
A gentleman, and then Lafiske,
The mirror of his time; it was he that set it•
But there's one Norbret, (him I never saw)
Has made a mirror, a mere Looking-glasse,
In show you`lt think it no other; the form oval,
As I am given to understand by letter,
Which renders you such shapes, and those so differing,
And some that will be questioned and give answers;
Then has he set it in a frame, that wrought
Unto the revolutions of the Stars,
And so compact by due proportions
Unto their harmony, doth move alone
A true automaton; thus Dedalus Statues,
Or Vulcans Tools —
Dost thou believe this?
Sir? why, what should stay my faith, or turn my sense?
He has been about it above twenty years,
Three sevens, the powerful, and the perfect numbers;
And Art and Time, Sir, can produce such things.
What doe I read there of Herbs banquet?
The great Gymnosophist, that had his Butlers
And carvers of pure gold waiting at table?
The images of Mercury, too, that spoke?
The wooden door that flew? a snake of brass
That hist? and birds of silver that did sing?
All those new done by the Mathematics,
Without which there`s no science, nor no truth.
You are in your sphere, Latorch: and rather
Than Isle contend w'yee for it, Isle believe it.
You've won upon me that I wish to see
My fate before me now, what ere it bee.
And Isle endeavour, you shall know with speed,
For which I should have one of trust go with me,
If you please, Hamond, that I may by him
Send you my first dispatches; after I
Shall bring you more, and as they come still more,
Take your way,
Choose your own means, and be it prosperous to us.
Come, bear up Sirs, we shall have better days,
My Almanac tells me.
What is that? your rump?
It never itched in vain yet, slide la Fiske
Throw off thy •luggish face, I cannot abide
To see thee took like a poor Jade in the pound,
That saw no meat these three days.
Slight, to me
It seems thirteen days since I saw any.
How?
I can't remember that I ever saw
Or meat or money, you may talk of both
To open a mans stomach or his purse,
But feed'em still with ayre.
Friar, I fear
You do not say your Office well a days.
Pox, he feeds
With lechery, and lives upon th'exchange
Of his two Eggs and Puddings with the market women.
And what do you Sir, with the Advocats wife,
Whom you persuade, upon your Doctoral bed,
To take the Mathematical trance so often?
Come, we are stark nought all, bad's the bossed of us,
Four of the seven deadly spots we are;
Besides our Lechery, we are envious,
And most, most gluttonous when we have it thus,
Most covetous now we want it; then our Boy
He is a fifth spot, sloth and he undoes us.
It is true, the child was wont to be industry∣os,
And now and then sent to a Merchants wife
Sick of the husband, or a swearing Butler
That mist of his Bowls, a crying Maid
Had lost a silver spoon; the Curry come
Somtims was wanting; there was something gotten•
But now—
What now? Did not I yester-morning
Bring you in a Cardecu there from the Peasant,
Whosse 〈◊〉 I had driven aside, and hid, that you
Might conjure for him? and then last night,
Six Souse from the Cooks wife, you shared among you
To set a figure for the 〈◊〉 I stole,
It is not at home yet; these things, my Masters,
In a hard time, they would be thought on, you
Talk of your lands and Castles in the ayre,
Of your twelve houses there: but it is I
That bring you in your rents for'em, it is Pippe••
That is your bird-call.
Faith he does w•ll,
And cuts through the Elements for us, I must needs say
In a fine dextrose line.
But not as he did
At first, then he would sail with any wind
Int' every Creek and Corner.
I was light then,
New built and rigged when I came to you, Gentlemen,
But now with often and far venturing for you
Here be leaks Spr••• and whole Plancks wanting see you;
If you'll new sheat• me• •••in, yet I am for you
To any bog or sleights, where ere you'll send me,
For as, 〈◊〉 when•• can this ragged Bark
Put in for any service; less it be
Of the Isle of Rogues, and there turn Pirate for you.
Faith he says reason, Fryer, you must leave
Your neat crisp Gla••et• and fall to your Cider
A while; and you la Fiske, your larded Capons,
And Turkeys for a time• and take a good
Clean Tripe in your way; de Bub too must content him with
wholesome two Soused pe•itoes, no more Crown ordinaries, till
we have clothed our Infant.
So you'll keep
Your own good motions, Doctor, your dear self.
Yes, for we all do know the Latitude
Of your Concupiscence.
Here about your belly.
You'll pick a bottle open or a whimsy,
As soon as the best of us.
And dip your wrists bands,
(For Cuffs you've none) as comely in the sauce
As any Courtier— hark, the Bell, who is there
Good luck I do conjure thee; Boy look out.
They are Gallants, Courtiers, one of'em is
Of the Dukes bed-chamber.
Latorche, down,
On with your gown, there's a new suite arrived,
Did I not tell you, Sons of hunger? Crowns,
Crowns are coming toward you, wine &amp; wenches
You shall have once again, and Fiddlers:
Into your studies close; each lay his ear
To his door, and as you hear me to prepare you
So come, and put me on that vizard only.
You'll not be far hence Captain, when the
Business is done you shall receive present dispatch.
Isle walk Sir, in the Cloister.
Monsieur Latorche; my son
The Stars are happy still that guide you hither.
I'm glad to hear their Secretary say so,
My learned Father Ruse•, whore's la Fiske,
Monsieur de Bub, how do they?
At their studies,
They are the Secretaries of the Stars, Sir,
Still at their books, they will not be pulled off,
They stick like cupping glasses; if ever men
Spoke with the tongue of destiny, it is they.
For loves sake let's salute em.
Boy, go see,
Tell them who's here, say, that their friends do chal∣lenge
Some portion of their time, this is our minutes;
Pray'em they'll spare it: they are the Sun and Moon
Of knowledge; pity two such noble lights
Should live obscured here in an University,
Whose beams were fit, to illumine any Court
Of Christendom•
The Duke will shortly know 'em.
Well, look upon the Astrolabe; you'll find it
Four Almucanturies at least.
It is so.
Still, of their learned stuff, they care for no∣thing,
But how to know, as negligent of their bodies
In diet, or else, especially in their cloths,
As if they had no change.
They have so little
As well may free them from the name of shifters.
Monsieur Latorche?
How is it, learned Gentlemen, with both your virtues?
A most happy hour, when we see you, sir.
When you hear me then
It will be happier; the Duke greets you both
Thus, and though you may touch no money, Father,
Yet you may take it.
It is his highness bounty,
But yet to me, and these that have put off
The world, superfluous.
We have heard of late of his highness good success.
And gratulate it.
Indeed he hath escaped a strange Conspiracy,
Thanks to his Stars; which Stars be prays by me,
You would again consul•, and make a Judgement
On what you lately erected for my love.
Oh, Sir, we dare not.
For our lives.
It is the Princes Scheame.
T'incounter with that fear,
Here's to assure you, his Signet, write your names,
And be secured all three.
We must entreat some time, sir,
I must then entreat it, be as present as you can.
Have you the Scheame here?
Yes.
I would you had sir another Warrant.
What would that do?
Marry we have a Doctor sir, that in this bu∣sinesse
Would not perform the second part.
Not him that you writ to me of?
The very same.
I should have made it, sir, my suite to see him,
Here is a Warrant Father, I conceived
That he had solely applied himself to Magic.
And to their studies too sir, in this field,
He was initiated, but we shall hardly
Draw him from his chair.
Tell him he •hall have gold.
Oh, such a syllable would make him to for∣swear
Ever to breath in your sight.
How then?
Sir, he if you do please to give him any thing,
Must have it conveyed under a paper.
Or left behind some book in his study.
Or in some old wall.
Where his Familiars may tell him of it, and that pleases him, Sir.
Or else Isle go and assay him.
Take gold with you.
That will not be amiss; give it the Boy, Sir,
He knows his holes, and how to bait his Spirits.
We must lay in several places, Sir.
That's true, that if one come not the other may hit.
Well, go then, is he so learned, Gentlemen.
The very top of our profession; mouth of the fates,
Pray Heaven his Spirits be in a good humour to take.
They'll fling the gold about the house else.
I, and beat the Fryer if he go not well
Furnished with holy-water.
Sir, you must observe him.
Not cross him in a word, for then he's gone.
If he doe come, which is hazard, yet
Mass he's here, this is speed.
Where is our Scheme,
Let's see, dispatch, nay fumbling now, who's this?
Chief Gentleman of the Dukes Chamber, Doctor.
Oh, let him be, good even to him, he's a Courtier,
Isle spare his Complement, tell him, what's here?
The geniture Nocturnal, Longitude
At forty nine and ten minutes? How are the Cardines?
Libra in twenty four forty four minutes,
And Capricorn.
I see in, see the Planets,
Where, how are they disposed? the Sun and Mercury,
Mars with the Dragons tail in the third house,
And pars Fortune in the Imo Coeli,
Then Jupiter in the twelve, the Cacodemon.
And Venus in the second Inferno Port.
I see it, peace, then Saturn in the Fifth,
Luna in the Seventh, and much of Scorpio,
Then Mars his Gaudium, rising in th`ascendant,
And joined with Libra too, the house of Venus,
And Iuniu Coeli, Mars his exaltation
In the seventh house, Aries being his natural house
And where he is now seated, and all these show him
To be the Almuter.
Yes, he's Lord of the Geniture,
Whether you examine in by Ptolomeys way,
Or Messethales, Lael, or Alkindus.
No other Planet hath so many dignities
Either by himself• or in regard of the Cusps.
Why hold your tongue then if you know it; Venus
The Lady of the Horoscope, being Libra
The other part, Mars rules: So that the geniture,
Being Nocturnal, Luna is the highest,
None else being in sufficient dignity,
She being in Aries in the Seventh house,
Where Sol exalted, 'is the Alchoroden.
Yes, for you see he hath his Termine
In the degrees where she is, and enjoys
By that, six dignities.
Which are clearly more
Than any else that view her in the Scheame.
Why I saw this, and could have told you too.
That he beholds her with a Trine aspect
Here out of Sagitary, almost partly,
And how that Mars out of the selfsame house,
(But another Sign) here by a Platique aspect
Looks at the Hilege, with a Quartile ruling
The house where the Sun is; all this could I
Have told you, but that you'll outrun me, &amp; more,
That this same Quartile aspect to the Lady of life,
Here in the seventh, promises some danger,
Cauda Draconis being so near Mars,
And Caput Algell in the house of Death.
How Sir? I pray you clear that.
What is the question first?
Of the Dukes life, what dangers threaten him?
Apparent, &amp; those sudden, when the Hyley
Or Alchorodon by direction come
To a Quartile opposition of the place
Where Mars is in the Geniture (which is now
At hand) or else oppose to Mars himself; expect it.
But they may be prevented.
Wisdom only
That rules the Stars, may do it; for Mars being
Lord of the Geniture in Capricorn,
Is, if you mark it, now a Sextile here,
With Venus Lady of the Horoscope.
So she being in her Exilium, which is Scorpio,
And Mars his Gaudium, is ore ruled by him,
And clear debilitated five degrees
Beneath her ordinary power, so
That, at the most she can but mitigate.
You cannot name the persons bring this danger?
No, that the Stars tell us not, they name no man,
That is a work, sir, of another place.
Tell him whom you suspect, and he will guess shrewdly.
Sir, we do fear one Aubrey; if it were he
I should be glad; for we should soon prevent him.
I know him, the Dukes kinsman, a tall man?
Lay hold of't Norbret.
Let me pause a little,
Is he not near of kin unto the Duke?
Yes reverend Sir.
Fart for your reverence, keep it till then; and somewhat high of statutre?
He is so.
How old is he?
About seven and fifty.
His head and beard inclining to be grey.
Right, Sir.
And fat?
He is somewhat corpulent, is he not?
You speak the man, sir.
Well, look to him, farewell.
Oh, it is Aubrey; gentlemen, I pray you,
Let me receive this under all your hands.
Why, he will show you him in his Magic glass
If you entreat him, and but gratify
A Spirit or two more.
He shall eat gold
If he will have it, so shall you all; ther's that
Amongst you first, let me have this to send
The Duke in the mean time; and then what sights
You please to show; Isle have you so rewarded
As never Artists wet, you shall to Court
Along with me, and there wait your fortunes.
We have a pretty part of't in our pockets;
Boy we will all be new, you shall along to.
Good Madam hear the suit that Edith urges•
With such submiss beseeches; nor remain
So strictly bound to sorrow for your son,
That nothing else, though never so befitting,
Obtains your ears, o• ••servation.
What would she say? I hear.
My suit is, Madam,
That you would please to think as well of Justice
Due to your sons revenge, as of more wrong added
To both your selves for it, in only grieving.
Th'undaunted power of Princes, should not be
Confined in deedlesse cold calamity;
Anger, the Twin of sorrow, in your wrongs
Should not be smothered, when his right of birth
Claims the air as well, and force of coming forth.
Sorrow is due already, Anger never
Should be conceived but where it may be borne
In some fact fit t'employ his active flame,
That else consumes who bears it, and abides
Like a false star that quenches as it glides.
I have such means t'employ it as your wish
Can think no better, easier, or securer;
And such as but th'honors I intend
To your partakings; I alone could end:
But your parts in all dues to crying blood
For vengeance in the shedder, are much greater•
And therefore should work your hands to his slaughter,
For your consent to which, it were infinite wrong
To your severe and most partial Justice,
To move you to forget so false a son,
As with a mothers duty made you curse him.
Edith, he is forgot, for any son
Borne of my mother, or to me a brother.
For should we still perform our rights to him
We should partake his wrongs, and as foul be
In blood and damned parricide as he.
And therefore tell the happy means that heaven
Puts in thy hand, for all our longed for freedom
From so abhorred and impious a monster.
Tell what she will, I'll lend nor hand nor ear
To whatsoever heaven puts in her power.
How strange she is to what she chiefly wishes?
Sweet Edith be not any thought the more
Discouraged in thy purpose, but assured
Her heart and prayers are thine; and that we two
Shall be enough to all we wish to doe.
Madam, my self alone, I make no doubt
Shall be afforded power enough from heaven
To end the murderer: all I wish of you,
Is but some richer ornaments and Jewels
Than I am able to provide my self,
To help out the defects of my poor beauty;
That yet hath been enough, as now it is,
To make his fancy mad with my desire?
But you know, Madam, women never can,
Be too fair to torment an amorous man;
And this mans torments I would heighten still,
Till at their highest he be fit to kill.
Thou shalt have all my Jewels and my mothers,
And thou shalt paint too, that his bloods desire
May make him perish in a painted fire;
Hast thou been with him yet?
Been with him? no;
I set that hour back to haste more his longing•
But I have promised to his instruments,
The admittance of a visit at our house,
Where yet I would receive him with all lustre
My sorrow would give leave to, to remove
Suspicion of my purpose.
Thou shalt have
All I can add, sweet wench, in Jewels, tyres•
I'll be my self thy dresser, nor may I
Serve my own love with a contracted husband
More sweetly, nor more amply than moist thou
Thy forward will with his bewitched affections:
Affects thou any personal aid of mine
My noblest Edith?
Nought but your kind prayers
For full effect and speed of my affair.
They are thine, my Edith, as for me, my own;
For thou well know, if blood shed of the best
Should cool and be forgotten, who would fear
To shed blood still? or where (alas) were then
The endless love we owe to worthy men?
Love of the worthiest ever bless your highness.
I never studied my glass till now,
It is exceeding well; now leave me; cozen,
How takes your eye the object?
I have learned
So much sir of the Courtier, as to say
Your person do's become your habit;
But being called unto it by a noble war,
Would grace an armour better.
You are still
For that great Art of which you are the master;
Yet, I must tell you, that to the encounters
We oft attempt, armed only thus, we bring
As troubled blood, fears mixed with flattering hopes,
The danger in the service to as great
As when we are to charge quite through and through
The body of an Army.
I'll not argue
How you may rank the dangers, but will die in it,
The ends which they arrive at, are as distant
In every circumstance, as far as honour
Is from shame and repentance.
You are sower?
I would speak my free thoughts, yet not appear so;
Nor am I so ambitious of the title
Of one that dares talk any thing that was
Against the torrent of his own opinion,
That I affect to speak ought may offend you:
And therefore gracious Sir, •e pleased to think
My manners or discretion have informed me
That I was borne, in all good ends, to serve you;
And not to check at what concerns me not:
I look not with sore eyes on your rich out-side,
Nor wrack my thoughts to find out to what purpose
It is now employed; I wish it may be good,
And that, I hope, offends not for a subject
Towards his Prince in things indifferent;
To use the austerenesse of a Censuring Cato
Is arrogance, not freedom.
I commend
This temper in you, and will cherish it,
They come from Rome, Latorch employed you?
True Sir.
I must not now be troubled with a thought
Of any new design; good Aubrey read 'em,
And as they shall direct you, use my power,
Or to reply or execute,
I will sir.
And Captain, bring a squadron of our guard
To th'house that late was Baldwins, and there wait me.
I shall.
Some two hours hence.
With my best care.
Inspire me Love, and be thy deity
Or scorned or feared, as now thou favour•st me.
My stay to do my duty, may be wrongs
Your Lordships privacy.
Captain, your love
Is ever welcome; I entreat your patience
While I peruse these.
I attend your pleasure.
How's this, a plot on me?
What is contained
In th'letters that I brought, that thus transports him?
To be wrought on by Rogues, and have my head
Brought to the axe by knaves that cheat for bread?
The Creatures of a parasite, a slave;
I find you hear Latorch, not wonder at it;
But that this honest Captain should be made
His instrument, afflicts me; I'll make trial
Whether his will or weakness made him doe it.
Captain you saw the Duke when he commanded
I should do what these letters did direct me,
And I presume you think I'll not neglect
For fear or favour, to remove all dangers
How near soever that man can be to me
From whom they should have birth.
It is confirmed.
Nor would you Captain, I believe, refuse,
Or for respect of thankfulness, or hopes,
To use your sword with fullest confidence
Where he shall bid you strike.
I never have done.
Nor will I think.
I hope it is not questioned.
The means to have it so, is now proposed you•
Draw, so, it is well, and next cut off my head.
What means your Lordship?
It is sir the Dukes pleasure:
My innocence hath made me dangerous,
And I must be removed, and you the man
Must act his will.
I'll be a traitor first, before I serve it thus.
It must be done,
And that you may not doubt it, there's your warren•
But as you read, remember Hamond, that
I never wronged one of your brave profession;
And, though it bee not manly, I must grieve
That man of whose love I was most ambitious
Could find no object of his hate but me?
It is no time to talk now, honoured Sir,
Be pleased to hear thy servant, I am wronged,
And cannot, being now to serve the Duke,
Stay to express the manner how; but if
I doe not suddenly give you strong proofs,
Your life is dearer to me than my own,
May I live base, and dye so: Sir your pardon.
I am both ways ruined, both ways marked for slaughter
On every side, about, behind, before me,
My certain fate is fixed: were I a knave now,
I could avoid this: had my actions
But mere relations to their own ends, I could s•ape now:
Oh honesty! thou elder child of virtue,
Thou seed of heaven, why to acquire thy goodness
Should malice and distrust stick thorns before us,
And make us swim unto thee, hung with hazards?
But heaven is got by suffering, not disputing•
Say he knew this before hand, where am I then?
Or say he do's not know it, whore's my Loyalty?
I know his nature, troubled as the Sea,
And as the Sea devouring when he's vexed,
And I know Princes are their own expounders.
Am I afraid of death? of dying nobly?
Of d•ing in mine innocence uprightly?
Have I met death in all his forms, and fears,
Now on the points of swords, now pitched on lances?
In fires, and storms of arrows, battles, breaches,
And shall I now shrink frō him, when he courts me
Smiling and full of Sanctity? I'll meet him;
My loyal hand and heart shall give this to him,
And though it bear beyond what Poets feign
A punishment, duery shall meet that pain;
And my most constant heart to do him good,
Shall check at neither pale affright, nor blood.
The Duchess presently would crave your presence,
I come; and Aubrey now resolve to keep
Thy honour living, though thy body sleep.
Now for a Fathers murder, and thy ruin,
All chastity shall suffer if he reign;
Thou blessed soul, look down, and steel thy daughter,
Look on the sacrifice she comes to send thee,
And through the bloody cloud behold my piety,
Take from my cold heart fear, from my sex pity,
And as I wipe theses tears off, shed for thee,
So all remembrance may I loose of mercy;
Give me a women's anger bent to blood,
The wildness of the winds to drown his prayers,
Storm like may my destruction fall upon him,
My rage like roving billows as they rise,
Powered on his soul to sink it, give me flattery,
(For yet my constant soul near knew dissembling.
Flattery the food o• •ooles, that I may, rock him
And lull him in the Down of his desires;
That in the height of all his hopes and wishes,
His heaven forgot, and all his lusts upon him,
My hand, like thunder from a could, may seize him.
I hear him come, go boy, and entertain him.
Take, Oh take those lips away
that so swetly were forsworn,
And those eyes, like break of day,
lights that doe mislead the Morn,
But my kisses being again,
Seals of love, though sealed in vain.
Hide, Oh hide those hills of Snow,
which thy frozen blossom bears,
On whose tops the Pincks that grow
are of those that April wears.
But first set my poor heart free,
bound in those Joy chains by thee.
What bright star, taking beauties form upon her,
In all the happy lustre of heavens glory,
He's dropped down from the Sky to comfort me?
Wonder of Nature, let it not profane thee
My rude hand touch thy beauty, nor this kiss;
The gentle sacrifice of love and service
Be offered to the honour of thy sweetness
My gracious Lord, no deity dwells here,
Nor nothing of that virtue, but obedience,
The servant to your will affects no flattery.
Can it be flattery to swear those eyes
Are loves eternal lamps he fires all hearts with?
That tongue the smart string to his bow? those sighs
The deadly shafts he sends into our souls?
Oh, look upon me with thy spring of beauty.
Your grace is full of game.
By heaven, my Edith,
Thy mother fed on Roses when she bred thee.
And thine on brambles that have pricked her heart out.
The sweetness of the Arabian wind still blowing
Upon the treasures of perfumes and spices,
In all their pride and pleasures call thee Mistress.
Will it please you sit sir?
So you please sit by me.
Fair gentle maid, there is no speaking to thee,
The excellence that appears upon thee
Ties up my tongue: pray speak to me.
Of what sir?
Of any thing, any thing is excellent•
Will you take my directions? speak of love then;
Speak of thy fair self Edith; and while thou speak,
Let me, thus languishing, give up my self wen•h.
He has a strange cunning tongue, why doe you sigh sir?
How masterly he turns himself to catch me?
The way to Paradise, my gentle maid,
Is hard and crooked, scarce Repentance finding,
With all her holy helps, the door to enter.
Give me thy hand, what dost thou feel?
Your tears sir.
You weep extremely; strengthen me now justice,
Why are these sorrows sir?
Thou't never love me
If I should tell thee, yet there's no way left
Ever to purchase this blessed Paradise,
But swimming thither in these tears.
I stagger.
Are they not drops of blood?
No.
They are for blood then
For guiltless blood, and they must drop, my Edith,
They must thus drop, •ll I have drowned my mischiefs.
If this be true, I have no strength to touch him.
I prithee look upon me, turn not from me;
Alas I doe confess I'm made of mischief,
Begot with all mans miseries upon me;
But see my sorrows, made, and doe not thou,
Whose only sweetest sacrifice is softness,
Whose true condition, tenderness of nature.
My anger melts, Oh, I shall lose my justice.
Do not thou learn to kill with cruelty,
As I have done to murder with thy eyes,
(Those blessed eyes) as I have done with malice,
When thou hast wounded me to death with scorn,
(As I deserve it Lady) for my true love,
When thou hast laden me with earth for ever,
Take heed my sorrows, and the stings I suffer;
Take heed my nightly dreams of death and horror
Pursue thee not: no time shall tell thy griefs then,
Nor shall an hour of joy add to thy beauties.
Look not upon one as I killed thy father,
As I was smeared in blood, do not thou hate me,
But thus in whiteness of my washed repentance,
In my hearts tears and truth of love to Edith,
In my fair life hereafter.
He will fool me.
Oh with thine angel eyes behold and close me,
Of heaven we call for mercy and obtain it;
To Justice for our right on earth and have it;
Of thee I beg for love, save me, and give it.
Now heaven thy help, or I am gone for ever,
His tongue he's turned me into melting pity.
Keep the doors safe, and upon pain of death
Let no man enter till I give the word.
We shall sir.
Here he is in all his pleasure; I have my wish
How now? why dost thou stare so?
A help, I hope.
What dost thou here? who sent thee?
My brother, and the base malicious Office
Thou made me doe to Aubrey, pray.
Pray?
Pray; pray if thou can pray, I shall kill thy soul else,
Pray suddenly.
Thou can not be so traitorous.
It is a Justice; stay Lady;
For I perceive your end; a women's hand
Must not rob me of vengeance.
It is my glory.
It is mine, stay, and share with me; by the gods, Rollo,
There is no way to save thy life.
No?
No, it is so monstrous, no repentance cures it.
Why then thou shalt kill her first, and what this blood
Will cast upon thy cursed head.
Poor Guard sir.
Spare not brave Captain.
Fear, or the devil he's thee.
Such fear sir as you gave your honoured mother,
When your most virtuous brother, shield like, held her;
Such I'll give you, put her away.
I will not, I will not die so tamely.
Murderous villain, wilt thou draw seas of blood upon thee.
Fear not, kill him good Captain, any way dispatch
Him, my body's honoured with that sword that through me,
Sends his black soul to hell: Oh, but for one hand.
Shake him off bravely.
He's too strong, strike him.
Oh, am I with you Sir? now keep you from him,
What ha•s he got a knife.
Look to him Captain, for now he will be mischievous.
Do you smile Sir?
Do's it so tickle you? have at you once more.
Oh bravely thrust; take heed he come not in Sir;
To him again, you give him too much r•spite.
Yet will you save my life, and I'll forgive thee.
And give the all• all honours, all advancements,
Call thee my friend.
Strike, strike, and hear him not,
His tongue will tempt a Saint.
Oh, for my souls sake.
Save nothing of him.
Now for your farewell,
Are you so warry? take you that.
Thou, that too;
Oh thou hast killed me basely, basely, basely.
The just reward of murder falls upon thee.
How doe you Sir? he's he not hurt you?
No, I feel not any thing.
I charge you let us pass.
You cannot yet sir.
I'll make way then.
We are sworn to our Captain, and till he give the word.
Now let them in there.
Oh, here he lies,
Sorrow on sorrow seeks me, Oh, in his blood he lies,
Had you spoke sooner
This might have been prevented;
Take the Duchess,
And lead her off, this is no sight for her eyes
Oh, bravely done wench.
There stands the noble doer.
My honour ever seek thee for thy justice,
Oh it was a deed of high and brave adventure,
A justice even for h•••en •o envy at,
Farewell my sorrows, and my tears take truee,
My 〈…〉 Oh bloody Brother,
Till this hour never beauteous; till thy life,
Like a full sacrifice for all thy mis•••ifs,
Flowed fro〈…〉 ri•ers, never righteous:
Oh how my eyes 〈…〉 wish then joys how?
My longing heart even leaping out for lightness,
But dye thy black sins with thee. I forgive thee.
Who did this deed?
I, and I'll answer it.
He faints, oh that same cursed knife has killed him.
How?
He snatched it from my hand, for whom I bore it,
And as they grapell'd.
Justice is ever equal,
Had it not been on him, th'adst died too honest.
Did you know of his death?
Yes, and rejoice in it.
I'm sorry for your youth then; though the strictness
Of Law shall not fall on you, that of life
Must presently, go to a Cloister, carry her,
And there for ever lead your life in penitence.
Best Father to my soul, I give you thanks, sir,
And now my fair revenges have their ends,
My vows shall be my kin, my prayers my friends.
Stay there, I'll step in and prepare the Duke,
We shall have brave rewards?
That is without question.
By this time wher's my huffing friend Lord Aubrey?
Whore's that good Gentleman? oh, I could laugh now,
And burst my self with mere imagination;
A wise man, and a valiant man, a just man;
To suffer himself be juggled out of the world,
By a number of poor Gipseys? farewell Swash-buckler,
For I know thy mouth is cold enough by this time;
A hundred of ye I can shave as neatly,
And ne'er draw blood in show: now shall my honour,
My power and virtue walk alone: my pleasure
Observed by all, all knees bend to my worship,
All suits to me as Saint of all their fortunes,
Preferred and crowded too, what full place of credit,
And what place now? your Lordship? no, it is common,
But that I'll think to morrow on, now for my business.
Whose there?
Dead, my Master dead? Aubrey alive too?
Litorche, Sir.
Seize his body.
My Master dead?
And you within this half hour;
Prepare your self good devil, you must to it,
Millions of gold shall not redeem thy mischief,
Behold the Justice of thy practice, villain;
The mass of murders thou hast drawn upon us:
Behold thy doctrine; you look now for reward, sir,
To be advanced, I'em sure, for all your labours?
And you shall have it, make his gallows higher
By ten foot at the least, and then advance him.
Mercy, mercy.
It is too late fool,
Such as you meant for me, away with him.
What gaping knaves are these, bring'em in fellows,
Now, what are you?
Mathematitians if it please your Lordship.
And you drew a figure?
We have drawn many.
For the Duke, I mean; sir Latorches knaves you are.
We know the Gentleman.
What did he promise you?
We are paid already.
But I will see you better paid, go whip them.
We do beseech your Lordship, we were hired.
I know you were, and you shall have your hire;
Whip'em extremely, whip that Doctor there,
Till he record himself a Rogue.
I am one, Sir.
Whip him for being one, and when they are whip't,
Lead'em to the gallows to see their patron hanged;
Away with them.
Ah, good my Lord.
Now to mine own right, Gentlemen.
You have the next indeed, we all confess it,
And here stand ready to invest you with it.
Which to make stronger to you, and the surer,
Then blood or mischiefs dare infringe again,
Behold this Lady, Sir, this noble Lady,
Full of the blood as you are, of that nearness,
How blessed would it be?
I apprehend you, and so the fair Matilda dare a•cept
Me her ever constant servant.
In all pureness,
In all humility of heart and services,
To the most noble Aubrey, I submit me.
Then this is our first tie, now to our business.
We are ready all to put the honour on you, Sir.
These sad rights must be done first, take up the bodies,
This, as he was a Prince, so Princely funeral
Shall waite upon him: on this honest Captain,
The decency of arms; a tear for him too.
So, sadly on, and as we view his blood,
May his Example in our Rule raise good.

Tic true Molosso, fortune hath prepared
A full revenge for thee, without thy hazar'd,
And ere the rising Sun shall yet decline
Imperial thy proud Lord shall fall
As low as hell; one unexpected blow
Shall recompense those many he gave thee;
When imitating foreign cruelty,
He bound thee fast, and made thy feet an Anvil.
Sango, if thou contemplating our friendship,
Begotten first by consanguinity,
And since confirmed by our joint sufferings here,
Hast undertaken some bold stratagem
Against my Patron to revenge my wrongs,
Thy great affection may but ruin me;
Delay not then to make me understand
Thy full intent: believe it will be vain,
Our sword once drawn, to think to sheath again.
Then know, the plot is more securely laid,
Than my weak means (although my will be strong)
Could ever reach, without my certain death;
And by strange chance I did discover it,
Without the Actors knowledge; thou hast heard
Of the old deadly fewd between our Lords,
Which wound although it were in show healed up,
Is broken out afresh; 't was not well searched;
For the last night, at setting of the Sun,
A household business called me to the Garden,
••ere in the thicket, near the Arbor, lying
〈◊…〉 my self, I quickly fell asleep.
Into which Arbor in the mean time came
My Patron, with a Brave accompanied,
A Fellow expert in that Mystery:
At their first entrance to the place I waked,
But durst not stir, for had I, death had seized me;
There was I privy to their whole discourse,
Which was in brief but this, that for the sum
Of fifteen hundred crowns, thy Patrons life
Is sold, and must ere noon be snatched away.
Sure thou did dream, thou were not thoroughly a∣wake,
For though our Lords were lately reconciled,
Mine keeps a careful watch, and never stirs
Out of the City, where he knows he's safe.
He'll be deceived, the rareness of the plot
Did please beyond the dear and longed for Act;
Heir's the design, this being a solemn day
Annually observed by the State,
In memory of a public benefit
Received by the private care of one
Of thy Lords Ancestors, will draw all sorts
Of People to the Temple, where the 〈◊…〉
Clothed like a filly Peasant, is resolved
To watch Imperial, and keep near him,
And when the usual Ceremonies are done,
In the confused Crowd his cunning hand
Shall guide a poisoned dagger to his heart,
And in an instant, letting fall his cloak,
Which shall belarge to hide his rustic habit,
He, with the rest, will stand about the body
And wring his hands at th'horror of the fact,
And thus the Brave shall thy part bravely act,
What? silent? not affected with a joy
Should ravish thee? and swell thy veins with pleasure,
Like to the Ostrich in the act of lust?
Light joys are eas'ly vented; such as this
Is entertained with an ecstasy,
And by degrees expressed: but as the full
Fruition of a thing we most delight in
Is checked with daily fear of losing it,
So find I now my rising heart kept down
With doubt of such a wished happiness,
Had thou, as I beheld the Actors looks
When he declared his resolution,
To my attentive Patron, thou would rest,
Assured of the event, and swear he needed
No other weapon to destroy a man;
His eyes would have outstar'd a Basilisk,
They were two Comets that are surely fatal.
May they portend more mischief to this House,
Then those that blasted ours and our whole Country;
But in this strong desire of a revenge
Discretion must direct our passion;
And therefore let it bee thy chiefest care
Neither in word, nor gesture, to disclose
Thy fortunate discovery, till the end
Shall crown the work, and banish all our fears;
My task shall be to make it profitable
No less then pleasant, by his foreknown fall
Weel raise our selves to wealth and liberty,
The great allurements of those bold attempts,
Wherein the Vassal dares affront his Lord,
And quite shake off the yoke of his subjection.
Our Magnificos think us phlegmatic rascals
Created but for blows, and scorn, so far
In love with servitude as scarce to wish
Revenge or freedom.
They shall find at length
Patience oppressed will into fury turn;
Nature, in spite of fortune gave us minds
That cannot like our bodies be enthral'd;
But soft, I doubt our early privacy
May render vs suspected; leave to me
The manage of th'affaire; only let thy
Virtue be now the dumb mans secrecy.
THe hateful sound of Imperiale's name
Would strike me deaf, my dear Iustinian,
Were it not tempered by thy gentle tongue,
That had the art to make m'embrace and trust
A reconciled foe, who hath rejected
With scorn my hopeful son, as if his birth,
Fortune, and parts, had not deserved that flirt
His gilded daughter; but I tax not thee,
Whose friendship is a gem without a foil,
And hardly can be valued, never matched:
I know thy milder studies chiefly bent
To weed out Rancor from the minds of men,
Smoothing rough nature with morality,
And this becomes Philosophers: but I
That doe profess the art of killing men,
Encouraged by all States, imposed by some
Must follow other precepts: he is sure
Of many wrongs, that will but one endure.
Thy Character of me, loved Spinola,
Thus far I may without vain glory own,
Truly to love my friend, yet hate no man,
And since mine own experience finds how well
Thou dost the one, I would persuade the other;
Nor would I now convert thee to a Stoic,
To make thee think there are no injuries,
Or if there be, that wise men cannot feele'm,
These, I confess, are not compatible
With thy condition; on the other side,
I can encourage none, much less my friend
To take a scandal, when there is none given,
To call that injury, which is in truth
A liberty that every man may challenge;
Or if Imperial ought to have wav'd the same,
Yet since the will is free, thou coldest expect
But Fatherly persuasion, to incline
The affections of his daughter, all the rest
Is ravishment, or tyranny at best.
I know not how the rigid schools define
A fathers power, in their begged principles,
As if the freedom of the will extended
To silly wenches, to restrain the power
Of them that gave them first and second being;
No, it was only his inveterate malice
That closely lurk't under a new fein'd friendship
That stuck on me and mine this contumely,
Which ought to be resented far above
An injury, by any generous spirit;
Let it be what thy fancy apprehends,
Which scarce appears in the least circumstance,
Yet generous spirits at poor contumelies,
As seldom stoop as Eagles doe to Flies.
What is there that should wound an active spirit,
Like base contempt?
The guilt of one base act.
Should we not then be jealous of our fame?
If we within find cause of jealousy.
Reports may brand, although they be untrue.
Yes, those that take their honour upon trust.
Our honour by opinion must subsist,
Then every puff of wind will scatter it.
How can we call that ours, which must depend
On the rash will, and vainer voice of others?
But herein thou most slightst thy self to doubt
Thou can be undervalued by any,
Much more contemned by him that dares not think
Himself to be the worthier, but that thou
Suggests it for him, in thy vain suspicion:
They that believe themselves despised, confess
An inward doubt of their own worthiness.
I am not for my part ambitious
Of the dull fame of stupid patience,
To be admired for wanting common sense,
Like Cato, that could let one spit in's face,
And when he should have wiped off the disgrace
With his sharpe Sword, he did it with a Jest
And his soft handcarcheife: This was that spirit
Thou lift'st above great Alexanders merit.
I, and above the glory of Hercules,
Or what bold Greece hath left in histories
Of her great Captains, to their endless fame,
They Monsters, Kingdoms, and their Justs overcome:
Cato fought not with Beasts, nor did live when
T'was thought that Heaven might be borne up by men,
But in an age when (barbarism being fled)
All industry and learning flourished;
And in that time did bravely set upon
That Monster, in many shapes, Ambition,
With all the crimes of Rome, and when the State
Was ready even to sink with its own weight
He it supported with his only hand;
And did (as much as one man could) withstand
Romes instant fate, till forced to let her go
He became partner in her overthrow;
And so one ruin did them both oppress;
Whom to have severed had bin wickedness;
For was it fit that liberty should dye
And Cato live? that had bin contumely,
Not the purgation of a mouth that might
As well have don the Sun or Moon despite:
But I will leave thee to thy thoughts a while,
For wholesome counsel like safe Physic is
Unpleasant in the taste, and must have time
To work upon the humour; thou that art master
Of so much worth, wilt master in the end
Those passions that with reason now contend.
I Must needs make a strong pretence to worth,
That dare pretend, Iustinian, to thy love;
But when I find how much I violate
The sacred Jaws of friendship, that refuse
T'anatomize my very Soul to thee;
I am complete ta'cknowledge mine own shame
Or to suspect thy known fidelity:
The plot, wherewith I labour, can admit
No Council, but a necessary faith
In the bold Actor, whose subsistence binds him
To resolution, and to secrecy;
All friendly trust is folly, every man
He has one, to whom hee will commit as much
As is to him committed: our designs
When once they creep from our own private breasts
Doe in a moment through the City fly,
Who tells his secret sells his liberty:
But shall I suffer this black treachery
To boil within my doubtful breast? mischief
Though it be safe, can never be secure,
Or shall I ease my thoughts, and give it vent?
Yes; prick a full swollen bladder to relax it,
Or bore a hole 'ith bottom of the ship
To cool a Calenture? dull fool thy life
Is with thy fame concerned: besides the base
Rejection of thy Son (lodged deeply here)
He wrought the Senate to confer the charge
Of our late aid lent Savoy against France,
On rash Marinò, so to blast thy merit,
Be confident, he that durst often venture
Taffront thee, meant to prosecute thy ruin;
And it is no greater hazard to attempt
Death, than disgrace, that makes his life contemptible:
On then, be bold and secret, Spinola,
So shalt thou reap the double benefit
Of safety and revenge: all wickedness
Is counted virtue, when it is prosperous;
Be not by any reconcilement led
To trust thy so, you are safe when he is dead.
HOw comes it, dear, that the clear sky, thy looks,
Is suddenly o're-cast? what misty vapour
Hath raised those stormy clouds? can bright Aurora
Rise cheerfully from shrivelled Tythons bed?
And thou so discontentedly from mine?
But I'll not doubt the cause to spring from me,
Rather from fear of young Prince Doria's safety,
Whose great affairs perhaps have made him stretch
His promise to the utmost, not to break it,
Though he could not prevent our expectation,
He'll not deceive't, but like th'approaching Sun,
Will soon expel these mists, and cheer our hearts.
I am solicitous, I must confess
Of his return, whom we have long expected,
To whom we have designed our only daughter,
And with her both our fortunes and our loves:
But the true cause of all these perturbations
Which you discover in my countenance,
Is a strange dream (heaven make it but a dream)
And I perhaps should but have thought it so,
Had not my daughter, even this very night,
And the same hour, as near as we can guess,
With the like vision been disquieted:
Me thought we harboured in our house a Wolf,
Bred up so tame, that all did handle him,
Which like a dog would fawn on them that beat him,
Till on a time, accompanied with another
Of his own race, he rush't into the chamber
Where I together with my Daughter sate,
There they resumed their native cruelty:
The one assaulted her, the other me,
And tearing first our Jewels from our necks,
They made us both at length their feral prey:
Oh, how the terror of that dreadful vision
Affrights my Soul! I tremble when I think on'c?
Me thought the heartstrings of Prince Doria crack'r
At the direnewes, it proved the overthrow
Of our whole Family: we differ but in this,
The Savage executioners to me
Seemed to be Bears, creatures as bloody as wolves.
It is no wonder that your dreams concurred,
Since there is that relation in your blood:
I must believe, you had the day before
Communicated some sad thoughts together,
Which in the night your wakeful fantasies
From a like temperature of brain reduced
Into like forms, suggesting that for truth
Which is at best but fond imagination;
What can be vainer then a women's dream?
It is less to be regarded then her tears,
Which are prepared to flow at her command.
Cassandra's true predictions were despised.
And well they might, had Troy bin provident.
Many at length deplore their unbelief.
But more lament their rash credulity.
Future events by dreams have bin revealed.
So did old wizards doubtful things unfold
By flights of birds, such witchcrafts now are seas'd,
And we from those dark errors are released:
To talk of visions is an indiscretion,
Practised by Children, and distempered persons:
Go then; prepare your selves for solid joys,
On this day the Republic yearly pays
A retribution to our Family,
And as I hear (the time being Carnival)
Some mirth shall season our solemnity;
If Doria come to day, as we expect,
To morrow nothing shall be heard of us
But songs of Hymen and Thalassius.
Never could any wretches be more glad
To be deceived.
My heart continues sad.
O Wretched state of man, to whom the time:
By nature made for ease, is found unquiet;
Sleep, properly called rest, who can express
How restless it becomes through various dreams?
Which are so strongly formed by the fancy
That though they be most false, and when we wake
Should wholly vanish, yet even then they leave
A deep Impression in the troubled mind;
Nor doth this only happen to weak women,
But unto men of special eminence,
Working upon their hopes as well as fears,
Who many times to their confusion
Have by such drowsy errors bin seduced;
Hence did Amilcar venture to assault
Strong ••racuse deluded by a dream;
But though it be a folly beyond pardon
To venture life or fortune in pursuit
Of such a vanity, yet in all things
Abundant warines can never hurt:
My slave may not unfitlie be compared▪
To a tame Wolf, or Bear, who may perchance
Resent his late sharpe castigation;
Him will I send to my own Galley, where
He shall be chained from mischief, and to me
Not prove unuseful, when the smallest boudt
May eas'ly be removed, who would omit it?
Let others lose themselves in laborinthes
Of hidden superstition, and believe
The ayre to be replenished with spirits,
Who by a natural and inherent virtue
Foreseeing things to come, and taking pity
Upon improvident man, reveal by visions
The dangers that approach, to th'end he may
By timely care prevent his misery;
I'll not depend on such intelligence
T'informe me whether Spinola hath buried▪
Or only hid, his long continued malice,
I'll fetch my preservation nearer; hence,
That shall conserve this individual;
No man can suffer ill but from himself,
Fate only awes the slothful; wisdom bars
The powerful operation of the stars.
THose men that mischief do devise,
Had need to borrow Argus eyes
To look about; a poor slave may
By chance lie hid, and then betray.
Within the house they may suspect
That walls and beds may them detect,
And in the field they must provide,
That not a bush a spy may hide.
And albeit they shut the door,
Having well searched the house before,
Yet they may be betrayed; for proof,
Jove in a shower did pierce the roof.
Though in the field no tree, nor bush,
Nor bird be near, nor wind doth rush,
Yet undiscerned a fairy drab
Their whole discourse may hear and blab.
Then since that neither house, nor field,
To our black crumbs can safety yield,
Let us be virtuous, and not fear
What all the world can see or hear.
Our dreams are often found to bee
Fruits of a wandering fantasy;
Yet many times they likewise are
Sure pledges of Celestial care.
Some men believe too much, and some
Conceive no truths by dreams can come;
It is a knowledge given to few
To find if they be false or true.
Then as it is a rash misprision
To count each idle dream a vision;
So it's an error at the least
To think all visions are quite ceased.
CAn no advice of friends? nor mine own reason
Hold me from strong pursuit of what I find
Can never be obtained? am I so stupid
After so many scorns not to desist?
An arrow shot sooner may be recal'd
Then her affection; th'Apenine, the Alps
Will eas'lier be removed then her Father:
Feed not thy self, fond fool, with desperate hopes:
But shall I, armed with powerful love, consult
With timorous discretion? the weak Child
Of feeble age? the towering Eagle may
More eas'ly be confined within high walls
Then that winged boy, that hovered over Chaos
Be tied to humane possibilities:
What transformations did the Antique Poets
Affirm to have bin wrought on men and Gods
By his sole deity? which Jove himself
His frequent sport had found; what guards, what spies,
He hath deceived and fore't; the fiery Bull,
The wakeful dragon, and g•asked Argus witness.
Though she that's truly named Angelica
Should now abhor thy person; love can lend thee
The shape of him she loves; were she averse
From all mankind, if she like any thing
She may at length be brought to dote on thee:
But may I not be taxed of too much sloth?
Neglecting active industry, t'expect
To be assisted by such miracles?
I yet have only trod the beaten path
Of vowed service, friends good will, and Jointure;
The elder Brothers formal evidence:
I am so far from practising the art
Of spells and philters, I have quite omitted
Corruption of her confidants and servants:
I am too cheap a lover and too tame,
And hither to have taught her to deny
By easy asking; I must let her know
What I dare doe: my Father is incensed
At my repulse, his old suppressed hate
Renews it self; he will rather condescend
To match me with a fury, then with her:
It will be wisdom to decline th'alliance
Of him thy Father counts his enemy:
It would be wretchedness to make thy love
Depend upon th'affections of another:
He never loved that can for any cause
Suspend his love: set then before thine eyes
Valiant Achilles, who acquired more honour
By constancy, even to his enemies Daughter,
In spite of th'opposition of his friends,
Then ere he did by Hectors overthrow,
Redeem the time Francisco, though't be short,
And let this one day satisfy the loss
Of weeks and months; her father keeps a slave
A cunning African, whose very soul
For money and hope of liberty i'll buy:
Him will I strait employ; love ne'er refuses
The basest instruments, if they be useful,
A drudge may find more corners in the house
Than ere the master knew; and may discover
A secret inlet to betray a City;
There will I now begin, he shall advise
Where I shall plant my golden batteries.
I Am with wonder stricken, not with fear,
At thy relation of this barbarous plot,
Contrived against my life, after faith given,
Of firm atonement: but the Leopards spots
Or staines of virgin honour may as soon
Be wiped away, as hatred that hath seizd
A cankered breast; this machination
Is so inhumane, that to lend it credit
Is a degree to inhumanity.
To give slow faith to such a horrid plot
Becomes a heart so full of piety;
But in this black design many presumptions
Unite themselves to fortify belief;
Nor is it to be thought, the wretch durst feine it
Giving so short a time to be disproov'd;
The heavens forbid your virtuous diffidence
Should lead you to the hazard: I must count
This blessed discovery a large recompense,
Of former ills fortune hath thrown on me:
For I am bold to hope, it will by you
Be graciously accepted, though I find
Some late unhappy errors have infore't
Your patience to inflict just punishment
On him that is your slave, and might expect
The restless misery of the painful •are,
With all the wants that ever were susteyin'd
In a remorseless Galley; but your goodness
(In spite of fate that meant all this) is pleased
To give me shelter under your own roof,
And to the emulation of my fellows
To grant the favour of your household service;
A bondage which I truly may prefer
Above the common peoples liberty:
These are the benifites, that invite my soul
To meditate your preservation,
Which ere I cease to doe, Tyber and Poe
Shall quite abandon fruitful Italy,
And wash th'Arabian sands; though I am rude,
I must abhor churlish ingratitude.
Fortune and thy integrity have found
A weighty occasion to confirm and fix thee
With roots of adamant, in my good opinion:
Nor doth it happen often to a servant
T'injoy the happy means t'account himself
The Saviour of his master: Kings are borne
More frequently, then such examples found:
But if to this unavlu'd benefit
Thy pregnant industry can add a second,
The mischief to divert upon himself
Thou having saved me now, shall crown me then.
Great sir, you owe the thanks of what's yet don
To chance alone; I am ambitious
Of something that might merit, if at least
The diligence and industry of one
Of my condition, may deserve that title.
It may, it may; great merit is in story
Ascribed sometimes to bondsman; all our souls
Are free and equal, thence our merits flow:
Why should the person vilify the work,
And not the work rather ennoble him?
It is the benefit we look upon,
And not the givers mean condition.
I have a ripe design that shall both give
Assurance of the truth of what I brought
And power the vengeance on your enemy;
Nor can it ever be discovered
To hurt your fame; it shall amaze the actor
And shall be speedy too; things of long time
Are ever doubtful, lost in expectation,
Propounded usually for private ends,
Gained by degrees; an acceptable deed
Hath double welcome when it is don with speed.
Noble Molosso, such thy virtues make thee,
Proceed with Courage in thy enterprise,
Which i'll not press to know▪ till the event,
But by implicit trust freely declare
What confidence I mean to place in thee;
And take from me this just encouragement
To rest assured, thy service hath not met
With an ungrateful master: I shall never
Forgive my late credulity, that meant
To have added to his former punishment.
HE's now made sure, I must with speed find out
Young Spinola, and speak with Sango too,
Behold'um both together, t'will succeed;
See where Molosso comes, sir.
O it is hee.
How is it Moloss? thy face hath business in it
I would thou were at lea•ur.
My toiled body
Will not admit a cheerful countenance;
But I can throw of care if you command.
Would thou embrace redemption?
Ask me whether
I would not wish some shade if I were broiled
Upon the Lybian Sands, where Cancer reigns:
But Sir if I mistake not, you sustain
A greater servitude, yet seek not freedom.
Thou would persuade me to shake off Loves fetters.
Rather to change them into chains of gold,
To wealth and ornament; it may be done
Without your Chemical projection.
Thou should not stand in need of that t'inrich thee,
Could this b'effected.
Sir, I have no art,
Nor leisure to discourse, but I have heard
There is by fare an opportunity
Allotted every man, to make him rich
And happy too, provided he take hold,
And I am confident that's offered you.
What? to enjoy divine Angelica?
No treasure else can make me rich or happy.
When she is brought into your own possession,
You can but blame your self, if she depart.
I shall destroy my self if then she scope,
But how? prithee convey thy joyful news
Into me by a reverend secrecy,
That I may be all ear, while thou art whispering.
What plot should this be now? I long to know,
Molosso doubts some accident may happen
Upon his Masters death, and wisely seeks
To gain a friend, under whose safe protection
He may be sheltered from a sudden storm;
I have an equal share in the success
Of his designs; his preservation's mine,
And therefore need not be inquisitive,
The assured fate of his obdurate Lord
May make that good hee promises; the daughter,
If once the Father were removed▪ perhaps
Would entertain new thoughts, me thinks she should
Be sensible of Dorias neglects:
Who can condemn this young mans hot desire?
Were I as free, as noble as himself,
I should most willingly become her slave,
And I doe hate my forced condition
For no one ill so much, as that it brings
Despair of such transcendent happiness
I'm ravished with it, it is the sprightful child
Of thine own brain, and will not brook delay.
That's true: I'll see that all things be prepared:
If the least wheel be out of frame, the watch
Is altogether useless.
Wind it up,
That I may observe each minute of the time
That is the Crysis of my life or death:
First take a taste of my ensuing bounty,
It may relieve thee, should we be discovered:
If by this plot my present hopes succeed,
All future Lovers shall thy story read.
I See thou hast a golden plot in hand,
Thou must impart.
Half this is due to thee
By our established law of equal fortunes.
I would I might share with Francisco too▪
That riddle quickly will unfold it self:
But Sango, I'm glad I met thee, I was forced
For some important reasons to reveal
〈◊〉 weighty secret to my Patron. San. how?
I was compelled to do it.
What? to disclose it?
And unto him? is this your dumb mans virtue?
Can thou so soon forget thine own vile wrongs?
Hath the dull ayre of Europe chilled thy blood?
For thy sole cause I hardly could contain
My present joy in the discovery,
Though death stood gaping for me while I heard it,
And would thou cowardly betray thy fortune?
My obligation to my stars and thee,
Their Mercury, can never be expressed;
Which I have husbanded to my advantage.
It is the ground from whence I'll take my rise,
To leap, and fall like dreadful thunder on him;
It is not vengeance, but soft piety
To wish a foes death, when hoe's fit to dye,
To let him live, and feel himself so wretched,
That he shall seek and sue for absent death,
Is a revenge becomes me, and I'll have it;
Thou know my Patrons former trust was changed
Into a sudden jealousy, which sprang
From consciousness of his base injuries;
This hath removed that doubt, and set me right
In his lost good opinion, which I mean
Still to confirm by my strict diligence,
Till time and opportunity shall show
How far this petty-mischiefe I'll out-goe.
Now are thy thoughts full plumed, it pleases me
To see thee mount, not flag in thy revenge:
I must confess, I love a present mischief,
But, if it may conduce to thy brave ends,
To make a feigned retreat, and then return
With greater violence; I must consent,
And when you are ready for thy great assault,
But, this, and I shall join; in the mean time
Let nothing be discovered to my Patron;
If that be, death's the best I can expect.
Rest thou secure, and to express my thanks,
It shall not be the least part of my plot,
To give thee means to gain the full fruition
Of her that Genua so admires and strives for.
Can there be hope of such a happiness?
I, and a good assurance of success.
I shall embraced with all the circumstance
Of danger, that bold treason undergoes,
Or what accompanies forbidden love
In the most jealous climes: I should desire
In the fruition of such bliss t'expire.
Stoutly resolved, come, let us lay our ground,
We shall build sure, when our foundation's sound.
Under a homely habit many times,
Virtue lies hid; this rustic weed conceals
An Engine that can frustrate providence:
When I attempt the death of any man,
No town of Garrison, not his own house,
Nor any place of sanctuary can save him:
Nor doth my praise consist in this alone,
That I command the life of whom I list;
A desperate wretch may claim that privilege:
He that is weary of his own, may be
Lord of another life; but such attempts
Hatched only by a frenzy, seldom prosper:
My actions are the fruits of a bold spirit,
Tempered with judgement, done with secrecy:
Hence is our brave profession found to be
Of special use to awe the insolent,
And secure those that seek to live in peace.
What satisfaction is it to a man
That receives wrong, to call his enemy forth,
And then expose himself to equal hazard?
Or in strict Commonwealths t'appeale to law,
As if a feigned submission in set words
Could cure the piercing sting of injury;
No, it is assurance of a close revenge
That plants civility, deters and keeps men
From giving, and from suffering affronts;
This benefit we bring to every man,
Yes, and the public States of Italy,
How ere they censure our particular actions,
Receive no small security from us;
Treason would hardly find just punishment
Within their narrow territories, if we
Should not, like eager hounds, pursue the traitors,
And make them know, that in another Country
The justice of their own can overtake them;
Let then the slothful tax us, that our ends
Are not the public good, but private gain,
Which we prefer above mankind; this is
But what's objected to the soldier; he
Will fight against his brother for reward,
Men ought to follow their vocation;
The fountain of our livelihood is profit,
Without which, honour challenging the skill
To nourish arts, cannot provide us clothes,
Nor virtue, noised to be the greatest good,
Procure us bread. Nor yet is our profession
More cruel then the gravest; I have heard
Of Lawyers, that are privileged to cut
Their clients throats, with a perplexed Indenture,
A parchment Saw. The learned Physician
Following the long and beneficial way
Of reverend Galen, by degrees will purge
The humours of his Patient, till he leaves
Nothing but by•…es for death, and hungry worms
To gnaw upon; as for his pliant skin,
That, while he lives, by pieces is pulled off,
Till he be wholly fleaed: the Usurer,
I'st not his use to bind men first in bonds,
And bring um then to execution,
Extending both their bodies and their lands
Upon a rack; we are more pitiful,
And by an unexpected way dispatch
Quicker then lightning, or a cunning heads-man,
For all the ill of death is apprehension;
How's Imperial wronged? if when he hath
But newly said his prayers, I release him
From the ensuing miseries of age;
And when that work's performed, my charity
May doe as much for Spinola himself,
Provided I be offered like conditions:
My hand of justice is not partial.
But soft, this pleasing contemplation
May make my omit the time of action,
Which now draws near; my plot is so contrived,
That being pursued with resolution,
It cannot want success; our best designs
Are often crossed, when through a fond remorse
We change our counsels: few have learned the skill
To be or wholly good, or wholly ill.
FOnd youth to hope, where no hope is,
And to be brought to place thy trust
On him, that makes deceit his bliss,
And counts it folly to be just:
Go wash an Ethiop white, and find
Faith harboured in a slavish mind.
Love wanting eyes, makes all men blind,
That to his power submit their wills;
No counsel can acceptance find,
But such as their own lust fulfils.
To be in love, and to be wise,
Apollo to himself denies.
When he that hath received harm,
Requites it with pretended love,
We must believe it is but a charm,
Quick-ey'd suspicion to remove.
Some may doe good for good, few will
Be brought to render good for ill.
Is it not strange to find a Trade?
Will act what our Revenge devises?
To see such formal bargains made
To kill, or wound at several prises?
At which those public States connive
That doe by private faction thrive.
But though some do commit these crimes,
Yet let not us believe we may,
Only cry out against the times,
And be our selves as bad as they:
But let our virtuous deeds prevent
Both theirs, and our own punishment.
ALthough my father hath resolved all doubts▪
My reason could object; yet still I feel
A chilling vapor hover in my breast,
Which many times breaks forth in sudden sighs,
For which I can assign no other cause
Than that the world cannot afford a Joy
Vnmixt with real or supposed sorrow;
Hence is it that most Brides are found to weep,
Yet know not why upon their wedding day.
Such follies are too common, I confess,
But should I have the happiness to see
Young Hymen in his yellow socks my guest,
I'd entertain him with no other tears
Than such as from pressed grapes in Autumn flow,
Werewith his drowsy head and withered garland
I would bedew; till to his twinkling eyes
Each tapour should present a double light,
While waggish Boys should with their wanton Songs:
Prepare our thoughts to our ensuing pleasures.
Fie, fie, Nugolla, no laciviousnes
Can ere become solemnities, that must
Create us Matrons; there is cause to fear
Their chastity, that unchafte songs can hear.
It is a shame to lend our ears to that
We are allowed to do?
Yes many things
Are lawful, and yet shameful to be don
Or spoken publicly.
A woman may
Be free in outward Gesture, yet preserve
An inward chastity; and I know many
Both rich and Noble Ladies so disposed.
It is not the glittering canopy of greatness,
But th'humble veil of modesty must guard
A women's fame; which being once thrown off
Leaves her exposed to every bold assault.
But when she's found impregnable, twi'll stop
Their vain attempts.
A fort cannot be thought
Impregnable, that offers frequent parleys.
Yet that (as I have heard) is often don
To gain advantage and delude the foe.
Can it beseem a Virgin or a Wife
To play with all the allurements of desire;
And think her honour's safe, if she abstain
From the bare act, the duller part of lust.
They do but imitate those Chariot drivers
That you were wont to read of, whose praise was
To come as near as might be, and not touch;
Love hath ordainedby an antique law
Newly revived, that every place and room
In Ʋenus palace, be allowed for sport,
Except her cabinet, that, must not be
Opened nor touched, at least not willingly.
Thou wilt be waggish still, But hark who knocks?
This wench that never felt the fire of love
Thinks like a wanton Child, it may be plaid with,
But she will one day find it far more raging
Than that which fierce Medaea did convey
Into Creusas robe: how now? who is it?
A stranger, with a letter, which he says
He must present to your own hand.
Admit him;
If it be from my Doria, I fear
Some unexpected accident, wherein
His honour is concerned, retards his coming;
But I must likewise arm my self for wiles:
Such love as ours, cannot want envious plots.
I Shall not be discovered by my voice,
Italian Virgins are at distance wood,
And more by fame, then verbal courtship won:
This speaks my errand, leaves no circumstance
To be related by the messenger;
See how her blood retires, to aid her heart,
So looks bright Phoebe, when Thessalian charms
Strike her with fear, or th'early Rose, whose beauty
Nipped by a later frost, appears like snow:
Now it returns, and settles in her cheeks,
As if the news took no impression:
Such orient beams when youthful day returns,
By the bedewed Shepherd are beheld.
I may suppose you, sir, not ignorant
Of what you bring; and may believe you've heard
Some thing of young Prince Doria and me.
Lady, I have; fame with her silver trumpet
Hath blazed your constant loves.
And are you not
Strangely amaz'ed to see me read these lines
Without a shower of tears?
If they relate
Any disaster, you then imitate
Those ancient Worthies, that had bravely learned
To conquer passion at the first assault.
You think young women very impatient
To have their joys deferred: my Laddie's wise
To bear it thus, so long as he is safe.
Hoe's dead, Nugella; the great. General
Writes me, that he having the sole command
Of an important place, forsook the same,
And in his swift retreat, received a shot
In the hinder part of's head.
O doleful accident!
Can thou be so ungrateful to my Doria,
To lend it such a serious belief
As may deserve a tear?
I would I durst
Suspect what comes so to our woe confirmed.
Were it confirmed by the unerring seal
Of this wise State, it should not merit faith.
Alas, he was not to be thought immortal.
But was he not to be acknowledged valiant?
That attribute his foes did not deny him:
Had these contrived lines contained but this,
Brave Doria's slain, a torrent, hence, had gushed,
That like Alpheus, had through earth and sea
Wandered unmixed, till in the gulf of death,
It should have lost it self in seeking him.
But when I find impossibilities
Basely obtruded, my true love disdains
To lend belief to any circumstance.
Mars could as soon be frighted from his sphere,
As he from any charge he undertook:
It is a malicious scandal; and although
My nature even abhors to use a stranger
With any incivility, yet I'm forced
To tax the bearer with this wild imposture.
By great Saint George, the Patron of this State,
Doria himself is not more innocent.
That name is sacred, let me then conjure thee
To answer truly but to this one question.
I shall.
Was there before you left the Army.
Any report of this sad news you brought?
I dare not say there was.
The Palace cracks
When such a pillar false, the General
One of those many which my fortune wood,
Envious that Doria gained both that and me:
And knowing well, that valour always i•
The special object of a noble love,
Attempted thus to shake my constancy:
But if the fates should prove so cruel to me,
To make me survive him; this is my vow,
To stand for ever like sad Niobe,
A weeping statue to his memory.
Never did such a virtuous courage reft
In the calm harbour of a Virgins breast.
AS the fly Fowler, having over night,
Set cunningly his artificial net,
Early returns, with an assured hope
To find the foul ensnared, so are my thoughts
Wholly possessed with present expectation
Of the glad news of my successful plot;
The managing whereof, I never can
Within my self sufficiently applaud:
I have not like rash Peso, foolishly
Dispers't my trust, nor like the sons of Brutus,
Disclosed my secret, where a servant might
Discover, and betray; my wariness
In a safe garden whispered my design,
And but to one, that if it should miscarry,
And he through fear or punishment confess,
Yet I am sure to have but one accuser,
Whose testimony my power and bold denial
Would easily convince; but these mistrusts
Are altogether needless: I may be
As confident as those Sicilians,
Who when their chief confederate was surprised,
So much relied upon his resolution,
As that not any one of them would fly,
And so conceal their bold conspiracy.
Behold my kinsmen bringing joyful news.
OH that I were snatched up into the sky!
And there transformed into a cloud, that so
I might dissolve into a shower of tears.
Can the day see such mischief, and be seen?
And not make haste to shroud his guilty head
Under the gloomy Canopy of night?
What earthquake? what prodigious spectacle
Hath struck you both with horror?
Oh he's dead!
Why should that so amaze or you? or me?
Since death must be the lot of every man.
Alas your son.
How does it concern him?
Great sir, your dear and only son is slain.
How's this?
He's murdered sacrilegiously,
Even in the Temple-porch, he was disguised,
And thought of all to have bin Imperial.
I am undone.
The desperate actor was
Clad in a country habit, and it seems,
Mistook the person; when he saw his face,
He tore his viperous hair; the Judge was present,
Who gave command to bring him instantly,
To receive speedy judgement,
Overreached?
In my own plot? the sword of my revenge
Turned on my self? and drowned in mine own bowels?
I am betrayed, yet cannot suspect how;
It could not be by any mortal subtlety,
It was some devil lurking in the ayre;
How shall I be revenged? O that he would
Assume a humane body, that I might
Encounter him! but I have found the way,
I'll study the black art, turn Conjurer,
And then impose a labour on them all,
Worse then Ixion, or the Belides
Are said to undergo.
We have done ill,
To rush upon him with such violence;
The sudden grief hath half distracted him;
We'll strive to temper it with better hopes,
Things may not be so bad as our affections
Have made us fear; Francisco Spinola
Was often named.
But neither of us both
Can say we saw him dead.
Nay then I see
You're villains hired, suborned to undermine me.
First you confound me with your horrid news,
And then confess ye may be both mistaken:
But I am armed with patience, if Imperial
Retaining still his late abjured malice,
Hath by some hellish art contrived this mischief,
I may in just resentment of my wrongs,
Implore heavens vengeance, on his perjured head,
And this is all you're like to screw from me.
Let not your troubled thoughts make you doubt us,
Who for his life would sacrifice our own.
I will devise a stratagem, shall need
No other hand but this, which I'll conceal
From my own self, till th'instant time of action;
For if I should disclose it in a place
Where there are trees, or flowers, I am betrayed:
I would not breathe it forth, unless it were
After a dreadful thunder, that had purged
The ayre, and frighted thence those subtle spies,
That to our foes by night betray our plots.
You have a faithful friend, to whom you may
Safely power out the secrets of your heart,
The wise Iustinian.
Oh that name is like
A precious balm to cure the wounds of fortune!
Please you retire, I'll bring him presently.
No wilde rebellion of my passions can
Make me neglect the friendship of that man.
NOw you may see, sir, you were not abused
In our discovery, and I hope you find
My undertakings and your trust made good;
The Sun at noon is not more clearly seen;
But may it not breed a suspicion
That he was clad like me?
Why sir you know
That it is now the time of Carnival,
When every man takes what disguise he pleases.
But I much wonder how he was persuaded
To put himself so soon into my habit.
I brought him to a strong belief, that he
By that device and my assistance should
Convey away your daughter.
I intended
The Father should be punish't, not the son.
By this your vengeance is more exquisite;
Make your account that with the son y' have thrust
The father through, who having found himself
Ore-reach't by you, or by his own just fare,
In such a counterplot must needs at length
Become his own dire executioner:
In the mean time his life is worse then death.
True, true, death is the end of misery:
To die 's not wretched, but to live wretchedly,
Vengeance is mere compassion when we kill,
I feel a joy beyond expression;
There is no pleasure like to sweet revenge;
But I desire things should be carried so
That I be still reputed innocent.
That's my sole care, the Brave in you have was taken,
And by commandment of the present Judge,
Is brought already to receive his trial.
Thou shalt do well to harken a aloof off,
I'll take no notice but in general,
And will proceed in our intended mirth.
By all means sir.
We must at this time shun
Unusual privacy; keep thou thy distance,
But know, that both my life and fortunes are
Most willingly committed to thy care.
SInce it hath bin the custom of this state
To place a stranger on this high Tribunal
Ordaining a professor of the Laws,
As his assistant (being the place you hold)
It is our duty to discharge that trust
With all integrity, and not to look
Upon men's persons, but to weigh their crimes
In equal balance, to which purpose now
Although a strange and horrid sacrilege
He's called us hither in unusual haste;
Yet it must be our chief care to proceed
With due deliberation; otherwise
Though just our sentence be, we are unjust.
I have for some years had the happiness
To be a witness of your constant session,
In all which time I have not heard a sentence
Pronounced by you that envy could pervert.
We must not think we deserve praise for that
Which to neglect would merit punishment.
But yet there are degrees of good and ill,
Wherein the actor takes a liberty.
Yet where the law prescribes a certain rule
A just Judge cannot challenge liberty:
But let us now pursue the work in hand,
Where is the prisoner?
Here.
Let him draw near.
His name?
He calls himself Virdugo, sir.
Then know, Virdugo, though thy heinous fact
Be evident, yet the Justice of this state
Grants thee free leave to answer for thy self.
I thank the state for their set complement.
Bring forth the witnesses that he may see them.
They are both here an't please your excellence.
Have they bin sworn?
Yes both sir, before me.
Then, by the oath you took, declare the truth
Of what you know concerning this delinquent,
Begin you first.
About some three hours since
Being in the Domo, I espied this man
At his first entrance, and although I never
To my remembrance saw his face before,
Yet instantly I found a strange mislike
Of his aspect, which did increase the more,
Because I saw him often fix his eyes
On him he slew, whom I conceived to be
Signior Imperial, I revealed my thoughts
To this young man who then stood next me, who
Concurring with me, did resolve as I
To watch him narrowly; we both agreed
To keep on either side of him, at length
In midst of all the crowd, raising his arm
To fetch his blow, he hit me with his elbow,
At which I suddenly laid hold on him,
Supposing he had snatched at some mans purse,
But then I saw drop from his hand the sheath
Of that dire weapon, he had newly buried
In the warm bowels of that Gentleman.
Most part of this I aver, I stood so near him
That I perceived the motion of his arm,
And looking down, spied blood upon his hand.
The Canker take your Physiognomy
That made you try conclusions upon me.
There cannot be more clear and pregnant proof,
What have you to allege in your defence?
He hath confessed the fact.
Hath he confessed
Who set him on? whether he meant to kill
Signior Imperial, or young Spinola?
The one had done me wrong, but destiny
Made the other take a Carnival disguise
Somewhat too soon.
Such recreations
Though in themselves they be in different,
Yet in a sacred Temple they are profane,
And draw down vengeance.
Had there bin but hope
To have enervated their testimony:
The rack, nor the Strapado, no nor yet
The subtler torment both of fire and water
Should have enforced me to the least confession:
But it is my fate, and therefore let me hear
My passing bell, my doom quickly pronounced;
For 't were ridiculous to expect favour,
Since your integrity (as you confessed)
May not show any, where the law condemns.
Dare thou deride the Judge?
Let him alone,
He hath no sense of his own misery,
His boldness moves not me, I shall proceed
With the unchanged countenance of Law,
And with a voice not furious, but severe;
When I condemn a guilty man, it is done,
As if I struck a Serpent, not with passion.
His wicked acts have hardened him, he came
No novice to this cruel enterprise.
In Venice he climbing a Ladder, shot
Through the glass window a Clarissimo
Sitting at supper, flew a Count of Naples
In his own garden, having first observed
A place where he might scale the wall to escape;
And that his wants may not obtrude the guilt
Upon his fortune, he but lately ravished
A young and Noble Virgin in Seen,
The only daughter of Petruccio.
Can that be thought to be a great offence?
The harmless man thinks it no great offence,
With hot and beastly lust to vitiate
A Damsel, at the most but ten years old.
Believe it, I have found um good at eight;
Why there are many like Quartella, sir,
Remember not that they were ever maids.
He takes delight not only in the act,
But in the infamy of wickedness;
But I will rid the world of such a monster;
And therefore now, Verdugo, I pronounce,
Because th'hast heaped up crimes, and drunk in vice,
Which is dispersed into every limb,
Thy body shall be laid upon a wheel,
And limb by limb be broken, till thou die;
Nor shalt thou then find any other grave,
Then the black mawes of Vultures, and remain
In the mean time a spectacle to men:
This sentence justice hath declared by me.
Sir?
Not to be revok't, take him away,
And early in the morning see it be done.
I'll bear it manfully, although I feel
Ixion▪like the torment of the wheel,
Such malefactors in a State are like
To putrefied members in mans body,
Which like a skilful Surgeon, law finds best
To cut off quite, lest they infect the rest.
LOve built on virtue, cannot be
Led by a rash credulity,
To entertain reports that tend
To the dishonour of a friend.
True love is confident, a doubt
That slakes loves fire will put out.
As they whose tongues are used to err
Are not believed, when they aver
That which is true, so when we know
A story false in part, we grow
Jealous of all; if truth once touch
On falsehood, it is rendered such.
When men in their revengeful hate
Doe study others ruins, Fate
Acts Justice part, to let them see
They plotted their own misery.
It is just that they themselves should find,
What they to others have designed.
But how are these amazed, when they
Being about to seize their prey,
Find themselves caught, yet doe not know
From whence they did receive the blow:
Like him that hid his gold in hope
To keep it safe, but found a rope.
Though they could blind and bribe the law,
And keep all witnesses in awe
By their great power, though they could make
By cunning the whole Stake mistake:
Yet can they be so void of sense,
To think to cozen Providence?
If mischiefe-workers would but bend
Their guilty thoughts, to weigh the end
Of their ill deeds, they would confess,
No safety found in wickedness.
How can those crimes that heaven doth see
And so abhor, unpunished be?
Believe it sir, he has all the signs of frenzy,
His inflamed blood boils in his swelling veins,
His eyes appear like fire, his colour changes,
He grates his teeth, and falters in his speech;
Sometimes he folds his arms, and deeply sighs,
Then strikes his angry foot against the ground.
Doth he continue in such violence
As at the first?
Yes sir, by fits; sometimes
A stupid silence seizes him, and then
He breaks again into his former rage.
These are, I must confess, the noted symptoms
Of a hurt fancy; he's of a high spirit
Apt to resent a wrong (if it could be)
From fate it self; but, where he takes, a friend,
On whom a man may build, as on a rock.
True sir, his rising passions at your name,
Like a tumultuous multitude, at sight
Of a grave Judge, were for the time appeased;
See where he comes, I pray observe, he vents
His passions often in poetic rage.
Ye Furies, active ministers of hell,
That have your heads environed with Snakes,
And in your cruel hands be are fiery scourges,
Lend me your bloody torches to find out,
And punish th'author of my dear son murder,
Assist Megaera with a new revenge,
Such as even thou would fear to execute:
Let a vast sea of blood o're-flow his house,
And never ebb till I shall pity him;
Ease now the infernal ghosts, remove the stone
From the Attic thief, and lay it on his shoulders,
Let the swift stream deceive his endless thirst,
And let his hands wind the unquiet wheel,
That hourly tortures the Thessalian King:
Let Vultures tire upon his growing Liver,
But let'um ne'er be tired; and fince there is
One of the fifty Danaan sisters wanting,
Let them admit that man into her room,
And with their Pitchers only load his arms;
How am Isure it is he? or if it be?
It is the law of Retribution,
And is but just, my conscience tells me so:
Hence childish conscience, shall I live his scorn?
And the whole Cities Pasquill? I abhor it,
Were he protected by the thunderer,
I'd snatch him from his bosom, and in spite
Of his revengeful thunder, throw him quick
Into the throat of the infernal dog;
Or if that monster be not yet releast,
Since great Alcides dragged him in a chain,
Through the amazed towns of Greece, Enceladus
That with his earth-bred flames affrights heaven,
Rather then he shall scope, shall fire the world:
But I delay, and wear away the time
With empty words, why doe I call for Furies?
That bear in mine own breast a greater fury
Then Acheron and night did ever hatch;
I'll dart my self like winged lightning on him;
Have I no friend?
Yes, one that dares assist you
In a more valiant act, to crush that Fury,
And to restore brave Spinola to himself.
O faithful soul, my dear Francisco's murdered.
A heavy fate, yet such as should be borne
Without so strange a tumult, what you give
T'unbridled rage, you take from your revenge.
Wilt thou allow me to take vengeance, speak,
But speak Iustinian with thy wonted faith.
Yes, such as law and Justice shall allow.
I have no skill in Law, and as for Justice,
Your learned Stoickes make it but a fool,
A very animal.
It is now not seasonable
To tell you whether Justice, Fortitude,
And the other virtues may be called creatures;
But I must tell you, that no creature can
Be happy, wanting them; whereof that man
Deprives himself, that subjugates his reason,
On which they all depend, to brutish passion;
Could you but be persuaded to reflect
Upon your self, to see as in a glass,
What a deformity this vice hath brought
Upon your soul, although you hated me,
You would embrace my counsel.
Dear Iustinian,
Fortune hath nothing left that's worth my hope,
But thy affection; at thy sole command,
I would attempt to swim the mid-land sea,
When Aeolus and Neptune are at wars,
Expose my self to the fierce Dragons jaws,
Enraged by the theft of Hercules;
At thy command I'll live; hark, hark, what's that?
It is the voice of my dead son, that calls
For vengeance; see, see where he stands and points
At his still-bleeding wound; he bids me think
What he had done ere now, had we changed fates;
Did you not see him?
No, nor you your self,
It was nothing but a strong impression made
In your disturbed imagination.
Could both mine eyes and ears be so deceived.
That happens often to perplexed minds.
Alas, what shall I do?
Let me persuade you
But to retire, perhaps some mild repose
May softly steal upon your troubled spirits,
To give you ease.
If you will have it so,
My passions in my breast shall silence keep,
I'll be as tame, as (what you wish me) sleep.
Waite on him in, I'll follow presently.
THe unexpected death of his dear son,
So wounds his soul, that his distracted fancy
Suggests belief, he saw and hard him speak,
But that cannot seem strange, if we consider
How far imagination doth usurp
Upon the power of Reason, though it be
A faculty coincident to Bruites,
Receiving objects from the common sense;
But these his perturbations I suspect
To flow from mixed affections, grief, and anger,
The last of which, sinks deepest in the hearts
Of most of us Italians, and I doubt
That he thereby having involved himself
In that, which is our Nations crime, Revenge;
Hath bin by the other faction undermined:
If this be, his disease is curable,
Yet so, as every virtuous man must think
The remedy as bad as the disease,
Unless strict Justice do become th'avenger,
Or that their own sad fates appease his rage;
O how it wounds my heart to see my friend
And one that truly merits that name
But for that vice, whereof not to be guilty
Is made a vice here, by the Tyrant custom)
Plunged in distress, that cannot receive counsel:
But could he once with safety be restored
To his own native ingenuity,
He would detest such crimes; his candid soul
Appears in this, that in the midst of fury,
The sight or name of him he loved before
Can Orpheus-like calm his enraged spirit:
I therefore am obliged by sacred friendship
Even to devote my self to all just means
Of his recovery, and I will perform it,
To cure Orestes (If the Heavens so please)
There shall not want a faithful Pylades.
ARe all things ready.
Yes sir.
Noble friends,
Your presence gives addition to the honour
Which some young Gentlemen are pleased to do me
In the free presentation of their mirth
Most seasonable in time of Carnival,
And fit to celebrate this joyful feast
Which we may challenge as our holy-day.
The honour of this day chiefly belongs
To you and to your family, but yet
The benefit redounds to the whole State,
Which every year is thankfully acknowledged.
The State, by such acknowledgement invites
All generous spirits beyond common duty
To venture life and fortune for her safety.
This common wealth that makes them truly happy
That share the blessings of her government
Disdains not, like a tyranny, to owe
A benefit to subjects; nor rewards
With banishment, in stead of Baize, their merit:
But hark, music proclaims the mockers coming,
Be pleased to take your places, there are seats.
I must crave leave to place your daughter, sir,
She that is once betrothed is a Bride.
It were incivility in her, or us,
If you request it, not to be uncivil,
Sit down Angelica.
Sit down, sit down,
Our friends desires are in our house, commands.
COme Hymen, light thy full branched Pine,
And let a rosie wreath entwine
Thy reeking brow, let thy brave sire
With liquid virtue thee inspire,
While waggish boys in witty rimes,
Taxing the follies of the times,
Spare not their masters, who are now
Content this freedom to allow;
Thus the chaste girdle of the Bride
Must be by pleasant rites untied,
But let dark silence bring to bed
Such as want Hymen when they wed.
For Thalassius, for Thalassius.
Though custom challenges a liberty
To take our wives and daughters forth to tread
A measure without scandal, yet to embrace,
And whisper too, requires a better warrant
Then carnival permission, it implies
Domestic privilege, or an affornt.
For Thalassius, for Thalassius.
That voice was frequent at a public rape,
But sacred hospitality forbids
All jealousy of any ill intent.
Not, as the Romans when they had betrayed
The Sabine Virgins, do my glad friends make
These acclamations of Thalassius,
But rather as a more auspicious name
Then that of drowsy and lascivious Hymen;
Behold the late Ambassador himself
Thus contradicts his own seyn'd embassy.
My Doria!
O perfect happiness!
See how Prince Doria hath surprised us all,
Transformed into a nuptial Deity.
My doubt is in the better sense resolved:
You may perceive you're welcome by the joy
Expressed both by my daughter, and my wife,
In no dry complement, but in a moist
And silent Oratory.
Which works more
On my affections, then a golden tongue;
But tell me my divine Angelica,
How coldest thou at the tidings of my death,
Put on a valiant incredulity?
And when thou find me safe burst out in tears.
To lend belief to any ill report
Of a known friend, although averred with boldness,
In common friendship were unpardonable,
Much more in such a love as mine, which finding
In a mayne part a manifest untruth
Was for your honour bound to slight the rest:
And though there be a contrariety
In the true causes of our joy and grief,
Yet both are often times expressed with tears,
I could not entertain nor then nor now,
The least suspicion of thy constancy,
But truest love delights to please it self
With such disguises, and to find by trials
Our own assurance many ways confirmed:
Nor had I ventured to disturb thy thoughts,
Which thy discerning judgement did prevent,
But that I had a present remedy.
I might have safely tasted what the Mede,
Or the fierce Parthian dips his arrows in,
So long as there was such an antidote.
Were I left helpless by Machaons art,
Thy presence hath a virtue would restore me,
Pandora on whom each Deity bestowed
A several gift, was not endowed like thee.
So soon at strife? if you will needs contend
Who will love best, I'll put you both together.
He whose ambition made him weep and sweat
Within the narrow limits of one world,
Did never thirst so much for fame and glory,
As I for that encounter, in which combat,
Whether I vanquish, or am vanquished,
I shall not envy Pompey or Caesars triumphs:
In the mean time I'll crave an hour or two
For preparation of some necessaries,
Whereof my absence makes me destitute.
Troth my occasions have the like request,
And therefore if this noble company
Will honour us to morrow with their presence,
We shall endeavour to requite their loves.
Most willingly.
And at your nuptial feast,
We'll wish that every grace may be your guest.
I'll soon return, my heart with thee shall stay
As a sure pawn.
You carry mine away.
You have some business too must be dispatcht,
Go, loose no time; Molosso come thou hither,
I leave thee in my absence to take care,
That supper be prepared, and tell the Steward
That great revenue, parsimony, now
Must be by us neglected: thriving men
In charges that come seldom, are profuse.
I Shall sir, yes, by that time you return,
You shall confess you have a skilful Cater:
Why should proud greatness undervalue us,
And our condition? since all men are slaves;
If we survey the greatest monarchies,
What art their Courtiers else? with all the suits
They either beg or wear? the rich Banquier
Enthrals his debtor, and his money him:
This Captain is a captive to that wench;
This Magistrate to bribes; that Lord to pride,
This Statesman to ambition; all to fear:
From whence we only that have nought to loose,
Are free, and that shall instantly appear;
I'll send the servants forth, that Sango and I
May act our part with more security.
See how the fates themselves have helped to bring
The Beast into my toil, and made both him
And his whole house the subject of my vengeance,
My joy is such, I cannot temper it:
As when the bloud-hound in a leash being led,
Noseth the ground, and while the prey's far off,
Spares both his mouth and feet, but drawing near,
Will open wide, and drag away his leader,
So are my thoughts transported, I'll away,
My fury calls for blood, and I obey.
Undoubted friendship having made
A strong impression in the mind,
Though wilde distempers doe invade
Our reason can their fury bind.
Love in distracted thoughts may bear
As great a sway as servile fear.
He whose strong passions are his foes,
Is happy in a faithful friend,
That will assist him to compose
Those strifes that to his ruin tend.
A true friend wishes not a cause,
But when ther's need, he ne'er withdraws.
A Lover with no ill intent,
Will Proteus-like, new forms devise,
He foins to be on errands sent,
And then himself he will disguise
Like to a god, Love loves to stray,
And seldom keeps the beaten way.
But now the fatal time draws near,
Wherein the error and the offence
Of Imperial will appear,
To trust the slave he did incense,
And to encourage him to act
What he once thought a heinous fact.
But may there not be some excuse?
At least to mitigate his fault?
That he could not expect a truce,
And that he found his own life sought:
It hath bin counted Justice still,
Rather then to be killed, to kill.
Ther's no excuse can purge the guilt
That murder brings; we must not take
Our own revenge, blood by us spilt,
Will our whole off-spring guilty make:
Then let's not blame heavens justice, when
Great plagues doe light on virtuous men.
VVEe see there is small hope that gentle sleep
Can find admittance to his troubled thoughts,
While rage distracts them; he's no sooner laid
To rest upon his couch, but up he starts.
The wise Iustinian means this night to bring
Some curious music, that may rock his senses
Into a slumber by sweet harmony,
Working on his affections, we are all
Eternally obliged to that good man;
Who though he be with hearty sorrow moved
To see his friend in such necessity,
Even of his help, yet is resolved to employ
His constant care, nor will he ever think
His debt of friendship paid by my labour.
What will become of us if he miscarry?
We are his kinsmen, and have no subsistence
But by his only bounty; I received
A deadly wound in the deplored death
Of his dear son, who oft was pleased to bid me
Throw all my care on him, and now I find
My hopeful venture sunk in that brave ship.
To lose out friends and fortunes I confess,
Is that which needs must shake the firmest minds,
But when there is no hope for us to increase
Our own affliction, and to lose our spirits,
Is an infirmity beneath a man:
Why should we doubt his safe recovery?
Since passion as we see, doth but disturb
His reason, not destroy't; when he's at worst,
He'll hearken to the counfell of his friend.
How earnestly he begs, that he may speak
With Imperial, and it seems Iustinian
Already condescends to his request;
Me thinks that should not be, since he suspects
Him to be privy to Franciscoes death;
No doubt, Iustinian understands what's fit;
Perchance if once he shall his mind unburden
His passions may remit, or he may seem
To promise, cause he would not have him crossed,
These things we wholly must commit to him,
Whose Iudgement's not inferior to his love:
He wished us but withdraw awhile, we must
Not be far off, least he should chance to call,
For what so ever occasion they should have
Ther's none but we t'assist: Sango the slave
Hath taken liberty to go abroad,
At his own pleasure, who would think the Villain
Durst venture to be absent at this time?
I have observed a wondrous league of late
Between him and his Cozen slave; how ere
Their Lords are far asunder, they are near.
It is ever best when such as they are kept
To daily labour, the least ease corrupts them.
There might perchance be some discovery made
If they were both examined apart,
And made believe each other had confessed.
Some plot, it is like to steal a silver spoon
To purchase Opium, or the drug Tobacco;
That is the height of their ambitious theft:
But hark they knock I prethy go thou in,
And i'll take order to have Sango sent for.
THou blow as much as he that carried
An Ox upon his shoulders, set it down,
Ther's for thy pains,
Troth t'was a heavy burrhen.
Ther's two quatrines more.
I thank you, sir.
Methinks Molosso might have saved this charge▪
And bin himself Porter.
Who the Slave?
He's now our major Domo, our Lord told me
He would deliver his commands by him.
He gave me order to make this provision.
I like him he begins his government
With bounty, now the Cooke may show his skill;
Since I came hither, I have bin confined
To several sallets, porrage with scrapped cheese,
And a few Vermicelli, such slight dishes:
O when I served the Grand-Dukes master Cooke
How we were all employed! I can remember,
What lectures of our Mystery he would read,
Stiling the belly master of all arts,
And by a model of his own invention
Demonstrate how the antique Cooks were wont
To dress th'intire Boar; he was a Scholar
And would discourse of the delicious Sumen
And of the noble Patrons of the kitchen
Both Greeks and Romaines; he was wont to speak
Most reverently of one Apitius,
Why what was he?
A man of a brave stomach,
That spent upon his belly near three millions,
And having cast up his accounts, and found
Only two hundred and od thousand crowns
Remaining to support his appetite,
Doubting he should be famished, rather chose
To live by fame, and end his life with poison:
But prethy knock; there was another too,
One Nomentanus, but far short of him:
Will they not open? we shall all be shent,
Knock harder.
Sure they are a sleep, perhaps
The Slave being overleaven'd with his favour
Hath made himself stark drunk; we shall disturb
Our Lady and her Daughter, I much wonder
Mistress Nugella comes not to the door.
What noise is that within? some body groans,
I will go seek our Patron.
Here he comes.
what, no for warder? w'are like to sup to night
At a fine hour?
W'have bin a good while here sir,
Have often knocked, but cannot be let in.
We thought we heard a groaning in the house.
How? knock again, yet, this is very strange,
Where should Molosso be; perhaps my wife
And daughter with their maids may all be busy,
For I suppose they were to take a bath;
He certainly would not neglect my service:
I know not what to think, my jealousy
Suggests a thousand fears, go presently,
Desire the Engineer to lend my an Engine,
That I may force the door.
SIr, here are they
Mean to make good this Fort in spite of you,
And all your Engineers.
What's thy intent?
Thou know how far I trust thee dear Molosso.
It is not your untimely trust or favour
(That is to me but sun-shine after shipwreck)
Can satisfy your former injuries:
I would have spent an age in base observance,
Only to gain this day, this happy hour
That shall produce what no time shall forget.
Jove my life to thee and ever shall
Make that acknowledgement, then doe not thou
Destroy thine own great merit.
Think not fond man,
I saved thy life for any love of thee,
But to reserve thee for a greater plague.
O my dear wife and daughter, where are they?
Both yet alive, the mischief's done already,
But not the vengeance, thou shalt that behold,
Till then there's nothing can be called revenge:
Go bring u'm Sango, thou hast had thy fill
Of Nectar, sweeter far than that of Jove.
THe best Physicians in extremities,
Allow their Patients what they most desire,
Though ne'er so seeming hurtful: when diseases
Exceed their safe and usual remedies,
They many times are cured by contraries:
What should this mean?
I must exact your promise.
Upon condition you'll forbear all out-rage.
Set me my bounds, and see if I transgress.
Stand here then, and be silent.
Like a Statue.
Behold a pair of Brides, their hair displayed,
Muse not to see u'm weep, the cause is light.
What is the woe that these strange signs import?
Speak my Honoria, my Angelica.
That which no women's tongue is fit to express,
Nor any humane ear fit to receive.
Mine ears may hear what such soft hearts can bear▪
I have a breast prepared for misery.
Behold the Wolves, the Bears, that our sad dreams
Fore-warn'd us of, which you did so despise.
You hear how light the cause is, but a dream.
Our wretched story's told and understood,
In the sole repetition of that vision;
The jewels ravished from our innocent necks.
When swords and direful threats could not 〈◊〉
By cruel force assisting one another,
Wrung from us both.
Oh that heavens power had pleased
According to my fervent invocation,
To have transformed me to some ugly monster,
That horror might have frighted away lust,
Or else converted it to sudden rage,
Whereby my life had ransomed mine honour!
Was there none near to aid? where was Nugella?
Bound, and then strangled, all the rest were forth.
What haste a wretched creature makes to hear
His own dire wretchedness? but now Molosso,
Since thou hast cloyed thy furious appetite,
Unbind their tender hands, and send them down,
That wee may all condole their heavy fortunes.
If my revenge could have bin satisfied
With what's already done, it had done nothing;
No, Bears and Wolves always persist to death,
And I lament to find so narrow a Stage
To act my vengeance on, as but two women:
Sango prepare.
Command, and I obey.
Then there is hope to find compassion
In more then Scythian breasts, ther's but that left
To expiate your former cruelty.
O spare their lives, and all shall be forgiven!
We are too far embark't to hope or wish
To be forgiven, mischief's upheld by mischief.
Alas poor souls, what crime have they committed?
They are both thine Imperial, that's their crime,
And it is the height of our triumphant glory,
That thou shalt see u'm dye, cast thine eyes up.
Villain, I will not, thus I snatch away
That part of thy revengeful insolence, pulls out his eyes.
So shall the Sun and Moon, heavens rolling eyes,
Drop from their spheres at the worlds general ruin,
To avoid the spectacle, it is fit my light
Should be extinguished with my dearest objects.
•…hat? hast thou so deluded us? thine ears
••…ough thou want eyes to see, shall hear their groans▪
Oh, oh! Ang. Oh, oh!
I would have laboured more for this revenge,
Than those that search the bowels of the earth
For Mines, or dive into the Sea for pearls.
whose fortune should I envy? that am going
To take possession of a happiness,
Great, and (what crowns felicity) secure?
Such constant joy proceeds from virtuous love:
But soft, what unexpected change is here?
Either mine eyes mistake, or my Imperial
Is quite deprived of his; alas, it is so:
I am amazed at this sad spectacle.
There can be none but young Prince Doria left,
So apprehensive of my misery.
What strange Eclipse? or dire Stymphalides
With their prodigious wings obscure the sun?
What cruel hand hath made us all thus wretched?
What thou behold, is the least part of mine,
And thine own woe.
Whore's my Angelica?
She and her mother both are visely murdered;
And that's not all, they both were ravished first
By those two savage beasts.
It is thy fate Doria
To be involved in that mans vowed destruction.
Where am I now, in fruitful Italy,
Or in Hircania, where there's nothing seen
But horrid monsters, and perpetual snow?
O wickedness! that no age will believe!
And all Posterity deny! malicious fate,
That to my boundless misery add this;
To make me suffer barbarous wrongs from such
As are not capable of my revenge.
Were the sole Monarch of the world, the actor,
Or had he but connived at the deed done
By his lustful son or minion; I might hope,
Armed with the justice of my cause, to wrest
The ill-sway'd sceptre from him, and reduce
Him and his race to unparalleled examples
Of woeful pride, and miserable greatness.
Then if abstracted spirits knowledge have
Of humane vows, look down deflowered Maid,
But yet no less a Virgin then a Vestal:
Since honour cannot stoop to punish slaves,
Whose vile condition sinks beneath that vengeance,
'Bove which no tyrants power could hope to clime.
And since thy cruel sufferings (blessed soul)
Require strict satisfaction, lo, I turn
My fury on my self, and punish thus
Mine own malignant fortune: who holds me?
Forbear, I may not be disarmed.
That man
That is transported by a desperate rage,
Disarms himself, he that may hinder mischief,
And yet permits it, is an accessory.
Noble Iustinian, thou were wont to be
Full of compassion, show it now, and end
A loathed life.
That which had bin a crime
Not to prevent, were wickedness to act.
Restore me then my sword, it is not worse
To kill him that unwilling is to dye,
Than to hinder him that's willing.
If thou kil'st
Thy self, thereby thou dost confess a guilt.
The guilty seldom inflict punishment
Upon themselves; what wretch can keep a life
So full of misery?
It is wretchedness,
Not to be able to bear misery,
It is not as thou think, renowned Doria,
A virtue to hate life, but to endure
These weighty strokes of Fortune valiantly,
And this becomes thy noble birth and spirit,
On which th'afflictions of the world should fall,
But as tempestuous showers into the sea.
Thy counsel comes too late, sentence is given
By me upon my self, nor can thou save
Or yet reprieve me, he that resolves to dye,
Finds weapons every where, my mind could arm
These hands without a sword, but it disdains
All borrowed aid; my weapons are within:
If sudden joy can speedy death command,
Why should not grief? and mine above all others?
Then summon all thy forces mighty sorrow,
Contract this stubborn heart and stifle it,
Deny it the bold privilege, to be
The last that feels the stroke of death: so, so,
It shoots a vapour that will poison it,
And choke each passage of the vital spirits,
And now I feel it beat against my breast,
As if it gave th'allarum unto all
The organs of my life; O how it struggles,
Disdaining to submit! proud rebel down,
Thy ligaments are shrunk, and I approach
The place, where Lovers after death reside,
Where I a ghost will yet enjoy my Bride:
Wilt thou not yield? dost thou expect relief?
Time, that releaseth sorrow, shall not join
With refreshed nature to repair thy ruin:
I to a broken heart will add this doom,
No substance within these lips shall come.
Thy daughter Imperial is canonised:
With contrite heart devout Prince Doria,
Hath vowed a fast to his Saint Angelica.
I feel so great a weight of misery,
That I can scarce be sensible of more,
Although it be (what's harder to be borne
Than my calamity) a villains scorn.
Thus shall my silence break, into remorse,
Not into rage, that fever of the soul
Is quite converted to an Apathy;
Let me cry out to fate, as Hanniball
At Canne, to his bloody Soldiers, spare;
Imperial know thou the voice of Spinola?
By the most faithful head of my Iustinian
(Than which there cannot be a holier found)
I truly am moved with pity, thy sad story
Would melt a flinty leered into compassion;
Procrustes, or the wilde Inhabitants
Of horrid Caucasus are mild to these.
• know not, gentle Spinola how thou
Ca••…t accept thanks from me, that have from thee
•eserv'd so ill, It may not be supposed
• •an dissemble now, that Villain there
Contrived thy dear sons death without my knowledge,
Though I am guilty of as great a crime,
For I was willing, to my too late grief
Upon discovery made by thine own Slave
Of thy intent, to have the same retorted
Upon thy self, the rest that wretch did plot,
In whom I placed a wicked confidence;
And did at length too much applaud the fact,
From whence our mutual miseries result.
Thy crime was but diversion of an evil,
Whereof I hate the memory, and wish
I could drink deep of Lethe, to forget
That impious design, and for these villains,
I'll study a new punishment, that shall
Transcend Perillus Bull, and all the torments
Invented by the fierce Sicilian tyrants.
It is wretchedness to fear where ther's no hope,
Coldest thou believe, vain Spinola, that we
Would undertake to act so bold a mischief,
And not resolve upon as brave an end?
We that have gained such a full revenge,
Mean not to lose it by a poor submission
To hopeless mercy, or your new found torments;
Though fortune made us wretched slaves to you,
We both retain some sparks of th'active fire,
Which the 〈◊◊◊…〉
Did sometimes flame in our Numidean breasts,
Not yet so quench thy servitude, but we
Have will and power to free our selves, behold
Out liberty; these shall restore us now
To that equality that nature gave,
In which blind chance hath put a difference:
One blow from these deliverers, can make
An abject beggar equal to a King:
Sango keep time.
I'm ready.
By consent
We thus avoid &amp; mock your punishment.
The Harpies are flown suddenly to hell,
And hang already on that hideous rock;
Where dreadful fiends lye gaping to receive 'm;
But let me, sir, become your faithful guide
To lead you to my house, where you shall live,
And want no comfort love or cost can give.
The only comfort of a wretched soul
Is to despair of comfort. I see not
The mansion guilty of such wickedness,
But I am seen, a wretch, in Genua,
Where all my ancestors stand wreathed with honour:
I'll wander to a desert, or else clime
Some remote mountain, where dark clouds that hung
About his high erected head, shall hide me
From all the eyes of men, there I'll lament
My miseries in willing banishment.
What need we care how powerful our foes be?
When slaves can bring us to such misery?
Whose innate cruelties at length appear,
Though they the same may cunningly forbear,
For their own ends; it is not wisdom then
To place our trust in such conditioned men,
Whom punishments, and wants, and fears prepare
To hatred, to deceit, and to despair:
Yet these are but poor instruments, the cause
That on our heads heavens indignation draws,
Springs from our selves, ••••…st which ther's no defence
〈1… lines〉

Urge this no more, it is troublesome.
My Lord, though I affect you
Almost with that Religion I do our Gods, yet
The constant motion of my will does fix
On noble Argalus, and I confess
His gracious merit challenges a wife,
Fair as Parthenia, did she stain the East,
When the bright morn hangs day upon her cheeks
In chains of liquid pearl.
I must confess,
I have not studied the nice rules of love,
Nor can with flattering eloquence adore
A Ladies aerie shadow, court her smiles
 With adoration, or with supple knees
Cringe like an humorous dancer, when the ayre
Ploy's with her hair, or fret to see the Sun
Be over save•cy with
 her cheeks or 〈◊〉:
I speak this to my glory; the big War
Has been my mistress, where intended fields
When I have 〈◊〉 a
 moving grove of Pike•
Advanced as if the splendour of their heads
Meant to obscure the Sun beam, gore the clouds
Till they wept •loud, a•d heard the
 fiery h•rs
Neighing destruction to
 •n host of men,
From their hot nostrils: there I did command
With ample Fortune; and to be repulsed
In an effeminate Skirmish; wounds my soul
Worse than a quiver of sharp Parthian shafts
Could prejudice my body.
I could wish
Both for your present peace, and to secure
Your future quiet, you had still confined
Your disposition to that war∣fare; this
Is far more dangerous▪ He that means to win
Loves bloodless battles, must be strong in tears,
Marshall his Army in a Field of Sighs,
Have for his Ensign beauty in his looks,
Under which colours ought to march kind smiles
As ablest 〈…〉 the
 van. Smooth vows,
And amoro•s
 〈◊〉 will batter Ladies
 hearts,
Sooner than slings or iron rams demolish
Resisting Citadels.
Can thou conceit,
That I Demagoras, to whose very name
Laconian Matrons have with early•haste,
Paid tributary vows, her choicest maids,
Have left Pans Orgies to present so•t Hymns
To the honour of my merit, can decline
So much my great soul, as with forced entreats
To beg Parthenias mercy; let tame fools
 Such as have hearts scarce fit to furnish
 Doves,
Or spleen less Iambs with courage; intercede
For female favours by submissive prayers;
My resolution grounded on the worth
Of my desert, shall with her mothers power
Enforce Partheniae, were she cold as ayre
In its most subtle motion, to become
In her affection fervent as the day,
That she was borne in, was to gaudy light,
Or ruin her best comforts,
I am fine to be
Your most industrious advocate: my Daughter
Thinks she offends in each familiar look
Bestowed on manhood, but I hope that Time
And Counsel may convert her to become
Loves proselyte,
Shoe's that already Madam,
Or Argalus durst not without consent,
And patronage from her, rival my love;
But if the boy oppose me in a thought,
Borrow a smile, or pay an amorous glance
As tribute to her eyes, were he defenced,
With some light bog, that dances to the winds
Loud whistling Music, I would dart a frown
Should ravish his mortality into Ayre,
For the presumption.
It is my Lord,
This rough demeanour (though it speak you man)
Declares a spirit full of fire, which does fright
Parthenia's softness: Virgins loves are won
(Like Heavens compassion) by submissive prayers.
It is not the brave relation of a fight,
Can move the mild breast of a tender maid
 To ought but terror; she will start at
 sight
Of scars though bought with honour, bleed in tears,
When wounds are mentioned; for Lord Argalus
His affable and courtly carriage calls
Respective blushes into the bashful cheeks
Of every Virgin, that my daughters bound
By a due Justice, to esteem his worth,
With more than common courtesy, yet my will
Seconded by a Mothers kind entreats,
Shall work upon her duty to accept
You'll as her servant.
Servant, Lady;
What mortal fool ambitious to out-vie
The Gods in honour, dare presume to hope
That glorious title from me? have I stood
(When armies timorous of a general death,
Quaking with Panick horror, have invoked
Divine assistance) fearless, and not deemed
Heavens power deserving a religious prayer,
After so many Trophies as may claim
Each its particular star, to be esteemed
A servant to a woman.
Nay, my good Lord.
Persuade the girl
T'attire like Iuno in a dress of clouds
Her beauteous head; put off her human Earth
For Immortality, and achieve a seat
Due to the Queen of Heaven, that with regard
The humble Senate of the petty Gods,
And Goddesses may tremblingly adore
The sparkling Majesty, yet were my will
Not satisfied by voluntary gift
Of her affection, my great soul would scorn it,
Worse than the proffered service of a Slave.
See my Daughter,
My Lord, loose not this opportunity,
You shall have place, and leisure, for my presence
Shall be no detriment to your purpose.
Now Lady,
Are you in haste, or do you slight a presence
May challenge your observance? I am come,
Confident of my merit, to inform you
You ought to yield me the most strict regard
Your love can offer.
Sir, I am not
(Though I affect not self conceited boast)
So ignorant of my worth, but I deserve
From him who will enjoy me, a respect
More fair and Courtlike.
The blunt phrase of war
Is my accustomed language, yet I can
Tell you yo'ar handsome, and direct your looks
With a becoming posture; I must speak
In the Heroic Dialect, as I use
To court Bellona, when my high desires
Aim at a glorious victory.
You'll scarce
Conquer a Lady with this sterne discourse,
Mars did not woo the Queen of Love in Arms,
But wrapped his battered limbs in Persian silks,
Or costly Tyrian Purples, speak in smiles,
To win her tempting beauty.
I'll bring on
Well-manag'd troops of Soldiers to the fight,
Draw big battaliaes, like a moving field
Of standing Corn, blown one way by the wind
Against the frighted enemy; the Van
Shall save the Rear a labour, and by me
Marshald, shall fold bright conquest in the curls
 Of their conducting Ensigns, while grim
 Death
Shall on the feathered arrows with more haste,
Then on his own shafts, fly upon the foe;
While the shrill Trumpet, and each piercing Fife
Shall sing their Dirges, and the hoarse mouthed Drums,
Wars fatal bells, with surly noise proclaim
Their sudden funeral: This brave resolve
Vanquished my steel winged Goddess, and engaged
Peneian Daphne, who did fly the Sun,
Give up to willing ravishment, her boughs
To invest my awful front, and this shall prostrate
Spite of all opposition, your nice soul
To my commanding merit,
These high terms, were apt to fright an enemy, or beget
Terror in flinty bosoms: Can you think
A timorous Virgin, can affect her fear,
Yield the security of her peace and life,
To the protection of her horror. You must not persuade my
 thoughts that you who vary so the Scene of love, can act it perfectly.
Slighted in this: it is a contempt inhumane, and deserves my
 utmost scorn.
Nay may most honoured Lord, be not transported with a needless
 rage, it is but her childish folly.
You have done ill to entertain a man
Of such an absolute worth, with such a mean
Regardless value; you must alter this
Neglectful temper, or my anger will
Surpass my natural love, and I shall chide
Your too affected niceness.
Gracious Madam
The zealous duty which religious laws,
Teaches me owe my parents, would inflict
A heavy curse for disobedient guilt,
 Upon my Innocence, should I transgress
The intention of your honourable will,
In what I can obey it.
Then in this
You are resolved t'usurp the privilege
Of your discretion: and not fulfil
My will in the disposal of your love.
Yes with that freedom that I would to Heaven
Tender my best obedience; but since love
Is by example and discourse allowed
Reasons superior, it must be esteemed
Above all duty.
Yet there ought to be
Consent attained from those whose power sh'ud guide
Their childrens youth and actions.
It is confessed,
But not except it justly sympathise
With their affection: you would have suffered
A conflict in your peace, had you been forced,
When your free will had yielded up your heart,
My fathers choice, to've had it ravished back,
And in despite of your resolve conferred
Upon another.
I was not so childish
To contradict my parents, but subscribed
To their discretions, as I would advise,
You would obey mine, and yield consent
To wed Demagoras.
What can your Wisdom
Behold in him, (if with impartial Eyes
You would survey his quality) that should engage
Your inclination to enforce my love,
Besides the native fierceness of his looks
Apter to fright a Lady, than beget
Fancy: his courtships clothed in angry threats,
As if that Love were turned a Soldier,
And had unyok'd her teem of spleenlesse Doves,
 To have her Chariot drawn by ravenous
 Wolves,
Tigers, or treacherous Leopards, had put off
Her wreath of harm esse Myrtle to invest
Her brow with Yew or Cyprus.
This excuse
Proceeds not from his merit, but your love
To Argalus, a stranger only known
For his brisque Courtship, the Queen supports
His wavering Fortune, he depends on her,
And should she fail by death, his utmost hopes
Embraced a sudden ruin.
Argalus,
Were he more abject in his fate than your
Imagination could conceit, deserved
My Equalst fancy; in his youthful looks
Sits a divinity able to enchant
Queens to admire, nay to adore his worth,
Continued smiles make Summer on his cheeks,
At his bright Eyes does Cupped warm his wings,
When he intends to fly at Women's hearts;
Music and rich perfumes are in his breath,
Aptly resembling aromatic winds,
That sing the Phoenix Exequies.
Can my daughter
So much decline the greatness of her spirit,
Hereditary to her blood,
To affect a person merely for his smiles,
Effeminate carriage without any proof
Of manly valour in him.
You mistake
His character, though he can tread in peace
An aerie measure to the warbling Lute,
Demean his actions with that sweet deceit.
Can cousin Ladies of their souls, yet when
The glorious war does summon him to the field,
He does excel in feats of active arms
The ablest youth of Arcady; instructs
 Old Soldiers Martial discipline, that
 those
Who had beheld his sweetness in the Court,
Puzzled in Faith, believed that conquering Mars
Had clothed his fierceness in a Cupids shape,
To vanquish some more beauteous prize than was
The blind Gods mother.
It is offensive, I'll hear no more of this.
Thus I'm enforced to prove,
Dead to obedience if I live to love.
Your niceness
Must not excuse the due respects we bear
The Lord Demagoras; if the shepherds be prepared,
They shall present their mirth to expel his melancholy.
Pish, you're as fierce an aspen leaf you wag every way.
I'll tell thee honest Strephon, I
No more affect a woman than the Sky
Does Birds that sore in it, they are as vain
Inconstant as the flying showers of rain
In April Strephon.
The more dissembling fellow you: why do you pro∣test to every
 Wench you see, you are enamoured on her: why you should see, and seeing ought to
 imitate your betters, Cli∣tophon, ther's not a Lass
That trips nimbly ore the Arcadian grass,
When she does fair Strephon view,
Though I fly, but will pursue,
Throw her eyes out on my shape,
 Call me Pigsny, pretty Ape;
Some there are that doe suppose
Loves hot fire in my nose:
With which they scorched, for pity cry,
Blow it ou't Strephon, over we die;
Others say my head's a bell,
My hair the ropes, that ring the knell,
My tong the clapper which though their deaths it rings,
They swear no Courefeu half so sweetly sings;
The hollow of my eyes, the grave,
Which with their nails they dig: but have— But who comes
 here?
Strepho, you're well-met, good Aminta, see,
Is he not chaste, and fair as young Goats be,
His head like to a Cedar over-growes,
His studded cheeks and rich enameld nose.
I would be loath to give my face for the washing
Girl, now Clitophon doe not you not imagine
 Venus girdle was
My swathband, the maids so dote on my well timbered limbs.
Here's a leg, Satho, that's as neatly made,
As any that ore Shepherdess is laid;
A thigh proportionable I tak't,
I know thou longst to feell it nak't,
A tail, some say, does hang thereby,
Which none must know but thee and I:
I have a back too, though I say it
That should not, can bear any weight,
Full limbs, with sinews strong and plump,
A lusty chine, and for my rump
It is so well made, and firmly knit,
The Nymphs are all stark mad for it,
Because they think the rest of my members proportionable.
What a quick flame
 Into my breast from Saphos bright
 eyes came,
Another from Aminta's; my desire,
Erst cold as Ice, grows active as the fire,
Dearest Aminta, Sapho lend your ear
To my just vows.
Fond Clitophon forbear
To swear in earnest, I do know your heart
Was never wounded with the blind Gods dart.
See how bright Strephon does entice the ayre,
To play with the sweet belropes of his hair.
What a soft murmuring the tresses makes,
As did Medusa's locks, or Alectos snakes.
Gentlest Virgin, white as infant snow,
Pleasing as Ladon that does coolly flow,
Through our green meadows; trust a loving swain,
When he protest with truth.
There does remain
No such good property amongst men on Earth,
Truth is fled to Heaven with Justice.
Florida the news.
The Lord Demagoras this way pursues,
And must have entertainment, it is a charge
From our great Lady, that we strait enlarge
Our Pastoral devises.
We have none
On such a sudden, less she will have done
Those that were for Argalus welcome meant.
Be pressed with speed that greeting to present—
They are upon us ere we are ready for the action.
Florida, are the shepherds here?
Madame they are, Castalia only wants.
This Music speaks her entrance.
 Please your Lordship,
Under this shady Poplar, sit and see
Our rural pastimes.
Loves a Child, and ought to be
Won with smiles, his Deity
Is clothed in Panthers skins, which hide
Those parts which kill, if but espied.
Hates wars, but such as mildly led
By Venus are to pleasures bed,
There does soft embraces fight,
Kisses combat with delight,
Amorous looks and sighs discover
What will win a Virgin-Lover.
It is too effeminate this; I had rather hear
The cries of dying men than these nice strains,
Or Soldiers with loud clamours rend the air
With shouts of victory.
Patience my Lord, the Shepherds are proceeding to dance.
I doe not like this Moral, it includes
Something that is distasteful; a mans possessed
With eminent frenzy that would a minute
View these idle Morris-Dances.
That fellow
That wooed with such obsequiousness and won
His yielding Mistress, sure did represent
Effeminate Argalus. The other, who
With confidence attempting, was repulsed,
Figured my self. This same was an abuse,
Such as no hospitality, nor laws
Of true nobility can suffer. Madam.
 You have done well and justly. I
 perceive
You are as various in your giddy faith,
As your coy daughter in her choice; reserve her
For gracious Argalus: but if this scorn
Meet not a sudden and severe revenge,
May all my former glories be obscured;
Though to perform it I should scale the Stars,
And snatch them like quick wilde-fire from their Spheres,
Then dart them on the earth: catch the dull clouds
And squeeze them into a deluge, and aspire
To startle Jove with terror of my ire.
This is the suddenest passion I have seen,
Whence had it its original? My Lord,
Let's follow and persuade him.
YOu are too strangely timorous, your full worth
Speaks in as loud an accent of Desert,
As the most meriting Arcadian Lord,
Who boasts his Ancestry.
My Lord,
The fair Parthenia instructs all hearts.
Nobility, with Music of her voice;
Myriads of joys are in her looks; her eyes
Are Natures richest Diamonds set in foils
Of polished Ebony, her breath expires
Odours more sweet than issued from the trees
Of Balm in Paradise.
Demagoras
 Drunk with opinion of himself,
 declines
As much her glorious merit, as your just
Expressions honours it.
'T were sacrilege
Not to confess so manifest a truth,
'T was she when first I did salute the War
With my unable person; who inspired
My soul with courage active as the wind,
Gave me a manly being, and infused
By the divine reflection of her love,
Thoughts fiery as that passion: I do live
Only her creature. Borrow my poor heat
From the extended virtue of her flame.
You are too modest,
T'ascribe a greater glory to my niece,
Then the whole stock of women ever boasted;
You'll make her proud my Lord, it is an excess
Of natural sweetness in you; you must temper
With a more moderate confidence.
Alas my Lord,
Of more sincere devotion; every thought
My fancy offers, is a sacrifice
To the bright deity of Parthenia,
Whose noble freeness, though it may afford
Me entertainment, more replete with grace,
Than she bestows on every Suitor, yet
My timorous hopes dare not assume that life,
As to believe she loves me; pray my Lord,
You are familiar with Parthenias thoughts
Resolve your friends this questionable doubt;
Whom her affection at purity has chosen
Her loves blessed favourite.
My Lord, you know him,
He's your most intimate friend.
My friend,
Were he my utmost enemy and beloved,
Of fair Parthenia: that should be a tie
 Of adoration to me, pray declare
The man must be made fortunate with the title
Of Lord of such perfection.
He is
A noble generous and well manured youth
Bears beauties ensigns in his gracious looks.
Has that supreme Divinity in his eyes
As sparkles flames, able to fire all hearts,
And the superlative virtue of his Mind,
Transcends his outward figure; he is wise
As most mature age, Valiant in resolve,
As fems beloved Child reputation,
Conjoin the masculine graces of his soul,
With lovely carriage, and discret discourse
Has not your knowledge reached him yet?
This character
So far excelling me undoes my hopes.
My Lord were not to
Secure your peace, I'd not disclose this secret, it is your
 self,
It is Argalus Parthenia has received
A welcome guest into her open heart,
Amass not your quick senses, it is a truth.
Your mutual modesties
Defer your just desires, I must become
The moderator twixt your bashful hopes
You do affect, as timorously as Swans,
(Cold as the brook they swim in) who do bill,
With tardy modesty, and chirring plead
Their constant resolutions.
Noble Argalus,
My honoured brother, pray heaven out entertainment,
Be worthy your acceptance, you must not expect
That happy welcome, here your house affords
 To such deserving guests. My Lord
 Philarchus,
Saw you the Lord Demagoras lately.
Madam,
Not since he flung last night hence in a rage
From the presentment by the Shepherds.
Demagoras
Is of so haughty a disposition
(Though noble otherwise) that I can wish
No alliance with him: sister, I doe fear,
You are too zealous to advance the match
'• waxed him and your
 Parthenia: her's a Lord
As great by birth, and greater by the favour
Done him by th'King, but greatest by his own
Superlative goodness, does affect her with
So true a fancy, that you much would wrong
Humanity to dispose her to another,
Wheresuch a meriting Suitor does pretend
A holy interest in her.
Good brother doe not
Question my honour so much, I am loath
To give the least occasion of distaste
To my Lord Demagoras, and since my daughter
Cannot affect him, I conceive he will
Cease his unnecessary suit, and leave her
To her own disposure.
I wish it.
My Lords, and sister, honour me to transfer
Your companies to my Castle; it doth stand
Oppressed with solitude, and mourns the lack
Of noble hospitality, like a widow
Deprived of a loved husband. I doe long
To see Dame Ceres crowned with wreathes of wheat,
Kiss plump cheeked Bacchus there in daily feasts,
To view my table furnished with such guests
As would esteem't no trouble to adorn it
A year or two together, and there find
No entertainment like a bounteous mind.
This way she went, I followed her thorough the grove of Cy∣press to
this Bower, she cannot before off.
O Argalus!
It was her voice, Parthenia's voice, she named
Her minion Argalus: that sound (though clothed
In the enchanting accents of her breath)
Was harsh as Screech-owles, or the Whislers notes,
And shall be fatal to her as the strains
The Sirens (dancing on the peaceful Seas)
Bestow on wretched Mariners. Come forth,
Employ your airy numbers on your own
Proud beauties Epitaph.
What means my Lord,
This rude intrusion on my retired thoughts?
How dare you hand me thus? Uncivil man
Forbear this boldness.
Persuade me to it.
When you can sing the world into a sleep,
Or tame wilde lightning with a tear; you'd best
Try if the passing sweetness of your tunes
Can (like the voice of Magic) charm my rage
To pity, or bring Argalus to your rescue;
 Would he were here, and armed with
 sulphurous clouds,
Like Jove embracing Simile in fire,
This hand should snatch thee from his circular flames
To my revenge, enforce him to behold,
Helpless, the present ruins of thy beauty.
Your threats cannot affright me, I defenced
With mine own innocence, fear not your malice,
Should it invade my life; your foul intent
Will (like an arrow shot upright) descend
On your own head. But pray declare my Lord
Why you thus riot on my guiltless self.
If because I cannot love you, I will die
That causes Martyr.
Die! your Fates reserve you
Not to so brave a period as death
From my great hand: I'll stick on thee a shame
Worse than the poor deprival of thy life,
Such as will kill thee daily with conceit
Of thy unequalled misery.
Perhaps
He does intend my ravishment. My Lord,
Mischief I see in your distracted looks
Pretended to my purity: Oh doe not
Murder mine honour; I'll resign my breath
With freedom to your fury. Surely Sirs
A virgins gore (sooner than blood of kids)
Will mollify your heart of Adamant
To a soft fleshie substance.
Doe not prate,
Nor with loud clamours fill the wood, nor question
What my intent is. Though you had not loved me,
You need not in contempt have thrown your heart
On that effeminate Argalus; that wrong
Fills my vast soul with horror, and invites
My active thoughts to a severe revenge,
Since he whom I can name, but in contempt,
Usurps my lawful privilege; otherwise
The injury with patience had been borne,
 Revenges cause is an immediate scorn.
Gentle Aminta hear me.
Have you done?
Winding Meander first shall straightly run,
Roses in winter flourish, and our flocks
Wear golden fleeces in stead of woolly locks,
Ere Clitophon's false heart doe serious prove,
And entertain the perfectness of love.
It is her love to me makes her slight Clitophon thus.
 This it is to be a handsome man: I shall dote shortly (seeing my lovely
 Physiognomy in some clear spring, the Shepherds looking-glasse) on my own
 shadow, and like Narcissus leap into the waves to embrace it.
Which is she among the Swains
On whom the gentle Strephon dains
To cast a sheeps-eye, nod or wink,
But does her self immortal think?
Who indeed has such a face,
So full of a bewitching grace.
My head loves pillow, where he does rest
As safe as Magpie in her nest.
My forehead sweetly is bespred
With Violets, and Tulips blew and red:
The amber Cowslip, and the coral Rose,
Precious complexion of my sweeter nose.
My eyes are elements from which fall showers
That make my cheeks a spring of several flowers.
So is my head a nose-gay growing on one stalk,
My body is the garden, though it walk;
And ther's no woman but may well,
To th'worst part about it smell.
My arms are Dragons that defend all these:
Now view in me living Hesperides.
Who looks on Strephon that will not suppose
The blushing Peony growing in his nose?
The yellow Primrose that in woods had wont
 To flourish, springs up in his amber
 front.
I had a face of brass indeed should I deny this for truth:
 she'll praise me shortly into the stars, and then I shall (for a new Planet)
 be set in the the Shepherds Calendar. What a gull's this Clitophon,
 •ow long might he live ere he be in
 such favour with the Shepherdesses.
Why when on him they will not gaze,
On me they stare with much amaze;
And when on him, as on a Clown,
With lowering looks they scowl and frown,
Let gentle Strephon but vouchsafe
To let them look on him, they laugh.
Oh you are pleasant Strephon. Sapho say,
Are you as cruel as Aminta? Day
Loves not the Sunne-shine dearlier than my flame
Is equally devoted to your name:
To yours Aminta jointly, Oh you two,
Are clearer, sweeter than the morning dew
Falling in May on Lilies, fairer far
Than Venus Swans, or spotless Ermins are.
Which first vouchsafes me answer? There does fly
Immediate comfort from Aminta's eye:
Sapho speaks joy in smiles: but Virgins, here
Comes beauties abstract, who has no peer
Grace me, dear Florida, with one blessed look.
Away dissembler; Fishes scorn the hook
They see laid bare before them: but prepare,
The other Shepherds hither coming are,
Attending on my Lady and her guests.
This music does invite us to Pans feast.
Great Pan to thee we doe confine
This fleece of W••ll,
This 〈◊〉 of Wi••
 To father Bacchus Ceres dear
This garland of the
〈…〉
Accept. Silvanus we present
These fruits to thee, thy bounty sent.
And you maid•, from
whose each•eye
Winged shafts of love doe fly,
Doe not shame to let your feet
In a country measure meet
With these youths, whose active parts
Will play the thieves, and steal your hearts.
Shepherds, we owe our gratitude to your thanks.
Lords, and Ladies, thanks to all
That graced our harmless festival.
I doe admire we wanted my fair Niece
At these solemnities: me thought the sports
Showed dull without her; noble Argalus
My best wishes wait upon you.
Your honours Creature: I much wonder where
Partheni•
 has bestowed herself.
She cannot
Be absent long, see here she comes;
Madam, you were expected here, the Shepherds
Did in their Pastoral presentiments move
Dully without your presence. Why thus veiled,
Extend your glorious beauty, and eclipse
The emulous day with brightness: Heavens protect me,
What strange delusion's this?
Surely a mist
Shades our amazed optics, or has some
Black Devil taken her habitual form
To mock our erring fancies; it is her face
Veiled in a robe of darkness, yet her eyes
Shoot their ass•stomed brightness through the clouds,
To tell the admiring gazers, two such lights
Cannot endure prev•tion: Horror friend!
What should portend this ominous sight?
 Dear Madam, have you devised this emblem
 of disguise▪
That when dispersed 't may give more perfect lustre
To your most exquisite figure.
Oh my Lord,
Look not on such a monster, lest my sight
Infect your spotless purity. I am
(Stop your innocent ears, lest the harsh sound
Pierce them with horror) poisoned.
What ignoble villain,
Madam, has spoiled natures most glorious frame,
Demolished such a beauty as the most
Cunning Painters with their skill shall never imitate?
Let her name
Guess at his appellation that has ventured
This irreligious blemish to white truth;
And were his heart wrapped in a marble rock,
Fenced with a Mine of Adamant, this hand
Should from the stony casket dig it out,
And with his vile blood poison all the world.
Dear Sir, the employment of this fruitless rage
Cannot attach him for this mischief. It was
Demagoras, who mad with the conceit
That for your sake I did neglect his love,
Surprised my guitlesse person in the wood,
And with a juice (more poisonous than the foam•
Of angry Dragons) sprinkled my clear face,
By the •owerfull
 venom straight ore bespred with this
Contagious leprosy, and then he fled.
Whither? What place can be so strong to guard
So merciless a Tiger? Should he mix
His conversation with unsettled aires,
Break (like a cunning Pioner) through the earth,
And hide himself in the Center, some quick wind,
Or hideo•s
 earthquake, would enforce him thence
To his deserved punishment. Oh friend!
Me thinks this object should affright the light
Into a sad concealment, force the clouds.
 To drop upon the earth in floods of
 tears,
And drown it everlastingly.
P•ore Lady.
Doe not Lords
Urge violent rage to discompose your peace, I will (like
The pleasing air) wrap in that cloud, my head,
That has infected it, and seek out death:
Nor doe I grieve for my vain beauties loss,
Since shivering sickness, or the hand of age
Would have performed that office which his poison
Usurped upon its lustre: this only wounds
My frail resolve, since I believe that you,
Lord Argalus, affected me, that I
Should be so wretched, as to be deprived
Of that indifferent form, for which I might
Have merited your favour.
Gracious soul!
Enforce my immortality from my breast,
Which like a flame (enclosed twixt walls of brass)
Strives to ascend to heaven, and fetch from thence
Thy ravished beauty: it was thy excellent mind
That I admired; no noble soul can fix
Only on fleshly glory; and since that
Remains entire, immovable as faith,
I should undo my honour, in revolt
From sacred truth, should I renounce thy love:
I'll yet embrace thy Nuptials with a heat
Holy as altars incense; for thy face!
A thousand virgins with immaculate tears
Shall weep upon it, bathe it in their bloods,
Till (from the different colours) the fresh Rose
And glorious Lilly, in that snowy field,
Regain their ancient seats, and re-create thee
The absolute Queen of beauty.
Oh my Lord,
Your fancy wanders in distracted paths
Of vanquished reason; since unfortunate I,
 Must like a piece of
 〈…〉
By an unskilful Carver, needs beco•e
A most imperfect statue. Since I cannot
Boast any thing that's meriting your love,
Strive to forget 〈◊〉, who will •eeke
Some desert, where poor mo•••ll never trod,
To spend the wretched
 〈◊〉 of he• lifein.
Farewell my Lord, hereafter wish to meet,
As I doe, in one tomb, one winding sheet.
ARe all our forces mustered.
They are my Lord.
Let them be
All in a readiness. I mean this night
T'attempt Calendars Castle: my great soul
Is not yet satisfied by my revenge
Upon Parthenia's beauty: the contempt
(Cast on me by▪ refusal of my match)
Cannot be washed off, but in streams of blood.
But my Lord, think on Calendars strength.
I know my own.
And it were a sin against my undaunted courage
To doubt it is large
〈…〉 has not power
To vanquish any enemy. Let hosts,
Conjoin to hosts, affront me; yet this arm
Has an innated virtue, that shall force
Victory from their multitudes, as due
Only to my deservings. Let the Cap•aines
Prepare our forces, while in this grove I meditate
 The sweetness of my just revenge.
Pray Sir to whom belong yo• forces.
To Lord Demagoras, there is the General.
You're happily encountered, Doe you know me?
Though such things as you are,
Fit only for effeminacy and sport,
Doe seldom meet my knowledge, you are,
If I mistake not, Argalus; I sent you
A glorious present lately, your Parthenia
Dressed in her new robes of beauty, such as might
Entice your wanton appetite to love.
Villain, to glory in thy most detested act,
Shows that thy Fiend-like nature has forgot
All laws of noble manhood; but I sin
To interchange a word with such a Monster;
Yet before thou dost fall by me, as, if heaven have not
Lost all its cure of innocence, thou must doe,
I'll force thee hear the blackness of thy mischiefs.
What devil clothed in humane shape, except
Thy barbarous self, would have achieved the wrack
Of so much matchless beauty.
It was too mean, too light a sacrifice for my re∣avenge,
Had her whole Sex been there, attired in all
The glory of their beauty, and you Sir present,
My anger had invaded them, and spite
Of your defence converted their choice forms
To the same loathsome leprosy.
Peace Monster.
Each syllable thou utterest does infect
The air with killing pestilence: it was
H•avens never-sleeping
Justice that directed
My erring person hither to revenge
murdered beauty on thy life.
Nay stare not on me Sir, were you defenced
With heaps of men as numerous as your sins,
This sword should force a passage, and dig out
Thy heart from that black cabinet of thy breast,
 And cast it a prey to Vultures.
You're very confident
Young gallant of your fortune, prithee go
Poor boy and fight a combat in the court
With some soft Mistress, dance, or touch a Lute:
Thou art a thing so abject you're not worthy
The anger of Demagoras; arm, be gone,
Lest I doe frown thy soul away. My sword
Will be an useless instrument against such
A childish enemy.
Glorious Devil,
My furies grown to that unequal height
Twill not admit more conference; thy crimes
Are now ripe for my punishment: though Fiends
Guard your black breast, I'll pierce it.
So valiant?
I shall chastise your fury.
Parthenia,
Thou art in part revenged, and if mine own
Death doe succeed his, I shall go in peace to my eternity.
Sure great Mars
Has put on arms against me in this shape,
For it is impossible mortality could
Achieve Demagoras conquest. Farewell light,
It is fit the world should wear eternal night.
I hate to triumph
O'er his loathed carcass, which should be a prey
To Wolves and Harpies: O Parthenia!
Here lies the Fatal Cause of all our mischiefs;
And sure no soul will at his death rapine:
Revenge, when just, 's, not humane, but Divine.
Where have you left my Lord?
There lies your Lord.
Dead?
Cursed Fate, that so much greatness
Should suffer this great overthrow, and fall
From such a height to a sad funeral!
It is such a cruelty, as no report,
Though it discourse of rapes, and timeless deaths,
Has ever equalled.
The success will speak
The wonder more prodigious. The poor Lady
(Still lovely in her sorrow) after this sad rape
Of her rare beauty, privately stole thence,
And with that strictness has obscured her self,
That though inquest (though many endeavoured
In her desired search) can attain the least
Discovery of her present being.
How bears Argalus this sad disaster?
As a man
Whose noble courage, 'bove the cross of Fate,
Seems patient at his misery.
He and I
Are both made up of sorrow, our full griefs
Might (like two swelling Oceans when they meet
In a contracted channel) aptly combat
For rough priority. Philoclea
My glorious Cousin, will by no entreats,
No services, yet be induced to love,
That I was forced, against the natural zeal
I bear the King my Uncle, to transgress
(Such is the power of my fancy) the strictness
Of my obedience, captivating her
By force, to whom by a most free consent
My soul before was prisoner.
I could wish, noble Amphialus, that your desires
Might both achieve forgiveness, and success:
I'm none of those strict Statesmen, though I love
My King, that hate your virtues for this fact,
Because I know the greatness of your spirit
Attempted it not for inveterate hate,
 Or for ambition, but to gain her love.
Philocleas love, upon whose meanest thought
The Art of Memorie's grounded, and inspires
Each organ of our meditating sense,
With their perfections merit.
But my Lord:
How brooks the king the bold detention
Of his fair daughters? Sure he will invert
Some sudden forces on you, and compel
Their back-deliverie.
He shall first enforce
Mortality into nothing. I did send,
To avoid effusion of more humane blood,
This fair defiance, that he should elect
A Champion daring singly to oppose
Me in a combat, and if Fate decreed
My fall by him, security for the freedom
Of his imprisoned daughters.
Did his Grace accept the noble offer?
With a freedom
Fitting a King, but who the person is
That hopes to gain a Trophy by my death,
Fame has not yet divulged. This urgent business
Hinders my visit of my Lord Argalus;
Present my true hearts service to him, tell him I
Doe inwardly dissolve into a dew
Of bleeding passion for his lo••e, and would
To re-invest blessed quiet in his heart,
Act o'er the Scene of dangers I have passed
Since I knew earliest manhood, so your Lordship
Will please to pardon my rude haste, I must,
As to my friends, to my own affairs be just.
Persuade me not to this, there is no woman
Worthy my love, they are all too falsely common
To every Suitor.
Why Clitophon say you so, who are blessed
With her society whom I love best?
Yet in her presence I'm forbid to move
My suit, nay dare not name the name of love.
It is your own flat foolery Alexis; you should with garb
and gesture pastoral, with as much scorn as you would o'returne your enemy at
football, contemn the force of wo∣man, Why?
Women are shadows, fly away
When followed, or desired to stay;
But if you slight them, they will sue,
Follow, entreat, nay fly to you:
But if stiff and strong you stand,
You may tread them at command.
But lie down, the pretty Elves
Will straight fall under you of themselves.
Like my Spaniel, beaten, they
Will lick your lips, and with you play.
This is the reason why
They love me so doggedly;
You might by my example edify,
And live in peace Alexis.
Why Strephon, you usurp without a cause
The privilege of their love; your carriage draws
Their laughter, not affection; you appear
To them for sport, not for your person dear.
Ther's your foolery still, thou hast commerced it seems with none
but thine own sheep, and art far silly• than they: your woman is the greatest dissembler in the world, and
where they toy and jeer, they most affect:
Finally women are slippery, as at their tails are Eels,
Their minds as light as are their heals.
 And every one's for what she feels:
And so with my opinion, farewell.
Stay honest Strephon, I did late compose verses in hatred
of them.
They are not prose, pray read them.
Who would trust a woman, when
They are the only curse of men?
Sirens sing but to entice,
They men to a fools paradise:
Hyaena's speak, it is to betray
To certain ruin, so doe they:
Crocodiles shed tears of slaughter,
Women weep when they mean laughter.
Inconstant, cruel, self, unkind,
Are attributes that suit their mind.
Now, as I am true Arcadian, thou would be whipped for this;
Cupped shall cite thee into his Court for this by some of his villainous
Apparators, where his wide conscienc'd Pro∣ctors, and their Clerks, shall with
their pen and inkhornes beat thy brains out: if thou scap'st that, Ladies
shall beat thee to death with their Monkeys, you jack-a-napes; cham∣barmaids
shall worry thee to death with kisses, than which there can be no greater
tyranny; then, the very Cooke, and Milkmaids, shall in scolding prose, baste
thee into a jelly, or charm thee into May-butter; you shall answer this, I'll
peach, I'll play the Informer.
I'll not recant it, not deny this truth,
Alexis you shall hear it justified.
Where met you Lord Amphialus?
In the grove, twixt Mantinea and his Castle, while
Our servants led our horses down the hill,
We did exchange some accents in discourse.
The noble youth, as hopeful of success
In his design, as brave in his resolve;
 But the great rumoured warfare twixt the
King
And hem's converted to a single fight
Betwixt Amphialus and what champion
The King will venture to engage in such
A cause of weighty consequence.
I'm glad:
Arcadia long blessed in a happy peace
Shall by the letting of so few veins blood
Continue in her quiet; it was feared
This sad domestic quarrel would have cost
More lives than might with justice have been spared;
But it is not yet divulged by fame whose valour
Will be employed in the combat.
His knowledge
Has not yet attained the notice of't: My Lord,
He does present his best respects to you,
Deplores your sorrows with a brothers grief, entreats you
Have so much mercy on your glorious youth,
As not to spend its blooming pride in sighs.
My Lord, I thank him, and rejoice his Fate
Has sorted him so honourable a trial
Of his undoubted valour: for my griefs,
They doe increase on me, like a disease,
Spreading through all my faculties, which shakes
My soul into an agony of death,
And will, I hope, ere long, dissolve this flesh
Into forgetfulness.
Nay good my Lord,
Renounce this passionate temper, we'll depart
Hence to my Castle, expel our cares with feasts,
Hunt the wild bore that will with masculine rage
Resist the hunters, till he foam to death,
View swift hounds running hotly in pursuit
Of the chased game, and from the neighbouring hills
Force Echoes to their shrillness.
Alas my Lord:
The sole conceit of fair Parthenia's loss
 Would from a heart of marble force salt
tears
Cold as the dew the stone distills, invite
An unremorsefull Crocodile to shed
Drops as sincere as does the timorous Hart
When he o'reheares the feath'red arrow sing
His funeral Dirge.
See Alexis accompanied with a stranger Lady.
Sir, this Lady, newly arrived from Corinth, has
Some business she will disclose to none but you.
My vow's absolved.
Angels, or if there be a power has charge
Of humane frailty, shroud me with their wings;
The sight of this divinity will strike
More than my Eyes, my Reason, and enforce me
Here to die gazing.
Bless me! it is sure Parthenia.
My virtuous Niece recovered.
It is her face.
I have examined with industrious eyes
Each line, each lovely circle that adorns
This best perfect piece of nature and all speaks
Parthenia's figure.
My honoured Lords.
It is her voice!
The same well-sounding music did enchant
With its melodious harmony my heart.
Let me adore the miracle.
My Lords: Doe not distract with a deceiving joy
Your noble souls, I will not seek to fold
Your thoughts in doubtful error: you mistake,
I'm not Parthenia.
What delusion plays with our faculties?
My Lord, afford me patient hearing, my discourse
Contains much consequence, you never loved
 Parthenia dearlier than my self: we
wore
The very figure of each others mind,
As well as body, and I should transgress
Th'integrity of our inviolate truths;
Not to fulfil each scruple of her will
With ceremonious duty, she being dead.
Oh my just fears!
Dear Lady, is she dead?
Dead, cold in her dark urn,
As was her Icy chastity; she did arrive
Some few days since at Corinth, where resolved
T'obscure her self to all but me, kind heaven
Pitying her sad disaster, by mild death,
Translated her to the immortal bliss
Prepared for innocent lovers.
Sure I am insensible of misery, or my breast
Would burst with fullness of my griefs; dear Lady
Inform me where Parthenia is entombed,
That like some humble pilgrim, I may visit
The holy place with a religious zeal, and bathe
Her virgin ashes in my tears,
Weep o'er her grave till from my drops arise
Some crystal pyramid to tell the world:
You interrupt, what my sad heart, as an unwelcome load,
Desires to be disburdend of: before
Her dying breath, she did enjoin me by
All our friendships rites, when I had laid
Her corps in earth: straict to repair (with notice
Of her expiring) hither.
Dear my Lord, be not so much distempered.
Tell, quoth she, my noble mother that I die in peace,
Even with D•magoras; commend me to my love,
My dearest Argalus; inform him that
His very name flies with my soul to heaven,
There to remain for ever; and engage him
T'accept of you as my last gift, you are
So like Parthenia that, he will love you for
 My memory: So with a constant truth
To my dead friend I'm come, my Lord, to offer
What she bequeathed, her legacy of my love,
To your acceptance.
Madam, I must rest
For your kind wish your servant; but in me
Parthenia only must have room to live,
While I have vital motion. Had she imposed
What charge (but this) soever, I'd endeavour
It's strict performance: but I am resolved
As she enjoyed my first, my latest love
Shall on her memory waite till we do meet
In the happy shades together.
Sure my Lord,
This is contempt of my desert, I must not
Be thus repulsed: to satisfy your fears,
I am your true Parthenia.
Parthenia.
Yes, and by the Queen of Corinth cured, whose sk•• and care cleansed my foul
leprosy.
Parthenia, it was well your wisdom by degrees
Diffused this comfort; had you showered it all at once,
T'would like a torrent have o'reborne the banks
Of my amazed mortality.
Come, discourse
Your story at your leisure, Argalus
Take your Parthenia, treachery nor hate
Cannot undo the firm decree of Fate.
Isle try your impudence, have you the face
To deny your libel Clitophon?
Good Strephon urge me not, I shall not want
Audacity to express them to recant.
My just opinion were injust, and fit
To stain my resolution, and my wit.
Clitophon, how dare
You armed with boldness greater than despair
 Venture abuse to woman, or defile
That name with scandal, to whose meanest smile,
You have done worship?
Praised looks with flat'tring art,
Each look, each lineament, as the best part
Of Natur's choicest workmanship: but men
Are more inconstant than light whirlewinds; trust
The sea with feathers, or March winds with dust
Rather; and let their words, oaths, tears, vows pass,
As words in water writ, or slippery glass.
This is more juggling. O! with these he has found
A passage through my Eyes, to give a wound
To my poor Heart: it is their looks beget
This sudden alteration, which as yet
Does but with infant feathers strive to fly
To heaven, tells Justice of the
•njury
I have done sacred womanhood: thence
Thou scroll detracting spotless innocence.
dear forgive me, Sapho see
How my tears distill.
If they were every one as big as a Turnip, it should not serve to
feed my anger: well wenches, if you doe pardon him, may your maidenheads be a
burden to you, till you bee fore∣score at least, then may you turn Witches,
and some Goblin get them; or else perish in your Virginity, and lead Apes in
Hell for it: Nay if you do forgive him, I will have you arraing'd of treason
against Venus, and Cupped shall be your blind Judge, and
condemn you for the fact, to loose your heads; your my∣denheads I mean, and
have a man of fourscore and ten for your Executioner.
Dear Strephon, do not frown, it does disgrace
The sallow color of thy withered face.
You would fine cog your self into my favour again; but till you
bee converted from this Clitophon, you shall not kiss the worst part
about me.
O say not so,
Thou art more sweet than Yew or Miscletoe,
O Clitophon, Aminta, every voice
Be filled with admiration, sing, rejoice,
Till the earth dance like our young Lambs, till trees
Grow active at the music; all degrees,
Of grief are banished: all our flocks shall play
For joy Parthenia, O Parthenia?
What of Parthenia?
Is returned, her right
Beauty new shining like the Queen of night,
Appearing fresher after she did shroud:
Her gaudy forehead in a pitchy cloud,
Loves triumphs in her eyes; auda•ious I,
That durst name love, and fair Alexis by:
Be dumb for ever.
Stay Alexis,
She shall now revoke that loving tyranny,
Since our Parthenia's returned, I'll turn
My Elegiac strains away, and burn in high love raptures.
She must strait be wed to Lord Argalus.
The bridal bed is in preparing.
At a verse of mine,
Hymen shall light his Nuptial flaming pine,
I will enchant them to embraces free,
With a devoted Epithalamy;
Till I sing day from Toads arms, and fire
With airy raptures the whole morning quire,
Till the small birds their Sylvan notes display
And sing with us, joy to Parthenia.
SIt my most honoured Cousin, you are Lord
Both of this house and feast: the honest Shepherds
Were taken too much of the sudden to provide
A fitting entertainment; but they've strived
With their most early haste, t'expresse their duty:
Sapho inspired with her Poetique fury,
Will speak your Epithalamy;
They do intend to dance too, I see;
This Music declares their purpose.
The joys of health and what the spring
Of youth, strength, happiness, can bring
Wait upon this noble pair;
Lady, may you still be fair,
As earliest light, may you enjoy
Beauty, which age cannot destroy,
May you be fruitful as the day,
Never sigh but when you pray,
Know no grief, but what may be
To temper your felicity.
And you my Lord, may truest fame
Still attend on your great name,
Live both of you espoused to peace,
And with your years let love increase,
 Go late to Heaven, but coming thither,
Shine there two glorious stars together.
Does these presentiments please you? our dull wits
Are not so fortunate, in rich conceits
As your quick Cyprian intellects.
You vouchsafe
Too much to grace them, but Parthenia
The King as conscious of my mean desert
To make me seem more worthy of thy love,
Has by imposing a command, conferred
An honour greater on my sprightly hopes,
Then the addition of estate or blood
Before enriched me with possession of.
Let me participate your happiness,
My dearest Lord, what is it?
An honour which like the Eldest child of Fame treads on the neck of
glory.
Come, my Lord, let's leave these happy lovers to themselves.
What may it portend tell me, and Isle rejoice
As much to hear it, as when I recovered my poisoned beauty.
Thou shalt know it,
And with loud acclamations sound my fate,
For most completely happy: by the King
I am elected instantly to meet
In single opposition, honours type
The brav'st of Soldiers and the best of men,
The noble Lord Amphialus.
Bless me divinity! can you conceive my Lord
That act an honour, upon which the loss
Of the unvalued treasure of your life
Has strict dependence? sure my Lord, the King
Cannot be such a Tyrant to employ
 You in your infant age of peaceful love,
To such a cruel warfare.
Now I see, Parthenia loves not Argalus, if she
wish him
Turn recreant to his valour; what account
Unless of Coward, shall I give the King?
Should I refuse this honourable task;
Which but to meet I'd scalestar-neighboring rocks,
Travel through deserts, scarcely known to beasts,
And combat all that durst oppose my passage,
To this brave enterprise.
My dearest Lord,
This resolution does oppress my soul,
With torments worse than death: there's not a word
Which you have uttered, but like mandraks groans,
Or howls of wolves affrights me: Can there be
Such a contempt of my regardless love
Be got so soon? Can you forsake my bed,
Before I scarce conceive my self a wife,
Or you a husband? Oh Argalus, I thought
We should have lived, and taught the erring world
Affections primitive pureness; grown like Palms
(That do with amorous mixture twine their boughs
Into a league-union) and so flourish,
Old in each others arms; when now if thou
Proceed to trial in this bloudytaske,
My fears do with prophetike motion tell me,
We are undone eternally.
Have you so slight an estimation of my worth,
In managing bright arms, that you can fear
My persons suffrance, O Parthenia?
Thou would deprive me of that same, which time,
Should he decline his restless course away,
Shall never equal, from my youth-full head:
Thou wouldk detain a chaplet of such baize,
As not Penein Daphne first transformed
Could boast the like for freshness: dry my love,
Those sacted eyes drowned in crystal streams.
 Or if thou wilt, I'll kiss away thy
tears,
In stead of heavenly Nectar.
This but ads to my misfortune, Sir, I am your wife,
And never yet requested any grant,
Unless your love deny me not my first,
And only suit; leave my good Lord to tempt
Your destiny, Amphialus is so good
In his kind love to women; that I doubt not
To find some means without your honours breach,
To put this fatal combat off.
No Parthenia,
It is but in vain to tempt me with your prayers,
Could he spit thunder would affright the Gods,
Or wore at each lock of his hair a flash
Of piercing lightning, yet I should attempt
To snatch the fery chaplet from his head,
And as a garland of victorious baize,
Wreath it about these temples.
Well my Lord, since no persuasion will reclaim your will,
Go, and be happy in your disastrous task
My maids and I will pay each hour to heaven
A thousand vows for your success; I give
You my free licence; O that deathful word
Comes from the Organs of my troubled soul!
As a constant does from a timorous maid,
To an enforcing ravisher.
Why now, thou art my best Parthenia, doubt not love,
But I will bring white victory to crown
Thy glorious front; give me but one kind look,
T will fill me with heroic force: let's in,
And feareleffe take a happy parting kiss,
Suspicion hinders loves immediate bliss.
Sweet Sapho, will you still persist, and kill whom you
might save?
It is your own various will
Enforces my contempt; but
•ere's no place
T'afford our loves an answer: the kind gre•e,
That decks the plains, will smile when we do fit
On its greene tapestry, and aptly fit
Our wilde affections: Shepherdesses, l•t
Our woolly charge within our folds be set,
Lest the hoarse Wolf to sate his ravenous thirst
With blood of Lambs, doe through our weak flocks burst;
After let's meet upon the neighbouring plain,
And there determine of our loves: I'll strain
A little on your patience to rehearse,
On the late Nuptials, this
•••uing verse.
Doe my dear Sapho.
Shepherds, attend her Lays.
They get us credit, and our Sapho Baize.
The holy Priest had joyed their hands, and now
Night grew propitious to their Bridal vow,
Majestic Iuno, and young Him•••ies
To light their Pines at fair Parthe•ia's eyes;
The little Graces amorously did skip,
With the small Cupids, from each lip to lip;
Venus her self was present, and
•ntide
Her virgin Love; when
〈◊〉, on either side
Stood as her handmaids Chastity and Truth,
With that immac•••e
g•ider of her youth
Rose-colour'd Modesty: These did
•nd
•esse
The beauteous maid, who now in readiness,
The Nuptial tapers waving about her head,
Made poor her garments, and enriched her bed;
While the fresh Bridegroom, like the lusty Spring,
 Did to the holy bride-bed with him bring
Attending masculine virtues; down he laid
His snowy limbs by a far whiter maid;
Their kisses link their minds, as they embrace
A quire of Angels flew about the place,
Singing all bliss unto this pair; for ever
May they in love and union still• persevere.
It is almost sung for the nuptials,
Why was it not sung with music?
voice would have been tired with it.
Come, let's depart,
Love though obscured still flames about the heart.
I could have wished the King
Had destined any to this fatal task
But noble Argalus; in him there rests
Such a commanding fullness of true worth,
That is it will be a glory to overcome,
Twill be a grief equal to think'gainst whom
The present fury of my arm must be
Unwillingly directed.
Famous Amphialus;
It is so much honour to be held your friend,
It were indiscretion in me to admit
A thought of being your enemy: we two
Should meet, my Lord, to revel, not to fight:
But since th'injustice of our Fates does force▪
This sad contention; dear Amphialus,
Think that two brothers may with hot resolve
Strive to achieve one crown, yet still be friends▪
The laurel destined for my head will wither
If it be snatched from thine.
More famous Erg•l•s,
Under whose hand the great
〈◊〉 fell•
 These attributes of courtesy doe speak
Your noble natures free•effe you and I
Should rather exercise our able arms
In one another quarrel, than employ them
Upon our selves. Dear Argalus, our fates
Are too in just t'ingage our swords against
Our bodies; for in harming thee, I offer
Wounds to my self; we two retain so much
Affinity, by friendship, we must needs be
One individual substance.
Good my Lords,
Since there's that sympathy of love and nature
'T waxed your two souls, dissolve it not; the blow
That shall divide your hearts will be more impious
In sep'rating that union, than in cutting
Your twists of life asunder.
Philarchus, you are so noble,
Our wills desired▪ you an indifferent Judge
In our unwilling difference, since you are
An equal friend to both.
Philarchus,
We two are fortunes scorn that we should be
Such friends in soul, yet by our deeds be thought
Severest enemies. Dear Argalus,
Let not thy lenity regard my life,
Which is so worth less, it is a weight I wish
Rather to lose than keep: but guard thy own,
Preserve that precious blood, which I shall grieve
To see diffused on earth, nay rather weep
Than shed a drop of it.
How much, my Lord, you vanquish him with cur∣tesie
Whom your arm means to conquer? But Amphialus,
Since we are mutual friends, and yet must seem.
Mutually enemies, to testify
It is by our fate, not malice, we are foes,
I'll make thee my full Executor; bestow
A gift upon thee of that priceless worth
 Posterity shall never boast I•par•llell•
When I am ashes, if there be a wretch
(For some there are that dare blaspheme the Gods)
Does injure my Partheni•; prithee friend,
Let be thy Care to punish that contempt
Against virtuous purity: and as the last
And most supreme inducement of my love▪
If by thy hand I perish, let my heart
Be sent to my Parthenia.
The same justice
I beg of thee, my Argalus, to have mine
Convay'd to my Philoclea; and if
•am
(As it may chance) traduce me after, death,
Noblest Argalu•, justify thy friend,
Thy poor Amphialus; and defend the dear
Author of my misfortune, sweet Philoclea; otherwise
Posterity informed by bad report,
May black her precious memory; and say
A worthless man fell by thy sword.
Let us embrace, my Argalus, and take
A true, though sad, farewell; and once
Let us employ our hands against our hearts.
Kill our selves mutually; for who first does fall,
Leads but the way to the others few•oral.
Eternal darkness seize me: O my Lord,
You are reported to be thrall to love;
•or her sake you
affect most, doe not make
A breach in ebbing nature; More! This blood
Clothing the grass in purple, does convert
My heart to Alabaster. O Argalm!
O Parthenia! Never till now unwelcome have I lived
To such an abject lowness, that my life.
Must (like a malefactors) be by prayers
Redeemed from death. Let us renew the fight.
〈◊〉 Me thinks I tread on
slippery glass, my unsupporting
〈◊〉.
Dance measures on light waves, and I am sinking
Into the watery bosoms, there to rest for all eternity.
I have seen
So dying tapers, as it were, to light
Their own sad funeral; expiring, dart
(Being but stirred) their most illustrious beams,
And so extinguish.
Angels, if ye have charity, afford
Some Surgery from heaven. Now I see the cause
Why my sad heart (filled with prophetic fear)
Sought to have stopped your journey and why I
Compelled by power of overruling Fat•
Followed you hither. Oh Argalus!
Parthenia, I doe feel
A marble sweat about my heart, which d•es▪
Gongeale the remnant of my blood to Ice;
My Lord, I doe forgive you, friend, farewell.
Parthenia, shower on my pale lips a kiss,
Twill waft my soul to its eternal bliss.
Parthenia, O Parthenia.
So cracks the cordage of his heart, as Cabl•s
That guide the heavy Anchors, cut by blasts
Of some big tempest. My Lord, your wounds are many▪
And dangerous, it is fit you doe withdraw▪
And have'm cured.
I am careless grow•e,
my life
Is now more odious to me than the light
Of day to Furies: Madam, I am past
The thought of grief for this sad fact, and
〈◊〉
Griefs individual substance: pray forgive me,
Heaven knows it was not malice that betrayed
Your Lords loved life; but a necessitous force
To save my own. Joy comfort you: thus Fate
Forces us act what we most truly hate.
Dear Madam, calm your passion, and resolve
 To arm your soul with patience.
Patience Sir?
Doubt not so much my temper, I am calm.
You see of the sudden as untroubled seas.
I could stand silent here an age to view
This goodly ruin. Noblest Argalus,
If thou had died degenerate from thy self,
I should have flowed with pity, till my tears
Had drowned thy blasted memory; but since
Thou perished nobly, let thy soul expect
A joy, not sorrow from me: the greene oak
Laurel, and lovely myrtle shall still flourish
About thy sepulchre, which shall be cut
Out of a Mine of Diamonds; yet the brightness
Proceeding from thy ashes shall out-shine
The stones unvalew'd substance.
Sure she is grown insensible of her grief, or fallen
Into some wilde distraction.
You mistake;
It is not a fury leads me to this strange
Demeanour; but conceit that I should sin
Against my Argalus. Should I lament
His overthrow? No Blessed soul,
Augment th'illustrious number of the stars.
Outshine the Ledan brothers: Isle not diminish
Thy glory by a tear, until my breast
Does like the pious Pelican's, break forth
In purple fountains for thy loss, and then,
It shall diffuse for every drop thou shed'st
A Crimson river, then to thee Isle come:
To die for love's a glorious martyrdom.
It is certain my Alexis; have not I
(Who in their presence for love daily die)
A cause to blame my destiny, and be
Oppressed with a continual melancholy?
You are your own Oppressor.
O wretched fate!
I in their presence •oat on every one,
Yet in their absence am content with none.
Yet I am in a far worse case
Than any of you both alas.
This villain Cupped played the knave,
Or at my birth his mother gave
Some of her beauty to my natural parts,
Which doe allure even stony hearts,
That I am weary of so many
Good parts, and would lend some to any.
I Clitophon, even every limb
About thee can with beauty trim,
And never missed: I •are be sworn
There's not an inch about me worn,
Which has not, all the Maids can tell,
Waiting on it of love an Ell▪
O far more happy Strephon,
I doe 〈◊〉
Alexis, I will surrender you
That happiness with all my heart:
Were there but only two or three,
Or four or five did dote on me,
I grant you then'twere very well,
The handsome th•n
should •ear the bell;
 But there's not in this face a wrinkle,
Nor on my precious nose a pimple,
Nor a hair upon my chin,
(But those you see are very thin)
Nor any squint comes from mine eye,
But that so•e w•nch for it does fry
In loves hot furnace: Though ne'er so coy,
Each Lass would my good pars enjoy.
Why does not Strephon then,
Make use of time, and choose the richest Gem
Out of this Mine of beauty, and enrich
Himself by marriage▪
My fingers itch at thee to
〈…〉 foolish∣lie: Would have me
make an Anatomy of my self?
Or dost suppose
That unto one I'll wed my nose.
And to another all the rest
Of this sweet face? A pretty
•est▪
Should I pretend my self to match,
The wenches then would play at catch
That catch may; each get a limb,
Or rather with themselves in rage,
They cruel civil war would wage,
And with those terrible weapons, their nails,
Which them in battle never fails▪
And far more terrible tongues▪
〈◊〉
They'd fighting scold, and scolding
〈◊〉
Still dearest 〈…〉
By prayers and tears be moved though
〈◊〉
Delight in murder; you doe seem to take
Your natural fierceness from them, there cannot
〈◊〉
So much sterne vigour in humanity,
As to contemn a suppliant, and prove
To him most cruel, who does truliest love.
You are too sickle' Clitophon, you see
Leaves in green Autumn scattered from each tree
By the rude winds; you are more light than they,
More fading than the flowrey dress which May
Attires the prickly thorns in; lighter far
Than frothy bubbles, or dispersed smoakesare,
Yet I should love you, did not Strephons eye
Dart flames might fire a marble heart; they fly,
With nimble wings about me; Strephon see
She who refuses him, will yield to thee.
Would you could persuade me to it my nimble toung'd
Melpomene. I must not bee injust to wrong my friend
Clitophon, my friend's my friend, sweet Sapho: and you are a
woman, of which gender (thanks be to Heaven and my good parts) I have
indifferent choice, a hundred or so. If you Aminta, or you
Florida love me, the best comfort or course you can take Is to run mad
for my dear sake.
And hang your selves, for you'll so prove
True lovers hanged in chains of love.
A cruel resolution: Sapho, well,
We must resolve not to lead apes in Hell.
And we have vowed never to match but where
Strephon vouchsafes to give us; for you two,
Unless he please, our wills can nothing do.
Come hither Clitophon, you love this witty rogue, this
Sapho.
Dear as my own eyes.
That's dear enough; and you Alexis love
Aminta.
I dare not name that word, yet ther's in me
A most severe and lasting constancy, to fair Aminta.
O be gentle Strephon, let kind pity move
Thy honest heart, not to deprive our love
Of its true comfort.
I shall be sure now to be famous for some thing,
Your hands, your hands, my pretty pair of turtles.
Will you forsake us Strephon?
Will you give me away?
 Whose heart desires to live only by your
affection.
I cannot help it, less I should distribute my self amongst you;
I'm very glad the matter is deposed into my handling; these wenches are in
good hope now that I will have one of them my self, and that makes them refer
themselves to me: here Clitophon, take Sapho, and you
Alexis the beautiful Aminta: But bee sure to con∣fesse you
have but my reversions. You'll give me leave to kiss your wives, or so, when
you are married, Isle not go an inch further, as I am a true Arcadian; and so
shake hands, and Heavens give you joy. Now Clitophon you're excellent
at that sport, shall's not have a frisque or so at your Wedding, ha?
We'r all your servants.
Now Strephon wee have suffered you to play the fool all
this while,
Receive our true opinions of you.
I, come, let's hear't.
Thou hast a face
So full of vileness, it does disgrace
Deformity it self; ther's not a woman,
Were she to filthy prostitution common,
That could affect thee.
Cease to torment him Sapho, the pretty el•e
Begins to see the beauty of it self:
We must attend our Lady.
Strephon go,
And hang thy self, or else resolve to show
Thy self no more, but like an Owl by night,
Or keep thy ill-favourd countenance to affright
Wolves from our sheep: Come lovers, now it is time
To celebrate our joys, which then renew
When proof has sealed our fancies pure and true.
Now doe I perceive my self an errant ass, and could hang my
self in earnest, were I sure but to die in jest for it: these wenches are
shee-furies, and I hope in time to see them grow so abominably ugly, that they
may hate them: for to say truth,
These women are mere Weather-cocks,
And change their minds more than their smocks;
Have hearts as hard as stony rocks,
And tongs that lie worse than false clocks,
By which they catch men like Jacks in a box:
And so with my curses I leave them.
It would be the safest way my Lord, and which
Would best suit with your honour; be a means
To gain fair Philoclea.
That blessed name
Charms me to adoration: O my Lord,
Philoclea's love is like a mine of wealth,
Guarded by watchful Dragons; there attend
Legions of fears, and unrelenting thoughts,
On the unvalued treasure.
I could wish you would express a more indul∣gent care
Towards yourself: you see the angry King
Grieved for his daughters, and Zelmanes loss,
Attempts what ever may invade your life;
I shall endeavour your reconcilement with him; but my Lord,
Farewell, I know you wait some opposite; I wish
Your actions crowned with a deserved success.
Thus honest Lord engages my observance: how my fate
Plays the sly tyrant with me, and involves
 My thoughts in killing passions: flames meet
flames
With equal resolution, and contend,
Like Cadmus earth-borne brothers to destroy
Each other by their fury; fear kills hope,
But a new rising from the former urn,
Takes vengeance on the murd'rer: wretched I
Live as to live were every hour to die.
A most sad apparition suiting well
The inward horror of my mind! this Knight
Sure should not be my enemy, he fights
Under my very colours; Noble youth,
If what your outward figure speak, does challenge
Relation to your mind; I see no cause
We should endanger our mortalities
In this unfortunate quarrel: there appears
So great an outward sympathy, it tells
My soul wee should not combat.
Teach your fears
This fruitless hope: I come not hither armed
With resolution big as Fate, to part,
Overcome with aeyry treaties; sooner think
To charm the Genius of the world to peace,
When earthquakes have affrighted it, tha• with
Well-worded eloquence, to decline the height
Of my waked wrath.
Sir, you promise
An Early conquest o'er me, but there rests
In me a manly pity, would not stain
My conquering hands in your too innocent blood;
I would not have your virtue, gentle youth,
Be like a toward Cedar overwhelmed
By an outrageous tempest blasted ere.
 It come to full growth; if for honours
Cause,
And to achieve fame, you attempt my life,
Let me desire you to employ your force
On some less fortunate Warrior. I am loath
To triumph in the guiltless spoils of your
Yet blooming honour.
Read thy friends this dialect of cowardice:
Know, to incense thee more, I'm one that hate
Thy dear Philoclea, with so dire a spite,
That I pronounce her one, who lives upon
The spoil of innocent virtue, that has cause
Guiltless esfusion of more Noble blood,
Than ever filled hers or your baser veins.
Then I see, you come to rail, and must chastise the wrong
You do inflict on her, whose spotless soul.
Is so much ignorant of the least guilt,
It understands it not: recant this wrong
Opinion of her purity, and leave off
To wake an anger that had rather sleep,
Than rise to hurt you.
I see then I must add
New truths to affright your cowardice: Your mistress
Is the decay of more same-worthy souls,
Than she has hairs or vain bewitching looks
T'inthrall your wanton passion: on your heart,
My sword shall write this for a serious truth,
And underneath it, that unworthy lie
You have pronounced, in justifying her free
From my just affirmation.
Fiends could never have so incensed me,
Bless me! sure some Angel's entered
Into arms against my unworthy self;
Those golden locks, surely are Pallas head-tyre, or the
Queen.
Of Love has masked her self in Mars his shape,
So to betray my luckle•se arm to slaughter
Of the worlds exquisite beauty.
Now my joy
 Exceeds the greatest trophies:
Argalus,
Me thinks I see him riding in a chariot drawn by Doves,
Cut the bright firmament, and there attend
My wished ascention.
Some mountain that
Has stood the longest rage of time, unloose
Its stony roots, fall on me, that I never
May be on earth remembered; dearest Lady,
Look up, and let me shower a flood of tears
Into your wounds: distraction seize me; may I
Like some black prodigy contemned by light
Never be more distinguished.
Nay my Lord,
Do not let passion discompose your thoughts.
You've done an office for me, that blots out
All my conceit of hatred: pray, forgive me,
I injured your Philoclea; armed for death,
I came to have it from that hand which
〈◊〉
My Argalus; weep not girls,
I do not need your moist religious tears
To usher me to Heaven: Look how an host
Of Sainted lovers on their turtles wings,
Conducted by my Argalus, approach
To wa•t me to Elisium;
take my breath
That flies to thee on the pale wings of death,
Argalus, O Argalus.
Can I retain mortality, and behold
This impious act of my dire fate? this piece
Of new demolished Nature, were it placed
For its own Ivory figure on a Tomb
Of purest Alabaster, would be thought
One with the stones white substance: Maids, convey
Your Ladies body hence, while I depart
To find a grief out, that may break my heart.
Haplesse Lady,
Let us resolve not to out-live her, but
Like constant servants, waite upon in death
 Our murd'red Mistress.
Our poor lives cannot
Redeem her loss, not pacify her ghost,
For her late slaughter. I have composed
An Elegy on her death, and beauty: hear it.
Happy Arabians, when your Phoenix dies
In a sweet pile of fragrant spiceries,
Out of the ashes of the Myrrhe-burn'd mother,
That you may still have one, springs up another.
Unhappy we, since it is your Phoenix nature;
Why could not ours our, only matchless Creature,
Enjoy that right? why from Parthenia's urn.
Should not Parthenia gloriously return?
O, there's a reason: it is because Natures store
All spent on her, is now become too poor
To frame her equal: so that on her Hearse
My trembling hand shall hang this funeral verse.
True love, and beauty, none can boast to have,
They both are buried in Parthenia's grave,
Who was loves, glories, beauties, virtues pride,
With her love, glory, virtue, beauty died.
Now girls,
Strew flowers upon the body, while our tears
Embalm her memory; and what ever ears
Shall hear this story, may with Justice say,
None loved like Argalus and Parthenia.

THe rumour still continues.
Yes, my Lord,
Ill fems though quick are certain,
it is concluded
Past question or dispute, for these reports
Are grounded on too manifest a truth,
To carry doubt in them, it is confirmed this morning;
Hee must resign
Though a stranger Sir,
And so less interested in the Generals cause
Then you his Country-man: were you not my friend,
You lied to speak it. Must our General
That soul of valour Wallenstein; who has
(Like subtle lightning) purged the German ayre,
From all the hot infections, foreign war
Could threaten: sent the health-carousing Dane
Drunk with his own blood home: broke all the force,
With which the valiant Palatine and his aids.
Infested had the Province: given to Death
(That thunder-bolt of war) whose very name
Was great as Fate it self unto his foes,
The Swedish King: and must he now, his age
Is candid o'er with victories, be enforced
To a base 〈…〉 Death he's damned
That dare but mutter it▪
And they were so
Who first occasioned it, it would bring much comfort
To all true Soldiers.
It is concluded Sir,
Past all redemption, they are doubly damned
For their ingratitude, displace a man
To whom they owe their lives! one whom, my Lords,
We have seen in the heat and bravery of a fight,
Cheer up his fainting and disheartened troupes,
Even when his body seemed but all one wound,
That it appeared a little Island, circled
Round with the purple deluge of his blood;
Who when wars Quiruters, the big-mouth'd Drums,
And surly Trumpet sung his Armies Dirge,
That fatal Music swelled his sprightly sense
More then soft Hymns at Nuptials.
Sir, his glories
Are so well known to us we need not urge
Their reputation, but it is past my thoughts,
Why on the sudden he should be compelled
To give his charge up.
When the world believed
He should have had a double triumph in
The honour of his victories.
Isle tell you,
There is in Princes Courts a leane-fac'd monster,
Termed Envy, reigning in unworthy breasts,
To fems Heroic sons, such as know to cringe
With subtle motion to their Princes smiles,
Adore his foot-steps and his awful nods,
And can like Aspes instill into his ears,
A sweet yet killing venom: these thin souls
When the blunt Soldier, has on piles of wounds
Built up his Countries peace, whisper Beware
In time my Lord, least he doe grow too great:
This meeting with the jealous Princes fears,
(As Princes still are fearful of the greatness
Of rising active subjects) breeds resolves to cut up
That prop, leaning on which themselves have stood,
Firm and unshaken on their base; and these
Court Parasites, and th'Emperors weak distrusts,
Pulls this disgrace on Fridland, which if he
With an effeminate patience doe put up,
May all the Laurels growing on his Crest.
Be turned to Cyprisse, serving for no use
But to adorn his Funerals.
Soft,
The Generall's here himself: my gracious Lord
The Duke.
Our thrice redoubted General.
Ha! that sound
Awakes my drowsy soul, pray good my Lords,
What do you behold degenerate in my looks,
Showing me unworthy still of that great title?
I would pull my eyes out,
Should they convey into my soul a thought
Tending to so much sacrilege to honour,
And perfect masculine virtue.
Yet I must
Put off that glorious title, like a garment,
Old and unfit for wearing: O my Lords,
Our honours individual with our souls
Grows to that essence, as to the hand or cheek
The native whiteness; and to have that torn,
Lugged off by violent torture, is a suffrance
Beyond the strength of patience: is it not, Lords?
Yes, and look
How far the noble immaterial soul,
Transcends the duller body, so much torments
Resemblance of a star, a Comet fall
By my own fire consumed to earth forgotten.
Great Sir, though a stranger to you
By birth and nation, yet the strict alliance
I've to your princely nobleness, injoins me
Under your pardon, and with the allowance
Of these brave Counts, your followers, to deliver
My zealous counsel to you.
Noble Scot,
Use your discretion freely.
Thus great Sir then,
Though't be in the power of Princes to prescribe
Laws to their subjects, it is their subjects wills
Must put those Laws in act, it is their obedience,
Which are the ablest sinews of the state,
And it were a barbarous cruelty to employ
Their hands against themselves, a strange injustice,
To make their proper virtue instrument
Of their own ruin.
Colonel Lesle
Speaks home.
And to much purpose.
Doe not Lords
Misunderstand my meaning, I speak not this,
That I contemn authority, or dislike
Order in every thing, without preeminence
In title of command our trade the warfare
Could not subsist, but to inform our General,
Our too much injured General, that it is
No such strange crime, to disobey a Prince
In things injust; and can there be a greater,
Or shamefuller injustice then for Caesar,
By's Mandate to enforce him to resign
His glorious charge up?
It were a shame.
An utter, an abominable disgrace
To all that honour virtue, should we suffer it?
Here then
Ends what I would have uttered; of what force
Are Caesars Mandats, when their real loves
Has disannull'd them? circled with these hearts,
These bulwarks of brave hearts, what need have you
To acknowledge any Emperor but your self?
Your self great Duke, whose merit lays just claim
To that supremest title.
Pray once more,
Give me your patience: Rashness, Gentlemen,
Gives the first on-set fiercely, then recoils,
As Wasps when they have lost their stings: affairs
Of this high consequence, doe require mature
Deliberation: to confirm our own
Strength for the exploit, it were fit we did conjoin
With Saxon Waymar and Gustavus Horn,
And the other bold confederates: how likes
Your Grace this project?
The Drum and Fife,
Trumpet and Canon, when their loud voices sing,
Iös to victory, could ne'er beget
More music in my ravished sense: best friend,
I am so bankrupt grown in my extent
Of gratitude, that trust me I could weep,
To see my self so far outdone in friendship:
I am engaged in honour to go on,
That this insulting Emperor by his fall,
To gain fit means to gratify your loves.
Thou aëry name of loyalty, hence to heaven,
And find like smoke a burial in the clouds,
Thus I expire thy essence; henceforth Isle acknowledge
No other Emperor but these worthies hearts.
And we (great Duke) henceforth will ne'er submit,
To any rule but yours, which to confirm
As sure as Fate had sealed it, on your sword
My Council always has had that success,
To be accounted faithful to my Prince:
Fear it not, follow then my poor advice,
Meet treachery with policy, and try,
If you the Ambitious traitor can surprise,
The head once off, the weak and fainting limbs,
Like seared dri'd boughs, by an impetuous wind,
Torn from an aged Ok, will fall to earth,
And be consumed to ashes.
It shall be so,
Lord Questenberg, with all convenient speed,
Dispatch a trusty messenger unto
The King of Hungary, command his presence,
With his most able legions for the safeguard
Of our own person: In such like affairs,
Which doe concern the uncertain rule of States,
Wise men should always be above their fates. 
A pox upon her fir, and for her sake,
On all good faces; must you sigh and whine,
And make a face worse then a zealous drunkard
Does o'er dead musty wine, because she is beauteous:
We Soldiers doe not use to engender with
A physiognomy, nor as the learned term it,
Co-habit with a handsome nose or lip,
There are some parts beneath the waste I take it,
More useful for a man of Arms.
Good Colonel,
No more of this.
Should I ask you
The reason why you love her, you must answer;
It is for the sport (as for what other reason
Women were made, unless to prick upon
A clout, or starch, transcends my best Philosophy)
And for that purpose, a short coat frister,
That as she milkes each morning,
Bedews the cool grass with her Virgin moisture,
As useful is and active (sounder far
That's certain granted) pray, my Lord, remember
Shoe's but your mothers Gentlewoman, and whom perhaps
The Butler has oftener folded up, then ere
He did his table linne one.
No more, you'll anger me.
You'll anger me again then: we Imps of Mars,
Should know no other mistresses, then what the Camp contains,
I ne'er durst love in the field (marry in the City.
I've had copulation with all trades) but one poor sutlers wife, &amp;
She as fair too, as was the kettle which she boiled her beef in,
O how the sweet smell of her amber grease
And kitchen stuff perfumed my greedy nostrils,
Yet on this beauty doted I (inspired by insurrection of the flesh)
And gave her to cuckol'd the good corporal her husband.
Ten comely dollars, and the devil take her, she paid me with a pox. But see, here comes the Lady of the Lake, for whom you good fir Lancelot make these lamentations; be not you bashful now, but fall on boldly heart, let me drill her for you, if her body be under Musket proof, it is ten to one my morris pike shall enter. to her, to her. 
Surprised by him alone, O my just fears.
Why, cruel fair one, should you shun his sight,
Whose very soul moves in your eyes, or why
Should your blessed voice, speak health to all the world,
Yet threaten death to me: look on my youth,
My hopeful youth, which in the active war,
Has taught old Soldiers discipline: behold it
Nipped by the cold frost of your icy beauty,
As in a fever languishing to nothing,
Forgetful of the noble pride and strength,
It has so lately boasted, it is injust
To see me still over my foes victorious,
Made by my self your captive, to insult
Over your suppliant vassal, would those eyes,
Which can contract lights orb into a glance,
Become impoverished by a smile, those cheeks
Sully their native tincture, should they blush
At your minds cruelty, it would rather add
To the illustrious excellence.
My noble Lord.
Stay, you must not speak yet,
There's not an accent issuing from your lips,
But has the power, should thunder speak, to charm,
To peaceful quiet the affrighted, the world,
And would strike dumb my passion: best of Virgins
There is not that disparity twixt our births,
As there's inequall difference twixt our hearts;
Mine's all on fire, dare combat with the Sun
For heats priority, yours Mountain snow,
Cold as the north, and cruel as my fortunes:
Yet you may make them equal as your eyes are,
By yielding up that fort, which will, when time
Has given it ceremonious privilege, be perhaps
By some unworthy groom, without resistance
Surprised and entered.
My Lord, bad custom is become
In men a second nature to deceive
Poor Virgins by their flatteries; noble youth,
That I doe love you dearly, may these tears,
Shed for your folly testify: look back
Into your princelesse honour, call that up
To assist the fortress of your mind assailed
By foul unlawful passion: think how base it is,
To rob a silly Orphan of her dowry;
I have no other but my Virgin whiteness,
Left to uphold my fame, nought but my virtue
To my inheritance; should you despoil me
Of that fair portion by your lust, my memory,
Would like an early Rose bud by that tempest,
Dye on its own stalk blasted.
I doe dream sure.
Women's fems sir,
Are like thin Crystal glasses, by a breath
Blown into excellent form, and by a touch,
Cracked or quite broken: say I should consent
To your desires, your appetite once sated,
You would repent the fact, when you should see
Your self surrounded in a mist of cares,
View bashful Virgins point at you, as at
Some hateful prodigy; hear matrons cry,
There goes the lustful thief, that glories in
The spoil of innocent Virgins, that foul thief,
That has a hundred eyes to let lust in at,
As many tongues to give his wild thoughts utterance.
Sure some Angel inhabits here,
This cannot be a Mansion
For mortal frailty: sweet farewell, good night,
I would not have my over-sawcie love,
Commit a rude intrusion on thy peace,
Though parting with thee be more torment to me,
Then to forgo mine eyes; may all the joys
Of healthful slumbers crown thy bed, thy dreams
Be free from paraphrasing on my memory▪
Lest it affright you; once more, Dear, good night,
While you with pleasing happy sleeps are blessed,
I'll seek some way to my eternal rest.
The honour you have done me mighty Princes,
Electors of the sacred Roman Empire,
By this your personal visit does engage
So much our gratitude, that what our selves,
And the most able forces of our friends,
Can in requital act, shall be performed,
Mutual discourses often mingle souls▪
And as the Arteries convey the blood,
Throughout the body, they from mind to mind
Convey affection: to this end we did
Entreat this meeting, that our conference might,
Join in an individual league our hearts.
This happy treaty, glorious Duke, shall bring
Blessed peace once more with turtles wings, to soar
Over the German Provinces; shall dry
Tears from the eyes of mothers, while the Virgins
Shall dedicate their hours to joyful Hymns,
In honour of your merit.
The sturdy boor
Shall plough his fields in safety, and ascribe
To you, great Duke, that happiness: it was you,
Who when Bellona thundered through the land,
Did stop the steel-wing'd Goddess in her course,
Who when our Armies, like a raging flood,
Did bear down all before them, did oppose,
The greedy torrent, boldly turned it back,
Into its native body, and conjoined
With you so inured to conquest, he were less
Then man, and more then coward, that could fear
Any ensuing dangers.
You doe me too much honour, mighty Princes:
And now my brave confederates in Arms,
Where business of import commands attendance,
That time's mis-spent, that's spent in useless words,
I shall so please you, therefore speak the cause,
(In brief) which urged me to desire this conference,
And give you reasons for my strange revolt,
From my so long loved Master.
It was the end
We only came for.
The sole reason
That drew us to this meeting.
Thus in brief then,
How I have served this Emperor, these wounds
That beautify my body (cause the marks
Of my just loyalty) given by your swords,
Can bear me righteous witness; but good service
To a malicious and ungrateful Prince,
Are rather causes of suspect, then love,
And when men's actions doe transcend reward,
They then descend to punishment (my cause
Is rightly stated thus) for when my self,
(I well may speak it without partial boast)
Had like his Eagle in my powerful gripe,
Snatched up his Crown that lay despised on earth,
And heaved it up to Heaven, borne all the weight,
Which yours, the Danish and the Swedish force,
Could load these shoulders with; nay shook it off
Lightly, as winds in Autumn doe from trees,
Their withered Summer garments: then, even then,
When my just hopes were pregnant with conceit
Of Wreathes and triumphs (as a brave reward)
My Soldiers by his Mandates were forbid,
To obey me as their General, and my self
Commanded straightway to resign my charge,
All my great power which I had bought with blood,
Unto Matthias Gallas my Field-Marshall.
Insufferable injury!
Inhumane and unhear'd of ingratitude!
Nay more,
As I had been a Traitor then in fact,
He did endeavour my surprise, to bring me
A prisoner to Vienna: think then Lords,
When both my priceless honour and my life
Were at one stake proposed, if I'd not cause
To play my game with cunning skill, when these
My brave Commanders from their martial eyes,
Did for my wrongs shed tears of blood, called on me,
As on their friend, their father, not to leave
My Sons my Soldiers: if I their request
Performed, I saved my honour and my life,
But if the Emperors, I gave up them both
To plain perspicuous ruin; yet in not
Accomplishing my Masters harsh commands,
The name of treason brands me (but pass that,)
I of two evils chose to take the least,
Rather to draw upon me Caesars hate,
Then to forsake my charge and soldiers loves:
And now being free in my own soul as thought
Unsought to (Lords) and unconstrained, I offer
T'assist against this Emperor (this thing
Made only up of name and voice) whom we
Will break as showers doe bubles, which themselves
Of nothing had created.
So welcome
Is this your proffes'd amity, no blessing
Heaven in its fullest bounty could have showered,
Could have arrived more pleasing, and to show
How much we prize your friendship, your the son,
Young Frederick be affianced to my daughter,
The tie of nature to the tie of blood,
Will make the union perfect.
It is an honour,
We are bound in duty to accept, my Lords,
In noble souls no thought should once admit
Sullen delay, our progress should be swift,
As is the passage of unlimited fire
In populous Cities; or as winds, whose force
Does at their birth send op the stubborn womb
Of the dull earth their mother; great designs
Should by great spirits only be pursued,
And our last business is our speedy conference
With Chancellor Oxenstern, and the French Ambassador.
Actions that carry an unusual weight,
Ought still to fly at an unusual height.
So, let the dull
Halfe-spirited souls, who strive on reremice wings,
By that which fools term honesty, to climb
To the top of honour, in their silly virtue
Boast, while ingenious and more active spirits,
In a direct line without stop or hindrance,
Mount to their wishes, yet ith'worlds esteem,
Are held as real, and endued with goodness.
This Wallenstein, like a good easy Mule,
Have I led on byth' nose to this rebellion,
Fired with such venom as will spread,
Like swift infection through his soul: these two
Shall be my agents to achieve my ends,
Factors in cunning to vent forth my intentions,
Lieutenant Colonel Gordon, and my good
Captain Butler.
We were musing,
What serious thought it was, that could so long
Detain you from our conference.
Faith I was studying
On our great Generals fortunes, upon which
Our hopes and lives depend; what think you of them?
Well at least, wee'r bound
To hope the best, he's in himself so mighty,
He seems above his fate.
His plots doe carry
A fair and specious out side.
It is a sign,
Corruption is within them, noble friends,
You are my country-men, and if my life
May preserve yours from ruin, I shall deem it
Religiously employed: if you discover
What I intend to utter, twill but send
My age some hours before its destined minute,
Unto my grave, and I most willingly,
Shall dye the causes martyr.
By our honours,
No syllable shall ever pass our lips,
What you in love reveal to us.
Thus then friends,
Rebellion never yet could boast a happy
Or prosperous period, Wallensteins designs
Are built on sand, and with the Emperors breath
Will be dispersed into the ayre; I speak not this,
That I doe hate the man, heavens know I love
His person, but detest the cause he justifies.
True, the dignity of Princes,
Does make what ever quarrels subjects raise
Against their Sovereigns, odious.
Shall we then,
Here in a strange country, violate
The Laws of hospitality, unmake the ancient faith
Ascribed unto our Nation, by assisting
A Traitor against his lawful Prince, a General
Against that power which gave him that command,
Betray that royal Master, to whose bounty
We owe our lives: first rather let's resolve,
To open all his treasons, his proceedings,
Unto our Lord the Emperor.
It is very just,
And in my judgement requisite.
I doe approve it.
It were mere madness,
And he that does mislike it, bears no brain,
No soul about him: Instead of slight preferment,
Which (should our General prosper) we at best,
Could but expect, we shall have
Castles, Lordships, Earledomes, nay Provinces,
Be styled the savers,
Preservers of the Empire, have our names,
As it were in triumph sung about the streets,
In popular acclamations, think then friends,
How far these certain honours will surpass
Our aëry expectations: come let's post
Straight to Vienna, and inform the Emperor
Of ell's proceedings, in this great affair,
We must not use our fortune, but our care. 
Pish, perish still in ignorance, am I,
Who am grand master in the art of Love,
Not able to instruct a limber youth
Of the first growth, your brother here makes love
In all ill favored tone, and skrewes his countenance,
As he were singing of lamentable Ballads
Of Tillies overthrow, but you for your part,
(I've known you of an urchin) are so fiery,
You speak all squibs and crackers, carry a Canon
In your mouth, you'll fright the Lady, she'll imagine
You come to ravish her.
The Colonel
Tells you, your own, good brother.
I've told you yours too, or I'm much mistaken,
You love, 'tshould seem, the fair Emilia,
A pretty wench, they say, but that's no matter,
Your fathers are agreed on it, and you'd have me
Show you the readiest way, how to accost her
Negatively, I will demonstrate instantly.
I shall observe your doctrine most exactly.
Pray observe,
You must not then accost her with a shrug,
As you were lousy, with your Lady, sweet Lady,
Or most super-excellent Lady,
Nor in the Spanish garb, with a state face,
As you had new been eating of a Reddish,
And meant to swallow her for mutton to it:
Nor let your words, as that I'm most afraid of,
(Because it is your natural mood) come rumbling forth,
Ushered with a good full-mouth'd oath, I love you:
But speak the language of an overcoming Lover;
I doe not mean that strange pedantic phrase,
Used by some gallants, who doe aim at wit,
And make themselves stark asses by it, praise their mistresses
Byth' Sun and stars, while the poor girls imagine,
They mean their signs, their Mercers or Perfumers
Inhabit at (for sure beyond those Planets
They've studied no Astrology) but you must
In gentle, free, and genuine phrase deliver
Your true affection, praise her eye, her lip,
Her nose, her cheek, her chin, her neck, her breast,
Her hand, her foot, her leg, her every thing,
And leave your roses and your lilies for
Your country froes, to make nosegays of:
But stay, here comes your Mistress, her father too,
In conference; fall on my Mirmidon,
While we retreat. 
Speed your endeavours, brother.
It is so concluded twixt me and her father,
For both our goods, be not you nice Emilia,
The noble youth's so furnished with all worth,
You needs must like him.
Good sir give me license,
To let my eye direct my heart to love,
And if young Frederick be the master of
Such absolute gifts, doubt not but I shall find them.
My Lord I'm glad
Of this fair interview I and my daughter
Were even conferring of you; sir as yet
She's something timorous, dreads a Soldiers looks.
She needs not sir.
She bears a spell about her that would charm
A Scythians native fierceness into softness,
Those spirit-breathing eyes, my Lord, which can
Kill as they please, or quicken with a glance.
Now they are entered,
Isle steal away and leave them.
Gentle Lady,
To make the addresses of my love-sicke heart,
Plain and apparent to you, that you may,
Search through my soul, and find it all your creature,
Give me your patient hearing.
It is a request,
Might tax my manners, should I deny it to
One of your noble quality; use your pleasure.
Which consists
In viewing your bright beauty, the idea
Of all perfections, which the jealous heavens
Durst ever lend to earth-divinest Lady,
The gentle ayre which circumscribes your cheek,
Leaving its panting kisses on the flowers,
That in that Tempe blossom, does not love
Those fields of purity more then mine eyes do,
Mine, Lady, is a holy,
An intellectual zeal, such as the Angels
And Saints, who know no sexes do affect by,
Past imitation too, should they who strive
To trace me, take the constancy of Swans,
Or never-changing Turtles, as their patterns.
Sir, it seems
You've studied complement as well as Arms,
But he's a foolish Lover, who to gain
His Mistress, dare not promise what you have uttered, but I must
Have more then verbal assurance of your love.
By your fair self I'm real, do intend,
What I've delivered with as much true zeal,
As Anchorits do their prayers: I love your mind,
Your excellent mind, and for its sake, the pure
Shrine, which contains that blessing, this fair building,
This palace of all happiness, and entreat you,
As you have mercy in you, to take pity
Upon my loves stern sufferings, and redress them,
By your consent to take me for your husband.
Sir you are an over-hasty Lover, to imagine
I can at first sight of your person, be
Surprised and yield, they must be strong allurements,
Must tempt a bashful Virgin still inured
To no companion but her fears and blushes,
To give her heart away, and live in thraldom,
Unto a stranger.
Love, Madam, has Eagles eyes; it can beget acquaintance,
Even in a moment, suddenly as time,
The time that does succeed it. Farewell.
I will not have my over-hasty zeal,
Urge your mild sufferance further, pray think on me
As one who've plaid my full extent of bliss,
In your enjoying, think you are the land wrack,
By which the brittle vessel of my hopes,
Must through Loves-swelling Ocean be directed,
To a safe harbour, honour me to kiss
Your fair hand; Lady now farewell, no bliss
Can be in love, till we know what it is. 
Crowns are perpetual cares, and to their heads,
That wear the wreath Imperial, are annexed.
Foreign invasions oft may shake a state,
But civil broils are the impetuous fire-brands,
That burn up Commonwealths; to quench
A flame domestic we are met, which will
Like fame increase, by going on; this late
Revolt of Wallenstein.
Perfidious slave!
On whom your plenteous bounties showered so fast,
They seemed to drown him▪ he whose great commands,
Could not know ought above them, but your self,
The General of your forces of Gloyawe,
Mechlenburg, Sagan, Fridland styled the Duke,
He to invert your own Arms against your self,
Swells my vexed soul to think on it.
It is not words,
Or aëry threatenings will appease thy mischief,
It must be done by force; Matthias Gallas,
Have you according to our late commands,
Given order for the levying new forces,
To oppose this Traitor.
Mighty Sir, I have,
And seen them mustered.
To what amounts their number.
Threescore thousand
A royal Army, had they been trained
In Military discipline, experience
Is half the soul of Arms, we will take order,
To have them taught the exercise of Arms,
By those Hungarians troupes which we brought hither.
Now sir, your business.
Mighty sir,
The Governor of Egers, Colonel Gordon,
Attended by Lieutenant Colonel Butler,
And Colonel Lesle doe desire admittance
Into your presence.
Let them enter,
They are his friends, and may perhaps discover
Some of his treacheries: Noble strangers welcome, 
I doe conceive it is business of importance
Has drawn you hither, in Colonel Lesles looks
I read affairs of consequence, with which
His active brain does teem, and fine would be
By's tongue delivered.
Most mighty Caesar,
To indear the service to you, I shall doe you,
By guilding o'er each circumstance, its weight
And consequence, since it is my bounden duty,
To you, my royal Master, would but show,
Pride and arrogant love in me the author,
To my own act, and so it would rather lessen
Then amplify my merit; how I've served you
Under command of him, whom in due justice
I cannot mention now without foul curses,
Revolted Wallenstein is to these Lords,
And your great self best known.
And our rewards
Shall strive to pay those services.
But when I saw him
Put off his faith, abandon his allegiance,
Accounting all your bounteous favours trifles,
Unto the mountainous pile of his deservings,
And like a black cloud hung o'er all your Empire,
Uncertain where to break and in's vast thoughts,
Aspired your sacred dignity and life,
I like his Genius skrewd into his counsels,
Explored his plots and treasons, and have found them
So full of eminent danger.
So malicious.
Empty of worth and honour, it had been
A sin beyond the horridst punishments,
To have concealed them from you, and which most
Tortures my loyal thoughts, is it had not been
Sufficient for him to rebel himself,
He has firmed a league defensive and offensive,
With your most eager enemies, Saxon Waymar,
Branàenburg, Arheim, and Gustavus Horn,
And had a personal meeting for that purpose,
And it is to be feared,
That if sudden power stop not their progress,
They will with speedy violence invade you,
Here in your capital City.
Worthy strangers,
In this one act you've shown your self more faithful▪
Then all my home-borne subjects, but be sure
If gratitude can equal your deserts,
You shall enjoy that amply: Noble Lesle,
The time is come now, and the dilemma cast,
That must conclude our Empire, which we must
Unto thy care commit; to kill a Traitor,
Is a deserving action, for thou strik'st
Then with the Sword of Justice: wilt thou add
This one act to thy former high deservings,
Kill this Arch-Rebell.
It was an office,
We should have begged, believe it he's dead already,
Isle kill him in his pride, in all his glories,
With such security, as I would sleep
After a tedious watching.
And expect,
Natures choice pleasures, that same happiness
You were created for.
You have prevailed Sir;
You who are still victorious o'er your foes,
Must needs remain a Conqueror o'er your friends,
My Lord, receive me freely, I am yours
For ever.
This chaste kiss shall seal the contract.
Come my Emilia, love is such a wealth,
As must be gained by free consent, not stealth.
Are they agreed yet, Newman,
Faith my Lord,
The Virgin Lady's something fearful, fears
A man of war should board her, lest his charge
Should make her keel split, my Lord Fredricke
Is of that rough demeanour, spite of my
Instructions, he will never learn to woe
In the due phrase and garb.
I doe admire,
The fond base carriage of our giddy youth
In love affairs, and grieve to see my sons,
(Who should inherit from me my great spirit,
As well as fortune) so degenerate from
My masculine courage; when in the blooming pride
Of my green youth I flourished, my desires
Aimed always rather in the tented field
To spend my hours, then on a downy Couch,
To see the face of a sterne enemy besmeared with blood,
Pleased me far better then a Ladies looks.
And yet you vowed,
Ever you won me, my Lord▪ you ne'er saw object,
That so much pleased your appetite.
Perhaps I might,
For the obtaining of my ends, descend
From my great spirit so much, as to decline
To idle Courtship, the birds and beasts will doe it
To sate their appetites, the fiery Steed,
(That in the fervor of a fight, oft times
Neighs courage to his rider) when provoked
With eager heat, will like and bite his female
Into the same desire: The Sparrows bill,
And with a chirping rhetoric, seem to court
Enjoyment of their wishes, which fulfil'd
Dulls their heads, they couch beneath their wings,
And in a slumber, forfeit all remembrance
Of their past pleasures: Yet insatiate man,
In his desire more hot then Steeds or Sparrows,
Will to obtain it, quite divest his soul
Of all that's masculine in him, and transform▪
His very being into woman.
Sure,
My Lord intends to write some Proclamation,
Against wearing holland smocks, some furious Edict,
Against charitable leaguerers: I've known him,
(And so have you my Lords) for all this heat
Against woman-hood, pursue a sutlers usroe,
(And she had but one eye neither) with as much zeal,
As ever knight-errand did his fair Linda brides,
Or Claridiana. 
My Lord, your son and fair Emilia.
The quarrel's reconciled, Isle lay my life on it.
Beauteous Lady,
The contract twixt me and your father, touching
The marriage twixt my son and your fair self, I hope
By your consent is ratified: my boy
Looks sprightly, as if he were new returned
From a triumphant victory.
But pray divide my soul, my life and fortunes,
Are at your disposition: noble Lords,
That this base Emperor seeks to take my life
By treachery, is an apparent sigre,
He fears that I should live, and half victorious
Ever blow be stricken, are they whom their foes
Dread, ever they doe behold them: let's go on then,
Armed with our aides, backed with our causes justice,
Against this insulting Emperor, and resolve
To pull the tyrant from his Throne, destroy
His very name, his memory, his ashes,
With as much easy freedom, as rough winds
Demolish crazy buildings. Colonel Gordon,
Some five days hence we shall arrive at Egers,
There to make preparation for the Nuptials,
Betwixt our some and fair Emilia.
Come Lords, since we amongst our selves are true,
Conquest is ours, which we will with speed pursue. 
To be in love, nay to be so in love,
To put off all our reason and discourse,
Which does distinguish us from savage beasts,
To dote upon a face (which like a mirror,
Sullied by any breath) by the least sickness,
Grows pale and ghastly: Is not this mere madness,
Why should't inhabit here then: sure the soul,
As it is a spirit of a subtle essence,
A form as thin and pure, as is an Angels,
Can ne'er be author of these wild desires,
So opposite to its nature, they are all fleshly,
Sordid, as is the clay this frame's composed of.
Shall the soul,
The noble soul, be slave to these wild passions,
And bow beneath their weight: ha Isabella, 
All reason, sense and soul are in her looks,
There's no discourse beyond them: cruel fair one,
Are you still resolute to persist in your
Strange tyranny▪ and scorn my constant love.
Doe not sir
Abuse that sacred title which the Saints,
And powers celestial glory in, by ascribing
It to your loose desires, pray rather cloth them
In their own attribute, term them your lust sir,
Your wild irregular lust, which like those fired rakes▪
Mis-guiding nighted travellers, will lead you
Forth of the fair path of your fame and virtue,
To unavoided ruin.
This is coyness,
A cunning coyness, to make me esteem
At a high rate, that jewel which you seem
To part from so unwillingly (Merchants use it
To put bad wares away:) dear Isabella,
Think what excessive honour thou shalt reap,
In the exchange of one poor trivial gem,
And that but merely imaginary, a voice,
And unsubstantial essence, yet for that
Thou shalt have real pleasures, such as Queens,
Prone to delicious luxury, would covet
To sate their appetites: Think Isabella,
That hardest Marble, though not cut by force,
By oft diffusion of salt drops, is brought
Into what ever form the Carvers fancy
Before had destined it: your heart's that substance,
And will by frequent oratory of tears,
Be brought to wear the perfect stamp, the figure
Of my affection on it.
Thus besieged,
It is high time, I summon up my virtue,
All that is good, about me, to assist
But ne'er aspire your Nuptials.
You're too humble,
Impose too mean a value on a gem,
Kings would be proud to wear, dear Isabella,
Let not thy modest sweetness interpose
A new impediment twixt my lawful flames,
And thy own Vestal chastity, let not fear,
(To thy sex incident) of my fathers wrath
Stagger thy resolution; thou shalt be
To me, my father, mother, brother, friend,
My all of happiness; if we cannot here
In peace enjoy our wishes, we will love
Like Turtles in a Desert, only blessed
In one another company. 
Why look you sir. yonder's the cock of the game,
About to tred you ginny hen, they are billing;
Shall we retire, my Lord, perhaps they are going to it,
And it would be a shame to spoil their sport.
I am resolved, I'll speak to him.
Your pleasure must be accomplished,
But take heed we draw not the Virgins curses on us
Both, take heed on it, it will fall heavy.
Surprised, and by my brother, prethy sweet
Withdraw, I would not have thy timorous ears,
Frighted with his loud anger.
Save you brother, you've parted with your
Mistress, pray tell me, does she kiss well,
Has she a fragrant lip?
Are her demeanours courtly, apt to ravish?
Are you resolved to run away with her,
And stain the honour of our family, for her sweet sake?
Gentle brother, you speak a language
I nor understand,
Nor value much the meaning. In your love
I meddled not, and't had been manners in you,
Not to have intruded upon mine, your presence
Being unrequired.
You're very confident, young Gallant,
In defence of your brave Mistress,
I know you are in love, bravely in love
With a trim Chamber-maid, a thing made up
Of a cast Taffeta gown of an old Wardrobe:
Degenerate brother, were I not assured
Of your chaste mothers virtues, I should question,
Whither my father got you, but I'm come
To disenchant thy senses from the charms,
That hateful witch throws on them, but resolve
Quickly to quit her, or by Heaven she would better
Commix with lightning.
Pray, good brother use
Your threats upon your Corporals, or stamp
At your tame Lancepresados, when they doe not
Perform your charge; your rage upon your boys,
Were more becoming, then upon your brother:
If you will sit, and with attentive patience,
Mark what I shall deliver, I will give you
Reasons for my intentions, but if not,
You may depart unsatisfied.
Well Sir, be brief, I shall attend you.
In brief, I love fair Isabella, so as honour,
Not the vicious heat of youth,
Commands me to affect, I love her virtue,
And have in that as noble, rich a dowry,
As the addition of estate and blood,
Which you have acquired in your late happy match
With young Emilia.
Dare you, boy, name her,
And my Emilia as paralels.
Why, good brother,
Though she transcends her in her birth and fortunes,
Yet in the rare endowments of her mind,
She is her equal, virtue has a soul as precious
Look on my face, and read my business there.
Alas my Lord, your looks
Are discomposed with rage, your fiery eyes
Roll with the accustomed motion, they had wont
To dart upon your enemies, I am
Assured my innocence can no way merit
Your all-consuming anger.
It is a lye,
A worthless lye, false as thy flattering hopes are,
You are in love, most gallantly in love
With Isabella, one who is composed
Of paint and plasters: thou degenerate monster,
Traitor to fame, and parricide to honour,
Abject in thy condition, as thy thoughts are;
Tear this vil'd strumpet from thy soul, do it quickly,
Renounce her with all binding ties can urge thee
To keep thy faith, or I will quite put off
The name of Father, take as little notice
Thou art my of-spring, as the surly North,
Does of the snow, which when it has engendered,
Its wild breath scatters through the earth forgotten.
This was the killing fever I still feared;
Sir I should be a stranger to your blood,
As well as noble worth, should I commit
Actions I shamed to justify: I confess
I love fair Isabella, and beseech you,
The meandness of her fortune and her birth
Omitted. she may be conferred upon me
In lawful marriage.
Dare you boy,
Speak this to me.
I should Sir be degenerate
From your great spirit, should I fear to utter
What I doe wish effected, were you a God,
As being my Father, you're but a degree
To me beneath one, in a cause so righteous,
I should not only boldly crave your license,
But hope to have it granted.
Hell and furies,
Durst any mortal fool, but my own issue,
Venture to brave my fury thus; resolve
Villain in full to satisfy my purpose,
Doe it without regret, renounce this strumpet
Even from thy soul, abandon her remembrance.
Or by my own unwearied valour, better,
And with more safety thou may hug a wave,
When its white lips kiss heaven: young sir your honour
Is not your own, for it you're but my factor,
And must give me account, a strict account
Of the errors you run in: to the Dust
Of my great Ancestors, stand I accountant
For all my family, and their blessed ashes
Would break their Marble lodgings, and come forth
To quarrel with me, should I permit this bar
To stain their glorious Heraldry.
Great Sir,
Can virtue be a blemish, or true worth
Disgrace Nobility; it was that at first,
When Nature made all equal, did distinguish
Twixt man and man, and gave a just precedence
To the most worthy: Honour is Virtues of-spring,
Since then the Angel, my affection's fixed on,
Is fair and virtuous, all the good that ever
Durst with frail flesh commix, or earth be proud of:
How to our Families honour can she bring
A diminution? Can sir the chaste ice,
Kissed by the Sun, into its native substance,
Pollute a crystal River, surely rather
It adds fresh moisture to its stream. My Lord,
I am your son, and have been still obedient
To your commands; O by your love, your virtue,
Your never daunted virtue, I beseech you,
Grant me this one request, were it for my life,
I should not be so abject, as to spend
This breath for its redemption.
Well, thy prate
Has overcome me, I am pitiful,
Beyond my nature pitiful to thee,
Thou shalt enjoy thy wishes.
All the blessings,
Prayers can obtain from heaven, shower down upon you
For your superlative mercy.
Stay and mark me,
'Tshall be with this condition, that as soon
As thou art wed, and hast enjoyed thy wishes,
Ere the next Sun rise on you,
You resolve without remorse,
To kill your Isabella.
Heavens protect me!
Nay thou shalt swear it too: Alas gentle boy,
I know thy nature is too full of fire,
To mix with sordid earth, and though thy last,
(Which is but manhood in thee) prompt thee on,
To taste the sweets of Isabellas beauty,
I know thou scornst so much to unmake thy Gentry,
To take her for thy wife, perhaps she will not
Give up her honour, till the Church has sealed
That grant as lawful; freely I allow
Her brave ambition, if as a reward
Due to her haughty pride, thy own hands kill her,
And so wipe out the infamy.
Strange cruelty! so tyrants used to grant offenders life,
After their condemnation: to reserve them
To combat wild beasts in the spacious Cirque,
Or bloody Amphitheater: My Lord.
Pish I am deaf, inexorable as Seas
To the prayers of Mariners, when their sinking Keel
Is drunk with billows. 
O my Lord,
Your justice on this cursed witch, this thief,
This morning I have lost out of my Cabinet
The so much valued Jewel, which your bounty
Bestowed upon me, none but she and I
Having been there since; she must be thief:
Force her to restitution.
It was a gem, my mother gave me, which I did preserve
With as much care, as votaries doe the relics
Of their protecting Saints: I gave it you,
When in the eager fervor of my youth,
I destined you my wife: come hither minion,
You who can steal the Jewels of men's hearts,
With your enchanting sorceries, will not fear
To make a venture upon pettier theft:
Sirrah go bid them wait me here.
My Lord,
I'm so secure in my own innocence,
That should your fury riot on my life,
It would not affright me, I should meet my death,
As willingly as I should doe my rest,
After a tedious watching, there's no armour
Like that of innocence, with which I'm guarded,
And therefore laugh at punishment.
So brave I shall soon quell your insolence; lay hands 
On this ignoble strūpet, hang her up, here in my presence.
Stay sir, I doe beseech you hear me.
Your entreaties are cast on me, as fools throw oil on fire,
Striving to extinguish it: hang her up,
Isle hang you all else.
Then Sir I will speak,
Since you forget to be a father to me,
I will put off my duty; I'm resolved,
Since it is impossible that we should live,
To dye together: nor doe not slave presume,
To touch this mine of purity, it is a treasure
While I'm alive Hell cannot ravish from me,
(For fiends would fear to touch it) if you murder
This spotless innocent Virgin, you are such,
So merciless a tyrant, as doe love
To feed on your own bowels, one whom nature
Created for a curse, and to get curses,
Such prodigies as I am, one whom all Lovers
Shall tremble at, if mentioned; one.
Death have I lost my command, is he or I
To be obeyed? hang her, if he resist,
Kill the unnatural Traitor.
Dear Albertus, draw not a ruin on thy prizeles life,
For my despised sake I will go to death,
All peace as does an Anchorite, that's assured of all his sins for∣forgiveness.
Saucy devil, carry that touch of her to hell, twill serve
To mitigate thy tortures. 
O my Lord, what has your fury acted,
Dear Albertus.
It was a most friendly hand, and I could kiss it,
For the most welcome benefit; Isabella,
In death thou give me life, thy innocence,
Will like my guardian Angel, safely convey me
To yonder heavenly Mansion: pray forgive me,
Dear Sir, if in my over-hasty zeal
In this poor innocents quarrel, my wild fury,
Transgressed my natural duty, and as the last
Request your dying son can ask, take pity
On this most innocent Maid: thy hand, my fair one,
And now as willingly I doe expire,
As a blessed Martyr, who does court the fire. O Isabella dies.
O my dear Albert.
Death slave, dare you play with a flame
That shall consume you.
Hang her up, or torments shall pay your breach of duty.
There friend, there's all the Jewels I am mistress of,
And that thou merits, prithee be as speedy
In thy dispatch, as fate it self; there is
A pure white Ghost in you same azure cloud,
Expects me straight, I come my dear Albertus.
Take hence their bodies, it was a hopeful boy,
And one I loved well, till his wild love
Made him forget his duty; and it is better
He died with fame, his sword in's hand, then that
He'd lived with foul dishonour: would he were
Alive again, I do begin to feel strange horrors here, and that
Big guest, my soul, is shaken as with a nipping frost, hence idle
Grief, I must be furnished with more spritly passions, thou art too
Heavy, fit for the society of none but pensive women. All must die,
Why should not he then, it was his destiny. 
Are all your horse in readiness.
Yes, it is time,
That we were mounted, it is four leagues at least
Unto the Generals Camp, and twill be late
Ere we arrive there, are you yet resolved
Upon the means, by which to put in practice
Our long intended purpose, our delay
Will make the Emperor apt to call in question
Our faiths integrity,
So great a business,
Is not with easy speed to be performed:
An eager haste oft-times o'rethrowes the fortunes
Of such affairs, if we once get him hither,
Within our City walls, be confident,
He's in his grave; but have you given command,
That all your Soldiers be in readiness,
To waite the Generals entry.
They shall be
In their best furniture of Arms, all drawn
Into parade, he shall have all pomp,
And ornament of war, to bid him welcome.
These triumphs
Shall be but funeral pomps before his death;
Gordon, you must, as Governor of Egers,
Present the keys with all humility
To his dispose, twill make him be more careless,
And trust his very soul into our hands.
Doubt not me,
I shall perform with cunning skill, what ever
Belongs to me; but doe you intend the General
Alone shall fall, or his confederates
Shall perish with him,
O by all means, Indian princes
Doe carry slaves to wait on them into
The other world, and it were inglorious,
That our brave General should not have that privilege
Count Tertzki, Kintzki, Newman, Marshall Illawe,
Shall be his harbingers, and in the shades below,
Provide fit entertainment for his Ghost.
They are of power, their deaths will shroudly weaken,
The strength of the Conspiracy.
Very true, I'll craftily instill into his ears,
New causes of distrust, so to beget
In him more confidence of my faith, so to
Allure him hither sooner, we must work
Surely, as does the Mole, who digs
Her habitation in the earth, and scorns!
All the assaults of tempests; when he's in,
We must be prompt in action, sure of hand,
And sound of heart, and strike him with that violence,
From the supposed Heavens,
His ambition climbs to, that the thin ayre
Does from its purer Regions
Dull earthly meteors; come let's away,
Nought crosses actions like a dull delay.
To be diseased in mind, diseased past cure
Of Physic or sage counsel, is a madness,
The active Soldiers, all whose ends are glory,
And that by virtue (cowards term a sin)
Ambition, should not be acquainted with.
Although my cares doe hang upon my soul,
Like mines of Lead, the greatness of my spirit,
Shall shake the sullen weight off; natural rest,
(Is like a wholesome bath to limbs oppressed
With gouts and aches) to a troubled mind,
A most excelling medicine, and I feel
A strong propension in my brain, to court
Sleep for its mild Physician: within there; boy. 
Sirrah be sure that none disturb my rest,
On no occasion, on your life I charge you.
Shall I sing Sir.
Yes, if the notes be heavy, apt to invite
The weary soul to slumbers. 
Who's there? you must not enter.
Must not sirrah, 
Where is your Lord?
Your pardon, gracious Madam, he's laid down
To rest, and has upon my life commanded
Me, none should wake him.
Think thou he is
So much addicted to his ease, he will
Neglect his business, go in and tell him,
The Governors of Egers, Colonel Gordon,
And Colonel Lesle are without upon
Affairs of consequence.
Would your Grace
Would pardon me, your self with greater safety
Might do it, Madam.
Foolish boy, go in, I will be thy security.
I shall perform,
Though most unwillingly your command; my Lord,
Please you to rise, your Duchess.
Ha, whore's my sword,
Thou art a Coward Ghost, and not my sons,
To take me in my sleep unarmed, my Poniard
Will still be faithful to me, if thou be not
Thin ayre, its point will graze on thee. 
O my Lord,
What has your fury acted? this your sudden
Murdering this innocent youth, doth add new horrors
To your strange cruelties.
Ha, my Page! his death
Was but due justice for his breach of duty,
For thus disturbing of my rest.
My Lord,
Your hands are purpled so in innocent blood,
Tears cannot wash the tincture of: my self
Am as deep guilty as you in the slaughter
Of Isabella, she was innocent,
The Jewel I accused her of, this morning,
Grief to my soul, I've found, pray heaven, repentance
May expiate our offences.
I begin
To feel strange horrors here, my Marble soul,
Does strive to sweat it self into a tear,
At thought of these sad accidents. Noble Friends,
You're opportunely welcome, I was oppressed
With sudden melancholy, but your loved presence
Expels all thought of it, and I'm grown
As full of sprightly mirth, as when my hopes
Aim at a glorious victory.
Mighty Duke,
According to my duty, I am come
Here to present you with the keys of Egers,
My place of Government, and with them my life,
To doe you service.
noble Gordon,
you doe so much indear me by your love,
I have no possibility to requite
Your overflow of Courtesies, have you not
Received new intelligence of business,
Which does concern me.
New temptations Sir
Against your precious life, it is to be feared,
Lest seeing we doe slack so in performance
Of what we've promised, he'll employ new agents
To attempt your ruin, and should treason,
As it is a subtle serpent, stings unseen Sir,
Invade your life: to what a dire misfortune
Were we, whose lives have upon your dependence,
Betrayed, and therefore good my Lord beware,
Lest your own courage, which contemns all dangers,
Doe undo you.
Never fear; how far
Is it hence to Egers.
Some three hours easy march.
Set forward thither;
It were in vain my enemies swords to fear,
When I doe carry sharper poniards here. 
Vexed with so many cares, so many mischiefs,
That doe like Hidra's dreadful heads increase,
By cutting off, as billows follow billows,
Succeed each other with that eager violence,
Our weary Eagles know not where to perch,
But flag their sickly wings: were it not irreligious,
I should capitulate with the powers divine,
And tax them of injustice; my whole reign
Has been a long and one continued trouble;
And if blessed peace with her fair beams did ever
Shine on our Empire, it was but like a fair
Deceitful wind, courting the ships out of the harbour,
Into the maine to drown them: but the mother
Of a more horrid warfare, that I fear as
I found the Wreathe Imperial drowned in blood,
So I in blood must leave it.
Have good hope Sir,
Tides then approach their full height, when their ebb
Has been at lowest; the most hideous tempests,
Which seemed to threat the ruin of the world,
Binge ushered in by thunder and hot lightning,
Are soonest past, there's nothing violent
Can boast of perpetuity; our fortunes
Are not so desperate, as our fears present them:
We've hands and hearts left yet, that dare oppose
The inhumane Traitor, and our causes justice
Assures us, if we cannot live victorious,
We shall dye nobly.
Man, my royal Father
Is not himself, when he beholds
Events through the quick perspective of fear,
Which shows him dangers at remotest distance,
As clearest and his most perspicuous objects.
Suppose this traitor in his Giant-reach
Fathom even heaven it self, yet there are bolts
To strike him into earth for his ambition,
And make his memory and name, all, save his treason,
For ever to be forgotten.
That which most
Does drive my tortured soul into affrights,
Is, that I see we'r false among our selves:
The faithless Soldiers daily doe in troupes,
Fly from our Ensigns to the Traitors Camp:
What cause have we then but t'expect sad ruin?
When those who should be our security,
Doe prove our greatest enemies; our Guard,
Our fear and terror, they all look
On him, as superstitious Indians on the Sun,
With adoration; on me, with contempt,
Or (but at best) with pity.
Mighty Caesar,
To doubt an ill before it fall upon us,
Amongst valiant and resolved souls▪ is counted
A point of cowardice: Great Spirits ever
Should be above their fates; good Sir retreat
Into that fortress of your mind,
Your resolution, call it up to guard,
Your soul from timorous thoughts:
Are you the man have swayed
The Roman Empire four and twenty years,
With that success against your foreign foes,
Your very name more then your forces vanquished,
To let a Traitor fright you: good my Lord
Let's draw forth new battalias to the Field,
Awake the Drum and Trumpet, summon up
The very last hopes of our weakened strength,
Against this insulting traitor; very infants
Will on the sudden grow up able men,
And fight in this brave quarrel.
Heaven it self
Will arm on our side, and with certain vengeance,
Pursue the inhumane monster: why? to dye,
(As that's the worst can happen) in this cause,
Were a religious martyrdom: I am your son Sir,
And what your fortunes are, good or disastrous,
Mine has on them dependence; by my hopes, I doe
So little weigh the glorious traitors pride,
I think him worthy scarce my meanest thought,
And rest assured, ere long, I shall behold
This fearful meteor, that would be a Star,
And does affright us with his hideous blaze,
Like a vain Comet drop his fading rays.
Your comforts
Come as in droughts the elemental dew
Does on the earth, it wets, but leaves no moisture,
To give the seared plants growth: But yesternight
We'd certain information, that our forces
Led by Matthias Gallas, were o'rethrowne
By Saxon Waymar, and his son young Fredricke:
Who had they known as well how to pursue,
As gain a victory, and made a sudden
Onslaught upon Vienna, their's; not ours
Had been the Wreathe Imperial. Now your news sir.
Letters from Colonel Lesle fir, from Egers.
This is our latest hope; he writes me word,
That the Arch-traytor, and his prime confederates,
Last night arrived at Egers,, and assures me
Of their immediate ruin: Well Colossus,
You'd best stand firm, unshaken as a rock,
Whose feet the fierce waves striving to trip up,
Doe against its hard hooves dash themselves to pieces,
Or thou wilt fall unpitied, fall to be
The scorn of story, the contempt and by-word
To all posterity; let's in my Lords:
This law the Heavens inviolably keep,
Their justice well may slumber, but ne'er sleep.
The honour you have done us mighty Duke,
By this your gracious presence, gives a period
To our ambition; Egers is grown proud,
Dares with Vienna stand in competition,
Which is the capital City, which does hold
The true and lawful Caesar.
Ferdinand,
Had he arrived here in his greatest glory,
Could not have been more welcome; while I am
Governor of this town, it and my life
Are at your service.
Noble Gentlemen,
You do so load me with new courtesies,
I know not first for which to give you thanks,
And did a sullen humour not possess
My much distempered faculties, my mirth
Should speak my gratitude; but on the sudden,
I am so overburdned with sad thoughts,
I cannot suite my mind (so much oppressed)
To jollity.
It is our general grief,
Ought should disturb your quiet here, when we
Were all composed of triumph, for the joy
We doe conceive for your arrival. My noble Lord of
Tertzki, these are the welcomes
Full bowls of sprightly Wine that Soldiers use
In entertainment; to our Generals health,
And to his good recovery from his melancholy.
Who shall refuse to pledge it with that zeal,
He would drink healthful potions, may it be
A deadly poison to him: Colonel Gordon.
May he dye for droughth like a Westphalia Pig
In the dog days, or be choked with eating tosted cheese.
My Lord of Kintzki,
This to our Generals health, and welcome hither.
I'm like to faint for thirst,
Would it would arrive at me once, my mouth
Even waters at it.
Noble Butler.
Marshall Illawe.
I shall be last, I see,
But if the stoops hold out, it is ten to one
I'll have my share.
Here Colonel Newman.
And it were the Tun of Heidleberg, I'd drink it
Off with as much ease, as a leaguer can
In a grim sutlers house of thatch: My Lord,
Under your gracious pardon, take me off
This lusty rouse to your own health, and after
Begin as much to each of ours, and if
It doe not make you as merry as a Corporal
Upon pay day, say I'm no Esculapius,
But a mere Mountebank in the effects
Of sprightly Wine.
Kind Gentlemen, my thanks
To all of you, and would my disposition
Afford me licence, I should not forget
The soldiers ceremony, to begin
Each of your happy wishes howsoever
I will trench so far on my melancholy,
To drink this cup. To all your healths.
Your Grace hath shown us
A too excessive courtesy.
Isle only
Repose a little, and if I find
My sad distemper alter, Isle return,
And frolic in your company.
I smell him:
Hee has a plot upon us, he will steal hence,
And shift a score or two of cups, and then
Set fresh upon us, make us all as drunk,
As rats in the Canaries.
We'll attend your Grace.
By no means,
Let not my melancholy discompose
Your thought of frolic mirth:
There's Colonel Newman,
Will in my absence take a cup or two
For me: mean time bee merry, it is my charge:
Remember to observe it. 
I'm sorry,
Hee should bee thus distempered here. My Lord
Let not our Generals sadness rob us of
Our late intended jollity: Colonel Newman
You'd wont to bee all ayre: I hope, you are not
Turned earth of the sudden.
No faith, thank heaven, I feel no inclination
that savours of mortality: gentlemen
Shal's have a catch.
With all our hearts, good Colonel.
A military Madrigal, I learned it
Of a right Imp of Mars, a red-fac'd Sergeant,
At Halberstat.
To me be terrible, since it is maine folly,
To fear that which we no way can avoid:
Nor is it much matter how we dye, by force,
Or naturally checkered with grisly wounds,
Or in our beds, since ell's but the same death still:
Oh! but to dye surcharged with mortal sins,
Such as can kill our everlasting beings,
Our souls, and send them hence to bathe in floods
Of living fire; there, that's the frightful mischief,
The other's but a trifle; I, who never
Could fear the other, at the thought of this,
Am one with death already; my vast crimes,
My horrid murders kill that conscience in me,
Which makes me know my guilt, that conscience,
Which as my shadow follows me.
Come softly,
And if my stroke miss, second me.
Ha! it was no ghost, that was a
Mortal touch,
It came so home and heavily: base Traitor,
Who ever thou art, thou durst not see my face,
My looks would even have blasted thee:
Ha! Lesle, Gordon, Butler.
Yes Traytor-Duke, it was we, who out thy soul
From thy weak twist of life, we who glory
More in performing this brave act of justice,
Then had we gained the Empire thy ambition
Aspired to, thy base treacheries to Caesar,
Are by us revenged.
The Counts,
Thy bold confederate Rebels, by our hands
Sent to their ruin.
Thus coward Hare,
Prey on a dying Lyon, for thee Lesle,
Basely perfidious to me in thy faith,
Receive my last breath in a curse: you have
But plaid the Hang-men to perform heavens justice.
Forgive me Heaven my past offence: I dye,
Not for my ambition, but my cruelty. 
Let us convey the body in, art post
With all speed to Vienna, and give notice
To the Emperor of our proceedings; thus every Traitor shall,
Stead of a Crown, meet his own Funeral.

THis air shall be perfumed, and every sense
Delighted with sweet smelling frankincense
And aromatic fumes: for please you know,
Gentle Spectators, from our Scene doth grow
Abundance of such fragrant stuff, you'll see
A Play that breathes Arabian spicery,
And such a doleful story as may take
Your minds to see a Prince and Princess fate
Presented, and their hard adventures shown,
Yea make you weep, and think they are your own:
Our Poet fears none but the common wits,
Who think a Scene's not good unless it fits
Their merry humours with some apish toys,
And peevish jeasts fancied by girls and boys,
Despised by abler judgements, who desire
A sad and solid matter, such a fire
Is kindled for you here; we fear no blame
Shall brand our Phoenix in her Funeral flame.
SIr, do not grieve, it is the chance of war,
Cheer up, &amp; triumph in despite of fortune,
What false without the compass of redress
To sorrow for, argues a feeble spirit,
And it doth nothing suit your Princely mind
Too much to yield to passion.
I confess,
Moral Philosophy doth teach as much,
And you have given me precepts, read me lectures
Of fickle fortunes mutability,
How madly, and without consideration,
She doth confer her favours, yet my sufferings
(How great you know my faithful Consolario)
Are of that nature, as but counterpoised
In equal balance with weak humane frailty,
They would in spite of my resistance weigh me
Down, down unto she ground.
How noble Prince,
Your passion hath unrectifi'd your mind,
And lead you into error, did you never
Read and believe what Scipio Affricanus
Said unto some commanders of his army?
That he did show a greater magnanimity
In mastering the affections of his mind,
Then in o'rethrowing armies, conquering kingdoms.
Apply this noble Roman, to your self,
Sweet Prince Amandus, what although your state
Be desperate now, your Country almost ruined,
Your army fled, and your chief City strait
Besieged by these Barbarians, if you can
Bear with a constant patience what the will
Of heaven doth lay on you, no doubt you shall
Purchase a greater glory to your self
By manly suffering what yon cannot help,
Than Geolon the Tartar, though the fates
Surrender fair Damascus to his hands.
Why should the partial fates be so unjust,
So cruel to me? had my fortune been
Good as my right, the lot of grief had fallen
Upon another soil: and thou my Country,
My dearest Country, had not felt these wrongs,
These miseries of war thou now sustainest;
The careful husbandman had then enjoyed
His harvest to himself, and reaped the fruits
Of his own labours, had not seen his house
Burnt to the very ground, his Vineyards spoiled,
His fields laid waste; the woeful father then
With bleeding heart had not beheld his daughter,
His fairest daughter ravished in his sight,
And his chaste wife lye prostituted to
The lust of common soldiers, whilst al••
He stands spectator of the loathed Scene,
Whose death at last shuts up the tragedy:
These things had never happened if my c••se,
Had been considered, nor this 〈◊〉 Ci•y
(Whose lefty turrets wrap themselves in clouds)
Had never been begirt thus round about
By foreign foes.
What news bring you my friend?
Sir, heavy news, this letter will inform you
Sent from the Governor, which to bring hither
In a disguised shape, I passed the guards,
The trenches and the camp of Geolon,
With thousand hazards of my life, all which
I reckon not to doe my Noble Prince,
My Prince Amandus service.
You are welcome,
And we congratulate your safe arrival;
But in what state did poor Damascus stand
When you departed thence? how victualled?
How furnished with ammunition was it?
How long can it hold out? first I will hear
Your sad relation ere I break the seal.
O Sir, I'm sorry my unworthy mouth
Should be the organ to convey a sound
Unto your Princely ears, so harsh as this,
So doleful, so unpleasant, I would rather
Be silent in a story of such woe;
Yet since you doe command me, know my Liege
The City is distressed for want of food:
All their provision is consumed and spent,
And nothing left for to sustain their lives.
These two months have they fed upon the flesh
Of horses, dogs, and cats, now they are driven
To such an exigent, as they begin
To eat sod leather, yea the excrement
Of men and beasts, and which is more, their flesh,
Their proper flesh: this day within Damascus,
I saw a sight which grieves me to relate,
It did appear so horrid, it was a woman
With hunger pined▪ who had not eat a bit
In seven days space of any •ustenance,
Fore'd with her knife to cut her infants throat
That sucked upon her breast, to satisfy
With its sweet fl•sh her ravenous appetite:
And for the ammunition of the town▪
As powder, bullets, match, and such materials
O• war, it is almost spent, for three years ••ege
Cannot but empty well the magazine;
Yet notwithstanding all this misery,
(Such as the like I think was never heard
Or seen in any age) they are resolved
(So much their loyal hearts affect their Prince)
Never to yield the town, so long as any
Survives to make resistance, and despise
All quarter, all reward that hath been offered
By Geolon the Tartar▪
Cons••••o,
Where are you now with your Philosophy?
You're gone, you're gone, will you preach patience yet
To wretched me your pupil? can you open
Your mouth to that •••ect in such a deluge,
In such an inundation of my woes?
No, it is in vain, I can receive no comfort:
Open ye watery sluices of mine eyes,
And let out tears enough to drown my heart,
My heart that's gauled for poor Damascus sake,
And my dear friends within: O had the heavens
Showered cataracts upon me, had their plagues
Drunk up my moisture, till my shattered bones
Had crumbled into dust, had I excused
My country with my fall, my peaceful ashes
Had filled their urn in silence, whereas now
Even life is tedious.
Sir, I am your tutor,
And I must chide you though you are my Prince,
When I perceive you err as now you doe
Through weakness of your you•▪ e••e I should show
No love nor duty, these grey hairs of mine,
Which time hath turned into a silver hue,
Know something of the world, and my experience,
How ere you slight it, hath seen many changes
And alterations wrought in mighty states.
I have waded through the various passages
Of a long life, and therefore can instruct
Your youth in the right way, if you but lend
An ear unto my counsels: hark my son,
I'll tell you plainly, you degenerate
In this intemperance of your grief,
From the brave stock of your progenitors,
Your royal predecessors; fie for shame,
Wrong not your virtue to be desperate,
O bury not in the forgetful grave,
Nor drown in this Laethean flood your glories,
Your former glories purchased on your foes
By your so oft relieving of your country▪
Rouse up your drowsy spirits, and mitigate
Your swelling passions, till I find a way,
A way to cure your sorrows.
Heaven reward thee
For this sweet Balsam thou hast powered into
My wounded heart, your words have eased me of
A great part of the burden which oppressed me,
And I refer me wholly to your wisdom,
To perfect what you have so well begun;
Now to my letter, here's sad matter sure.
Sir, so miserable is the state and condition of the town
for want of food to sustain us (as this bearer can more par∣ticularly
inform you) that unless we have speedy relief, I
fear Damascus will be taken in upon an assault, for our me•
are so weak through hunger, as they are scarce able to come
up and visit the breach, notwithstanding we are resolved
rather to dye there, then surrender: so much we prefer
your good before our own safety.
Now Consolario, what will you advise me
To doe in this extremity of fate?
Hark how the Ordnance battereth the walls
Of yond fair City, how the Musketeers
Discharge whole volleys; it is some sally sure,
Made by the brave besieged; how doe I talk,
They are too weak, too feeble to attempt it,
Poor hunger-sterv'd souls; may it not be
A Mine sprung in the rampire of the town,
And an assault made? O I fear it is so,
My mind presages ill, mine arms, sa, •a,
I'll once again attempt for to relieve it,
Although repulsed last.
Sir, it is in vain,
They are too strong entrenched for your weak power
To make an entrance, had you not experience
Too sad, last time by l•sse of your own blood,
And slaughter of your men, what folly it was
For to attempt impossibilities?
You may fall on, and loose your self and soldiers
Unnecessarily, and to no purpose:
But this yon cannot term true •ortitude,
But rather rashness•e and temerity;
For it is a policy in war, sometimes
For to preserve your soldiers, as it is
At other times to put them upon service:
But it is not proper now, stay and attend
The sequel of this business.
Colonel,
Can you inform the Prince what did occasion
The shooting that we heard now no• the town:
V▪ as it a sally▪ or a triumph made
By the Tartarians for their good success.
In conquering this Kingdom?
Neither Sir,
But an assault alas upon Damascus,
A soldier that escaped, told me the manner,
And thus it was: After the enemy
Had sprung their Mine, which levelled the rampire,
And made a breach that eight might march in front:
They did assault it with their multitudes,
And furiously fell on: thrice the besieged,
Though hunger-sterv'd, repulsed them, thrice they were
Enforced to quit the breach, some had their brains
Dashed out with stones and beams, others with flails
Received their deaths, and some whose limbs were rent
To pieces with grenades, but at length,
Fresh succours from the quarters coming down,
And Hydra-like increasing, they prevailed,
When all our men were slain in the defence,
Before they entered: only this poor soldier
Escaped whilst they were pillaging the town,
From whom I learnt this sad intelligence.
Now fortune doe thy worst, and if thou can,
Make me more wretched, I'll no longer now
Fl•tter thy malice; since mine eyes have seen
The final period of my Countries fate.
Come Consolario, thou and I, and these,
Will travel like poor pilgrims through the world,
For I am weary of this desolation,
And as we pass through this and to'ther Realm,
We will inquire their state, that I may find,
If possible, a partner in my grief.
Dear Colonel, dismiss that little Army,
That little remnant which the wars hath left me;
Bid each man seek his safety where he can,
And tell them if Amandus ere may hope
To see a change of fortune, and enjoy
Hereafter better days, he will then think
Upon their faithful service, and reward them,
When all these gusts of sorrow are blown o'er,
In ample manner. Now let us obey
Our stars, and follow where they point the way.
Brother Praedarius, could thou not find in thy
heart to turn Orator now, and bestow thy best Rhetoric
in praise of our most noble profession.
If my education, friend Rapinus were answer∣ble
to my desire, I should write whole volumes upon that
subject, so much am I taken with it.
How right you jump upon my humour, for when
I doe reflect with judicious eyes upon the poor state and
condition of our former life, and weigh it with this glorious
change, I magnify my self beyond measure for entertaining
such brave sparks of honour and true fortitude in my breast,
which hath kindled my affections to these worthy exploits.
And now since you bring that into our remem∣bronco,
let us consider what poor mechanic rascals we
were, under what slavery we lived, how oppressed by hard
and u•urping Land-lords, and the like?
All this is true, and much more we suffered, but
how are these times altered since? how doe we live now my
friend? nothing inferior in command to the King of
Arabia himself; are not all these mountains ours? these
caves and forests ours? these deserts and wildernesses ours?
are we not safe in these fortifications from the greatest po∣wers
that can possibly invade? we need not now fear the
King nor his imposts, he shall now make us amends, and
pay tribute of all such goods as pass this way under our ju∣risdiction.
Tribute say you? it shall be tributus t••alias, not
a part, but all shall be confi•cated to our use: all travellers
whatsoever, wh•there Arabians, Jaws, Turks, Persians or
Egyptians, whose occasions bring them hither either as pile∣grims
to Maecha, or as convoyers o• rich merchandise over
these deserts, must here be content to doe home•g•▪ and un∣load
their commodities to enrich the brave montaneers.
How commendable therefore i• this course of 〈◊〉
how profitable unto us, as when w••lth and rich boot
is as it were every day offered to our possession, nothing is
required from us but a little valour to make us masters of in∣finite
treasures.
And what care we though they brand our fore∣heads
with the names of robbers, thieves, out laws, re∣bells,
renegados, and such like, whilst we live rich and brave
and enjoy our pleasures.
True, but wee can give our selves when wee list
other attributes, taking upon us the glorious name of soul∣diers,
which we worthily merit in exposing our lives, to
purchase wealth and honour, to so many hard and dange∣rous
enterprises.
Rightly spoken, for confirmation whereof
witness so many skarres upon our bodies, so much treasure
in our Caves, so many Captives in our chains, all simon∣boles
of our mighty darings.
But I marvel wee have had no doings today,
will there be no Market think ye? no travellers? no car∣riages?
no Camels, no Dromodaries? no boot? it was not
wont to be so, how comes this change in the name of Ma∣homet,
what is the clock prithee Praedarius?
It cannot be less then six, for Apollo hath left
dallying with Aurorae more then an hour ago.
By Fermagant this is strange, wee were wont
to be at our prey as soon as they at their play, how comes
it wee hear not from our sentinels wee sent out to disco∣ver.
Hark I hear them coming, they should
bring good news by their joyful acclamations.
What news soldiers, are there any travelers
stirring this morning, or Caravans driving over the moun∣taines?
speak quickly, wee are rusty for want of act∣on.
Noble Captains as wee sa•e to discover the
plain, from the top of yonder mountain, wee might per∣ceive
to descend great troops of people, but the distance
of the place suffered us not to discern whether they were
travellers, pilgrims, or merchants.
Which way come they, and whether doe they
bend their course?
It should seem they come from Alexandria, and are
travelling towards Ormus, for they take that way.
Then they are rich witho•t question; courage
my hearts, we shall bee all made by Mahomet; need wee
animate them Praedarius with an Oration?
It will not need, for you see no dullness in
them to the business, too much when•ting will take of the
•dge of their courages.
Captain Rapinus.
Captai•e Praedarius.
What do ye mean to delay the time so long in talk,
and let this rich boor in the mean time slip out of •ur
hand•.
Tic well considered, and we're glad you are
So forward in the action; now my friends
Let's fall one bravley, thus I doe dispose you;
Some 50. shall lie close in ambuscado
Behind the thicket that's within the valley;
Discover not your selves before you hear
Their Camels pass beyond you, then break forth
And give a sudden onset; fifty more
Shall be obscured from sight behind the mountain
That lies upon the right hand, and commanded
If it stand with the liking of Praedarius
By his discreet conduct; the rest with me
Shall guard the passage o'er the bridge, and lie
Along the crystal River, which so gently
Glides on the left hand by the 〈◊〉 foot.
There is no other passage but those three,
Which thus blocked up, the prey must needs be 〈◊〉;
Now every man unto his charge; we aim
• our attempts at nought 〈…〉
Have we not reason my masters, to adore the
deity of Fortune, for still favouring our attempts, sure wee
are much indebted to that goddess for her continual bless∣sings,
and we should be very ungrateful if wee did not ac∣knowledge
it.
Wee are in a double manner bound to her
curtsy. First for this wealth, next for sending such a co∣wordly
guard to convoy it, for had they behaved themselves
valiantly, wee had not been masters of our prey, but re∣turned
home well beaten for our labours.
But no more of this, I am glad we have it: now
we will divide it equally among our selves; your share
Praedarius shall be the Jewels and Plate, the Money, Mer∣chandize
and other commodities shall be evenly distribu∣ted
amongst our men, and for mine own par• I desire no∣thing
but the fair Lady.
Ha the fair Lady I must not condescend to
that, she is my prisoner taken by my own hands, and
therefore belongs to me as a guerdon of my valour, take
you the jewels, and leave me the Lady.
By Termagant thou art a villain, and shalt not
live an hour for contradicting my will.
Give up all claim to her, or thy life Praedarius.
Never, thou shalt write that resignement with
thy blood, and seal it with thy heart.
Then have at thee—they fight.
Forbear good Captain Rapinus.
Captain Praedarius what doe you mean, will you
kill one another for a woman, a pox on her, let her bee
common to both, peculiar to neither, enjoy her alike by
turns.
She will find you both employment enough I'll war∣rant
you.
She looks like a free mettall'd beast that will not faint
in a double career.
When you have spurred her sufficiently, and she begin
to grow dull for your service, turn her over to us that we
may back her.
She shall be mine, and who dares lay claim to
her besides, forfets his life.
She shall bee only mine maugre the devil him∣self.
Assuage your furies (I beseech you) and let me de∣cid
the business between you, since you both claim her
particularly to your selves, and neither will yield thereun∣to,
refer your selves to the Ladies own choice, and bee
content to stand to her election.
I am content—I know I am the properer
man—aside.
I subscribe to it willingly—she must
needs choose me for many respects, whose deserts cannot but
be discerned by her affectionate eyes—aside.
Methinkes I am embracing her dainety body al∣ready,
whilst thou Praedarius stand as an envious specta∣tor
of my happiness.
Alas poor fool how thou art deceived, thou
imbracest Ixion like but a cloud in thy imagination, while
the Lady Iuno the true substance is reserved for me; mark
thou th'event to thy shame Rapinus.
I come Lucinda, thy Rapinus comes
To court thy beauty, who in spite of fate
And all the opposition of the world
With this right hand will guard thee, though a troop
Or armed Fiends stood up, grant me but Love
I'll hold thee then though rivalled by Jove.
But that I know Lucinda ne'er will gre••
When she perceives Praedarius rivals him
Her lovely guardian, I doe see her eyes
Dart amorous glances on me, and her hate
To him shall be discerned in his fate
This is good they are gone and left all the boot
behind, but twill not be amiss to discover if the coast bee
clear or no. Ha, ha, ha, they are gone sheer away by this
light, was it not sport comrades to see them fight one with
another, what fools were they to fall out in that manner
and leave this unregarded?
Let them still disagree so, wee fare the better for it, if
this occasion had not happened we had fingered but a little
share of this wealth, I can tell ye.
This bag is mine.
And this is mine.
But where is my part then?
And mine, by Mahomet we will not be thus used.
This is good y'faith, whilst wee are talking you are
taking, my masters you are best let us share with you, give
me this bag Sirrah.
And me this, or by.
Tic in vain to strive, you shall get nothing that way
but blows, doe you not know that possession is a main•
point of the Law.
Cheat us and jeer too, Rogues our parts are your
heart•—they fall together by the cares.
How now what's the matter here, fighting a∣bout
the prey, we'll have you all hanged for this you
slaves.
Good Sirs bee patient, and by your good sa∣vours,
let me tell you we did but follow your example, and
we know tic a chief maxim in war that Soldiers are
bound to follow their Leaders.
Besides Sirs our quarrel bears a better colour with it
then yours, being for gold and jewels, yours but for a pret∣tie
Wench, pardon our saucy talkings.
Well for this time wee pardon you, yet because
you shall learn next how to behave your selves better, and
to make use of a booty when tic offered unto you, wee will
case you of this burden, come your bags, Sir your bags.
And yours Sir, dispatch we must have them all,
Henceforth my friends agree, and differ not
In the division of your boot, nor give
The world occasion to traduce our fame
By confirmation of this proverb old,
When thieves fall out, true men come by their gold.
what should I think my Lord of this delay,
That holds so long the Princess of my life,
My fair Lucinda from me, doe not you
Measure the time, and wonder what should be,
The occasion of her stay? me thinks it is strange!
I wonder not at all Prince Perseus,
Nor scarce expect her yet, for but consider
The distance of th•se kingdoms, and the tract
Of ground twixt Egypt and the Persian Realm,
And you must then conclude that this is not
A work of three days journey.
Then my hopes
And languishing desires to see my love
Err in the computation of the time,
Fancying three days three years, but by your leave,
Was it not reported in this Court of Persia
More then a moreth agony that she was ready
With her Egiptian train to take her journey?
It is true it was so reported, yet it might
Be a false rumour, grant the contrary
That truth and it concurred, yet many things
Happen you know between the cup and the lip.
The Princess then might have been indisposed
To health and sick and so unapt to travel,
Or else he royal Father and my king
(Which heavens defend) might be affected with
His old disease, and she loath to depart
Before he had recovered better state;
Innumerable other things might happen
Which now I cannot think of, but suppose
She had at home no let or interruption,
Yet must they pass the red sea, or be forced
To come about by Istmus overland,
Then travel through the deserts of Arabia,
Which is a tedious way and not so soon
To be overcome as you suppose it is.
It may be so, my Lord Ambassador,
These are the reasons or such like as these,
But my Prophetical my Delphic mind
Prompts me alas unto another cause
More probable, I fear that glorious Orb
Where my fair star moves in (I mean your land,)
Made glorious by her lustre, and envied
By all the neighbouring kingdoms round about,
Should now grow proud, &amp; scorn her beams should grace,
B•sides their own, another Hemisphere,
What think you Sir of this?
It cannot be
Your princely mind should harbour such conceit,
To think our land so dull, as not to see
The greatness of this empire, and the honour
Egypt receives to match with Persia;
But I interpret o•herwise your speech
Applying it unto the power of love,
Whose force is such as it will draw a man
Into Poetic raptures,
I approve
Your judgment in the art, when I but name
Lucinda, that bare sound strikes heavenly music
Into my soul, and makes my thoughts harmonious,
Each syllable therein is a strong charm
To hold me in the labyrinth of love;
Fairest Lucinda why dost thou with-hould
The day so long, and suffer Perseus
To live in night wanting thy wished presence,
•ill thou appear I can behold no sun
No beam of comfort, that bright wagoner,
Who doth begin his progress in the East
And ends it in the West, each day surrounding
The compass of this lower world, infuses
No light into my senses, for he stays
To borrow some of the•; bright star appear.
Now Sir I see love hath divinely wrought
Upon your inward faculties, that could
Beget so high a strain as you have used
In admiration of the loud obeict;
Put love they say is •urse of poetry.
I think no less for for ere I was in love
Before Lucindas beauty kindled had
A sacred fi•e in my inflamed breast,
I knew not what it was to poetize,
But now I'll cloth my lines in sable weeds,
And vent my thoughts in an Elegiac name,
I•le sing sad songs until my mistress comes
For to inspire me better; O I cannot
B•are with h•r absence, what think you my Lord
Is she upon her journey• that I may
My self in person with some •roopes of horse
Ride sorth to meet her on the way as far
As the wild deserts of Arabia stretch
To safe conduct her hither.
Noble Prince
I doe believe she wants no strong convoy
To guard her o'er the mountains, and more strength
Added, I think would be superfluous,
For •ur the King knowing the passage well
How danger•us, how long and troublesome
Would ne'er consent she should go weakly guarded,
But you may doe your pleasure.
Friend, what news
Bring thou unto the Court? what speaks thy face
Comixed with dust and sweat?
Redouted Prince,
It speaks in characters a story which
Will make you sad to hear, and me to speak,
Which thus I read unto you, our fair Prin•esse,
The beautiful Lucinda travelling through
The Country of Arabia, for to meet
Her happiness in Persia with a guard
Of some few horse and foot, was set upon
By soldiers, what they were I doe not know,
Their number was ten times as much as ours,
Yet we so long resisted as we could,
Until the most part of our men were slain,
Then some were forced to save their lives by flight•
Some three or four, no more of which small number
I write my self, who took my journey hither
Alone to give you notice what befell us;
Let not my news great Prince, exclude my welcome.
But what befell the Princess all this while,
Her Ladies and attendance?
Taken prisoners
By two that seemed to command the rest
With all their plate and jewels.
Know you not
In what part of that fatal soil befell
This sad disaster, or by whom it was done?
Was it in Arabia faelix, or desert,
Or Petrea else?
Faith Sir I was never
There in my life before, nor did I then
Enquire the true denomination of it,
And therefore cannot satisfy you in
The thing you doe demand•
But you can tell me
The nature of the place and Country, then
I'll satisfy my self: was it sweet and lovely,
Perfumed with spices and rich Frankincense,
Or was it a rocky soil, and mountainous,
Wilde, unfrequented, full of caves and dens,
Of wood and desert, you can tell me this?
I'm sure it was not spicy, for it had
A bitter smack, we proved it to our cost,
Some never could digest it: Frankincense
There was not any, I should smell it then:
Mountains I saw, and unfrequented paths,
Resembling well a desert: this is all
I can inform you of by circumstance.
How's this? am I awake, or in a dream?
Dead, or alive? what Apoplex was that
Tied all this while my tongue from breaking forth
Into wilde exclamations? O my heart!
My better part, Lucinda prisoner!
Heavens what a sound is that, no death so fatal,
So doleful to my thoughts, Lucinda tan
By thieves and out-lawes, worse, and Perseus
Uncertain where she is, still worse and worse.
What shall I doe, dye? that were to no purpose,
And leave her unredeemed: no, I'll first
Raise a great Army, and lay waste that soil,
That fatal soil which first procured my woe:
I'll cut off this distinction of three names,
Arabia faelix, Petraea, and Desert,
And bring them into one, and that's the later:
Cosmographers shall ne'er divide the land
Into three parts, Arithmeticians neither
Shall work it as a fraction, but entire,
An entire •umber, termed by all desert:
The Phoenix shall no longer harbour there,
Or if she doe, we will destroy the Spice•
Where with she always built her funeral pile
To burn her self to ashes▪ and the••by
Hinder a second birth: what will we not
Doe to revenge this wrong? the worst of else
That can be thought of is not bad enough
For to afflict that Country which detains
My fair Lucinda from me: I have not
The patience to dispatch an Embassage
And to expect reply: I'll go my self
And by my armies march, my cannons mouth,
My trumpets warlike sound, my beating drum,
The King shall know the business why I come.
Then you dismissed the army.
As I was
Commanded by your Highness, so I did.
But did you tell my loving friends &amp; soldiers,
That in this grateful heart of poor Amandus,
Was treasured up their love and faithful service,
Never to be forgotten.
Sir, I was not
Wanting in the least part of my commission.
How did they take my leaving them, and this my separation.
At the first unkindly,
Because you would not take them as a guard
To safe conduct your person, yet when I
Enforced your love by binding arguments,
They did submit unto your will, and stood
No longer to dispute it.
Yet their hearts
Were grieved I make no question, for their loss
And desperate fortunes.
Not so much my Lord
For their own fortunes, as for yours appeared they
Troubled in mind, for when I drew them all
Into a Ring, and told your mind unto them,
From every common soldiers eye, gushed forth
Rivers of tears, and after from their hearts,
Brake forth these exclamations: O my Prince,
My dearest Prince, why should the partial heavens
Deal so unjustly with thee, or their malice
Injure thy goodness? why wilt thou depart
So weakly guarded, and expose thy self
Yet longer naked to the stroke of fortune?
Why should we be excluded 〈◊〉 thy pre•ence?
Yet since it is his pleasure, we'll no longer
Dispute the reasons why, but yield unto it:
Heavens prove propitious, let his smiling stars
Shed pleasing influences o'er his head,
And guide his journey, let the froward fates
See and repent the wrong they did unto him,
And recompense his loss with interest
For all his sufferings: O what cause have we
To grieve for him, for ne'er in any age,
Have subjects boasted 〈◊〉 a sweeter Prince.
This makes me melt again, and to deplore
Their miserable state and sad condition
That were so touched with mine; but Consolario,
What desert soil is this, that so well suit•
My desert mind? what solitary land
That mocks my far more solitary heart?
What ayre doe we now breath in?
Sir, this Country
Is termed the deserts of Arabia
Where we now travel in.
Not that same Country.
So famous for the Phoenix and her nest,
And for that second Phoenix, rare Phaeni•in,
(Far more to be admired then the first)
The Arabian Kings fair daughter.
No my Lord,
That's called Arabia •aelix, this desert,
So infamous through thefts and ••bberies
Committed on all travellers by the thieves
And out-lawes of the Country, who frequent
These Caves and Mountains, this and the other part
Make but one kingdom, it was not my advice
You came this way, you know I told you of
The danger by the robbers.
Prithee tell me
What should they rob from me that I should shun them?
What have I left that I should fear a thief?
A jewel, two or three, poor paltry toys
To loose, when I before have lost a kingdom:
You'll say they'll take my life, alas they will not
Be so compassionate to ease me of
A burden so despised, under which
I faint, and panting breath this ayre of woe.
Nay good my Lord, no more of this discourse,
You promised once a manly resolution
To tug with fortune, will you fall again
Into relapse of grief, and sad remembrance?
How poor this shows in you!
Well, I'll forget it,
And find some other talk: you told me now
This was a part of fair Arabia,
Termed desert, and another part
Hight Faelix, there's another yet besides,
Or else the history is false that writes it,
How name you that?
That Sir is Petraea,
So called of Petra, the chief City in it,
Or else because it is rocky.
Which of these
Arabia faelix, Petraea or desert
Is that sweetsoyle so much commended for
Her gummes and spices, odours, and perfumes?
I'm sure it is not this.
No, that is Faelix,
And rightly bears it that denomination;
For it is a happy Country, no delight
But flows abundant there, embroidered •ields,
Fair meadows, pleasant groves, clear crystal brooks,
Sweet lovely Cities, garden• diapered
All o'er with Flora's richest tapestry,
Are seen there all the year, continual spring
Dwells in that coast, white hoary bearded Hymns,
Ne'er shakes his snowy tref•es, nor his frost
Nips the fair flowers that beautify her breast,
Nor boisterous Bore•as with his winter blasts,
Shakes her fair fruit, but delicate Favonius
Creeps gently o'er her fields with flowery breath
Creating gummes and spices; sure it is
The garden of the world; the Phoenix else
Had never chose that place above all other
To recreate her self in: your Damascus
Is but a desert if compared unto it.
But good old man, have you forgotten that,
Before the Tartar did invade my land,
We had laid down our travel there to see
The much admired Phaenicia, when the sight
Of this fair picture did captive my heart:
What motion doe I feel again within me,
To blow the fire raked in forgetful ashes,
And half dead in Damascus?
Stand, and give up your purses, or your lives,
We require one or both.
Dost thou not see us
Stand with our swords drawn, mine I thus give up into thy
body,—
What shall we doe? our Capt killed, let's fly.
As thou hast lived with him, so shalt thou die
And serve him in the other world
But I
Served him for fear, not love, and should be loath
To wait on him to hell 〈◊〉 such a •••ney.
Villain forsake thy master, that thou shalt not
my sword shall keep thee in thy true obedience,
Bless••d deliverance! we have cause to thank
The heavenly powers for this our victory,
And preservation.
With what confidence
Of good success their Captain gave the onset?
But when the Princes conquering sword dispatched him
How soon his thieves were quel'd.
Sweet Prince I fear
More storms for in this clouded Wilderness
They are most frequent, and I doubt the worst
Is not blown o'er, let's therefore hast our journey
To shelter us in safety.
I'll not be
Averse unto good counsel though I value
This life at a lowe rate; now let's direct
Our steppes towards that happy soil you spake off,
That I may see though now with humbled eyes
Phaenitia fair, the minion of the skies,—
See fair Lucinda mine, what triumphs we
Bring to adorn thy conquests, see what captives
Are ready here to waite upon thy triumph,
See what a purple flood hath issued forth
From these two gaping wounds which I received
To bring these precious jewels to Lucinda,
And yet she kills Rapi••• with disdain,
Did ere your eyes see fairer?
Never true lie,
And I believe this Kingdom yields none such,
They speak the owner some great personage▪
From whom did you 〈◊〉 them▪
From that captive
Who killed Praeda•juice and thus wounded me,
And made such havoc of our men, he now
Shall lie in durance for it.
Heavens what a wonder,
What an Ange•like object strikes mine eyes,
In masculine appearance!—aside.
Were you Noble
These j•wels were a ransom to redeem him,
And set his friends and him at liberty
At least to bar hard usage.
If it be
Your pleasure to command their free enlargement,
I seal unto it, for fair Lady know
You carry such divinity about you
As it converted hath and almost altered
(I speak it to my shame) my former nature,
But had I still continued as my self,
I had not begged this favour, which you know
I might command at pleasure.
You are angry
And all this while mistake me, • as little
Desire their liberty as you your self,
But I would have them used in gentler manner
Then other prisoners for these jewels sake,
Which take me more then all the wealth you ere
Presented me withal.
This cheers me yet
That now at length, one of my offerings are
Accepted by my goddess; captives kneel
And reverence her deity whose breath
Hath freed you from a servitude more dark
Then hell it self; now this must bee your prison
This Cave of mine, till we determine further.
Would I might be his •ayl••• and his surgeon,
〈◊〉▪ his wounds bleed—〈◊〉
Sir you'll loose your prisoners
Unless some care be taken for their wounds,
Their death can doe no service, first I'll dres••
Your hurts▪ and then for pities sake apply
A plaster unto their•.
Do what you will
Your wounds are deep Sir—dresses him.
I believe they are,
And you have one fair Lady too wants •en•ing,
I hope one day to search it and return
Your curtsy again in a kind nature.—aside
This salve will cure it.
I bele•ve no less,
There is great ve•tu in 't derived from you.
Come let the dress you Sir.
Me gentle Lady,
No let me bleed to death, like Seneca
Go sleeping to my grave, your pains were ill
Bestowed on one that's weary of his life;
Show your compassion one my friends, and then
You shall •blige my ashes in their urn
To bless your bounty.
I'll not be denied,
Your friends I care for too—sure Leads swans
Were black compared to this more whiter ski••e,
No silk so soft—aside
Now I have done with you.
As I have been your Surgeon be mine too,
Would he did know my wound—all aside.
To speak my thanks
Would come to short by far of what I think;
I'm sorry Madam your so pr•tious salve
Should wasted be on such a wretch as I,
It better were reserved for nobler uses.
Now Sir you must receive too from my hand,
This plaster and your cure.
I kiss those hands
That deign me such a favour—dresses him.
You must feel
The virtue of my salve too.
As we have
The bounty of your noble disposition,
For both our humble thanks—dresses him,
Come have you done,
You dwell too long there and neglect a cure
Worth all the rest, Rapinus heart is sick,
And craves a plaster, wounded by your love,
A patient in your care to be preferred
Before a thousand captives.
May be so,
But yet repent not charitable works
Upon the poor distressed, if gentle nature
Move not your heart to this, yet let the thought
That they may doe good service in your wars,
(Since you your self have seen the valour tried)
Work that effect upon you.
You plead strongly,
And I cannot repugn your argument;
But are all Ladies so compassionate
And pitiful as you? I think they are not.
They are indeed, cur sex hates cruelty.
Then you should hate cruelty in love.
That's in another nature.
Come sit down,
How long have you professed surgery?
I never saw you practise it before.
I learnt it from a child.
It is a fine art
And well it doth become a Ladies hand
Gently to touch a wound, but I forgot
To ask my prisoners what and when they were,
And to what place they travelled, pray demand.
I will Sir—this suites well with my desire—aside
Fair Sir may I request to know your state,
Your name and country, whence you come and where
Your journey lay when this captivity
Befe•l you on your 〈◊〉?
Courteous Lady,
You first demand my state, I can resolve you
In these two words; it is poor and miserable,
Made so by fortunes malice, and my stars.
My name I humbly crave I may conceal,
My Country is Damascus, and therein
As in a book you may read out my story;
Have you not heard the fall of that brave City?
Yes, and the same of that more braver Prince
Admired Amandus, I believe you have
Some near relation to him.
Yes, in fortune
I have indeed, for I suppose our sufferings
Are much alike.
So are your names and natures;
I make no question, if they were revealed,
But I have found enough.
He will not tell
His name it seems
That matters not at all,
I gather by his words he is some Knight
Of sad Damascus, or some kinsman of
Th'unfortunate Amandus.
Very likely,
But we spend too much time in this discourse.
What doe I mean? I have not yet given order
To put out sentinels upon the hills
For to discover boot; come will you walk
And take the air a little? prisoners come
You shall receive a dram too and no more
But to prepare your stomachs against the time,
I'll wean you from it.
Wean me from my breath
Of life, and then I'll thank thee in my death.
This is worse and worse by the Almanac.
Alkeron, fool thou would say, we doe •ot use
to swear in that phrase.
Besides, there is no sense in Almanac.
I say there is good sense and meaning in it, if
you had the wit to conceive it.
As how prithee?
As thus, grossum caput, it is worse and worse by
the Almanac, that's as much to say, it is worse with us this
year then it was the year before.
Faith thou say true, thou hast opened and ap∣plied
the point too very handsomely, I commend thy wi•
for it.
Besides, did I not shift an oath too very prettily•
observe my religion in it as well as my wit.
I thought thou had sworn.
And so did I by the Alkeron.
But to our first discourse before you int•rrupted
me: is it not worse and worse with us every day than other?
we were wont to have some feeling of the gain, as well as
of the pain, and to share with our Captains, now we must
be contented to stand to his curtsy, devil share him for it.
We lost our best Captain when we lost Praeda∣•juice,
would Rapinus had excused him, we should had better
days then.
What fools were we to save his life, when hee
lay at the mercy of the stranger, I repent it now most
heartily,
And so doe I, but had we known he would re∣ward
us so, and give us nothing for our labours, he should
have gone to hell for me, I would never have staid him.
And the more to torment his Ghost, we would
have made his foe and conqueror Captain in his place.
If he continue thus dogged, we may doe it yet by
some trick or other, let him 〈◊〉 too much provoke us.
All his mind is upon the wench by Mahomet,
all is given unto her, nothing unto us but a bastinado now
and then, shall we endured?
And yet for all so much treasure as he gives her,
of my conscience she gives him nothing in return thereof,
no not so much as her maidenhead.
Her maidenhead, it was a question if she had that
to give him.
Then not a vaulting turn, not one single career,
not a foot in the stirrup, or term it what you will.
Nay, I believe scarce a dry kiss unless by force.
Then he is a precious coxcomb, if I were he, I
trow she should give me a dry and a wet kiss too by her
leave.
I am clean out of charity with him in good faith.
And so are we all for his hard dealings.
But we must smother our discontent as well as we can.
What shall we doe now?
To our old trade, to watch for others Profit.
Come let's away then, we shall be found tardy
else, and perchance told so much by a dumb instrument
called the cudgel.
Indeed he speaks oft•n to us in that language.
But come comrades the times may altered be,
When we shall speak that speech so well as he,
And make him understand us when we call,
As he doth make us now, this may befall.
IN midst of storms, and these tumultuous times
Of war and blood, in midst of troubled seas
Of foreign states, how safety doe we sail
And steer our course, Alecto, in a calm:
No dusky cloud lours on our ship of state,
No winds of adverse fortune shake our peace,
But smile and gently breathe a quiet gale:
Blessed stars that reigned at our nativity,
Kind Planet, under whose sweet influence
We were brought forth, dear fortune that conferred
This happiness upon the Arabian King.
It cannot be denied Sir, but you are
As much indebted to the gods for favours,
As any mortal Prince, and in some things
Enjoy prerogatives above them all,
As in the wealth and beauty of your land:
Your subjects love, your peace with foreign Kings
That are your neighbours. Lastly, in this point,
Which makes you more admired then all the rest,
In having such a daughter, who for virtue
And beauty both cannot be paralel'd
By any other Princess, and I think
Hath not her equal in the world besides.
She is my chiefest joy I must confess,
And the sole staff of my declining age.
I undervalue far my Crown beneath her,
My gold, my jewels, yea although I were
Possessed of the worlds vast treasury,
It were but dross unto my darsing dear,
My dear Phaenicia, all my care and study
Is how to see her married as ••comes
The daughter of a King, and the great dower
Dame nature and her fortune both will leave her▪
This likes me not, I'll thwart it what I can,
For to advance my love and proper fortunes.—
But royal Sir, have you proposed yet
A match unto the Princess?
Yes, and have
Showed her the portraitures of divers Princes,
Of Persia, of Tartaria, of Austria,
Of Egypt, Babylonia, and the rest,
To make her choice, but yet she likes not any.
That's good, she likes a substance, not a shadow:—
This makes for me.
What doth she then object
An't please your royal Majesty?
That she's
Not yet disposed to marriage, pleading youth
And ignorance in what doth suit a Bride.
That's nothing, she'll be soon instructed by
Her husband in that duty.
Yet I will not
Force her affection; she desires to have
Two years yet added to her age, before
She would determine marriage; but you left
The clause imperfect, when you did digress
From what we first discoursed, and fell upon
The praises of my daughter, now no more
Of this, but enter on the first again;
What was it nephew?
Sir, I was applauding
Your happy state and fortune, and what cause
You had to thank the gods for benefits
You did enjoy above all other Princes,
Yet to the end you might not think your self
In earthly pleasures absolutely happy,
And so grow proud, there lies a bar between you
And the full consummation of your bliss.
A bar, what is it? it shall be then removed,
And the way cleared.
There's difficulty in it▪
I mean the thieves and our laws of your Country,
Who make your land unfree, and hold by force
The third part of Arabia, 〈…〉
Who rob your self and subjects of their goods,
Usurping privil•dges, and exacting
Tributes an dues of every passenger,
Stranger or other wise that trave•• that way.
This takes away much from my true content,
(I must confess•) and troubles me the more,
Because I know not which way to redress it.
You know we have left no way unattempted,
To drive them thence, yet failed in our desire,
Because of their retreat into the 〈◊〉,
Which for our army is inaccessible.
Many complaints are preferred unto us,
Not only by our subjects, but by others
Against these rebels •or their goods extorted,
Who doe demand from us all restitution,
As if those thieves were under our command:
Yea, many Kings our neighbours have dispatch•
Ambassadors about it to our Courts
Whose Caravans and treasures have been robed,
Passing the deserts by these mountaineers,
Demanding for their loss, full satisfaction,
Who have departed hence much discontented:
This in the end I doubt will raise a war
Between us, and disturb our settled peace.
What news with you?
Sir, there's a Gentleman
Lately returned from travel, now arrived
Unto the Court, who humbly craves to have
〈◊〉 about affairs of great impo••
Which doe concern• your royal Majesty.
Admit him straight, we'll hear the business.
We understand you're late returned from travel,
From what parts came you now?
From Persia Sir.
What have you to deliver?
That the Persian
Is marching hither with a mighty army
To fall upon your Kingdom, from the Court
I did accompany the Camp, until
I learnt the certainty of their design,
Then in the night I left them, and with speed
Rode post to warn you, that you might provide
Against a strong invasion.
But where did you
Part from the Persian Army?
In the confines
Of Babylonia ne'er fair Euphrates.
How strong are they?
Their Army doth amount
Unto a hundred thousand foot, their horse
Equals that number bravely equipag'd
And furnished for the war.
Who doth command
As General?
Prince Perseus himself.
Could you not understand upon what grounds
They built their discontent and rash proceeding?
I can in form you nothing of the cause,
But so much of th'effect, I can assure you,
Is it too too true.
This makes me not a little
To wonder at the strangeness of the thing;
Who ever heard of any Prince that was
Invaded by his foe, before he knew
What his pretence was, and the cause that moved him
To enter into war; I cannot guess
The reason why the Persi•n should receive
Distaste, and therefore am incredulous
Almost of your report.
Sir I 〈…〉
(So much I doe prefer my King and Country
Before my life) I might be proved a liar,
Although I s•ffer'd for it, rather then
Behold the devastation of a soil
So sweet as fair Arabia; but alas
Your royal self, and we your loyal subjects
I fear too soon will have experience of
The truth of my relation, and perchance
Repent too late your incredulity,
Grounded upon too much security.
What should it ought advantage me to lie?
Urge it no more, we do believe what you
Have told us is a truth, and will provide
Against the enemies approaching force;
Sure tic some wrongs hath cause this by the thieves,
And the mad hare brained Prince hath not the patience
(It seems) for to acquaint me but by war,
And violent eruption into Arms;
It must be so, else can I not imagine
The least occasion why, well we will stand
Upon our strongest guard to keep our land.
In troth sweet Lady you are much to blame
Thus to defer my pleasures, and delude
My longing hopes with trifling vain delays,
I suffer most extremely.
I could laugh
To hear you talk thus; are you so impatient,
You that are borne to such a course of life,—
(And so low fortune) as you cannot stay
A month or two to waite the love and pleasure
Of a Kings daughter, for the which great Princes
Have sued, and served a year for.
Are you then
Of the blood royal, well we'll mix our bloods
Together, so shall mine be royal too;
But wherefore did you tell me that you were
But an Egyptian Lady?
And in that
I did not li•, scarce use equivocation
For Madam is a title that's applied
To Queens sometimes as unto common Ladies.
Why did you keep me in this ignorance
So long, and now at last reveal your self?
To awe your boldness when I saw it grow
To such a height as now; Sir keep your distance.
High words indeed seeming to have a kind
Of reference to Majesty; but tell me
What King begat you?
Not to satisfy
Thy proud demand, but make thee know thy self
And the base wrong thou dost me, do I answer
Unto thy question: understand I am
The mighty Souldans daughter and his heir
Sent by my Father to be married to
The Prince of Persia, when thy barbarous troop
And lawless self enforced a Rape upon me,
For which thou shalt repent, unless thou doe
Make speedy restitution of myself
Unspotted in my honour.
Not such haste
To part, fair Princess, in a fit of choler;
You know not yet my humour nor I yours,
We must participate each others nature
Before we can resolve in coulder blood▪
Uncivil groom dost thou think to enjoy me?
I'll rather prostitute my body to
The lust of a deformed Incubus,
Or ugly Satire, then retain one thought
Of thy lewd loathed embrace•
That's because
You're told they're active in the art of vaulting,
But you shall• find me Madame so dexterious,
As not inferior to them in that kind;
Try my performance.
Thou lascivious man
Thou bestial Goat, how dare thou taint chaste ears
With thy infectious breath? know tic in vain
Further to urge thy lust, for I'm resolved
To run the hazard of a thousand deaths
Rather then to yield unto it.
Foolish woman
Thy rage over comes thy wit, think thou this way
To work upon me? dost thou not perceive
Thou art my prisoneer▪ and what now thou hast
Is all my gift, thy life, thy repu•ation;
Thy wealth and jewels? dost not see when I
Please to command thee to give up those things
Thou hast not power to hold them fear a menu•e▪
And yet art thou so inconsiderate?
Dream not, nor feed this foolish fantasy
Within your mind to think your Father can
Rescue you hence, or your betrothed Lord
The Persian Prince redeem you from my cave,
•lthough they came with gre•• forces far
Then Xerxes or Darius; I am safer
Here in this unfrequented wilderness,
Thus barricaded round with hills and mountains,
Then they in all their strong fortifications,
Their Forts and Castles.
I perceive my error,
And therefore must a little temporise
To prevent outrage.—astde.
Sir, you moved your lust,
But not your love and wooed me in a phrase
That fitter were to be applied unto,
A common whore or strumpet, then a Lady,
Much less a Princess, this I must confess
Inflamed my anger, and enforced me to
Forget my self a little.
I confess
My error too, and crave your pardon Lady,
See how one gentle word hath mollified
My disposition, and clean turned the str•am
Of my full bent desire to be possessed
By force of what I now resolved am
To crave by fair entreaty in the way
Of honest marriage.
Now your stile is good,
And tastes something of civility,
Yet I desire some respi•e to give answer
Unto your suit for two considerations:
First, that I may have time to make my prayers
Unto the shrine of holy Mahomet,
To grant a dispensation of my vow
Made to the Persian Prince, to be his wife:
Next that I be not perjured to my self,
To loose my Virgin girdle, ere my age
Hath numbered twenty springs to reinvest
Our naked mother earth in robes of greene▪
Why did you make, pray, such a foolish vow
To stay a Maid so long?
I did indeed.
What wants now of the time?
But a bare month,
That is not long you know.
Well, I'm content,
Though my desires are apt to climb the tree
Just at this very instant, and to taste
Your dainty maiden fruit, but love is sweeter
If freely granted, then if tan by force,
Therefore I'll stay the time prefixed, and not
Beyond the same a minute, see you doe not
Longer abuse my patience, if you doe,
What love cannot, force shall constrain you to:
Come, will you go?—
I must stay here a little.
I'll wait on you soon; heavens in what narrow straights
Wretched Lucinda have thy fates confined thee?
In what amazed labyr•nth of love
Am I enclosed, and cannot find a clue
To guide me forth, no light, no •all•port?
I love my fellow prisoner, but • hate
The thief Rapinus, how I shall enjoy
The one, and handsomely avoid the other.
A women's wit alas cannot contrive:
How soon I have forgot the Persian Prince?
How soon my self? my eye but glanced on
The beauty o• this stranger, but his look,
His high commanding look, which darted forth
Majestic sparks, captived my yielding heart:
He is though shadowed, that •are famed Amandus,
Damascus Prince, I read the characters
Of majesty deep stamped in his brow;
I'll vent my thoughts unto him, and this cave
Shall help me to his love, or to my grave.
what wilt thou counsel me to doe in the thing you
wot of?
I have told you my opinion already.
But can a woman with any modesty make love
to a man?
Puh, why not in a case of extremity, when the wo∣man
is hot, and the man is cold in the business?
But if I should commit through extreme passion
such a folly, should I not be wondered at, and hated amongst
women for giving an ill example to the world?
Nothing less, but on the contrary, be assured you
shall reap from them infinite love and thanks for laying
them down •uch a president of boldness, but if you dispute
pro &amp; con, thus, and make such objections, you shall never
obtain your desires while you live, I will warrant you.
But dost thou think there is any hope of spy∣ding
in my •uit, upon notice given him of my love▪
No question, Madame, he cannot but most willing∣lie
embrace it, and bless his fortune for so high a favour.
Aye me Sara, I fear I am not so happy, my stars
•oretell not so prosperous an Omen: though I have by signs
and dumb shows, by sighs and amorous glances told him
my affection, yet seems he not to understand that language,
but as insensible of my pain, suffers me to languish in my
torment.
I would fine ask your Ladyship one question, if I
might be so bold, and thereby not incur your displeasure.
Speak thy mind freely, thou shalt give me no
offence at all.
Taking your word for my warrant then, I desire to
know if you be in earnest or in jest, for I cannot believe you
should so soon forget the great Prince of Persia, and dote
so extremely on this stranger, whose rank and quality you
know not, but by conjecture.
Such is the commanding power of love thou
•eest, which is able to doe more impossible matters then
these; I mean sincerely;
Neither have I reason to repent the chance.
No, suppose he be that poor exiled Prince of Da∣mascus,
is he to be compared, or in your good opinion to be
preferred before the puis•ant Persian, one of the greatest
Monarchs of the world?
How foolishly thou talk, dost thou not know
that comparisons are odious, especially in love matters?
counsel me better what to doe, or keep thy thoughts in
thine own bosom.
Madame, my help and furtherance shall not be wan∣ting
in any thing wherein I can doe you service: let your
wit contrive the way according to your desire, and let me
alone to put it in execution.
Then what if I sent thee to him with a letter
stuffed full of affection, would not that be a pretty way to
cover my blushes, and yet discover my love? sure it would,
what think thou Sara?
I cannot but approve your plot exceedingly Ma∣dame,
for if there be then any fault escaped, or any small
breach of maiden modesty made, it shall be imputed to the
ink and paper, which is of too pale a colour to blush.
It shall be so then, get me pen, ink, and paper
presently, but soft, he comes to save me that labour, I am
armed with boldness for the encounter, assist me, Cupped, I
beseech thee.
Fair Princess, here behold before your eyes;
Those whom your curtsy hath made your slaves:
I mean my friends and me, whose thanks, yea lives
We come to tender to you, but alas,
The debt we owe is greater, and the sum
Not to be answered so, yet we beseech you
Take this in part of payment, which we offer
With zealous hearts, and no less• strong devotion,
And though we cannot cancel your great bill,
Impute that to our want, not to our will.
Most courteous Sir, if through my means you have
Enjoyed the benefit of any thing,
I thank my fate• that made me an instrument
Of doing so much good: you shall oblige me
To tell me, since I cannot tell my self
What thing Lucinda did, that could produce
So strong an obligation.
You impose
Too great a task upon me, for weak words
Cannot express it full; Madame, we owe you
First for our lives, then for our liberties,
For cu•ing of our wounds with your fair hand,
And many other favours great besides,
All which we treasure up here in our hearts,
As in a trusty Cabinet.
Sure the man
Seems of so gentle nature, that he would not
Be so unkind, as to repell the suit
Of a poor love-sicke Lady—aside.
Will you grant me
One boon in lieu thereof, and you shall make me
A ten-fold satisfaction.
For your good
We will expose our lives unto all hazards,
For we account them yours, and not our own,
Since by your means we live, and doe enjoy them:
What's your command?
Sir, since you doe acknowledge
You owe to me your life and liberty,
Your cure, and other court••ies besides,
I am endangered now as you were then.
It is now my turn, and I am like to suffer
In all these things, unless your gentle nature
And pity doe relieve me.
How sweet Lady
I doe beseech you comes it? doth the thief
Rapinus dare to offer violence
Unto your chastity, or threat your death
Unless you yield unto him? I will soon
(So much I'm obliged unto your goodness)
Find out a way to send that fiend to hell,
Although I suffer for it twenty deaths,
If this procure your fear.
This is the least,
(Although I know not well how to avoid him)
Of what I suffer.
Let me know it then:
Your life and liberty endangered?
In need too of a cure, and not that way?
Strange mystery, unfold it I beseech you,
That if it lye in my poor power, I may
Make known how much I love and honour you.
Sir, it is a secret, and requires to be
Spoken to you in private all alone.
Should I not be unmannerly to crave
Your friends retirement for a little space?
Madame, there needs no ceremony in
Your Ladyships commands to us your vassals.
Now you can help me by an easy way
Without your hurt, for know I am your Patient,
But am ashamed to lay to you op my wound:
Imagine in what nature it is by these
My tears, my blushes, my abrupted fighes,
My broken speeches, my dejected eyes,
My strange unwonted passions: more, I am
Your prisoner too by the commanding power
Of all subduing love, now it is in you
To cure me, it is in you to give me life
And liberty at once: O be not cruel
Fair Prince, but help a poor distressed Lady,
Who craves but love, and in that •uit your best
Construction: take it not in the worst sense,
Nor think me ought immodest, though I have
Opened my sore which was procu••• by
Your most majestic carriage.
Heavens defend
So great a Princess, and so beautiful,
Of such imperial fortunes, should descend
So low in thought, to look on such a wretch
As I am, being the map of misery,
Griefs Emblem, yea the tennis ball of fortune,
Tossed by her angry Racket evermore
Beneath the line, into a thousand hazards—
For her disport, I love you better Lady
Then so, to work your downfall, and should ill
Requite your favours that way: you that may
For beauty, birth, or fortune, match with any
The greatest Prince of the terrestrial orb.
It were sin in me not to be pardoned,
To wrong you with my love in way of marriage,
Who can assure you nothing for a dower
But sorrow and affliction,
Sure you cannot,
Although you would, conceal your self from me,
Whose love discerning eyes have found you out
To be admired Amandus, and surveyed
Each lineament a part, with such regard
As Painters use in lemming of a piece,
You're drawn within my heart, from head to foot.
I grant it Madam, that I was that Prince
You pleased to name, but now have nothing left me
But the bare title, but that a•ery name,
Poor echo of Damascus, would I might
Loose that and life, the shadow with the substance,
Then I were happy, but my fa•e• alas
I fear reserve me for more misery.
If possible, then I have tasted yet:
Therefore let all avoid me as the plague,
Lest they should be infected with my grief.
Doe not suppose your pleading poverty,
Or ought you can allege, to wrong your self,
Hath power to turn the stream of my affection
Another way then now it holds its course,
Or to repell my argument of love:
No, no, the plea is stronger, though you were
Poo•er then Irui (I invoke as witness•e
Of this my vow the power that made me yours)
Yet would I rather be conjoined to you
In nuptial ba•ds, then be the w•dded wife
Of any other Prince, although he were
Richer then Croesus, and heaven knows I could
Content me better in this prison here,
(So you could love me, and I might enjoy you)
Then in the Persian Palace, if I lye,
Let Cupped shoot you with a lea•en dart,
And with disdain kill poor Lucinda's heart.
O dearest Princess, take deliberation,
And enter into thought of what you are,
Of what I am, and what the Persian is.
Then you wi•l soon call home these wandering thoughts,
And place them where they shall be worth your love:
In me alas they cannot, for although
I had not lost my Country, though my kingdom
Had still been mine, and though I now enjoyed
My former rega•l dignities and state,
Yet should I count my self too mean by far,
To match with you the mighty Souldans heir,
And only daughter, now I scarce deserve
To wait on you in nature of your servant.
Lucinda This shall not serve your turn, these vain excuses
And wrongful reasons urged against your self,
Shall not prevail at all: the more you strive
To stop the current of my swelling passions,
The more they rage within this breast of mine,
And in the end will overflow and break
My heart if you prove cruel, and put off
My hopes with such weak shif•s and poor delays.
Come, grant me love, and seal it with a kiss
As an assurance.
What is this I hear
Spake by Lucinda to this caftive slave,
Come grant me love, and seal with a kiss
As an assurance? well I'll be revenged
By all the Pagan gods; ignoble strumpet
How dare thou wrong me thus, and in my Cave
To court my prisoner? was it for this thou did
Deny my suite, and still from time to time
Delude me with delay, that thou might act
Thy shame, and make me pander to thy lust?
Base Whore was this thy drift? for this abuse
I'll presently enjoy thee, if thou yield
Without constraint, I'll keep thee to my self,
But if thou strive, or make the least resistance
To cross my will, when I have satisfied
My lust at full, I'll put the o'er to be
Used and abused by every common soldier;
Come huswife I must teach you true obedience.
Offers to ravish her.
Help▪ help.
Base villain offer her no wrong,
But turn thee upon me, although unarmed
I dare thy utmost power.
Then thou shalt feel
The fury of my rage, have at thee slave.
Draws his sword and assaults him, Amand. defends
himself with a stool, and at last closing with him,
hath him at this mercy.
Now I will dye thy sword in thy own blood,
Which thou did think to make deep drunk in mine.
O stay thy hand for fair Lucindas sake.
That hastes thy death, &amp; puts me in remembrance
Thou would have ravi•h'd her.
Sir let him die,
And •ree •s all from this captivity,
Never a better time then now to doe it.
Then it is done, take that, and breath thy last,
Heroic Prince now show thy pity on me,
And as thou hast released me from this thief,
And from the violence of loathed lust,
So free me from the violence of love
By taking me unto thy wedded wife:
I will refuse no danger, nay no death
To bear thee company, live here or travel
Throughout the world, I'll Lackey it a foot
With sweet Amandus; can you be so hard
And cruel to me? sure when Ladies woo•
Hard are the shi•tes love doth constrain them too.
No more of this sweet Lady till we have
O•der'd the business that now false upon us:
The thieves we need not fear, for I have them
Firmly at my devotion through distaste
And discontent they did receive against
Rapinus in his life, they will not stir•e
(I know) one foot in his revenge, but rather
Render me thanks for acting of his death;
Come let us go, to better our poor state
We must confirm these men yet in their hate.
But my masters shall wee be still ridden thus, and un∣dergoe
the but then patiently, without seeking remedy or
revenge?
No we'll suffer it no longer, if we do wee shall deserve
Midst ears y'saith.
And Actions horns too for our future fortune.
Then wee are all resolved to doe our best to dispatch
him, are we not?
All the shame of the world befall him that is a••inst it.
And al the bastinadoes that do grow in the deserts light
upon him▪ lets devi•e a way now to work our revenge,
will you study the plot?
Since you refer it to me, I will not be long about it,
lets release the stranger, give him arms, make him our
Captain, and cut Rapinus throat; how like you this?
Excellent well, it cannot choose but advantage us great∣lie,
for the stranger is wonderful valiant, you know wee
had costly experience of it, and he seems of a generours dis∣position
besides, that would not forget such a court∣sie.
This will I believe, so oblige his gentle nature as what∣soever
boot we take, he will not trouble himself with it,
but divide it freely among us; will not this be excellent my
hearts?
But who lies here all this while weltering in his own
blood and we not see him? our Captain Rapinus, tic hee,
come here and congratulate his death,
Blessed accident!
This befell according to our wishes, and hath saved
us the labour to put our design in excution.
Ha Captain do you lie there y'faith, remember how
often you gave me the bastinado, I could now be revenged
upon your dead carcass, but I will now only satisfy my
self with laughing over thy body, ha, ha, ha.
To whom are we bound for this curtsy, I marvel,
I cannot imagine to whose courage to impute it unless to
the strangers.
Tic he, it can be no other, he shall be our new Cap∣taine
for the deed, do you cons•ned to it?
By all means we approve it, he shall have his act pre∣sently.
Come let us find him out, and know how the busi∣ness
passed between Rapinus and him.
Agreed, and offer him our service and recive his com∣mands.
How apt a Soldiers mind is still to range,
And doth desire his office•rs to change,
But stay let us not leave Rapinus body lie here unburi∣ed,
lend me your hand for charities sake.
That's well remembered—exeunt with the body.
VVEheare ill news, Alecto, Perseus
Hath passed his Army over Euphrates
And marches through our Country, all the spoil
That can be used in war his Soldiers practise,
All the hostility that can be thought off,
As burning houses, robbing Villages,
Committing Sacrilege, deflowring Maids,
Ravishing Women, murdering the Men,
And diverse other outrages besides:
Come let us march, I make you General
Of one part of my Army, t'other part
I will command my self, our subjects cries
Are come already home unto our Court;
Beat Drums, sound Trumpets.
Royal Sir there is
A Herald now arrivi'd unto the Court
Sent from the General of the Persian army,
Who craves he may deliver what in charge
Was given him by the Prince.
He shall •e heard,
Admit him to the presence.
Speak your business.
The• this it is my sovereign Lord and Prince,
Demands surrender of the •air Lucinda
The Egyptian Princess his betrothed love,
Upon whose person in your Kingdom here,
There was a rape committed; if she be not
Returned unspotted in her reputation,
And all her goods, her gold and precious jewels
Restored, and a full satisfaction made
Unto the utmost do it, he vows by heaven
To lay Arabia wast, until it be
Reduced unto a wildern•sse, and made
A habitation •or the forlorn Owl,
The Bat, and other birds of dismal night,
That shun and hate th'appearance of the light.
Tell Perseus we doe not doubt his power,
But dare his utmost malice, and because
We would not have him live in ignorance,
Give him to understand that we know nothing
Of what befell the Princess, and this is
The first time that we heard it; for the wrong
He doth us in invading of our land,
Without just cause, he shall be answerable:
So much inform thy master.
It is my duty.
This is strange news, Alecto is it no•?
The Souldans daughter raped, and we not know it
Till now, and yet done in our kingdom too?
How should it be? let us consider of it;
I now have found it, and it is probable,
How think you? may it not be by the thieves
That live among the deserts? so it is
Upon my life, for that way she must pass
To travel into Persia, and we know
Their strength too well: these villains in this war
Will more annoy us then the Persian army:
Heaven look upon us, for we stand in danger,
Between a forra•gne and domestic so:
We sail between the rocks, the shelves, the shores
Of Scylla and Charibdis, yet we may
Escape those dangers, if the immortal Gods
Commit the balance to Astrea's hands,
To weigh our causes; let our fortune be
According to our right, and we agree.
Now fellow soldiers, since you have committed
This place of Captain to me, and submitted
Your selves to my command, I must reduce you
Into another way, another form,
Another course of life more honourable,
And make you worthy of that glorious title
And attribute of soldier, which as yet
You but usurp and wrongfully apply
Unto your selves: I doe assure you this,
You shall not have occasion to complain,
Or to repent the change.
Sir, you shall mould us
Into what form or fashion you please.
Our minds shall be as soft and tractable
To your commands, as Virgin wax unto
Th'impression of the seal.
Then I will give you documents of war,
And rudiments of martial discipline.
But first you must shake off unworthy thoughts,
And stick to virtuous actions, •re you can
Rightly attain this knowledge, you must not
Seek by unlawful means to gather wealth,
Or to extort by violence and wrong,
What doth not rightly appertain to you.
You must not rob poor passengers, nor take
Them prisoners on their way, you •used forget
Your out-rages, your murders, rapes, and the••s,
And put on other habits which may suit
This our profession.
But then how shall we
Subsist and live?
I'll tell you how you shall
More rich then ever, and yet honestly
And honourably too.
What news my friends?
Strange unexpected news we have received,
The Persian army is at hand and ready
To enter in the deserts, and are marching
In hostile manner to the Arabian Court,
Burning and spoiling all the land before them.
But can you understand what moved the Persian
To enter into war against the King,
And to invade his Country?
It is because
He was informed, though falsely, that the rape
On fair Lucinda was committed by
The Kings command, and she detained at Court.
How came you Sirs by this intelligence?
We had it from a prisoner, which our men
Took of the Persians, who it seems, is one
Of the fore-riders of the camp.
Here's work,
And brave employment for you, here you can
Get wealth and honour too▪ and doe your King
And Country service: here's boot enough,
Win it and wear it; now courage my hearts.
Sir, from the top of yonder lofty mountain,
The sentinel discovers dust to rise
From up the champagne country, and doth hear
Drums beating of a march, and trumpets sounding,
Which makes us doubt an army.
Let them come,
We'll stand upon our guard for to receive them,
Yet we'll doe things discreetly too, and not
Give battle rashly, for the Persian army
Is rich and mighty, not for us to deal with
But upon great advantages: attend
My words, we'll lye close in our ambuscadoes
Until we hear the vanguard of their army,
And battle is marched by, then on the rear
We will fall on, and fercely give the charge
Upon the narrow passage, so before
The vanguard and the battle can assist,
We shall cut of their baggage, and retire
With all our wealth into the Caves and Mountains
Safe from the strongest forces of the world;
I'll bring you on and off with honour Sirs.
Go one brave Captain with success, and we
In all thy bold attempts will second thee.
Now fellow soldiers is not this more honourable,
And profitable too? •o beat an army,
Then to oppress poor pilgrims, and the like,
Who travel for devotions sake unto
The tomb of famed Mahomet at Maecha?
Sure you must needs confess it.
We extol
And magnify this change of discipline.
and will conform our selves to any thing
You shall command us.
Yea so much we love,
And honour your brave spirit and resolution,
As these your faithful friends ••ll not more close
Stick to your side in fortunes doubtful chance
Then we, whom you have honoured with the name
Of your poor soldiers.
My kind thanks to all:
Now for this wealth which we have purchased
With glory to our selves, I will distribute
And equally divide it amongst you all:
As for my part, I will not take one denier,
But freely give it you in recompense
Of your good service.
We'll not yield to this,
All shall be yours, our lives too at your service,
And we beseech you take it.
It is a meed
Due to your valours, therefore I command you
Enjoy it freely: now I must acquaint you
Further with my intentions, which shall be
To raise your fortunes, and procure your good.
In brief, I doe resolve forthwith to send
A messenger unto the Arabian King,
Your native Lord, to offer in his aid
All our assistance against the Persian Prince,
And to come over to him with proviso,
That he shall pardon, and no more remember
The trespasses you did commit against him:
Which he will willingly embrace, I know,
And more besides, bestow preferments on you,
Endeared the more unto us by affection
For this our service, which serves as a prologue
To usher in our welcome: condescend you
To this I doe propose?
With willing hearts.
And count it a religious piece of service
To help our King and Country.
I am glad
You are so altered in your inclination
And rudeness of your nature: but where is
The fair Lucinda, and old Consolario?
Fair Lady, welcome, you have made this place
Poor by your absence.
But you have enriched it
With your fair presence Sir.
I'm sorry Lady
That we must part so •o•no: the Prince of Persia
Is come to fetch you with a mighty army,
Who claims you as his wife, therefore in justice
And conscience too, we cannot hold you from him:
You shall have all that is your own, and more,
We'll wait upon you as becomes the state
Of such a mighty Princess, with a guard
To safe conduct you to the Persian camp.
How is your mind disposed?
Unkind Amandus,
More cruel far then proud Narcissus was
Unto the constant Nymph that loved him so,
More salvage hearted then the boy Atones,
That scorned the love of Venus, these were never
Half so beloved as you, yet will you leave me
To dye in your disdain, and put me over
To him I cannot love? unkind Amandus!
Sweet Lady, think I doe prefer your good
Before mine own, misconstrue not my words,
For I doe speak this for your great advantage,
If you conceive me rightly, but we will not
Force you to any thing against your will:
I'm sorry that you will participate
Our evil fortunes, and refuse to live
The Persian Empress, it was for this I did
Persuade you unto what I did.
O let 〈◊〉.
Go with you Sir, and if you cannot love me
In nature of your wife, yet I beseech you
Respect me as your handmaid, who's still ready
To waite on your command.
You do confound me
And make me blush to hear so great a Princess
To speak to me in such an humble key,
Who do confess my self your lowly vassal;
And since you're bent so much to wrong your self
And to forget your state, my life shall stand
'Tweene you and danger; Madam you have heard
Our resolution to assist and help
T•' Arabian King against the Prince of Persia;
Will you go over with us?
Where you go
There doe I bend my journey.
Consolario
I must dispatch you to the Arabian King
About this business, wherein I'll instruct you]
Particularly more before you go.
My faith and care shall not be wanting in
The trust you shall commit unto my Charge;
How I may doe you service is my study.
So then al's done but this, to crave you hand
And lead you wheresoec'r you shall command.
So let this most inhospitable Land
Suffer our wrath, so let the whip of war
Inflicted on this country by our hand
Lash them severely that have violated
The laws of Nations, and therein committed
What even the base Barbarians hate to think off;
Now let the speedy messenger of death
The king of weapons, called the sword unsheathe him.
And drink his fill in blood, let every soldier
Freely enjoy his pleasure, make his pillage
And do the greatest outrage that he can;
We will no longer now suppress our fury
But let it burn unto full height, the cries
Of ravished Maids and Virgins shall no more
Enter our ears, the humble supplications
Of undone Orphants shall not move my pity,
So much I am incensed against the King.
I would divert you from this cruelty
Great Prince if you would hear me, and allege
Some reasons too to fortibie my speech,
First, tic a beauteous country, and the world
I think not parralels it, next you do
Intend it for a conquest, will you spoil
So sweet a habitation, and lay waste
A seat will make you proud to be enthorn'd in?
If this be not sufficient to induce you
To spare the rod of vengeance, let respect
Unto your Princely same with-hold your hand;
What sordid blot, what foul aspersion can
More taint the candid honour of a Prince
Then tyranny upon poor seely wretches:
You know as much my Lord, and histories
Show many soul examples of such tyrants
Whose names live in reproach to these our times:
But Sir have you received the news? my mind
W as big to bring it forth, before your speech
Hindered the birth.
News I hear none but that
The fearful King dares not fight a battle,
We must enforce him to it, or pursue him
As greedy grey-hounds do the heartless Hares,
Till we have tan his Crown and Life away;
Now what is that you hear?
Quite contrary
To what you last delivered •or they say
He is prepared to fight, and with his army
Means speedily to seek you, all the thieve
That in your passage through the de•••s did
So damnify your army, have submitted
Unto their King, and serve him in this war;
His force is much augmented, and you're like
To to have a speedy trial of your fortune.
And after that a speedy strong possession
Of all this Kingdom, I am confident
That with our breathes we shall destroy them all
Powered forth in anger, our great multitudes
Will scatter them as Wolves a flock of Sheep,
Suppose his army doth amount unto
Some fifty thousand men, which is the most
His strength can raise, our army doth exceed it
By half the number put away our horse,
Whose gallantry is spoken of by all
The Nations of the World, and held to be
The best for service in the universe:
Can he resist our Force? or the Arabian
Stand up against the Persian in a battle?
Speak your opinion.
Sir you know the chance
Of war is doubtful, and plumed victory
Doth oftentimes deceive great expectations,
Besides dame fortune is a fickle Lady
We know not how to trust her, but if things
Be justly carried with an equal hand,
If juggling be not used amongst the fates,
Tic evident your army must overcome,
But judge we cannot till we see th'event.
We doubt not nor despair of the success
But from this talk, I have been oftentimes
Resolved to ask you, but till now forgot
What might be gathered hence that fair Lucinda
Your Princess, in this time of her restraint
Solicits nothing for her liberty
Nor writes a word unto us of her state,
We hear she lives at the Arabian Court.
I heareso too, and worthily entreated
According to her bith and high degree•
This makes me to admire, nay to suspect
The stream of her affection is diverted
Another way, and holds no constant course,
It must be so, else being so entertained
And high respected in all points of honour
Would any man conjecture, that the King
Would hold her against her will, if she desired
To come unto us, now she hath forgot us,
And may be too, her honour and good name,
Then we are gross abused, fooled with a match
And must be full revenged; I have no patience,
My Lord Ambassador doth your opinion
Go hand in hand with mine?
Then I should be
A traitor to my King; dare I presume
To think the Princess should distain her honour?
Far be it from my thoughts, Sir I must tell you
You are too rash in passing such a censure,
And your too unadvised tongue exceeded
The decent bounds prescribed him not to touch
A Princess reputation.
Thou durst as well
Have eaten fire, as uttered these bold words,
If it were not for the laws that are observed
Between all Nations, that Ambassadors
Be well entreated, this great privilege
Hath brought forth this presumption; know your self
And how far you may go, else I shall be
Though loath, a breaker of the ancient custom.
Sir, I'm commanded not to be in place
Where I shall hear my King, or any branch
Sprung from that royal stock traduced in fame,
But to make answer roughly, not to stand
A silent auditor, or a dumb statue,
Without or sense or motion.
I commend thee
Old man, and love thee for it, we will be
Soon reconciled, and will lay the ••ult
Of our contention to the heate of youth
And choler of old age; now our affairs
Call us to fight a batell, all my thoughts
Must be employed in this, whereby I shall
With glory rise, if not with honour fall.
Now whilst the trumpets sound, drums beat alarm▪
The cannons roar, the armies join and charge,
(Which sometimes were the music we delighted)
Must old Arabia lay his arms aside,
And sit at home with Ladies by command
Of natures law although his life and crown,
Lye at the doubtful hazard of the day:
Heaven bless ou• 〈◊〉 we that cannot fight
Will send our prayers up to the Gods for aide,
And wake there sleeping justice with our cries:
Great Princess you are sad to see us so
And of your silken disposition seem
To have a fellow feeling of our sorrow,
Cheer up, we doe bes•each you, and dear daughter
Be joyful too, we shall have good success
My better Genius tells me.
Who commands
Great King your army against the enemy?
The valiant Prince Amandus, whom at length
We did persuade to take that charge upon him.
Then be assured the victory is yours,
For all things prosper under his conduct.
Madam you doe revive•• our dying spirits
With words of comfort, happy time that made us
Enjoy your conversation, blessed occasion
That brought the noble Prince unto our aid
Whom heavens defend from danger and return
Home safe conqueror cround with victory.
Here comes a Lord with news, what tidings bring you?
To whether side doth victory incline,
And bend her flight?
it is doubtful yet my Lord
Where she will •ight, she hovers in the air
Uncertain where to rest her, sometimes ready
To light upon the prince his wh••• parilion,
Sometimes upon the Persian•; had we no•
Fought at such disadvantage as we doe,
The glory of the day had not so long
Between us been disputed: never was
An army better ordered for a battle,
Then ours is by the Prince, 〈…〉
Doth wonders in the field 〈…〉 their troops,
And strong battalions, 〈…〉
Wisely retraits with honour: hard's the fight
That is between them, and the issue stands
Yet in suspense.
We must attend more new•s•
Another Lord intelligence• comes.
How speeds the battle?
Sir, it was endangered
On our side when, I left it for the mighty
And strong brigadoes of the enemy:
Brake the battalion of the Duke Al•cto,
And charged quite through the body of that 〈◊〉
Where he himself commanded if he be
Alive or dead, escaped or taken prison•••
I have no certain knowledge.
Then our army
Is half defeated, for Alecto doth
Command as great a part as Prince Amandus:
But let me not despair, until we hear
The utmost trial.
Long live mighty King.
I bring you joyful news of victory,
The Prince hath won the field, redeemed the Duke
Out of the hands of death, and when the battle
In all men's judgement was snpposed lost,
He by his valour, and his wisdom both,
By none but by the more taneers assisted,
Recovered it again, and took the prey
Out of the Persians jaws, routed their troops,
Brake their battalions, and reduced their order
Into confusion, fighting hand to hand,
He brought the Persian Prince unto his mercy.
And took him prisoner, then the Persians fled,
And we pursued them; great the slaughter is,
And infinite the riches that is tan
In costly plate and jewels, gold and silver
Was never a more braver overthrow.
Each common soldier now is like a Captain,
With scarlet hose, buff coat, and tossing feather,
There's no distinction in their habits seen.
Thanks to the gods for this our victory,
Next, to their instrument Damascus Prince,
Three times a day we'll smoke your sacred altars
With sweet perfumes, and come with adoration
To offer to your shrines, three times a night.
The Priest shall sprinckle o'er with blood of beasts
Your sacred places, and with zeal perform
The ceremony of your sacrifices.
The Prince Amandus, and the Duke Elect•.
Are come in triumph wi•h their prisoners,
And wait your royal pleasure.
Pray them from us
They would be pleased to enter.
Unto you 〈…〉
The Prince of Persia 〈…〉 the chance
Of war hath made me master of: I freely
Give unto your possession, all the wealth
Is gotten in this Persia• 〈…〉
And I am glad my 〈…〉
Occasion to me, whereby I have shown
Unto your Maj•sty my love and •••vice.
Victorious Prince•, sen• to us from the gods,
(Whom we may term the 〈◊〉 of our Country)
Thy same reward thee fully, for we cannot,
Let the shrill trum•et of thy virtues blaze thee
Throughout the world, 〈…〉 be raised
And trophies built to speak they living praise.
Let every piece and picture 〈…〉
Be gazed upon by 〈…〉 eyes,
And this thy conquest crowned Laurel boughs.
Prince Perseus welcome, we receive you now
I know a most unwilling guest, you shall not
Be entertain 〈◊〉 your royal state,
Although our 〈…〉
Please you salute these Ladies, one of them
I doubt not but you know.
The 〈…〉
But who's the other 〈…〉
As diamonds glass.
That lovely touch hath filled
My veins with a new fire, and quite put out
The former flame within me.
Madame, I crave the honour for to kiss
Your Highness Princely hands.
My fathers servant.
And trusty subject, se•• i• his affy••s
To foreign Princes, I am glad to see you,
We shall have private time to talk at large
Of our affairs.
My royal guests I fear
We keep you from your rests, whose wearied bodies
Would fine enjoy the benefit of sleep,
Toiled with the sweating labour of the day:
Please you to walk, we'll show you to your lodgings.
You grace me Sir.
Madame, I under stand
No honour like to this, to kiss your hand.
Most fair and beauteous Princess,
My thoughts did tell me as I lay abed,
There was a wonder to be seen this morn,
A Sun whose glorious beams eclipsed Apollos
As much as he doth Cinthias, she the stars.
I find they were no liar•, for behold
I see it verified, my gazing eyes
Are come to bless, and to adore your rise,
Fair Prince, it was some fall•e suggesting dream
Abused your sleep, and wronged your expectation.
You find not what was promised, though your wit
Would fine excuse the leaving of your bed
So soon for nothing: doe you use to stir
So early in a morning?
Seldom Madame.
But if such Nymphs attend Auroras train,
I'll hate to be a fl•ggard, and more often
Frequent this place, the garden of delight.
You are not like another time to jeer me
For early rising.
Nay, fair Princess leave not
This good and wholesome exercise, the graces
Will dye for sorrow then, the mounting Lark
Will not read o'er his matins, nor the Thrush
Warble forth ditties with delightful throat:
Fair Philomela shall no more be heard
To chant and charm the hearers of her songs;
And all the other winged choristers
Will hang the head, and weep in silent tears,
If fair Phaenicia grant no audience:
Hark how they doe salute you, every one
Striving to paste, and to excel the other
In sweet harmonions notes to please your e•re•:
O what a consort's this! if you but mark it,
There is a certain mutual emulation
Amongst these pretty birds, whose musick's sweetest,
Hath attracted most your kind attention,
Proud to be overheard by beauties Queen.
Sir, you have learned a pretty art indeed,
To understand the languages of birds,
And tell their meanings: I have read of some
Could well interpret that way, but believe not:
You use it row in a poetic sense,
And so I take it, I should make another
Construction of their singing that they chide me,
And say I am not modest to adventure
Alone without my Maids into the garden.
The wronged Philomela most of all
Urges her grief, and bids me take example
Of her too much credulity of man:
I was to blame to come so weakly guarded
I must confess, nor would I change a word
With any other man besides your self
Alone in such an hour, so much I trust
Your virtue noble Prince, and worthy tho•light•.
My humblest thankee for this high privilege•
Bright goddess that you deign me, let my lips
Pay duteous tribute to your lily hands
I doe bes•each you
Sir I now leave you,
For fear I should be missed, and so f•ll ••der
The censure of black to•nges, which take delight
To spot the reputation of a maid;
I should be loath to give the world occasion
Even of the least suspicion, yet I must
Dispense with my return a little longer
To doe one friendly office in behalf
Of a distressed Princess, you may guess
The scope of my intent in these few words.
Who doe you mean, the fair Lucinda Madam?
Whose angry stars made so unfortunate,
As to bestow her love on me unworthy,
Whose state is such, as that I cannot make
Reciprocal return of her affection.
I must impute that to your cruel nature,
(Pardon me Sir) and to no other cause,
Else what should make the Princess• so contemned?
Is beauty wanting? no, the envious't wretch
That breathes this ayre, must be enforced to say,
Her portion's large that way, the curious't eye
Can see no blemish in her beanteous face.
Is youth decayed then? no, it were sin to think it,
For flowers and Roses spring up in her cheeks,
Half white, half red, most purely intermixed.
Is virtue banished? O me thinks my tongue
Profaned is for asking such a question
So much improbable! will you allege
She is not great enough in birth or fortune?
That will not stand in ••w, for twill be proved
She is the greatest Princess of the world;
If beauty, youth, virtue, and high descent
Accompany her greatness: what is more
To be required in a princely Bride?
I grant it Madam, that she comes not short
Of what you speak her, but abounds in all
Perfections of the body and the mind,
But yet this cannot bind me to become
Disloyal to the Saint, whose temple was
Long since erected in this heart of mine,
Before I saw Lucinda, I'll adore
No other goddess in my thoughts but she,
To whom I sacrifice my heart and soul;
I know your virtue's such, as not to urge
(My reasons thus revealed) a thing unlawful:
O no, you hate to further such a suit,
Fair Princess, so unjust.
Would I were she
He loves with such devotion, but alas
I doe despair my fortune.
I have done.
Far be it from my thoughts to make a breach
Of love and loyalty between two hearts,
United in themselves; but since I have
Made this discovery, I beseech to know,
(Pardon a women's curiosity)
The Mistress of your thoughts, I must not be
The second time denied.
You doe impose
Such a command upon me, as I know not
If I shall more offend to disobey
Your will in saying nothing, or in uttering
What you will have me speak; if it displease you,
The fault is yours, not mine, for I had been
Content to smother up my woe• in silence;
Know then, sweet Princess, that I loved as soon
As fourteen years crept on upon my age,
A beauteous picture, such as rare Apelles
Durst ne'er presume for fear, to imitate,
Lest he should come far short, and shame himself:
I served this shadow with a z•alous heart,
Six years, but yet the heavenly substance knows not
How much I suffered for her love so long,
I dare proceed no further.
Come, you must
Unfold this d•rke Enigma, I doe long
To bea•e your story to the end; but if
You be so modest, let me see the picture,
And •le disp•nc• the trouble of your speech.
Madame it is yours, 〈◊〉 doth the blushing morn
Cast a most pure vermilion on her cheeks
When Phoebus doth salute her, wonder not
Admired Godesse that I am so bold,
To court a beauty doth deserve the stile
Of more then mortal, love compelled me to
This high presumption, and confirmed me in it
By telling that his mother loved a mortal,
Iuno and Pallas did the like, he swore,
Yea chaste Diana though she were so coy,
Cupped will be deposed upon the book
Would sport in private, upon Litmus top,
With fair Endimion once a shepherds boy;
Descend a little from your heavenly state,
And look upon a wretch, who lays his life
Now at your mercy; can you grant me love
And life, divine Phaenicia.
Noble Prince,
My tongue can now not sound the negative,
Although I fine would, for my heart commands
That instrument of speech who in this thing
Is all affirmative; I never could
Dissemble what I thought, and therefore tell you
I'm yours, if you be mine, so firm united
Unto your love as death shall not di••love
The gordian knot is tied between us two:
But Sir we doe forget our selves to stay
So long together here, suspicious eyes
Will overlook our actions, and I fear
Alectos malice and his jealousy,
See where he passes by, we are discovered,
Come let's away, next meeting shall conclude,
If fates doe say amen, loves interlude.
Madam we hear you're fallen of from us
In your affection, and prefer Amandus
In your best thoughts before the Persian Prince,
How can you answer this, and save your honour?
I'll lay the fault (if any be) on Love,
Chide him not me; I was obliged to
The valour of Amandus for my life
And honour, when they both endangered were
By fierce Rapinus, was not this a tie
To make me love him?
Yes but not so much
To dote upon him as I hear you doe,
Your reputation I must tell you Lady
Suff•rs reproac• &amp; scandal, and herein
You undergo, the censure of bad tongues
Which will not cease to blaze you.
Sir you are
A most unworthy Prince to tax my fame,
I never thought you other, though I were
Enforced to entertain your love embassage,
My heart ne'er condescended to my journey,
For fame had told me what you were though rich
In the external fortunes of the world,
Yet poor in the internal faculties
And virtues of the mind, which do adorn
A Prince more then his greatness; I disclaim
All interest you can or may allege
In my affection, for I scorn the man
Shall ques•ion my good name.
This doth confirm
Your foul disloyalty, your own tongue almost
Tells me you have been false, I do believe it,
Else would you not have broke your plighted faith,
Nor staid with poor. Amandus when you might
Come over unto me without disturbance;
Is he to be put in scale with me?
An exile banished from his native home,
A poor distr•ss' d Pilgrim? what although
He were sometimes Damascus petty Prince,
He now is but a beggar, and at best,
When most he flourished in his 〈◊〉 and fortune,
Was then but worthy to attend my train,
And could you be so prodigal of love
And five•urs on this man, as to adventure
The shipwreck of your honour and your oath,
The high displeasure of the King your Father,
And your perpetual ruir• I am glad
The match is broken off, and by your means,
I am not guilty of the breach of faith.
Were you endowed with both the Indies wealth
And were the daughter of great Alexander,
Were you ten times more fair then you are,
By al the gods we worship and adore,
I would not marry you to wear a Crown
Action should lay claim too; Perseus bed
I trow, deserves to have a Maiden-head.
Stay, in the mighty Souldans Name my King
I do defy thee unto mortal war
For this base wrong, and foul contagious spot
Thy leprous mouth hath vomited against
The Princess reputation, look to be
Called to a strict account for this abuse.
I do not fear thy King, but fleight his force
As weak and feeble to encounter mine
He durst not look our country in the face
In angry arms, we are more apt and likely
To enter on his confines with an army.
And be taken prisoner, valiant Prince,
As in this Country with so small a force;
You'ave reason sure to boast your mighty power
Tic so redoubted by your wit and valour,
Experience shows it.
Lady of lost honour
Your jeering cannot patch your broken credit,
I will divulge you, and your Fathers Kingdom
Shall pay the wrong you did me,
Just heavens bear witness of mine innocence,
And clear me of this foul aspersion which
This villain casts upon me undeserved,
If I have plaid false, let the greatest plagues
You can inflict fall on me, let the earth
Gape and devour me, let your thunderbolts
Light on my head, and strike me to the center,
But if I'm guitl•sse (as you know I am)
Return your plagues on him that is the author
Of those my wrongs, and let him justly suffer
The utmost of your rage, that by his fate
The world may know his scandal was but hate.
Nephew we understand how intimate
And dear you are unto the Persian Prince,
How much he honours your society
Above all oath•rs, you can well inform us
What entertainment he doth give his fortune,
And how a prisoner suites his lofty mind.
At first he stormed and cursed his angry stars,
Reviled the fates, and railed against the gods,
Refu•'d to eat or drink, banished all sleep
From entering in his eyes, locked up himself
Within his private study all alone,
Comm•nding none upon his high displeasure
Should offer to disturb his meditation:
His high swollen heart, was big with angry passion
Until another far more powerful wrought
A contrary effect, and that was love,
For gazing on the Princess peerless beauty
With surfeiting delight, a sudden shaft
Sent from the curious circlet of her eye
Stroke him unto the heart, and there withal
 The winged archer, sprung up from his stand
And took him prisoner, now 〈◊〉 languishes,
But pleasingly doth take this second chance,
Submits with patience to the will and pleasure
Of fair Phaenicia Lady conquers,
And glories to be manacled by her
Whose prison he esteems, and doth prefer
Before the Palace of the greatest Kings.
This thing is motioned to us; how think you
Can I bestow her better, or •end out
A marriage greater or more honourable?
You cannot though you sought the spacious world
From one end to the other—I must turn
My thoughts unto as many several shapes.
As Proteus used—
Have you proposed this thing unto the Princess?
Not yet but now we do intend to do it:
Go bid Phaenicia hither to repair
Unto our presence, we must speak with her.
How will she entertain the motion think you?
She cannot sure dislike or disapprove it,
What's your opinion Nephew?
I should think so,
But for one bar that lies in the way
Were that tan off al scruple were removed.
Did you command me hither to repair
Unto your presence Sir?
I did Phaenicia,
And thi's the business, daughter you perceive
My care and study of your future good,
And Fatherly affection: I am old
And cannot live long by the course of nature,
If I might see thee married as becomes
Thy state and fortune ere I left the world,
And settled well my Crown for ••y possession,
I then should welcome death, come when it would,
And these gray hairs descend into my grave
Without disturbance, there is off••ed now
A marriage, shall advance thy regal state
Above the clouds, and make thee overtop
The greatest Queens and Empresses that are.
Unless it be Amandus I shall be
The most unhappiest Princess of the earth 
Please you my royal Father to acquaint me,
Who is the party meant?
The Persian Prince,
He loves and serves you with a strong devotion,
Yea doth even jdolize you in his heart
His saint and goddess; he hath se'd unto me
My liking might procure you to his wife,
And I have granted what he did demand;
I know your virtue's such and your obedience
As not to stand against our will and pleasure,
Especially when it presents you nothing
But what is for your honour and high fortune.
Please you to hear me, this you do propose
Is most unlawful, and my conscience tells me
It were a sin to think off: for you know
The Prince of Persia is betrothed to
The beautiful L•cinda, and shall I
Be guilty of the breach of faith between them?
Far be it from me; I believe he is
Inconstant in his love, and apt to change
From one unto another, his large titles
Shall never win me to his wavering humour,
I rather would content me with a match
Inferior far so I might marry virtue,
In him indeed I cannot, for not only
F•me but experience manifests his vices.
Come, c•me, you are a foolish girl to make
These vain excuses to put off your good,
You •o presume •oo much up•n our love
And tender nature, we have been •oo ••nd
And given you too much of your will; unless
You do conform your self to our command,
We shall be are o'er you a severer hand:
Get out my sight, and think upon your duty.
Is this not strange Alecto, that my daughter
Is so averse unto her good? you told me
Just as she entered that there was a bar
Lay in the way might chance to stop the match,
What is it prithee that we may remove it?
She loves Amandus Sir, and he loves her,
I over heard their cour•ship in the garden,
Their amorous discourse, and protestations
Of love and service, such affection shown
In action, gesture, speech, as greater was not
Expressed between fair Hero and Lender:
Their eyes stood fixed upon each others face,
Their tongues were sometimes mute and could not utter
The abundance of their hearts, then would their sighs
Supply that silence, till they had recovered
The instrument of speech to make it move,
I never saw more passion used in love.
This makes me wonder much that her ambition
Bears such an humble wing, we must not suffer
This business to run on, what though we are
Bound to Amandus in a high degree,
Yet not so much his benefits oblige us
As to confer our Daughter and our Crown
Upon his merits, whose poor state is such
As he can give her nothing for a Dower:
This must nor shall not be, our full inde•four
Shall be employed this love to break and sever.
Why how now noble Prince, within a dump?
How come you so dejected in your thoughts
I do beseech you? hath your love sped ill
Unto the fair Phaenicia, or some other
Ill accident befall you, that you are
So melancholy Sir?
My dearest friend,
Welcome; the mistress of my thoughts hath slain me
With too much cruelty alas, for when
I marched with my army led by love,
And came before the fortress of her beauty,
To lay my siege there, how she played upon me
From all her batteries, but when I began
To make approach. then from her angry eyes
Flew balls of wilde-fire, and grenades followed,
Which scorched and rent my heart, but last of all,
The cannon of her mouth so thundered on
My poor besieging thoughts, as I was fine
To raise my siege in haste, and get me gone,
This is the poor success of my design.
Do ye know Sir what's the cause you speed so ill?
I have been thinking on it, but cannot lay
The blame on any thing but fortunes malice,
Can you inform me better?
Would I could not.
I have found out Amandus hath her heart,
By what smooth guile, or Siren oratory
He won her to himself; I am not able
To give you satisfaction, or to go•sse it:
This ancient enemy of yours and mine,
(For who stands ill affected unto you,
Shall ne'er affected be by me your friend)
Hath now the second time deceived your match.
Wrong of all wrongs! disgrace of all disgrace!
So to be cheated of two princely brides:
Sir, you must be revenged, deeply revenged,
Or else your Princely name will be reproached
With foulest infamy that can be spoke.
Blind men and boys will sing you in the streets
In Ballads, and at length twill grow a proverb,
So patient as the Prince of Persia,
If you sustain those injuries which lye
So heavy on your Princely reputation.
I am even burst with rage and jealousy,
That villain, vagabond, that enegado,
Borne to be author of my sufferings,
Shall not out-live one day; I am incensed
Beyond all measure, and I cannot longer
Contain my self, I'll find that beggar out.
Stay Sir, be patient, and doe things discreetly,
I'll join with you, and have a hand as deep
Or deeper as your self in your revenge,
For the great love I bear you: by the gods
I am as much touched with your wrongs, and am
As zealous in your cause, as you your self.
And now to work to bring our ends to pass,
I have a dainty powder here that was
Ordained for such a pu•pose, which will work
Effect unto ou• wish i• it bu• fall
Into his cup, or light upon his hai•e,
Twill soon di•p•tch him 〈◊〉 po•der hence,
Such virtue is there•in: we sh•• •••rupt
His B•rber by rich 〈◊〉 or by some other
Unthought of way yet, 〈◊〉 the same
To be employed and 〈◊〉 upon the Patient
This physic is ordained for 〈◊〉 you this,
Or shall we yet devise some 〈…〉?
These figs are too too common, and besides,
It doth not suit the honour of a Prince
By such a way of 〈…〉
Destruction to his foe; although Amandus
Deserve from me an ignominious death,
Yet because he is a Prince, and bred in war,
I•••in would have him, like a soldier dye
Nobly, by sword or pistol.
He shall fall then
According to your will and in this manner
If you approve it Sir, what if you send
A challenge to him for to meet you single,
A foot or horseback, in the field to answer
These shameful wrongs he did you? I will be
Ready to rescue you when I perceive
You need my help with certain friends of mine,
Who will lye close the while, and undiscovered,
Until we see you have the worst, then forth
We'll break, and soon dispatch that traitor Prince•.
This, noble Duke, is daintily devised,
I shall be grateful ever to your love,
And show it in a large and ample manner,
Well I'll dispatch my challenge instantly.
I build upon your aid, you will not fail me
In time of my extremity.
The floods
Shall fail to pay their tribute to the sea,
Before I break with noble Perseus.
I'm confident of thee my dearest friend,
Adieu, until we meet, our work to end.
This now begins to work as I would wish;
The shallow wetted Persian thinks my aims
Doe bear a wing with his, and my ambition
Is bounded by his love: I fished to take
His good opinion with mine angle wit,
Not to advance his ends, but work mine own.
Alas poor Prince, he thinks I am his friend,
And on that plat-forme grounds his resolution:
He is deceived, I'm friend unto my self,
And enemy to him as to Amand••.
I hate them both, as being both •y rivals:
Rivals unto my love, and to my kingdom:
Neither must live, neither survive the other.
I'll let them sight till one of them be killed,
The Persian shall in vain expect relief,
Although distressed: the conqueror shall dye
By me and my associates: these remove•d
The way unto my Crown, lies smooth and easy;
The Princess sure will break her heart for grief.
The King I'll poison, then Alecto reign
King of Arabia, crowned by thy brain.
A furious challenge, and it speaks the man
All in a fire that sent it, but extremes
Are seldom permanent, I doubt twill prove
But like a sudden flash that's soon burnt out:
This is the time and place, but how comes it
The Persian is so tardy? this proud paper
Stuffed full with ostentation, made me think
He would not be the last man in the field.
What, is his courage cold, or doth he now
Begin to take advised deliberation
Upon the matter, that he stays so long?
I should not think so neither, for a Prince
Cannot so much forget his reputation,
No sure, he'll come, some business of import,
I doe believe, detains him; I'll attend
His leisure here with patience•, if my thoughts
Would but descend a little from their height,
I would consider too what should beget
This fierce challenge, but he comes, I must
Prepare to entertain him.
Here before me?
This honour I could hardly spare you Sir,
You came before the hour appointed, else
I could not be prevented.
Punctually
I did observe the time, but to what purpose
Are we come hither? to discourse and talk,
And nothing •ls? I doe expect some doings,
Some wonders too by you performed upon me,
If I may credit this your salutation.
Is the •um vanished?
Thou shalt find it burn
Asresh to fierce• flames, it was my goodness
That raked it up in ashes, lest it should
Consume thee, and thou die in ignorance,
Before thou knew th'occasion, now I'll tell thee.
Lucindas wrongs and mine c•ll on my sword
To doe the office of revenge upon▪
Thy treacherous head, thou did dissolve the knot
Was tied between us two, and alienatest
Her heart from me, thou robst her of her honour,
And strumpettedst her fame, and not contented
With this abuse, thou dost proceed yet further
To doe me mischief with false filed tongue,
To wrest the fair Phaenicia from my love:
These are gresse inj•ries, a•d such as cannot
Be undergone with patience, yet if thou
Wilt urge thy suit no further to this Lady,
But give up all thy right in her to me:
I will forget thy former injuries,
And count thee for my friend.
Coward, villain,
Art thou my rival in Phaenicias love?
And doe I suffer thee to breathe a minute
To utter these •old words, these defamations,
These lies and slanders; know Phaenicia hates
Thy sight as a pernicious Basilisk;
Here farther, read my mind.
Thou see my breath
Fails, if thou art a Prince, and nobly minded,
Thou wilt a little intermit the fig•t.
Breath then a •ittle lo•ger, though I might
•justly deny it, since we are not tied
To any such conditions in a duel:
But wherefore doe you cast your sight about?
I doubt some treachery, come, I'll delay
The time no longer, there have at thee Prince.
•uard well thy life, it is endangered.
This may endanger thine if it hap right.
I faint and dye, hell light upon Alecto,
And all the suriesrend his soul in pieces;
False perjar'd villain.
I doe sm•ll a plot
Laid for my life, his words betoken something.
How's this • the noble Prince of Persia slain,
And his bold murderer triumphing o'er
His slaughtered body? come, my noble friend
Shall not dye unrevenged.
If there be any
Princely or royal blood within thy veins,
Distain it not or shame by such a fact,
To fight at such foul disadvantage with
A wounded wearied man, y•t in this state,
Though faint with loss of blood, dismiss these men,
And I will try my fortune out with thee,
And if I fall, I'll say the art noble too.
No, if thou liv'st, my fortunes then must dye:
I aim, man, for the kingdom, and to gain
The love of fair Phaenicia, thou art a bar
That hinders both, there•ore must be removed:
This plot I did contrive, not with intent
To work thy end alone, but Perseus too;
Now it is finished, make an easy passage
For life to issue forth me dear associates,
There's one gap more, a floud-gate large enough.
Most impious wretch, think thou the gods a∣bove
Will favour thy so damnable attempt?
Think thou to scope the justice of the heavens,
And to hood-wink the gods? no, though thou hast
Proceeded thus far in thy villainies:
Though thou hast slain me by thy base treachery,
My mind foretells thou shalt be soon cut off,
And all thy hopes destroyed.
Where is my Prince?
Where is he? torment to my wounded heart?
Weltering in his own blood.
How? heavens defend,
What impious hand hath done so f•ule an act?
Speak Noble Prince, speak quickly.
Worthy friends,
You're fitly come here to revenge my death,
There stands the villain, and his treacherous crew
Who did procure it.
We will sacrifice
Their lives with speed, to pacify your spirit;
But that's a poor requital for our loss:
Villains, our swords must send you hence to hell,
Go, and the furies give you entertainment.
Dear Sir, how doe you? speak to Consolario,
Speak to your tutor, op these lovely eyes,
And look with pity on the aged face
Of him that dyes for sorrow of your wounds.
Dear son, speak comfort to thy fathers heart,
(For so you bid me stile you to my death)
I faint, yet let one word come from you month,
To tell me that you he••e my g••vous moan.
And I shall die in peace.
Dear Consolarie
Thy ore• have waked me from a pleasing sleep,
I love thee still in death and after death.
But I'll die first, so, so my heart strings break.
Help, help, my Fathers fallen in a •wound.
He's dead sweet Prince and passed recovery.
I'll soon be with him, for I must not loose
His loved society; have you revenged
My death, upon Alecto and the rest?
Tic done, dear Sir, see where the viliaines lie.
Thanks dearest friends, one thing before I die
I shall request you if my failing breath
Will give me leave to utter it, tic this,
Tell fair Ph•nicia my beloved Princess
The story of my death, tell how I love her,
And grieve to leave her comfortless alone.
I cannot fully speak my mind unto you,
For death stops up the passage of my speech;
Adieu dear friends, adieu, Phaenicia
I dye thy servant, sweet Phaenicia.
Farewell brave Prince, we thy unworthy subjects
Can but lament thy loss, and curse the fates
For their unjust decrees; O could they not
Have spared the chief of Princes to give lustre
Unto the world? could not they see his beauty
And virtue shining in their glorious Orbs?
His youth fair blooming? cruel destinies!
Come now your shoulders honour with his Coarse
Sweeter then all the perfumes of the Realm,
Some to bring Consolarios body off;
We'll see this fatal Land Arabia shall
Provide them both a royal Funeral,
Do I yet breath and live when he that was
The comfort of my life lies dead and breathless?
Can I behold another Sun but that
Which shined from his majestic countenance,
Eclipsed now by death, procured by treason:
O heavens grant freedom to my troubled spirit
To break this prison of mortality,
And so get loose with wings of swift desire
To meet my lover in the Elision fields.
O how I languish here! hark blessed spirit
Of my departed friend (for I believe
Thou dost refine this air) hark to my woes;
Do not condemn Phaeuicia that she stays
So long behind thee, for thou know her soul
Desires to take her flight into thy bosom,
Nor shall she meet a stop (I am resolved)
Amandus have a little patience yet,
And then I come, tic but a minute• longer
Until I do contrive an easy way
For life to sally forth: my trusty maid
My faithful Saba, now assist thy Mistress
In this kind office that I shall command,
Wherein thy love shall more appear then ever:
I loath this life thou see, go fetch my Doctor
I must take his advise; thou wilt be secret,
I am •ssur'd, I have so often had
Exp•rience of thy faith; wilt thou dispatch,
And bring him to me with all expedition?
What you command my duty wills me do
Without dispute, I'll instantly return
And bring the Doctor—
Do so trusty servant
And thy reward shall follow; I must work
This Doctor to my will by fair entreaties,
And if that fail, by large rewards and gifts,
I'll leave no way u•t•i'd, nor una••empted,
Until I do prevail.—
My worthy Friend
And hitherto preserver of my health,
I have a business now wherein I shall
Make trial of your utmost love and trust,
In which you must not fail me.
Gracious Princess
My life shall be employed in any service
You shall have need to use it.
These are words
Of ceremonious complement, you shall not
Adventure so for me, tic but a trifle
I would employ you in.
What first, I do beseech
Your Grace to tell me, and tic done with speed.
But I must have you swear to execute
The thing intended, and be secret too,
Else I shall think you never were my friend.
Tic some great matter that you bind me thus,
But Ladies wills must not be disobeyed,
Since tic your pleasure that I take my oath,
I here protest before the gods above
To do the utmost of my power therein.
Well then, you know my love, you know my loss▪
You know the virtues of that noble Prince
Whose death exhausts tears from forth mine eyes
And drops of blood from my poor wounded heart;
I am resolved to die and now no longer
To carry such a heavy load about me
Of grief and sorrow, which doth overweigh
By much the weakness of a women's nature;
Kind friend you must be the instrument to send me
Unto the Prince Amandus, whose sweet spirit
Shall come with mine, and hover o'er your house,
Until the whistling air sound both our thanks:
Come do this friendly office, you are ti'd
Unto it by your oath, you must not start,
Or fall back from your former resolution.
You do but try me, Madame, if I will
Prove such a villain, sure you cannot mean
Sincerely what you speak, or if you did,
This is a thing unlawful, there was nothing
You could command me but this only thing
That I would not perform, but pardon me
I must dispense with oath and all things el•e
To leave this deed undone.
And perjured prove
Unto the gods, and false unto thy Mistress
O cruel man! see thou the pain I suffer
And will it not lend thy hand to •as my torment?
Are all my favours out of thy remembrance?
Could they not bind thee to this curtsy?
Take pity on me yet, and here is gold
Enough to purchase thee a Lordship fair,
What say thou to me?
I am doub•f•ll whether,
To grant or to deny, but yet you have not
Declared your mind at full; what must I doe?
Devise an easy way for me to die,
Not in a common ordinary road,
Which many use by cutting of a vain
Or such like, to get passage to their bliss;
I saw the Phaeni•• burning in her flames
The other day, and was enamoured off
So sweet a death, I fine would die so too
Your art can help me in the imitation.
Tic true I can compose variety
Of gummes, of drugs and spices mixed together,
And make a perfume not unlike unto
The Phoenix Funeral fire, whereby you may,
Be sweetly smothered lying in your bed,
As she is in her nest, but I would rather
You would de••• from this your resolvtion,
And make a trial of my love and service
I• any other thing.
It is more easy
To stop the current of a swelling river,
Or to remove a mountain from his place,
Then to divert my mind from this, whereupon
It doth so firmly fix, therefore kind Sir
Send me forthwith by this my maid (for now
The time fits right) this excellent receipt.
Your will shall be obeyed, mine shall give place.
Come maiden will you go?
Dispatch her to me
With all the hast you can, in the mean time
I'll rest me on my bed, and never rise
Until I see Amandus with mine eyes
This short, or rather this lunge time I have
To breath the air of woe (for life is tedious
To those that take no pleasure but in death)
Shall be employed wholly in meditation,
How sweetly I shall pass unto my friend,
And come unto him as in sacrifice,
Mine altar smoking incense and perfume.
Doctor and Maid again.
Madame, I'm come my self to doe the deed,
Doubting the maid should fail in my directions.
Most welcome, sacred priest, for that's the title
Your office now requires, because you are
To sacrifice me to Amandus shrine
A spotless Virgin; nay delay no time,
But presently about it, light the fire
Whilst I attend the sweet assenting flame
Here in my bed with longing expectation
To wrap my body round, dispatch I pray.
It is kindled, Madam, and a cloud o••um
Shrouds you from sight.
I smell a heavenly vapour
Assaulting my weak breath, now Prince I come,
Beloved Prince thy dear Phaenicia comes,
Be ready to rec•iv her, for her spirit
Ascends up in this smoky sacrifice.
She's dead Sir, for the sweetness of the fume
Hath smothered her senses.
It was her pleasure
She would not be dissuaded from her purpose.
I must be gone, here is no safe abiding.
I dare not stay here neither, though her l•tter
Be a sufficient warrant for our lives;
I'll leave it on the bed, because the King
May find it if he chance to enter in.
How sweet my daughter sleeps and how her breath
Perfumes the chamber o'er like Arabs gummes,
I'll wake my darling with a fathers kiss,
She sleeps too long; •ow's this? her lips are cold,
Her cheeks are pale, aye me, I fear she's sick,
I cannot feel her pulse, nor yet perceive
The passage of her breath; O heavens, she's dead.
A Doctor there with speed, my daughter dear,
Speak to thy aged father: O shoe's gone.
What say you master Doctor? is there hope
To call back life again?
My gracious Sovereign,
It is too far fled to be revok't, the art
O• Aesculapius could doe nothing in it,
Nor all the power of physic, nor the force
Of medicine can help.
O then I am
The wretchedest man alive, why was I borne
To see this woeful hour? but what is this?
My daughters will and tes•amened 〈◊〉 may be
Twill give me satisfaction of her death:
It is her own hand and seal, these the contents.
My royal father, please you understand,
Despair and sorrow for Amandus death,
(Whom heavens ordained the owner of my heart)
Made me loath life, and seek this way to dye
In perfume like the Phoenix, none is guilty
Unto my death but I my self: dear Sir,
I humbly crave you would be pleased to lay
My ashes in Amandus urn with his,
That so my spirit may rest in quietness.
Thy will shall be performed, lye there gray hairs
And aged head, think now no more to wear
A regal Crown, nor feeble hands to wield
A sceptre, think of nothing but a grave:
I'm coming daughter, and I will surprise thee
Before thou art aware, beloved corps!
Help, bring it hence unto our bed chamber,
That I may break my heart, whilst I embrace
The body 'tween my arms.
What tragic Scenes
This fatal land presents? come Madame, let us
Return to Egypt, to the King your father,
And make relation of these sad disasters
That have befallen in this our pilgrimage.
Let it be so since things have •alne ou• thus,
When I come to my native Land, my thoughts
Shall shun all pleasures, banish all delights,
And live Dianas Votary I will,
Till death shut up the remnant of my days.
What course sirs will you take?
Fair Princess, we
Intend to travel back unto Damascus,
Where we first breathed, there to surrender up
Our breath again unto the Land that gave it.
The Tartars swords, we hope will cut it off.
Nay rather go with us, &amp; live in pleasure
At the Egyptian Court, for I'll assure you
High honours and preferments for the favours
You showed me once in my captivity,
And for his sake, whom yet in death I love,
But I shall not participate in joy.
Alas, dear Madame, we abhor delights
As much as you, since our delight is gone;
We thank your noble curtsy, but cannot
Accept it, for despair and sorrow doth
Pos•esse our very souls, come, let us go
And leave this Land so much replete with woe.
ANovelty is happened since the Play
Was ended, and it came to pass this way,
A scroll was found within the spicy bed
Of that rare Phoenix, fair Phaenicïa dead,
Sealed up, and superscribed thus, to all such
Whom mine and Prince Amandus fate doth tou•h
With any sorrow: these were the contents,
We thank you all for your kind audience.
Come, and be welcome still, and let your friends,
Who have not seen as yet our tragic end,
Come here and weep with you, until together,
You make up this a full pressed theater:
Then it shall please our ghosts to think the age
Pities our wrongs presented on the Stage.

WE know not what will take, your palates are
Various, and many of them sick I fear:
We can but serve up what our Poets dress,
And not considering cost, or pains to please▪
We should be very happy, if at last,
We could find out the humour of your taste,
That we might fit, and feast it, so that you
Were constant to your selves, and kept that true▪
For some have their opinions so displeased,
They come not with a purpose to be pleased:
Or like some birds that leave the flowery fields,
They only stoop at that corruption yields.
It were a custom would less stain the times,
To praise the virtues, when you chide the crimes.
This is but cold encouragement, but we
Hope here are few of those, or if there be,
We wish 'em not infectious, nor confine
We censures; wooed each soul were masculine:
For your own sakes we wish all here to day,
Knew but the art and labour of a Play;
Then you would value the true Muses pain,
The throws and travel of a teeming brain.
But we have no despair, that all here may
Be friends, and come with candor to this Play.
St. Patrick whose large story cannot be
Bound in the limits of one Play, if ye
First welcome this, you'll grace our Poets art,
And give him Courage for a second part.
WE are undone.
We are lost.
Not so, your fears
Become you not, great Priests of Jove and S aturn;
Shall we that a we the furies, at whose charm
Hell itself quakes, be frighted with a shadow,
A tame, a naked Church-man and his tribe
Of austere starved faces? no, this Kingdom
Shall still be ours, and flourish, every Altar
Breathe incense to our gods, and shine with flames,
To strike this Christian blind.
This is but ayre▪
He is now landing, every tread he prints
Upon this earth, will make it groan.
Are not
The havens strengthened by the Kings command
With soldiers, to watch that none arrive
With this suspicion.
But we that can
Command armies from hell for our design,
And blast him, now stand idle, and benumbed,
And shall grow here ridiculous statues, I'll
Muster my friends.
And if I haven't lost
My power, the Spirits shall obey to drown
This straggler, and secure this threatened Island.
Stay, which of you can boast more power than I?
For every Spirit you command, my spells
Can raise a legion; you know I can
Untennant hell, dispeople the wide ayre,
Where like innumerous atoms the black genij
Hover, and nestle one another, all
That haunt the woods and waters, all in the dark
And solitary chambers of the earth,
Break through their Adamantine chains, and fly
Like Lightning to my will, and shall your factious
And petty correspondence with the fiends,
Attempt this work without my voice and counsel?
Who brought you first acquainted with the devil?
Did not my Art?
We are disciples to
The Great Archimagus.
We acknowledge all
Our Art derived from you.
But in this justice to our gods, we hope
Our gods chief Priest will give us leave—
Yes, and confirm it, and applaud your zeals,
My fellows both in sacred Arts and Priesthood.
Go on, I praise your resolution:
My Spirit gave intelligence before
Of his approach, and by all circumstance,
Our prophecy doth point this Christian Priest
The black subversion of our Isle, but we
Like masters of all destiny, will break
His fate, and bruise him in his Infancy
Of danger to this Kingdom, fly and be
Armed to your wishes; Spirits shall attend you,
And the whole power of hell. 
This news affrights me,
How ever I seem to swell with confidence,
This is the man, and this the revolution,
Fixed for the change of sacrifice foretold,
And threatened in this fatal prophecy.
A man shall come into this Land,
With shaven Crown, and in his hand
A crooked Staff, he shall command,
And in the East his table stand;
From his warm lips a stream shall flow▪
To make rocks melt, and Churches grow,
Where while be sings, our gods shall bow,
And all our kings his law allow.
This, this is the vexation.
Sir, the King.
What of the King?
Is troubled, sick, distracted.
How?
With a dream; he has no peace within him;
You must with all haste visit him, we shall
Suspect his death else.
Mighty Priest, as you
Respect the safety of the King, you must
Make haste, the Court is up in arms, and he
Calls for his sword.
You fright me gentlemen:
Rebellion in the Court, who are the Traitors?
His own wilde thoughts, and apprehension
Of what, he says, was in his sleep presented,
He calls upon his Guard, and rails upon 'em,
When they appear with no more arms, and swearos
That every man shall wear a Tun of Iron.
The Prince▪
The King impatient of your absence, Sir,
Hath left the Court, and by some few attended
Is coming hither, laden with fear and weapons;
He talks of strange things in his dream, and frights
Our ears with an invasion, that his Crown
Sits trembling on his head, unless your wisdom
Clear his dark fears, we are undone.
He's here.
How fares the King?
Dear Archimagus,
We want thy skill to interpret a black dream
I had last night, my fancy is still sick on it,
And with the very apprehension
I feel much of my soul dissolve, and through
My frighted pores, creep from me in a sweat:
I shall have nothing in me but a bath,
Unless thou do repair my languishing essence
With thy great art and counsel.
Give me, Sir,
The particular of your dream.
They must not hear it,
Yet stay; the Eclipse, if it be any thing,
Is universal, and doth darken all.
Me thought, Archimagus, as I was praying
In the Temple near the se•…, my Queen, my Sons,
Daughters, and Train of my Nobility
Prostrate before the Altar, on the sudden
The roof did open, and from Heaven a flame
Descending on the images of our gods,
Began to burn the sacred brows, from which
Many deformed worms, and hideous serpents
Come crawling forth, and leaped unto our throats,
Where, with their horrid circles and embrace,
We were almost strangled 〈◊〉 in this fright, me thought▪
We fled out of the Temple, and as soon
We saw a pale man coming from the sea,
Attended by a Tribe of reverend men,
At whose approach the Serpents all unchained
Themselves, and leaving our imprisoned necks,
Crept into the earth, straight all that were with me,
As I had been the prodigy, forsook me,
My wife, my children, Lords, my servants all,
And sled to this pale man, who told me, I
Must submit too, humble my self to him,
This withered piece of man: at which, my-thought,
I felt a trembling shoot through every part,
And with the horror, thus to be deposed,
I wakened. Now, Archimagus, thy Art
To cure thy soule-sick King.
It is done already.
How, my dear Priest?
This pale thing shall not trouble you,
He that so long was threatened to destroy
Vs and our Gods, is come.
Ha▪ where?
Now landing:
But were the coasts unguarded, he wants power
To fight with those ethereal troops, that wait
Upon the Gods we serve▪ H•… is now dying,
This minute they have blasted him: and they,
Above the speed of wings, are slying hither
With the glad news, be calm again, and let not
These airy dreams distract your peace.
They are vanished
Already at thy voice, thou (next our Gods
The hope of this great I•…and) hast dispersed
All clouds, and made it a fair sky again,
My learned Archimagus.
He is come.
He's come.
And we must fly.
What voices make the air
So sad?
They strike a horror▪
They are Spirits.
I command once more to oppose him.
In vain, great Priest.
We must away.
Away.
We cannot, dare not stay.
What harmony is this? I have no power
To do them harm, observe their ceremony.
Post maris s•…vi fremitus Iernae
(Navitas coelo tremulos bent)
Uidimus gratum jubar enatantes
littus inaurans
Montium queen vos juga, vosque sylv•…
Nuns salutamus, chorus advenarum
Jubilum retrò modulantur, Ass
Carbasa vents
Dulls supremo melòs occinanus
Carminum flagrans Domino litamen
Cujus erranti dabitur popello
Numine sacr•…m.
I'll speak to him. Stay, you that have presumed
Without our leave, to print your desperate foot
Upon our Country; say, what bold design
Hath armed you with this insolent noise, to dare
And fright the holy peace of this fair Isle;
Nay, in contempt of all our gods, advance
Your songs in honour of an unknown power?
The King commands you speak.
Unto that title
Thus we all bow; it speaks you are allied
To Heaven, great Sir, we come not to distract
Your peace, look on your number, we bring no
Signs of sterne war, no invasive force to draw
Fear, or suspicion, or your frowns upon us:
A handful of poor naked men we are,
Thrown on your Coast, whose arms are only prayer,
That you would not be more unmerciful
Than the rough seas, since they have let us live
To find your charity.
Whence are you?
We are of Britain, Sir.
Your name, that answer for the rest so boldly?
My name is Patrick, who with these poor men
Beseech you would permit.
No dwelling here▪
And therefore quit this Kingdom speedily,
Or you shall curse you saw the land.
Are they not Spies?
A whirlwind snatch'em hence, and on the back
Of his black wings transport these fugitives,
And drop their cursed-heads into the sea,
Or land'em in some cold remotest▪ wilderness
Of all the world, they must not here inhabit.
Hence, or we'll force you with these go•…ds.
Unless
You have a mind to try how well your hoods
Can swim, go trudge back to your rotten bark,
And steer another course.
You will find Lands
Peopled with Squirrels, Rate, and Crows, and 〈◊〉,
Where you may better plant, my reverend Moles.
Faces about.
You are inhospitable,
And have more flinty bosoms than the rocks
That bind your shores, and circle your fair Island▪
But I must not return.
How?
How?
Till I have
Performed my duty: Know great King, I have
Commission for my stay, I came not hither
Without command, Legate from him, before
Whose angry breath the rocks doe break and thaw;
To whose nod the mountains humble their proud heads,
The earth, the water, air and heaven is his,
And all the stars that shine with evening flames,
Show but their trembling when they wait on him:
This supreme Kings command I have obeyed,
Who sent me hither to bring you to him,
And this still wandering nation, to those springs
Where souls are everlastingly refreshed;
Unto those gardens, whose immortal flowers
Stain your imagined shades, and blessed abodes.
What place is this?
Heaven; now a great way off▪
But not accessible to those permit
Their precious souls be strangled thus with mists,
And false opinion of their gods.
No more.
I must say more in my great Masters cause,
And tell you in my dreams, he hath made me hear
From the dark wombs of mothers, prisoned infants
Confessing how their parents are mis-led,
And calling me thus far to be their freedom▪
Have pity on your selves, be men, and let not
A blind devotion to your painted gods.—
He does blaspheme. Accept me, Jove, thy Priest,
And this my sacrifice. Ha, mine arms grow stiff,
I feel an ice creeping through all my blood▪
There's winter in my heart, I change of the sudden
Am grown a statue, every limb is marble;
Ye gods take pity on me, in your cause
I wither thus; Jove, if thou hast a lightning,
Bestow some here, and warm me.
Strange!
Father! Brother, if he should dye now?
I am his eldest son, he shall find me reasonable,
He may doe worse, considering how long I have been of age.
No power let fall compassion. I have
Offended. Whom? I know not, this good man
Forgive, and if the Deity thou serve
Can put a life into this frozen pile,
Pray for me.
Villain, would thou owe thy life
To the mercy of the power he serves,
Wish rather
To rot for ever thus.
And if thou die,
I'll build a Temple here, and in this posture
Kings shall kneel to thee, and on solemn days
Present their crowns; Queens shall compose thee garlands,
Virgins shall •…ing thy name, and about thy neck
And arms disperse the riches of their Art,
Next to our Gods we honour thee: keep from
The Impostor.
I have no meaning to come near him.
Give me thy hand: now move, and may thy heart
Find softness too, this mercy is the least
Of my great Masters treasures.
I feel my heat
Returned, and all my rocky parts grow supple,
Let the first use I make of their restore, be
To bend my knees to you.
Bow them to him
That gave me power to help thee.
He is well again.
I find a beam let into my dark soul,
Oh take me to your faith, here I give back
My self to serve your god.
Traitrous to heaven!
Come from him.
Bid my haste forsake a blessing.
Father.
Call this good man your father, Boys.
H 's mad, and I am frantic at this base
Apostasy. My Lord think how you may
Provoke our gods, and the King anger.
Fear
His wrath that made, and can let fall the world.
He may yet do me as great a courtesy
As dying comes too, if his error hold,
And the Kings anger.
Dotard,
Return; and prostrate to the gods we worship,
Or though his witchcraft now protect thy self,
Thy sons shall bleed.
How's that?
To satisfy
The gods and us, with the next mornings Sun,
Unless thou rise, and sacrifice to our Altars,
Down from that Rock which over looks the Sea,
They shall be throwlie; my vow is fixed.
Dear father.
Take them away, their fate depends on him.
Oh, I am lost.
Thou art found.
Forsake me not, poor boys! my prayers and blessing.
Set forward now in heavens name,
And finish our procession.
Death pursue 'em,
Will nothing make them feel our wrath.
The charm
Will not last always.
I heir fate is not yet ripe,
Be not dejected, Sir, the gods cannot
Be patient long. Mean time let me advise,
Not by your Laws, or other open force,
To persecute'em; but disguise your anger.
Ha?
What matter is it, so we destroy these wretches
What ways we take? invite him to your Court,
Pretend, I know not what desires, to hear
More of his faith, that you find turns within
Your heart, and tremble at the miracle
Wrought upon Dichu; when he's in your possession
A thousand stratagems may be thought upon
To send his giddy soul most quaintly off to
That fine fantastical reward he dreams on
I'th't'other world.
Thou hast pleased us, Archimagus.
Great Ceanerachius has inspired the Priest!
This is the only way.
I doe not like it.
It shall be so, he shall be thus invited,
And we will meet him with our Queen and Daughters,
Who shall compose themselves to entertain him.
Leave me to instruct my princely charge, your Daughters,
Be still their blessed Director, to thy charge
We gave them up long since, but do not tell 'em
What happened to the Apostate Dichu; women
Have soluble and easy hearts, that accident
May startle their religion, keep 'em firm
In the devotion to our gods, whose virgins
We hope to call them shortly, if their zeal
Maintain that holy flame that yet hath filled
Their bosoms.
They are the Darlings of the Temple.
Conallus, you shall be the messenger,
And bear our invitation.
Trouble not
The Prince, impose that business on my care.
Be it so.
I am glad I am off the employment.
All ways to serve our gods are free, and good,
When shed for them, they take delight in blood.
I am weary, and yet I would have more, my heart
Was never more disposed to mirth, Fedella.
Mine is as light as yours, Sister, I am
All air, me thinks.
And I all mounting fire.
It is well we are alone.
It is ill we are;
This heat our servants should have given us:
I wonder we cannot see 'em, they were not
Since we first took them to our favour, guilty
Of such neglect.
You wrong our birth and blood,
To think they dare neglect us, for if they
Forget what we deserve in loving them▪
They owe more duty, as we are the Kings
Daughters, than to displease us so.
That binds:
But form and heartless ceremony, Sister▪
By your favour, I had rather hold my servant
By his own love, that chains his heart to mine,
Than all the bands of state.
I am of thy mind too, wo'd they were here,
I shall be sad again; fie, what a thing it is
For two Ladies to be in love, and alone without
A man so long.
Here's one.
A foolish one, our Governors servant,
How now Rodamant?
Keep off.
What, is the fellow conjuring?
I wo'd, but I cannot read these devilish names.
How long hast thou served Archimagus?
Long enough to have had a Devil of mine own, if hee had pleased, I have drudg'd under him almost these seven years, in hope to learn the trade of Magic, and none of his spirits will obey me; would I were a witch, then I should have a Familiar, a sucking Devil, upon occasion to doe me service.
A Devil?
Oh, I loved him of a child.
What would thou do with the Devil?
Only exercise my body, take the air now and then over steeples, and sail once a month to Scotland in a sieve▪ to see my Friends. I have a granam there, if I had been ruled, would not have seen me wanted a devil at these years, pray Madam speak to my Master for me, that my friends may not laugh at me, when I come out of my time, he has spirits enough, I desire none of his grand•…s, a little Don Di•…go Diabolo would serve my turn, if he have but skill in Love or Physic.
Physic for what? art sick?
I am not sick, but I am troubled with a desperate consumption.
How?
Why that's nothing.
To you that are great Ladies, and fed high
But to a man that is kept lean and hungry
A little falling of the flesh is seen.
I heard thee name love, prithee art thou in love?
In love? look on my sore eyes.
They are well enough, and thou can see.
Yes, I can see a little with em, would they were out.
How? out?
Out of their pain. I have but seven teeth and a half, and four on em are rotten, here's a stump, a pickax cannot dig out of my gummes.
Are these signs of love?
Oh infallible. Beside, I cannot sleep
For dreaming a my Mistress.
So, and whats her name?
You shall pardon me, she is—
A man or a woman.
Nay she is a woman, as sure, as sure as you are the Queens daughters. I name no body; do not you say it is the Queen, I am what I am, and she is what she is.
Well said.
And if I live, I will die for her, but I forget my self, I had a message to tell you; first my Master commends him to your Graces and will be here presently: secondly I have news, Do you know what I mean?
Not we.
Why then, my Lord Ferocbus, and his brother
Endarius, you know em?
What of them?
And they know you.
To the purpose.
I know not that, but they are
What?
Not made for worms meat.
What means the fellow?
The King has commanded, they shall be thrown from a rock into the sea, thats all, but here's my Master can tell you the whole story.
What said the scritchowle
We hope Archimagus brings better news.
And yet his face is cast into a form of sorrow.
What are these?
Read, and collect your noble forces up,
You will be lost else, alas poor Ladies,
How soon their blood is frighted?
Every character
Gives my poor heart a wound.
Alas, how much of mischief is contained
In this poor narrow paper.
Can this be?
Madam too true, the anger of the King
Is heavy and inevitable, you may
Believe what their sad pens have bled to you;
They have no hope, not once before they die
To see your blessed eyes, and take their leave,
And weep into your bosom, their last farewell.
They must not, sha' not die so.
They must Madam.
I will die with 'em too then: Sister shall
They leave the world without our company?
Could not you bend the King our cruel father?
You should have said, we loved them; you have most
Power to prevail with him; you should have told him,
The gods would be offended, and revenge their death
With some strange curse upon this Island.
You knew our loves, and all our meetings Sir,
They were not without you, nor will we live
Without them, tell our father. Did our hearts
Flatter themselves with mirth, to be struck dead
With this, this murdering news. I'll to the King.
Stay, and contain your selves, your loves are brave,
Nor shall your flame die thus; as I was first
Of counsel with your thoughts, I will preserve 'em:
They sha'not die, if my brain leave me not.
Oh, I could dwell upon his lips to thank him.
But they must then be banished.
That's death.
Unless we go along to exile with 'em.
I have the way, they shall deceive the sentence
Of the enraged King, and live; nor shall
This be reward of your affections;
You shall converse more often, and more freely
Than ever, if you dare be wise and secret.
You make us happy.
Here's your elder brother,
Away and trust to me.
Health to our Priest.
And to your Highness. 
Do you see that couple?
My brother and the fair Emeria, Milcho's daughter,
Out of their way; but so, to reach their voice,
This place o'th'Garden's apt.
Observe 'em.
But will you not, my Lord, repent to have placed
Your love so much unworthily.
Oh never.
My best Emeria, thou hast a wealth
In thy own virtue, above all the world;
Be constant, and I'm blessed.
This hand and heaven
Be witness where my heart goes.
If my fate
Cannot enjoy thy love, I shall grieve both
Your destinies.
Be confident you shall
Enjoy her, if you'll follow my directions.
Thou art my genius, but she's very holy,
And, I fear, too religious to her vows,
She is devoted much to Ceanerachius, head of the gods.
Sir her piety
Prepares your conquest, as I'll manage things,
I wonot trust the ayre too much.
This kiss and ell's confirmed.
Pray my Lord use
My poor heart kindly, for you take it with you.
I leave mine in exchange.
He is gone, advance
To your Mistress, and if you want art to move her,
I shannot sir, to make you prosper, tic
Firmly designed, when we meet next, you shall
Know more.
How now my fair Emeria.
I do beseech your highness pardon,
I did think I was alone.
Alone you are
In beauty sweet Emeria, and all
The graces of your sex.
You are too great to flatter me,
And yet this language comes
So near the wickedness of court praise, I dare not
With modesty imagine your heart means so.
Yet in this garden, when you seemed most solitary,
Madam, you had many fair, and sweet companions.
Not I sir.
Yes, and my rivals too Emeria,
And now they court thy beauty in my presence
Proud erring things of nature, dost not see
As thou dost move, how every amorous plant
Doth how his levy head, and beckon thee;
The wind doth practise dalliance with thy hairs
And weave a thousand pretty nets within
To catch it self.
That violet drooped but now,
How tic exalted at thy smile, and spreads
A virgin bosom to thee. There's a rose
Would have slept still within his bud, but at
Thy presence, it doth open his thin curtains
And with warm apprehension looking forth
Betrays her love in blushes. And that Woodbine•…
As it would be divorced from the Sweetbrier,
Courts thee to an embrace. It is not dew
That like so many pearls embroider all
The flowers, but tears of their complaint, with fear
To loose thee, from whose eye they take in all
That makes them beautiful, and with humble necks
Pay duty unto thee their only spring.
Your Grace is courtly.
When these dull vegetalls
Show their ambition to be thine Emeria,
How much should we, that have an active soul
To know and value thee, be taken with
This beauty? yet if you dare trust me Madam,
There's none, within the throng of thy admirers,
More willing, more devote to be thy servant
Then Coribreus.
I must ag•…n beseech
Your pardon, and declare my self most ignorant:
Pray speak your meaning in a dialect
I understand.
Why, I do love you Madam.
If this be it, I dare not sir believe
You condescend so low to love Emeria,
A worthless thing.
Why not? I love you Madam.
If there be difference of our birth or state,
When we are comp•…'d, it should make me the first
In your fair thoughts: come, you must love again,
And meet me with an equal active flame.
I am more skil'd in duty sir, then love.
You would be coy, your heart is not bestowed.
Indeed it is.
On whom?
I must not name.
Were he my brother did twist heart with thine,
That act should make him strange to my blood,
And I would cut him from his bold embraces.
Alas, I fear.
I know you will be wise
And just to my desires Emeria,
When you shall see my love bid fairest for you,
And that presented from a Prince, who knows
No equal here. Come, I already promise
My self possessed of those fair eyes, in which
I gazing thus, at every search discover
New crystal heavens, those tempting cheeks are mine,
A garden with fresh flowers all the winter;
Those lips invite to print my soul upon 'em
Or loose it in thy breath, which I'll convey
Down to my heart, and wish no other spirit,
As loath to change it for my own again.
How in thy bosom will I dwell Emeria,
And tell the azure winding of thy veins
That flow, yet climb those soft, and ivory hills
Whose smooth descent leads to a bliss, that may
Be known, but puzzle art and tongue to speak it.
I prithee do not use this froward motion,
I must and will be thine.
Be your own sir,
And do not thus afflict my innocence,
Had you the power of all the world, and man,
You could not force my will, which you have frighted
More from you then my duty, although powerful,
Can call again; you are not modest sir,
Indeed I fear you are not, I must leave you,
Better desires attend your Grace and me.
This wo'not gain her, her heart's fixed upon
My brother, all my hope is in Archimagus,
She is a frozen thing, yet she may melt.
If their disdain should make a man despair,
Nature mistook in making woman fair.
These be new Deities, made since yesterday,
We shift our gods, as fast as some shift trenchers;
Pray sir what do you call their names, they are
But half gods, demi-gods as they say, there's
Nothing beneath the navel.
This with the thunderbolt is Jupiter.
Jupiter? It is time he were cut off by the middle,
He has been a notable thunderer in his days.
This is Mars.
Mars from the middle upward. Was it by my Lady
Venus direction that he is dismembered too.
H•… that overcame all in a full career, looks now like
A Demilaunce.
Are they not lively formed, but sir away, tell the young Ladies the King is upon entrance.
To Jove and Mars the King doth pay
His duty, and thus humbly lay
Upon his Altar, his bright crown,
Which is not his, if they but frown.
In token you are pleased, let some
Celestial flame make pure this room.
The gods are pleased, great King, and we
Return thy golden wreath to thee,
More sacred by our holy fume;
None to the Altar yet presume▪
Now shoot your voices up to Jove,
To Mars and all the Powers above.
Come away, Oh come away
And trembling trembling pay
Your pious vows to Mars and Jove.
While we do sing,
Gummes of precious odours bring,
And light them with your love.
As your holy fires do rise,
Make Jove to wonder
What new flame
Thither came
To wait upon his thunder.
Archimagus, Conallus; see my children,
The statue moves.
Approach it not too near.
It is prodigious.
With devotion,
Expect what follows, and keep reverent distance;
I am all wonder.
King Leogarius,
Jove doth accept thy vows, and pious offerings,
And will shower blessings on thee; and this kingdom,
If thou preserve this holy flame burns in thee.
But take heed, thou decline not thy obedience,
Which thou shalt best declare by thy just anger
Against that christian straggler Patrick, whose
Blood must be sacrificed to us, or you
Must fall in your remiss and cold religion.
When you are merciful to our despisers,
You pull our wrath upon you, and this Island.
My duty is performed, and I return
To my first stone, a cold and silent statue.
What cannot all commanding Jove? it is now
That artificial tongueless thing it was,
•…ow are you bound to honour Jupiter?
•…hat with this strange and public testimony
Accepts your zeal. Pursue what you intended,
And meet this enemy to the gods, that now
Expects your entertainment.
I obey.
Come my Queen, and daughters.
I attend you Sir.
Is not the Queen a lovely creature Sir?
Why how now Rodamant, what passion's this?
Oh that I durst unbutton my mind to her.
Your Princely daughters pray they may have leave
To offer in their gratitude to the gods
One other prayer, and they will follow Sir.
They are my pious daughters, come Conallus.
They are gone, uncloud.
Oh my dear Mistress, is not the King mocked rarely?
My most loved Endarius!
Have I not don't my Charge?
Most quaintly. Welcome
To thy Fedella.
Hum, how's this? more scopes of Jupiter? they have sound their neither parts; the gods are become fine mortal gentle∣men, here's precious juggling, if I durst talk on it.
Not a syllable, as you desire not to be torn in pieces sir.
Gods quoth'a, I held a candle before the devil.
To the door and watch.
So I must keep the door too, here's like to be holy doings▪
We owe Archimagus for more then life
For your loves, without which, life is a curse.
The music prompts you to a dance.
In the temple.
'T is most secure, none dare betray you here.
We must away.
My life is going from me.
Farewell.
The King expects, now kiss and part.
When next we meet, pray give me back my heart.
I am an Esquire by my office.
Oh my Royal love! why should not I love the Queen? I have known as simple a fellow as I hath been in love with her horse, nay they ha been bedfellows in the same litter, and in that humour he would have been leaped, if the beast could have been provoked to incontinence; but what if the King should know out, and very lovingly circumcise me for it, or hang me up a gracious spectacle with my tongue out a perch for sparrows? why, I should become the gallows o'my conscience: oh I would stretch in so gentle posture, that the spectators all should edify, and hang by my example.
The Kings merry Bard, if he have overheard, he will save the hang∣man a •…about, and •…ime me to death.
Rodamant, my half man, half gobbling, all fool, how first? when did thou see the devil.
Alas, I never had the happiness.
Why then, thou art not acquainted with thy best friend.
Have you never seen in the air,
One ride with a burning spear,
Upon an old witch with a pad,
For the devil a sore breech had.
With lightning, and thunder
And many more wonder.
His eyes indeed-law sir,
As wide as a saw•…er.
Oh this would have made my boy mad.
An honest merry trout▪
Thou say right 〈◊〉, gape, and I'll throw in a bushel, why does thy 〈◊〉 hang over thy mouth; as it would peep in, to t•…ll h•…w many teeth thou hast?
Excellent Bard Oh brave Bard Ha Bard.
Excellent 〈◊〉! O•… fi•… fool, Ha fool.
〈◊〉 with what news, and whither is thy head tra∣ve 〈◊〉?
My head▪ and my feet go one way, and by•…h now at their 〈◊〉 •…nd. The •…ewes is, that one Patrick a stranger, is envy∣ted to court: this way h•… must come, and I like one of the Kings wanton 〈◊〉, have broke loose from •…he kennel, and come thus before to bark, and bid him welcome, the King and Queen will meet him.
Has the King invited him?
What else man.
Oh the Queen and the King, and the royal Off spring,
With the Lords, and Ladies so gay,
I tell you not a trick, to meet the man Patrick:
Are all now trouping this way.
This man report sings, does many strange things:
Our Priests, and our Bards must give place.
He cares not a straw, for our sword or club-law.
Oh I long to behold his gay face.
Prithee a word, thou did name the Queen, Does she come too?
By a•…y means.
W•…ll tic a good soul.
Who?
The Queen.
The Queen first? dost make but a soul other? treason, I have heard some foolish Philosophers affirm, that women have no souls: it were well for some they had no bodies; but to make no body of the Queen, is treason, if it be not felony.
Oh my royal love▪
Love, art thou in love Rodamant? nay then thou may
Talk treason or any thing. Folly and madness are la•…h free, an•… may ride cheek by jowl with a judge. But dost thou know when•… love is, thou one of Cupids overgrown monkeys? Come, crack me this nut of love, and take the maggot for thy labour.
Prithee do thou say what it is.
No, I will sing a piece of my mind, and love to thee.
Love is a bog, a deep bog, a wide bog.
Love is a clog, a great clog, a close clog.
It is a wilderness to loose our selves,
A halter it is to noose our selves.
Then draw Dun out of the mire:
And throw the clog into the fire.
Keep in the Kings high way,
And sober you cannot stray.
If thou admire no female else,
The balter may go bang it self.
Drink wine and be merry, for love is a folly:
And dwells in the house of melancholy.
It is such a merry baboon, and shoots quills like a Pore∣cupine, but who's this?
It is he, I know him by instinct.
Patrick welcome to this Isle,
See how every thing doth smile:
To thy staff and thy meter,
And Lawn that is whiter.
And every shaven crown a welcome welcome to town.
Look where the King, and Queen doe greet thee:
H•… Princoly sons are come to meet thee.
And see where a pair is, of very fine Ear•…es.
Prepared too,
That thou may report, thy welcome to Court,
And the Bard too,
And so pray father give me your 〈◊〉.
I thank thee courteous Bard, thy heart is honest.
But to the King my duty.
Welcome Patrick,
For so thou call thy self; we have thrown off
Our anger: and with calm, and melting eyes
Look on thee. Thou hast piety, to forgive
Our former threats and language, and to satisfy.
For our denial of some humble cottages,
Against the hospitable laws of nature.
We give thee now our Palace, use it freely.
My self, our Queen and children, will be all
Thy guests: and owe our dwellings to thy favour.
There are some things of venerable mark
Upon thy brow, thou art some holy man,
Designed by providence to make us happy:
Again, most welcome to us.
His aspect
Doth promise goodness: Welcome.
To us all.
If this be hearty, heaven will not permit
Your charities unrewarded.
I am weary
Of these dull complements, Archimagus.
I am prepared, I know your blot's a longing,
To change embraces with Emeria.
Receive this, which worn upon your
Arm, is so by power of magic fortified,
You shall go where you please invisible,
Until you take it off: Go to your Mistress.
Softly my dear Archimagus; the rest
Speak in a whisper▪ I shall be jealous of
The intelligencing air.
You may be confident
Our favour spreads to all▪ But where is Dichu
Your Convert? we'll receive him to our grace too.
He durst not Sir, approach your royal presence.
And grief▪ for the sad fate of his two sons,
Hath made him weary of society:
Not far off in a wood, he means to wear out
His life in prayer and penance.
How do you taste it?
It is rare, and must succeed to my ambition.
Loose no time time then▪
I fly, command me ever.
I am not well of the sudden.
How? what first
That doth offend the King?
An evil conscience: Alas my children.
Father.
Sir.
Pray speak to us.
How shall I
Win credit with this good man, that I have
Repented, for the blood of Dichues sons?
If you dissemble not with heaven, I can
Be easily gained Sir, to believe and pray for you.
Some wine, it is the greatest ceremony
Of love with us, the seal of reconcilement.
Let some one bring us wine, I wo'not move,
Until I drink to this blessed man.
Away.
This place shall be remembered to posterity,
Where•… Leogarius first, showed himself friend
To holy Patrick. It is religious thirst,
That wi•…l not l•…t me expect▪ till more return.
There is a stream of peace within my heart.
Tic rarely counterfeited.
He is my father,
I should 〈◊〉 tell him; Tic not like a King,
T•…us to con•…per a poor mans death. What thinks
Our royal mother? Is it just to take
By stratagemme, this innocent mans life.
What means my son?
Shall I betray the plot
Yet? and preserve him: see the wine.
The wine
Attends you Sir.
Tic well, •…ill us a cheerful cup: here Patrick,
We drink thy welcome to the Irish coasts.
What does my father mean to doe with this
Dull thing? he will never make a courtier.
His very looks have turned my blood already.
I'll spice his cup.
Do it strongly.
There's something within prompts me to pity
This stranger.
Do you love wine Sir?
If I did not,
I should presume against my nature once
To please the King that hath thus honoured us.
Do not, I say do not.
Please you Sir?
Come, to our Queen.
My royal love, would I had the grace to drink to her or kiss the cup.
My duty.
Now observe Sir the change, he has it home.
I cannot live, my heart wonot hold out.
Forbear, as you affect your life.
How's this? now I suspect Conallus.
I have one boon to ask your M•…jestie;
Since you look on us with this gracious smile:
That you would give my poor companions leave,
To build a little chapel in this place,
It shall be the first monument of your love;
To use our own religion, the ground offers
Plenty of stone, the cost and pain be •…urs.
Not yet?
Twill bind us ever to pray for you.
If it were violent, as thou say, it had
By this time gnawn to his bowels.
Sir, you mind not
The humble suit I make.
Not yet?
Great Sir.
It does not alter him, he rather looks
With fr•…sher blood upon him.
It is my wonder,
I did not trust another to prepare his cup.
Come, it is not poison, we are abused.
Upon my life.
The King is troubled.
Prepare another.
It shall be done.
Come hither sir, you brought this wine.
I did, Sir.
And you shall taste it.
Would I were but worthy.
I will have it so. Come, drink our health.
May I remember your good Queens.
And he had the constitution of an Elephant
It would pay him.
How cheer you, Sir.
Well, Madam; but I observe
Distractions in the King.
Nay, drink it off.
And it were as deep as the root of Penmenmaure, my roy∣all Love should have it.
Now we shall try the ingredients, it stirred
Not him, has he done it?
So.
Yes, and the change begins to show already.
Hoy ho—what's that?
Where?
H•…re, here abouts, was the wine burnt? oh there's wilde∣•… the wine.
It works on him.
There's squibs and crackers in my stomach; am not I poisoned?
Poyso•…'d? we shall want a fool then.
A way, I'll never drink again.
Not often, and thou be poisoned.
It increases, my royal love has poisoned me, her health has blown my bowels up. Oh a cooler, would I were a while in the frozen sea, charity is not cold enough to releeive me: the de∣will is making fireworks in my belly. Ha the Queen, let me but speak to the Queen; Oh Madam, little do you think, that I have poisoned my self, Oh for your sweet sake. But howsoever; Oh think upon me when I am dead. I bequeath my heart, Oh there it is already: my royal love farewell.
What think you now? it hath dispatched him raving.
Madam, you show a pious heart, I find
My death was meant; but it is heavens goodness
I should not fall by poison: do not loose
Your charity.
Hoe's dead.
Pray l•…t me see the fellow.
It affrights me, this was some treason meant to us;
And thee good man: How I am innocent.
How soon death would devour him.
Past your cure.
That power we serve can call back life, and see,
He has a little motion.
He breathes too, n•…y then he may live to have the other cup: Madam, this Patrick is a rare physician, if he st•…y with us, •…ee'l 〈◊〉 all immortal.
Alive again? Oh let me honour thee.
We cannot Sir enough;
Receive me Patrick,
A weak disciple to thee: my soul bids me
Embrace thy faith: Make me a Christian.
How? did •… thou hear Archimagus, let some
Convey our Queen hence, her weak conscience melts;
She'll be a Christian she says: I hate her,
And do confine her to the house of Milcho
Our zealous Provost.
Tic the Kings pleasure Madam,
I should attend you hence.
Where the King please.
In any prison Madam, I dare visit you;
Be comforted, they do but fight with heaven.
I'll waite upon my mother.
Look to my daughters,
Least this change work on them.
They are my charge.
Be not dejected Patrick, we do mean
All good to thee: set forward, have a care
Of that poor fellow.
I'll attend you Sir,
And trust to Providence we shall be safe.
How first now Rodamant? dost thou remember thou were•… dead? Thou were poisoned.
There is a kind of grumbling in my guts still.
Come, we will drink a cup boy, but of better brewing,
And we will drink it up joy, without any fear of—
Wine is injust that is taken on trust, if it tarry with us it fatts,
A cup boy, drinkup joy, and let i'm go p•…yson rats.
What is it that doth sit so heavy on me?
Since Coribrous talked with me, I find a dullness in my brain; and
My eyes look as through a mist: which hangs upon my lids,
And weighs i'm down. He frighted me to hear him,
He has a rugged and revengeful nature;
Not the sweet temper that his brother.
My dear Con•…llus, mine? alas did I
Say mine? indeed he is Master of my heart,
But something makes me fear I shall not 〈◊〉
So happy as I wish in his possession:
Yet we have vows on both sid•…s, holy ones,
And marriage promised. But I am too loud;
Yet not, my lodgings are remote and priva'st
Of all the Court: and I have dismissed the servants,
None near to reach my voice, then till this give
Access, I need not fear the silent chambers.
More clouds doe gather about my eyes, it is strange,
I am not used to be inclined to sleep,
While the day shines; then take what nature offers
Emeria, and comply, it may discharge
Thy waking melancholy, so I feel
It gently slide upon my senses.
So, so, this amm•…let I find secures me
From all obs•…rvers, 〈◊〉 I now am in
H•…r chamber, by a feat my Spirit did me:
Ha? She sle•…pes too, what a fine Bawd the devil is,
What opportunities he can frame to bring
These things to pass; I were best loose no time;
Madam, Madam, fair Emeria.
Ha? who's that? was it a voice that called me?
Or do I dream? here's no body, this key
Made all without sast; yet In•…l see.
I had
Forgot, she'll never see me if I do not
Take off my charm, perhaps I may again be visible
If I ha not lost my self.
The doors are fast.
Ha•… Bless me you Powers,
This music is not frequent in my chambers;
It is here, I know not where, I can see nothing.
Emeria.
Who first that calls Emeria? goodness aid me!
Put off thy fright Emeria, yet I blame not
Thy feeble sense to tremble at my presence:
Not used to mortal eyes, and unprepared.
But gather strength, and call thy blood again
Whose seat a paleness doth usurp: I am
Thy friend.
But no acquaintance sure, what are you?
Not what I seem, I have assumed this for me,
To tell thee what a happiness is now
Coming from heaven upon thee.
Upon me?
And when the sweet Emeria is collected,
She will loose her life again in joy and wonder.
My strength returns, this is a gentle language,
And Spirit, if thou be one; speak thy will.
Then know Emeria, I am no mortal
But Ceancrochi, chief of all the gods
That now appear.
I know not what to answer
But with my humble knee.
Thy pure devotion
Richer then clouds of incense, Myrrh, and Cassia,
And all the Gummes whose piles make sweet our Altar,
Hath been delightful to the gods, and me,
And I have left the Palace of the blessed,
Where many glorious virgins waite: and want thee,
A fellow singer in their heavenly quire,
To visit in this form the fair Emeria,
And thank thee for thy pious sacrifices:
Rise then and be confirmed, we mean to honour
Thy p•…rson and thy virtues.
Can this roof
Be so much blessed? and can so great a deity
Consider my imperfect duty thus?
To assure thy thoughts, ask fairest virgin, what
Thou most desire, and it shall firmer, than
The Destinies, be made thine own: hast thou
A wish to this worlds glory, to be greater?
Would thou enlarge thy knowledge, or thy pleasure?
Dost thou affect to have thy life extended,
Double the course of Nature; or thy beauty
Above the malice of disease, or time
To wither? Would thou see thy book of fate,
And read the various lines that fall into
Thy life, as to their center: speak, and be
Possessed; if thou refuse what here is named,
Thy wish will come too late, Emeria?
None of all these; let me be still accepted
An humble servant to the gods.
Then I
Will find some other way to thy reward:
First, we release that duty of thy knee;
Reach thy fair hand.
I dare not.
Doe not tremble,
It shall but meet another like thine own;
For I had care not to affright my virgin:
What dost thou see in me, that to thy sense
Appears not man? Divinity is too bright
For thy weak eye, and therefore I have clad
In this no threatening shape, all that is divine:
That I with safety of thy sense, Emeria,
Might visit thee: come, I will see thee often,
If thou be wise to understand how much
It is my will to honour thee; and I
Will thus descend, and leave my beams behind,
Whose brightness were enough to burn thee,
To converse with thee in a loving way
Of smiling thus, and thus embracing thee—
Of mixing palms, nay I will kiss thee too.
Doe our gods practise this?
Not, but with those
They mean especial grace to, such as they know must hereafter shine above with them, though merely mortals, are adored; and seldom visit the world, hid thus in flesh and blood, which wee at pleasure can assume, and have desires like you, and have our passi∣once too, can love, I, and enjoy where wee will place the happi∣ness, else we had less than men.
I thought the powers above had been all honest.
It is in them chastity, nor is it sin
In those we love to meet wit active flames,
And be glad mothers to immortal issues:
How oft hath Jove, who justly is adored,
Left heaven, to practise love with such a fair one?
The Sun, for one embrace of Daphne, would
Have pawned his beams: not one, but hath sometimes
Descended, to make fruitful weak Mortality.
Oh, if thou coldest but reach, Emeria,
With thy imagination, what delight,
What flowing ecstasies of joy we bring
Your sex, made nice and cold by winter laws
Of man, that freeze the blood, thou wood'st be fond
To my embraces, and petition me
To bless thee with a rape, yet I woe thy
Consent.
Away:
Thou art no god sure, but
Some vicious Impostor: Can a Deity
Breath so much impious language, and reward
Virtue with shame?
Take heed, and doe not va••e
Thy self by rash and froward opposition;
Know, I can make thee nothing, at a breath.
Better be so, than made so foul a being.
Nay then, what should have been with thy consent a blessing, shall now only serve my pleasure, and I will take the for∣feit of thy coldness.
Oh help, some man, I dare not call upon the gods; for they are wicked grown, oh help.
I shall need none, thou thing of disobedience, thou art now within my power of love, or fury: yield, or I ll force thee into po∣stirs shall make pleasure weep, and hurl thee into want•…nnesse.
Who's with the Queen, my prisoner?
The Prince Conallus came to visit her.
So: bid my daughter Emeria come hither,
She's come very melancholy from the Court,
Under pretence to wait upon the Queen here. 
Still sad; come, I must have your face look otherwise,
Dress it in smiles: I hope you put not on
This sorrow for the Queen, she is a traitor
To the King, and to the gods.
A traitor, Sir!
Oh doe not say so; it is, I hear, for nothing,
But looking on the stranger Patrick with
Some pity.
It will not run
Out of my thought; but this is the same Patrick
That was my slave once, he was a Briton too:
I know not how, he found some treasure then
To buy his liberty: were he again
My slave, no gold should buy him from my swine,
Whose once companion he was: Emeria,
Do ye hear? Conallus, the young Prince is come
To see his mother; use him gently, girl:
Come, I have heard he does affect thee, ha?
He may be King.
His brother Coribreus
Is nearer to that title, and he says
He loves me.
Does he so? then love him best,
Imagine I had promised, Sir, my heart
To his younger brother.
Break a thousand promises,
And hazard breaking of thy heart too wench,
To be but one degree nearer a Queen;
It does exalt my heart, spread all thy charms
Of wit and language, when he courts thee girl:
Smile, kiss, or any thing, that may endear
Him and so great a fortune: I must leave thee,
But wonot be long absent.
Sir, the Bard does press to see the Queen.
He must not see her,
His insolence I'll punish; yet admit him hither,
His pleasant nature may raise mirth
In my sad daughter. 
Welcome, merry Bard.
I care not whither I be or no: the Queen
I come to see.
Shoe's private with the Prince:
Come hither, dost thou see that piece of sullenness,
That phlegmatic foolish thing.
And like the father.
Make her merry, and I'll give thee
Gold joy to purchase a new harp, here's some
In earnest; thou hast wanton pretty songs
To stir the merry thoughts of maids: I'm gone
To give thee opportunity, my presence
May spoil the working of thy mirth, that done
Shall it speak with the Queen too.
Fare you well Sir, and take a knave
Along with. Here's a rose
Sprung out of a thistle now: You are sad, Madam.
I have no cause of mirth, Bard.
What do ye think of me?
Think of thee, Bard; I think you are honest, and can show a pleasant face sometimes, without an over joy within, but it is thy office.
I know why you are so melancholy.
Prithee why dost think, Bard?
You want a man.
Why, thou art one?
That's more than you know.
It is l•…ng of men that maids are sad;
Come then, and sweetly kiss them,
Their lips invite, you will be mad
To come too late and miss them.
In their cheeks, are full-blown roses
To make garlands, to make posies:
He that desires to be a father,
Let him make haste before they fall, and gather:
You stay too long, and do them wrong:
If men would virgins strive to please,
No maid this year should dye of the greene disease.
What, are you merry yet?
I am so far
From being raised to mirth, that I incline
To anger.
Come, I'll sit you with a song,
A lamentable ballad, of one lost
Her maiden-head, and would needs have it cried,
With all the marks, in hope to have it again.
You were not sent to abuse me?
A dainty air too, I'll but tune my instrument.
No more, or I'll complain: sure hee knows nothing of my dishonour. How mine own thoughts fright me?
Now you shall hear the ditty.
Hence, foolish Bard.
A poor wench was sighing, and weeping amain,
And fine would she have her virginity again,
Lost she knew not how; in her sleep (as she said)
She went to bed pure, but she rise not a maid:
She made fast the door,
She was certain before,
She laid her self down in the bed:
But when she awaked, the truth is stark-naked,
Oh she mist her maiden-head.
Ha, the young Prince, I'll tarry no longer w'ee.
Now to the Queen.
Emeria, prithee doe not hide thy face
From me, it is more than common sorrow makes
Thee look thus: If the Queens mis-fortunes have
Darkened thy face, I suffer too in that.
If for thy self thou weep, my almost ebbing
Grief thou wilt enforce back, and beget
New seas, in which, made high by one strong sigh
Of thine, I meet a watery sepulchre.
My mothers fate commands my grief, but thine
A greater suffering, since our hearts are one,
And there wan•…s nothing, but a ceremony
To justify it to the world.
Call back
Your promises, my Lord, they were ill placed
On me, for I have nothing to deserve'em.
If thou be constant to thy self, and art
Emeria still—
That word hath wounded me.
Why, art not thou thy self?
I have the shape still,
But not the inward part.
Am I so miserable,
To have my faith suspected, for I dare not
Think thou can sin by any change: What act
Have I done my Emeria? or who hath
Poisoned thy pure soul with suggestion
Of my revolt? Apostasy I'll call it,
For n•…xt our gods, thou art my happiness.
Now, my dear Lord, and let me add thus much
In my own part, I never loved you better;
Never with more religious thoughts and honour
Looked on you; my heart never made a vow
So blessed in my hopes, as that I gave you,
And I suspect not yours.
What then can make thee,
My Emeria, less; or me? Thou dost affright—
Yes, I am less, and have that taken from me
Hath almost left me nothing, or if any,
So much unworthy you, that you would curse me,
Should I betray you to receive Emeria.
Doe not destroy me so, •…e plain.
Then thus—
But if I drop a tear or two, pray pardon me:
Did not the story touch my self, I should
Weep for it in another; you did promise
To marry me, my Lord.
I did, and will.
Alas, I have lost.
What?
The portion that I promised to bring with me.
Do I value thy wealth?
Oh, but the treasure
I lost, you will expect, and scorn me ever,
Because you have it not; yet heaven is witness
It is not my fault, a thief did force it from me,
Oh my dear Lord.
I know not what to fear,
Speak plainer yet.
You'll say I am too loud,
When I but whisper, Sir. I am no virgin.
Ha!
I knew it would fright you; but by all those tears,
The poor Lamb, made a prey to the fierce wolf,
Had not more innocence, or less consent
To be devoured, than I to lose mine honour.
Why, were thou ravished?
You have named it, Sir▪
The villain, name the villain, sweet Emeria,
That I may send his leprous soul to hell for it,
And when he hath confessed the monstrous sin,
I'll think thee still a virgin, and thou art so:
Confirm thy piety by naming him.
It will enlarge but your vexation, Sir,
That he's above your anger and revenge;
For he did call himself a god that did it.
The Devil he was; Oh do not wrack, Emeria,
The heart that honours thee; mock me not, I prithee,
With calling him a god, it was a fury,
The master fiend of darkness, and as hot
As hell could make him, that would ravish thee.
If you do think I ever loved you, Sir,
Or have a soul after my bodies rape,
He named himself a god, great Ceancrochius,
To whom I owe my shame and transformation.
Oh, I am lost in misery and amazement
So; I did see before it would afflict him:
But having given these reasons to Conallus,
For our divorce, I have provided how
To finish all disgraces by my death. 
Come, cure of my dishonour, and with blood
Wash off my stain. Ha, Archimagus!
Madam.
What news with our great Priest.
I come to tell you, heavenly Ceancrochius,
Of whom I had this day a happy vision,
Is pleased again to visit you, and commanded
I should prepare you.
I begin to find
Some Magical imposture. Does he know it?
I leave to say, how much you are his favourite,
Be wise, and humble for so great a blessing▪
This does increase my fears, I've been betrayed,
I'll live a little longer then; great Priest
My words are poor to make acknowledgement
For so divine a a favour: But I shall
Humbly expect, and hold my self again
Blessed in his presence.
Hoe's here Emeria;
Never was virgin so much honoured.
How is it with my sweet Emeria?
That question would become an ignorant Mortal,
Whose sense would be informed; not Ceancrochius
Whose eye at once can see the soul of all things.
I do not ask,
To make thee think I doubt, but to maintain
That form, which men familiar to such fair ones use
When they converse: For I would have my language
Soft as a lovers.
You are still gracious.
This temper is becoming, and thou dost
Now appear worthy of our loves and presence.
I knew when thy wise soul examined what
It was to be the darling to a god,
Thou would compose thy gestures, and resign
Thy self to our great will: Which we accept
And pardon thy first frailty; it is in us
Emeria to translate thee hence to heaven,
Without thy bodies separation,
In the twinkling of an eye, but thou shall it live
Here to convince erring mortality,
That gods do visit such religious votaries
In humane for me; and thus salute 'em.
And thus be answered, with a resolute heart.
Oh thou hast murdered me, Strumpet, hold.
Sure if you be a god, you are above
These wounds: If man thou hast deserved to bleed
For thy impiety.
My blood is punished,
A curse upon thy hand, I am no god;
I am the Prince, see Corybreus.
Ha? the Prince? were you my ravisher my Lord?
I have done a justice to the gods in this
And my own honour. Thou lost thing to goodness;
It was a glorious wound, and I am proud
To be the gods revenger.
H•…lp, Oh I am lost.
Call on the furies they did help thy sin,
And will transport thy soul on their black wings
To hell, Prince•…; and the gods can do no less,
Than in reward to draw thy purple stream up,
Shed in their cause, and place it a portent
In heaven, to affright such foul lascivious Princes.
I will live now, this story shall not fall so,
And yet I must not stay here, now Conallus
I have done some revenge for thee in this,
Yet all this wonot h•…lp me to my own
Again; my honour of a virgin never will
Return, I live and move, but wanting thee,
At best I'm but a walking misery.
My royal love, my Lady, and fair Mysteries,
Such love as mine, was never read in histories.
There's love, and love, good.
The poison to my heart was not so cruel.
As that I cannot hang thee, how's that, hang the Queen?
The poison to my heart was not so cruel,
As that I ca•…ot hang thee, my rich jewel.
Within my heart. Oh there's hang and jewel, and heart, and heart, good again.
I am thy constant Elf,
And dare for thy sweet sake, go hang my s•…lfe.
What though I am no Lord, yet I am loyal,
There's a gingle upon the letter, to show if she will
Give me but an inch, I'll take an ell; Lord and loyal, and though no prince I am thy servant royal. There's no figure in that, yes impossibility, servant and royal.
Then grant him love for love, that doth present these,
With Noverint universe per prefentes.
there's to show I am a Linguist, with a rumme in the rime consist∣ing of two several languages, beside love and love, thy jet and alabaster face. I eat because it draws the straw of my heart, and alabaster, because there is some white in her face,
Thy jet and Alabaster face now calls,
My love and hunger up to eat stone walls.
But so I may bite of her nose, if her face be alabaster; but she is in prison, there it holds, and I may do her service to break prison for her any way. Well, here's enough at a time, if she like this, I have an ambling muse that shall be at her service: But what stumbling block is cast in my way? This is no place to sleep in, I take it in a story under a trundlebed: I have seen these clothes before now, the tailor took measure for one of our gods that made 'em; 〈◊〉 hear friend, hal it is the Prince Corybreus, dead, kilt, Ha? my Lord hoe's speechless. What were I best to doe? in stead of searching the wound I'll first search his pockets: What's here? a bracelet, a pretty toy, I'll give it the Queen, but if I be found here alone I may be found necessary to his death. Ha, what shall I do?
My daughter gone abroad without a servant?
I offered my attendance.
Ha! what's here, one murdered? it is the Prince,
Slain in my house, confusion; Look about,
Search for the traitor I am undone for ever.
The Prince! I'll take my oath I see him not enter.
Why thus disguised?
I tremble to look on him, seek every where.
I gave access to none but Rodamant, and he is gone.
What shall we doe? remove the murdered body,
And on thy life be silent, we are lost else.
Attend without, and give access to none,
Till I have thought some way through this affliction.
Did my stars owe me this? oh, I could curse 'em,
And from my vex•…d heart exhale a vapour
Of execrations, that should blast the day,
And darken all the world. The Prince murdered
In my house, and the Traitor not discovered.
One, Sir, with a letter.
Let him carry it back, whore's the young Prince, Conallus?
Gone long since, Sir.
I'll lay the murder upon him,
It will be thought ambition, or upon the 〈◊〉.
Sir, one waits
With a Letter from the King.
The King? that name
Shoots horror through me now, who is the messenger?
A stranger both in habit and in person:
This is he, Sir.
Ha.
The King salutes you,
My Lord, this paper speaks his royal pleasure▪
You have forgot me, Sir; but I have been more
Familiar to your knowledge: Is there nothing
Within my face, that doth resemble once
A slave you had?
H•…, is your name Patrick?
It is, my Lord: I made my humble suit
To the King, that by his favour I might visit you;
And though I have not now that servile tie,
It will not shame me to profess Jove
You duty still, and shall to my best power
Obey your just commands.
He writ to me,
That I should try my art, and by some stratagem
Discharge his life; I'll do it, but all this wonot
Quit the suspicion of the Princes death:
What if I lay the murder to his charge?
I can swear any thing. But if he come off,
My head must answer; no trick in my brain?
You're welcome; the King writes you have desires
To see the Queen, you shall entreat her presence.
The King has honoured me.
You have deserved it.
And I doe count it happiness to receive
Whom he hath graced; but the remembrance
Of what you were, adds to the entertainment:
My old acquaintance, Patrick.
You are noble.
The Queen? welcome again, come hither, sir.
Madam; I joy to see you, and present
My humble duty: Heaven hath heard my prayers,
I hope, and if you still preserve that goodness,
That did so late, and sweetly shine upon you,
I may not be unwelcome, since there is
Something behind, which I am trusted with,
To make you happier.
Holy Patricik, welcome.
Obey in every circumstance: My despair 
Shall have revenge wait on it. This is, Madam,
A good man, he was once my slave; let not
That title take thy present freedom of
My house; my fortunes and my fate, I wish,
May have one period with thee, I shall
Attend you again, I hope we all may live
And dye together yet. My duty, Madam.
I doe not like their whispering, there's some mischief, hee
did so over-act his curtsy, I'll look about us.
Doe, honest Bard. Oh Madam, if you knew
The difference bet waxed my faith, and your
Religion, the grounds and progress of
What we profess, the sweetness, certainty,
And full rewards of virtue, you would hazard,
Nay, lose the glory of ten thousand worlds,
Like this to be a Christian, and be blessed
To lay your life down (but a moment, on
Which our eternity depends) and through
Torture and seas of blood contend, to reach
That blessed vision at last, in which
Is all that can be happy, and perfection.
I have a soul most willing to be taught.
Oh Madam, fire, help, we are all lost,
The house is round about on fire, the doors
Are barred and lock'•…▪ there is no going forth,
We shall be burnt, and that will spoil my singing:
My voice hath been r•…covered from a cold;
But fire will spoil it utterly.
Have no dread, holy Patrick, all their malice
Shall never hurt thy person, Heaven doth look
With scorn upon their treachery, thou art
Reserved to make this Nation glorious,
By their conversion to the Christian faith,
Which shall by blood of many Martyrs grow,
Till it be called the Island os the Saints;
Look up, and see what thou observ'st.
Milcho throwing his treasures into the flames.
Patrick, thou art caught, inevitable flames
Must now devour thee, you are my slave again,
There is no hope to scope: How I doe glory,
That by my policy thou shalt consume,
Though I be made a sacrifice with thee
To our great gods; ha, ha, the Queen: Bard,
You will be exlent roast meat for the Devil.
Hear me.
I choose to leap into these fires,
Rather than hear thee preach thy cursed faith.
You're sure to follow me, the King will praise
My last act yet; thus I give up my breath, 
And facrifice you all for his sons death.
Oh Tyrant, cruel to thy self, but we
Must follow our blessed Guide and holy Guardian:
Lead on, good Angel, fear not, virtuous Queen;
A black night may beget a smiling morn,
At worst to dye, it is easier than be borne.
Great Jove and Mars appeased bee
With blood, which we now offer thee,
Drained from a Christians heart, our first
Oblation of that Sect accursed;
And may we to the Altar bring
Patrick, our second offering.
The father of this Tribe, whose blood
Thus shed, will doe this Island good.
The gods allow what we present;
For see, the holy flame is sent
To mighty Jove and Mars, now bring
Your vocal sacrifice, and sing.
Look down, great Jove and God of war,
A new sacrifice is laid
On your Altars, richer far,
Than what in aromatic heaps we paid:
No curled smoke we send,
With perfumes to befriend
The drooping air, the cloud
We offer is exhaled from blood,
More shining than your tapers are,
And every drop is worth a star.
Were there no red in heaven, from the torn heart
Of Christians, we that colour could impart,
And with their blood, supply those crimson streakes
That dress: the sky, when the fair morning breaks.
Father.
The King.
Away. Let not my daughters stir from hence:
Is this reward, you gods, for my devotion:
No more: I could not by my Art foresee
This danger.
Our father seemed much troubled.
I must appear a stranger to all passages,
Be not disturbed, my princely charge, use you
The free delights of life, while they are presented
In these your lovers: Si•…ra, make fast the door,
And wait aloof; I'll follow the sad King.
No misery can happen, while I thus
Embrace Ferochus.
And I safe in the arms
Of my dear servant.
You make it heaven by gracing me.
But why have we so long
Delayed our blessed enjoyings, thus content
With words, the shadows of our happiness.
So, so, here's fine devotion in the Temple:
But whore's my bracelet, let me see?
Whore's Rodamant?
Am I invisible again? Is this the trick on it.
The door is safe; come, my dear princely Mistress,
And with the crown of love reward your servant.
What's that?
Fruition of our joys.
Is not this
Delight enough, that we converse, and smile
And kiss, Ferochus.
Who's that?
Where, Madam?
I felt another lip.
Than mine? here's none, try it again:
Why should her constitution be so cold?
I would not lose more opportunities,
Love, shoot a flame like mine into her bosom.
Who's that, Endurius, that kissed me now?
None, since you blessed my lip with a touch, Madam,
My brother is at play with your fair sister.
I felt a beard.
A beard? that's strange.
You shall feel: some else too.
Why that unkind blow, Madam?
What means my servant?
Now to my other gamester.
Oh, I could dwell for ever in this bosom, 
But is there nothing else for us to taste?
Hold.
What's the matter?
Something has almost torn away my nose. Endarius?
What says my brother?
Did you pull me by the nose?
I moved not hence.
Did you kick me, brother?
We have troubled f•…oles sure, here's no body
But our selves; the doors, you say, are safe.
Wonot that prompt you to something else?
I dare not understand you.
What blood is that upon your face?
You want a beard, young Gentleman.
Mine? Blood; I felt something that like a fly
Glanced o'my cheek:
Brother, your nose bl•…d you that 〈◊〉.
You no•…d not blush•…d one side, brother▪ ha, ha.
Is not this strange, sister; how came our servants
So bloody?
Again. I prithee leave this fooling with my face,
I shall be angry.
I touched you not.
Another wipe for for you.
Some spirit sure:
I cannot contain laughter: what a raw head my servant has?
Mine has the same complexion.
Put me to keep the door another time. I ha kept 'em ho∣nest, and now I will be visible again.
Rodamant.
Here: I was a sleep, but this noise waked me.
Ha you done with the Ladies?
Open the doors.
We are undone, my Lords, the King is coming
In fury back again, with full resolve
To break these images, his son is slain,
And burnt to ashes since, in Milcho's house,
And he will be revenged upon the gods,
He says, that would not save his dearest son:
I fear he will turn Christian: Archimagus
Is under guard, and brought along to see
This execution done, no art can save you.
We are lost too for ever, in our honours.
Break down the Temple doors.
He's come already, we are all lost, Madam.
Tear off these antic habits quickly, brother,
Doe you the same. More blood upon our faces.
Oh, my Fedella, something may preserve us
To meet again: Endarius, so, so: open.
Ha! keep off, more horrors to affright me,
I must confess I did command your deaths
Unjustly, now my son is murdor'd for it.
Oh do not pull more wrath from heaven upon you.
Love innocence, the gods have thus revenged
In your sons tragedy: Draw not a greater
Up on your self and this fair Island, by
Threatening the temples, and the gods themselves,
Look on them still with humble reverence,
Or greater punishments remain for you
To suffer; and our ghosts shall never leave
To fright thy conscience, and with thousand stings
Afflict thy soul to madness and despair:
Be patient yet and prosper, and let fall
Thy anger on the Christians, that else
Will poison thy fair kingdom.
Ha, Archimagus, can thou forgive me,
And send those spirits hence?
I can, great Sir,
You troubled Spirits, I command you leave
The much distracted King; return and speedily,
To sleep within the bosom of the sea,
Which the kings wrath, and your sad fates assigned ye;
And as you move to your expecting monument
The waves again, no frown appear upon you,
But glide away in peace.
We do obey
Great Priest, and vanish.
Are they gone Fedella?
They talk of women's wit at a dead lift,
This was above our brains I love him for it
And wish my self i•…'s arms now to reward him,
I should find him no ghost a'my conscience:
But where shall we meet next.
Let us away.
Art sure they are gone Archimagus? my fears
So leave me, and religion once again
Enter my stubborn heart, which dared to mutiny
And quarrel with the gods; Archimagus,
Be near again, we will redeem our rashness,
By grubbing up these Christians, that begin
To infect us, and our kingdom.
This becomes you,
And if you please to hear me, I dare promise
The speedy ruin of them all.
You are borne
To make us happy, how my dear Archimagus?
This Island Sir is full of dangerous serpents,
Of toads, and other venomous destroyers:
I will from every province of this kingdom
Summon these killing creatures to devour him,
My prayer and power of the gods, fear not,
Will do it, by whom inspired I prophecy
Patricks destruction.
I embracemy Priest,
Do this, and I'll forget my son, and die,
And smile to see this Christians tragedy.
So, so, we are like to have a fine time on it, we may get more by every Christian we have the grace to catch, than by three months pay against our natural enemies.
And th•…ir noddles be so precious, would all my kindred were Christians; I would not leave a head to wag upon a shoulder of our generation, from my mothers sucking pig at her nipple, to my great grandfathers Coshering in the peas straw. How did that fell∣low look whose throat we cut last?
Basely, and like a Christian, would the fellow they call Patrick had been in his place, we had been made for ever.
Now are we of the condition of some great men in office, that desire execution of the Laws, not so much to correct offences and reform the common wealth, as to thrive by their punish∣meant and grow rich and fat with a lean conscience. But I have walked, and talked my self a hungry, prithee open the secrets of thy knapsack, before we build any more projects; lets see what store of belly timber we have. Good, very good Pagan food: sit down and let our stomachs confer a while.
royal My love is roasted, she died of a burning fever, &amp; since poison wonot work upon me, I am resolved to look out the most convenient tree in this wood to hang my self: And because I will be sure to hang without molestation or cutting down, which is a disparagement to an able and willing body, I will hang invisible, that no body may see me, and interrupt my hempen meditations. But who are these? a brace of mankillers a mounching; now I think what a long journey I am going▪ as far as to another world, it were not a miss to take provision along with me▪ when I come to the trick of hanging, I may weigh the better, and sooner be out of my pain: bracelet stick to me, by your leave gentlemen, what's your ordinary?
Who's that?
A friend, my brace of Hungarians, one that is no soldier; but will justify he has a stomach in a just cause, and can sight •…oath and nail, with any slesh that opposes me.
I can see no body.
I will knock your pate, fellow in arms, and to help you to see, open the eyes of your understanding, with a wooden instru∣meant that I have.
I see nothing but a voice, shall I strike it?
No, it is some Spirit take heed and offend it no•…, I never knew any man strike the devil, but he put out his neck bone or his shoulder blade, let him alone, it may be the ghost of some usu∣rer that kicked up his heals in a dear year; and died upon a sir∣f•…t of Shamroks and cheese parings.
Who's this, a woman alone?
A•…d handsome, what makes she in this wood? we'll divide.
What the woman?
No, I'll have her body, and thou shalt have her clothes.
I know not where I am, this wood has lost me,
But I shall never more be worth the finding:
I was not wise to leave my fathers house,
For here I may be made a prey to rapine,
Or food to cruel beasts.
No, you shall find that we are men; what think you? which of us two have you most mind to laugh and lye down withal.
Protect me some good power, more ravishers.
We are soldiers, and not used to complement, be not coy but answer.
We are but two, you may soon make a choice.
You shall find that we be three, are you so hot?
Come humble your self behind that tree, or—
Are you a man?
Never doubt it, I have passed for a man in my days.
Oh my skull.
Whats the matter?
Where shall I hide my self?
Your Comrade will expect your company in the next ditch.
Are you good at that?
What dost thou mean?
What do I mean? what dost thou mean to beat my brains out?
I: hold, it is some Spirit, and we sight with the air.
Cannot a Mare come into the ground, but you must be leaping you stone horses.
My skull is as tender as a Mullipuffe.
He has made a cullice of my sconce, hold dear friend.
Has the devil no more wit then to take part against the flesh?
The Devil may have a mind to her himselse, let him ha her.
If I come back, let me be glib'd.
Now Lady—what, is she invisible too? Ha. Well, let her shift for her self, I have tamed their concupiscence. Now to my business of hanging again.
I doe like none of these trees; the Devil is at my elbow now, I doe hear him whisper in mine ear, that any tree would serve, if I would but give my mind to it. Let me consider, what shall I get by hanging of my self, how it will be to no purpose, a halter will be but cast away, by your leave—I would not have you much out of the way, because here are trees that other men may hold con∣venient.—Oh, my wrist: It is a spirit. Sweet Devil, you shall have it, the bracelet is at your service. Have I all my fingers? A pox on his fangs, now o▪my conscience I am visible again, if the Soldiers should meet with me now, whom I have pounded, what case were I in? I feel a distillation, and would be heartily beaten to save my life.
Here's one, for ought I know, may be as dangerous: A pox of de∣spear that brought mehither to choose my gallows; would I were at home in an embroidered clout.—I'll sneak this way.
I am no ghost, but the same lost Emeria,
My Lord, you left me.
Did not the flames devour thee.
I felt no flame, but that which my revenge
Did light me to, for my abused honour.
Oh say that word again: Art thou revenged
Upon thy ravisher? It was a god,
Thou told me.
But he found the way to death:
And when I name him, you will either not
Believe me, or compassion of his wounds
Will make you print as many in my breast:
He was—
Say, fear not, wronged Emeria,
Can any heart find compassion for his death,
That murdered the sweet peace of thy chaste bosom?
Oh never, I shall bless that resolute hand,
That was so just, so pious; and when thou hast
Assured, that he which played the Satire with thee,
Is out of the world, and killed sufficiently,
(For he that robbed thee hath deserved to dye,
To the extent of his wide sin) I'll kiss,
And take thee in mine arms, Emeria,
And lay thee up as precious to my love,
As when our vows met, and our yielding bosoms
Were witness to the contract of our hearts.
It was your brother Coribreus, Sir:
That name unties your promise.
Ha! my brother?
Sweet, let me pause a little, I am lost else.
I did not well to enlarge his sorrow thus:
Though I can hope no comfort in this world,
He might live happy, if I did not kill him,
With heaping grief on grief thus.
He is slain then.
If you will, Sir, revenge his death, you must
Point your wrath here, and I will thank you for it;
Though you should be a day in killing me,
I should live so much longer to forgive you.
This weak hand did not tremble when it killed him,
And it came timely to prevent, I fear,
The second part of horror he had meant
To act upon me.
Wo'd he had took my life,
When he assailed thy chastity, so thou
Had been preserved: I cannot help all this.
Did it not grieve thee he deserved to dye, hue?
I took no joy, Sir, in his Tragedy.
That done, thou sledst.
I left my fathers house,
And found no weight hung on my feet for giving
His lust the bloody recompense.
Thou are•… happy:
The gods directed thee to fly, Emeria,
Thou had been lost else with my brothers ashes,
And my dear mother, whom the hungry slames
Devoured, soon after thy departure.
How?
I know not by what malice, or mis-fortune,
Thy fathers house was burned•… and in it he
Did meet his funeral sire too, ha•…? Emeria.
Your companie's fair, but I'll leave you in a Wood, I could like your religion well; but those rules of sasting, prayer, and so much penance, will hardly sit my constitution.
It is nothing to win heaven.
But you doe not consider, that I shall loose my pension, my pension from the King▪ there's a business.
Do not I leave more?
I confess it; and you will get loss by the bargain; but you that have been used to hunger, and nothing to live upon, may make the better shift. The less you •…at, you say, will make the soul fat; but I have •… body wonot be used so: I must drink, and go warm, and make much of my voice, I cannot doe good up∣on water and salads, keep your 〈◊〉drink to your selves, I am a kind of foolish 〈◊〉, P•…ec, with us, wine and women are provocatives, long tables▪ and short graces are physical, and in fashion. I'll take my leave▪ Madam, no Christian yet, as the world goes; perhaps hereafter, when my voice is a weary of me, I may grow weary of the world, and stoop to your ord▪na•…ie, say my prayers, and think how to dye, when my living is taken from me, in the mean time
I neither will lend, nor borrow,
Old age will be here to morrow,
'This pleasure we are made for,
When death comes all is paid for:
No matter what's the bill of fare,
I'll take my cup, I'll take no care.
Be wise, and say you bad warning,
To laugh is better than learning,
To wear no clothes, not neat is.
But hunger is good where meat ù:
Gìve me wine, give me a wench,
And let her Parrot talk in French.
It is a match worth the making,
To keep the merry thought waking;
A song is better than fasting,
And sorrow's not worth the tasting,
Then keep your brain light as you can,
An ounce of care will kill a man.
And so I take my leave.
Ha! doe I see the Queen, Emeria?
Alas, poor Bard, the flatteries of this world
Hath chained his sense: thus many selfe-loving natures,
Prisoned in mists and errors, cannot see
The way abroad that leads to happiness,
Or truth, whose beamy hand should guide us in it.
What a poor value do men set of heaven?
Heaven, the perfection of all that can
Be said, or thought, riches, delight, or harmony,
Health, beauty, and all these not subject to
The waste of time; but in their height eternal,
Lost for a pension, or poor spot of earth,
Favour of greatness, or an hours faint pleasure:
As men, in scorn of a true flame that's near,
Should run to light their taper at a glo-worne.
It is she, and the good Bishop Patrick with her.
Madam, the Prince Conallus▪
Oh let me kneel to you, and then to Heaven,
That hath preserved you still to be my mother;
For I believe you are alive, the fire
Hath not defaced this monument of sweetness.
My blessing and my prayers be still my child's,
It was the goodness, son, of holy Patrick
That rescued me from those impris'ning flames
You speak of, his good Angel was our Conduct.
To him that can dispense such blessings, mother,
I must owe duty, and thus kneeling, pay it:
May Angels still be near you.
Rise, Conall us:
My benediction on thee; be but what
Thy Mother is, a Christian, and a guard
Of Angels shall attend thee too; the fire
We walked upon secure▪ and which is greater,
Escaped the immortal flames, in which black souls,
After their ill-spent lives, are bound to suffer.
Sir, you shall steer me, and my mothers blessed
Example will become my imitation.
But there's a piece of silent misery
Is worth your comfort, mother, and his counsel;
She is, I dare not name how much dishonoured,
And should have b•…en the partner of my bosom,
Had not a cruel man forbid my happiness,
And on that fair and innocent table powered
Poison, above the Dragons blood, or Vipers.
My humblest duty, Madam
Dicbu's Cell
Is not sar off, please you attend the Queen,
We are bent thicher.
Yes: and as we walk,
I'll tell you a sad story of my brother
And this poor virgin.
Come▪ I'll lead the way.
With such a Guide we cannot fear to stray.
Where are we yet Endarius?
I cannot
Inform you more, then that we are in the wood still.
And we are lost, our fear to die in the sight
Of men, hath brought us hither with our blood
To quench the thirst of wolves: Or worse, to starve.
We are in no fear to be apprehended
Where none inhabit.
Now that lust is punished,
Which fed our hope, if we had staid in the Temple
To have polluted it, with foul embraces:
How weariness, with travel, and some fasting
Will tame the flesh.
Stay here's a cave.
Take heed,
It may be a Lion, or a fierce wolves den;
How nature trembles at the thought of death:
Though it be pressed down, with the weight of life.
I dare not enter, a new fear invades me.
The worst is welcome, with our clamour, rouse
What ever doth inhabit here, or man
Or beast appear, if any such dwell in
This Cave? We can meet charity or death.
What voice with so much passion calls me forth,
Ha? Be my protection good heaven:
My sons, my murdered sons with ghastly looks,
And bruised limbs; why do you come to me thus
To fright my withered eyes? alas I was innocent,
It was the King, not I commanded your
Untimely death, I have wept for ye boys,
And constantly before the Sun a waked,
When the cold dew drops full upon the ground▪
As if the morn were discontented too.
My naked feet o'er many a rugged stone
Hath walked, to drop my tears into the seas,
For your sad memories.
We are no spirits, but your living sons,
Preserved without the knowledge of the King,
By Archimagus, till a new mis-fortune
Compel d us hither to meet death, we fear,
In want of food.
Are ye alive? come in,
It is no time to be inquisitive;
My blessing, I have something to refresh you,
Course fare, but such as will keep out sad famine:
Humble your selves and enter, my poor boys,
You'll wonder at the change; but we to Heaven
Do climb with loads upon our shoulders borne,
Nor must we tread on roses, but on thorne.
Now we approach the Hermit Dichu's Cell:
Are you not weary, Madam?
Not yet, Father,
In such religious company.
You were not
Used to this travel; how does my new son,
And sweet Emeria?
I am blessed on all sides.
You have quieted the tempest in my soul,
And in this holy peace I must be happy.
You will be Spouse to an eternal Bridegroom,
And lay the sweet foundation of a rule,
That after ages, with devotion,
Shall praise and follow. You are, Sir, reserved
To bless this Kingdom with your pious government,
Your Crown shall flourish, and your blood possess
The Throne you shall leave glorious: This Nation
Shall in a fair succession thrive, and grow
Up the worlds Academy, and disperse,
As the rich spring of humane and divine
Knowledge, clear streams to water foreign Kingdoms,
Which shall be proud to owe what they possess
In learning, to this great all-nursing Island.
May we be worthy of this prophecy.
Discourse hath made the way less tedious,
We have reached the Cell already, which is much
Too narrow to contain us; but beneath
These trees, upon their cool and pleasing shades,
You may sit down; I'll call upon my Convert:
Dichu, my Penitent, come forth, I pray,
And entertain some guests I have brought hither,
That deserve welcome.
I obey that voice.
The Queen, and Prince, and Milcho's virtuous daughter
Gained to our holy faith.
Let my knee speak
My duty, though I want words for my joy,
Ten thousand welcomes; I have guests within too,
You'll wonder to salute my sons, not dead,
As we suppose, by heavenly providence,
I hope, reserved to be made blessed by you,
They are here. 
Your duties to the Queen and Prince,
Then to this man, next to our great Preserver.
The Patron of us all.
A happy meeting:
I must rejoice to see you safe, and here:
But tell us by what strange means, all this while,
You have been preserved? Sit down.
What musick's this?
It is heavenly.
And a preface to some message,
O•… will of Heaven, be silent, and attend it:
Such harmony as this did wait upon
My Angel Victor, when he first appeared,
And did reveal a treasure under ground,
With which I bought my freedom, when I kept
Unhappy Mil•…ho's swine; Heavens will be done.
What, all asleep already? holy dreams
Possess your faucie, I can wait no longer.
Down from the skies,
Commanded by the Power that lies
The world and nature in a c•…aine,
We come, we come, a glorious train,
To wait on thee,
And make thy person danger•…free:
Hark whilst we sing,
And keep time with our golden wing,
To show how earth and heaven agree,
What echo rises to our harmo•…ic.
Holy Patrick, sleep in peace,
Whilst I thy Guardian, with these
My fellow Angels, wait on thee,
For thy desence: A troop, I see,
Of serpents, vipers, and what ere
Doth carry killing poison, here
Summoned by Art, and power of hell;
But thou shalt soon their fury quell,
And by the strength of thy command,
These creatures shall forsake the Land,
And creep into the sea; no more
To live upon the Irish shore.
Once more then.
Patrick, sleep; oh sleep a while,
And wake the Patron of this Isle.
Your person shall be safe; fear not, great Sir,
I have directed all their stings and poison:
See where he sleeps, if he escape this danger,
Let my life, with some horrid circumstance,
End in this place, and carry all your curses.
What think you of these creeping executioners?
Doe they not move, as if they knew their errand?
My Queen! my son Conallus! Dicbu! ha!
And the still wandering ghosts of his two sons!
They are alive, Sir.
Ha, who durst abuse us?
Will you not have compassion of the Queen,
And the Prince, Sir?
How met they to converse?
They are all Christian.
Let the serpent then
Feed upon all, my powerful Archimagus.
In vain is all your malice, Art, and power
Against their lives, whom the great hand of Heaven
Deigns to protect; like wolves you undertake
A quarrel with the Moon, and waste your anger:
Nay, all the shafts your wrath directs hither,
Are shot against a brazen arch, whose vault
Impenetrable, sends the arrows back,
To print just wounds on your own guilty heads.
These serpents, (tame at first and innocent,
Until mans great revolt from grace released
Their duty of creation) you have brought,
And armed against my life; all these can I
Approach, and without trembling, walk upon;
Play with their stings, which though to me not dangerous,
I could, to your destruction, turn upon
Your selves, and punish with too late repentance.
But you shall live, and what your malice meant,
My ruiue, I will turn to all your safeties,
And you shall witness: Hence, you frightful monsters,
Go hide, and bury your deformed heads
For ever in the sea; from this time be
This Island free from beasts of venomons natures:
The Shepherd shall not be afraid hereafter,
To trust his eyes with-sleep upon the hills;
The travellers shall have no suspicion,
Or fear, to measure with his wearied limbs
The silent shades; but walk through every brake,
Without more guard than his own innocence.
The very earth and wood shall have this blessing
(Above what other Christian Nations boast)
Although transported where these Serpents live
And multiply, one touch shall soon destroy 'em.
See how they all obey him, Archimagus.
Confusion: All my Art is trampled on.
Can neither man, nor beast, nor Devil hurt him?
Support me, fellow-Priests; I sink, I feel
The ground bend with my weight upon it, ha!
The earth is loose in the foundation,
And something heavy as the world doth hang
Upon my feet, and weigh me to the Center.
A sire, a dreadful fire is underneath me,
And all those fiends that were my servants here,
Look like tormentors, and all seem to strive,
Who first shall catch my falling flesh upon
Their burning pikes: There is a power above
Our gods, I see too late. I fall, I fall,
And in my last despair, I curse you all.
Patrick, the King will kneel to thee.
Oh rise,
And pay to Heaven that duty.
Can forgive?
Let me embrace you all, and freely give
What I desire from this good man, a pardon.
Thou shalt no more suspect me but possess
All thy desires. The ground is shut again:
Where now is Archimagus? How I shake,
And court this Christian out of fear, not love?
Once more visit our Palace, holy Father.
The story of your sons, and what concerns
Your escape, Madam, we will know hereafter;
In the mean time be secure.
We are your creatures.
Our prayers and duty.
I suspect him still;
But fear not, our good Angels still are near us:
Death at the last can but untie our frailty;
It were happy for our holy faith to bleed,
The Blood of Martyrs is the Churches seed.
HOw ever the Dice run Gentlemen, I am
The last man borne, still at the Irish game:
What say you to the Epilogue? may not I stay,
And boldly ask your Verdict of the Play?
I would report the Sun-shine on your brow,
And the soft language of the Dye t'allow
Our labour and your Story, native known;
It is but justice to affect your own;
Yet this is but a part of what our Muse
Intends, if the first birth you nobly use:
Then give us your free votes, and let us stile
You Patrons of the Play, him of the Isle.


FRom my Devotions yonder am I come,
Drawn by a nearer and more glorious Sun.
Hail ô ye sacred Lights; who doe inspire
More than yond holy and eternal Fire.
A foreign Court lands here upon your Shore,
By showing its own worth to show yours more:
Set here as Sapphires are by your Queen's veins,
Not to boast Colour, but confess their stains.
No matter now for Art, you make all fit;
Your Presence being still beyond all wit.
Whiles by such Majesty our Scene is dressed,
You come both the Entertainer and the Guest.
A Priest discovered as before.
AFter our Rites done to the King, we doe
Think some Devotions to be paid to you.
But I could wish some Question hung up there,
That we by Genuine sounds might take your ear▪
Or that our Scene in Bodley's Building lay,
And the Metaphy sickes were cast into a Play.
To please your Palates I could wish there were
A new Professor, Poet of the Chair.
But as where the Earth cannot ascend, we know
The Sun comes down and cheers her here below:
So we (the Stage being aired now, and the Court
Not smelt) hope you'll descend unto our sport;
And think it no great trespass, if we doe
S••no o'er our Trifle once again to you.
It is not the same as then, that glorious Press
Did pass both for the matter, and the dress▪
For where such Majesty was seen, we may
Say, the Spectators only made the Play.
Expect no new thing yet; it is without doubt
The former Face, only the Eyes put out,
But you add new ones to it, being sent
As for our grace, so for our supplement.
We hope here's none inspired from late damned books,
Will sour it into Tragedy with their looks;
The little Ruff, or Careless, without fear
May this securely see, securely hear.
There's no man shot at here, no Person's hit,
All being as free from danger, as from wit▪
And such should still the first adventures be
Of him, who's but a Spy in Poetry.
No Envy then or Faction fear we, where
All like your selves is innocent and clear.
The Stage being private then, as none must sit,
And, like a Trap, lay wait for sixpence wit;
So none must cry up Booty, or cry down;
Such Mercenary Guise fits not the Gown.
No Traffic then: Applause, or Hiss elsewhere
May pass as ware, it is only Judgment here.
THe rites and Worship are both old, but you
Have pleased to make both Priest and People new.
The same Sun in yon Temple doth appear;
But they'are your Rays, which give him lustre here.
That Fire hath watched ever since; but it hath been
Only Your gentler breath that kept it in.
Things of this nature scarce survive that night
That gives them Birth; they perish in the sight;
Cast by so far from after-life, that there
Is scarce ought can be said, but that they were.
Some influence yet may cross this fate; what You
Please to awaken must still come forth new.
And though the untouched Virgin Flower doth bring
The true and native Dowries of the Spring;
Yet some desires there are perhaps, which doe
Affect that Flower chafed and sullied too:
For in some bosoms stuck, it comes from thence
Double-perfum'd, and deeper strikes the Sense.
And we are bid plead this; fore-seeing how
That which was fresh ere while may languish now.
Things twice seen loose; but when a King or Queen
Commands a second sight, they're then first seen.
THese wicked Ephesian Captives, are most everlasting Tipplers; I charmed my fleas with'em last night, and left them too I'm sure well to live, and yet they're at it again this morning.
Hem! hem! hem! A pox on our Goo∣lore. &amp;c.
So! now they're tuning their Pipes. O the Reli∣gion of these Greeks! they sing and drink down the Sun, and then they sing and drink him up again. Some drunken Hymn I warrant you towards now, in the praise of their great huge, rolling, Tunbellyed god Bacchus as they call him. Let's hearken a little.
He pox on our Gaolor, and on his fat Jowle
'Ther's liberty lies in the bottom o'th'Bowle. 
He fig for what ever the Rascal can doe,
'Our Dungeon is deep, but our Cup's so too. 
'Then drink we a round in despite of our Foes,
'And make our hard Irons cry clink in the Close.
Wondrous good I faith! These fettered Swans chant it most melodiously before their deaths. Sure there is a great deal of pleasure in being hanged; for I have observed
it ever since I was a little one, that they always sing before they go to it. But here's that will spoil your voices my Friends.
Who's there?
Your friend at a dead lift; your Landlord Molops.
Now grand Commissioner of fate; what would thou have Heir apparent to Pluto?
Come forth; and if you can endure to read, her's a Persian line in my hand will instruct you.
Guardian of Rags and Vermin, Protector of halfe-breeches and no shirts, what's thy Raskalship's plea∣sure?
Good words Sir, good words: I am your Destiny, do you not see your Thread of Life here?
Yes, yes, it is of thy wives one twisting, good Mo∣lops, I know the Promotion of your Family: she came from the Web-errantry of highway-Inkle, to the domestic turning and winding of home bred Hemp, and thence gets a three-halfe-penny Legacy at the departure of every wronged Sinner.
And as for thy self, had not that weighty bulk of thine cracked so many Gibbets, that the King began to fear his Forests, thou had never been preserved to whiffle plagues as thou usher'st us to the Bar, and take away the Judges stomachs as often as they come to eat upon Life and Death, and celebrate the Funerals of distressed Gentle∣men.
You dying men may be impudent by your places, but I'd wish you to compose your countenances and your manners both, for the King is coming to visit you.
What make thou here then? though I easily be∣leeve thou hast an ambition to be seen in good company, yet prithee be gon, and don't discredit us. The King loves no Garbidge-tubbes.
The King shall be informed of the foul words you give his Officers.
Why what can he doe? he won't let us go and
conquer us again, will he?
But good honest Landlord, what's the Kings intent to honour us with his Royal visit?
To assign us perhaps some three or four hun∣dred stripes aday a piece, to take down my Landlord's by∣die, and make him in case to suffer what he hath been long adjudged to.
No, Sauciness, it is to make one of you King.
Then Sauciness, know your Masters.
Be not mistaken: it is not any way to hon••• you, but to make himself sport. For you must know, that tic the custom of the Persian Kings after a Conquest, to take one of the Captives, and adorn him with all the Robes of Ma∣jesty, giving him all Privileges for three full days, that hee may doe what hee will, and then be certainly led to death.
Will he allow so long▪ I'd give my life at any tim• for one days Royalty; it is space enough to new mould a Kingdom. His Majesty uses us wondrous reasonably, I'd as liffe deal with him as any man I know. But who's to have our clothes, Sirrah, when we have done?
It is a small fee that the State hath entailed upon my Place an't please you.
By my troth! guessed so: I was wondering how their Courtiers could go so brave with so little means.
Well, what must be, must be▪ I was afraid I should have died a silly foolish old Animal, called Virgin. But now, have at one of the Ladies ever I go▪ I have a strong desire to leave some Posterity behind me. I would not have the house of the Stratocles decay for want of Issue.
If I have the fortune of't, I'll Revel it all night; Kings they say, ought not to sleep for the good of the people.
Sirrah Gaolor, see you send Mistress Turne-key your wife to take us up whores enough: and be sure she let none of the young Students of the Law fore-stall the Market.
Peace, the King approaches: stand in your ranks orderly, and show your breeding; and be sure you blow no∣thing on the Lords.
ARe these the fairest, and the handsomest
among all the Captives?
There is one more which I set apart; a good per∣sonable fellow, but he's wondrous heavy and bookish, and therefore I thought him unfit for any honour.
Go call him forth; there's none of all these has
A Forehead for a Crown; their blood runs thick,
As if it would blot a sword.
See, there comes one
Armed with a serious and Majestique look,
As if he would read Philosophy to a King:
We've conquered something now. What readst thou there?
I believe hoe's conning a Hymn against the good Time.
It is a discourse of the Nature of the Soul;
That shows the vicious Slaves, but the well inclined
Free▪ and their own though conquered.
Thou dost speak
As if thou were victorious, not Arsamnes.
I not deny your Conquest, for you may
Have virtues to entitle't yours; but otherwise,
If one of strange and ill contrived desires,
One of a narrow or intemperate mind
Prove Master of the field, I cannot say
That he hath conquered, but that he hath had
A good hand of it; he hath got the day,
But not subdued the men: Victory being
Not fortunes gift, but the deservings Purchase,
Whom dost thou call deserving?
Him, who dares
Die next his heart in cold blood; him, who fights
Not out of thirst, or the unbridled lust
Of a fleshed sword, but out of Conscience
To kill the Enemy, not the man. Who when
The Laurel's planted on his brow, even then
Under that safe-protecting Wreath, will not
Contemn the Thunderer, but will
Acknowledge all his strength derived, and in
A pious way of gratitude return
Some of the spoil to Heaven in Sacrifice;
As Tenants doe the first fruits of their Trees,
In an acknowledgment that the rest is due.
True, Tell me, were thou then to pay thy vows
What would thou sacrifice? the best, or worst?
The best, unto the Best. If I had destined
An Ox unto the Altar, he should be
Fair, and well fed; for the Deity doth not love
The maimed, or misshapen, because it is
A thing so different from himself, deformity
Being one of Natures trespasses: he should
Be crowned then, and conducted solemnly,
That my Religion might be specious,
It were stealth else, not Devotion.
Bravely said.
But (t's pity) thou hast reasoned all this while
Against thy self, for our Religion doth
Require the Immolation of one Captive;
And thou hast proved that he is best bellowed
That best deserves to be spared.
I could
Tell you, the Gods have neither appetite
Nor entrails; that they doe not hunger after
Your Cookery of sacrifice, and that
A grain of Incense, or a piece of Gum,
If offered with Devotion, may redeem
A destined Hecatomb. But this would be
To deprecate my fate; which by your Sun,
Your Sun that doth require me, I expect
With the same mind, as I would doe my Nuptials.
And so't shall come, thy shape and virtues doe
Enrich and furnish thee for Heaven. I would
Or thou had fled, or I not conquered.
Adorn him with Robes. But thou must swear
First to be faithful to the State.
I swear.
'Come from the Dungeon to the Throne
To be a King, and straight be none.
'Reigne then a while, that thou may be
'Fitter to fall by Majesty.
'So Beasts for sacrifice we feed;
First they are crowned, and then they bleed.
'Wash with thy Blood what wars have done
'Offensive to our God the Sun:
'That as thou fellest we may see
'Him pleased, and set as red as thee.
Enjoy the Glories then of state,
'Whiles pleasures ripen thee for fate.
'So Beasts: &amp;c.
Now then, Cratander, I doe here indulge thee
All the Prerogatives of Majesty
For three full days; which being expired, that then
Thou may fall honourably, I intend
To strike the blow my self.
I neither take
New courage from the Power, nor suffer new
Fears from the Death that waits it: both are things
That have two ears, by which they may be taken;
So that they are indifferent in themselves;
And only good or bad as they are ordered.
Off with their shekels Sirrah: you my Lords
Take order they be quickly well attired,
That they may come to Court, and doe us service.
It is next of all our Royal pleasure, that
Battle be re-inforc'd by the next Sun,
To make our Conquest perfect: ell's not safe
Till the Snake leave to threaten with his tail.
Our Reign is short, and business much, be speedy.
Our Counsels and our deeds must have one birth.
If you'll make use of any Ornaments, I've a couple of Jack-chaynes at your service.▪ Come Gentlemen, please you to follow, I'll give you ease of your Irons suddenly.
Sirrah be quick, that my foot may be at liberty to kick thee.
Whether tends the mind of this ambitious wretch?
H'hath thoughts so hasty, and so large, as if
He would over-runne the whole world in a breath.
I like the courage of the man: methinkes
H'hath given a taste, how worthy he is of
A longer Kingdom.
You'll obey him then?
I don't obey
Him, but the King; as they that pay their vows
Unto the Deity, shrouded in the Image.
True, it is the King's will he should be obeyed
But hoe's a Slave; the man looks personable,
And fit for Action, but he is a Slave.
He may be noble, virtuous, generous, all,
But he is still a Slave.
As if the sullying
Must turn all purer mettle into dross;
Or that a level might not sometimes be
In the possession of a private man.
What? you too for the rising Sun my Lord
Though't be but a Meteor cast from the true one?
If that the conquered Hart must lead the Lyon,
I'll teach my wishes to run thwart unto
That large success you look for.
Be my fears
No Omen to the Kingdom, ô ye Gods,
But I suspect, this Comic folly will
Sport our free Monarchy into a Nation
Of cheated Slaves. But peace; the Queen.
We two
Will go, and see his carriage.
Doe my Lords;
And because you wish his State so well, pray see
The Slaves provided of their clothes.
you've seen
This Three-dayes King my Lords? I cannot sport
At the Miseries of men: methinkes I feel
A touch of pity, as often as I view him.
How doe you think he will bear his State?
As Schoole-boyes
In time of Misrule, look big a while, and then
Return dejected to the Rod.
I wonder
No woman's chosen Queen for company.
These Male wits are but gross and sluggish; faith
You'd see a delicate Comedy, if that
A she wit might but Imp his Reign.
O Madam!
Your Sex is too imperious to Rule;
You are too busy, and too stirring, to
Be put in Action; your Curiosity
Would doe as much harm in a Kingdom, as
A Monkey in a Glasse-shop; move and remove,
Till you had broken all.
Things then it seems
Are very brittle, that you dare not trust us.
Your Closet and your Senate would be one;
You'd Gossip at the Councell-table, where
The grand contrivance of some finer Posit
Would be a State affair.
I never knew
But this one difference yet twixt us and you:
Your follies are more serious, your vanities
Stronger, and thicker woven; and your Councels
About the razing of a Fort or City,
Contrived as ours about a mess of spoon-meat;
So that you laugh, and are laughed at again.
I hope you doe but exercise, your wits
Are not at sharpes?
We'll venture how he will,
Foils, or bare points we care not.
Cease the strife.
How's this Cratander qualified, my Lords
What virtues has he?
No great store of virtues;
Hoe's a tough fellow, one that seems to stand
Much on a resolute carelessness, and hath
A spice of that unnecessary thing
Which the mysterious call Philosophy.
Here comes a couple can inform you better:
They have observed the thing.
MY Lords, what think you
Of this new King? what doth he do? what is he?
Hoe's one that knows, and dares preserve his own
Honour, and others too; a man as free
From wronging any, as himself; he bears
A Kingdom in his look; a kingdom that
Consists of Beauty, seasoned with Discretion.
His Graces are virile, and comely too:
Grave, and severe delights so tempering
The softness of his other pleasures, that
A settled full content doth thence arise,
And wholly take up the beholders thoughts.
Why then he will turn the Scene; we did expect
Something that would have saved us the labour
Of reading Play-bookes, and Love-stories.
See,
How you're mistaken Madam: he doth carry
All things with such a State, and yet so free
From an insulting Pride, that you'd conceive
Judgement and power put into the Scales,
And neither overpoysing, whiles he shows
Rather that he can rule, then that he will.
The afflicted ne'er want praises. O how false
Doth the Eye of pity see! the only way
To make the Foul seem gracious, is to be
Within the ken of death; he that ever while
Would have been thought a Monster, being now
Condemned to die, is thought an Hero.
Truly,
I think you have not yet been near your death.
I've been but seldom with your Ladyship.
Away, let's go and view again: he promises
Something that is not sport: If he doe well,
And keep his virtues up until his fall,
I'll pay a good wish to him as hoe's going,
And a fair mention of him when he's gone.
HOw doth our new King bear his Royalty?
If he go still on thus, his three days folly
Will fill your Annals.
He is grown the talk
And sight of all the Court: h' hath eyes chained to him,
And some say hearts; nor are they mean ones, such
As he may steal without being missed, but those
The theft of whom turns sacrilege.
I hope
Atossa is not in the Roll; he dares not
Be favoured by my Queen.
Her pure Affections
Are sacred as her Person, and her thoughts
Soaring above the reach of common Eyes,
Are like those better Spirits, that have nothing
Of Earth admixt, but yet look down upon
Those number of Inhabitants, and where
They see a worthy mind oppressed, vouchsafe
At least to help with pity.
Doth she then
Seem to compassionate his fortune? we
Must watch his Actions narrowly.
He may
Grow insolent else past remedy: but yet
Your Majesty hath a preventing eye.
He may, when that his Channel's full, discharge
His streams on all that's round him, rushing forth
With a strong headlong Torrent, as mischievous
As uncontrollable, the ungrateful waters
Choking even that which gave 'm life; but yet
You can kill evils by first seeing them.
All this hath taken up but one Ear only;
The other, and the softer is reserved.
Religion, and your word (which, equally
As that, is binding) are both past for three days:
To cut him off before, were to abridge
Your Triumph, and Devotion.
He must live
And Reign his time prescribed; but he must not
Perform the Actions he intends. Let then
All the delights and pleasures, that a Slave
Admires in Kings be offered. Though an hundred
Still watchful eyes beset his head, yet there
Is one way left; Music may subtly creep
And rock his senses so, that all may sleep.
PErish their Tables, and themselves: a Throne
May stand without those tumults of delights,
That wait on big and pompous Luxury▪
I'll cross their expectation, and quite banish
All that their weaker minds do think delight.
Kings pleasures are more subtle, then to be
Seen by the vulgar; they are Men, but such
As ne'er had any dregs, or if they had,
Dropped 'em as they were drawing up from out
The grovelling Press of Mortals. To offend
Beyond the reach of Law without control,
Is not the Nature, but the vice of Power;
And he is only great, that dares be good.
HE wears a serious look still; we may hope
As soon to calm a Tempest with a song,
As soften him.
Beasts and hard Rocks have both
Been moved, and by his Country-man. Let's try.
That we may some way, Sir, express our service
Unto you, with intent you may not feel
Bare honour only without the delights,
We have provided you a taste, of our
Best Persian Music.
That's an innocent pleasure;
Spears make it, and Gods hear it.
Boy come in.
YOur last new song, that which I gave you Sirrah.
See yonder where he sits; let's stand and see
How he will behave himself; the Lords have vowed
To try him to the utmost▪
I begin
To fear that he is mortal.
Come begin
Come my sweet, whiles every strain
Calls our Souls into the Ear;
Where they greedy listening fain
Would turn into the sound they hear▪
Lest in desire
To fill the Quire
Themselves they tie
To Harmony,
Let's kiss and call them back again.
Now let's orderly convey
Our Souls into each other's Breast,
Where interchanged let them stay
Slumbering in a melting rest.
Then with new fire
Let them retire,
And still present
Sweet fresh content
Youthful as the early day.
Then let us a Tumult make,
Shuffling so our souls, that we
Careless who did give or take,
May not know in whom they be.
Then let each smother
And stifle the other,
Till we expire
In gentle fire
Scorning the forgetful Lake.
I did expect some solemn Hymn of the
Great world's beginning, or some brave Captains
Deserving deeds extolled in lofty numbers.
These softer subjects grate our ears: But what
Are these my Lords? she Minstrels?
Consequences,
Which we out of that duty which we owe you
Thought a fit present, that you might not want
Any delight that Persia yields.
I have
No humane thought about me now, forbear.
You are no Statue Sir? or if you were,
These yet methinkes might melt you.
If you will
Needs put your selves to the trouble of Procurers,
Bring me a Kingdom in one face, or show me
A People in one body; then you might
Happily work on mine Affections.
There I durst power my self into Embraces,
Loosing my self in a Labyrinth of joy.
As it is you only make me colder, by
Surrounding me with these your hostile flames.
I hope you doe conceive it our Affection,
And duty to your Sceptre.
Let me ask you▪
Was it not enough you tried me with those baits
Of wines, and meates, culled from the spoil of Nature,
But you must bring vice in another fashion?
Will you then let your days pass sluggishly,
And reap no pleasure from your Power?
It is one
To punish such offenders as your selves,
That will abase your honour to so vile
And abject an employment. If you offer
The like again, you shall perceive, that Kings,
How short so ever their Reigns be, have long hands.
This Act, what ever you stile it, is flat Treason.
Our Honour is abused in it. O the foreheads 
Of women once grown impudent! that these
Can stand so long, and hear their infamy
Debated quietly, expecting when
They shall be called to their reproach! what fled?
And left the Prey behind to tempt me? Ho!
Who waits without? Convey these wicked creatures
Unto the Gaolor Molops: give him charge
To use them as he would doe Enemies.
My Country would twice suffer, should I yield
Unto their vices too. But Greece is not
Only preserved in me: had they perhaps
Carried these Creatures to the wilder knot,
Headlong Archippus, or bold Stratocles,
Easy Leocrates, or prone Philotas,
Their Present might have hit. But hark, they come.
I'll step aside, and watch their actions.
What doe you think Mandane? is he mortal?
HOw far do we out-shine the Persian Court▪
See what good clothes can do. I think there are not
Four properer Gentlemen walk the streets.
The Ladies certainly must love us now▪
But are you sure they'll pass this way▪
Yes, yes.
Let's to our stations, and be ready to
Accost ▪m at the first approach.
Mandane▪
Doe you and Ariene step down to em▪
And try their Courtship.
All I think be safe.
Cratander is hard by; ne'er fear; let's down.
I wonder none pass by yet: sure theyl'e send
Tickets unto us, to invite us to
Their Lodgings the back-way.
Ne'er doubt it Man,
They'll come themselves; for proof behold▪
Half booty;
Equal division Gentlemen.
Agreed, agreed.
Agreed, agreed.
Agreed, agreed.
Nay, start not Ladies, we are men,
It is well
You tell us so before hand, we might else
Think you disguised Satyrs, come on purpose
To put the Nymphs to flight.
We are not hairy;
We have no Tails, I'm sure.
Truly if Satyrs
And you were in one Market-towne, I think
You might see one another for nothing.
Doe you
Take us for Monsters then?
Pray heaven we don't
Discover 'em in your Manners.
We are come
Not to disturb, but heighten your delights.
Can you show any tricks then?
Love-trickes Lady.
Can you run through a Hoop? or fetch up money
With your eye-lids backward?
Can you pierce your Tongue,
Or cut your Throat, and yet live after it?
Do y'thinke us Tumblers then, or Jugglers?
Both;
And truly these would please us far above
Your Love-trickes.
Shall I draw some Ribbon then
Out of my Throat? Shall I cast a Lock upon
Your pretty cheeks, or seal your lovely lips
Up?
What will content you when you have done▪
A kiss.
We doe not use to grant such favours gratis▪
What will you take to give one then?
A Muffler.
I perceive you are well skilled
In the whole course of Love, you but keep off
To make delights more sweet.
You would doe well
To doe so too.
Why Madam? doe not fear me:
I snore not in my sleep; this Nose of mine
Will not proclaim.
It is something Trumpet-like;
I would not trust my self with such an Instrument▪
Methinkes it is somewhat guilty▪
How I love
This pretty, pettish, froward, wanton anger?
Give me a Pleasure that I struggle for.
That Favour's genuinely sweet, that's wrested.
Fear him not Madam; I'll be your defence;
My soul is linked and chained unto your Tongue.
You speak in a fit dialect; you relish
Of the Language of the place whence you came lately.
But to be serious now awhile, pray speak,
What doe you see in us fit for desire?
You cannot love us possibly.
By this kiss.
Stand off.
And this.
Your Oath's not good in Law.
Tell us, what wrong hath either of us done you,
That you should seek thus to revenge your selves▪
You are too scornful, we too easy; come
Let's hurry 'em to some place of secrecy,
Where all their scoffing shall not prevail: you two
Quickly seize her.
Help, help.
Help, help.
YE Villains hold.
What is the matter? why this violence?
A little Love-sport only; we were arguing
Pro, and Con out of Plato, and are now
Going to practise his Philosophy.
What they stile Love-sport only, and misname
An arguing out of Plato, would have proved
A true and downright Rape, if that your presence
Had not become our Rescue.
Wicked Villains,
That in your miseries can't forget your vices,
Acting those crimes to day, which ever the Sun
Thrice set, will elsewhere be your Torture. Cannot
The chain and hunger kill those seeds of evil,
But even in the midst of your misfortunes,
Your sports must be the robbing of fair honour▪
And Rapes your Recreations? which, an't please
The Gods, you call Philosophy. Leave the place;
Infection's busy where you breath; the next
Attempt installs you in the Dungeon.
Most worthy Sir, your Nobleness hath shown
A mind beyond your fortune: though it be not
Real as we could wish it, yet believe it
You hold a perfect Royalty in the hearts
Of those, whose honours you have now preserved.
I owe this duty to your virtues Madam. 
These Slaves must be repressed; the giddy People
Are ready to transpose all crimes upon
Him that should moderate them; so perhaps
Their faults might be accounted mine. Besides
Snares are laid close in every path for me;
And if a King but stumble, it is a Precipice:
When all eyes see it, a blemish is a Monster.
Pure virtue then, and thou fair honour, give me
Leave to cōtemplate on your Beauties; let 
The strength of my Imagination dwell
U•on the sight of your Divinities.
What? more temptations yet? ha? whence? from whom▪
The heavens I hope don't drop down follies too:
No arm out of the clouds▪ a chain? why this
Is but an Exprobration of my late
Distressed fortune. It is rich yet, and Royal;
I 'cann't be the wealth of any, but the Throne▪
Fall out what will, I'll wear it, 'till I know
From whence it came; and if it prove a Mettle
That some foul drossy mind could not endure
Should longer dwell with it, I then will cast it
With as much scorn and anger from my shoulders,
As now I doe receive't with admiration.
Look, there he walks alone considering;
Let's to him while we may; good day Craetander▪
Good Hippies, Phocion! you are welcome; how
Dare you trust your selves in an Enemies Court?
We pass disguised to see what will become
Of our Affairs; and being the future state
Of Ephesus depends on you, are come
Only to give you notice of it, for
We doe presume you're not to be entreated
To doe us good.
Alas! I am not, after
The period of three days; this makes the time
Which even now I thought an age, seem short
And too contract for my desires.
When you
Should raise your Country struggling in the dust,
The time is short, and too contract; it is long
Enough to lead an Army out against it,
To crush those Relics of an halfe-life, that
Her doubtful body faintly breaths; you may
With that right hand spin three days to the space
Of many Olympiads.
What is your meaning?
Have we endured the hate, and felt the fury
Of violent Arsamnes so long? have we
Suffered his sword until it did grow blunt,
And rather broke, then wounded? have you tried
The weight and strictness of the Persian chain
So long, and ask us now, what is your meaning?
Come, come Cratander, I could chide you, but
That I believe you only hide the good
That you intend your Country, that it may not
Be disappointed; you may safely tell us
You will betray the Persians into our hands,
That we may gather forces, and prepare
Against their coming.
Oh! is this your Errant?
Here, take your chain again, it cannot bind.
How ever don't exprobrate our Poverty,
Though all our wealth hath been the Persians spoil.
Why you threw't in before you, to make way
Unto your Suit.
Is it not lawful to
Salute the Persian Mock-King, think y', unless
We bring a Gift? I'd thought the name of Ephesus
Had privileged our access. Think on the honours,
The long continuing honours, that you shall
Receive at home; think on those numerous tears
That you shall wipe away from flowing Eyes,
At the first sight of Liberty.
Your approach
Will entice Cities out of Houses; the aged,
And the young too; the Matron, and the Virgin,
All mingled in a blessed confusion,
Will in a solemn full Procession come,
And with that great Religion bring you in,
As if their Captive Gods were brought them back.
Come then a King home, that went out a Slave.
I am so still; no sooner did I come
Within the Persian Walls, but I was theirs▪
And since, good Hippies, this power hath only
Added one link more to the Chain. I am
Become Arsamnes Instrument: I've sworn
Faith to his Sceptre and himself, and must
Ask his leave, ever I doe betray his Country.
You're free enough against us. O the justice
Of an unnatural Son! yet ask your self;
Ought that be ratified that's done by force?
As if the valiant could be forced by any.
You shall not change your fortune, you shall only
Pass to another Empire; and for that
Right may be violated.
Empires are
Desired for glory; be all wickedness then
Far absent, for in that there can be none.
You are resolved to reason your self then
Into a measured unthankefulnesse? what can
Hinder this good t'your Country, but your self?
Fear thou the Thunder, and the Gods? the anger
Of the Grecian Powers will be upon thee, if
Thou not restor'st them to their seats. On then,
Thou undertak'st their cause, thou fight their war▪
I cannot tell what powers you pretend;
Tell me of Justice and Fidelity,
These are the Grecian Gods.
Be then thy name
Blasted to all Posterity, and let
Our wretched Nephews, when then Souls shall labour
Under the Persian Yoke, curse thee, and say,
This slavery we owe unto Cratander.
Pray stay, I will go with you, and consider,
How am I straightened! Life is short unto me:
And the good man's End ought still to be a business▪
We must die doing something, least perhaps
We loose our Deaths; we must not yet doe ill
That we misplace not Action: If I strike
On this hand, I'm a Parricide; if on that,
The same brand waits me too: how doe I tremble,
Like to the doubtful Needle twixt two Loadstones,
At once inclining unto both, and neither!
Here Piety calls me, there my Justice stops me.
It is resolved; Faith shall consist with both;
And aged Fame after my Death shall tell,
Betwixt two sins, Cratander did do well.
SEt a watch at the door, to keep out sleep;
He's mortal that offers to betray so much weakness
As to wink. Here Archippus.
May not a man wink without mortality,
When he lets it go down? Here Stratocles.
I doe state winking in that case divine.
Come thou uneven lump, thou heap of sins in proof; we will liquor thy Keys, open thy Cages, and give thy meager Tenants a Play day, Rascal. Bring the Jars nearer. As I hope for fortune, I think my soul will pass into a frog. Now for a hundred Throats; to thee Molops.
You Gracious I think have sponges in your mawes; it is but setting your hands to your sides, and squeezing your selves and presently you drink as much as before.
Off with thy Cup Landlord, and talk not; wee learned it from the Teat, soole.
Have at thee, Archippus.
I doe not like these healths at random; let's have a sober methodical order for a while.
What? shall we drink by dice then, and let fortune name the heir to the Cup?
Or shall we drink our Mistresses names, and soak it Alphabetically?
If we drink names, let not the Letters pass for single ones, but as they would in number: I doe pronounce Alpha no letter till it begin to multiply.
I never thought Drinking such a Mystery before; a blockhead can't be drunk, I see.
Right; shallow brains can ne'er attain to it; that makes your fools, and your old governing Philosophers continue so sober still. The vegetable Artist, and the vigorous Poët, whose brains are full and forging still, will straight get a pleasant madness from that that will but warm those colder Rheumatic Sages, whose noses always drop like Still-snoutes.
The noblest drinking methinkes is the Postures.
Let's have'em
Bring the Pots in play. But whore's the wenches, and the Music you promised us, good Molops.
For wenches, the Town will not yield any at this time; and I durst not venture my single wife amongst you all. For Fiddlers, I have provided them, they stand ready without.
Call 'em in sweet Molops.
Well, what shall those Raskalls play, whiles we drink the Postures?
The Battle by all means.
Strike up the Battle then. Think your selves all in service now, and doe as I doe.
Take your Bows Gent: and make a stand. 
Right! draw your shafts now, &amp; neck 'em.
Very good! now smooth your feathers.
Well done! Present, and take aim.
Here's to thee Leocrates.
Have towards thee Philotas.
To thee Archippus.
Here Molops.
Have at you Fiddlers.
Now draw your Bows and let loose all.
The other charge, good fellow Soldiers.
Let's have a Song between, and then have at you
Fiddlers, employ your Throats and sing a while; you shall drink with 'em after.
Sing that which I made in the Prison; it is seasonable enough.
Now, now, the Sun is fled
Down into Tethys bed,
Ceasing his solemn course awhile.
What then?
It is not to sleep, but be
Merry all night, as we;
Gods can be mad sometimes, as well as men.
Then laugh we, and quaff we, until our rich nose:
Grow red, and contest with our Chaplets of Roses▪
If he be fled, whence may
We have a second day,
That shall not set till we command?
Here see
A Day that does arise
Like his, but with more eyes,
And warmes us with a better fire, than hee▪
Then laugh we, &amp;c.
Thus then we chase the night
With these true floods of light,
This Lesbian wine, which with it's sparkling streams,
Darting diviner Graces,
Cost's Glories round our Faces▪
And dulls the Tapers with Majestique Beams.
Then laugh we, &amp;c.
Well said! now the other charge to the honour of Cratander.
I feel a rumbling in my head, as if the Cyclops were forging Thunder in my Brains: But no matter, give it me: our ancient Orpheus says it, Perpetual drunkenness is the reward of Virtue.
Which the most vicious have: must I still meet
Some thing must greeve me more than your misfortunes?
The Chain and Fetter were your Innocence.
We don't fire Temples Sir: we kill no Father
Nor Mother, it is not Incest to be merry.
But to be drunk is all. Doe but consider▪
(If that at least you can) how Greece it self
Now suffers in you; thus, say they, the Gracious
Do spend their Nights: Your vices are esteemed
The Rites and Customs of your Country, whiles
The beastly Revelling of a Slave or two,
Is made the Nations Infamy. Your wreathes
Blue•h at your Ignominy: what praise is it
When't shall be said, Philotas stood up still
After the hundredth Flagon; when it is known
He did not so in war? you're now just fit
To reach the Spartan boys sobriety;
Are all good Principles washed out? how ever
Be without vices, if not virtuous.
That I should have authority to command
Vices but not forbid 'em! I would put you
Once more into his charge, but that you would
Make even the Dungeon yet more infamous.
Gentlemen hear me; Cratander 
Speaks well, and like a good Common-wealth's▪ man▪
Out you dissembling Rascal; are you of Cratan∣der's faction.
Good Gentlemen don't kick me: I shall leave al my drink behind me, if you doe.
Must we still thus be checked? we live not under
A King, but a Pedagogue: hoe's insufferable
Troth hoe's so proud now he must be killed to make
a supper for the immortal Cannibals, that there's no Ho with him.
I never thought he would have been either so womanish, as to have been chaste himself, or so uncivil as to keep us so▪ but hee talks of lying with surprised Cities, and committing Fornication with Victory, and making Mars Pimp for him.
These are the fruits of Learning; we suffer all this merely because he hath a little familiarity with the Devil in Philosophy, and can conjure with a few Notions out of Socrates.
In good troth I take it very scurvily at his hands, that he will not let me deserve hanging. I'd thought to have done all the villainies in the world, and left a name behind me: but hoe's severe forsooth, and cries out Virtue, Mistress Virtue.
Diseases take her; I ne'er knew any good she did in Common-wealth yet. I wonder how he dares be so im∣pudent, as to be good in a strange place.
Did not you mark his Rhetoric cast at me?
I was the But the shot at.—What praise if it,
When't shall be said Philotas stood up still
After the hundredth Flagon, when it is known
He did not so in war?—mere, mere upbraiding:
And shall Philotas this? this from Cratander?
Whence this deep silence? are you sacrificing
To your dumb Gods of Greece? where are your Caps?
Your Loves, your Madness?
Do not Ravish me;
I will cry out a Rape, if that you come
Within twelve foot of me; we must be modest.
Modest an't please the Gods.
Fie! fie! We looked, you should
Have left at least a dozen of great bellies
A piece behind you upon every Tribe.
Where are your Spirits? had I been in your case▪
Nature ever this had been inverted. But
You think on your last end, as if the world
Were to expire with you.
O! we must walk
Discreetly, look as carefully to our steps,
As if we were to dance on ropes, with Eggs
Under our feet: we have left off shackles,
To be worse fetterd.
Can a breast of large
And ample thoughts tamely endure the ring?
And be led quietly by th'Patient Nose,
When Licence is Religion? One whose dull
And sluggish temper is called wisdom, one
Whose indiscretion killed with some formality,
As Quicksilver with fasting spittle, doth pass
For a grave governing Garb This heavy lump
Dulls all your active fire.
You understand not:
For to what end is Liberty indulged?
To be oppressed by a severer Rule?
One newly taken from among your selves,
To make your state worse by his Tyranny?
But you show what you can endure.
By Heaven
We doe enslave our selves; We can b'as free
As is Cratander, though not so malicious.
You are as things of nought with him; for tell me;
When called he Stratocles to Council? when
Asked he Leocrates his advice? Philotas,
Archippus, names excluded from his thoughts,
But when he means to show that he hath anger.
What Star were thou borne under Stratocles?
That which all Governors of Market-townes are,
Some lazy Planet, I believe.
Thou 'wer• wont
To exercise upon a throat or two,
To keep thy hand in ur; now show thy self▪
Let's slit this graver weazen.
Now I see
You have some man about you, now your bloods
Run as they should doe, high and full; you slept
Merely till now. If that Cracander should
Quit scores with Nature ever his time be out,
The King must choose again; the dead you know
Ne'er goes for Sacrifice.
Must one of us
Piece up his Reign then?
There's no other way;
The Gods themselves require't.
My Honchos quake,
As if that Molops were to season them,
And put 'em straight in paste for the great Gods
Who ever
Succeeds him. shall allow the rest what ever
Nature or Art can yield. Nothing shall be
Uulawfull, but to sleep and mumble Prayers.
Agreed, agreed.
Agreed, agreed.
Agreed, agreed.
Then fill me out an Oath.
All I presume will bind themselves with this
Good common looser of all cares, but what
Do tend to Liberty to doe the like.
The motion's worthy; crown the Goblet then.
Would ▪it were his blood. By Truth her self th'Ofspring
And child of Wine, Cratander dyes ever half
The glass of his short Tyranny run out.
This thē to the infernal Gods. 
&amp; this
To our just angers, Gods as great as they. 
Good Omen! so! the thickened streams run black;
It was blood methought I drank: it were Laziness
To say, he shall be dead; hoe's dead already.
Drink and prepare for Pleasures.
Liberty.
HE must be more than Man that gains it back
Without my will.
Your Justice must restore it.
Will your severer Majesty triumph,
With soft spoils of a Lady's Cabinet?
As I would not feign Favour, and be-ly
A Jewel or a Twist, to gain the name
Of Creature, or of Servant unto any;
So by your Beauty, (for if Persians may
Swear by their Sun, I well may swear by that)
Where honour is transmitted in a true
Mysterious Gage of an Immaculate mind,
I will defend it as some sacred Relic,
Or some more secret pledge, dropped down from Heav•n▪
To guard me from the dangers of the Earth.
But in that
You make it common, you bereave it o•
All that you call Divinity.
He that vaunts
Of a received Favour, ought to be
Punished as Sacrilegious Persons are,
Because he doth violate that sacred thing,
Pure, spotless Honour. But it may be seen,
And yet not prostitute. I would not smother
My Joys, and make my happiness a stealth.
How your thoughts slatter your deceived Fancy
Into a State, that when you leave to think,
Dyes, as your thoughts that kept it up! what is it
That you call joy and happiness?
I must
Confess, I have no Merits, whose just heat
May extract ought from you, called Love: yet when
I doe consider, that Affection
Cannot look virtuously on any thing
That is resplendent, but a subtle image
Purely reflecting thence, must needs arise,
And pay that Look again; I doe take leave
To say, the careful Deities provide,
That Love shall ne'er be so unhappy, as
To want his Brother.
Why? I never spent
A sigh for you; you never had a kiss,
Nor the reversion of one yet.
Such Love
Is but Love's I doll; and these soft ones, that
Confine it to a kiss, or an embrace,
Doe, as the superstitious did of old,
Contract the Godhood into a Bull, or Goat,
Or some such lustful Creature. Be it far,
Be it far from me to think, where ever I see
Clear streams of Beauty, that I may presume
To trouble them with quenching of my thirst.
Where a full splendour, where a bright effusion
Of immaterial Beams doe meet to
Make up one Body of perfection;
I should ass••not my self injurious
Unto that Deity, which hath let down
Himself into those Rays, if that I should
Draw nigh without an awful Adoration.
Which my Religion pays to you: but being
You like not the Devotion, be content
To slight the Sacrifice, but spare the Altar.
I am so far from ruining that Breast
In which there lives a spark of chaster honour,
That I would hazard this so prized a trifle,
Which men call Life, that I might live there still;
And prove that Love is but an Engine of
The careful Powers, invented for the safety
And preservation of afflicted goodness.
Conceive not hence a passion burning toward you.
For she that speaks like woman, is a Queen.
I can distinguish betwixt Love, and Love,
Tweene Flames and good Intents, nay between Flames
And Flames themselves: the grosser now fly up,
And now fall down again, still cov'ting new
Matter for food; consuming, and consumed.
But the pure clearer Flames, that shoot up always
In one continued Pyramid of lustre,
Know no commerce with Earth, but unmixed still,
And still aspiring upwards, (if that may
Be called aspiring, which is Nature) have
This property of Immortality
Still to suffice themselves, neither devouring,
And yet devoured; and such I knowledge yours.
On which I look as on refined Ideas,
That know no mixture or corruption,
Being one eternal simpleness; that these
Should from the Circle of their chaster Glories
Dart out a beam on me, is far beyond
All humane merit; and I may conclude,
They've only their own Nature for a cause,
And that they're good, they are diffusive too.
Your tongue hath spoke your thoughts so nobly 〈◊〉.
I bear a pity to your virtues, which
Ever night shed Poppy twice o'er th'weary'd world,
Must only be in these two Registers;
Annals, and Memory. Could you but contrive,
How you might live without an injury
Unto Religion, you should have this glory.
To have a Queen your Instrument.
There's nothing
Can woo my heart unto a thought of life,
But that your presence will be wanting to me,
When I'm shut up in silence: yet I have
A strong Ambition in me to maintain▪
An equal faith twixt Greece and Persia:
That like a river running twixt two fields,
I may give growth and verdure unto both.
Praxaspes, and Masistes, potent Lords,
Are both against my designs; so that I shall not
Obtain an Army▪ for they think I have
That vile mind in me to betray this Kingdom▪
To which I've sworn fidelity; when by
Your self, by all thats good, my'intent is only
To perfect great Arsamnes Conquest, and
In that be beneficial to my Country.
In which if that your Majesty will descend
To act a part, after the Scene is shut,
I'll down to Elysium with a joyful mind,
And teach our Grecian Poets your blessed name
And virtues, for an everlasting Song.
Were it against my self, I'd not deny it.
Walk in, I▪le follow you. In great designs. 
Valour helps much, but virtuous Love doth more.
Was it not enough that you perused his Actions,
And surfeited your Eyes upon his follies,
Seeing, and seen again, but you must cast him
A Chain, an Emblematicke Chain?
It is not
The veyle that hinders the quick busy Eye
From reading o'er the Face, but Modesty.
He hath a weak defence, that doth entrust
The preservation of a chaster Love
Unto a silken Cloud.
I stand not much
Upon the commerce of your Eyes, but it is
Your Chain.—Your Favour—that—. Do'y 'thinke it is fit
A Queen should send one link unto a Slave?
Doth not the Sun (the Sun, which yet you worship)
Send beams to others than your self? yet those
Which dwell on you loose neither light, nor heat,
Coming not thence less vigorous, or less chaste.
Would you seal up a Fountain? or confine
The Ayre unto your walk? would you enjoin
The Flower to cast no smell, but as you pass?
Love is as free as Fountain, Air, or Flower.
For it stands not in a point; it is large, and may▪
Like streams▪ give verdure to this Plant▪ that Tree,
Nay that whole field of Flowers, and yet still run
In a most faithful course toward the bosom
Of the loved Ocean.
But when you divert
And break the Stream into small Rivulets,
You make it run more weak, then when it kept
United in one Channel.
If it branch
Into a smaller twining here, and there,
The water is not lost, nor doth it quit
The former Name; this is not to destroy,
But to enlarge the stream: did it dry up,
And leave the Fountain destitute, indeed
You'd reason to be angry.
But what should make you
Present him with a gift? you might have smothered
A good opinion of him in your Breast,
(As some digressing streams flow under ground)
And so have rested; but you show it now,
And make the world partaker.
Who would stifle
An honest Fire? that flame's to be suspected
That hides it self. When that a man of valour
Graces his Country with a good attempt,
You give a Sword, an Horse, a Manor, nay
Sometimes a whole Province for reward. We have
A sense of Virtue too, as well as you:
And shall we be denied the Liberty
To show we have that sense? A Favour is
The Alms of Love; I doe not pass away
My heart in Charity▪ Virtuous Cratander
Shows forth so full a Transcript of your life,
In all but his misfortunes, that methinkes
You may admire your self in him, as in
Your shade. But yet let chaste Atossa rather
Not be at all, than not be wholly yours.
Thou art still virtuous my Atossa, still
〈◊〉 as thy Crystal, but more spotless.
Fools that we are, to think the Eye of Love
Must always look on us. The Vine that climbs
By conjugal Embraces about the Elm,
May with a ring or two perhaps encircle
Some neighbouring bough, and yet this twining prove.
Not the Offence, but Charity of Love.
THat we have naturally a desire
To preserve Honour is a Principle
Not questionable, but by those that would
Corrupt, and rob us of it: that you prize
Your Chastity more than wealth, and think your Cabinets
Cheap and unworthy, if compared t'your minds,
I'm so assured, that I need only tell you
The danger, not entreat you to avoid it.
The Slaves next night intend a Rape upon
Your Honour, and your Wealth; to tell your Husband▪
Were to procure a slaughter on both sides.
If we avert the riot, and become
Our own defence, the Honour, as the Action,
Will be entirely ours: which may be done
Only by flying to Arsamnes Castle.
A thing so easy, that twill only be
To take the Ayre for fame: and when we doe
Return, our Husbands shall strew praises in
Our ways▪ which we will tread on, and contemn▪
Let's fly, let's fly, let's fly.
How I doe love
These worthy, noble thoughts▪ the Action
Will make our Tombs not need an Epitaph▪
When we shall live still fresh in History.
The sacred Gods of Marriage will present
Themselves unto you night by night for this,
And personally thank you in your Dreams,
For thus preserving their Rites undefiled▪
But time is short, I must away, to make
Provision for our flight. If any doe
Desire a further satisfaction
In this our grand design, we leave our Ladies
Mandane here, and Ariene, who
Can give a full relation of our business.
Away, away, to the Castle, to the Castle.
Urge me no more, I am sure my Country
Requires not Perjury.
Ought any word
Be kept with Enemies? no path is foul
That leads to liberty.
O Phocion!
Such men as you have made our Grecian faith
Become a Proverb to express Treachery.
An Oath's the same in Persia, and in Greece:
And binds alike in either.
But consider
Wee're thrall'd and yoked; the hard gains of our sweat
Must be sent in to serve their Luxury.
Tribute▪ and tax, and payment, will still keep us
As in a siege: to take the Air perhaps
Will be a charge unto us.
Nor is it Ephesus
That only dreads this slavery; Claros too,
And Colophon, nay Magnesia, and others
That joined in the war do fear a share in the Tyranny.
Your forces are so weakened, that you cannot
Regain a perfect Liberty: your Friends
Begin to fall off too: all that you can
Expect now, is to settle these your evils,
And live protected as a weakened friend
Under the Persian shelter: still preserving
Your Laws and Liberties inviolate.
A thing perhaps yet rather to be wished for,
Then compassed.
Yet methinkes you might procure it,
Having such command.
What may be done in so
Short space, shall all be to your good: go then
And deal discreetly with the Army: tell them
The tempest that is falling on their head,
Unless the Persian shield them. When you have
Persuaded them to this, conduct your Forces
Towards Arsamnes Castle, where the Queen,
And Ladies now expect me. But be sure
You come not within sight of Sardis.
Why?
Shall we not march beyond the Frontiers then?
By no means, for you'll cut off all retreat,
Now, when you see the numerous Persian come,
You may securely fly without the loss
Of any; this will quell the future rising
Of those, whose frowardness is not content
Either with th'Calme or Tempest of Affairs▪
We must comply with Fortune, now wee're conquered,
Permit the rest unto the Gods and me.
Success attend it.
So; my next care now
Must be to avoid those Slaves, who, I o'reheard,
Have a design upon my life. But let
Even the plotting Destinies contrive,
And be themselves of Council, all their malice
Shall only show an idle fruitless Hate,
Whiles Wisdom takes the upper hand of Fate.
HOlla!
Holla!
Archippus?
Leocrates? Ne'er be afraid man, it is I, the very same.
Before Mercury I did not know thee: thy coming forth out of the wood with that raw arm, and those tot∣ter'd clothes, makes thee show like Action, newly revived after his worrying.
Whore's Stratocles, and Philotas?
They're looking Bur-leaves perhaps for Excoriate∣on; or else •obbing some Gibbet to accommodate themselves with decent weeds.
Holla!
Holla!
Hark: I hear 'em; they are hard by; let's an∣swer 'em. Holla!
O are you there?
Save thee Brother Stratocles: Joy to thee Valiant Philotas; I commend you that you keep your words: I'm glad we are so punctual.
D▪ye think we have no Religion in us? it is a most corrupt time, when such as we cannot keep touch, and be faithful one to another.
But are you sure Cratander will pass by this way?
My Lord Praxaspes says he loves this walk.
But wee've done ill to leave our weapons yonder▪
Pish! he won't pass by this hour, hoe's busy yet: We'll fetch 'em as soon as wee can agree who shall doe the deed.
Who shall doe the deed say thou? why thou, or he, or he, or I.
Do thou then if thou hast a mind to it.
No faith, thou shalt have the whole honour of it to thy self; I will not rob thee of an inch of it: I am not envy∣os, Leocrates, not envious.
Well; the next Passenger is to decide it then; hee that shall be judged the fittest to make a Persian Priest, must do the deed.
What else? dost thou think we will be so base, as not to stand to Covenants?
You have all made your selves very unfit to bee Priests methinkes.
Why so Philotas? do you not see wooden legs, and Crutches, wry Necks, and lame Arms, maimed limbs, and blind sides?
Good faith, we may be all taken for an Hospital broke loose.
And we have wood enough among us to—.
As I hope for Mercy Cratander.—by the ball of Fortune here hee comes: Soul of my life what shall we doe?
Not a sword, not a knife among us! all left behind us in the wood! that we should be all manicled now, out of a most unluckily Policy! We shall never have him alone again▪ make toward him and be hanged, that hee may resolve the Question however.
Bless thy senses and thy limbs, fair Master: doe a curtsy to a company of poor distressed Persians;
it is not money we ask, nor clothes; only thy Judgement, thy Judgement▪ man of Understanding.
What's your request?
That out of thy great Wisdom, soul of Learning, Thou'd'st be pleased to tell us freely, which of us four is fit∣test to make a Persian Priest.
I am not well skilled in your Persian Rites, 
I know not what Man, or how qualified
Your Temple may admit of, but I have
Two or three Servants within call here, they
Shall umpire this your variance. Ho! Sisarmes,
Ho! Artobazes, draw nigh quickly; seize 
These four pernicious Raskalls: did you think
You could lie hid? it is not your leg good Stratocles,
Nor your close arm Leocrates, that can
Disguise you from mine eye. I can tell you
Who drank my death, who were your grand Abettors.
In this design. You now would know who's fittest
To make a Persian Priest: Malicious fools,
Is it not all one as to ask me, who
Is fitt'st to Sacrifice me? But you see
I live, and will doe, to your Punishment.
Go, away with 'em; take them as they are.
Let 'em not alter either Clothes, or Posture,
But lead 'em through the City thus to Molops;
And give him charge to keep 'em so, until
He hear our farther Pleasure.
Come along, Gentlemen, we'll try your stumps,
How many miles a day you can halt▪
Sirrah, be civil, or else before Jove I'll pull off my wooden leg, and break your Pate with it, though I die for it.
WEe're like to have an honest Court of▪t shortly▪
You speak my Lord, as if'twere not so now▪
Tic honest now, and shortly will not have
The Power to be otherwise.
Why Hydarnes?
There's not a woman left man; all are vanished▪
And fled upon the sudden.
What? I hope
They have not changed their Sex all in a minute?
They are not leap▪d into rough chins, and Tulipants▪
There's scarce a face without a beard appears.
A sign there are few Eunuchs in the Palace.
My Lords,
This is not to discover what's become of ▪em.
They've taken weapons with ▪em too they say.
They have no Sacrifice to perform, that I
Can tell of, neither if they had, would they
Take arms, that were t'invade the Deity.
The Sword's no Instrument of their Devotion.
My Lords, you must make haste with all your forces
To th'Queene and Ladies in Arsamnes Castle:
They now are likely all to be surprised,
By the remainder of the Greeks.
Cratander,
That damned Villain hath enticed 'em thither
Merely t▪ entrap 'em. Let us to the King;
We'll on although against revolted Slaves
We fought with Men before, but now with Vice;
He calls for death that must be conquered twice.
MOst virtuous Queen, you make me search my self,
To find the worth which you do so far prize;
As thus to hazard for one man▪ whose life
Is under value, that which others would not
For a whole Kingdom, Reputation.
Where Goodness is to suffer, I would willingly
Become the Sacrifice my self to free it.
Had great Arsamnes been in danger, had
Your whole Line been in jeopardy of ruin,
You could have done no more; Your pity hath
Thrust you into Heroic Actions, far
Beyond the eager Valour of tried Captains;
Which I can never worthily admire,
When I consider your reward will only
Be, to be ranked in story with a Slave.
I do it not to the Man, but to the Virtue.
The deed's reward enough unto it self.
It would be a piece of exemplary Ingratitude,
To bring you into any danger hence:
You're safe as in your Court; your Subjects shall not
Run any doubtful hazard, in the Chance
Of an uncertain Battle: their first step
Shall be Victorious: and when your Eloquence,
Guarded with Beauty, shall procure the freedom
Of our Enthralled City, the Ephesians
Shall know a Goddess greater than their own,
And you depose our magnified Diana;
Having Shrines in every Breast out-shining hers.
As for my self, I shall live still in those
Good benefits my Country shall receive.
This day instating me in Immortality:
While raising thus our City by my fall,
I shall go down a welcome shade, and dwell
Among the Ancient Fathers of my Country.
Leave the Conditions to me: but peace;
Expect me quietly a while, they come.
CAn you contain Sir? look how proudly hee
Sits in the midst, hemmed in on every side
With Beauties, which his wheeling eye runs o'er
All in a Minute.
Here's a delicacy
That ne'er was practis▪d by a Captive yet,
Nor heard of since the Custom first began,
That Conquered Slaves should personate their King,
The Luxury and Riot of arm▪d Love!
O that mine eyes could dart forth piercing Lightning▪
That I could shoot some quick invisible Plague
Into his boiling marrow. Hee is seated
So, that a Dart or Arrow cannot reach him,
Without the danger of a Persian breast,
Worth all his Nation. But why name I worth,
Where I see so much Infamy? O Atossa!
Is this your amity to Virtue? this
The Pity that you lend afflicted goodness?
There's work enough now for my sword, although
The Enemy approach not. Credulous woman,
Descend, Arsamnes calls thee; if he be
A Name regarded when Cratander's by.
Most virtuous Sir, you may expect perhaps
Atossa's breast grown strange, and wrested from
Her wonted faith; but witness O thou Sun,
Whom with a pious eye I now behold,
That I have neither tried t'unty, or loosen
That sacred knot: but what I've condescended
To aid thus far, is only a fair likeness
Of something that I love in you.
If then
Your Loyalty be still entire to me,
Show it, and yield Cratander up to us.
As his designs are honourable, so
Are our intents, with which there needs must stand
A resoluteness: it cannot be Virtue,
Unles't be constant too. The approach of the Enemy
Forbids me to say more: On to your Victory,
Your wonted art to Conquer; they're the Relics
Of a few scattered troops, the fragments of
The last meal that your swords made; on, and when
You have subdued them wholly, we will plant
Fresh Baize upon your brows, and seal unto you
A peace, as everlasting as our Loves.
within. Arm, arm, arm, arm.
Mithra and Victory.
Let us be resolute now my Ladies, and
At their return show them that they have something
Left yet to Conquer; Breasts, that are not shaken
With their loud noise of Trumpets. See, they're coming
This was a Race, no Battle; Let's prepare.
WHat? fly upon the sight of us? to'appeare
Was here to overcome, a look hath done
The business of the sword; your fears may sleep
Securely now; Open the Castle gates.
But you must grant us some Conditions first.
Must we be Articled with by our women?
What is it an't please the Gods, that you require?
Cratanders life.
It is not in your Power
To grant it great Arsamnes: your Queen speaks
Out of a tender pity to no purpose.
Hear me Arsamnes: whom the raging sword
Hath spared, why should the peaceable destroy?
All hate's not ended in the field, I see:
There's something still more cruel after war.
Alas! you know not what you ask; the Gods
Permit not that he live; he falls to them.
You must not hear her, Sir, against the Gods,
Who now expect their solemn Feast and Banquet.
If they are Gods, Pity's a Banquet to 'em.
When ever the Innocent and Virtuous
Doth escape death, then is their Festival.
Nectar ne'er flows more largely, then when blot's
Not spilt, that should be saved. Do y'thinke the smoke
Of humane Entrails is a steam that can
Delight the Deities? Who ever did burn,
The Building to the honour of the Architect?
Or break the Tablet in the Painters praise?
It is Mercy is the Sacrifice they like.
Let not Affection call a Curse upon you,
While you permit it to take place of your
Religion.
See, he will not live Atossa;
To doe the unwilling man a curtsy
Is but a specious Tyranny.
Alas!
He would be near the Gods, he would leave us.
You must not, shall not kill him, my Arsamnes.
Speak Ariene, call to him Mandane.
You owe him, Sir, the honour of your Court;
Slaves had defiled our Husbands beds, and we
Brought forth a Race of unlike Children, to
Blemish your Realm, and us; when now by him
Wee're all preserved immaculate and spotless,
As tender Votaries.
Consider next,
No heated rage hath snatched a sacred Goblet
From any Altar, to profane it with
The streams of bold intemperance; no cries
Of Virgins came unto your Ears; you've lived
This while as safe, as if you had been guarded
By the revengeful Thunder.
I may not
Afflict him with a Curtsy; it can't be
A Gift, that he must be compelled to take.
It is the best time to fall, when there are most
Requests made for our preservation.
Though, great Atossa, I could wish that your
Blessed Prayers were spent in gaining a good peace
For hopeful Ephesus. The Gods that doe
Require my ruin, would accept their safety.
He durst not be so bold, unless h'were Innocent.
Will you be so ungrateful then, Cratander,
As after all to cast away your self?
Forbid him good Arsamnes, by these Tears
I ask you: ▪ but I am too womanish.
Your Majesty is not Rock: you had a Nurse
That was no Tiger; look but up upon her.
Can you deny ought, when the Soul is powered
Out at the eyes in a Petition?
Cratander, live; we doe command thee, Live.
Bear witness ô ye Gods, that I doe suffer
This as his Servant too. And ye the Souls
Of my deceased Country-men, who fell
in the last Battle, if there yet be sense
In the forgetful Urn, know that it was
No stratagem of mine to be detained
Thus long from your Society. Now to you,
Arsamnes: Good Kings equal those in Laws
Whom they have overcome in war; and to
The Valiant, that chief part of good, to which
We all are borne, sweet Liberty, is pleasing
Even in the Enemy. Your Queen, and others
Her Ladies here, with the most beautiful
Part of your Royal Court, are in my power.
But far be it from me t'injure but the meanest:
Only one life I'm so much Master of,
(Since you have put it in my Power) that I
Must give it back again, if it must be
Beyond the Ephesian safety: the Altar comes
More welcome than the Throne, if this shall bring
Freedom to me, and Slav'ry to my City.
Here I must dwell, Arsamnes, tie▪d by great
And solemn Vows, (our Gods do now require it)
Till you shall grant that the Ephesians may
Still freely use their ancient Customs, changing
Neither their Rites nor Laws, yet still reserving
This honest Power unto your Royal self,
To command only what the free are wont
To undergo with gladness. I presume
You scorn to have them subject as your own,
And vile as strangers, Tyrants conquer thus.
It is a time of Mercy; you have only
Called forth those Favours which were freely coming▪
These generous thoughts have added to our Conquest.
It is no Victory, that's got upon
The sluggish, and the abject. Descend then;
And when wee've joined our hands, as Pledges of
Our hearts combining so, let us return
To th'Celebration of an equal Triumph,
In an united marriage of our joys.
There I confess a Conquest, where I find
He that subdued my body, gains my mind.
NAy, remember you kicked me Gentlemen.
Faith Landlord Molops, I'd have sworn thou had been of a better Nature, than to re∣member Pot quarrels.
By my troth I should have kicked my Father in that humour.
Well, you cologne now: say I should present you to Arsamnes and Cratander, what would you doe?
Only welcome their return with a Dance, that so we might frisk into Liberty.
Yes, and kick me again.
Dost thou think we are Rogues and Villains?
Well, with all my heart, but upon this Condition, that you untie neither Leg, nor Arm; you know Cratanders charge.
Dost thou think weed bring thee into any danger? We have studied the Figure, and the Measure already.
You must let the two old women dance with you.
Who, the two whores that Cratander committed?
The very same. They are wondrous suitable now: for you must know, that when such slippery Eels doe come under my fingers, the first thing that I doe, is to strip 'em and to put 'em into other cases. You•le make a most perfect Gobline's Masque among you.
Why? they will fall in pieces, If they stir but any
thing violently.
No matter for falling in pieces; I'll pawn my word to you, they shall not sweat.
Any thing, good honest Molops, we are content.
You, within there, Polecats; do y'heare? I have procured so much of the Gentlemen, hold your breaths be sure, and remember you doe not drown the Music with your Coughing.
Whiles thus we're joined we are too hard for fortune, Scarce Heaven it self can hurt us, for it will not.
There's no care now remaining, but t'invent
New pleasures. Let the hours wheel swiftly away
In sports and Dances. Then we pay the Gods
Best thanks, when we doe show most sense of joy.
I have an humble suit to your Majesty in the behalf of some distressed people.
Let's heare't: what is it?
There are half a dozen of sinners at the door, four of them are the Captives which your Majesty refused▪ two of 'em are of another Sex, but would willingly join with 'em, and present you with a Dance, in congratulation of your happiness.
Go, bring 'em in, let Prisons this day know
The joys of Palaces. We will receive 
All the delights the world can yield us. Hark.
I hope your Majesty will not deny
To grace a Company of younger Ladies,
With the like favourable eye.
They doe
Honour our joys in condescending to
Be Actors in their Celebration.
Insonuit cum verbere sign magister,
Mute to sque edunt pariter tunc pectora motus,
In latus allisis clypeis, aut rursus in altum
Vibrates, grave parma sonat mucronis acurum
Murmur, &amp; umbonum pulsu modulante resultans
Ferrous alterno concentus plauditur •ctu.
I see that Sardis hath it's Amazons:
An Army of these would subdue the world.
THe fire is fully kindled, and the people
All in their festival attire; there wants
Only the Sacrifice, and your self to kill it.
The voice of Ravens in the dead of night
Conveighs not harsher notes into mine ears.
I've pardoned him.
You cannot, unless you
Will be more impious in preserving him,
Than you were valorous in conquering.
Will not the Gods receive an Hecatomb
Of Oxen in exchange? may we not find
The Destiny's in Beasts entrails? we will choke
The fire with weighty lumps of richer gummes,
And send perfumed clouds up into their seats
In one continued thankfulness, if that
They'll spare this humane Sacrifice.
To promise
The fairest Captive, and redeem him with
A Beast, or Tear of some relenting Tree,
Is not to worship, but delude.
Cratander,
The Gods recall my courtesy; I stand
Doubly engaged, to Heaven, and to thee;
But thou can easier pardon; for I know
Thy Virtue's such, that thou had rather suffer
Thy self, than Heaven should be violated.
Being then this sword must cut thy precious thread,
If Statues may preserve thee, and thou think it
A life to flourish in fair memory,
I'll people all my Kingdom with thy Images,
To which they shall pay vows, as to those Gods
Who now require thy company.
Ye• Powers,
Why are you grown thus cruel unto Virtue?
'T will be a wish hereafter to be foul.
I cannot see him die, and live my self.
Pray you defer his death a while, don't post him
Away; perhaps the Gods may spare him yet.
I know that divers minds are here contained
Under one silence, all expecting how
I'll bear this sudden accident. T'accuse
Or Gods, or Men,'s the part of him that would
Live longer. If I look on the desires
Of some here, whenever I shall fall,
I shall be thought to have lived too little: if
On the Actions I have done, I've lived enough
If on the injuries of Fortune, too much:
If on mine honour, and my fame, I shall
Live still; he gains by death that doth die praised▪
Others have longer kept an Empire, but
None better left it. To speak more, were but
A sluggard's Policy, to defer his sufferings.
On to the Altar.
Art thou willing too?
Cursed be my Victory! and thou my Sword
Be never henceforth happy, if there be
Another Sacrifice to fall like this.
Witness ye Gods, how I unwilling pay
My vows in kind. Most virtuous Cratander,
(Worthy of Heaven, but yet to tarry longer,
And make Earth happy by thy presence,) look;
These tears I pay thee as a sad farewell.
I feel the blow my self that I must give thee.
These tears doe neither befit you to pay,
Nor me to take; be then Arsamnes, on.
I feel a numnesse seize me; I am stone;
I shall not lift mine arm against thee. Sure
The Gods desire it not.
Thou ô bright Sun who see all.
Look down upon our Captives fall.
Never was purer Sacrifice:
It is not a Man, but Virtue dyes.
While thus we pay our thanks, propitious'be;
And grant us either Peace or Victory.
But thou ô Sun may set, and then
In brightness rise next morn again.
He, when he shall once leave this light,
Will make and have eternal night.
Good deeds may pass for Sacrifice, ô than
Accept the Virtues, and give back the Man.
Hold, hold Arsamnes;
Heaven is not pleased with your Sacrifice.
The glorious Sun hath veiled his face in clouds
Not willing to behold it, and the skies
Have s•ed such numerous tears, as have put out
The fire though fully kindled.
Thou hast now,
The voice and visage of the Gods, good Priest.
The Heavens were never more serene. The Gods
Have justified my care, Cratander.
Happy news,
Death sends thee back unto us; this comes not
From any humane power; it is not my hand
That spares thee, blessed Cratander, it is some God,
Some God reserves thee unto greater works
For us, and for thy Country.
Being then
You so interpret it, I'll thus divide
That life they lend me, one haife shall be yours,
The other Ephesus's, that mine Actions
Wearing both Gratitude and Piety,
Like to some well wrought Picture, may at once
Behold both you, and that. 'I shall ne'er be said,
The Gods reserved Cratander to a crime,
To make him fall more foul.
Thy faith hath been
So firm and tried, thy moderation
So stayed, that in a just reward I must
My self conduct thee into Greece, and there
Continue thee a King; that what was meant
For sport and mirth, may prove a serious honour;
And thy Three Days pass o'er into a long
And happy government; to be ruled by thee
Will be as freedom to them; twill not be
Accounted slavery to admit a Prince
Chosen from out themselves: thy Virtues there
May shine, as in their proper Sphere. Let others
When they make war, have this ignoble end
To gain 'em Slaves, Arsamnes gains a Friend.
THose glorious Triumphs of the Persian Court
Are honoured much in being made your sport
The Slave though freed by the King, and his Priest too,
Thinks not his Pardon good, till sealed by you:
And hopes, although his faults have many been,
To find here too the favour of a Queen.
For it is our forward duty that hath shown
These loyal faults in honour to your Throne
Great joy doth bring some madness with it still;
We challenge that as title to doe ill.
Can you expect then perfect motion, where
It is the Digression only of our Sphere
Which wheels in this new course, • express the sense
Of your approach, it's best Intelligence?
O were you still fixed to it! your resort,
Makes us desire an everlasting Course.
And though wee've read you o'er so long, that we
Begin to know each line of Majesty,
We think you snatched too soon, and grieve, as they
Who for an half yeare's night, part with their day.
And shall, till your return, though you appear
In favours still, think darkness in our Sphere.
Your sight will be preserved yet, though you rise▪
When ever you go, Great Sir, hearts will have eyes.
THus cited to a second night, wee've here
Ventured our Errors to your weighing Ear.
Weed thought they'd have been dead, as soon as borne;
For Dreams doe seldom live until the morn.
There's difference twixt a College and a Court;
The one expected Science, the other sport.
Parts should be Dialogues there, but Points to you:
They look for pleasing, you for sound, and true.
We fear then we have injured those, whose Age
Doth make the Schools the measure of the Stage:
And justly thence for want of Logic darts,
May dread those sturdy Yeomen of the Arts.
We are not trained yet to the Trade, none's fit
To fine for Poet, or for Player yet.
We hope you'll like it then, although rough filed;
As the Nurse loves the lisping of the child.
The Slave (then truly Royal, if you shall
By your smiles too redeem him from his fall)
Hopes you'll dismiss him so, that he may swear,
One Court being gone, he found another here.
Though rays•d from Slave to King, he vows he will
Resume his former Bonds, and be yours still.
THe unfil'd Author, though he be assured,
That a bad Poet is a thing secured.
Feare's yet he may miscarry, for some doe
Having just nothing, loose that nothing too.
His comfort's yet, that though the Incense fly
Foul and unwelcome, and so scattered die,
Neither the blot nor sin can on him stand,
Being the Censer's in another hand.
For though the Piece be now marked his, and known:
Yet the Repeaters make that Piece their own.
Being then a new Reciter some way is
Another Author, we are thus made his.
Wee therefore hope nothing shall here be seen
To make the Slave appeal from King or Queen:
From your selves here, t'your selves at Oxford; grace
And favour altering with the time and Place,
So that some thence may deem it happy fell
There only, where you meant to take all well.
It is then your Countenance that is the price
Must redeem this, and free the Captive twice.
He fears ill fate the less, in that if you
Now kill him, you kill your own favour too.
How ever he will not •against injustice cry;
For you who made him live, may make him die.

After the waste of many thousand wounds
Given and received alike, in seven set battailēs,
Lydia's old King upon conditions signed
For Peace and truce, entered onfeigned league
With his fierce enemy the Lycian King
Gave him in Hostage as his pledge of faith,
His Nephew, Lord Lapyrus, and received
Noble Zantippus from the Lycian;
To make the contract full and honourable,
This Lord Lapyrus entertained and welcomed
But chiefly by the fair Eurymone
The Kings sole daughter, who unto Lapyrus
Offers her as his Bride, so he would turn
A Traitor to his Country and his King:
Lapyrus, to obtain the beauteous maid
Turns Traitor to his King, and joins his forcē
Unto his fair loves Fathers, Lycia's King▪
The old King of Lydia being so beset
By his own Nephews unexpected trechēries,
Sent forth his son Tymethes to crave aid
From Armatrites King of great Cilicia,
Which he obtained in a disastrous hour
As the event will witness; In this trouble
The frighted Queen with her two Infants fled
Into a Forest, fearing the sad ruin
Hourly expected, until Armatrites
With a fresh Army forced Lapyrus fly
And saved the King, doomed for worse treachery.
What follows shows it self; tic our full due,
If we with labour give content to you.
Speranza.
Long live Armatrites King of Lydia.
How?
Art thou amazed old King, and all thy people
Mutually labouring in a fit of wonder?
Start from those palē dreams, we will prove all true,
Who wins the day the brightness is his due.
King of Cilicia.
I and Lydia now,
Bate us not our Titles, we and ours
Have sweat and dearly earned them in our flesh.
It savours not of nobleness nor virtue,
Religion, loyalty, heaven or natures laws
So most perfidiously to enter, Tyrant,
Where was, expected honesty and honour,
Assistance from a friend, not a dissembler,
A Royal neighbour and no politic foe.
What worse than this could the enemy perform?
And when shines friendship best but in a storm?
Why, doting Lydia, is it of no virtue
To bring our Army hither and put in venture
Our person and their lives upon our foes?
Wasting our courage, weakening our best forces;
Impoverishing the heart of our munition,
And having won the honour of the battle
To throw our glory on unworthy spirits,
And so unload victories honey thighs
To let Droanes seed?
Will nothing satisfy but all?
Without all, nothing.
The Kingdom and not under suites our blood,
Flies ate are not Eagles preys nor thanks our food:
And for Cilicia our other sphere,
Our son Zenarchus let thy beams move there.
Rather, my Lord, let me move pity here,
Unto that reverend fate-afflicted King;
For whom, with his disconsolate son (my friend
And plighted Brother) I here kneel as Suitor.
Oh my most Noble Father, still retain
The seal of honour and religion,
A Kingdom rightly possessed by course,
Contains more joy than is usurped by force.
The Boy hath almost changed us.
He cools—my Lord, remember you are possessed.
What, with the Devil?
The Devil! the Dukedom, the Kingdom, Lydia.
All pant under your Sceptre; the sway's yours,
Be not bought out with words, a Kingdome's dear,
Kiss fortune, keep your mind, and keep your state,
You're laughed at if you prove compassionate.
Thanks to Mazeres, he hath refreshed our spirits,
Zenarchus, it is thy death if thou proceed,
Thy words we threat, rise silent or else bleed.
Who can expect but blood where Tyrants govern?
We are not yet so cruel to thy fortune
As was Lapyrus, thy own Nephew, treacherous;
That stole upon thy life, besieged thee basely,
And had betrayed thee to thine enemies anger
Had we not beat his strength to his own throat;
And made him shrink before us, all can tell
In him it was monstrous, tic in us but well;
A trick of war, advantage, policy, nay rather recompense;
There's more deceit in peace, tic common there
To unfold young heirs, the old may well stand bare.
You have your life, be thankful, and tic more
Than your perfidious Nephew would consent to,
Had he surprised you first, your fate is cast,
The sooner you be gone twill prove the safer.
On thee Lapyrus, and thy treacheries, fall
The heavy burden of an old mans curse.
Your Queen with her two Infants fled the City
Affrighted at this treason and new wars.
News of more sadnesses than the Kingdoms loss,
She fled upon her hour, for had she stayed
She had either dyed, been banished, or betrayed.
I have some servants here?
All these my Lord.
All these? not all▪ you did forget, I am not worth the flattering, I am donē,
Old and at set, honour the rising Sun.
If any for love serve me, which is he?
Now let him shame the world and follow me.
That's I my Lord.
And I.
What two of you?
Let it be enroled
Two follow a King when he is poorē and old.
Farewell King. Isle play the Flounder, keep me to my tide.
And so will I, this is the flowing side.
Those men are yours, my Lord.
We will grace them chiefly,
Waite for employment, place and eminence,
The like to each that to our bounty flies,
For he that falls to us shall surely rise.
His son Tymethes little frights our thoughts,
He's young, and given to pleasure, not to plots.
Your Grace defines him right, he may remainē,
The Prince your son, binds him in a love-chaine;
There's little fear of him.
Their loves are dear,
Base Boy, he leaves his father to live hēre.
His presence sets a gloss on your attēmpts,
They have their luster from him.
He's their Countenance,
It was well observed and followed, he shall stay,
Mazeres, thou arm us that won the day▪
None but Mazeres, that Court fly, could on
The virtues of the King blow such corruption,
Man falls to vice in minutes, runs, and leaps,
But unto goodness he takes wary steppes.
How soon a Tyrant? why Tymethes, Friend, Brother?
Peace, prithee peace, you undo me if you wake me,
I hope I'm in a dream.
Would it were so happy?
No! why then wake Beggar; but the comfort is
I have brave seeming kinsemen: why Zenarchus,
Tic not the loss of Kingdom, Fathers banishment,
Uncertainty of Mother, afflicts me
With half the violence that those crossed affections,
Betwixt your Princely Sister and our self,
Who upon fortune, or her Fathers frown,
Erecting the whole Fabric of her love,
Either now will not, or else dare not love me.
Chance alters not affection, see in me
That hold thee dear still spite of Tyranny:
Fate does but dim the glass of a right man,
He still retains his worth, doe what fate can.
Change faith for dross? I will not call her sister,
That shall hate virtue for affliction.
And here she comes to clear those doubts her self.
Strange alteration! will the King my Father
Go to his grave a Ruffian and a Treacher?
In his gray heirs turn Tyrant to his friends?
Wasting his penitential times in plots,
Acting more sins than he hath tears to wēepe for them?
Alas Lady, fortune hath changed my state, can you love a beggar?
Why fortune hath the least cōmand ore love,
She cannot drive Tymethes from himself,
And tic Tymethes, not his painted glories,
My soul in her accomplished wish desires.
What say you now sir?
Nothing but admire
That heaven can frame a creaturē like a woman
And she be constant, seeing most are common.
Put by your wonder sir, she proves the same,
I spake her virtues for her ere she came,
And when my father dyes I here doe vow,
This kingdom now detained wrongfully
Shall then return unforcedly to you,
In part thy dowry, but in all thy due.
Unmatched honest young man.
Comē, let your lips meet though your fortunēs wan∣der.
Ha! taste lips so bounteously with a beggar?
Thus in firm state let your affections rest,
Time, that makes wretched, makes the same men blessed.
What's here? either the Princes out of charities rare∣ness
Are pleased to lay aside their glories, and refresh
The gasping fortunes of a desperate wretch;
Or if for larger bounties I was mad
To advise the King for his remaining here
That had been banished, and with him my fear:
I love the Princess, and the King allows it,
If he should prove a rival to my love,
I have argued fair for his abiding here:
My plots shall work his ruin, if one fail
Isle raise a second, for I must prevail:
I that used policy to cause him stay
Can show like Art to rid my fears away.
Oh whither shall I fly with these poor Babēs?
Twice set upon by Thieves within this Forest
Who robed me of my Clothes, and left me these,
Which better suite with my calamity:
What fate pursues the good old King my husband,
I cannot learn which is my worst affliction;
Oh treacherous Lapirus! impious Nephew!
All horrors of a guilty breast keep with thee;
Either poor Babes, you must pine here for food,
Or have the wars drink your immaculate blood.
Oh flyē, least life and honour be betrayed.
Villainē and fugitive, where wilt thou hide
The abhorred burden of thy wretched flesh?
In what disguise can thou be safe and free,
Having betrayed thy Country? base Lapirus.
Earth stretch thy throat, take down this bitter Pill,
Loathing the hateful taste of his own ill.
Oh help, good heaven save a poor wretch from slaugh∣la.
Stop her mouth first, soldiers must have their sport
Tic dearly earnd, they venture their blood for it.
A Mother so enforced by pitiless slaves?
Let me redeem my honour in her rescue,
And in this deed my former baseness dye.
Come, come.
If ever woman bore you.
Who ere bore them monsters begot̄ them; merciless damned villains.
Hold, hold, sir; we are soldiers, but doe not love to fight.
Let me dissuade you from all hope of recompense
Save thanks and prayers, which are the Beggars gifts,
You cannot give me that I have more need of
Than prayers; for my soul hath a poor stock;
There's a fair house within, but tic ill furnished
There wants true tears for hanging▪ penitent falls,
For without prayers soldiers are but bare walls:
Whence are you? that with such a careful charge,
Dare pass this dangerous Forest?
Generous sir,
I was of Lydia once, as happy then
As now unfortunate; till one Lapyrus,
That traitorous villain Nephew to the King
Sought the confusion of his State and him;
And with a secret Army guirt his Land,
When peace was plighted by his enemies hand▪
Little expecting such unnatural Treason
From forth a Kinsmans bosom; all admired
But I his miserable Queen.
Oh sink into perdition, let me hear no furthēr,
Isle tell you all; for your so late attempt
Confirms you honest, and my thoughts so keep you:
I frighted at new wars, and his false breath,
Chose rather with these Babes this lingering death.
Oh in her words I endure a thousand deaths.
The truth of this sad story hath been yours.
Now, courteous sir, may I request your name,
That in my prayers I may place the same,
Isle put my death into her woeful hands.
I hear you not sir, I desire you name.
To add some small content to your distress,
Know that Lapyrus, whom your miseries
May rightly curse, and be revenged justly
Lurks in this Forest equally distressed.
In this Forest lurks that abhorred villain?
These eyes did see him; and faith Lady, say
If you should meet that worst of villains here,
That Treacher, Monster; what would you attempt?
His speedy death, I should forget all mercy,
Had I but means fully to express my vengeance.
You would not, Queen.
No? by these Infants tears
That weep for hunger, I would thoroughly do it.
See yonder he comes.
Oh wherē?
Here, take my sword,
Are you yet constant? shame your Sex and be so; will you do it?
I see him not.
Strike him through his guilt and treachery
And let him see the horrors of his perjured soul,
Are you ready?
Pray let me see him first.
You see him now — now do it.
Lapirus!
Oh fortunate revenge! now all thy villainies
Shall be at once requited, thy countries ruin
The King thy Uncles sorrow, my own miseries,
Shall at this minute all one vengeance meet.
Alas, he doth submit, prays, and relents,
Who could wish more? none made from woman can,
Small glory it were to kill a kneeling man:
When he in penitent sighs his soul commends
Thou send him to the Gods, thy self to the fiends:
But hearken to thy piteous Infants cries,
And they are for vengeance, peace then, now he dyes.
Ungrateful woman, he delivered thee
From ravishment, can thou his murthresse be?
What's riches to thy honours? that rare treasure
Which worlds redeem not, yet tic lost at pleasure.
Kill him that preserved that? and in thy rescue
His noble rage so manfully behaved:
Rise, rise, he that repents is ever saved.
Will misery yet a longer life afford;
To see a Queen so poor, not worth her word?
I am better than my word, my word was death▪
Man's ne'er past grief, till he be past his breath.
I pardon all Lapyrus.
Doe not do it.
And only to one penance I enjoin thee
For all thy faults past, while we here remain
Within this Forest, this thy task shall bee,
To procure succour to my Babes and me.
And if I fail may the earth swallow me.
You are now grown good, here could I ever dwell,
Were the old King, my husband safe and well.
Come, come, drive away these fits, faith Isle have thee merry.
As your son and heir at his fathers funeral
Thou see my sister constantly affects thee.
There were no mirth nor music else for me.
Sir in this Castle the old King my father
Ore-worne with jealousy keeps his beauteous wife,
I think thou never saw her.
No, not I.
Why then thy judgements fresh, Isle visit her
On purpose for thy censure.
I speak my affection.
Nay on my knowledge she's worth Jealousy▪
Though Jealousy be far unworthy a King.
My loved Lord?
How cheers the Queen?
Have I not seen this fellow before now?
He has an excellent presence for a Pander,
I know not his office.
Use those words to her.
They shall be used my Lord, and any thing
That comes to using, let it come to me.
What's he Zenarchus?
Who Roxano? a fellow in great trust,
Elected by my fathers jealousy.
But he, and all the rest attend upon her
I think would turn hēr Panders for rēward;
For tic not watch nor ward keeps woman chaste,
If honours watch in her mind be not placed.
Right Oracle; what gain hath Jealousy?
Fruitless suspicion, sighs, ridiculous groans,
Hunger and lust will break through flesh and stonēs:
And like a whirlwind blows op Castle doors.
Italian padlockes,
What mad Lords are your jealous people then,
That lockes their wives from all men but their men?
Make them their keepers, to prevent some greater,
So oft it happens to the poores relief,
Keepers eat Venison when their Lords eat Beef.
See, see, she comes.
Honour of beauty? there mans wishēs rise,
Grace and perfection lighten from her eyes.
Amazement is shot through me.
Tic Tymethes, Lady, Sonnē to the banished King.
Is this he?
It is sweet Lady.
I never knew the force of a desire
Until this minute struck within my blood;
I fear one look was destined to undo me.
Why Tymethes? friend.
Ha?
A Courtier, and forget your first weapon? go and salute our Lady Mother.
He makes towards us: you're Prince Tymethes? so I un∣derstand.
The same unfortunate, most gracious Lady,
Supremest of your Sex in all perfections.
Sir, you're forgetful, this is no place for Courtship,
Nor we a subject for it, return to your friend.
All hopes kilt in their blossom.
Too cruelly in faith I put him by,
Wine for our son Zenarchus, it was done kindly
You son, and our best Visitant.
Duty binds me.
Begin to me Zenarchus, Isle have it so.
Why then there's hope shele take occasion
To drink to me, she hath no means to avoid it.
Isle prevent all loose thoughts, drink to my self,
My mind walks yonder, but suspect walks here.
The divell's on that side and engrosses all,
Smiles, favours, common courtesies, none can fall
But he has a snatch at them; not drink to me?
Make you yon stranger drink.
Pox of't not I.
I speak strange words against my fantasy.
Prithee Tymethes drink.
I am not dry.
I think so too; dry, and so young, it were strange,
Come prithee drink to the Queen, my mother.
You shall rule me— unto that beauteous Majesty?
Thanks noble sir; I must be wary, my mind's dangerous.
Isle pledge you anon sir.
Hart? how contempt ill fortune does pursue?
Not drink, nor pledge, what was she borne to doe?
Isle stay no longer, least I get that flame,
Which nothing but cold death can quench or tame.
Zenarchus, come.
I go, music of mind to the Queen.
To you no less.
And all that you can wish, or I express.
Thanks to our son,
The other took leave in silence, but left me
To speak enough both for my self and thee.
Tymethes? that's his name, poor heart take heed,
Look well into the event ere thou proceed:
Love, yet be wise; impossible, none can;
If ere the wise man claim one foolish hour
Tic when he loves; he's then in follies power.
I need not fear the servants that ore-watch mē
Their faiths lye in my Coffers, in effect,
More true to me then to my Lords suspect.
The fears and dangers that most threaten me,
Live in the party that I must enjoy,
And that's Tymethes; men are apt to boast;
He may in full cups blaze and vaunt himself
Unto some meaner Mistress; make my shame
The politic Engine to beat down her name,
And from thence force a way to the Kings ears,
Strange fate; where my love keeps, there keep my fearēs.
Alone? why whore's her guard? suffer her alone?
Her thoughts may work, their powers are not her own.
Women have of themselves no entire sway,
Like Dial needles they wave every way,
And must be thoroughly taught to be kept right,
And point to none but to their Lords delight.
Time to convey and plot? leave her alone!
Why Villains — kiss me, my perfection,
This night we will banquet in these blissful armēs.
Your nights are music, and your words are charms.
Kiss me again fair Tithes.
My Lady is scarce perfect in her thoughts
How ere she framed a smile upon the Tyrant.
I have some skill in faces, &amp; yet they never were more deceit∣full;
A man can scarce know a Baud from a Midwife by the face;
An hypocritical Puritan from a devout Christian
If you go by the face; well ell's not straight in my Lady.
She hath certain crooked cogitations if a man had the liberty to search 'em:
If ought point at my advice or performance, she may fortune∣nately
Disclose it: she knows my mettle, and what it yields to an ounce,
She cannot be deceived in it: here's service, and secrēcie, and no Lady can
Wish more, beside a Monkey; she is assured of our faculties, there's none
Of us all that stand her smock Sentinels, but would ven∣la a joint
To doe her any pleasurable service, and I think thats as much
As any woman desires — mass here she comes.
Tic so me strange Physic I know by the working.
It cannot be kept down with any Argument,
Tic of aspiring force; sparks fly not downward,
No more this received fancy of Tymethes,
I threaten it with my Lords Jealousy,
Yet still it rises against all objections;
I see my dangers, in what fears I dwell
There's but a Plankē on which I run to hell,
Yet were it thrice narrower I should venture on,
None dares doe more for sin than woman can.
Misery of love — Roxano? I am observed,
What news Roxano?
None that's good, Madam.
No? which is the bad!
The worst of all is, Madam, you are sad.
Indeed I am not merry.
Would I knew the means would make you so,
I would turn my self into any shape or office
To be the Author of it, sweet Lady.
Troth I have that hope of thee, I think thou would
Think it? sfoote, you might swear safely in that action
And never hurt your oath — I ne'er fayld yet.
It were sin to injure thee, I know thou did not.
Nay I know I did not.
But my trusty servant,
This plot requires art, secrecy and wit,
Yet out of all can hardly work one safety.
Not one, that's strange, I would it were put to me,
Isle make it arrive safe what ere it be.
Thou could not my Roxano — why admit I love, now I come to thee.
Admit you love? why ell's safe enough yet.
I, but a stranger.
Nay, now we are all spoiled Lady,
I may look for my brains in my Boots— now you have put
Home to me indeed, Madam; A stranger? there's a hundred
Deaths in the very name, besides vantage.
I said I should affright thee.
Faith no foolē can fright me, Madam, commonly called a stranger.
Hast thou the will? or dare thou doe me good?
Doe thee good, sweet Lady? as far as I am able ne'er doubt it;
Let me but cast about for safety, and Isle doe any thing, Madam,
I, I, our safeties; which are mere impossibles,
Love forgets all things but its proper objects.
What is he? and his name?
Tymethes, in a most unlucky minute
Led hither by our Son in Law Zenarchus.
Hum, is that the most fortunate, spider catching, smock wrapped Gentleman?
Yet if he know me.
What then?
I am undone.
And is it possible a man should lye with a woman and yet not know her?
And yet tic possible too—thank my Invention, follow that game still.
He must not know me; than I love no further;
Although for not enjoying him I dye;
My Lords pale jealousy does so orelookē me,
That if Tymethes know what he enjoys
It may make way unto my Lords mistrust;
Then since in my desire such horrors move
Isle dye no other then the death of love.
Lady, Madam, doe you hear?
Have you leisure to swoon now, when I have taken such pains in the business?
To take order for your safety, set all things right; why Madam?
What says the man?
Why he says like a Gentleman every inch of him,
And will perform the office of a gentleman; bring you to∣gether;
Put you together, and leave you together: what gentleman can doe more?
And all this safely?
And all this safely? I by this hand will I,
Or else would I might never doe any thing to purpose;
If he have but the first part of a young gentleman in him.
Tic granted Madam; I have crotchets in my brain
That you shall see him and enjoy him, and he not know where he is, nor who it is.
How? shall he not know me?
Why tic the least part of my meaning he should Lady.
Doe you think you could possibly be safe and he know you?
Why some of your young Gallants are of that vaine-glorious and preposterous
Humour, that if they lay with their own Sisters you should hear them prate of't,
This is too usual, there's no wonder in it: what I have said
I will swear to perform, you shall enjoy him ere night
And he not know you next morning.
Thou art not only necessary but pleasing,
There, catch our bounty, manage all but right,
As now with gold, with honours weal requite.
I am your creature Lady; pretty gold,
And by this light me thinks most easily earned,
There's no faculty, say I like a Pander, and that makes so many
Now adays dye in the Trade: I have your gold Lady,
And eke your service; I am one step higher,
This office makes a gentleman a Squire.
Come fellow Coridon, are the pits dug?
I, and as deep as an Usurers conscience I warrant thee.
Mas and that's deēpe enough, twill devour a wid∣ow and three Orphans
At a brēakefast; soft, is this it?
I, I, this is it.
Nay for the deepenesse Isle be sworn; but come my masters &amp; lay these boughs cross over: so, so, artificially, and may all those whoreson Muttonmongers the wolves, hole here, which eat our sheep.
I wonder what wolves those are which eat our sheep,
Whether they be he wolves or she wolves?
They should be he wolves by their loving Mutton,
But by their greediness they should be she wolves.
For the belly of a she wolf is never satisfied till it be damned up.
Why are the she wolves worse than the he's?
Why, is not the dam worse than the Devil pray?
You have answered me there indeed.
Why man, if all the Earth were Parchment, the Sea Ink Every stick a pen, and every knave a Scrivener, they were not all able to write down the knaveries of she wolves.
A murren on them, hoe's or shees, they suckē the blood of none but our Lambs.
Oh always the weakest goes to the wall, as for ex∣ample, knock down a sheep and he tumbles forwards, knock down a woman and she tumbles backewards.
Sir, I wonder how many sorts of wolves there bē.
Marry just as many sorts as there be knaves in the Cards
Why that's four.
First there are your Court wolves, and those be
Foul eaters and clean drinkers.
And why clean drinkers?
Why because when they be drunkē they commonly cast up all, and so make cleansing week of't.
So sir, those are clean drinkers indeed.
The next are your Country wolves, nothing chokes them but plenty, they sing like Sirens when corn goes out by ship-fulls, and dance after no tune but after an angel a Bushel.
The halter take such cornecutters.
Are there no City Wolves?
A rope on them, yes, huge routes, you shall have long lane full of them; theyle feed upon any whore, carrion, thief, or any thing.
Have they such mawes?
Mawes? why man, fiddlers have no better stomachs,
I have known some of them eat up a Lord at three bits.
Three bonds you mean.
A Knight is no body with them,
A young gentleman is swallowed whole like a Gudgēon.
I wonder that Gudgeon does not choke him.
A Gudgeon choke him, if the throat of his consci∣ēnce be sound, he'll gulp down any thing; five of your sell∣ken Gallants are swallowed easier than a Damask Prune: for our City wolves doe so roll my young prodigal first in wax, which is soft, till he look like a gilded Pill, and then so finely wrap him up in Satin which is sleek, that he goes down without chewing, and thereupon they are called slip∣pery Gallants.
Isle be no Gentleman for that trick.
The last is your Sea wolf, a horrible ravenēr to, hee has a belly as big as a ship, and devours as much silk at a gulp as would serve forty dozen Taylors against a Christmas day or a running at Tilt.
Well, well, now our trap is set what shall we doe with the wolves we catch?
Why those that are great ones and more than our mat∣ches we will let go, and the lesser wolves we will hang: shall it be so?
I, I, each man to his stand.
Foulē monster monger, who must live by that
Which is thy own destruction: Why should men
Be natures bondslaves? Every creature else
Comes freely to the Table of the Earth;
That which for man alone doth all things bearē
Scarce gives him his true diet any where.
What spiteful winds breath here? that not a Tree
Spreads, forth a friendly arm? distressed Queen,
And most accursed Babes; the earth that bears you
Like a proud mother, scorns to give you food: ha?
Thanks fate, I now defy thee starveling hunger,
Blessed tree, four lives grow in thy fruit, run taste it then,
Wise men serve first themselves then other men.
Oh me accursed and most miserable,
Help, help, some Angel lay a listening ear
To draw my cry up; none to lend help? oh
Then pine and dye.
A wolf caught, a wolf caught.
Oh help, I am no wolf good friēnd.
No! What art thou then?
A miserable wretch.
An Usurer?
No, no.
A Broker then?
Mock not a man in woe, in a greene wound,
Pour Balsam and not Physic.
Snails, he talks like a Surgeon,
If you be one why doe you not help your self sir?
I am no Surgeon friend, my names Lapirus.
How? a wolf caught hoe — Lap what Lap, hoe!
Lapirus is my name dost thou not know me?
Yes, for a wolfish rascal that would have worried his own Country.
Torture me not, I prithee, I am that wretch; a villain
I was once; but I am now —
The Devil in the Vault; you sir, that betrayed your Country, and the old King your Uncle, there lye till one Wolf devour another, thou treacherous rascal.
Oh me most miserable and wretched creature!
I now doe find there's a revenging fate
That dooms bad men to be unfortunate.
We are observed.
By whom?
Mazeres follows us.
Oh he's my protested servant, your sole Rival.
The devil he is.
You'll makē a hot Suitor of him anon?
He may be hot in the end, his good parts sue for it,
He eyes us still.
He does, you shall depart Lady;
Isle take my leave on purpose in his presence,
He's jealous, and a kiss runs through his heart,
Isle make a thrust at him on your lip.
Death! minute favours? every step a kiss?
I think they count how the day goes by kissing,
Tic past four since I met them.
I have hit him in the Call in stead of the blood,
He sheds distractions, which are worse than wounds.
But sir!
Stays he to prove my Rival? cursed be the hourē
Wherein I advised the King for his stay here,
I have set slaves to entrap him, yet none prosper,
Isle lay no more my faith upon their works
The are weak and loose, and like a rotten wall,
Leaning on them may hazard my own fall.
Isle use a swifter course, cut off long journeys,
And tedious ways that run my hopes past breath,
Isle take the plain roadē way and hunt his death.
So so, he departs with a knit brow, no matter;
When his frown begets earthquakes, happily then
Twill shake me too: I shall stand firm till then.
Mass here a walks; I am far enough from my self,
I challenge all disguises except drinking
To hide me better; I give way to that,
For that indeed will thrust a white gentlēman
Into a suite of mud, but whist I begin to be noted.
I, he changed upon it.
I marked him.
Good your honours, your most comfortable charity∣ble relief
And devotion to a poor star crossed Gentleman.
Pox on thee.
Ime bare enough already if it like your honour.
He did!
Pox on thee? your young gallants love to give no Alms▪
But that that will stick by a man, that's one virtue in them:
He's not content to have my hat off, but he would have my hair off too.
Thank your good Lordship.
No! was that his Action!
It called him Lord.
Nay he's a Villain.
Good your honours! I have been a man in my time.
Why what art thou now?
Kept goodly beasts, had 3. wives, 2. men uprising, 3. maids down lying; oh good your kind ho∣nurse.
Sfoote, I am a beggar my self.
Perhaps your Lordship gets by it;
Good your sweet honour▪
This fellow would be whipped.
Your Lordship has forgot since you were a Beggar.
Isle give thee somewhat for that jest in troth.
But now you are in private, shut your purse, and opēn your ear sir.
How?
He's dealing his devotion, hinder him not.
I am not literally a Beggar, as Puritanical as I appear
The naked Truth is you are happily desired.
Ha?
Of the most
Sweet, delicate, divine, pleasing, ravishing creature
Peace, peace, prithee peace.
That ever made mans wishes perfect.
Nay, say not so; I saw one creature lately
Exceeds al humane form for true perfectiō; this may be beau∣teous.
This for white and red sir, her honour and my oath sue for that pardon,
You must not know her name nor see her face.
How?
She rather chooses death in her neglect
Than so to hazard life or lose respect.
How shall I come at her?
Let your will
Subscribe to the sure means already wrought,
She shall be safely pleased, you safely brought.
Ha! and is this sheer faith, without any trick in it?
Let me perish in this office else; and I need wish
No more damnation than to dye a Pander.
Thou speak well, when meet wee?
Five is the fixed hour, upon to morrows Evening.
So, the place?
Near to the further lodge.
Go to then, it holds honest all the way?
Else does there live no honesty but in Lawyers.
Enough, five? and the furthest lodge? Isle meet thee.
Enjoy the sweetest Treasure in a woman.
Always excepting and the Tyrants Gem.
What, have you done with the Beggar?
None that lives can say he has done with the Beggar.
Hold conference so long with such a fellow?
How? are your wits perfect? if one should refuse to talk with every beggar, he might refuse brave Company sometimes, gallants y faith.
The loss of my dear Queen afflicts me more
Then all Lapirus cursed treacheries: Inhumane monster!
If you have humane forms to fit those voy∣ces
And hearts that may be pierced with miseries groans
Sent from a fainting Spirit; pity a wretch,
A miserable man, Prisoner to darkness,
Your charitable strengths this way repair,
And lift my flesh to the reviving Ayre.
Alas, some travelling man, by night out stripped,
Missing his way into this danger slipped;
Set all our hands to help him; Come, good man,
They that sit high may make their ends below.
Millions of thanks and praises.
You're heavy sir, who ere you be.
There's weight within keeps down my soul and mē
One full strength more makes our pains happy, poor strength helps the poor.
So sir, you're welcome to — Lapirus? oh.
We doe forgive thy Treachery, revive,
Tic pity and not hate makes goodness thrive.
Oh that astonishment had left me dead!
Shame, sitting on my brow, weighs down my hēad:
Even thus the guilt of my abhorred sin,
Flashed in my face when I beheld the Queenē.
Our Queen! oh where, Lapirus? tell the rest.
Within this forest with her Babes distressed.
Which way? lead dear Lapirus.
Follow me then.
Not only shall we quit thy souls offencē
But give thy happy labour recompense.
The miserable Queen expecting still
The Infants succour from Lapirus hand
Who wants himself; it chanced through extreme want
The youngest dyed, and this so near his end
That had not Shepherds happily passed by
And on the Babe cast a compassionate eye,
And snatched the child out of the arms of death
Where the sad mother left it, the same hour
Had been his grave that gives his life new power.
Thus the distressed Queen to them unknown
Was as a Nurse received unto her own.
Whose sight Lapirus missing▪ having led
The King her husband to this haplesse place,
They all depart in extreme height of grief
To get unto their own sad wants relief.
This is the farther Lodge, the place of meeting; The hour scarce come yet—well— I was not borne to this, There's not a hair to choose betwixt me and a Pander in this case, shift it off as well as I can: I doe envy this fellows hap∣pines now; and could cut his throat at pleasure: I could en gnaw feathers now to think of his downy felicity. I that could never aspire above a dairy wench, the very cream of my fortunes; that he should bathe in Nectar, and I most un∣fortunate in Buttermilk, this is good dealing now, is it?
Isle have some other, for he must not live.
Who's this? my Lord Mazeres discontent▪
H' has been to seek me twice, and privately,
I wonder at the business; I'm no Statesman;
If I be, tic more than I know; I protest therefore
I dare not call it in question; what should he makē with me?
Isle discover my self to him—if the othēr come in the mēane time so I may be caught bravely, yet tic scarce the hour, Isle put it to the trial.
Roxano in my judgement had bēene fittest,
And farthest from suspect of such a deed
Because he keeps in the Castle.
My loved Lord.
Roxano!
The same my Lord.
I was to seek thee twice;
Tell me Roxano, have I any power in thee? doē I move there,
Or any part of me flow in thy blood?
As far as life my Lord.
As far as love man, I ask no further.
Touch me then my Lord, and try my mettle.
First there's gold for thee,
After which follow favour, eminence,
And all those gifts which fortune calls her own.
Well my Lord.
There's one Tymethes son to the banished King,
Lives about Court, Zenarchus gives him grace,
That fellow's my disease, I thrive not with him,
He's like a prison chain shook in my ears
I take no sleep for him, his favours mad me.
My honours and my dignities are dreams
When I behold him; That right arm can easē me,
I will not boast my bounties, but for ever
Live rich and happy: thou art wise farewell.
Hum, what news is here now? thou art wise farewell.
By my troth I think it is a part of wisdom to take gold
When it is offered, many wise men will do it: that I learnt
Of my learned Council: this is worth thinking on now.
To kill Tymethes, so strangely beloved by a Lady, and so mon∣strously detested by a Lord? here's gold to bring Tymethes, and here's gold to kill Tymethes. I, let me see, which weighs heaviest; by my faith I think the killing gold will carryit: I shall like many a bad Lawyer, run my Conscience upon the greatest fee; who gives most is like to fare best. I like my
safety so much the worse in this business in that Lord Ma∣zeres is his professed enemy: he's the Kings bosom, hee blows his thoughts into him; and I had rather be torn with whirlewindes than fall into any of their furies. Troth as far as I can see, the wisest course is to play the knave, lay open this Venery, betray him; but see my Lord again.
Hast thou thought of me? may I doe good upon thee?
Isle out of recreation, make thee worthy; play honours to thy hand.
My Lord?
Art thou resolved? and I will be thy Lord.
It will appear I am so; be proud of your revenge be∣fore I name it;
Never was man so fortunate in his hate,
Isle give you a whole Age but to think how.
Thou make me thirst.
Tymethes meets me here.
Here? excellent, on Roxano; he meets thee here.
I meant at first to betray all to you sir: understand that my Lord.
Y faith I doe.
Then thus my Lord — he comes.
Withdraw behind the Lodgē, relate it briefly.
A delicate sweet Creature? slight, who should it bē?
I must not know her name, nor see her face?
It may be some trick to have my bones bastinadodē
Well, and so sent back again; what say you to a blanquetting
Faith, so it were done by a Lady and her Chambermaids
I care not, for if they toss me in the Blankets
Isle toss them in the Sheets, and that's one for the other.
A man may bee led into a thousand villainies; but the fellow swore enough,
And here's blood apt enough to believe him.
I both admire the deed, and my revenge.
My Lord Isle make your way.
Thou make thy friend.
Art come? we meet en jump upon a minute.
I but you'll play the better jumper of the two.
I shall not jump so near as you by a handful.
How! at a running leap?
That is more hard;
At a running leap you may give me a handful.
So, so, what's to be done.
Nothing but put this hood over your head.
How? I never went blindfold before.
You never went otherwise sir; for all folly is blind;
Besides sir, when we see the sin we act,
We think each trivial crime a bloody fact.
Well followed of a Serving man.
Servingmen always follow their masters sir,
No not in their Mistresses.
There I leave you sir.
I desire to be left when I come there sir.
But faith sincerely is there no trick in this?
Prithee deal honestly with me.
Honestly, if protestation be not honest,
I know not what to call it.
Why, if she affect me so truly, she might trust me with her knowledge,
I could be secret to her chief actions, why I lovē women too well.
Sheele trust you the worse for that sir.
Why because I love women?
O sir, tic most common,
He that loves women, is near true to woman.
Experience daily proves he loves none
With a true heart, that affects more than one.
Your wit runs nimbly sir, pray use your pleasure.
Why then goodnight sir.
Mass the candles out.
Oh sir the better sports taste best in the night,
And what we doe in the dark we hate i'th'light.
A good doer may thou prove, for thy experience;
Come give me thy hand, thou may prove an honest Lad,
But however Isle trust thee.
Oh sir, first try me,
But we protract good hours, come follow me sir,
Why this is right your sportive Gallants prize,
Before they'll loose their sport theyle loose their ēyēs.
Oh my feare-fighting blood! arē you all here.
All at your pleasure Madam.
That's my wish, and my opinion
Hath ever been persuaded of your truths,
And I have found you willing t'all employments
We put into your charge.
In our faith's madam.
For we are bound in duty to your Bounty.
Will you to what I shall prescribe swear secrecy?
Try us, sweet Lady, and you shall prove our faith's▪
To all things that you hear or see
I swear you all to secrecy;
I pour my life into your breasts,
There my doom or safety rests.
If you prove untrue to all
Now I rather choose to fall
With loss of my desire, than light
Into the Tyrants wrathful spite:
But in vain I doubt your trust,
I never found your hearts but just.
On this book your vows arrive,
And as in truth in favour thrive.
We wish no higher, so we swearē.
Like Jewels all your vows Isle wear.
Here, take this Paper, there those secrets dwell,
Go read your charge, which I should blush to tell.
Ell's sure, I nothing doubt of safety now,
To which each servant hath combined his vow.
Roxano, that begins it trusty,
I cannot choose but praise him, he's so needful,
There's nothing can be done about a Lady
But he is for it; honest Roxano;
Even from our head to feet he's so officious,
The time draws on, I feel the minutes here,
No clock so true as love that strikes in fear.
How far lack I yet of my blind pilgrimage?
Whist, Roxano▪
You are at your— In my Lord, away, Isle help
You to a disguise.
Enough.
Me thinks I walk in a Vault all under ground.
And now your long lost eyes again are found: good morrow sir.
By the mass the day breaks.
Rest here my Lord and you shall find content,
Catch your desires, stay here, they shall be sent.
Though it be night, tic morning to that night which brought me hither,
Ha! the ground spread with Arras? what place is this?
Rich hangings? fair room gloriously furnished?
Lights and their luster? riches and their splendour?
Tic no mean creatures, these dumb tokens witness;
Troth I begin to affect my Hostess better;
I love her in her absence, though unknown,
For courtly form that's here observed and shown.
Valesta? yes, the same; tic my Ladies pleasure,
You give to me your coat, and vizarded attend without
Till she employ you — so now, this disguise
Serves for my Lord Mazeres, for he watches
But fit occasion: Lecher, now beware,
Securely sit and fearless quaff and eat,
You'll find sour sauce still after your sweet meat.
The servants all in vizards? by this light
I doe admire the carriage of her love;
For I account that woman above wise
Can sin and hide the shame from a mans eyes.
They never doe their easy sex more wong,
Than when they venture fame upon mans tongue.
Yet I could swear concealment in loves plot,
But happy woman that believes me not.
What ere is spoke or to be spoke seems fit,
All still concludes her happiness and wit.
This banquet from her own hand received grace
Her self prepared it for you; as appears
By the choice sweets it yields, able to move
A man past sense, to the delights of love,
I bid you welcome as her most prized guest,
First to this banquet, next to pleasures feast.
Who ere she be we thank her, and commend
Her care and love to entertain a friend.
That speaks her sexes rareness, for to woman,
The darkest path love treads is clear and common;
She wishes your content may be as great
As if her presence filled that other seat.
Convey my thanks to her, and fill some wine.
My Lord?
My Lord Mazeres caught the Office
I can't but laugh to see how well he plays
The Devil in a vizard; damnēs where he crouches; little thinks the Prince
Under that face lurks his lives enemy,
Yet he but keeps the fashion; great men kill
As flatterers stab, who laugh when they mean ill.
Now could I poison him fitly, aptly, rarely,
My vengeance speaks me happy; there it goes.
Some wine?
It comes my Lord.
My Lady begun to you sir, and doth commend,
This to your heart, and with it her affection.
Isle pledge her thankfully; there remove that.
And in this my revenge must be removed
Where first I left it, now my abused wrath
Pursues thy ruin in this dangerous path.
That cup hath quite dashed my Lord Mazeres.
Return my faith, my reverence, my respect,
And tell her this, which courteously I find,
She hides her face, but lets me see her mind.
I would not taste of such a Banquet to feel that which follows it,
For the love of an Empress. Tic more dangerous to be a let∣cher
Than to enter upon a breach; yet how securely he munches
His thoughts are sweeter than the very meates before him:
He little dreams of his destruction;
His horrible fearful ruin which cannot be withstood,
The end of Venery is disease or blood
I have not known one happier for his pleasure
Than in that state we are; tic a strange trick,
And sweetly carried; by this light a delicate creature,
And should have a good face if all hit right;
For they that have good bodies and bad faces
Were all mismatched, and made up in blind places.
The wind and tide serve sir, you have lighted upon
A Sea of pleasure; here's your sail sir, and your top streamer
A fair wrought shirt and a night-cap.
I shall make a sweet voyage of this.
I, if you knew all sir.
Is not all known yet? what's to be told?
Five hundred Crowns in the shirt sleeve in gold.
How?
Tic my good Ladies pleasure,
No Clouds eclipse her bounty, she shines clear,
Some like that pleasure best that costs most dear;
Yet I think your Lordship is not of that mind now;
You like that best that brings a Banquet with it, and 500. Crowns.
I by this light doe I; and I think thou art of my mind.
We jump somewhat near sir.
But what does she mean to reward me before hand?
I may prove an Eunuch now for ought she knows.
Oh sir, I ne'er knew any of your hair but he was ab∣solute at the game.
Faith we are much of a colour; but here's a Note, what says it?
Our love and bounty shall increase
So long as you regard our peace.
Unless your life you would forgo,
Who we arese eke not to know.
Enjoy me freely: for your sake
This dangerous shift I undertake.
Be therefore wise, keep safe your breath,
You cannot see me under death.
I'd be loath to venture so far for the sight of any Creature under heaven.
Nay sir I think you may see a thousand faces better cheap.
Well, I will shift me instantly, and be content
With my groping fortune.
Oh sir, you'll groape to purpose.
Isle after thee, and see the measure of my vengeance upheapt
His ruin is my charge; I have seen that
This night would make one blush through this vizard.
Like lightning in a Tempest her lust shows,
Or drinking drunk in Thunder, horrible:
For on this Act a Thousand dangers waite,
The King will seize him in his burning fury
and seal his vengeance on his reeking breast,
Though I make Panders use of ear and eye
No office vile to damme mine Enemy.
This course is but the first, twill not rest there,
The next shall change him into fire and Ayre.
Nay, did ere subtlety match it?
Slight, led to a Lady budwinck'd!
Placed in state, and banqueted in Vizards.
All by this light: but all this nothing was
To the delicious pleasures of her Bed.
Who should this be?
Nay enquire not brother,
I'd give one eye to see her with the other.
See thou this Jewel? in the midst of night
I slipped it from her veil, unfelt of her,
'T may be so kind unto me as to bring
Her beauty to my knowledge.
Can not guess at her, nor at the Placē?
At neither for my heart; why Isle tell thee man
It was handled with such Art, such admired cunning,
What with my blindness and their general darkness,
That when mine eyes received their liberty, I was ne'er the nearer.
To them in full form I appeared unshrowded
But all their lights to me were masked and clouded.
Fore heaven I doe admire the cunning of't.
Nay you cannot out vie my admiration,
I had a feeling of't beyond your passion.
Well, blow this over, see, our sister comes.
Art sure Mazeres that he courts our Daughter?
I'm sure of more my Lord, she favours him.
That Beggar?
Worse my Lord, that villain Traitor, and yet worse my Lord.
How?
Pardon my Lord, a riper time shall bring him forth.
Behold him there my Lord.
Dares she so far forget respect to us,
And dim her own lustre to give him grace?
Favours are grown to custom twixt them both,
Letters, close banquets, whisperings, private meetings.
Isle make them dangerous meetings.
In faith my Lord Isle have this Jewel.
Tic not my gift Lady.
What's that Mazeres?
Marry, my Lord, she courtly begs a Jewel of him
Which he keeps back as Courtly, with fair words.
I have sworn my Lord.
Why upon that condition
You'll keep it safe and close from all strange eyes
Not wronging me, tic yours.
I swear.
It shall suffice.
Tic hers my Lord, at which they part in kisses.
Isle make those meetings bitter; both shall rue,
We have found Mazeres to this minute true.
No trick to see this Lady? heart of ill fortune!
The Jewel that was begged from me too was
The hope I had to gain her wished for knowledge.
Well; here's a heart within will not be quiet;
The eye is the sweet feeder of the soul,
When thē taste wants, that keeps the memory whole;
Tic bad to be in darkness all know well,
Then not to see her what doth it want of Hell?
What says the Note?
Unless your life you would forgo,
Whom we are, seek not to know.
Pish, all Idle.
As if she'de suffer death to threaten me
Whom she so bounteously and firmly loves?
No trick? excellent, twill fit; make use of that.
Enough, you are honest; I affect thee much;
Go, train him to his ruin.
Let me alone my Lord; doubt not Isle train him:
Perhaps sir I have the Art.
Oh, I know thy mind.
The further lodge?
Enough, Isle meet thee presently.
Why so; I like one that will make an end of himself at few words;
A man that hath a quick perseverance in ill:
A leaping spirit; he will run through horrors jaws
To catch a sin; but to oretake a virtue
He softly paces, like a man that's sent
Some tedious dark, unprofitable journey.
Corrupt is nature, she loves nothing more
Than what she most should hate, there's nothing springs
Apace in man but gray hairs, cares, and sins.
Isle see her come what can; but what can prove?
She cannot seek my death, that seeks my love.
My Lord, what is the matter?
I know not what;
The King sent.
Well, we obey.
Here comes his Highness.
How now what's she?
I my Lord?
Your Highness knew me once, your most obedient Daughter.
They lye that tell me so, this is not she.
No, my Lord?
No, for as thou art I know thee not,
And I shall strive still to forget thee more;
Thou neither bear in memory my respects
Nor thy own words; how can we think of thee
But as of a dejected worthless creature?
So far beneath our grace and thy own luster, that we dis∣deign to know thee.
Was there no choice mong our selected Nobles
To make thy favourite besides Tymethes?
Son to our enemy, a wretch, a Beggar?
Dead to all fortunes, honours, or their hopes,
Besides his breath, worth nothing; abject wretch,
To place thy affection so vigorously
On him can ne'er requite it; deny it not,
We know the favours thou hast given him,
Pledges of lovē, close letters, private meetings,
And whisperings are customary twixt you.
Come, which be his gifts? whereabout lye his pledgēs?
Your Grace hath been injuriously informed,
I ne'er received pledge.
Impudent creature,
When in our sight and hearing shamefully undervaluing thy best honours
And setting by all modesty of blood thou bēg'dst a Jewel of him.
Oh pardon mē my Lord, I had forgot, here it is,
That is the same, and all that ere was his.
Ha! this! how came this hither?
I gave it you my Lord.
Who gave it thee?
Tymethes.
He! who gave it him?
I know not that my Lord.
Then here it sticks, Mazeres!
My Lord!
Tic my Queens, my Queens, Mazeres.
How to him came this?
I can resolve your highness.
Can Mazeres?
He is some Ape, the husk falls from him now,
And you shall know his inside: he's a villain,
A Traitor to the pleasures of your Bed.
Oh, I shall burst with torment.
He's received this night
Into her bosom.
I feel a whirl wind in me
Ready to tear the frame of my mortality.
I traced him to the deed.
And saw it done?
I abused my eyes in the true survey of't,
Tainted my hearing with lascivious sounds;
My loyalty did prompt me to be sure
Of what I found so wicked and impure.
Tic spring tide in my Gall, all my blood's bitter,
Puh, lungs too.
This night.
Lodovico.
My Lord.
How came thou up? lets hearē.
My Lord, my first beginning was a Broker.
A knavē from the beginning; there's no hopē of him, Sertorio?
Here my Lord.
We know thee just, how came thou up? let's hear.
From no desert that I can challenge but your highness favour.
Thou art honest in that answer; go, report we are 40. leagues off
Rid forth: spread it about the Castle cunningly.
Isle doe it faithfully my Lord.
Do it cunningly,
Go, if thou should do it faithfully thou lie;
I'm lost by violence through all my senses,
I'm blind with rage, Mazeres, guide me forth
I tread in Ayre, and see no foot nor path,
I have lost myself, yet cannot lose my wrath.
What have I heard? it dares not be but true▪
Tymethes taken in adulterate trains,
And with the Queen my mother? now I hate him,
As beauty abhors years, or Usurers charity;
He does appear unto my eye a Leper
Full of sinnēs black infection, foul Adultery:
Cursed be the hour in which I first did grace him,
And let Mazeres starve in my disdain
That hath so long observed me with true love,
Whose loyalty in this approves the same.
Madam.
My love? my Lord I should say, but would say my love.
I doe beseech your Grace for what I have done
Lay no oppressing censure upon me;
I could not but in honesty reveal it,
Not envying in that he was my Rival,
Nor in the force of any ancient grudge
But as the deed in its own nature craved,
So mong the rest it was revealed to me:
Appēaring so detested that your self
Gracious and kind, had you but seen the manner
Would have thrown by all pity and remorse
And took my office or one more in force.
Rise dear Mazeres, in our favours rise,
So far am I from censure to reprove thee
That in my hate to him I choose and love thee.
If constant service may be called desert, I shall de∣serve.
Man hath no better part.
Why this was happily observed and followed;
The King will to the Castle late to night,
And tread through all the Vaults, I must attend.
I wish that at first sight the had forced his end.
Tic better thus; so my revenge imports;
Now thrive my plots, the end shall make me great,
She mine, the Crown sits here I am then Compleatē.
So, leave us here a while, bear back the light,
I would not be discovered if he come,
You know his entertainment, so be gone,
I am not cheerful troth, what point so ere
My powers arrive at: I desire a league
With desolate darkedesse, and disconsolate fancies,
There is no music in my soul to night.
What should I fear when all my servants faiths
Sleep in my bounty, and no bribes not threats,
Can wake them from my safety? for the King,
He's forty leagues rode forth, I heard it lately:
Yet heaviness like a Tyrant, proud in night
Usurps my power, rules where it hath no right.
Me thinks this a longer voyage than the first?
Pleasures once tasted makes the next seem worse.
Is that the trick?
Oh sir, experience proves it,
You came at first to enjoy what you ne'er knew,
Now all is but the same what ere you doe.
Isle prove that false, the sight of her is new.
I have forgot a business to my Lord Mazeres,
My safety to the King relies upon it,
You are in the house my Lord, this is the withdrawing Room.
I see nothing.
No matter sir, as long as you have
Feeling enough.
Is the Hood off?
Tic here in my hand sir,
I must crave pardon, leave you here a while,
But as you love my safety and your own
Remove not from this room till my return.
Well here's my hand I will not.
Tic enough sir.
Hist, art gone? then boldly I step forth
Cunning discoverer of an unknown beauty
As subtle as her plot: Thou art masked too,
Show me a little comfort, in this condensive darkness;
Play the flatterer laugh in my face;
Why here's enough to perfect all my wishes;
With this I taste of that forbidden fruit
Which as she says death follows; death twill sting,
Soft, what rooms this? lets see, tic not the former
I was entertained in, no, it some what differs:
Rich hangings still, Court deckings, I, and all —
Oh all that can be in mans wish comprised
Is in thy love immortal, in thy graces.
I am not the same flesh, my touch is altered.
Hast thou betrayed me? what hast thou attempted?
Nothing that can be prejudicial
To the sweet peace of those illustrious graces.
Oh my most certain ruin?
Admired Lady hear me, hear my vow,
Oh miserable youth none saves thee now.
By that which man holds dearest dreadful Queen.
And all that can be in a vow contained
Isle prove as true, secret, and vigilant
As ever man observed with serious vērtue
The dreadful call of his departing soul.
Your own soul to your secrets, shall not prove more true
Than mine to it, to them, to all, to you.
Oh misery of affection built on breath?
Were I as far past my belief in heaven
As in mans oaths, I were the foulest devil.
May I eat and ne'er be nourished, live and know no∣thing,
Love without enjoying, if ever—
Come, this is more than needs.
There's comfort then.
You that profess such truth, shall I enjoynē you
To one poor penance then to try your faith?
Be it what it will command it.
Spend but this hour, wherein you have offended
In true repentance of your sin, and all
Your hasty youth stands guilty of, and being clear,
You shall enjoy that which you hold most dear.
And if this penance I perform not truly
May I henceforth ne'er be received to favour.
Why then Isle leave you to your task a while:
Most wretched, doubtful, strange distracted woman,
En drawn in pieces betwixt love and fear,
I weep in thought of both: bold venturous youth,
Twice I writ death, yet would he seek to know me,
He'll make no Conscience where his oaths bestow me▪
I'm glad ell's so well past, and she appeased,
I swear I did expect a harder penance
When she began to enjoin me; why, this is wholesome
For soul and body, though I seldom use it.
Her wisdom is as pleasing as her beauty,
I never knew affection hastier borne,
With more true Art and less suspicion:
It so amazed me to know her my Mistress
I had no power to close the light again,
Unhappy that I was, peace, here she comes.
Down to thy penance, think of thy whole youth,
From the first minute that the womb conceived me
To this full heaped hour I doe repent me,
With heart as penitent as a man, dissolving,
Of all my sins, borne with me, and borne of me;
Dishonest thoughts and sights, the paths of youth,
So thrive in mercy as I end in truth.
Fly to thy wish, I pray it may be given,
Man in a twinkling is in earth and heaven:
I dealt not like a coward with thy soul,
Nor took it unprepared.
I gave him time to put his armour on
And sent him forth like a Celestial champion,
I loved thee with more care and truer moan,
Since thou must dye to taste more deaths than one
Too much by this pity and love confesses,
Had any warning fastened on thy senses:
Rash, unadvised youth, whom my soul weepēs for,
How oft I told thee this attempt was death?
Yet would thou venture on, fond man and knēw?
But what destruction will not youth pursue?
Here long might thou have lived, been loved, enjoyed,
Had not thy will thy happiness destroyed;
Though thou by oaths to have thy deedēs well borne?
Thou should have come when man was ne'er forsworn▪
They are dangerous now; witness this breach of thine;
Who's false to his own faith, will ne'er keep mine.
We must be safe, young man, the deed's unknown,
There are more loves, honours no more than one.
Yet spite of death Isle kiss thee; oh strange ill,
That for our fears we should our comforts kill?
Whom shall I trust with this poor bleeding body?
Yonder's a secret Vault runs through the Castle
There for a while convey him; haplesse Boy
that never knew how dear it was to enjoy.
Oh 'me confounded everlastingly,
Damned to a thousand Tortures in that sight
What shall I frame? my Lord
What's she?
Oh my sweet dearest Lord.
Thy name?
Thy poor affrighted and endangered Queen.
Oh, I know thee now.
Did not your Majesty hear the piteous shrieks
Of an enforced Lady?
Yes, whose were they?
Mine my most worthy Lord; behold this Villain
Sealed with his just desert: light here my King,
This violent youth, whom till this night, I saw not,
Being, as it seems, acquainted with the footsteps
Of that dark passage, broke through the Vault upon me
And with a secret Lantern searched me out;
And seized me at my Orisons alone
And bringing me by violence to this room
Far from my guard, or any hope of rescue,
Intending here the ruin of my honour;
But in the strife, as the good Gods ordained it
Reaching for succour, I lighted on a Pistol,
Which I presumed was not without his charge,
Then I redeemed mine honour from his lust,
So he that sought my fall lies in the dust.
Oh let me embrace thee for a brave unmatchable
Precious, unvallewed admirable whore.
Ha! what says my Lord?
Come hither, yet draw nearer, how came this man
To's end? I would hear that, I would learn cunning,
Tell me that I may wonder and so lose thee.
There is no Art like this; let me partake
A subtlety no devil can imitate,
Speak, why is all so contrary to time?
He down and you up? ha, why thus?
I am sorry for my Lord, I understand him not.
The deed is not so monstrous in it self
As is the Art which ponders home the deed;
The cunning doth amaze me past the sin,
That he should fall before my rage begin.
My Lord.
Come hither yet, one of those left hands give me,
Thou hast no right at all;
Nothing but put a Ring upon a finger
That's a wrong finger for a Ring my Lord.
And what was he on whom you bounteously bestowed this Jewel?
I doe not like that word.
Look well upon it, doest know it? I, and start.
Oh heaven, how came this hither?
Your Highness gave me this, this is mine own.
Tic the same ring, but yet not the same stone
Mystical Strumpet, dost thou yet presume
Upon thy subtle strength? shake thou not yet?
Or is it only Art makes women constant, whom nature makes so loose?
I looked for gracious lightning from thy cheeks,
I see none yet; for a relenting Eye,
I can see no such sight; lust keeps in all;
My witness? whore's my witness? rise in the same form.
Oh I'm betrayed.
Is not you woman an Adulteress.
Yes, my good Lord.
Was not this fellow caught for her desire?
Brought in a Mist? banqueted and received
To all her amplest pleasures!
True, my Lord,
I brought him, saw him feasted and rēceiv'd,
Down, down, we have too much.
Oh tic Roxano.
So, by this slight I have deceived them both,
I'm took for him I strive to make her loath.
Needs here more witnesses? Isle call up more.
Oh no, here lies a witness against my self
Sooner believed than all their hired faiths;
Doom me unto my death, only except
The lingering execution of your look;
Let me not live tormented in that brow,
I doe confess.
Oh I felt no quick till now.
All witnesses to this were but dead flesh
I was insensible of all but this.
Would I had given my Kingdom so conditioned
That thou had ne'er confessed it.
Now I stand by the deed, see all in Action,
The close conveyance, cunning passages,
The Artful fetch, the whisperlng close disguising;
The hour, the Banquet, and the bawdy Tapers▪
All stick in mine eye together; yet thou shalt live.
Torment me not with life, it asks but death.
Oh had thou not confessed? had thou no slight?
Where was thy cunning there?
I see it now in thy confession.
Thou shalt not dye as long as this is meat,
Thou kill'dst a Buck which thou thy self shalt eat.
Dear sir?
Here's Dear struck dead with thy own hand,
Tic Venison for thy own tooth, thou know the relish
A dearer place hath been thy Taster; hoe, Sertorio! Lodovico
Here sir.
Drag hence that body, see it quartered straight,
No living wrath can I extend upon it,
Else torments, horrors, Gibbets, rackes and wheels
Had with a thousand deaths presented him,
Ere he had tasted one; yet thou shalt live.
Here, take this Taper lighted, kneel, and weep,
Isle try which is spent first, that of thine eye,
Isle provide food for thee, thou shalt not dye.
If there be hell for sins that men commit,
Marry a strumpet and she keeps the pit.
I feared this misery long before it came,
My ominous dreams, and fearful dreadfulnesse
Promised this issue long before it was borne.
Yonder she kneels, little suspecting me
The neat discoverer of her Venery.
I were full safe had I Roxano's life
Which in this stream I fish for; how now Lady;
So ne'er the earth suites not a living Queen.
Under the earth were safer and far happier.
What is it that can drive you to such discomforts▪
To prize your glories at so mean a Rate?
The treachery of my servants, good my Lord;
Dare they prove treacherous? most ignoble Vassals,
To the sweet peace of so divine a Mistress?
I'm sure one Villain, whom I dearly loved,
Of whom my trust had made Election chief,
Perfideously betrayed me to the fury
Of my tempestuous unappeased Lord.
Let me but know him, that I may bestow
My service to your Grace upon his heart
And thence deserve a Mistress like your self.
Oh me, too soon behold him.
Madam, stand by, let him not see the light.
Now I expect reward.
He dyes were he my kinseman for that guilt,
Though it were as far to's heart as tic to the hilt.
Ha? what was that? there's a reward with a avenge∣ance.
Fall villain, for betraying of thy Lady,
Such things must never creep about the earth
To poison thē right use of service— a Trecher!
This is some poor revenge, thanks good my Lord,
Into that cave with him from whence he rose
Not long since and betrayed me to the King.
O villain, in, and overtake thy soul.
Here's a perplexed breast, let that warm steel
Perform but the like service upon me,
And live the rarest friend to a Queens wish.
Oh pardon me, that were too full of evil,
I threat not Angels though I smite the Devil:
Doubt not your peace, the King will be appeased
There Isle bestow my service.
We are pleased.
As much as comes to nothing; Isle not sue
To urge the King from that he urged him to.
Betrayed where I reposed most trust? oh heaven,
There is no misery, fit match for mine.
So, bring 'em forward yet, there, there bestow thēm,
Before her eyes lay the divided limbs
Of her desired Paramour; so, you're welcome,
Lady you see your cheer, fine flesh, course fare,
Sweet was your lust, what can be bitter there?
By heaven, no other food thy taste shall have▪
Till in thy bowels those Corpse find a grave.
Which to be sure of, come, Isle locke thee safe
From the worlds pity: hang those quarters up,
The bottom drinks the worst in pleasures cup.
Oh my Tymethes! truest joy on earth!
Hath thy fate proved so flinty? so perverse?
To the sweet spring both of thy youth and hopes?
This was Mazeres spite, that cursed Rival,
And if I fail not, his own plot shall shower
Upon his bosom like a falling Tower.
My worthy Lord.
Oh, you should have seen us sooner.
Why my Lord!
The quarters of your friend passed by in Triumph,
A sight that 〈◊◊〉 had pleased you well.
〈◊◊◊〉 villain to my fathers pleasure,
No friend of mine▪ the sight had pleased me 〈◊〉
Had I not like Mazeres, run my hate
Into the sin before it grew to act;
And killed it ere't had knotted▪ it was rare servicē,
If your vexed Majesty conceive it right.
In politic Mazeres, serving more
In this discovery, his own vicious malice
Than any true peace that should make you perfect:
Suffering the hateful treason to be done
He might have stopped in his confusion.
Most certain.
Good your Majesty bethink you
In manly temper and considerate blood;
Went he the way of loyalty, or your quiet,
After he saw the courtesies exceed
T'abuse your peace, and trust them with the deed?
Oh no, none but a Traitor would have done it.
For my Lord, weigh't indifferently.
I doe, I doe.
What makes it heinous, burdensome, and monstrous,
Fills you with such distractions, breeds such furies
In your incensed breast, but the deed doing?
Oh.
Th'intent had beenē sufficient for his death,
And that full satisfaction; but the act —
Insufferable,
Sertorio! whore's Sertorio.
My Lord.
Seek out Mazeres suddenly, peace Zenarchus
Let me alone to trap him.
It may prove,
Behold my friend, how I express my love.
Oh villain, had he pierced him at first sight,
Where I have one grief, I had mist ten thousand by it.
I dreamt of some new honours for my late servicē,
And I wondered how he could keep off so long from my de∣sert,
Mazeres?
My loved Lord.
I am forgetful
I am in thy debt some dignities Mazeres,
What shift shall we make for thee? thy late service
Is warm still in our memory and dear favour:
Prithee discover to's the manner how
Thou took them subtlely.
I was received into a waiters room my Lord.
Thou wast!
And in a vizard helped to serve the banquet.
Ha, ha!
Saw him conveyed into a Chamber privately.
And still thou let him run?
I let him play my Lord.
Ha, ha, ha!
I watched still ne'er, till her arms clasped him.
And there thou let him rest.
There he was caught my Lord.
So art thou here; drag him to execution he shall dye.
With tortures bove the thought of Tyranny.
No words are able to express my gladness,
Tic such a high bornē rapture that the soul
Partakes it only.
My Lord Mazeres led
Unto his death?
It proves too true dear Princēsse.
Cursed be the mouth that doomed him, and for ēvēr
Blasted the hand that parts him from his life.
Was there none fit to practise Tyranny on
But whom our heart elected? misery of love!
I must not live to think oft.
Here's my Sister,
I could not bring that news will please her better,
My news brings that command over your passions, you must be merry.
Have you warrant for it Brother?
Yes, strong enough in faith; here me, Mazeres
By this time is at his everlasting home;
Where ere his body lies, I struck the stroke
I wrought a bitter pill that quickly choked him.
Oh me, my soul will out, some wine there hoe!
Wine for our Sister, for the news is worth it.
It will prove dear to both; so, give it me; now leave us.
Revenge ne'er brought forth a more happy issue
Than I think mine to be.
I'mē setting forth Mazeres, here Zenarchus.
Thou art not like this hour, jovial.
I shall be after this.
That does't if any,
Wine doth both help defects, and causes many.
Here's to the deed faith of our last revenge.
Dying men Prophecy, faith tic our last end;
Now I must tell you brother, that I hate you,
In that you hive betrayed my loved Mazeres.
What's this?
His deed was loyal, his discovery just,
He brought to light a monster and his lust.
Nay if you grow so strumpet like in your behaviour to me,
Isle quickly cool that insolence.
Peace, peace,
There is a Champion fights for me unseen,
I need not fear thy thereats.
Indeed no Harlot
But has her Champion, besides Baud and Varlet; oh!
Why law you now such gear will ne'er thrivē with you.
I'm sick of thy society, poison to mine eyes.
Tic lower in thy breast the poison lies.
How?
Tic for Mazeres.
Oh you virtuous powers,
What a right strumpet? poison under love?
That man can ne'er be safe that divides love.
Nor she be honest can so soon impart,
Oh ware that woman that can shift her heart.
Ha? thunder? and thou marrow melting blast
Quick winged lightning; and thou blazing star,
I like not thy prodigious bearded fire;
Thy beams are fatal: ha? behold the Influence
Of all their malice in my childrens mines?
Their states malignant powers have envyde,
And for some hast struck with their envies died:
Tic ominous; within there?
Here my Lord.
Convey those bodies a while from my fight.
Both dead my Lord.
Yes, and we safe, our death we neēd less fearē,
Usurpers issue oft proves dangerous,
We depose others, and they poison us,
I have found it on Records, tic better thus.
My Lord, this Castle is but slightly guarded.
Tic as I hoped and wished; now bless us heaven,
What horrid and inhumaine spectacle
Is yonder that presents it self to sight?
It seems three quarters of a man hung up.
What Tyranny hath been exercised of late? I dare not venture on.
Fear not my Lord, our habits give us safety.
Behold, the Tyrant makes toward us.
Holy, and reverent Pilgrims, welcome.
Bold strangers, by the Tempest beaten in.
Most welcome still, wee are but stewards for such guests as you,
What we possess is yours, to your wants due,
We are only rich for your necessities.
A generous, free, and charitable mind
Keeps in thy bosom to poor Pilgrims kind.
Tic time of day to dine my friends; Sertorio?
My Lord?
Our food.
Tic ready for your highness.
Sit, pray sit, religious men right welcome
Unto our Cates. Grave sir I have observed
You waste the virtue of your serious eye
Too much on such a worthless objects as that is.
A Traitor when he lived called that his flesh;
Let hang, here's to you, we are the oldest here,
Round let it go, fēede, if you like your cheer.
My Lord.
How now?
Ready my Lord.
Sit merry.
Where ere I look these limbs arē in mine eye.
Some wretch on whom he wrought his Tyranny.
Hard was his fate to light into his mercy.
Peace, he comes.
I perceive strangers more desire to see
An object than the fare before them set;
But since your eyes are serious Suitors grown
I will discourse; what's seen shall now be known.
Your bounty every way conquers poor strangers.
You Creature whom your eyes so often visit
Held mighty sway over our powers and thoughts,
Indeed we were all hers.
Besides her graces, there were all perfections;
Unless she speaks, no music: till her wishes
Brought forth a monster, a detested issue
Poisoning the thoughts I held of her.
She did from her own ardour undergo
Adulterous baseness with my professed foe;
Her lust strangely betrayed, I ready to surprise them,
Set on fire by the abuse, I found his life
Cunningly shifted by her own dear hand
And far enough conveyed from my revenge:
Unnaturally she first abused my heart,
And then prevented my revenge by Art.
Yet there I left not; though his trunk were cold
My wrath was flaming, and I exercised
New vengeance on his carcase; and gave charge
The body should be quartered and hung up; it was donē,
This as a penance I enjoined her to
To taste no other sustenance; no nor dares
Till her loves body be consumed in hers.
The sin was great, so is the penance grievous.
Our vow is signed.
And was he Lydian borne?
He was no less, son to mine Enemy,
A banished King; Tymethes was his name.
Oh me, my son Tymethes.
Passion may spoil us: sir, we oft have heard
Of that old King his father; and that justly
This Kingdom was by right due to his sway.
It was, I think it was, till we called in
By policy and force deceived his confidence,
Showed him a trick of war and turned him out.
Sins boast is worse than sin.
Ell's sure, the guards are seized on.
Good.
The Passagē strongly guarded.
Holy sir, what's he?
Our brother, a poor Pilgrim, that gives notice
Of a Religious father that attends
To bear us company in our Pilgrimage.
Oh, ho, tic good, tic very good.
Alas poor Lady, it makes me weep to see what food she eats.
I know your mercy will remit this penance.
Never, our vow's irrevocable, never;
The Lecher must be swallowed rib by rib,
His flesh is sweet, it melts, and goes down merrily,
Ha? what arē these?
Speranza.
Ha?
Villain, this minute looses thee, thou Tyrant.
Pilgrims wear arms? the old King? and Lapirus?
Betrayed? confounded? oh, I must dye forsworn;
Break vow, bleed Whore, there is my jealousy flownē.
Oh happy man, tic more revenge to me
Then all your aims, I have killed my jealousy.
I have nothing now to care for more than hell
'T had been if you had struck me ere she fell.
I had left her to your lust, the thought is bitterness,
But she first fallen; ha, ha, ha.
Dye cruel murderous Tyrant.
So, laugh away this breath,
My lust was ne'er more pleasing than my death.
As full possessed as ever, and as rich
In Subjects hearts and voices; we present thee
The complete sway of this usurped Kingdom.
I am so borne betwixt the violent streams
Of Joy and passion, I forget my state;
To all our thanks and favours, and what more
We are in debt to all your free consent
We will discharge in happy government.
The peacefull'st reign that ever Prince enjoyed.
Already a Petition? suitors begin betimes
We are scarce warm in our good fortune yet, what are you?
Unworthiest of all the joys this hour brings forth.
Our dearest Queen?
Your poor distressed Queen.
Oh let me light upon that constant breast,
And kiss thee till my soul melt on thy lips:
Our Joys were perfect, stood Tymethes there,
We are old; this Kingdom wants a hopeful heir.
Your joys are perfect though he stand not there,
And your wish blessed behold a hopeful heir:
Stand not amazed, it is Manophes.
How just the Gods are? who in their due time
Return what they took from us.
Happy hour,
Heaven hath not taken all our happiness;
For though your elder met ill fate, good heaven
Hath thus preserved your younger for your heir.
Prepare those limbs for honourable burial,
And noble Nephew all your ill is lost
In your late new borne goodness, which we will reward,
No storm of fate so fierce but time destroys,
And beats back misery with a peal of Joys.

WHere is my Uncle sir?
Not within.
Come hither, tell me truth.
Hoe's gone abroad.
He has commanded your off∣cious rogueship.
To deny him to me.
What do you mean sir?
To speak with my Uncle sirrah, and these kicks
Shall fetch him hither.
Help.
Your howling will
Be his kue to appear.
What insolence is this?
No insolence: I did but correct your knave,
Because I would not lose my labour sir,
I came to speak w'ee.
Shall I not be safe
Within my house? hence.
I ha not done yet.
You were best assault me too.
I must borrow money,
And that some call a striking; but you are
My very loving Uncle, and do know
How necessary it is, your Nephew should not
Want for your honour.
Hence; I disclaim,
And throw thee from my blood; thou art a bastard.
Indeed you do lie Uncle, and it is love,
And reverence bids me say so, it would cost
Dear, should the proudest Gentleman of Venice
Have called my Mother whore, but you shall only
By the disbourse of fifty Duccats take
My anger off, and I'll be still your Nephew,
And drink your health, and my good Aunts.
Drink thy
Confusion.
Heaven forbid your Heir should so
Forget himself, and lose the benefit
Of such a fair Estate as you have Uncle;
Shall I have Gold for present use?
Not a Zechine.
Consider but what Company I keep.
Things that lie like Consumptions on their Family,
And will in time eat up their very name;
A knot of fools and knaves.
Take heed, be temperate,
A hundred Duccats else will hotly satisfy,
The Dukes own Son Signior Thomazo wo'not
Blush to be drunk sir in my company.
He is corrupted
Amongst diseases like thy self, become
His Fathers shame and sorrow, and hath no
Inheritance of his noble nature.
You
Were best call him bastard too, the money
I modestly demanded, and that quickly,
And quietly, before I talk aloud,
I may be heard to'th Palace else.
Thou heard? i'll tel thee,
Were treason talked, I believe thy testimony
Would hold no credit against the hangman, but
I lose too precious time in dialogue with thee,
To be short therefore know.—
Very well, to'th point.
I will consume all my estate my self.
You do not know the ways without instru∣ction.
I will be instructed then.
I doe like that,
Let's join societies, and isle be satisfied;
Let me have part in the consuming of
The money, that does mould for want of Sun-beams
Within your musty Coffers, I'll release you.
You have no swaggering face; but I can teach
Your very looks to make a noise, and if
You cannot drink or game, we'll have devices;
You may have whores, I that but live in hope
After your death, keep twelve in pension,
They wear my Livery, I'll resign the Leverets,
I can ha more, I have a list of all
The Courtesans in Venice, which shall tumble
And keep their bugle bows for thee dear Uncle,
We'll teach thee a thousand ways.
It shannot need,
I shall take other courses with my wealth,
And none of you shall share in it. I have a humour
To turn my money into Hospitals;
Your riots come not thither.
But we may,
Drink, and diseases are the ways to that too,
But will you turn a Master of this College
You talk of Uncle? this same Hospital?
And lay out money to buy wooden legs
For crippled men of War, invite to your cost
Men that have lost their noses in hot service?
Live and converse with rotten bawds &amp; bonesetters,
Provide Pensions for surgery, and hard words
That eat like Corrosives, and more afflict
The patient? but you'll save charges, I consider
My Aunt, your wife—
How dare thou mention her
With thy foul breath.
May be excellent at composing
Of Med'cines for corrupted lungs, impostumes
At making plasters, diet drinks, and in charity
Will be a great friend to the pox.
Thou villain.
And you'll be famous by'c, I may in time
As I said before, if lust, and wine assist me,
Grow unsound too, and be one of her patients;
And have an office after in her household
To prepare lint, and fearcloths, empty veins,
And be controller of the Crutches, oh
The world would praise the new foundation
Of such a Pest house, and the poor souls drink
Your health at every Festival in hot porridge.
Art thou of kin to me?
I think I am,
As near as your brothers eldest Son, who had
No competent estate from his own parents.
And for that reason by wise nature was
Ordained to be your heir that have enough Uncle.
The fates must be obeyed, and while your land
Is fastened to my name for want of males,
Which I do hope, if my Aunt hold her barrenness
You will never bang out of her Sheaf, I may
Be confident to write my self your Nephew.
Thou hast no seeds of goodness in thee, but
I may find ways to cross your hopeful interest.
You'll find no seeds in my Aunts parslybed
I hope, and then I'm safe, but take your course,
Supply me for the present, for your honour—
The Duccats come.
You are cozened.
As you would not
Have me pull down this house, when you are dead
And build a stews, the Duccats come.
Thou coward!
Because I do not cut your throat, that were
The way to disinherit my self quaintly.
Can thou not steal? &amp; so deserve a hanging?
Yes I can, and am often tempted, but I wo'not
Do you that mighty wrong, to let what you have
So long, and with so little conscience gathered,
Be lost in confiscation by my felony.
I know a way worth ten on it; yet thus much
I'll bind it with an oath, when I turn thief,
Your Gold shall be the first I will make bold with,
In the mean time lend me the trifling Duccats,
And do not trouble me.
Not a Muccinigo
To save thee from the Galleys.
No? the Galleys!
Must I shift still? remember, and die shortly
I'll live, I will, and `rather then not be
Revenged on thy estate, I will eat roots
Course ones I mean, love, and undo an herbwife
With eating up her sallets, live and lap
Only in barley water, think on it yet,
I am now for wine, you know not what that heat
May do, the injury being so fresh, I may
Return, and you'll repent.
It is more then I
Can hope of thee, go to your rabble sir.
You a Gentleman of Venice? but remember,
A pox he your wealth, I will do something
To deserve the halter, that I may disgrace
The house I came on, and at my Execution
Make such a speech, as at the report, thou shalt
Turn desperate, and with the remnant of
My Cord go hang thy self, and that way forfeit
All thy Estate when I am dead, i'll do
Or this, or something worse to be revenged.
Hoe's lost, this doth new fire my resolution;
See if your Mistress be yet ready sir,
Say I expect her. 
My blood is almost in a fever with
My passion, but Claudiana may cure all,
Whom I have wrought with importunity
To be spectator at the exercise
This day 'ith Academy, here she comes,
Art ready?
Ever to obey you sir,
But if you would consider yet, you may
Be kind, and let me stay, I dare not think
You are less careful of my honour, but
You gave once Command with my consent too,
Not to be seen too much abroad.
I did.
I must confess Claudiana, I had thoughts
And scruples which thy innocence hath cleared,
And though our nice Italian every where
Impose severely on their wives; I should
Be unjust to make thee still a prisoner to
Thy melancholy Chamber, take the air,
It is for thy health, and while I wait upon thee,
Thou art above the tongue, and wound of scandal.
I know your presence takes off all dishonour,
But—
No more, I charge thee by thy love,
And to convince all arguments against it;
I have provided so, thou shalt observe
Unseen the bold contentions of art,
And action.
I'm not well.
I shall be angry
If my desires be played withal, pretend not
With purpose to delude me, I have blessings
Stored in thy health, but if you practise any
Infirmity to cross my will, that aims
At the security of thy health and honour—
Sir, you shall steer me.
This becomes Claudiana,
I will think thee in a kiss, prepare
The Gundelo.
It waits
And I on thee,
The treasure of my eyes, and heart.
Where is my son Giovanni sir?
Hee went two hours ago to the A ademy,
To see the exercise to day.
How's that?
What business has he there, pray amongst Gentlemen?
He does presume too much.
Patience good Ursula.
You give him to much reine; it would become him
To follow his profession, and not look after
Those gentlemanly sports.
No tempest wife,
No thundering Ursula, am not I the Dukes
Chief Gardiner, ha? and shall I make my Son
A drudge; confine him here to be an earth-worm,
Live like a mole, or make it his last blessing
To plant, and order quickset; let him walk,
And see the fashions.
He has cost you sweetly
To bring him up, what use had he of learning?
What benefit, but to endanger us,
And with his poring upon books at midnight,
To set the house on fire, let him know how
To rule a spade, as you ha done.
He does so,
And knows how to inoculate my Ursula,
My nimble tongue, no more: because he read
The story of Zantippe to'ther night
That could out-talk a drum, and sound a point
Of War to her husband honest Socrates,
You took a pet; he shall abroad sometimes
And read and write till his head ache. Go to
So, so, the Dukes Garden shall be then
Well looked to, he deserves a Pension,
For reading Amadis de gaul, and Guzman,
And Don Quixote, but i'll read him a lecture.
You will? offer but to bark at him,
And I will send him to the University
To anger thee, nay he shall learn to fence too,
And fight with thee, at twenty several weapons
Except thy two edged tongue, a little thing
Would make me entertain a dancing master,
Peace, or I will destroy thy Kitchen Ursula,
Disorder all thy trinkets, and in stead
Of brass and pewter, hang up Viol de Gambos,
I'll set an Organ up at thy beds head,
And he shall play upon it: what tyrannical
To thy own flesh and blood, to Giovanni?
My heir, my only boy? fetch me a taylor,
He shall have new clothes, and no more be warm
With the reversion of your petticoats,
Do not provoke me, what imperious?
Get you in, or I will swinge you, go, and weed.
Now for vexation could I cry my heart out.
Sir stay you, and is Giovanni gone
To'th' Academy say?
Yes sir, they say,
There is an English Gentleman, that wins
The Garland from 'em all at every exercise,
One of the Court told my young master on it,
(As he enquired of every Gentleman
Comes in to'th' Garden, what's the news abroad)
And does he not tell thee tales &amp; dainty stories
Sometimes?
Oh, of Tamberlain, and the great Turk, &amp; all
His Concubines, he knows 'em to a hair,
He is more perfect in the Chronicles
Then I am in my prayers.
I do believ't
And talks a battle, as he were among 'em,
He tickles all your turbans, and in a rage,
Wishes he had the cutting of their Cabbages
To show what house he came on.
Ha my boy!
Oh sir he has a pestilent memory,
He told me to'ther day there was another
World in the Moon, and that the world we live in
Shines like to that, to people that live there,
How many miles it is about the Earth,
How many to the stars, I fear he will
Be mad, if he read much, it is just like ravening,
And such hard words would choke me to repeat 'em.
He never tells me this.
We are familiar.
You are his Father, and he dares not lie
To you, to me he may talk any thing,
He knows my understanding to an inch.
Would you would speak to him though, to take a little
More pains, it is I do all the droile, the durtwork:
When I am digging; he is cutting Unicorns,
And Lyons in some hedge, or else devising
New knots upon the ground, drawing out Growns
And the Dukes arms, Castles and Cannons in 'em,
Here Galleys, there a Ship giving a broad side,
Here out of turf he carves a Senator
With all his robes, making a speech to Time
That grows hard by, and twenty curiosities,
I think he means to embroider all the Garden
Shortly, but I do all the course-worke; here's
My Mistress again.
What, is the storm laid?
I must be patient: your sonne's not come yet
Why now thou art Vrsa Mayor, love thy whelp,
And we are friends.
Was not the Dukes Son here?
I fear he is sick, that I have not seen him
These two days in the Garden.
There's a Gentleman.
I, there's a Gentleman indeed.
I dream't on him last night, pray heaven he be
In health, I prithee make enquiry,
There's a Gentleman, and you talk of a Gentleman.
Signior Thomazo?
Where is hee?
I know not, but my mistress would send me
To know the state of his body.
Why, how now Vrsula? sir about you business,
And spare that inquisition, what hath
Your impudence to do with the Dukes Son?
Have not I to do that gave him suck?
I hope I was his nurse, and it becomes me
To enquire of his health, he is the very pearl
Of courtesy, not proud nor coy I warrant you,
But gentle as my Sunday muff.
Your conny skin.
I am the better when I look upon him,
There a gentleman, and you talk of a gentleman,
So complete, so affable, a scholar too,
If I could understand him, prithee sweet heart,
Get me with child that I may long a little.
For a piece of the Dukes Son?
I shall ne'er forget how prettily
He took the nipple, and would play, and prattle himself
A sleep I warrant you, but hoe's now a man,
A great man, and he remembers me still:
There's a gentleman, and you talk of a gentleman.
The woman dotes.
Whither so fast?
To the Academy.
Spare
Your hast, ell's done.
Who has the vote to day?
The English Gentleman is still victorious▪
All praises flow upon him, he he's deposed
Our City, which hath now resigned her Laurel.
Is not this hee?
The same, in's face the promise
Of a most noble nature.
Gentlemen,
Pray give me leave, to understand your language,
For this, so much above me, scarce will be,
(When I'm less ignorant), worth my thanks,
This is
We know pretence of modesty, we must
Congratulate yourtriumph.
For this time
I'll be content your praises shall abuse me.
Who are these?
Friends and Honorers of your worth.
I see that curtsy is native here,
All the reward I can return, must be
To speak abroad the Nobleness of Venice
For so much grace to an unworthy stranger.
The Duke himself.
We must resolve to send new forces
And speedily, the flame will else endanger
Venice it self.
This town lost will encourage
The insulting Genowese.
Thomazo!
Sir.
I look when you will ask me leave to trail
A pike, and purchase honour in these Wars.
I have not been well since I was last
Let blood, and therefore if you please, I would
Be excused till the next wars, and then have at 'em▪
By that time I shall be a better rapier man.
This fool is the dishonour of my blood,
He declines all that's noble, and obeys
A base and vulgar appetite, he dwells
Like a disease within my name, but it is
Heavens punishment, what are they?
All strangers, but among them one
In whom you may read something worth your grace,
An English Gentleman.
He, to whom fame
Gives the honour of our exercises, nature
With such an active heat might have built up
My Son, but hoe's cursed to live a shadow, 
Welcome sir to Venice.
He shall kiss my hand too, I am the Dukes Son.
You honour me.
Thomazo give that gentleman
A box 'oth ear.
He wo'not take it kindly,
He is one—
Will strike again, is not that it?
I would not use a stranger so discourteously, or else—
Embrace him then, and make your self worcester∣thy of
His friendship and converse, you'll gain more honour
Then the empty title of your birth can bring ye:
But to the great affair; the War, your Counsels.
My father bids me embrace you sir.
I shall
Be proud when I can do you any service.
Gentlemen, pray know me every one▪
I am the Dukes Son, my name's Signior Thomazo.
You do us too great honour.
We had no object worth our envy sir
Till you arrived, you have at once dishonoured,
And made our Venice fortunate.
Malipiero, let's bid 'em welcome in rich wine.
I attend you sir.
This fellow must not live to boast his trophies,
He may supplant me too, if he converse
Too freely with Thomazo, whose course wit
Is all the stock I live by, please you gentlemen
To walk.
We follow.
I would not have the way
But that you are a stranger.
it becomes you.
II have obeyed you sir.
Thou hast done well
My Claudiana, very well, who dare
Traduce thee for it? am I not careful of thee?
I prithee give me thy opinion
Who deserved best of all the gentlemen?
I have not art enough to judge.
But thou
Hast fancy, and a liberal thought, that may
Bestow thy praise on some or other, tell me
If thou had been to give the garland, prithee
Whose head should wear it? though wee ha not judgement
To examine, and prepare our justice; yet
Where men contend for any victory,
Affection may dispose us, and by some
Secret in nature we do still incline
To one, and guard him with our wishes.
I hope
This is but mirth.
By my regard to thy
Fair honour, nothing else, it shannot rise
To a dispute, who he's the vote to day
Of all the gentlemen? I must know.
They are
To me indifferent.
So is my question, but I must have more,
It cannot be but some man must deserve
More print and poise in thy opinion,
Speak as thou love me Claudiana.
Sir,
Your inquisition is not without change
Of looks upon me, and those smiles you ask with,
Are not your own I fear.
Nay, then you dally,
And undo that obedience, I so much
Commended.
Dear Cornari.
Yet again?
The man, tell me the man?
What man?
The gentleman
That best deserves in thy opinion.
I shall be angry: what deny to give me
This trivial satisfaction? the expense
Of a little breath? why do you tremble so?
Alas, I know not what to answer, this
Must needs engender fears in my cold bosom,
That my poor honour is betrayed, and I
Stand in your thoughts suspected of some guilt
I never understood, if the report
Of malice have abused me to your ear,
(For by your self I am all innocent)
What do you mean Claudiana?
Sir, your question
Hath frighted me, it is strange, and killing to
My tender apprehension.
You're a fool
To be thus troubled, and but that I know
The purity of thy faith to me, this language
Would make me jealous, it is an ill dressed passion,
And paleness, that becomes not Claudiana
To wear upon her modest cheek, I see
Thy heart sick in thy eyes, be wise, and cure it,
My question was but mirth, without the sense
Of the least scruple in my self, or meaning
To discompose one cheerful look.
Your pardon.
And you as safely might have answered me.
As I had casually asked the time of the day;
What dressing you delight in, or what gown
You most affect to wear.
Once more I ask you pardon, you restore me,
And I am now secured by your clear goodness,
To give my weak opinion—
Of the man
That did appear in thy thoughts to deserve
Most honour.
You'll excuse a women's verdict,
My voice is for the stranger sir.
Why so!
You like him best; what horror was in this
Poor question now? you mean the English man?
The same, most graceful in his parts &amp; person.
It is well, I'm satisfied, and we both meet
In one opinion too, he is indeed
The bravest Cavalier, what hurt's in all
This now? I see you can distinguish, were thou
A virgin Claudiana, thou would find
Gentle and easy thoughts to entertain
So promising a servant; I should be
Taken with him my self, were I a Lady,
And loved a man.
How's this? my fears return.
Madam Bellaura the Dukes charge is entered
The Garden, let's choose another walk.
Why you are conceited sir, does wit
Grow in this Garden?
Yea, Madam while I am in it, I am a slip
My self.
Of Rosemary or time?
Of wit sweet Madam.
It is pity, but thou should be kept with wa∣tering,
There's wit in every Flower, if you can ga∣there it.
I am of thy mind.
But what's the wit prithee of yonder tulip?
You may read there the wit of a young Cour∣tier.
What's that?
Pride, and show of colours, a fair promising,
Dear when it is bought, and quickly comes to no∣thing.
The wit of that rose?
If you attempt
Madam to pluck a rose, I shall find a moral in it.
No Country wit?
That grows with pot-herbes, and poor roots, which here
Would be accounted weeds, course things of profit,
Whose end is kitchen Physic, and sound health;
Two things not now in fashion.
Your wit dances.
Where learned you all these morals?
I but glean
From my young master Giovanni Madam,
He will run division upon every flower,
He he's a wit able to kill the weeds,
And ripen all the fruit in the Dukes Orchard.
Where is Giovanni?
He went betimes to'th Academy,
He is at all the exercises, we
Shall ha such news when he comes home.
Why does
Your master (being rich) suffer his son
To work in the garden?
My master? hoe's an honest mortal man Madam,
It is my mistress, that commands him to it,
A shrove, and loves him not, but it is no matter;
I have the better company, hoe's here.
I'll leave him to you Madam, I must now
Water my plants.
Why? how now Giovanni, you frequent I hear
The Academies.
When I can dispense
Madam, with time, and these employments, I
Intrude a glad spectator at those schools
Of wit and action, which although I cannot
Reach, I am willing to admire, and look at
With pity of my self lost here in darkness.
By this expression I may conceive
How much you have improved, &amp; gained a language
Courtly, and modest.
Madam, you are pleased
To make my uneven frame of words your mirth.
I profess nothing but an humble ignorance,
And I repent not, if by any way
(My duty and manners safe) it may delight you.
Indeed Giovanni I am pleased, but not
With your suspicion, that my praises are
Other then what become my ingenuous meaning,
For if I understand, I like your language,
But with it I commend your modest spirit.
It is an honour Madam, much above
My youths ambition, but if I possess
A part of any knowledge you have deigned
To allow, it owes it self unto this school.
What school?
This Garden Madam, it is my Academy,
Where gentlemen, and Ladies (as your self,
The first and fairest, durst I call you mistress,)
Enrich my ear, and observation
With harmony of language, which at best
I can but coldly imitate.
Still more courtly!
Why how now Giovanni, you will be
Professor shortly in the art of complement,
You were best quit the Garden, &amp; turn Courtier.
Madam, I think upon the Court with re∣verence,
My fate, is to adore it afar off,
It is a glorious Landscape, which I look at
As some men with narrow optic glasses
Behold the stars, and wonder at their vast
(Though unknown) habitable worlds of brightness:
But were my eye a nearer judge, and I
Admitted to a clearer knowledge Madam
Of the Court life, there I might find the truth
Of mans best Ideas, and enjoy the happiness,
Now only mine by naked speculation,
I think how there I should throw off my dust
And rise a new Creation.
The Court
Is much beholding to you Giovanni.
It is a duty Madam I owe truth.
A truth in supposition all this while.
I should be sad if any experience should
Betray an error in my faith, and yet
So soft and innocent a trespass, Madam,
Might well expect a pardon.
Some that have
Freely enjoyed the pleasures, or what else
You so advance in Court, have at the last
Been weary, and accused their gay Condition,
Nay, changed their state for such an humble life
As you profess, a gardiner.
I despise not
What I was born to Madam, but I should
Imagine the disease lay in the mind,
Not in the Courtier, that would throw away
So spacious a blessing to be servile.
You know not Giovanni your own happiness,
Nor the Court sins, the pride and surfeits there
Come not within your circle, there are few
Pursue those noble tracts your fancy aims at,
It is a dangerous Sea to launch into,
Both shelves and rocks you see not, I, &amp; mermaids.
What are they Madam?
You have heard of Mermaids.
You mean not women I hope Madam?
Yes.
Oh do not by so hard an application
Increase the Poets torment, that first made
That fabulous story to disgrace your sex,
You're firm, and the fair seal of the great maker,
A print next that of Angels.
We are bound t'ee
If our cause want a flourish, you have art
To make us show fair.
And you are so,
It is malice dares traduce you; or blind ignorance
That throws her strains, which fall off from your figures,
For those which weaker understandings cal
Your spots, are ermines, and can such as these
Darlings of heaven, and nature, women, shoot
At Court an influence like unlucky planets?
They cannot sure, why you live Madam there,
That are enough to prove all praise, a truth,
And by a sweet example make 'em all
Such as you are objects, of love and wonder,
Oh then how blessed are they that live at Court,
With freedom to converse with so much virtue;
As your fair sex embraces.
Here's your mother.
She was too hasty.
Madam I hope you'll pardon my sons rudeness
To hold discourse with your Ladyship.
It is a curtsy,
And he talks well to pass away the time,
Exceeding well, but I must to my Guardian
The Duke—
Happiness attend your Ladyship.
Now sir what are you thinking of?
Your pardon, nothing.
Nay stay, I must talk with you my self,
But first what talk had you with my Lady?
She was pleased to ask some questions.
What were they?
I have forgot.
You have forgot you're a lewd
And saucy boy, go to, your father spoils you;
But if you use me sir 'oth this fashion
I'll break your pate, I will, the Dukes own son
(My blessing upon him) would not answer me
With I have forgot, I warrant you, but you—
Why, how now Vrsula, what? perpetual clamours?
Oh here's your stickler.
Nothing unkind to me, she was angry
With your servant Georgio, and threatened to break
His head, away—
My head? come heals.—
Was it but so? she shall, she shall do that,
With all my heart, and I will break it too.
Nay, then I will be friends with him.
Whore's the knave?
I wo'not be compelled to break his head,
And you were twenty husbands; fare you well.
It is such a wasp, but she shannot wrong thee.
I know she wo'not sir, she is my mother,
She comes again.
My heart does leap to see you.
The Dukes son, and a troop of gallants, but
I always have sore eyes to see one there,
That Signior Malipiero, he does owe me
Already forty Crowns, and I forgive him.
Signior Roberto, remember that I owe
You forty Crowns.
Pray, do you forget 'em.
I never pay till it come to a hundred.
Never pay! it is no matter Signior.
I were best be gone before he borrow more,
It is a trick he nses to put on
With his rich clothes, I'll vanish.
Strange this English man appears not?
I was afraid you had been sick my Lord.
I was never sick in my life, but when
I had a fever, or some other infirmity.
I'll call thee nurse still. Giovanni.
Sir.
Thou look like a changeling.
The more's my misfortune.
You are the Dukes son.
Who can help it? nurse,
He was never courteous to women.
Here's a gentleman, and they talk of a gentleman,
Now could I weep for joy. I must take my leave sir.
I must make bold with my nurse.
Blessings upon thy heart, how sweetly he kisses.
Here was a touch for a Lady.
Go thy ways,
An admirable twanging lip, pity thou art
A thought too old: ha wagtail!
Does he come alone?
Alone, be you resolute
When you see me draw, shoot all your points
Into his heart.
Be confident.
Unless
He be steel-proof, he shannot boast abroad
Much victory in Venice.
Signior Thomazo sir, is there.
I thank you.
You pay too much sir for no service.
Here he is.
We were wagering thou would not keep thy pro∣mise.
I durst not make that forfeit of your grace,
I most consult my own, when I am careful
To wait upon your honour.
You are noble.
Your humble servant gentlemen.
Where did supp?
I was not willing to engage my self
Abroad, lest I might trespass on your patience.
What shall's do this evening?
Walk a turn,
And then to a bone robe.
A match.
Giovanni!
Thy spade, and hold my cloak.
What's the device?
I have 'great mind to dig now, dost think I cannot
Handle a spade, i'll make a bed with my Gentle∣men now
For a hundred Duccats.
It is a base employment,
Fit for such a drudge as Giovanni.
Sir!
A drudge? I said, dee scorn your little dung∣hill breed?
This is not noble.
How mole-catcher?
Forbear he is not armed.
You were best be his champion.
Are you good at that?
I do not love to wear my doublet pinked.
Three against one?
Hold.
I am no drudge you'll sind
To be commanded sir, you painted flies,
And only fit for troutes.
Let's give 'em play, and breath.
Lost our advantage? is Thomazo fled?
And Bernardo, we were best retire, that Gardiner
Will stick me into ground, else for a plant.
Expect we'll be revenged.
Let's prevent 'm.
They are not worth it Giovanni, so
I heard you named.
My name is Giovanni.
Thou hast relieved, and saved my life, I find
Their base conspiracy, what shall I pay
Thy forward rescue?
It is but what I owe
To justice, with the expense of blood and life
To prevent treachery, reward I have
Received in the act, if I have done you service.
But it was your innocence that made such hast
To your own valour, not my sword preserved you.
I am young, and never taught to fight.
I prithee
Accept this trifle, buy a sword, and wear it,
Thou hast deserved to thrive a nobler way
Then thy condition shows.
Though some would call
This bounty, urge it not to my disgrace,
I scorn to sell the motion of my arm!
I fear you are not safe yet, there may be
Danger in following them, and it grows dark.
Have patience while I fetch a key, that shall
Befriend you with a private way.
You are noble,
Though I am careless where the terms of honour
Engage my life, it is wisdom not to lose it
Upon their base revenge, but I must study
Some other payment for this young mans courage.
How ere his body suffer in a cloud,
His spirit's not obscure, but brave, and active.
If my intelligence fail not, he must be
Here still. This evening hath put on a Vizard
To conspire with me, there he walks, surprise him.
Villains, Cowards, Slaves, my sword.
If you be loud, we'll strange you.
Dispatch.
We ha done sir, is he for the river now?
No, follow me.
These show like officers,
Alas hoe's apprehended on their base
Complaint, I cannot help; thy cause and innocence
Must now befriend thee! base world! yet I may
Injure, the parts abroad; it is only Venice
Is sick with these distempers, then▪ i'll leave it,
And instantly pursue some other fate
In the wars, it may cure something too within me,
That is denied all remedy at home,
Some bodies for their Physic, are designed
To change of air, i'll try't upon my mind.
NOt this Englishman to be found?
Hoe's not above ground
Where I could suspect him in the City—
Let him go, may be his hast toppled him
Into the river, and we may eat his nose
In the next haddock.
Wherefore did you fly?
Dost think it was fear?
It was something like a will,
To keep your skin from oilet-holes.
I grant you,
What had I to do to bring up a fashion?
We might ha'gone a sure and nearer way
To have killed him in a right line with a bullet,
But let him go, so he quit Venice any way.
Hee would spoil our mirth, but I much wonder
Bernardo is not come yet, whom I sent
Ambassador for money to the Merchants.
Nor Marcello, whom I employed to the same end,
To my most Costive Uncle for some goldfinches.
Why should the state have an Exchequer, and
We want?
For pious uses too, to drink their health;
And see the Common-wealth go round
In mutual commerce of mirth and spirit,
Which phlegm and usury hath almost stifled,
Sobriety and long gowns spoil the City.
It is we would keep the body politic
From stinking, ulcered with long obligations,
And notaries, which now stuff the Rialto,
And poison honest natures, that would else
Live freely, and be drunk at their own charge.
I would make new laws, and I were Duke of Venice.
We would not sit in the chimney corner then,
And sing like Crickets.
We would roar like Trumpets,
And deaf the Senators with, give us your monies—
Their's? give us our own, their states, their wives,
And wardrobes Scanderbeg.
And their pretty daughters,
My valiant Turk, who should feed high of purpose—
To keep the wanton blood in titillations.
It should be a Law, no maid should be in fashion.
Yes let 'em be in fashion, but not hold.
Not after fourteen be it then enacted.
Wee would banish all the Advocates that refused
To pimp, and prove it Civil Law.
No scribe should dare to show his ears in our Dominions
Hang 'em, they are labells of the Law, and stink,
Worse then a fish-shambles in lent. No Jew
Should turn a Christian upon peril of
A Confiscation.
Why?
The slaves are rich,
To turn 'em Christians were to spoil their Con∣science,
And make 'em hide their money, it is less evil
In state to cherish Jewes, then Christian Usurers.
I will have every Citizen a Jew then.
We have built no Seraglio yet.
That's true,
What think you of the Universities?
Would not they serve?
O excellent,
They have several schools for several games.
And scaffolds
For the spectators when we keep our acts.
The College rents would find the wenches petticoats,
And the revenues of a score of Abbeys
Well stripped; would serve to roll 'em in clean linen,
And keep the toys in diet.
excelsent!
But when we have converted to the use
The Monasteries, where shall we bestow
The Fryers, and the thin religious men?
You may
Keep them with little charge, water is all
The blessing their poor thirst requires, and taylors
Wo'not be troubled for new clothes, a hair shirt
Will outwear a Copy-hold, and warm 4 lives,
Or if you think 'em troublesome, it is
A fair pretence to send 'em to some wild
Country to plant the faith, and teach the infidels
A way to Heaven, for which they may be burned
Or hanged, and there's an end of the honest men.
There be a thousand ways to quiet them.
My admirable Counsellor, thou should be
My supreme officer to see Justice done.
You cannot honour men of worth too much.
We'll ha the bridges all pulled down, and made
Of silver.
Dross! Gold is our orient metal.
Here is Benardo, welcome, whore's the money?
Not a gazette: the merchants are all sullen,
And say you owe too much already.
These are Dogbolts.
It is time we had new laws and they wo'not trust.
But we must build
No golden bridges at this rate with sun-beames.
They were best content themselves with ho∣nest stone,
Hard as the heart of your ungodly Merchants.
Prithee let's leave our dream of frighting Sailors,
And say, what hope hast thou of getting money
For this days mirth?
Some hope there is, if my Uncle have but faith
Enough, to credit what I never mean,
Thrift and submission, and holy matters;
It is all the ways are left to cozen him
And creep into his nature, I have pawned
All my religion that il'e turn Fryer.
Hast pawned thy religion, much good do him,
Let him take the forfeit, so he send thee money—
For present use, and howl, and hang himself.
I care not—oh—here's Marcello.
Did st speak with him?
Yes.
That's well.
He doe's commend him to you, and with it this—
I knew t'would take, his tender conscience
Hast thou prevailed?
This halter—he he's tied the knot himself,
And says next the Philosophers stone, hee knows not
What thing of nobler value to present you:
And rather then you should delay for want
Of a convenient—you know what, you should
Once more peruse his Orchard, there's one tree
He would have bear no other fruit.
I thank him.
For his fine noose, would I had his neck in it,
The Devil should not conjure him from this circle.
Is this the end of all?
No, not of all.
I prithee try how it will hold—do ye hear
Let's lay our heads together. Which of you
Is best acquainted with the Turk?
What Turk.
The great and mighty Sultan, the grand Signior.
Or have you but a Christian correspondence
With any of his heathen officers.
What to doe?
No rogue that lies purdue here for intelli∣gence?
What then?
I would make a bargain with him now and sell
This City to the Pagan instantly.
Venice is a Jewel, a rich pendant;
Would hang rarely at the great Turks ear.
No doubt.
Or at one horn of his half Moon.
I think so.
I would betray if I knew how, the state
Or any thing for half a hundred Duccats
To make one merry night, though after I
Were broke upon a wheel, or set upright
To peep through a cleft tree like a pole-cat
In the high way—no money from the Mungrells?
Well if I live. I will to Amsterdam,
And add another schism to the two hundred
Fourscore and odd;
I am resolved.
What?
To cry down all things
That hang on wit, truth, or religion.
Come, thou art passionate, is there no trick?
No lewd device? let me see?—I have thought
Away to raise us my dear Tully, a project
Shall raise us, or i'll venture—
What?
My neck
For hanging is the end of my device,
Unless I thrive in it: go to the rendezvous,
To Rosabella's Of the grand Cavale,
Kiss her and call for wines, my bullyrookes,
A dish of dainty fiddlers to curvet too,
And drink a health that I may prosper, tumble
And shake the house, I'll fetch you off.
But fignior—
No more words, cannot you be gone, be drunk,
And leave me to the reckoning, i'll return
With Indian spoils like Alexander.
Spoken
Like a true Macedonian, we are gone.
He's right, and may in time, and our good breeding
Be brought to something, may deserve the Galleys.
Follow your leaders Mirmidons.
We attend.
But will you venture Signior Giovanni
Your body to the wars indeed?
I mean so.
And leave me to be lost, or thrown away
Among the weeds here!
Try thy fortune wo'me.
Yes, and come hopping home upon one leg.
Will all my pay then buy a handsome halter
To hang my arm in, if it be but maimed,
Yet I endure a battle every day,
My mistress hath a mouth carries whole Cannon;
And if you took that engine to the wars,
You would find it do rare service.
What?
Her tongue;
Make her but angry, and you'll need no more
Artillery to scour them with a breach.
What spoil her breath would make in a market place?
Be less satirical;
I must not hear this, she is my mother.
She is my mistress, and thats worse, but I`me resolved,
I'll to the wars w'e, do not tell her on it,
My prentiship is worse then killing there.
My hand, i'll w'ee.
In the mean time buy ye a sword, and belt,
And what is fit.
No more, i'll be a soldier;
And kill according to my pay, this will
Suffice to vamp my body, I may rise
If I grow rich in valour, that will do it,
Money and a tilting feather make a Captain.
There is no other way to quiet the
Afflictions here, beside it is honourable,
And war a glorious mistress.
It is Bellaura and my Father.
I know Madam you may break his resolution,
If you be pleased, you may command; hoe's here.
I'll try my skill.
Blessings attend your Ladyship.
I'll waite for the success.
How now Giovanni,
What with a sword, you were not used to appear
Thus armed, your weapon is a spade I take it.
It did become my late profession Madam;
But I am changed.
Not to a soldier.
It is a title Madam will much grace me,
And with the best collection of my thoughts
I have ambition to the war.
You have?
Oh it is a brave profession, and rewards
All loss wee meet with double weight in glory,
A calling Princes still are proud to own,
And some do willingly forget their crowns
To be commanded, it is the spring of all
We here entitle fame to, Emperors
And all degrees of honours, owing all
Their names to this employment, in her vast
And circular embraces holding Kings,
And making them; and yet so kind as not
To exclude such private things as I, who may
Learn and commence in her great arts. My life
Hath been too useless to my self and Country,
It is time I should employ it to deserve
A name within their Registry, that bring
The wealth, the harvest home of well bought honour.
It is an active time I must confess,
And the unhappy scene of war too ne'er us
But that it should inflame you on the sudden
To leave a calm, and secure life, is more
Then commonly it works on men of your
Birth, and condition, besides I hear
Your Father is not willing you should leave him,
To engage your self in such apparent danger.
Here you will forfeit your obedience
Unless you stay.
I cannot despair Madam
Of his consent, and if by my own strength
Of reason I incline him not, it was
In my ambition to address my humble
Suite to your Ladyship to gain it for me,
At worst it is no breach of duty Madam,
If I prefer my Country and her cause
Now bleeding, before any formal ties
Of nature to a soft indulgent father.
For danger, let pale souls consider it,
It is beneath my fears.
Yet I can see
Through all this resolution iovanni?
It is something else hath wrought this violent change,
Pray let me be of counsel with your thoughts,
And know the serious motive, come be clear,
I am no enemy, and can assist
Where I allow the cause.
You may be angry
Madam, and chide it as a saucy pride
In me to name, or look at honour, nor
Can I but know what small addition
Is my unskilful arm to aide a Country.
I may therefore justly suspect, there is
Something of other force that moves you to
The wars, enlarge my knowledge with the secret.
At this command I open my heart, Madam,
I must confess there is another cause
Which I dare not in obedience
Obscure, since you will call it forth, and yet
I know you will laugh at me.
It would ill
Become my breeding Giovanni.
Then,
Know Madam, I'm in love.
In love with whom?
With one I dare not name, shoe's so much
Above my birth and fortunes.
I commend
Your flight, but does she know it?
I durst never
Appear with so much boldness to discover
My hearts so great ambition, it is here still,
A strange and busy guest.
And you think absence
May cure this wound.
Or death.
I may presume,
You think shoe's fair.
I dare as soon question your beauty Madam,
The only ornament, and star of Venice,
Pardon the bold comparison, yet there is
Something in you resembles my great mistress
She blushes—
Such very beams disperses her bright eye
Powerful to restore decrepit nature,
But when she frowns, and changes from her sweet
Aspect (as in my fears I see you now
Offended at my boldness) she does blast
Poor Giovanni thus, and thus I wither
At heart, and wish my self a thing lost in
My own forgotten dust, but it's not possible
At last (if any stars bless but high thoughts)
By some desert in war, and deeds of honour.)
(For mean as I, have raised themselves to Empire)
That she without a blush to stain her cheek
May own me for a servant—I am lost
In wandering apprehensions.
Poor Giovanni,
I pity thee, but cannot cure—I like
Thy aspiring thoughts, and to this last of love,
Allow the wars a noble remedy.
I have argued against your sons resolve, but find
His reasons overcome my weak dispute.
And I must counsel you to allow 'em too.
Nay, I was never much against it Madam.
She loves him not, but does your Ladyship
Think fitting, he should go?
Yes, yes it is honourable;
And to encourage his forward spirit,
The General is my kinsman Giovanni,
What favours he can do you, you shall have
My letters to entreat, and at my charge
You shall be furnished like a Gentleman,
Attend me at my lodgings.
You bind all
My services; why this will make a show yet.
Nay, then take my consent and blessing too.
And mine: the Duke.
Bellaura, I must speak to you.
I attend.
You have my purpose, and return me clearly
How he bestows himself, and what society
Withdraws him from his duty thus.
I shall
With my best care.
I fear that Malipiero, 
But let me find your diligence: Bellaura.
I am all wonder: shall I trust my senses.
A fair and pleasant gallery; was I
Surprised for this? or doe I dream, I did
Expect the end of my conveyance should
Have been more fatal,
No tract appears, or sign of those that brought me,
The place is rich in ornament, sure these
Are Pictures, all things silent as the Images,
And yet these speak, some do inhabit here,
This room was not ordained only for air
And shadows, it is some flattering Prologue to
My death, some plot to second the affront
Of Malipiero with more scorn to ruin me.
What art?
A friend.
That posture and presentment
Promise no great assurance, yet there's something
Within that noble frame would tempt me to
Believe thou art.
What?
A black murderer.
Point not thy horrid messengers of death
Upon a man disarmed, my bosom is
No proof against those fiery Executioners.
How came I to deserve from thee unknown
So black a purpose, as thy looks present me?
I never saw thy face, nor am I conscious
Of any act, in whose revenge, thou hast
Put on this horror, let me know my guilt
Before I die, although I never lived
At that poor rate to fear a noble death;
Yet unprepared, and thus to die, doth something
Stagger my soul, and weaken my resolve
To meet thy Execution, thou hast
Too good a face to be a Mercenary
Cut-throat, and Malipiero would become
The hangmans office better.
You believe then,
How easily I can command your destine,
I have no plot with any Malipiero,
And thus remove thy fears
Is he gone?
You're still within
My power, but call your self my guest, not prisoner,
And if you be not dangerous to your self
Nothing is meant but safety here and honour.
This does amaze me more; but do Italians
Compel men to receive their courtesies?
I must not give you reasons; yet for your
Surprise, you may receive a timely knowledge
And not repent. I am a Gentleman,
And by that name secure thee, if you can
Fancy a peace with this restraint, it is none
But something that may please you above freedom,
If your unruly thoughts tempt a resistance,
Death is let in, at every thing you look at.
I'll leave my wonder and believe, what now
Must I obey?
First walk away your fright.
It is off.
How do you like this gallery?
It is very handsome.
And these pictures.
Well.
Your eyes are yet too careless, pray exa∣mine 'em.
They cannot answer.
Now your opinion.
Very good faces.
Have your eyes ever
Met with a substance that might reflect
On any of these shadows sir in Venice?
Never.
Look a little better, is there nothing
Of more then common curiosity,
In any of these beauties.
I have seen
Fair ones, what should this mean?
But pray tel me,
Of these (which some have praised for handsomeness)
Which doth affect you most? I guess you have
By frequent view, and the converse with Ladies
Arrived at excellent judgement:
I did not
Expect this Dialogue, yet i'll be free,
I profess stranger to 'em all, but this 
I should elect the fairest and most worthy
A masculine Embrace. I build upon
The promise of your Honour, I should else
Be nice in my opinion.
You are just,
And I prefer that too, what will you say
To call that Lady Mistress, and enjoy her?
Shoe's noble to my knowledge, but enough
At this time. I must pray your kind excuse
If (whilst) you walk into this room
A fair one.
Which is designed your lodging, I become
Your jailer, and make sure this Gallery
Till my return; be constant to your temper,
There shall be nothing wanting to procure
You safe, and pleasant hours.
Distrust falls off.
I will expect to find you noble, though
My faith bind not to all, and enter.
So.
I tread a maze too, but must not resign
My office, till I perfect my design
Active Malipiero.
Excellent
They move as they had nothing else but soul.
So, drink, we are not merry, here's a health
To my hen sparrow.
Let it walk round.
What Rosabella's health? before the states—
Hang States, and Commonwealths we will be Emperors;
And laugh, and drink away whole Provinces.
Shall we not dydapper?
What you please, but will Signior
Thomazo be here presently, and bring—
The golden Fleece, thou Lady Guinever,
And he shall mount thy little modesty,
And ride like Agamemnon, and shall pay for it,
While we, like valiant Greeks in lusty wine,
Drench the remembrance that we are mortal,
More wine, my everlasting Marmoset.
Brave Malipiero still! our grand Signiors health, 
Signior Thomazo.
Let it come squirrels,
And then a song my pretty Rosabella,
Which of the Senators were here last night
To court thee with a draught of dissolved pearl?
Be supple to thy friends, and let thy men
Of state, who hide their warp't legs in long gowns,
And keep their wisdom warm in furs like agues,
Most grave and serious follies, wait, and want
The knowledge of thy fiddle, my dear Dowsabel.
What hath advanced your brain thus Malipiero?
You were not wont to talk at such a height,
There is some mighty fortune drpoping, is
Your Uncle sick, whose heir you hope to be?
Hang Uncles, there's a damp in's very name.
Wine, or I sink,—so now thy song, come sit.
Nay you shall enter, Gentlemen, my friend, Salute him, Malipiero, he is one
May do us service.
sir! i'll take my leave.
That were a jest, you shall stay by this hand,
Who he's the wine, drink to my noble friend,
Whilst I embrace my Queen of Carthage.
Welcome.
I have seen this Gentleman wait ne'er your Father.
Right in his bedchamber, a sober Coxcomb,
We met by chance, let's make him drunk, I have
The brave devices here boy.
Good: you're welcome,
Fill me a tun of wine.
How Signior!
It is too too little for a friend.
They'll drown me, here's a precious knot
I hug thee Cleopatra, Gentlemen,
Am not I behind half a score glasses, fill,
Come charge me home, i'll take it here
What will become of me? they mean to drench
Me for the sullens, I am like to have
A very fine time, and employment here.
But ha'you ne'er a banquet?
It is preparing.
Let it be as rich as the Egyptian Queen
Made for Mark Anthony; in the mean time
What limb of wantonness have you ready for
My noble friend here, get him a fine flesh saddle,
Or whore's thy mother, now I think upon it,
He loves to ride upon a pad.
Not I sir.
Oh by all means Signior.
He shall go to the price of any Ladyware.
Who I? alas my tilting days are done, nay, nay, then
I'll drink w'ee gentlemen, but I cannottumble
Why then here's to thee.
No Lady ware for me sweet Mistress,
I blush to say I cannot mount at this time.
Would I were off again, polecats for me?
Now gentlemen wipe your eyes
A Cabinet of rich Jewels.
And how, and how show things?
Is it fit we want to revel, while my father
He's these toys idle, we grope in the dark
And lose our way, while such bright stars as these
May light us to a wench?
There is no conscience in it.
But what shall we do with 'em? there's a lustre
Hath struck me into a flame.
Drink half, and tumble out the rest
In featherbeds.
Whore's Rosabella, to lend money?
Stay, sir,
She never can disburse to half their value,
Beside I know their sly and costive natures.
I am acquainted with a Jew, are we
All faithful? are there no traitors here?
I am acquainted with a Jew shall furnish you
To purpose, &amp; transport these, where they shannot
Betray from whence they came: trust her? it is dan∣gerous,
Besides the scanting of your mirth, by a
Penurious Son, give me the Cabinet—
You're sure all these are friends, &amp; will say nothing?
I warrant thee; what luck had I to meet him.
Will you trust him?
Hoe's one of us, make hast, a mighty sum.
I'll bring a storm of Duccats instantly.
So, so to'th wine again.
You need not spend the total here, I have use
For forty of those Duccats.
S'hat have fifty.
These gentlemen are out of figleaves too.
Some fresher robes would show well.
They shall have
New skins my Holofernes.
I'll have half.
A match.
Wine, to our Generalissimo.
That's I, I understand the Metaphor.
It shall have law, oh for some trumpets now.
Tantarra rara boys, outrore the winds
And drink the sun into Eclipse, hang meshing,
But whore's my wanton Pinnace?
Boarded by.
Some man of war by this time.
She is spooned away.
My top and top gallant gone? ha! are there Pirates
Upon these Goasts; give fire upon the water-rats,
And shoot pell mell, fight as a whirlwind flings,
Disordering all, what man of Menaces
Dare look awry upon my Cattamountaine?
Not I: now hoe's got rampant, heel kill some body.
You must not be affrighted, to'ther lift
And be a Giant eke, and talk of terrors
With words Olympus high.
Will that do it?
Oh sir.
Give me the bottle then?
Suppose thou were my Uncle now, come hither,
Hold thy head fair, that I may whip it off.
Mine's nothing like, Bernardo has been taken
For your Uncle Signior.
How dare you be like
The rogue my Uncle sir?
I sir? it is
Signior Thomazo that he means, and see
For very fear his head fales off
Reach it me,
I'll drink a health, then in his skull.
Who talks of me, who dares mention
A thought of me? where be the dainty duccats?
The moneie's coming sir, six men are laden,
And will be here immediately.
Thou shalt drink
A health, kneel venerable sir.
Be humble,
Thou man of Malligo, or thou die
I do sir.
To the Town, a fire.
What dee mean Signior.
He has a very good meaning, never doubt it.
That you shall pledge, or forfeit your sconce to me,
None shall have the honour to pledge this health,
But this whey bearded Signior.
Now do my brains tumble, tumble, tumble—
give it him,
And drink it with devotion as I did.
I long to see these double, double—hickets
But whore's the Cockatrice, this whirligigge?
Is my head fast?
The scrue is firm, suspect not.
I dare not pray nor ask forgiveness here.
Do not my brains now turn upon the toe.
Do you hear my doughty Signior Thomazo,
W••••t you kill the Duke, your graceless father now?
Yes marry will I.
You she'll let him into the Chamber one night,
Where he shall strangle him.
O• I can play upon his windpipe rarely.
We'll see (do ye mark) some corner of the Palace
A fire, at the same time, and in that hurry
Break into the Treasury, take what we think fit,
And steal away by Sea into another Country.
Most admirably contrived; the men are come.
Hey, the money boys?
Disarm the traitors.
Plots, ambuscadoes, are these your Jew tricks.
I'll wait till you have slept away your surfeit,
Here in the house.
Which is the Jew of all these?
We are cheated by a Court-nap.
My friend, are you the Jew? where be the Jewels.
Truth is, I have sent the Jewels to your Father,
And he will lend no money.
No money?
But must we go to prison?
I'll to prison with i'm spite o'your teeth.
Not, till you have slept, this way.
The Banquet's ready gentlemen.
A rescue.
We are snatched up for traitors, we are betrayed,
And going to prison.
Who pays for the wine and banquet?
Why any living body, that has a scruple
In's Conscience, for the loss of thy dear Comfits,
And Caraways, away, lead me ye rogues.
'le not march else, and let us make a show,
My fine officious rascals, on before,
I follow in fit state, so farewell firelock.
I shall be undone.
Undoing is thy trade,
March on I say.
YOur pleasure sir; you did command my presence.
Are you come? you and I must not be
Interrupted Claudiana.
Why do you shut your Chamber?
Wee must be private.
How does my life?
Well sir, if you be so.
I have a suit to thee, my best Caudiana.
To me? it must be granted.
That's well said,
But it is a business (sweet) of mighty consequence,
More precious then my life.
Goodness forbid
I should not give obedience to the least
Of your commands, but when your life requires
My service, I should chide my heart, and thoughts
Unless they put on wings to show their duty.
Nay, it is a business sweet will speak thy love.
Thou know how many years since the Priest tied
Our holy knot, with what religious flowing
Of chaste and noble love our hearts have met,
How many blessings have I summed in thee,
And but in thee, for unto this, Heaven gave not
(That which indeed doth Crown all Marriage,)
Children, thou hast been fruitful Claudiana
In all that's good, but only fruitfulness;
And when I think who in my want of that
Great blessing of thy womb, must be my heir,
A base and impious villain, to possess
And riot in my spacious fortunes, I
Forget that other happiness in thy person,
And let in a vexation to consume me.
I know not what to fear, it is heavens will
And not my fault.
Oh no, the fault is mine,
All mine Claudiana, for thou art not barren
It is I, a man prodigious and mulcted
By nature, without faculty of man
To make our marriage happy, and preserve
This fair; this lovely figure, be at peace
And let me blush, a thing not worth the love
Of such a bounteous sweetness.
Let me fall
Beneath that which sustains me, ere I take
In a belief, that will destroy my peace,
Not in the apprehension of what
You frame to accuse your self, but in fear
My honour is betrayed to your suspicion;
Oh kill me sir, before I lose your thought,
Your noble thought.
Rise, with thy tears I kiss
Away thy tremblings; I suspect thy honour?
My heart will want faith to believe an Angel,
That should traduce thy fair name, thou art chaste
As the white down of heaven, whose feathers play
Upon the wings of a cold winters gale,
Trembling with fear to touch the impurer earth.
How are the roses frighted in thy cheeks
To paleness, weeping out of transparent dew:
When a loose story is but named? thou art
The miracle of a chaste wife, from which fair
Original, drawn out by heavens own hand,
To have had one Copy, I had write perfection
To all my wishes here, but it is denied me,
Nor do I mock thee with a fable, while
I miserably complain, convinced, and lost
In my own Masculine defect; but yet
I love thee Claudiana, dost not think so?
And after so much injury, I bring
Not my repentance only, but a just
And noble satisfaction.
You oppress
My senses with the weight of new amazement.
I must be clear, thou must embrace another—
Another in my bed, whom from the world
I have made choice to know thee, be not frighted
This way is left, and this alone to recompense
My want, and make both happy.
I embrace
Another in your bed?
Dost think I would
Attempt, or wish thee to it, without a care
In every circumstance to both our fems?
Fame? are you master of your reason? dare you
Provoke heaven thus?
Heaven only shall be witness,
Whose secrefie i'll trust, but not another.
Beside the principal agent, to get heaven.
You're no Italian sure.
Yes, and thy husband,
A just one to thy memory, that would
Cancel his faith, rather then be a strict
Idolater of words, and severe laws,
To the destroying of so sweet a figure;
I would not have thee fly like birds in the air,
Or ships that leave no tract, to say here was,
So rich a blessing, rather like a plant
Should root, and grow, and bloom, &amp; bear for ever.
I'm lost for ever.
Be wise and meet my wishes, it is my love
That hath overcome all nice considerings
To do thee justice. Nor will I intrude
Upon thy bosom one shall be unwelcome,
Hoe's honourably born, of comely person,
But has a soul adds glory to 'em both,
A boy from him, born to my name and fortunes
Leaves not another wealth to my ambition.
To raise thy free consent my Claudiana,
It is he, Whom thou dost think worth thy own praise,
The gentleman victorious for his parts,
So late in Venice, the English Cavalier.
I am undone.
To be short,
I have surprised his person for this use,
He hath been many days an obscure guest
Within the lodgings next the Garden, for
I must confess I have had strugglings in
My nature, and have sate in Council against
My self sometime, touching this great affair,
But I have answered every thing opposed it,
And took this time to acquaint thee.
Good sir kill me.
I will,
And him too, if ye mingle not and make
The project as I cast it, be not obstinate,
Why, he shall ne'er discover who thou act,
If thou be faithful to thy self, thou moist
Pretend thy self some pleasant bone robe.
Dr take what name, and shape thou wilt.
There's none
Can hide my shame, or wash the stain away:
What shame or stain is in it when it is kept
A secret darker then the book of destiny
From mankind?
Am I practised in those arts?
Of sin that he should take me for a Courtesan?
Nay, rather let me be known your wife,
It will oblige him more to use me well,
And thank your loving pains that brought me to him.
If I must be a whore, and you a—
Stay, and I a—what? I bleed within me.
This key will make the Chamber free, I follow.
Consider sir, I'm else undone for ever
Why if he know me for her husband, it is
Without a name, I can secure my honour,
And send him quickly to eternal silence.
I'm resolved they must obey, proceed,
A little blood will wash away this deed.
Our City drooping with the wounds so late
Received, is now to study with what joys
To entertain so great a victory.
Treuiso is returned to our obedience,
Almost without a loss, how many fell
On the adverse part, those papers signify,
And must enlarge our triumph: but is it not
Strange what our general writes of Giovanni,
Whose spirit he admires, and forward valour,
Referring to his bold attempt, our Conquest,
That he advanced his head and sword first on
The enemies walls, which inflamed our army
To second him with courage, and that after
With his own hands he slew their general,
Whose fall shot death and trembling through their Army.
Where is Giovanni?
He is by direction of our general
Now marching hither, to his only conduct.
The Captives are remitted, and his act
By us to be considered, but we have
Sent order for the placing of his Prisoners
Securely, and commanded he should here
Attend our pleasure
The young Gardiner?
The same, whose early valour takes away
The prejudice of humble birth, and ought
To be encouraged nobly.
It is but justice.
Is it possible the Gardeners Son should so
Behave himself in war,
He will deserve some honour for it.
Why may not
Our power dispense, and though his low condition
By our rule exempt him (for his gallant service
Done) now create him gentleman of Venice,
With a noble pension from our treasury
To bear his title up?
We give it strangers,
Whose birth we not examine,
He deserves it.
Let him receive no favour
For his relation to me, but take
His place and punishment with the rest, away
I cast him from my thought.
Why comes not
Our General himself?
Reasons of war
May yet compel his stay, hoe's to repair
Some breaches which our Soldiers made, &amp; wisely
By some new fortification, secure
The Town if the Enemy should reinforce.
Signior Giovanni waits.
Hath he disposed
By our direction those prisoners were
Sent by our General?
He hath and please your excellence.
Admit him.
All health and honour to the Duke and Senate.
We thank thee Giovanni, and will spare
Your trouble to relate what we have gained
In the war; Our General writes how much our Venice
Doth owe to you, whose maiden yet bold valour,
Hath wrought our safety, and suppressed the late
Insolent Genowese.
Your bounty makes
That mine, which I want merit sir to challenge,
But if my will to serve my Country (for
Beside that name and warm desires, I dare
Call nothing mine) you're pleased to accept and cherish
A young mans duty, you will teach me in
The next employment to deserve indeed.
Till when, you lose not, to have built upon
This humble pile, a monument of your goodness,
To tell the world, although misplaced on me,
You love a growing virtue.
This Giovanni?
His words taste more of courtier then the Garden.
To show we understand, and to that knowledge
Have will to recompense the desert, Giovanni
The Senate beds you ask, what in your power
Your thought can aim at, to reward your service,
And you shall soon possess it.
Ask, ask quickly,
A hundred thousand double double duccats.
'Twil serve us both, do it, beggars must be impudent.
Now you destroy what else might live to serve you,
This grace will make me nothing, when I call
My airy worth to balance, keep those glorious
Rewards for men borne, and brought up in honour?
That may be great and able Columns to
Your ever envied state; alas I rise
Like a thin reed beneath this Common-wealth,
Whose weight, an Atlas must sustain like heaven,
This favour is too mighty, and if you
Command me, ask a just reward, it is nothing.
You had as good ha said nothing, I blush for you,
You know many Soldiers
So modest, to refuse pay, or preferment?
They cannot have it sometimes, after many
Petitions to the State, and now their minds
Are soluble and apt to power out favours,
You to be so maidenly—
May I credit
With pardon of your wisdoms, that you mean
To encourage thus the low born Giovanni?
Now he makes question of their honesty too,
Oh simple soldier.
We look not at thy root, but at thy blossom,
And as a preserver of our Country
We offer up a gratitude, consult
With thy best judgement, (though beside this act
Of his abroad) I can give no account 
Why I should love this young man, or prefer him,
I know not by what mystery, I have
Had thoughts to wish him more then common for∣tune,
And this occasion of his merit offered.
I will pursue.
Do as I counsel you, and remember, I
Have left my fortunes, and my trade to serve you.
Call it not pride if I be willing to
Believe your excellence, that I have done
Something your goodness prompts you to reward,
And the grave Senate, I have thought.
Be free.
Now do I expect to be half a Senator at least.
And since you raise my act to such a merit,
I will not ask a thing too much beneath it.
Well said Vannij.
And shame your bounty; yet I may fear
You will not grant—
Again?
Name it with confidence.
I look at no reward of gold.
How's that? hoe's out on's part.
I know not,
By what fate I contemn it, nor at titles
Of honour, or command, or what can trench
On state or wealth.
I thank ye heartily,
I must to dig again.
Employ such gifts,
To pay some slight, and mercenary souls,
That make their end of good, reward, and not
It self, but since you have imposed I should
Make choice of somewhat know my ambition aims—
At what?
It is too great a happiness, but I now
Consider I have prattled to the wind,
What I desire is not within your power,
And what you may command, not in my wishes,
For I would ask Bellaura: can you make
Me fit for such a blessing? no, you cannot,
Unless I were unborn, and should again
Come forth, not Giovanni, but the Son
Of some bright name, and this world-taking honour.
Bellaura? strange request.
Madam I dare not
Be seen, if you prevail, I shall attend,
And put his mercy into act.
Shoe's here.
I have a •uit to your highness.
Me Bellaura?
About your son, whom men to your dishonour
Lead like some base offender.
I must speak
The cause into your ear.
I was too blame
To mention her so public, but my heart
Grew sick with silence, and their proposition
To ask what I desired most, prevailed
Against my reason:
Leave him to me, Bellaura.
Do you observe that gentleman?
It is Giovanni.
He does become the soldier.
He has done wonders
Abroad, and quit our gratitude, to be
Only by you rewarded, can you love him?
I understand you not.
And marry him?
How have I lost my self, since I became
Your charge, a legacy bequeathed your care
By my dead father, the late Duke of Venice,
That you should think I can descend with such
Forgetfulness of my self, my birth or fortunes
To place my love on one so poorly born.
You blush. Bell. it is anger in my blood to hear him named. 
You pay me coursely for my charity.
Learn modesty hereafter to be grateful.
I ha done with sir
Do you heer the tit? be wise,
And look at ready money, it is a better
Commodity then any Lady in Christendom;
Pray dismiss,
And pardon Giovanni. I am satisfied.
For your own honour let not my ambition
Be told abroad, i'll check and punish my
Aspiring thoughts hereafter.
You have leave,
Come gentlemen,
He is in love.
I pity him.
What shall become of us now by your folly?
We'll to the Garden George, and there begin
Another grouth, for what we hive's despised.
I knew I should return to my dear dunghill.
I prithee see the armour which Bellaura
Bestowed on me, brought home.
Your armour? yes
We might have worn soft natured silk, and you had
Been ruled by me, a pox of love for my part,
It is good for nothing, but to make things dear.
I'll be revenged upon my stars, that made
Me poor, and dye forgotten in my shade
I find no great devotion in this
Monastic life, the Mayor Domo promised
A Mistress here of that complexion,
But I like not this solitude,
And tedious expectations,
I shall ne'er do things handsomely,
Give me freedom and fair play,
And turn me to a harpy, but to be thus
Compelled to an embrace (for thats the meaning
Of my sly Signior, if it be not worse)
Fed high to encounter with an Amazon,
I know not? tic not well, nor conscionable
In my opinion: I hear some busy
About the lock.
My Jailer? What now fellows?
Sir, if I must ha my throat cut, as much
Better I do not hope, though I deserve not
That bounty from your hands, I live so dully,
I would request you set a time, and't be
A day or two, to pray and think of matters,
And then turn me loose to the other world!
Read that.
He shannot see my blushes, I must pity
Thee Claudiana, but my stubborn fate
Will have it so, it is to make thee live
Although we both must suffer, and I like
A father thus, whose child at play upon
A rive•s bank, is fallen into the stream,
Leap in, and hazard all to save a little,
But I must on
Amazement Circles me,
Such wonders are not read in every Marriage,
What shall I doe? madness to question it.
I must resolve or die? since there's no help,
Tic something if she be but like that face
To comfort my proceeding.
Bebold, and take as lent this treasure from me,
I must expect it back again with interest.
The door is fast again, here is a president
For husbands that want heirs to their estate.
A goodly person. Please you Lady, to
Unveil; a rich and most inviting beauty. 
I am all flame, shall I take boldness, after
My duty paid your white hand, to aspire
And touch your lip—now could I wish to dwell▪ here. 
Can you read Lady? 
She turns away her face. I hope my Signior
Has taken pains to bring her to the business,
And not left me to break her: can she speak?
Those lines (I know not how you like 'em Madam)
Were none of my invention, the character,
I guess to be your husbands. I am here
A prisoner to his will, to which unless
You give obedience, I have took leave
Of day for ever, destined by his vow
To an eternal shade. 
She leads the way;
Conscience be calm, no grumblings now of piety.
THese were the excellent Bellaura's gift,
Of no use now to me, but to keep fresh
The memory of my dreams and that I loved her.
I see how passion did blind my reason,
And my prodigious hopes vanished to air
Have left me to contemplate my own vanity.
I know not, but if I may credit Georgio
That did wait on thee to the Senate, thou
Hast lost an opportunity, that might
Have made us all Clarissimo's Giovanni.
I might have kept my reverend Mules, and had
My Crupper worshipped by the Plebeians,
And Ursula here been Madam heaven knows what,
And did you wisely to refuse?
Nay, nay I know
He was not born to do us good, not stoop
To take preferment from the Duke and Senate?
Well, it was his modesty.
He learned it not from me.
No more—
You will be always taking his part against me,
But I know, what I know, and that's a secret,
Here comes the t'other Dunderhead.
The armour is hung up already, this
We must all come to.
What to the Gibet Georgio?
Master look here.
If you had but this hole to put your head in,
It would be a great preservative to your hearing,
And keep out all the noise, of my Dames Culvering,
Within this fortification well locked up.
You would think her loudest scolding a mere which∣per.
What's that you talk of your Dame sir?
Oh dame, I have news for you.
For me? what is it? whom does your new's con∣corn?
One that you love with all your heart.
Who is it knave?
Knave? call your word in, and eat it, I'll ad∣vise,
You may fare worse: you do not hear the news then?
I shall when you'll find utterance.
The news—
We are all of one Religion?
Out with it.
Every thing is not to be talked on.
So it seems by your concealment.
Shall we hear it?
Yes? Signior Thomazo—
What of him?
There's a gentleman, and you talk of a gen∣tleman.
What of Thomazo? now am I longing.
I heard, as I came hither—
What?
Let us hear too.
What? be brief.
That he is to lose his head Mistress—
Now a thousand blisters upon that tongue.
But you do not know for what, mistress there's it,
You are so angry still at half a business.
For what is he to suffer? oh my heart!
For nothing but high treason.
How?
You haven't patience, to hear a story out.
High treason said he? that's a shrewd business.
Thomazo lose his head?
So it seems.
Better thy generation were headless.
I told you but in good will, because I knew
You loved him. I ha done.
Passion O my dear heart! i'll to the Duke
My self, and beg his pardon.
You'll make
Your self a party in the treason, will you?
You'll beg his pardon, you'll beg a halter,
And sooner'twill▪ be granted.
Giovanni,
Sweet Giovanni, there's a sunshine word,
Dear child go with us.
Us? dost think i'll go
And run my head into the hemp?
Best hony-suckle!
One word ohine will strike the pardon dead.
Id rather go a pilgrimage.
Thou shalt go a pilgrimage, another time
To the worlds end, I charge thee on my blessing,
And husband you must gotoo.
No, no not I.
I thank you Ursula, i'll not have my foot
Nor hand in any treason.
Is it so much to kneel? you shall say nothing.
Unless you please, leave all the talk to me,
I wo'not go, though the Duke send for me.
How? that's a piece a treason.
So, if I go not,
She'll betray me too; well Giovanni shall go too,
Where is he?
Let me alone to conjure him.
Shall we go presently, delays are dangerous.
The rascal George is gone too, all forsake me
In my distress.
What will you say Vrsula,
When you come there; what will the Dukes think on you?
Or who shall suffer for your impudence?
And what? that is considerable, I have
No mind to go again.
Then I'll spoil the Garden,
Break up the hedges, and deface the works
Your darling Giovanni made; i'll let in
A regiment of swine, and all their Officers
To undermine the Castle he made last,
And fortified with Cannon, though I dye for it.
More treason, well I will go, but I hope
You wo'not trudge this evening, if we must
Resolve upon it, let us do things discreetly.
That was well said, nay, I am for discretion
For all my hast.
I think it most convenient
To wait his business, coming forth his Chamber
To morrow morning Vrsula, and then let
Good natures work, to nights no time,
We must consult our Pillows; what to say;
And how to place our words.
Now it is my best
Pigeon, let's home instantly.
A sober pace goes far, not too fast Vrsula,
Remembering the Proverb, and what follows;
We should march slow to save me from the gallows.
You have had your time of pleasure, can you pray?
Pray, what do you mean Signior.
The Lady whom you have enjoyed, com∣manded
I should present one of these two, or both
In token of her gratitude.
This cannot
Be earnest sir.
These are the Jewels
Which you must wear sir next your heart: how de'e
Affect the lustre of this toy? it is bright,
But here's a thing will sparkle.
I am lost.
Is this the promise of my safety?
Yes,
This will secure all, thou dull Ilander,
Because you can dance, and vault upon a hobbihorse,
De'e think to mount Madonas here, and not
Pay for the sweet Career. Fool, to thy prayers,
For when these messengers salute thy heart,
Thy soul shall find, I'm an Italian,
And wo'not trust a life to him, whose tongue
Commands my honour.
Art a Christian?
As much as comes to a Venetians faith,
That believes no man is moreto fit die
Then he, that has been capering with my wife.
Ye cannot fir forget I was betrayed,
Awake thy conscience, and let that answer
I have obeyed a dire necessity,
And was brought hither by a stratagem.
It is all one Signior; I presume you gave
Consent to the dear matter of delight,
Which is not held convenient you should talk of.
Hold.
Hope not to breath ten minutes, gather up
Those thoughts you would have wait upon you to
Another world.
Then it is high time to think
Of other matters, though you have cruelly
Resolved there is no safety for your fame,
To let me still be numbered with the living.
(Which if your scattered reason were collected,
I could refute,) but I'll not hope it now,)
Since most ignobly against the rules of honour,
And faith already forfeit, you will make
This undefenced pile your sacrifice,
Yet do not kill me twice.
Twice?
Such a rage
Were infinite; practise not cruelty
Upon my second life, by murdering my
Eternity, allow to my last breath,
Leave to discharge the weight of many sins
Into the bosom of some confessor.
This may be granted, it is not much unrea∣sonable.
Your charity will think it fit to allow
Some minutes to collect my self.
To show
My design has no malice in it, i'll do
Your soul that office, though our bodies must not
Enjoy this air together many hours.
I'll send one to you.
The innocence of a Saint,
Wot not secure his life from an Italian
When his revenge is fixed. In what black hour
Did I salute the world, that I am thrown
Upon so hard a fate? it is not fit
To expostulate with heaven, or I could say
Something in my defence, (as I am man)
To keep this mighty rock from falling on me,
My tutelar Angel be at counsel with
My thoughts, and if there be a path of safety
Direct my trembling steps to find, and taste it.
Has kept his word, and it is no time to trifle,
As you're a Priest, and by that sacred order
And scapular you wear, not only hear me
But use your pious art to save from ruin
A man condemned for that which heaven and you
Call virtue, for not doing a black deed
Would damn three souls at once, &amp; if your power
Cannot prevail for mercy to my life,
I challenge you when I am dead, to be
A witness of my innocence.
This has
No shape of a confession.
Nor do I
Under that holy seal discourse a story,
Yet Father I must throw my self upon
Your Charity. Know therefore I am betrayed,
And by the plot of him that owes this Palace
(Whose name is never like to meet my knowledge)
Snatched up, one fatal evening, and forced hither
By some dark ministers he had employed
(I know not which way) to this fatal chamber.
I shudder but to name what impious act
Against his own, and his dear Ladies honour
He had designed for me; Her chaster soul
Should have been stained, in his distrust of heaven,
To bless him with an heir, and her white treasure,
By me a stranger rifled, had not providence.
Chained up our blood, so that the hours he gave
To serve his black ambition, and our Just,
We only spent in prayers for his conversion.
Ha.
This yet he knows not, and it is not safe
To appear in our own virtue, since the justice
We did our peace, in crossing his expectance
May improve his rage to both our ruins. This
Sad story frights you, there is horror in it,
But it is an hour, the last, without some miracle
To rescue me (a man disarmed) from violence,
Nor dare I mock heaven now, or hang upon
My soul the burden of a lie, when tic
Taking her last eternal flight, It is not
A fear to dye afflicts me, with my faith
And innocence about me; I have looked
Death in the face, and be it thought no boast
To say, I have taught others by example
To march up to the ugliest face of danger.
But to die thus dishonourably, to be
Sent out of the world in the dark, without a name
Or any account to those, to whom I owe
My blood, and birth? persons that carry names
Of honour in my Country? This doth stagger me
To quit my life, and may excuse my address
To you, who have Authority from heaven
To take his fury off, whom otherwise
I expect my violent executioner.
I have some tremblings for his Lady, whose
Most holy tears, streamed through my soul compass∣on,
And charmed my blood, tears, if he durst have pati∣ence
Were powerful enough to beg from heaven
That blessing which he fondly thinks to hasten▪
With loss of his eternity.
No more.
Forgive me, oh forgive me Claudiana,
And if my sin of forcing thy obedience
Beyond the rules of honour, and of marriage
Have not quite murd'red thy affection;
Wish me a little life for my repentance.
I joy to hear this from you.
There's work within me, and so deep a seuse
Of my own shame and sorrow, that I feel
My heart already weeping out a bath
To make thee white again.
Sir, in what best
I understand, I must ask you forgiveness.
Ha mine, for what, betraying thee to dark∣ness?
For disobeying your command.
Thou did
The impious act by my design, which takes
Thy guilt away, and spreads the leprosy
Upon my self.
Although you kill me sir,
I must remove the cloud, and let you see
Me as I am, not changed from my first innocence.
Possible?
Most easy, where there is
A chaste resolve, and I must tell you sir,
Although I wanted courage to oppose
Your passion, when your reason, and religion
Were under violence of your will, my heart
Resolved to try my own defence, and rather
Then yield my self a shameful spoil to lust,
By my own death to quit my name from scandal;
But providence determined better for me,
And made me worth a strangers piety,
Whom your chic meant the ruin of my honour;
If this want entertainment in your faith,
It is peace to my poor heart that I have many
White witnesses in Heaven.
You have done no feats then?
My wife is chaste.
I cannot sir engage
My last breath to a nobler truth.
It is so— 
You may withdraw Claudiana; by what
Has been expressed, though I am satisfied,
You are not guilty in the fact, as I
Expected, it is not safe, when I consider
My own fame in the story, that you live sir.
I must not trust you longer with a secret
That by my tameness may hereafter spread
The infamy abroad: there's no avoiding—
Then I must die.
Perhaps you have some hope
This engine may deceive me, and my fortune
Not coming better armed, give you the advantage
To use your strength, upon my single person!
I know you are active, but i'll make sure work.
Till now I did not reach the precipice.
My heart would mutiny, but my hands are naked,
And can do nothing.
A knot of murderers! arm me with a sword,
And let me die fighting against you all.
I'll say you're noble hangmen, and not throw
One curse among you.
I've one word to say sir.
Let none approach,
The fatal doom I threatened is reversed;
Throw off your wonder, and believe you may
Live long, if not in Venice, and your safety
Is more confirmed at Distance, you are noble,
An honour to your nation. Here is gold,
I know not how you may be furnished sir
For travel hence, bills of exchange may fail.
These will defray a present charge; betray
No wonder, take it.
I'll accept your bounty,
And will not ask to whom I owe all this,
Forgive me that. I thought you not so honourable.
So when you please, i'll take my leave.
Not yet.
By such attendants ss you came to me,
I have provided sir for your departure.
Your duties gentlemen. You know my purpose.
Resume thy place within my soul Claudiana,
When I have done my sorrow for what's past
Weel smile, and kiss for ever.
A letter sir.
From whence?
Your Nephew now a Prisoner.
Let him rot, and give 'em back the paperkite.
The messenger is gone.
Then he expects no answer.
You may read it.
Sir, I send not to you for relief, nor to
Mediate my pardon. I have not lived after
The rate to deserve your bread to feed me,
Nor your breath to save me. I only beg
That you would put me into your prayers,
And forgiveness, and believe, I do not wish life,
But to redeem my self from past impieties,
And satisfy by a repentance the dishonours
Have been done to you, by the worst of men. Malipiero.
This is not his usual stile.
This miracle may be.
I do want faith.
And sent a blessing to reward our penitence.
Heaven has a spacious charity.
Thou art all goodness.
Sure this is gold.
Florelli.
The same.
Thy looks are wild.
Where in the name of wonder hast thou been▪
I am dropped from the Moon.
The Moon.
I was snatched up in a whirlwind,
And dined and supped at Cynthia's own table,
Where I drank all your healths in Nectar gentle∣men,
Do ye want money? if you have a mind
To return viceroys, let's take shipping instantly.
And whither then?
For new discoveries,
A cloud will take us up at Sea.
It is morning.
To drink, and then aboard, no matter whi∣there
I'll keep this for a monument.
That bag?
Do not profane it, it was Endimions pillow
Stuffed with horn shavings of the Moon, it had
The virtue when she clapped it ore my head
To bring me thence invisible through the air;
The moon does mobble up her self sometime in it.
Where she will show a quarter face, and was
The first that wore a black bag.
But dost hear?
No inquisitions if you will leave Venice.
Let's drink and spoon away with the next vessel.
A hundred leagues hence, I may tell you wonders.
Here is a chime to make Ring Oberon
Queen Mob, and all her fairies turn of the toe boys.
Hoe's mad I think.
I could not sleep all this night for dreaming,
O'my poor suckling.
peace I say and wait
In silence Vrsula.
You may excuse me yet.
I wo'd not see his excellence.
It is not my meaning boy, thou should ap∣pear
Unless there be necessity, you may stay, in the next Chamber.
I beseech you Signior, is this grace coming forth.
Not yet.
I have an humble suit, I must deliver
A paper to his graces own hand,
I hope his grace can read.
Why how now bagpiper.
Nay, theres no harm in it what if he can,
You will be talking, did not I say
I would speak all my self.
But Vrs. what do you think now will become on•s
When you have told your tale, though I am innb∣cent.
It will be no great credit, nor much comfort
To see you whipped my Vrsula, I would
Be sorry for my part to peep through a Pillory
And have an even reckoning with my ears,
Having no more hair to keep warm, and hide
The poor concavities.
Never fear it husband.
I will so curse you Vrsula, and once
A day, bind your body to a pear tree,
And thrash your honchos till you stink again;
For ought I know thou hast committed treason,
Look to it, and bring me off with all my quarters
If I be maimed or cropped, I'll flea thee Vrsula,
And stuff thy skin with straw, and hang thee up
To keep the fruit from Crows, and after burn it.
To kill the Caterpillars, come, be wise in time,
And let Thomazo quietly be hanged,
Or headed yet, and talk no more, he is
But one, and has a young neck to endure it.
We are old, and sha'not show with half the grace
Without our heads, twill be a goodly sight
To see our faces grin upon two poles,
To tell the gaping world how we came thither
To pe•••, and stink in unity, be wise,
And leave Thomazo to the Law.
Can you be so uncharitable, oh Tyrant!
May it please your excellence, my husband and
My self.
She has put me in already.
Humbly beseech a pardon for our son.
Your son Giovanni, where is he?
He waits in the next Chamber.
Call him in. What is the fact?
It must be an offence next treason, if we
Deny him pardon.
I fear it is much about the matter.
What is the fact?
We do beseech you grant a pardon first,
And then you shall know all.
That were preposterous justice.
Why dost thou kneel Giovanni?
To beg your mercy sir
To him, for whom my mother kneels
She asks thy pardon.
Mine? Let me offend first.
Hoe's innocent.
No matter what he says, my husband knows it.
She'll make sure of me.
And if your highness will but grant the par∣don,
Your grace shall not repent, but thank me for
The best discovery; i'll not bribe your excellence,
But I will give you for it, what you'll hold
As precious as your Dukedom.
The old woman
Raves, you had best send her to the house
Of the insane.
So shoe's to be whipped already,
What do you say Roberto!
I say nothing,
But that I think my wife will hardly mend upon it.
Upon what?
On whipping, if it like your highness,
She cannot feel those small corrections.
I have taw'd hunting Poles, and hemp upon her,
And yet could do no good.
Let not your grace mind him, give me a par∣don,
And if I do not make good all my promise,
You shall hang my husband, and flea me alive.
What's that paper?
Ge't him, thou should have done this before.
I am prepared, more bone and flesh upon me
If the business come to hanging, were a courtesy.
Nay it is there in black and white, you'll find it▪
Giovanni is your son, that was the Gardiner,
And he that is in prison poor Thomazo
My lawfully begotten.
Changed in their infancy.
And since concealed out of ambition
To see my own a great man.
I feel the knot under my ear.
I durst not trust my husband.
That was not much amiss.
He has not wit enough to keep my secrets.
Oh what a blessing has that man whose wife
Knows when to hold her peace.
Sir, if we may compare their tracts of life,
I shall believe your nobleness lived there
In Giovanni, not suppressed in poverty,
And their rude course condition, notwithstanding
The helps of Education, which seldom
Do correct nature in Thomazo's low
And abject spirit.
I'm too full, I must
Disperse my swelling joys or be dissolved,
Summon our friends, invite Bellaura hither.
Art thou my son?
I would I were so blessed.
Iow'd you duty sir before, and now
My knees incline with double force to humble
The doubtful Giovanni.
Let that name
Be lost, take all my blessings in Thomazo.
What think you of this Roberto.
Why? I think
The Duke is mad, and when he finds his wits
He will hang us both yet.
Now I find the reason.
And secret of my nature: but tell me
What after so long silence, made you now
Open the cloud that had concealed my son?
I know not sir—now Ursula.
The weakness of a woman, and a mother
That would be loath to see her natural child
Dye like a bird upon a bough for treason,
Nature will work, a mother is a mother,
And your son, by the opening of this riddle
Restored, I hope all shall be well again.
Would I were fair washed, yet out of my pickle.
What think you now?
I wish, I wish I could not think.
We hear of wonders sir.
This is my son.
With our most glad embraces let us hold you.
Ever a servant to your gravities.
The sky clears up.
Bellaura, now receive not Giovanni,
But Contarini's son my deer Thomazo.
My heart hath wings to meet him.
Oh my happiness!
Pause a little.
I melt again Vrsula, the Duke points at us,
And carries fireworks in his eyes,
Though we did grant a pardon for your son,
You are subject to the censure of our laws
For this imposture.
I know it would come, now telltale, will you beg
The favour we may hang till we be dead?
Sweet Giovanni Thomazo speak for us,
Not guilty my Lord, I am not guilty,
Spare me, and let my wife be burned or hanged,
Or drowned, or any thing you shall think fit,
You shall find me reasonable,
Who shall beg our pardon?
Mercy oh mercy.
Let me beseech you for their pardon sir.
They always used me civilly.
Let me join.
And all of us, this is a day of triumph.
It shall be so.
A Jubilee, a Jubilee, here comes Thomazo,
I shall speak treason presently.
Now heaven preserve your sweet graces.
Mercy, oh mercy, my indulgent father.
Art thou come boy?
Boy? stand away good woman.
I have procured thy pardon, mary have I child.
I wo'd it were true, thou were ever a loving Crone.
You may believe her son.
Son, the old fellow's mad.
I say thou art pardoned,
You must kneel to me now, and this good
Old man, and ask us blessing.
Your name is proved Giovanni now, the Duke
Has found another son.
What shall become of me?
You shall be only punished to return,
And dig as he hath done, and change your name
To Giovanni, nature was not willing
You should forget your trade, whore's my Thomazo?
Are you my father?
So my wife assures me.
Are you my mother?
I my dear child.
And you Signior Thomazo, that was I?
And you Giovanni with the inside outward
And must I be a Gardiner? I am glad on it.
Pray give me a couple of blessings, and a spade,
And fico for this frippery. I'll thank
My destiny that has yet kept my thread
To a better use then hanging.
Let nothing
Of punishment profane this day, I must
Implore your mercy upon this young man,
Whose future life may recompense his past
Impieties, and make him serviceable
To honour and good men.
You show •••arity,
If I have heard a truth in some sad stories,
Hoe's yours and •••don'd.
You're a •••isle
Of goodness, it is too much to look upon,
Whom I have with such impudence offended.
Command me sir abroad until by some
Years well employed, a penance for my crimes
I may be thought one worthy to be owned
Your Kinsman.
Again, welcome my Thomazo,
My dearest pledge, till now I was no father;
In him, the want of hope my thoughts oppressed,
In thee my fortunes, and my name are blessed.

IT was a strange and sudden mar∣riage.
Could he not love her for the game, and so forth,
But he must thus exalt her? no less title
Then Queen, to satisfy her ambition?
It is a brave rise!
I did not prophecy,
When the honest Count her husband Altomarus
Lived, she would bring us on our knees.
I hope
She'll love the King for it.
And in his absence,
Gotharus the Kings Minion, her old friend,
He has done this royal service; beside, what
Rests on accounts in her old husbands days.
I do suspect her Son Haraldus was
Got with more heat, and blood, then Altomarus
Age could assure her, but hoe's dead.
—Be with him;
Although I wo'not make oath for her chastity,
That boys good nature is an argument
To me, Gotharus had no share in him:
Hoe's honest, of a gentle disposition,
And on my Conscience does pray sometimes.
No more, we have a Wolf by'th'eare, what news
From Hell? he cannot want intelligence, he has
So many friends there—he's displeased, there is
Some goodness in that Letter, I will pawn
My head, that makes him angry.
How his frown
Hath scattered 'em like leaves, they fly from him
As nimbly, as their bodies had no more weight
Then their Petitions; I would give an eye-tooth,
To read but three lines.
Curse upon his victory!
I meant him not this safety, when I wrought
The King to send him forth to war, but hoped
His active spirit would have met some engine
To have translated him to another world;
He's now upon return.
Would I had but
The harrowing of your skull; my genius gives me▪
That Paper is some good news of the Prince,
I would I knew it but concerned him.
It was
My wonder, the King would send his Son abroad
To wars, the only pledge of his succession.
He had a Councellor, this Politician,
That would prefer the Prince to Heaven, a place
His Lordship has no hope to be acquainted with;
The Prince, and his great Uncle Duke Olaus,
Would not allow these pranks of State, nor see
The King betrayed to a Concubine;
Therefore it was thought fit they should be engaged
To foreign dangers.
It is Madam Albino,
Our great mans wife.
The King did seem to affect her,
Before he married her to his favourite.
Dost think she's honest?
Isle not stake my soul on it,
But I believe she is too good for him,
Although the King and she have private conference.
She looks as she were discontent.
She has cause
In being Gotharus wife, some say she loved him
Most passionately.
It was her destiny;
She has him now, and if she love him still,
It is not impossible she may be a Martyr,
His proud and rugged nature will advance
Her patience too't.
Avoid the Gallery.
The King is coming, oh my Lord, your par∣don:
Nay we must all obey.
I near liked
This fellow.
He is one of fortunes Minions▪
The love of the choice Ladies of the Laundry,
That's one that draws in the same team, but more
Inclined to'th Knave; he is a kind of Pendant
To the Kings ear, an everlasting parasite:
The King? Albino returned with him.
Leave us.
You're most unkind to your self in my opinion,
You know well who I am, and what I have
Advanced you too; neither in virgin state
Nor marriage, to allow your King a favour?
Sir, let the humble duty of a subject,
Who shall with zealous prayers solicit heaven
For you, and your fair Queen—
Had you been wise,
That might have been your Title, but the God
Of love had with his Arrow so engraven
Gotharus in your heart; you had no language
But what concerned his praise, scarce any thought
At liberty; I did imagine, when
I had compassion of your sufferings,
And gave thee a fair Bride to my Gotharus,
You would not lose the memory of my benefit,
But (now in state, and nature to reward it)
Consented to return me love.
Be pleased
To excuse the boldness of one question.
Be free Albino.
Do not you love my husband?
There wants no testimony, beside the rest,
My giving thee to him, dear to my thoughts,
Is argument I love him.
Would you take
Me back again? you but betrayed his faith,
And your own gift, to tempt me to forsake him.
You are more apprehensive, if you please
He shall possess you still, I but desire
Sometimes a near and loving conversation,
Though he should know it, considering how much
I may deserve, he would be wise enough
To love thee near the worse; he's not the first
Lord that hath purchased offices by the free
Surrender of his wife to the Kings use,
It is frequent in all commonwealths to lend
Their play-fellows to a friend.
Oh do not think
Gotharus can be worth your love, to be
So most degenerate, and lost to honour;
You have a Queen, to whom your vow is sacred,
Be just to her, the blessing is yet warm
Pronounced by holy Priest, stain not a passion
To wander from that beauty, richer far
Then Mine; let your souls meet and kiss each other,
That while you live, the examples of chaste love
(Most glorious in a King and Queen) we may
Grow up in virtue by the spring of yours,
Till our top-boughs reach heaven.
You are resolved then
We must be strangers, should my life depend
On the possession of your bosom, I
Should languish and expire, I see.
Good heaven
Will not permit the King want so much goodness,
To think the enjoying of forbidden pleasure
Could benefit his life, rather let mine
Ebb at some wound, and wander with my blood
By your command taken from me, on my knee—
Rise, I may kiss Albino—
Ha!
'Thas shot
Another flame into me, come you must—
What?
Be a woman, do it, or isle complain.
To whom?
Thy husband.
Horror!
Think upon it.
What will become of miserable Albino?
Like a poor Dear pursued to a steep precipice,
That overlooks the Sea, by some fierce hound;
The Just of a wild King doth threaten here,
Before me, the neglects of him I love,
Gotharus my unkind Lord, like the waves,
And full as deaf affright me.
How now Madam?
Come, can you kiss?
Kiss sir?
What difference
Between his touch and mine now? his perhaps
Was with more heat, but mine was soft enough.
What has he promised thee, but that's no matter,
Thou wo't be wise enough to make thy bargain,
I father all, only the King shall give it
A name, he'll make it master of a Province.
What means my Lord:
Thou think I am jealous now, not I, I knew
Before he doted on thee, and it is
To be presumed, having a veil to hide
Thy blushes, (I do mean our marriage)
Thou moist find out some time to meet, and mingle
Stories and limbs, it may be necessary;
And because I will be dutiful to the King,
We will converse no more abed, isle be
Thy husband still Albino, and wear my buds
Under my hair close like a prudent Statesman;
But it were not much amiss, as I advised
Before, and these new premises considered,
You appear abroad with a less train, your Wardrobe
Will make you more suspected, if it be
Too rich; and some whole days to keep your Chamber,
Will make the King know where to find you cer∣tain.
Will you have patience my Lord to hear me?
The world doth partly think thee honest too,
That will help much, if you observe good rules
And diet, without tedious progresses,
And visiting of Ladies, expert in
Night Revels, Masks, and twenty other torments
To an estate; your Doctors must be left too,
I wo'not pay a fee to have your pulse
Felt, and your hand rolled up like wax, by one
Whose footcloth must attend, while he makes legs,
And every other morning comes to tell
Your Ladyship a story out of Aretine,
That can set you a longing for diseases,
That he may cure you, and your waiting-woman,
Whose curiosity would taste your Glister,
Commend the operation from her stomach.
Should you be sick, and sick to death, I wo'd
Not counsel you to physic; women are
Frail things, and should a cordial miscarry,
My conscience would be arraigned, and I
Might be suspected for your poisoner.
No, no, I thank you, you're in a fine course
To ease me wife; or if you must be loose,
In the spring and fall, let the King bear the charges.
He will, if you apply your self.
I am wretched;
Why do you without hearing thus condemn me?
The Lady lives not with a purer faith
To her loved Lord, then I have; nor shall greatness,
Nor death it self, have power to break it.
Come,
These are but painted tears, leave this, have you
Prepared your last accounts?
They are ready sir;
Never was Lady slaved thus like Albino,
A stipendary, worse, a servile steward,
To give him an account of all my expenses.
I'll have it so in spite of customs heart,
While you are mine; accountless liberty
Is ruin of whole families: now leave me,
We may talk more anon, I have observed
This privacy before, search here Gotharus,
It is here from whence mutinous thoughts conspi∣ring
With witty melancholy, shall beget
A strong born mischief, I'll admit she be
Honest, I love her not, and if he tempt her
To sin, that's paid him back in his wives looseness;
From whom I took my first ambition,
And must go on, till we can sway the Kingdom,
Though we clime to it o'er many deaths. I first
Practise at home, my unkindness to Albino,
If she do love me must needs break her heart.
My honoured Lord.
Most dear Haraldus welcome,
Preciously welcome to Gotharus heart.
The Queen my mother, sir, would speak with you.
How excellently do those words become thee,
It is fit Haraldus Mother be a Queen,
You are worth a princely fate; I will attend her.
Isle tell her so.
It is not an office for you.
It is my duty sir, to wait upon
My mother.
Who in the Court is not your servant?
You doe not exercise command enough,
You are too gentle in your fortunes sir,
And wear your greatness, as you were not born
To be a Prince.
My birth sure gave me not
That title, I was born with the condition
To obey, not govern.
Do not wrong those Stars,
Which early as you did salute the world,
Designed this glorious fate; I did consult,
And in the happy minute of thy birth,
Collect what was decreed in heaven about thee.
Those books are 'bove my reading, but what
Ever my stars determine of me, it is but late
I heard my mother say, you are on earth,
To whom I am most bound for what I am:
It is a shrewd truth, if thou knew all.
You have
Been more a father then a friend to us.
Friend to thy Mother, I confess in private,
The other follows by a consequence,
A father my Haraldus? I confess
I was from thy nativity inclined
By a most strange and secret force of nature,
Or sympathy to love thee like my own;
And let me tell thee, though thy mother had
Merit enough to engage my se••••es;
Yet there was something more in thee considered,
That raised my thoughts, and study to advance
Thee to these pregnant hopes of state, methinks
I see thee a King already.
Good sir, do not
Prompt me to that ambition, I possess
Too much already, and I could, so pleased
My Mother, travel where I should not hear
Of these great titles, and it comes now aptly,
I should entreat your Lordshp to assist me
In a request to her, I know she loves you,
And will deny you nothing; I would fine
Visit the University for study,
I do lose time methinks.
Fie Haraldus,
And leave the Court? how you forget your self?
Study to be King,
I shall half repent my care,
If you permit these dull and phlegmatic
Thoughts to usurp, they'll stifle your whole reason,
Catch at the Sun, divest him of his beam,
And in your eye wear his proud rays; let day
Be when you smile, and when your anger points,
Shoot death in every frown: covet a shade,
Affect a solitude, and books, and forfeit,
So brave an expectation?
Of what?
Of Norwayes Crown.
Could there be any thought
Within me so ambitious, with what hope
Could it be cherished, when I have no title?
I that have thus far studied thy fortune,
May find a way.
The King —
Is not immortal while he has Physicians.
What's that unsaid? The King is happy,
And the whole Nation treasure up their hopes
In Prince Turgesius, who with his great uncle
Valiant Olaus.
Are sent to'th wars, where twill con∣corn 'm,
To think of fame, and how to march to honour
Through death.
I dare not hear him.
Or if they
Return—
They will be welcome to all good
Men's hearts, and next the King, none with more joy
Congratulate their safeties, then your self:
I am confident my Lord you will remember
To see my Mother, and excuse me if
To finish something else I had in charge,
I take my leave, all good dwell with your Lordship.
But that I have Marpisas faith, I could
Suspect him not the issue of my blood,
He is too tame, and honest, at his years
I was prodigiously in love with greatness;
Or if not mine, let him inherit but
His Mothers soul, she has pride enough, and spirit
To catch at flames, his education
Has been too soft, I must new form the boy
Into more vice, and daring, strange, we must
Study at Court, how to corrupt our Children▪
The Queen!
My expectation to speak
With thee Gotharus, was too painful to me;
I fear we are all undone; dost hear the news?
The Prince is coming back with victory,
Our day will be o're-cast.
These eyes will force
A brighter from those clouds; are not you Queen?
But how Turgesius, and his bold uncle
Will look upon me.
Let 'em stare out
Their eyeballs, be you mistress still of the
Kings heart, and let their gall spout in their sto∣mack,
We will be secure.
Thou art my fate.
I must confess
I was troubled when I heard it first; seem not
You pale at their return, but put on smiles
To grace their triumph; now you have most need
Of women's art, dissemble cunningly.
My best Gotharus.
They shall find stratagems in peace, more fatal
Then all the Engines of the war; what mischief
Will not Gotharus fly to, to assure
The fair Marpisa's greatness, and his own,
In being hers (an Empire 'bove the world)
There is a heaven in either eye, that calls
My adoration, such Promethean fire,
As were I struck dead in my works, should thou
But dart one look upon me, it would quicken
My cold dust, and inform it with a soul
More daring then the first.
Still my resolved Gotharus.
Let weak Statesmen think of conscience,
I am armed against a thousand stings, and laugh at
The tales of Hell, and other worlds, we must
Possess our joys in this, and know no other
But what our fancy every minute shall
Create to please us.
This is harmony,
How dull is the Kings language, I could dwell
Upon thy lips; why should not we engender
At every sense?
Now you put me in mind,
The pledge of both our hopes, and blood, Haral∣dus,
Is not well bred, he talks too morally,
He must have other discipline, and be fashioned
For our great aims upon him; a Crown never
Became a Stoic, pray let me commend
Some conversation to his youth.
He is thine.
He shall be every way my own.
The King desires your presence Madam.
I attend, you'll follow —
Thee to death, and triumph in
My ruins for thy sake, a thousand forms
Throng in my brain, that is the best, which speeds,
Who looks at Crowns, must have no thought who bleeds.
THis music doth but add to melancholy,
Isle hear no more.
He's strangely moved.
I cannot think a cause,
You were wont to fool him into mirth; Whore's Helga
Your dear companion? no device between you
To raise his thoughts?
I am nothing without my fellow,
Music is best in Consort.
Your buffonry is musical belike.
Your Jugglers cannot do some o'their tricks
Without confederacy.
I'll try alone.
If please your Majesty there is—
That for your unseasonable and saucy foo∣ling.
That was a musical box o'th'ear.
Leave us.
It is nothing without a fellow, he knows
Music is best in Consort.
Would you had your parts?
Hormenus you may stay.
Your pleasure sir.
Men do account thee honest.
It is possible
I May fare the worse.
And wise; can tell the cause why I am sad?
Not I sir.
Nor I my self, it is strange I should be subject
To a dull passion, and no reason for it.
These things are frequent.
Sometimes ominous,
And do portend.
If you enjoy a health,
What is in fate?
I am King
Still, and I not?
We are all happy in it,
And when time shall with the consent of nature,
Call you an old man from this world to heaven,
May he that shall succeed you, Prince Turgesius,
The glory of our hope, be no less fortunate.
My Son,
I was too rash to part with him.
We should
Have thought his stay a blessing, and did wish
You would not have exposed such tender years
To the rough war; but your commands met with
His duty, and our obedience.
It is very
Strange, we of late hear no success, I hope
This sadness is not for his loss, he has
A kinsman with him, loves him dearly, it is
The Queen.
I feel my drooping thoughts fall off,
And my clouds fly before the wind, her presence
Hath an infusion to restore dead nature.
My sweet, my dear Marpisa.
You sent for me.
I am but the shadow of my self without thee.
No wonder I was sad, my soul had placed
All her delight in these fair eyes, and could not
But think it self an exile in thy absence,
Why should we ever part, but chain our selves
Together thus?
He's in a better humour I hope;
I do not think but his Majesty would cuff well,
His hand carries a princely weight.
A favour.
Would you might wear such another in your ear.
Come hither—on this side.
You were on that side before.
wo'dst not thou lose thy life, to do a service
My Queen would smile upon?
Alas, My life
Is the least thing to be imagined, he
Is not a faithful subject would refuse
To kill his wife and children, after that
To hang himself, to do the Queen a service.
Come hither Helga.
Royal sir.
What would affright thy undertaking, to de∣serve
The least grace from my Queen?
I cannot tell,
But I've an opinion, the Devil could not;
My life is nothing fir, to obtain her favour,
I would hazard more; I have heard talk of hell,
So far she should command me.
Bless me goodness!
What wretched Parasites are these? how can
The King be patient at 'em? here is flattery
So thick and gross, it would endure a hand-saw.
His judgement's I fear stupefied.
Come hither,
Which of you can resolve, what serpent spawned you?
You are pleasant.
My good Lord, it hurts not you,
There is necessity of some knaves, and so
Your Lordship be exempted, why should you
Trouble your self, and murmur at our courses?
The King.
Peace.
Your business?
News from the field.
Good?
Good.
How?
How prithee?
The day, the field, the safety, O the glory
Of war is Norwaies, Letters to the King—
Give 'em to me.
Or me.
Trust not a fool with things of consequence,
He's the Kings mirth, let me present the news.
Sir, I should know you; this is a knave,
Would take to him all the glory of your report;
If please you, let me present the Letters.
My Liege!
My Sovereign!
News!
Good news!
Excellent news!
The Prince▪
The Prince is—
The enemy is—o'rethrown.
They have lost the day.
Defeated utterly.
And are all slain.
Madam, will you hear the news?
Say on, what is it you would relate?
One of my creatures sir hath brought you Letters,
My servant sir, one strengthened to your service
Out of my maintenance, an instrument of mine,
So please you to consider my duty in his service.
Why hark you Gentlemen, I have but mocked
Your greedy zeals, there's no such matter in
Those Letters as you have told; we have lost all,
And the Prince taken prisoner, will you not
Stay for the reward, you know I'm but your Cry∣ture,
I look for nothing but your courtly faces
To pay my travel.
We wo'not appear yet—
How the Rats vanish.
Read here my best Marpisa, news that makes
A triumph in my heart, great as the conquest
Upon our enemies; Hormenus, Cortes,
Our Son will prove a Soldier, was my sadness
Omen to this good fate? or nature feared
The ecstasy of my joy would else overcome me?
They are returned victorious.
Thanks to heaven!
And some reward is due to thee; wear that
For the Kings sake.
You too much honour me.
But something in Marpisa's face, shows not
So clear a joy as we express, forbear,
Wait till we call; can this offend my Queen,
To hear of happiness to my Son? O let
Thy eyes look bright, there shine hath force to make
The wreath of Laurel grow upon his temples;
Why dost thou weep? this dew will kill the victory,
And turn his Bay to Cyprus.
Witness heaven,
There's not a tear that mourns for him, his safety
And conquest is most welcome, and he shall
Have still my prayers, he may grow up in fame,
And all the glorious fortunes of a Prince:
But while my wishes fly to heaven for blessings
Upon his head, at the same time, I must
Remember in what miserable condition
My stars have placed me.
What can make thy state
Guilty of such a name, and so deject
Thy nobler thoughts? am not I still the King?
And is not fair Marpisa mine by marriage?
Crowned here my Queen immortally.
Though I be
By royal bounty of your love, possessed
Of that great Title sir, I have some fears.
You amaze me, speak thy doubts at large.
The Prince
(Dear to your love, and I still wish him so)
(Dear to your peoples hearts) I fear, will think
Our marriage his dishonour, and Olaus
Your passionate Uncle, no good friend of mine,
When he shall see to what a height your love
And holy vow hath raised me, most unworthy,
Will but salute Marpisa with his scorn,
And by his counsel, or some ways of force
Unchain our hearts, and throw me from your by∣some
To death, or worse, to shame; oh think upon me,
And if you have one fear that's kin to mine,
Prevent their tyranny, and give me doom
Of exile ever their cruelty arrive:
Isle take my sentence kindly from your lips,
Though it be killing.
Let my Son or Uncle,
Dare but affront three in a look, I shall
Forget the ties of nature, and discharge 'em
Like the corruption in my blood.
I can
Submit my self to them, and would you please
To allow my humbleness no stain to what
You have advanced me to, I can be their servant,
And with as true a duty wait upon 'em—
Thou art all goodness, twenty Kingdoms are
Too little for thy dowry; who attends?
Thus every minute I will marry thee,
And wear thee in my heart, vanish the thought
Of all thy sex beside, and what can else
Attempt our separation: you are obscure,
And liv'st in Court but like a maskquing star,
Shut from us by the unkindness of a cloud
When Cynthia goes to Revels: I will have
A chariot for my Queen richer then ever
Was shown in Roman triumph, and thou shalt
Be drawn with Horses white as Venus doves,
Till heaven it self in envy of our bliss,
Snatch thee from earth to place thee in his Orb,
The brightest constellation.
He dotes strangely.
Hormenus, Cortes, I would have you all
Search your inventions to advance new joys;
Proclaim all pleasures free, and while my fair
Queen smiles, it shall be death for any man
In the Court to frown.
You have not so much love in the Court Aqninus.
How do you like the Queen?
Why she's not married,
He does but call her so.
And lies with her.
The Prince yet knows it not.
He will meet it coming home.
Aquinus?
Sir.
You brought Letters from the Camp.
I did my Lord.
What in the name of Policy is now hatching?
I do not like those fawning postures in him,
How kind they are.
That Soldier is thought honest.
But if he cringe once more I shall suspect him,
That leg confirms he is corrupt already.
How does he like his fathers marriage?
We had no fame on it there when I set forth.
'T was strange and sudden, but we are all happy
In the good Princes health and victory;
The Duke Olaus too I hope is well.
He was designed at my departure,
To be here before the Army.
He will be welcome:
You shall accept the price of a new Armour,
And wherein any power of mine can serve you
In the Court, command.
I am your Lord-ships creature.
They are gone, I long to see the Prince▪
How do you think his Highness will
Behave himself to his new mother Queen?
Will it be treason not to ask her blessing?
I am confident his Uncle, brave Olaus.
Wo'not run mad for joy of the Kings marriage?
Let them look to it, there may be alterations.
They talk sure of my mother and the King.
Secure as they account themselves, the Prince
Must be received spite of Marpisa's greatness,
And all the tricks of her incarnate fiend
Gotharus, who both plot I fear, to raise
That Composition of their blood,
Haraldus—
How was that?
The strange effect
Of their luxurious appetites, though in him
Poor innocence, suspecting not their sin,
We read no such ambition.
Oh my shame!
What have my ears received? am I a bastard?
It is malice that doth wound my Mothers honour;
How many bleed at once? yet now I call
To memory, Gotharus at our loving
Late conference, did much insult upon
The name of a Father, and his care of me
By some strange force of nature: ha! my fears
Shoot an Ice through me, I must know the truth
Although it kill me.
Who was that Haraldus?
I hope he did not hear us, again Gotharus.
And the two squirrels; more devices yet.
Let us alone my Lord, we will quicken him.
You must use all your art to win him to it.
Let us alone to make him drink, we are the credit
Of the Court for that, he's but a child alas, we will take our time.
Hormenus.
My good Lord Olaus, I
Joy in your safe return, how fares the Prince?
Well, whore's the King?
Kissing his new made Queen Marpisa.
Ha!
The King is married then.
Away, the Duke Olaus, sir—
I am too stiff for Complement,
My Lord, I have rid hard—
He has met the intelligence,
And is displeased with me the state of things at home;
This marriage stings him, let it, we must have
No trembling hearts, not fall into an ague,
Like Children at the sight of a portent:
But like a Rock when wind and waves go highest,
And the insulting billows dash against
Her ribs, be unmoved. The King must be saluted
With other Letters, which must counterfeit
The Princes character, I was his Secretary
And know the Art, malice inspire my brain
To poison his opinion of his Son;
Isle form it cunningly.
Ha! it is Haraldus.
He looks sad.
I dare not ask
My mother, it were a crime, but one degree
Beneath the sinful act that gave me life
To question her, and yet to have this fright
Dwell in my apprehension, without
The knowledge of some truth, must needs distract
My poor wits quite; it is he, I will take boldness
And know the worst of him, If I be what
I am already charactred, he can
Resolved my shame too well.
How is it my Lord?
Never so ill sir.
Art sick?
Most dangerously.
Where?
Here, at heart, which bleeds with such a wound,
As none but you, can cure.
Isle drop my soul
Into it, show me how I may
Be thy Physician, to restore thy blood
I will lose all mine, speak child.
This very love
Is a fresh suffering, and your readiness
To cure my sorrow, is another wound;
You are too kind, why are you so? what is
Or can be thought in me fit to deserve it?
Thou dost talk wildly; to accuse me thus
For loving thee, could the world tempt me here,
And court me with her glories to forsake thee,
Thus I would dwell about thy neck, and not
Be bought from kissing thee for all her provinces:
There is a charm upon my soul to love thee,
And I must do it.
Then I must dye.
Forbid it gentler fates.
If I could hear you wish
Me dead, I should have hope to live; although
I would not willingly deserve your anger,
By any impious deed, you do not know
What comfort it would be to hear you curse me.
He's mad; Haraldus, prithee do not talk so.
Or if you think a curse too much to help me,
Yet rail upon me, but do it heartily, and call me
What?
Vilaine, or Bastard, sir,
The worst is best from you.
Thou dost amaze me.
Will you not for me?
Then for my mothers sake if you do love her,
Or ever did esteem her worth your friendship,
Let me entreat you draw your sword, and give me
Something to wear in blood upon my bosom;
Write but one letter of your name upon
My breast, Isle call you father, by your love;
Do something that may make me bleed a little.
By that I dare not, thou hast named Haraldus
A father.
I but call you so, I know
You are a stranger to my blood, although
Indeed to me your great affection
Appears a wonder; nor can nature show
More in a Parent to a child; but if
I be.
What?
I shall blush sir to pronounce it,
There's something that concerns my mother, will not
Give it a name; yet I would be resolved,
That I might place my duty right; If I
Must answer to your Son, you may imagine
I shall no more ask you a reason, why
You have been so kind to me; and to my mother.
Thou hast said it, you are mine own, it was na∣ture in me,
That could not hide the actions of a Father.
I am your base seed then.
Stain not thy self
With such a name, but look upon thy mother
Now made a Queen.
You made her first a strumpet,
And it would ask the piety of her Son,
To dye upon that man that stole her honour:
Why did you so undo us? why did you
Betray my mother to this shame? or when
She had consented, why should both your lust
Curse my unsinning heart, oh I must be
For your vice scorned, though innocent.
None dare—
I should not by your virtue have been saved,
Where shall I hide my life, I must no more
Converse with men—
Thou art too passionate.
I will entreat my mother we may go
Into some wilderness, where we may find
Some Creatures that are spotted like our selves,
And live and dye there, be companion
To the wild Panther, and the Leopard, yet
They are too good for their converse, we are
By ours, defiled, their spots do make them fair.
It is time that Sueno and his companion,
Dispersed these clouds; now to the King, with whom
If the Queens beauty keep her magic, then
Our Engine mount, and day grows bright again.
UNcle, I am glad to see you.
I am not glad
To see you sir.
Not me?
Consorted thus.
If Olaus be forgetful of good manners,
I shall forget his years, and blood; be temperate.
There's something in your blood that will undo
Your state and fame eternally, purge that,
You know I never flattered you, that woman
Will prove thy evil Genius.
You're too saucy.
Do not I know her, was she not wife
To the Count Altomarus a weak Lord?
But too good for her, charmed by the flattery
And magic of her face, and tongue, to dote
And Marry her, born of a private Family,
Advanced thus, she grew insolent, and I fear
By pride and liberty, and some trick she had,
Broke her good husbands heart.
Sir, you much wrong me,
And now exceed the privilege of your birth
To injure mine.
We all know you can plead
Your own defence, you have a women's wit,
Heaven send you equal modesty, I am plain.
It would be held an insolence in others,
And saucy boldness in the sacred presence
Thus of the King, to accuse, whom he hath pleased
To take companion of his bed; and though
It would become the justice of my cause
And honour, to desire these black aspersions
May be examined further, and the Author
Called to make proof of such a passionate language,
(Which will betray his accusation was
But envy of my fortunes) I remember
You're the Kings Uncle, and it is possible
You may be abused by some malicious tale
Framed to dishonour me, and therefore I
Beseech you humbly sir, to let this pass
But as an act in him of honest freedom,
Beside what else may give you privilege
Being a Soldier, and not used to file
His language, blunt and rugged ways of speech
Becoming your profession.
Very good!
Although we have not the device of tongue
And soft phrase Madam, which you make an Idol
At Court, and use it to disguise your heart,
We can speak truth in our unpolished words,
Thou art—
What am I?
Not the Queen.
She is
My wife Olaus.
I must never kneel to her,
Nor the good Prince your son, the hope of war,
And peaces darling, honour of our blood,
And worth a better Kingdom then he's born to—
What of him?
Must never call her Mother.
Dare you instruct him
Against his duty, leave us.
You have lost
More honour in those minutes you were married,
Then we have gained in months abroad, with all
Our triumph purchased for you with our blood;
Is this the payment, the reward for all
Our faith? when thy young Son, whose springing valour
And name, already makes the confines tremble,
Returns like young Augustus crowned with victo∣ries;
Must a stepdame first salute him,
And tread upon his Laurel?
Leave the Court.
May it not prove an Hospital, it is in the way
To change a title, lust and all the riots
Of licence reeling in it, by th'example
Of one should least profane it, I am still
O laus, and your fathers brother.
My Lord.
Take heed
You do not talk your head off, we have Scaffolds,
But the old man raves, come my Marpisa.
Then I will talk, threaten my head,
Command that Parasite that dares do most
In wickedness, to show himself your servant;
Give him his engine, and his fee for hangman,
Let him take boldness but to move one hair
That withers on my head out of his posture,
He shall have more hope to overcome the Devil
In single duel, then to scope my fury.
Sir—
Our guard.
Look you, i'll bring no danger to your person,
I love you too well; I did always use
To speak, your father liked me near the worse.
And now I am cool again—
You say you are married—
We are.
Then between you, and I, and let none hear us,
To make your self, your Son, and Kingdom pro∣sper,
Be counselled to a divorce.
Not, not
To save thy soul, my sons life added
To thine, and lives of all the Army shall
Be divorced from this world first, you are my fa∣theirs
Brother, and if you love my son, your pupil,
So hopeful in your thoughts, teach him to come
More humbly to us, without thought to question
Our marriage, or i'll find a chastisement
For his rebellious heart, we will.
You must not; I wo'not leave him yet.
This freedom may engage his life to danger,
He is too passionate.
He has said too much,
Isle venture speaking to him.
He's alone, now to him.
Noble sir— I have a suit to you.
A Courtier ask a suit of a Soldier?
You'll wear no Buff nor Iron?
I come very impudently, and I hope to thrive
The better for it; this Gentleman my friend,
A man of quality, and in some grace with
The King, hath laid a wager with me of
Two hundred Crowns, I dare not pull a hair
From your most reverend Beard: now if you please
To give me leave, i'll win the Crowns, laugh at him,
And drink your health at supper.
A hair from my beard?
But one hair, if shall please you.
Come, take it.
I have pulled three noble sir.
It was more then your commssion, there's one
That's another, and that will make you an upright Courtier.
Ha, ha.
Sir, I beseech you—
Beg modestly hereafter, take within your bounds,
You have small beard to play upon. it is fit
My fist should make an answer to your wit.
I have it to a hair, the choleric Duke again?
I am gone.
Sir, you have been too blame.
How dare you talk to me sir?
It is my duty, and I must tell you,
You've built too much upon him as a kinsman,
And have forgot the King.
Take that for your impudence.
I have it, and I thank you.
They are gone sir, but have left Prints of their fury,
The angry Duke has broke Aquinus head,
For speaking dutifully on your behalf;
To'ther mute man of war stroke Sueno sir.
I hear his language humming in my head still.
Aquinus? strike so near our presence?
Nay these Soldiers will strike a man, if he doe not
Carry himself to a hairs breadth, I know that.
They shall repent this impudence, look up
My dear Marpisa, there's no tempest shall
Approach to hurt thee, they have raised a storm
To their own ruins.
Sir, if you'll bring me
To'th King. you shall do an office worth your la∣bore,
I have Letters will be welcome.
You must give
Me leave sir to present 'em from the Prince:
Most excellent, sir, my Sovereign.
Letters? If you have a chain of gold—
Go hang thy self.
I am most fortunate to present you sir
With Letters from the Prince, and if your Majesty
Knew with what zeal I tender these.
Ha!
He frowns, whore's the Soldade? you'll go my half.
Who brought these Letters? whore's the mes∣senger
He was here but now, he's vanished.
Vanish thee too, and creep into the earth.
I shall sir.
The impudence of Children, read Marpisa,
More Letters from the proud ambitious boy,
He dares to give us precepts, and writes here,
We have too much forgot our self and honour,
In making thee our Queen, puts on his grace
A discontent, and says, the triumph he
Expected, the reward of his young merit,
Will be ungloried in our sudden match,
And weak election.
This was my fear.
He threatens us, if we proceed with his
Command and power in the Army; raise new Forces
To oppose 'm, and proclaim 'm Rebels, Traitors—
Sir, I beseech you for the general good,
Temper your rage, these are but words of passion,
The Prince will soon be sorry for it, suspect not
His duty, rather then disgrace your Son,
Divide me from your heart, the people love him.
I'll hate him for it, Gotharus; whore's Gotharus,
This Letter tast's of his invention,
He's active, it concerns us both. Albino.
Nay, you may forward Madam.
I beseech
Your pardon, I did hope to have found my Lord
Gotharus here.
The King asked for him,
And is but new retired, who I presume
If he had known of your approach, w'od not
Have gone so soon.
I have no business Madam
With the King.
Come do not disguise it thus,
I am covetous to know your suit;
But I am confident he will deny
You nothing, and your husband is of my
Opinion lately.
By your goodness Madam,
Let me not suffer in your thoughts, I see
There is some poison thrown upon my innocence,
And tic not well done of my Lord Gotharus,
To render me to your suspicion
So unhappy, it is too much he has withdrawn
His own heart, he will show no seeds of charity,
To make all others scorn me.
If he do,
You can return it, but take heed your ways
Be strait to your revenge, let not my fame
And honour be concerned with the least wound.
I understand not what you mean.
I cannot
Be patient, to hear the King commend
Your lip.
I am betrayed.
My phrase is modest,
Do not you love the King?
Yes, with the duty—
Of one that wants no cunning to dissemble
Her pride, and loose desires.
You are the Queen.
What then?
I should else tell you, it is ill done
To oppress one that groans beneath the weight▪
Of grief already, and I durst take boldness
To say, you were unjust.
So, so.
I can
Contain no longer, take from my sad heart
What hitherto I have concealed, (in that
You may call me dissembler of my sorrows)
I am weary of my life, and fear not what
Your power and rage can execute; would you
Had no more guilt upon your blood, then I
Have sin in my accounts that way, My Lord
Gotharus would not be so unkind to me.
What's that you said so impudently Albino?
What I did think should have consumed me here
In silence, but your injuries are mighty,
And though I do expect to have my name
In your black Register designed for death,
To which my husband will I know consent;
I cannot thus provoked, but speak what wounds me.
Yet here again I shut the Casket up,
Never to let this secret forth, to spread
So wide a shame hereafter.
Thou hast waked
A Lioness.
Death cannot more undo me,
And since I live an exile from my husband,
I will not doubt but you may soon prevail,
To give my weary soul a full discharge
Some way or other; and in the minute when
It takes her flight to an eternal dwelling,
I will forgive you both, and pray for you,
But let not your revenge be to long idle,
Least the unmeasured pile of my affections
Weigh me to death before your anger comes,
And so you lose the triumph of your envies.
You sha'not be forgotten, fear it not,
And but that something nearer doth concern us,
You should soon find a punishment. The King.
He struck Aquinus, Helga saw him bleed.
These are strange insolences, one go for Aquinus.
Did Olaus bring these Letters?
No, some spirit,
For he soon vanished.
I have given my son
To the most violent men under the Planets,
These Soldiers.
And they'll cling to him like Ivy,
Embrace him even to death.
Like Brees to Cattle
In summer, they'll not let him feed.
But make
Him fling, unquiet.
Most repineful, spleeny.
Ready to break the twist of his Allegiance.
Which they fret every day—
These put upon his young blood discontents.
Dangerous—
Extremely dangerous.
Swell him up
With the alluring shapes of rule, and Empire—
And speak his strength with a proud Emphasis;
Yours, with a faint cold-hearted voice; was ever
Such peremptory lines writ to a father?
Thy counsel, while the dangers yet aloof.
Aloof? take heed, hills in a piece of landscape
May seem to stand a hundred leagues, yet measure,
There's but an inch in distance; oh ambition
Is a most cunning, infinite dissembler,
But quick in the execution.
Thy counsel.
He that aspires hath no Religion,
He knows no kindred.
I ask for thy advice.
Have you not seen a great Ok cleft asunder,
With a small wedge cut from the very heart
Of the same tree?
It frights me to apply it;
Oh my mis-fortune, this is torment, not
A cure.
Aquinus, Speak him gently sir,
And leave me to encourage him in a service
Worth his attempt, and needful to your safety.
Noble Aquinus, our good King has sense
Of the affront you suffered from his Uncle,
And as he is informed, for speaking but
The duty of a subject.
This is true sir,
I wear his bloody favour still, I never
Took any blow so long on trust.
I know thy spirit's daring, and it shall become
My justice to reward thy suffering;
A storm now hovers o'er my Kingdom,
When the air is clear, and our sky fair again,
Expect, nay challenge, we shall recompense
What thou hast suffered for us, with a bounty
Worth all thy merits, in the mean time apply
Thy self to my Gotharus, and be counselled.
My duty.
Th'hast no alliance to my blood;
Yet if thou think I do not flatter thee,
I feel a friendly touch of thy dishonour,
The blow, it was not well done of Duke Olaus.
You great men think you may do what you please,
And if you've a mind to pound us in a mortar
We must obey.
That law is none of natures,
And this distinction of birth and royalty
Is not so firm a proof, but there are men
Have swords to pierce it through, and make the hearts
Of those that take this privilege from their blood,
Repent they were injurious.
My sword
Was quiet when he beat me.
He did not, could not beat thee.
It was worse, he cudgeled me, I feel it yet,
Nor durst I strike again.
It could not be
A tameness in thy spirit, but quick thought
That it was Olaus, not, that in thy heart
There was no will to be revenged, for he
Is false to nature, loves his injury,
But that there was no safety to return
Thy anger on his person.
You're in the right,
That frighted me.
For he is not revenged,
That kills his enemy and destroys himself,
For doing his own justice, therefore men
That are not slaves, but free, these we receive
Born, and bred Gentlemen in fair employments,
That have, and dare bid high again for honour,
When they are wronged by men 'bove them in title,
As they are thought worthy a personal wound,
In that are raised and levelled with the injurer;
And he that shall provoke me with his weapon,
By making me his enemy, makes me equal,
And on those terms I kill him: But there is
Another caution to wise men, who ought
To cast and make themselves secure, that when
They have returned full payment for their sufferings
In fame, they may be safe without a guard.
That sir is the prudence.
Yet I can direct thee
To be revenged with safety unto this,
What if I add therein, thou shalt do service
That will oblige the common-wealth, that groans
With fear of innovation, and make
The King thy friend by one expense of courage;
And having named the king thus, it must make
Thy thoughts secure from future loss, and in
The present act no danger.
Sir, be clear,
Make good what you have promised,
And see if I be frighted, I have helped
Many give up the ghost.
Olaus used
Thee basely, how much would the Kingdom suffer
If he were dead and laid into his Tomb,
Perhaps a year sooner then nature meant,
To make his bones fit.
I dare kill him sir,
If I were sure the King would pardon me,
That in my own revenge, and any other
Whom he calls enemy without exception,
To this I am bound in conscience; sir, there needs
No conjuration for this, nor art
To heighten me, let me but hear the King
Will have it, and secure me.
Thou deserve him,
And moist a statue, for our great deliverer,
Yet, now I have thought better on it, we may
Save trouble in Olaus Tragedy,
And kill him through another.
Whom?
One that
Sits heavier on the Kings heart, and dwells in it
Such a disease, as if no resolute hand
Cure him.
I'll be his Surgeon.
When I name him,
One that has had no will to advance thee
To thy deserts in wars, for all thy former
And thy late services, rewarded with
A dull command of Captain, but incensed
By Olaus now who rules his heart, less hope
To be repaired in fortune.
Let him be the Prince.
It is he.
It honours my attempt;
And while his father holds him disobedient,
I think him less then subject.
Disobedient? look there.
This is the Princes hand.
But read his heart.
Impious! above the reach
Of common faith.
I am satisfied, he must not live; the way:
They would not trust me with his cup to poison it,
Show me the way— the King and Queen.
Lets study.
You have a faithful servant in Gotharus.
Upon his wisdom we depend.
I have it,
He shall dye like a Soldier, thus—
Their malice
Doth only aim at me, and if you please
To give me up a sacrifice to their fury.
Not for a thousand Sons, my life and honours
Must sit with thine Marpisa.
Sir, it is done.
This act shall make thee great, the King and Queen
Look cheerful royal sir, and think of honour
To crown the merit of this Captain, let
No trouble shake a thought, he will deserve
Your bosom sir.
He shall possess it; how my Gotharus?
Pray leave it to me, it is not ripe yet for your knowledge sir.
We will trust thee, come Marpisa.
Dearest Madam! come Aquinus.
I attend your Lordship.
My Lord, you honour us.
If we knew how to express our duties.
No more ceremony,
Your loves engage me, if some discontents
Make me not seem unpleasant; yet I must
Confess I was more prompted to th'acceptance,
In hope to cure a melancholy.
With your pardon,
It does too much usurp on your sweet nature,
But if your Lordship please, there is a way
To banish all those thoughts.
I would call him doctor
That could assure me that.
I am of his
Opinion sir, and know the best receipt
In the world for sadness.
Prithee what?
Good wine.
I have heard 'em talk so, If I thought there were
That operation—
Try sir.
My humble duty—it is excellent wine!
Helga.
Your Lordships servant.
It is pleasant.
It has spirit, will you please
Another trial, that prepares more sweetness,
Health to the Queen.
I thank you.
With your pardon, fill to me,
Your grace should have it last.
She is my mother.
She is our royal mistress, heaven preserve her;
Does not your Lordship feel more inclination
To mirth, there is no spell against sorrow, like
Two or three cups of wine.
Nothing believ't,
Will make your soul so active, take it liberally.
I dare not trust my brain.
You never tried.
You'll never know the pleasure then of drin∣king
I have drunk my self into an Emperor.
In thy own thoughts.
Why is it not rare, that wine
Taken to the extent, should so delightfully
Possess the imagination, I have had my Queens
And Concubines—
Fine fancies.
The Kings health,
Give me't in greater volume, these are acorns
Sueno to thee, I'm sprightly but to look out.
What rare things will the flowing virtue raise,
If but, the sight exalt you? to your grace,
The Kings health.
Let it come, i'll trespass once.
That smile became you sir.
This Cup doth warm me,
Methinks I could be merry.
Will your grace have any music?
Any thing.
Strike lustily.
I have begun no health yet Gentlemen.
Now you must honour us.
Health to the Prince.
That is your title sir,
As you are Son to a Queen,
My father was no King, father? i'll drown
The memory of that name.
The Prince Turgesius health.
He's not far off
By the Court Computation—happiness now
To Prince Haraldus mistress.
With devotion.
Alas, I am too young to have a mistress.
Sir, you must crown it.
These are complements
Methinks loud music should attend these Healths—
So, shall we dance?
We want Ladies.
I am as light, thou shalt go for a Lady.
Shall I?
Is not this better, then to sigh away
Our spirits now?
I'm hot.
A cup of wine is the most natural cooler.
You are my Physicians Gentlemen.
Make it a health to my Lord Gotharus. 
I'll pledge it as heartily as he were my father.
Whose father?
Mine, I said.
Cry mercy.
Nay, it is but so much wine lost, fill't again.
I'll drink no more.
What think you of a song?
A catch, to it boys.
Shall we to bed Gentlemen?
I did not sleep last night.
If your Grace
Desire to sleep, there's nothing to prepare it
Like to either cup.
A health to both your Mistresses.
You do us grace.
There's hope of his conversion▪
I am nos well, what wheels are in my brains?
Philosophy affirms the earth moves not,
It is here me thinks confuted, Gentlemen,
You must be fine to lead me to some couch,
Where I may take a nap, and then i'll thank you,
I'll come again to morrow.
Every day
For a twelve-month.
That will make you a good fellow.
You tell me wonders.
It is all truth, we must
Stand on our guard, it is well we are provided.
Is it not some device to make us fear,
That at our entertainment we may find
Our joys more spacious.
There is some device in it.
It is not possible a father should
Be so unkind to his own blood and honour.
My life was threatened.
Who durst threaten it?
The King your father.
Oh say not so good sir.
And if you please him not with your behavi∣our,
Your head may be soon humbled to the axe,
And sent a token of his love, to your stepdame
The Queen, I trifle not.
For what sins
Hath angry heaven decreed to punish Norway,
And lay the Scene of wrath in her own bowels?
I did suspect when none came forth to meet
Our victory, to have heard of some mis-fortune,
Some prodigies egendring: down with all
Our pride of war, the Garlands we bring home
Will but adorn us for the sacrifice;
And while our hairs are decked with flowers and ribbons,
We shall but march more gloriously to death.
Are all good women dead within the Kingdom,
There could be found none worth my fathers love,
But one whose fame and honour is suspected?
Would they were but suspected.
Marpisa?
Her preferment was no doubt
Gotharus act, for which it is whispered,
She pays him fair conditions, while they both
Case up the Kings eyes, or confine him to
Look through such cunning optics as they please.
I'll have his heart.
But how will you come by it?
He's safe in the Kings bosom, who keeps warm
A serpent, till he find a time to gnaw
Out his preserver.
We had dyed with honour
By the Enemies sword, something might have been read
In such a fall, as might have left no shame
Upon our story, since it is chance of war,
Not want of valour, gives the victory;
This ship-wracks all, and eats into the soul
Of all our fame, it withers all the deeds
Is owing to our name.
Health to the Prince,
Cortes, welcome, what news?
These Letters will inform his highness.
Sent, from the King Cortes? has he thought upon it?
Are we considerable at last, and shall
The Lady Geugaw, that is perched upon
His throne, be counselled not to take too much
Upon her? will Gotharus give us leave
To be acquainted with the King again? ha!
These Letters came sir from Aquinus.
How?
I hope he mentions not the broken pate
I gave him, and complains on it to the Prince,
I may be apt to make him an amends
With such another.
Sir.
What's the matter?
Read, I am planet-stroke, cursed Gotharus!
What would the traitor have?
It is here, I take it, he would have you sent
Yonder, and has took order with Aquinus
For your conveyance hence, at both their charges;
But now you know the plot, you wo' not trust
Your life as he directs.
Not trust Aquinus?
You are desperate, hark you, I do suspect him,
And I have cause, I broke his head at Court
For his impertinent counsel, when I was
In passion with the King, you sha'not trust him,
This may be cunning to revenge himself,
I know he has a spirit, come you sha' not
Be cheated of your life, while I have one
To counsel you.
Uncle, I am unmoved,
He is a Soldier, to that name and honour
I'll trust a Princes life, he dares not be
A traitor.
I have read that one Prince was
So credulous, and escaped, but Alexander,
Though he were great, was not so wise a Gentle∣man,
As heaven in that occasion might have made him,
The valiant confidence in his doctor, might
Have gnawn his bowels up, and where had been
My gallant Macedonian? come you shall
Consider on it.
I am resolved already,
March to the City, every thought doth more
Confirm me, passion will not let you see,
Good Uncle with your pardon, the true worth
And inside of Aquinus, he is faithful,
Should I miscarry, it is my single life,
And it is obedience to give up our breath,
When fathers shall conspire their Childrens death
YOu may surrender up your Crown, 'twell show
Brave on Turgesius Temples, whose ambition
Expects it.
Nay Gotharus—
Has my care
Cast to prevent your shame, how to preserve
The glories you possess, by cutting off
A Canker that would eat into your trunk,
And hinder your fair growth, and do you make
A scruple to be cured?
I did but mention,
And nature may excuse, he is my son.
The more your danger, when he dares be impious,
The forfeit of his duty in this bold
And hostile manner to affright your subjects,
And threaten you with articles, is already
The killing of your honour, and a treason
Nature abhors, a guilt heaven trembles at,
And you are bound in care of your own province,
To show your justice, and not be partial
To your own blood; but let your Kingdom suffer,
Her heart be torn by civil Wars; it is none
Of mine, and let him in the blood of many
Fathers, be made a King, your King; and you
That now command, be taught obedience,
Creep to your child, exchange your palace for
A prison, and be humbled till you think
Death a preferment, I have but a life—
Which I will cherish, be not passionate,
And I consent to all thou hast contained;
Thou art my friend.
I would be sir, your honest Surgeon,
And when you have a Gangrene in your limb,
Not flatter you to death, but tell you plainly
If you would live, the part so poisoned must be
Cut from your body.
And I wo'not shake
With horror of the wound, but meet my safety
And thank my best preserver; but art sure
Aquinus will be resolute?
Suspect not,
He is my Creature.
The Prince your Son—
Is a bold Traitor.
And they are Rebels join with him.
What of the Prince Hormenus?
He is very near the City with his Army.
Are the walls fortified?
They are?
We wo'not trust him, nor the Ruffian
Olaus, that Incendiary.
The Queen.
O sir.
There are more wounds in those sad accents,
Then their rebellion can give my Kingdom.
My boy, my child, Haraldus.
What of him?
Is sick, is dying sir.
Forbid it heavens, he was in health—
But if I mean to see him
A live, they say I must make hast,
The comforts of my life expire with him.
The Devils up in arms, and fates conspire
Against us.
Mischiefs tumble like waves upon us.
Sir, It will be necessary
You lend your person to direct, what shall
Be further done in the City, Aquinus hath
Charge of the Gate and Walls, that offer
The first view to the Enemy.
He is trusty, and
A daring Soldier; what at stand Gotharus?
I was thinking of the Queen sir, and Haraldus,
And grieve for the sweet child.
Some fever, would my
Son were in his state, but soon we shall
Conclude his destiny, if Aquinus prosper;
But to the walls.
I attend, my very soul
Is in a sweat, Hormenus.
I wait on you.
The Gates are shut against us Soldiers.
Let our Engines
Tear 'em, and batter down the walls.
Good Uncle,
Your counsel I obeyed in the wars abroad,
We did there fight for honour, and might use
All the most horrid forms of death to fright
Our enemies, and cut our way to victory:
But give me leave to tell you sir, at home
Our conquest will be loss, and every wound
We give our Country, is a crimson tear
From our own heart, they are a viperous brood
Gnaw through the bowels of their parent, I
Will rather dye without a monument,
Then have it bear my name, to have defaced
One heap of stones.
Gotharus on the walls?
Hormonus and Aquinus? now a speech,
And it were at Gallows would become him better.
Thus from my master, to the Prince of Nor∣way,
We did expect, and had prepared to meet
Your victory with triumphs, and with Garlands
Due to your fate and valours, entertained you▪
Nor has your Army sacrificed so many
Warm drops of blood, as we have shot up prayers
That you might prosper, and return the pledge
Of all our hope and glory. But when pride
Of your own fems, and conquest in a war,
Hath poisoned the obedience of a Son,
And tempted you to advance your sword, new bathed
In enemies blood against your Countries bosom;
Thus we receive you, and declare your piety,
And faith lost to your Country, and your Father.
My Lord, all this concerns not me, we have
But done our duties, and return to lay
The Trophies at his feet, whose justice did
Make us victorious more then our own valour,
And now without all titles but his son,
I dare hells accusation, to blast
My humble thoughts.
Sir, give us leave to fear,
Not your own nature, calm as the soft air,
When no rude wind conspires a mutiny—
Leave Rhetoric, and to'th point, why do not
The Gates spread to receive us? and your joys
Shoot up in acclamations? I would have
Thy house give good example to the City▪
And make us the first-born fire.
Good heaven knows,
How willingly I would sacrifice my self,
To do a grateful service to the Prince:
And I could wish my Lord, you were less passionate,
And not inflame his Highness gentle spirit
To these attempts.
I am ignorant Gotharus
Of what you mean, where is the King my father?
Where a sad father is, to know his Son
Bring arms against his life.
How now Aquinus,
Dare you be saucy?
O that Gentleman
Is angry, his head aches with the remembrance of
My Truncheon.
It was a valiant act,
And did become the greatness of Olaus,
Who by the privilege of his birth, may do
A wrong and boast it.
Shall these Grooms affront us?
Have you commission to be thus insolent,
They do not know us?
Yes, and in our hearts
Bleed, that our fears of your unjust demand,
Compel us to this separation.
Demands? is it injustice for a Son
To ask his fathers blessing? by thy duty
Gotharus, I command thee, tell my father
His Son desires access, let me but speak with him.
I have not in your absence sir neglected,
What did become my service to your highness,
To take his anger off.
What Riddles this?
But let me with a pardon tell your Grace,
The Letters that you sent, were not so dutiful,
You were to blame, to chide and Article
So with a King and Father; yet I said,
And pawned my Conscience it was no act of yours,
I mean entire, but wrought and formed by some
Rash spirits, to corrupt you with ambition,
Feeding your youth with thought of hasty empire
To serve their ends, whose counsel all this while
Did starve that sweetness in you we all hoped for.
Devices! more devices!
I am amazed,
And if the King will not vouchsafe me conference,
I shall accuse thy cunning to have poisoned
My Fathers good opinion.
Innocence
May thus be stained, pray let your justice clear me.
What would our Son?
Thus pay his filial duty.
It is but counterfeit, if you bring no thought
To force our blessing in this rude manner, how
Dare you approach? dismiss your soldiers.
Not the meanest knapsack,
That were a way to bring us to the mercy
Of wolves indeed, Gotharus grinds his teeth
Already at us.
We shall talk with you sir
Hereafter, I command thee by thy duty
Thou ow'st a father and a King, dismiss
Your Troops.
I will.
You shall not, that were fine,
So we may run our heads into their noose,
You give away your safety.
I will not
Dispute my power, let my entreat prevail
For their dimission.
You may dimiss
Your head and mine, and be laughed at, these men
Are honest, and dare fight for us.
I know
Their loves, and will rewait; dear, dear Uncle.
How he prepares his Tragedy Aquinus,
Let not thy hand shake.
I am resolute.
And I, for thy reward, it is done, the soldiers
Disperse already.
If any mischief follow this,
Thank your credulity.
May I now hope for access?
Descend Gotharus and Aquinus
To meet the Prince, while he contains within
The piety of a Son, we shall embrace him.
When I degenerate, let me be accursed
By heaven and you.
Are you not pale to think on it.
It puzzels me to think my father guilty.
I do not like things yet.
O I am shot, I am murdered.
Inhumane Trayton, villain.
So, so, his ••nd has saved my execution,
It is not safe for me to stay, they are both sped rarely.
O my dear Cousin, treason, treason.
Where?
In thy own bosom, thou hast killed thy Son,
Convey his body, guard it safe, and this
Perfidious trunk i'll have it punish't
Past death, and scatter his torn flesh about
The world to affright mankind, thou art
A murthdren, no blood of mine▪
It is done,
And all the guilt dyes with Aquinus, fallen
By Olaus sword most happily, who but
Prevented mine, this act concludes all fear.
He was my son, I must needs drop a tear.
It is not possible, he••••ch a feavor
By excess of wine? he was all temperance.
He had a soft and tender constitution,
Apt to be inflamed, they that are most abstemious,
Feel the disorder with more violence.
Where, who assisted him in this mis-fortune?
He had some company.
He was invited
He says by Sueno, and Helga, to a banquet,
Where in their mirth, they careless of his health,
Suffered him drink too much.
They poisoned him,
Go apprehend the murderers of my child,
If he recover not, their death shall wait
Upon Haraldus; but pray you tell me Gentlemen,
Is there no hope of life, have you not art
Enough to cure a feavor?
We find Madam,
His disease more malignant by some thought
Or apprehensions of grief.
What grief?
You're all impostors, and are Ignorant
But how to kill.
Is not my mother come?
Yes my dear son, and here shall weep my self
Till I turn Niobe, unless thou give me
Some hope of thy own life.
I would say something
Were you alone.
Leave us; now my Haraldus,
How is it with my child?
I know you love me,
Yet I must tell you truth, I cannot live,
And let this comfort you, death will not come
Unwelcome to your son, I do not dye
Against my will, and having my desires,
You have less cause to morn.
What is it has made
The thought of life unpleasant, which does court
Thy dwelling here with all delights that nature
And art can study for thee, rich in all things
Thy wish can be ambitious of, yet all
These treasures nothing to thy mothers love,
Which to enjoy thee would defer a while
Her thought of going to heaven.
Oh take heed mother, heaven
Has a spacious ear and power to punish,
Your too much love with my eternal absence,
I beg your prayers and blessing.
You are dejected,
Have but a will and live.
It is in vain mother.
Sink with a fever into earth?
Look up, thou shalt not dye.
I have a wound within
You do not see, more killing then all feavors.
A wound? where? who has murdered thee?
Gotharus—
Ha! furies persecute him.
Oh pray for him!
It is my duty, though he gave me death,
He is my father.
How? thy father?
He told me so, and with that breath destroyed me,
I felt it strike upon my spirits; mother,
Would I had near been born!
Believe him not.
Oh do not add another sin to what
Is done already, death is charitable
To quit me from the scorn of all the world.
By all my hopes Gotharus has abused thee,
Thou art the lawful burden of my womb,
Thy father, Altomarus.
Ha?
Before whose spirit long since taken up,
To meet with Saints and Troops Angelical,
I dare again repeat thou art his Son.
Ten thousand blessings now reward my mo∣there!
Speak it again, and I may live, a stream
Of pious joy runs through me, to my soul
You've stroke a harmony next that in heaven;
Can you without a blush, call me your Child,
And son of Altomarus? all that's holy
Dwell in your blood for ever, speak it once,
But once again.
Were it my latest breath,
Thou art his and mine.
Enough, my tears do flow
To give you thanks for it; I would you could resolve me
But one truth more, why did my Lord Gotharus
Call me the issue of his blood?
Alas, he thinks thou art—
What are those words? I am undone
Again.
Ha?
It is too late to call 'em back, he thinks I am his son—
I have confessed too much, and tremble with
The imagination, forgive me child,
And heaven, if there be mercy to a crime
So black, as I must now to quit thy fears,
Say I have been guilty off, we have been sinful,
And I was not unwilling to oblige
His active brain for thy advancement, by
Abusing his belief thou were it his own,
But thou hast no such stain, thy birth is innocent,
Or may I perish ever, it is a strange
Confession to a child, but it may drop
A balsam to thy wound; live my Haraldus,
If not for this, to see my penitence,
And with what tears i'll wash away my sin.
I am no bastard then.
Thou art not.
But I am not found while you are lost,
No time can restore you,
My spirits faint.
Will nothing comfort thee?
My duty to the Kign.
He's here.
How is it Haraldus?
Death sits in's face.
Give me you blessing, and within my heart
Isle pray you may have many, my soul flies
'Bove this vain world, good Mother close mine eyes
Never dyed so much sweetness in his years.
Be comforted, I have lost my son too,
The Prince is slain, how now.
Justice upon the murderer of my son,
This villain Helga, and his companion
Sueno, have killed him, whore's the other?
Fled Madam,
But Helga does confess he made him drunk.
But not dead drunk, I do beseech you Madam.
Look here what your base surfeit has destroyed.
It was Sueno as well as I, my Lord Gotharus
Gave us commission for what we did.
Again Gotharus, sure he plotted this.
Hang him up straight.
I left no drink behind me,
If I must dye let me have equal justice,
And let one of your guard drink me to death sir;
Or if you please to let me live till
Sueno is taken, we will drink and reel
Out of the world together.
Hence, and hang him.
Sir, you must make provision against
New danger, discontent is broke into
A wild rebellion, and many of your subjects
Gather in tumults, and give out they will
Revenge the Princes death.
This I did fear,
Whore's Gotharus? O my fright, my conscience,
Has furies in it, whore's Gotharus?—
Not in the Court.
I tremble with confusions.
I am resolved, my joys are all expired,
Nor can ambition more concern me now,
Gotharus has undone me in the death
Of my loved Son, his fate is next, while I
Move resolute i'll command his destiny.
How are we lost, the Prince Turgesius death
Is of no use, since it is unprofitable
To the great hope we stored up in Haraldus,
It was a cursed plot directed me
To raise his spirit, by those giddy engines
That have undone him, their souls reel to hell for it
How will Marpisa weep her self into
The obscure shades, and leave me here to grow
A statue with the wonder of our fate.
Sir.
Do not trouble me.
Although
I am not partner of your joys or comfort,
Yet let your cruelty be so mindful of me
I may divide your sorrows.
Would thy sufferings
Could ease me of the weight, I would
Empty my heart of all that's ill, to sink thee,
And bury thee alive, thy sight is hateful,
Ask me not why, but in obedience
Fly hence into some wilderness. The Queeen.
Great Queen, did any sorrow lade my bosom,
But what does almost melt it for Haraldus,
Your presence would revive me, but it seems
Our hopes and joys in him grew up so mighty,
Heaven became jealous, we should undervalue
The bliss of the other world, and build in him
A richer Paradise.
I have mourned already
A mothers part, and fearing thy excess
Of grief, present my self to comfort thee,
Tears will not call him back, and twill become us
Since we two are the world unto our selves,
(Nothing without the circle of our arm's
Precious and welcome) to take heed our grief
Make us not oversoon, like him that dead,
And our blood useless.
Were you present Madam,
When your Son dyed?
I was.
And did you weep;
And wish him live, and would not heaven at
Your wish, return his wandering Ghost again?
Your voice should make another out of Atoms;
I do adore the harmony, and from
One pleasant look, draw in more blessings
Then death knows how to kill.
He is recovered from his passion.
Whats this? ha?
Where?
Here, like a sudden winter
Struck on my heart, I am not well of the sudden, ha?
My Lord, make use of this, it is Cordial,
I am often subject to these passions,
And dare not walk without this Ivory box
To prevent danger, they are pleasant,
It is a most happy opportunity.
Let me present my thanks to my preserver,
And kiss your hand.
Our lips will meet more lovingly.
My heart will break.
Your Lady, we are betrayed,
She see us kiss, and I shall hate her for it.
Does this offend your virtue?
You're merciless,
You shall be a less▪ Tyrant sir to kill me,
Injurious Queen!
Shall I be here affronted?
I shall not think Gotharus worth my love,
To let her breath forth my dishonour, which
Her passion hath already dared to publish,
Nor wanted she before an impudence
To throw this poison in my face.
I'll tame her.
I wo'not curse you Madam, but you are
The Cruel'st of all woman kind,
I am prepared to meet your tyrannies.
My Lord,
We are undone, the common people are
In arms, and violently assault our house,
Threatening your Lordship with a thousand deaths,
For the good Prince, whose murder they exclaim
Contrived by you.
The friends of hell will show more mercy to me,
Where shall I hide me?
Alas they'll kill me too.
There's no staying, they have broke the wall of the first Court,
Down at some window sir.
Help me, O help me, in me lost.
Down with the doors,
This way, this way.
He that first moves this way
Comes on his death, I can dispatch but one,
And take your choice.
Alas good Madam, we do not come to trouble you
You have sorrow enough, we would talk
With my Lord your pagan husband.
I, I, where is he?
That Traitor.
Murderer of our Prince.
You're not well informed,
Aquinus killed the Prince.
But by my Lords correction
We know his heart, and do mean to eat it.
Therefore let him appear, knock down the Lady
You with the long bill.
How dare you run the hazard of your lives
And fortunes, thus like out-laws, without authority
To break into our houses, when you have done,
What fury leads you to 't, you will buy too dear
Repentance at the Gallows.
Hang the Gallows, and give us my Lord your husband.
He's escaped Madam, now they may search.
But whore's the Queen, she must not be be∣trai'd.
This way, this way, he got out of a window,
And leaped a wall, follow, follow.
Follow, follow, follow.
O my poor Gotharus.
Madam, you are secure, though you pursued
My death, I wish you safety,
I have been
Too cruel, but my fate compelled me to it.
I am become the extremest of all miseries.
Oh my unhappy Lord.
Helga is hanged, what will become of me?
I think I were best turn Rebel, there's no hope
To walk without a guard, and that I shall not
Want to the Gallows, heathen Halberdiers
Are used to have a care, and do rejoice
To see men have good ends.
I am pursued.
My Lord Gotharus? worse and worse, oh for a mist before his eyes.
You sha'not betray me sir.
Hold my Lord, I am your servant, honest Sueno.
Sueno, off with that case, it may secure me,
Quickly, or—
Oh my Lord, you shall command my skin,
Alas poor Gentleman, I'm glad I have it
To do your Lordship service.
Nay, your beard too?
Yes, yes, any thing:
Alas my good Lord, how comes this?
Leave your untimely prating, help,
You'll not betray me.
I'll first be hanged.
—Follow, follow.
Hell stop their throats; so, so, now thy re∣ward
It was my duty, troth sir I will have nothing.
Yes, take that, and that, for killing of Haral∣dus.
Now I'm sure you will not prate.
O murder.
—Follow, follow.
I cannot scope, oh help invention.
This way they say he went, what's he?
One of our company I think,
Who killed him?
I know not.
Lets away, if we can find that Traitor,
He shall pay for all▪
Oh that I had him here, I'd teach him—
This way, this way.
Oh.
Stay, There's one groans.
Oh—
Nay it was here abouts, another dead?
He has good clothes, Gotharus? the very cur.
It is Gotharus, I have seen the dog.
It is he, it is he.
Oh.
Now it is not he, if thou can speak my friend—
Gotharus murdered me, and shifted clothes,
He cannot be far off, oh.
Thats he that lies dead yonder, O that he were
Alive again, that we might kill him one after ano∣there.
He's gone:
The Devil he is, follow, follow.
This way, he cannot scope us, farewell friend,
i'll doe thee a courtecy.
Follow, follow.
So, so, in this disguise you may to'th Army,
Who though they seem to scatter, are to meet
By my directions, honest Aquinus, you
You wait on the Prince, but sir—
Were you not wounded?
I prepared a privy Coat, for that I knew Go∣tharus
Would have been too busy with my flesh else,
But he thinks I'm slain by the Duke, and hugges
His fortune in it.
You'll follow.
And bring you news, perhaps the Rabble are
In hot pursuit after the Politician,
He cannot scope them, they'll tear him like
So many hungry Mastives.
I could wish they had him.
Lose no time, Cortes stay you with me,
Not that I think my house will want your guard.
Command me sir.
Whas ever such a practise by a father,
To take away his Sons life?
I would hope he may not be so guilty, yet I know not
How his false terrors multiplied by the Art
Of this Gotharus may prevail upon him,
And win consent.
Aquinus has been faithful,
And deceived all their treasons, but the Prince
Is still thought dead, this empty Coffin shall
Confirm the people in his funeral,
To keep their thoughts revengeful,
Follow, follow—
Till we are possessed of him that plotted all.
The cry draws this way,
They are excellent Blood-hounds.
As you are men, defend me from the rage
Of the devouring multitude; I have
Deserved your anger, and a death, but let not
My limbs inhumanely be torn by them,
O save me.
Follow, foal—
Blessed occasion.
I am forced to take your house, and now im∣plore
Your mercy, but to rescue me from them,
And be your own revenger, yet my life
Is worth your preservation for a time,
Do it, and i'll reward you with a story
You'll not repent to know.
You cannot be safe here,
Their rage is high, and every door
Must be left open to their violence,
Unless you will obscure you in this Coffin,
Prepared for the sweet Prince that's murdered,
And but expects his body which is now embalming.
That, O you're charitable.
Follow, foal—
Their noise is Thunder to my soul,
So, so.
How now Gentlemen, what means this Tu∣muled,
Do you know that I possess this dwelling?
Yes my Lord,
But we were told my Lord Gotharus entered,
And we beseech you give him to our justice,
He is the common enemy, and we know he killed the Prince.
You may search if you please,
He can presume of small protection here,
But I much thank you for your loyalties,
And service to the Prince, whose bloodless ruins
Are there, and do but wait when it will please
His father to reverse a cruel sentence,
That keeps him from a burial with his Ancestors,
We are forbid to do him rights of funeral.
How, not bury him?
Forbid to bury our good Prince? we will bury him,
And see what Priest dare not assist us.
Not bury him? we will do it, and carry his body in triumph
Through the City, and see him laid in the great Tombs
Not bury our Prince? that were a jest indeed.
It is their love and duty.
We will pull the Church down, but we will have our will.
Dear Prince, how sweet he smells.
Come Countrymen march, and see who dares
Take his body from us.
You cannot help.
They'll bury him alive.
He's in a fright.
So may all Traitors thrive.
OH I am lost, and my soul bleeds to think
By my own dotage upon thee.
I was cursed
When I first saw thee, poor wind-shaken King!
I have lost my Son.
Thy honour impious woman,
Of more price then a Son, or thy own life,
I had a son too, whom my rashness sent
To another world, my poor Turgesius,
What sorcery of thy tongue and eyes betrayed me?
I would I had been a Basilic, to have shot
A death to thy dissembling heart, when I
Gave my self up thy Queen; I was secure,
Till thou with the temptation of greatness
And flattery, did poison my sweet peace,
And shall thy base fears leave me now a prey
To Rebels?
I had been happy to have left
Thee sooner, but be gone, get to some wilderness
Peopled with Serpents, and engender with
Some Dragon like thy self.
Ha, ha.
Dost laugh thou prodigy? thou shame of wo∣man?
Yes, and despise thee dotard, vex till thy soul
Break from thy rotten flesh, I will be merry
At thy last groan.
O my poor boy! my son!
His wound is printed here, that false Gotharus,
Your wanton Goat I fear, practised with thee
His death.
It was thy own act and timorous heart, in hope
To be secure, I glory in the mention
Thou murderer of thy son.
Oh sir, if ever, stand upon your guard,
The Army which you thought scattered and broke,
Is grown into a great and threatening body,
Lead by the Duke Olaus your loved Uncle,
Is marching hither, all your subjects fly to him.
Ha, ha.
Curse on thy spleen, is this a time for laugh∣la,
When horror should afflict thy guilty soul?
Hence mischief.
Not to obey thee, (shadow of a King)
Am I content to leave thee, and but I wo'not
Prevent thy greater sorrow and vexation,
Now I would kill thee coward.
Treason, treason.
I, I, Who comes to your rescue?
Are all fled?
Slaves do it naturally.
Can thou hope to scope?
I am mistress of my fate, and do not fear
Their inundation, their Army coming,
It does prepare my triumph, they shall give
Me liberty, and punish thee to live.
Undone, forsaken, miserable King!
Worthy Aquinus, I must honour thee,
Thou hast preserved us all, thy service will
Deserve a greater monument then thanks.
Thank the Duke, for breaking of my pate.
I know it was well bestowed, but we have now
Proof of thy honest heart.
But what with your highness favour, do you mean
To do with your father?
Pay my duty to him,
He may be sensible of his cruelty,
And not repent to see me live.
But with your favour, something else must be
Considered, there's a thing he calls his Queen,
A limb of Lucifer, she must be roasted
For the Armies satisfaction.
They'll ne'er digest her,
The Kings hounds may be kept hungry
Enough perhaps, and make a feast upon her.
I wonder how the rabble will bestow
The Coffin.
Why, they'll bury him alive
I hope.
Did they suppose my body there?
I'm sorry, he will fare so much the better,
I would the Queen were there to comfort him,
Oh they would smell, and sweat together rarely.
He dare as soon be damned as make a noise,
Or stir, or cough.
If he should sneeze.
It is his best course to go into the ground
With silence.
March on, stay, what Trumpets that?
They are no enemies, I know the Coffin.
What rusty Regiment have we here?
They are going to bury him, he's not yet disco∣veered;
Oh do not hinder 'em, it is a work of charity:
Yet now I do consider better on it,
You may do well to show your self, that may
Be a means to waken the good Gentleman,
And make some sport before the rascal smell,
And yet he's in my nostril, he has perfumed
His box already.
It is he, it is he, the Prince alive! hey.
What would he give but for a knife to cut
His own throat now?
Our noble Prince alive?
That owes himself to all your loves.
What? what trinkets have you there?
The Duke Olaus told us it was the Princes by∣die,
Which we resolved to bury with magnificence.
So it appears.
It is better as it is.
There's something in it, my shoulder is still sensible,
Lets search, stand off—
Now do you sent him Gentlemen? he wo'd forgive
The hangman to dispatch him out of the way;
Now will these Masties use him like a Cat,
Most dreadful Rogues at an execution:
Now, now.
It is a man, ha Gotharus, the thing we whet our teeth for.
Out with the traitor, and with the mur∣derer, hey, drag him.
I told you.
Hold, know your duty fellow renegades,
We do beseech thee high and mighty Prince,
Let us dispose of what we brought, this traitor
He was given us by the Duke, fortune has
Thrown him into our teeth.
And they'll devour him.
We beseech your highness.
I doe acknowledge it, good sir grant their boon,
And try the Cannibals.
Isle have an arm.
Isle have a leg, I am a Shoemaker,
His shinbone may be useful.
I want a sign, give me his head.
Stay, let's first see him, is he not stifled?
I had rather my wife were speechless.
The Coffin sir was never close.
He does not stir.
We will make him stir, hang him, he's but asleep.
He's dead, hum.
Dead? Then the Devil is not so wise as I took him.
He's dead, and has prevented all their fury.
He was not smothered, the Coffin had air enough.
He might have lived to give these Gentlemen some content.
Oh let us tear his limbs.
Let none use any violence to his body,
I fear he has met reward above your punishment.
Let me have but his clothes.
He is a Taylor.
Only to cut out a suit for a Tarytor by 'em,
Or any man, my conscience would wish hanged.
Let me have a button for a relic—
No more.
There is some mystery in his death.
The King? obscure a little nephew—
To whom now must I kneel? where is the King?
For I am nothing, and deserve to be so,
Unto you Uncle must I bow, and give
My Crown, pray take it, with it give me leave
To tell you, what it brings the hapless wearer,
Beside the outside glory: for I am
Read in the miserable fate of Kings.
You think it glorious to command, but are
More suject then the poorest pays you duty,
And must obey your fears, your want of sleep,
Rebellion from your Vassals, wounds even from
Their very tongues, whose quietness you sweat for,
For whose dear health you waste, and fright your
Strength to paleness, and your blood into a frost.
You are not certain of a friend or servant,
To build your faith upon, your life is but
Your subjects murmur, &amp; your death their sacrifice;
When looking past your self, to make them blessed
In your succession, which a wife must bring you;
You may give up your liberty for a smile
As I have done, and in your bosom cherish
More danger then a war or famine brings,
Or if you have a son—my spirits fail me
At naming of a son.
Oh my dear father.
Ha! do not fright me in my tears, which should
Be rather blood, for yielding to thy death,
I have let fall my penitence, though I was
Counselled by him whose truth I now suspect,
In the amaze and puzzle of my state—
Dear sir, Let not one thought afflict you more,
I am preserved to be your humble son still,
Although Gotharus had contrived my ruin,
It was counterplotted by this honest Captain.
I know not what to credit, art Turgesius?
And do account your blessing, and forgiveness
(If I have erred) above the whole worlds Empire▪
The Army sir is yours.
Upon conditions—
Good sir—and all safety meant your person▪
Right, but for your gypsy Queen, that Co∣citric.
She's lost.
The Devil find her.
She's false.
That Gentleman
Jack in a Box, if he could speak,
Would clear that point.
Forgive me gentle boy.
Dear sir no more.
Best dismiss these Gentlemen.
The Princes bounty, now you may go home;
And do ye hear, be drunk to night, the cause re∣quires it.
We will show our selves good subjects.
Heaven bless the King and Prince, and the good Duke.
My comforts are too mighty, let me pour
More blessings on my boy.
Sir, I am blessed▪
If I stand fair in your opinion.
And welcome▪ good Olaus.
You're deceived,
I am a Ruffian, and my head must off
To please the Monkey Madam that bewitched you,
For being too honest to you.
We are friends.
Upon condition that you will —
What?
Now have I forgot what I would have,
Oh that my Lady Circa that transformed you,
May be sent — whether? I have forgot again,
To the Devil, any whether, far enough:
A curse upon her, she troubles me both when
I think on her, and when I forget her.
Gotharus wife, the sorrowful Albino.
If pity dwell within your royal bosom,
Let me be heard; I come to find a husband,
Isle not believe what the hard hearted rebels
Told me, that he is dead, (they loved him not▪
And wish it so) for you would not permit
His murder here. You gave me, sir, to him
In holy marriage, i'll not say, what sorrow
My poor heart since hath been acquainted with,
But give him now to me, and i'll account
No blessing like that bounty; where, oh where
Is my poor Lord? none tell me? are you all
Silent, or deaf as Rocks? yet they sometimes
Do with their hollow murmurs, answer men.
This does increase my fears, none speak to me?
I ask my Lord from you sir, you once loved him,
He had your bosom, who hath torn him thence?
Why do you shake your head? and turn away?
Can you resolve me sir? the Prince alive?
Whose death they would revenge upon Gotharus.
O let me kiss your hand, a joy to see
You safe, doth interrupt my grief, I may
Hope now my Lord is saf too, I like not
That melancholy gesture; why do you make
So dark your face, and hide your eyes, as they
Would show an interest in sorrow with me.
Where is my Lord? can you or any tell me
Where I may find the comfort of mine eyes,
My husband; or but tell me that he lives,
And I will pray for you—then he is dead
Indeed I fear.
Poor Lady.
Madam be comforted.
Why that's well said, I thank you gentle sir,
You bid me be comforted, blessing on you,
Show me now reason for it, tell me something
I may believe.
Madam, your husbands dead.
And did you bid me sir be comforted
For that? oh you were cruel▪ dead? who murdered him?
For though he loved not me in life, I must
Revenge his death.
Alas you cannot.
No?
Will not heaven hear me think you? for i'll pray
That horror may pursue the guilty head
Of his black murderer, you doe not know
How fierce and fatal is a widows curse;
Who killed him? say.
We know not.
You're unjust.
Pursue not sorrow with such inquisition
Lady.
Not I? who hath more interest?
The knowledge of what circumstance deprived him
Of life, will not avail to his return;
Or if it would, none here know more, then that
He was brought hither dead in that enclosure.
Where?
In that Coffin Lady.
Was it charity
Made this provision for him? oh my Lord
Now may I kiss thy withered lip, discharge
Upon thy bosom a poor widows tears;
There's something tempts my heart to show more duty,
And wait on thee to death, in whose pale dress
Thou dost invite me to be reconciled.
Remove that Coffin.
You're uncharitable;
Is it not enough that he is robed of life
Among you, but you'll rob me of his body?
Poor remnant of my Lord; I have not had
Indeed so many kisses a great while,
Pray do not envy me, for sure I sha'not
Die of this surfeit, he thought not I was
So near to attend him in his last and long
Progress, that built this funeral tenement
Without a room for me; the sad Albino
Must sleep by her dead Lord, I feel death coming,
And as it did suspect, I durst not look
On his grim visage, he has drawn a curtain
Of mist before my eyes.
Look to the Lady.
Look to Albino, our Physicians,
There is not so much virtue more in the Kingdom:
If she survive this passion, she is worth
A Prince, and I will court her as my blessing.
Say, is there hope?
There is.
Above your lives preserve her.
With our best art and care.
She has almost made me woman too; but
Come to other business.
Is not this the Queen?
The Queen of hell, give her no hearing, but
Shoot, shoot her presently without more repentance,
There is a lecherous Devil in her eye,
Give him more fire, his hell's not hot enough,
Now shoot.
Be temperate good sir.
Nay let his choleric highness be obeyed.
She is shot-free.
The Prince alive? where is Gotharus?
Your friend that was.
It is confessed.
Your Stallion.
He has more titles sure.
Let but some strangle her in her own hair.
The office will become a noble hangman.
Whore—
Isle not spend my breath upon thee,
I have more use on it, does Gotharus live?
You may conjecture Madam, if you turn
Your eyes upon that object.
It has wrought then.
What has wrought?
His Physic sir,
For the state Megrim.
A wholesome poison, which in his poor fears,
And fainting when the Rebels first pursued him,
It was my happiness to minister
In my poor boys revenge, killed by his practise.
Poisoned.
She is turned Doctor.
He becomes
Deaths pale complexion, and now I'm prepared
For what?
To die.
Prepared to be damned, a seven years killing
Will be too little.
I pity your poor rage,
I sha'not stay so long, nor shall you have
The honour sir to kill me.
No, let me try.
Ha, ha.
Dost thou laugh Helcat?
Yes, and scorn all your furies, I was not
So improvident, to give Gotharus all
My cordial, you may trust the operation,
Here's some to spare, if any have a mind
To taste, and be assured, will you my Lord?
Twill purge your choler rarely.
Isle not be your patient I thank you.
This box was ever my companion,
Since I grew wicked with that Politician,
To prevent shameful death, nor am I coy
To pleasure a friend in it.
Devils charity.
It works with method, and doth kill dis∣creetly
Without a noise, your Mercury is a rude
And troublesome destroyer to this medicine;
I feel it gently seize upon my vitals,
It is now the time to steal into my heart.
Hast thou no thought of heaven?
Yes, I do think
Sometimes, but have not heart enough to pray;
Some vapour now rises twixt me and heaven,
I cannot see it, lust and ambition ruined me:
If greatness were a privilege in the other
World, it were a happiness to die a Queen,
I find my conscience too late, it is bloody,
And full of staines, oh I have been so wicked,
It were almost impudence to ask a pardon,
Yet for your own sakes pity me; survive
All happy, and if you can, forgive, forgive.
Those accents yet may be repentance.
See's dead.
Some take their bodies hence.
Let them have burial.
It is in thee Turgesius
To dispose all, to whom I give my Crown;
Salute him King by my example.
Stay,
Upon your duty stay, will you be traitors,
Consent your lawful King should be deposed?
Sir, do not wound your Son, and lay so great
A stain upon his hopeful, his green honour,
I now enjoy good men's opinions,
This change will make 'em think I did conspire,
And force your resignation, were it still
By justice and your self, it shall not touch
My brow, till death translate you to a Kingdom
More glorious, and you leave me to succeed,
Bettered by your example in the practise
Of a Kings power and duty.
This obedience
Will with excess of comfort kill thy father,
And hasten that command thou would decline.
Receive this Captain, and reward his faith
To you and me.
Be Captain of our guard.
And my good Uncle, to your ear I leave
The Soldiers, let the largess speak our bounty
And your love.
I, this sounds well fellow Soldiers,
Trust me beside your pay for the Kings bounty.
Heaven preserve
The King and Prince.
Not a short prayer for me?
Heaven bless the Duke, heaven bless the Duke.
Why so, money will do much.
A bright day shines upon us, come my son,
Too long a stranger to the Court, it now
Shall bid thee welcome, I do feel my years
Slide off, and joy drown sorrow in my tears.

COme, I protest i'll have you home again,
And tell all to your Father, if you go not
More cheerfully on about this business.
O Peso I dearest (dearest?) only Friend,
That Name of Father tic, that checks my blood,
And strikes a filial Reverence through my Soul;
Lays load upon my loins, clogging my steps,
And like an armed Angel warns me back.
So, so, he runs away to proper purpose
That bears his Hue and Cry in's conscience.
It is not yet day-light: night will conceal
My secret purposes. I will return.
Do so; and damn thee blacker then the night,
Thee and thy Father too for company
Express your filial Reverence so, doe so.
Dear Peso peace.
Peace fond Fabritio.
Dost thou not fly from him to save his Soul?
His and thine own to boot? will not thy stay
(Stay not to answer me) ruin your Family;
Cut off all hope of Blessing, if not Being
Of your Posterity? and all this by obeying
A wilful Father in a lawless Marriage;
More fatal (I foresee't) then ere our State
Of Venice yet produced example for.
O now thou tear'st my very bowels Peso,
Should I consent (as I dare not deny
My over-hasty Father) to this match,
I should submit my self the most perfidious,
That ever shadowed Treachery with Love.
No, my Victoria, sooner shall this steel
Remove thy hindrance from a second choice,
Then I give word or thought, but to be thine.
Why fly we not to Rome then, where you left her,
And shun the danger of your Fathers Plot,
Which would not only force you break your Faith
With chaste Victoria, but to wed another,
Whose faith is given already to another?
Double damnation! It were a way indeed
To make your children bastards of both fides.
Can there no way be found to shun the danger
Of this so hastily intended Marriage,
But by my flight, and the most certain loss
Of mine inheritance?
That would be thought on.
Stay; who comes here?
Some Night-walkers, that throw
Balls at their Mistresses, well of all Cities
Under the universal reign of venery,
This is the civill'st! in what sweet tranquillity,
The subjects pass by and salute each other!
Stay, what grave beast, what reverend Gibe is that?
(In the name of darkness) dropped out of a gutter?
O age what art thou come to!
Pray forbear.
Look there Fabritio, Venus can it be?
Come you're deceived.
Nay now I know I am not,
For by that little loving glimpse of light
That leads him on, Fabritio, tic thy Father.
I pray thee peace.
What will this City come to?
A young man shall not shortly venture to
A vaulting School for fear he jump in the
Same saddle with his Father, to the danger
Of his old bones.
Stay here comes more. This is
Some special haunt! sure tic the habitation
Of the Novella lately come to Town,
Which draws the admiration of all
The Rampant Gallantry about the City!
They say shoe's yet a Virgin.
And is like
So to continue, still she prove stale fish,
At the rate shoe's stamped for: for she has set
Such a large price upon her new nothing,
That Venery and Prodigality are at odds
About her, it seems thy Father could not bargain.
Fie! it was not he.
Not hee! peace and stand close.
Is she so rare a Creature, this Novella?
Rare? above excellent (man) it is unpossible
For a Painter to flatter her, or a Poet to belly her
In aiming to augment her beauty: For
I saw her that can judge.
Now if a man
Were to unkennell the handsomest she Fox
In Venice, let him follow these dogs. Sure
She is earthed hereabouts. They have the sent.
You have not seen her often?
Only thrice
At Church, That's once for every day, that she
Has beautified this City.
What rare help
May this be to devotion, that he speaks of!
And all this Beauty, and this seeming virtue Offered to sale?
I thought it was such a piece.
Thence only springs the knowledge of her worth
Mark but the price shoe's cried at: two thousand Duccats
For her Maidenhead, and one months society.
What a way, now, would that money reach
In Buttock-beefe.
She is indeed for beauty,
Person, and Price, fit only for a Prince:
I cannot think a less man then the Duke
Himself must bear her; and indeed it were pity
That she should sin at less advantage.
Why do we then make way to visit her
By our expense in Music?
A wary whore-master: I like him well:
A penneyworth for a penny would be looked for.
Why Francisco? Why?
Francisco! is it hee?
Although her price be such to be sold for
In ready money, she is yet allowed
To give herself for love if she be pleased.
Who knows how well she may affect a man
(As here and there a Woman may by chance)
Only for virtue? That's worth our adventure,
But I wish rather we could purchase her
At the set price betwixt us for a twelvemonth
Our friendship should not suffer us to grudge
At one another good turns.
There's love in couples,
What whelps are these? sure this Francisco is
The late forsaken lover, betrothed to Flavia
Whom now thy Father would so violently
Force thee to marry.
Would he had her Peso.
O here they pitch, stand close, we'll hear their Music.
Come sad Francisco, we'll to morrow see
This Miracle of nature, whose mere sight
Will wipe away the injury thou sufferd'st
In Flavia; and make thee quite forget her.
Tic he, and I will speak to him.
Good forbear.
Francisco must not so forget his Flavia.
What are you?
Men, that would have you be so,
And not to wanton out your holy vows
Dancing your selfes to th'Devill.
What doe you mean?
I mean, Francisco, you too much forget
The love you bore to Flavia, she to you,
She has forsaken him, and is bestowed
(Forced by the torrent of her fathers will)
On young Fabritio, Pantaloons Son.
Here stands the man denies it, speak Fabritio.
Not that I undervalue Flavius worth,
But not to violate her faith by breach
Of mine, were all this signiory her dowry
(Here is my hand Francisco,) i'll not wed her.
I must embrace you sir.
And Gentlemen,
My Lodging is not far, please you retire,
And there repose your selfes until the light
That now is near at hand, shall point you forth
A way to future comfort; you shall find
Good wine and welcome, please you to accept it
Your offer sir is large: yet let me ask
If we may rest securely for a day;
Lurk close and private, till the appointed hour
For this forced Marriage be over-slipp'd,
In case that our necessity may require it?
I understand you, Take mine honour of it.
Be cheard Fabritio, thou shalt not to Rome,
We may prevent thy danger nearer home.
Now night we thank, and follow thee away
(As being thy servants) from the approach day.
You conclude well, lovers and sprights are
Night-walkers, warned away by th'morning Star.
Whilst yet the Leaden fingered god of sleep
Keeps close the eye-lids of fantastic youth,
Feeding their acry fancies with light dreams,
Of wanton pleasures; giddy, vain delights,
The ever watchful cares of aged Parents
Throw op the gates and windows of soft rest,
Making our midnight noon, to guard and order
The wholesome fruits of our continual labour.
Wholesome and happy off-springs of my pains
Thus I salute you and implore your safety,
And thus that you may rest, grow and increase
Mine eyes prevent the breakers of your peace.
But see the morning hastens to relieve me!
Day spreads apace, and warmes the provident hand
Doe out the useless taper. Hoe! what hoe!
Nanulo! Astute! is it midnight with you?
Your servants are all here and ready sir.
About about, you drowsy headed drones,
Where is my Daughter?
Up and ready too sir.
Sirrah haste you to Pantaloons house.
The rich Magnifico?
Who else, you Rat?
Tell him I doe attend his coming hither,
To expedite the work we have in hand.
It shall be done sir, please you give me passage.
Here take the Keys; lock the door after him
Then call my Daughter to me.
See shoe's here sir.
Flavia my Girl, see how my early ??????r???
Provides for thee, The toil of many years
By daily travail, and my nightly watches
Lies here in readiness to build thy for???un.
And take it willingly, since thou consentst
To match unto my will; whereby this Coin,
Thy self, and both our joys may find increase.
I can no less then thank thee Flavia,
Although I must confess, my suit was long,
And grievous to me, ere thy childish will
Yielded to my appointment of a husband:
For whom (with no small joy I speak't) thou did
Cast off (indeed) the off???cum of his blood
The poor, degenerate in fortune, fellow,
I scorn to name him.
Alas my Francisco???
By which thou gain'st the Nonpareil of heirs
In all this wealthy City.
Sir tic not
The Riddance of the one, to gain the other,
Both which are equal blessings unto me
Can ad unto my present happiness
More, then the thought of your paternal wisdom,
Whose provident care was author of this good:
Chiefly to you I therefore wish the comfort.
It will be so: I find it my dear child
For though thy joy I know will be abundant
Mine must exceed, that includes thine with it.
Why smile thou Flavia? to think how dear
Thy Hymeneal day, to morrow is?
No I could weep for that.
How! ha! whats that?
This money's mine again, and thou art not
If thou dost wish one days procrastination,
Degenerate brat, changeling???
Dear Father???Father???
You have seen thy last of happiness: all content
From this black minute, and thy self are strangers.
Sir, I beseech you hear me???
Get you in
I'll mew you up where never Sun shall show
Into what endless misery i'll cast thee;
Nor any sound bring succour to thine Ear.
To call thee back from torment.
Sir,???dear sir???
My self will be your Keeper, Cook, and Carver.
Indeed you will be sorry.
Sorry! for what?
For the mistake you run away withal.
Did thou not say thou wept'st, because to more???row was come so nigh?
So nigh and yet not come sir,
Fearing how many dangerous hours are thither.
Ha! I begin to be now sorry indeed.
Loves Minutes, sir, are days, and hours are years,
When each protracted, multiplies our fears.
Now I am sorry with all my heart; and here's a
Thousand checqines to expiate my trespass.
But do not let thy husband know of them
Till he redeem a fault to their full value,
Oh mine own Go???le, my honey, honey Girl?
Was not I si??? applauding of your wisdom,
And giving you the glory of my comfort
In this approved match?
Thou did, thou did,
With tears of joy I must confess thou did.
Had you but heard me out, I had magnified
My fortune, sprung out of your providence.
Speak yet, and I will hear attentively.
First then, how first your admirable wisdom
Weighing how I had settled my affection
Upon Francisco excellent in parts,
Of noble blood, how ever low in fortune,
You gave your free consent (knowing your estate
To be a portion fitter to restore him
Unto the dignity of his Ancestors,
Then to be added to another Mu???k-hill)
That I should be his wife???
What's this you say?
Nay dear sir fly not off.
Well, on then, on.
I say you gave consent, that I should be
Wife to that noble Gentleman (pray sit still sir)
As you had foreseen my future happiness
Only in him consisted???sir until
This wealthy heir, young Fabritio,
You Neighbour Trades-mans Son, of great estate,
Was by his father tendered unto you
For me a husband, then unseen by me:
But since I must confess a proper man,
Worthy a fitter Wife???
Sweet Modesty.
But that your wisdom needs will have it so,
By reason that his heaps may purchase honour,
Which to'thers wants can never wash away,
But farewell him: I must look this way now;
And crown your wisdom with this closing point,
That whereas I betrothed was to Francisco,
And Pantaloons Son unto another,
(A Lady as tic justified at Rome)
You force me on this man, the fittest husband
On whom to make my party good hereafter,
Who shall not dare to upbraid my breach of faith.
And first not a sound policy my Flavia?
But now no more; old Pantaloon comes,
I take it. How now! dos he not come?
Signor Pantaloon, sir, entreats you
Meet him on the Rialto instantly,
That you may go to the Advocates together.
It is my Flavia interchangeably
To seal your Marriage covenants; make thee happy,
Look to my house and havings; keep all safe,
I shall be absent most part of this day,
Be careful Girl, thine own special good
Requires thee to it: and therefore I dare trust thee.
Happy success attend you sir, whilst I Rest here in prayers for you.
Thanks my child,
Come sirrah lock the door. But first (dee hear)
Beware that none have entrance in my absence
Except Fabritio, Pantalonie's Son;
Or such as I have warranted, look to it.
With due respect.
Come lock the door I say.
I, I, be sure of that, and I could wish
My thoughts were prisoners too: that they might fly
No further then the casement, or the wicket;
Where they (loose things) get out, and nothing bring
Back to this heart, but cold and sad returns.
O my Astute???
Now or never help me!
As thou did ever dream what true love was,
Fancy some way to quit me of this bondage;
Or else contrive this hour to be my last.
What! would you disobey your Father? what!
So good, so careful, and so wise a Parent?
O doe not vex me into longer life.
Either speak help, or let me die in silence.
Yes, at sixteen; you would die at sixteen?
Else let thy pity of my youth preserve me.
O Cupped what a Termagant tyrant art thou
Over poor subjects of sixteen! There is not one
Among a hundred of those ticklish Trifles
But is more taken with a Toy at sixteen
Then six and twenty: because by that time
The edges of most maidenheads are allayed.
Nay dear Astute hast thou thought a course?
What to prevent your Father, my good Master?
Think you I can turn traitor to his trust,
And cross his purpose for your Marriage?
If Knife, or Poison, Fire, or Water may
Remove this wretched cause, i'll do it else.
Yes, you were best leap from the top o'th'house
Into the Cavail grande: and there perhaps
Some courteous Gondaliar may catch you up,
And waft you to some house of dear delight.
Thou tortur'st me.
You see the door is shut,
And Go-by-ground your fathers Giant here
More sterne then Cerberus holds fast the Key,
You can make no ex???u???zion; nor let in
Any attempt for your redemption:
No Letter or a Message can approach you,
But by this Gyant-dwarfe your Fathers Agent,
Though I my self were wicked to assist you.
O could thou be so virtuous! Then I know
Some quaint devise would issue from thy brain???
To conjure and control his weaker spirits.
Thou know I have command of Gold and Jewels
Enough to buy a Senators large conscience:
Doe thou command it all to win him to us,
That petty thing. Dos he appear bribe-free?
Is he the only officer uncorrupted?
Madonna Flavia??? news.
What I beseech you?
From your elected Bridegroom, brave Fabritio.
Dissemble patience as you are a woman,
Or hope to be; and hear him handsomely.
How dos hee Nanulo?
That was well said.
Well and respectful towards you it seems,
For hee desires you not to stir abroad,
As I could wish you would not???
Insolent slave!
You know I may not stir beyond the Key
You keep, and yet you wish me stay within.
Will you mar all? the reason?
The reason is, he means to send anon
A Mercadante from the Merceria,
The famous Peddler woman of this City
With her most precious wares; for you to choose
What you shall like, and take them as his presents,
(A ceremony used on wedding Eves)
Such Rings, such Things, such Knacks, such Knots &amp; Bobs;
Such Curls, such Purls, such Tricks and Trilly bubkins
As Maids would turn no Maids almost to see 'hem!
And can you yet be angry at such news
With me the gladsome bringer?
Very good!
I have heard of this rare Pedler-woman;
And that she is much used in close affairs
Twixt parties Hee and She; and doe not doubt
Since you make golden offers (gentle Mistress)
To work her to your ends, as near (dee mark?)
As women's wit may reach at such a pinch,
Pray let her come.
Well sir, you know I shall not stir abroad;
When she is come shoe's welcome with my thanks.
Return so by the messenger.
Most readily.
Now M???stress if I chance to set the saddle
On the right horse; that is, to place your Mayden-head
Where you would fine bestow it, I trust you will
Out of your store reward me with a dowry
Fit to convey me to a Tradesmen's??? Bed.
Yes, and wish there a second Maidenhead,
On the condition.
Well, be cheerful then,
And clear those cloudy looks, awake your senses,
Refresh your temples, rouse invention up.
I have found ground to build on; but there lacks
Much rewing, squaring, jointing, to make sure,
Against all storms, our lofty Archi'ture,
Come up to council?
Now thou comforts me.
IS this Checquino's house, your Advocate?
It is, and Prospero your learned Council
Is with him here, attending too, our coming.
Tic well, Give me my writings Nicolo,
Please you to enter: I'll dispatch my man,
And follow instantly. Now Nicolo,
About the serious business Nicolo,
In which this morning I instructed you.
For your revenge sir.
Right my Apprehension
On that discourteous, cursed Courtesan,
Twill breed me more delight, then all the dalliances
I could have found in her most free embraces;
I hug my quick and sweet invention for it;
Here take this gold; this bright refulgent gold,
Twenty Checquines, and promise twenty more
On the performance of the brave exploy't
Twill take unto my wish, I doe foresee't.
Twill be sir, such a notable Revenge
That the report of it in after-ages
Will either mortify concupiscence
In young lascivious Harlots; or, at least,
Fright out of'em their itch of wronging age:
They shall no more dare to put youthful tricks
On years, and gravity.
Right my Nicolo.
Sli'd sir, and if you should not be revenged,
An old man should not step in the Bordello
Without the taunts of Boys and Gondelie???s,
Crying take heed, old man, you be not served
As the Movella fitted Pantaloon.
So, in short time, the City were well served
When age shall be ashamed to crawl to lechery.
Right, witty Knave. Go heartily about it,
Think what a Master tic thou dost it for,
That has no slender tie upon thy duty;
One that has bred thee from a youngling up
To this maturity.
I must acknowledge it.
And Nicolo, it was no petty kindness
To manumize your Father from the Galley
Which you cannot forget.
Yet must I hear it????
But i'll urge thee no further. Boy be careful;
Work but this for me with effect and speed,
And bind me as a Father to thy need.
You have even spoiled all now. I had as good a mind
And thought to have gone as heartily about
This piece of villainy as the Devil, that
Is in my Master could devise, or wish
Till that ore-doing spirit put me out;
Could he not see it was well; and mischievous
Enough in conscience, but himself must cross it?
Dos he think by redeeming of my Father
To slave me with his boasts, and foul upbraydings?
Had he still rowed in the gally, I not knowing,
The toil, the smart and grief had been his own:
Now I inherit what was then his pain,
Hearing continually the clash of's care,
And his f???ll stripes, out of this Bablers mouth,
Which more then kills my thanks; it wreaks my Spleen.
To br???g of benefits one hath bestowne
Doth make the best seem less, and most seem none:
So often times the greatest courtesy
Is by the doer made an injury.
Nicolo well met. I saw you house my Father,
And waited for you. Come you shall draw near.
This is a near friends Lodging Gentlemen,
My fathers special man I told you of;
Pray bid him welcome.
Most entirely,
Please you to sit sir: Here's a short potation.
But good Lyatico I assure you si???
I'll be your taster to quit fear of danger,
And now i'll let you know we have made oath
Upon this nimble master of invention
This sprightly liquor to be firm, and faithful
To one another in a present project.
Take you the ???am, and grow in one with us.
May I not ask what end your project aims at?
Nor what, nor unto whose???
Let it suffice,
We carry that about us shall end you,
And presently, if you comply not with us.
Nay, nay, by fair means Gentlemen I pray.
I am apt enough to mischief of my self.
Look ye. I swear with you.
Tic well. Now know
Tic for the good of your young Master here.
Then you would use me in some treachery Against my old one.
Thou art a Soothsayer.
Look you, i'll swear again, I like your oath,
Your deep Lyatick oath here, wondrous well.
Tic well done Nicolo: try the bottom of't???thrice
I will comply now and complot with you,
And was indifferently prepared before.
Provided always that it tend not to
Danger of's Life.
Could think me such a Villain?
Nay, if it were, it were no disparagement
To stake my head with yours. But Gentlemen,
Please ye fall roundly now upon the business,
I have now sworn enough.
Then you must answer
To these intergatories. First do you know
If the old men Guadagni and Pantaloon
Doe hold their purpose for their match to morrow
Betwixt Fabritio here, and Flavid?
They are marrying of 'em now at their Lawyers,
By Deed and Covenant, under Hand and Seal.
I left them, and their Books there now together,
And for the Priest to morrow is the day.
Is not Fabritio mist at home this morning?
No, not at all, the old man's mind's so carried
Upon the wings of this new marriage f???rtune???
I cry you mercy sir, you are the Gentleman
I think, that should have had her.
In good time sir.
In good time may you I'll do something for you???
Honest, deserving Nic.
Sir thus it is:
My Master sent in my young Masters name,
(The more to indear his service and his care
To the young Lady) that the Merchantesse,
The rich She peddler of the Merceria
Should visit her to day with all her wares,
For her to take her choice to deck her Brideship;
If you know how to plough now with that Heifer
You may herhaps convey a message to her.
I know her, and will fit you with directions.
Thou hast given a hint, for which I will renown thee.
But Nicolo, where was your reverend Master
Attended by your self before day-light?
Prithee inquire not further, it was not he???
The doubtful light deceived you sir.
No more then Noon in faith, a man may spy
An old whore-master in the darkest night
Like an old Cat, by the gloring of his eyes.
Will his old Mutton-mongership ne'er leave?
He is already known sufficiently
Thorough the City for his gift that way;
And yet he will deny his son free choice,
And force him marry one hee not affects.
That is his drift, whereby he may inherit
From him the same licenciousnesse; and make
The World acknowledge him the more his Son.
But has he made the purchase? has he bought
The famous piece of flesh, the rare Novella?
I could unshale a plot.
Ne'er doubt but do it then,
My noble Nicolo out with it I say.
I would entreat the favour of this Senate
I might unfold it only unto one.
Take your free choice.
To you young Master then,
Take heed wee render not ridiculous
Your Father to the wildness of their youth:
But to your self I will disclose a secret
That may be wrought to your advantage.
On.
Tic true, my Master was with the Novella
Drawn by the loose desires of wanton flesh;
But such a foul affront he did receive
As justly doth provoke his dire revenge,
Which he hath trusted me to execute.
How Nicolo? but first what was the affront?
He bargained with her; and for some large price
She yielded to be his. But in the night
In the conditioned bed was laid a Moore;
A hideous and detested Blackamoor,
Which he (demanding light to please his eye,
As old men use all motives)
Discovered and enraged, forsook the house;
Affrighted and ashamed to ask his coin again.
But seeks Revenge How, how, good No???colo?
Thus sir, you know what common disrepute
Falls upon Man or Woman that is found
Conversing with the common City-hangman,
That nearest Kindred after such converse,
Shun their society, as they would doe him
(The Hangmans self) so odious are they held
Except it be those officers allowed
By the State-publick to negotiate with him.
I know it Nicolo. But what can follow?
Tic plotted that the Hangman shall go to her,
And be discovered with her in such sort,
As her disgrace shall force her fly the City,
And I have undertaken to effect it.
It must be then by bribing of the Hangman:
And how can thou do that with thine own safety?
Thou may be so discovered and so hated.
For that observe the politic invention
Of my old Master! the habit of a Zaffi,
One of th'inferiour Ministers of Justice,
That walks between the Senate, and their Friend
The Executioner of their commands.
But what disguise shall shroud the Hangman thither, whose own shape is as horrid as the Plague?
The habit of some stranger in the City,
Which here is gold to purchase.
Thou hast informed,
Nay more thou hast inspired me Nicolo!
I shall find way by this, to break the contract
My Father would enforce; preserve his credit,
And save the poor Novella from the same
My father threatens by his own disgrace
Be then but true to me.
Sir, if I fail???
Enough: I'll trust thee. Keep the gold thy self:
Give me this Habit. Get thy self another
In all points like it, and in that return
Unto my Father, confidently tell him
The Hangman undertakes it, and at five,
Soon in the Evening, in strangers habit,
He will accost her.
Sir???
I'll see it performed,
Trust to my word and care, and thy reward.
I leave all to you sir. And crave my dismiss???zion.
What! Has he done?
Most friendly. Farewell Nicolo.
He has given me plot enough, if I but work it;
And it produce not Comic sport in the end
I must subscribe my Wit is not my Friend,
I must crave your assistance Gentlemen.
We have been plotting too.
And though our proj???ct run not the same way,
It may conclude with yours to crown the day.
So to your several ways.
I am for the Novella.
SO I am ready: And trust me Jacconetta
My pretty Moore, (for so I still must call thee
For thy dear Masters sake that gave thee to me)
Thou art grown skilful in these quaint attires,
So lately unacquainted with my wearing:
Thou hast plaid the good beginner at this dressing,
And by thine industy and further practise,
I doubt not but my Knowledge will grow ripe.
And by that Knowledge, you your self soon rotten.
O! could these Creatures grow still towards ripeness;
O???, being ???ipe, abide so, and no further,
What excellent fruit they were!
What say you Borgio?
I say among the twenty thousand Courtesans
In and about this City, none becomes
The dressing, or the habit like your self;
Your most unparalleled??? self! But, noblest Lady,
Think tic your person beautifies the Dress,
Not it, your person.
Why not it my person?
Yes, as the flame the fuel;
To work it into coals, and so to ashes.
Still Borgio in your old morality!
These Tires, these Chains, these Paintings, and these Gawds
Are but the sprigs and leaves, the butchers use
To set out flesh to sale with; or, at best,
But the gay Garlands which adorn the Beast
Prepared for Sacrifice???
Peace Borgio, peace.
And as those Beasts, so senseless are you women
Of the most certain danger you put on,
With your vain glorious gaiety; chips and straws,
To kindle fire of lust, in whose lewd flame
Sinks (with Troys Buildings) Natures choicest
Flame.
I would I understood this misery!
Deal freely with me Borgio, what new art
Hast thou in practise, that thou set a face
Shiningly varnished with Divinity
On a profession, that makes Nature vile
In her own shame? Lust's instrument!
Nay case of instruments, holding all means
For propagation and maintaining of it;
To make thy Gain out of its dregs and fragments.
Tell me, dost think by preaching modesty
To quit thee of the baseness of thy trade;
A poor necessitous Bravo? or hast hope
To live upon my honesty, and yet be still
Thy self a Ruffiano?
I would give o'er, would you; and change my Function.
Ha, ha, ha,???
What mean you Borgio, would you now spoil all?
Did you instruct her in this way of profit,
And no less pleasant too, then profitable
(As most of my Books titles are) whereby
She was so well resolved to go on???
Hold thy peace fool: she will run on the faster.
Thou know not how much harm, preaching has done
Amongst women. She will prove the only Sweep-stake
In all the City.
O are you there Devil?
Sir, leave this grumbling, or i'll turn you off
Amongst your Brothers, and your Sons Ruffianos,
To lurch in the night betwixt eleven and two
To rob and drown for prey; till being taken
Imediate Hanging follows.
I'm now your Creature;
My noble resolute Mistress; now I adore you:
Now you shine bright; your bravery now becomes you,
Yet (let me tell you under fair correction)
I have some cause to hinder your desires,
And theirs that seek you more, yet, for a time.
Your reason sir?
You know I was preferrd to you for a Bravo
Of long and dear experience: I have served
Six, the most famous Dames, this City bred
These sixty years; none scorning my advise,
By which, and their endeavours they grew up
To purse the price of Providence; which bestowed
The most in public, some in pious uses
Purchased them fame, almost Canonisation.
The last and least of them, Margarita Emiliana
Founded the Augustinian Monastery
I shout you late; where she has daily prayers.
These women, whom successively I served,
Fell not by rash adventure unto all
Great Fortunes offers; but by sound advise
(Which kept their Bodies sound and 'rich'd their coffers)
Were long ever they embraced; by which their price
And beauty grew of greater estimation,
My profit in this too is unneglected:
For long suspense, and tedious Expectation
Bring me more certain fees; where, if you fell
Immediately to work, my work were done,
And your own too, perhaps too soon: witness the falls
That Pox and Poverty have brought on many!
When their youths flame was spent and they rejected,
When others of their Sisterhood were embraced
Into a wholesome Nunnery.
This fellow speaks my thoughts. Borgio, I thought
You had respect to your particular profit
In all this winding wariness for my good.
You may conceive, it would grieve me, that (where now
You have continual new, and bounteous suitors,
That yield me fees for the bare sight of you)
You should in yielding to their common use
Send one man cloyed away, t'affright another
From his approach.
Borgio, no more of this,
A dear friend put you to me, for whose sake
I hitherto have followed your advise,
In hoisting up the price of my virginity.
To such a rate no common purse dares venture,
Nor common folks presume to approach the house.
And such as did attempt, by offering less,
I have sent back with shame; as the old youth
Last night, for which I thank thee Jacconetta???
I think I cooled his grave concupiscence.
And therefore, doubt not, careful Borgio,
Unless I meet a husband by the way
I will not stoop this month at a less rate,
Then the proposed sum and your consent.
I thank you more then if you had possessed
Me of the value of that sum proposed.
He means her Maidenhead! I faith good sir,
The mark's grown out of your old chaps, or else
Hang me if I believed you, by that little
I know of man.
So now about our business.
Some of my visitants I know are near,
Wait circumspectly Borgio.
You need not doubt me.
There is some hidden virtue in this fellow,
Or dangerous ill: but whether let it be;
As was my Birth my purpose shall be free.
Make fit my Chamber Jaconet. But first
Give me my Lute; and set me for the sign
O what I mean to be, the famed Novella.
Now Borgio, how speaks your muster roll?
What? are you full?
I have an army royal
Of Princely spirits, ready for encounter.
But one at once good Borgio.
I have encamped them each in several quarter.
Here lies the no less politic then stout
Italian force, and there your sprightly French;
Here the brave Spaniard, there the German bold;
Here the Polonian, and Sclavonian there;
Persian and Grecian???
Pray thee hold. No more.
It is not your house can hold, (would I admit'em)
One of each several nation would throng in
To make his battery on your virgin Fort.
The rich Piazza, on her greatest Mart
Boasts not more Nations; nor St. Mark himself
The understanding of more Languages
Then I (could I find house-roome) could receive,
To be made one by your interpretation
O what a Daring glass is sparkling beauty;
Fetching ambition from above the p???tch
Of towering Eagles, or Sky-touching La???ks
Down with a glance into the Nets of Love!
Prayed speak nearer home, who hast thou housed?
I have culled from the pack a special prince;
Four glittering Gallants; one of Italy,
For our dear Countries sake; But then a Monsieur,
A jovial French-man, all of flame and spirit.
I shall not dare to meddle with his glory
For fear I fall with Simile, who next?
A Spaniard next, that, to adorn his pride,
Wears an Ep???tome of both the Indies.
I saw his punctuality pass by.
And did you note his stiff reservedness?
He dares not cough for breaking of his chain,
But then there is a Dutchman, (Cargo lustick!)
A jolly strong chind German, princely borne;
A Landsgrave at the least; whose very bluntness
Promises more then the sharp-set Italian,
The fiery Frenchman, or the doughty Diego
In all their eager pursuit.
That man Burgio!
You have bestowed them all in several Rooms?
O like fierce Beasts, from sent of one another.
Then first, in fair requital of the Music,
I doe imagine some of them bestowed
On me, this morning ever my Love appears
To feed their eyes, let Music feast their ears.
WHy not me, Lady? stand not I as fair,
And fit for your embrace as any man?
Yes sir, tic granted; and as acceptable
I yield to none.
Tic but to try my Courtship, I presume,
That you put on this coyness, and to draw
More ample testimony of affection,
By Protestation, Prayers, Compliments;
The weakest ceremonies due to love;
Mere noise and Lip-labour, with loss of time.
I think with scorn upon such poor expressions,
And am above the art of Amorists,
That cringe and creep by weak degrees of Love;
To Kiss the hand, the Cheek, the Lip, then cry
O Divine touch! then smirk, and then embrace,
Then nuzzle in the Elizium of your bosom,
And be entranced! means fit for duller spirits,
To gather heat and strength of appetite.
My desire speaks in Loves true dialect;
And, from my heart inflamed, you may perceive
Loves fire rage in mine eyes, enough
To melt to yeildingnes a frozen breast.
In this I talk too much. I find you yielding.
And I my self too blame???
Let us retire then.
Mistake me not good Signior. Keep your distance:
I blame my self to let you overweene
By my long silence, that immodesty
To be in me, that might embolden you
To your and my dishonour. Pray desist,
And let the friendly welcome you have found
Persuade your fair construction.
Is this earnest?
Yes in sooth is it.
I'll be plainer then,
What make you here in the Smock-Faire, precious Mistress?
Or why these dressings, these perfumes and paintings?
Doe you wear the habit of our Courtesans,
And, by their art, call Gazers to your beauty,
Full of high hopes and flames of ardent Love,
Thus to delude, and make them witnesses
Of a cold seeming Chastity? what n???w Art
Is this? it cannot be to get a husband!
Nor a child neither sir, that's less.
That's soon believed, yet, no disparagement
To your expert sufficiency in the trade:
For the best Carpenters make fewest chips,
There's very few of all your function fruitful:
Yet some there be approved men at arms
Famous in public service; and a many
Good handy craftsmen in the Arsenal
Bred by this bounteous City from such mothers
That ne'er could boast their fathers; and as many
Daughters (if they prove worthy in their feature)
Succeed their active Mothers in their fortunes.
You are better read then I sir.
Tic common knowledge Lady. Nor do I
Read this t'informe your self, who were instructed
(I make no doubt) before your price was set,
By all examples to your present practise.
Sir, I must tell you now, you grow too lavish;
So, as I fear foul language; to'avoyd which
Let me entreat a fair departure hence.
Lady, this overacted State might fit
The wife of a Clarissimo, or the bashful
Daughter of some Patrician: but in you,
A pi???ce set out to sale, it but appears
Affected singularity, more unsuitable
To the temptations you wear about you
Then th'holy seeming pictures in your Chamber.
Why should it trouble you sir?
It dos, to think what new and secret aim
You may intend by this; in taking on you
The habit, and the name of Courtesan:
And, first, to set a price so far beyond
The strength of any ordinary means;
And then to show a carriage that may strike
Lust out of countenance! O the Knot's dissolved!
O Oedipus! O Sphinx! I now have found it
You fish for Fishermen (tic pregnant truth)
She claps a Cardinal aboard at least:
Tic not a Lay-mans purse, or Learning can,
Or purchase, or confute you, first not so?
Now you are foul indeed, and I must plead
My privilege against you sir, you know
I have a freedom grounded upon custom
Here in this City, for a month to make
Choice of my Lodging, set what price I please
Upon my self; admit what visitants
I shall think fit; no other, nor no more;
And this without control, or least exception
Of you or any man; secured by the City,
So safe from out-rages, that least abuse
May, on my just complaint, be punishable
In whomsoever by affront dares grieve me.
I fear she'll prove another creature then
The Beast I took her for: she knows her strength???
Yet thus much (for you are a Gentleman)
I'll yield for satisfaction unexacted:
If in this Months space, in that honoured way
(For I despair not of a husband sir)
Of holy Marriage, I be not promov'd;
Nor, by that time prefixed, the great Son tendered
(Great as you terme'???) for my virginity;
And that I stoop for less, here is my hand,
I will be yours as freely as mine own
At your own price.
Said like a noble Wench,
Only a word by way of friendly advise,
And so farewell. This Maidenhead of yours,
By you so highly prised; now being ripe
(And therein only merchantable ware)
Will, if you oversl???p the season, grow
Suddenly fulsome, straight way stale, then Rotten:
Think upon choicest Fruit, or Foul, or Fish,
Rich Wines, or any Rarity; how soon
Their virtue's lost.
I am enough instructed.
O???ce more farewell???pray ponder on these things.
Fear not I shall.
Could you consider how it would grieve a soul
Endued with Reason, Knowing, the true use
Of Nature's delicates, to see 'hem lost,
O??? spoiled for want of seasonable ta??????ng,
I know you would, and thank me for my counsel.
Indeed and so I doe.
Indeed farewell then.
Hoe's gone, at last the tedious storm is over.
I shall want day, as well as patience
T'indure and answer all the rest so largely,
See my sprightly Frenchman! I must look
For a hot O ???s???t now, though a short Skirmish.
Let me in my approach admire that Object
That vindicates the voice of Fame, in proving
She??? was no Liar in the loud reports,
That blazed it for the Beauty of the World!
Good sit beware idolatry.
The Egiptians,
Would they forbear their wonted heathenish worship,
And fall in adoration of this face???
Indeed i'll hear no more.
Lady you must,
You are so far above the pitch of flattery
That highest courtship in our best of Language
Wants due expression of your supreme graces:
And not to tender you the height of praise
Were mere Rusticity, rather profanation.
Yet. Let me stay you there, and let me tell you
You have worded well your high conceit of me,
But in a way so low, so undeserving
A courtiers art, that I have found you none.
No Courtier Lady?
No, no Courtier sir,
How can it fall in courtly understanding???
That beauty can be conquered by it's praise?
It breeds but less respect, and oft times scorn
From those that are ambitious of praise
On such praise-givers. And if you came only
Thus to pronounce my praise, you have said enough.
Nay dearest Lady, saving your displeasure???
I must come closer to her, she'll forget
She is a whore else.
Sir, your further pleasure
To tell you, Lady, now I like your wit
Equally with your beauty; briefly of which
A word or two, and so unto our business.
(You tax me with the loss of time already)
You doe consider fitly, that to praise
What we would purchase makes the value higher:
It is the chapmans rule to discommend.
Right sir, were you to buy a Horse or Jewel,
You would not praise it past the price propounded.
Yes, where I find the worth exceed the price.
(I am betrayed. Hee brings the Money sure)
And, that you know I doe esteem your worth
Above all Salary, I yield my self,
Fraught with unvaluable Love and Honour
To be the due reward of your embraces.
What's this si???, to a thousand double Duccatts?
You cannot think so poorly, or if so,
Perceive them in a taste of my endowments.
First see my late composure; where the flame
Of the soule-ravishing art of Poesy
May light your judgement 'bove the love of money.
You'll say my soul is noble, then if I
(As I protest I doe) complain the wants
Of even the best professors of that art.
The words are set.
To notes my voice can master?
Please you to read 'hem sir, and in requital
Of such a debt, my maid shall sing 'hem for you.
Hee Reads the Song.
Let not the corrupted steam
Of invective breach blaspheme,
Ladies for those artful graces
Which they lay upon their Faces:
Ceruse and Vermilion there
As aptly may be laid.
As (to cover Nature bare)
All other parts be clad.
Be wee sick in any part,
Pained, or Lame, we seek to Art,
(Nature's Rector) to restore
??s, the strength we had before.
Who can say a Ladies Face
Less merits the cost,
Or the privilege, or grace
Her other parts may boast?
Ladies no, since Time may steal
Natures bounty, learn to heal;
And with nimble hand repair
Teeth and Lips, Cheeks, Eyes and Hair;
Filling wrinkles, purling veins:
That unperceived may be
??pone your looks, the strokes and pains
Of Age and Casualty.
Now try your voice, Maid.
However it was well Sung, you seem to slight
In such requital, my esteem of you:
But yet there rests in me a quality,
I may suppose not so to be requited.
Please you command your Music, I will Dance,
To what you first shall name of latest practise.
Your skill hath made you confident; and I
Do so much honour these endowments in you,
That I my self will answer you in this.
Name you the Dance sir.
To come the closer to you, the Novella.
I am but weakly practised yet in that.
Some other then.
No let it be the same.
Go play it Jacconetta, the Novella.
I doe begin to doubt my qualities
Will not pass here in payment at the rate
My schooling cost me, when she repays all
I can bestow, in the same coin again:
But since I'm in, i'll on, and make the best
Both Face and Legs I can in it.
How like you it Lady?
For so much sir as you have excelled me
I crave your kind acceptance of my thanks.
I still had rather you were pleased to accept
Me and my whole deservings. I come to you.
If you esteem of Courtship, Language, Quality,
Sorting a Gentleman of best degree,
The Mixture of whose knowledge with his practise
Cost thrice your golden Son; let me and those
Be made the meed of your most sweet enjoying.
I will not make you such a loser sir,
But rather wish you had your money again
Those excellencies cost.
You doe not flout me Lady?
No, i'll speak plainly sir, these qualities
Might on some thriving Stage, and lucky legs
Bring you your money again, winning, perhaps,
The love of some old Lady, by stirring up
The embers of affection, rather lust.
Did ever woman talk so?
But certes here
They will not pass for ready money sir.
I dreamt as much. She has a devilish wit.
My courtesy si??? forbids me bid you hence;
But having private business of my own
I must crave leave to leave you to the thought
Of what two thousand Duccats are.
Be handed.
Is it performed sir? have you done the feat?
Pox of your Fates.
Just as the Music played I warrant you
Sir, it was a moving Lesson; played to th'life.
We struck it home, that you might do so too.
The Rogue, too, jeers me! sir I should doe well
To strike, or beat your undeserved Fee
Out of your bawdy Pocket.
As if you had not done the doe you came for!
What pretty ways can Gentlemen find out
To save their moneys! It is worth praise in some,
That have but little, or come hardly by it,
By travail, study, or laborious toil,
Dear shifts sometimes, and dangerous ways with hazard???
Very good!
But for you Gallants, that have, as it were
Wealth above with borne with you, and still growing
Up with you, past the reach of your expenses;
And never sweat, but for your exercise,
Or what your exercises bring you to!
For you to think your pleasures costly; fine
Excuse for petty fees, now the great charge
Is paid, and your desire satisfied???
No more.
Alas sir, what is a poor Duccatoun
After a thousand Duccats????
Have you done?
Would you had not; 'lesse my reward were better.
See, see, the bed made smooth again and all!
(O precious craft!) as here had nothing been!
Well would ye were all as wise in greater matters.
Tic the Rogues humour: I will give him something
For abusing me. There's your Duccatoun
To work more affability in your Mistress
Against my next approach.
It seems then yet
You are not cloyed with her deliciousness.
Nor had one taste (I swear by life and honour)
Of all my hopes, more then her Hand and Lips.
Have you not in that a double meaning sir?
I vow, for ought I know she is a virgin.
You've satisfied me, and perhaps my art
May in your absence work a little for you.
Think of me then.
My profit pricks me to it.
Respect it then, Adieu.
Servitor Monsieur.
The fear of thee is past. I was almost
In a cold sweat: but all the danger now,
Lies on the tother side of the house; my Don
My hot Goat???ver'd Diego, should he now
Discharge his Pistols on her, they would prove
More forcible then Cannon-shot on me.
Faith quit me of suspect. How big hee looks!
As if he scorned repulse. If he grow violent
I'll bring the Duchman in to cool his pride,
And set them by the ears for our Low Countries.
I have not in all Spain (where Majesty
Enthroned sits upon the brow of beauty,
And crown the Ladies with prerogative
'Bove all the women of the Earth) encountered
With such a scorn, as here. Discourteous woman,
Worthless and ignorant of the weighty trust
Was tendered to thee in my blood and honour.
Your blood and honour, will not feed or cloth me.
I will not change a word more with a mouth
So full of rudeness, and mechanic baseness.
Not upon my submission sir?
It must be great and sudden if it move me.
Hee looks that I should kneel and beg a Kiss.
Why seek you not to expiate your trespass
By tender of your self to my embraces?
I cannot do it: My virgin Modesty
Denies that freedom.
I'll no more delay,
I see tic only force must conquer you.
You will not ravish me! within there! help!
What! is the great some tendered?
Doe you want hands to tell your money Mistress?
No, to take off the hands of Rape and Outrage
This proud imperious Spaniard grip'd me with.
Signior you must not gripe nor grope here
Under the sum prefixed; two thousand Duccats.
We have arithmetic to receive them by
In your own Pistolets, or pieces of Eight
In Rialls, if you please; but not one single one
To be abated, my most thrifty Don;
Whom I cannot abuse enough me thinks,
I have seen one in your shape so well presented.
Villain, i'll have thee whipped for this affront,
Thy fault is punishable by the Law.
Not in defence of honour dear Don Tarquin.
Preventing Rape and Murder.
Villain die.
Not at this distance sir,
Besides here's aid.
Hence you Muskitta. Give a look more this way
I'll force thee take thy wings out at the window.
Borne down by Bravos! let the place protect ye,
By my few minutes patience. My revenge
Shall shortly speak in thunder.
Hold your peace;
And vent not here your loud Rodomontadoes
Lest I spit lightning.
Well si??? I am silent.
Be so my politic Don. This Hans has snapped her;
The Dutch man carries her from your great claim:
And this may be an ominous portent
Against your title to the Netherlands,
It may hold in the great work sir, as well
As in this small assay.
Abused and Jeered!
Nor they hear me not my noble Signior,
I'll tell you for your satisfaction
This Alinanie is a you???kerr that would marry her,
And she nor I durst bear it otherwise,
(Knowing by chance he slipped into the house,
And overheard us) when you come again
I will inform you further, you shall find
My information worthy of a fee.
Take from my hand a piece of four Gazetts.
That's three pence sterling, you are bounteous sir,
So, now, look big and vanish.
I have not sir, in my short story strayd
In the least syllable from truth, and were
The eyes of all the world fixed upon
My seeming Levity, my mind should be
Still constant as the center to that end
Reserved in my free thoughts.
Why was the sum, then, of two thousand duccats
Proclaimed the price of your virginity?
To keep the fl???sh flies off, you know my aim sir.
I find the noble Lady; nor can I
Further attempt a breach upon your honour.
Upon those terms I pray sir be my Guest,
I have by this time a sl???light Dinner staying.
You favours make me bold.
See all in readiness Jacconet.
I'll drink a frolic Lady;
M??????th and good wine take me: My loose desire
Is to chaste love refined by Vista's fire.
Am I a prophet? sure the Dutchman's tan
In a chaste snare indeed. I did but forge it
For an excuse to calm and rid the Spaniard,
And he seems to prevent my fiction: yet
Presumption shall not sway me. Women's wiles
Are oft times past prevention, and men catch
Sense of the wrongs, which to prevent they watch.
IF this move him not, nay prevail not with him
To the accomplishment of your desire,
Would I were a man, both for your sake and his.
What would thou do?
First take away the cause
Of your Greene-sicknesse by killing him; then
Cure you my self.
What wonders thou would doe!
I, if I were a Man and able to doe what I
Now desire (for I would have mine own desire still)
I would doe wonders indeed. Believe it Mistress,
An able man that has but a weak women's desire
Has an unknown thing; and may doe any unknown thing, for ought I know???
I pray thee leave thy idle prattle, and let
Me hear thy moving Letter.
Hear it then,
As your own Act and Deed, and quickly sign it.
MY dear Francisco, If you intend not my death, help me to break Prison this Night: Else though my Execution be appointed to morrow more???ning by a forced Marriage, I will prevent it by a speedier way, and by my own hand die,
Here, write your Name.
But thou hast set him down no means???
That's in the Postscript, mark,
The last minute that I will expect you shall be three in the morning, when from the back Window I will either fall into your Arms, or on my Death.
I thank thee good Astute. O that the messenger Would be as true to me!
If we cannot win her to it, tic but a Letter lost,
How doe they??? that have whole pockets ???u???l of ???h???m
In readiness to borrow money?
I pray thee peace.
Why I doe not think there's any of 'hem within hearing.
Thou dalliest with my fears.
Fear it not M???stress, she is as sure at such a lift???
And so shoe's come already.
Look you Lady, I told you true, here is the
Party, that has the Knacks and things; come
Open, open, and sh???w all.
Not before you good sit.
Are you so coy of your toys?
Your diligence were better somewhere else:
This prying into women's businesses
Is ill sir for your eye-sight, and perhaps
May spoil your growth, Good Sir, I crave your ab???sense.
I must give way. She has a devilish tongue. Exit
Mistress, shoe's for our turn I warrant you
I find it by her aptness to abuse him.
Come Mistress Bride,???Nay blush not, pretty one,
To take the name one day before your time.
I hate the Name, on those accursed terms,
That have prefixed the time. Good Astute,
Break with her by your selfes; I cannot speak:
My tears forbid me.
I hope you will not offer it.
Come Mistress, see. What weep you, pretty one?
What! and the great good turn so near you? ha!
What will she doe to morrow night?
Even cry out right perhaps.
Perhaps so too; and laugh as fast ever morning,
Come Lady, come, hear me, and see my ware:
Tic from Fabritio, he, that noble Gentleman,
Dos not your heart leap now? Now but suppose
French chains here of five hundred crowns a piece;
A rich Pearl Neck-lace, Sapphire and Ruby Bracelets;
Variety of Jewels, and a Diamond work???
I hate their price and them, the Sender more.
Pray peace.
I cannot: let me go.
Pray stay sweet Lady,
I doe not say Frabritio sent such things,
I said I came from him, that noble Gentleman.
He is not noble.
Judge him by his presents,
And see the things he sends.
I would not hear
A mention of him; much less would I see
The least relation from his hated hands.
Pray Mistress see 'hem! Open your Box I pray.
Had she there Lucrece' Knife, or Portias coals,
Or Cleopatra's ashes I could embrace 'em.
Look you how near I fit you. See what's here
What a choice??? chain is this! and here's a Knife,
As sharpe as that of Lucrece. And, for coals,
Here is a poisonous juice, whose every drop
Would eat through Iron. These Fabritio sends you.
I doe accept them.
Stay; conditionally
If you refuse another present here.
I must reject any from him but these.
What a scorne's this! This Bawd ne'er scopes alive
Out of these doors. Pray whats' your other pesent?
Here Lady, look on it pray; examine't well.
And take or this or those.
Ha! look here Astute;
The lively image of my love Francisco!
It is exceeding like him! what's the plot trow?
A thousand kisses shall thy welcome be,
Happy resemblance of my hopeless love;
As many thanks to you, good, virtuous Woman,
O let me fall and bless the ground that bears thee,
And ask forgiveness for my late rude trespass.
Recall your self, sweet Lady??? tender heart!
And could Fabritio (I can name him now)
Show me such Kindness, and himself so noble,
To send me this?
On this condition (as I was to say)
That you embrace it in the memory
Of him your Love, namely his friend Francisco,
And that you ever love, and only him.
Ever and only (though I thank him for it)
He need not have urged that.
Nor threatened these;
(Your Rope, here, and the rest) had she refused,
And to express their needlesses the better
I pray return them to him with great thanks.
It was his great care to work me to this Message,
Let then the charge be mine. Here's forty duccats???
And could you but convey a Letter for me
To my Francisco, take a hundred more.
Knew you but my desire to further Lovers
You need not bid so much. Give me the Letter.
Seal it Astute.
Then you know me not
I must be privy unto all I carry,
Where I meet doubts, I never undertook.
Nay I dare trust you (Read it if you please)???
Indeed you may. To wrong an innocence
So sweet as yours were sin inexpiable.
But will you gi't him Faith? I never swore
Nor urged a body to an oath before.
Tic given already Flavia. Hence disguise,
More yet? nay all shall off. Doe you know me yet?
O my Francisco!
Cursed be this??? idle habit
In which my impious curiosity,
To make a trial of her constancy
Hath wounded her so deep with jealousy
Of a mistrust in me, that now she faints
Under the passion; and herhaps may die so,
Flavia! my Love! O???
Slight what mean you si????
By all the bliss that a true Lover wishes???
Will you hold your peace?
By all the oaths and practises of Lovers???
Will you undo all now?
I was not jealous of thy constancy,
Flavia! my Love, my Life! my Flavia???
Will you lose all you came for with your clamour?
Help me; for Love's sake help to make her speak,
Or but look up???
Would you could old your peace;
Whilst I look down to scope discovery,
She'll come to her self again, and you too; fear not
Tic but a qualm of kindness, this.
Francisco???
She comes already.
Speak my Flavia.
Pray doe you peace. Handle her handsomely,
And then all shall be well I warrant you,
You doe not know the danger, noise and nakedness
May pull upon you, should the Rogue
Dwarf overhear you, we were all blown up,
Which to prevent, all hushed while I go down.
Be cheard my Love, I came to rescue thee;
And hired this habit and the Peddlers craft;
Prayed for her absence, and her silence too,
And cause a Gondalo wait at the back door
In case I might surprise thee??? Pray take comfort.
You need not bid, nor wish it in these arms,
Who ever praye's for those in Paradise?
Ay me! How soon my fears control my bliss?
I have blasphemed in my security,
And terror threats my downfall into torment.
Out, out alas my Master in all hast???
What shall we doe?
It is too late to ask,
Or now to d'on your Peddlers weeds again:
Gather 'em up and fly into your closet,
Dress him up there??? Stay not to look about ye.
I'll doe my best to keep him back a little.
None else to speak with me?
None but the merchantesse to fit my Mistress,
Signior Fabritio sent.
I thank his care.
I see that all goes well. No cross but one,
That I forgot a writing, which in ????????????
I am constrained to fetch. Now whore's my ?????????l????
Above sir, busy with the daintiest things,
That ever allured a virgin into wedlock???
Out with your purse sir, for you cannot see 'hem,
But they will ravish you to large expense:
Besides sir, twill be fit you give her something,
Coming so jump as it were into the Market.
I will not see 'em. Put the woman by
Into the Gallery, or somewhere remote,
Quick, quick, dispatch.
You shall not need to urge it.
No, no: my cost is amply shown already:
And will be more, before the Wedding's over.
Without a needless wast in Gawds and Trifles,
See who's at door.
A fathers care consists not in expense
That is not qualified with providence.
Signior Pantaloon, sir sends after you
He and your advocates expect you in hast
To bring away the Writing.
Say I am coming.
What have you done with him?
Our hast and fears could not find time to dress him
But I have locked him up into that press.
Your Father's coming up to seek a writing,
Pray Love it be not there.
I am undone then.
Well hold your peace, look bold and cheerfully,
And be you silent, youth: nor cough, nor stink;
Nor let your fear run forth in streams of urine
To make him think his Aqua vitae spilt.
Where are you Flavia?
O me he comes!
Why speak you not?
Flavia.
You were best betray all with your silliness.
Why Flavia I say?
Here father, here sir,
You will not I shall answer for you when hoe's here?
Come, look as nothing were, all will be nought else.
Bear up hee comes.
Tic here that I would have thee Flavia.
Give me the Key of this press here.
O Father, Father???
What's the matter? ha!
Alas poor heart! you know sir, in her infancy,
You beat her once for losing of a Key:
For which she trembles still, being asked in hast.
Are you a child still in your fears, and must
Bowed to morrow? Fie, fie upon you,
She thinks she has lost it, but I saw her look it
Together with a writing which you dropped
Out of this press this morning, safe enough
Here in her Cabinet.
Tic like I let it fall.
Where is your Key of this? Give mee't, give mee't.
How hast and fear perplexes her! I could
Have picked it open.
Doe, or break it open.
Ay me the fruits of rashness? See, tic fallen
With all her Jewels and your writing too
Into the street. O my unlucky hand!
Peace giddy headed harlot, watch that none Take it away, while I run to recover't, Nanulo, Nanulo.
Will you be nimble yet to find a way
By the backdoor into the Gondalo.
While I lock him and's man into the street?
I know their hast will leave the Keys i'th'dore.
Quickly unpresse him; and take as much gold
As you can carry, i'll along w'ye too.
Stay not to think, or thank me for my wit.
What shall we say?
Do as you are bidden, and say nothing.
Lovers shall saint thee; and this day shall be
For ever callenderd to Love and thee.
Nanulo! The Key to let me forth.
St. Mark and fortune make it a good prize.
Hands off Sir, that's not yours.
Nor yours I am sure.
Half part then brother Zaffi.
The Key I saw.
Sir you are none of the Zaffi.
Villain slave! come open the door.
How came you by this habit?
Perhaps to try sit how it will become me
When I have a mind to be as very a Knave
?????????ffice as your self, But shall we sl???p
?????????, and share, before the dog that owes it
?????????e the bone from us both?
I fear you can be quicker in my absence.
The fault was in your hast sir.
Took you not up a Cabinet, friends?
Zaff N???t we sir, we saw none.
O you watch well above there.
This fellow has it under his coat sir.
But who shall know it for yours sir?
May we be bold to ask what marks it has,
Or what's within it?
I'll have you ear-mark'd Villains for your theft,
Know you not me?
I cry your worship mercy, and am glad
I was your instrument to preserve this treasure
From this false counterfeit.
Fortune has sent my master to relieve me.
Signior Guadagni our Council have thought fit,
For better confirmation of our act,
That it be past here in your Daughters presence
Together with my Son, whom I have sent for,
Why doe you seem thus moved?
An accident hath crossed me. Look you sir,
You have authority; Here's a Counterfeit
(Deserves examination) would have robed me.
I saved you sir from being robed. Hear me aside
Sir???Nicolo whispers Pant.
Carry this in; and send away the woman
Now do you know me I have done the feat.
Hast treated with the Hangman Nicolo?
The Carnifex is fitted for your service,
In a most gorgeous hob???t of a Dutchman,
And about five in the evening will be with her.
Astute! Madonna Flavia! Astute!
What's the matter there?
The best jest, ha, ha, ha.
You'll open the door?
What's that?
It will be mirth to morrow at our feast
To laugh our bellies full.
I am sure you hear me
Fool me, but not my master: he is here.
Why stay you there sirrah?
I let him go???: a merry harmless fellow
I'll answer for him. Hence, away, and shit you.
And quickly send my Son.
The door is fast sir, and they will not hear me.
I fear I am undone. Flavia, Astute, ko???!
T???s so, tic so, some Robbers are slipped in,
And now make havoc??? of my goods and Daughter.
It is no dallying Run and fetch a Smith
To force the Lock.
Astute, Flavia! O this cursed chance
I fear will ruin me and all my hopes.
How came you hither?
Sir by good appointment
To bring Bride-laces, Gloves, and curious Dressings
To deck your Daughter on her Brideale-day,
To morrow as I wean, holds it I pray?
Were you not here before, and in the house?
If you could put it off sir one day longer
I could so fit her with new fashiond tires
That she should thank me.
I fear a new, and further secret mischief.
Hence let me fall to earth; I may not see
My Masters fury rise out of his ruin.
How gotst thou thither?
By the backdoor which I found widely open.
O sir your Daughter???
Ravished or murderd is she?
Worse, worse, by far sir, she is conveyed hence
The Neighbours from the windows o'er the way
Saw her, the Maid, and a young Man take boat.
They guess it was Francisco.
How, how, how!
Laden with Caskets sir. Here's his Deceptio visus,
The ????????????ed cl???ak, that charmed my honest care; N????????? show???
And here's his juggling By???. What toys are these!
O me accursed wretch.
O sir, your Son!
Where is he? speak.
Sir, no where to be found
In private let me tell you, he slipped forth
At four in the Morning; sir, when you and I
Were you know where. He cast forth doubtful words
Of a vagary he would fetch at Rome.
We both are wrought upon by hellish Magic.
Devils are in this plot.
Think you of Devils?
Though you sirs, being Lawyers, think there's none
We may both think there are, and fear 'em.
Forbear such talk; and think upon the ??????earth,
The jest you have in hand against to morrow.
Sir, use your jerks and quillets at the bar.
Cast there your petulant wit on misery.
Sir, you mistake, my counsel is to comfort,
Be not dejected, but seek speedy way
To circumvent the wit has wrought upon you.
Good sir, your best advise.
First charge this officer
Here, with this woman; who by'examination
May make discovery???
I can discover nothing but my ware sir,
Nor part with that for less then ready money.
Take her to custody.
Mistress come with me.
Whither? for what?
You shall know that hereafter.
What can I discover?
Away with her.
What can I discover?
Into your house sir now, and secure that;
Come, recollect your selfes, call home the strength
Of your approved judgements, we'll assist you.
You must be sudden too in this your pursuit;
Advise and do at once, use no delay;
The speediest course is now the safest way.
FOund you the Fort, then, so impregnable?
Against all force of arms, or brains.
No way but by the down-right composition
Of the two thousand Duccats to be entered.
Sure tic some noble wench then you imagine,
But my disguise shall put her to the test.
I'm sure she jeerd me out of my Monsieurship.
Did she, and all thy fine french qualities?
And is as like to make a skitter brooke
Of you in your Dutch slops. For if she be not,
After all this, a cunning whore, i'm cozened.
She lives at a good rate how ere maintained.
The secret way, man, by her comings in
Too common among women for their livings,
I'll not believe her wit and feature are
Allied to honesty.
Thou art no worshipper of fair women Peso.
No, If I worship any of 'hem more
Then in the Knee-trick, that is necessary
In their true use let me be ???unuchiz'd.
Look here's your fathers Pimp again.
Now Nicolo?
S???w you my young Master Gentlemen?
Yes there he stands, transl???ted out of sober
Italian into high Dutch.
I swear he was past my reading,
Slight, he appears as like the noted Almaine
Late come to town, if he had but his beard???
How like you this for a beard?
Most excellent!
But pray take heed your stay spoil not the purpose
Of your disguise.
Why what news Nicolo?
Your Father is in busy quest of you.
Then he dos miss me?
Pray Phoebus he miss as much of Madness,
He and his virtuous brother old Guadagni,
Who misses too his Daughter. Francisco has her.
Has he got her off?
And she has got him on by this time: they
Are silly fools else.
Hymen be their speed.
But how I pray thee escaped they?
First, sir, know
There's a strange fellow without desires to speak w'yee
I guess hee is some Bravo.
A Bravo speak with me?
Yes, and inquires here for my Master too,
And Signior Peso, you are all known it seems.
Come leave your fooling.
By mine Ears tic true.
Go call him in, I fear no Knavery.
Your lodging protects me.
My disguise me.
This is the Gentleman.
Tic the proud Bra??????es whisk!
I cry you mercy si???, are you Signior Horatio?
I took you sir this morning for a Monsieur.
I thank you for my Duccatoun.
What! Is she come about? Has she sent for me?
Good sir! are you here too? I thank you sir,
You paid me your entrance, but no pa??????ing foe???.
Prithee deserve no be??????ing ???ill thou hast done
Thy errand. What dost come for?
Sir, to entreat this Gentleman to bring
With him one Signior ???is???, and F???britio???
Beyond my hopes! Good ???ir, are you here too?
This is a Devil! could he know me else
That ne'er saw him before; in this disguise?
Cry mercy ???ir: you would not these should know
Nor shall they (I fear it not) but h??????k you sir.
What Familiar these ???old??? are. They'll talk yet
Thus to Lords in private.
Sure he takes him for the Dutch loggerhead
We saw to day in the Piazz???.
So would any man: Hee has hit his shape so right.
I am sure I rejoice in these Dollors, that you
Give me to day, and are as ???????????????in, that
My Mistress wished a better dinner for you
For frighting of the Spaniard with your fireworks.
But, by your strangers it seems you repent
The Marriage offer that you made my Mistress.
Fortune direct you to no worse a wife,
And so I leave you to your choice.
I have found the error, and will make good use ??????'t.
Your business then is to that strangers sir???
Only your self, and briefly from Francisco.
Francisco! where?
Where but at our house sir? he and his Bride
Craving your company and those Gentlemen
I named unto you.
For no disparagement unto their words, sir,
But private reasons yet unknown to me
Wherein you shall be satisfied at your coming,
But are they Married?
I brought the Priest to 'em:
And saw them lawfully coupled, and before
Sufficient witnesses, that saw 'em chamberd,
She was his own Church-sure before I left '???m,
And he has made her Cock-sure, sir by this time,
Or else he is a Bungler.
Go i'll follow thee.
Peso is here.
But where is that Fabritio?
We'll find him too. J???g you sir on before:
You are no street companion for us.
I am gone sir???
You have heard all Fabritio; what d?????? think on it?
Nothing; nor nothing will till I arrive
There at the full knowledge of all together.
But prithe??? hang thy Ha???gman??? project now,
And bear us company in thine own shape.
Not for the price of the Novella Peso.
I'll try her to the quick. You'll give me leave
To make prize of her if I can, I crossed not you.
We wish you safe aboard sir.
On before then.
Now Nicolo; your disguise again oath Zaffi.
O, it is ready; and I know my quue.
Who see me, in this strain, seem to outstrip
The bounds of filial duty, let (withal)
Their observation, by my just ends, gather,
Tic not to lose, but to recall a father.
NOw Lady, has your entertainment pleased you
In the Novella's house? is all well yet?
So well, that now come Father Friends, and all
The friendly Foes that did oppose my bliss
I can maintain my cause in these safe arms
Against all their Frowns and Furies.
And your Mistress is over, too??? I hope sir
The place is not so dangerous as it was.
Lady your nobleness shown in this great bounty,
Hath not alone wiped off my foul suspicion:
But scored upon my breast an endless sum
Of thanks; which I, unable to discharge,
Must not presume to live, but as your Creature;
Nor will I further dare to tempt your goodness
In deeper search of what your reason was
(Past all my hopes and wishes) to provide
For me; I will not sum in such a scruple???
For sure, I hold you for a power Divine
(Past all the fictions of the fabulous times
Fashioning out the Gods in earthly forms)
Sent by the highest providence to help me.
You take too deep a sense of courtesy!
But see, are these your friends?
And let me beg
Your suffrage Lady, I may bid them welcome.
Your Bride and I will both supply you in it.
Neither of these is he they call Fabritio?
No, but hoe's sent for; and comes instantly.
This is the Lady I am bound to serve.
And I to honour.
Setting aside your suit sir.
I cannot promise that.
And I doe wish
I had her double price in ready Duccats,
For what she has done, and tother doe besides.
You still stand in your good conceit of me.
Yes, and I would so stand to???, ha???
You are a merry Gentleman.
I will not whisper it, Horatio,
The woman that I dealt with for disguise
Was wrought before by this most matchless Lady
To cross the Match twixt Flavia and Fabritio;
And had undone it though I had done nothing,
And ere she would condition with me,
Obliged me, by an oath, (in case we escaped)
To bring her hither to this Ladies house.
I kept that oath, and here you find us welcomed.
Then thou hast done it, would I had still the Duccats
To pledge thee here.
We'll talk of that hereafter.
What acted you, Tit, in this Comedy?
The Chambermaid, a kind of putter forwards,
Sir, to the business.
She has done so well,
That, if a Match in Venice may be found
By my best care, i'll help her to a Husband,
For she deserves a good one.
And if he prove not so, I am like to prove
A good one my self, and make him something.
Thou wilt, I find it in a villainous cast
Of that eye there.
And what think you of this?
Even such another, of another hue,
She has a devilish gloat too.
Gallants, I find you merry, you're more welcome:
My man acquaints me with a present business
Requiring privacy. Please you, with your friends
Go up to the Bride-chamber. There is music.
Waite you respectively.
We'll all observe you Lady.
But Lady, if you receive the Duccats
Before you come to us, pray bring our shares,
Wee all connive you know.
Pray be not jealous,
Follow your Friends, i'll follow you straight way.
How dreams he of this money? he knows nothing,
An English Factor, say you Borgio?
Yes Mistress, a brave fellow.
And is he so well moneyed as to spare
Out of his Masters trust, so great a sum?
Oh hoe's a master here himself. They are
Abroad, the royalist Nation of the World.
What rich Venetian Rarity has not
The English Money-masters purchased from
Princes and States, to bear home as their triumphs?
And for their pleasures???but i'll say no more;
Hee thinks I stay too long for him to wait
Without, with so much money.
Did thou see'????
Most brightly shining! Hoe's now telling it
In the next room! He comes not to tender
The value of it in fine qualities
Like your supposed Monsieur: but in cash!
Cash! cash of Gold! Oh tic a tempting sight;
Able to damn a Noble women's honour.
What's your descent? But poor I make no question;
Why, this will set you up and make you noble.
This way of his might serve to turn the blood
That has but any tincture of good in it
From touching such a bait, yet he thinks now
He spurs me to it. But Bravo I will fit you.
Go call him in, go.
Now my Blood and Brain,
Be strong and sudden, stay.
Why stop you Borgio?
To see him weigh his gold. Oh dainty sight!
He brought his weights in's pocket: just Gentleman
He will be sure you shall not want a grain
Of your full price of sweet damnation.
Hoe's doing no such thing.
No, no, I have it now.
I pray thee go, thou know not how the thought
Of so much gold, and the conceit of the Maidenhead
Lost in the house to day sets my virginity
On edge now to be going.
Are you so ready? then I fly.
What ails the fellow trow!
I must yet have an eye upon this female
To quit my jealousy, or catch her in the nick.
Here we may see, and hear all undiscovered.
Watch close, he comes.
By your leave Lady, I come not a pure Suitor
(With studied Oratory; nor address a Sonnet,
Or trifling Love-toyes to persuade admittance
By slow degrees into your inmost favour)
But a rich purchaser, that brings, at once,
The golden Sum, and Price of your enjoying.
Here precious Beauty, made by this more precious!
Take your full due, and render readily
The full tuition of my wealthy purchase.
Now virtue guard me.
VVhat's that?
She invokes virtue.
Ha! why this delay?
Let not the glorious sight of this amaze you,
Though it be granted, sudden apprehension
Of such bright blessings may transport a soul
Into high raptures, when it is considerd,
The Ornament of youth, the strength of age,
Lifes great maintainer, Lady, let not this
At all transmute you. For i'll bring supplies
That shall so frequently acquaint you with
Such sights as these, that you shall grow regardless
Even of the care to keep them, in respect
Of the delicious pleasure brings them in:
Delay not therefore that high purchased pleasure,
That brings this to you, by a Minutes loss
To make it fully yours.
Sir I have heard you:
And now must let you know, tic not the sight
Of that your glorious sum can take my wonder;
Much less my love or person: my amazement
Is, that a man, that bears his Makers shape,
Endued with reason, to direct and govern
That goodly fortune; and has such treasure given him
(Besides his greater blessings of the mind
By well disposing of it) to advance
This worth in deeds of virtue, should descend
Below the sense of Beasts, to part with that,
Allotted for his livelihood and honour
To wast it, and himself in bestial Lust.
How's this?
I know not what to make o'this wench.
She preaches me thinks:
Besides sir, were it well examined,
The golden sum you tender is, perhaps,
None of your proper own: I understand
You are another Factor, I presume
In all your Catalogue of Merchandise
You find no warrant to buy Maidenheads.
Is such a thing in all your bills of Lading?
They are no way transportable??? though you allow
For fraught and leakage half the worth; and less
Returnable by way of exchange. How can
You take up a virginity in Venice,
And make a London payment of it, on
Sight of your bill, or six or ten days after?
Good!
Nay then you dally with me, and I must
Deal plain and briefly with you. Here's the price,
And either render me my just demand,
Or I shall take for your disgrace an order
Shall spue you forth the City.
Now I fear
I am ensnared. I have but one way left
To fly from shame, or fall to utter Ruin.
I begin to suspect her honest.
Your answer Gentlewoman.
Gentle sir,
The Law hath made me yours. And I have now
No Court but Conscience to relieve me in.
What may this mean?
If the strong passion of a Virgin soul,
Expressed in bitterst tears, move not your pity,
This shall prevent your cruelty.
She'll prove honest of my life.
What mean you Lady?
Keep at that distance sir, and you shall know:
Come nearer, and I will not live to tell you.
Pray rise and speak your story: yet I tell you,
I hold it very strange, that so much money
And such a one as I (none of th'unhandsomst)
Should not go down with a young wench, and one
Of the profession you pretend to be of
Before cold Iron! Me thinks most unnatural.
Think better yet before you utter further.
Indeed I may not.
Well, well, on then.
Tic true, I am indeed a mere pretender
To the profession you supposed me of;
A spotless Virgin (by my utmost hopes)
And will remain so till I am a Bride.
Too honest to be a woman!
Why took you this deceiving habit then?
I am about to tell you for your pity,
I am a Roman borne, of good descent;
My father noble (of the Candiani)
How ere decayed in fortune, ere he dyed;
Which drew on my Misfortune: For, being betrothed
Unto a wealthy heir, here, of this City,
Who so journ'd then in Rome, his covetous Father
Rav???shd his faith from me, to give it another;
And called him hastily from Rome to Venice.
I followed him, in hope to cross the Match.
And so regain him; towards which already,
I have done something.
Fabritio's wench my life on it.
What in this habit, as a Courtesan?
Not without good advise: For, by this means
I draw the eyes of all the youthful Gentry,
Not without hope to gain a sight of him.
My price and port keep back inferior persons.
Nor lose I honour by it: For the strictness
Of our Italian censure gives a virgin,
That held familiarity with any Man,
By way of Marriage treaty, and then forsaken,
Lost in repute; she is no honest woman
Until that man doe vindicate her honour.
But should hee find you here, what were his censure?
Here he should find what his disloyalty
Had wrought me to; and should restore me firm
On my first basis, or exchange a life
For mine ere we would part.
This sounds yet well.
I'll trust thee now. Thou art a noble wench,
Thou had kissed Death by this else. Now i'll trust thee.
If he were lost by Marriage of another,
I would remove with such a testimony
Of my reserved honour (in despite
Of this my outward carriage, for my ends;
Maugre the sterne construction of my country)
That strangers should receive me; and some one
More noble then himself???
Take you to wife?
I should not doubt.
Tic done, and I am he that does it.
I cannot sir, but kindly take your offer:
But, if my first love fail me, there is one,
A noble German, that commenced his suit
To me this day.
I am he too Lady???Look well upon me
That in this shift, reducing of my beard,
With this supply of money came to try you,
I find you noble, and above it, honest.
This is the German that Fabritio apes.
And he should come now.
Gentlemen forbear;
Indeed it is not civil in you to pry beyond
Your hospitable usage, pray forbear.
Tic timely chidden wench, we will obey thee.
Besides the Bridegroom, and the Bride ex???pect you.
O ha they done we come, we come.
This jealous trial now of yours (how ere
You have expressed strong arguments of love)
Has not augmented you in my affection.
O say not so sweet Lady, i'll redeem it.
I cannot yet believe you are the Man,
You are so changed from what you seemed to day,
Must the mind alter with the outward habit?
Mistress the German???
Here he is man, he says.
I say he is without, and craves to see you.
How can this be? or who can I believe?
Good sir depart and make room for your self
Your proper self to enter the Dutch Prince.
I tell thee I am he, and here already,
I am Swatzenberg.
Yes in your tother beard sir.
Hans Snortanfart, are you not? well I can but warn you,
If you will needs stand to the taking off
A mans good name from him before his face,
Then take what follows, I will fetch him in
Mistress, you were best be out of sight a while:
Your presence with this stranger may whet up his fury
To cut all our throats else.
I'll take your council.
For sir i'll tell you, if you had but seen
How he worried a Spaniard to day, you would
Have been able at your return to make
As many of your Countrymen, as thrive
By serving of the States to laugh in faith.
I tell thee I am he; it was I that chased
The Spaniard hence.
I tell you yet again
You were best be gone before the He indeed
Come in to chase you after him.
I'll stand the hazard.
See his impatience pulls him in already.
Where is this Lady? Dos her beauty fly me?
She is at hand, but first here is a stranger,
A most strange stranger that says he is you sir.
Was oder were bistu? Bistu ein Deutscher? Sag mihr in was ort Du gelebst hast?
Who's this?
Each denke du best ein heuchler; bistu aber ein Deuteronomy???scher so anwort mihr in deutscher sprach.
Good sir speak in the proper language of
The Nation we are in, though it come brokenly
From you that this good fellow here may understand us.
Thou son of impudence, and imposture, speak;
What is thy end in this?
Think what thine own must be, thou son of slander.
Precious counterfeit!
But I am weaponless, and must fetch strength
Of officers to right me.
What dos your shame remove you sir?
What can this Rascal mean?
I care not honest fellow, whore's thy Mistress?
Good Angels guard me.
Dos she fright you sir?
I ask thee for thy Mistress, the Novella.
What appears she to you?
Thou powerful man in Magic, I will tell thee.
Th'hast raised an apparition, that has damned thee
Blacker, then thy black art; nay hell it self.
Bless us! more madness yet!
The heavenly spirit, that inspired this form,
(When the unworthy world enjoyd her being,
Which thou hast conjured into this lewd habit)
Has, at this instant won the powers above
To sink thee and thy for???errors.
What may you mean? Here is no forcery,
This woman's Flesh and Blood.
I would not dare to try to be the Duke.
You may depart, pray hinder not the house.
Had thou but seen, as I have, one like her,
And noted the divinity in her looks
(Although in those adulterate incitements
She seems to wear) she would have struck thy soul
With fervent adoration, not base lust.
I know not what to say to 'him.
See who rings.
What divine creature, sir, was that you mentioned?
I dare to name her to thee, though thou be
Her incensed Ghost, to work me to despair,
It was Victoria.
This sounds most strangely! Have you been at Rome sir?
It was there I saw and loved her.
Answer me pray sir, why could not this fall
In your discourse to day, when I rel???ted
My Life and Fortune to you? why do you start?
I am no shadow; but suspect you rather,
To be not as you seem, the noble German
That vowed me love, dos that too startle you?
See sir, to prove I am no aerie spirit,
I'll trust your hand (if you be mortal substance)
With so much flesh and blood as may resolve you.
I find tic she, and having found her thus
Shoe's lost for ever, and my self no l???sse,
That was the cause of this her desperate fortune.
VVhat's that you say? what ail you sir? how first?
And what moves thy distraction? Borgio, speak.
Horror and shame invades us, all the house
Is round beset with officers. The Magistrates,
Are entering now, for what, or whom they search
I cannot guess, unless this be some Murderer
Slipped in, to draw our lives in question.
Deal plainly sir, what are you? hoe's stupefied!
The Spanyard's with 'hem too that took th'affront
By the supposed Dutchman here to day;
And he that feigned himself to be that Dutchman
Desires their aid against this unknown person.
This is the house you say.
And this is the Gentlewoman.
Give me my Daughter, Harlot.
Here's no such creature, here sir, if she be
Your Daughter, this woman directed hither,
She is no Harlot, but an honest Bride;
Lawfully wed and bedded; as may appear
By the strong testimony of divers friends:
Call them all down.
Unheard-of impudence! Are Bawds, and VVhores
Fit Matchmakers for Magnificoe's Daughters?
Speak lower, or at home sir, you know not
What we are: Hark you sir???your last nights trial
Did not enough inform you.
We shall know more anon;
In the mean time what are you?
A stranger sir.
We shall know more of that anon too.
This is the stranger, that affronted me;
Against whom I crave your Justice.
You shall know more anon too.
And this is my Abuser.
You also shall know more anon.
You are well met Gentle-woman???I gave you lost.
What will you whimper now? will not marriage
Make you bold, that makes so many impudent?
She was not lost sir; nor in danger of losing,
She was but mislaid a little, as your Writing was to day.
Well said my chattering Magpie. I will side thee.
Audacious strumpet that seduces my Daughter.
You are Mistaken, she did but wait upon her.
Right sir, and did but duty i'll be sworn.
Nor I, I will be sworn.
Not, in consenting to the stealth?
It was my duty sir for the reward,
VVee all would live you know.
Will you be gone?
I hope I am discharged: for look you sir,
I brought you where you find your Daughter safe.
Begone I say.
No whit the worse for wearing, as they say.
Go thrust her out of doors.
At my own liberty I hope.
How thou wilt to be rid of thee.
May you see your Childrens, Childrens, Childrens, Children.
And thou misledst my Son, I ask him of thee.
You shall know more of that anon sir.
Out-brav'd and scorned by Strumpets, Bawds, and Bravos!
Call in the Officers.
And call the common Hangman if you please,
And end all among your selfes, if your grave wisdoms,
And Lawyers, here, can find one guilty person
VVee'l all submit our necks to you.
Tic boldly spoken.
I will speak but truth.
And you, opposing it, shall wrong the dignity
You bear in the City, to your utter shames.
This Gentleman and your Daughter were contracted,
Your self a willing witness; your Son likewise
Unto a noble virgin (Sir of whom
You shall know more anon)
It pleased diviner providence to take
From eiders chosen mate their earthly fortunes;
Yet each had person, blood, and virtue left
Above the value of a Princes dowry.
Would you so Kick at heaven then, in despite
Of its great Ordinance, as to force your children,
To forfeit both their faiths, thereby to lose
The never-fayling hope of future blessings,
To pull withal a curse on your own heads,
That could no less then ruin your estates,
And render you most wretched in your dotage,
Past help or hope how to relieve your selfes:
Your consciences still groaning underneath
The lashes that your Childrens bastard issue
Should lay upon you? more, you may consider???
We doe consider sir, this place and people
No fit receipt for warrantable business.
This was no bawdy talk sir, nor have I
Heard worse from any mouth in this free place
Till your arrival here.
I cannot be so happy.
Let her see your face.
O my Fabritio???
You see the worst of us, I should be loath
Any unwarrantable act should pass among us.
Thou look like one indeed of upright Con???science!
And for the Marriage sir, it is as lawful
As if your self had given her in St. Marks.
I'll fetch the Priest t'avouch it.
Fetch that Priest.
But i'll be so revenged
Upon this instrument, this unknown Trull here???
Our Ears and Eyes, Fabritio, witness for her.
You have told me wonders,
Yet with such faith as I shall ever wish
Locked in this heavenly Cabinet I take all.
You may Fabritio, for as I prize Life;
Honour 'bove that; and above both thy friendship,
My soul is not assured of firmer truth,
Let thy Dutch habit drink off jealousy,
And take her to thee.
It is done my Peso.
And I made happy past my height of hopes.
Good, you shall see how I shall cool those Kisses.
May I say boldly you are man and wife?
We are most faithfully till death;
I'll fetch a Priest shall straight pronounce ye??? so.
You say that is a Dutchman sir, that wronged you.
Right, worthy Signior, that's the man I Chal???lenge.
You say you are the man confronted Don here.
Yes, and will still mayntain't, for violence
He offered to that noble virtuous Lady.
Good! virtuous Lady! Let me join your Friendships.
You have done it sir.
That is the man I challenge.
The same man I. He has not left the house
Since my abuse; I fear to her much wrong:
For he is some disguised Knave on my life.
Now you are in the right.
Hee could not wear those Clothes and speak no Dutch else.
Still in the right; i'll show you what he is,
And out of him, what she is, whom you call
So virtuous and so noble! and you sir,
That mentioned the Hangman, come all and see
The commendable port this Lady bears.
It seems, sir, you affect this Gentlewoman.
The best of any living.
And you him Lady?
Yes, he is my husband.
Would that were true in faith. The rogue your man
Said he would fetch a Priest???
No verier Rogue then my self sir.
Thou art a mad fellow for a Priest indeed;
But such a Priest, such a Marriage,
Put 'em together.
I doe pronounce them lawful man and wife.
The Bridegroom thanks you, but you Mistress Bride
For the fine trick you put on me last night,
Look now upon your husband,
Who would you speak with fellow?
With Signior Rastrofico here, the Hangman,
I come to call him to State-businesse sir.
Can this be he? (you said he was a counterfeit)
I saw him ride the Wooden-horse, last day
With less then half this beard, unbeard him sirrah.
I'll bear you out. So rest you Gentlemen
With your so virtuous Lady, and her husband.
Pi. &amp;c. Fabritio!
Sir I must crave your pardon, This is he,
My first love that I told you of.
You have it freely Lady.
I am abused and couzend.
I thank you sir for all the harm you did me
In your Revenge???And hark you, be at peace,
And i'll be silent for your last nights work.
Forbear me, I am off again.
Good sir,
Stop not the blessing you were about to give us.
I am off again. The pander was the Priest,
The Match is no Match, you no more my Children,
But Knave and strumpet.
I'll not be so couzend.
This is no Priest; and all that's past unlawful
You will know more anon.
Then cast your eyes on me, who dare maintain
My Priest-hood lawful; it being derived
From th'holy Order of St. Augustine?
Let me not surfeit with excess of joy?
My brother Paulo!
Thy brother and thy father, virtuous sister.
Be ever subject of my dearest care;
And pardon me, who (jealous of thine honour
Inflamed by the same heart, of the same blood:
For we are all the Realists of our Parents)
Watched nearly, and pursued thy scope from Rome.
For which I had good warrant, Gentlemen
See there my dispensation with the allowance
Of all the holy brotherhood of my Covent.
My ends were fair, though in this uncouth way
Though (heaven I beg thy pardon) as my care
Was to preserve her life and more her honour;
Fearing her violent and abused spirit,
Might have made wrack of either, or of both,
I once had secret purpose to have taken
Her Life, in case she had forsook her honour;
And with her cut off Candianies Line,
Which now branched here, may touch the worlds end
With fair succession! Be you blessed for ever.
And now, grave sirs, let me entreat your likings,
And cheerful reconcilement to your Children:
That so you may your Childrens, Children see,
Crowned by the prayers of your prosperity.
I am content.
And I, but for one scruple
Clear me this point, how had you saved your honour
If the old youth, last night (who shall be nameless)
Had but mis??? spent his time upon your moore here?
It is easily done sir, see my loved Fabritio
The Eunuch moore you gave me.
My boy Jacomo, turned Chambermaid!
Has thy Mistress used thee well?
Not without much desert.
She means for your dear sake sir.
I see, sweet Heart, you have an honest Fa???mily.
Here you see all, and all that came in the house;
(Since it was made mine) in this Convention,
I dare them not; but give them freest leave
To speak the worst they found in the Novella.
Wee all conclude you're noble.
Ell's well accorded then. Wee all are Friends,
And may Priests travail never to worse ends.
CAuse it is the Custom, By the Poet, Sirs,
I'm sent to crave a Plaudit, and the Spurs
That prick him on to it, is, his promised Pay
May chance to fail, if you dislike the Play,
But don't if you be wise; for hee has vowed
To write far worse if this be not allowed.

YOU have your Money; full a thou∣sand pound,
Sir Humfrey Dryground.
And you have my Mortgage.
All well and good; all well and good. But, now,
Sir Humfrey Dryground, let me counsel you.
You have already spent a fair Estate;
A goodly, great estate: I do not taunt,
Nor tax you for it.
Because its pumped into
The purses of such wretches as thy self.
But give me leave, now, fairly to admonish
You, to a care, how you do part with this.
You spirited men call Money Dirt and Mud.
I say it is the Eel.
And you the Mud
That foster it.
It is an Eel, I say,
In such sleek hands, as yours; from whence it glides—
Into the Mud, oft-times, from whence it came.
I know you doe conceive me. Therefore, Sir,
(As I before was saying) Hold it fast.
According to the Ballad.
Youth keep thy Money fast,
And tie it in thy Purse:
For that must be thine only Friend,
For better and for worse.
So so, I see it going already.
I, to thy comfort. This is the Usurers Scripture;
And all that they pretend Salvation by:
To give good admonition with their Money;
Though, in their hearts they wish the quick subversion
Of all they deal with. This is all they plead
Against the curses of oppressed souls:
Did not I warn you? Did not I say, take heed?
And so, and so forth. I must thank you Sir.
You say, you'll make a venture of this Money.
Yes Mr. Vermin, in a Project, that—
Out upon Projects. Fie fie, out out out.
I'm confident shall set me out of debt,
With you and all the World; and reap, again,
All, that I formerly have sown, with profit.
Sown! There's a word! Prodigal wast is sowing.
We shall call Shipwreck, shortly, sowing too.
Hark you Sir Humfrey Dryground, may not I
Be privy to your Project? Will you tell me,
If I guess on it?
That I will in sooth.
Is 't not to dreine the Goodwins? To be Lord
Of all the Treasure, buried in the Sands there?
And have a Million yearly, from the Merchants
To clear the passage.
You have had your blow.
No Sir, my Project is in the behalf
Of the poor Gentleman, you overthrew.
By the strong hand of Law, Bribes, and oppression;
Brookall: Do you know him Sir? whose state you sucked
That wrought him to a poverty that cries
Your sinful Covetise up to the height;
And renders you the Monster of our time,
For avarice and cruelty.
No more of that.
You should do well to add a sum, like this
To his relief: To wave the bitter curse
That will in time fall on you and your house.
O ho! I now remember, you have reason.
That Brookall had a Sister, whom you vitiated
In your wild heat of blood, and then denied
Her promised Marriage; turned her off with Child
A dozen years since, and since that, never heard of▪
Ha! Is it not so? Pray, did you know her Sir?
I wish I could redeem that ruthful fault,
By all expiatory means: But thy
Inhumane cruelty is inexpiable:
Unless (it comes from Heaven into my heart
To move thee to it) thou take a speedy course
To give him threefold restitution.
Isle put thee in the way. He has a Son,
A hopeful Youth, a Student in the Law,
If his poor Fathers want of means have not
Declined his course: Give him thy only Daughter,
And make his Fathers own Inheritance
(By thee unrighteously usurped) her Dowry;
And pray a blessing may go with it: And then
Thou may regain a Christian reputation,
Till age shall lead thee to a quiet Grave.
Come, is 't a match? Will you bestow your Daughter
On Brookalls Son, and make your way to Heaven by it?
You have your Money.
And thou hast Adders ears
To all such Counsels.
If you break your day
I shall think of your counsel.
Farewell Vermin.
And farewell Dryground.
This parcel of thy Land, Isle keep from wetting:
Tic not in thee to turn an Acre of it
Into pure Liquor, for a twelve months day.
And break that day thy payment, and the Sun
Sets not more sure, then all this Land is mine.
My Daughter! ha! Can't be in thought of man
To dream of such a Match? A wretch, a Beggar?
Within there! Where▪s my Girl? What Ally? Ally?
Here Sir—
My blessing, and good morn: Now hear me Girl.
Now for a Speech—
The care of Children's such a startle-braine,
That had I more then one, I should run Wild-cat,
(Then one I mean, to care for) that's thy self,
My sober discreet Daughter. Note my care,
Piled up for thee in massy sums of wealth;
Too weighty for thy weak consideration
To guess from whence it came, or how together
So laid in mountainous heaps.
It is indeed
As strange to me, as are the stony wonders
On Salsbury Plain to others. But my duty
Persuades me it was your thrift, and that great blessing
That gives increase to honest Industry,
Drawn on it by your prayers and upright life,
That wrought these heaps together.
O, Ally Ally,
Tic well if thine with all thy Housewifery
Can keep 'em so. I thank thee for thy judgement
And charitable thoughts. But—
You had other ways.
I say, thou art the only Child I care for.
Thy Brother (though I loath to call him so)
Is, now, an utter stranger to my blood;
Not to be named but with my curse, a Wolf
That tears my very bowels out.
Your Money.
A riotous Reprobate, that hath consumed
His last, already, of my means and blessing.
But he yet may be turned Sir.
Out of the Counter!
May he be so, dost think? Could I but dream
His Creditors, that have him fast, could be
So idly merciful, or that his youthful Ghing
Could stretch, to get him out, Isle lay, my self,
An Action on him weightier, then the strength
Of all their poor abilities could lift:
His Jacks, his Toms, his Nams, Nolls, Gills, and Nuns,
The roaring fry of his Blade-brandishing mates
Should not release his Carcass: If they did,
I'd force him to a trial for his life,
For the two hundred Pieces that he pilfred.
Out of my Counting-house. He shall up.
I will not forfeit my obedience Sir,
To urge against your Justice, only I crave
Your leave to grieve, that I have such a Brother.
Thou shalt defy the name of Brother in him,
My only, only Child; and but in one command
Obey me further, all my estate is thine,
Tic that I called thee for.
I do not crave
More, then your daily blessing; but desire
To know what you'll impose upon my duty.
Thou shalt, and stile thy self a Lady by it.
Now Love defend me from the man I fear.
This day Isle match thee to a matchless Knight.
The Western Kite Sir, that was here last Term?
Even he, this day he comes to Town.
Would I
Were out on it first. A matchless Knight
Indeed, and shall be matchless still for me.
I like those blushes well: I read his welcome
Upon her cheeks.
Sir, I have heard, he has
But little Land.
But he has Money Girl
Enough to buy the best Knights Land, that is
A selling Knight, in the West part of England.
He's well in years.
A lusty Bachelor of two and fifty,
With, O, the husbandry thats in him.
How came he by his Knighthood? Cost it no∣thing?
No: He was one of the Cobbe-Knights in the throng,
When they were dubbed in Clusters.
Sir, the Knight,
That you expect this day, is come to Town.
His man has brought's Portmanteau.
Fetch the Man.
The welcomst man alive is come to Town.
Ally, my Girl, my Daughter, Lady Bride!
What title shall I give thee? Now bestir you,
I know his thrift, he has rid hard to day
To save his Dinner
Welcome honest friend.
And how does the right worshipful Sir Amphilus?
My Master is in health Sir, praised be Go—
A little weary, or so, as I am of my carriage,
Which I must not lay down, but in the hands
Of your own Worship.
Tic of weight and locked: I guess the worth,
And warrant him the safety under these Keys.
But whore's thy Master?
At his Inn in Holborn
Telling a little with the Host, till I
Bring word from you.
No, I will run to him
My self: you shall stay here▪ his Chamber
Fitted against he comes, Ally, bestir you,
And think no pains your trouble on this day,
To morrows Sun shall light your Wedding way.
Unless some unexpected Fate relieve me,
I shall be hurried to my endless ruin.
You are sad, me thinks, young Mistress, I can tell you,
My Master, when he comes, will make you merry.
How? As he is a Fool?
No: But as he has
The soul of mirth and Music at command;
Money, the all-rejoycing spirit; that
He will make you merry with: Nor that alone,
But Dignity, which Women prise 'bove money,
You are a Lady by it: Mark that. And if
He has a weakness, which you reckon folly;
It lays you open way to Sovereignty;
The thing which is of most esteem. You'll be
His Lady Regent; rule all his, and him.
This Fellow talks not like a Serving-man:
A forty shilling wages Creature, but
Some disguised spokes-man. What may be the trick o'nt?
You cannot, in the estate you are, imagine
What tic to be a Wife to such a man.
No more then you perceive the pains you loose
In fooling for him thus. But spare your breath,
And take this brief taste of his Entertainment.
First know, that J do know the man you speak of,
To be a covetous Miser; old and foolish.
Not worth in my estimation the worst Meal
That ever he himself paid three pence for.
Who do you mean? Sir Amphilus my Knight.
Yes Squire, J know him and his qualities;
The ways he got his Wealth by, casual Matches;
Of forty, fifty, and sometimes a hundred
For one. When bounteous Fortune (seldom failing
Men of his Brain) cast all into his mouth,
The Gudgeon gap▪d for. And how slight a thing
It is, for such base Worldlings to be rich?
That study nothing but to scrape and save.
That have no Faith, but in their ready money,
Nor love to Worldly pleasures above those
Poor Cobblers use.
Cheap Whores, and Duck-hunting:
There▪s his delight indeed.
J hate to think of of such a Dunghill Scarab.
A water-Dog Knight!
But Wedlock, to his age, will bring him home
To choicer pleasures, and abandon such.
His Age is fit for nothing, but to rock
Another Child; and to rejoice through Spectacles,
At the strong Guess he has, it is his own.
You slight him strangely yet: but when you see
Him, and his weighty reasons to confute you.—
J will nor weigh, nor see him, or his reasons.
And if thou ow'st him so much Service, tell him;
Go back and tell him strait: save him the end
Of his intended Journey. For to come
Hither, will be to drive me hence. And tell
My Father, ere he shall enforce me, take him;
Isle fly into the Arms of one he hates.
Are you in earnest?
Yes, by all my hopes.
These are the arms that must receive thee then.
Nay, be not frighted Sister; look, tic J.
Beshrew me but J am. How got you hither?
Could not the Counter hold you?
So it seems,
My Virtue was not to be so obscured.
Noble Sir Humphrey Dryground, Sister, was
My frank Infranchiser. O, J have wonders
To tell thee Sister. Thou must go with me.
But first, lend me some money. Borrow some;
(And let it be a good Sum) of my Father,
Now in his absence. Come, supply, supply
My Pockets and thine own. For we must hence.
You are made for ever, Sister. Quick, dispatch.
What's the meaning of all this?
Twill be too long to tell it here.
The Rascal fool, to whom my Father gives thee,
Is come to Town: And should he now surprise thee,
Here in my Fathers power, thy strength might fail thee.
Be therefore at a sure Guard. O, Sir Humphrey,
How are my Sister and my self bound to thee,
That plottest this escape. Dispatch good Ally,
And hear thee rest by the way.
Why? Wither? What's the matter?
Say thou will have that Coxcomb, Isle but kill thee,
And leave the here: And all my care is over.
Isle sooner dye then have him.
Why do you not shun him then? O, sweet Sir Humphrey,
Is thy care slighted thus, in my delivery?
In my disguise? In sending out my Father
On Tom-fooles Errant? While a Coach is sent
To the back-doore here; All to save my Sister,
My thankless Sister here, from worse then Rape.
Why, whither would you have me?
But hard-by.
But till the Wilde-fire of my Fathers Passion
Shall be run out. Slid, J had even forgot.
Bear money with us, Sister; pretty store.
Who knows occasions? Let him keep in pawn
My rich Portmanteau for it.
There's some good stuff in it.
More then hee▪ll thank me for. We'll talk in the Coach
In, in, and furnish; &amp; so through the Garden,
And, whirre, we are gone. If we should be prevented;
By this good steel, if J but hear one knock,
Jle make sure work o▪thee. J can but truss for▪t.
There's a fair end on's both. And what will he
Do with his money then? Look how thou standst.
If you respect your Father, or the Dog-Master,
To be your Husband, better then me, then take
You your own course: Mine shall be known next Ses∣sions.
Better then you, don't you respect your Father Better then me?
No, if J do, let me be hanged for nothing:
And that would anger any man I think.
'Slid, thou and J had one Mother, (which
We both take after) so had not he and we.
And he takes after no body, that J know.
He loves a stranger better then's own Child:
And that mans money, better then that man,
The Devil 'bove all J think. Thou dost not know
What Coals we stand on.
Who shall look toth'house?
Wilt loose thy self with keeping that? Is that All now? Away, away.
You're a precious Brother.
ALL this needs not Sir Humphrey.
Do but hear patiently, and do your pleasure.
J go not about to stop your course, Mr. Bumpsey.
Nor J yours, Sir Humphrey; Nor your Sons here; Nor his Wives there: Only this Gen∣tlewoman, in mine own right J may be bold withal, while you depart my house, if you may be entreated, so. Is not this right? Is not this plain?
Yet hear his Worship speak, good Bump.
Good Whirly, what can his Worship speak? Or your wisdom twatle for him, in this Cause; that J do not understand already? Has not his Son wedded our Daughter? How directly, or indi∣rectly,
who meddles with his match? Nay more, has he not bedded her? How, directly or indirect∣lie, who meddles with that either? Let him have and hold, possess (Hmh.) and enjoy; do his worst, and make his best of her, though she be an Heir, J will not sue him out of her: No, J protest; were it Ante Copulam, as it is post, J would not cross em. Is not this right and plain enough.
But good Mr. Bumpsey, Brother Bumpsey, I would call you—
Keep your Brothers and your Goods to your self, Sir, J have no need of 'em.
You are a Knight, and a man ot Worship—
He will speak all himself.
J am a plain Fellow, and out of debt.
J, let him run on.
J sought none of your Alliance, J—
Has he the speed to run beyond himself?
Yes, and bring himself about, J warrant you.
Nor to be joined with houses of great sound,
Whose noise grows from their hollow emptiness.
J could have matched my Daughter here, that was,
But now a Barronettesse in Reversion,
To a substantial Heir of two fair Lordships.
Perhaps no Gentleman.
Yet honourable, Land-Lordship's real honour,
Though in a Trades-man Son: when your fair Titles
Are but the shadows of your Ancestry;
And you walk in'em, when your Land is gone:
Like the pale Ghosts of dead Nobility.
Ha! First not so? Is not this right and plain?
Yes like the privilege you use in your own house here.
Nay I come up to you now Sir Humfry Dry∣ground;
Up in a point of Chivalry. You are a Knight,
A Baronet to boot: Your son is like
T'inherit that dear paid-for title, but
(You'll give me leave to use my plainness)
Freely.
Your son (I say) is Heir to your bought honour.
Which may hereafter Ladifie my Daughter:
But where▪s the Land you once were Lord of? Ha!
The goodly Cornfields, Meadows, Woods, and Pastures,
That must maintain the House, the Gowns, the Coach,
With all by complements of Horses, Hawks, and Hounds.
Now hes in.
Where be the Parks, the Warrens, Herds, and Flocks?
Besides the Gardens, Orchards, Walks, and Fish-ponds?
For that hear me.
Odds pity, give me leave,
You, that had all these once, in three fair Lordships,
To be wrought on, and tonyed out of all,
But a small pittance of Trois Cents per Annum,
By Providence intayld upon the Heir,
(Or thad had wasted too) which now maintains you,
In a proportion of Smoke, and Sack,
To wash your mouth with after, where you live
Confined in Milford Lane, or Fullers Rents,
Or who knows where, it skills not—
Must I hear this too.
Now he has almost done.
Can you (I say) think your good husbandry
A lawful Precedent for your Gamesome son
To make my Daughter happy in a Marriage,
Though he had twice my Fortunes?
Now hoe's coming:
Bear but with this; and if he offer not
More then you would request, Isle lose your love.
But here's the substance of't, you have my Daughter,
Your Son, sir, has my Daughter, that must have,
And shall, my whole Estate at my Decease;
(No Law exacts it sooner) This Estate
You safely may suppose ten thousand pounds,
Which J have got by thrifty Industry.
Only one thousand, J confess, my Wife
Improved my Fortune with, Here's the just sum.
J give her▪ leave to give it to her Daughter:
She may endow her Husband with it. So,
Is not this plain? Now note me further, sir;
What J have left is my own; and you, sir, may
Which what is theirs take hence your Son &amp; Daughter,
Till you shall hear old Bumpsey is deceased.
Then let him come, and challenge all—that's left;
Mean time J know my course.
Now chop in with him, Mother, you know how apt
Hee is to cross you in these Moods.
Dear, worthy, honoured, sir,
sh•t, sh't, sh't; Woman come you with me.
J Bump. Let us go our way, and let them take theirs agods name.
Pray hear me, sir.
At this time, sir, he shall not.
Shall not! He shall sure: Odds pity! shall not: Are you pleased to speak, sir.
not to offend—
Not to a Fiddlestick. Shall not! Can you speak or not?
If not, pray yell me so.
J married, sir, your Daughter.
You may thank her Mother for it, not me.
Well, will you speak?
J married her in a firm hope to win
Your Love and favour.
Well.
Which, since I have not yet; and time must work it,
I would make this my suit.
Would I could hear it once.
That you would take
With re-acceptance of this thousand pound
Your Daughter and me into your Family.
And why the thousand pound; doe's't burn your Fingers?
Give us but meat and lodging for•t: My Father,
Out of his little left Estate will give us
A hundred yearly for other necessaries.
With all my heart.
And as you find my regular life deserve
Your future favour, so extend your bounty,
When Age shall call upon you to dispose
Of all your fair Possessions.
Humh! A pretty od speech this! I would I knew The meaning on•t.
I mean, Sir, as I speak; that till you find
Strong probability in me to manage
A good estate, you trust me not with any.
Ha! Is it so? Then J come to a point with you.
Mark him now, Sir Humfrey.
You look, Sir, in my Daughters right, to have,
After my death, my whole Estate, by showing
Me, in my life time, your good husbandry, by husband∣ding of nothing:
Y' have tan off half my purpose; for J meant
To have kept it in my power, whether to leave her
Any, or nothing: And, perhaps (do ye hear)
By an odd course, that J was thinking on
To ha▪ made all nothing ere J died: But now
Half of that power Isle put into your hands,
Isle try what you can do with something.
Half? What mean you half?
Even half of all J have.
J hope you will not deal so.
And as he deals with that, Isle use the rest.
Pray be advised.
Never by you against this:
Isle give him instantly the free possession
Of half J have: Now mark; if you increase,
Or keep that half, then, doubtless, J shall do,
As well with tother for you: If you diminish
Or waste it all, isle do the like with my part.
Husband.
Isle do it: Together we will live:
And Isle along with you in your own course,
And, as you play your game, you win or lose all:
Thrive and isle thrive: Spend you, and J will spend:
Save, and Jle save; scatter, and Isle scatter.
You won't be mad.
Isle do it: Let him throw Money
Into the Thames, make Ducks and Drakes with Pieces,
Isle do the like: till he has made a match
Or no match of my Daughter: There's the point
And the whole substance on it.
Will you do so?
Will I? Tic done. Isle make him a good husband,
Or be no husband for him: And so see
Whats mine, out of the danger of his waste,
And have some sport too for my Money: Ha!
I love to do these things.
Nay, but in one thing, Bump. let me advise you.
In nothing `against this course, good whirly: no,
Tic so set down. I know I shall be counted
An odd old humorous Cockscomb for it by some:
But the truth is, I love to do these things:
And so God go ye joy.
Isle take my leave Sir.
Not so I hope, Sir Humfry.
I have business,
And go well satisfied with this agreement:
And, Val. take briefly this my Charge: You are now
A Husband, be a good one: You've my blessing.
But (hark you) do you remember against the evening?
All Sir, all: I have spread my Nets already.
Sir, fare you well.
At your pleasure Sir.
Isle shortly visit you.
At your own good time Sir-
These shall stay here, Isle blindfold them with Money,
And by a new way try, if they can grope
The right way into the World. Come your way.
ANd why this Gullery to me, good Ambrose?
J swear J am serious, and you may may believe it.
What, that there can be in the World an Ass
(Were thou a fool to credit it) that would keep
A House, by way of public Ordinary,
For fashionable Guests, and curious stomachs;
The daintiest Palates, with rich Wine and Cheer;
And all for nothing, but alls paid and welcome?
Val Dryground told it me, whose truth deserves
So well my credit, that, prove you it false,
Isle pay all Ord'naries and Tavern reckonings
You shall be at this twel'moneth.
J have heard
Of all the Mockeries, the Ape, the Ram, the Horns,
The Goat, and such tame Monsters, whom poor wits
Have sent wise Tradesmen to, as to a Knight,
A Lord, or foreign Prince; to be his Mercer,
His Taylor, Semster, Milliner, or Barber:
When those, that have been mocked, still sent their Neighbours,
Till half the City have bee fool-found. Ha!
First not some such poor trick?
Here comes my Author.
O Mr. Bridegroom, that stole the wealthy match!
How got you loose so soon? J thought you had been
tied up by the Loins, like a Monkey to the Bed-post,
for a fortnight at the least. How does old Bumpsey, that
Freecost Drunkard, thy mad Father-in-Law, take thy
stolen Marriage? I am sure he knows on it.
He found's abed last night in the nick, as we say.
But we are pieced this morning.
Then he wrangled it out, of himself. J know his singular humour.
What has he gi'n thee?
Half, of all he has.
How?
On this Condition, that, if J save
That half until he dyes, the rest is mine too.
What if thou spendst thy half?
Heel spend the tother; and the same way, hee swears.
He will ne'er keep Covenant.
He tell you how he runs at waste already,
This morning the French Taylor brought a Gown home,
Of the fashion, for my Wife. He bought one
Straight, ready made, for his old Gentlewoman,
That never wore so rich in all her life.
O brave old woman! How will she carry it?
I spoke but of a Coach, and he bespoke one.
Wonder upon wonder! Name was telling one Before thou came.
What the new Ordnary?
Dost know the man that keeps it?
They call him Osbright.
A brave old Blade. He was the President
Of the Can-quarrelling Fraternity,
Now called the Roaring Brotherhood, thirty years since,
But now grown wondrous civil, free, and hospitable,
Having had something fallen to him, as it seems.
That Osbright has been dead these many years.
It was given out so: But he lived beyond Sea.
There▪s some strange plot in it.
O thou politic Noll.
Judge thy self, Val, what can the mystery be?
He tells me there's no Gaming, so no Cheating;
Nor any other by-way of expense,
By Bawdry, or so, for privy profit.
Such a suspicion were a sin. But now
I will unfold the Riddle to you. This feasting
Has been but for three days, and for great persons,
That are invited, and to be prepared
To venture for a prize. This very night
There will be some great Rifling for some Jewel,
Or other rare Commodity, they say.
I cannot nam't: tic twenty pound a man.
Is not that gaming prithee?
Thats to come:
But, hitherto, nor Dice, nor Cards▪ nor Wench,
Is seen in the house, but his own, only Daughter.
O! has he Daughter there? Mark that Name.
No gaming say thou? Odds me, and they play not
At the old Game of old there, I dare—
I dare be sworn thou dost 'em wrong.
Shees too ftale, is she?
Tic above twenty years since he went over,
And was reported dead (they say) soon after,
In France, I take it: But, then, it seems, he lived,
And got this Damsel there? Is she French borne?
Yes, she was born and bred there: And can speak
English but brokenly. But, for French behaviour,
Shees a most complete Damoiselle, and able
To give instructions to our Courtliest Dames.
She must be seen.
But see who here comes first.
Thou hast undone me Villain.
Out alas!
I was as ignorant of the deceit,
As your own innocent worship ever was
Of cozening any man of Land or Living.
Was ever man so cursed in his Children!
Tic the wretch Vermin.
What makes he here, trow, in the Temple Walks?
What should he do elsewhere, when Law's his Lechery.
The Devils itch dry up his marrow for it.
He undid a worthy Gentleman I know.
I, Brookall, thrusting him out of his Land.
Hoe's fitted with an Heir for it; one that can
Justly inherit nothing but the Gallows.
Wheres Brookalls son? He had a hopeful one;
And, at sixteen, a Student here in the Temple.
Alas his Fathers fall has ruined him.
Mere want of maint'nance forced him to service;
In which hoe's lately travelled into France.
Go back to the Recorders: Fetch the War∣rant,
Isle search the City and the Suburbs for her.
But Vermin has a daughter may prove good,
A good one like enough: Isle lay a wager
Hoe's poshing among the trees here, for a Broker;
To match his daughter to a landed husband.
This is their walk.
Let's try if we can fit him.
Thou'lt ne'er endure his breath, it stinks of brimstone.
Isle take the wind of him: You are well met, Sir.
They say you have a daughter you would match, Sir.
It may be I have; it may be not; How then?
What's that to you?
Pray be not angry Sir.
The worst of us has land, and may deserve her.
Pray let me ask you first, if you be not
The knaves consederates that stole her from me?
Is she stolen from you Sir? In troth I am glad on it.
Tic the first news we heard on it.
Though J assure you
We heard none ill to day: But very good,
As that of the New Ordinary.—
Then the good success
This Gentleman had lately with a wife—
And lastly, this you tell us; which, but that
It comes from your own mouth, were even too good
For our belief, me-thinks.
Pray, is it true Sir?
That your daughter's gone, lost, or stolen, as you say?
May we report it after you, good Sir?
What are you? I would know.
Gentlemen, Sir,
That cannot but rejoice at your affliction.
And therefore blameless, that desire to hear it.
Cannot this place▪ where Law is chiefly studied,
Relieve me with so much, as may revenge
Me on these scorners? How my Slave stays too!
Yet I may find a time.
Ha ha ha.—
Look, look, what thing is this?—
Trebasco, Skip-kennel.
. . . .
It speaks, me-thinks.
Yes, and its shadow answers it in Cornish▪
I know him; it is the wi•e Western Knight, that should
Have married Vermin daughter.
Skipkennell, you shall turn Footman, now, Skipkennell.
I'll ne'er keep horse more—
You must be Footman then your self Sir.
No nor Mare neither.
You need not Sir, now you be determined to marry, and live here in the City altogether. And truly, Sir, she could never have dyed better, nor been taken from you (as they say) in a better time▪ so near her journeys end.
His Mare's dead it seems.
Was it well done of her, dost think, to die
to day upon the way, when she had been i'my purse to morrow in Smithfield: Poor fool, I think she dyed for grief I would have sold her.
It was unlucky to refuse Reynold Pengutlings money for her.
Would I had taken't now: and she had not dyed mine own, it would ne'er have grieved me.
Pray hear it Sir, as they say—We are all more∣tall you know, and her time was come, we must think.
And't had not been the first loss that ere I had in my life, I could have born it.
And grace og (as they say) it shall not be the last.
I would thou could ascertain me that; but mischiefs are tailed to one another, and I must grieve as well for the what's to come, as the departed.
We will have a bout with him: Who is depar∣ted, Sir?
My Mare, my Mare Sir: It was the prettiest Tit—But she is gone—
How, is she gone Sir?
You will not talk to 'em.
How is she gone, I pray Sir?
Sir, as it were, because she could go no fur∣there.
Good angry man give us leave to talk with thy Master.
Good Sir a little more of your Mare.
I would you had her all to do you good Sir: she lies but a quarter of a mile beyond Brainford.
Did you leave skin and shoes, and all behind Sir?
Shoes all behind▪ I thought how wise you were: Come away Master▪ No, while she lived, she never wore but two behind Si•.
Gramercy honest fellow, thou hast wit in thy anger.
Sirrah, answer not the Gentleman so snap∣pishly.
How can I choose, when they do nothing but make a fool of your Worship before your Worships face, and your Worship perceives it not.
Good Sir, fall from your man to your beast a∣gain.
There again, another main mock: He would have him fall from a man to a beast.
Give me the shoon; let 'em go I say, I will have 'em.
Pray take 'em then, he will ne'er be wiser.
These were her shoon Gentlemen, I'll keep 'em for her sake, that little Tit, my little poor Gonhel∣lie, that would have carried me on this little iron from Pensans to S. Columb on a day. And that's a way would try a stumbler you'll say, if you know it.
It is enough, I know you Sir Amphilus, and have fooled enough with you. Adieu; my business calls me. Gentlemen, will you meet me to night at the Ordinary▪—
Yes, and perhaps, be there before you too. Come Ambrose—
Od Gentlemen, me-thinks
Why did you talk with 'em? What had you to make with 'em?
True, wee have other matters to think on: Your first course Trebasco, after we come to our lodge∣ing, shall be to Turnbull-street, to the Cobbler▪
Your Dog-tutor.
Yes, and see how my whelp proves, I put to him last Term.
Yes, Sir.
And know of him what Gamesters came to the Ponds now adays, and what good dogs.
Yes Sir.
And ask him—Dost thou hear? If he have not done away his own dog yet, Blackswan with the white foot? If I can but purchase him, and my own whelp prove right, I will be Duke of the Ducking-pond.
Never misdoubt, your whelp's right I warrant you; for why, he could lap before he could well go: And at ten weeks old he could peace under leg.
He was a fine forward Puppy, true enough: But and that be a sign of short life, and he should peak away after my Mare now—Here, prithee take her shoon again: What should I keep 'em for? They put me too much in mind of mortality, do 'em away, make money of 'em, and Isle convert it into a Dog-Collar—
Isle try the Market with 'em.
the frumping Jacks are gone.—
See my Aldermanicall Father-in-Law! How do ye do Sir? I am come. I keep my day you see before I am a Cittiner among you. How does my best beloved I pray, your daughter? You do not speak me-thinks.
Ask you for my daughter? Let me ask you first what was your plot to put me in this fright, to make me trudge to your Inn, whilst knave your man here—Is not this he?
I doubt Sir he was taller.
Having first left a bag of Trumpery with me,
stones, and old iron, steals away the baggage.
This is abomination! What Inn? and what old iron? I came at no Inn to day, nor touch old I∣ron, but that with sorrow enough, my poor Mares shoes, she left me at her sad decease to Brainford. I had rather have lost the best part of five Mark J wuss: From whence I came by water, landed here at the Temple, to leave a Letter to a kinsmans chamber, now right as sure as can be. Say Trebasco.
He tells you true.
But is your daughter gone?
Gone, gone.
All ill go with her: Did not I say I should hear of more mischief, and that one was ever tailed to another?
You said so indeed: but if she had been tailed to your Mare, I should have seen her sure, when I stripped her.
This is the day of my affliction,
This day Isle cross out of my Almanac
For ever having any thing to do on it.
Why then, you will not seek her out to day
Although me-thinks the day might serve as well
To find her, as to lose her, if luck serve.
What else did you intend Sir by the warrant?
Best lose no time Sir.
No, no, we'll go.
First take my execration with thee, Monster.
Hell vomits all her malice this day on me.
Hell sends by me this commendation to thee,
That thou hast there a most deserved Possession,
That gapes to entertain thee.
Who's this, a Conjure• that knows hell so?
No, but a certain Spirit, that my Master
Conjured out of his Land.
If you can conjure,
Here's money to be got Sir, but to tell us
What may be now betide of this mans daughter?
Himself, and his Posterity must all
Sink unavoidably to hell.
You are most deeply read! May not a Son-in-Law—
Why talk you to that Rayler?
Pray Sir, may not
A Son-in-Law escape in your opinion?
No Sir: it was by Law he made the purchase.
And by his Son-in-Law, or out-law'd, down he must:
If he set venturous foot, as his Inheritor,
Upon the mould, was got by his oppression.
Pretty mad reason me-thinks; whore's that Land?
Sirrah, Isle tame thy tongue▪
No, wretch, thou can not,
Nor fly out of the reach of my fell curses,
That freedom (being all that thou hast left me)
Thou can not rob me of.
I shall find means
Then to confine it, and your self in Bed lame:
Thou can not be so just sure, to exchange
Thine own inheritance for mine.
Have you made
A purchase there too, Father-Law that should be?
How am I tortured! I will fly this place.
Nay prithee stay a little, good old man,
Give something to my box.
Out on thee Baggage.
A little something, prithee; but a tester.
Out, out.
Thou look like a good Penny-father,
A little of thy money would so thrive here,
It would grow, by that I were ready for a husband,
Up to a pretty portion. Pray thee now—
What can thou be?
Insooth a Gentlewoman, but a By-blow,
My Father is a Knight, but must be nameless.
Can Knights get Beggars?
Why not? when such as thou get Knights.
Nay, prithee, prithee now give me a tester.
I ne'er ask less: My mother's a poor Gentlewoman,
And has no means, but what comes through my fingers.
And this is all my work: Come, wring it out.
Oh how I love a hard-bound Money-master,
Whose countenance shows how loath hee is to part with it!
It comes so sweetly from him, when it comes:
Nay, when? I pray thee when? Pish, make an end.
It is the prettiest merry Beggar.
Huswife Isle have you whipped.
I, when I beg in the streets.
I have allowance here▪ as well as any
Brokers, Projectors, Common Bail, or Bankrupts,
Panders; and Cheaters of all sorts, that mix here
Amongst men of honour, worship, lands and money.
O rare Beggar-wench!
I come not hither to in∣trap or cozen.
My work lies plain before me as my way.
With, will you give me? Prayed, hard old man.
Away, away.
What though thou come to deal
For this mans Land, or sell another right,
Or else to match thy daughter, if thou hast one
To this young Gentleman—Thou wilt give me something.
The Devil haunts me.
She makes a youth of me.
Yet I prithee make not
Thy money such an Idol, as to think
Thou shalt dishonor't, or impair this bargain,
That match, or whatsoever thou hast in traffic,
By parting with a silly silver sixpence.
Shalt not i'fecks la, shalt not; Isle strike luck to it,
Thy match shall thrive the better. Look, I have got
Here, four and sixpence, Prithee make it a Crown,
Twill ne'er be mist in thy dear daughters Dowry,
If (as I said) thou hast one.
Hellish baggage!
He will gi't me by and by. I prithee find
Thy money out the while. Come out with it man:
Pull her away,
I fly thee, as I would the Devil that sent thee:
Yes, let's away, tic time, she begs of me now.
The Devil is not surer to o're-take thee.—
Good child I thank thee: Thou hast some∣what eased
My pensive heart by his vexation:
She spake as Divination had inspit'd her
With knowledge of my wrongs; and his oppression,
To take my part: Take thou a blessing for it
Who ere thou art, whilst I recalculate
The miseries of a distressed man,
Cast out of all. Unhappy chance of Law!
More false and merciless then Dice or Strumpets;
That hast into thy Hydra-throated maw
Gulped up my lives supportance; left me nothing;
Not means for one days sustenance, for breath
To cry thy cruelty before my death.
That Law, once called sacred, and ordained
For safety and relief to innocence,
Should live to be accursed in her succession,
And now be styled Supportresse of oppression;
Ruin of Families, past the bloody rage
Of Rape or Murder: All the crying sins
Negotiating for Hell in her wild practise.
A man I hope for my purpose, and save me a going to the Church for one: Will you make an Oath Sir?
An Oath? for what?
For two shillings; and it▪ be half a Crown, my Client shall not stand w'ye; the Judge is at leisure, and the other of our Bail is there already. Come, go along.
I guess you some Attorney: Do you know me?
No, nor any man we employ in these cases.
He takes me for a common Bail; a Knight of the Post,
Thou art a villain, and crop-ear'd I doubt not:
What, dare thou say, thou see upon me, that—
I cry you mercy: I must up (I see)
To the old Synagogue, there I shall be fitted—
Can I appear so wretched? or can grief
So soil the face of poverty, which is virtue,
To make it seem that Monster Perjury?
Rather let sorrow end me all at once,
Then virtue be misconstrued in my looks,
Which I will hide from such inter∣pretation.
Alas hoe's sore afflicted, and my news,
I fear, will strike him dead; yet I must speak.
Sir, give not misery that advantage on you,
To make your self the less, by shrinking under
The buff•ings of fortune.
I desired you
To seek my son. Have you found him at his Chamber?
Or has not want of fatherly supplies
(Which heaven knows I am robbed of) thrust him out
Of Commons, to the Common World for succour?
Where is he, have you found him?
No, not him.
But I have found what may be comfort to you,
If you receive it like a man of courage.
Hoe's dead then, farewell my tender boy▪
Indeed, Sir, hoe's not dead.
Phew—
Pray, sir, hear me.
You'll tell me, man ne'er dies; But changes Life,
And happily for a better. He is happiest
That goes the right way soonest: Nature sent us
All naked hither; and all the Goods we had
We only took on Credit with the World.
And that the best of men are but mere borrowers:
Though some take longer day. Sir, J know all
Your Arguments of Consolation—
Indeed he is not dead; but lives—
In Heaven.
J am the surer on it; for that he lived
Not to learn Law enough, to—hush. No more.
Substantially he lives in flesh, as we do▪
Speak that again.
A Gentleman of the next Chamber told me so.
Only, sir, this; if you can brook his absence
Without fear, or mistrust; then he is well.
How thou playact with me!
He's gone to travel, sir. Here comes the Gen∣tleman.
J am sure he does not know me. If he could,
J were as sure this Charity would be rejected.
So much J know his Spirit. Is your name Brookeall, sir?
My losses, wrongs, and sorrows, speak my name.
You had a Son late of this house.
And do not you infer by that he▪s dead?
Good, do not mock me, sir.
If this be gold,
He lives and sent it to you; forty pieces?
Pray, sir, from whence, or where might he achieve
So great a Sum? Not in this World, J fear.
A handsome possibility he had once,
Could J have kept it for him.
He's in a way,
Now to a hopeful fortune. A Noble Gentleman,
Late gone to travel, taken with good affection
Towards your Son, has taken hen to his care:
And like a Father, not a Master, keeps him.
From whose free bounty he received this means.
Do you think the Boy did well to send it me then:
When it was intended for his Masters honour,
To fly in Silks and Feathers? Tic not Servant like
To wave a Masters meaning so.
J had a Letter too;
Though most unhappily mislay'd.
What from my Boy?
In his own hand.
Ha!—but mislay'd, you say. Ha, ha, ha,—
What is the Gentleman? Or whither travelled?
That's all J crave excuse for.
Keep your money.
If you can render me my Son, Isle thank you.
You speak not like a Father: wanting means
Your self for his advancement, would you bar him
The bounty of another full ability?
J speak more like a Father, then a Beggar:
Although no Beggar poorer. And I fear,
J am no Father: for J would not give
My Son to gain a Province, nor except
This Coin to save my life: If he 〈…〉
Let me look nearer 〈…〉
J 〈…〉
He will accept the Money. Poverty
Was ne'er so coy else.
J cannot remember,
J ever saw this face: But J have seen
(Many years since) one, that it so resemble•,
As J could spit defiance on it—
What mean you?
And charge thee with the Murder of my Son
Pray, sir, collect your self.
Your name is Valentine.
Right, sir.
Sir Humphrey Drygrounds Son:
Most true.
Even so thy Father looked, when, at like years
He was my Rival: For young man, I tell thee
Thou had a virtuous, well deserving Mother.
He won her without loss of my known Friend-ship:
But, since her death, you cannot but have heard,
He ba•ely wronged my Sister, and, in her,
Me, and my Family: Whored her, and cast her off,
On the appointed Marriage day.
O, sir.
You cannot but have heard on it. Nay, it seems,
My Boy has charged thee with it, before his years
Could warrant his ability in Combat.
And so is fallen; Or thou, not daring stand
Trial in such a cause, by treachery
Hast cut him off; And come to make thy peace:
Presuming on my Poverty, with money.
Worse then the base Attorneys Project this!
This is mere madness. In an Act so foul,
As your wilde Fancy gathers this to be;
Who could escape the Law?
The Law; Ha, ha, ha.
Talk not to me of Law, Law's not my Friend.
Law is a Fatal to me, as your house.
I have enough of Law; pray stand you off.
Will you, sir, furnish me, but with a Sword;
And bring me to fit ground to end this difference?
Will you do so, and like a Gentleman?
What shall J do for pity?—Now J have it.
Talk not to me of Law.
Pray hear me, sir.
Now sir, your will before your end. Be brief.
You know me for a Gentleman, though an E∣nemy.
(I must speak in his phrase) and by that honour
A Gentleman should keep sacred, two hours hence
Isle meet you in this place—
Pray stand you off—to Friendly.
From whence wee▪ll walk—
Silent, as nothing were—
As nothing were betwixt us—to some other Fit ground, (as you propounded) where we'll end the difference.
By the Sword, no otherwise.
No whinnelling satisfaction.
You shall see, sir.
Go set thy house in order. Here Isle meet thee,
I Shall repent me, sir, that ere I yielded,
In that fair Noble way, if you express
Your self in this regardless of my honour.
J like a Whore, withal my heart, that talks
So like an honest woman.
Can you expect
A Chaste and constant Wife of her, Whom you
Have wrought to Lewdness before Marriage?
Or may J not as well deserve as well in bringing
A Maidenhead into your Marriage-bed,
As a polluted Body?
Here's a coil,
For a poor bit afore-hand! Is it so?
'Heart, if a man bespeak a Tavern Feast
For next day Dinner; and give earnest for it
To half the value, (as my Faith and Troth
J think, is somewhat towards your Marriage payment
To be to morrow) Will not the Hostess give him
A Modicum o'er night to stay his stomach?
Your Father comes: Jle whisper yet more reason.
Now pretty Mr. Alice, you see the end
I had upon you: All the scope thereof
Tending to your contentment. Are you pleased?
So well, that could I but shake off the fear
(Which is most dangerous) of a Fathers curse,
I durst prouounce; nay, boast my happiness,
To be above my Virgin hopes, or wishes.
Let your fear vanish then: And, if this night,
The happiness you are ambitious of,
Together with your Fathers leave and blessing
Crown not your Bed, let all the Infamy
Due to all perjured Wretches, that have wronged
Beauty and Chastity be branded here.
The fair respect I have, sir, to your Nobles;
For what you have already shown me, bars
Mine ears against protestation. I dare trust you.
As I have trusted you with my whole project,
My discreet Alice, further then I dare trust
My Instrument your Brother; though he thinks
He understands it all. Yonder he is,
Profoundly Love-struck too, J make no doubt.
Fie! Can you be so lewd? Is that your rea∣son?
Yes; can the Parish Parson give you better?
His Parish Bull's as civil.
Well no more.
Isle talk with your Father about it.
J with your Sister, and to better purpose.
Now Wat, what think you of my course, and habit?
As J love mischief, and desire to live by it;
It is the daintiest course.—O, brave sir Humphrey,
How I am taken with your Shape! Old Osbright,
The Father of the Swindgers; so much talked on
Could ne'er have borne it up so. Nor his Daughter,
That was French born indeed, could ere have clipped,
And Frenchified our English better, then
She counterfeits to Coxcombs that do Court her:
With her fine Fee-fees, and her Laisse-moys;
Her Prea-awayes; Intrat a you make a me blush.
O, J am tickled with it.
A, ha, my Lad.
slid J could dote upon you. Had J been
Your Son now, how I could have honoured you!
Though I had kept a Precept by t, I care not.
Notable Reprobate.
The Devil sure
Ought me a mischief, when he enabled that
Old Wretch, my Father to beget me. Oh,
Tic in my bones; I seele it in my Youth:
I know from whence the Pocks is now descended.
The Gout begets it. There's no Usurers Son,
Butt's born with an hereditary spice on it.
Had J raked Limbo, as J did the Counter,
I were not better fitted with a Copesmate.
slight, I could ask you blessing.
And I think,
That courtesy you have seldom done your Father.
Ne'er since I grew to any understanding:
Nor (as I know) before, but whipped and held to it.
Well Wat. You see how far I have trusted you,
To have the second hand in our great work;
Our Project here. Though you must seem my Servant,
You are like to have the better share, if you agree.
Upon the Match, and make your self my Son.
How like you your new Mistress, sir, my Daughter;
The Maidenhead here, the new Ordinary—
The Damoyselle, or what you please to call her?
What first a Match Wat? Condescended she?
No man shall be her Husband, but my self;
Who ere she lies withal, before or after.
That she has roundly promised. But she balkes,
And Boggles with me in a less request.
She shall deny thee nothing. What first Wat?
You may command her duty, if you please.
What is it man?
'Troth, sir, but one nights knowledge
Of her aforehand. One word of your mouth,
I know would do it, sir.
O Devilish Rascal,
That can imagine this a Fathers Office▪
Patience good Wat.
But that I am afraid
My Father would be pleased with it, Il'd take home
My Sister else, and presently.
In Maids about your work. And hear you Frank
Discharge the Butchers, and the Chandlers Bills.
They wait below. The Baker and the Brewer,
I have made even with.
And the Vintner too.
The Bottle-man too, and Tobacco Merchant.
Do as I bid you, go. Now Wat Observe me:
As an ingenious Critic would observe
The first Scene of a Comedy, for fear
He lose the Plot.
I do observe you, sir.
I have, you know, released from your thrall∣dome.
Upon condition you should steal your Sister,
To be at my dispose. You have performed it:
Honestly, sir.
Yes▪ honestly, as you say.
And though it be for her own absolute good;
Yet was your Act so grateful to me, that
I promised you my Daughter.
Right sir, on.
I shall be brief: you know my Fortune, What
Are sunk, and you have heard, I make no doubt,
Amongst other of my follies, of a Child
I got on Brookealls sister, on the by, Wat.
And this is she, I love a bastard naturally,
Ah thy are bouncing spirits: Now I love her
More then I did Sir.
You come fairly on.
But now, my poverty affords no portion.
Now, Wat, to raise a portion!
J, now, now.
Now I come to it, Wat: J took this house,
And in this habit here, turned pimping Host,
To make the most of her, and find a Husband
To take her with all faults.
That's I, that's I Sir: this has music in it.
You will be secret Wat.
No dumb Bawd like me.
Nay in a plot of villainy I dare trust thee.
In troth you cannot think how much I love it;
How I am tickled with it! Good Sir, on.
This I have designed to put her off
(I mean her Maiden-head) at such a rate
Shall purchase Land.
How, good Sir Humphrey, how?
She shall be rifled for.
How! Rifled Sir?
Yes, rifled Wat; the most at three fair throws,
With three fair Dice, must win and wear her, Wat.
You'll take her with all faults?
Can you suspect me?
It is the rarest invention, if the Gamesters
Be stiff and strait, that ever was projected!
What is it a man?
But twenty Pieces, boy.
I vow too little, less their number help us.
How many Gamsters have you?
A full hundred.
Two thousand pound! A merry portion,
And worth as many Maiden-heads in the sport
A man shall find in spending it? Me-thinks
I feel my self even flying with it already.
What art thou thinking, Wat?
That here may grow
A danger Sir, the Gamesters being so many.
Why, there's but one must use her.
Phew, for that
I were indifferent, if it were all or more
(As it is possible a wench might bear it)
If they come single, and in civil sort,
Allow her breathing-whiles—
Here's a ripe Rascal!
But my doubt is, that such a multitude
May fly into combustion, blow up all
The business and our hopes.
Now your doubt
Reflects upon my Judgment: did thou note
How quietly those Gallants here to day
Parted with their gold?
Yes, very gallantly.
They shall agree as well for the Commodity,
As I have cast it, What; so well my boy,
That no distaste shall be or taken, or given,
Anon you'll see.
She knows not on it you say,
Nor shall she What, till at the push I charge her
To be obedient in the undertaking.
And that's a sweet obedience: I could kneel
Before my wretched Sire in such commands.
Anon Isle maked all plain to you. How now Frank?
There are two Gentlemen in the next room,
That by all means would speak with you: I have had
The foulest coil with one of 'em, that persuades
Himself you keep a Bawdy-house, by somewhat
He gathered Eavesdropping, by your discourse here,
While t'other held me talking; who is civil,
And loves me with a modest fair affection.
Where is his sister, Alice?
Unseen I wrrrant you.
Then let them enter. Whip into your disguise Wat—
And be at call.
Presto, Anon, anon Sir.
Did they Eavesdrop me? I will
Eavesdrop too.—
Did not I tell thee't was a Bawdy-house?
I cannot think so yet: there is some other
Trick in it; the Maid you see is very modest.
That is the trick on it man, she must seem so.
Her Father deals for her.
Fie! Can there be such Fathers?
Yes, and such Mothers too: The Towne's too full of 'em.
Come, shoe's a Juggling whore I warrant thee,
For all her Fee-fees, and her Laisse-moys.
Pox of her counterfeit Gibberish Isle make her speak
In plainer English, ere I have done with her.
I have enough. You are welcome Gentlemen.
He looks like such a Blade. Are you the Master here Sir?
I am the man that's much rejoiced to see
Such sparkling Spirits underneath this Roof,
Where all you find is yours. Sirrah Varlet.
Each syllable he speaks bewrays him.
Varlet I say.
Here Sir.
Give me the Complement. Gallants,
Wilt please you taste your welcome in a Cup,
The spirit of whose never dying Liquor,
Speaks ore the brim in this high Language to you.
Full six and thirty times hath Luna wan'd
The strength she got in six and thirty growths
From Phoebus virtuous beams, into this Juice,
To make it Nectar for Phoebean wits.
Tic this inspires their brains with fire Divine,
By which to write high strains; and herein lurks,
The gift, One has to bounce up his own works.
Your meaning is good Sack, and three years old.
To put you by your Beverage and your Bombast,
I will nor drink, nor talk of other thing,
But the choice thing of things, your Daughter Sir.
Thou shalt not woo my Daughter, nor no man for thy sake,
Unless thou come until her by her Daddy naked.
Her Mommy's gone to Heaven Sir. And I pray,
Let Fathers poor breed Daughters as they may.
Your care, no doubt, is great what will it hold?
The Rifling Sir, I mean. Is your number full?
May not a man put in Sir for a chance?
What do you mean Sir?
May not we
Come in adventurers? Here are twenty pieces.
I find you have overheard me. Call my Daugh∣la.
Now Isle disclose a secret to you. But Gentlemen,
As you love wit and mirth, censure me mildly.
I am a Gentleman decayed in Fortune.
And can thou be so base to sell thy Child
To Lust and Impudence?
Be not too rash.
My Child's as dear in my respect, as you
Were ever to your Father.
Devil thou lie—
Nay, hold, good Ambrose; you even now were angry
With me, that did oppose your fair Construction
Of this good Gentleman and his virtuous Daughter.
My ignorance wronged us both.
Good modest Ambrose,
What do you think of this discovery?
You had discovered more, if his impatience
Had not prevented me: But now I am dumb to you
In all, but this. If you'll be pleased to sup here,
I shall afford you welcome. I have business.
What can we make of this?
I know what to do.
If City Justice, grave Authority
Protect it not, Isle surely spoil the sport.
Can thou be so malicious, that, but now
Did love this Wench so dearly, as to run her
Into the hazard of Correction?
Stay: Here she comes, and the Pimp whiskin with her.
Do thou take him in hand. Isle handle her.
Now Madam, twenty pound a man! Nay do not
Coy it too much? Your provident Father left us,
To make our selves more known to you; as your price
Is known to us already: Look upon us.
Pre ye Sir, have you been ever in France?
In France? No surely, nor in Doctors hands
Since I was Plac•et high. Why ask you Lady?
For, if you could speak French, I could the better
Find what you say. I can no understand
What tic you mean by price. What is that Price,
If it be no Welch Gentleman?
I mean
The price of three throws for your Maidenhead,
Tic twenty pieces. If I win it (Hark you)
What will you give me out of your gross sum
To take it neatly off; and like an Operator,
Put you to no pain?
Parley Françoy Monsieur, Je vou pry.
Thou art a handsome Hyppocrite: And this
Cunning becomes thee well. Isle kiss thee for it.
Fee fee Monsieur. O fee! tic no good fashion,
For the young Man and Maid to no ting but kiss!
Tic not so good indeed; nothing but kiss.
A little of tone with tother will doe well.
Fee fee, you no understand. That Gentleman,
Speaks he no French?
Yes yes. He speaks no French.
He Monsieur vou mosque de Moi.
Owe par ma foy.
Ha Monsieur vou parley françoy. Je su•' bien aisie.
Easy! Yes yes, I think you would be easy
To one that knew but how to manage you,
For all the boast of your Virginity.
Excuse me Sir, I can no understand.
Me thinks you should. Come prithee leave this fooling,
I know you can good English, if you list.
Indeed I can. But, in my best, and all
I cannot understand you Sir, nor frame
An answer to your rudeness. When you know me
Better, you'll speak in better phrase, and then
Tic like you may find better language from me:
Till when, pray give me leave to leave you Sir.
Nay hark you Lady, hark you (still more my∣sticall!)
Nay since you can speak English, I must talk w'ye.
So you'll be civil.
Civil I swear, and private.
Does she not know on it, say thou?
No Sir, no:
Not the least inkling of it: The old man
Carries it so discreetly.
Bless me Heaven?
Discreetly say thou. To betray his Child,
To sale of her Virginity.
Yes, discreetly.
She dreams of no such business; such intent:
No more then the Cud-chewing Heifer knows
The Butcher, that must knock her down i faith.
O, twill be bravely carried! I my self
Knew nothing till this hour: though I saw
Money put in his hand by divers Gallants:
Men of great place and worship; which I gather
Are to be of the Riflers.
Prithee who?
All must be nameless. There are Lords among 'em.
And some of civil Coat, that love to draw
New stakes at the old Game, as well as they;
Truckle-breech'd Justices, and bustling Lawyers,
That thrust in with their Motions; Muffled Citizens;
Old Money-Masters some, that seek the Purchase:
And Merchant Venturers that bid for the
Foreign Commodity, as fair, as any.
Was ever such an outrage! Hark thee fellow—
Sir, I have heard you with that patience
(And with no better) as the troubled Pilot
Endures a Tempest, or contrary winds:
Who, finding nerethelesse his Tackling sure,
His Vessel tight, and Sea-room round about him,
Plays with the waves, and vies his confidence
Above the blasts of Fortune, till he wins
His way, through all her threatenings, to his Port.
You may apply this.
And you may be plainer.
Is there not such a project for your Maiden head?
It deserves no answer.
But to be rid of you, together with
The Devil, that inflamed you to that question;
Know, that knew I of such a plot or project;
Or, that I had a Father (as injuriously
You have suggested) could be so inhumane,
To prostitute my spotless Virgin honour
To Lust for Salary, I would as sure prevent it,
As there is force in poison, Cord, or Steel,
At price of both our lives. Sir, I have say—
This Wench amazes me. Could I believe now
There could be truth in Woman, I could love her.
Well, Isle make one: Meet me there two hours hence,
And fetch my twenty Pieces.
I will not fail you. In the Temple Walks—
Where, if I fit you not—
Name! What discovery?
A villainy enough to blow the house up.
And I have found (I think) a virtue, that
Might save a City: But let's hence. We may
Confer our notes together by the way.
NAy, nay, I know he is flown out, and I
Am prettily provided for like flight:
And if I do not pitch as high, and souse
As deep, as he, while there is Game to fly at—
Five hundred Pieces he took out you say?
And said he would venter't at the Ordinary.
Thats hee, thats he! Why this is excellent.
This was your folly Bump. He was content
To have walked moneyless you saw, but you
Would force him. At a word you did la' Bump.
I force him, ha?
I, at a word, you put it in his head,
And put the Sword into the Madmans hand,
As one would say.
Good Mrs. At-a-word.
Let not your fine French Frippery, which I bought,
Turned of the Taylors hands (as one would say)
Huffle you up to Sovereignty: Nor your Coach,
Which I have but bespoak, whirl you away,
Before tic finished) from obedience,
Good lack fine Gentleman, that wears the Purchase
Of a Pawned forfeiture. Must I not speak trow?
Excellent Magdalen!
Sir, J will speak; and be allowed to speak.
And speak allowed too; will you Magdalen?
J, at a word; Since you have put me to it,
J will uphold the Fashion; Learn, and practise
Behaviour and carriage above my'parrell.
J at a word, J will la, that J will.
This is most excellent! My old Beast is
Infected with the Fashions; Fashion-sick!
Pray Ma-dame take your course, uphold your Fashion:
And learn and practise Carriage to your Clothes:
I will maintain my humour, though all split by it.
Mr. Ʋermine desires to speak with you.
I faith I will Ma-dame.—
My Husband, Mother,
Reports of a rare Creature come to Town,
Of a French breed; a Damoiselle, that professes
The teaching of Court-carriage and behaviour:
The rar'st he says—
Can she teach the elder sort?
All ages from six years to sixty six.
Unless they be indocible he says.
Indocible! What's that?
Stiff in the hams, I think.
Nay, then we'll to her.
I can yet bow my Haunches; come and go
With them, as nimbly as the barren Doe.
My Gimboles don't complain for want of Oil yet.
We'll have this Madame; and we will be Madams
Ourselves, or it shall cost us each a Crown
A month the teaching. In a Month we may,
Practising but one hour in a day,
Be Madams, may we not?
Yes, if we give our minds to it; and but steal
Fit times to practise.
We'll find Lecture times:
Or bau•k St. Antlius for it the while. But mum.
Do you wonder at my bravery? Look you here:
This is my Wife; and this my Daughter, sir.
You have lost yours, you say: Perhaps for want
Of Hue•ty-•usties, and of Gorgets gay.
Ha! first not so?
The World's turned prodigal.
You do not well to mock me, when I come
For comfort and advise.
Shall I be plain w'ye;
My best advise is, since your Daughters gone,
To turn your Son after her. He lies not in
For much above a hundred pound. Pay it,
And let him take his course: If he be not
Got loose already. Then (observe my Counsel)
Spend you the rest of your Estate your self;
And save your Heirs the sin. It is the course
I have in hand, and mean to follow it.
You like it not (it seems) but thus it is,
When men advise for nothing. Had your Lawyer
Now for his fee, given Counsel, might have damned you:
You would have thought it worth your Gold, and followed it.
Will you go with me to an Ordinary?
Venture five hundred or a thousand Pieces,
To begin a new World with.
Mrs. Bumpsey, I take it you are she.
An old Ape has an old eye.
He knows me through all my cuts and slashes.
How long I pray, has my good friend your Hus∣band
Been thus distracted?
But when I am perfect
In the quaint Courtly carriages, that belong
Unto this habit: in which, I confess,
I am yet but raw; how will you know me then?
She is as mad as he.
How Lady-like she talks!
Or, now my black Bag's on, I hold a penny
You do not know me. Bogh-who am I now?
Most unrecoverably mad! young Gentlewo∣man:
Nay, I entreat your favour for an answer?
As you can pity a wronged mans distress.
Give me what light you can of my lost Daughter.
You have been inward always, and partook
The nearest of her Counsels. Tell me fairly
I do beseech you in this gentle way.
Though I profess I have a strong presumption
Against your Husband, and his young Associates
I met to day; and bore their mocks and taunts:
On which I have good ground for a strict course
To force 'em to examination.
Yet I entreat you see.
The World is turned
Quite upside down: Else I should wonder
How you could make requests, that have got all
You have (too much) by Rapine and Oppression.
Do you upbraid me?
What's the matter Jane?
The Fox here learns to sing.
Isle fox him out of the hole if he sing here.
Will no Prey serve you but new married wives, Fox?
Why do you abuse me thus?
I heard you, sir, with too much patience,
Abuse my Husband with your foul Suspicion.
Who is as clear, I know, from wronging you,
As your own Son.
Your mocks are monstrous.
Were not he fast enough, I would resolve
No other friend had robbed me.
Is your son a friend? At a word, hoe's like you.
J pray, if my man ask for me, send him to me, by your Masters leave. By your leave Sir, I made bold to follow a Father-in-Law of mine that should have been, into your house here, with much ado to find it. Any good news Sir yet? Have you heard of her? J cry these Ladies mercy; though you may take me for a Clown, J must not forget I am a Knight, and give you the courtesy of my lips—
In the name of Peasantry, what Knight art thou,
If not the Knight of the Plough-share?
A fine spoken, and a well-bred man, at a word: He called us Ladies. To see what Apparel can do! How long might I have trudged about in my old coats before J had been a Lady? And then hee would do us the courtesy to kiss us: Sure, sure, as courtesy makes a Knight, so clothes makes a Lady.
It seems she's lost then. All ill go with her.
What old youth can this be?
Your warrant, perhaps, may find her though.
And J tell you what.
J have sent my man to lay the Ducking Ponds for her.
Do you think she would drown her self?
Who knows what toy might take her? Is she not a woman, as other flesh and blood is? I had another occasion to one that belongs to the Ponds. I tell you as a Friend, I had not •ent else: Come Father∣in-Law that should have been; hang sor∣row. You have had but one Loss to day. I have had two. Isle gi't you in Rhyme.
My Mare and my Mistress I lost on a day,
T'one of 'em dyed, and t'other ran away.
You are acquainted among the Poets it seems, sir?
Truly but one that's a Gamester amongst us at the ducking Pond; a Cobbler, but the neatest Fellow at Poetry, that ever was handicrafts-man; &amp; no School∣ler, to enable him by learning, to borrow of the An∣cients: Yet he is a Translator too. And he makes the sweetest Posies for Privie-houses.
Ha, ha, ha.
What a youth's this for a Knight!
Isle tell ye Ladies—O Trebasco. Good news at last I hope.
J can never find you any where, but jeered and laughed at, and are fooled, (as I have often told you) to your Worships face, and your Worship perceives it not.
To the point, man. How does my Whelp? He
is grown a tall Dog by this J hope: resolve me quickly.
Why, to put you out of your pain; your Whelp's grown a tall Dog.
Good
You said you would tell us, sir: What will you tell us?
And a handsome Dog.
Good again.
What a Dog-trick's is this?
And he has learnt, besides the main Game, all the rare tricks and qualities his Tutor could teach.
Excellent.
Will you not tell us, sir, about your Poet?
Hang him, my Dogs worth 'em all, in ready money.
I pray, sir.
I will not give his ears for the swolnst head∣full of wit among 'em.
Are not his Ears finely curled Trebasco? Like his Dam Flapses.
Yes, and his Coat all over, sir, they told me.
Told thee! Did thou not see him? My heart misgives me.
See him? No indeed, sir; but J pray bear it as well as you may:
And set not your heart too much upon transportable things.
Ha!
The Dog is gone, sir.
How!
Stolen from School, sir; and sold to a great Monsieur,
And Shipped away four days ago.
O my heart will break:
Do not faint Knight; Cheer up your heart with your Muse.
My vein is yet too dull; But I will offer at it.
Three Losses I have had; gone, past all help
My Mare, my Mistress, And (which grieves me most of all) my whelp.
That line is long enough to reach him.
I would it were else.—o—
Od's pity. Look you, sir, your Son-in-Law, that should have been, is in much passion too. But you'll be ruled by me, you say. And if J lead you not to comfort, never trust Neighbours counsel while you live. Is not this plain enough? My own case at this time is as dangerous as yours.
That's all that comforts me.
Neighbourly said. I thank you. Come, Sir, will you join with your Father-in-Law that should have been, and me in a Cup of Wine to order a design.
There's a reckoning towards.
It shall cost you nothing.
To the next Tavern then. Ladies adieu.
To part with such as you to some are crosses.
Yet Isle not put you down among my Losses.
Daughter while they are gone, let us fall on our project.
For Courtly carriage and behaviour.
J long to see this French young schoolmistress.
The Damasin do you call her?
The Damoiselle, Isle wait on you.—
YOU Rogues, Slaves, Villains, will you murder me?
To the Pump with him: To the Pump, to the Pump.
Prithee beat off the Curs.
No, to the Thames, the Thames.
Why do you use the man so? Is he not a Christian
Or is he not Christened enough think you, that you would dip him?
Pray Gentlemen forbear: It is thought fit,
Upon request made by a Noble Friend,
Favouring his Person, not his quality;
That for this time the Pander be dismised.
So all depart in peace.
Away, away, lets go then.
1. A Noble Friend! Pox of his Noble Friendship.
He has spoiled our sport. O! how we would a soused him?
Now, Mr. Hackney-man, if you have so much grace▪
Render due thanks.
J thank you Gentlemen.
I thank you for him too.
On both your Knees; unless you hold it better
To kneel yet to the Pump: which you had done,
My most officious Pimp, had not his pity
Prevailed against our Justice.
So, arise; enough, enough.
Troth tic a shame he should get off so easily;
Let him be yet but ducked, or showed the way
Over the Garden Wall into the Thames.
Good Ambrose, be not so severe; who knows
What need we may of him? We are all
Flesh and blood Ambrose.
Thou art a Wag I warrant thee.
Are not you married?
Mass, it was so late, I had almost forgotten it.
No, tic so late you have not yet forgot
Some Office he has done you in his way.
Did ever pimp for him? Protest by what thou fea•'st most.
No, as I hope to escape this Gentleman's fury.
Go, get the hence, insufferable Villain.
I could even kick thee into twenty pieces,
And send thee to thy Master, for my stake
Soon, at his Rifling.
Think whilst thou liv'st what tic to be a Pander.—
A Pander,—Pander—there's for your remembrance.
Enough.
This touch, &amp; I have done—▪
Away
Pray let him go, Isle school him for it.
This may work good upon the Rascal, if he
Have but humanity, although no grace.
We have discovered the great Rifling Val.
We know the Jewel now; the rich Commodity.
And think you have done wondrous wisely; do you not?
To sneak before me thither. I know all
You have discovered; and how far you are
Mistaken in the old man and his Daughter.
All shall be plain to you soon. Walk off a little.
We'll leave you till anon we meet at the Ordina∣rye.
I protest, Gentlemen, I have not drowned sorrow
With so much merry▪go-down, these three half years.
As with your part of three half pintes of Sack.
We had no more amongst us.
How much was that a piece think you?
It was enough to show his Prodigality.
In over-wastfull Cost. You were not wont
To be a Boordsend-King; a pay-all in a Tavern.
But now I love to do these things.
Now if you could be drawn to the ducking-Pond,
To join your Great sometimes with me; or two-pence▪
There were a Recreation indeed:
That Peerless Princely sport, that undoes no man:
Though cheating there; and rooking be as free
As there is square play at the Ordinaries.
Well the point is: My swaggering Son-in-Law,
Appointed to be here among the Trees.
My Daughter told me so. Walk here-about.
If he can give light of your light, he would chide.
Well try what may be done. Isle but step up
Into Ram-Alley-Sanctuary, to Debtor,
That prays and watches there for a Protection;
And presently return to you:—
Let it be so; slid the old angry man!
He'll cross us if he see us walk this way.
These walks afford to miserable man,
Undone by Suits, leave, yet, to sit, or go,
Though in a ragged one; and look upon
The Giants, that over-threw him: Though they strut
And are swollen bigger by his emptiness.
It was here, that we appointed, further meeting.
The two hours respited are almost run:
And he engaged his honour in such terms,
As I presume he'll come. Honour! From whence
Can he derive that Princely attribute,
Whose Father has descended to a Villainy?
His house was Noble though: and this young man
Had a right virtuous Mother, whom I loved,
Entirely loved: and was in Competition
For marriage with her; when high Providence
Allotted her to him; who since her Death,
Defamed my Sister, and disgraced our house.
My quarrel is not good against his Son
For that: But for my Boy! His doubtful talk
Of him distracts me.
See the Vermin,
That hath devoured me living, His Aspect
Adds to my Passion such a bitterness,
That turns me all to gal•. I must avoid him,
In truth Father-in-Law that should have been, or that
May be yet (come, who knows what luck we may have▪
Though the dancing Planets have cut cross Capers over
Out heads.) I like this old fellows humour of cheering up
The heart well! And would I were lost too, after my Mare,
My Dog and your Daughter: If this warm Sack has not
Kindled a desire in me to play the good fellow, so it might
Be of free cost, to drown these dry remembrances.
See, one of the jeerers. Is this he, that stole the marriage?
Yes, and perhaps my Daughter too. His Father's gone
Now, and I know not how to question him.
Let me alone to question him. Did you see this Gentleman's
Daughter, sir, my Wife, that should have been?
Since when, sir.
Since she was stolen away, sir. It were good
You would let us have her again; and quickly too,
Ere she be worse for wearing, as we say.
Old Brookall is not come yet.
Will you answer me?
You are a busy fool.
I am satisfied. He knows nothing.
You lye, Sir.
I think I do. You know nothing of her I mean, Sir.
You lye again, Sir.
I think I do again, Sir. Pray be not so terrible;
Examine him your self, if it please you.
Were his eyes Basilisks; or did he bear
Upon his hellish Countenance the faces
Of all the Furies (that no doubt attend him)
Isle shun no place for him. Are they acquainted?
O most prodigious!
What do you know, Sir, of my Daughter, I be∣seech you?
That she has a wretch, a miserable Caitiff Unto her Father.
How is that?—
A villain that has scraped up by oppression
Law-strife and Perjury, a Dowry for her,
So mixed with curses, that it would consume
An Earls Estate to match with it and her.
And leave him cursed in his Posterity.
How blessed was J to miss her!
Can he speak thus to him?
Dare thou confront me thus?
Dare thou yet keep a Great of thine extorted Wealth,
And see what Judgments fall one thee already?
Can all thy Gold redeem thy good opinion,
To thine own Son? And though thou would no give
(In case he wanted it) to save his life,
A Hangmans Fee, much less a Judges thanks,
Or price of a Lords Letter to reprieve him;
Yet may this Son survive thee; and hourly he
Unto thy last hour, thine Affliction be.
O happy condition of a Bachelor!
I like this well in the young man▪—
How can you say you know this?
Prithee how can't be otherwise?
Had thou a virtuous Child (as here and there,
Some Mothers win a soul) it would be taken
Dead or alive from thee▪ unto thy grief too,
To scope the curse might come with a Child's part
Of thine ill-got estate: that's thy Daughters case.
Oh—
Brave young fellow!
But show me where an evil Off-spring has not
Survived to spurn the dust of such a Father;
And lewdly wast in one or two descents
(Unto their own destruction) what was purchased
At price of souls departed?
Will you vouchsafe to leave me?
Pretty odd Doctrine, this!
I have not done w' ye yet.
What corrupt Lawyer, or usurious Citizen,
Oppressing Landlord, or unrighteous Judge,
But leaves the World with horror? and their wealth,
(By rapine forced from the oppressed Poor)
To Heirs, that (having turned their Sires to the Devil)
Turn Idiots, Lunatics, Prodigals, or Strumpets?
All wanting either wit, or will, to save
Their fatal Portions from the Gulf of Law.
Pride, Riot, Surfeits, Dice, and Luxury,
Till Beggary, or diseases turns them after?
Have you done yet?
A word or two for use; and so an end.
Not so: It must be amplified a little further.
Torment and death! Is he come? Let me go▪
Nay pray Sir hear them; though you pro∣fit not;
I may perhaps. Methinks it edifies.
You said, and you said well; His tainted wealth,
Got by corruption, kept by niggards,
Must fly as ill, through Luxury and Riot:
I add, that they who get it so, shall leave it,
To run at the like waste, through their succession
Even to the Worlds end: tic not one age,
Though spent in prayers, can expiate the wrong
Such an estate was gotten by, though the estate
Be, to a doyt, spent with it: But it shall
Fly like a fatal scourge, through hand to hand;
Through Age to Age, frighted by Orphans cries,
And Widows tears, the groans and Lamentations,
Of oppressed Prisoners, mingled with the curses
Of hunger-bitten Labourers, whose very sweat
Thou robst them of: this charming noise is up
Of many sad, some mad afflicted wretches,
Whose marrow thou hast sucked; and from whose bowels,
The nourishment was crushed that fed thee, and
That ravenous Wolf, thy conscience.
I shall trounce you:
What's here? Worrying of Vermin?
This noise, I say, of hideous cries and curses▪
That follows thine estate, will not be laid
In thy dear life time; nor in theirs, the strangers,
That must be cursed with the division
Of it, when thou art gone: But, still, it shall
Pursue, to all succeeding times, all those,
That entertain least parcels of thy money,
When they shall find at best, it can but buy
Disgrace, diseases, overthrows at Law,
And such dear punishments; until, at last,
All hands, affrighted with the touch of it,
Shall let it fall to earth; where it shall sink
And run into a vein of Ore, shall reach—
To Hell. And they, that shall, hereafter, dig it,
Hundreds of Ages hence, must all compound
With the grand Lord of the Soil, the Devil, for it.
So they make hot Purchases!
Now Sir, you may instruct the Usurer, to make use
Of all he has heard, while I avoid his sight;
Heaven knows I am sick on it: you forget me Sir.
Fear not: I will not fail you.
No: Isle deliver him the use of all.
Oh the variety of my vexation—
And all is this (as I advised before.)
Spend all your self, and save your Heirs the sin;
The shame, the sorrows, and the punishments,
That are joynt-heritable with your wealth:
As very learnedly hath been related.
And there's the point, and the whole substance on it.
Bestow your Substance so Sir, if you like it.
Sir, my condition runs another way.
To the same end perhaps; following my Leader, here.
Your Son in Law? Trust me, a most fine man:
And, if his life be answerable to his Doctrine,
Tic like heel lead you to a fair end of all.
Doubtless he is a fine young Man indeed.
A proper teacher and an edifying.
Come Sir, lead on, I hear you are provided
Five hundred thick for this free nights adventure.
I am Sir, here it is.
I am so too Sir.
And here it is: And here it is, and here and there, and here it is.
O brave old man.
Isle make one w'ye at your new Ordinary,
They say tic excellent.
For rarity and plenty,
There's no such Pension in all this City.
And all for nothing?
For less then kiss your Hostess.
And is there delicate Wine too? I must thither.
The flower of France, and quintessence of Spain
Flow like a Spring-tyde through the House.
O rare!
And all for nothing?
Hang nothing. Be it as twill,
I am for any thing; and as well provided,
As you, or any the best Gamester there.
Sir.
I love to do these things. But first, pray tel me
Can you tell tale or tidings of his Daughter here?
Not of his Daughter: But I heard his Son
Was freed, this day, from Prison.
How, how, how?
Yonder he is, still▪ busy.
Isle among 'em. Walk you back a little,
And, get I any money, Isle lend thee some.
Isle tell you how. Some friend has paid his debt,
The Action is discharged; and he's releas▪d.
You practise my abuse. Tic not in man,
To do me such a mischief.
Away Girl.
Thou art as hard, as this dry crust, here, was,
But he is better minded now, I hope:
Now, old man I am sure thou art for me,
Thou cursedst me before, but now thou wilt
Bless me, I hope, and not without a Cross
Of a fair Silver Sixpence.
Hence you Harlot.
Nay look you, if I could afford it, think you
I'd make two words w'ye: tic but a sixpenny matter
Between us; why will you be so hard: tic but
So little less left among all thy Children;
And Isle bate it them in their prayers for thee,
Though I be at the trouble, my self, to do it.
Troth, she begs prettily. I must give her some∣thing.
Here Wench.
What is it, J will see it.
Tic a good Shilling, and a vie; will you see it Sir?
Look you, tic covered.
Gentlemen, will you come in? will you vie it?
No we deny it.
You may revye it then, if you please. They come not in to bind it.
Will you come in again Sir?
Sir, after you, and't be to my last sixpence.
I will keep Covenant w'ye.
A shilling more on that.
Done Sir: there tic.
Why, these are Lads of bounty! Have you any mind yet Gentlemen?
What, to be Bankrupts?
Troth, thou would fear as much, should thou but break
Thy Porridge Pipkin.
Prithee what's thy name?
Nil, my Mother calls me. J ne'er knew Sire, nor Godsire.
Nil?
Yes: And tic as bonny a Beggars name, as ever came from beyond Trent.
This Girl, methinks, howere necessitated
Into this course, declares she has a spirit
Of no gross ayre: And J dare think her Blood,
Although, perhaps, of some unlawful mixture,
Derived from Noble veins. One may perceive
Much in her Language, in her Looks, and Gesture,
That pleads, methinks, a duty above pity,
To take her from this way, wherein she wanders
So far from the intent of her Creation.
Your meaning is, you would buy her out of her Calling.
Is it not so?
Ten Pieces J would give
Towards a new one for her.
Here's ten more
To bind you quite from begging. Can you afford it?
If yes, accept it. And let's see your back.
J make no Curtsies, nor send thanks that way.
No, Isle be forwards in them. May my thanks and prayers
Multiply years and blessings on your heads.
And when J beg again, may Beadles take
Advantage on my back, and lash the skin off,
So Heaven be ever with you—
Stay. Who would not have given this Money? Gentlemen,
Dost not move you to give a packing penny?
Nor move you them for me. J should, now, fear
One of their ill-got pence, here mingled, would
Corrupt and overthrow my righteous Fortune.
O villainous Vixen.
Each minute of this day augments my torment,
Yet I have cooled it with some patience;
Attending Sir your answer.
For your son.
J have no Son. J ask you for my Daughter.
Be this your penance for your misbeleife,
Hye you to the Counter: if you find not there
Your son; meet me an hour hence at my Fathers,
Isle tell you news of him; and he perhaps
May tell you of his Sister. This deserves
A fee. Your absence pays it me. Go quickly,
We have some business: And your stay will but
Make the Scene tedious.
Weel go. Will it please you?
Yes: we will off in Rhyme. There is no doubt,
If Wat be not in the Counter, he is out.
Now, what's the next vagary?
Only this Sir,
You have played at small Game with me. Now there is
A greater trial of my Love and Bounty,
Instantly to be made. A Gentleman,
(J stay too long) an intimate Friend's arrested,
But for two hundred pound on execution:
Will you join Charity to fetch him off?
J would 't had been thine own case two days since.
One of your fine Companions, some poor Shark?
Ha, first not so?
Will you be pleased to see him?
J am half sick of this Condition▪
J do begin, not altogether, now,
To love these things so well methinks. Humh ha!
Nay, if you go not cheerfully—
Yes: J go.
GOod Child, thy tale is pitiful; yet it sorts
So with the fell condition of my Fortune,
That J crave more of it.
J came not to
Discourse of sorrow, but to bring you comfort:
Will you yet have a Crown?
J prithee keep
Thy Money Child; and forwards with thy story.
Thou said thy Mother was a Gentlewoman.
Jle give you reason. Since J can remember,
She never did a wrong, though suffered much;
Nor the least unjust thing▪ No, though her poverty
And care of me have pinched her very bowels,
She knew not how to seek another good,
So much as by request. She never durst borrow,
For fear to come so near the danger of
A promise-breach: And, for base ends, to lye
She holds it sacrilege. I faith she jerked
That humour out of me; for J was given
(I tell you as a Friend) a little to it.
It came sure by the Father▪ God forgive him.
Thou said, thou thoughtst, thy Father was a Knight.
How think thou he could lye then, to abuse
A Virgin of that goodness, as it seems
She, that by him became thy Mother, was.
The Devil, sure, was powerful with him, then.
Nor do you hear me say, all Gentlefolkes
Are of one mind. Alas they could not live
One by another then.
Peace, stay a little:
How came thy Mother to decline her spirit
So low, as thus to suffer thee to beg▪
Virtue goes often wet-shod, and is fine
To coble it self up to hold out water
And cold necessity: But sure, the quality
Came to me by the Fathers side too: For
Tic a more commendable, and Courtly practise
To beg, then steal. He was perhaps, a Courtier.
J rather would be robed of all J have,
Then steal one farthing.
Thou say thy Mother never would reveal
To thee, or any one, her Birth, or Fortune.
Answer me, prithee, how dost thou collect
The had such a Father? Or that he has thus
Wrong▪d thy poor Mother, by not marrying her?
Now you come to me indeed old man: How now,
What do you weep?
The sharpness of the Air
Strikes on mine eyes a little. Prithee say.
J first, as fain would know the hidden cause
That works this aptness in me, to discover
My Mother and my self to you, J know not
How to look off of you. I •aith you weep.
I have heard some talk of natural instinct,
But know not what it is. Pray can you tell me?
Or any like reason, why J should
Thus dote, and hang about you? Or tell me this,
Have you not been of better Fortune? Are not you
Some decayed Knight? Be not ashamed, but tell me.
They cannot all be rich, there are so many.
Oh my heart!
Yea, are your Conscience struck?
Have at you for a father then: And yet
Me-thinks you are more old in goodness, then
To be, so late, so wicked, as to wrong
A woman of her sweetness. Yet Isle try you.
Here is a long-kept Paper. This is all
That ere I gathered of my Mothers wrong,
And of my Fathers cruelty, and condition.
It seems this was his hand, and ruthful farewell,
He turned her off withal. See, if you know it.
More then a thousand times I have observed her
Weep o'er that Paper; ever careful, though,
Her tears might not deface it. If by chance,
As when those tears prevented had her sight,
Some soft ones did on that hard Sentence light,
Her Lips took off the Trespass of her Eye;
And her hot Sighs restored the Paper dry.
Broo. This comes so near a Miracle; that my faith
fear is staggering. How got, thou this paper?
Phil. I stole it from my Mother, (and in Troth
〈…〉s all that ere I stole) because she should not
Weep out her eyes upon it. I do not love,
〈…〉hough I am a beggar, to lead blind folks.
〈…〉o you not find there, that he is a Knight,
〈…〉ough he subscribes no name? He tells her there,
〈…〉d tauntingly, he knows she is more sorry
〈…〉 the lost Ladyship he promised her▪
Then for her Maiden-head. Let me hear you read it.
Mine eyes, are now, too full indeed; I cannot.
Are you the man then, whom I must ask bless∣sing?
If you bee, speak. Isle have you to my Mother,
Though, I dare swear, she had rather dye, then you,
Or any of your Race, or hers, should see her,
Whilst she has breath. Yet I will undertake
To prattle you both good friends.
And you shall have my Mommy,
And she shall have her Nil (that's J.)
The man shall have his Mare again,
And all shall be well. How do you?
Prithee forbear me good wench but a little▪
I have kept my time you see; and shall not fail•
In any Circumstance. Here are two Swords,
Pray take your choice. I have bespoke a Boat
Shall land us o'er the water, where you please;
Though, I Protest, I yet would beg your Love,
Next to my Natural Fathers.
This I fear▪d.
And charged the plain way. But't shall not serve.
You took my part of late, against old Vermin•
Prithee who would not? This is another case
Why, if there be no remedy, pray accept
Your forty pounds. The money, Sir, may stead you
For your escape, when you have taken my Life.
Your money 'wou'ld hang me, Sir. Your life not worth it.
Tic your own money; sent you by your So•
How know I that? Or that I have a Son
By thee unmurther'd.
I told you of a Letter I had mislaid:
Look you. Do you know his hand?
If it be not,
Much changed, and lately, here is that will match.
Was ever given Gold so weighed, and tried?
What Lawyer, Nay, what Judge would be so scrupu∣lous?
No want corrupts good Conscience: Nor excess
Allaies in bad, the thirst of Cov'tousness.
What do you think, Sir?
I think you beg again, and would be whipped.
I fecks, I do not beg; but came to offer
This grieved old man some of my infinite fortune
Found in your lucky money: Lucky indeed;
For I have found a Father by it. I vow
I think my Father. I'st not a fine old man?
I shall know more anon.
Her money, sure,
Has made her Mad: How do you find it, Sir?
My wonder now, is, how thou can be Son
Of such a Father! Thou art honest sure.
Here is your Sword, I will accept the money.
Then I shall live, and so may want the money.
Will you forbear it for a day or two?
Your Sword again.
Now, I profess to you, I have present need on it,
And am as strict, Sir, for my right, as I
Before was to decline it.
Pray, Sir, take it;
And give me leave to beg your charitable
Construction of my Father.
How is that?
Did you but know the care, the cost, and tra∣vell
He has been at a thousand ways, to find
Your injured Sister, to make good his fault,
If possibly he might—
O fie, O fie!
Till all Opinion gave her dead; and then
The means he has sought to do you Offices
Against your knowledge. For he knew your Spirit
Would not except of his benevolence.—
Read that, and guess whose deed it is. Stand off Girl.
Yes forsooth Father, I shall learn in time,
Isle call him Father till he finds me another.
J know he could not shed those tears for nothing.
But does she live, to whom this was directed?
Speak low▪ is that your Fathers hand?
It is.
Along with me then. Girl, lead you the way.
Anon forsooth Father▪
Show us to your Mother.
Shall he go too? What will the Neighbours think?
There's none but Beggars all about us. Odds so,
There'll be a show indeed.
No matter. Will you go?
Sir, they will hale you to pieces.
Will you deny me?
How shall I answer'• to my Mother? She
Never saw man, nor has been seen by man,
That J k〈…〉n my life.
N〈…〉tter: Will you on?
Isle save thee blameless.
Troth Isle venture.—
TRes bien venue Madams.
You are very welcome.
Good lack! And is it you, Mrs. Alice? I'st possible? Are you come to learn Carriage too? I will make bold with tother Glass of Wine. At a word, J like your French Carriage the better, that it allows elder Women to drink Wine.
They have no other drink, except water. And Maids are▪ allowed but that.
And young wives (they say) wine with their water.
Mingle your Glass, then, Daughter. This for me. Your father has so fought you Mrs. Alice.
My Father has mist us too, by this time▪
But neither of 'em can dream French enough, to direct 'em hither, J warrant you. And does she learn the Carriages very well, Madam∣silly?
Mademoiselle, si vous plaist.
What do ye call it? I shall never hit it. ▪How do you find your Scholar?
O, she is very good. She learn very well.
But how much carriage hath she learnt? Hark
you Mrs. Alice. Have you not learnt to carry a man? Has not a good Husband stolen you hither?
J can think waggi•hly I tell you: And an old Ape has an old eye. Go to.
No such matter, Mrs. Bumpsey.
What is that you say?
I ask you how much carriage she has learnt?
She come but dis day; And she carry both the hands already.
How say by that. I'st possible? Can she carry both her hands in one day?
Yes, and before to morrow, she shall carry the foot as well.
It seems, then, you teach handling before footing in your French way.
You may learn dat of de little Shild. De lee∣tle Shild you see will handle de ting, before it can set one foot to de ground. Come, let me see you make a Reverence.
Reverence! VVhat's that?
Tic dat you call a Curtsy. Let me see you make Curtsy.
Look you hear then.
O fee, fee—dat is de gross english Douck, for de swagbuttock'd-wife of de Peasant.
How like you this then? There's a Reverence I warrant you.
Fee, dat is worse. See how you carry de hands like de Comedian dat act de shangling.
Shall I ever hit on it trow? I must take tother Glass.
Take heed she does not take too much.
I hope she will not. But there's no crossing her.
Let me see your hands.
There they bee. They have been a little too fa∣miliar with Sea-coale fires, and much other course housewifery, which J shall utterly abhor, and wash off, when J have learnt to carry them Courtly.
But shall J ever do it, think you?
Yes, yes, and all your other parts and mem∣bers.
I may win my Husband to love me Court∣lie then.
To love, and lye with you Courtly.
That's but seldom, I doubt.
You shall know all de ways to win his Love,
Or any mans, to multiply your honour.—
J will so multiply then.
Not only in your looks, your smiles and sweet Caresses▪
(Besides the help of Painting) that adorn
The face: But with the motion of each Lineament,
Of the whole frame of your well ordered body.
An Eye, a Lip, a finger shall not move;
A Toe trip unregarded. But your Geat
And your whole graceful Presence shall attract,
(Beyond affection) admiration:
As Isle artifice you.
Isle be a Nymph. Diana and her Dearlings▪ dear, dear, dear, &amp;c.
But may I paint, say you?
O most allowably; nay, commendably.
Tother Glass for that.
Then for the Art of dressing, setting forrh
Head Face, Neck, Breast,; with which I will inspire you.
To cover, or discover any part—
Unto de best advantage.
That is to say,
To hide shame, or show all: that's her meaning.
You shall have no defect perceived, no grace concealed.
I am for the naked Neck and Shoulders, then.
For (I tell you Mistress) I have a white Skin,
And a round straight Neck: smooth and plump Should∣ders,
Free from French Flea-bits, and never a wrinkle
Neare'em, though I say it.
'Thas been suggested by invective men,
Women, to justisie themselves that way,
Began that Fashion. As one tother side,
The fashion of men's Brow-looks was perhaps
Devised out of necessity, to hide
All il-grac'd forehead; Or besprinkled with
The outward Symptoms of some inward grief.
As, formerly the Saffron-steeped Linen,
By some great man found useful against Vermin,
Was ta▪no up for a fashionable wearing.
Some Lord that was no Niggard of his Beauty,
Might bring up narrow brims to publish it.
Another, to obscure his, or perhaps
To hide defects thereof, might bring up broad ones.
As questionless, the straight, neat timbered Leg,
First wore the Troncks, and long Silk-ho•e: As likely
The Baker-knees, or some strange shamble shanks,
Begat the Ancle-breeches.
Sir• the men
Took that conceit from us. What woman show•
A Leg▪ that's not a good one?—
These among men, are followed for the fashions,
That were invented for the better grace.
(As our Attires) to set off Limb, or face.
Good lack! What knowledge comes from foreign parts?
I prithee Wat, have patience for an hour.
Not for a minute, Sir, Isle not be kicked,
And called base Pander for your baseness.
Nay, look you Wat.
And had almost been pumped,
And made a sport for Water-men in the Thames.
But Hear me, Wat.
Isle hear my Father sooner. (Give me hence
My Sister) were he a ravenous Beast, a Wolf,
J would obey him rather then trudge a foot
Further in your base way. Heart J am hip-shot.
Now, would his Bodies pains convert his Soul,
It were a good work.
J am in desperate fear
Of the Mourning of the Chine too with the kicks▪
And hunches they o're-laid me with. O base!
Without resistance. Give me hence my Sister.
But how was it my fault?
Was it not your project?
What may this mean▪
No harm J warrant you.
Nay, it shall out. Your base inhumane Pro∣jest,
To sell your Daughters Maiden-head. (J care not
Who hears me, J.) And cunningly to make me
Your Hackney-jade to fetch your Chapman in.
Where are we now?
What did my Husband mean to wish us hither?
Baseness! J cannot call it bad enough.
You were as forward in it as my self,
And wooed me you might have her without all faults.
Mine eyes are opened now.
But J believe,
They were almost beaten out first.
And J vow
Ere J will marry so, Isle take a Beggar,
And join in trade with her, though I get nothing
But—My name is Vermin already, J
Thank a good Father for it.
A Beggar-wenches breed would propagate
Your name most numerously.
Much better then your Sale-ware, and more lasting.
J think J saw her to day must be the woman,
Good Madame Polcat, the trim Schoolmistress.
Isle make bold with your Scholar. What! you have more.
Isle carry her and her Virginity
Unto some fitter place of Execution.
You brought me hither, Sir, and here Isle stay.
What! in a Bawdy-house?
O dear! and is it so? What are we then?
Is this your boun fashion? Is this the carriage of the
Body, that you would teach us? What, to bee
VVhores? We could learn that at home, and
there were need, without your teaching,
Mother; what do you mean?
Mrs Bumpsey; pray fear no harm.
O good lack! what will become of us? where
are we now, Jane?
Betrayed! betrayed! Our honours are betrayed. O my
poor Bump. how will thou take this at my hands,
though J carry them never so Courtly?
'Sfoot, she's in her Maudlin fit: All her wine
showers out in tears.
Oh, oh, oh,—
Pray have her in. Look carefully to her,
Oh, oh, oh,—
Take the Bottle with ye.
I, I, I.
In all to the next Room.—
Sir, she shall with me. Isle leave her where J found her.
Sir, no such matter.
'Sfoot, Gentlewoman, must I kick you out o▪ doors?
No, nor depart your self, but by Authority.
J am provided for you. Friends come in.
And do your Office.
We arrest you, Sir; Nay, we shall rule you▪
Ha, ha, ha. Why, this is well, and very hos∣pitably done.
Would any man but an old Bawd have done this?
Sir, J mistrusted your Apostasy.
Since you revolt, J must recall my money;
Or lay you where J found you, as you threatened your Sister here.
Baser, and baser still. Are you a Knight?
A Knight, a Post-Knight. A Postilion,
That rides a fore-horse, o▪re the Ears in dirt,
Three fingers thick, is not so base. You Varlets,
Do you arrest folks in a bawdy-house?
We do not find it so; Or, if it be,
The place may be as honest as our Office.
Will you walk, Sir?
Stay; Let me consider,
If now my Father (as some in like cases
Have done) would take a fine submission.
I could afford to kneel and whine, me-thinks,
Rather then back to my old Ward again.
Twill ne'er be handsome though.
The business Gentlemen.
My lucky friend.
Sir, you relieved me lately. Could you now
But add another Favour, it might teach
One, that ne'er learnt to pray, to pray for you.
Do you not know me, Sir? It was I you saved
Out of the Temple Sudds.
Hast thou been shaved since?
No, Sir, I was disguised.
Disguised!
Disguised in villainy, which I recant.
Who knows but he may prove an honest man?
Pray, Sir, a word.
We do not use to wait dry-fisted; nor dry throe∣ted.
I would you were as wet all over, as I was like to have been: Or, as you are Catchpoles, I would you had been but in those hands I es∣caped from.
You have prevailed, Sir.
Sergeants you shall not out of the House. Here's for half an hours attendance. Go into that Room with your Prisoner. You shall have Wine, and Smoke too.
Be of good cheer friend▪ if thou can be honest,
I can relieve thee: fear not.
Sir, get my Father but to say as much,
And you shall be Co-heire with me. I vow you shall have half.
VVee'll talk anon. The Youth appears con∣verted.
There was no other means to work it by,
But that I used; to urged him past his Nature.
He was so free in's Villainy, that I
Giving the Spurs, ran him beyond his speed;
Quite off his Legs, and glad to be led home.
His Father comes on fairly: I have followed
All your Instructions concerning him,
And my fantastic Father-'Law. Both whom
Are hard at hand, with the wise western Knight.
He too's content to go to the best Ordinary,
While tic best cheap he says. Where are the women?
Your Mother-'Law, after she had got
As much French Carriage, as might serve to furnish
A petty Court; is fallen into a fit,
To over-throw it all again.
The better.
But is the house clear, Sir, of all your Riflers?
As I could wish; And well satisfied.
For, when they understood the honest end,
My Project aimed at; which, by an Oration
Well charged with virtuous Sentences, I forced
Into the nobler Breasts: they all recanted
The barbarous purpose; and as freely left
Their money for that Charitable use,
To which I pre-intended it. The rest
Pursed theirs again. But yet I have collected
In this odd uncouth way, five hundred Pounds,
That was laid down at stake for a Virginity,
To make an honest stock for Frank.
Tic good.
I may fetch in my Guests in the mean time
You maybe pleased, Sir, to peruse this Baper.
How now! what's here? How might he come by this?
It is the scorn I sent my injured Love;
My abused Elynor: The hand, that threw
Her from me. O, that at the price of it
I could receive her.
Sir, by your leave,
We come to sup w'yee. Does your Rifling hold?
What, you are off of the hooks, me-thinks.
If there be no such thing, tell us the Riddle?
You shall know all, and briefly. Frank, come in.
Now Gentlemen—
Let us salute her first.—
She does not taste of sin. Fair Chastity
Sits crowned upon her Brow, with an aspect,
May beat down. Lust to Hell, from whence it rose.
You profess Nobly, sir.
I vow, and do not lye to you: If I find
Your Father so inhumane, you against it:
VVee'll be your Rescue, if forty able sword-men
Which we have, at the signal of a finger,
Planted in readiness, can fetch you off:
Do you approve?
Yes, and admire your goodness.
Now we are for you, sir:
Then hear the story; which your late Im∣patience
would not permit.
You speak not now
In that high Phrase, or tone, as you
did then. Val. Stand here, unseen;
and hear attentively.
I am a Gentleman, that by foul misdeed
(Heaven, Heaven I ask thee pardon) once did wrong
To an unfortunate Family, by rejecting,
After affiance, and her love abuse▪d,
A Gentlewoman—
You got with child, and then denied her Marriage.
It was so.
Ay me!
No passion, gentle Soul.
If this should prove my Father now!—
Well Sir, your Gentlewoman!
She, on the discontent, (poor haplesse Soul)
Now fourteen Winters since though sadly burdened,
Fled, and no more is heard of: at the first
My wildness took no sense of this dear Loss;
But drew me through the ways of careless pleasure,
By riotous expense, that mine estate
And Credit ran at waste, and was nigh spent,
Until my trespass cried against my Conscience
To render satisfaction: but in vain
We offer to the dead. My Genius therefore
Prompts me to grateful deeds unto her Blood.
What can this come to?
She had a Brother, that lost his estate By Law—
Means he not me?
To a Corrupt Oppressor—
Ha! How's that?
Was stripped out of the very Coat he wore,
Had nothing left him, but a Son—
What's all this to your Daughter?
Even all that may be; (see) His Sonne's my Daughter.
Now do you find my project Gentlemen?
It has at Charge of three days House-keeping
Put hal•e a thousand pounds in's purse; Besides
A fair pull for his Fathers Land again:
For he has, by a lawful Church-man, married
The Daughter of his Fathers Adversary.
Why, here are wonders!
Bravely, nobly done
Come Mrs. Alice; and justify your Act.
My Daughter, ha!
My sweetheart, hoe!
Your haes and hoes can not draw her from me,
Thee is my Wife.
By what witch-craft?
By stronger Charms, then your Art can dis∣solve▪ You know me now, Sir—And my Project, do you not?
Amb. Sir Humfrey Dryground.
I am struck dum with wonder.
O tic he, tic hee.
Alas she swoons, Sir cheer you up this Lady,
While I appease the rest. A word with you Sir.
I will not be appeased.
My love! my Elynor!
So, cheer her up Sir Humfry. To her again Sir Humfry; your Son and mine in Law has told me all your story, and reconciled your Brother Brookall to you before your interview. I know all, the full point and the whole substance; the flat and plain of the business; and now I love these things again. How now Sir Am∣philus?
Drowned in Melancholy?
No: But and I were at the Duckingpond, I know what I know. But when I drown my self, I'll give you leave to hang me.
Your pardon, and your blessing; I beseech you.
Hence.
Was this thy Journey into France my Boy?
High Providence hath made it good. But tell me,
Was Love your chief Instructor to this Marriage?
Indeed it was equal in her and me.
Pray Sir your blessing.
Away.
Turn this way for a blessing then my Daughter,
Shall I tell you Neighbour? Law has no re∣lief for you; And Conscience and you have a lunge time been strangers▪ Could you be friends and embrace Conscience now, all would be well. And there's the substance. Is it plain?
Conscience! do you know where she is?
Hears one has brought her in his true Conver∣zion.
Sir, If you can forgive, and can obey you▪—
I now can better kneel▪ then speak
Do you note those tears, Sir? Had you lost your Daughter,
My Father had in this made you amends,
In finding you a Son. His Art converted him.
Sure, ell's but Apparition, or a dream.
Ha! Think you so? Tic your own flesh and blood: And by your leave and liking▪ may prove as ho∣nest a Man, as his Father. Is not this plain now? For∣give and bless •m all over, and so Kiss 'em too▪ They are your Children▪
O my dear Bump! Art thou there? Thou may kiss, and forgive me all over too, for any harm, or dishonesty; though the place be as they say-at a word, Bump. Thou may be∣leive me, I came but to learn Carriage of the Body, nor to carry no bodies body, but my own body, Bump. No truly, truly Bump. o—o—that ever I did that.
Peace, peace: Ell's well. At least I know your Disease.
Think me not drunk, good Bump, a little fashion-sick, or so.
Fashion-sick! a fine civil word. To be drunk, is fashion-sick.
I am awaked out of the Lethargy
Of Avarice: Blessed may our Friendship be.
I will not sleep, before the holy Priest
Has done the Office. Blessing on my Girl.
Val, Thou hast made me young again: the best
Occurrents in this Project have been thine.
Thy Accidents exceeded my design.
They do not yet cease here: For see, the strife
Betwixt these long continued Adversaries
Perfectly reconciled; and both have given
The young and hopeful married pair their Blessings.
To which I have given my Consent most freely.
For it was Nolens volens as they say.
They are beholden to you. Mr. Vermin
Restores unto the Son the Fathers Land,
For Dowry with his Daughter: And is taken
So with the good you wrought upon his Son,
The Convertite here; that if he stand firm
Till the determination of your Mortgage,
Hee • cancel it, and send it Gratis to you.
That's sure enough. But Sir, the other business.
What's that?
The most to be admired of all;
He loves my Sister here; and has done long:
But, now, that he perceives her worth (being yours)
And, since you promised him your Daughter too,
He makes it his fair suit.
I'll talk with his Father.
And Wat stand you but firm, and live reformed,
Winning my Daughters love, you shall have mine.
That Fortune is not blind, that showed me way
To Father, Friends, and Husband in one day.
This binds us all into a Brother-hood.
And with a Brothers Love I now salute you.
So may we with a general embrace,
Create the Heart of Friendship, not the Face.
Come Gentlemen, your Ordinary stays,
Twill prove good fare (I hope) though no rich Feast;
And acceptable to each welcome Guest.
NO way ambitious yet of vulgar praise,
The writer of these Scenes desires to know,
By your fair leave, though he assume no Baize,
Whether he pulled fair for a ••afe or no.
If yes, then let your hands assistant be,
T'incourage him to climb Apollo's tree.

