THe brothers then are met?
They are.
Tic thought they may be re∣concil'd.
Tic rather wished.
For such whose reason doe direct their thoughts
Without self flattery, dare not hope it Baldwin,
The fires of love which the dead Duke believed
His equal care of both would have united,
Ambition hath divided; and there are
Too many on both parts that know they cannot
Or rise to wealth or honour, their maine ends,
Unless the tempest of the Princes fury
Make troubled Seas, and those Seas yield fit Billows
To heave them up, and these are too well practised
In their bad arts to give way to a calm,
Which yielding rest to good men proves their ruin.
And in the shipwreck of their hopes and fortunes
The Dukedom might be saved, had it button
That stood affected to the general good,
With that confirmed zeal which brave Aubrey does.
He is indeed the perfect character of a good man,
And so his actions speak him.
And did you observe the many doubts &amp; cautions
the brothers stood upon before they met?
I did, and yet that ever brothers should
Stand on more nice terms then sworn enemies
After a war proclaimed would with a stranger,
Wrong the reporters credit; they saluted
At distance, and so strong was the suspicion
Each had of other, that before they durst
Embrace, they were by several servants searched,
As doubting concealed weapons; antidotes
Tan openly by both, fearing the room
Appointed for the interview was poisoned;
The chairs and cushions with like care surveyed,
And in a word, in every circumstance
So jealous on both parts, that it is more
Then to be feared, concord can never join
Minds so divided.
Yet our best endeavours
Should not be wanting Gisbert.
Neither shall they,
But what are these?
They are without my knowledge,
But by their manners and behaviours
They should express themselves.
Since we serve Rollo
The eldest Brother, weel be Rollians,
Who will maintain us as brave as Romans
You stand for him?
I doe.
Why then observe,
How much the business, the so longed for business,
By men that are named from their swords concerns you:
Lechery, our common friend, so long kept under
With whips and beating fatal hemp shall rise;
And bawdry in a French-hood shall plead before her
Where it shall be concluded, after twelve
Virginity shall be carted.
Excellent!
And Hell but grant the quarrel thats between
The Princes may continue, and the business
That's of the sword, t'outlast three suits in law.
And we will make Atturneys lans prizadoes,
And our brave Gown•men practisers of back-sword,
The pewter of all Sergeants Maces shall be melted
And turned into common Flagons,
In which it shall be lawful to carouse
To their most lousy fortunes.
Here's a statesman!
A Creditor shall not dare but by petition
To make demand of any debt, and that
Only once every leap year, in which if
The debtor may be won for a French Crown
To pay a souse, he shall be registered
His benefactor.
The Chancellor hears you.
Fear not, I now dare speak as loud as he,
And will be heard and have all that I speak law.
Have you no eyes? there's a reverence due
From children of the gown to men of action.
How's this?
Even so, the times, the times are changed,
All business is not now preferred in parchment,
Nor shall a grant pass which wants this broad seal,
This seal, doe you see? your gravity once laid
My head and heals together in the dungeon
For cracking a scald officers crown, for which
A time is come for vengeance and expect it,
For know you have not full three hours to live.
Yes somewhat longer.
To what end?
To hang you, think on that Ruffion.
For you Schoolmaster, you have a pretty daughter;
let me see,
Near three a clock, by which time I much fear
I shall be tired with killing some five hundred,
Provide a bath, and her to entertain me.
And that shall be your ransom.
Impudent rascal!
More of the crew.
What are you Rollians?
No: this for Rollo and all such as serve him:
We stand for Otto.
You seem men of fashion,
And therefore isle deal fairly, you shall have
The honour this day to be chronicled
The first men killed by Granpree; you see this sword,
A pretty foolish toy, my valours servant,
And I may boldly say a Gentleman,
It having made when it was Charlemaines
Three thousand Knights; this Sir shall cut your throat,
And doe you all fair service else.
I kiss your hands for the good offer, here's another
The servant of your servant, which shall be proud
To be scoured in your sweet guts, till when,
Pray you command me.
Your Idolater Sir.
That ever such
Should hold the names of men!
Or justice be held cruelty, when it labours
To pluck such roots up.
Yet they are protected, and by the great ones.
Not the good ones Baldwin.
Is this a time to be spent thus by such
That are the principal ministers of the State?
When they that are the heads have filled the Court
With factions, a weak woman only left
To stay their bloody hands? can her weak arm
Alone divert the dangers ready now
To fall upon the Common-wealth, and bury
The honours of it, leaving not the name
Of what it was? O Gisbert the fair trials
And frequent proofs which our late Moister made
Both of your love and faith, gave him assurance
To choose you at his death to be a Guardian, nay
A Father of his Sons, and that great trust
How ill doe you discharge? I must be plain
That at the best you're a sad looker on
Of those bad practises you should prevent.
And whore's the use of your Philosophy
In this so needful time? be not secure,
For Baldwin be assured since that the Princes
When they were young and apt for any form,
Were given to your instruction and grave ordering,
Twill be expected that they should be good,
Or their bad manners will be imputed yours.
It was not in me my Lord to alter nature.
Nor can my Counsels work on thē that will not
Vouchsafe me hearing.
Doe these answers sort
Or with your place or persons? or your years?
Can Gisbert being the pillar of the Laws
See them trod u•der foot, or forced to serve
The Princes unjust ends, and with a frown
Be silenced from exclaiming on the abuse,
Or Baldwin only weep the desperate madness
Of his seduced Pupils? See those minds
Which with good arts he laboured to build up,
Examples of succeeding times oreturn'd
By undermineing Parasites; no one precept
Leading to any act, or great or good
But is forced from their memory, in whose room
Black Counsels are received and their retirements
And secret conference, producing only
Devilish designs, a man would shame to father.
But I talk when I should doe, and chide others
For that I now offend in.
See it confirmed:
Now doe or never speak more,
We are yours.
You shall know who I am.
I doe, my equal.
Thy Prince, give way, were we alone id force thee
In thy best blood to write thy self my subject,
And glad I would receive it.
Sir.
Dear Lord.
Thy subject?
Yes, nor shall tame patience hold me
A minute longer, only half my self,
My birth gave me this Dukedom, and my sword
Shall change it to the common grave of all
That tread upon her bosom, ere I part with
A piece of Earth, or title that is mine.
I need it not, and would scorn to receive
Though offered what I want not, therefore know
From me though not delivered in great words,
Eyes red with rage, poor pride, and threatening action;
Our father at his death, then when no accent
Were it then a son could fall from him in vain,
Made us co-heires, our part of land and honours
Of equal weight, and to see this confirmed
The oath of these is yet upon record,
Who though they should forsake me, and call down
The plagues of perjury on their sinful heads,
I would not leave my self.
Nor will we see the will of the dead Duke in∣fringed.
Nor I
The elder robed of what's his right.
Nor you?
Let me take place I say I will not see it,
My sword is sharpest.
Peace you tinder-boxes,
That only carry matter to make a flame,
Which will consume you.
You are troublesome,
This is no time for Arguments, my title
Needs not your school defines, but my sword
With which the Gordian of your Sophistry
Being cut, shall show the Imposture for your law.
It is in me to change them as I please,
I being above them (Gisbert)
Would you have me protect them?
Let them then now stretch their extremest rigour,
And seize upon that Traitor, and your tongue
Make him appear first dangerous and then odious,
And after under the pretence of safety
For the sick State, the Lands and Peoples quiet,
Cut off his head, and Isle give up my sword,
And fight with them at a more certain weapon
To kill, and with authority.
Sir I grant,
The Laws are useful weapons, but found out
To assure innocence not to oppress.
Then you conclude him innocent?
The power your father gave him, must not prove a crime.
Nor should you so receive it.
To which purpose,
All that dare challenge any part in goodness
Will become Suppliants to you.
Such have none,
That dare move me in this, hence, I defy you
Be of his party, bring it to your laws,
And thou thy double heart, thou popular fool•
Your moral rules of justice, and her balance.
I stand on my own Guard.
Which thy injustice
Will make thy enemies; by the memory
Of him whose better part now suffers for thee,
Whose reverend ashes with an impious hand,
Thou throwst out to contempt, in thy repining
At his so just decree; thou art unworthy
Of what his last will, not thy merit gave thee,
That art so swollen within, with all those mischiefs
That ere made up a Tyrant, that thy breast
The prison of thy purposes, cannot hold them
But that they break forth, and in thy own words
Discover, what a monster they must serve,
That shall acknowledge thee.
Thou shalt not live
To be so happy.
Nor your misery
Begin in murder; duty, allegiance,
And all respect of what you are forsake me.
Doe you stare once? is this a theater?
Or shall these kill themselves, like to manfencers,
To make you sport? keep them asunder, or
By Heaven Isle charge on all.
Keep the peace,
I am for you my Lord, and if you'll have me•
Isle act the Constables part.
Live I to see this!
Will you doe that your Enemies dare not wish,
And cherish in your selves those furies which
Hell would cast out? doe, I am ready, kill me,
And these that would fall willing sacrifices
To any power that would restore your reason
And make you men again, which now you are not.
These are your bucklers boy,
My hindrances,
And were I not confirmed, my justice in
The taking of thy life, could not weigh down
The wrong, in shedding the least drop of blood
Of these, whose goodness only now protects thee.
Thou should feel, I in act would prove my self
What thou in words dost labour to appear.
Hear this and talk again, Isle break through all
But I will reach thy heart.
Tic better guarded.
Make way or I will force it, who are these
My sons, my shames; turn all your swords on me,
And make this wretched body but one wound,
So this unnatural quarrel find a grave
In the unhappy womb that brought you forth.
Dare you remember that you had a Mother,
Or look on these gray hairs, made so with tears
For both your goods, and not with age, and yet
Stand doubtful to obey hers? from me you had
Life, nerves and faculties to use those weapons,
And dare you raise them against her, to whom
You owe the means of being what you are?
All peace is meant to you.
Why is this war then?
As if your arms could be advanced, and I
Not set upon the wrecks, your blood is mine
Your danger's mine, your goodness I should share in,
And must be branded with those impious marks
You stamp on your own foreheads, and on mine
If you go on thus: for my good name therefore
Though all respects of honour in your selves
Are in your fury choked, throw down your swords•
Your duty should be swifter then my tongue,
And join your hands while they are innocent,
You have heat of blood and youth apt to ambition
To plead an easy pardon for what's past;
But all the ills beyond this hour committed,
From Gods or men must hope for no excuse.
Can you hear this unmoved?
No Syllable
Of this so pious charm, but should have power
To frustrate all the juggling deceipts
With which the Devil blinds you.
I begin to melt, I know not how.
Mother, Isle leave you,
And Sir, be thankful for the time you live
Till wee meet next, (which shall be soon and sudden)
To her persuasion for you•
O yet stay,
And rather then part thus, vouchsafe me hearing
As enemies, how is my soul divided!
My love to both is equal as my wishes,
But are returned by neither, my grieved heart
Hold yet a little longer, and then break•
I kneel to both, and will speak so, but this
Takes the authority of a Mothers power,
And therefore like my self, Otto to thee,
And yet observe son, how thy Mothers tears
Out strip her forward words to make way for 'em,
Thou art the younger Otto, yet be now
The first example of obedience to me,
And grow the elder in my love.
The means to be so happy?
This, yield up thy sword,
And let thy piety give thy mother strength
To take that from thee, which no enemies force
Could ere despoil thee of• why dost thou tremble?
And with a fearful eye fixed on thy brother,
Observ'st his ready sword as bent against thee?
I am thy armour and will be pierced through
Ten thousand times before I will give way
To any peril may arrive at thee,
And therefore fear not.
Tic not for my self
But for you Mother; you are now engaged
In more then lies in your unquestioned virtue.
For since you have disarmed me of defence,
Should I fall now, though by his hand, the world
May say it was your practise.
All worlds perish
Before my piety turns treasons parent.
Take it again, and stand upon your guard,
And while your brother is, continue armed.
And yet this fear is needless, for I know
My Rollo, though he dares as much as man,
So tender of his yet untainted valour,
So noble, that he dares doe nothing basely.
You doubt him, he fears you, I doubt and fear
Both, for others safety not my own.
Know yet my sons when of necessity
You must deceive or be deceived, it is better
To suffer treason then to act the traitor;
And in a war like this, in which the glory
Is his that's overcome. consider then
What tic for which you strive, is it the Dukedom,
Or the command of these so ready subjects?
Desire of wealth, or whatsoere else
Fires your ambition? it is still desperate madness,
To kill the people which you would be Lords of,
With fire and sword to lay that country wast,
Whose rule you seek for, to consume the treasures
Which are the sinews of your government,
In cherishing the factions •hat destroy it.
Far, far be this from you, make it not questioned,
Whither you can have interest in that Dukedom,
Whose ruin both contend for.
I desire
But to enjoy my own which I will keep.
And rather then posterity shall have cause
To say I ruined all, divide the Dukedom,
I will accept the moiety.
I embrace it.
Divide me first or tear me limb by limb,
And let them, find as many several graves
As there are Villages in Normandy,
And it is less sin, then so to weaken it.
To hear it mentioned doth already make me
Envy my dead Lord, and almost blaspheme
Those powers which heard my prayers for fruitfulness,
And did not with my first birth close my womb.
To me alone, my second blessing proves my first,
My first of misery, for if heaven
That gave me Rollo, there had staid his bounty,
And Otto my dear Otto ne'er had been,
Or being, had not been so worth my love,
The stream of my affection had run constant
In one fair current, all my hopes had been
Laid up in one, and fruitful Normandy
In this division had not lost her glories.
For as it is now it is a fair diamond
Which being preserved entire exceeds all value,
But cut in pieces, (though these pieces are
Set in fine gold by the best workmans cunning)
Parts with all estimation: so this Dukedom
As tic yet whole, the neighbouring Kings may covet
But cannot compass, which divided will
Become the spoil of every barbarous foe
That will invade it.
How this works in both!
Prince Rolloes eyes have lost their fire.
And anger, that but even now wholly possessed
Good Otto, hath given place to pity.
End not thus Madam,
But perfect whats so well begun.
I see in both fair signs of reconcilement
Make them sure proofs they are so: the fates offer
To your free choice, either to live examples
Of piety or wickedness, if the latter
Blinds so your understanding that you cannot
Pierce through her painted outside, and discover
That she is all deformity within,
Boldly transcend all presidents of mischief,
And let the last and the worst act of tyrannies,
The murder of a Mother but begin
The Scene of blood; you after are to heighten;
But if that virtue and her sure rewards
Can win you to accept her for your guide,
To lead you up to heaven and there fix you
The fairest star in the bright sphere of honour,
Make me the parent of a hundred sons
All brought into the world with joy not sorrow,
And every one a Father to his country
In being now made mother of your concord.
Such and so good loud fame for ever speak you.
I, now they meet like brothers.
My hearts joy
Flows through my eyes.
May never women's tongue
Hereafter be accused, for this ones goodness.
If we contend, from this hour it shall be
How to overcome in brotherly affection.
Otto is Rollo now, and Rollo Otto,
Or as they have one mind, rather one name,
From this atonement let our lives begin,
Be all the rest forgotten.
Spoke like Rollo.
And to the honour of this reconcilement
We all this night will at a public feast
With choice wines drown our late fears,
And with Music welcome our comforts.
Sure and certain ones.
Supported thus I am secure o sons,
This is your Mothers triumph.
You deserve it.
Did ever such a hoped for business end thus?
Tic fatal to us all, and yet you Granpree
Have the least cause to fear,
Why, what's my hope?
The certainty that you have to be hanged;
You know the Chancellors promise.
Plague upon you.
What think you of a bath, and a Lords daughter
To entertain you?
Those desires are of frail thoughts:
All friends, no Rollions now, nor Ottoes,
The several courtesies of our swords and servants
Defer till apter consequence: let's make use
Of this nights freedom, a short Parliament to us,
In which it will be lawful to walk freely,
Nay to our drink we shall have meat too, and thats
No usual business• to the men 'oth sword.
Drink deep with me tonight, we shall to morrow
Or whip or hang the merrier.
Lead the way then.
Why should this trouble you?
It does and must doe,
Till I find ease.
Consider then and quickly,
And like a wise man take the current with you
Which once turned head will sink you.
Blessed occasion offers it self in thousand safeties to you,
Time standing still to point you out your purpose,
And resolution (the true child of virtue)
Ready to execute: what dull cold weakness
Has crept into your bosom, whose mere thoughts
Like tempests ploughing up the soyling Forests
Even with their swing were wont to shake down hazards.
What first your mothers tears?
Prithee be patient.
Her hands held up, her prayers, or her curses?
O Power of prayer dropped through by a woman.
Take heed the Soldiers see it not, it is miserable
In Rollo, below miserable, take heed your friends
The sinews of your cause, the strength you stir by,
Take heed I say, they find it not; take heed
Your own repentance (like a passing bell)
Too late and too loud tell the world you are perished.
What noble spirit eager of advancement,
Whose employment is his plough, what sword whose sharp∣ness
Waits but the arm to wield it, or what hope
After the world has blown abroad this weakness
Will move again, or make a wish for Rollo?
Are we not friends again, by each oath ratified
Our tongues the Heralds o• our hearts?
Poor hearts then.
Our worthier friends.
No friends Sir to your honour,
Friends to your fall, where is your understanding
The noble vessel that your full soul sailed in,
Rib'd round with honours, where is that? tic ruined,
The tempest of a women's sighs hath sunk it.
Friendship, take heed Sir, is a smiling harlot
That when she kisses, kisses a soder'd friendship
Pieced out with promises; ô painted ruin!
Latorch, he is my brother.
The more doubted,
For hatred hatched at home is a tame Tiger,
May fawn and sport, but never leave his nature.
The jars of brothers• two such mighty ones,
Are like a small stone thrown into a river,
The breath scarce heard, but view the beaten current
And you shall see a thousand angry rings
Rise in his face, still swelling and still growing;
So jars circling in distrusts, distrusts pull down dangers,
And dangers death, the greatest extreme shadow
Till nothing bound them but the Showers, their graves.
There is no manly wisdom nor no safety
In leaning to this league, this piece patched friendship,
This reared up reconcilement on a billow
Which as he tumbles• totters down your fortune.
First not your own you reach at? law and nature
Vshring the way before you, is not he borne and
Bequeathed your subject?
Ha?
What fool would give a storm leave to disturb him
When he may shut the casement? can that man
Has won so much upon you by your pity,
And drawn so high, that like an ominous Comet
He darkens all your light, can this cou•h'd Lyon
(Though now he licks and locks up his fell paws
Craftily humming like a Cat to cozen you)
But ambition whets him and time fits him,
Leap to his prey, and seized once, suck your heart out?
Doe you make it conscience?
Conscience Latorch? what's that?
A tear they tie up fools in: natures coward,
Tasting the blood and chilling the full spirits
With apprehension of mere clouds and shadows.
I know no conscience, nor I fear no shadows.
Or if you did, if there were conscience,
If the free soul could suffer
The fiery mind, such puddle to put it out,
Must it needs like a rank vine run up rudely,
And twine about the top of all our happiness
Honour and rule, and there sit shaking of us?
It shall not nor it must not: I am satisfied,
And once more am my self again.
My mothers tears and womanish cold prayers
Farewell, I have forgot ye. If there be conscience,
Let it not come betwixt a Crown and me,
Which is my hope of bliss, and I believe it
Otto, our friendship thus I blow to ayre
A bubble for a boy to play withal,
And all the vows my weakness made like this,
Like this poor heartless rush, I rend a pieces.
Now you go right Sir, now your eyes are open.
My Fathers last petition's dead, as he is,
And all the promises I closed his eyes with,
In the same grave I bury.
Now you are a man Sir.
Otto thou show my winding sheet before me,
Which ere I put it on, like heavens blessed fire
In my descent isle make it blush in blood.
A crown, a crown, ô sacred rule now fire me,
Nor shall the pity of thy youth false brother,
Although a thousand Virgins kneel before me•
And every dropping eye a Court of mercy,
The same blood with me, nor the reverence
Due to my Mothers blessed womb, that bred us
Redeem thee from my doubts: thou art a woolfe here
Fed with my fears, and I must cut thee from me,
A crown, a crown, ô sacred rule now fire me,
No safety else.
But be not too much stirred Sir,
Nor too high in your execution; swallowing waters
Run deep and silent till they are satisfied,
And smile in thousand curls, to guild their craft,
Let your sword sleep, and let my two-edg'd wit work.
This happy feast, the full joy of your friendship
shall be his last.
How my Latorch?
Why thus Sir.
Isle presently go dive into the Officers
That minister at Table, gold and goodness
With promise upon promise, and time necessary
Isle pour into 'em.
Can thou doe it neatly?
Let me alone and such a bait it shall be
Shall take off all suspicion.
Go and prosper.
Walk in then and your smoothest face put on Sir.
A hot day, a hot day, vengeance hot boys,
Give me some drink; this fire's a plaguy fritter.
Body a me I am dry still, give me the Jack boy,
This wooden skiff holds nothing.
And faith master,
What brave new meats, for here will be old eating?
Old and young boy, let em all eat, I have it,
I have ballasse for their bellies, if they eat, a Gods name
Let em have ten tire of teeth a piece, • care not.
But what new rare munition?
Peuh a thousand,
Isle make ye Pigs speak French at table, and a fat Swan
Come sculing out of England with a challenge.
Isle make ye a dish of Calves feet dance the Canaries,
And a consort of crammed Capons fiddle to em.
A Calves head speak an Oracle, and a dozen of Larks
Rise from the dish, and sing all supper time;
Tic nothing boys, I have framed a fortification,
Out of Rye past, which is impregnable,
And against that for two long hours together,
Two doz•n of maribones shall play continually.
For Fish isle make ye a standing lake of White-broth,
And Pikes come ploughing up the plumbs before 'em•
Orion on a Dolphin playing Lachrimae,
And brave King Herring with his oil and onion
Crowned with a leomon pill, his way prepared
with his strong guard of pilchers.
I marry moister.
All these are nothing, isle make ye a stubble goose
Turn oath toe thrice, doe a cross point presently
And then sit down again, and cry, come eat me.
These are for mirth, now Sir, for matter of mourning
Isle bring ye in the lady loin of Veale
With the long love she bore the Prince of Orange.
Thou boy, thou!
I have a trick for thee too,
And a rare trick, and I have done it for thee.
What's that good master?
Tic a sacrifice, a full vine bending like an Arch,
And under the blown god Bacchus sitting on a hogs-head
his altar here, before that a plump Vintner,
Kneeling and offering incense to his Deity,
Which shall be only this, red sprats and pilchers.
This when the Tables drawn, to draw the wine in.
Thou hast it right,
And then comes thy Song butler.
This will be admirable.
O Sir, most admirable.
If you'll have the paste speak, it is in my power
I have fire enough to work it, come stand close,
And now rehearse the Song it may be perfect,
The drinking song, and say I were the Brothers.
Drink to day and drown all sorrow,
You shall perhaps not doe it to morrow.
Best while you have it use your breath,
There is no drinking after death.
Wine works the heart up, wakes the wit,
There is no cure against age but it.
It helps the head-ach, cough and tissick,
And is for all diseases Physic.
Then let us swill boys for our health,
Who drinks well loves the common wealth.
And he that will to bed go sober,
Falls with the leaf still in October.
Well have you borne your selves, a red-deere pie boys,
And that no lean one, I bequeath your •ertues.
What friends hast thou to day, no Citizens?
Yes father the old Crew.
By the Mass true, wenches
Sirrha, set by a choine of beef and a hot pastie•
And let the jowl of Sturgeon be corrected,
And doe you mark sir, stalk me to a Pheasant
And see and ye can shoot her into the Seller.
Godamercy dad,
Send me thy roaring bottles,
And with such Nectar I will see 'em filled,
That all thou speak shall be pure Helicon.
Monsieur Latorch, what news within?
Save ye,
Save ye moister, save ye Gentlemen,
You are casting for this preparation,
This joyful supper for the royal brothers:
I'm glad I have met ye fitly, for to your charge
My bountiful brave Butler, I must deliver
A heavy of young lasses, that must look on
This days solemnity, and see the two Dukes
Or I shall loose my credit, you have stowage.
For such freight isle find room, &amp; be your servāt.
Bring 'em, they shall not starve here, isle send 'em victuals
Shall work you a good turn, though it be ten days hence sir.
Godamercy noble moister.
Nay isle do it.
And Wine they shall not want, let 'em drink like ducks.
What misery it is that minds so royal,
And such most honest bounties as yours are,
Sold be confined thus to uncertainties?
I, were the State once settled, then we had places.
Then we could show our selves and help our friends sir.
I then there were some savour in it, where now
We live between two stools, every hour ready
To tumble on our No•es, and for ought we know yet
For all this supper, ready to fast the next day.
I would fine speak to you out of pity,
Out of the love I bear you, out of honesty,
For your own goods, nay for the general blessing.
And we would as fain hear you, pray go forward.
Dare ye• but think to make your selves up cer∣tainties,
Your places and your credits ten times doubled
The Princes favour Rolloes?
A sweet gentleman•.
I, and as bounteous if he had his right too.
By th'masse a royal gentleman indeed boys,
He will make the Chimneys smoke.
He would doe friends,
And you too, if he had his right, true Courtiers,
What could ye want then? dare ye? —
Pray be short sir.
And this my soul upon it, I dare assure you•
If you but dare your parts.
Dare not me Monsieur,
For I that fear neither fire nor water sir,
Dare doe enough a man would think•
Believe it sir,
But make this good upon us you have promised,
You shall not find us flinchers.
Then isle be sudden.
What may this mean, and whether would he drive us?
And first for what you must doe, because all dāger
Shall be apparently ti'de up and mussel'd,
The matter seeming mighty, there's your pardons.
Pardons? is it come to that? good god defend us.
And here's five hūdred crowns in bounteous earnest.
And now behold the matter.
What are these Sir?
And of what nature? to what use?
Imagine.
Will they kill rats? they eat my pies abominably,
Or work upon a woman, cold as Christmas?
I have an old jade sticks upon my fingers.
May I taste 'em?
Is your will made?
And have you said your prayers? for they'll pay ye,
And now to come to you for your knowledge,
And for the good you never shall repent ye,
If ye be wisemen now.
Wise as you will sir,
These must be put then into the several meats
Young Otto loves, by you into his wine sir,
Into his bread by you, by you into his linen.
Now if you desire, ye have found the means
To make ye, and if ye dare not ye have
Found your ruin, resolve me ere you go.
You'll keep faith with us?
May I no more see light else.
Why it is done then.
Tic done.
Tic done which shall be undone.
About it then, farewell, ye are all of one mind?
All.
All, all.
Why then, all happy.
What did we promise him?
Doe you ask that now?
I would be glad to know what it is.
Isle tell ye,
It is to be all villains knaves and traitors.
Fine wholesome titles,
But if we dare go forward.
We may be hanged drawd &amp; quartred.
Very true Sir
What a goodly swinge shall I give the gallows, yet I think too,
This may be done, and we may be rewarded
Not with a rope, but with a Royal master,
And yet we may be hanged too.
Say it were done,
Who is it done for? is it not for Rollo and for his right?
And yet we may be hanged too.
Or say he take it, say we be discovered.
Is not the same man bound still to protect us?
Are we not his?
Sure he will never fail us.
If he doe friends, we shall find that will hold us,
And yet me thinks this prologue to our purpose,
These Crowns should promise more. Tic easly done,
As easy as a man would roast an egg,
If that be all; for look ye gentlemen•
Here stands my broths: my finger slipps a little,
Down drops a dose, I stir him with my ladle,
And there's a di•h for a Duke: Whole podrilla:
Here stands a baked meat, he wants a little seas•ing
A foolish mistake, my spice box gentlemen.
And put in some of this, the matters ended:
Dredge ye a dish of Plovers, there's the art on it,
Or in a galingale a little does it.
Or as I fill my wine.
Tic very true Sir
Blessing it with your hand, thus, quick and neatly first,
Tic past.
And done once tic as easy•
For him to thank us for it, and reward us.
But it is a damned sin.
I never fear that,
The fire's my playfellow, and now I am resolved boys.
Why then have with ye.
The same for me.
For me too.
And now no more our worships, but our Lordships.
Not this year of my knowledge, isle un-lord ye.
Perfume the room round: and prepare the table:
Gentlemen officers waite in your places.
Make room there,
Room for the Dukes meat, Gentlemen be bare there,
Clear all the entrance, Guard put by those papers,
And Gentlemen Ushers see the Gallery clear
The Dukes are coming on.
Tic certainly informed.
Reward the fellow,
And look you mainly to it.
My life for you Sir.
Now am I straight my Lords, and young again,
My long since blasted hopes shoot out in blossoms,
The fruits of everlasting love appearing.
O my blessed boys, the honour of my years,
Of all my cares the bounteous fair rewarders!
O let me thus embrace you, thus for ever
Within a mothers love lock up your friendships,
And my sweet sons, once more with mutual twin•ings,
As one chaste bed begot you, make one body:
Blessings from heaven in thousand showers fall on ye.
O women's goodness never to be equalled,
May the most sinful creatures of thy Sex,
But kneeling at thy Monument, rise Saints.
Sit down my worthy sons, my Lords your places.
I, now me thinks the Table's nobly furnished,
Now the meat nourishes, the wine gives Spirit,
And all the room stuck with a general pleasure,
Shows like the peaceful bower of happiness.
Long may it last, and from a heart filled with it
Full as my cup, I give it round my Lords.
And may that stubborn heart be drunk with sorrow
Refuses it, men dying now should take it,
And by the virtue of this Ceremony
Shake off their miseries and sleep in peace,
You are sad my noble brother.
no indeed Sir.
No sadness my sweet son this day.
Pray ye eat,
Something is here you have loved, •ast of this dish,
It will prepare your Stomach.
Thank you brother,
I am not now disposed to eat.
Or that,
You put us out of heart man, come these baked meats
Were ever your best diet.
None I thank you.
Are you well noble Child?
Yes gracious mother.
Give him a cup of wine then, pledge the health,
Drink it to me isle give it to my mother.
Doe my best child.
I must not my best mother,
Indeed I dare not, for of late my body
Has been much weakened, by excess of diet.
The promise of a fever hanging on me,
And even now ready, if not by abstinence.
Excuse your self sir,
Come tic your fear, &amp; not your fever brother,
And you have done me a most worthy kindness.
My Royal mother, and my noble Lords,
Hear, for it now concerns me to speak boldly,
What faith can be expected from such vows,
From his dissembling smiles, what fruit of friendship,
From all his full embraces, what blessed issue,
When he shall brand me here with base suspicion?
He takes me for a poisoner.
Gods defend it son.
For a foul knave, a villain, and so fears me
I could say something too.
You must not so sir,
Without your great forgetfulness of virtue.
This is your brother and your honoured brother,
Indeed your loving brother.
If he please so.
One noble Father with as noble thoughts,
Begot your minds and bodies, one care rocked you,
And one truth to you both was ever sacred;
Now fie my Otto, whether flies your goodness?
Because the right hand has the power of cutting,
Shall the left presently cry out, hoe's maymde?
They are one my child, one power and one performance,
And joined together thus one love, one body.
I doe beseech your Grace, take to your thoughts,
More certain Counsailors then doubts and fears,
They strangle nature, and disperse themselves
If once believed, into such fogs and errors,
That the bright truth her self can never sever.
Your brother is a Royal gentleman,
Full of him self honour and honesty,
And take heed Sir, how nature bent to goodness,
(So straight a Cedar to himself) uprightness
Be wrested from his true use, prove not dangerous.
Nay my good brother knows I am to patient.
Why should your grace think him a boys•ner?
Has he no more respect to piety,
And but he has by oath tide up his fury,
Who durst but think that thought?
Away thou firebrand.
If men of his sort, of his power and place,
The eldest son in honour to this Dukedom.—
For shame cōtain thy tongue, thy poisonous tongue,
That with her burning Venom will infect all,
And once more blow a wildfire through the Dukedom.
Latorch, if thou be honest or a man,
Contain thy self.
Go to, no more, by heaven
You'll find you have plaid the fool else,
Not a word more.
Prithee sweet son.
Let him alone sweet mother, and my Lords
To make you understand how much I honour
This sacred peace, and next my innocence,
And to avoid all future difference
Discourse may draw on, to a way of danger,
I quit my place, and take my leave for this night,
Wishing a general joy may dwell among ye.
Shall we waite upon your Grace?
I dare not break ye, La Torch.
Doe you now perceive your brothers sweetness?
O mother that your tenderness had eyes,
Discerning eyes, what would this man appear then?
The tale of Synon when he took upon him
To ruin Troy, with what a cloud of cunning
He hid his heart? nothing appearing outwards
But came like innocence and dropping pity•
Sighs that would sink a Navy, and had tales
Able to take the ears of Saints belief too,
and what did all these? blew the fire to Ilion.
My brother has put on, oh I could tell ye
But for the reverence I bear to nature,
Things that would make your honest blood move backwar•
Ye dare tell me.
Yes in your private closet,
Where I will presently attend you, rise
I am a little troubled but twill off.
Is this the joy I looked for?
All will mend.
Be not disturbed dear mother: Isle not fail you.
I doe not like this.
That's still in our powers,
But how to make it so that we may like it—
Beyond us ever. Latorch me thought was busy,
That fellow, if not looked to narrowly, will doe a sudden mis∣chief.
Hell look to him,
For if there may be a devil above all yet,
That rogue will make him. Keep your self up this night.
And so will I, for much I fear a danger.
I will, and in my watches use my prayers.
You wonder (Madam) that for all the shows
My brother Rollo makes of hearty love,
And free possession of the Dukedom twixt us,
I notwithstanding should stand still suspicious;
As if beneath those veils, he did •onvey
Intents and practises of hate and treason.
It breeds indeed my wonder.
Which makes mine,
Since tic so safe and broad a beaten way
Beneath the name of friendship to betray.
Though in remote and further off affection
These falsehoods are so common, yet in him
They cannot so force nature.
The more near the bonds of truth bind,
The more oft they sever,
Being better cloaks to falsehood ever.
It cannot be that fruits (the tree so blasting)
Can grow in nature, take heed (gentle son)
Lest some suborned suggester of these treasons
Believed in him by you, provoked, the rather
His tender envies to such foul attempts.
Or that your too much love to rule alone
Bred not of him this jealous passion,
There is not any ill we might not bear
Were not our good held at a price too dear.
So apt is treachery to be excused
That innocence is still aloud abused,
The fate of virtue even her friends perverts
To plead for vice oftimes against their hearts;
Heavens blessing is her cur•e, which she must bear,
That she may never love.
Alas (my son) nor fate nor heaven it self
Can or would wrest my whole care of your good
To any least securenesse in your ill.
What I urge issues from my curious fear,
Lest you should make your means to scope your snare,
Doubt of sincerenesse is the only mean,
Not to incense it but corrupt it clean.
I rest as far from wrong of all syncerenesse,
As he flies from the practise, trust me (Madam)
I know by their confessions he suborned,
What I should eat, drink, touch, or only have scented
This evening feast was poisoned, but I fear,
His open violence more that tree••heroes odds
In his insatiate thirst of rule•
Is like to execute.
Believe it son,
If still his stomach be so foul, to feed
On such gross objects, and that thirst to rule
The state alone, be yet unquenched in him,
Poisons and such close treasons ask more time
Then can suffice his fiery spirits hast,
And were there in him such desire to hide
So false a practise, there would likewise rest
Conscience and fear in him of open force,
And therefore close nor open you need fear.
Good Madame stand not so inclined to trust,
What proves his tendrest thoughts to doubt it just;
Who knows not the unbounded flood and sea,
In which my brother Rollo's appetites
Alter and rage with every puff of breath?
His swelling blood exhales, and therefore hear
What gives my temperate brother cause
To use his circumspection, and consult,
For remedy against all his wicked purposes;
If he arm, arm, if he strew mines of treason
Meet him with countermines, it is justice still
(For goodness sake) to encounter ill for ill.
Avert from us such justice (equal heaven)
And all such cause of justice.
Past all doubt,
(For all the sacred privilege of night)
This is no time for us to sleep or rest in,
Who knows not all things holy are prevented
With ends of all impiety? all but
Lust, gain, ambition.
Perish all the world
Ere I but loose one foot of possible Empire
By sleights and colour used by slaves and wretches,
I am exempt by birth from both those curbs,
And sit above them in all justice; since
I sit above in power, where power is give•n,
Is all the right supposed of earth and heaven.
Prove both Sir, see the Traitor.
He comes armed.
See mother now your con••dence.
What rage
Affects this monster?
Give me way or perish.
Make thy way Viper if thou thus affe•t it.
This is a Trea•on like thee.
Let her go.
Embrace me, wear me as thy shield my son,
And through my breast let his rude weapon run
To thy lives innocence.
Play not two parts,
Treacher and coward both, but yield a sword,
And let thy arming thee be odds enough
Against my naked bosom.
Loose his hold.
Forbear base murderer.
Forsake our Mother.
Mother, do it thou name me,
And put off nature thus?
Forsake her traitor,
Or by the spoil of nature through hers
This leads unto thy heart.
Hold.
Hold me still.
For twenty hearts and lives I will not hazard
One drop of blood in yours.
O thou art lost then.
Protect my innocence heaven.
Call out murder.
Be murdered all, but save him.
Murder, murder.
Cannot I reach you yet?
No fiend.
Latorch
Rescue, I am down.
Up then, your sword cools Sir,
Ply it in the flame and work your ends out.
Ha,
Have at you there Sir.
Author of prodigies,
What sights are these!
O give me a weapon Aubrey.
O part em, part'em.
For heavens sake no more.
No more, resist his fury no rage can
Add to his mischief done.
Take spirit my Otto,
Heaven will not see thee dye thus.
He is dead,
And nothing lives but death of every goodness.
O he hath slain his brother, curse him heaven.
Curse and be cursed, it is the fruit of cursing.
Latorch, take off here; bring too of that blood
To bloody ore my shirt, then raise the Court,
And give it out how he attempted us
In our bed naked; shall the name of brother
Forbid us to enlarge our state or powers?
Or place affects of blood above our reason,
That tells us all things good against another,
Are good 'ith same line against a brother.
What affairs inform these outcries?
See and grieve.
Prince Otto slain!
O execrable slaughter!
What hand hath author'd it?
Your Scholars, Baldwin.
Unjustly urged Lord Aubrey, as if I
For being his schoolmaster must teach this doctrine.
You are his Counsellour did you advise him
To this foul parricide?
If rule affect this license, who would live
To worse then dye, in force of his obedience?
Heavens cold and lingering spirit to punish sin,
And humane blood so fiery to commit it?
One so outgoes the other it will never
Be turned to fit obedience.
Burst it then
With his full swing given, where it brooks no ground,
Complaints of it are vain, and all that rests
To be our refuge (since our powers are strengthless)
Is to conform our wills to suffer freely
What with our murmurs we can never master.
Ladies be pleased with what heavens pleasure suffers,
Erect your Princely countenances and spirits,
And to redress the mischief now resistless,
Sooth it in show, rather then curse or cross it,
Wish all amends and vow to it your best,
But till you may perform it let it rest.
Those temporizings are both dull and servile
To breath the free ayre of a manly soul
Which shall in me expire in execrations
Before for any life I sooth a murderer.
Power lives before him till his own be dry
Of all lives services and humane comforts,
None left that looks at heaven 'sleft half so base
To doe these black and hellish actions grace.
Hast Latorch,
And raise the City as the Court is raised,
Complaining the abhorred conspiracy
In plot against my life.
I shall my Lord.
You there that morn upon the justly slain
Rise and leave it if you love your lives,
And hear from me, what (kept by you) may save you.
What will the Butcher doe? I will not stir.
Stir, and unforc't stir, or stir never more.
Command her you (grave Beldam) that know better
My deadly resolutions, since I drew them
From the infective fountain of your own,
Or if you have forgot, this fiery prompter
Shall fix the fresh impression in your heart.
Rise daughter serve his will in what we may,
Lest what we may not he enforce the rather.
Is this all you command us?
This addition
Only admitted, that when I endeavour
To quit me of this slaughter, you presume not
To cross me with a syllable, nor your souls
Murmur, nor think against it, but weigh well,
It will not help your ill, but help to more;
And that my hand wrought thus far to my will
Will check at nothing till his circle fill.
Fill it so, I consent not, but who soothes it
Consents, and who consents to tyranny does it.
False Traiteresse dye then with him.
Are you mad
To offer at more blood, and make your self
More horrid to your people? Isle proclaim
It is not as your instrument will publish.
Doe, and take that along with you—so nimble:
Resign my sword, and dare not for thy soul
To offer what thou insolently threaten,
One word proclaiming cross to what Latorch
Hath in commission, and intends to publish.
Well Sir, not for your threats, but for your good,
Since more hurt to you would more hurt your country,
And that you must make virtue of the need
That now compels you, isle consent as far
As silence argues to your will proclaimed.
And since no more sons of your princely Father
Survive to rule but you, and that I wish
You should rule like your Father, with the love,
And zeal of all your subjects, this foul slaughter
That now you have committed made ashamed
With that fair blessing that in place of plagues
Heaven tries our mending disposition with,
Take here your sword, which now use like a Prince,
And no more like a Tyrant.
This sounds well.
Live and be gracious with us.
O Lord Aubrey.
He flatter thus?
He temporises fitly.
Wonder invades me, doe you two think much
That he thus wisely and with need consents
To what I author for your countries good,
You being my Tutor, you my Chancellor?
Your Chancellor is not your flatterer Sir.
Nor first your Tutors part to shield such doctrine.
Sir first know you,
In praise of your pure Oratory that raised me,
That when the people who I know by this
Are raised out of their rests and hastening hither,
To witness what is done here are arrived
With our Latorch, you (extempore)
Shall fashion an Oration to acquit•
And justify this forced fact of mine,
Or for the proud refusal loose your head.
I fashion an oration to acquit you?
Sir know you then that it is a thing less easy
T'excuse a parricide then to commit it.
I doe not wish you Sir to excuse me,
But to accuse my brother as the cause
Of his own slaughter, by attempting mine.
Not for the world, • •hold power blood on blood,
It were another murder to a•••se
Him that fell innocent.
Away with him,
Hence, hail him straight to execution.
Far fly such rigour your amendfull hand.
He perishes with him that speaks for him.
Guard doe your office on him, on your lives pain.
Tyrant twill hast thine own death.
Let it wing it,
He threatens me, villains tear him peece-meale hence.
Avaunt Sir.
Dispatch him Captain,
And bring me instant word he is dispatch't,
And how his Rhetoric takes it.
Isle not fail sir.
Captain besides, remember this in chief,
That being executed you deny
To all his friends the Rites of funeral,
And cast his carcase out to dogs and fowls.
Tic done my Lord.
Upon your life not fail.
What impious daring is there here of heaven•
Sir now prepare your self, against the people
Make here their entry to discharge the Oration
He hath denied my will.
For fear of death•
Ha, ha, ha.
Is death ridiculous with you?
Works misery of age this, or thy Judgment?
Judgment false Tyrant?
You'll make no Oration then.
Not to excuse
But aggravate thy murder if thou wilt,
Which I will so enforce, isle make thee wreack it
(With hate of what thou win'st by it) on thy self
With such another justly merited murder.
Isle answer you anon.
The Citizens
Are hasting Sir in heaps, all full resolved
By my persuasions of your brothers treasons.
Honest Latorch.
See Sir Gisberts head.
Good speed, wast with a sword?
An axe my Lord.
An axe, it was vilely done: I would have had
Mine own fine headsman done it with a sword,
Go, take this dotard here, and take his head
Off with a sword.
Your Schoolmaster?
Even he.
For teaching thee no better, it is the best
Of all thy damned Justices, away
Captain, isle follow.
O stay there Duke,
And in the midst of all thy blood and fury
Hear a Poor maids petitions, hear a daughter
The only daughter of a wretehed father,
O stay your hast, as you shall need this mercy.
Away with this fond woman.
You must hear me:
If there be any spark of pity in you,
If sweet humanity and mercy rule you.
I doe confess you are a Prince, your anger
As great as you, your execution greater.
Away with him.
O Captain by thy man-hood
By her soft soul that bare thee:—I doe confess sir,
Your doom of justice on your foes most righteous;
Good noble Prince look on me.
Take her from me.
A curse upon his life that hinders me,
May fathers blessing never fall upon him,
May heaven never hear his prayers. I beseech you,
O Sir, these tears beseech you, these chaste hands woe you•
That never yet were heaved but to things holy,
Things like your self, you are a God above us,
Be as a God then, full of saving mercy,
Mercy, O mercy sir, for •is sake mercy,
That when your stout heart weeps, shall give you pity.
Here I must grow.
By heaven Isle strike thee woman.
Most willingly, let all thy anger seize me,
All the most studied torments, so this good man,
This old man, and this innocent escape thee.
Carry him away I say.
Now blessing on thee: ô sweet pity
I see it in thy eyes. I charge ye soldiers,
Even by the Princes power release my Father,
The Prince is merciful, why doe ye hold him?
The Prince forgets his fury, why doe ye tug him?
He is old, why doe ye hurt him? speak O speak sir,
Speak as you are a man, a mans life hangs sir,
A friends life and a foster life upon you.
It is but a word, but mercy, quickly spoke sir,
O speak Prince speak.
Will no man here obey me?
Have I no rule yet? as I live he dies
That does not execute my will and suddenly.
All thou can doe takes but one short hour frō me.
Hew off her hands.
Lady hold off.
No, hew 'em,
Hew off my innocent hands as he commands you,
Theyle hang the faster on for deaths convulsion.
Tho• seed of rocks, will nothing move thee then,
Are all my tears lost, all my righteous prayers
Drowned in thy drunken wrath? I stand up thus then,
Thus boldly bloody Tyrant,
And to thy face in heavens high name defy thee,
And may sweet mercy when thy soul sighs for it,
When under thy black mischiefs thy flesh trembles,
When neither strength nor youth, nor friends nor gold,
Can stay one hour, when thy mo•t wretched conscience
Waked from her dream of death, like fire shall melt thee,
When all thy mothers tears, thy brothers wounds,
Thy peoples fears and curses, and my loss,
My aged fathers loss shall stand before thee—
Save him I say, run save him, save her Father•
Fly and redeem his head.
May then that pity,
That comfort thou expect'st from heaven, that mercy
Be locked up from thee, •lie thee, howlings find thee,
Despair, O my sweet father• storms of terrors,
Blood, till thou burst again.
O fair sweet anger!
I came too late Sir, it was dispatch't before,
His head is here.
And my heart there go bury him,
Give him fair rites of funeral decent honours.
Wilt thou not take me monster? high heaven,
Give him a punishment fit for his mischief.
I fear thy prayer is heard, and he rewarded
Lady have patience it was unhappy speed,
Blame not the Duke, it was not his fault but fates,
He sent you know to stay it, and commanded
In care of you, the heavy object hence
Soon as it came, have better thoughts of him.
Whore's this young Traitor?
Noble Citizens here,
And here the wounds he gave your Sovereign Lord.
This Prince of force must be
Beloved of Heaven, that heaven hath thus preserved.
And if he be loved of heaven you know,
He must be just and all his actions so.
Concluded like an Oracle, O how great
A grace of heaven is a wise Citizen!
For heaven it is makes them wise, is it made me just,
As it preserved me, as I now survive,
By his strong hand to keep you all alive,
Your wives your childrens goods and lands kept yours,
That had been else prey to his Tyrannous power.
That would have preyed on me, in bed assaulted me
In sacred time of peace, my mother here,
My sister this •used Lord, and all had felt
The Curtian Gulf of this conspiracy,
Of which my Tutor and my Chancellor,
(Two of the gravest and most counted honest
In all my Dukedom) were the monstrous heads.
O trust no honest men for their sakes ever
My politic Citizens, but those that bear,
The names of Cutthroats, Usurers, and Tyrants.
O those believe in; for the foul mouthed world
Can give no better terms to simple goodness,
Even me it dares blaspheme, and thinks me tyrannou•
For saving mine own life, sought by my brother;
Yet those that sought his life before by poison,
(Though mine own servants hoping to please me)
Isle lea• to death for it which your eyes shall see.
Why what a Prince is here!
How just?
How gen•le?
Well now my dearest subjects, or much rather
My nerves my spirits, or my vital blood,
Turn to your needful rest, and settled peace,
Fixed in this root of steel, from whence it sprung
In heavens great help and blessing, but ere sleep
Bind in his sweet oblivions your dull senses,
The name and virtue of heavens King advance
For you (in chief) for my deliverance.
Heaven and his King save our most pious Sovereign.
Thanks my good people, mother, &amp; kind sister,
And you my noble kinsman, things borne thus,
Shall make ye all command what ever I
Enjoy in this my absolute Empery.
Take in the body of my Princely brother,
For whose death since his fate no other way
Would give my eldestbirth his supreme right,
We'll morn the cruel influence it bears,
And wash his Sepulchre with kindly tears.
If this game end thus• heavens! will rule the seat:
What we have yielded to, we could not let.
Good Lady rise and raise your spirits withal
More high then they are humbled, you have cause
As much as ever honoured happiest Lady,
And when your ears are freer to take in
Your most amendfull and unmatched fortunes,
Isle make ye drown a hundred helpless deaths
In sea of one life poured into your bosom
With which shall flow into your arms the riches,
The pleasures, honours, and the rules of Princes.
Which though death stop your ears me thinks should op them:
Assay to forget death.
O slaughtered Father!
Cast off what cannot be redressed, and bless
The fate that yet you curse so, since for that
You spake so movingly, and your sweet eyes
With so much grace filled, that you set on fire
The Dukes affection, whom you now may rule
As he rules all his Dukedom, first not sweet?
Does it not shine away your sorrows clouds?
Sweet Lady take wise heart, and hear and tell me.
I hear no word you speak.
Prepare to hear then,
And be not barred up from your self, nor add
To your ill fortune with your far worse judgement,
Make me your servant to attend with all joys
Your sad estate, till they both bless and speak it:
See how theil bowt'ye, make me wait, command me
To watch out every minute, for the stay
Your modest sorrow fancies, raise your graces,
And doe my hopes the honour of your motion
To all the offered heights that now attend you.
O how your tou•hes ravish! how the Duke
is slain already with your flames embraced!
I will both serve and visit you and often.
I am not fit Sir.
Time will make you Lady.
Come bring these fellows on, away with em.
Make room before there,
Room there for the prisoners.
Lets run before boys, we shall get no ply•e else.
Are these the youths?
These are the youths you look for.
And pray my honest friends be not so hasty.
The'rle be nothing done till we come I assure you.
Here is a wise hanging, are there no more?
Doe you hear Sir,
You may come in for your share left please you.
My friend if you be unprovided of a hanging
You look like a good fellow I can afford you
A reasonable pennyworth.
Before, before boys,
Here is even enough to make us sport.
Pox take you, doe you call this sport?
Are these your recreations?
Must we be hanged to make you mirth?
Doe you hear Sir,
You Custard-pate, we go too't for high treason,
An honourable fault, thy foolish father
Was hanged for stealing sheep.
Away, away boys.
Doe you see how that sneaking rogue looks now? you sheep Pantler,
You peaching rogue that provided us these necklaces,
You poor rogue, you costive rogue you.
Pray, pray fellows.
Pray for thy crusty soul, whore's your reward now
Good goodman manchet, for your fine discovery?
I doe beseech you Sir, where are your dollars?
Draw with your fellows and be hanged.
He must now,
For now he shall be hanged first that's his comfort,
A place too good for thee, thou meale-mouthd rascal.
Hang handsomely for shame, come leave your pray∣ing
You peaking knave, and die like a good Courtier,
Die honestly and like a man, no preaching
With I beseech you take example by me.
I lived a lewd man good people. pox on it,
Die me as thou had dined, say grace &amp; God be with you.
Come will ye forward?
Good Master Sheriff your leave too.
This hasty work was never done well, give us so much time
As but to sing our own Ballad, for weel trust no m•n
Nor no tune but our own, it was done in Ale too,
And therefore cannot be refu•'d in justice,
Your penny pot-Poets are such pelting thieves,
They hang men ever twice, we have it here Sir,
And so must every merchant of our voyage,
Heel make a sweet return else of his credit.
One fit of our own mirth, and then we are for ye.
Make hast then and dispatch.
Theres day enough Sir.
Come boys sing cheerfully, we shall never sing younger,
We have chose a loud tune too because it should like well,
Come fortune's a whore I •are not who tell her,
Would offer to strangle a page of the Cellar.
That should by his oath to any mans thinking
And place, have had a defence for his drinking.
But this she does when she pleases to palter,
Instead of his wages she gives him a halter.
Three merry boys, and three merry boys,
and three merry boys are we,
As ever did sing three parts in a string,
All under the triple tree.
But I that was so lusty, and ever kept my bottles,
That neither they were musty, and sell•ome less then pottles.
For me to be thus stopped now
With h•mp instead of Cork Sir,
And from the Gallows lopped now
Shows that there is a fork Sir
In death, and this the Token.
Man may be two ways killed,
Or like the bottle broken,
Or like the wine be spilled.
Three merry boys, &amp;c.
O yet but look on the master Cook the glory of the kitchen,
In sowing whose fate at so lofty ara•e no Tailor had a stitch in
For though he make the man,
The Cook yet makes the dishes:
The which no Tailor can,
Wherein I have my wishes.
That I who at so many a feast have pleased so many Tasters,
Should come my self for to be dressed, a dish for you my masters.
Three merry boys, &amp;c.
O Man or Beast or you at least,
That wears or Brow or Antler,
Prick up your ears unto the tears,
Of me poor Paul the Pantler.
That am thus chipt, because I clipped,
The cursed crust of Treason
With loyal knife, O doleful strife,
To hang thus without Reason.
Three merry boys, &amp;c.
There's a few copies for ye now,
Farewell friends, and good Mr• Sheriff let me not
Be printed with a brass pot on my head.
March fair, march fair,
Before good Captain Pantler.
Latorch I have waited here to speak to you
And you must hearken: set not forth your legs
Of hast, nor put your face of business on,
An honester affair then this I urge too,
You will not easily think on, and twill be
Reward to entertain it. It is your fortune
To have our masters Ear above the rest
Of us that follow him, but that no man envies,
For I have well considered, truth sometimes
May be convay'd in by the same conduits
That fa•shoot is, These courses that he •aches
Cannot but end in ruin, Empire got
By blood and violence must so be held,
And how unsafe it is, he first will prove,
That toiling still to remove Enemies
Makes himself more• it is not now a Brother•
A faithful Counsailor of state or two,
That are his danger, they are fair dispatcht,
It is a multitude that gin to fear
And think, what began there must end in them,
For all the fine Oration that was made 'em;
And they are not an easy monster quelled.
Princes may pick their suffering nobles on it,
And one by one employ them to the block:
But when they once grow formidable to
Their Clowns and Cobblers, ware then guard themselves•
If you durst tell him this Latorch, the service
Would not discredit the good name you hold
With men: besides the profit to your moister,
And to the public.
I conceive not Sir,
Their aerie fears, and why should I object 'em
Unto his fancy, wound what is yet sound?
Your Counsels colour not with reason of state,
Where all that's necessary still is just.
The actions of the Prince, while they succeed,
Should be made good and glorified, not questioned:
Men doe but show their ill affections
That—
What? speak out.
Doe murmur against their masters
Is this to me?
It is to whosoever,
Mislikes of the Dukes courses.
I? is it so?
At your state ward sir.
I am sworn to hear,
Nothing may prejudice the Prince.
Why? doe you?
Or have you? ha?
I cannot tell: men's hearts
Show in their words sometimes.
I ever thought thee
Knave of the chamber: art thou the spy too?
A watchman for the State, and one that's known
Sir, to be rightly affected.
Bawd of the State,
No less then of thy masters lusts; I now
See nothing can redeem thee, dare thou mention,
Affection or a heart that ne'er had any?
Know not to love or hate, but by the scale
As thy Prince does't before thee, that dost never
Wear thine own face, but putst on his, and gatherst
Baits for his ears, liv'st wholly at his beck,
And ere thou durst utter a thought thine own,
Must expect his, creep'st forth and wad'st into him,
As if thou were to pass a ford, there proving
Yet, if thy tongue may step on safely or no,
Then bring his virtue a sleep, and staist the wheel
Both of his reason and Judgment that they move not,
Whet over all his vices, and at last
Dost draw a cloud of words before his eyes,
Till neither he can see thee nor himself.
Wretch I dare give him honest Counsels, I,
And love him whilst I tell him truth: old Aubrey
Dares go the straightest way, which still's the shortest.
Walk on the thorns thou scaterst, Parasite,
And tread 'em unto nothing: and if thou
Then letst a look fall of the least dislike,
Isle rip thy Crown up with my sword at height,
And pluck thy skin over thy face in sight
Of him thou flattrest: unto thee I speak it
Slave, against whom all laws should now conspire,
And every creature that hath sense be armed,
As against the common enemy of mankind,
That sleep within thy masters ear, and whisper'st,
It is better for him to be feared then loved,
Bid him trust no mans friendship; spare no blood
That may secure him; Tic no cruelty
That hath a spacious end for sovereignty,
Break all the laws of kind, if it succeed,
An honest noble and praiseworthy deed,
While he that takes thy poisons in, shall feel,
Their virulent workings in a point of time,
When no repentance can bring aide, but all
His spirits shall melt, with what his conscience burned,
And dying in a flatterers arms shall fall unmourn'd.
There's matter for you now.
My Lord this makes not,
For loving of my moister.
Loving? no,
They hate ill Princes most that make 'em so.
Isle hear no more.
Alas tic for my brother,
I beseech your highness.
How? a brother?
Had not I one my self? did title move me,
When it was fit that he should dye? away.
Brother loose no word more, leave my good cause
To upbraid the Tyrant. Ime glad I am fallen
Now in those times that willed some great example
T'assure men we can dye for honesty.
Sir you are brave, pray that you hold your neck
As bravely forth anon unto the headsman.
Would he would strike as bravely, and thou by
Rollo, it would make thee quake to see me dye,
What's his offence?
For giving Gisbert burial
Who was sometimes his Moister.
Yes Lord Aubrey,
My gratitude and humanity are my Crimes.
Why bear you him not hence?
My Lord, (stay soldiers)
I doe beseech your highness doe not loose,
Such men for so slight clauses, this is one
Hath still been faithful to you, a tried soul
In all your fathers battles. I have seen him
Bestride a friend against a score of foes;
And look, he looks as he would kill his hundred
For you Sir, were you in danger.
Till he kills his Brother, his Chancellor, then his amster,
To which he can add nought to equal Narrow
But killing of his mother.
Peace, brave fool,
Thou valiant Ass, here's his brother too Sir,
A Captain of your Guard hath served you long
With the most noble witness of his truth
Marked in his face, and every part about him
That turns not from an enemy• but view him,
And doe not grieve him, Sir, if you doe mean
That he shall hold his place, it is not safe
To tempt such spirits, and let 'em wear their swords,
You make your Guards your terrors by these Acts,
And throw more hearts off from you then you hold,
And I must tell you Sir (with my old freedom,
And my old faith to boot) you have not lived so,
But that your state will need such men, such hands,
Of which here's one shall in an hour of trial
Doe you more c•rtaine service with a stroke,
Then the whole bundle of your Flatterers,
With all the unsavoury unction of their tongues.
Peace talker.
One that loves you yet my Lord,
And would not see you pull on your own ruins,
Mercy becomes a Prince, and guards him best,
A weand affrights they are no ties of love,
And when men 'gin to fear the Prince, they hate him.
Am I the Prince or you?
My Lord, I hope
I have not uttered ought should urge that question.
Then practise your obedience, see him dead.
My Lord.
Isle hear no word more.
I am sorry then
There is no small despair Sir of their safety,
Whose ears are blocked up against the truth,
Come Captain.
I doe thank you Sir.
For what?
For seeing thy brother dye a man and honest,
Live thou so Captain, I will so, I assure thee,
Although I die for it too. Come. 〈◊〉
Now Latorch,
What doe you think?
That Aubries speech and manners
Sound somewhat of the boldest.
Tic his custom.
It may be so, and yet be worth a fear.
If we thought so it should be worth his life,
And quickly too.
I dare not Sir be author
Of what I would, he is so dangerous,
But with your highness favour and your license.
He talks it is true, and he is licensed: leave him.
We now are Duke alone, Latorch secured,
Nothing left standing to obscure our prospect,
We look right forth, besides and round about us,
And see it ours with pleasure: only one
Wished joy there wants to make us so possess it,
And that is Edith, Edith, she that got me
In blood and tears in such an opposite minute,
As had I not at once felt all the flames,
And shafts of love shot in me (his whole armoury)
I should have thought him as far off as death.
My Lord expect a while, your happiness
Is ne'rer then you think it, yet her griefs
Are greene and fresh, your vigilant Latorch
Hath not been idle, I have leave already
To visit her and send to her.
My life.
And if I find not out as speedy ways,
And proper instruments to work and bring her
To your fruition, that she be not watched
Tame to your highness, say you have no servant
Is capable of such a trust about you,
Or worthy to be—of your delight.
O my Latorch, what shall I render thee
For all thy travels, care, and love?
Sir, one suit,
Which I will ever importune till you grant me.
About your Mathematitians.
Yes to have
The scheme of your nativity judged by them.
I hav't already erected, O my Lord,
You doe not know the labour of my fears.
My doubts for you are such as cannot hope
Any security but from the stars,
Who being rightly asked can tell man more,
Then all power else, there being no power beyond them•
All thy petitions still are care of us.
Ask for thy self.
What more can concern me
Then this?
Well rise true honest man and go then,
We will study our selves a means how to reward thee.
Your Grace is now inspired, now, now your Highness
Begins to live, from this hour count your joys,
But Sir, I must have warrants with blank figures
To put in names such as I like.
You shall.
They dare not else Sir offer at your figure,
O I shall bring you wonders, there's a Fryer,
Russee an admirable man
Another Gentleman, and then La fiske,
The mirror of his time, it was he that set it,
But theres one Norbret, (him I never saw)
Has made a mirror, a mere lookin-glasse
In show you'd think it no other, the form oval,
As I am given to understand by letter,
Which renders you such shapes, &amp; those so differing
And some that will be questioned, and give answers,
Then has he set it in a frame that wrought
Unto the revolutions of the stars,
And so compacted by due proportions
Unto their harmony doth move alone
A true Automicon: Thus Dedalus Statues
Or Vulcans stools—
Dost thou believe this?
Sir, Why what should stay my faith or turn my sense,
He has been about it above twenty years,
Three sevens, the powerful and the perfect numbers,
And art and time Sir can produce such things,
What doe we read there, that Hiarbaes banq•et
The great Gymnosophist that had his Butlers
And Carvers of pure gold wait at the table:
The images of Mercury too, that spoke,
The wooden Dove that flew, a Snake of Brass
That hist: and Birds of silver that did sing.
All these were done Sir by the Mathematiques:
Without which there's no science nor no truth.
You are in your own sphere (Latorch) &amp; rather
Then Isle contend with you for it, Isle believe you.
Yo' have won upon me that I wish to see
My fate before me now, what ere it be.
And Isle endeavour you shall know it with speed,
For which I should have one of trust go with me,
If you please, Hamond, that I may by him
Send you my first dispatches: after I
Shall bring you more, as they come more,
And accurate forth from them.
Take your way,
Choose your own means, and be it prosperous to us.
Come bear up Sirs, we shall have better days,
Mine Almanac tells me.
Whats that, your rump.
It never itch't in vain yet; slid La Fiske,
Throw off thy sluggish face, I cannot abide
To see thee look like a poor Jade in the pound,
That saw no meat these three days.
S'light to me,
It seems thirteen days since I saw any.
How?
I cannot remember that I ever saw
Or meat or money, you may talk of both,
To open a mans Stomach or his purse,
But feed 'em still with air.
Fryer, I fear
You doe not say your office well adays,
I cannot hear your beads knack.
Pox, he feeds
With lechery, and lives upon th'exchange
Of his two eggs and puddings, with the market-women.
And what doe you sir with the Advocates wife,
That you persuade upon your Doctoral bed,
To take the Mathematical tran•e so often?
Come we are stark nought all; bad's the best on's,
Four of the Seven deadly spots we are,
Besides our lechery we are envious
And most, most glutinous when we have it thus,
Most covetous now we want it: then our boy,
He is a fifth spot, sloth, and he undoes us.
Tic true the child was wont to be industrious,
And now and then send in a Merchants wife
Sick of the husband, or a swearing Butler
That mist one of his Boles; a crying maid
Had lost a silver spoon: the Curry-combe
Sometimes was wanting, there was something gotten
But now —
What now, did I not yester-morning
Bring you in a Cardecu there from the Peasant,
Whose Ass I had driven aside and hid that you
Might conjure for him? and then last night
Six souse from the Cooks wife, ye shard among ye
To set a figure for the pestle I stole,
It is not at home yet. These things my masters,
In a hard time they would be thought on, you
Talk o'your Lands, and Castles in the air
O'your twelve houses there, but it is I
That bring you in your rents for'em, tic Pipeau
That is your bird called.
Faith he does well,
And cuts through the Element for us, I must needs say
In a fine dextrose line.
But not as he did
At first, then he would sail with any wind
Int' every creek and corner.
I was light then,
New built and rigged, when I came to you Gentlemen,
But now with often and far venturing for you,
Here be leaks sprung, and whole plancks wanting, see you,
If you'll new sheath me again, yet I am for you
To any bog or sleights, where you'll send me,
For as I am, where can this ragged bark
Put in for any service, less it be
In the isle of Rogues, and there turn Pirate for you.
Faith he says reason, Fryer you must leave
Your neat crisped Claret, and fall to your Cider
A while; and you La Fiske your larded Capons
And Turkeys for a time, and take a good
Clean tripe in your way; Debube too must content him
With wholesome two soused pettitoes, no more crown Or∣dinaries,
Till we have clothd our Infant.
So you'll keep your own good motions Doctor, your dear self.
Yes for we all doe know the latitude
O'your concupiscence.
Here, about your belly.
You'll pick a bottle open, or a whimsy
As soon as the best on us.
And dip your wrist-bands,
(For cuffs you ha'none) as comely in the sauce,
As any Courtier — hark, the Bell, who's there.
Good luck I doe conjure thee, boy look out.
They are Gallants, Courtiers, one of 'em is
Of the Dukes Bedchamber,
Latorch down,
On with your Gown, there's a new suit arrived
Did I not tell you Sons of honger? Crowns
Crowns are coming towards you: wine and wenches
You shall have once again: and Fiddlers
Into your studies close, each lay his ear
This door, and as you hear me to prepare you,
So come, and put me on that visor only.
You'll not be far hence Captain, when the business
Is done, you shall receive present dispatch.
Isle walk sir in the cloister.
Monsieur Latorch, my son,
The stars are happy still that guide you hither.
I am glad to hear their Secretary say so,
My learned Father Russee, whore's La Fiske,
Monsieur La Bub, how doe they.
At their studies,
They are the Secretaries of the Stars sir,
Still at their books, they will not be pulled off,
They stick like cupping glasses; if ever men
Spoke with the tongue of destiny, it is they.
For loves sake lets salute 'em.
Boy go see,
Tell'em who's here, say that their friends doe challenge
Some portion of their time, this is our minute,
Pray them they will spare it, they are the Sun &amp; Moon
Of knowledge, pity two such noble lights
Should live obscured, here, here in a University,
Whose beams were fitt' illuminate any Court
Of Christendom—
Well look upon the Astrolobe, you'll find it
For Almucanturies at least.
It is so.
Still of their learned stuff, they care for nothing.
But how to know, as negligent of their bodies
In Diet or else, especially in their clothes
As if they had no change.
They have so little,
As may well free'em from the name of shifters.
Monsieur Latorch.
How is it learned Gentlemen,
With both your virtues.
A most happy hour
When we see you sir.
When you hear me then,
It will be happier; The Duke greets you both
Thus, &amp; though you may touch no money father,
Yet you may take it.
Tic his highness bounty,
But yet to me and those that have put off
The world superfluous.
We have heard of late his highness good success.
And gratulate it.
Indeed he hath escaped a strange conspiracy,
Thanks to his stars, which stars he prays by me,
You would again consult and make a judgement
On what you lately erected for my love.
O sir, we dare not.
For our lives.
It is
The Princes Scheme.
T'incounter With that fear
Here's to assure you, his signet, write your names,
And be secured all three.
We must entreat some time Sir•
I must then
Entreat, it be as present as you can.
Have you the Scheme here?
Yes.
I would you had Sir
Another warrant.
What would that doe.
Marry,
We have a Doctor Sir that in this business
Would not perform the second part.
Not
Him that you writ to me of?
The very same.
I should have made it Sir my suit to see him•
Here is a warrant (Father), I conceived
That he had soly applied himself to Magic.
And to these studies too Sir, in this field
He was imitated: but we shall hardly
Draw him from his chair.
Tell him he shall have gold.
O such a syllable would make him forswear
Ever to breath in your sight.
Sir, he (if you doe please to give any thing)
Must hav't conveyed under a paper.
Or left behind some book in his study.
Or in some old wall.
Where his Familiars
May tell him of it, and that pleases him sir.
Or else Isle go and assay him.
Take gold with you.
That will not be amiss, give it the boy sir,
He knows his holes, and how to bait his spirits.
We must lay in several places sir.
That's true,
That if one come not, the other may hit.
Well go then; is he so learned Gentlemen?
The very top of our profession, mouth of the Fa•••,
Pray Heaven his spirits be in good humour to take,
They'll fling the gold about the house else.
I,
And beat the Fryer, if he go not well
Furnished with holy water.
Sir you must observe him.
Not cross him in a word: for then he's gone.
If he doe come, which is a hazard yet,
Mas he's there, this is speed.
Where is your scheme?
Let's see it; dispatch: nay fumbling now, who's this?
Chief Gentleman of the Dukes chamber Doctor.
O let him be, good even to him, he's a Courtier,
Isle spare his complement tell him: whats here?
The geniture nocturnal longitude
At twenty one degrees the latitude
At forty nine and ten minutes, how are the Cardines?
Libra in twenty four, forty four minutes,
And Capricorn.
I see it see the Planets
Where, how they are disposed, the Sun and Mercury•
Mars with the Drago•s tail, the third house,
And pars fortune in the Imo coeli.
Then Iupiter in the twelfe, the Cacadaemon.
And Venus in the second, inferno port.
I see it, peace• then Satu••e i•th fifth,
Luna ith'seaventh, and much of Scorpio,
That Mars his gaudium rising in the ascendant,
That joint with Libra too, the house of Venus,
And Imum Coeli, Mars his exultation
In the seventh house, Aries being his natural house,
And where he is now seated: and all these show him
To be the Almuter.
Yes he's Lord of the gen•tures,
Whether you examine it by Ptolemies way,
Or Nasahales, Laell, or Alkindus.
No other Planet hath so many dignities
Either by himself, or in regard of the Cusps.
Why hold your tongue then, if you know it; Venus
The Lady of the Horoscope, being Libra,
The other part Mars rules• so that the geniture
Being nocturnal, Luna is the highest,
None else being in sufficient dignity,
She being in Aries in the seventh house
Where Sol exalted is the Alchocoden.
Yes for you see he hath his termine
In the degrees where she is fand enjoys
By that six dignities.
Which are clearly more
Then any else that view her in the scheme.
Why I saw this, and could ha told you to•
That he beholds her with a trine aspect
Here out of Sagitary, almost partly,
And how that Mars out of the self same house,
(But another sign) here by a platique aspect
Looks at the hilage, with a quartile ruling
The house where the sun is; all this could I
Have told you, but that you will out-run me, and more•
That this same quartile aspect to the Lady of life,
Here the seventh promises some danger,
Cauda Draconis being so near Mars,
And Caput Algell in the house of death.
How Sir? I pray you clear that.
What is the question first?
Of the Dukes life, what dangers threaten him?
Apparent and those sudden: when the Hyley,
Or Alchocoden by direction come
To a quartile opposition of the place
Where Mars is in the geniture (which is now
At hand) or else oppose to Mars himself, expect it.
But they may be prevented.
Wisdom only,
That rules the stars may doe it, for Mars being
Lord of the geniture in Capricorn,
Is (if you mark it) now a Sex•isle here
With Venus Lady of the Horoscope,
So she being in her exilium, which is Scorpio
And Mars his gaudium; is o'er ruled by him•
And clear debilitated, five degrees
Beneath her ordinary power, so
That at the most she can but mitigate.
You cannot name the Persons brings this danger?
No, that the stars tells not us, they name no man;
Thats a work Sir of another place.
Tell him whom you suspect, &amp; he will guess shrewdly•
Sir, we doe fear one Aubrey, left it were he
I should be glad, for we should soon prevent him.
I know him, the Dukes kinsman, a tall man.
Lay hold on it Norbret.
Let me pause a little,
Is he not near of blood unto the Duke?
Yes reverend sir.
Fart for your reverence,
Keep it till then, and somewhat high of stature?
He is so.
How old is he?
About seven and fifty.
His head and beard inclining to be gray?
Right Sir.
And fat.
He's somewhat corpulent, is he not?
You speak the man sir?
Well look to him, farewell.
O it is Aubrey: Gentlemen I pray you
Let me receive this under all your hands.
Why he will show you him in his Magic glass
If you entreat him; and but gratify
A spirit or two more.
He shall eat gold
If he will have it, so you shall all, there's that
Amongst you first: let me have this to send.
The Duke in the mean time• and then what sights
You please to show Isle have you so rewarded
As never Artists were: you shall to Court
Along with me; and there• no• waite your fortunes.
We have a pretty• pa•• on it in our pockets:
Boy we will all be new, you shall along too•
Good Madam hear the fut that Edith urges
With such submiss beseeches, nor remain
So strictly bound to sorrow for yo•• son,
That nothing else, though never so befitting,
Obtains your ears or observation•
What would she say? I hear.
My suit is Madam,
That you would please to think as well of justice,
Due to your sons revenge, as of more wrong added
To both your selves for it; in only grieving,
Th'undaunted power of Princes should not be,
Confine•d in deedlesse cold calamity.
Anger (the twin os sorrow) in your wrongs,
Should not be smothered when his right of birth
Claims the air as well, and force of coming forth.
Sorrow is due already, anger never
Should be conceived but where it may be borne.
In some fact fit t'employ his active fame,
That else consumes who bears it, and abides
Like a false star that quenches as it glides.
I have such means t'employ it as your wish
Can think no better, easier or securer
And such, as but for th'honours I intend•
To your partakings I alone could end•
But your parts in all dues to crying blood
For Vengeance in the shedder, are much greater,
And therefore should work your hands to his slaughter,
For your consent, to which it were infinite wrong,
To your severe and most impartial justice,
To move you to forget so false a son,
As with a mothers duty made you curse him.
Edith he is forgot for any son
Borne of my mother, or to me a brother,
For should we still perform our rights to him,
We should partake his wrongs, and as foul be
In blood and damned Parraoi•• •• he:
And therefore tell the happy means that heaven
Puts in thine hand, for all our longed for freedom•
From so abhorred and impious a Monster.
Tell what she will isle lend nor hand nor ear,
To whatsoever heaven puts in her power.
How strange she is to what she chiefly wishes,
Sweet Edith, be not any thought the more
Discouraged in thy purpose, but assured
Her heart and prayers are thine: and that we two
Shall be enough to all we wish to doe.
Madam my •elf alone I make no doubt,
Will be afforded power enough from heaven
To end the Murderer: all I wish of you,
Is but some richer ornaments and jewels,
Then I am able to provide my self,
To help out the defects of my poor beauty,
That yet have been enough as now they are,
To make his fancy mad with my desire,
But you know Madam, women never can,
Be too fair to torment an Amorous man;
And this mans torments I would heighten still,
Till at their highest he were fit to kill.
Thou shalt have all my jewels and my mothers,
And thou shalt paint too, that his bloods desire,
May make him perish in a painted fire.
Hast thou been with him yet?
Been with him? no;
I set that hour back t'hast more his longing,
But I have promised to his Instruments,
Th'admittance of a Visit at our house,
Where yet I would receive him with all luster
My sorrow would give leave too, to remove
Suspicion of my purpose.
Thou shalt have,
All I can add, sweet wench, in jewels, tires,
Isle be my self thy dresser; nor may I
Serve mine own love with an attracted husband,
More sweetly nor more amptly then moist thou,
Thy forward will with his bewich'd affections:
Affects thou any personal aide of mine,
Mine noblest Edith?
Nought but your kind prayers,
For full effect and speed of my affair.
They're thine (my Edith) as for me mine own,
For thou well know if blood shed of the best,
Should cool and be forgotten, who would fear
To shed blood still, or where (alas) were then,
The endless love we owe to worthless men.
Love of the worthiest ever bless your highness.
I never studied my glass till now,
It is exceeding well, now leave me cousin,
How takes your eye the object.
I have learnt
So much Sir of the Courtier, as to say
Your person does become your habit, bu•
Being called unto it by a noble war,
Would grace an Armour better.
You are still
For that great Art, of which you are the moister,
Yet I must tell you, that to th'encounters
We oft attempt, armed only thus we bring
As troubled blood, fears mixed with flattering hopes,
The danger in the service too as great,
As when we are to charge quite through and through
The body of an Army.
Isle not argue
How you may rank the dangers, but will dye in it,
The ends which they arrive at, are as distant
In every circumstance, as far as honour
Is from shame and repentance.
You are sour.
I would speak my free thoughts yet not appear so,
Nor am I so ambitious of the title
Of one, that dares talk any thing that run•
Against the Torrent of his own opinion,
That I affect to speak ought may offend you.
And therefore gracious Sir, be pleased to think,
My manners or discretion have informed me,
That I was borne in all good ends to serve you,
And not to check at what concerns me not,
I look not with sore eyes on your rich outside,
Nor wrack my thoughts to find out to what purpose
It is now employed; I wish it may be good,
And that I hope offends not. For a Subject
Towards his Prince in things indifferent,
To use the austerene••e of a censuring Cato,
Is arrogance not freedom.
I commend
This temper in you, and will cherish it.
They come from Rhoane, Latorch employed you.
I must not now be troubled with a thought,
Of any new design, good Aubrey read them•
And as they shall direct you, use my power
Or to reply or execute.
I will Sir.
And Captain bring a squadron of our guard,
To the house that late was Baldwins, and there waite me.
I shall.
Some two hours hence.
With my best care.
Inspire me love, and be thy deity
Or scorned or feared, as now thou favour'st me.
My stay to doe my duty, may be wrongs
Your Lordships privacy.
Captain your love
Is ever welcome. I entreat your patience
While I peruse these.
How's this? a plot on me!
What is contained
In the letters that I brought that thus transports him?
To be wrought on by rogues, and have my head
Brought to the Axe by knaves that cheat for bread,
The creatures of a Parasite, a slave,
I find you here Latorch, nor wonder at it,
But that this honest Captain should be made
His instrument, afflicts me; Isle make trial,
Whether his will or weakness made him to it.
Captain you saw the Duke when he commanded
I should doe what these letters did direct me,
And I presume you think I'll not neglect
For fear or favour, to remove all dangers,
How near soever that man can be to me,
From whom they should have birth.
It is confirmed.
Nor would you Captain I believe refuse,
Or for respect of thankfulness or hopes,
To use your sword with fullest confidence,
Where he shall bid you strike.
I never have don.
Nor will I think.
I hope it is not questioned.
The means to have it so is now proposed you,
Draw, so, it is well, and next;—cut off my head.
Tic sir the Dukes pleasure,
My innocence hath made me dangerous
And I must be removed, and you the man
Must act his will.
Isle be a traitor first,
Before I serve it thus.
It must be done,
And that you may not doubt it, there's your warrant,
But as you read, remember Hamond that
I never wronged one of your brave profession,
And though it be not manly, I must grieve
That man of whose love I was most ambitious,
Could find no object for his hate but me,
It is no time to talk now honoured Sir,
Be pleased to hear thy servant, I am wronged
And cannot, being now to serve the Duke,
Stay to express the manner how, but
If I doe not suddenly give you strong proofs,
Your life is dearer to me then my own,
May I live base and dye, so sir your pardon.
I am both ways ruined, both ways marked for slaugh∣la,
On every side about, behind, before me,
My certain fate is fixed, were I knave now
I could avoid this: had my actions,
But mere relations to their own ends, I could scope now:
O honesty, thou elder child of virtue,
Thou seed of heaven, why to acquire thy goodness,
Should malice and distrust stick thorns before us?
And make us swim unto thee hung with hazards.
But heaven is got by suffering, not disputing:
Say he know this before hand, where am I then?
Or say he doe not know it, whore's my loyalty?
I know his nature troubled as the Sea,
And as the Sea devouring, where he is vexed,
And I know Princes are their own expounders,
Am I afraid of death? of dying nobly?
Of dying in my innocence uprightly?
Have I met death in all his forms and fears,
Now on the points of swords, now pitched on lances,
In fires, in storms of arrows, battles, breaches,
And shall I now shrink from him when he courts me?
Smile•ng and full of Sanctity? isle meet him,
My loyal hand and heart shall give this to him,
And though it bear, beyond what Poets feign,
A punishment; duty shall meet that pain,
And my most constant heart to doe him good,
Shall check at neither pale affright nor blood.
The Duchess presently would crave your presence.
I come; and Aubrey now resolve to keep,
Thy honour living though thy body sleep.
Now for a Fathers murder and the ruin,
All chastity shall suffer if he reign,
Thou blessed soul look down and steel thy daughter,
Look on the Sacrifice she comes to send thee,
And through that bloody cloud behold my piety.
Take from my cold heart fear, from my sex pity,
And as I wipe these tears off, shed for thee,
So all remembrance may I loose of mercy,
Give me a women's anger, bent to blood,
The wildness of the winds to drown his prayers,
Stormelike may my destruction fall upon him,
My rage like roving Billows as they rise,
Poured on his soul to sink it; give me flattery,
(For yet my constant soul ne'er knew dissembling)
Flattery the food of fools, that I may rock him,
And lull him in the down of his desires,
That in the height of all his hopes and wishes,
His Heaven forgot, and all his lusts upon him,
My hand like thunder from a cloud may ceize him,
I hear him come, go boy and entertain him.
Take ô take those lips away,
That so sweetly were forsworn,
And those eyes like break of day,
Lights that doe mislead the morn,
But my kisses bring again,
Seals of love though sealed in vain.
Hide ô hide those hills of Snow,
That thy frozen bosom bears,
On whose tops the pincks that grow,
Are yet of those that April wears,
But first set my poor heart free,
Bound in those Icy chains by thee.
What bright star taking beauties for me upon her,
In all the happy lustre of heavens glory,
Has dropped down from the sky to comfort me?
Wonder of nature, let it not profane thee,
My rude hand touch thy beauty, nor this kiss,
The gentle sacrifice of love and service,
Be offered to the honour of thy sweetness.
My gracious Lord, no deity dwells here,
Nor nothing of that virtue but obedience,
The servant to your will affects no flattery.
Can it be flattery to swear those eyes
Are loves eternal lamps, he fires all hearts with
That tongue the smart string to his bow; those sighs,
The deadly shafts he sends into our souls,
O look upon me with thy spring of beauty.
Your Grace is full of game.
By heaven my Edith,
Thy mother fed on roses when she got thee.
And thine on brambles, that hath pricked her heart out.
The sweetness of th'Arabian wind still blowing,
Upon the treasures of perfumes and spices,
In all their pride and pleasures call thee Mistress.
Wilt please you sit Sir.
So you please sit by me.
Fair gentle maid, there is no speaking to thee,
The Excellence that appears upon thee
Ties up my tongue, pray speak to me.
Of what sir.
Of any thing, and any thing is excellent,
Will you take my direction, speak of love then,
Speak of thy fair self Edith, and whilst thou speak,
Let me thus languishing give up my self wench.
Has a strange cunning tongue, why doe you sigh sir,
How masterly he turns himself to catch me.
The way to Paradise (my gentle maid)
Is hard and crooked, scarce repentance finding
With all her holy helps the door to enter,
Give me thy hand, what dost thou feel?
Your tears sir,
You weep extremely: strengthen me now Justice,
Why are these sorrows Sir?
Thou'lt never love me
If I should tell thee, and yet there is no way le•t
Ever to purchase this blessed Paradise,
But swimming thither in these tears.
I stagger.
Are they not drops of blood?
No.
They are for blood then,
For guiltless blood, and they must drop my Edith,
They must thus drop till I have drowned my mischiefs.
If this be true I have no strength to touch him.
Pree thee look upon me, turn not from me,
Alas I doe confess I'm made of mischief,
Begot with all men's miseries upon me,
But see my sorrows mind, and doe not thou learn,
Whose only sweetest sacrifice is softness,
Whose true condition tenderness of nature.
My anger melts, ô I shall loose my justice.
Doe not thou learn to kill with cruelty,
(Those blessed eyes) as I have done with malice,
When thou hast wounded me to death with scorn,
As I deserve it Lady for my true love
When thou had laden me with earth for ever.
Take heed my sorrows, and the stings I suffer,
Take heed my nightly dreams of death and horror
Pursue thee not, no time shall tell thy griefs then,
Nor shall an hour of joy add to thy beauties;
Look not upon me as I killed thy father,
As I was smeared in blood doe thou not hate me,
But thus in whiteness of my washed repentance
In my hearts tears and truth of love to Edith,
In my fair life hereafter.
He will fool me.
O with thine Angel eyes behold and bless me,
Of heaven we call for mercy, and obtain it,
To justice for our right on earth, and have it,
Of thee I beg for love, save me, and give it.
Now heaven thy help, or I am gone for ever,
His tongue has turned me into melting pity.
Keep the door safe, and upon pain of death
Let no man enter till I give the word.
We shall Sir.
Here he is in all his pleasure.
I have my wish.
How now, why dost thou stare so?
A help I hope.
What dost thou here? who sent thee?
My brother, and the base malicious office
Thou made me doe to Aubrey: pray.
Pray?
Pray,
Pray, if thou can pray, I shall kill thy soul else,
Pray suddenly.
Thou can not be so traitorous.
It is a justice: stay Lady,
For I perceive your end; a women's hand
Must not rob me of vengeance.
Tic my glory.
Tic mine, stay &amp; share with me: By the Gods Rollo
There is no way to save thy life.
No?
No,
It is so monstrous no repentance c•res it.
Why then thou shalt kill her first, and what this blood
Will cast upon thy cursed head.
Poor guard Sir.
Spare not brave Captain.
Fear or the devil ha thee.
Such fear Sir as you gave your honoured mother,
When your most virtuous brother sheild-like held her,
Such Isle give you; put her away.
I will not,
I will not dye so tamely.
Murdrous villain,
Wilt thou draw seas of blood upon thee?
Fear not,
Kill him good Captain anyway dispatch him,
My body• •onour'd with that sword that through me
Sends his b•••k soul to hell, ô but for one hand.
Shake him off bravely.
He's too strong, strike him.
O I am with you Sir, now keep you from him,
What has he got a knife?
Look to him Captain
For now he will be mischievous.
Doe you smile Sir?
Does it so tickle you, have at you once more.
O bravely thrust, take heed he comes not in Sir,
To him again, you give him too much respit.
Yet wilt thou save my life, and isle forgive thee,
And give thee all, all honours, all advancements,
Call thee my friend.
Strike, strike and hear him not,
His tongue will tempt a Saint.
O for my souls sake.
Save nothing of him.
Now for your farewell,
Are you so wary, take you that.
Thou that too.
O thou hast killed me basely, basely, basely.
The just reward of murder falls upon thee,
How doe you Sir, has he not hurt you?
No,
I feel not any thing,
I charge ye let us pass.
Ye cannot yet sir.
Isle make my way then.
We are sworn to our Captain,
And till he give the word.
Now let'em in there.
O there he lies, sorrow on sorrow seeks me,
O in his blood he lies.
Had you spoke sooner this might have been
Prevented, Take the Duchess,
And lead her off, this is no sight for her eyes.
O bravely done wench.
There stands the noble doer.
May honour ever seek thee for thy justice,
O it was a deed of high and brave adventure,
A justice even for heaven to envy at.
Farewell my sorrows, and my tears take truce,
My wishes are come round, ô bloody brother,
Till this hour never beauteous; till thy life
Like a full sacrifice for all thy mischiefs
Flowed from thee in these rivers, never righteous,
O how mine eyes are quarried with their joys now,
My longing heart even leaping out for lightness,
But, dye thy black sins with thee, I forgive thee.
Who did this deed?
I, and I will answer it.
He faints, ô that same cursed knife has killed him.
How?
He snatched it from my hand for whom I bore it,
And as they grappell'd?
Justice is ever equal.
Had it not been on him th'had'st dyed too honest.
Did you know of his death?
Yes, and rejoice in it.
I am sorry for your youth then, for though the strictness
Of law shall not fall on you, that of life must presently;
Go, to a Cloister presently carry her,
And there for ever lead your life in penitence.
Best father to my soul, I give you thanks Sir•
And now my faint revenges have their ends,
My vows shall be my kin, my prayers my friends.
Stay there, isle step in and prepare the Duke.
We shall have brave rewards.
That's without question.
By this time whore's my huffing friend Lord Aubrey,
Whore's that good gentleman — O I could laugh now,
And burst my self with mere imagination,
A wise man and a valiant man, a just man
Should suffer himself to be juggled out of the world,
By a number of poor Gipsies: farewell swash-buckler,
For I know thy mouth's cold enough by this time,
A hundred on ye I can shave as neatly,
And ne'er draw blood in show: now shall my honour
My power and virtue walk alone; my pleasure
Observed by all, all knees bent to my worship,
All sute's to me, as saint of all their fortunes
Preferred and crowded too: what full place of credit
And what place now? your Lordship? no it is common,
But that isle think to morrow on, now for my business.
Who's there.
Ha dead? my moister dead? Aubrey a live too?
Latorch sir.
Ceize his body.
O my fortune,
My moister dead?
And you within this half hour
Prepare your self good Devil, you must to it,
Millions of gold shall not redeem thy mischiefs,
Behold the justice of thy practise villain,
The mass of murders thou hast drawn upon us,
Behold thy Doctrine, you look now for reward sir,
To be advanced I me sure for all your labours,
And you shall have it: make his Gallows higher
By twenty foot at the least, and then advance him.
Mercy, mercy, it is too late fool.
Such as you meant for me, away with him,
What peeping knaves are those, bring'em in fellows;
Now, what are you?
Mathematicians,
And it like your Lordship.
And ye drew a figure.
We have drawn many.
For the Duke I mean sir.
Latorches knaves you are.
We know the gentleman.
What did he promise ye.
We are paid already.
But I will see you better paid, go whip 'em.
We doe beseech your Lordship, we were hired•
I know you were and you shall have your hire,
Whip 'em extremely, whip that Doctor there,
Till he record himself a rogue.
I am one Sir.
Whip him for being one, and when they are whipped•
Lead 'em to the gallows to see their Patron hanged;
Away with 'em.
Ah good my Lord.
Now to mine own right Gentlemen.
You have the next indeed, we all confess it,
And here stand ready to invest you with it.
Which to make stronger to you and the surer,
Then blood or mischief dare infringe again,
Behold this Lady sir, this noble Lady,
Full of that blood as you are, of that nearness,
How blessed would it be?
I apprehend ye,
And so the fair Matild• dare accept me,
Her ever constant servant.
In all pureness,
In all humility of heart and service,
To the most noble Aubrey I submit me.
Then this our first tie, now to our business.
W'are ready all to put that honour on you.
These sad rights must be done first. Take up the by∣dies,
This as he was a Prince so princely funeral
Shall waite upon• him: On this honest Captain
The decency of Arms, a tear for him too.
Go sadly on, and as we view his blood,
May his example in our rule raise good.

HOw doe these new Guests like us?
Very well:
That fortnight they've been here, I have observed
From them not the least relish of distaste;
The Lady and her sister are so good
Themselves, their innocence cannot mistrust
Ill in another, specially in us,
Who doe assume that formal gravity
Might dash prying eyes: But is the sister
Cured of her Ague perfectly?
The Spring
Does not produce an Ague but for Physic,
She's cured, and only does expect her sister,
The Lady Yellow, otherwise I fear
We should not have her company.
Green-Sicknesse take her,
I thought it had been that, and then my Art
Would have been requisite. I should have found
Some lusty youth that would have given her physic,
More powerful to expel that lasy humour
Than all your Cordials: Heaven, I can but think
How in this seven years, since we came to town,
The Tide is turned with us: when thou were an Inne-
Keeping Apothecary in the Country,
The furniture of our shop was Gally-pots,
Filled with Conserve of Roses, empty Boxes,
And Aqua vitae glasses: and now thou art
My most admired Doctor, walk in Satin,
And in plush, my heart.
Applaud my wit that has effected it.
You will grant I hope
An equal share to me? Was it not I
That first advised you to set up a School
For Female vaulters, and within pretence
Of giving Physic, give them an over-plus
To their disease. How much this has conduced
To our advancement, forgetfulness it self
Cannot deny.
Nor will I, my dear associate, I have now
Achieved a wealth sufficient to procure
My self a license, though the murmuring Doctors
That doe not bite-backe it, though they watch
All opportunities that may undo
My estimation: we must therefore arm
Our selves with circumspective care: be sure
Those virtuous gentle women, who are now
Domestic guests, have no cause to suspect
A misdemeanour here, nor that, our daughter,
A virgin could as morning ayre or Ice.
So timorous of society, that she seems
Neglectful of mankind, be exposed to every common eye,
Frequents our house, we must be politic, wise, or our state,
Will soon embrace a ruin.
Are you the Doctor Artless pray sir?
My name is Artless
Sir, I am sent from Mr. Mixum, your Apothecary, to
give attendance on you.
Your name is Urinal, I take it?
you take my name by the right end sir, my father was a
brother of master Mixum's function: marry my mother told me
a Doctor got me, for professions sake I hope you'll use me kindly.
Doubt not good Urinal, if thou be not cracked can
thou hold water.
Well, that is, bee secret, insooth husband, the young
man will be very good at a dead lift, to serve our patients turns,
he has a promising countenance.
A good subsidy face mistress, but master Mixum has cer∣tified
me, that hither come Ladies and gentlewomen, City
wives and country wives, and the better sort of sailors wives:
Nay wives of all sorts, but Oyster wives, some to have the fall∣ling
sickness cured, others the inflammation of the blood, the
Consumption of the body and lungs; if I doe not to any man or
woman administer a glister, vomit, potion, Iulip, Cordial, or
what physic your worship shall think fit, with dexterity, say
I am no sound Urinal, and beat me to pieces.
I believe thee, but did Tom Mixum give you nought in
charge to say to me?
O yes sir, hee had me tell you hee had a fat Goose in the
pens, only for your pulling: a yunker of a thousand pound per
annum.
Say so, what is he; know thou?
I saw him sir, he was a propenman: but I think has
not much more wit then my self, he seems of a good •an dis∣position,
and may I believe, be led by the nose as quietly as the
tamest Bear in the garden: he has not wit enough to be a knave,
nor manhood enough to be an honest man: this is my 〈◊〉
of him sir, when you see him you'll understand him better.
With licences, is not this 〈◊〉 a receiptacle
For sinners?
Now you are in it perhaps it is, what mean you?
Pish, seem not to obscure, is it not in plain terms, a
house of ease.
There is one in the garden sir.
Where one may do his business with 〈◊〉 fear of Marshall,
Constable, or any one of that most awful tribe.
Surely this gentleman comes to take a purge, hee talks
so eleanely.
Shall I have answer sir? I come as hot from sea, as a
Hollander from herring fishing, I have an appetite,
The most insatiate citizen who frequents
Your mansion cannot tame; had she been fed
With amber posits, eaten sparrows eggs, or her accustomed
Bevendy, been the juice of Clare or Sparagus.
What abuse may this be?
Perhaps your most officious pander 〈◊〉
That for a shilling will betray his sister
to prostitution; did mistake, be gone, or I shall
Fetch a gentleman will whip your hot blood out of you.
Shall I •un for the Bead les mistress?
No go to the next Justice for a warrant, and make haste,
be sure Isle have the knave smoked for abusing my house.
This must not fright me, doe you not keep a pimping
Roaring varle• noted as much as pig, have you not constant
She ••uldiers in your citadel, none such,
Had Hollands Leaguer, Lambeth Marsh is held
A Nunnery to your College.
And the three Scuirrels in the town; I warrant a very
Sanctuary to it.
Come here's gold, be not so bashful, Mistress pray receive it,
I know you are open handed.
Now I desie thee for a Rascal• Urinal why run you
not to the Justice, his man would have taken your money ere
this time.
Yet least I should mistake you, though I am by all
Truth confident this is the house: pray resolve me;
Has the Lady Yellow a chamber here?
Yes sir, she lies in the yellow chamber, and has done this
two months.
I did believe it.
Nay you may believe me if you will: I know neither
Lady Yellow, nor yellow chamber, I have not been here above
half an hour.
Sure sent this fellow hither, he's so unman∣nearly,
silence Urinal, what if that Lady have a chamber here sir?
Now he comes to the purpose.
Nay speak directly suppositions: include a doubtful
sense, if she have not, I shall repent the error of my language
and crave your mercy.
Impudence I think, beyond my own rests in this youth,
I must find out his meaning; tic perchance some one
Sent from her jealous husband, whom she told me,
In discontent was travelled prithee wife go in, and tell the
Lady Yellow, here is one wishes the knowledge of her.
Hang him young whisling, he know a Lady, pity of
his life first.
Doe as I bid you: Urinal attend your mistress in.
Yes, I will attend her in and in too, to do her any service.
Sir, the uneivill language you have given me,
Might justly stir a passionate man to rage;
But it no morestirs me then the light wind,
If you've relation to the Lady Yellow:
She's one who•e virtues merit that respect,
Twould be a stain to manners not to use the meanest of her
Friends with due regard: pray sir what is she to you?
As any woman else is for my money, only I must con∣fesse,
I have an itch, a tickling thought to her before the rest of
common prostitutes: I know she'll lodge in none but vicious
houses, which enforces me think yours is so.
Tic a misconceit, I me sorry for her sake (whom I esteem
So chaste, the pure untainted Doves may envy
Her unstained whiteness) should be cast upon
My innocent house, expect Isle send her to you, she'll shape you •
Just answer, would she were as they suspect her.
This Doctor is dishonest, speaks untruth,
My jealousy is just, that any man
Should so undo his reason; in belief
Of women's goodness, as on their loose souls,
To venture his creation; nay transform
His essence by them: for a cuckold is
Na•uric huge prodigy, the very abstract
Of all, that is wonderful: contempt and shame, are accidents as
Proper to his brow, as baire and whiteness.
Is this she sir?
I nephew that's the monster.
If Africa did produce no other monsters, there would
Be more cuckold in it then Lyons, but to my business,
Madam the old tradition of this house invites your
Knowl•dge to conceive for what I sent to speak with you.
As yet indeed it does not.
Truly it does, I hope I shall obtain
The virgin glories of this days encounter,
Come shalls kiss, and then retire into your chamber.
My chamber, sure your manners lies in your berd, what
doe you take me for?
An excellent creature▪ one whose meanest smile
Would tempt a votary earnest at his prayers,
Before the image of his tutelar Saint; to vary his
Fixed brow: yet I must tell you, you are a factress• of the
Devils, one who fell damnation pleasingly as Asps
Infuse their itching venum: a standing poole,
On whose salt womb the too lascivious sun
Begets of Frogs and Toads a numerous off-spring.
Compared with you is empty of corruption.
••so have at him, a strange complement to win a Lady,
Sir by your first disco••e I had imagined
You came to spend part of this cheerful morn
In amorous dalliance with me, I am apt
For entertainment of it, as a bride
Long time contracted to some exquisite man
Is on her wedding night, but your quick change,
(Did not my glass assure me) no great blemish
Dwells in my cheeks, would urge me to mistrust
An imperfection in them: they are my own sir,
I doe not wear (though its common among Ladies)
My face ith day-time only, and at night
Put off the painted visor, this hair believe it,
Was never shop-ware, you may venture on me, let but your
Creature keep the door, my chamber is empty for you.
Impudent strumper.
Ga• y•u be a woman, &amp; utter this, the hot desire of quails,
To yours is modest appetite, you carry
A stone about you, not to warm your blood
Oppressed with chilly cold, but to inflame it
Beyond all sensual heat, which you would extinguish,
(Had you a soul about you) with your tears,
Or weep with the continuance that tall Pines
Diffuse their gummy drops in summer, and
Faster then trembling Icicles, or snow, at their own dissolution.
This is stranger yet sir, I see you come to convert me
Prompted with a zeal would choke ten precisians earnest in
Their hot house of convention, alas poor youth thy want
Of practice in the sweet delights of love,
Undoes thy judgement, can there be a joy
Equal to this to have a sprightful Lady,
Whose every lineament speaks captivity
To the beholder, clasp with the same strictness
That curling billows doe embrace a wrack,
Her lovers neck, kiss close, and soft, as moss
Does some oregrowne Oak; but I see tic vain,
To prate to thee whose ignorance may plead
Excuse for thy fond here•ie; go depart,
Turn Eunuch and reserve thy voyee, perhaps • will purchase thee
A petty Cannons place in some blind chantry.
Isle cut off their discourse, if 〈◊〉 be right isle have my
benefit out of her: Dalinea attend her Ladyship, Madam I fear
you take cold here, your Sister, Mistress Know• worth expects you
too within; Gentlewoman you cannot complain you have been
used uncivilly; pray now depart, tic time.
They may return to the wise man my husband, from
whom I'm sure they come, and tell him my disposition, ha, ha, ha.
Flames rise on flames successively, the sphere
Has no such fire as I doe •arbour here.
What divine creature should the other be, well master
Doctor, we shall be even with you.
I, doe your pleasure sir, the small Riveret
Does in its cold waves, seem to drench the sun
(When liks a riotous drunkard) his hot rays
Sucks up the pea•lie waters, if this Lady
We are in her breast, the burning spots of lust,
They shall increase, and like the Stars, light her soul
To the firmament of pleasure. The business sirrha?
The business sirha, he's gotten into the Lordly phrase
Already, Sir the gentleman I speak off?
Is this he? would you have ought with me sir?
Amon Deui, this is the Doctor: Foutra I would fine
speak to him, Sir I should bee happy to initiate my knowledge
in your acquaintance Master Mixum an Apothecary, at whose
shop I use to eat Eringo Roots, did recommend me to you.
Honest Tom Mixum, you are welcome; what's your de∣sign
with me?
Fame does divulge you to be a man experienced in the
Arts.
Of cousinage and lying excellently.
Which does concern our bodily health.
And you perhaps Iabor of some disease,
And come to seek for remedy, I can
As Gallon or Hipocrates, read a lecture,
On maladies, their causes and effects,
Tell by the countenance of a man, the ill oppresses him,
You by that 〈…〉 altitude of your horoscope,
Should be subject to Calentures.
Neen up mine •eale min here: ec neet, infection vanish
I never was subject to disease, but the gentile itch which I obe∣taind
in the Low Countries.
I was in hot service certainly.
With licence sir, let me desire your character, I long to
know you, Symptoms of worth declare you in my opinion
noble.
I shall explain my self by land shape a far off, my father
was a Dutch man.
Which makes him look so like a smoked westphalia
ham, or dry Dutch pudding.
And one in the conspiracy with Barnevet, at whose
hanging he fled ore hither.
And the gentle noose had knit up him, and a hundred of
his country men, •our land would not be pestered so with butter∣boxes.
Thinking to have purchased a monopoly for Tobacco:
but that the Vintners took in snuff, and informed the gallants,
who had like to smoked him for it.
An admirable project.
Afterwards he undertook to have drayn'd the Fens, and
there was drowned, and at the ducking time at Crowland
drawn up in a net for a widgin.
Pray sir what tribe was he of?
He was no Jew Sir, yet he would take pawns, and their
forfeits too, and has left me such as you see, I am a proper man: a
trifling patrimony, a thousand pounds perannum.
I admire no man begs him for a fool, and gets it from
him.
May I request your name?
My name is Sconce sir, Master Ier•my Sconce, I am a gen∣tleman
of a good family, and can derive my pedigree from
Duke Elves time, my ancestors kept the inquisition out of Am∣stardom.
And brought all Sects in thither.
And took their surname from Kickin pot, the strongest
Sconce in the Netherlands.
An excellent derivation for a Dutch-man, Kickin-pot.
I had a good strong cousin taken in by the enemy, last
summer, Skinks Sconce Mr. Doctor, my cozen german once re∣moved
by a stratagem of hay boats a fire on them.
That should have been before they came there Master
Sconce.
But tic thought our nation had recovered it ere this,
but that the villainous Dunkerkers at sea met with the Herrinbus∣ses
and made stocke-fish of them.
They beat them soundly then it seems.
Have you no brothers Mr. Sconce?
Not any that I know of, as I am gentleman, nor was there
any of my name till of late, that gallants have begot me name∣sakes
in every Tavern.
But the business you have with me is unrelated yet, and
I have haste, pray what may it concern?
A household matter Mr. Doctor; I would be loath to be
accounted troublesome, I should be none of your vulgar guests
though: Mixum has informed me you have fair lodgings in your
house, convenient for ease and pleasure, might I be so much en∣gaged
to your goodness, as to afford me a handsome one for my
money, it should be an end earement conspicuously trenching upon
my gratitude, and render me your obliged servant ever lastingly.
As long as his money lasts, that is
If that be all, for Tom Mixums sake, were chambers
scar••r, you should not be denied. Urinal bring the gentleman
into the dining room, Isle go acquaint my wife with it.
Urinal, art thou styled Urinal?
It is my right and title to be termed so.
Come hither my sweet Rascal, can keep council,
there's gold for thee, thou shalt have a new case sirrha, wilt thou
be true to me?
I will steal nothing from you Mr. Sconce.
Thou look not like a man of theft, I mean in a design.
Tic not to convey gold over, in hollow anchors, to pay
your Countrymen soldiers; if it be, Isle hear no more of it.
Pish, not that neither. Mixum thou know him, dost
not?
It was he preferred me hither.
I did imagin't; my fine Urinal reports thy Mr. to have
the rarest salve.
The weapon salve I warrant.
Which would, if I were desperately hurt, cure me
without a Surgeons help.
So I have heard indeed.
Now Urinal, it is our Country Custom only to Stick
or Snee. But could thou but procure this precious salve, I
would confront the glistening steel, out-face the sharpest
weapon.
My Master is very cautious in parting with it.
Save you gentlemen, belong you to this house?
No sir, this house belongs to us.
Mistress Know-worth, the Lady Yellows sister, she is not
stirring?
Tic a lye sir, she is.
Your wit is very scurvy Sir: if you serve a Creature here
to carry messages; pray deliver one to her.
I may choose whether I will or no though.
Nay, and he shall choose sir.
Prithee good friend let him; isle do it my self.
Nay, that you shall not neither: what stand I here for?
But sir, it is not the fashion of this liberal age, to employ a man
of merit in a message without consideration: your Lawyers Clark
will not acquaint his Master with a Clients cause, until his fist
be soundly greased: Why may not I then use the privilege of
my office? Sir, wee Doctors men take aurum palpabile for Re∣storative:
you are not unfurnished sir.
O thou would have money; there's for thee, prithee
Entreat her presence.
Instantly, instantly, noble sir, Mr. Sconce pray bear this
worthy gentleman company.
Why should she lodge here? all similitude
Explains this house for vicious, and this Doctor
For an impostor: Though she have •bin sick,
She might have found to remedy her disease,
Another, and more famed Physician
Than this: She stays perhaps to bear
Her sister company. Whatsoere's the cause,
Who dare deprave her innocence, or cast
A thought of blemish on her virtues? Light
Diffused through air (although some thicke-brow'd fog,
Or sickly vapour doe invade airs sweetness)
Suffers no loathed corruption. Thomes may gore
With envious pricking, the discoloured leaves
Of the chaste wood-binde, but can never blast
Their unstained freshness.
Now in the name of madness what 〈◊〉 this man? Sir
are you jealous of your wife before you have her?
What if I be sir.
She may chance Cuckold you after you have her for it.
Good Go••comb hold thy prattling.
Coxcomb? how Coxcomb to a naturalised Dutch∣man?
Death sir, shall I blow you down with my Can; or
show you Twibill.
How Sir?
Nay, bee not angry man, I meant no harm, tic but a
complement all salutation, I purchased of the Mr. of the Order
of the valiant Knights of the Twibill.
A new Order of Knight-hood, that may I know the in∣stitution.
Servant welcome: Lovering entreat
That gentleman to withdraw with Mr. Doctors man.
Sir, my Mistress begs your absence.
Beggars are no choosers my friend: she shall
Undergo no contradiction: but Madam, tic the fashion
As I tak't, to salute at meeting, and kiss at parting.
You had best kiss her double Mr. Sconce.
Lady, serviture vostre &amp; a vous assi Monsieur tresnoble.
He looks like a squirrel indeed: this way sir.
I hope you grow to perfect health,
The Native beauty that once silt your cheeks,
Like to the budding Rose puts forth again,
After cold winters violence: and your lips
On whose soft touch, had it bin possible,
Death would have died himself, begin to show
Like untouched Cherries, pale with Morning dew,
Which once shook off, the purple fruit aspires
With amorous blushes to entice the small
Linnet and wanton Sparrow from their Lays,
To dote on its pure tincture, till they eat
What they admired.
—O you are pleasant servant; did you know
How near I am to death, and for your sake,
Your humour soon would alter.
Truly, fair one,
It is a sweetness in you, I could wish
Were tempered with less passion: (Your much care
Of my unworthy self;) tic but a fortnight,
Since last my eyes enriched their needy sight,
By the reflection of these stars, and had
The least ill seas'd me, you had bin the first
Whose ears would have received it; harms are aptest
To be reported where they are least welcome.
They are indeed, and one of yours is come
To kill my knowledge; such a one, as had
You worn a common heart, no strong disease
Could have dispatched sooner.
—I feel
No inclination in my faculties
Tending to sickness: I have never yet
By nightly sursets forced my youthful blood•
To a distemper.
Would your youthful blood
Has ne'er forced you one. Perfidious man,
Had I achieved the patience of a Saint
(Seclude my love to thee) I should in rage
Title thee worthless: nay, a name above
That hateful appellation: did you never
Injure a Creature of your mothers one Martha?
Ha: how mean you Lady?
In the black act of Sin, when you designed
Her honour, as a carcass to the Grave,
Wherever since your deed of ill was acted,
'T has slept lost and forgotten.
By just truth.
Invoke your falsehood, if you dare etect
On the black number of your heed less oaths
A monument to perjury. White truth,
Flies from the ranckorous poison of your breath,
As from a stifling damp. Can you deny
Without a blush what I have urged?
My resolution staggers a tall Oak,
Whose weighty top has discomposed his roots)
When whirlewinds doe assault it, fits unmoved,
Balanced with me, to recollect the strength
Of impudence, and deeply contradict
Her mightiest affirmation, were to wage
A feeble war with truth. Say I did Mistress;
It was ere a thought reciprocal enjoynd me
A serious duty to you and your mercy,
In which you doe approach as near heavens goodness,
As heaven does blessed eternity, will pardon that wit less error in me.
Truth I shall n•t: the harmless Myrtle first shall live in frosts,
And the pale Couslips flourish, ere warm showers
With quickening moisture raises them to tell
The e•rly Violets they are not alone
The Springs prime Virgins: my peculiar wrong
I freely pardon: but if you respect
Your conscience, seek that injured woman, and
Restore by sacred marriage the sad loss
Of her deprived fame. Doe it Free-wit, heaven
Will smile at thy integrity; my tears
Shall strive to wash your crime away.
She weeps: so choice flowers, when extracting fire,
Enforces their lost leaves to a mild warmness,
Doe through the Lymbecke temperately distill
Their odoriferous tears. But tic most just
To lose a chaste love, when distained with lust.
BUt are you certain Urinal this ointment is Ortho∣doxall;
may I without error in my faith believe this
same the weapon salve Authentical?
Yes, and infallibly the cream of weapon salves, the
simples which doe concur to the composition of it, speak it
most sublime stuff; tic the rich Antido•e that scorns the steel,
and bids the Iron be in peace with men, or rust: Aurelius Bom∣bastus,
Paracelsus, was the first inventor of this admirable Un∣guent.
He was my Countryman, and held an Errant Conjurer.
The Devil he was as soon: an excellent Naturallist, &amp;
that was all upon my knowledge, Mr. Sconce; and tic thought
my Mr. comes very near him in the secrets concerning bodies
Physical, as Herbs, Roots, Plants vegetable and radical, out
of whose quintessence, mixed with some hidden causes, he does ex∣tract
this famous weapon salve, of which you now are Mr.
There's a Welch Doctor in the City reported skilful in
compounding it.
He? a mere Digon a whee▪ his salve, why it is Case∣baby
to my Masters: I dare be sworn tic nothing but Metheg∣ling
boiled to jelly, the blades of Leeks, mixed with a Welch
Goats blood; then stamped, and strained through a piece of Bri∣tech
Freeze, or one of the old laps of Marlins Jerkin.
Probable Urinal. That Welch Doctor I doe not like: I
did attempt him for the weapon salve, and like a Turk hee an∣swer'd
me, that Hollanders were Jaws.
They are a rebellious nation that's certain.
And that the salve was only made for Christians; there
is a City Captain too; I know not how you stile him.
Not Iohn a Stiles, the Knight of the post is it?
No, no, a very honest gentleman; but he's•, reported to
have achieved the salve in Lapland among the witches, and to
be very liberal in imparting it to his friends, an Aldermans
daughter Urinal may, and they say a witty gentlewoman.
Is it possible Mr. Sconce? they have few sons of that
condition.
Had a desperate hole made in her by a gentleman,
with his But-shaft, as in her Country garden he was shooting at
Penny prick; was, when none else could doe it, eur'd by this
Captain.
By this light a trifle, a mere trifle, the very scraping of
our Galley-pots performs more monstrous wonders: there
was a Puritan Mr. Sconce, who, cause he saw a Surplice in the
Church, would needs hang himself in the Bell-ropes.
Why did not the Sexton ring him by the ears for it?
Him my Mr. seeing, did for experience sake anoint the
noose wherein his neck had bin, and it recovered him.
Is it possible he should so easily escape a hanging! but
on good Urinal.
Nay sir Isle tell you a greater miracle: You heard of the
great training last Summer master Sconce?
O when the whole: City went in Arms to take in Is∣lington;
marry I heard the Ale-wives curse the report of their
Muskets, it made their Pies and Custards quake ith'Oven, and
so come out dow-back't, whìch almost broke the poor Harlots.
I then Mr. Sconce there was at least three-score blown
up with a basket of powder, thirty of their lives my Master
saved.
Rarer, and rarer yet: But how good Urinal?
He dressed the smoke of the powder as it flew up Sir,
and it heald them perfectly.
O that any body would blow me up, to see how I
could eure my self. Still on good Urinal.
Nay theré, are thousands of this kind: but now I
think on it since, it did commit a villainous mischief.
Could it ever doe a mischief Urinal?
Yes, yes, it has done a most notorious one, sufficient to
exauctorate its power, and almost annihilate the virtue of it.
What was it good Urinal?
I could even weep to tell yousir: tic supposed twill no∣ver
recover the favour of gentlemen and City wits, they are
quite out of conoeite with it.
But why should they be so Urinal?
I scaree dare answer Sir, for fear you hate it likewise,
It was such another mischief.
Prithee what? nay on my gentility Urinal.
Why sir, it cured two Sergeants, and their yeomen.
How? two Sergeants.
Who otherwise had drunk Mace-Ale with the Devil.
A Capital crime that same, to cure two Sergeants.
Tom Mixum I thank thee for the man
Thou set me; tic a most serviceable knave;
I've set him to pull you bird of Paradise, you parcel Dutch:
thou sentst him hither too.
I knew he was for your purpose, Mr. Doctor: this is
the gentleman I told you had one thousand pound per annum, and
would be a match for Mr. Doctors daughter.
There was a touch for him indeed Urinal.
It will, indeed, now I consider on it, I had rather she
should marry a wealthy gull, than a witty Beggar: Wife and
Mr. Mixum, will you discourse a little with the gentleman,
sound his intent and proneness to a match, and as you find him
use him; Mr. Sconce I should be glad to wait on you, did not ur∣gent
affairs withdraw me.
Mr. Doctor I saw you not before: I am sorry sir, you
will be gone so soon, I should have changed some syllables
with you.
Another time sweet Mr. Sconce.
A very good fortune Mrs Arilesse for your daugh∣la,
and not to be neglected: shall I speak to him, or will you
for sooth?
Perhaps he will speak to us: see kind gentleman.
Lady, my manners does command me leave you: you
would perchance be private by your selves, or peradventure V∣renal
were more behoofefull for your company: then I adieu
Vfroes.
Pray stay sir, we have some business with you,
(let me alone to try him Mrs. Artless) besides wee had rather
be private with a gentleman, then by our selves: they say you
Dutch-men are the kindest men, and love a woman heartily, you
kiss so finely too.
You shall feel that presently 
 there was a touch for you: Nay Mrs. Artless you shall not
blame my manners, I have a lip, a piece for you  and
there was a touch for you Lady.
So please you sir, I have another touch for you too,
 Must try his disposition Mrs. Artless.
A very strong touch that same; she will beleaguer me I
think, and her Cannon shot will bee kisses, they almost
blow me over. Surely the Minikin is enamoured on me.
Motion it to him Mrs. Mixum.
Pray give me leave to feel his mind first, Mistress
Artless: Tic pity sir, you are so long unmarried; you are an
exceeding handsome Gentleman.
Yes, yes, I know that well enough, I might serve
for a gentleman Usher, were my legs small enough: there
are Ladies would consume half the revenues of their Lords,
on such a man of Chine and pith as I am.
Fie master Sconce, think not of Ladies sir, they
are so imperious, a man must serve them as they doe command,
at every turn and toy comes in their head; they'll puff and fret
else, like their taffeta petticoats withoften brushing up; I will
protest to you, you had better set you mind upon some honest
country Gentlewoman, or Citizens daughter, Master Doctor has
a handsome girl (though I say it before her mothers face) only
she wants the audacity, which a man would put into her; would
you were married to her: Sir, she may doe worse, I dare assure
you.
Yes indeed may you master Sconce, have you not
seen her yet? tic a pretty puling baggage, so it is, marry ere I
would make her a Lady, she should be a new Exchage wench,
your Citizens wives they are the goodest creatures, live the finest
lives.
Very right, mistress Artless, good souls, did you
but know sir, what tender hearts they have, how kind they will
be to a gentleman that comes to deal for their commodities,
they will use him and it were their own husbands.
Isle lay my life this musk-melon has a mind to use me
so: I care not much to give her a touch, or so, she's of the right
sis, but Mistress Artless should I have your good will, if I could
love your daughter.
Certainly sir, were you of English blood, I should
like you better.
Fie Mistress Artless, when I was a maid, I had a
desire to be a kin to all nations: I have tried some English
men, and they are like my husband, mere meacocks verily:
and cannot lawfully beget a child once in seven years.
A touch, by this light, that's the reason there are so many
bastards in the city.
Your Spaniard as a neighbour of mine, told me who
had lived among, is too hasty, he will not give a woman time to
say her prayers after she is bed: your French is with a woman
as with an enemy, soon beaten off, but mistress Artless, if you
will marry your daughter to the most complete man, let him be
Dutch: they are the rarest men at multiplication, they will doe
it so readily.
They be indeed very good Arithmeticians.
Here comes the Ladies: Mistress Mixum we will de∣part,
they must not know our conference.
A dew kind master Sconce.
Adieu min vroen, I have a pestilent mind to this talking
harlotry, I will to her, but if I should obtain the Neapolitan be∣neach,
a creek ith'backe, or so, from her, it would be but a sour∣vi
touch, that for me, I should be forced to swim ith tub for it, or
be hanged by the arms, and smoked like a bloat herring, I had
forgot my precious salve, should I be served so, it were but dres∣sing
the weapon that hurt me (which I can have at any time)
and be sound again, ha other donsella's: Madams, they are cry∣tures
of Plush, and Satin, Isle accost them.
This is the gentleman I told you of, I wonder what
his quality may be, our Landlord the Doctor is a much famed
man, and surely very honest.
It shall be so, my English is not complete enough
To hold discourse with Ladies of regard, my natural
Dutch too is a Clownish speech, and only fit to court
A leagurer in: no your French shall doe it, and thank
My memory, I am perfect in it, tic your most
Accomplished language, there's scarce a gallant but does woe
His mistress in the mood, but if they should
Not understand me: well I will experce
Me it.
He means to speak surely in cringes.
Madametres puissant en lecommand. de touts ceurs de cest
monte, ie que sui semond &amp; invite en tant de lieux que ie no scay
•u aller pour abrir mon sayn: a un beauty digne de mon acceptance.
Heyday, what's this, how should he know
Who can speak French.
He supposes it, prithee answer him sister.
Suiuant vostre treschier virtue, Ie sui si liberal
Que ie abadonnerenie &amp; renounce a tout mis beans
Demon vet mon Engine mon alayne mon sang &amp; mon
Pensir (pour ie no saurioye, que dire) proueior mon
Ceur mon affection tout a vostre plaiseur.
Aproche's ie no vou's morderay pas.
Si ié no vous fey tratement t'el que
A vons appartient, ie espere que vostre
Nobles te contera de mon bon intention.
There is the Lady you enquire for.
Thank thee my friend, there's for
Thy pains, depart.
Nephew stand clear, observe.
Sily'a chose en mon petit povoir en quoy ie vous puisse
Servir &amp; eider commands moi librement.
Vous Este fort &amp; liberal de suparoll monsieur.
At it so close, so now he wrings her hand,
And she smiles on him: and her sister laughs
At the lascivious posture, that I could
Command a flash of lightning, or usurp
A minute the prerogative of death
That I might force a ruin on them, sudden
As water falls from mountains, yet so wretched,
They might despair and damn themselves, what say they?
They speak French, I understand them not.
O that's the ages bawd to lustful contracts,
Hell seize them, may their lips, like twins
In mischief grow together, that their foul breath
May have no vent, least like some poisonous fog,
It doe infect the air.
Per dona mi Madam apre's le's lours le maine.
Again, why strait,
If I stand still, they'll to the very act,
I shall behold my self transformed to beast,
And like an innocent lamb, when the keen knife's
Prepared to slit his wesand never bleat
But in calm silence perish; villain devil
Had thou as many lives as thou hast sins.
This should invade them all with the swift rage
Of fire or whirlewinds.
Heavens bless ye
Innocent gentleman: sister my husband.
I fear he has mischiev'd him.
You think you have hurt me wonderfully I warrant.
Good sir be more your self.
Give me thy hand, tic but a touch ith arm man, thou art
a valiant fellow, I warrant thee a right twibiller, run a tilt at
a man before his weapon is drawn, your, Lady would not have
don't I me sure, but tic no matter, thou hast done me a courtesy,
or otherwise I should not take it so patiently, (I shall by this
means experience my precious weapon salve) hold, thou wilt
fight no more, there's a twibill for thee, thy sword Isle keep till
wee next meet, Ladies beso los doights de vostre blanch mains, a∣dew
comrade remember I am beholding to thee.
He's gone, but has left his hanger behind him.
Sister prithee speak to him, he has put me in such a fright,
I cannot.
Sir be not so extremely passionate,
Discourse your grievance mildly, hear her answer,
Then censure justly of her.
Brot•er • admire
A person of your breeding should transgress,
Civility so highly, to at amped
Upon a gentleman, who to my knowledge
Injured you no way.
He is your champion, and you his Ladies.
How sir?
His prostiutes I might have said O creature,
Who art so bad, the present age will question
The truth of history, which do's but mention
A virtuous woman; with what impudence
Can thou behold me, and a shivering cold,
Strong as the hand of winter, casts on brookes
Not freeze thy spirits up, congeal thy blood.
To an ere'lasting le•hargy. The stars
Like stragglers, wander by successive course,
To various seats yet constantly revisit
The place they moved from: the Phoenix whose sweetness
Becomes her sepulchre, ascends again
Vested in younger feathers from her pile
Of spicy ashes, but mans honour lost
Is irrecoverable the force of fate cannot revive it.
Sir tic past my thoughts,
What should incense you to this jealous rage
Against me your loyal wife, when no one blemish
Lies on my soul that can give testimony
Unto my conscience that I have not ever
Truly and chastely loved you.
Yes just so the greene
Willow and shady Poplar love the brooke,
Upon whose banks they're planted, yet infect
By frequent dropping of their witherd boughs,
Its wholesome waters; that thou should be fair
And on the white leaves of thy face bear writ
The character of foulness, swallow up
In thy abyss of sin, thy native pureness,
As the high seas that doe with flattering curls
Entice the spotless streams to mix their waves
With the insatiate billows, that entomb the innocent rivers.
O me unfortunate woman.
Good uncle speak more kindly to her, alas she weeps.
I see it nephew,
So violent rain weeps or the purple heads
Of smiling Violets, till its brakish drops
Insmuate among the tender leaves,
And with its weight oppress them: these are tears,
Such as distill from henbane full of poison,
And craft as she they come from: tell me woman,
Who hast not shame enough left in thy cheeks
To cause a blush, dare thou usurp the name
Of good or virtuous, when these ears can witness
Thou did solicit yesterday this youth,
To fate the ravenous heate of thy desire,
With all the eloquence well worded lust
Could borrow to adorn its painted fow lenesse.
Was it you indeed? I'm glad I know it dear sir,
Had I the chastest temper, that frail flesh
Could ever boast of, your strange usage of me,
Would undermine it: to forsake my bed,
Before my blood scarce relished the delights
Attending on young nuptials, so that I
Expect no anger from you, if I seek
That from the charity of other men,
Which your neglect (though you in duty owe it)
Will not allow me.
Well said sister.
Life sheel tell me straight
She will retain before my face some slave,
Some strong backed monster to perform her hot
Desires with able activenesse, the slow
Motion of snails that carry on their heads
Their shelly habitations to the pace
Of my dull rage, is swift as erring flames,
Which had it not been leaden winged; as sleep,
Ere this had seized the monster.
Ha, ha, ha, the man is sure distracted, ha, ha, ha,
Heyday, here's laughing and crying both with a wind,
As boys doe, a juglar's but an ass to a right woman.
Good sir will you walk? the gentleman hoe's in a la∣rible
sweat, should he stand still, he may chance catch an Ague.
A Cardus posit were very sovereign for him, I per∣ceive
his fit is coming.
How doe you husband, sweet heart, what not speak? I
thought your jealousy ere this had driven you into France, but
now I see you fear to bee sea-sicke, you have found me out it
seems; I hope ere long you will provide Gossips for the child
I go with, mark you duck.
If I stay, my rage
Will hurry me to mischief, better leave her
To certain ruin, then betray my self
To danger of it, when strong tides meet tides
In a contracted channel, they theirforce,
Resign to the wearing of the troubled waves
A frothier livery, then when Oceans
Encounter with full liberty, the winds
Imprisoned in the Caverns of the earth,
Break out in hideous earthquakes, passions so
Increase by opposition of all scorns,
Tic most opprobrious to be armed with horns.
He leaves you here sir as his spy, do's he not?
Pray wait upon your master, I suppose he is so.
Pardon me Madam, he is my uncle.
Which of his sisters sons are you?
The Lady Popingaies.
My cousin Harry Popingay; I cry your mercy sir: your
good mother knows, and grieves Ime sure, to see her brother
wrong me as he does: should I tell her how you dealt with me
too, she would chide you soundly.
Your goodness Madam will forgive it on my submission
and sorrow for it.
Weel beg it for you sir.
Sister he has it, were it possible
To work a reclamation on this man,
From his fond jealousy, I would not wish
A change to be an Empress.
Madam, my mother does entreat your Ladyships com∣pany
in your chamber, Mrs. Mixum has brought the conserves
my father did appoint her.
Tic the same face, or else some Angel does
Assume this shape to mock mortality,
With the true form of beauty.
Nephew pray see us oftner, and use all means to gain
your distracted uncle from his frenzy, sister shall's walk; Dali∣no
be it your care to see my Nephew forth.
I shall Madam.
Life, she speaks too
A tempting language, such was our first mothers voice,
While she was innocent, most perfect woman.
Would you have ought with me sir?
Yes bright virtue.
That title relishes flattery for ought you know: I may be
vicio us.
Goodness deludes it self then,
I cannot flatter Lady, you mistake me:
What I shall speak, comes from an innocence
Yet undefild by falsehood.
Speak quickly, if it concern me, otherwise I must
Entreat a licence to depart.
You cannot afford example of such cruelty
To following Lovers, to deprive my sight so soon
Of yours, for whose least view, the dark Cimmerian, blinded
With continual sleep, would rouse his heavy eyelids.
Nay, and you begin to run a complementout of breath,
You' l drive me hence indeed: (believe me sir) had I not liked
You well, my modesty would scarce have suffered the least
Interchange of words (but since it has done) pray be brief,
What tends your conference to?
I love you Lady
With the religious fancy, that one Saint
Affects another; such a heate as mine
Was that, with which the first who ere knew love,
Had their souls warmed (essential) not as now
The common garb is to adore a lip,
Or any other lineament, but for
The abstract of perfection, which do's glory
In being derived from one so good as you are,
Am I become your captive.
This to me, sounds as the empty whistling of the ayre
Does in some hollow vault, unspotted truth
Informs my ignorance, there's not a person
In all the multitude of men loves chastely.
Be so charitable
As to believe I can, who never yet
Knew flame was vicious, my desires retain
Their maiden purity, no other object
Did ere attract my souls unblinded eyes, but your fair self.
Then I believe you sir,
No man will be so worthless to dissemble
With me, who cannot think but all the world
Intends the same reality that I doe:
Yet tic an error, which persuasion scarce
Shall free me from: that every woman ought
To love a man with that indifferent heate
She fancies other women, without sense
Of difference twixt the Sexes.
Soul of sweetness,
How equally an Angels intellect
Informs her sacred Reason: to love chastely,
Could not have bin defined with juster strictness,
Had we produced the constancy of Swans,
Or never changing Turtles, as our patterns,
(It had but described chaste love) the Palm that prospers,
(Not but by's fellow) and the Vine that weaves
Of her own leaves a thin, yet glorious mantle
For her naked lover. Doe but emblem what
Her truth has utt'red: but resolve me fair one,
Could you affect so?
If that were all
Requisite to love, I could; but there's obedience
A Nuptial wreath brings with it, which I fear
My frailty would scarce keep, and to become
Perfidious to a vow were such a sin
As I should quake to think of.
You allege
Vain difficulties: I perceive your looks
Would be propitious to me, did your will,
Ashamed perhaps to suffer sudden conquest,
Not play the Tyrant with them, and call back
The crimson Nectar from your well-form'd cheek
To guard your heart from yielding: come, let's kiss,
The modest heate proceeding from my lips
Will thaw your soul to softness.
Away, we may not;
If true—chaste love had rested in discourse,
I could have been its votary, but a thought
Of any thing beyond it, is to me
Dangerous as sickness: farewell sir.
Sure some white Cherubim,
Coming to teach the irreligious earth
The ancient truth; in its swift flight to heaven,
Pronounced that happy farewell to the souls
Its music had converted, I've not lost
In my first trial, like some venturous man,
Who finds the Indies, though he get small wealth,
Yet he sets forth again, in hopes at last
To lade his winged vessel: Isle return.
That fire's not out, which does in Ashes burn.
SO, now it works: the operation I believe is not on
the sudden, and my wound rancles as fast as if hee
had run his Rapier through a Head of Garlic, or washed it
in Aqua fortis; and this weapon salve, so much extolled byth' Twi∣ball
Knights, commended by Mixum, deified by Urinal, and
adored by my believing self, procures no more miraculous of∣fact,
than if it were unguentum album. Well, I am confident
yet, there's no defect in the ••guent; my blood, my blood is sure
anathemated; carries some cursed impediment about it, that
disannuls the virtue and incomparable force of the divine s•lvi.
This Dutch blood of mine, guilty of Bacon grease, and potted
Butter—Sof, who are these? my Cozen Fortress, General
of the Twiball Knights; and his assistant Perk, with Mr. Mix∣um;
it were a detriment to valour to complain before them.
Yonder's your Cousin talking to himself: pray Gentle∣men
draw near. Mr. Sconce I brought these friends to visit you.
Thanks good Mr. Mixum, Cousin Fortress, and my
Diminutive Captain Perk; give your hands, you are welcome,
very welcome.
Health to the Weather-cocke of my Kin, the noble Sig∣neur
I•emias Sconce.
Propitious, and auspicious be thy stars, man of re∣noun
and merit: ha thy arm in sling my Palmerin: Confusion
Captain Fortress, he wears a wound about him.
No, no, a touch, a mere touch, a Flea-bite, Captain Perk.
Is it not recovered by the salve Mr. Sconce?
Yes, as good as whole; the weapon salve will reme∣die
it.
Yes, past all chance it will: twill mundifie and purge
your body Cousin: I use to combat three of four at once, every
spring, purposely to be let blood a little: it does me good all the
year after.
I am very glad of it. But tell me Cousin Fortress, how
fares it with the residue of the blades, the valiant Twiball
Knights, the famous brethren, doe they walk in Coat gilt, or
all a mode in Dunkirk Cloaks?
Those fashioned Cloaks I never heard of before: I mer∣veil
my Tailor gets not a pattern of them; Pray sir, what is a
Dunkirk Cloak?
Not know a Dunkirk upper garment, a leag•er Cloak;
behold my I•, this Cane, this staff of office; this wee stile the
Military Caster.
Twill hardly keep a shower of rain out that.
Are they confined to Chamber still, for want of Boots,
or Linen? I love to hear of their prosperities.
Why Cousin they are well, but in the accustomed garb,
the frugal brim, and petty feather: they expect most careful∣lie
thy admittance into our Order.
'Tshall be don• after my wedding Cousin▪ I have got,
dost hear, sirrah Perk a girl of mettle, the Doctors daughter
Bully, Fortress. Flesh of Milk and Roses Blade.
But Cousin, tic necessary, you enrol your self into the
Family before you wed: our order, like the Knights of Malta,
does admit no persons espoused: but with this difference, if
they receive the Order Bachelors, they may then marry and
yet retain the title.
Say you so Cousin?
Certain truth my Io: we met upon our grand Exchange
last night, our place of trade and consultation, and there conclu∣ded
some decrees, necessary for supporting our Common∣wealth.
How perdition Captain? how durst you meet without
me? or conceit that decree valuable, which the voice of Cap∣taine
Perk has not assented to. Refuse me sir, the brethren of
the Blades shall me their bold confrontment: vengeance doe
you take me for a boy, or some Pigwiggin? consult with∣out
me?
Patience, good Captain Perk, I would fine hear
them.
He reads his necke-verse, reads them in my presence:
Death rob me of the privilege of my place and dignity Cap∣taine,
confound you, I could show you Twibill for it.
What does this Tom Thumb mean trow?
Why sirrah Dandiprat, you might have given attendance.
What without a summons, you can send Jack Shirk
your Beadle; to congregate the meaner branches of the Brother∣hood,
not a Picke-pocket I warrant you, but had notice of it:
and must I be forgotten? by my man-hood tic base.
You have given the Captain too bold a touch Senior
Perk; thou art just like the Mouse to the Elephant, borne to
vex him 〈◊〉 p•other for my sake let him read them.
Your sake prevails, or otherwise—
Attend then Cousin Sconce; our Orders Isle assure you are
such, as the most envious Justice, nor their Goose-quill Clerks,
that smell at new Bridewell, and Finsbury shall not exclaim
on. Imprimis, it is generally decreed.
How, generally without me? Fire of Styx this is in∣sufferable.
Good Captain Perk, on cousin Fortress.
That no knight of the Twibill; as Whiskin or ally
gentleman shall presume to lead or convey any of the sisters of
the order, viz. Striker, Cockatrice, or Gynimeg through the
watch after twelve, unless he see them asleep, or be in see with
the Constable, under the penalty of being sent to the house of
Correction.
Renounce me sir, this order Isle not sign to, it savours of
cowardice, fear to convey a sister through the watch, tic against
Our noble institution
Next it is enacted, that none of the grooms of our ward∣robe
shall offer to deprive any man of cloak, coat, or hat,
unless it be in the dark, as they fear to answer it at the next
assises, and be burned in the hand for it.
Twould be a hot touch for them cousin Fortress.
Next it is decreed, that the receivers of our rents and
customs, to wit divers Rooks, and Saint Nicholas Clerks
shall certainly use no more slights to get more then they can
clearly come off with, under penalty of being carried up Hole∣borne
in a cart, and at Tiburne executed, which may tend to the
dissolution of our whole fraternity.
But have you concluded nothing for the sisters, I long to
hear them?
O yes cousin, we have confined them to a certain price, a
stipend reasonable, so that they shall not need to dive into
pockets.
They will doe that if you would hang them cousin.
I doe disclaim that order, Captain Fortress. your
wisdom should have well considerd at when• charge they are,
for coach or hand litter, specially those of the gentile garb,
next their ushers must be maintained, paint paid for, clothes, pro∣vided
and the matron satisfied, these things considerd, could you
bee so cruel as to confine them to a price by valour sir, I am a∣shamed
on it.
Tic mended by the next order, they are prescribed from
wearing Plush and Satin, unless in petticoats.
You will not have them like the Jewes at Rome wear
party coloured garments, to be known from Christians?
By no means sir, we would have every one take notice
of them, but Marshalls men, Beadles, and Constables, and
therefore have ordained that they shall wear Beaver Hats,
Poked Ruses, Grogram Gowns, or at the best wrought Taffeta,
Fox Skin Musses, Moehaire petticoats, Bodkins and Cross∣clothes
edged with gold lace.
This is the habit of our Rotterdamians.
The only shape to hide a striker in: ever while you
Live, your city is most secure from officers, and most
Notorious to gentlemen, they will take up your city ware at
Any rate. Besides while they •lanted it in plush,
It was an abuse to gentlewomen and Ladies, we have er'd in
Questioning them for females of our tribe, and had our pates
Broke for it.
But Cousin is this edict generally confirmed by all the soci∣ety
of the Twibillers Knights and Ladies.
Tic universal cousin, only for Captain Pirkes name, wee
left a blank, there's the decree sir, read it if you please.
It was the safest course to leave a blank for me, or I had
Blanked your whole decree! I had by magnanimity.
Im•rimis, I Captain Furibundo Fortress.
A fearful name that same.
Knight great master of the order of Twibill: Lord of no
Cloak, Viscount Rattan, cane and one spur.
You are but an ill cock of the game it seems.
Count Freeze, gray Felt, and mony-lacke, Duke of Turn∣bull,
Bloomesbury, and Rotten Row, Lord paramont of all
Garden-Alleyes, Gun Ally, and Rosemary Lane.
He has more titles then the great Turk• Proceed sir.
Chief commander of all Twibills, dangerfeild and which∣kins,
who will quarrel in Taverns with a man, and not fight
in the field with a mouse. And of the residue of the fraternities
of husses, diverse dams and decoys, sole sultan and grand sig∣neur,
have to the premises set my mighty hand, together with
hands of our trusty and our courageous assistants (this blanke's
for you Captain Pike) Holafernes Make-shift, Rosiran Knock∣down,
and twenty six more of our principal companions of the
order.
Nay there are others too, bu•y not their appellations
in oblivion, they merit memory.
To which at our command also are subsign'd our most il∣lustrious
and remarkable sisters (they are slit nosed perhaps)
(there was a touch for them cousin Fortress) Donna Iesabella,
Garreta, mother of the maids of Lambeth Marsh, with her con∣spicuous
consort, at the three skipping Cones in the town.
(a touch that) you mean the three Squirrels, you are cunning
cousin Fortress, together with our most industrious servant Pie∣thagoras
Pig.
I gave him that name from his transmigration into cast
suites, who has put his petie toes to it, and finally the woman
that sings ballads, has her name trunled at the tail of it.
I marvel master Doctor has not set his hand to this.
Sealed with the seal at arms of our order, viz. Three
Rooks volant in a field sanguine, two broken jugs the supporters,
and a Twibill for the erest, and given the second day of this pre∣sent
month, at our mansion royal, or place of meeting in the
long gravield walks in our usual fields.
Well Master Doctor you'll remember me,
And have an eye unto my nephew, I trust
Her with you. Farewell sir.
Doubt it not good sir Martime.
Captain Perk pray retire unto the brothers of our
Society: entreat them to prepare again tomorrow, for
My cousin Sconces enseasement.
Upon compulsion sir, I should refuse, marry on fair en∣treaty
I doe fly, good and high fates look on you.
Son Sconce (I'm bold to call you so) how do's your
at me?
Indifferent sir, but yet I have not found
That rare effect in the weapon salve you spoke of,
Urinal I fear since it cured the two sergeants and their
Yeomen, the virtue has been much extenuated.
It was your ill dressing the weapon: give me your sword
son, this is of the right salve the welsh Doctor makes, this
shall save my credit. (Anoints the weapon.) Now Urinal take
this weapon, lap it warm in linen clothes, and locke it in my
son, your anguish son will soon be mitigated.
I have a touch of it already sir.
I have seen experience of this weapon salve, and by its
most mysterious working known some men hurt, past the help
of surgery recovered.
Mark you that master Sconce, the gentleman may be be∣leaved.
Yet I cannot
With my laborious industry invent
A reason why it should doe this, and therefore
Transcending natural causes, I conclude
The use unlawful.
He is unlawfully begotten sir, dares term it so, there
was a touch for him cousin Fortress; I called him son of a
whore, and he would take no notice of it.
But pray sir, why should it be unlawful?
Cause Conscience and religion disallow
In the recovery of our impaired healths,
The assistance of a medicine made by charms,
Or subtle spells of witchcraft.
his mother was a witch, says this maid, so there was
another touch for him cousin Fortress, son of a witch, but he un∣derstands
not that neither.
Conceive you this to be compounded so?
Isle prove it master Doctor.
The proof of a pudding is the eating, in your teeth sir,
a pudding in his teeth: you know what I mean cousin Fortress,
another touch for him, but al's one, he has wit in's anger, and will
not understand me.
If he durst blunder for it Cousin Sconce.
Yet to avoid a tedious argument,
Since our contention's only for discourse,
And to instruct my knowledge, pray tell me,
A 〈◊〉 you not tha this same salve will cure
At any distance (as if the person hurt
Should be at York) the weapon, dressed at London,
On which his blood is.
All this is granted twill.
Nay we will grant you more sir (that it will not) and yet
prove it, and you shall prove your self a (so you shall.) There
had been another touch for him cousin Fortress, but I feared hee
would have understood me now, ere you shall prove it.
Silence cousin Sconce, let's hear the whif•la if he can∣not
verify his words, sink me my Jo, he shall taste arm of dan∣gerfield.
Out of your words sir Isle prove it Diabolical, no cause
Natural; begets the most contemned effect,
Without a passage through the means, the fire
cannot produce another fire until
it be applied to subject apt to take
Its flaming form, nor can a natural cause,
Work at incompetent space: how then can this
Neither consigned to the matter upon which
Its operation is to cause effect;
Nay at so far a distance, work so great
And admirable a cure beyond the reach
And law of nature; yet by you maintained,
A natural lawful agent, what dull sense can credit it.
Very authentic this, well if the devil have tan the
pains to be my surgeon, my arm I fear will be possessed, I feel
an evil spirit in it already.
Respect the Doctors answer.
Sir, you speak reason, I must confess, but every cause
Works not the same way; 'we distinguish thus:
Some by a Physical and real touch
Produce: So Carvers hewing the rough Marble,
Frame a well polished statue: but there is
A virtual contact too: which other causes
Employ in acting their more rare effects,
So the bright Sun does in the solid earth,
By the infusive virtue of his rays,
Convert the for did substance of the mold
To Mines of mettle, and the piercing ayre
By cold reflection so engenders Ice;
And yet you cannot say the chilly hand
Of ayre, or quickening fingers of the Sun,
Really touch the water or the earth.
The Load-stone so by operative force,
Causes the Iron which has felt his touch,
To attract another Iron; nay, the Needle
Of the ship guiding compass, to respect
The cold Pole Artic; just so the salve works,
Certain hidden causes convey its powerful
Virtue to the wound from the anointed
Weapon, and reduce it to welcome soundness.
The salve is legitimate again, Cousin Fortress, O rare
Doctor
Nay, you shall hear him tickle the gentlemen I war∣rant
you.
This, Mr. Doctor, is
A weak evasion, and your purities
Have small affinity; the glorious Sun
As tic a general instrument of heaven,
In all its great productions, and the Ayre
An Elemental agent, naturally
Engender Metals in the earth, and Ice
On the self 〈◊〉 waters: The Load-stone
As tic a simple body, may afford
That virtue to the steel by secret power
Of all-commanding nature. But that this,
This weapon ••lvi, a compound, should affect
More than the purest bodies can, by ways
More wonderful than they doe, as applied
Unto a sword a body void of life,
Yet it must give life, or at least preserve it.
Pish, he talks like an Apothecary to the Doctor.
You mistake, it does not,
Tic the blood sticking to the sword achieves
The cure: there is a real sympathy
Twixt it, and that which has the juice of life,
Moistens the body wounded.
Rare Parac•lsian, thy Annals shall be cut in Brass by
Pen of steel.
You may as well
Report a real sympathy between
The nimble soul in its swift •light to heaven▪
And the cold carcass it has lately left,
As a loathed habitation: blood, when like
The sap of Trees, which weeps upon the Axe
Whose cruel edge does from the aged Trunk
Discover the green Branches from the Veins,
Ravished, forgoes his Native heate, and has
No more relation to the rest, than some
Desertlesse servant, whom his Lord casts off,
Has to his virtuous fellows.
Mr. Free-wit returned again, and in discourse
With Mr. Doctor: Isle not disturb your conference.
So please your Ladyship we had even done.
I am glad she's come to rescue me.
There was a touch for him Cousin Fortress, victus, vista,
victum, he looks like a Schoole-boy vanquished at capping ver∣ses:
hark you sir, repent your error, and in time you may bee
saved; you see the virtue of the salve the Doctor had dressed his
Speaking weapon with it. It hurt you, and it has cured you Be∣ware
you fall not into a relapse: there was another touch for
him Cousin
Doctor give your hand (father I should
have said) some famed Historian, some Gallo-Belgicus shall Chro∣nicle
thee and thy salve, there was a touch for him Cousin For∣tress.
Come you shall see my Mistress.
Mr. Freewit have you yet found the injured
Woman out, I motioned at last parting?
Truly Mistress, had she bin worthy the seeking, your
Command should not have been protracted, but
It were a stain to my own honour to be inquisitive
After a prostitute, and a blot to your
Discretion, should nice judgements know you enjoined me
So manifest a folly.
It was a greater to be the author of her shame,
Whom now you slight so infinitely.
Could I slight her more,
It were a due justice which I owe my self,
(In hazarding the forfeit of your love)
Undone by her, but your most serious thoughts
Will sure convert your soul from the intent
Of my most certain ruin, which your last
Discourse perhaps, for trial of my faith,
Seemed to invert upon me.
You mistake; needless are second trials, when a first
Proves you perfidious; doubtless you confirmed▪
Your love to her, with the same sad protests
You've done to me (yet left her) for her sake,
And in revenge of women's innocence, martyred by you,
I here to heaven pronounce a sure disjunction
Of our loves and vows for ever.
O reserve that breath,
Which ought like sacred incense to be spent
Only on heaven, or in delivering notes
May charm the world to peace, when raging wars
Or Earth quakes have affrighted it. Confirm't
On no such use, horrid and ominous,
As if it threatened thunder to the earth,
Or would infect the genius of the ayre
With Mists contagious (as if composed
Of Viper steam) O had you were wont
To be so good, that virtue would have sighed
(At the unwelcome spectacle) if you
Had appeared woman in a passion,
(Though of the slightest consequence) O do not
Renounce that Saint-like temper, it will be
A change hereafter burdenous to your soul,
As sin to one, who all his life time blessed
With peace of Conscience, at his dying minute,
Falls into mortal enmity with heaven,
And perishes eternally.
These words
Have not the effectual Oratory you first had,
When I was confident, as day of light,
Your youth had been as destitute of vice
As of deformity. So a sweet stream,
Whose bubbling harmony allured the Birds
To court its moving music, when it mixes
With impure waters, with the noise affrights
The ears, before delighted in it.
This is too severe a Justice, and extends
To cruelty, had some intemperate rage
Purpled my hand in murder (though the guilt
Would have been written in a larger Text
In Conscience black book; yet the punishment
Had not bin half so hideous. I should for that
Have suffered but a temporary pain
At worst; and my truly repentant soul
Perhaps have had free entrance to the place
consigned to penitents, when now, like so me
Manacled Captive, or diseased wretch,
On whom each minute does beget a death:
I like a slow fire by my own soft flames,
With Tortoise speed extinguish.
Sir, your words are superficial, as a shadow which
The morning Sun produces and black night
Renders forgotten: and no more excite
Belief in me: that what you utter's truth,
Then Mand rakes groans doe a conceit of death
In persons resolute▪ while I have yet
A specious memory left, that once my heart
Tendered you dearly; I would counsel you
First to endeavour to find out that maid,
(If that succeed not) not to think on me,
As one affianced to you by a nearer interest then other women
Are that never had conversation with you.
Had a frost, sharpe as a tedious winters Northern blasts,
Congealed your mercy, my unfeigned tears
Should with moist warmth dissolve it, mistress you
Approach so near the attributes of heaven,
That had you lived in the superstitious age,
More precious gums had fumed upon your altars,
Then on all female deities. O forgive me,
A rigorous tyrants breath will scarce pronounce
For one and the first crime, so strict a sentence:
You shall not go yet if you will recall it,
Lovers will bless your piety, and sub scribe to your
Superlative goodness.
Pray desist, afford me liberty to retire, I cannot alter
my resolution.
Yet reclaim it; some devils spleen has lately fraught
Your breast, and banished thence mild de pity, (bostrous winds,
Force so the gentle and untroubled seas,
To swallow up some ships, its natural calmness
Would have transported safely with their wealth
To their desired harbors) were my thoughts,
Not fixed with that religion upon you
That are my prayers (when I repent) on heaven,
I should not thus transcend the laws and strength
Of manhood, and like some distressed babe
Left by its parent to the desolate woods,
Or airs cold charity, so long implore
A new and holier union twixt our souls,
Then ere had linked them which when you have tied,
Time shall depend like summer on your brow,
And your whole life be one continued youth,
(Such were the springs in paradise) and when
You pass to be a sharer in heavens bliss,
Virgins and innocent lovers spotless tears,
Hardened to pearl by the strong heat of sighs
Shall be your monument.
I shall relent spite of my settled will, if be continue
These moving supplications: Sir because
You shall not blame my cruelty, or judge
Tic for regard of any thing but my honour,
I doe forsake you, if ere to morrow night
You find that woman, get her to renounce
Freely her title to you, • again
On 〈◊〉 of your future loyalty
Will stand the trial of your wavering faith,
Perhaps be yours again: you have
Received my utmost meaning,
How I adore
This constancy of worth in her, though
It make against myself, well I must to my task,
That labour's richest that most pains doth ask.
TIC a strange humour Madam, and condemns
Your judgement of much indiscretion,
Did I not know it lawful; nay no way
But that for the recovery of your health,
I should not urge it thus, you are lately fallen
Into a desperate melancholy, and your blood
Can no way purge so well as by
Performance of what I have declared.
Truth sir I weigh not at so high a rate, my life
That to prolong it to an irk some age,
I should destroy my honour, neither doe I
Find any such strange sickness raining on me
As you have urged; pray as you love me sir,
Unless you mean to drive me from
The house, repeat this argument no more.
Why look you sir, my master has
Persuaded her as much as lay in him, and
He has a tongue able to cousin the devil: but twill not doe,
She is too honest believe it, for your nephew Sir Martine, she
His kept her chamber ever since she came,
None but my self has seen her.
It shall be so, the holy law of heaven
Made us one individual; the strict league
'Iwixt man and wife, ought to confine both souls
To a most constant union, injured woman.
My husband and on the sudden, speak you to me sir.
His mouth opend Ime sure, sir the Dutch Gentleman.
O my son Sconce, come hither Urinal.
This acknowledgement cannot
Be serious from him, good Sir Martine
Has your wilde fancy not imposed enough,
Temptations on my frailty that you come after
So many strange indignities, again to delude me.
Tic misery of customary sinners when they mean
A real truth, then their precedent ills,
Deprive it credit, Madam not that night,
That sacred night which spread its starry wings,
(Like Curtains shadowing the Altar) ore
Our Hymeneal couch, could witness more
Sincerity of indissolving love'twixt us,
Then does this minute, if your soul,
(Which is so passive it may justly challenge
A Martyrs temper) can dispense with pas'd
Absurd distastes, and like a Saint for humane
Condition is too vengeful freely pardon
What I amiss have acted.
As you are my husband sir, and consequently my head.
How many Lad•ies in town are of that mind.
And ought to be the guitar of my youth,
I will not stand on that nice term of honour,
With you whom duty ties me to observe
With more then superficial care, t'injoyne
A penance for your folly; the light smoke
Finds not a surer burial in the a ire
(To whose embraces with ambitious haste.
On azure wings it soared) then has your guilt,
In this forgiving bosom, this pure kiss seals the agreement.
She offred first too, and me thought she kissed
As she would eat my lips, the ravenous touch
Of her hot flesh has seard me up like grass
In summer time, and her foul breath like blasts
Of Southern winds, has quickened my dead fire
Of jealousy, nay raised it to a greater
Heat then my former.
What aisle you sir on the sudden?
Viper, toad, out of my presence, ere my just waked
Rage, get to its height, whence like a Falcon towering
At full pitch ore the trembling foul, it will seas on thee.
Madam tic best to leave him, I fear he's absolutely fran∣tick;
Urinal look to him, least he act some violence on him∣self,
please your Ladyship withdraw.
Soft patience guard my heart: wheres no offence,
one safely may rely on innocence.
Why sir Martine, how doe you sir? not speak? now by my
life, hee looks like a staggerell newly come to his Horns,
flings his head just in that manner they do not touch the seeling,
yet Sir Martine: in time they may be three and four at top, and
serve to hang hats and cloaks on in the best knights hall in
town.
O Urinal.
O Urinal, what a pitiful noate was there, that very
sound has almost cracked me to pieces: Sir Martine, good Sir
Martine what ails you? or rather what ails your wife, that
you hum and haw so after kissing her▪ her breath is savoury, I dare
bee sworn she has neither eaten Onions nor drunk Aqua∣vitae.
O no, she is like a too ripe, so extremely sweet,
She poisons like the honey which small Bees
Suck from the Aconite, the Panther so
Breaths odors precious as the Sarmaticke gums
Of Eastern groves, but the delicious sent not taken in at
Distance chokes the sense with the too muskie savor.
You should have kissed her as the Court fashion is, upon
the cheek, but pray •ir, why are you so jealous: yet cannot prove
your Lady has a trick with her toe, or turns oftner then an ho∣nest
woman (if she do) had not you better like an old Stag, cast
the cognisance of your order into the hedge, then like a wanton
Pricket, run f•ll Butte at every one you meet, as who should
say; take notice of my horns. I am ashamed of it so I am.
Dost not believe I am? a hideous cuckold.
And must you needs cry Cuckoo therefore. There are
knights in town who know their Ladies to be Hens oth'game,
and •iv by trotting, yet like mettle Cocks they never hang the
Gills for it, they are sure fair Gamesters use to pay the box well:
especially at In, and In, (the Innes of Court Butlers would have
had but a bad Christmas of it else) and what care they, so they
can purchase plush, though their wives pay in the hole for it.
Can there be such monsters?
Monsters, they are men Sir Martine, such as you are;
only they are velvet browd a little: but hear me Sir, if a man
would venture fair offer to give a certain knowledge of your
wives honesty.
Doe that, and be my genius Urinal.
You would have an evil Angel of me, Isle tell you sir,
my master intends privately this night to wed his daughter to
the Dutch younker S•once, the house will be atquiet, and your
Lady left alone in her chamber, her sister Mistress Knoworth, be∣ing
to go to Church with them.
What of this?
Soft and fair Sir Martine, I will in the evening steal you
into the Ladies chamber when she's in bed, come to her, and in
the dark, (thats the only time to deal with a woman) (and as
another man) try what you can doe with her: if she consent
(the worst) you doe but cuckold your self, if hold out, being a
woman alone, in bed, and in the dark having a man standing by
her, you may then conclude her an honest wife, and your jealou∣sie
foolish, as your vexation needless, you think I have no wit
now I warrant.
According as my soul could wish.
Why law you then, who's the fool now? Sir Martine
come in the evening, I will not fail you.
Nor I hopes of trial, fare you well,
A jealous man has in his heart his hell.
well knight, if I doe not fit your jealous head, let me bee
sung in ballads for an erranter coxcomb then your self.
Well said mi•x, you will not have him: but you had
best consider and doe as I and your father would have you: or
you shall trudge for it, you shall be his wife.
Nay in sadness Mistress Dal. you are too blame, the
gentleman is an honest gentleman, I and a kind man I warrant
him to a woman; your mother and I have made trial of him,
and find him of a very good disposition, come chic you shall
have him.
Nay let her choose and bee hanged, proud baggage
who will refuse a gentleman of my own choosing, but Isle send
him to you and see if thou dare deny him, for thy life, come
Mistress Mixum.
Was ever innocent virgin thus betrayed
By cruelty of parents, who for wealth
Have sold my youth to slavery, the cold
Ashes of injurd maids surround my heart,
Or some divine dew, stead of blood replenish
My swelling veins, circle my thought with Ice,
Thou power of chastity, that like the fresh
Primrose uncropt, by any hand, I may
Return my self as pure and white
To earth, as when I came from it.
How doe you Mistress Dal. alas poor gentlewoman,
would they have thee coverd with a Frisland horse, a Dutch Stal∣lion:
now shame upon their souls that wish it, he's neighing
here already.
Urinal, my cousin Fortress and the rest of the Knights will
be here presently; pray you prepare the music and the wine,
I would not fail in the most diminute ceremony.
Of a most absolute coxcomb, I shall provide them sir.
Now begins my horror, the fatal Bell should it pro∣claim
my death, were spheare-like music to his night-crowes
voice; yet I must hear it and retain my sense, continue subject
to a da•lie noise from the ill boding monster.
Lady or Madamosell, Vfroe or Seniory, what you please,
or in what language to be entitled the Mistress of my thoughts,
the complemental garb is customary, and though I have learned
by conversation with the Twibill Knights to kiss my hand, be∣lieve
me I had rather bestow my lips on yours; our natural Dutch
contracting is the best, without deceit or shadow, there we on∣lie
go to the tavern and be ungue browd, then drunk together.
Ther's all our ceremony, and tic lawful marriage too.
Would you would sir, better consider with your self and
ma•ch where your own customs are observed, my fear my qua∣lity
will never suite the liking of your Dutch manners.
Manners Lady, you mistake I've none at all; ere we will
disagree about manners, Isle be as clownish as an Upland Bore,
foutra, tell a Dutch man of manners?
Yet sir have so much charity.
We detest that worse then the former, tic Papisticall, and
was with that religion banished our reformed Common-wealth:
but to our business, pretty soul, I shall give thee touch mon and
get a burger of thee.
Gentle sir, there ought to be in manhood a divine
Pity, believe me as I tender truth,
I cannot set the smallest of my thoughts
On your ill welcome love, therefore I beseech you
Not to proceed in my unfortunate match
Which will be fatal to us both, for goodness
Have so much mercy on me.
An excellent touch that, as if there could be mercy in a
Dutch-man, and to a woman? if there had been any, the Nuns
at Tilmont had not been used so horribly last summer: why
should you say you cannot love me•tic a false touch I me certain
of it, I shall know anon, till when receive your lips in pledge
that no such words shall issue forth of them, adieu Lady,
anon we must to the old touch of Matrimony.
The hand of death
Shall give me first a bride to some dark grave,
Where I will mix with worms before the Priest
Knit so unjust an union, the kind grass
Will sure be greene still on my Sepulchre, and spotless
Virgins annually dance a fairy ring about it.
Now if you doe not catch a Roach in her troubled waters,
I shall conclude you a gudgion: speak to her; a woman has e∣ver
a hole open to receive a mans tale, believe it you shall have
my assistance, and if I doe not second you confidently, may my
tongue be cramped, my wit breached; and the machine of my in∣vention
ruined perpetually.
Fairest creature.
Had you said wretched'st, Mistress you had given me
My proper attribute.
Can there be on earth,
A savageness so great as will conspire
To afflict so rich a goodness? yet by your eyes
Adorned by those clear pearls which doe transform
Even sorrow to a loveliness beyond
Indifferent beauty, I conceive some fiend
Rested in humane shape (for man would never
Have dared so vile a sacrilege) in hope
By your pure tears, t'extinguish his own flames
Cause this distemper in you.
Pish you are long to speed, be
Short and quick, that pleases Ladies.
I had a younger brother, though not fully blessed
In your sweet knowledge, yet once his tongue
Was his hearts bold ambassador, and delivered
A true narration of his zealous love,
Which is in him so permanent, that when
his ears receive a notice that your faith
Is plighted to another, twill be •vice
Of baleful hemlo•ke to his brain, convert it
Either to sudden madness or a sleep, cold and erelasting.
I remember once a nephew of Sir Martines did solicit
That which he termed my love, but I conceived
His meaning rather was to cause discourse,
Then that his strict intention had resolved
His promises performance.
Did I not tell you she would come about?
Trust me Lady, the solitary Nightingale who sings
To her lost honour a harmonious ditty,
Loves not the thorne so dearly, to whose pricks
She sets her featherd bosom, as I me sure
My brother tenders you, the gaudy light
May sooner be obscured by wandering smoke:
Nay the eternal essence of the soul
Become corporeal and revisit earth,
After its flight to paradise, ere he
Descend to variation of his love, could you affect him.
Had your brother been
Of the same disposition and soft sweetness
That I perceive in you (though this be our
First interview) there could not have been molded
(Had I been borne to entertain loves heat)
A man that would so fitly sympathize
With my condition, nor whom I should fancy
With more entire perfection.
Strike home, and sure the iron's hot already,
Behold him Lady,
Whose every motion does as from the sphere,
Receive a lively influence from your looks;
The modest silence of the temperate Even,
When zephyr softly murmurs to the flowers
A wholesome farewell undisturbed by storms,
May sooner rest in one continued night,
Then can my soul in quiet without just
Assurance of your love, which if you grant,
Times native Belman, the shield Organd Cock
Shall cease to carol• 〈◊〉 to the morn,
The •early Lark that whispers to the Sun
A constant Augury of a beauteous day,
Shall lose his light plumes in the che•kerd Clouds,
Ere I my resolute chastity▪ nor can you
Invent evasions to declare my suite,
Since on its grant relies the only hopes
Of your redemp•ion from the barbarous arms,
Of him you were espoused to.
This surprise,
And your strong vows would batter a resolve,
Down in a breast that could be flexible
To easy love, but since I cannot frame
My conscience to a warrantable zeal
Toward any man, Isle rather fix my hate
(For that must of necessity accrue
To him that weds me) on a person worthy
Contempt, then on your self, whose worcester•• do's challenge
A noble and reciprocal regard
For your affection, blessings on ye sir, think not amiss of me.
Now the curse of a tedious virginity light on ye, you
will not be tupped by a Dutch Ram, a Houses Kinder, a West-fally
Bore-pig, now the iniquity of a swagbellied Hollands
Burgers get thee with child of a dropsy, if thou merriest him,
why how now Master Popingay, stricken with a Planet? tic a fe∣male
Star, as changeable as the Moon, go to your chamber, I
hear company approaching, this Dutch Butter-Firkin shall bee
melted to grease ere he shall have her, trust to it.
Passion on passion fall when hopes are spent,
The best of comforts is a forced content.
So here comes my blades, now plot but hit,
And Urinal shall be styled the Lord of wit.
Cousin Fortress welcome, welcome Captain Perk, va∣liant
brothers, nay gentlemen, then your accoutrements be of
the vulgar cut, be not daunted, tic hereditary to Low Country
soldiers to wear off reckonings, the time shall come the little
worm shall weave, and silken tribute pay to men of service,
give me your hands gentlemen, I shall be one of you anon, but
Cousin F•rtresse, what bashful youth is that that dares not thrust
his nose out of his coat, for fear the wind should blow it
to his face, ha?
Tic flat enough already, this my Jo, nay show thy Phis∣nomy,
h'is our quondam trusty attendant, but now Knight of the
Twibill, Pithagoras Pig.
Is this the famous off-spring of great hog? we should be
kindred certainly, my Ancestors were Bores, give me thy fore∣f•ot
sirrha, and tell me cos, why dost not wander into a new
skin? this begins to crackle vilely.
O tic forwent of basting sir.
No my Jo, hee casts his skin but once a year, like the
poor snake: well, he has done our Order special service; but
cos, where are the preparations the vancarriors cos, to the so∣lemnity
of your insta•m•ned? renounce me, if you vilify the insti∣tution
by disregard of properties, this hand shall never cross the
Twibill ore thy head, nor give thee thy avaunt chevalier, while
thou art mortal my Jo, I say I shall not.
No matter sir Sconce, by the head of valour, my self shall
dub thee.
Who you King Twadle? Mushrome you dub him?
Yes, I Gog, Magog, I dub him Garantua.
Nay good cousin Fortress, Captain Perk, this Urinal I
could even fill him to the brim with curses, but here's my agent;
come where are the musitioners Urinal?
They will bee loud enough by and by, I warrant
you.
This is legitimate blood of the Spanish grape my Jo.
Lusty sack credit me cos, twill give the touch, Urinal
make fast the door, and leave us, and give us notice if any body
approach.
What haste this gull makes to cheat himself in private,
must the music enter?
No by no means, weel call to them through the door,
varlet avoid.
Now cos, to begin our ceremony; first, drink to me.
I like it well when it begins with drinks, tic a sign
twill end merrily; this cup is abominable to little, one can
scarce wet his whistle out of it, it shall be this goblet, a vostre
grace, cos Fortress.
Sir Pithagoras we doe create you skinker, it shall go
round my blades, you shall dible in liquor of account; here bro∣there
Make-shift.
Gramercies Captain.
Choke you sir, learn manners, offer to drink before
betters, tic an affront to seniority, destroy me if I can suffer this,
no forsake me Captain I cannot.
There was a touch for you brother Makeshift, but good
little Perk be patient.
This Preface is very Canonical my Io, nay, I shall learn
the phrases instantly.
Have you all had it brothers?
All but my self Sir Holofernes.
Who my cos Pig, off sup off thy wash my Jo, at worst
thou can but be swine-drunke; but cos, shall we dispatch? I long
to be instald.
I now we will to it, come hither Captain, sing the hymn
preparatory to Knight-hood, but wet your pipes first, Ganimed,
they'll squeak the better.
An admirable touch this, what's next trow?
Now cos Sconce, our Order does constrain us to a frisk, a
dance about you, as the Fairies tred about their great King Oberon.
But can this music play the Twibill dance, none else
will satisfy.
Music you must play the Twibill dance he says, dance
so while.
They dance, the wine shall tread a sink apace into my
belly, you have lost one of your best heels cousin.
No me Jo, it was off before the ceremony is half accom∣plish'd,
you are our wardrobe keeper, brother Knock•down have
you brought the vestments of our Order?
Fuse Captain not I.
Rot me sir, you would be made to fetch them.
How, not our robes of honour the ensigns of our cheval•y?
Sink me, sir you know they are in tribulation.
Hell take the Broker: we must perforce employ one of
our own suits.
Take my Buff Jerkin Captain.
Death keep it on, you'll show your dirty shirt.
Found you sir, you lye: I fathom in your guts, hee has
none on.
How, son of foul Adultery, the lye?
What doe you blunder, whi••lers Pig, are you grun∣ting
too: shall I whet my Twibill on your bones mips of de∣bility?
Nay, Cousin, Gentlemen rather than you shall fall out,
Isle be content to bee dubbed in my own clothes: nay pray you
Gentlemen.
Tic against order, and we must observe ceremony.
O by all means Cos.
First then receive this cap of maintenance.
Cap of Maintenance doe you call it? I will maintain
when this old Cap was new, it was a Dutch felt, but now tic
nine degrees below a straw Hat; I doe not like this touch: but
Cos I shall have my Beaver again I hope?
How? suspicious my Io: Brother Knockdowne disroab
his neck of this old linen, savours of a winding-sheet: this is
Decimo Sexto, fears no rumpling: Now Cousin Sconce, you must
discuss your doublet.
That will be damned instantly; pray heaven my skin
scope.
Here sir, receive this Military Cassock, 't has seen
service.
'Thas been shot through both the Elbows; this Mi∣litary
Cassock has I fear, some Military hangbyes: this Twi∣bill
Knight-hood is but a lousy Order, would I had he're med∣led
with it.
Now you appear something above an Embryo: Make∣shift
help to untrusse his breeches.
I shall be whipped instantly: But Cozen Fortress, is there
no redemption for my Breeches?
Sum me Captain, tic not requisite he should put off his
Breeches.
Thanks good Captain Perk, it was a friendly touch that
May not his transitory money serve to excuse his breeches?
To him it may.
A Twibill Knight ought to regard no money, but the gli∣string
steel.
Well, since it must be so, there take my money.
Paw sir, you lose the privilege of the Order, if you
respect your money.
Now doe I look like—as if I were new come from
the Lottery: or what say you Sir Holofernes, to the Picture of
the Prodigal in the painted Cloth? Sure I have now performed
all the Ceremonies; if not, I me sure I have nothing else left
to perform withal.
So, now kneel down, while thus I thee create: Ie∣remia•
Sconce, Knight of the order of Twibill. Now avaunt
Chevaleire.
Health to our worthy Brother, Ieremi•• Sconce, Knight
of the Twibill.
But brothers, there is Sack yet to be drunk, in Cele∣bration
of this Knight-hood,
I like this drinking heartily; there's some goodness in it:
will you begin, my Captain General; Isle call you so now.
Pythagoras, fill his Bowl up. Capt. Perk this Cornucopia
To my Lieutenant Generals health: Isle call you so now.
A place of Mark and Charge that.
Man of valour, respect this Cup to the health of our Leift,
General.
A vous brother Knockdowne.
Here Sir Barrabas.
Altogether gentlemen, a health Musicians,
Gentlemen all tres humblement serviture vostre: I ha done you
right.
Expect me Io; heart of my father, you must for consume∣motion
of your instalment, drink a cup a piece to each of us.
It was my intention General: to you all in general,
help Pith. let it be be two Captain, tic pity to put so many
worthy men in a pint pot.
Soul of my valour, you're shipped sir, you must drink five
together.
You're wanton Captain, a wag upon my Knight-hood,
you mean to measure the profundity of my belly, twill bee a
hard task to doe it to a Dutch-man—look you Captain.
Thou shalt be my Bacchus Io, he drinks as if hee had
eaten Pickle Herring.
This Cup was as deep as Fleet-street Conduit. Sound
me my Io, I have made a new River in my Belly, and my Guts are
the Pipes: Tother cup good wreckling, virtue shall be virtue
still, so long as I can stand Captain.
That will not be long I hope.
This Collar spoils my drinking, or else this Sack has
horse-flesh in it, it rides upon my stomach. O Urinal, Ime a
Knight of the Twibill honest Urinal.
Take heed you'll crush me sir to pieces. Gentlemen
yonder are the Constables at the door to apprehend Captain
Fortress.
Some more sack sirrah, I shall be married anon.
That's I, tic for the linen brothers: Hell my Io, how
shall I scope them?
More Sack sirrah, the tother touch sweet Pig, the to∣there
touch.
There is no way but one sir, they have beset the house;
my Master is persuading them. Follow me, Isle by a back
way set you safely out with your company.
Noble Urinal: come Blades here's purchase for us.
This is but four Cups captain Cousin Pig. Skinke
my parting Cup, and then I me gone: ha! where be you Gentle∣men,
I am not blind, or play you at Boe-peep? they are gone,
this is a pretty touch, my touch my Io, with my money and
Clothes, a pretier touch still, let me see, they have left some
Sack behind them, there's my comfort yet.
Who's this? my wife that must bee.
Come hither wife, thou see the worst of me
I am but drunk: Kiss me Borankee: never fear, I will not
spoil thy gorget. Hark in thy ear my Io, shall I have a gentle
touch? twill doe no harm, wee are to be married anon thou
know; I shall get wise children on thee.
What would thou ravish me libidinous Swine? Strive, and thou die.
It was an unkind touch that, my Io, you might have
fallen under me, 't had been the fitter place for a woman, (pray
help me up again.
Yes, to thy death, if thou deny to perform what I en∣join
thee.
How, kill a knight of the Twibill, and in the Ensigns
of his own Order, ere it shall be said to the disgrace of Knight-hood,
that any of the fraternity was kilt by a woman, Isle doe
any thing: Lead on, Isle follow you.
Thus they must strive▪
Who in loves subtle Merchandise will thrive.
THis stealth was unexpected, tic almost
Beyond belief, my daughter should thus change
Her perverse humour, and embrace his love
Which when I motioned to her, the dark shade
Seemed not a greater enemy to blessed light
Than she appeared to it: and that she should
Cousin my hopes, and without me her mother,
Or any friend resign her will to his,
And strike the match up, puzzles my best faith,
Though I rejoice at it.
You have reasons sir to doe so, your daughter had more
wit then you expected, tic the quality of maids, to deny what
they desire: had you but seen how nimbly she trod over the
threshold; you would have sworn she had been mad of the
match: I stood and heard him ask her: shall wee go to the
Church 〈…〉 not too late 〈…〉 •oo
late to doe well replied she again: (though it were at midnight)
and then the Dutch you 〈◊〉 took her up into a (what doe you
call it) 〈◊〉 (and heaven speed) away they went, marry to
what Church, he's gone I know not, only I heard him swear he
would not 〈◊〉 at Pencridge.
And why not; tic an ancient Church, and all old
things must not be cast away▪ there has been many an honest
couple given to the lawful bed there, so there has.
No matter for that, he protested he would be married in a
Tavern ere that pencridge, there's no drink ne'er it; but at the
Pinder of Wakefield, and thats abomi•able, and he has vowed to
season their bargain with a cup of Sack ere they return.
Hee will not bee drunk on's wedding night I
hope; my daughter would have a sweet bed-fellow of him, if he
should.
There is another loving couple gone with them too
for company, who will be man and wife if the Priest say Amen
to it.
who are they of our knowledge?
O yes sir, tic Master Lovering, the attendant to Ma∣ster
Know•rth, and Sir 〈◊〉 Niece that came but yester∣day.
Is it possible? it was some •lie policy of her Uncles to
bring her hither, Master Lovering knew her before it seems.
Too well I fear sir, they would not have married in such
post haste else.
Well Master Doctor, I hope my gloves shall bee
better then the ordinary, I had no small hand in this match, you
know.
Tic nine a clock at least: twill not belong ere they re∣turn,
wife pray go in and see all things in readiness for their
lodgings.
They will have more stomachs to their beds then
to their suppers.
To morrow we will celebrate their nuptial feast: Urinal
be you careful of the doors▪ let none come in but our own
company.
Isle locke them up, and keep the keys my self sir, Mrs.
Mixum your husband is with them, and in his absence I would
desire a word with you.
I love to talk with any man in my husbands ab∣sense;
sweet Urinal I will fulfil your pleasure, will you go
Mistress?
So now have at her.
Have I not plotted finely? has my brain
not won the laurel garland the fa••d breath
That wafts the honour of deserving wits
Among the humorous multitude (as 〈◊〉
As it speaks conquering triumphs) shall proelaime
My politic merit, who have raised my self
From worse then no name in the judging world,
To an indifferent wealth, which though• ve g•t
By ways sinister, such as err from truth:
Nay might incur a punishment no eyes
Has ere discerned them, but with wonder how
I should achieve such fortune, now complete
In this alliance.
Sister, let's to our chambers and to bed,
That time approaches.
Your good Ladyship (I hope) will honour me so much
As for an hour to dispense with rest▪
And see my bride in bed.
Your bride good Master Doctor, who should that be?
I understand you not.
My daughter Ladies, that to me
And all the house seemed so averse from marriage,
Is this night stolen forth with younker Sconce,
And is by this time wedded to him.
Beyond wonder, well sir,
We will have her bride garters, it shall go
Hard else, sister could you have thought it?
You may both credit it, instantly they will return, and
Then Isle wait upon you.
I pity the p•ore girl,
That she should be so sudden in her choice,
Enthral her soul in the manacles of fate,
(For such are nuptial bonds) 〈◊〉 sister
Enforces me to 〈◊〉 her 〈◊〉
How equally we two•
Divide true, sorrow sympathy•e in grief,
As in our blood and nature: sister you
When your affectionate fancy •vexed your heart
Upon your husbands love, had no suspicion
Of his unmanly jealousy, and I
When I c•nfin'd my love to Free 〈◊〉 breast▪
Judged him as void of falsehood, as the spring
When it has rested in green tobes the Earth is
Of bare nakedness, but we are both
Deceived by our cred•lity▪
For you, discretion may 〈◊〉 you from the care
Of his affection, you are free (as light)
(Which in the darkest night retains some splendour)
From the obedient slavery, due to marriage;
But I no burne-markd captive is engaged
With more officious •eale to serve his Lord,
Then I my husband, I must either perish
Like the chaste ice, when from a Christ all Rock,
It feels a sad conversion into foul
Corrupted waters, by his jealous flames;
Or break those ties whose dissolution
Would betray my innocent virtue to a ruin,
Sure and eternal.
But yet counsel me,
I love this man so that if honour would
Dispense with his offence, I should forgive him,
And take him to my bosom
Alas you cannot,
What noble soul (though halse starved) would be fed with
Base reversions, conscience too forbids.
The supplantation of another, sister strive to forget him
Mrs. there is a gentleman without, this knocked for en∣trance
as if he had been a Constable, his business is with you,
and his name Free•it; I told him you were in bed •nd he swore
he would come to you through the door, shall I admit him?
This is his last night, his business carries weight, pray
let him in. Be now propitious Love: is any with him?
There is enough of him, unless he made less noise. Isle
send him to you.
Sister, now give him his latest answer, and resolve
Upon some choice more happy: here he comes.
How, as a Bridegroom?
Decked with the Ensigns of young Nuptials,
A wreath of Flowers, and Baize, and yet me thinks
His hand displays a Willow: what should this Emblem?
Master Freewit we scarce expected you thus late.
You'll please to afford my manners an indulgent pardon,
For pressing to your presence thus: but tic
Perhaps our extremest interview, and so
May challenge the prerogative of excuse,
For the audacious error.
Would I could, with as much safety to my honour, grant
Remission to your other fault.
My thanks, are humble debtors to you for it, Mistress,
The nimble minutes have with crafty theft,
Stolen time away, reduced your limited hour
To an unwelcome period: I have sought
With the same diligence good men seek heaven,
What you enjoined me, but the rain that falls
In Summer time upon the parched dust,
May easier be restored to the moist Clouds,
Then she to my discovery. Wherefore since
Her loss is certain, and the loss of you
Depends on her, to satisfy your soul
That I have man about me, I am come
With the same confidence your scorn has taught me,
To tell you, I as lightly prize your love,
As you have valued mine• nor can you blame me, since it was your own desire.
Credit me I•me very glad on it: but pray tell me sir,
Why yo• come thus adorned with Nuptial wreathes
Into my presence? is it to invite me to your wedding, or express∣zion
Of your contempt, I have not merited so harsh an usage.
Neither: This branch of forsaken Willow I resign
To your own wearing, that when after times
Shall know our ••tuall parting; 't may report,
That we were both forsaken, though we sever
With the unwillingness that flourishing •rees,
Divest themselves of greenenesse, yet no blemish
Of harsh unkindness shall defile our thoughts:
We'll part fair, though for ever.
This gentleman seems so noble, I repent that I advised her from him.
This Laurel wreath, that circles
My uncaptiv'd brow, I doe justly challenge,
Since I have conquered the greatest enemy,
Mankind can combat (passion) yet the dew
(That on the red lips of the blushing Rose
Bestows a weeping kiss) leaves not so sadly
The amorous flower, that curls its purple leaves,
To hide it from the Suns enforcing Rays,
As doe my thoughts your memory, which did once
Preserve it as inviolable, as heaven
Does the bright souls of innocents.
You might
Have had so much humanity, as to have kept
Your purpose to your self: though your loose sin
Constrains my honour to renounce your love,
I would not have my ears 〈◊〉 with this
Relation of your contempt, for so
Trust me I take it Freewit.
Why, good Madam? can you condemn my too officious truth,
Of a conceit of falsehood, when the spring
Of my Revolt, derives its head from yours.
You for a trivial, and scarce known offence,
Could without scruple banish me your heart,
When Angels should, for a desertlesse kiss
From an impure lip, have renounced their bliss,
Ere the most urgent reason of suspect,
Should upon me have practised a contempt
Of you: Had not your breath e•posed a mist
Of infidelity before the eyes
Of my clear seeing soul, and left it blind
As the black Mole, that like a Pioner digs
A winding Labyrinth through the earth to find
A passage to the comfortable light,
He never has fruition of.
But sir, suppose my sister did it for a proof,
Of your affection, and now should reclaim
The harsh prescription she imposed, you would not
Continue in this temper.
Madam ever. The Cedars juice, whose bitter poison gives
The most strong body unavoyded death,
Preserves the Carcass by its dying force,
Void of corruption: so has dealt her love
With me; its reclamation struck me dead,
And since my Exequies has kept my heart
From entertaining a corrupt regard
Of future slavery,
They are entered, sir, I heard Mr. Mix. say as I let them in,
that they were married.
Nay, come an end gentlemen and your wives, Mr. Doctor will
not be angry though I have usurped his office, and been the father to
his daughter.
You are not a cunning baggager you would
none forsooth when I proposed it to you; but when the fit came on
you, you could then run matting, and never let the Sexton ring
the Bell to give us notice: had it been any one but Mr. Sconce, you
should have fought a portion; but since to him, we pardon it: take her
son, heavens give thee joy of her.
You would scarce say so, knew you as much as I doe.
We thank you sir, and rest your dutiful children.
Ha• my Nephew Popingay!
Mr. Popingaies. Sir 〈◊〉 Nephew! I am abused, undone,
my daughter's consent Urinal, a 〈◊〉 put on me, Mr. Popingay to
wed my daughter.
• was with her own consent Sir, and
she my wife by your free gift.
Your wife, your whore she is as soon, she is Master
Sconces wife, and that you shall find, so you shall, let me come to
the baggage husband, 〈…〉 her eyes out.
〈◊〉 he sh•ll enjoy her, Isle spend the best part of my wealth
he shall not have a penny portion with her, depart my house I charge
you• urinal call in my neighbours, ere 〈◊〉 he used thus▪
〈…〉 I know you and your ways.
〈…〉
Go to, be patient, then give this gentleman your daughter;
nay be friends, and love him too, or all shall out.
Thou wilt not betray me villain?
But I shall discover you and your practises, nay to the Justice,
This gentleman is the same Sir Martin brought hither as his Niece.
Plots upon plots against me.
But the great one is still behind: if you will be friends
quickly with them, so; if not, your impostures all come out.
Is it even so? well since I am ore-reach'd.
Better sit down in peace, than with disgrace:
Mr. Popingay consideration of your just desert,
Now his persuasion has suppressed my heat,
Enjoyns me to forgive your loving theft▪
Accept my daughter with as good a heart
As she is mine: come hither wife, say you so too?
Nay, since you say it, it must be so.
Humbly I thank you: such another gift,
Should Nature offer all her precious store,
Could not be given Mortality: but truly sir▪
I had much ado to win her.
You have me now;
But I profess until we came to be
Conjoined in the Church, I took you for Mr. 〈◊〉, but now rejoice
I was deceived so, I shall study to love you•
Now you name, where is Mr. Sconce?
Tic my cue now. O father I me here they have given me a
touch, a very scurvy touch, I am a brother of the Twibills, and I am
married too, but I need not fear being a Cuckold.
Mris. you know the Gent.
My servant Lovering married to Mr. Sconce!
You'll get brave boys I doubt not.
I and wenches too; come hither, we will be man and wife,
that's certain, nay and lie together, so we will, you shall behave
your self well enough like a woman: but that you have a 〈◊〉 ••pe∣diment
for-bearing Children: but give me thy hand, shal's be drunk
together?
He is scatoe sober yet I think.
•e tell you father, ere I▪ went to the Church I had gotten a
touch in the Crown, the Twibil Knigh•• 〈…〉 my 〈◊〉
had made me'drunke, and got my 〈…〉 by these
I know not: But ha, let me see, this should be my suite, tic it, by va∣lore
it is: doe you hear good man Fox, how crept you into this
Lyons case?
What means this new married man?
Do you jeer me, with a touch of that? hark you husband,
Though I be your wife, you shall not hinder me from claiming my
own Breeches. Mistress a word with you too you put a gentle touch
upon me did you not? But I shall know you hereafter, Isle say no
more, and touch you boldly for it.
You're very merrily disposed Sir: had it not been to have
done Sir Martines Nephew, I should not have been fooled so.
Isle try his temper though.
No matter Lovring thou art a Gent.
And since I am resolved from Master Freewit,
That heel not have me now, (though I were willing)
To toote the least remembrance of him
Out of my breast, by this my happier choice,
Isle marry thee.
But let him marry you though if he dare, isle sue the Statute
of Bigamy upon him, he shall be hanged for being double married.
In this one act
She only appears woman, all her Saint,
Speak her a Saint. I did not think her heart
Could have resumed (though than rejected me)
A baser choice, Sir you've good Fortune: Mris
I will not wish you ill success in your
So sudden Love: but it was arrival in you
To give away your soul, (as in despite)
In my loathed presence: yet to show how much
I prize your satisfaction, I resign•
My interest in you to him, and thus freely
Bestow him on you: will you have him Lady•
Heaven bless me sister, this is the same maid
Whom Master Freewit is reported to have
Got with Child: this is strange•
Nay, be not amazed Mistress it is she:
You had best call her to a strict account
How long tic since I lay with her.
〈◊〉 Freewit, what means this mad delusion?
My wife turned a woman indeed: this is a touch indeed, I
had best be• gone, for fear she challenge me.
O stay your patience good Mr. Sconce.
Now let heaven, and all that can be titled good beneath
Divinity, conjoin to frame a piece
Of virtue great as this; yet be deficient
In the achievement▪ for some c•••ing Artist
To draw her in this posture (to be placed
(In Alabaster, white as her own figure)
Or some greene mead or flowery valley, where
Posterity of Virgins yearly might
Offer a tear to the blessed memory
Of perfect feminine goodness. Let me dye,
Gazing on you and I shall fly to heaven
Through your bright eyes.
Sir, what means this ecstasy?
Isle tell you, and Mrs trust each word▪
As the just accent of Oraculous truth:
Knowing your and e•t love to me, I feared
It might embrace a change, and therefore shaped this woman•
In the habit of a man got her unknown to you,
Preferred to serve you: (which she could not have bin without
Discovery, in her own shape) not too••look your life.
Or watch your actions, but to raise report
That I had bin false: so to try if that
Would stagger your resolve, which I have found•
So noble, that the happiness of Fates,
Can give no more addition to my bliss.
Madam beg you my pardon.
O sir you have it, and I my best of wishes, but why did you
Employ a woman thus dis••is'd suppose
She had been got with child you must
Have been the father of it.
I knew she was too honest, and beside,
I put her to the acting of't because
She being the accuser of me for her self
Might without the least seruple of 〈◊〉
Free me from her own calumny, nay here's another,
Can witness this for truth.
How Urinal Master: Doctor's man turned to 〈◊〉 Mr.
Freewits man, and Marthies brother?
So it appears by
the story Mrs. I am glad sir you put my sister in this disgu•se, she has
got a good husband by the shift, take your wife sir, she is no worse
a woman then my own sister.
But let me see and feel you better, it is no periwig this
but are you my husband, a woman; wife?
I your wife am sir.
Master Doctor you wish me well I know, I have married
here I know not whom, you have excellent salves and unguents sir.
They are at your service all.
Thank you good
Mr. Doctor, have you never a one that will eat off the wen of man∣hood,
make all whole before that will eunuchs a man, I would
•aine be a Her maphrolite, or a woman to escape this match, I do not
like it
Help gentlemen, help Mr. Doctor, yonder is a man
would ravish me whether I would or no, nay kilt me, I think he
has pulled out the longest naked weapon, O there he is.
She shall not scope me were she
Fenced with fire, strumpet thou die.
Who's this, Sir M••tin, what doe you mean sir?
I, this is he Thomas doe you see what a terrible thing hee
has got? was that sit to use to a woman? I was but laid in the next
room, to sleep, and he would have done something to me so hee
would had not I been the honester woman.
Is it so Sir Martine? I have now just cause
To suspect your loyalty, and that your fond
Jealousy proceeds out of intemperate lust,
Could I not serve, but underneath my nose
You must be rioting upon another?
Shame and confusion seas me.
You may see Sir what comes of your jealousy, but fear not
Sir, your wife will pard on it, there's no harm done.
But there might have been, had not my honesty been
the greater.
Well Sir martine, though you have injurd
Me most infinitely, I doe re••t all if you will protest
Ne'er to be jealous more.
Amazement and my shame hinders my utterance,
Let me breath in sighs my true repentance,
And henceforth
That jealousy in man if it be injust
Is ill, nay worse then in a women's lust.
But pray you brother, who brought you hither?
We shall tejoyce to have you at out wedding,
And see this reconcilement.
I Madam, I; under pretence to have attempted his wife, but I
sent him in to Mrs. Mixum, who I knew would fit his turn.
And so I could have f••ed him as well as another wo∣man.
Brother Urinal you are a ••ave, brother Urinal, and
have shout all a •••ehing touch.
No sir I saved you from being consent, my sister shall have
some portion, here's a hundred pieces in this pu••e.
Sink me my •o, my own purse.
It, is indeed Sir, I got it from your 'Twibill brothers, and
this your watch too, and your cloths which Mr. Popingay wears, by
locking them into a room, and threatening punishment, if• they de∣need,
the blades shall now resume freedom▪ this key will let them
out, come forth gentlemen, he•e is your brother Master Sconce.
Captain general, give thy hand bully, Captain Perk, my
cousin Pig, and all of you; though you would have cheated me tic
no matter, you shall dance at my wedding, and be drunk too, my
Joe, you shall.
Confusion rot the bones of Urinal perdition shall slay him;
Madam I hope we shall keepeour nuptial feast with Master
Doctor.
As you dispose it sir, I have resigned my will to yours.
Uncle I hope you'll pardon me, that I deceived your expo∣ctation
in watching my Aunt, she is too ver••os: father your bless∣sing,
and then we are happy.
Take it.
Thus all are pleased I hope: what this night cannot
(For celebration of these feasts) perform,
To morrow shall, and from this 〈◊〉 I
Renoun•e all ways sinister to get 〈◊〉
Things that in the p•riot prosperously• succeed,
Though crossed before, are acted well indeed.

Tic worth my Fears, to see within this place
Wits most accomplished Senate; tic a grace
Transcending our desert, tho not our fear,
Least what our Author writes should not appear
Fit for this Judging presence; all the ways
He knows that lead to the true throne of Plays
Are rough uneasy paths, such as to tread
Would fright an active able Muse; strike dead
A weak and timorous travailer: for some
Will gin the play a piteous Martyrdom
Ere it hath life; yet have t'excite that flame,
Only distrust in the new Authors name.
Others for shortness force the Author run,
And end his Play before his Plot be done.
Some in an humorous squeamishness will say,
They only come to hear, not see the Play,
Others to see it only, there have been,
And are good store, that come but to be seen:
Not see nor hear the Play: How shall we then
Please the so various appetites of men.
It starts our Authors confidence, who by me
Tells you thus much t'excuse the Comedy.
You shall not here be feasted with the sight
Of antique shows; but Actions, such as might
And have been real, and in such a phrase,
As men should speak in: Ladies if you praise,
At least allow his language and his plot,
Your own just Privilege, his Muse hath got
So full a wreath, that spite of Envies frown
Shall in his Brow sit as a lasting Crown.
IS the news certain he is arrived?
The Duke
Had sure intelligence, that the whole Fleet
Anchored last night without the Bay: and now
For confirmation of it, the thick breath
Of his saluting Cannon hangs in Clouds
Over the Citadel, and the glad noise
Of the applauding people, gratulate
His entrance to the River.
The day rose
So cheerfully, as if it meant to gild
With unaccustomed light, his sails swollen big
As pregnant mother with the pleasing ayre
Of victory.
The rumour of the Fleet
Has filled all Italy with wonder, how
So small a number should in open fight
Defeat the Turkish Navy; and conclude
The Generals skill and valour, the mayne cause
Of the achievement.
Hee has returned as large
Assurance of his worth, as when his force
Backed with successive fortune which attends
His mighty resolution, over-threw
The power of Uenice in a fight; which changed
The Sea into a flame, and took me in it
His fortunate Captive.
Sir, tic noble in you
To acknowledge that as good, which might have bin
Your eminent ruin; stately buildings so
Rise out of ancient structures which the rage
Of eating time, or anger of the winds
Had tottered from the ground works: you may prove
As fairly happy in the Generals love,
As in the honour which your name or Country
Conferred on your desert.
You speak the scope
Of my intention, a perfect friend
Includes both honour, Country, Family,
And all that's dear and holy: such a friend
As is my Doria, to whose spacious merit
Succession shall pay volumes, who was man
Ere in the smooth field of his face, rough age
Displayed his hairy Ensign; who has pulled
Bright honours wreath from her triumphant front
In battles when the trembling Sea being calm
Did crowd and thrust its waves into a storm
To part the dreadful fury.
The report
Of his Land services do stand on terms
Of Competition with the multitude
Of his Sea Victories.
Yet must subscribe
To his Naval triumphs: though the Land
Has seen him Conqueror, when the bodies flayne
Buried the ground they died on, which did shake
To view it self entombed by them, for whom
It was ordained a Sepulchre, the Drums
Were to his ears delightful as the Lute:
Pikes moving then in Forest, seemed as groves
Of lofty Cedars stirred by sportive winds,
And when wars Choristers, the whistling Fife,
And surly Trumpet sung an army dirge,
That fatal music wraps his sprightful sense,
Like jovial Hymns at Nuptials.
You cannot exceed
His praises duty, since his worth contains
Honours most several attributes.
Signior Frangipan,
What riding post on foot, whither in such haste?
Very well met gentlemen, I scarce have breath
To utter a wise word yet.
We doe believe you Signior, and are in doubt
When you'll have leisure for it.
Hear you the news,
The General's arrived: farewell, he will not land
Till I have had the maiden-head of his hand.
Tic such another Parrot, he relates
Things by tradition, as dogs bark: his news
Still marches in the rear, yet he relates it
As confidently, as if each tale he tells,
As to be straight inserted as an eight
To the seven former wonders???But here comes one
Will cut off the Fools Character: renowned General
Doe us the gracious honour to permit us
Salute the hand has saved our Country.
Noblest friends,
I am more victorious in your early loves,
Than in the Turkish Conquest; though I remain
A Captive to your kindness, my Vitelli,
The solid earth, or a continued Rock,
May by some strange eruptions of the wind,
Be rent, and so divided; but true friends
Are adjuncts most inseparable: I have
Still worn thee here Vitelli, as a Jewel
Fit for no other Cabinet: gentlemen
Your welcome hands me thinks we should embrace,
So as ships grapple in hot fight, nor part,
Till our affectionate fury has discharged
Volleys of joyful curtsy.
This is fitter ceremony for them
Then to embrace an enemy, who will not part
On terms so easy; these gentlemen know better
To cut a Caper, than a Cable, or board a Pink in the Burdells, than a Pinnace at sea: I marvel my Lord should know such Milk-sops.
My Lord,
You come t'instruct us Courtship, as you've taught
Your foes to fear your valour: you appear
As if this were your Nuptial day, on which
You were to wed bright triumph; but you can
As well Court peace in silks, as raging war
In burnished steel, and touch the ravishing strings
With as much cunning industry as if
Mars could like Orpheus strike the trembling Harp???
Signior Adorn welcome home, I hope
You've made a richer prize, then when my ship
Struck to your mercy.
Yes, we are very like
To make good prize indeed, when all the profit
Goes to the State and heavy-headed Burgers,
That lye and snort at home, and eat what we
Sweat bloody drops for.
Honest Adorn,
His bluntness must excuse him gentlemen???
How harsh and rough so ever he seems, his honour
Will quickly vary, when I have bin tired
With toil of war; the observations which
His travails have afforded him of men,
Countries, and manners, lively set forth
By his expressive action, has begot
Mirth in my drowsy soul: when you're acquainted
With his conceit of carriage; you'll not affect
A jovialler Companion,???See the Duke
My noble warrior,
Peace now looks lovely on us, since we enjoy
The author of't in safety: rise my Doria,
Let me embrace those youthful limbs which cloth
War in loves livery: thy honoured father,
When he returned laden with Turkish spoils,
As trophies of his valour from the slaughter
Of Holy Bassa at Lepanto, where
The Christian name was hazarded, arrived not
More welcome to the State; believe me youth,
Had thou a mother living, to be proud
Of thy Nativity, unless she wept
For joy to see thee, could no way express
A more affectionate gladness: Chrisea,
Eurione welcome him home, who cannot
Receive an equal grace to the just value
Of his deservings.
Your grace prepares us for that,
We did intend to offer.
Yes truly did wee sir, this General is ill-bred, I war???rant him, to slight a gentlewoman of my demeanour.
My gracious Lord,
To tender thanks, where tic a debt, not duty,
Befits an equal; subjects ought to offer,
With the sincere devotion that our Priests
Doe prayers to Heaven, their hearts as sacrifices
To their deserving Princes, whose sole favours
Doe as the quickening lustre of the Sun
Cherish inferior spirits: yours have bin
Showered down on me as elemental dew
On the parcht earth, which drinks it up, and cannot
Give heaven a retribution, yet my duty
Shall speak my willing thankfulness, and while
These arms can wield victorious steel, no danger
Shall fright me from that service which I owe
My Prince and Country: since men are not borne
For themselves only; but their life's a debt
To the Common-wealth that bred 'hem.
Gentle warrior,
Thy fathers spirit swells thy soul, I read it???
In thy submissive loyalty; lets in,
Tic just that those who cause the wars to cease,
Should have the early fruits of their own peace,
Have you employed a serious diligence yet
In giving Lord Vitelli secret notice
Of my affection to him?
Truly Madam,
And as I hope to have a husband yet
Ere I be fifty, I have been so taken up
About my new device, I scarce have leisure
To say my prayers sincerely: Ladybird
You look not sprightly, ravishing, only this fear
Was not well cut, nor well laid on, it wanted
A little of my learned art: Vitelli
Doubt him not Madam, he shall love you so:
Tic pretty neat now; I would not have a Lady
That wears a ????????? about her, have the least
Pimple in her countenance discomposed??? it does
Disgallant a whole beauty.
But Corimba???
What's this to me, thou moist as well tell tales
Of love to one departing life, these toys
Relish with me as bitter pills with children,
Wilt thou effect my business?
I confess
I have been very fortunate in bringing
Couples together, though I near could couple
My self with any, your Ladyship could not
Have chose a better agent.
Save you sweet Lady, save you, Aunt I have
Lost all my morning exercise at tennis
In seeking you, and yet was still in hazard???
Whether I should meet you; I must request a little
Help from your Art good Aunt, a patch, or two,
To make me appear more lovely; for my glase
Tells me I have a very scurvy face
Without some ornament.
Tic a good innocent face, be not ashamed on it;
Isle cut out one instantly; nay I never
Go unprovided of materials let me see,
What form is best for thee; that something timorous
A heart stuck neatly on thy face, will excite
Thy heart to more audacity, good Madam
Dost not become him prettily? Cousin be sure
You doe commend this fashion to all gentlemen,
Were but as common among them as Ladies,
My wit would be eternally made famous
For the invention.
Wilt please you to dispatch Ant, i'm in hast,
I've a whole staple of news to vent.
Of what trow?
I would have my kind red more ridiculous
To th'world than I am; Cousin all your news
Is stale; invent me rather some choice story,
How true or false no matter, and declare it
For news, twill please far better, and endear
Your judgement in the relation???
Noble General you're happily encountered:
Have you seen my Aunt yet Signior; here she is, I have
News to inform you worth your knowledge.
Keep them
Good Signior till some other time: Eurione
We must implore your absence, we'd be private.
Why we have been trusted
With as good secrets: please your Lordship
Accept this Crescent, you see my Cousin
Is in the fashion; let me lay it on,
Insooth your face is, for a soldiers,
Too smooth, and polite; this device will show
Is it had a skar upon it, which is an honour
To faces Military.
Good Madam gravity,
Keep your devices for your Chamber Lords,
That dance to Ladies shadows; pray be gone,
We need not your society???Sabelli
Put to the door, and then be gone???Chrisea
The modest Turtles which
In view of other more lascivious Birds
Exchange their innocent loves in timorous sighs,
Do when alone most prettily convert
Their chirps to billing; and with feathered arms
Encompass mutually their gaudy necks.
You would infer that we
Should in their imitation spend this time
Intended for a conference which concerns us
Nearer then Complement.
Why my Chrisea,
We may entwine as freely, since our loves
Are not at age yet to conceive a sin,
Thine being new borne, and mine too young to speak
A lawless passion, for my services
Pay me with priceless treasure of a kiss,
While from the balmy fountains of thy lips
Distils a moisture precious as the Dew,
The amorous bounty of the morn
Casts on the Roses cheek: what wary distance
Do you observe? speak, and enrich my ears
With accents more harmonious then the Larks
When she sings Hymns to Harvest.
Sure my Lord
You've studied Complement; I thought the war
Had taught men resolution, and not language.
Oh you instruct me justly, I should rather
Have tan the modest Privilege of your lip,
And then endeavoured to repay the grace
With my extremest eloquence.
You mistake me.
Remit my ignorance, and let me read
The mystery of thy language in thy looks,
In which are lively Characters of love
Writ in the polished tablets of thy cheeks:
Which seem to vary colours, like the Clouds
When they presage a storm; and those bright eyes
Dart unaccustomed beams, which shine as anger
Flashed from their fiery motion.
You misconstrue
The intention of my looks, I am not angry
Though much distempered.
At what, by whom?
Lives there a creature so extremely bad
Dares dis-compose your patience? speak, reveal
The monster to me; were he fenced with flames,
Or locked in Bulwarks of congested ye:
And all the fiends stood Sentinels to guard
The passage, I would force it to his heart,
Through which the mounting violence of my rage
Should pierce like lightning.
I believe
That in some trivial quarrel to redeem
My fame, should scandal touch it, you would fight
Perhaps to show your valour: But I have
A task to enjoin me, which my fears possess me,
You dare not venture to accept.
By truth
You wrong my faith and courage to suspect me
Of so extreme a Cowardice: have I stood the heat
Of Battles till upon the mountainous piles
Of slaughtered Carcasses, the souls which left em
Seemed to ascend to Heaven: that your suspicion
Should taint my honour with this base revolt?
This is not noble in you.
Doe not rage,
When you shall hear it, you will then confess
Your confident error.
My loyalty will not
Permit that strong rebellion in my breast,
To doubt the meanest falsehood in a word
Her voice can utter, which should charm the world
To a belief, some Cherubim has left
Its room in heaven, to carroll to the earth
Celestial Anthems, and I now begin
To question my own frailty; but by all
Which we call good or holy, be it your will
I should invade inevitable death,
In its most ugly horror, my obedience
Shall like a careless Pilot cast this bark
On that pale rock of ruin.
Will you swear this?
Yes, invent
A form of oath so binding, that no Law
Or power can dispense with: and isle seal
With my best blood: pray Madam tell me what
The imposition is you judge so easily,
Will stagger my just truth, that I may fly
On Loves light wings to act it.
Hear it then, and doe not,
As you respect your oath, or love, request
The cause of what I shall command.
Still Suspicions:
My honour be my witness, which no action
Shall violate, I will not.
Enough, that vow
Cannot but be material, receive it,
I must no longer love you.
That's no command: what did you say Chrisea?
I must no longer love you, and command you,
Leave your affection to me.
You're very pleasant Lady.
You'll find me very serious: nay more,
I love another, and I doe enjoin you,
Since tic a man you may o're-rule, to assist me
In my obtaining him, without whose love
I'm resolute to perish.
Sure I dream,
Or some strange sudden death has changed his frame
To immortality; for were I flesh
And should hear this, certain my violent rage
Would pull me to some desperate act beyond
The reach of fury; these are words would infect
Rose-colour'd patience; Clear and lovely front
With loathsome leprosy, change flames to tears
And with unusual harshness of the sound
Deafen the genius of the world.
Whore's now
The strength of soul you boasted, does the noise
Of the death speaking Cannon, not affright
Your settled resolution, and the voice
Of a weak woman shake your youthful blood
Into an ague: since you so ill bear this
When you shall hear the man, whose love has stolen
Your interest, you will rage more than unlimited fire
In populous Cities.
Sure tic she who speaks:
I doe enjoy yet sound untainted sense,
Each faculty does with a peaceful harmony retain
Its proper Organ; yet she did rehearse
She must no longer love me: oh that word transforms
The soul of quiet into rage,
Above distracted madness: madam tell me,
What place is this? for you have led me
Into a subtle Labyrinth, where I never
Shall have fruition of my former freedom,
But like an humble anchorite, that digs
With his own nails his grave, must live confined
To the sad maze for ever.
Sir you cannot
By most submissive and continued prayers
Reclaim my affection, which stands fixed as Fate
Upon your friend Vitelli.
My friend Vitelli?
Sir, I not use
To jest my life away: Vitelli is
The person, to obtain whose precious love
I doe conjure you by all ties of honour
To employ your utmost diligence.
Can I bee
So tame of the sudden? has the feeble spirit
Of some degenerate Coward frighted hence
My resolution, which has given a Law
To fate it self, that I must now become
The stale to my own ruin: oh Chrisea,
Who were so good that virtue would have sighed
At the unwelcome spectacle, had you
Appeared but woman in a passion,
Though of the slightest consequence: oh doe not
Abjure that Saint-like temper, it will be
A change hereafter, burdenous to your soul:
A sin to one, who all his life-time blessed
With peace of conscience, at his dying minute
Falls into mortal enmity with heaven,
And perishes eternally.
My will guides my determination, and you must
In honour act your promise.
Yes, I will,
Since you can urge it tho, but two
Things precious to me, and one cruel word
Robs me of both; my friend and her, Chrisea
I have not left another sigh to move,
Nor tear to beg your pity.
They are but vain,
You may as easily think to kiss the stars,
Because they shine on you, as recall my vows,
Which I will urge no further; but wish you
Regard your honour: But farewell, I must
Be cruel ever, to my own love unjust.
She's gone; what vapour, which the flattering Sun
Attracts to heaven, as to create a star,
And throw it a fading meteor to the earth,
Has fallen like me: I am not yet grown ripe
For perfect sorrow, but as a bubbling brooke,
That sports and curls within its flowery Banks,
Till the vast sea devour it, only falling
Into theabysse of mischief; passions surround
My intellectual powers, only my heart,
Liketo a rocky Island does advance
Above the foe my violence of the flood,
Its unmoved head: love be my careful guide,
Who sails against danger both of wind and tide.
THanks good Adorn, we are much endeared
To your relation; this rich corsick wine
Erected our dull spirits, and you shall
Command our service in as high and jocund
A Nature.
Sir, although I am
One that affects not the nice phrase of Court,
Having bin nursed in war, yet I can frame
My self to imitation of what honour
Shall there, or any where appear to be.
Worthy my laughter.
You have explained your knowledge, we who breath
Only the air of Genoa, and ne'er tasted
Foreign behaviour, covet nothing more
Than certain knowledge of it, as it is proper to
Complexions intellectual to delight.
In novelties; your Spaniard as you say,
Is of a staid, serious, and haughty garb:
Acts all his words with shrugs and gestures, kisses
His hand away in kindness, is of diet
Sparing, will pick his teeth as formally
After an Orange, or a clove of Garlic,
which is his ordinary morsel, as he'd fed
On Partridges or Pheasant.
It is his grace
After his dinner Sir, and to confirm
Their most officious gravity, a Castilian
Was for some crime in Paris to be whipped
In triumph through the streets, and being admonished
To be more swift of foot, so a void
The dreadful lash the sooner, in scorn answered,
He rather would be flayed alive, than break
A Title of his gravity.
Much good
Doe it his patient shoulders: but Adorn,
What think you of the French?
Very airy people, who participate
More fire than earth; yet generally good,
And nobly dispositioned, something inclining
To over-weening fancy???This Lady
Tells my remembrance of a Comic scene,
I once saw in their Theatre.
Add it to
Your former courtesies, and express it.
Your entreaty
Is a command, if this grave Lady please,
To act the Lady I must court.
Why doe you think
I cannot play the woman? I have plaid a women's part
About twenty, twenty years ago in a Court Masque,
And tho I say it as well as some of them, &amp; have bin courted too,
But it is truth, I have a foolish quality as many more women are guilty of besides my self, I always love them best, which slight me most, and scorn those that doe court me: look you Signior, if it be a lovers part you are to act:
Take a black spot or two, I can furnish you.
Twill make your face more amorous, and appear
More gracious in your Mistress eyes.
Stand fair Lady.
Tic your part to stand fair sir: doubt not my carriage???
O most rare man: sincerely, I shall love the French
The better while I live for this.
Nay pray sir; gentlemen entreat the man
To pacify his wrath, tell him Isle love him,
Rather than see him rage thus.
He would have just reason to be mad indeed then, but now
The Mood is altered.
Excellently ravishing: this is of force
To make the hardest hearted Lady love him:
Can I entreat him but to teach my Cousin
Some of his French, he will for ever be engallanted???
Beauteous Cousin,
You've mist the quaintest sport; honest Adorn
You would endear this Lady to you, would you
Please to react it.
Nay, if you make me common once, farewell,
I am not for your company.
Pray sir a word or two; here is a gentleman,
Nay Nephew, though I say it a toward young man,
Vouchsafe him your acquaintance.
Will he fight, is he soldier?
No truly sir, nor shall hee bee:
I would be loath to have my only Cousin
Heated about the heart with lead; he's dull
Enough already: Frangipan come hither,
This gentleman will for my sake teach thee French.
For your sake reverent Madam I shall do it:
Sir please you walk, we will confer on rudiments.
Come with him Cos: Sir, and you have occasion
To use me in a pleasure, stands within
The ability of my performance, pray command,
You shall not be denied.
Come Signiors, will you walk?
Cousin Bonivet,
I should be glad, after some minutes, to
Enjoy your Company.
I shall attend your Ladyship.
Corimba what answer from Vitelli? do I live?
Or in the killing rigour of his scorn
Must I dye wretched.
Sincerely Madam,
You are too timorous of your own deserts,
Or else you durst not doubt, that he, or any
You being so neat your self, and dressed as neatly
As any Lady in the Court, should hazard
The reputation of his wit, by slighting
Such an accomplished beauty.
You talk,
And play the cunning flatterer, to excuse
Your negligence; but know affections fire
Once kindled by desire, and blown by thought
Into a heat, expires a thousand sighs,
Which as loves smoke, like incense flies to heaven,
While the light fire with nimble wings doe soar
To its own sphere, true lovers hearts who cherish
The flame, till they to ashes burn, and perish.
Why Ladybird, are you so passionate, the gentleman
Is a kind gentleman, has all that may
Set forth a man; for when I told him how
Like a hurt Dear you wounded were with love,
Life how he leapt for joy, as if the self
Same arrow which struck you, had glanced on him,
And as a token of his love, hee sent you
A bleeding heart in a Cornelion, which
Beshrew me, most unfortunately I lost.
Cornuba see
If General Doria be within???Eurione
I have been seeking thee, how dost thou sister?
I must demand a question that concerns
The safety of your fame.
I rest
Secure in mine own innocence, and no malice
Can forge an accusation which can blemish
My meanest thought with scandal.
I believe, but know Eurione I am informed
You doe affect Vitelli, and conjure you
By the dear memory of our mother, tell me
If the report be certain.
Should I deny it,
My love would muster thousand blushes up
To invade my guilty Cheeks, I must confess
I love him so, as modesty and truth
Afford me warrant.
Tic ill done, and childishly so easily to impart
The treasure of your liberty, to keeping
Of a neglected stranger.
His own worth
Deserves as noble knowledge here, as many
Who borrow titular glory from the dust
Of their forgotten Ancestors.
You defend him
Like a brave Championess, as if you meant,
T'ingage your dearest pawn of life and honour
In his protection.
Say I did, the even'st,
Though most strict justice would allow as lawful
My honourable purpose.
Fie, you are lead on too wildly by your fancy sister,
It ill befits the greatness of your blood
To seek to mix its pure stream with a poor
Regardless River.
He appears to me
Broad in his own dimensions as the sea,
Clear as a brooke, whose Crystal lips salute
Only the freshest meadows: such a Creature
That were some cunning painter to express
An Angel clothed in humane shape, he might
From his derive a pattern.
But suppose my fancy
Should over-sway my judgement, to affect
Vitelli; sure your manners would allow me,
By willing resignation of your choice,
The privilege of my birth-right.
Would you urge
A claim so justly mine, because you viewed
The light two years before me: no Chrisea.
Love's an unlimited passion, that admits
No Ceremonious difference: this prerogative
Should Queens endeavour, their unvalued Dowries
Are not of worth to purchase: and tho here
As it befits me, I observe the distance
Due to your birth; yet in loves sacred Court,
My place is high as yours, and there we may
Walk hand in hand together.
Doe not flatter
Your fancy with this vain conceit: Vitelli
Must be no more yours; Know I have enjoined
The General Doria to engage his friend,
To embrace my proffered love to him.
You strive,
Because you think my young and timorous flame
Unapt t'incounter brave Vitellis heat;
As cunning Nurses doe with froward Babes,
Fright them into an appetite: but say
All this were real, think you Doria would
So easily be persuaded to renownce
His proper interest, and enthral his friend
To an unwilling slavery?
By truth he has impawn'd his honour to endeavour
What I have uttered, gentle Girl consider
Loves unresisted violence, and believe
I would not have a rival to usurp
A corner in the Kingdom of that heart
Of which i'm sovereign, so farewell dear soul,
Consider out.
Consider out, why this is such an act,
Done by a cruel sister, as shall taint
That holy name with such a black reproach
That should a thousand pious Virgins weep,
Rivers of tears, their most immaculate drops
Would not wash white her scandal haplesse girl,
That in loves tempests were but lately tossed;
And now recovered in a calm art lost,???
Madam the Duke entreats your instant company.
I shall attend his pleasure, good Lactantio.
If you can meet my Cousin Bonivet,
Desire him visit me.
Noble Lactantio,
You're happily encountered, I expected
My friend Vitelli here, this is his hour,
I wonder he is tardy.
Your Lordship prevents the time with speed, or else Vitelli
Has some impediment by business, sir.
You're opportunely welcome to deliver
Your own excuse, I was about to stretch
My invention for you.
Noble friend, your enemy had you ingagd your faith
To any personal meeting could expect you,
But at the minute, reason may dispense
Twixt us with such a nicety.
Now your friends
Arrived, I must beg licence to depart,
I have some urgent business.
Good Lactantio your time's your own.
I kiss your Lordships hand.
Friend now wee're alone, I safely may
Speak my conjecture, I have read your looks,
And in their pensive Characters find secret,
Strange signs of sadness.
I am sad indeed,
When my remembrance tells me I have only
Verbal assurance of your friendship.
Try me by any attempt, whose danger does surpass
The common path of daring, beet to snatch,
A fiery bolt when it from heaven comes wrapped
In sheets of lightning to afford true proof
Of my affection, and with eager haste,
Such as inspires a husband to enjoy
His spouses virgin purity, isle run
To the achievement.
These are but protests; such as be got by ceremony, proceed
Not from intensive zeal, yet isle experience
The truth of your affection by a trial
Of such a noble and effective weight,
Which if you bravely doe support, you'll stand
As some tall Pyramid or Column for
Your own memorial to tell after-times
The power and strength of friendship.
Pray nam't, and it were a burden would orepresse the earth,
Isle be the able Atlas to sustain
Heaven on my willing shoulders.
There is a Lady in whose each eye sits fire, &amp; on her cheek
Victorious beauty captive to her smiles
Dances in lovely triumph, one who emblems
The glory of mortality in each look,
Contracts the orb of lustre to a glance,
Brandishes beams, whose purity dispense,
Light more immaculate then the gorgeous east,
Wears when the prostrate Indian does adore
Its rising brightness, yet this wonder dotes
On you with such inevitable fervor
That I in pity of her sufferings come
T'intreate you love her.
Whom my Lord?
You cannot appear so strangely stupid not to acknow???ledge
Creations miracle, when I point out 
Her very figure you as well may seem,
When the bleak North does with congealing blasts
Bind up the crisling streams in chains of Ise,
Not to know Winter, ignorant of her
Who had she lived when superstitious mists
Shaded the world, more groves of gammes had famed,
T'her Divinest beauty, then to all
The race of idle deities: tic Chrisea,
The fair Chrisea loves you.
The fair Chrisea, your Lordship's merry.
Doe you slight
What I delivered with that unfeigned zeal,
That penitents doe their prayers, I say, Chrisea,
A name whose every accent sweetlier sounds,
Then quires of Sirens sense bereaving notes,
Chrisea loves you infinitely above
Expressive terms; the Orators shoud strive
To paint her masculine fancy, and i'm bound
To pay this homage to her best content,
As to conjure you, by all sacred ties
Of honour, amity, and what else may serve
To enforce the indeerement with your noblest love
To gratify her fancy.
No persuasion
Can make me think this serious, good my Lord,
Doe not you love Chrisea?
More then a babe does the kind Nurse that feeds it with her blood,
More then I doe my quiet, or the joys 
Of ought but blessed eternity; Uitelli,
No other argument can more convince,
Suspicion should it doubt my love: but this
That to procure her peace, I have confined
The greatness of my passion, and give up
To thy dispose, a Jewel which the earth
And sea should both unlade their hidden wealth,
Should not have purchased from me.
These are arts to pusle my conceits, my Lord
I'm no such puny in the Craft of love,
That I want brain to find this drift, which is
As obvious to me as your eyes: now you
Are home returned victorious, big with praise,
Laden with titles that sit heavier on you
Then your steel Corslet in hot fight coniemne,
Affinity with me, to whom you've heard
the fair Eurione has resigned her heart,
And by this circumvention should I court
At your entreats her sister might pretend
A righteous cause, for an unjust revolt,
For were it otherwise,, your temper could not
Brooke your Chriseas change without a start
Into a sudden fury.
This language I understand not, by my honour friend,
This ireration may disperse your doubt,
I doe again conjure you by all right
Friendship can challenge in you to affect
Chrisea nobly; shall I have your answer?
Nay then my Lord, since you are serious, freely I resume
The privilege of my liberty; this body
I doe confess your captive, and t'has suffered
an honourable thraldom, but my mind
Remains unbounded as the ayre or fire,
Are from their spheres, Eurione has won
By the subduing valour of her looks,
That in a field of fancy, not of blood,
And ere another shall usurp her right,
In the defence isle dye her willing martyr.
I judged what serious value
your boasted friendship would retaineith test,
Draw your bright weapon, know that I doe hate
Baseness as much as cowardice: and since
You slight a Lady for whose priceless love
Kings might resign their Crowns, and humbly fall
Like bare foot pilgrims prostrate at the shrine
Of such a beauty, sure if in this sword,
Death has a residence your life shall find it,
And not survive to boast the cruel triumph of her refusal.
Sir your sword cannot excite a trembling in my blood,
The glistering splint our cherishes my sight,
Like polished Crystal, henceforth name of friend
Be no more known betwixt us then a dream.
Thus I expire it, I may now regain
My honour forfeited in the General cause
By this particular Combat.
Should my fate yield me the conquest, yet his death would not
Beget Chriseas quiet, but augment
Her grief and hate against me: stay, forbear,
I feel a palsy in my veins, and cannot
Manage this little instrument of death,
My sinews put on infancy again
And have no vigour in them, oh Vitelli,
I am so full of passion, I have scarce
Room left to vent a sigh, a mine of lead
Hangs on my heart, and with its weight has cracked
The feeble courage.
Noble soul, his grief
Works more compunction in me, than his sword
Did sudden anger; could I grant what you
Request, no brand-markt slave should fulfil
Sooner his Masters most severe command,
Than I would yours; but this abrogates all laws
Of friendships duty: ify'ave vowed this act,
You may as safely disanull the Oath,
As should you in some desperate fury swear
To be your fathers murderer.
Bid me first renounce
My allegiance to my honour, sell my faith
I owe my Native Country: my Vitelli
I feel an humour in my brain, which strives
For passage at mine eyes, wilt see me weep?
Consider friend, denying my request
Thou dost undo a Lady, who may claim
The privilege of all hearts: depriv'st the world
Of such a gem, that should old nature strive
To frame her second, it would quite ex haust
Her glorious treasury, then in her ruin:
My life and honour's forfeited, think this,
And were thy heart obdurate as a rock
Of Adamant, this thought joined with my tears
Would sooner than the blood of Goats dissolve it
To gentle softness.
Your eyes are moving advocates, they speak
Such an o're-flowing Language, that my love
Then in its own cause a most partial Judge,
Allows my mercy freedom to pronounce
Sentence on your side: you have prevailed,
Isle serve Chrisea, as her pleasure shall
Dispose my will and fortune.
I begin to feel my spirits quicken, and my blood
Receive its noble temper; dear Vitelli,
Thy nobleness does prompt thee to an act
Shall write thy friendship higher in the lists
Of sacred amity, than mothers loves.
Go to my best Chrisea, she expects
To know by thee the truth of my success,
Tell her I am more happy in her bliss,
Than if I had enjoyed her constant love:
So leave me love, I may perhaps transgress
Man-hood again, and should thou see me weep
Twice, thou would judge my former flood of tears
A feigned passion.
Your Genius guard you; thus I apply
Balm to his wounds, while I doe bleeding dye.
Noble General, I come to gratulate the happy choice
You've made in fair Chrisea; she's a Lady,
That though she were a stranger to my blood,
My judgement would allow as rich a virtue
As ever glorified the sex.
It would be a sacrilegious error not to admit
Your Character for truth, but in our loves
A thousand hidden causes doe produce
Alternate changes, my return has settled
My thoughts on new resolves, and I must suite
My affections to them.
How? perhaps because
You are returned triumphant with your baize,
Growing upon your brow, you doe reject
The love before you sued for, tic not noble
So to abase a Lady, whose bright fame,
Although untainted as a Crystal rock,
Must pass a popular censure, if you, who
Did with such earnestness pretend her match
Should on the sudden scorn it.
I'm not bound
To give you reasons why; but know my mind,
Which your contesting cannot altar's fixed
On what I have related.
I must then tell you
You doe defame the opinion of that worth
The world does credit in you: this affront,
Should all her other friends sit idle gazers
On her disgrace, should stir me to attempt
An ample satisfaction from your heart,
Though you had multitudes of greater glories
Heaped on your head, or were defenced with legions
To affright me from the adventure.
Sir, your courage is juster than your quarrel, doe you think
I wear a sword only for ornament;
And though our years declare us equals, yet
My education was in the trade of war.
Tic my profession to enfranchise souls
From prisons of their flesh, and would be loath
Cause you have interest in Chriseas blood,
Your passion should betray you to the fury
Of my incensed wrath.
All discourse is tedious to me, sure the world's abused
With report of your valour, men who commit
Affronts they dare not answer, use excuse
In moderation of them, I expected
I should have met an adversary of you,
Of temper hot as lightning, and as bold
As Lyons vexed with hunger, and I find you
A tame dege narrate Coward:
All respect of love and pity hence:
Bear up, my steel
Has pricked your breast; I would not have you dye
Chriseas Martyr.
I've pulled untimely ruin on me, I'm hurt,
I fear to mortal danger: Noble General,
See me conducted to Lactantios house,
There I shall get a Surgeon.
Noble young man,
Muster thy strongest spirits up: I am one
Of Fortunes pastimes; yesterday returned,
Advanced to heaven by the peoples breath,
To day hurled down into the abyss of death.
CAme none yet from the General?
No insooth Madam; I protest your sister
If she continue in these sudden fits,
Will so undo her face, that all my art
Can never rectifi't; she weeps, as if
She might as easily be supplied with eyes
As with new dressings, isle be sworn, I took
As hearty pains to cut a handsome heart;
And though I say it it was a pretty one
As ever was made of Taffeta, to grace her Check,
And never trust me if I lye to you,
Her tears has washed her heart away.
You are still
In these impertinent discourses: what's the cause
My sister is so prodigal of her grief,
To let thee see her vent it?
Why Madam, I have seen a Lady weep,
Besides your sister, and have wept my self too,
I never shall forget the time; I could
Even cry again to think on it; it was at the death
Of your fine little Jewel: never Lady
Nursed such a dainty puppy, but hoe's gone,
And farewell he; I will not give a rush
For any woman cannot use her eyes
With as much liberty as her tongue, these fools,
These loving Idiots men for three forced drops
Will mollify like wax, and be made apt
For any impression.
Vitelli you are welcome, I suppose
Your business has been urgent, we expected
Your presence sooner, howsoever now
Tic grateful hither.
My young Lady shall
Have notice of's arrival, perhaps his sight
Will cheer her drooping spirits.
Madam, my friend
The General, does by me tender his best
and truest service to you, he has sent me
Prompt, to fulfil the nicest point of duty
Your pleasure casts upon me.
Sir, the General is so just in his proceeding, I must ever
Esteem him truly Noble, though I should
Banish him my affection.
I could wish
The sweetness of your virtue would vouchsafe
To lay a reclamation of your love:
Had you but seen with what ambitious haste,
With what extreme persuasions he endeavoured
The satisfaction of your will, you could not.
Fancy a change from one so worthy.
No? not to enjoy your self?
Me Madam;
No equal eye can parallel my poor
Regardless merit, with the glorious worth
Which does as far transcend mine in desert,
Is it does in eminence of fortune.
Sir your modesty
Extenuates your own worthiness, to bestow
A large addition on your friends, my judgement
Has balanced both, and has concluded which
Ought to be held most noble, I doe honour
True constancy in men, pray tell me sir,
For it concerns me nearly, did you ever.
Fervently love my sister?
To include,
(All strength of humane zeal) as Doria does adore
Your excellent beauty, with a heat
Holy as souls in deonest fancy
Their sainted fellows.
And can you extinguish
So great a flame so easily, can entreats,
So soon subdue your temper? if your truth
Be of this wavering quality, how shall I
Receive assurance of it?
The vow
I made, my friend secures it, think not Madam
That both my parents with persuasive prayers,
Could have enforced me violate my faith
To fair Eurione, but when my friend,
My honoured friend to whom I owe my life,
As tenant to his, bounty did in tears,
A soldiers tears whose every drop prevails.
More then a captive princess, plead the loss.
Of his own life, my gratitude did vanquish
Passion, and forced me tear even from my soul
Euriones affection.
You are just
In your determination.
Bless me friendship,
And with thy white wings overshade my heart,
Or here descends a Saint will dispossess thee
Of the accustomed shrine, a bark enclosed,
Twixt two encountering tides is not more tossed
Then I twixt striving passions, while a friend,
I cannot be a lover.
Uitelli am I in your opinion lost? my sister
Relates so sad a wonder, that if truth,
I am undone for ever.
Hark she speaks too,
A tempting language; such was our first mothers voice,
While she was innocent, deeere Ladies would
I could divide my self, for being one,
I cannot on the Theater of my mind,
Act both a friend and lover, that two names
Of so entire affinity should occasion
So manifest a dissension, in a soul
That would be true, yet is enforced, though loath,
To forfeit one, or to be false to both.
My expectation did not
Sage this softness in you, I had thought
You had come furnished with a full resolve
To act your friends request.
Yet I must needs
Speak in a cause so moving; Madam think
How much more noble tic in you to save,
Then to destroy; behold three bleeding hearts
Imploring pity from you, mine, your sisters,
And your adorer Dorias, which one word
Of yours would ransom from approaching death,
Oh be not sparing of that breath, twill sound
In the just ears of heaven more sweet then prayers
Offered by Cloistered virgins, of resume
Your native charity, and fulfil my suite,
And in requital of that sacred grant.
Time shall depend like summer on your brow,
And your whole life be one continued youth.
Such were the springs in Paradise, and when
You pass to be a sharer in heavens bliss,
Virgins and innocent lovers spotless tears,
Hardened to pearl by the strong hear of finger,
Shall be your monument.
This whole discourse
Should you enlarge it to a volume, cannot
Alter my meanest thought, I only wish you
As you are noble to respect your honour;
That's all my answer.
But doe you mean
Uitelli, to perform what Doria has enjoined you.
I shall melt
Into a willing pity, if the flame
Of friendship did not with its effectual heat,
Dry up loves moysturer dear Madam he
That has commanded me this deathful task,
Claims such a lawful Interest in my life,
That spite of my affection, I must-yield
To his resistless will: yet I will love you
So far as honour gives me warrant, and
Wish you the best of women, the best joys
Happiness can impart to you, farewell,
It is a befitting gratitude to give
That life a being; by whose gift I live.
sorrows flow high; grief unto grief succeed,
Wounds are more dangerous which doe inward bleed.
Come let not this dishearten you, your French
Is a thing easily gotten, and when you have it,
As hard to shake it off, runs in your blood,
As 't were your mother language, but there is
An observation far more necessary
T'improve your judgement, still let your discourse
Concern the foreign business, and be sure
To applaud outlandish fashions, and take off from
What is native, as if you shall hear
Any commend the Genoa garb, or state
Answer in France, in Naples, or in Spain,
No Matter where, so it be far enough.
From hence, they are more politic, more witty;
Every way more deserving, this will speak
Infinitely judicious, when to praise
Our own domestic manners, is as if
A man should praise himself, and be accounted
A self conceited gul for it.
Very good, this is a rule Isle put in practice I,
Thanks to my inclination can speak ill
Of my own father signior.
Signior; still, you betray your igorance, why signior,
Mounsiuer has a far more airy and harmonious sound,
There's music in the letters, still polish your phrase
With particles of language, which till I've taught you
Perfectly answer with a shrug or nod,
Or any foreign gesture, such a silence
Will be esteemed for gravity, and become you better
Then volubility of speech does some
Whose tongues are gentlemen ushers to their wits,
Still going before it, and when you doe speak,
Let it not be, as now you doe of news
Abroach ten days before, and quite drunk of;
But what affairs are acted then in France,
What in the English Court; and still remember
T'extoll 'hem infinitely, and if any answer
Comparatively with our own a serious laughter,
Will not become you ill, to show how much
You slight their error.
Better still, I like this slighting humour infinitely, but how
If they should talk of our Italian dames, 
I'm bound to be their Champion, for I've heard
Strangers report, and I hold their opinion,
Our Courtesans excel all other Nations.
That showed those strangers judgements, and confirmed
What I would have you understand in England,
Where public houses are prohibited:
There are the bravest Lasses, there some Donsella
That was the last night yours, shall for two Ducats
To morrow be a Sailors: when there
Your Citizens wives, girls fresh as ayre, and wholesome
As precious Candy wives will meet their Gamsters,
At a convenient Tavern, rob their husbands
Without a scruple, and supply their friends,
While the good innocent Cuckolds pay a price
For their own horning.
Excellent, excellent
Genoa, I doe defy thy costive girls,
Isle henceforth love these English sparks of gold:
Would I were there: it should go hard but I
Would graft on their Aldermens Coxecombs.
They are grafted fast already sir, besides
They ne'er get Children, but their Haunch boys on
Their Sergeants wives, after some City feast,
When the provoking spirit of White broth, and
Custard inflames their blood: what Genoa Burgess
Da res be so boldly courag'd: Isle tell you,
And mark how base and forded it appears
To have our Cellars stuffed with Corsike Wines:
Yet for this foolish sin called Temperance,
Tantalise, and ne'er taste it, while your Dutch,
Your noble-spirited German will carouse
A score of Goblets to provoke this stomach
To's bread and Butter; doe nothing but by discreet
Counsel of drink, not match his daughter to
A man he sees not drunk first, scarce soy's prayers
Till he be full of liquor, which inflames
The mind to generous actions.
Commend 'hem, and will be glad to imitate.
Your English
Deserves as large applause, who to say truth,
Out-drinks the Dutch, as is the common proverb,
The Dutch-man drinks his buttons off, the English
Doublet and all away, then mark their carriage:
If two fall out and strike, and be by company
Parted; though one wears in his face the badge
Of his dishonour, which excites him to
As brave revenge, not daunts him: for he'll straight
Call out his enemy to a single Duel,
Scorning his life; concerning the Lands laws,
Which doe forbid those combats, and ne'er part
Till one be slain, and the survivor sure
As death to hang for it.
Excellent, I love a man that cares not for hanging.
Then to their further glory, which takes off
All the disgrace of halter, they are sure
Ere they be scarce cold, to be Chronicled
In excellent new Ballads, which being sung
In the streets among boys and girls, Colliers, and Carmen,
Are bought as great memorials of their fems,
Which to perpetuate, they are commonly stuck up
With as great triumph in the tippling houses,
As they were scutchions.
Better: yet I'd give
A hundred Ducats to be chronicled
In such a historical Canto: who composes them?
They have their special Poets for that purpose
Such as still drink small Beer, and so are apt
To spit out lamentable stuff: then for their clothes
They hate a cut domestic, but imitate
The French precisely gallants, wear their long
Parisian Breeches, with five points at knees,
Whose tags concurring with their harmonious spurs
Afford rare music; then have they Doublets
So short in the waste, they seem as it were begot
Upon their Doublets by their Cloaks, which to save stuff
Are but a years growth longer than their skirts;
And all this magazine of device is furnished
By your French Tailor: what Country man is yours?
A Genoese.
Fie, change him Monsieur,
You have heard a Spanish Count's
Lately arrived, without any advice, hou'd you salute him?
Thus sir, after our Italian fashion.
That's too vulgar;
You must accost him thus with a state face,
As if your beard had been turned up that morning
By advice of all the Barbers in the City,
As you had dressed you in a Looking-glasse,
Proper to none but the Dukes privy Counsellors:
Pronounce your Besolos manas with a grace,
As if you were the son and heir, apparent
To th'Adelantado of Castle.
Adorn, this is no time for mirth,
Your noble General has slain Lord Bonivet,
And for the act is a prisoner.
Dares the state bereave him of his liberty,
Without whose most unwearied valour,
It had been betrayed to slavery?
You know Lord Bonivets alliance to the Duke.
Alliance, death a thousand Bonivets,
And Dukes and States, weigh not
A scruple poised with his full worth.
He's to be tried ith'morning without noise,
For fear of mutiny, and tic supposed
That if some virgin Lady doe not claim
Her privilege, and beg his life, he'll suffer.
If the maid that begs must be above fifteen,
Tic shrewdly doubted where she'll be found.
All our virgins ought, if they have virtue, to contend
For such a glory; but if all be squeamish,
May all the daughters of our best Burgers run
Away with soldiers, and become Sutlers wives.
Or else when they have a masculine itch upon 'hem,
And would taste man, may they be wed to Eunuchs.
else be forced to keep their maiden-heads
Till they be musty and not marchantable
To younger brothers with additions of wealthy portions.
May they when they would strive to mend their faces to allure a suitor, want paint and blacke-patches to stop the Crannies of their Cheeks; may their Pomatum bee mixed with Hogs-grease, that they may be abominable even in the nose of Jaws: may the green-sicknesse reign in their bloods, and may they be debarred of oat meal, and clay-wall, and fall to Rats???bauc.
May their parents turn most precise precisians,
And forbid em the sight of plays, or they may never
Dance unless be to a bag-pipe or a Crowd.
May they want silks for gowns, and if they seek
Supply from Naples, let them instead, be furnished
With their Disease; may Milliners break and Feather-men,
May my Aunt dye suddenly, and bury with her
All her devises; may there be no Earth
Found to make looking-glasses, that they come to use of
Kitchen-wenches, dress their heads by the reflection of a
Pail of water, or in a pewter chamber vessel.
Lactantio, let's go wait the General
In prison, it would be base should we neglect him in
His extremity.
Is it confirmed hoe's dead?
The general voice
Divulges so ith'City; and the Duke
Has sent an order which commands you forth
In the morning to your trial: my dear Lord
I hope the service you have done the State
Abroad, will here at home secure your life
From the Laws violent Rigour.
Yes poor boy,
If thou might be thy masters judge Sabelli,
I am at the period of my fate, and would not
Have thee a sad spectator of my fall
At home, whom thou so oft hast waited on
Abroad in triumph, therefore gentle heart,
Return home to thy mother, and survive
To serve a happier master.
My noble Lord
Have I so often followed you, when death
Attended on each step, when every hurt
That scared your noble body, I have wished
Imprinted on my flesh, and with my tears,
Even drowned the purple deluge of your wounds,
That as my truth and loyalties reward,
I must be turned a way unkindly, when
My last and just est service might declare
My zeal to you my master; Oh sir,
You more afflict my innocence with these words,
Then if sad truth had brought me the report
Of my own mothers sunerall, and should you
Enforce me leave you, the succeeding care,
And labour of my life should be consumed
In a perpetual weeping.
Good Sabelli
Cease this afflicting language, lest I grow as
Childish as thy self, and burst into tears
To bear thee company.
Besides my Lord,
When your blessed soul does on immortal wings
Arrive at heaven who shall attend it there, the
Saints and Angels will esteem themselves
Worthy to be your fellows, while my poor
And humble Ghost would reckon it a bliss
To waite on you, as carefully as when
We lived on earth together, dear my Lord,
Let me die with you, death and I have been
Play-fellowes these many years, he'll only bring me
To rest as pleasing to my sense as sleep
After a tedious watching.
This kind passion shakes my
Most masculine temper; here Sabelli
Accept this Gold, these Jewels, as the lest
Gift of thy perishing Lord, thou shalt accept 'em;
If the law doe not pass upon my life,
Isle send for thee again, I prithee leave me,
I would be private, and thy presence does
Disturb my serious thoughts.
Nay then tic time for
Me thewretched'st soul on earth to take
My lasting farewell of you; all the joys
Of blessed eternity in stead of my
Desertlesse service; waite upon your life;
You ne'er shall view your boy again, for sure if your
Light be extinguished, my weak flame
Cannot continue burning; give me licence
To kiss your honoured hand, and to let fall
A parting drop or two: and now farewell
For ever noble Lord; that grief appears most true,
That's writ in blood as well as tears.
Poor boy; I have not yet deserved so ill
But my untimely fate excites some pity.
Adorn thou art come to see the last
And greatest of thy Generals actions,
Which like a cunning and well managed scene,
not till the period will disclose the plot
Or my lifes Tragedy.
Your life my Lord;
Death dare not venture to invade it, and
The state as soon will call the enemy
Into their City, as pretend the least
Danger to their supporting Column, which
Should it but shake, it might dismantle their
Best Bulwarks, burn their Navy, and surrender
Themselves to present slavery.
The Duke,
Though he did hold his kinsman dear, will value
The public good before his private ruin.
Let the Duke doe his worst, and all the state
Stand on Pontilios, I can fetch a Lady
Of excellent quality shall beg your Lordship,
Isle make her do it.
Nay, should all fail you sir,
Should the States angers, and the Dukes partiall-sentence,
The peoples malice bandy to surprise
The treasure of your life; know you have friends
Would fix the heads of half the Town upon
Their Lances points, ere your least drop of blood
Should be diminished.
Gentlemen, I thank you
All your loves; but know the shape of Death
Is not ugly to me, but if justice
Contract me to the monster, I shall court it
As it were some beauteous Bride; and think the Axe
That like the Priest, unites me to a Spouse
That will not play the woman and revolt.
Come Gentle-men let's in, brave souls doe hate,
To be dejected by the force of Fate.
I Am very sorry that his Fate has cast
Such a disastrous chance upon his Life:
But his desert will blunt the edge of justice,
And mitigate the severity, which would
Question the safety of his Life.
It is in your mercy
To dash the Laws proceedings, gracious Madam,
The Privilege that our Country gives your Sex,
Can hope for no employment, that will raise
A greater Trophy to your fame, then this
To ransom him, whose constancy and truth
Exceeds all boast of Stories.
You'll redeem
The opinion of your piety, which scandal,
Should you omit this just and righteous task,
Would blast with blackest infamy.
You plead in your own cause, not his, to does not beseem
My modesty to interpose my self
In that which nought concerns me.
Is his life
Of such a trivial value in your thouglits,
That you esteem't not worthy your entreats,
To sav't from killing, ruin, sacred love,
Thou miracle of Mature, and delight
Of all who know humanity with some
Religious arrow pierce her flinty breast,
Some pious shaft, on whose subduing point
Pity and amorous softness gently sit,
Reduce this straying Schismatic to the first
Unspotted pureness of her constant faith,
And we will pay a thousand clouds of sighs,
As incense to thy Altars.
Offer up
Myriads of virgin vows and with our tears
Extinguish all irregular flames that taint
Thy holy fries.
Oh Madam
What heart so barbarous, does not at loves smiles
Put off the native fierceness, beasts with beasts,
Observe his laws; the Lyons whose big breath
Affrights the trembling people of the woods,
Were his hoarse accents to be understood,
They would appear to be affections groves.
The Nightingale that on lascivious wings
Flies from the poplar to the trembling Beech,
And on each bough chants melancholy notes,
Had hey humane utterance, would proclaim
Those pensive strains, the music of his love;
And can ye be less sensible of a power,
That is so great, then creatures bard the use
Of sacred reason, and discourse?
This is to seek to pacify the sea
With tears; Vitelli you mistake, your friend
Values not at so dear a rate his life,
As to receive a being tributary
To my unasked entreats, besides I should
Envy the states prerogative, whose mercy
Is in remitting his unwilling fault,
But a becoming thankfulness, and should
Be censured, as too partial to my own
Affection should I strive to be his wife,
Whose hand is purpled with the innocent blood
Of my late murdered kinsman.
This concerns
As nearly me as you, but by just truth,
Though I'm engaged by my particular choice
To my Vitelli, were I sure the General
Would not contemn my offer, and so blast
My future fame, I would disclaim all eyes
Of former fancy; and implore his safety.
This is a sweetness
Which I cold wish you, what has begot
This strange desertion of your faith, true love,
Being once received into the soul converts
Into its very essence, does become
The same eternal substance, can you then
Tear from the tender Cabinet of your breast
Your very heart? this cruelty exceeds
The depth of tyranny, but est assured,
If Doria suffer by your proud contempt,
I'm freed then from my promise, and will sooner
Warm an empoysoning Scorpion in my arms,
Then yield my meanest thought to you who are
By evident circumstance, though not by fact,
My friend the Generals murdresse.
This Vitelli
Is not a means to win me to your friend,
But more avert me from him, it inflames
My mind with holier fire to Court your love;
There is an evident beauty in your soul,
Equal to truest honour, I will cherish
This bravery in you, if your masculine fancy
Engages you thus constant, to a friend,
You'll be a loyal husband, fare you well,
Be still thus noble, and be happy.
My sister
Has lost all sense of pity; dear Vitelli,
There is no wretchedness oppressing earth
Equal to ours, love thus the Tyrant plays,
Afflicting innocence by unusual ways.
Tic like your self my noble Lord, but see
The Duke approaching, let your soul expect
An equal hearing.
Bear back, room for the Duke and Senate, what
Cuckold's that would have his Coxcomb broke? bear back there.
Cite in the prisoner.
Hoe's here my Lord.
I'm sorry that
You for whose head the gratitude of the state
Decreed triumphant baize should be enforced
To stand here a delinquent, but the law
Must as a straight and uncorrupted stream
Enjoy its usual freedom, my Lords,
We are not met here to arraign a prisoner,
Whose guilt does speak his sentence, but a person
Not only most unblemished in his fame,
But one to whom our country owes its life:
Who with his dearest blood has balm'd the wounds
Which michiefes giant-off-springs, raising war,
Cut in the bosom of the common-wealth.
We all confess his worth.
Yet this brave youth,
This patron of our liberty, all his honours,
His blood and titles, his defensive baize
(That would have guarded his victorious front
From blasts of lightning) laid aside, is come
To tender satisfaction to the laws,
He has offended, and since judgement is
The immediate act of Justice, it must pass
To save impartial censure on his life,
As on the wretched'st malefactors; for
His former merits cannot take away
His present fault; for who ere is guilty
Undoes the privilege of his desert and blood;
For if great men offending pass unpunished,
The common people who doe use to sin,
By their example fearless, will run on
Into licentious wickedness.
Your grace delivers
The intention of the state, no oracle
Could have explained the meaning of our laws
With more integrity.
Yet my good Lords,
I speak not this, that my particular vengeance,
Because slew he my kinsman, has the least
Aim at his life, which I would strive to cherish
As my own health, or as the Cities peace,
For Magistrates ought to behold their crimes,
Not the committers, as the Poets fine
Of wise Tyresias, to want eyes, and only
Have seeing understanding, for a judge
Is guilty of the fault he does not punish,
And if rewards and triumphs doe adorn
Deserts tic just that shame and punishments
Should wait on vices, and how much more worthy
The person is that acts them, so far sharper
Should be the penalty inflicted on him.
And when the law
Uses its utmost rigour, tic the crime,
And not the man it sentences.
In brief We must
Decline his merit, and forget
Our gratitude, and since his hand is dipped
In civil blood, his life must expiate what
His arm unfortunately committed.
My Lords,
The services which I have done the state,
Were but my natural duty, I achieved 'em
To gain me fame and glory, and you safety, and
Should esteem them Traitors to honour, if their intercession
Be a protection for my crimes, I mean not
To plead to save a dis-respected life,
Cause I fear death, a sea encompassed rock
Is not less timorous of the assaulting waves,
Then I of the grimm monster, but there is
A fame surviving which I would be loath,
Should tell posterity I tamely yielded
My head to the Axe, and dyed because my spirit
Durst not desire to live to quit this scandal,
I hope what I can urge in my defence
Shall have indifferent hearing.
Speak freely.
Know then my intention
Is not by excuse to extenuate my fact,
Which I confess most horrid, and would I pay
A thousand showers of sorrow, could this hand
Reedify that goodly from of flesh
Which it demolished, but my priceless fame,
In whose dear cause I slew him, will to justice
Boldly proclaim, I did no more then what
The truth I owe my reputation tells me,
Was right in point of honour.
But the law
Does disallow it as unjust, and that
Must be your judge, and not that idle breath
Which you abusively term honour.
Your laws cannot without partiality pronounce
Judgment against me, for they doo acquit
That man of guilt that to defend his life
Is forced to slay his enemy; my act
Carries the same condition, since my fame,
Whose safety urged me to kill him, is my life,
My immortal life, as far transcending this
As the soul does the body, for the sword,
Returns that to its primitive matter dust,
And there it rests forgotten, but a wound
Struck upon reputation, leaves a brand,
So self diffusive is dishonours guilt,
Even to posterity, and does revive
After t'has suffered martyrdom.
Yet this
Cannot excuse your fact, for civil reason
Allows a reparation for the loss
Of fame, but gives no man a lawful licence
To snatch the privilege from the hands of justice,
Which would dispose it equally.
This strictness destroys all
Right of manhood, since a coward
May fearfully relying on this sufferage
Of Law affront even valors self, consider
That the most cunning Pilot cannot steer mans
Brittle vessel twixt these dangerous Rocks
Of law and honour safely, sail by this,
And on that suffer ship wrack, for suppose
I had with patience borne this scandalous name
Of a degenerate coward, I not only had
Nipped the budding valour of my youth,
As with a killing frost, but left a shame inherent
To our family, disgraced
My noble fathers memory, defamed
Nay cowarded my Ancestors, whose dust,
Would he broke through the Marbles, to revenge
To me this fatal infamy.
Well urged, and resolutely.
Nay more, your selves
That hate the deed being done; would have detested
The doer worse had it not been performed
Withdrawn my chardge in the army; as from one
Protested for a coward, I might then
Have abjured the trade of war, in which I have been nursed,
Yet for preserving this unvalued gem
Of precious honour that hangs on my soul,
Like a well polished Jewel in the care,
Of the exactest beauty, must I suffer
The laws sterne rigour.
Sir I should refute
With circumstance your wrong opinion, but in brief,
Religious conscience, utterly disclaims
An act so barbarous to take mans life,
Is to destroy Heavens Image, and if those
Are held as Traitors, and the law inflicts
Severest tortures on them, who deface
The stamps of Princes in their coin, can they appear,
As guiltless whose rude hands disgrace
The great Creators Image, and commit
Treason against awful nature; Oh my Lord
Collect your serious temper, and put off
The over weaning fantasies of youth,
Consider what a vain deluding breath
Is reputation, if compared with life.
Think that an idle, or detracting word
May by a fair submission (which our laws
Of honour doe require it will enforce)
Be washed away, but the red guilt of blood
Sticks as a black infection to the soul,
That like an Aethiop cannot be washed white,
Think upon this, and know I must with grief
pronounce your fatal sentence.???
Doe you hear General, Isle tell you news, you were in
Jeopardy to have had your little weason slit; but I pronounce
The happy word, be safe; his piece of beauty,
By my persuasions does intend to take
The edge of law off, and become your wife,
True and inseparable.
With reverence to this presence, my good Lords,
Know that I come not urged by heate of youth.
Tic true Isle bear her witness.
Or any wanton or unchaste desire
To beg this gentleman for my husband, neither
To raise my self a fortune by the match,
But moved in charity, and provoked in mind,
With pity to behold a man so proper,
Brought to an end untimely, by a death
So scandalous to honour as the Axe,
I come to crave our privilege, and desire him
For my most lawful husband.
Gentle maid
Your piety does prompt you to an act
That shall engage your country to erect
A statue to your memory, though I could not
Dispense with justice, yet since there's a means
Without the laws infringement, to preserve him,
I doe rejoice as much as if my son
Had escaped apparent danger: go on and prosper
In your design.
Doe you think because I pleaded
For my honours life,
I dote so much upon this idle breath,
As to preserv't with infamy, dispose
This womanish privilege to submissive slaves,
Know that I hate a being that depends
Upon another bounty more then death,
At which my soul does, like an Eagle stretch its
Silver wines, and ore the monsters head
Will make flight at heaven; pray sit proceed
To judgement suddenly, delay begets
More tortors in me then your sentence.
What doe you mean sir, pray let me understand you Better, look upon me, I am no woman to be slighted.
She's not ashamed to show her face, marry her Uncle, that I may call you so.
To wed this figure, is a far greater punishment then Death.
Ne'er stand on terms, but marry her, and free your
self, and trust to me, you shall not want a mistress has better colours in her face.
Corimba,
I'm much engaged to your officious haste,
And pay you many thanks, conceive not that
I doe contemn your person or dislike
The meanness of your match, for were your beauty
Created for a miracle, and atoned
With the addition of a fortune ampler,
Then that perfection, I should crave a licence
To tell your modesty I am prepared
Rather for death then Nuptials, and no strength
Of prayers and beauty, shall have power to tempt me
From my fixed resolution.
This is madness not courage Doria.
Sir I must tell you, you know not how to use a woman rightly,
Perhaps tic bashfulness, take courage sir,
I have reserved my dear virginity
This fifty years for such a pious purpose,
And should you slight me now, I should forswear
Good purposes hereafter: gentlemen persuade him,
Sure he cannot choose but melt
At your entreaties.
Will you then pull your ruin on; that seeks
Thus easily to fly from you; Justice calls
On me to give your sentence???new interruptions
It is the voice of music, and presages
An Omen as harmonious as its notes,
Approach fair troops of Virgins, here's subject,
Fit for your maiden pity.
Tic time for me to take my farewell, these may bee beauties, perhaps my Lady may bee one, adieu sir; you may be offered worse.
My honoured Lord,
The charity I owe my native country,
That in the ruin of this brave young man,
Would suffer infinitely, has forced us strive
With early zeal first to presentour duties
For his redemption, among ten thousand Virgins
That would attempt it, and my true affection
Has won this favour from my fellows, that
To me they yield their interest, which I claim
As my desired prerogative.
Tic an act the State will thank you for; unveil your self,
That we may know to whom we owe our gratitude,
A most excelling beauty, such an eye
Would tempt religious coldness to a flame,
Thaw Ages chilly frost, at such a cheek
The Spring might take a pattern to create,
A most accomplished freshness; in her looks,
Are modest signs of innocence, such as Saints
Wear in their liveliest counterfeits: Doria, here
A Lady begs you, whom if you refuse,
The times would black you with the hateful title
Of your own wilful murder; take her to you
And live a fortunate husband.
Noble maid, my misery is so extreme a sin,
It cannot meet your bounty without breach
Of vows; which should I violate, would pull
Eternal torments on me; keep your beauty
For one whose soul, free as the ayre he breaths,
Can yield a mutual fancy to your flame,
And not destroy his honour, for your goodness
Since my expired date, cannot yield you thanks
Worthy the bound less merit of your love,
If there can be a gratitude after death
Expressed by prayers, my soul in heaven shall pay it
To your kind charity.
Oh my Lord,
I did expect this answer, my poor worth
Cannot deserve your value; yet there is
A constant purity in my thoughts, that intend you
So much of Bliss, that had your safety no
Dependence on my suit, it would be deemed
Most cruel to contemn me, I have loved you
These many years; wished you as many glories
As I have numbered days, have vowed I never
Will marry any man, but your blessed self my Lord,
Should you neglect the justness of my request,
Besides the danger waiting on your life,
A thousand Virgins, whose unspotted prayers
Like hosts of guardian Angels, would have borne
You on their wings to heaven, will for my sake
Convert their zeal to curses, and in tears
Of anguish drown your memory.
Why friend, this is
Such an o're-weening passion, as does question
The soundness of your judgement, fills the world
With a conceit you dye; because your fears
Dare not accept of life: Besides your Mistress,
To whom you would so strictly keep your faith,
Does so much scorn your constancy, that no
Entreats could move her pity undertake
This honourable employment.
Doe it with speedy diligence.
Her causeless frailty
Shall more confirm my truth:
My Noble Lord pronounce
My happy sentence, twill be welcome to me
As charming harmony, and swell my breast
With more than humane pleasure.
Are you come? approach,
Behold this Executioner, and this Priest,
This is to wed you to destruction, that
To this rich Mine of purity: your choice
May accept either: if you fix on this,
Besides your own redemption, you enjoy
A Lady, who may claim as many hearts
As she has virtuous thoughts; but lean to that,
Your Spring returns unpitied, to the rude
Arms of perpetual winter, that will freeze you
To a ne'er melting icicle, be sudden,
And wise in your election.
Tic but vain: a Saint may sooner be overcome to sell
His native Piety: come thou grim man,
Thou art to me more lovely then the face of perfect
Beauty: Do thy office, it will free me
From these perplexities.
Well my Lord,
Since I'm unworthy to enjoy in life
Your fair society, my soul shall hast
To waite on you to death, there is no bliss
Without your presence, since you will not have
Mercy on your own life, by your example
Isle be as harsh to mine, Isle go
Before you to the other world,
And be your loved Ghosts Harbinger.
Hold, hold the Lady???
Let no hand presume to seize me,
For the meanest touch that shall
Endeavour to prevent my will
Shall urge my speedier ruin: Good my Lord,
Shall I have answer? I would fain be going
On my long journey.
I'm confounded
In my imagination, I must yield,
You have enforced a benefit upon me, I
Can hardly thank you for, yet I will try
To love you as my wife; that I were lost
In Clouds of black forgetfulness.
My Lord,
Your pardon's sealed as soon as by the Priest
You are conjoined in marriage:
Isle not leave you
Till't be solemnised, Hymen light thy Pine,
Deaths tapers fade at the clear flame of thine.
IS the Priest prepared
For his Hymn after Nuptials, and the virgins
Ready to gratulate the Bride, and Bridegroom
With the appointed dance?
The Priest I think
Has the song perfect, but it is a question
Among the wisest, whether in the City
There be seven Virgins to be found to furnish
The dance is it should be; but you must accept them
With all their faults; this music speaks their entrance.
TRiumph appear, Hymen invites
Thee to wait upon this feast,
Mix thy joys with his delights,
It is the General is chief guest.
Bid the Drum not leave to teach,
The Soldiers fainting heart to beat,
Nor wars loud music Canon cease,
Breasts with deathful fire to heate.
Thy waving Ensigns in the air display,
The General lives, tic triumphs Holiday;
Come bright virtues that reside
In heaven, as in your proper sphere,
Though all contained in the fair bride,
Chastity doe thou first appear,
With Temperance and innocent grace,
Rose-colourd Modesty and truth,
Dance harmless measures in this place,
With health, and a perpetual youth:
And all your Virgin Trophies bring away,
To grace these Nuptials, Triumphs Holiday.
You have our hearty thanks, and we shall study
To give you fair requital; come my Lord
Erect your drowsy spirits, let your soul,
Dance airy measures in your jocund breast;
This is a day on which each Bridegroom ought
To wear no earth about him; ayre and fire
Are Hymens proper elements, your mirth
Ought to infuse into your frolic guests,
An humour apt for revelling and sport:
Your disposition is more dull, than if
You were to be chief mout'ner at a Coarse:
For shame shake off this sadness.
It becomes you to say truth scurvily, I doe not like it,
You look as if y'ad lost some victory,
Of which your hope had an assurance: Shall I tell your Lordship
A very pleasant story?
It must be, if it be delightful to me, a discourse
Of some quick means to free me from this cruel
Oppressive weight of flesh, which does entomb
My martyred soul, that like to sulphury fire
Hid in a Mountains entrails, strives to burst
The prison, and fly upwards; it must needs
Be a sad wedding, when the Bridegroom wears
His Nuptial livery on his eyes in tears.
Friend, this is
A passion too effeminate for a heart
Endued with manly courage; things past help
Should be past thought, your sadness casts a Cloud
Upon the lustre of this Ladies looks,
You make her dim the brightness of her eyes
With unbecomming tears, if you continue
This strange distraction.
Alas my Lord,
Let me participate your cause of sorrow,
And be a willing partner in your grief,
Which like a violent Current that o're-flowes
The neighbouring fields and meadows in its rage,
Into two streams divided, smoothly runs,
Kissing with calm lips the imprisoning banks,
Would, though too mighty for you, when my soul
Should vent a part of it, be mild, and pass
Away without disturbance of your peace,
Which to procure I would even burst my heart
With sighs devoted to your quiet, and
Become a loving fountain by my tears
I shed without intermission.
Gentle Lady,
I am at such an enmity with fate,
Makes me incapable of ought but grief,
But I shall study to declare how much
I am indebted to your care???good heaven
Send down some Angel to protect my heart,
Or my religion will scarce stay my hand,
For acting wilful violence on my life,
I have sucked poison from her eyes, that will
Like to juice of Hemlock drown my soul
In a forgetful Lethargy, or oppress
My temperate faculties with madness.
Cousin you're welcome, know this virtuous Lady
Who has redeemed the General.
Sir, ime come to gratulate your beauteous bride, and wish you joys immortal.
I hope Madam, my innocence has gi'n you no offence,
That you refuse me, being a stranger to you,
The Ceremonious wishes, which pertain
To new made Brides, and only doe confer them
Upon my Lord.
Your happiness already,
Is so superlative, I cannot think
A new addition to it, you enjoy
The very sum of fortune in your match,
To such a noble and illustrious husband.
I no longer can hold my passion in,
These walls of flesh are not of
Strength sufficient to contain
My big swollen heart: My Lords behold a creature
So infinitely wretched, I deserve not
The meanest show of pity, who have, like
A silly merchant, trifled away a gem,
The darling of the quarry, lost a love
By my too foolish niceness, to regain
Whose forfeiture I would lay down my life:
But he is gone for ever, and I left
A piteous spectacle for the reproach
And scorn of wiser women.
Is this possible?
Was all her passion to Vitelli seign'd?
My hopes recover life again.
Why Chrisea,
Whence springs this passionate fury?
Oh my Lord,
When you shall hear it, you will sigh for me,
And shed a charitable tear, at thought
Of my unkind disaster: sir my Justice
Cannot accuse your constancy, which stood
In the first trial of your love, as fast
And spotless as an Alabaster rock,
That had it but persisted in that height
Of honourable loyalty, your glory
Had been advanced to heaven, as the fixed star,
To guide all lovers through the rough
Seas of affection.
This taxation
Cannot be just from you, who did enforce
The sad revolt upon him.
Is there in heaven no friendly
Bolt left that will strike this frame into
The center, and set free a wretch
(So overgrown with misery) from life,
That death would be a comfort above health,
Or any worldly blessing, may time blot my name out
Of his Book, that such a Prodigy
May not affright succession, nor stick
Like an orespreading Leprosy upon
The beauteous face of manhood.
Oh my Lord, each grief of which
You're sensible, is mine, and not your
Torment, every sigh you breath is an
Afflicting motion, expired by my vexed
Spirit, and if you could weep, each drop
Would be my blood, who am the spring
Of the whole flood of sorrow; oh forgive
The too exceeding honour of my love, I would
Have had you for your perfect truth so glorious;
Your loyalty should not for
Preservation of your fame, have needed
To adopt a statue for its heir, or builded a
Monumental pyramid, but love
Is ofttimes loves undoing.
This is such
A cunning la byrin of,
Sorrow, that no clew
Can lead them out of.
It would be
A great affront to misery, should there live
A person half so wretched to out-dare
The strength of my affliction, me thinks
I me like some aged mountain that has stood
In the seas watery bosom, thousand shocks
Of threatening tempests, yet by the flattering waves,
That cling and curl about his stony limbs,
Is undermind and ruined, I have escaped
Wars, killing, dangers, and by peaceful love,
Suffer a strange subversion, Oh Chrisea,
While I have reason left that can distinguish
Things with a cool and undistracted sense,
Let's argue mildly the unhappy cause
Of our undoings.
Truly sister,
It was a suspicious rashness, I could wish
You never had attempted.
My Lord,
Humane condition always censures things
By their event, my aims have had success
So strangely haplesse, that will blast the truth
Of their intentions purity, I never
Harboured the least suspicion of your faith,
Which I did strive to perfect, by the test,
As richest gold refined, and purged
From dross of other baser metals, and besides
The trial of your constancy, I meant
To sound Vitellies depth; upon whose love
My sister doted, so that I was loath
To see her cast the treasure of her heart
Upon a stranger, of whose constancy
She had too small assurance.
Gentle Cousin,
Your good intents encountered bad success,
But I ad mire, since you must needs have notice
Of his disaster, that the law would pass
Upon his life, you did not to prevent
All other virgin intercessors haste
To pay the early tribute of your love.
My wretched fate
With a too quick prevention has orethrowne
The justness of my purpose,
I relied so much upon his nobleness, I thought
The ugly horror of a thousand deaths
Could not have moved his temper, and besides,
Knowing his mighty courage, I permitted
The law proceed upon him, that hereafter
He might be sure no merit can appear
Offended justice, otherwise I could
Easily have stopped this mischief.
How Chrisea? I understand you not.
Lady, to quit all scruple that I doe not wish
Yours and your Lords succeeding happiness, Isle offer
Something as an oblation that shall ad de
Peace to your nuptial garland (see my Lord)
My Cousin Bonivet lives.
Lives? Lactantio did not you inform us
That he was dead, and you had cause his body
To be prepared for funeral? which occasioned
The Generals sudden trial, because our custom
Does not permit the corpse to be entombed,
Before the murderer have his sentence, sir you shall know
What tic to mock the state thus.
Good my Lord
Hear but my just excuse, I am so much the fair
Chriseas beauty's by such ties
Obliged to serve her, that I choose to hazard
The anger of the state ere her displeasure,
And doe submit me to your gracious censure.
I must confirm't,
Sir it was I who cause him to conceal
My Cousin Bonivet, for the causes which
I did declare before, and now my self
Having received a satisfying proof
Of his affection, came resolved to clear
These misty errors, but my cruel fate
Has like a sudden storm which has beat down
A goodly field of standing Corn even ripe
For the laborious sickle, crushed my hopes
In one sad minute into nothing.
My Lord I owe
Such an obedient duty to your peace,
That though my heart does wish to waite on yours
For ever; since I see betwixt this Lady
And you such firm appearances of love,
If the law please to allow it, I resign
My interest to her and be fortunate
To see you two live happy.
Since the marriage
Has not arrived to consummating act,
I doe believe this may be done.
Doe not delude
Your favour with vain hopes, the law cannot
Dispense with the strict Cannon, tic impossible
You should be separated.
This happiness
Was too extremely good to be confirmed
To such a wretch as I am: I am like
One that did dream of a huge mass of wealth,
And catching at it, grasped the fleeting ayre,
And waking grieves at the delusion.
Sir resume your ancient quiet, the formal
Love shall not oppose your peace, Isle disanull
The marriage easily, and most noble Lord
Pardon your humble servant.
Sure this is
Some apparition to confirm my faith,
Speak, art thou my Sabelli.
Yes tic he, fate would not suffer two such
Noble souls to be so disunited, gentle boy,
Thy duty to thy Master will continue,
Thy name in story, as the great example
Of loyalty in servants.
It was the zeal I ought in duty to my Mrs. life,
Hath put me on the attempt, which if he pardon,
I'm fully satisfied.
My joys does with a sudden ecstasy oppress
My frail mortality, and I should sink,
Were not for my supporters, my Sabelli,
Thou hast restored two lovers to their bliss,
Whose gratitude shall pay to thy desert
The tribute of their hearts: Dear Madam, now
I hope your scrupulous doubts will remain free
From any new suspicion.
Since I have escaped the danger past, believe isle avoid
The like hereafter; my Lord please you confirm
My choice; and let my sister be disposed
To good Vitelli, he deserves her.
Your wishes are fulfild, Cousin Bonivet welcome to life
Again; you and the General must be friends.
Your goodness will pardon my misfortune?
And desire to be esteemed your servant.
With your leave gentlemen: Madam I have such news to tell you, as will tickle your understanding, to believe the Ge???nerall is married; and more, Signior Doria, Lord Bonivet lives; That's lucky news for you.
He's here, good Signior Frangipan.
My news has ever the worst luck; I must resolve to leave it off.
But sir J have somesuddaine news to tell you:
The thousand Ducats you contracted to pay me,
When you could understand the French as perfectly
As my self; by all these Lords indifferent judgement is
Due on this very minute.
This is news indeed; you do not mean to make a gul of me, a figo for a thousand Ducats: as J am a gentleman I know not French for any thing, not for an Ass: good your grace let me not be abused.
It was I my Lord who made the bargain with him,
The money is not due until my Cozen
Have French as perfect as himself.
He has, isle bear him witness; for Adorn Speaks not one true French word.
How not one true French Word?
No not a word, you must disburse.
Tutor, isle tell you news,
You made a fool of me,
I could abuse him horribly,
If I durst for fear of beating.
My Lord
If he will undertake wars,
Isle quit my bargain.
Isle pay it treble first, the name of war Has brought an age on me.
You two agree that: Cozens I rejoice
To see this happy period of your loves.
Let's back unto the Temple, that the Priest
May by his sacred power unite your hearts.
Lead to the Temple.
GEntlemen, Isle tell you News, the Play is done,
And he that writ it betwixt hope and Fear
Stands pensive in the Tyring-house to hear
Your Censures of his Play: Good Gentlemen
Let it be kind, or otherwise his Pen
Will write but dully, for he needs must lack
If you disprayse't the quickening Spirit of Sack
To inflame his Genius, which you'll ever find
Devoted to you, if your Votes be kind.

YOu need not fear me Gentlemen, although
I come thus armed; tic but to let you know
I am in office; in my own defence,
And to secure me from the violence,
Which might from you (who now my Judges sit)
Be off'red to this Trophy of my wit:
And cause I know that you will obey
Authority, I doe charge you, like the Play:
Think who I am, how often I may catch
You at ill hours in Taverns, or in the Watch;
In Frays sometimes; nay sometimes (not to trench
Too much upon you) with a pretty wench.
All this is possible, and Gentlemen,
Consider how my rage will use you then,
If you should now, as sure tic worth your fear,
Be in the censure of my wit severe,
Vexed In me implacable; and though the Tribe
Of Constables doe us't, Isle take no bribe
To let you pass: These sturdy knaves will take
Not the least mercy on you for my sake:
Nor will the Justice free you: (to your smart)
You'll find, he and his Clarke will take my part.
I can but gently warn you to prevent
A danger, nay a certain punishment,
Should you dislike: for if the Play doe fall
Under your votes, Isle apprehend you all.
ARe you resolved yet Gentlemen? I am
In earnest haste of Towne-affaires, and came
To know your minds: how's that? there's one I spy
That will dislike, to the Counter instantly
With him; entreat• Sir, shall not prevail,
Nor shall you thy•ke to come out upon bail.
For in this case (believe it) I'd not spare
(Though the sword were borne before him) my Lord Major;
Nor should the Court of Aldermen reprieve
For such a f•ct, my good friend Master Shrive.
If so severe to them then, who by vow,
Are my own brethren? what will become of you?
I have considered; and will now commit
To your free votes the Cen•uric of my wit.
For though their dullness (whom I've threatened) may
Dislike (you'ave wit) and will allow the play.
DID you ere we departed from the College
Orelooke my library?
Yes sir, I spent two days in sorting Poets from Historians,
As many nights in placing the divines
On their own chairs, I mean their shelves, and then
In separating Philosophers from those people
That kill men with a license: your Physicians
Cost me a whole days labour, and I find sir,
Although you tell me learning is immortal,
The paper and the parchment, tic contained in,
Savours of much mortality.
I hope my books are all in health.
In the same case the Moths have left them, who have eaten more
Authentic learning then would richly furnish
A hundred country pedants; yet the worms
Are not one letter wiser.
I have been idle
Since I came up from Cambridge, go to my stationer
And bid him send me Swears Metaphysickes,
Tolet de enema is new forth,
So are Granadus commentaries on
Primui• se•undae Thomae Aquinatis,
Get me the Lyric Poets. And —
I admire
How he retains these Au•horse names, of which
He understands no syllable, it were better
I bought the Authentic Legend of Sir Bevis,
Some six new Ballads and the famous Poems
Writ by the learned waterman.
Iohn Taylor, get me his nonsense.
You mean all his works sir.
And a hundred of Bookers new Almanacs.
And the devil to boot,
Your fathers books in which he keeps th accounts
Of all his coin will scarce yield crowns to afford
Your fancy volums: why you have already
Enough to furnish a new Vatican,
A hundred country pedants can read dictats
To their young pupils out of Setons logic,
Or Golius Ethics, and make them arrive,
Proficients learned enough in one bare twelmonth
To instruct the parish they were borne in: you
Out of an itch to this same foolish learning
Bestow more money yearly upon books:
Then would for convert sisters build an almes-ho•se.
You will displease my patience Tristram.
I speak truth: if you shut want, your learning scarce would make you
Capable of being town Clerk, or at best,
To be a famous Tyrant unto boys,
And wear out birch upon them: or perchance
you may arrive to be the City Poet,
And f•nd the little moisture of your brain
To grace a Lord Majors festival with shows,
Alluding to his trade, or to the company
Of which he's free, these are the best preferments
That can attend your learning.
I say Tristram, the spirit of my learning stirs me up
To give thee due correction.
Would you study? as does young Thorowgood your noble Cousin,
Not books, but men which are true living volums:
You would like him, be held rich in the esteem
Of all the illustrious wits that deck the city
When the extent of your admirers is
Confined to fresh men: and such youths as only
Know how to frame a syllogism in Darij,
And make the ignorant believe by Logic
The Moons made of a Holland Cheese: and the man in it.
A swagbellied Dutch Burger
Cousin Holdfast, a good day attend
Thy learned piamater: prithee tell me
How doe the Cabalists and ancient Robins
And thou agree? will they be sociable,
And drink their mornings draught of Helicon
With thee: have they instructed you to prove yet
That the world runs on wheels? or that the sea
May be drunk off by a shoal of Whales? such things
You know there are in nature.
O far stranger.
Peace you booke-worme,
Fit only to devour more paper then
A thousand grand tobacco men or a legion
Of boys in pellets to their elderne guns.
Dost think to live this life still? you're not now
Amongst your eves at Cambridge, but in London,
Come up to see your mistress beauteous Clare,
The glory of the city: go and court her,
As does become a gentleman of carriage,
Without your Tropes and figures Inkehorne terms,
Fit only for a Mountebank or Pedant,
Or all your Physics Metaphysickes and Meteors,
(Tomes larger far and more replete with lies,
Then Surius, Gallo-Belgcus, or the welsh
Bard Geffrey Monmouth) sh•l be straight-way made
Pitiful Martyrs.
Why cousin I had thought.
Thy self an errant idiot, that's the fittest
Thought for thy brain more dull then a fat Burgers,
Or reverend country justices, whose wit
Lies in his spruce clerks standish, thou were begot
Surely in the wane of the Moon, when natures tools
Were at lame Vulcans forge a sharpening, thou art so lumpish.
He has already spoiled
His eyes with prying on Geneva prints,
And small dutch Characters: his watching makes him
Look like a grand-child of old Errapaters,
Some lean Astronomer, who to get ten shillings,
For that's a large price for an Almanac,
Has wasted himself to the bigness of his Iaccobs staff,
Which is so limber, 't cannot stand to take height of Venus rising.
He says truth: besides your study has attained already,
Learning enough to inform your mind the knowledge
Of arts fit for a gentleman, were not better
For you my sprightful senior to advance
Your beaver with a hatband of the last
Edition in the Court, among the noblest
Youths of our nation, then to walk like Faustus,
Or some high German conjurer, in a cap
Fit for a Coster-monger, to wear your purl
Or cut work, band then this small ••ip of lining
That's proper only for T•om Thum: or some of queen Mobs gen∣tlemen-ushers.
This Cassock were a pretty garment for a fortuneteller.
And this cloak of tinder comely for a ballad-seller,
Life sir, you are borne here to an ample fortune,
Your father absent knows not how you've altered
Your disposition: I must reclaim it,
Thou shalt with me and court the beauteous Clare
Reserved for thee, a purpose in the mean time,
Our chief companions, shall be wits more pure,
Then your quick sophisters, or •lie logicians,
We'll talk of the bright beauties of the age,
Girls whose each look deserves to be a theme
For all the nimble poets, two days practise
In our brave arts will teach thee to forget
Philosophy as fruitless and abjure
All other Ethics, but what's used amongst us, as most erroneous▪
Well You shall persuade me, Isle be an errant ass, or any thing
For thy sake cos, but shall we have such wenches
As are at Cambridge, handsome as peg Larkin.
O far before her, cousin thou shalt read
Are•juice Politics; and Ov•ds Art,
Shall be new read, thee and wee will refine
Thy Academic wit with bowls of wine.
Tristram shall to the College and sell my books emma∣diately.
Speak like the son of Phoebus and my cousin.
My studious master.
Sell thy Dictionary.
Isle not keep a prayer book.
They are out of fashion.
Nor a Calender, to look the age of the Moon in, Trist. be sure
You burn G•eons groats worth of wit; I scorn to keep
The name of wit about me.
Tic confessed sir, but for the numerous Rhemes of paper, which
Are piled up in your study, give them me,
I have a brother in law in the towne's a cooke,
Isle give them him to put under his bake meates.
Take them: I will not leave a pen within my lodging,
I will forget to write, or set my hand to any thing.
Unless 't be to a bond.
Isle go put this blessed design in execution,
Cousin anon isle meet you at your chamber.
What in that reverend shape? the gentlemen
That I converse with, will believe thee some Itinerant
Scholar, have thee whipped by the statute.
I would be loath, now I am past a fresh man to bee had into the buttries.
Still them terms? study to forget them, Isle send my
Man to you with a new suite of mine I never wore yet,
Be sure to put it on right, you mere Scholars
Know no degree of garment above Serge,
Or Satanisco: tie your band-strings neatly
And doe not eat the buttons off, put not
Your Cuffs both on one hand; twill tax your judgement
Of new inventing fashions when accoustred,
Come to my chamber, and Isle furnish you
With language fit to accost your mistress.
Rare, I've got more learning from him in half an hour,
Then in a whole lifes practise out of books.
Follow me Tristram, farewell dear cousin.
How I could laugh now, were my spleen large enough: a
Hundred such lame stupid Idiots were enough, if married,
To precise Burgers daughters to replenish
The city with a race of fools, and root
The stock of knaves quite out of it, he loves books:
Not that he has a scruple more of learning
Then will suffice him to say grace, but like
Some piteous cowards, who are oft thought valiant
For keeping store of weapons in their chambers,
He loves to be esteemed a doctor by
His volumes: but I shall fit his scholarship: whose these?
Alderman Covets, Formal, byth' proportion:
That rib of mans flesh should be Clare, dost hear
My honest Cadis garters: who for care
And close attendance on thy charge deserves
To be grand porter to the great Turks Seraglio: how hight that veiled damsel?
She has been at Brit•ins burse a buying pins &amp; needle
To work a night-cap for my master sir.
Pox upon him, is not her name Clare, niece to Alderman Covets
Her father was a country Squire of large revenue and her mother.
I shall be forced to hear him blaze her pedigree,
Id beat him, but that clubs and paring shovels of the city
Would be so busy above• my ears: they'd spoil
My hearing two months after Gentle Lady
Pardon my error if I doe mistake, are not you mistress Clare?
Formal at last, would have resolved you, and I held my
Peace of purpose, cause I knew his slow discovery would vex
Your nimble patience
You are a Gypsy, but does thy uncles hue•our hold of wed∣ding
His daughter to sir Timothy.
Yes, or to young monsieur Holdfast whom he says is
Learned enough to make Cheap-side a College,
And all the City a new Academy, but have you
Thorowgood performed what I advised you to?
Yes, my girl: good Formal use thy motion to convey
Thy ears a little farther off, there's money
To buy thee a new pair of garters: Clare
Thou shalt no more behold me in the garb
And noble ornament I used to wear, my fashion shall be altered.
To the schoolars,
Young Holdfasts likeness.
O by all means girl▪ thou shalt behold this comely hat transformed
To frugal brim, and steeple crown, this band
Of fair extent changed to a modern cut,
Narrower then a precisians: all this gay
And gaudy silk I will convert to Serge
Of limber length: like some spruce student (newly
Exalted for saying grace well, to be fellow
Of the College he had studied) I will
Salute thy reverent Uncles spectacles,
And without fear of his gold chain, isle woe thee
In metaphors and tropes Scholastic till
The doting Senator with a liberal hand give
Thee his dainty darling to become my spouse inseparable.
This suites well with my directions.
True girl true, farewell Clare,
I kiss thy white hand: Sir resume your charge,
I've done my errand: let not your old Sir Amiar▪
Know of this conference, if you doe, that twist
Of spinners thread, on which your life depends
Shall be shorn off like a horse mane. Farewell.
Mans life indeed is but a thread, good day sir.
Attend your charge friend, Valentine, Sir Timothy.
You're well encountered, may I inquire the affair
Which happily has brought you up to the City?
May I know it? is it not to purchase a Monopoly
For Salt and Herrings? for state business,
Unless it be to see the great new ship,
Or Lincolns Inn fields built: I'm sure you none here.
Very right sir.
But for thee: my noble man of merit, thou art welcome,
Weel be as kind to one another boy,
And witty as brisque poets in their wine,
Weel court the black browd beauties of the time,
And have by them the height of our desires: with ease accompli∣shed
Noble Thorowgood,
Did I not own you by the name of friend,
Already these endearments would engage me to beg that title.
Very right, and me too.
I know you for the most Egregious'knight
In all the country.
You sir, you've reason,
Very right▪ I am indeed esteemed so.
One that live on Onions and Corne-sallets.
Right again,
Sure he can conjure, I had one to my breakfast.
Nay no Herald
Can better blase your pedigree. I've heard
Your father my most worthy knight, was one
That died a knave to leave you so.
Passing right still.
And pray right witty, and right honoured sir,
What may your business seem to be in the city.
Are you come up to learn new fashions?
Exceeding right again.
To change this ancient garment to a new one
Of a more spruce edition.
Yes, but before,
For I am privy unto ell's intentions,
He means to see and court his mistress.
Who's that? my doughty Imp of spur and sword,
Some fair Dulcina de Tob•so.
No, tic Grace, daughter to Alderman Covet.
I doe commend thee my dear Don, and will
Be thy assistant, go and see thy horse dressed,
And then approach my chamber.
Very right, I kiss your fingers end.
Doe you, Valentine, know
The Lady he intends to Court.
Only by report,
Which speaks her most accomplished.
Oh she'll make
An excellent Ass of him: she has a wit
More sharpe and piercing than a Wasps sting, she speaks
All fire; each word is able to burn up
A thousand such poor Mushromes: had her mother
Not been held honest, I should have believed
She'd bin some Courtiers By-blow, or that some
Quick Poet got her.
How's her feature?
Rare, past expression, singular, her eyes
The very spears of love, her cheeks his throne,
Her lips his paradise, and then her mind
Js far more excellent than her shape.
You give her a brave Character; is it possible
To have a sight of her?
Yes, by my means, scarce otherwise wilt thou have her▪
Speak but a syllable, 't shall be performed
As sure as if Don Hymen, in his robes
Had ratified the contract.
You are merry sir.
When did thou know me otherwise: yet now
In sober sadness friend, could thou affect
A woman, as there's few of them worth loving,
Thou can not make a nobler choice: Isle bring thee
On to the skirmish, but if thou retreat,
Beat back by the hot Artillery of her wit,
Which will play fast upon thee: moist thou live
To be enamoured on some stale Hay, or Matron
Of fourscore, that may congeal thee to a frost
Sooner than forty winters: or be wed
To an insatiat Chamber-maid.
Defend me
From thy last curse; fear not my valour.
This fool shall serve both her and us for sport:
Lets to our task; and if our project hit,
Isle swear all fortune is comprised in wit.
YOu will provoke me.
No matter:
Although you be my uncle, and so nature
Binds me to observe you, isle not be obliged
To what the phlegmatic humour of your age
Strives to enforce upon me: I was borne
Free, an inheritresse to an ample fortune,
Of which you doe pervert the use, and trust me,
Isle be no longer tame and suffer it.
Suffer what? you're used
Too well: if you complain of this, I shall
Study to be more harsh.
Doe; you shall not, as you had wont,
Think to attire me in black Grogram,
Daubed o'er with Satin lace, as if I were
Daughter, and heir apparent to a Tailor,
Who from the holiday Gowns of six neat fish-wives
Had stole the remnants made the thrifty garment.
Nor shall you sir (as tic a frequent custom,
Cause you're a worthy Alderman of a Ward.)
Feed me with Custard, and perpetual White-broth,
Sent from the Lord Majors, or the Shriefes feast,
And here preserved ten days, (as it were in pickle)
Till a new dinner from the common hall
Supply the large defect.
You'll leave this language?
Leave to use me so then:
You've made my self, your daughter, and my woman,
Sup with a pennyworth of Lattice, under
Pretence it would make us sleep well: your full morsels
(Had not the virtue of Clay wall, and Oatmeal
Preserved my maid) ere this she'd bin shrunk up
To the bigness of a Squirrel.
Any Dwarf
might without stretching his small fingers, have
Spand me about the waste.
Nor shall you,
(As sure tic your intention) marry me
To the quondam fore-man of your shop, (exalted
To be your Cash-keeper) a limber fellow,
Fit only for dear Nan, his schoole-fellow,
A Grocers daughter, borne in Bread-street, with
Whom he has used to go to Pimblico,
And spend ten groats in Cakes and Christian Ale,
And by the way has courted her with fragments,
Stolen from the learned Legends of Knights Errants,
Or from the glory of her fathers trade,
The Knight of the Burning Pestle.
Sure the Devil
Has entered her in the likeness of an Eel,
Her tongue's so slippery: Minion—
Isle not be frighted
As are your Prentices, with Little ease,
Or showing them the Beadle. In plain terms,
I doe not mean to incorporate with a Salter,
Or any of those thriving trades, to have
My shoes licked o'er each saturday night
Byth' under prentice; they shine so brightly
With soot and kitchen stuff, that I next morning
May spare my glass, and dress my head by their
Greasy reflection: yet let me tell you,
I must be married instantly a virgin:
Of my full age, setting aside all niceness
May justly claim a husband.
Have but patience, isle wed thee to a Knight.
What is hee, one of the Post sir, or some such
As was in the old famous Ballad mentioned:
He that has forty pounds per annum, by
Which Charter I should be undutiful,
And take the wall of my aged Grandam: No,
Isle have a Courtly gentleman, whose wit
Shall equal his estate, and that so large,
Is it shall afford me a sufficient joyncture.
This Knight shall do it, or if you like not him,
What say you to Sir Geffery Holdfast's son,
The famous Scholar?
If he be a Parson;
And I his wife, I sure shall make my friends
Lucky to horse-flesh: No, I will have one
That shall maintain my Coach, and four fair horses:
Not such thin jades, nor such a crazy Chariot,
As i've seen used by Citizens to convey
Their wives with leisure to their Country houses,
(For fear the late Plum-pudding they had eaten
Fried to their Breakfast, should with too much jogging
Broil on their queasy stomachs) One that shall
Maintain me a Sedan, and two strong varlets,
That so I may not need the Common men Mules,
With their wood-Litters, with nineteen at end of them,
The usual shelters, which the Gallants carry
Their wenches to their Chambers in: In brief,
If you can find me any where a husband
That I can like, I will allow your choice;
If not, isle take my own; so good day to you.
Pray meditate upon it.
This is the maddest wench: would I were rid of her,
She vexes me more than her Portion's worth;
But if she stoop not to my Country Knight,
Sir Timothy Shallow-wit, or to young Holdfast,
(Whom I had rather marry to my daughter)
She shall ha grazing.
Sir, there are a brace of gentlemen without,
Desire admittance to you.
Let them enter.
I shall denote your pleasure.
Some young heirs,
To borrow money upon Mortgages.
I shall observe my Cousins rule, ne'er fear me.
Save you sir.
You do not think me damned sir, you bestow
That salutation on me.
Good sir no.
Whom would you speak with here?
Sir, my discourse
Points at one Alderman Covet.
I am the party.
Good Mr. Covet, I covet your acquaintance:
I understand you have a daughter is
Of most unknown perfections.
She is as heaven ma•e her.
She goes naked then,
The Tailor has no hand in her; may I see her?
I must desire your name first.
My name is Holdfast.
Son to sir Geff. Holdfast.
His proper son and heir, and I am come
To see your Daughter and your Niece.
Came you from Cambridge lately.
I come from Cambridge:
What do you see in these my looks, should make you
Judge me such a Coxcomb.
Your father writ me word, his son that should
Come up to see my Daughter and my Niece,
Was a rare scholar, wholly given to's books.
My father was an arrant ass for's labour,
I ne'er read book in all my life, except
The Counter scuffle, or the mer•y Gossips,
Raynard the Fox, Tom Thumb, or Gargantua,
And those i've quite forgotten: I a scholar!
He lies in's throat that told you so.
On my Conscience
You may believe him: he scarce ere saw book,
Unless the Chronicle in an iron Chain,
In's fathers Hall: for learning sir, except
What's in a Horse, a Hawk, or hound, he knows not
How to expound your meaning.
I mar'le sir Geff. knowing my aversion
From any of these courses, should bring up
His son to all of them: nay, write me word,
Knowing my love to learning, he had him
A scholar purposely: pray sir resolve me,
Are you sir Gefferies son?
I am a Bastard else.
Sir Gefferies son of Eppinge?
Yes, of Eppinge,
One that will venture five hundred pounds upon his horse,
Soon as the proudest hee that lives in London,
Isle play my Crop-eare against my Lord Majors Steed,
And all his furniture: I doe intend
To scour Hide Park this summer.
did give him
His Oats this morning? Shall I see your daughter.
Did he drink's water hastily? Your Niece
I'd be acquainted with.
Sir, you must pardon me, you're not the man
I took you for.
You did not take me for an Ass I hope.
O by no means, but they cannot be seen
Conveniently this morning: another time,
At your best leisure, I shall not deny you.
Please you walk in, and taste our Beer?
I know it is but of the sixes; and I hate
Liquor of that complexion: pray commend me
To both my sweet-hearts. Tristram come lets back,
And, as my Cousin says, drink lusty sack.
There's some deceit in this, perhaps some gallant,
Knowing my purpose with Sir Geffery Holdfast,
Has tan his name upon him: isle dispatch
A messenger straight to him: whom have we here?
Sir, that's the Alderman my Master.
Is this the venerable Man, to whom
This goodly Mansion is impropriate:
I should negotiate with his reverence
About authentic business.
This rather
Should be sir Geff. son, his words and habit
Speak him most learned. I'm the person, pray
Let me be bold to crave your name.
My appellation or pronomen, as
(It is termed by the Latins) is hight Ieremie,
But my Cognomen, as the English gather,
Is called Holdfast.
This is he certainly; are you, I pray
Sir Gefferies son of Eppinge?
The Nominalls, the Thomists, all the sects
Of old and modern Schoolmen, doe oblige me,
To pay to that Sir Geffery filial duty.
I'm glad to hear it, tother was some varlet,
I shall find out and punish: Sir, you're welcome;
I guess your business; tic about a match,
Or with my Niece, or Daughter: which you like,
Shall be at your dispose: if not, your business.
My business is of procreation, or as
The Civil Lawyers learnedly doe paraphrase,
Is of concomitance, Cohabitation,
Or what you please to term it.
How am I blessed, that this rare scholar shall
Be matched into my family? Within there;
Niece, Daughter, both come hither.
One at once sir,
Twill satisfy; the Canon does prohibit
Us Polygamy.
Sir, this is my only daughter, this my niece,
Pray know them better.
Fair types, nay Orbs of beauty, J salute you,
Each in his proper altitude.
Heyday, this is some Fortune-teller.
Tic Thorowgood, you must not seem to know him.
Daughter and Niece, this is a gentleman,
My care has picked out, as a most fit husband
For one of you; which he can soonest fancy,
Hear him but speak, and he will put you down
Ten Universities, and Jnnes of Court,
In twenty syllables. Good Mr. Holdfast
Speak learnedly to th'wenches; though J say it,
They have both good capacities.
Most rubicund, stelliferous splendent Ladies,
The ocular faculties, by which the beams
Of love are darted into every soul,
Or humane essence, have into my breast
Conveyed this Ladies lustre: and J can
Admire no other object; therefore beauty
Your pardon, if J only doe address
In terms Scholastic, and in Metaphors
My phrase to her.
J shall not
Envy my Cousins happiness.
You're full of Candor;
If you will love me Lady▪ isle approach your ears,
Not in a garb Domestic, or terms vulgar,
But hourly change my language, court you now,
In the Chaldean, or Arabic tongues,
Expound the Talmud to you, and the Rabbis,
Then read the Dialect of the Alanits,
Or Ezion Gebor, which the people use
Five leagues beyond the Sun-rising, in stead
Of pages to attend you, I will bring
Sects of Philosophers and quaint Logicians,
Weel Procreate by learned art, and I
Will generate new broods of Scholars on you,
Which shall defend opinions far more various
Then all the Sectaries of Amsterdam
Have ever vented.
Learned, learned young man,
How happy am I in thee?
Doe but love,
Isle call the Muses from the sacred hill
To Enucleat your beauty: I my self
(After in loftier numbers I have sung
Your famed Encomiums) will convert to poet,
And for your sake Isle write the city annals,
In famous meter which shall far surpass
Sir Guy of Warwickes history: or Iohn Stows upon
The custard with the four and twenty Nooks
At my Lord Majors feast.
How am I ravished!
Whose brave show hereafter
Shall be no more set forth with stalking pageants,
Nor children ride for angels nor loud actors
Pronounce bold speeches, I will teach his Heneh∣boys
Sergeants and trumpeters to act and save
The city all that charges: Nay Isle make a new
Found engine; which without fire shall keep his
Whitebroath warm till his return from Westminster
Nor shall the Aldermens daughters, who have
Dreamt at least six nights before of gilded
Marchpane, forfeit their serious longing: Isle have
Horses with their Saint Georges on them, that shall gallop
Into their handkerchers.
You promise wonders.
Hold your tongue, hes able
To perform more by's learning.
The cross
And standard in Cheapside I will convert
To Hercules pillars: and the little conduit
That weeps in lamentation for the Church,
Removed that did lean on, it shall be still
Like the great tun at Heidleberge silt with wine,
And always running, that the prentices
Shall not on Sundays need to frequent Taverns,
And forfeit their indentures.
Still more miraculous.
The great conduit
Shall be a magazine of sack, and Smithfield
A Romish Cirque or Grecian Hippodrom,
My Lord Majors gannet shall not die without
An Elegy, nor any citizen break,
But have a doleful ditty writ upon him.
Save you gentlemen.
Noble sir Timothy, and your friend both
Welcome, this is my niece, &amp; that my daughter, pray
Be pleased to know them, Sir honour me to walk,
I'd have some private conference with you,
The house sir Timothy is at your command.
Cousin what would these gentlemen?
Truth I know not,
Isle venture my discretion to his nose there,
And that appears a rich one, they are two
Country Idiots whom thy father would
Put upon us for husbands.
Very likely,
Pray gentlemen your business.
Speak for me Valentine.
Ladies wee'r come to see you, fame does give
You the attribute of fair and witty.
Yet our wits you see sir will not serve to keep
Fools from our company.
Very right in faith.
That tartness
Becomes you prettily, and might serve to fright
Young linnen-drapers or some milliner
That does with gloves and bracelets stolen from his
Master court you, a haberdasher would have shook
His blockhead (as if he had been trying a Dutch
Felt out) and with a shrug departed, but we are
Gentlemen Ladies, and no city foremen
That never dare be venturous on a beauty,
Unless when wenches take them up at plays
To entice them at the next licentious Tavern
To spend a supper on them, we are creatures
Deserve you at your best a•d noblest value,
And so expect you'll use us.
Very right, this is
A country gentleman my neighbor I,
A trusty and coragious country knight.
I doe believe you sir, your face does tel me,
You're one that feed on bacon and bagpudding,
Your nose by its complexion does betray
Your frequent drinking country Ale with lant in it,
Have you no hobnails in your boots, driven in
To save the precious leather from the stones
That pave the streets of London.
Is not sir your
Cloak new turned, the aged three piled velvet
Was not your grandams petticoat this jerkin
Made by your grandsire at his first translation
From Clown to Gentleman, and since reserved
An heir long to the family, and this sword
The parish weapon?
Very right again.
Now for you sir.
Who of two fools doe yet appear the wisest,
Can your ingenious noddle think that we
Bred in the various pleasures of the city,
Would for your sake turn beasts and grase in the country,
We cannot milk, make wholesome cheese, nor butter,
And sell it at next market and lay up
Out of the precious Income as much coin
In thread bare groats, mill-sixpences, and pence,
As will suffice to find the house in Candles
And Soap a twelve month after.
Nor can wee
Spin our own smocks out of the flax which grows
Behind your Dovehouse, no. nor card the wool
Must make us petticoats things (to say truth)
Not worth the taking up.
They've Magic in their tounges
They have so daunted me, I think I shall
Turn fool and get me▪ 'hem without reply.
All the company,
We can enjoy there is each day to walk
To the next farmers wife, whose whole discourse
Is what price Barley bears, or how her husband
Sold his last yoke of Oxen: other meetings
We cannot have, except it be at Churchales,
When the sweet bag-pipe does draw forth the
Damsels to frisquo about the May poles, o• at
Weddings, where the best cheer is, wholesome
Stewed broth made of legs of pork and 〈◊〉▪
Yes, at Christnings, where the good
Wives, stead of burnt Wine and Comfets,
Drink healths to the memory of all christian souls
In Ale, scarce three hours old: eat cakes more tough
Then glow or farthing gingerbread: then talk
Of the last Blazing Star, or some new monster:
Then drink, and cry heaven bless us from the Spaniard,
While the learned Vicars wife expounds the Ballad
Of'twas a Ladies daughter in Paris properly,
And so breaks up the wise assembly.
And you
That are the precious paragons of the City,
Who scorn these harmless sports: can have your meetings
At Islington, and Green Goose fair, and si•
A zealous glass of Wine till the parched floor
Be moistened with your virgin dew, then prattle
How that you dream• last night that Iohn the Mercer,
Or Tom the Drapers man at London-stone
Was in your bed, and what sweet work he made there.
Very right, and kissed you oftner
Then ere the good man did his Cow, and hugged you
As the Devil hugged the Witch, that's right now▪
When you're married
(For that you will be, or else run away
With Costermongers, Mountebanks, or Taylors)
Your husbands are more subject to you then
Their bondsman are, whom by profuse expense
You break beyond redemption from the Indies▪ the
Straights, or Barberry, see them lodged in Ludgate,
And then turn pricking semsters, till that trade
Failing, you take your selves (as to the last refuge)
To the old occupation; till the Marshall
Carry you to Bridewell, of which you're free,
Even by your fathers charters that have been
Sometimes the masters of it, there Isle leave you,
So farewell wildcats.
Very right as I am a gentleman.
I like his 〈…〉 Clar•, 〈…〉
Or none shall be my husband.
help me to laugh good wenches, I have tal•'d
Thy Uncle Clare into so free an humour,
That hes resolved straight to take forth the licence,
And marry us in the morning.
What od fellow's this?
Know you him Cousin Grace.
Prithee good wit no more, we've overcome
All foreign enemies, and tic unfit
To war among our selves.
This is the pedant
My father brought to mock us, good thine stuff,
Get thee home to thy parish,
And instruct
Thy people wholesome Doctrine, for us,
We have no zeal to learn.
Life they'll persuade me out of my self,
Clare, Grace, know you not me, not Thorowgood.
Thorowgood, pray put your tricks on some body,
More easy to be wrought on, Thorowgood, Ha, ha, ha.
What should these wenches mean, the •iv and shears
Cannot resolve this mystery; they know me
Better then I can know my self: it was she
Advised me to this habit to deceive
Her uncles prying eyes, and why then
Should they abuse me thus? the rest were made
But fools in Quarto, but I find my self
An ass in Folio: Isle away, and if
I quit them not with an abuse as fine,
Isle say there is no quickening spirit in wine.
ARE they so witty say thou?
You'd best try
The acuteness of their intellects.
You may endeavour
With the large talent of your masculine wit
To exceed their female sharpness you shall find,
Though you firm and stiff in your defence,
These city lasses able to take down
Your most courageous fury: pray endeavour't.
That gentleman, were to usurp your presence,
I find no inclination, yet I thank you,
To rest a fool upon record as you doe.
How's that, my imp of understanding?
By being so egregiously abused
By two poor City infants, things that never
Have heard wit named, unless it was when their father
Has called his Formal foreman witty varlet,
For cheating handsomely, had they been some
Illustrious dames, the glory of Cheapside,
Stars of the City, that are daily haunted
By this great Lord that courtly kiss their gossips,
It had been possible their conversation
Might have instild into them so much language
And wit sufficient to withstand the assaults
Of some young Innes acourtman.
Yes, who never
Had mooted in the hall or seen the revels
Kept in the house at Christmas.
Some such gamester might have
Come oft with credit, though he would ventured
His whole estate of wit on them and lost it,
But you the rooks of the age to be ored one
At your own game by city girls.
Thou art an ass,
A very coxcomb, there are girls in the City
Able to oredoe at their own game a hundred
Such feeble fellows as thy self, but Thorowgood,
Leaving this infidel to his mis-beliefe,
Are you resolved that I shall undertake
The new design we plotted?
With what speed
Can be convenient, sir Timothy
Shall be our instrument.
If there be wit in it,
Honour me to assist you.
A revenge
Upon these peevish wenches, one of them
Loves me entirely, nay has vowed me a marriage,
And did advise me to assume this shape,
To cheat her uncle.
And for the other,
By many a shroud cast of her eye upon me,
I doe suspect for all her quaint dissembling,
She's taken with my good parts.
Thy face I must confess,
Is full of choice allurements, see there maid,
How fares it with your witty mistress,
My gallant type of beauty, is the stomach,
Come down, I'm sure you are furnished
With some excuse or lamentable epistle,
To reconcile me to them.
Sir I am
As ignorant of the interpretation of your words,
As of your person.
She not know me neither?
But if there be one Valentine among you,
A well accomplished gentleman.
That's I, thats I.
Then sir,
I would require your privacy some minutes.
Weel be as private as thou wilt, my girl,
Your patience gentlewoman.
I wonder Thorowgood what business
She can have with him.
Heel declare it.
See they are parting.
Tel them Isle advise ont.
You will be speedy.
Yes, •es, ne'er doubt my haste, say I me their servant.
The business Valentine.
Dost not thou know it,
Even by instinct?
We cannot prophecy.
Thou art a fool then,
Does not the harmony of my good parts
Speak me the conqueror of all beauties Thorowgood.
The wenches are on fire for me.
Their bloods
Are always 〈◊〉 in the Dogdayes: but good Valentine
Be serious, did their maid bring news of love
From either of them?
From both, from both, now were for the statute,
That Bigamy my tender conscience
Would not much be oppressed to have two wives,
But one of them thy Pinnace, thou shalt man her:
But J delay too long, I must go meet them;
I long to be a kissing, pray heaven their breath
Smell not of Marmalade, twill turn my stomach.
You'll practice our design I hope.
Methodically: farewell boys.
Pray be you Sir Timothy, know his entrance:
Tic such another mad-cap my Scene is.
Nay, come forward Land lord Spoiled else.
Tic my Cousin• lodgings, pray be bold in it,
As is my Chamber. Cousin this is a Constable.
He comes not with a warrant.
No, Isle warrant you, I
Brought him Sir to see you; he's a wit,
A very wit, or as the modernes term it,
A spark, a mere spark, such a one as I am▪
Since I left off those idle toys called books,
He'll take Tobacco too, and with a grace
Spit in the rubbed chamber, though his testy wife,
Cry fie upon him: he's a very spark,
and worthy your acquaintance.
Come forward sir, you stand as if you'd cozened
One of them with bad linen; pray advance,
My Master is your Leader.
Save you gentlemen.
You're very welcome Sir, my Cousin speaks you
A Citizen of rank.
That you bear office
Of honour in your parish.
That you're witty,
Or as he says a spark.
Nay, a good fellow.
Tic granted gentlemen,
This is my Character, I am by trade
A Linen Draper.
Would trust me
For forty ells of Holland?
Ha, how's that sir?
I have more wit I thank you: cause you seem
A Gentleman of quality, I care not
To venture as much Cambric as shall make
Your Crush a gorget, but •o farther, sir,
There is no wit in it: how's that Mr. Holdfast?
You are a spark still Landlord.
Isle swear in this he's witty.
Tic my humour,
My wit has half and one me long ere this;
But for my wit Id be••ie an Alderman,
And twirld a pondrou• chain upon the bench,
With as much grace as can the formalst of them:
I should have fined for Sheriff, but all Guild Hall
Hearing I was a wit, cried out upon him,
Twill breed an alteration in the Senate,
To have a wit amongst them. How's that sir?
And so you mist preferment▪
And continue
In the state of wisdom still; an humble Constable?
Yes, and an honest one, i•e say that for him,
He ne'er stopped wench in's watch.
How's that? I scorn it,
I've stopped a hundred in my time: how's that sir?
You relish wit I see.
Tic so acute,
No palate but most taste it; shall's to the Tavern?
You're for a cup I hope?
For now sir,
It is my frequent use, when I have set
My watch, to view the Tavern, drink a quart,
And then back to my business, and there wit in it.
Tic granted sir: Come gentlemen, an •our
Is ou• extent of time: good Mr. Constable
It shall be yours. Cousin J have some business
Concerns your knowledge, as we pass along
J shall inform you.
You see I me come
Upon your summons.
Sure you mistake,
There's none here is so fond of you to court
Your cheap and vulgar presence.
Here's a Letter
Speaks other language, you might cloth your discourse
In the same phrase, or I shall laugh your folly
Into a milder temper, and then leave you.
You're very confident.
No, you're too coy,
I me now in the humour to be tempted to
Love any of you: take me while the fit
Is on me, for ime sure twill not endure
Longer than does a wealthy widows grief
For a loa•h'd husband. Speak, ha you a mind to me?
Speak quickly, or for ever more hereafter
Be sure to hold your peace, and that's a task
Far worse then death to any of your sex.
Her blushes does betray her, were it to me,
He should find other usage. Sir my Cousin,
I know not how transported by her love,
Above her reason, has enthrald her heart
To your dispose. I hope sir you're so much
A Gentleman, you will make civil use
Of her affection; twill be worth your care sir.
Besides the rich endearements of her youth,
She's Mistress of a fortune that may challenge•
A noble retribution for her love.
Weal not disturb your conference.
Cousin, cousin, you will not leave me thus?
I pray let me go sir.
Thus far into my arms girl, that's the place
Thou oughtst to rest in: you expect I warrant
That I should court you now, and with an army
Of oaths, stuffed with as many cynical falsehoods,
Protest I love you: by this light I know not,
Tic folly to dissemble, whether or no
I can affect thee; yet thou seem to wear
That pretty harmless innocence in thy looks,
It wins my credulous thoughts to believe
Thou moist be virtuous.
Sir, I hope my own
Too forward zeal, in tendering you my love,
Will not in your good thoughts beget an ill
Opinion of my modesty.
Never fear•t:
That freeness more engages my just faith
To embrace thy affection. I have seen some Ladies,
Coy as a Votaress below their suitors,
Yet with a tough-backt groom, have known them sin
With most libidinous appetite in private;
But J'me as fearless girl, that ought amiss
Can stain thy soul, as thou were confident
In settling thy most constant choice upon
A stranger; yet I must desire the reason
Why you did love me: for my own good parts,
Certain they're not so attractive as to conquer
A beauty at first sight▪
Since I have
Disclosed my affection to you, (although love
Oft times admits no reason) isle endeavour
To satisfy your question: the first cause
Moved me to love you, was my father.
Hang thy father
In's own gold chain: but such another word,
And never hope to have me; dost thou think
Isle be beholding to an eight in the hundred,
To such an empty cask as is thy father,
(Who soon did get his wealth by the old proverb▪
Of fools have fortune) for a wife; but that
I have some mercy in me to believe
Thou moist be virtuous; I would not match
With any of my squeamish Ants of London,
For all the wealth in the Chamber.
Sir, you asked,
A question of me, and will not permit
Me give a civil answer; as I said,
My father—
Father again, farewell, my ears doe blister
At the harsh sound: would thou had been a Bastard,
So thou had no title to his blood:
Another father, like a whirlwind, blows me
Hence from thy sight for ever.
Pray hear me.
Intends to match me to Sir Timothy
Shallow-wit, a creature only fit for scorn;
Which to prevent, and taken with the fullness
Of your true worth, I rather choose to cast
My reputation on your noble pity,
Than stand the desperate hazard of my ruin.
She loves me by this light, this is no trick.
Now to my Thorowgoods project: you are a good wench,
A harmless wench, and I believe a sound one,
And I will have thee; give me thy hand: yet stay,
Ere I doe cast my self away upon thee,
You here shall promise Mistress, to become
A most obedient wife, and not according
To the ancient trick inherent to the City,
Rail till you be my Master.
Never fear me.
Nor shall you, when you're at my house in the Country
Be niggardly, or spoil a dinner for
Want of the tother ounce of Sugar, nor
Rapine to see me merry with my friends,
Or curse my brothers, when they so journe with me▪
Nor starve my servants when I am from home.
I must be dr••k• sometimes •oo, then you must not
Whine and cry out, were I • maid again,
Id never marry any that does take
This wicked Herb Tobacco. Those injunctions,
And some few hundreds mo•• of the same nature,
Sealed and delivered to me by your promise,
I may be won to wed thee, nay to bed thee,
And get a race of such Heroic children,
As shall entice posterity to conceive
Some good came from Cheapside. Your lip shall seal this.
You see your strength• upon me.
Tic my good girl:
Thy father, armed with the trained bands of the City,
Shall never pull thee from me▪ to confirm thee
How much I love, isle disclose a plot
I had to gain thy affection.
Tic some good one,
Pray let me hear it.
You see my youth and feature will admit
A women's Character; if I were clothed
But in the habit, should I not appear
A bouncing Mary Ambr•••▪
Some such creature▪ but to your project.
I have prepared me
A handsome female-shape, my man without
Has them under his 〈◊〉; and I persuaded
Sir Timothy, in hope that would court thee
I his behalf, to have presented me
Here for his Niece; you mark me.
Very well; but now
This the design is useless.
By no means;
It must be pu• in action; come go in,
And help to dress me: Sir Timothy expects
To meet me in that shape here: and besides
In that disguise, secure I can at any time
Steal out with you, and marry you.
Your reason
Shall govern my obedience.
Come let's in then.
Tic very right that sir, but yet methinkes
A wholesome song, sung to a fine new tune,
Should not be much amiss: my boy here has one,
And Id be very loath, although I cannot
Sing, as they say, my self, that she should hear
What those, I can keep, can doe; is not this right now?
Your pleasure shall prevail, though to say truth,
Son Shallow-wit, for son I still shall call you,
I never liked a Song, unless the Ballad
Of the famous London Prentice, or the building
Of Britains Burse: for Music, less the Virginals,
I never cared for any. Does but cloy
The ears, but never fills the purse son.
Very right indeed; tic too light
For such a purpose.
With your leave sir,
Music is most delightful, and young Mistress
Grace, and her Cousin surely will receive it
With thankful Equipage.
Honest Formal,
You are in the right still; come exalt thy voice
My little Imp of gut and hair: My Mistress
Shall know there's something in me.
How doe you
Like it?
Tic very odoriferous.
I shall begin
To love it better then I have done; tic a good boy,
A very pretty boy, and isle reward thee.
There's a threepence for thee.
Very right.
Father you are too bountiful.
He shall take it,
Indeed he shall; tic manners to receive
Money from your betters boy: but here's my Niece.
Very right, I had almost forgotten, pray whore's mine?
Why, have you a Niece Sir Timothy?
Yes, yes, I've two or three, but one I sent
Hither, to view my Mistress in a Coach
An hour ago at least.
Sure she is come.
Clare did you see the gentlewoman?
None such came hither yet Sir.
That's not right though,
A pox upon her for her pains.
Mrs. your Cousin does desire some conference with you.
Maudlin,
Did there a Gentlewoman arrive here lately,
To see my daughter?
There is one within,
In busy conference with her.
Very right that, he's pleading for me now.
Fair Damsel that's my Niece; pray tell her▪ here's
A Knight, a simple Uncle of hers, or so, desires her
Company. But here she comes, my Mistress with her; Niece
Tic well done, isle give thee the tother thousand to increase
Thy portion for it: Mistress, and how, and how do y•• like my
Niece, a plain Country girl, or so.
A very handsome woman, I could love her,
Did I but know her portion. Mistress welcome.
Whats in that house is yours?
Sir Timothy,
You have much graced me by the sweet acquaintance
Of this good gentlewoman. Pray Cousin know her;
She's worthy your endearment.
I shall be proud
To doe you service.
I most fortunate
To be esteemed your creature.
Very right
Shees a poor niece of mine, yet she can speak you
May perceive or see.
Life Thorowgood with young
Holdfast, pray heaven my folly
Has not undone me.
You'll please to pardon
Our rude intention sir, we have some business.
Please you declare't.
This gentleman and my self,
Come to inform you that this spark my Cousin,
Is son and heir to sir Geffrey Holdfast,
And since I hear you have disposed your daughter
To that good knight, I in his fathers name,
Desire your niece should be his wife.
Pray Sir speak
In your own cause he needs no advocate.
I've been abused,
In this Sir Geffreys son the scholar?
The very same sir.
I am the spark sir.
Valentine, in the name
Of madness: man why in this shape?
Valentine, Ha, ha, ha.
Very right, my niece is Valentine.
And how first bully, hast not found these girls
Of a hot appetite, how often ha?
Has my Land-lady
Provided me a cullis, life my back
Does needs a swathband.
What means this gentleman?
Nothing sir,
But to inform you what strange things your niece,
And daughter and, nay never blush he has
Performed it better then your uncles foreman.
I know he has.
Timothy this abu•e must not be thus put up,
Did not you say I was your Niece.
Very right, but it was Valentine.
He has been here all night 〈◊〉
Cousin we are basely betrayed.
Take courage.
Doe you think sir, my Cousin shall mix with such
Stale ware that keep their gamsters in their chambers.
Or this knight have Valentines reversions?
Very right, I scorn it.
Keep them. they I serve to set up some twice
Broken Merchant, or undone Linnen-draper, come away
Valentine, thou hast made a brave discovery. Farewell,
My witty virgins, you are pay• now.
Isle be revenged for this, and if it cost me
Half my estate Formal send post, for sir Geffrey,
The whole town shall know of this abuse▪
Isle make you fast enough.
THey are both sparks, that's certain, ••ere
I take them in my watch, Isle make them stoop
Under my staff of office, Mistress Clare,
Though I'm a Citizen, and by my charter,
Am not allowed much wit, as being free
Oath Linnen-drapers, and a man in office,
Yet if my counsel, if you please to follow it,
Doe not revenge you on these saucy mad caps,
May taking up of Holland at dear rates,
Be quite abjured by courtiers: and I canvas'd
Out of authority, how's that now?
Master Busy,
You seem of sage discretion: and to say
Truth, I conceive you have the stock of wit
Belonging to the city in your custody,
You are the chamber of London, where that treasure
Is hoarded up, and I doe hope you can
Be true and secret.
How's that Lady?
I were unworthy else to thrive by linen,
Could I not keep smock secrets for your uncle,
Your father mistress Grace, I care not for him,
Although he be right worshipful and an Alderman,
As I may say to you he has no 〈◊〉
Wit then the rest of the bench: what lies in's thumbe-ring,
Yet I doe love you dearly for the kindness
Shown to my girl here, and because you have
Some flashes in your brains: and since you have
Opend the case to me, ere we proceed
To sentence, tell me seriously doe not you two
Love Valentine, and Freewit?
For my own part,
And I dare say as much too for my cousin,
Their memories are as distant from our hearts,
As civil honesty from theirs.
And though
I well could like that Freewit for a husband,
Yet in mere spite because he shall not have me,
Isle wed the next mans offered me.
How's that?
I would my wife were dead; two comely lasses,
Such as sometimes I light on in my watch,
would make fit wives for such rude sparks, and t'shal
Go hard but I will for your sakes sweet beauties,
Number a brace of such sound •u•tell to them,
If you'll give way to it.
And crown thee for
The king of witty Constables use our names,
Or any thing to draw them forward, that
Wee may in triumph laugh at their disgrace,
And weel procure a patent, to continue
Thy office to thee, during life: and after
To hire some ingenious poet that shall keep
Thy fame alive in a brave Epitaph
Graved on thy marble.
What varlet should that be trow?
Truth I know not,
Nor can conjecture, yet I 〈…〉
Him to be truly yours, because attired
In the habit and the phrase of a right Scholar,
And for your son, pardon me master Holdfast,
I took you for some lewd audacious varlet,
That had usurped that title.
I imagine
It was some bastard of my fathers, gotten
In youth upon his Taylors wife or Laundress,
He has good store of them, but master Alderman
You now conceive I me son and heir apparent
Unto the Holdfasts, whosoever got me,
That's not much matter.
How's that, anon before I set my watch,
Isle visit you again: meanetime, pray give my
Daughter Luce leave to come home, her sister
Poor wretched, is troubled with a pain in the
Bottom of the body, pricks even to her very heart,
And I would have Luce go to the Apothecaries,
And get some Baser stone, they say twill cure her.
Farewell good Ladies, you'll be sure to come Luce.
Are these the maidens, I promise you master
Alderman the'r virgins of good feature, and I shall
Be well apaid if my son match to either,
Which lik'st thou best boy?
Both of them good father,
Be not so troublesome, but let me take
A view of them: Sir Timothy which doe you
Like best of these two Ladies?
Which doe you
Like best good Mr. Holdfast.
Yours shall be
The choice noble Sir Timothy.
Yours indeed,
Magnanimous Mr. Holdfast.
On my gentility yours.
Yours on my knighthood.
Good sir Timothy,
No striving, they are free for you▪ and for
The stain those idle gallants put upon them,
It was on my credit gentlemen to keep
All other suitors off, in hope by that means
To obtain them for themselves.
Tic very likely
That Valentine's a wag.
Daughter and niece,
This hopeful gentleman, and this good knight are
By my care provided for your husbands, pray use
Them as befits their worth, and take it
As a fatherly admonition; either resolve
To marry these or none.
Tic a hard choice sir,
Yet rather then our maiden-heads shall starve,
Weel feed on this course fare, young wenches uncle,
Are like young hungry Hawks: they'll stoop at
Jack-daws, when they can meet with no better prey,
Draw nearer thou doughty knight, and thou good
Squire of the damsels, Uncle these youths are bashful in the
Presence of you two their grave Elders: your grim beards,
And azure notes able are to fright
Their precise love to silence.
Shees in the right,
Ime scuh a fearful fool I cannot speak,
If any body look on me.
Let's withdraw,
Now ply thy business boy.
So now the game
Will begin presently: I pray you tell me
Which of you is the valiant Rosicleer,
Dares break his Lance on me.
Marry that would I
If I durst be so bold, mine is a stiff one,
And will prick sorely.
A fools babble first not?
But come in brief to the purpose: is it you
Sir knight of the ill favoured face,
That would have me for your Dulcina?
Very right,
You know my mind as well it seems as if
You're in my belly.
So then you are sped:
This gentleman's my comely spouse that must be,
It were fitting Cousin Clare ert be a bargain,
They know on what conditions they doe cast
Themselves away upon us.
It was discreetly
Thought on, I would doe nothing rashly.
Mark then
You men that will transform your selves to
Monsters, wretches that will become so miserable,
You'll hang your selves: &amp; think it a fair rid dance,
Mark what you'll come to, if you be so mad,
So desperate mad to wed us, you must first,
Resolve like patient gulls to have your no•es
Twingd if ours'chance to itch: your ears like asses
When they grow lasy cropped, least they oreheare
Our chamber secrets, for our recreation,
And least with too much ease we should grow resty,
Weel beat you daily: while you like tame Spanells,
Shall fawn and like our shooe-strings.
Nor expect,
To get a good word from us in a twelve month,
Hourly revilings and perpetual noises
Shall be as favours taken that we would
Vouchsafe to spend in such regardless trifles,
We'll be as proud as ere our mothers were,
When she was Lady Majoresse, and you humble,
As her trim hench-boyes: whatsoever servants
You kept before, although they were your grandsires,
You shall turn off and limit your attendants,
As tic the city fashion to a woman
Butler, that shall not dare without our license,
To let you have a penny pot of sack
To give a frugal entertainment, to
Your visiting friends.
If you have a brother,
Kinseman, or friend, that does in pity grieve at
The tyranny you live in, him it shall be felony
To converse with, we in tissue and plush will
Brave it while you walk in fustian, weel
When we please have our fair coach and horses
To carry us up to London to ask counsel of
Our mothers and our gossips how to abuse you.
You shall be still obedient, we commanding,
And if a Lord or courtly gentleman,
Whom we stile servant, out of love sometimes
Gives us a visit, you shall not rapine:
If we forsake your bed to go to his.
And if you chance, as fools will oft be
Peeping to spy us coup•ing, with respective silence,
You shall depart, not daring to bedew
Your eyes with tears for grief that you are cuckolds,
Nor to exalt your honours above your neighbours,
But big with joy triumph that you have wives
That are in so much credit, as to have
Persons of quality, take the pains to get your
Heirs to your large revenues.
Very right,
Tic not the fashion now adays for knights
To get their own sons, tic sufficient for us
If we can leave them lands, no matter who
Was their true fathers.
Say sir Timothy
If upon these conditions you can like
The match is perfect: but faith take my counsel,
Make not your selves mere raskalls: the reproach
To boys and scholars, subjects fit for ballads,
Not worthy M Ps name to them, good Sir Timothy
Have pity on your self, and marry rather
In your own tribe, some damsel that can churn,
Make Cheese and Apple pies with Currants in them,
And Mr. Holdfast it were far better for you to
Match with some grave doctors imp at Cambridge
Or else as it was your use when you're a student,
Lye with your bed maker.
Very right,
Yet I doe know all this is but in jest,
To make us love you better.
True sir Timothy;
Speak as it were to let us understand
By an Irony as we the learned call it,
How well they mean to use us: therefore in
My judgement it were requisite with all speed,
While there in this good humour
To strike the match up.
Very right, we are
No Jackdaws to be fright with these Scar-crowes,
Mistress your hand, and if you'll have me so,
If not so likewise: but you will repent it,
You'll scarcely meet two that will offer fairer
Then we have done.
But doe you mean performance,
Truly of these conditions.
As sincerely
As ere we mean to eat.
Or drink good Ale
At mother Huffs a mornings.
You'll confess this
Before the Priest and witnesses.
Before
The Congregation, or at a Commencement
Before the University.
That you'll be
Honest contented Cuckolds, bear your heads
As peaceably, and with as much obedience,
As the tam'st beast in the City.
On my Knight-hood.
On my gentility.
Why then strike hands on it;
Since you will needs undo your selves, it were folly
To endeavour to redeem you: but this night
We will be married, and in private,
Not yours nor our friends being acquainted with it.
Weal meet you any where, procure the license,
And weal be ready; so farewell: to night,
Or not at all lets hear from you.
And feel us too ere morning, 'tshal go hard else.
Sir Timothy, was not this wisely carried:
To let them have their sayings? but we will not
Be such stark fools to doe what we have promised;
When they're ours once, we may rule them easily
At our own pleasures.
Very right; and use them
At our own pleasures: But see here's your Mr.
And Mr. Constable your Landlord.
Landlord, welcome
On my Gentility, to my house that must be.
Thou thoughtst, because I did wear Lokram shirts
Id no wit: but hark thee, I have got
The wench of Gold: Sir Timothy, and I
Have struck the stroke old boy: to night's the night,
Thou shalt know more of it ere twelve of Cl•••e,
And then believe me: Grimes go you to th'office;
There's money, fetch a Licence.
There's more money,
Bring me a Licence too; sure as we wooed
Weal wed together,
How's this? Gentlemen
I shall have gloves I hope.
And favours too,
Thy daughter Nil shall have my Bride gatters,
And thy fore-man my points: But hones• Landlord,
I know the art excellent at a device,
This matter must be private, not my father,
Nor Mr. Alderman must be acquainted,
Till all is finished: Could thy wit but help us
To plot this finely: Clare and Grace will meet us,
At any place where weal appoint.
How's that?
Isle set you presently in the way; my house
Shall be your rendezvous: soon after ten.
The hour of meeting: there Isle have prepared
For the two Ladies a Sedan: that shall
Carry them thence unseen through the watch
At Ludgate, where I exercise my office,
Into white-Friers, there shall a little Levite
Meet you, and give you to the lawful bed.
With much celerity: give me your money, &amp; isle take out the li∣cence.
How's that now?
Very right.
Mean time my daughter Lu•e shall give them notice
How ell's contrived, they'll be willing,
When they shall know the managing's committed
To my discretion; but about your business;
It will grow late of the sudden.
Come Sir Timothy.
So, so, as I would have it: if I doe not
Doe something to exalt the fame of Constables,
May I be hanged upon my staff of Office.
Ha! Valentine and Freewit with my daughter?
They must not see me.
Tic certain Mr. Freewit they are contracted,
And this night to be married: I am sorry
You should be thus supplanted, by two such
Dull witless idiots: but they are so bent on it,
That when I speak in your behalfes, my Mistress
Stopped my mouth with a blow of the lips: see here
They are themselves; if you doe any good,
It must be now or never.
Ha, ha, ha.
What doe the Monkeys laugh at?
To behold
Two such trim gallants as your selves, like Asses,
Shaking your empty Noddles ore the Oats
You fine would eat, but must not lick your lips at.
You thought to have won us by your wit, where lies it?
In your gay clothes; perhaps so, if you can
Out-sweare the faithful Tailor, that's unpaid yet.
Or cheat your Sempstresse. Troth make safe retreat
Into the Suburbs, there you may find cast wenches,
Who will in pity have you: and for dowry,
Bring you an ampler stock of hot diseases,
Than you are already furnished with. We Orphans
Of the City have more charity to our selves,
Than to wed•Surgeons boxes.
When our portions
Shall be consumed in Apothecaries Bills,
Or giving Doctors fees; or at best use,
Serve but to purchase Sack; or be as tribute
Paid to the three Kings; or piously bestowed
Upon Jerusalem.
No, you'd best reserve them,
Till th•se you wed be begged for fools; and then
They will be seas'd to better use. You think now
You have broke our gulls with anger that you have
Resolved on other husbands: who would have you?
But two such idiots, fit to be the styles
To the vast pride and lust lurks in your blood,
Derivative from the City: for our selves,
Why should you have a thought we could descend
So much from gentries honour, to mix with you?
Tic true, you appear handsome, but you paint
Worse then a Bawd, or waiting-woman, in love
With the spruce Chaplain.
For your hair let's see
Your eye-browes badge: oh tic not your own;
Be modest and confess it: tic a Peruke,
I saw it at the French-mans in the Strand,
The other day: and though you hold your head up,
It is supposed it grows too near your shoulders,
And you wear iron bodies, to keep down
And rectify the crooked paths that are
In this same hill your body.
Nay, besides
You're infinitely lascivious, tic reported
You've kilt the reverend Alderman at least,
Ten Prentices, besides four journeyman.
With too much labour: That you will be drunk
Our selves can testify: and with these imperfections
This inexhausted Magazine of vices,
Could you imagine we would have you? no.
Heaven give you joy, with your well-chosen spouses:
May they be patient Cuckolds, that's all the harm
Weal wish them: the more fools, more fit for husbands
To such hot wild cats.
Well Mr. Free-wit,
I thought how ever we, in mirth, or madness,
Could have transgressed civility, that you
Would not have made such a severe construction
Of our intentions: how i've loved you, heavens
Can bear me righteous witness; but mans faith
Is •ickle as his shadow, never seen,
But when the Sun shines.
And that you, whom I
Even at the first view loved, and fixed my heart on:
Should not alone contemn me, but with these
Abuses wound my fame, torments my soul
Beyond the strength of patience, heaven forgive you.
They are our own, dear Valentine: our own as surely,
As if the officious Priest had put the Ring
Upon their pretty fingers; why you need not
Take words with such unkindness Clare yourselves
Being the occasion.
Such discourtesies
From friends; nay, such beloved friends as you were,
Wounds deeply Mr. Freewit.
Prithee Clara
No more remonstrances of this unkindness,
Dry thy fair eyes, or I shall else grow childish,
And weep for company: poor heart i'm sorry
You are thus distempered; prithee sweet forgive me;
We will be friends, and instantly steal hence,
And end all difference in a happy marriage.
Ha, ha, ha: hold the mans head, heel swoon
I fear of the sudden: marry you; go boast
How you've abused us, and doe not forget
This part of the story, twill much grace the action,
That you were foold again into belief
That we could love you: ha, ha, ha.
We have made our selves fine fools, a pox upon them:
I knew their tears could not be serious:
They only fell from their left eye, as wealthy
Young widows weep for their old husbands, Freewit
They're lost, past all recovery.
Who can help it;
There are more wives in the Kingdom; yet Ime vexed
That two such gulls should carry them: lets go seek
Sir Timothy and my Cozen Holdfast out,
And geld them, then proclaim them to be Eunuchs.
That course may spoil their marriage.
I have o're-heard them all, and it •onduces.
Much to my purpose: now, or never Busy
Show thy self a true spark, that Constables
Hereafter may be thought to have some wit▪
More than is in their staff. Good day to you gallants,
I have some business with you.
Your name is Busy?
The same body,
Your friend, although a Constable▪ there were two Ladies
Went lately from you.
What of that?
They told me, as I am of their council, that they loved you.
And though some words of cou•se had past between you,
As oft does among friends: you know the Proverb put lately
In a Ballad, where I learned it, that amantiumirae amoris redinte∣g•atio est: yet that was but in jest, and in all haste,
Wished me to assure you, that if you would speedily
Take out the Licences this very night, twixt nine and ten, at my
House they would meet you, and join with you in Matrimony.
Is this truth?
How's that? upon the faith sir of a man in office,
You may believe me: for a P•jest, leave that
To my care gentlemen, isle have one ready
Privately in White-Friers, the house anon
I will inform you, and what way to take
To miss pursuit, if any should endeavour
Your apprehension.
How may we deserve this kindness from you?
When tic done, then thank me; mean time make haste, and get the licences.
I will pursue the rest, and if I fit not some body,
Let me be held as other of my fellows are, Asses in office.
Luce thou art come as aptly as I could wish: be sure at nine of
Clock to be at home, and if you can bring with you two of the gentlewoman's gowns, question not why?
But on my blessing doe it; if this hit,
Time shall report some Constables have wit.
IT is a cold night neighbour,
And tic likely we shall have frost,
That will make Sea-coals dear: heaven help poor people.
Is no news stirring neighbour?
Yes, to day
I heard such news, heaven bless us, as would make
A mans heart quake in's belly; strange, and true,
It came up in a Carret Boat from Sandwich
Last tide; an Oyster wife, a good old Woman,
Heard it at Billingsgate, and told my wife on it,
What is it? pray lets hear it.
Marry, that twixt Deal
And Dover, one fishing for Flounders, drew
A Spaniards body up, slain in the late sea-fight,
And searching him for money, found in the sets
Of his great Rust the — I shall think on it presently,
Tic a hard word—the Inquisition.
O monstrous, what's that?
I have not heard of such a Beast before.
You've heard nothing then:
It is a Monster very like the Man-drake
Was shown at Temple Bar.
You have heard nothing neither:
The Monster's no such Monster: neighbor Mandivell
You are a zealous brother, a Translator,
Tic such a Monster as will swallow thee,
And all the Brethren at Amsterdam,
And in new England at a morsel: verilies,
Your yeas, and nays will not appease its stomach,
Twill sup them up as easily as a Tailor
Would doe six hot loaves in a morning fasting,
And yet dine after.
There is the Licence sir for Mr. Holdfast,
And wise Sir Timothy; you have instructions
How things ought to be carried: when I have
Disposed my Watch, I will be there my self;
Mean time good Sir be careful.
Doubt me not,
Good Mr. Constable; tic not the first time
I have espoused couples of as much worship,
Behind the Brickhills: when tic done, tic done,
And surely consummate.
Well said neighbours,
You're chatting wisely o'er your Bills and Lanterns,
As becomes Watch-men of discretion: pray you
Let's have no wit amongst you; no discourse
Of the Common-wealth; I need not neighbours give you
Your charge to night: only for fashion sake.
Draw near and be attentive.
I have edified
More by your charge I promise you, than by
Many a mornings exercise.
First, then,
You shall be sure to keep the peace; that is,
If any quarrel, be in the streets, sit still, and keep
Your rusty Bills from blood-shed; and is it began
So let it end: only your zeals may wish
The Devil part them.
Forward Mr. Constable.
Next, if a thief chance to pass through your watch,
Let him depart in peace; for should you stay him,
To purchase his redemption he'll impart
Some of his stolen goods, and you're apt to take them,
Which makes you accessory to his theft,
And so fit food for T••urn.
Good advise,
I promise you, if we have grace to follow it.
Next if a drunkard of a man disguised,
Desire to pass the gate, by all means open it,
You'll run your selves intoth' praemunire,
For your authority stretches but to men,
And they are beasts by statute.
Such as we are,
Horned beasts he means.
How's that; you carry lanterns,
Thou hast wit, and Isle reward't, there's four tokens
To buy the cheese: next for the female creatures,
Which the severer officers in the suburbs
Term girls, or wenches, let them pass without
Examining where they been: or taking from them
A single token: lass good souls, they get
Their money hard, with labours of their bodies,
And to exact on those were even extortion
Beyond a brokers.
Yet they do it
Without the City, I have heard a brewer,
Being one year in office, got as much from those
Good souls as bought him a new mash-fat,
And mended all his coolers.
How's that? we are bidden
Not to take ill examples, for your selves you have
Free leave for the good of the common wealth to
Sleep after eleven: mean time you may play at
Tray trip, or cockall for black puddings,
So now your charge is finished.
Stand, who goes there?
Come before Mr. Constable.
Tic I Landlord,
There's sixteenpence to buy thy watch some 〈◊〉.
Prithee tie up their tongues.
And there's four 〈◊〉
To purchase tosts to it.
How's that, pray stay 〈…〉,
You're sober men and fit 〈…〉:
Whither goes all this carriage? 〈…〉,
These are the cunningest wooden bawnly houses,
Were ere invented, and these blew coat men 〈◊〉,
The most authentic pimps: set down and open
Your chair of sin you 〈◊〉
Why good Landlord,
You will spoil all, doe you not know your tenant,
Not Ieremy Holdfast?
How's that? not my father
Upon a watch, Isle lay my life they've stolen
Some city orph••e, they are so loath to have
Their load discovered.
There's ten shillings▪ Landlord
To buy thee sack: although it be thy office,
And thou art sworn to it, for a friend tic lawful
To break an oath: I will forswear my self
A hundred times to doe thee good.
Jam
Appeased, march on: look you remember my
Instructions: so this money was well gotten,
And 'tshall as merrily be spent, you need no
More, club your half pence sparks to purchase Ale,
You've an exchequer: ha• another chariot,
This same should be some Lady from a labour,
Her waiters smell of groaning cheese: goodnight
Gentlemen, pay the Porter, what first twelve pence▪
Share it amongst you.
Mr. Constable
Tic very late, a fire and a browne tossed now,
With some of mother Trundles Ale, I promise you
Would comfort much the inwards.
How's that hang it,
It is heretical: Sack's the Orthodoxall
Liquor: and now I think ont, you two, and Mendwell
Shall with me to the Saint Johns head: there is
A cup of pure Canary, and wee have it,
Twill break your heads, your own bills,
And wear your Lanterns in your noses bullies:
My masters, you that stay behind observe
My charge with strictness, and if any business
Be of importance, call me.
Now my masters,
Shall I expound a motion to you, shall wee
Share, and share like this money?
With all our hearts▪ Omnes▪
Lets see what comes it to a piece▪ there's eleven groats,
And we are five of us, that is — that is, let me see seven pence a piece.
No, no, I lye, tic eight pence, and six pence over.
Right, right, this it is to be booke-learn'd,
He's a good Arimetician: but stay neighbours,
Here comes more company: come before the Constable.
This is the government the city keeps,
How doe you liked Sir Geffery?
Very well,
I doe not think all Christendom affords
The like for formal discipline.
Leave your pratin•,
And come before the Constable, though he be not
Here himself, theres those that can examine you?
You doe well masters to keep diligent watch,
Theres many varlets at these hours commit
Disorders in the City: Wheres the constable?
Good master Alderman, I cry your worship mercy,
Because your worship wanted your worshipful horse.
We did not know you: Mr. Constable
And please your worship is but at next door
Drinking a pint of sack
How at a Tavern?
At the Saint Johns head▪
And please your worship, where if your worship please,
You may have excellent s•cke, and please your worship.
This is the fowlst enormity I ever
Heard on in the city, that a Constable,
Who ought to see good orders kep•, should be
At these unlawful hours, breeding disorder▪
And in an open Tavern. Good Sir Geffery
Bear me but company, Isle make the knave
A fair example to all men in office, how they
Come ne'er a bush: watchmen look well
To the charge committed to you: for your Constable,
Isle make him kiss the counter, light on Formal.
A shrewd man this, if ere he live to be
Lord Majors, ha mercy upon us; neighbours surely
Tic very late, and I was up till twelve
Last night a mending my wives bodies, shall we
Each to his bulk and take a nod?
Agreed, agreed.
Set down your trusty Bills my sparks, and let us
Watch ore a cup of Sack, here tic will make you
Each one an Alderman: a bigger glass boy,
I doe not love these thimbles, they are fit
For none but precise Taylors, that doe sip,
In zeal, and swear cuds negs over their wine,
To cheat their customers: so this is something.
A score or two of these my sparks, will set
Our brains a float, and then weel talk as wisely,
As all the common Counsel, how's that now?
Mr. Constable
You're in the right I promise you: I feel
My self already growing from a watchman
Into a head-borow.
How's that? thou shalt be
A Constable within this half hour Mendwell,
Carry thy staff with the red Cross and Dagger
In as much state, as the best gold smith,
That ere bore office in Cheap-side; here's to thee,
Hang care and Cosenage; let mercers use it
In the dark shops: I am a Linen Draper,
Love wit and Sack, and am resolved to thrive by it,
When they shall break like bottles: Here lets ••nvas
This quart, and then will bombast off another,
And drink a health to Holland, and the mad boys
That trail the puissant Pike there: how's that; doe you peep?
Please you hear a good song Gentlemen?
These squeakers, doe claim more
Privilege in a Tavern,
Then a man in office; into every room
They thrust their frizzled heads; and Id bin at it
With some distressed Damsel, that I had taken
Late in my watch, thus Id bin served: isle have
An Edict made against them at Guild Hall,
Next sitting certainly.
A very new song and please your worships gentlemen.
There you lye boy;
I doubt it is some lamentable stuff,
Of the Swine-fac'd ge••lewoman, and that you'll grunt out
Worse than a parish Boar when he makes love
Unto the Vicars sow; her story's stale boy,
'T has been already in two plays.
An't please your worships,
My song is of a Constable.
How's that? a Constable,
Tic not my self; I hope ime not exalted
Into a ballad: Dare you sirrah abuse
Officers in your Madrigals; you deserve,
And so does he that made 〈◊〉, to be whipped for it.
Pray hear it sir: tic no such matter on my credit.
How's that? Well, on thy credit I will hear it.
Colin your company; welcome my Master•:
Here: wet your 〈◊〉 first, then thund•• forth
Some lofty Sonnets in the praise of Constables;
And never fear the whipping-post hereafter.
SIng and rejoice, the day is gone.
And the wholesome night appears.
In which the Constable on Throne
Of trusty bench, does with his Pe•res
The comely watch; men 〈◊〉 of health,
Sleep for the good of the Common-wealth.
Tic his office to doe so,
Being bound to keep the peace.
And in quiet sleep all know
Mortal jar•, and lewd brawls cease:
A Constable may then for's health,
Sleep for the good of the Common-wealth.
Unless with Nobler thoughts inspired,
To the Tavern here sort,
Where with Sack his Senses fired,
He reigns as fairy King in Court;
Drinking many a lusty health,
Then sleeps for the good of the Common-wealth.
With a comely girl, whom late
He had taken in his watch,
Oft he steals out of the gate
Her at the old sport to watch,
Though it may impair his health,
He sleeps with her for the good of the Common-wealth.
Who then can Constables deny
To be persons brave and witty,
Since they only are the eye,
The Glory, the delight •the City,
That with staff, and 〈◊〉 light
Are like black Pluto Princes of the night.
An excellent Ditty I promise you.
Well done boy.
There's twelve pence for you Knaves, and tell the Poet
That made it, if heel come to me, isle give him
A quart of Sack to whet his Muse.
Sir, below there's one enquires for you, and I suppose him
To be at least an Alderman.
And if he be
The Major and his horse, let them come up.
Flinch Squeakers into another room: Good Mr. Alderman
Tic strange you are abroad so late, will it please you
To taste a cup a Sack, twill warm your stomach
After your walking.
No Sirrah, isle not be
Partaker of your riot: this the watch
You keep good Mr. Constable? in truth
The City's much beholding to your care,
And they shall understand it, in a Tavern
A fit place for an Officer: but isle send you
To one fitter for you to the Counter.
Lay hands I charge you, bear him hence,
Isle have you all laid fast else.
How's that? I hope you'll let us
Drink off our sack first: it were far better sir,
In my poor judgment, that you sate down in peace,
As does befit your gravity, and drink
A friendly cup or two: then for the first
Offence to send your neighbour to the Counter:
Pray sir be not so fierce; a glass, or two
Will mollify your hard heart.
Will you not stir knaves?
Where is the Master of the house? isle make
This Busy an example.
Pray doe not sir:
Perhaps you're bashful sir, and will not dr•nke,
Cause you want coin• to pay: isle lend you some;
Or if you scorn to borrow, you may dip
Your chain; a good pawn never shames the master.
Pray sit down sir; we just now had Music,
Isle call them in again.
Within, the master of the house, isle have
These knaves indicted for this bold contempt,
And whipped about the City.
You may see sir,
My Watch-men know their duty, they'll obey
None but the Constable, and isle experience,
If they'll know me for one: My masters, take
This Alderman and his company I charge you,
And carry them straight to the Counter, isle secure you
Against all the harm that follows.
Come, come, come along sir.
Dare you doe this sirrah?
Yes, and answer't too sir.
You've met a Constable that has the wit,
To know the power of's office: neighbour Mendwel,
Because they'll take him for a Rat in the Counter,
And Id be loath to have his reverend b••rd
Be twitched off for his Garnish, to my house
Convey him, and that comely Knight, and bid
My maid show them a Chamber; isle deal kindlier
With you, then you'd have done with me: there watch them
Till I come home: how's that now?
Sirrah, sirrah, isle make you smoke for this.
Come, we lose time sir.
Let him have
A good fire pray you. So, all works is it had bin
Molded before in wax: boy there's your reckoning.
Now to my sparks, Iv done that will be talked on in the City,
And registered, a Constable was witty.
You think you have us sure now. This same Busy
Is a mere cheating Rascal.
Come, your rage
Is useless now: he has done better for you,
Than I by the circumstance perceive you had
Intended for your selves: what would you've done
With two such March-pane husbands? I believe,
For all you set a good face on the matter,
It was your own plot.
Ours? then may we dye Virgins,
And these same trusty youths, now called our husbands,
Be suddenly transformed to Eunuchs; we
Had thought young Holdfast, and Sir Timothy
Had bin the Squires had ushered us, and them
We had resolved to couple with.
Sweet Clare
No more of this; for all your quaint dissembling.
I know you love us, better than to part
For a slight quarrel; now we're man and wife,
And we will love you, if you'll be obedient,
And get such Boys upon you, as shall people
Cheap side with wit five generations after us.
Fear not thy fathers frowns: sweet Grace I have
An Aldermans heir a joyncture.
Bless you my hearts of gold, and give you joy.
Frown not good Mistress Clare, I knew your mind
And so fulfild it.
Constable, isle have
Thy Annals writ, in a far larger volume,
Than Speed or Hollingshed.
Well Mr. Busy,
You've served us sweetly.
How's that? I hope your husbands
Anon will serve you sweetlier: faith I thought
There was no wit in it, that you two should cast
Your selves away on two such gulls, your portions.
Deserved more noble husband•: therefore finely
After you were gone down, to take your Chariot,
Instead of them, when in the mean while my daughters
Held in disco•se, I sent these, now your husbands▪
To exercise their office: Now you are married.
I shall have Gloves I hope?
Yes, and such favours
As thou shalt wear in triumph: but what have you
Done with our other sweet-hearts?
How's that? matched them
To two will hold them play: Come will you •ravaile
Your father Mistress Grace is at my house,
Thither you shall, and if he will be angry,
Let him be pleased again• Advance my sparks▪
Isle be your valiant 〈…〉
Storm not so Mr. Alderman, the man
Has done no more believe it, than what his office
Will bear him out in.
Isle spend a thousand
Pound, but Isle be revenged: a saucy rascal
In my own Ward to serve me thus?
Nay, come forward Ladies,
Although your father sweet-heart, be in our search,
Be not abashed, come forward, though you kept
Your tongues in peace, ere since our going forth,
And ne'er spake word, unless before the Parson
When we committed Matrimony, yet now
Pull of• your Masks and Veils, and show your faces,
Be not ashamed of them.
Who's here? Sir Timothy and your son, Isle lay
My life on it they have struck a marriage up
Without our knowledge.
Very likely Ieremy.
No more words sir, tic done, I and sir Timothy
we hit the white: Good father Covet be not
•ungry mood now I have wed your daughter,
And he your Niece, weal use them kindly: pray you
Bid give us joy; your daughter is so fearful,
She dares not ask you blessing.
This qualifies all anger, I forgive them.
Forgive us sir? you doe not hear us ask it,
Not need we your remission.
Ha! who are these! Sir Geffery we are cheated
Abominably, cheated by this Constable,
This rascal Busy, these are his daughters.
Nor are we ashamed
To own him for our father, that has provided
Us two such wealthy husbands.
Nil, I did not think you would have served me thus
Unkindly, gentle Nil.
Unkindly sir, in what? to make you master
Of all I have. Isle use you kindly trust me;
When you come drunk a nights home, in the morning
Isle make you amber Caudles.
Say thou so;
Give me thy hand: Father pray be not angry,
My Wife's my wife, and so I will maintain her
Against all the world. Sir Timothy, your spouse
Is not to be contemned, she's a good girl.
And therefore pray regard her.
Very like; for your sake
I will doe much: Although I find my self
Made a stark Ass. Come hither Luce
Your pardon Sir, and blessing.
We have done sir
What cannot be undone, now if you will
Be foolish now, and vex your selves, you may
Be laughed at for your labour; they're our husbands,
And we no cause now to repent our choice,
Nor you Sir to rapine at.
Our duties
And after carriage, shall deserve your love,
Nor our fortunes Sir so m•an, but may
Merit their portions
Well▪ you shall not
Report me cruel; you have my consent,
And blessing with it; neighbour Busy, Isle
Be friend• with you, and at my entreaty
Sir Geffery shall be reconciled.
How's that?
Give me thy 〈◊〉 good brother Knight, my daughters
Shall not come without portions; they shall have
Each one a Bolt of Holland▪ that's enough.
Son Knight give me thine too; and son Holdfast
Weal be as merry boys, and drink old Sack
In plenteous glasses, till we all grow witty,
A• humorous Poets▪ to your beds, the're ready,
Your wedding dinner shall be mine, weal dance.
And have the Song of the Constable; March fair,
And get each one a chopping boy by Morning;
I and my Watchmen here will drink your healths,
Though we doe lose our own by it.
Mr. Busy,
Wee're all beholding to you, and it is fit,
We should confess this Constable had wit.

HOw's this, The strange discovery, may some say,
Tic likely we shall see some glorious Play
Of Christopher Columbus, and his brother,
Whose navigable pains did first discover
That unknown world, thinking the far fetched scene,
To be Peru, and the Indies, but to w•an
Your expectations from this gold•n dream,
Our Author bad me tell you, that the scope
Of his intend•d travell's Aethiope,
There he begins, there ends, but as he passes
To and again, touches at many places,
As Egypt fertile soil and learned Greece,
Y•t as h•roicke Jason sought the fleece
In divers coasts, but in the stately Isle
Of Colchos gate it by Medeas guile,
So he in Aethiopia s•tteth down
The period of his plot, which but a frown
Of yours will ruinate, your gracious eyes,
Raise to the height of Jasons enterprise.
The History is candid, crowned with praise,
So let the play be too, our Poet prays.
WHat course shall aged Circles now take
After his weary travels? shall I here
Resolve to lay my bones, and Egypt make
The final period of my pilgrimage?
No, I must bid Catadupíce adieu
So famous for these sluices of fair Nile,
And since the surfeit which I took of sorrow
For my dear daughters sad untimely death,
Is well digested in this breast of mine,
And change of air hath wrought a change of mind;
I am resolved to stately Greece to wend
And breath my last breath where I breathed my first,
It is so determined;— 
Honest Nebulo,
My man draw near, I'm in a humour now
To change some words with thee;—so oftentimes— 
We see wise men for recreations sake,
Consult with Fools, and honest men with Knaves.— 
What course doth thy fond brain advise me to?
To no other but to a home course Sir, I must tell you plainly, I like not these extravagant ones you take of travelling the world thus; I'm sure I have paid dear for those idle hue∣morse of yours, witness my body, brought to a mere Anato∣my by travel and fasting; me thinks, a wise man, as you are, should not have such wandering thoughts in his mind: well Master, resolve to leave this place, and return to Delphos our native habitation, or I shall soon resolve to leave you, and go there without you. O the smoke of mine own poor chim∣ney at home, and the beloved smoke of my wife, would both smell to my nose now so comfortable, as a perfume made of Arabia spices; adieu, I can stay no longer from pretty Nebu∣lone without the lash of her just displeasure; I come my chicken, I come, be ready to receive me, I know thou languishest all this while for want of my company.
Nay prithee stay a little longer and hear me; wilt thou leave me now at last, and frustrate the good opinion I have always had of thy simple plainness and constant service? have patience awhile, and I will accompany thee in thy journey; as for thy wife Nebulona (if that trouble thee) I shall rectify her in the truth of al thy actions. Who knocks there? go• see, and bring me word before you grant entrance Nebulo.
Who is it now?
A very sweet faced Gentleman, so sooty as the Di∣vell himself, I believe some Ambassador sent from Pluto and the fiends.
What ever he be admit him.
God save you reverend Father.
Welcome Sir,
Although I have not seen your face before
That I can well remember.
May be so.
But I have seen you often in this town
Walking the streets, and read the character•
Of gravity and wisdom ciphered in
Your aged face, wherein I think my judgement
Nothing deceives me; and I doe suppose
You are an alien here as well as I,
No natural Egyptian.
I confess
I am a stranger borne, and should be glad
To know your name, your country and your business.
I shall obey you, for my country, first
It is Aethiopia underneath the line,
My name Sisimethres employed now
As Legate from my sovereign King Hydaspes,
Unto the Deputy here, to forbid him
To meddle with the mines, out of whose bowels
The Smaragds dug were, which appertain
To none but to the crown of Aethiopia:
Now Sir you know me, be not scrupulous
To let me understand so much of you,
Something doth prompt me strangely, that you have
Some near relation to the gods, or else
My Genius doth deceive me.
Understand then,
You doe not err in your imagination,
I am a Grecian borne, and sometimes Priest
Unto Apollo in that sacred City
Of Delphos, which Parnassus lofty tops,
As with a wall, encompasses about,
And sweet Castalius pleasant springs refresh,
There was I borne and bred, and exercised
The office I was called to by the gods.
Most venerable Priest, and holy Father,
Let me beseech you tell me what mischance
Drove you from thence to these remoter parts?
The great misfortune that I had at home.
I wonder at it, pray relate the manner.
When you have heard my story to the end,
Your wonder will forsake you.
Then resolve me
Upon your better knowledge and acquaintance
I sh•ll, till when excuse me.
I'll not press you
Beyond good manners; Sir, I saw you buy
Some herbs and roots that grow in India
And Aethiopia for your use last day;
If so you please, I can produce you such
As ne'er were better.
Pray Sir let me see them,
You must for these, good Sir, seek other chapman,
The Margaritas, the Smaragds, Hiacinths,
Are for a Princes use, and not for mine:
Each one alone is ransom for a King,
My whole estate cannot buy one of them.
But though you cannot buy them, you can take them (I trow) if freely given you, can you not?
It is true, I can receive them, but I marvel
Why you should mock me thus?
I mock you not
By all the Gods, but mean uprightly in it,
I will not only give you these, but if
You will be pleased to take it at my hands
Bestow a richer gift, to which compared,
These are but dross and rubbish.
Ha ha ha.
Why laugh you Sir?
Is it not a matter which
Deserves laughter, when you promise things
Of such a prise, and yet assure me more;
You cannot mean uprightly.
Ttrust me, but swear
That you will use this gift as I shall teach you,
And I'll perform my promise of the other.
Accept it Sir, if you be wise; it is not good, nor re∣ligious to refuse any mans curtsy.
You tempt me shrewdly Sir.
Let me prevail,
And bind me still your servant.
You have won me
To what you would.
Then take an oath, and swear
To follow my directions, so confirm it.
By great Apollo, then whose Minister
I was at Delphos, I shall not digress
From what you shall instruct me touching this.
It is sufficient, and I build upon
Your faith, your trust and your religion;
Here fellow, take this bag, and keep it for
Your honoured Master.
But more honoured bag,
Would I might keep thee for my self, I then
Should make an Idol of thee — 
What's your pleasure,
That I should doe in lieu of this reward?
I cannot now acquaint you, for some reasons
Best known unto my self, give me your hand
To meet me without fail tomorrow morning
At Ices Temple, thence I shall conduct you
Unto my lodging, and in secret tell
The sum of my request.
I shall not fail you.
Adieu, until we meet— 
Apollo keep thee
In his safe custody. I marvel much
Whence this unlooked for kindness should proceed,
I'll see the issue on it, what ever betide me,
It may be that the gods have preordained
I shall once more be happy, and in lieu
Of all my passed sorrows, reap the fruit
Of long expected comfort, sure my mind
Is much illuminated with the thought
Of some good fortune, and refreshed as if
The spirit of Pitho were infused into me
By heavenly inspiration; I'll obey
My Genius, for oftentimes the gods by signs
Will have that mortals understand their minds. 
MY pretty boy, how dost thou? where hast thou been so long absent from my embraces; come hither, let me solace my self a little with thee, let me kiss thee my sweet heart, my heir, my own life.
Had ever any one a kinder stepmother—  Mother, you make too much of me, I am not able to deserve your love in so high a strain, my duty cannot countervail it.
How prettily hee speaks, I cannot choose but kiss thee for it.
What a close and hot kiss was that? I like not this behaviour, would I were delivered hence, please you give me leave to go about my exercises?
What exercises?
My books and studies at the School, I shall be shent else by my Tutor.
Come, thou shalt not leave me.
Will you have me prove a truant then?
No, but a student in a better art; hast thou ever read Ovid de art amend, or Ovids amorous Epistles?
Never.
O, I would have thee study that book above all other, there are very good rules, and worth the observation truly, if thou err in any thing therein written, I will be thy Mistress to instruct thee, follow my rudiments good son.
But I have heard it is a ribaldrous book, and cor∣rupteth youth to all wantonness.
That is but a fantasy, a mere untruth; it was made by the Poet for youthful recreation and pastime, none but Stoical old men will invey against them, who envy that in others which they cannot enjoy in themselves.
I understand not your Philosophy.
Would thou did, and were well entered in my book• and science; but where is thy father and my husband Ari∣stippus?
O, my dear husband, where have you lingered so long; you are too blame indeed to leave me so solitary, I must chide you for it, truly, had you tarried never so little longer, I should have died for sorrow.
My sweet wife Demeneta, I have a jewel of thee, thy extreme love to me is confirmed in thy affection to my son Cnemon, virtuous woman.
I love him I must confess, as well as if he were mine own son, or better.
I know thou dost my love; never was a man happier in his choice, I think.
Cnemon, sit on my lap pretty boy.
No, I know my duty better.
I will have it so; the very picture of his father.
Pray mother excuse me, this is no fit place for me.
There is not a prettier or wittier boy in Athens, but it is no wonder, that old men beget always the finest i will∣drone, it is most commonly seen.
I know your virtue, and therefore will dispute with you a little upon this subject, and ask you this question: how could you, a young woman, affect me an old man?
How could I not Sir; your wisdom, staidness and understanding were such motives to my affection, as I would not change my old man for the youthfull'st cavalere of all Greece; I hope for all your age, to have a hopeful off-spring from you, such another as Cnemon, you can doe it i'faith, old Aristippus.
My girl, how thou dost revive my decayed spirits to hear thee talk thus! I will strain hard for this, but I will answer thy expectation.
Thanks sweet husband, let me hang upon your neck, pretty gravity, how well it becomes him, who could choose but love such a man entirely; pox upon smooth faces,
and young lusty gallants, there's more trouble with them a bed, when a gentlewoman would sleep and take her rest; they are al∣ways disturbing of her, when by a man of some years and ex∣perience we may lie as quiet as we will; would all women were of my opinion, we should cut the combs then of these lusty gamesters.
Indeed young men are very inconstant in their love, and changing from one unto another, whereas an old man perseveres to the end in his devotions.
True, true, my love, your words are oracles,
Were I now as I seem, how should I wrong
Youth, beauty, nature, and rebel against them — 
My dearest love, though loath, I am enforced
To leave you for some hours, the state of Athens
Sent for me, to repair unto the Senate
At ten a clock about affairs of weight,
It is now about the time; farewell my sweetest.
You shall not go, come, come, you doe not love me,
Else could you not be so unkind my dear,
To kill your loving wife with your departure.
I doubt I shall not live till your return.
Come prithee, leave this off, and be assured
I will not stay two hours.
On that assurance
I doe dismiss you, but if you exceed
The time, you're like to find me turned a coarse;
stick to your promise.
I'll not fail you sweet.— 
Where go you Cnemon?
No where, but to waite
Upon my Father to the Senate-house,
And instantly return.
See that you doe,
And you shall not repent it, 
I must gain him
Unto my will by fair and gentle means,
By promises and gifts, by sweet allurements
And strong enticing words, by pleasing him
With what he likes best, this will take his youth
(I make no doubt) and bring me to his bed.
I burn for love of him and must be quenched,
Old Aristippus I have fooled and made
Believe I love him, but it is not so.
I have brought him to my own lure so th••
He stoops unto my beauty; now if I
Can but enjoy my Cnemon, I am then
Mistress of my design, and a chief Artist
In this sweet trade; let fools burn in their fire
Of modest love, i'll on to my desire. 
Prithee honest friend
Shall I entreat thee to go forth and bid
The pretty girl without in the next room•
To come here to me.
Yes sir that I shall,
I love to be employed a messenger
To pretty maids, is she so beautiful▪
O wondrous fair and beautiful.
I'll then
Usher her safely in, and kiss her too.
See here the second gift I mean to give you:
More precious then the first, you told me sir
You had a daughter once, but raped by death.
Here is another for you, use her well.
I am amazed to see so rare a beauty,
Such an Angel-like creature.
Cease your wonder;
The mother of this beauteous girl which here
Stands before us for a certain cause
Which you shall learn hereafter, laid her forth
Clad in such weeds as commonly is used
For such a purpose, so committing her
To fortunes doubtful chance, but I by hap
Finding her took her up, for tic not lawful
That we neglect a soul when once it hath
Entered a humane body, (being a precept
Amongst the wise men with us, to be whose
Unlearned scholar I was once judged worthy)
Be•ides even in the infants eyes appeared,
Something which bred both wonder and delight.
With her I found this bag of precious stones
Whi•h I gave you of late, and a silk cloth
Wrought full with letters in her mother tongue,
Wherein contained was her whole estate;
Her mother as I guess procured the same,
Which a•la I had read, I knew from whence
and what she was, and •herefore carried her
Into the Land far distant from the City
Delivering her to certain honest shepherds
To bring her up, with charge that they should not
Reveal her unto any; for those things
That were found with her I detained with me,
Least for them she might suffer any danger,
And thus at first this matter was kept close.
But what befell her after pray go one.
In process then of time this princely maid
Growing and as she grew increasing still
More fair then any women else besides
(For beauty surely cannot •e concealed
Though under ground but would from thence appear)
I fearing least her fortune should be known
And I brought unto danger, sued to be
Sent in embassage to the Deputy
Of Egipt and obtained it, therefore come I
And bring her with me, full of zealous care
To set her business right and in good order.
Leave that to me.
But chiefly unto me,
I'll be her guardion too.
What will you have me doe concerning her?
Direct me, and i'll punctual observe it.
As touching her, first I commend her to you,
(And to the gods who hitherto have kept her,)
On such conditions as by oath you're bound
To see performed, that is that you will use her
As a free woman ought to be, and give her
In marriage to a free man, as you doe
Recevie her at my hand, or rather of
Her mother who hath left her to your charge:
I hope you will perform all things according
Unto your oath, and answer the opinion
I have of your good manners, which I find
By some few days experience to be
Greekish indead; this much I had to say
Before I executed my commission
Concerning my embassage, other secrets
Belonging to the maid, i'll tell you them
To morrow in more ample manner, if
You please to meet me about Ices temple.
Expect me there then; but I cannot brooke
So long a time to see the Virgin masked
In so obscure a manner.
Now I cannot
Stay to discover what I know of her;
The Deputy of Egypt hath appointed
This day for hearing of me: farewell both. 
Can you speak Greek my pretty sweet heart, can
you?
No, can you speak Egyptian? neither sweet?
I'll undertake to teach her both the tongues
So I may be her tutor. 
Nebulo
Thou see I have another daughte• •ow,
She shall be called fair Cariclea
Derived from Caricles which is my name.
Would I had such a daughter too, she should not
Have then so course a name, all men should call her.
The pretty Nebuletta; Nebulo,
Then Nebulona, then neat Nebuletta,
A sumptuous pedigree, how sweet it runs!
Thy house would flourish then, were she thy daughter.
Above the clouds, the gods would lodge themselves
Beneath my roof, and power down plenty on me
In golden showers to rest in Danes lap.
What grown so high conceited Nebulo?
Something inspired my brain, I know not what sir,
But now i'm come unto my self again,
It was but a toy that took me.
I believe it,
Many such toys doe take thee in the head:
Get me a mask, I must convey this damsel
Muffled home to my house.
She need not be
Ashamed to show her face, it may procure her
A husband by the way for ought you know;
You shall but wrong her much in doing so.
Sirrah away, dispute no more, but doe it.
It is pity faith methinkes to use her thus,
It is such a pretty thing.
Come you must go
With me my daughter dear where you shall be
Used and respected as my native child:
When I have understood (hark Nebulo
Her's news for thee) by good Sysimethres
My daughters fur•her state, we'll hye forthwith
To Greece and Delphos, and put on again
My first religious habit; to your shrines
Ye gods we'll offer sanctified minds. 
When saw thou Cnemon, Thisbe?
Know you not
That Pallas high feast called Quinquatria
This day was celebrated here in Athens,
One with a ship by land, (as is the manner)
Was consecrated, Cnemon was employed,
Clad in his robes, and on his head a crown,
To sing the usual hymn due to her praise
I saw him busy in the ceremonies.
Is this the day? by Jove I knew it not,
Else had I been spectator of the sight,
Chiefly to see my Cnemon in his office,
Could I be angry with him, I should chide him
For not acquainting me.
He did it neatly;
I would not for my maiden-head have missed
So rare a sight, not for ten maiden-heads.
Are all the rites and ceremonies done?
I fine would see yet the conclusion.
Mistress, tic to late; see Cnemon there returned in all his robes.
My young Hippolitus, and my dear Theseus,
Welcome, O welcome to me.
Heavens defend me
From this lewd Phaedra—  Mother what dee mean
To burn me thus with kisses?
Burden thee
With blisses too I can, my pretty boy,
If thou wilt love thy mother.
In what nature
Require you that? if as it ought to be,
That children love their Parents, I agree.
As Ʋenus with Anchises sported once
In Ida grove, so let me sport with thee;
Dost understand me now?
You are too bold,
Too impudent.
Nay, prithee doe not frown,
This night I must enjoy thee, and thou me,
Thy fathers absence doth invite us to it;
I will maintain thee like a Princes son,
Glittering in gold, and our sweet furtive sports
Keep from the sun and knowledge of the gods,
No one shall know it.
Hence incestuous woman,
Think thou to make me wrong my fathers bed,
And to commit an act so foul as incest?
Tempt me no more; by heaven, by earth and all
Th'immortall gods, I'll die a thousand deaths
Ere think a thought on it, much less yield unto it,
Your damned wit, nor quaint enticing words
Shall not prevail, my hate exceeds my love.
Am I despised thus, and my hot love
Requited with disdain, as cold as ice,
By such a youngling? he shall know the difference
Between a women's favours and her frowns,
And curse too late his foolish modesty:
Go Thisbe to the Castle, tell my husband
I am not well, entreat him to come to me
With all the speed he can.
I shall sweet Mistress.— 
What raging fires still burn me? how I am
Divided in my self tweene love and hate,
two mighty passions combating together?
Love would prevail, if reason might be judge,
But love is too unreasonably harsh:
Hate therefore execute thy proper function,
Inflame my breast with rage and high disdain
Against this brat that gave me the repulse,
Inspire my study in his Tragedy.
How fares my sweet heart, that she keeps her bed?
Dear husband, very sick and in ill case.
The gods forbid, that sound doth strike me dead;
What ails my dearest wife? tell me the cause
Of this your sudden sickness.
Nothing Sir,
I know no cause at all.
Come, come, you must not
Conceal your grief, but lay it op unto me,
I doe beseech my love.
Since you are so
Importunate to know it, understand
The goodly young man, son unto us both
(To you by nature, but to me by love)
Whom I (the gods know) held as dear unto me
As you, when he perceived by certain tokens
I was with child by you (which thing I kept
Hid from your knowledge till I knew my self
The certainty) and waiting for your absence,
When I in wonted manner councilled him
To leave his whores, and to avoid his cups
(Which things I knew he loved, but would not tell you,
Lest I should run into the ill suspicion
Of stepmother) whilst I in gentle manner
Told him these things, I will not speak the worst,
Nor in what sort he did revile us both,
But last of all, he spurned me on the belly,
Which hath procured this my disease and pain.
O villain, I will scourge him even to death;
Thisbe, go call him hither. 
Dear father, I beseech you let me know
The cause of this your anger and my stripes
So cruelly laid on me.
Oh cleanly dissembler,
Thou would indeed know thy own fault from me.
Yet now at length, Sir, let me understand
What I have done, that thus provokes your wrath,
The gods doe know my innocence.
Base wretch,
Thy innocence; would she belie thee think thou,
That loved thee better than her self? away,
Get out of my sight, I will not hear thee speak. 
My dearest Demeneta, cheer your self,
Strive to forget the pain.
I'm in bad plight,
So that I doe not only fear the life
Of that I go with, but mine own, besides,
These accidents are dangerous to women;
Yet, Sir, it grieved me that you took so sharpe
A punishment of Cnemon, for all this
I cannot choose but love him.
That's thy virtue,
But banish him thy thoughts as I will doe,
Hence forth as most unworthy of our love;
Come sweet, you shall remove from hence into
A fitter room, I'll send a Doctor to you. 
You doe mistake my pulse, whose veins doe swell
With rage and fury, and shall live in pain,
Until I be revenged.
My Mistress knows
How to deceive old Dotards with false shows. 
WEe shall fall down the river Nile to night, and hoes sail for Greece, brave news, comfortable news, my heart capers within me for joy, that I shall see my country again; my Master is sore troubled for black Sysime∣thres his constrained flight, which hath defeited their appoin∣ted meeting and conference touching Caricleas fortunes, but haste our journey the sooner, there's my comfort. I left him cursing the Deputy, and invoking the god Apollos wrath to plague him for dismissing the Ambassador so suddenly, with such deadly threatenings to depart the Kingdom. Alas, poor maid, I pity thee, that by this means thou shalt not be able to
know who begot thee nor who brought thee forth, but ell's one, thou wilt soon learn to be begotten, and to bring forth by instinct of nature and thy own experience. Catadupice adieu adieu, adieu gentlemen; when you see us next, twill be in Delphos; away, away, away, merrily, merrily.
Am I the goodesse Ices priest, and burn
In these unlawful fires? shall Rhodopis
With her Ʋenerious charms subdue my heart,
And make me break that temperance of life
Which I have hitherto preserved unspotted?
What shall I doe? I cannot stand the push
Of these strong passions, yet I am resolved
Ne'er to commit the act, nor so to stain
My priesthood with dishonour; Ices temple
And secret places shall not be defiled
By Calasiris, no i'll rather banish
My self from sight of cursed Rodopis,
Least staying here I should be forced to doe
So vile a deed; I am resolved to leave
This stately City Memphis suddenly,
I'll give it out, my journey is for Thebes
To see my eldest son called Thiamis.
With this pretence I shall unquestioned go,
But there's a City sacred to Apollo
In Greece hight Delphos, there i'll bend my course
(For tic a College where wise men resort
Free from the concourse of the common people)
To visit my old friend priest Caricles.
When whorish beauty and vain pride display
Their gaudie colours, wise men shun the way. 
Thisbe my wench, thou must be secret unto all my commands.
As your own heart could wish, as your trusty cabinet.
I am confident of thee; thou know how I loved that proud boy Cnemon, what proffers I made him, what fa∣vours I bestowed upon him, and all to win him to my imbra∣ces, yet how scornfully and scurvily he refused me, with what disdain he left me; I am now resolved no longer to solicit my love but to execute my revenge; I have devised a dainty plot against him, which will take according as I would wish, follow thou my directions.
I will not digress a hairs breadth mistress.
Then thus I school thee, make a show that thou love Cnemon exceedingly, entice him to thee with beckes and amo∣rous glances, he'll soon be caught with these baits, especially having heretofore long nibbled upon thy beauty; frequent his bed often, be not ashamed, it shall be for thy great advancement, and whereas thou art now a bondmaid, thou shalt be made free forever.
I am your creature in all things, especially in matters of this nature.
When thou hast done this which I command thee, I will instruct thee farther.
I waite your pleasure. I must give Cnemon good coun∣tenance, well, I must entice the young man, well, I must lie with him too, very well; faith these are no harsh commands, it shall never grieve me to be employed in such work, would my mistress had no harder labour for me, this is a task of pleasure; I have a warrant now for what I shall doe; I durst not yield to C••mon before when he attempted me, now let him come with his stoutest artillery, I will stand the charge vali∣antly.
Fair Thisbe are you here? why now I like you,
You smile upon me, and your countenance
Darts amorous glances which before cast frowns,
Now you appear like Ʋenus.
Courteous Cnemon,
Although at first I did deny your suit,
Impute it not to want of love, but place
And opportunity, besides the doubt
And danger which the action brings with it
If once discovered, made me to commit
So gross an error.
Will you be reformed
Upon mature counsel?
You shall see
I will not be refractory to ought
You shall advise me, I doe know your mind,
Come with me then and learn to kiss and smile,
You know the back way to my chamber sweet.
I do, and will attend you, there we'll meet. 
Welcome to Greece my worthy friend and brother,
And in the fittest time, because I shall
Need your assistance in the perfecting
A business which concerns me, you are wise
And can persuade, when reason is your theme.
What I can doe, our long acquaintance sir
And brotherhood in travel and vocation,
Wills me to render it unto your service;
Wherein can I be useful to my friend?
In this, you know last night I did relate
Cariclaes story, how I did receive her
And brought her from your Egypt here to Greece,
where in a short time she hath learned our tongue•,
And so far passes she all other beauties
That she attracted all men's eyes to gaze
With admiration on her, as well strangers
As Greeks, so that where ever she be conversant,
Either at home, or in the Temples, or
At public exercises, all men's eyes
Are fixed upon her with as great devotion
As if she were the image of some goddess
Lately created; that which grieves me, is
She loathes to hear of marriage, and resolves
To live a maiden still, and so becoming
Dianas servant, for the most part doth
Apply her self to hunting and to shooting;
I had a great desire to marry her
Unto my sisters son, a fine young man,
Well mannered, and fair spoken; but I cannot,
Either by prayer or promise, or by force
Of argument persuade her thereunto:
In this I crave your help, dear Calasiris,
Use some point of your wisdom to persuade her
To know her nature, that she is a woman,
And that she would not so degenerate
From all those of her sex; this I beseech you
To doe for great Apollos sake, and all
Your country gods.
In this point, Caricles,
I'll doe my best endeavour. 
Master, come
Away for shame, the captain of the Aenians
Embassage stays for you at the gate
For to begin the sacrifice.
Pray Sir,
What are those Aenians? what their holy message?
What sacrifice make they?
They are the noblest
Of all Thessalia, this same sacrifice
They send to Pirrhus, stout Achilles son,
Every fourth year (at such time as the feast
Again is kept unto Apollo here)
For here was Pirrhus massacred before
Apollos altars by enraged Orestes,
This message is more honourably done
Than any of the rest, because they say
The Captain is sprung from Achilles line.
Indeed, such is the beauty of his person
And brave majestic carriage, as confirms
He is some goddess son.
I fine would see him.
You shall, and his brave ordered sacrifice,
Cariclea too, my daughter, must be there
To day by custom, at the funeral pomp
Of Neoptolemus, but you have seen her
Before.
Yes, and done sacrifice together.
Come, you must go unto the Temple with us
To help me in this ceremonious work.
Lead on, I'll follow, if I'm prompted right,
Strange things will happen after this rare sight 
Thisbe my love, we must act closely, and with great circumspection, lest we be discovered by the mischievous De∣meneta, who (as thou say) hates me more now than she loved me before.
You talk simply Cnemon, if you count it a dangerous matter for me being a bond-maid, bought with money, to be taken a bed with you; what punishment think you her worcester∣thy, who is a free-woman, and lawfully married to a husband, yet plays false, and bears a man too many.
I judge her worthy of death, but who is the person, prithee?
Your virtuous stepmother, my Mistress Demeneta, now you may be revenged upon her by discovering it to your father Aristippus.
I can scarce believe it.
To confirm my report (if you please) I will delive• the adulterer unto you in the very act.
You shall doe me a curtsy then.
With all my heart, not only for your sake who have been injured by her before, but for mine own also, who, for that she hath me in jealousy, am used of her very extremely, wherefore if thou be a man apprehend him.
Else let me die in scorn and infamy,
Isle kill them both, for ne'er shall it be said,
That Cnemon knew his fathers bed defiled
And durst not be revenged, assist my hand
Infernal furies, Thisbe lead the way
That I may doe the deed ere see the day. 
It is late 'ith night, sweet husband, let's to bed,
I cannot have too much of your embraces,
The envious day will interrupt our sport,
Me thinks we married were but yesterday.
Conceiv'st thou so, that doth proceed from love,
But I am old, and thou a sprightly lass.
You wrong your self, you are a lusty man,
For were you old the dull effects of age
Would then appear, but I have had experience
Of your performance, Cnemon, I believe,
Your son is not so active in his trade.
If it be so, then sure the youthful heat
Of thy fair body hath infused life
Into my withered veins, more powerful then
Medeas charms, when she stirred up fresh blood
In the decayed body of old Aeson.
Where is the villain, the most worthy lover
Of this chaste dame?
My son, have pity on thy fathers age,
Spear his white hairs, take not away his life
That gave thee thine, and brought thee up with care,
We doe confess we wronged thee, yet the fault
Was not so great that it should merit death;
Assuage thy fury, and put up thy sword,
Imbrue not in thy fathers blood thy hands.
Did I not tell you this before, sweet heart,
To look unto this princoks pride and hate
Who would no doubt, if time had served his turn,
Attempt some mischief to destroy us both.
You told me so indeed, but I believed not;
Now I do find it true, which to prevent
I'll raise my house and bind him fast, to morrow
I'll carry him before the people to
Be judged for his offence; let nature go
In parents, when sons prove unnatural so. 
Nebulona my pretty chicken, how fairs thy body? did thou not think me lost long ago?
I gave you for dead in good faith, and was in the humour once to marry another man?
Why sure thou were not, thou dost but jest I know.
Truly I was, nor could you blame me for it if I had; is it not a torture, think you, for a woman, to stay seven years without her husbands company?
Methinkes my brows begin Acteon-like to bud already, they are very knotty, I pray God thou hast not graft something there, I begin to suspect it shrewdly by diverse signs and tokens, how comes your belly so high wife?
It is nothing but a timpani I am sometimes trow∣bled with.
I do believe thee, how long is it since you perceived it to grow upon you?
About two months since, the Doctor tells me I
shall be free of it very speedily.
He is a fool, I am a better Doctor then he, thou shalt go with it this fourteen weeks yet or thereabouts; come you are a whore, and have abused my honest bed; Isle have you before the Justices to be punished for thy offence.
Spare me prithee gentle Nebulo, and hearken to my counsel a little, since thou art a cuckold (as I doe not deny it) choose whether thou wilt wear the horns in thy fore∣head, and so all men see them, or put them into thy pocket, and no man see them, I leave it to thy own discretion.
Why then I am a cuckold it seems?
I cannot say against it truly, and speak the truth, if I should, this mark of thy fortune here deeply stamped would bewray me, be not so foolish now as Vulcan was, to make a proclamation of thy forked order.
Did Ʋulcan do so?
Yes, but afterwards he repented it for he forged an artificial net, with which he caught his wife Venus and Mars a bed together in carnal copulation, then called all the gods and goddesses to be spectators of his own shame.
But what said they when they saw it?
They commended Mars, but condemned Ʋulcan for being the publisher of his own disgrace.
But it was a shame for Mars to be caught so.
The gods wished every one of them if that were a shame, to be shamed in the same manner.
but how did Venus •ache this?
In scorn of the smith, and in revenge of this trick hath made his head as hard as his anvil.
Thou hast devised a pretty story in thy own de∣fence, i'st best to follow thy counsel, and say nothing, or stir this bad thing and make it stink the more?
You may do what you please, but I have told you the best course.
Let it be so then; I have travelled well I trow, and to good purpose, at may return home to father a child, of which I did not beget so much as the least finger or the least toe; if this be the fruits of travelling, God keep me from it
hence forward, and all good folks besides; come Nebulona we are friends, do so no more, and all is forgotten.
Not, if you stay at home and warm my bed,
But if you leave me, then have at your head. 
O Nereus god in surging seas, we praise thy  daughter dear,
Whom Peleus at commandment of Jove did make his fear:
Thou art the goddess we adore in Sea a glimpsing star,
Who stout Achilles did bring forth a very Mars in war,
And Captain good unto the Greeks, thy glory scales the skies;
To thee did thy red-headed wife cause Pirrhus rough to rise,
The Trojans utter overthrow, but stay to Greekish host,
Be thou good Pirrhus unto us a favourable ghost,
Who here in grave entombed least in Phoebus sacred ground,
Bow down thy ear to the holy hymns that we to thee do sound,
And this our City suffer not in any fear to be,
Of thee and Thetis is our song, Thetis all hail to thee.
Most sacred Priest of this high Deity
We make request unto you to begin
This sacri•ice to Neoptolemus.
The sacrifice indeed belongs to me,
But you •ir, as the Captain o• this charge,
And sacred mess•ge, ought to take the taper
Of her there, who of all those ceremonies
Is p•esedent, and burn the alter of;
This is the order and our Country f•shion.
So burns my heart as doth this Alter here,
The taper that did set my heart a fire
Was fair Caricleas beauty. 
How my soul
Could sacrifice to fair Theagines.
Great god of Delphos in whose sacred temple
We celebrate these funeral obsequies
Of great Achilles son, vouchsafe to send
A happy ômen which may crown this work
Of our devotion offered at thy Altar.
Ye men of Delphos sing of her, and her rare beauties praise,
Who now in grace begins to grow, but fame shall end her days,
Who leaving these my temples here, and sailing surging streams
Shall come at length to contries scorched with Phoebus burning beams,
Where they as recompenses due that virtues rare doe gain
In time to come ere it be long White meters shall obtain.
Cnemon stand forth, who doth accuse him here?
I brought not up my son ye men of Athens
To see him come unto this end, but rather
To be a staff to stay my age upon;
As soon as he was borne his education
Was good and civil, when he did attain
To riper years, I set him to our schools
And Academies there to study arts,
And Mathematicke sciences, besides,
According to the laws of this our City,
Made him free denison, yet notwithstanding
He hath not only cast behind his back
These favours of my love, but diversely
Both injured me, and beaten this good woman,
Who by our laws is now my second wife;
And not content herewith, one night he came
Unto us with a drawn sword in his hand
(When we in bed suspected no such thing)
In mind to kill us both, and was no farther
From being a parricide but that by chance
His sword by sudden fear fell out his hand,
Which Demeneta my good wife took up:
Therefore I flee to you most learned Judges,
And though I might by law of this our Senate
Slay him with my own hands, yet I appeal
Unto your justice, and commit my cause
To your grave censures, counting it more fit
To punish this my son by public law
Then private bloodshed.
Cnemon, i'm sorry for thee pretty boy,
In an ill hour were thou brought to the world;
Unhappy creature.
Grave and learned senate
Vouchsafe to hear me speak.
We will not hear thee,
But answer to this question we propound,
Came you unto your father with a sword
Drawn in your hand, or no?
I not deny
But I came with a drawn sword in my hand,
But I will tell you how, please you to hear me.
He hath confessed enough, he ought not speak more for himself.
Let us proceed to sentence.
I judge him worthy to be stoned to death.
I to be hanged.
This is my sentence, fathers,
That he be cast headlong into the dungeon.
O cruel stepmother, and most unkind,
For thy cursed sake am I so ill entreated
Against all equity and justice too,
Thou kil'st me contrary to course of Law.
Your sentence is too hard and too severe,
Let him not die, but be for ever banished.
Let him be stoned.
Nay hanged.
nay cast into
The dungeon.
since we differ conscript fathers,
In our opinions, I doe think it fit
It be referred unto the peoples voices.
I doe assent unto it.
So do I.
And I.
Then people give your voices, shall young Cnemon
Die or be banished!
banished, banished, banished.
Then Cnemon, this must be thy punishment,
Perpetual exile from thy native land
Never to be revoked, which if infringed
By thy presumption, then expect to have
No mercy from the senate, but a grave.
Break up the Court. 
Saw you my only joy, and the sole honour
Of Delphos, fair Cariclea my daughter?
This was not sir the first time that I saw her
As often as the people made resort
Unto the temple I was present with her,
And more, we have done sacrifice together,
And when she doubted any point depending,
On divine matters, or on humane learning;
She would have me instruct her in the truth.
How did you like her at the sacrifice?
Did she set forth that brave sight any thing?
You ask me a strange question Caricles,
As if you doubted, whether the bright moon
Did pass the lesser stars.
The people praised
Theagines the young Thessalian captain,
Attributing the second place to him.
Yea, and the third too, but they all acknowledge
Your daughter carried it away, and was
The very eye of the solemnity.
Come will you go with me to visit her
I doubt the concourse of so great a troop
Hath preiudic'd her rest.
though my affairs
Call me another way, yet il'e dispense
With them how great so ever and important
To waite on you and her 
O cruel power of love! why dost thou triumph
In lovers restless pains? what glory can
Be added to thy deity in seeking
The overthrow of my poor liberty?
Take here this tribute of my tears, these sighs,
Sent from a gentle heart, convaey them hence
That they may meet Theagnies, and flow
With his as from one fountain, from one head.
What ails my sweet, my dear Carcilea,
Tell me my daughter.
Nothing but my head
Doth ache a little, and I fine would sleep.
What should this mean good Calasiris think you,
What disease hath she tan?
You need not marvel
At this, for I believe some envious eye
Hath over looked her.
I must laugh at this,
Then you believe as commonly men doe,
That there is witch craft
Yes as I believe
That anything is true, and for this cause,
The empty air that is about us round
On every side, entering in by our eyes,
Our mouth, our ears our nostrils, all our pores,
Carrying such outward qualities with it
As tic endowed with, doth engraff a like
Infection in the man who hath received it;
As when a man hath enviously beheld
Something that's excellent forthwith the air
Is filled with that poisonous quality,
Which entered into that is near at hand,
This same air being a slender suble thing
Pierces even to the bones and very marrow,
And by that cause hath envy been the means
Or that disease, which by a proper name
We call bewitching.
Your wise reasons bear
Some probility I must confess.
Consider Caricles how many have
Gotten the plague, although they never touched
Nor saw, nor eat, nor lay wi•h the deseas'd,
B•t being with them in the selfsame air,
Let love be argument and proof of this,
Who takes its beginning from the object
Or what it sees, and so as if it were
Some privy passage by the eyes hath entrance
Into the heart, and this is probable,
For seeing of all other pores and senses
The sight is capable of most mutations,
And so the hottest, it must needs receive
Such like infections as are round about it,
And with a hot spirit entertain loves changes,
As for examples sake, I will produce
Out of the holy books some reasons for it
Gathered from natures sole consideration;
You know the bird Charadrius doth heal
Those persons whose disease is the kings evil,
Which bird doth fly away as soon as any
Diseased with this grief hath spied her,
And turns her tail to him, and shuttes her eyes
Not (as some say) because she would not help them
But that by looking on them she by nature
Draws that disease unto her, therefore wisely
Declines such a sight as present peril,
You have discussed this doubt right sagelie Sir,
I would my daughter once might feel and find
What love doth mean, I would not then conceive
That she were sick, but in her perfect health,
But nothing less then this is to be thought
Hath happened to her, who contemns all love,
But rather seems to be bewitched indeed;
Dear Calasiris for our friendships sake
Show some point of your wisdom to dissolve
This witchchraft, and if possible to bring her
Into a good opinion of my nephew.
Sirs what dee mean to make such tarriance? The∣agines hath made such a feast, and all the good cheer will be eaten before you come, for shame come away, there are none of the ghestes wanting but you who are the principal, if you will be such fools to miss it, you may, but i'll not follow your foolish example.
This fellow calls us rather •o a battle
Then to a banquet.
It is his rustieke manner;
O what a lo•tie fellow Bacchus is
When he is well washed! but come let us go
Least with his cudgel honest Nebulo
Doe drive us forward.
Well firs you may jest,
But I mean earnest if I miss the feast.
How have I played the fool and robed my self
In hasty passion of my only son;
Repentance when it comes too late doth argue
An inconsiderate judgment; O my Cnemon
Would thou had killed me ere I banished thee,
For death is better sure then banishment;
Ne'er shall I see my boy, well for this fault
I will do penance, penance on my self;
Athens adieu and all the City pleasures
Forsake me quite; my solitary manor
Far in the country where no people comes
Shall be my habitation day and night
Where I will eat my heart out. 
Oh my Cnemon,
My pretty boy, more dear then my own life,
How I lament thy chance and my mishap.
Comfort your self dear mistress I beseech you.
Peace fool, my grief is more then can be cured
By any words of comfort, no man knows
What a sharpe cursive it was to my heart,
More fervent is my love now he is absent.
Fie, fie, forget him, think upon his pride
And high disdain against you, think he doth
Deserve this punishment and greater too.
How ready thou art Thisbe to doe mischief,
Thou art the fire brand that hast kindled this
Combustion in my heart, thou hast not been
A help unto me, but a hinderance
In the fruition of my love, by thee
And by thy means I h•ve lost my only joy,
And yet for all this thou dost still incense me
To run on in this way; most wicked wretch.
Well I perceive your mind, she thinks to make me
Support the fury of her frantic fits,
But I shall overreach you sure in wit,
And lay the saddle on the right horse back, 
Why do you thus accuse your trusty servant?
You know I did but what I was commanded,
Nor ere did any thing without your warrant,
If this thing happened not as you would have it,
Ascribe it not to any fault in me,
But r•there, as you justly may, to fortune;
If you will have me yet devise some way
To remedy your present grief and sorrow,
You shall perceive how ready my good will
Shall be at your commands.
What remedy
Can possibly be found, since he that can
Ease me, and none but he, is separated
At such a distance from me? and besides
Th'unhop'd for lenity of those which gave
Sentence against him hath destroyed my hopes.
I would he had suffered death, for then in me
H•d quenched been the flames of burning love.
Hope that is past removes grief from the heart,
And when despair possesses troubled minds
They in•ermit all sorrow building on
The impossibility of their enjoying;
But as it is methinkes I see and hear
Cnemon complaining of my cruelty,
And how by unjust guiles I did ensnare him;
Sometimes me thinks he comes to me as if
I should enjoy him, othertimes I bend
My course to him where ere he lives remote;
These things inflame me, these things make me mad,
But O ye gods, I have as I deserve;
Why did I not with good will seek to win him
Rather then by deceit and craft compel him?
Why did I not most humbly sue unto him
Rather then wrong him like an enemy?
It may be at the first he did deny me
For maiden modesty, and fear to foul
His fathers sheets, but had I persevered
Unto the end, he might have been allured
To condescend by fair means to my will;
But O my Thisbe tell me, tell me quickly
What remedy is that thou would devise
For me and say is easy?
Mistress this:
All men suppose that Cnemon is departed
The town of Athens and the territory
As he was judged to doe, but I know well
(Who have searched all things merely for your sake)
That he remains here still in secret manner
With one Arsinoe whom I think you know,
She plays well on the Virginals, with her
He lies every night, for this fair maid
Won with his love, and pitying his distress
Received him in, and promises as soon
As all things are provided for her journey,
To go away with him.
O happy wench,
Happy Arsinoe is thy destiny,
Though banishment or death with such a partner;
But what doe these things ought advantage me?
Much, i'll pretend I am in love with Cnemon,
And will desire for old acquaintance sake,
Arsinoe would be pleased to suffer me
In stead of her to lie with him one night,
Which if I can obtain, it shall be yours,
You shall enjoy him in Arsinoes stead,
And isle provide before he go to bed
He shall have wine sufficient, least our plot
Should be discovered; if you have your wish,
Rest then contented to give o'er your love,
For in most natures it is easily seen
That such love whose beginning's violent
After the first experiment decays
And waxes cold, but grant it burn a fresh
Within your bosom (which ye gods forbid)
Tic but to make a new voyage, &amp; seek out
A new way to achieve it.
I approve,
And praise thy rare invention dearest Thisbe;
Fail not to put this plot in execution,
And I shall well reward thee.
Fear it not,
I crave but three days to bring this about.
Tic granted; if thy wit can work my pleasure,
How I shall love my Thisbe beyond measure!
Welcome my honoured friends, and holy fathers
To my poor Table here, please you to sit
And eat of what the gods have sent us.
Sir,
Superabundant are your cates and dainties,
Fair Cleopatra that luxurious Queen
Might revel here, and be contented too,
We that are Priests use to such dainty fare
Whose lives are squared by rules of temperance.
We will not cause you break those rules, nor swerve
From your religious order, but sometimes
A little Wine will much inflame your zeal
To holy duties, reverend Caricles
I must begin to you. 
Theagines, I must return you thanks.
What means this variety? I think
Some envious eye hath looked upon him too,
Methinkes Cariclea and Theagenes
Heave one disease. — 
By Ices that they have
One and the same disease, thus it appears:
Since he next to your daughter was the fairest
Of all the show at that brave sacrifice.
Sirs, pardon my stupidity and dullness,
A little fit of passion did possess me,
But now tic past, here worthy Calasiris,
I drink a health to the fair president
Of our late funeral pomp.
Excuse me Sir,
I drink no healths, yet thank your courteous proffer.
Refuse Caricleas health?
Sir, be not angry,
This man ne'er drinks wine, nor eats the flesh
Of any living thing.
That's strange, how comes it?
He's an Egyptian, borne at holy Memphis,
And Ices Priest, whose custom is t'abstaine
From wine and flesh as things unlawful.
Then
Bring me some water, wise and reverend man,
Pardon my ignorance which knew it not;
Now Sir to you in your own element,
And let this table make a lasting league
Of amity between us.
Let it be so,
Worthy Theagenes, for I doe much
Desire that combination.
Ere you go
Please you to see a dance in armour, called
Pyrricha, which we use in Thessalie.
What pleases you doth please us.
Sound music then.
Thanks for our worthy entertainment Sir.
It was not a dream or such like fantasy,
As oftentimes invades and creeps into
The minds of men, when Morpheus shuts their eyes,
That took me last night napping in my bed:
No, it was no dream, but a true apparition.
I saw Apollo, and Diana both
Appear before me, and with them they brought
Theagenes and fair Cariclea,
Apollo gave me him, Diana her,
With this command, go take these young folks with thee,
And haste thee home unto thy native country,
Tic time, for so the Destinies command,
Love them as if they were thy natural children,
And when thou come to Egypt, lead them further,
Where it shall please us gods to give direction;
With that they vanished, and a token gave
That it was not a dream, or a false vision:
Immortal powers, your hests I will obey,
If you vouchsafe to point me out the way. 
Who's there?
It is I, Theagenes your friend.
Theagenes, the 'brave Thessalian Captain,
Most welcome Sir, what business was of force
To make you stir so early?
Reverend Father,
A stirring one which keeps my thoughts awake,
And banishes sweet slumber from mine eyes,
Hath made me break your morning meditations,
And though I suffer beyond thought of man,
Yet blush I to reveal my grief for shame.
Come, come, I know your grief, although you are
Ashamed to tell it me, I know it well,
For nothing from my wisdom can be hid,
And from the knowledge of the gods my son.
Young man, thou art in love, nay, start not back,
Thou art in love with fair Cariclea.
Thy prophecy is true, I am in love
With fair Cariclea, save me learned man;
For without help I cannot live a day,
So much this mischief works upon my heart;
I never till now knew the effects of love,
Nor ere saw woman that I thought deserved
To be beloved, before Caricleas beauty
Made me a slave to Cupids cruelty.
Weep not Theagines, be of good cheer;
For since you have recourse to me for help,
My wisdom shall prevail above her strength,
Although she be perverse, and easily
Will not be drawn to love, I'll try all means
For your sake whom I love, and use all art
I can to break her nature, be but bold,
And doe as I shall show you.
With my soul,
And if you doe this, I am yours, and all
I have at your command.— 
Who's there, be gone
Theagines, to morrow morn I'll meet you
In great Apollos Temple and talk more.— 
O, is it you Sir Nebulo, what news
Bring thou I prithee?
What dee take me for, a news Carrier? I would you should know it, I am none such, I have not to doe with other men's business nor their wives, I would they had not to doe with mine, but tic no matter for once, there is promised a refor∣motion, I hope all will be amended, let it pass; but to the point now.
I, to the point Nebulo by all means.
And then to the business afterword.
Why, did thou not mean the business when thou mention'dst the point? is it not all one in the sense? I conceive it so, else thou art more learned than I am.
No, tic not all one, the point is one thing, and the business another, we must first handle the point, before we come to the business; for your better understanding, I will make it plainer.
Thou art a very learned Doctor sure, in matters of this nature.
I hope so, yet my wife hath gone beyond me I'll be∣sworn, by many degrees.
But Nebulo, prithee what would thou have with me? how doth thy Master, and my good friend Caricles?
In health, but doggedly out of tune, hee will be with you presently, so much he bid me tell you, and something else, but I have forgot•n it, so much business I have to think of.
My dearest friend and brother, welcome to me,
Why doe you look with such a sullen cheer?
Methinks you're very s•d and melancholy.
I am indeed, and I have reason for it.
I come to crave your counsel what to doe,
But first depart and leave us Nebulo.
Wherefore I pray? well, there will be a sweet coun∣sell now I am excluded, I should be loath to change heads with either of them for all my horns.— 
My daughter, Sir, since yesterday, the race
Was run in armour tweene Theagenes
And stout Ormenes, hath been wondrous sick,
And the last night did never sleep one wink.
Who won the garland Sir?
Theagines,
Cariclea as the custom is did hold
The prize, and he received it at her hand,
She still grows worse and worse, dear Calasiris,
Employ your skill and wisdom to restore her,
I know tic easy for you if you please
To heal her, who, you say, is but bewitched,
For I believe tic not impossible
For holy Priests to bring to pass strange things.
Let's go then if you please unto the maid,
And by recommendation strive to make
Me more familiarlie acquainted with her,
That she the bolder may sustain my cure.
Content, Apollo grant a good success
Unto thy work, and Aesculapius. 
Master I doubt not but my sudden coming
Appears strange as being unexpected,
The cause whereof I will relate unto you
Without more circumstance, or vain preamble••;
I come here to accuse my self unto you;
And to receive such punishment as your
Discretion shall think fit for my offence;
By me sir you have partly lost your son,
I doe confess I was an accessory,
Though much against my will; when I perceived
My mistress lived not well, but wronged your bed,
Not only provident to shun the danger
Might light upon my self for keeping counsel
(If it should come to light by any other)
But chiefly sorrowful for your mis-hap,
Who should in recompense of all your kindness
Unto your wife, reap such disgrace from her,
I came one night to my young master Cnemon,
(My self not daring to acquaint you with it)
And told him there was one who used to play
The lecher with my mistress, he enraged,
Thinking that then they were in bed together,
Took suddenly his sword into his hand,
And notwithstanding that I told them then
They were not at their sport, he would not hear me,
But thinking that I had repented of
Betraying it, ran like a mad man forth
Unto your bed-side with intent to kill
Th'adulterer, what followed sir you know:
Now to confirm that this I say is true,
If so you please, this night isle show your wife
My mistress Demeneta with her friend
A bed together in a neighbours house
Without the City.
If thou can doe this,
Isle make thee free, and pardon all thy faults,
For I suppose I should revive again
So I revenged were on my enemy;
I had such a suspicion in my head
That she was false, but kept it to my self,
Because I wanted clear proofs to convince her,
But what must I doe Thisbe, tell me wench?
You know the garden where the monument
Of Epicures doth stand, there come a little
Before the night and stay for me; adieu. 
My old acquaintance welcome, welcome Thisbe.
Thanks good Arsinoe, will you teach me now
A lesson on the Virginals?
You jeer me,
I fine would learn of you: but prithee tell me
What business brought thee hither?
I will tell thee,
You know Feledemus the dancer
Yes.
We too must dance la volta here to night,
Let's have a chamber and a bed made ready
Sweet sister, for I've promised him this night
He shall come first, and I will follow after,
As soon as I to bed have brought my mistress.
All things shall be according to thy wish,
My better half.
But when he comes I pray you
Be out the way, for he is very shame-fac'd
As being a novice in this art.
Is he
Not entered yet?
Not yet I can assure ye,
His flower is yet to spend and strength of youth.
That flower thou soon wilt crop, and wast the seed.
In time I may, at night expect me sister.
Isle waite you home.
If this my plot doe hit
Ne'er was the like devised by women's wit. 
Come mistress, let me make you unready instantly, all that I promised you is done, I will go fetch young Cnemon unto you who is making merry here by, and return suddenly, lye down, take your pleasure and say nothing. 
Bind the adulterer fast master.
O wonderful thing, the villain is fled, take heed sir that you be not again deceived.
Peace be of good cheer, I have this wicked and mis∣chievous woman which I most desired.
O thou much hated of the gods, I have thee
And all thy shame about thee, come thou shalt
With me unto the City, to receive
What punishment the laws allot to such
As live unchaste, and wrong their husbands bed,
Which is no less then death.
See Thisbe, is she dead?
Oh yes, her neck
Is broken sir.
Then hath thy punishment
Prevented what the law should have inflicted;
Isle to the people and declare this matter,
And with my friends consult what means to use
For to call home my son from banishment,
Whose truth and innocence doth open lie
By this unheard of strange discovery. 
My child, my daughter dear, tell me thy father
The cause of thy disease, have a good heart,
This wise man Calasiris is requested
By me to find some remedy to cure thee,
And he can well perform it as a man
Of heavenly knowledge, and a sacred priest.
My most endeared friend, you shall doe well
To suffer him to exercise his art
And holy spells for your recovery,
For I perceive thou art ore-look'd my child.
Sir tic my duty to obey your will
In all things you command me.
Then depart
Dear Caricles, and all the rest avoid
The room, we must be private here together,
Fetch me a little Laurel and a stool
Having three feet, some fire and frankincense,
And let no man disturb us till I call.
It shall be done forthwith, heavens crown your work.
Father you are deceived in my grief,
You cannot guess at it for all your art.
Nay daughter say not so, but cheer your self,
For what doth vex you is a malady
Common, and easy to be cured by me;
Thou were o're-look'd not only at the pomp
Of Pirrhus funeral rites, but at the race
In armour too when you were overseer,
And gave the prize unto the conqueror;
Theagenes was he that overlooked you,
Whose want on eye was always fixed upon
Your splendent beauty object of his sight.
Whether he deigned to look on me or no
Apollo have him in his custody;
But whence is he, and what's his pedigree?
He's a Thessalian borne, and as you heard
Descended from Achilles, who although
He have bewitched you with an envious eye,
He suffers more than you by the reflex
Of your Sun-burning eyes upon his heart.
Why do you wrongfully accuse the man
Of witchcraft, who hath done no harm at all,
There's no such matter, tic some other sickness.
Then tell me daughter, and conceal it not
If you desire to find a remedy,
I am no stranger to you but your friend,
and old acquaintance of your loving father,
I am of your profession too, a priest,
I'll keep your counsel, and be bound by oath
To help you what I can; all griefs are cured
In the beginning, but if left alone
At length they grow incurable; declare
Your mind at full.
I love Theagines.
I knew so much before, he loves you too,
I'll be your faithful friend and true assistant.
Dear friend what have you done? what news have
You to tell me that is good?
All shall be well
Cariclea shall be healed to morrow morn
Of her infirmity, I now will leave you
To prosecute my business for her health.
Adieu dear friend, the gods reward thy pain.
Here Acestinus, lies the sickly patient 
You are well read in physic, feel her pulse
And give your wise opinion.
fairest maid
Where doth your pain lie most?
Her state of heart I find Priest Caricles,
My labour is in vain, no physic can
Restore her to her health.
The gods forbid,
Why say you so, must my dear daughter die
Without all hope of her recovery?
Peace make not such ado, but here me speak.
Our art sir, doth extend no further then 
To cure distempered bodies, if the mind
Diseased be without the bodies sickness,
We have no help for that, the maids disease
L•es in the mind, her bodie's in good state,
No humours doe abound there, no headache,
No fever burns her, all is free within.
What then should be the cause of these her fits,
Utter what y•u perceive doth trouble her,
I doe beseech you, skilful Acestinus.
Tic love doth trouble her, which who knows not
Is an affection and grief of the heart,
Doe you not see her eyes swollen in her head
Rolling one every side, her visage pale,
Her half distraction, how she utters
What ere comes in her mind, and sleeps but little;
In brief I doe perceive that she hath lost
The moisture of her body, and indeed
Just amplitude thereof, my counsel is
You find her out a man and that with speed. 
A man, heavens grant she be inclined that way,
Then Calasiris hath plaid well his part;
How fares my daughter now, what sickness hast thou?
Shall I send for more Doctors yet?
Tic needless,
Send none to me but Calasiris only,
He hath the art to ease me, and none else.
Isle send him to thee, sleep Cariclea,
Until he come: if Alcamenes love
Possess her heart, thanks to the gods above. 
My worthy friend most opportunely met.
What, beautiful Theagines!
How can he
Be beautiful that pleases not Cariclea?
No more, you make me angry thus to doubt
My skill by which she is entrapped in love,
And longs to see you.
What is that you say?
Doth fair Cariclea wish to see me father?
Why doe you then detain me here, and not
Conduct me to her?
Nay sir stay a while,
Though you are very nimble of your feet,
You must not think this matter must be handled
As if it were a prize for every man
That list to get it, take my counsel first;
Know you not that her father Caricles
Is the chief man in Delphos? that the laws
Give present death to such as steal a maid
Without their friends consent? be wise my son.
The matter were not great although I died
After I had enjoyed Cariclea,
Death for her sake is life, but Calasiris
If you think good, let us demand her of
Old Caricles her father for my wife,
I doe suppose my blood is high enough
To be comixed with his.
We shall not speed,
Not that he thinks you any way unworthy,
But because she's promised to his sisters son
By him in marriage.
O ye gods above,
It cannot be, nor shall it by your leaves,
Theagenes, and none but he shall wed
Cariclea, who ere presumes to touch
My goddess but my self, shall sure repent it,
This hand is not benumbed, nor this sword blunt
But it can take revenge.
It shall not need,
Theagines be patient, be but ruled
By me, and we will bring all things to pass
According to your wish; now leave me here
Alone to project on your good, be careful
You be not seen oft-times to talk with me,
But when you come, come private and alone
To shun suspicion.
Farewell reverend Father. 
So efficacious is your wisdom sir,
So forcibly our friendship, as it hath wrought
That effect I wished upon my daughter,
Cariclea is in love and quite subdued
By strong affection, who before was stubborn
Unto so sweet a yoke.
I knew my charms
Were of sufficient force to doe the feat,
But can you tell as well what man she loves
As that she is in love?
No by Apollo,
Would Alcamenes were the man she loved
My sisters son, I have endeavoured it
All that I can to make her fancy him.
Tic best you bring him to her, and so try
The aim of her affection, mutual sight
Of lovers kindles sparks which else would die
Raked up in ashes of forgetfulness.
Isle take your counsel.
And return with news
How you have sped.
Isle give you a relation. 
I must convey them hence, this task is laid
Upon me by the gods, but where I know not.
The Oracle is mystical and dark,
I cannot well interpret what it means,
We must begin our voyage by sea it seems,
As may be gathered by the Oracle
Where it is said, and sailing surging streams
If I could by any means get the Fascia now, which was laid out with Cariclea, wherein Caricles said he h•art all the maid estate was notified, I should be instructed more particularly what I ought to doe, and whether the Ladies of destiny would send us. 
Now brother what success?
Oh woeful news,
My daughter seems distracted, such a strange
Infirmity doth seize her, when I brought
My nephew Alcamenes to her fight
Freshly apparelled, as if Gorgons head
Appeared, or some more fearful thing, she cried
With a loud voice, and turned her countenance
From him and me, withal she put her hand
Unto her throat, threatening to kill her self
And bound it with an oath, if we departed
Not suddenly the chamber, which we did
In Less time then she spake it, least she should
Put that in execution which she said;
Now Calasiris once again I come
Most humbly to beseech you that you will not
Suffer the maid to perish, nor her father
Be fr•strate o• his purpose.
Caricles,
Tic true your daughter is distract in mind,
For she is moved which the multitude,
Wh•ch I have b•rth••'d her of purpose with,
They are not of the least but such as should
Force he• to doe what she abhorred most
As well by nature as decree of mind,
But I suppose some god doth take in hand
To hen•er this design and strive to cross
My ministers, therefore tic requisite
And time you show me that same Fascia
You said was found with fair Cariclea
Amongst her costly jewels, for I fear
Least that it be enchanted stuff and wrought
With such things as doe now exasperate
Her mind, by reason that some enemy
As soon as she was borne had this ordained
To keep her from all love and thought of marriage
That she might die, and leave behind no issue.
Tic probable; it may be so indeed.
Come go with me, and I will show you all
What in the Fascia is contained and written,
I understand it not, character
Is Ethiopian, and the letters are
Not common, but such as the princes use
Of Egypt in their holy businesses.
I understand the Ethiopian tongue•,
Which unto thee I must interpret wrong.
Come let's away my children, let's away,
Why do we linger here? the gods commands
Must be obeyed, all things are ready for
Our secret flight, a ship for Memphis bound
Waits us without, the wind comes gently from
Th'adjoyning shore, and stays to swell the sails
With pride till you embark, see here the Fascia,
Which by a sly devise from Caricles
I have obtained, nothing doth hinder us
To meet this long wished opportunity,
If you have got your jewels, dearest jewel,
From your supposed father.
Calasiris.
I have them all, but how gat you I pray
The Fascia from old Caricles, for when
He had received me from Sysimethres,
Who brought me up, he brought me here to Greece
I know not how, and took the Fascia from me,
Which in a chest he did preserve and keep.
How I came by it you shall know hereafter,
But can you tell me what it doth contain?
How should I as being never told by any?
Besides although I oftentimes had seen it,
I could not understand the character,
Pray sir, interpret what it doth contain.
It doth declare your parents and your Country,
And all your fortunes, thus I read it to you
Verbatim as it stands, give your attentions.
My daughter, the sun being author of our sto•ke, is witness that for no mis-deed, I have cast thee forth, and concealed thee from
thy father Hydaspes sight, yet I would have my self excused to thee, if thou happen to live, and to him that shall find thee if the gods procure any, and therefore I declare the cause of thy expose∣tion, after king Hydaspes had been married to me ten years, and we had never a child, we happened one time to rest us after dinner in a gallery where hung rare pictures and images, amongst which were those of Perseus and Andromeda portrayed as when he first redeemed her from the rock, at this time your father lay with me, swearing that by a dream he was command•d so to doe, and I by and by perceived my self to be with child: but thou were borne white which colour is strange among the Aethiopians. I knew the reason, because I looked sted fastlie upon the picture of Andromeda naked, and by that means, conceived a thing like to her, yet I de•er∣mined to rid my self of shameful death (counting it certain that thy colour would procure me to be accused of adultery, and that none would believe me when I told them the cause) and to commit thee to the unstablenes of fortune, which is a great deal rather to be wished for then present death, or to be called a bastard: and tel∣ling my husband that thou were straight dead, I have privilie laid thee forth with the greatest riches that I had for a reward to him that shall find thee and take thee up: above all things remember that thou seek among thy jewels for a certain ring, which thy father gave me when we were first made sure, in the hoop whereof is a princely posy, the stone is a Pantarbe of secret virtue, consecra∣ted in the place where it is set. The gods preserve thee my dearest daughter, and grant us a happy meeting.
A strange but blessed discovery hast thou made
Of fair Caricleas royal pedigree
(Right reverend father) which before lay buried
Deep in the obscure vault of ignorance.
Now princely virgin raise thy glorious head
Above the clouds, and give thy conquering beauty
Command to pull the thunderer from his seat
To serve thee here on earth or in Olympus
Where thou shalt please to dwell, and rest not here,
Let Mars be fettered, Mercury a slave,
And bright Apollo dazzled with the sight
Of beams more splendent then his own, fall down
And worship thy appearance, offering thee
His throne to sit upon.
Theagenes,
Fie, be not such a vain Idolater
The gods may plague you for it.
plague me for
Adoring queen Caricles deity?
They are unjust then, for themselves commit
The same Idolatry as well as I.
That's but your superstitious jealousy.
Think you the gods will rival you, or love
A mortal Virgin? fie it is blasphemy.
They have done so, or else the Poets lie,
Witness Europas bull, and Leads swans
Fair Danes shower, and Daphnes transformation;
If their poor beauties had that operation
To work such strange effects in heavenly powers,
How much more force, nay violence think you
Hath hers, to whose compared, theirs are like glass
To sparkling diamonds.
My dearest friend,
Forbear these candid raptures of your wit,
Not my desert, and enter into thought
Of what concerns us most.
Agreed my goddess.
No more dispute then, but forthwith to sea.
Delphos adieu, the fates call us away. 
So sweet a man as thy description makes him?
Nothing inferior Madame, but beyond it;
His body is a Temple stately built,
Where Ʋenus comes and offers turtle doves
To gain his liking.
Such a majesty
Accompanying that sweetness too?
As if
They wedded were together, hand in hand
Walking in so delectable a mansion.
So active and broad shouldered as thou say,
So tall and portly?
Every way provided
To satisfy your pleasure.
Thou hast kindled
A fire within me; but what Country owns
This wonder of a man? when landed he
At Memphis shore? who brought him, can thou tell?
He came with Calasiris from some parts
Of Greece, as I am given to understand,
And landed here last night.
Where doth he lodge?
In Calasiris house without the Temple.
Thou must devise some way to bring him to me,
And lodge him in our palace, for I have
An itching humour to enjoy the man.
Let me alone, I am your Engineer
To work your pleasure.
But who is the maid
Thou say did bear him company, and was
So near his bosom?
I suppose she is
Hi• sister or his wife.
Is she fair as he?
I never saw one fairer, such a beauty
As would have made Jove stoop, and shaken off
His Eagles borrowed shape, to force a kiss
From her Nectorious hand.
Thou make me jealous
With praises of my rival.
Let not that
Trouble your thoughts, he cannot be so foolish,
That when so great a happiness shall be
Offered unto him as the love and liking
Of fair Arsace Oromdates wife,
Egypt great Deputy, but reverently
Kneel down, and worship such a change in love.
If thou can bring, dear nurse, this thing to pass,
Thou shalt at once cure two diseases in me,
Fell love and jealousy.
I doubt it not;
What mad man but will be content to change
His Brass for Gold, his Copper for rich pearl?
Both which he shall enjoy, enjoying you.
O what a sugared time have I to use
My sweet disports now that the Deputy
My husband is employed in the war
Against Hydaspes King of Aethiopia
About the Smaragd mines, pray heaven they end not
Before my pleasures period.
Never fear it.
You shall have time enough to bathe in bliss.
See Cibile who knocks there. 
Calasiris
And the fair parties.
Heavens! conduct them in.
All hail unto the Palace of my Prince,
Madame it may seem strange unto your Highness,
That I presume to bring these strangers with me
To kiss you Princely hands; I make no doubt
But when you shall be well informed of
Their birth and breeding, it will plead my pardon.
What need this complement? you're welcome sir,
So are your friends, when did you ever know me
Unkind to strangers, or inhospitable
To such as these▪ whose outward looks declare
Their inward minds, and speak their noble parts?
So elegant a grace and stately beauty,
As shines in their countenances cannot
Proceed but from some Princely pedigree,
Pray •r speak whence you are?
Most beauteous Lady,
Please you to understand, we are of Greece,
Descended of a Noble family,
Which ne'er produced yet unworthy branches,
Let it suffice (I doe beseech your Grace)
We open it no further; we have been
Robed on the sea by pirates, but redeemed
By Noble Calasiris, and brought here
To Memphis stately City.
Is this Lady
Your sister, or your wife?
My sister Madame,
Tossed equally with me by fortunes blasts.
but now those storms are past, and you are in
A quiet harbour: pleasant calms appear.
Sir, I must rob you of your ghosts.
I durst not
Deny you Madame, though I must confess
I should to any other.
Cibile,
Prepare their lodging near our own, and let
No costly furniture be wanting there,
It shall be done with speed.
My noble ghosts,
I know not if you would retire alone
Into your private chambers, travel doth
Require repose, please you to follow me,
Isle be your glad conductor.
O I fear
This kindness is some love plot on my dear. 
What sly evasion to put off thy guilt
Is left thee now poor Thisbe? what device
To shun the severe justice of the Law?
All will be now discovered, and my plots
Return upon my self, the heavens are just
In sending Cnemon home from banishment
To punish me in cheering of himself,
Can thou behold his face, or speak one word
In thy defence, when he stands forth t'accuse thee
Before the people? O what shame, what curses
Breathed from a general mouth will weigh thee down
Even to Avernus gulf; I feel the weight
Of my offences poised in the scale
Of sad despair; O thou incendiary
Of all this mischief, saith my guilty thoughts,
Thou murderess of thy mistress, hie thee hence
To the infernal shades, where never light
Appears, but gloomy darkness covers all
Under her sable mantle, there find out
Medea, Clitemnestra, Pasiphe,
Long since condemned for murder to this place,
Companions of thy shame; why lingrest thou
Upon the earth? is not thy sin complete.
And ripe for hell? yes, yes, I know it is,
I know it is, my sad despairing thoughts,
Isle follow your suggestions, gentle viol
Reserved for such a use, this kiss from thee
Shall cross the sentence of the Laws decree. 
Hold, hold thy hand, drink not the poison down▪
Thou desperate woman.
Not to gain a crown,
Tic done, and past prevention.
Thisbe yet
Make thy confession, and subscribe thy hand,
That innocent Cnemon die not.
Write it then. 
I Thisbe doe confess young Cnemon was
Unjustly banished, I and Demeneta
Did forge that plot against him, for the which
We have our condign punishment.
Tic done, now put your hand to it 
Dying Thisbe.
Son tic enough to clear thee of all things
Can be objected; i'll forthwith declare
This matter to the people, and produce
Thisbes confession, strengthened with her han•,
Come with me Cnemon.
See the wretched state
O• false accusers, and their po•sonous fate. 
My children great Arsace recommends
Her love unto you, who hath seat me here
To serve you in all things that you command,
I'm proud to be employed in your service
Who am a Gr•cian too, and borne in Lesbos:
Most be•utifull young man cheer up thy self,
I bring thee joyful news, Arsace loves thee,
Arsace she whose favour kings have kneeled for,
Doth kneel• to thee petitioning thy love
With rich oblatio•s both of pearl and gold.
O heavens, my prophecy is too too true,
My jealousy foresaw this.
Tell Arsace
My sister and my self both kiss her hands
And doe return her humble thanks for all
Her noble favours, but that she doth love me
I think it strange, whose husband is a man
So far beyond my rank as put in balance
With worthless me, it would not brooke the trial.
We know you are her hands, her eyes, her ears,
Her mind, her all, for countries sake persuade her
(I doe beseech you) to remove her thoughts
Upon some worthier person; all that we
Desire is one•y this, that she would please
To send us back again to Calasiris,
And never bring strange banished, restless lives
Unto so high and excellent a fortune.
My son be ruled by me, be not so foolish
To shun this happiness that courts thee now,
Embrace it, least hereafter thou repent
Thy over-sight; thou shalt have rule and riches,
Dalliance, and all the fruits of flourishing youth,
If thou but condescend unto her will;
But if thou dost deny, know that she hath
A high and Princely stomach, which ne'er brooks,
Affronts of such a nature.
Tempt me not,
But tell your mistress I despise her lust
As much as prize her love, you shall obligue us
Unto you in a bond of love and kindness
To get us leave from her hence to depart
To seek our fortunes.
Obstinate young man,
That wilt not see thy good, Lady persuade
Your brother to some reason, you may hap
To work upon his nature, and prevail;
I leave you to your selves. 
Theagines,
This is no honest dealing, I perceive;
Was it for this she sent us from her table
Such curious viands, and such costly cates?
Was it for this she did adorn our chambers
With stately hangings wrought with sundry colours,
Which came from Sidon and fair Lidia?
Was this her wicked end? would that we were
A hundred leagues from this accursed place,
Or that we never had beheld her face. 
But will he not be won?
Not all the art
I have can work him to it.
Doe my favours
Make no impression in him?
Yes of thanks,
No otherwise, he craves leave to depart,
A sign he doth not like his entertainment.
•thou make my hot blood cold within my veins
As if an ague ceased me; how depart,
Ere he get o•t my power, I am resolved
T'enjoy him, or destroy him.
A right course
Yo•r wit hath found out mistress, my advise
Is this, that once more you solicit him
By fair entreaty and persuasive means
To win him that way, but if he stand out
And stubbornly refuse to grant your suit,
Let him be ti'd unto cold fare hard lodging,
And give him up unto your Eunuchs hands
To be scourged and tormented, for young men
Reg•rd not when they are entreated fair,
But when enforced, then they stoop and yield.
Tic well advised, but how can I endure
To see that body bleed?
Madame you are
Too pitiful, if that an eye-sore be
To see him scourged, you may refrain• the sight,
I know twill mollify his haughty stomach
To your desire.
First try all means, before
You put this last devise in execution;
But Cibile what cause or colour have we
To hold them prisoners, or detain them here
Against their wills?
We will give it out, they came
As spies from King Hyd•sp•s army hither,
To view the strength of Memphis.
Excellent.
How shall we handle fair Cariclea
His beauteous sister?
Sister, I believe
She is his mistress rather, for such dalliance
As I have seen between them argues love
Of a more fervent nature; I have come,
And found them kissing with such ardency,
As if they fine would have their souls to meet,
And at their mouths salute.
O strange discovery!
If this be true, hence may proceed the cause
Of my repulse and his unkind denial;
Sift out this business further, and observe
Their looks, their gestures, give an ear unto
Their privatest discourse, for this concerns
My business mainly; if Cariclea prove
A bar to my desires, we must remove her.
Go presently and know the young mans mind,
If he will yield yet, but if he refuse,
Let Euphrates the Eunuch punish him
With irons to pull down his lofty heart.
So far I'm gone, pursuing my desire,
Hell shall not make me now back to retire. 
Although I doe not doubt most learned Judges,
That your grave judgements would acquit my son
Without more proofs then by the sequel of
This business doth appear, yet to the end
To make his innocence the more perspicuous
Which hath so long strived to break through this cloud
Of falsehood and deceit, I here have brought you
Thisbes confession, and her hand subscribed
For confirmation of it, please you see
What it contains. 
When did she write this?
Presently upon
Her poisonous draught, her conscience prompting her
Unto so good an action.
Was it voluntarily done without constraint?
Yes, for what force hath power to work upon
The settled resolution of a person
Whom death is ready for to seize upon?
I• came free from her, the confession was
Her own invention, and the hand her own.
But will you swear to t•is?
I will, and safely.
By all the gods tic true, else let me be
Struck with their thunder for my perjury.
It is enough, we doe acquit your son,
Long may he live the comfort of your age;
So now dismiss the people, it is done.
Thus innocence shines clearer then the sun. 
Now will he bend or break, yield or endure
More punishment? how doe his fetters please him?
How doth he bear his stripes?
With patience
And manly fortitude beyond belief,
Takes glory in his sufferings, and becomes
More unrelenting now then heretofore.
What a strange nature hath this savage man,
Will nothing work upon it? cannot love
Persuade him, nor the force of punishment
Compel him to humanity? some Tigress
Or she Wolf in the forest was his nurse.
Is there no hope he will relent in time?
Our labour's lost in the attempting it,
He hath Cariclea still before his eyes,
Lodges her in his heart, his mouth expressed it;
I heard him to exclaim thus, dear Cariclea,
My love, my life, my heart, thy only name
Makes me despise my torments, and in thee
I'm comforted what ever fall to me;
Whereby I'm confident she is his wife,
Or secret mistress, wherefore if you please,
Lets (as the proverb saith) cast our last anckor,
And seek some means to rid her of her life,
For when he knows she's dead, tic very likely
He'll change his mind, when hope of love is gone.
Thy counsel pleases me, and i'll command
This stop to be removed presently.
How, will you doe it without course of Law
Or orde•lie proceeding, who will doe
In this point your commandment? for although
All things are subject to you, yet the laws
Are free, and will not let you kill without
The judgment of the Persian magistrates;
Besides we should be careful how we did
Accuse the maid, least we should not be able
To pro•e what we doe lay unto her charge.
How then shall we contrive it?
D•intily,
By a more sure and far more safe a way,
By a strong subtle cup of deadly poison,
The plot is laid already, and the potion
P•epar'd, I stay but only for the patient
T'administer it.
Is any gone to call her?
Yes, Aura madame.
Well i'll leave you then,
Strong physick's best for stubborn natured men. 
Why doe you weep, sweet heart? twill mar your be•uty,
Your brother shall not long be kept in prison;
Be not so foolish to consume and pine
Away for sorrow, know Theagines
This night shall be released, and come unto thee,
Therefore be merry; it was his foolish fault
And disobedience to my mistress service
Made him to be committed; nicety
Is nought in young folks, but all is forgotten,
(Partly at my request) and liberty
Granted unto him, this was the occasion
I sent for you, that you might be partaker
Of this glad news, therefore rouse up your self,
And now at length eat something; Aura lay
The table, I have made some meat, I hope
Will comfort your weak stomach, sure you are
Too blame to fast so long.
But is this true
That you have told me? you so often have
Deceived me with untruths as I scarce dare
To credit any thing you say unto me.
By all the gods tic true, which if it be not,
Let me be poisoned at this table here
And be a sad example; more this day
Your business all shall be dispatched, so that
You shall not need to take more care hereafter,
If by refraining from your meat you doe not
Destroy your health and die, pray eat a little.
On confidence that this is true I will.
Aura give me some wine, Cariclea health
Remember good Theagines.
I will not have thy help, false wretch, I will not you have poisoned me, bear witness all here present
That see me die, I lay my death on none
But her and this queen Aura, so inform
Arsace that she may revenge my death. 
See here the justice of the heavens displayed
To mortal view in this strange accident;
This cup, this poisonous cup was meant to me
By wicked Cibile, but yet it fell
By some mistake to her own lot to drink it.
What doe you mean to bind me a weak maid,
I'll go without constraint where you will lead me
If it be before Arsace, though I die
I care not so Theagenes be by. 
Thus far have we marched by the banks of Nile,
And conquered Philae, and the Smaragd mines,
Thus far hath fortune favoured our attempts,
And sterne Bellona set our conquering feet
Deep in the bosom of the Egyptian Land;
Are we not now revenged Sysimethres
For thy uncivil barbarous entertainment,
When we employed thee our Ambassador
To Oroondates Deputy of Egypt?
How think you, doe they not repent the wrongs
And disrespect they gave thee, contrary
Unto the laws of Nations? doe they not
Wish that they had surrendered to our Crown
Those lands we justly challenged for our own?
I think they doe, and curse their arrogance
That hath brought home the wars unto their doors;
It cannot choose but vex their very souls
To see so fruitful and so fair a soil,
Their native Country, over-runne and spoiled
By the incursions of a hostile army.
Tic fit they suffer for their usurpation;
But where lurks Oroondates since his flight
In our last battle, no news yet of him?
Fame gives it out, he is within this town
Of Syene with the remnant of his army.
Will not the Town yet come to composition?
Will it hold out yet longer notwithstanding
Our water-workes to drown them?
Royal sir,
As soon as we had cut the banks of Nile
And let the river in upon the town,
Th'inhabitants began to see and feel
Their misery, for suddenly the water
Encompassed fair Syene round about
That it became an Island, and by sinking
Into the earth below the walls foundation,
The weight above began to shake as if
It would have fallen down in every place;
Then suddenly arose a piteous cry
Amongst the people of the town, imploring
The gods assistance, and the Deputy
It seems by this extremity constrained
First caused letters tied to a stone
As messengers to be shot to our camp
Out of a sling, and archers from their bows
Sent their swift winged arrows to speak for them,
But both fell short and perished in the water;
At last when we by signs perceived their minds,
As holding up their hands in token of
Submission, and sometimes behind their backs,
In token they were ready to receive
Bands so they might find mercy, we sent out
Some boots to talk with them, who brought us word
They would surrender to your royal hands
The town of Syene, if you would be pleased
To grant some poor conditions.
What a•e they?
First Oroondates makes request that he
And all his soldiers without interruption
May march forth as best suits their profession,
With all their martial habiliments
And arms about them, next to be convoyed to
Elyphantina with your royal guard;
Else he would rather die then live to be
Condemned as a traitor to his king,
For yielding up the City and betraying
The army, and besides be put to death
With rackes and tortures.
What a fool is he
To make his own conditions, or to argue
Of such a matter? doth he not conceive
He is not in his own power, but in ours,
To live or die, why what a madness is it
For conquered men to argue of conditions?
But tic not noble to destroy a number
For one mans folly, go Sysimethres,
Take here our seal and sign their articles,
F•r pity works upon a noble spirit. 
If I could entertain ambitious sparks
Within my royal breast, or never enter
Into examination with my self
Of right or wrong, (as many politicians
And proud usurpers doe not) what should let me
From adding this large kingdom to my own,
Stretching my Empire to the mouth of Nile;
But justice sets down limits to my thoughts,
Bounds my ambition in, so that I dare not
Advance one foot beyond it, sacred goddess,
Divine Astrea, though all kings rebel
And pay no reverence to thy deity,
Hydaspes shall adore thee, and his might
shall never be more potent then his right. 
Is this fair maid the prisoner?
Fair without, but foul within.
Tic pity vice should bear
A semblance of fair virtue, or be masked
Under so sweet a veil,
Sure by her looks
I should not judge her guilty.
That's a rule
Deceives us, for the choicest fruits of all
Ofttimes have rotten cores, and underneath
The fairest Hours lurk most the foulest snakes.
That cannot hold,
Bring forth the prisoners;
You are accused for poisoning Cibile,
How doe you answer this?
Who's my accuser?
My self, and these my servants, who were present
When the old woman died, and heard her name
Thee, a•d that other guilty of her death;
Can thou deny the fact?
Isle answer thee
Proud dame, if my Theagines live yet,
I say, I am not guilty of this murder,
But if by thy most damnable attempts
His purer soul hath left the earthly prison
Of his fair body, I declare my self
Guilty of this and whatsoever else
Thy malice can invent, I was the woman
That poisoned then thy nurse, who trained thee up
To all those goodly virtues of thy mind;
I doe desire to suffer, kill me straight
That I may meet my lover, who so stoutly
Resisted thy foul lust, and lewd enticements,
Choosing to die rather then condescend.
Base queen, how durst thou take unto thy self
Such liberty of speech? judicious sirs.
And magistrates of Persia, understand
That this she saith is false touching my honour;
I take the gods to witness that when first
This woman and her friend came to the Palace,
I entertained them as became the state
Of greater persons, and so long continued
My favours to them till by open proof
I found they came as spies to Memphis sent
From King Hydaspes army, then indeed
I did begin to draw back my affection,
Many more things inciting me to doe it
Which I forbear to speak of, but in brief
Although I loved this maid so as to make her
My bosom-friend, and my most dear companion,
She hath repaid me as you see, and poisoned
My trusty woman, is it not to be doubted
Her purpose stretched yet further, even to me?
I doe confess yet once again, I poisoned
Thy nurse, and would have done so much to thee
Had I not been prevented.
O Cariclea,
Unhappy maid, why dost thou wrongfully
Accuse thy self, and draw on death upon thee?
Hear me right grave and most impartial Judges,
There is no fault in her, I only, I
Gave Cibile the poison by mistake,
Which was prepared for this virtuous maid
By that old beldam, this is true, or else
Ye gods hurl down your thunder on my head.
But how came this mistake? make it more plain.
Old Cibile my mistress did prepare
This cup for fair Cariclea, I was forced
To have a hand in it too; when I should give
The poisoned cup unto Cariclea,
And Cibile the other, I know not
Whither being troubled with so strange a deed
Or hastily called on by Cibil•,
I changed the cups, and poisoned the old woman.
This is a forged devise, believe it not,
This woman is a traitor, and conspires
With them in all their plots, as privy to them.
If she that calls herself Cariclea.
Be guiltless of this business, what should make her
To cast herself into the jaws of death
By her so free confession of the fact?
Sir I believe she's weary of her life,
And being in desperation ever to see
Much less t'enjoy her husband, without whom
Life seems a burden hastens on her death.
Madame you must produce some witnesses,
Or we shall clear the prisoners.
Here are five
Will be deposed they heard Cibile charge
These two here with her death.
What say you friends.
Dare you swear this?
We dare and will, by Ices,
And all the gods tic so.
Then we must pass
Sentence according to the law, which most
Depends on witnesses, your doom is death,
Carry these two forthwith unto the fire,
O sun, and earth, and all you blessed creatures
That are above or underneath this round
Terrestrial ball, you that doe take revenge
On such as work impiety, bear witness
I die an innocent, and willingly
Submit my self to death, for to avoid
The intolerable griefs that burden me;
Vouchsafe to take me gently to your hands,
And speedily inflict your punishments
Upon this whore Arsace, who hath plotted
This mischief to no other end and purpose
But to take from me my Theagines.
Cariclea raped, O gods how can it be;
Where is your justice then? where our reward
For serving at your altars, when you suffer
Your sacred temples to be robed and spoiled
Of its chief jewel, and my life, Cariclea?
O sacrilege unheard of! can you sleep
And wink at this? or is your anger to me
Implacable, and therefore to torment
My heart the more, you seem not to regard it?
Was it not enough, O cruel powers, to kill
My daughter at her Nuptial, and my wife
For grief thereof, but to augment my sorrow
Beyond the bounds of reason, give consent
Unto Caricleas rape, who was my joy,
My only comfort, heart, yea life and all?
Well I will once more put on pilgrims weeds.
Ha, what was that? a dreadful sound me thought
More pilgrimages? stay but listen yet.
And go in quest of thee throughout the world,
First to Thessalia, where that thief was borne
That stole thee hence, then unto Memphis City
Where Calasiris that false priest remains.
I am confirmed in horror, tic too true
He'll travel once again, but soft attend.
And if I find thee not, isle travel further,
Even to the utmost bounds of Aethiopia,
Where I suppose thy parents live and reign.
To Aethiopia, what strange land is that
(I marvel) oh, oh now I doe remember
Sysimethres was borne there as he said; 
We shall be black a devils if we go there.
What Nebulo, my trusty friend and servant,
Prepare thy self to accompany thy master.
Where sir, unto the temple of Apollo?
Beyond the seas I mean.
Beyond the seas;
He's mad I think, or hath some worse disease. 
I hear you sir, it seems your grown a Poet
You rime so well.
I care not who doth know it.
Raptures still flow upon thee more and more,
But this bad news of yours doth vex me sore,
That you will cross the seas, the bare conceit,
Will keep me seven days without taste of meat.
Why that is profitable, saves thy purse.
But hurts my body sir, and that is worse.
Why you are a second Ovid, all he says
Doth flow in verse.
Then I shall wear the Baize.
But Nebulo no more of this, you are content to accom∣pany me this journey, are you not?
Good sir, do not •rge me to it; you know how willing I should be to wait upon ye, did not one thing cross it.
What's that thy wife?
You have hit the mark, tic dangerous (I can tell ye) for me to go abroad and leave her at home▪ I had woeful experience on it after our last peregrination.
What did she make thee a cuckold in thy absence?
I know not, but she dubbed me knight of the forked order.
Why that honour is for term of thy Life man; thy staying at home cannot take it away, nor thy going abroad add unto it.
No, doe they not rise by degrees? I suppose yes, as in this manner, from Knight to Lord, from Lord to Earl, from Earl to Duke of the forked order, and so forward: but my ambition is not to climb so high, therefore i'll stay at home and prevent that promotion.
fie, prevent thy honour?
My Nebulona will heap enough such honours on my head, If I follow your counsel, but I tell you again I am not ambitious so to be promoted, yet notwithstanding, so well I love you, that rather then you shall go alone, i'll once more adventure my fortune.
Spoken like a right honest man, come let's away then withal expedition.
Delphos and Greece farewell, your priests hard fate
Denies him still t'enjoy a settled state. 
And hast thou escaped the fire my dearest love?
Miraculous deliverance! let me hear
The manner on it related.
Thus it was,
After we were condemned to be burnt
By foul Arsaces slanderous report
For poisoning Cibile, a blazing fire
Was made, and we two cast into the same,
And whereas it was thought by every one
The fierceness of the flame would soon consume us,
It proved clean contrary, for we stood in
The midst of it untouched, for every side
It gave us way, and never singed our clothes,
Although Arsace with a threatening voice
Commanded the tormentors to lay on
More wood and reed, yet all prevailed not,
For no hurt would approach us, which the whore
Arsace seeing, presently declared
Before the people with an open voice
That we were witches; though good Calasiris
Did what he could to free us from her hands,
We by her guard were apprehended, and
Brought here again to thee my dear, for which
I'm glad that we may suffer both together.
I have not heard a stranger miracle,
This doth proceed from favour of the god•,
And their unbounded justice.
It should seem so,
But still to be tossed on the angry seas
Of rigid fortune and ne'er see an end
Of our sad miseries, should rather argue
Their hate and fierce displeasure, if th••e be not
Some secret and more hidden mystery.
We mortals understand not, which r•store• u•,
After our sufferings when all hope is fled,
Unto a happier state and peaceful being.
Oh sweet, let not the sense of misery,
Make you offend the gods thus, but be patient.
It was a rashly spoken, and I doe repent it,
My dear Theagines; now I remember
A dream I had last night, but had forgotten
Till now to tell it you, thy• was the verse.
By virtue of Pantarbe let fear of fire removed be:
An easy thing to Persaetis, though else right strange to see.
The gods are good to us, for I likewise
Am made a Poet by remembering now
An answer which last night some spirit gave m•
Who seemed to say this,
To morrow shalt thou with the maid escape Arsaces hand,
And soon be brought with her into the Ethiopian land.
That Oracle hath but a sad construe•tion,
Which thus I dare interpret, Aethiopia
Is meant that land that is beneath the ground,
That with the maid is meant with Proserpine,
And the escaping of Arsaces band
Doth signify the soul and bodies parting.
Still how you err! calamity hath made you
Forget your self, and always doubt the worst,
Turning all things to a sinister sense,
The Oracle is plain, you are the maid
The gods do point at, whom I shall convey
Out of Arsaces power into your Land
Of Aethiopia, but how this shall be
Effected, unto us doth not appear,
Yet it is credible the gods can doe it;
We must leave th•t unto their secret workings.
Now what your verse should mean I cannot guess,
Which doth contain so many contrarieties,
For Pantarbe, in its true signification,
Is taken for all fearful, yet it would not
Have you to fear the fire.
I doe believe
This ring preserved us both from force of fire,
Wherein is set a precious stone called Pantarbe,
And round about some holy letters written;
My Fascia, if you doe remember well,
Did mention such a one among my jewels;
And to be brief, I think that stone contains
Some heavenly virtue which withstands fire.
But then, how was it that Aura perished not?
She had no Pantarbe to defend her.
No
But I still held her always in my hand
Whereon my ring was.
This is probable;
But now what other Pantarbe have we left
To shun the next days danger, for Arsace
Will not end here, but practise still new mischief.
Despair not, but rely upon the promise
The gods made you last night.
Distressed Aura,
What wilt thou doe?
Run on, in the same fortune
That you doe, be it life or be it death.
Be not afraid, I come not to destroy you
As you suppose, but to deliver you
From hence; my Lord and General Oroondates
Hath sent me hither from the camp, to bring you
Unto him, for the fame of your rare beauty
And virtue in resisting his wives lewdness,
Hath wrought so much upon his disposition
As he desires your presence, come with me,
Delay breeds danger, I have fifty horse
Shall safe convoy us to the camp, the way
Is clear.
Lead on then, we are bound to obey. 
Ye sterne Eumenides, and direful powers
Of the infernal kingdoms, muster all
Your troops together by a general summon,
For I doe cite you to the court of hell,
My grievances beget this invocation;
Have I so long served you, and bent my thoughts
To your low centre? have my actions been
As lewd as you would wish them, and as black
As you your selves, and could you suffer me
To fail in this achievement of my lust?
So much your instigation? is this justice?
Justice that is a word not known in hell;
Is this injustice? no, then are you rebels
To your own laws, I doe insist on this:
What other doctrine preach your ministers
But foul inj•stice, rapes, impieties,
Adulteries, murders, slanders, ignominies,
False accusations and the like, all which
My life hath practised? yet ye punish me
With justice ne'er till now heard in your courts:
You thought it just Cariclea should escape
The poisoned cup, and afterword the fire,
You thought it just Theagines and she
Should scope my hands, and Oroondates know
All my proceedings, cursed fates of mine!
Wretched Arsace, wilt thou live and feel
Thy punishment augmented by thy shame?
Shall the laws triumph o'er Arsaces will?
Or Oroondates say he was revenged
Upon the high and royal blood of Persia
For wrong I did him? no, since I have failed
In my desire, these fa•es I will withstand,
And die by none but by this Persi•n hand.
Persina welcome to our camp, how durst
Our fairest Queen adventure forth to see
The angry face of Mars? this is no object
For Ladies eyes, dame Ʋenus sport's more proper.
Where you are sir, there is my object fixed,
Whether at home or here, ell's one to me,
Besides, where Mars is, there will Venus be.
This was a favour we expected not;
I must embrace thee; O Sysimethres,
What is there wanting in the curious model
Of this rare Architecture, built by nature,
That mortal or immortal eye can see
To add more beauty to it then it hath?
Nothing, I know you'll grant it, then what pity
Think you it is, so beautiful a frame
And building should contain within it's womb
No living creature, no inhabitant
That might support it's ruins, but stand rather
For prospect then for benefit?
this points
At my unfruitful womb. 
I grant it sir,
But if the gods have ordered that this house
So stately built by them, this temple rather
Shall be reserved for their immortal uses,
And have forbid that any mortal seed
Shall dwell therein: it argues in you
Sin and impiety so to rapine
At their decrees and secret operations. 
Sir the fore-riders of your royal army
Have tan two prisoners the most beautifull'st
That ere were seen, a young man and a maid,
They waite without attending what's your pleasure.
Let them be brought forthwith into our presence,
They may be found a fitting sacrifice
And an oblation to be offered
Unto our gods for this our victory,
Being the first fruits of the wars.
Ye gods 
Be merciful unto me!
What doth ail
Your royal majesty, that you remain
In such a studious meditation?
I had a dream last night Sysimethres,
That did present unto my fantasy
A beauteous virgin, such as is this maid
Telling me that she was my natural daughter:
But whence are you, and of what country borne?
Great King, I am her brother, she my sister,
Both borne in Greece.
O noble Greece, that still
Producest what is good, and at this time
Hast given us such fair offerings to present
Unto our gods; but O thou beauteous maid,
Why dost thou hold thy peace, and answer not
Unto my question?
At the sacred altars
Of the immortal gods (to whom we are
Reserved for sacrifices) you shall know
Me and my parents.
O sir, what a maid
Have you appointed to be sacrificed?
Ne'er have mine eyes beheld a fairer creature;
With what a stout and an undaunted courage
Bears she her fortune? I am moved with pity
At her so flowering age, O had my daughter
I bare unto you lived, she would have been
Almost as old as she, I doe beseech you
Spare her, and let her serve me at my table,
For I am prompted strangely by my Genius
Unto commiseration.
So am I,
Beyond imagination, but you know
The Law requires the first fruits of the war
Should be the gods oblation, to the Sun
Therefore we'll offer him, she to the Moon,
The gods must be obeyed, the laws fulfil'd.
Wise, grave, and learned sir, be pleased to stay
A little longer, for I have a cause
Of consequence to plead before the King
And Queen Persina, which concerns them too
As well as me, this matter doth require
A speedy judgment, and I hear that you
Give sentence on such noble personager;
Therefore judge you this plea of life and death,
And know it is not just to off•r me
Unto the gods.
Vouchsafe to hear, most gracious Sovereign,
This strange appeal, and what this maid requires.
What judgement may this be? or what have I
To doe with her? by what means should I come
Into her danger?
Please you to attend,
She will declare it.
But take heed that this
You doe, be no true judgment, but plain wrong,
If I that am a King must stand to plead
My cause with any prisoner whatsoever.
Justice and equity ner'e looks into
The person, but the cause, and he speeds best
That brings best reasons.
But the Law permits
You only to determine controversies
Between the King and subjects, not with strangers.
Wise and discreet men doe not measure things
By the appearance, but by equity.
Well let her speak, since good Sysimethres
Will have it so, but it is manifest,
She will say nothing to the purpose, but
Some forged devise to shun the stroke of death.
O Sun, thou founder of my ancestros
High pedigree, and all ye other gods.
Ye noble men that here are met together
Assist me in this place, and be a witness•
That what I say is true, and by firm proofs
It shall appear: doe you command, O King,
Strangers or your own subjects to be offered?
Strangers.
Then it is fit and necessary,
You seek out such, I am no stranger borne,
But of this country, and your subject too.
Thou least.
You seem to wonder at small things,
But there are greater undiscovered yet,
I am not only of this Country borne,
But of the royal blood.
This woman's mad,
Away I'll hear no more such lunacy.
My royal father, I beseech you know
Your only daughter and despise her not.
Sysimethres and grave Gymnosophists,
How long shall she abuse my patience?
This maid's distracted, and the fear of death
Makes her speak any thing how false soever,
How bold and impudent; I know I had
Sometimes a daughter, but she died as soon
As she was borne, this is a false impostor,
Wherefore away with her, and let's delay
The sacrifice no longer.
none shall dare
To take me hence, unless the judges please
So to command, for you are not to judge
In your own cause although a King, but must
Be subject to the law as well as others
Which priviledgeth you perchance to kill
Strangers, but neither this law, nor the law
Of nature doth allow you to destroy
Your natural children, for the gods to day
Shall by a strange discovery make you know
I am your daughter, though you now disclaim me.
All controversies in the law depend
One these two points especially, that is
Firm proof by writings, and sure confirmation
By witnesses, both which I can produce
To prove I am your child, my witness shall not
Be common neither, but the judge himself,
And heir's a writing shall declare both mine
And your estate.
What means this Persina, that thy blood
Thus comes and goes, and that thy countenance
Wears such an alteration? is there ought
Contained in this writing troubles thee?
O King, my Lord and husband, I have nothing
To say unto it; but take heed, and read it
Your self, the same shall teach you well and truly.
Persina doe you own this character
As your own hand, and know the birth to be
Legitimate and true?
By Sun and Moon I swear it.
Although you told me that my daughter died.
I yet believe she was exposed forth
As here is mentioned but who was the man
That took her up and carried her to Egypt,
How shall I know that he was taken with her,
Or this is she, or whether the exposed
Be dead or no, besides whether some man
When he hap'd to find this might his good luck
Abuse, and make her play this famed part,
Mocking the great desire we have of issue
By the suborning of some changeling and
Colouring the truth with this devised Fascia.
All these doubts must be cleared ere I believe.
I can resolve you in the first, for I
Was he that took her up, and carried her
With me to Egypt, when you sent me thither
Ambassador (you know we may not lye
Who are Gymnosophists) I know this Fascia,
Written with Aethiopias royal letters.
Therefore you need not doubt that it is forged.
Besides tic signed with Persinas hand;
But there are other tokens that I gave
To him that did receive you at my hands
Can you produce them?
Yes, lo here they are 
What are they? doe you know them?
Yes with wonder.
These jewels were my mothers, but this ringe
Was yours, I think you know the Pantarbe well.
I doe and all the rest, but whether you
Came by them as my daughter, that I know not,
You might have got them by some other means,
For to omit all other needles questions,
Your colour's strange and the like never seen
In Aethiopia.
She was also white
That I brought up, and with this virgins age
Doth correspond the term of years when she
Was forth exposed being seventeen years,
So old seems this fair maid.
Sysimethres
In my opinion you have showed your self
An advocate in this cause, not a judge,
Beware least while you strive to clear this doubt,
I may suspect Persina hath been false,
For how first possible that such a thing
Sold be in nature, we two being black
To have an issue white? this is against
All humane sense, and reason natural.
The Fascia tells you how this came to pass,
in the act of generation
Contemplatively eyeing the fair picture
Of beautiful Andromeda, and firing
A strong imagination thereupon,
Conceived in her womb the very figure
Of Perseus Mistress when she was bound fast
Unto the rock, and he redeemed her thence,
For proof let that same picture be presented,
And then compare them, you shall find the substance
And shadow nothing different but in life.
Sir there's a strange priest newly come from Greece
Desires he may be heard touching this matter,
Who can inform you of the truth of things.
admit him straight. 
Grave Sir can you declare
Ought of this matter, doe you know this maid
And that young man?
I know them both great King;
That maid which shall be found to be your daughte•
I nourished from a child; one of this country
Gave her to me in Egypt, and with her
Rich costly jewels, and a Fascia,
Wherein was written her high pedigree;
With her I went to Greece my native country,
And being priest unto Apollo there,
When I was busy in the rites and customs
Belonging to my office, This Thessalian,
Who vaunts himself borne of Achilles line,
Stole her from Delphos, and I understand
Passed many dangers with her; I forgive him
And crave you would be pleased to doe so too;
For since the gods by diverse signs and tokens
Have unto us reveild their sacred wills,
And made it plain by strange discoveries,
Strive not to cross their workings.
O my Father,
As dear unto me as those that begat me,
Take what revenge you please, lo here I stand
T'abide your sentence.
O how largely am I 
Rewarded for my travel! tic enough.
I have beheld thy face yet once again.
What Caricles, doe you not know your friend?
Have you forgot the Ethiopian Legate?
No, no, I have not good Sysimethres,
But doe congratulate our happy meeting.
We have heard and seen enough, I'm yet unmoved;
Bring in the picture of Andromeda.
One point is wanting yet, strip up your sleeve
Fair maid, there was a black spot above your elbow.
It is no shame to show a naked arm
Before your parents for to prove your birth.
You strive to wash me white an Ethiopian
In hen•ering this sacrifice, you shall
Doe one as well as tother, for although
I now believe she is my natural daughter
Sprung from my loins (as I have seen it proved
By many arguments) yet I so much
Fear justice and the gods, and owe such love
Unto my country, as i'll lay aside
All natural respects, and all regard
To the succession of my blood, and offer
My daughter to the gods for your behoof,
(As Agamemnon did his Iphigene)
Regarding more the public benefit
Then my own private profit and respect.
Save the blood-royall, save her whom the gods
Will have preserved, appease the Sun and Moon
With a more lawful sacrifice.
Well since
You'll have it s•, though loath I am content;
And now I turn to thee my daughter dear
With armefuls of my love; but what is he
That was tan with thee, whom you called your brother?
I trow he shall not too be proved my son.
In that sir pardon me, I did abuse you,
He's not my brother, but necessity
Compelled me to dissemble, what he is
Himself can boldly tell you.
Whatsoever
He be, he's destined to be sacrificed,
Some women too must bear him company.
This maid that waits on you shall serve the turn.
If he be sacrificed, Isle be that woman,
Death must not part us two.
The gods forbid,
Why say you so?
Because tic fore-decreed
I must both live and die with that young man.
I praise your curtsy and gentle nature
Unto this Grecian stranger, who hath been
Companion of your journey, but we cannot
Break so the custom of our Country, as
To save his life.
Then I must perish with him,
For know, O king, (perchance I may not dare
To call you father) it is cruelty
To spare my body, and destroy my heart,
He is my heart, my love, my life, and all,
My husband by the destinies appointed,
And it is sin t'oppose the gods decrees.
What will you counsel me to doe herein,
Sysimethres and thou most reverend Priest,
I will be guided by your wisdoms wholly
In this affair,
Through the exercise of joy
The wisest men, oft-times we see are blinded.
For at the first, great King you might perceive
The gods liked not this sacrifice which was
Ordained, who have every way declared
Cariclea your daughter, and brought hither
Out of the midst of Greece this reverend man,
Who brought her up, to fortify your faith.
Moreover it is plain by many signs
And secret revelations that the gods
Have fore-decreed this couple man and wife,
And to that end have freed them from so many
And imminent dangers, therefore let us suffer
These divine miracles to sink into
Our understandings, and from this time forward
Doe sacrifices more acceptable
Unto the gods, who are not pleased with
Humane oblations, but the blood of beasts.
Since things are thus appointed by the will
And pleasure of the gods, since this fair couple
Have been preserved by fate from many dangers
By Land and Sea, and as should seem reserved
For Hymens instigation, isle no longer
Resist the will of heaven, heavens send you joy, 
And a most plenteous off-spring to succeed you,
This is our firm decree, which we'll confirm
By sacrifice, and worshipping the gods.
O Sun and Moon, whose sacred deities
We most adore, since it is fallen out thus
By your decrees, that young Theagines
And fair Cariclea are made man and wife,
Accept their offerings, and vouchsafe to take them
Into the order of your holy Priesthood.
Theagines, I doe resign unto thee
My office, be thou Priest unto the Sun,
Wear this white Meter. 
And Cariclea thou
Wear this of mine, which consecrates thee
Priest of the Moon, adore her Deity.
Now is the god Apollos Oracle
Of Delphos verified, which said of them
That leaving Greece, and sailing surging streams
They should arrive at Countries scorched with Phoebus burning beams,
Where they as recompenses due that virtues rare doe gain,
In time to come ere it be long white Meters should obtain.

O Thou who govern'st what thou did create
With equal sway, great Arbiter of Fate,
The Worlds Almighty Father; I, thy Son,
Though born in Time, before his Course begun;
Thus far my Deeds have answered thy Commands:
If more remain, my Zeal prepared stands
To execute thy Charge: all that I fear,
All that I hate, I shall with patience bear;
No misery refuse, no toil, nor shame:
I know for this into the world I came.
And yet how long shall these extremes endure!
What Day or Night have known my life secure!
My burden, by enduring, heavier grows;
And present ills a way to worse disclose.
My Kingdom, Heaven, I left, to visit Earth;
And suffered banishment before my Birth.
An unknown Infant, in a stable born,
Lodged in a manger: little, poor, forlorn,
And miserable: though so vile a Thing,
Yet worthy of the envy of a King.
Two years scarce yet complete, too old was thought
By Harrods fears: while I alone was sought,
The bloody Sword Ephratian Dames deprives
Of their dear Babes; through wounds they exhaled their lives.
Secured by flying to a foreign Clime,
The Tyrant through his Error lost his Crime.
A Thousand Miracles have made me known
Through all the World, and my extraction shown.
Envy against me raves: yet Virtue hath
More storms of Mischief raised, then Harrods wrath.
It is decreed by thy unchanging Will,
I should be acknowledged, and rejected still?
Th'inspired Magi from the Orient came,
Preferred my Star before their Mithra's flame,
And at my infant feet devoutly fell:
But Abrahams Seed, the House of Israel,
To thee sequestered from Eternity,
Degenerate and ingrate! their God deny.
Behold the contumacious Pharisies,
Armed with dissembled Zeal, against me rise:
The bloody Priests to their stern Party draw
The Doctors of their unobserved law:
And impious Sadduces, to perpetrate
My intended Overthrow incense the State.
What rests to quicken Faith? Even at my Nod
Nature submits, acknowledging her God.
The Galilean Youth drink the pure blood
Of generous Grapes, drawn from the Neighbor flood:
I others famine cured, subdued my own;
Life-strengthning food for forty days unknown.
Twixt the Dispensers hands th'admired Bread
Increased, great multitudes of People fed,
Yet more then all remained. The Winds assuage
Their storms; &amp; threatening Billows calm their rage.
The hardened Waves unsinking feet endure:
And pale Diseases, which despise their cure,
My Voice subdues. Long Darkness chased away,
To me the Blind by Birth now owes his Day.
He hears who never yet was heard; now speaks,
And in my Praises first his silence breaks.
Those damned Spirits of infernal Night,
Rebels to God, and to the Sons of Light
Inveterate foes; my Voice but heard, forsake
The long possessed, and struck with terror quake.
Nor was it enough for Christ, such wonders done,
To profit those alone who see the Sun:
To vanquish Death my powerful hand invades
His silent Regions and inferior Shades.
The Stars, the Earth, the Seas, my triumphs know:
What rests to conquer but the Deeps below?
Through opening Sepulchers, Nights gloomy Caves,
The violated privilege of Graves,
I sent my dread Commands: A heat new born
Reanimates the Dead, from funerals torn;
And Deaths-numb Cold expulst, enforced a way
For Souls departed to review the Day.
The Ashes from their ransacked Tombs receive
A second life, and by my bounty breathe.
But Death, his late free Empire thus restrained,
Not used to restore his Spoils, complained
That I should thus unweave the web of Fate,
Decrease his Subjects, and subvert his State:
I, for so many ransomed from Death,
Must to his anger sacrifice my breath.
And now that horrid Hour is almost come,
When sinful Mortals shall their Maker doom:
When I, the worlds great Lord, who life on all
Mankind bestowed, must by their fury fall.
That Tragic Time to my last Period hastes;
And Night, who now on all her Shadows casts,
While with the motion of the Heavens she flies,
This short delay of my sad life envies.
Fate, be less sterne in thy intended Course;
Nor drag him who will follow without force!
After so many miseries endured;
Cold, Heat, Thirst, Famine, eyes to tears inured;
The end, yet worst of ills, draws near: their breath,
For whom I suffer, must procure my death.
The Innocent, made guilty by the foul
Defects of others, must his weary Soul
Sigh into air; and though of heavenly birth,
With his chaste blood distain th'ungratefull Earth.
They traffic for my Soul: my death, long sought,
Is by the mitred Merchants faction bought;
And Treason finds reward. My travels draw
Near their last end. These practices I saw;
See what this Nights confederate Shadows hide:
My Mind before my Body crucified.
Horror shakes all my Powers: my entrails beat,
And all my Body flows with purple sweat.
O whither is my ancient Courage fled,
And God-like Strength! by Anguish captive led.
O Death, how far more cruel in thy kind!
Th'anxiety and torment of the Mind!
Then must I be of all at once bereft?
Or is there any hope of safety left?
O might I to my heavenly Father pray,
So supple to my tears, to take away
Part of these ills! But his eternal Doom
Forbids, and ordered Course of things to come.
His purpose, fixed when yet the world was young,
And Oracles, so oft by Prophets sung,
Now rushing on their destinated end,
No Orisons, nor Sacrifice can bend.
Why stay I with triumphant feet to tread
Upon the infernal Serpents poysnous Head,
And break the old Dragons jaws? The sin of our
First Parents must be cleansed with a shower
Of blood, rained from my wounds: my death appease,
And cure the venom of that dire Disease.
All you who live, rejoice; all you who die:
You sacred ashes of the just which lie
In peaceful Vrnes, rejoice in this my fall:
I for the living lived, but die for all.
My sufferings are not lost. To Earth I owe
These promised ills: bonds, whips, and thorns to grow
About out bleeding brows; the Cross the scorn
Of a proud People, to destruction born.
O let my Fathers wrath through singed air
On me in thunder dart, so mine it spare!
Lest the World should, I perish???; and must bear
The punishments of all that ever were.
You who inhabit, where the Sun displays
His early light, or near his setting Rays;
Who suffer by his perpendicular
Aspect, or frieze beneath the Northern star;
Affect this ready Sacrifice, who am
A greater offering then the Paschal Lamb.
My precious blood alone the virtue hath
To purge your sins, and quench my Fathers wrath.
Now the full Moon succeeds that Vernal light,
Which equally divides the Day and Night;
Sacred to Feasts. The next Sun shall survey
One brighter then himself, and lose his Day.
False Traitor, through thy guilt so timorous grown,
Although thou lead an army against One,
Shrouded in Night; I am not taken by
Thy guile, but know thy'fraud, and hast to die.
But you my chosen friends, who yet preserve
Your faith entire, nor from your duty swerve;
Your Festival, our washings past, rehearse
Your Makers excellence insacred Verse;
While I to those frequented Shades repair
Where the trees answer to the sighing Air.
Learn, as we walk along, unto what place
I shortly shall return; what heavenly Grace
Is to descend upon you from above;
What are the laws of Charity and Love.
While my last prayers solicit Heaven, to Sleep
Give no access: this Night my Vigil keep.
THe rapid Motion of the Spheres
Old Night from our Horizon bears;
And now declining shades give way
To the return of cheerful Day.
But Phosphorus, who leads the Stars,
And Day's illustriou's Path prepares,
Who last of all the Host retires,
Not yet with-draws those radiant Fires:
Nor have our Trumpets summoned
The Morning from her dewy Bed:
As yet her Roses are unblown,
Nor by her purple Mantle known.
All night we in the Temple keep,
Not yielding to the charms of Sleep;
That so we might with zealous prayer
Our thoughts and cleansed hearts prepare
To celebrate th'insuing Light,
When Phoebe shall her horns unite.
This annual Feast to Memory
Is sacred, nor with us must die:
Thus by that dreadful Exul taught,
When God his plagues on Egypt brought.
Those Cities these our Rites bereave
Of Citizens, and widows leave,
Where Jordan from two bubbling Heads
His oft-returning waters leads;
Till they their narrow bounds forsake,
And grow a Sea-resembling Lake.
Those Woods of Palm, producing Dates;
Of fragrant Balsamum, which hates
The touch of Steel; where once the sound
Of trumpets levelled with the ground
Vnbatter'd Walls; that Mount which shrouds
His ai??rye head in hanging Clouds,
Where Death closed our lost Prophets eyes;
Admire to see their Colonies
Ascend the hills of Solyma
In celebration of this Day.
Cephaeans, whose strong Walls with-stood
The ruins of the General Flood,
To solemnise this Day forsake
Adored Dercetis, and her Lake.
Hither the Palestines from strong
Azotus, both the Jamnes throng.
Not Lid could her Own restrain;
Nor Caparorsa's walls contain
Her Edomites; Damascus could
Not hers, though she ten Nations ruled:
Nor yet Sabaste, long the Nurse
Of impious Sons, sprung from our Surse.
Phoenicians, who did first produce
To Mortals letters, with their use;
Where Tyrus full of Luxury
With Mother Sidon, front the Sky,
Hither with hasty zeal repair:
Among the Syrians, those who dare
Feed on forbidden fish; nor more
The Deity of a Dove adore.
From Belus, whose slow waters pass
On glittering sands, which turn to glass:
From Arnons banks; those Borderars
The subject of our ancient wars:
Whose sulphurous Bitumen take
From salt Asphaltis deadly lake.
No Tempest on that Sea provailes;
No ship upon her bosom sails;
Vnmov'd with oars: what over-flies,
Struck by her breath, false down and dies:
Hates all that lives; in her Profound
None are received, but flora undrownd:
No Seas, by slimy fhores embraced,
So pestilent a vapor cast:
This blasts the corn before it bears,
And poisons the declining Ears:
Sad Autumns fruits to cinders turn,
And all the fields in ashes mourn:
Lest time should waste the memory
Of those revengeful flames, the sky
On Earth in melting sulphur showered,
Which that accursed Race devoured:
When she who did commiserate
With impious grief her Cities fate,
Grew, in the moment of her fault,
A Statue of congealed Salt.
Hither devout Esseans fly,
Who without issue multiply,
And Virtue only propagate:
All sensual loves, all lucre hate,
And equal Poverty embrace:
Thrice happy, of a noble Race,
Who slight your own particular,
Transported with a public care.
He flies a pitch above our woes,
Or crimes, who gladly undergoes
Their toil and want; nor would possess
What others miscall Happiness.
What numbers from the Suns up-rise,
From where he leaves the mourning Skies,
Of our dispersed Abrahamites,
This Vesper to their Homes invites!
Yet we, in yearly triumph, still
A Lamb for our deliverance kill.
Since Liberty our Confines fled,
Given with the first unleavened Bread,
She never would return; though bought
With wounds, and in destruction sought.
Some stray to Lybia's scorched Sands,
Where horned Hammons Temple stands:
To Nilus some, where Philips Son,
Who all the rifled Orient won,
Built his proud City: others gon
To their old Prison, Babylon:
A part to freezing Taurus fled;
And Tiber, now the Oceans Head.
Our Ruins all the world have filled:
But you, by use in sufferings skilled,
Forgetting in remoter Climes
Our vanished Glory; nor those Times,
Those happy Times, compare with these,
Your burdens may support with ease.
More justly we of Fate complain,
Who Servitude at home sustain:
We, to perpetual woes designed,
In our own Country Egypt find.
YOu Of-spring of bloud-thirsty Romulus,
Foes to sweet Peace, to our great God, and us,
And you profaner Sacrificers, who
With subtle mischief guiltless blood pursue;
Since you would not refuse to bind the hands
Of Innocence, on me impose your bands:
Seize on the guilty; he who hath refused
His Lord and Master, by himself accused.
The ills yet suffered, I deserve to bear
For looking on; what follows, for my fear.
You need no torches to subdue the Night's
Dark Shades to find me; no sterne Satellites
Drawn from the Temple, nor with Romans join
To act one Sin; nor spend your sacred Coin
In salary to such a Guide as may
With a perfidious kiss his Lord betray.
This Head I give you freely; hither hast:
No sudden hurl-windes shall your bodies cast
On trembling Earth. Behold; I with my hands
Behind me bound, implore your dire Commands;
And run to meet your stripes. Are you now prone
To melting pity? will you punish none
But with injustice? is your fury slow,
Unless to those who no offences know?
We both alike have impiously transgressed:
You in not punishing a fault confessed;
And I who have the living Lord denied.
Just Jugdes of a life so sanctified
To whom suborned Witnesses have sold
Their damned perjuries, a Wretch behold,
And hear his Crime: My Country Galile,
To follow Christ I left both Land and Sea:
Son to the Thunderer, his only Heir;
From Heaven sent by his Father to repair
And rule th'affairs of Mortals. This is He,
Whom you have bound, who must his Country free.
Rebellious Vassals, you have doomed your King.
I know the impious Race from whence you spring,
Your savage manners, cruel Ancestors,
Whom Nature, as her greatest curse, abhors.
Such, when the trembling Boy his brethrens hands,
Their truculent aspects, and servile bands
Beheld; though privy to a better fate,
Whose providence was to reward their hate:
Soon after, called to Nils seven channel'd Flood,
He famine from both Lands expel'd with food.
So your seditious Fathers mutined
At Sine's rocks against their sacred Head:
And there the food of Angels loathed, which fell
From Heaven in showers: besotted Israel
Egypt and Servitude preferred above
The Tents of Moses, and their Countries love.
What numbers, with prophetic Raptures filled,
Have you, and yet not unrevenged, killed!
Memphis, devouring Deserts, Civil wars,
Oft foreign Yokes, Assyrian Conquerors,
Great Pompeys Eagles, sacred Rites profaned,
Your Temple sacked, with slaughtered Levites stained;
Are all forgot? Yet worse attend your Hate.
O that I were the Minister of Fate!
I then would tear your guilty buildings down,
And in a crimson Sea their ruins drown.
Witness you Groves, late conscious to our cares,
Where Christ with tears poured forth his funeral prayers,
How I revenge pursued; and with their blood
Would have augmented Citrons murmuring Flood:
But he, for whom I struck, reproved the blow;
And following his own Precept, cured his foe.
For Malchus, rushing on in front of all,
Perceiving part of his, with-out him, fall,
Searched with his flaming brand: the bleeding ear
See on the earth, revenge subdued his fear;
Who loudly roaring shook his threatened bands,
And straight encountered those all-healing hands:
They to his Head that Ornament restored,
And benefits for injuries affor'd.
But O blind Mischief! I, who gave the Wound,
Am left at large; and he, who healed it, bound.
O Peter, can thou yet forbear to throw
Thy body on the weapons of the Foe!
If thou would vindicate thy Lord, begin
First with thy self, and punish thy own Sin.
Thou that dare menace armies, thou that art
Fierce, as a Median Tiger, of a heart
Invincible, nor knows what it is to dread;
With Fortune, at the first encounter, fled.
A Fugitive, a Rebel; one that hath
All crimes committed in this breach offaith.
Who towering hopes on his own strength erects,
Nor the selfe-flattering Minds deceit suspects,
But his vain Virtue trust; let him in me
The sad example of his frailty see:
From slippery heights how pronely Mortals slide;
Their heady errors punishing their pride.
What can I add to these misdeeds of mine!
Who have defiled the water, bread, and wine,
With my abhorred defection! O, could I
Those lips pollute with wilful perjury,
But newly feasted with that sacred food,
Presenting his torn flesh, and powr'd-out blood!
O Piety! for this, thou Renegate,
Did Jesus wash thy flying feet of late!
Not Jordan with two Heads, whose waters roll
From snow-top Libanus, can cleanse thy Soul:
Not thou Callirhoe; nor that ample Lake,
From whose forsaken shore my birth I take,
Coldest thou blue Nereus, in whose troubled Deep
Nils seven large Mouths their foaming currents steep???
Or that red Sea, whose waves in Rampires stood
While our Fore-Fathers past the parted Flood?
These purging streams from thy own Springs must flow.
Repentance, why are thy complaints so slow!
Raise storms of sighs; let tears in torrentsfall,
And on thy blushing cheeks deep furrows gall.
O so! run freely: beat thy stubborn breast:
Here spend thy rage; these blows become thee best.
This, wretched Cephas, for thy crimes I owe:
What can I for my injured Lord bestow!
My deeds and sufferings disproportioned are;
Nor must they in an equal sorrow share.
Should this Night ever last, to propagate
Increasing sorrows, till subdn'd by Fate,
My penitent Soul this wasted flesh forsake;
Yet can my guilt no reparation make.
Swollen eyes, now weep you? then you should have wept,
Besprinkled my devotion, and have kept
That holy Watch, when interdicted Sleep
Your drowsy lids did in his Lethe steep.
You should have dropped my brains into a Flood,
Before he at that dire Tribunal stood:
Ere thrice abjured, on me his looks he threw;
Or ere th'accusing Bird of Dawning drew.
Where shall I hide me! in what Dungeon may
My troubled Soul avoid the woeful Day!
Fly quickly to some melancholy Cave,
In whose dark entrails thou moist find a grave
To bury thee alive: there waste thy years
In cherished Sorrow, and unwitnest Tears.
TArpaean Jove; Mars, great Quirinus Sire;
You Household gods, snatched from Troys funeral Fire,
With greater Zeal adored; when shall I pay
My Vows! my Offerings on your Altars lay!
And see those Roofs which top the Clouds! the Beams
With burnished gold enchased, and blazing Gems.
Those Theaters; which ring with their applause
Who on the conquered World impose their Laws!
And thee, the triple Earths imperious Guide,
Great-Soul'd Tiberius! whether thou reside
On Tibers banks, adored by grateful Rome;
Ambitious of his residence, for whom
She gave the World; or Copra, much renowned
For soft delights, impoverish the Long-gown'd!
Far from my friends, far from my native Soil
I here in honourable Exile toil,
To curb a People whom the Gods disclaim:
Who cover under the usurped Name
Of Piety, their hate to all Man-kinde;
Condemn the world; in their own vices blind:
And with false grounded fear abjure for One,
All those Immortals which the Heavens enthrone.
Their only Law is to renounce all Laws:
Their Error, which from others hatred draws,
Fomenting their own discord, still provokes
Their Spirits to Rebellion, who their yokes
Have oft attempted to shake-off; though they
More eas'ly are subdued, then taught to obey.
Clear Justice, sincere Faith, bear witness you
With how much grief our swords the Hebrews slew:
But such as stubborn and inhumane are,
Unless they suffer, would enforce a War:
And Reason urges those who Scepters bear,
Against their Nature, oft to prove severe.
I go to question what these Prelates would:
Since they forbear to enter, lest they should
(Their Feast so near) with my unhallowed Floor
Their feet pollute. Who's this, by such a power
In shackles led! How reverend his aspect!
How full of awe! these Looks no guilt detect.
Thou, Caiaphas, of Solyma the Prime,
And Prince of Priests, relate th'imputed Crime.
Great Guardian of the Roman Peace, whom we
Next Caesar honour; to be doomed by thee
Our Senate brings th'Infection of these Times:
Whom we accuse of no suggested crimes.
Those holy Rites which grave Antiquity
First introduced, since defended by
A long descent, this Innovator sought
To abolish, and a new Religion taught.
Nor fearing the Recess of Gods own Seat,
The Temples ruin sings, and Roof replete
With the full Deity: disturbs the Feast
Of the seventh Day, designed for sacred Rest.
Those laws rejects which Moses pen revealed,
Even those by God with dreadful thunder sealed.
Nor so content; with Heaven his fury wars,
Aspires that Throne, and tramples on the Stars.
Who stiles himself, though of ignoble birth,
His only son, who made both Heaven and Earth.
This, Death must expiate; he hath judged his Cause,
Who writ in leaves of Marble our ten Laws.
When Wrath, the Nurse of War, and thirst of gold
Destructive Arts produced; the better Souled
No peace nor safety found, enforced to bear:
Life, of it self infirm, through common fear
Into Societies the scattered drew,
Who by united forces potent grew:
Entrenched Cities with high walls immured;
But more by well-digested Laws secured:
The Crime and Punishment proportion kept;
And Wrongs, like Wolves, on their first Authors leapt:
Justice from each Offence example took;
And his own weapon the Delinquent struck:
Spoil seized on Rapine, Blood drew blood; deterred
From doing that, which they to suffer feared.
But more then humane plagues attend on those
Who God provoke: he prosecutes his foes
With sure revenge. Why should those Hands which tear
The clouds with thunder, shake the World with fear;
Their wrath to Man resign? The impious find
Their scourge: the terror of th'astonish'd Mind
Affrights their peace: who feel what they deny;
And fear an unbeleeved Deity.
One Day no period to his torment gives:
To tremble at the Name of Death he lives;
Still apprehending what then death is worse;
Long life awarded to prolong his curse.
But if he have your laws infringed, be you
Your selves the judges, and his guilt pursue.
Although those ancient Laws, which now remain
Among us, we acknowledge to retain
From Romes free bounty; yet to you it is known,
Our curbed Power can death inflict on none.
You, to whom Caesars Fortunes recommend
His Rods and Axes, sacred Rule defend.
This guilty Wretch, whose practises we fear,
Of late his place of birth forsaking, where
The Sea is honoured with Tiberius Name,
With troops of Clients to this City came.
Who seeds of War among the Vulgarsowes:
With what injustice Roman Arms impose
Their Tribute on a Nation ever free.
With magic Charms, and Stygian compact, he
Attracts belief: denies the dead their rest,
Of those un-envi'd Mansions dispossessed
By wicked Spells. These prodigies delude
The novelty-affecting Multitude:
Whom for their Lord their loud Hosannas greet;
And strew the noble Palm beneath his feet.
Emboldened by these Arts; He, as his own
By birth, aspires to Davits ancient Throne.
When Rome, provoked by his rebellion, shall
Arm her just Grief; we by the sword must fall,
Our City sink in flames, our Country lye
Depopulated. But since One must dye
To save the General; sentenced by thy breath,
Let him redeem his Nation with his death.
Such doubtful causes grave advice require:
Here, if you please, attend; while I retire.
The Prisoner to the Soldiers care commit:
On whom this day we will in judgement fit.
YOu lofty towers of Solyma,
Thou ancient Throne of Sovereign sway:
To thee the conquered Tribute paid,
From th'Isthmos, crowned with Ebon shade,
To great Euphrates trembling Streams:
Arabians, scorched by Phoebus beams.
Th'admiring Queen, winged with thy Fame,
From her black-peopled Empire came.
Great Kings, ambitious of thy love,
To join with thee in friendship strove.
Those who Canopus Sceptre bore;
Those Monarchs who the Sun adore,
And o'er the wealthy Orient reign:
Serene, Sovereign of the Main.
Now, ah! a miserable Thrall!
O, nothing, but a prey to all!
This Land, t'one God once chastely wed,
How often hath she changed her Head,
Since they our Temples ruined pride
With bad presage reedifi'd!
Since those, in foreign bondage born,
Did with their servile Fates return!
On us Antiochus guilt reflects:
Our Fathers Sins sit on our necks.
What durst that wicked Age not do,
Which could those Altars naked view,
Oft flaming with celestial Fire!
Provoking Heavens deserved ire
With their adult'rat Sacrifice!
For this did Ours so highly prize
Th'I??neon Gods, by mortals made,
And incense to those Idols paid?
Since when th'Accurst their brothers slew;
Wives, less malicious poison brew;
Sons fall by Mothers: we have known
That, which will be believed by none.
Twice vanquished by Roman Arms;
Twice have their Conquerors our harms
Removed for greater: Fortunes change
To our proud Masters proved as strange.
Yet this no less our grief provokes,
Our kindred bear divided yokes:
One part by Roman bondage wrung;
The other two by Brothers, sprung
From Savage Idumaeans, whom
Our Fathers have so oft ore-come.
O thou the Hope, the only One
Of our distress, and ruined Throne;
Of whom, with a prophetic tongue,
To Judah dying Jacob sung:
The crowned Muse on ivory Lyre,
His breast inflamed with holy Fire,
This oft fore-told; That thou should free
The People consecrate to thee;
That thou, triumphing, should revoke
Sweet Peace, then never to be broke;
When freed Judaea should obey
One Lord, and all affect his Sway.
O when shall we behold thy Face,
So often promised to our Race!
If Prophets, who have won belief
By our mishaps and flowing grief,
Of joyful change as truly sung;
Thy absence should not now belong.
Thee, by thy Virtue, we entreat;
The Temples Veil, the Mercies Seat;
That Name, by which our Fathers swear,
Which in our vulgar Speech we dare
Not utter, to compassionate
Thy Kindreds Tears, and ruined State.
Hast, to our great Redemption, hast,
O thou most Holy! and at last
Bless with thy Presence; that we may
To thee our Vows devoutly pay.
YOu who preserve your pure integrity;
O you whose crimes transcend not credit, fly
Far from my presence! whose envenomed sight
Pollutes the guilty. Thou, who wrong and right
Distinctly can discern; whose gentle breast
All faith hath not abandoned, but art blessed
With children, brothers, friends; nor hast declined
The sweet affections of a pious Mind;
Shut up the winding entry of thine ear,
Nor let the world of such a bargain hear.
A Sin so horrible should be to none
Besides the desperate Contractors known.
Wher's now that mitred Chief? where that dire Train
Of Sacrificers, worthy to be slain
On their own Altars? I have found my Curse:
The Sun, except my self, sees nothing worse.
Hear, without hire; O hear the too well known:
If you seek for a witness; I am one
That can the truth reveal: Or would you find
A Villain? Her's a self-accusing Mind.
That sacred Life, O most immaculate!
More then my Masters! to your deadly Hate
Have I betrayed: discharge my hands I may,
Although not of the Guilt, yet of the Prey.
Receive the gift you gave: a treachery
Second to mine, you may of others buy.
If thou accuse thy self of such a Sin
Deservedly, thou hast a Court with-in,
That will condemn thee. Thy offences be
No Crimes of ours: our consciences are free.
Nor shall the sacred Treasury receive
The price of blood. Thee to thy Fate we leave.
Is this the doctrine of your piety
To approve the Crime, yet hate the Hire? O fly,
Fly, wretch, unto the Altar, and pollute
The Temple with thy Sins accursed fruit.
Nor will I for my self with hopeless prayer
Solicit Heaven; lost in my own despair;
But Gods sterne Justice urge, that we, who were
Joined in the guilt, may equal vengeance bear.
Nor shall I in my punishment prove slow:
Behold, your Leader will before you go;
It is fit you follow; to those silent Deeps,
Those horrid Shades, where Sorrow never fleepes.
Thou great Director of the rolling Stars,
Unless thou idly look on men's affairs,
And vainly we thy brutish Thunder fear;
Why should thy land so dire a Monster bear?
Or the Sun not retire, and yet behold?
If those thy fearful punishments of old
Require belief, in one unite them all:
Let Seas in Cataracts from Meteors fall,
Afford no shore, but swallow in their Brine;
That so the Worlds first ruin may prove mine.
Let melting Stars their sulphrous surfeit shed,
And all the Heavenly Fires fall on my Head.
And thou, O injured Earth, thy jaws extend,
That I may to the infernal Shades descend:
Less cause had thy revenge, when she the five
Enraged Conspirators devoured alive.
Those evils which amazed the former-times,
Thy fury hath consumed on smaller Crimes.
O slow revenger of his injuries,
And he thy Son! some fearful death devise;
Unknown, and horrid: Or shall I pursue
My own offence, and act what thou should doe?
You Legions of Heavens Exuls, you who take
Revenge on Mortals for the crimes you make;
Why troop you thus about me? Or what need
These terrors? Is my punishment decreed
In Hell already? Furies, now I come.
In your dark dungeons what more horrid Rome
Shall now devour me? Must I to that Place,
Where the cursed Father of a wicked Race
Your scourges feels? who, when the world was new,
And but possessed by four, his brother slew.
Or where that faithless Prince blasphemes? then all
His Host more eminent; who lest his fall
Should honour to his enemies afford,
Made way for hated Life with his own sword.
He most affects me, who his fathers Chair
Usurped; when caught by his revenging Hair,
He lost the Earth and Life: the way he led
T'avoided Death, my willing feet shall tread.
Master, I fly to anticipate the event
Of my foul crime with equal punishment.
HOrror distracts my sense: irresolute
Whether I should break silence, or sit mute.
Envy th'accus'd condemns, whom Justice clears.
I must confess, persuaded by my Fears,
Lest I this State and People should incense,
I wished they could have proved that great Offence.
Yet whatsoever they enforced of late,
No fault of his revealed, but their own hate.
His silence was a vanquishing reply.
Who for detecting their false piety
(Whose supercilious looks, with fasting pale,
Close avarice, and proud ambition veil)
Is by their Arts made guilty: One that slights
The God they adore, and violates his Rites.
From hence those many-nam'd Offences spring;
And his aspiring to become their King.
Can those poor Fishers of that In-land Sea,
And women, following him from Galile,
So great a Spirit in their Leader raise;
That Rome should fear, whom all the World obeys.
Yet he avers his Kingdom is unknown,
Nor of this World; and bows to Caesars Throne.
Proved by th'event: for when the Vulgar bound
His yielding hands, they no resistance found.
But his endowments, zealous in defence
Of clouded Truth, their mortal hate incense.
Followed by few, who like affections bear,
And with belief their Masters doctrine hear.
If true, he may speak freely; nor must dye
For Ostentation, though he broach a lye.
But if distracted, that's a punishment
Even to it self, and Justice doth prevent.
He, whom this Annual Solemnity
Hath now invited to the Temple by
His Father built, whose Kingdom borders on
The land ennobled by Agenor's Throne,
Of these stupendous acts by Rumour spread
Could fix no faith, though in his City bred.
To laughter doomed, his Rival Herod seorn'd;
And sent him back, in purple robes adorned.
Th'implacable, now far more fiercely bent
To prosecute the twice-found innocent:
Perhaps afraid lest they their own should loose,
Unless they him of forged guilt accuse.
But when Revenge doth once the Mind engage;
O how it raves! lost to all sense but rage!
No Lioness, late of her whelps bereft,
With wilder sury prosecutes the Theft.
O Shame I through fear I sought to shield the Right
With honest Fraud, and Justice steal by slight:
As when the labouring Bark, too weak to stem
The boisterous Tide, obliquely cuts the stream.
They have an ancient Custom, if we may
Believe the Jews, derived from that Day
When the delivered Sons of Israel
Fled from those banks whose floods in summer swell:
That ever when the Vernal Moon shall join
Her silver Orb, and in full lustre shine,
They should some one release, to gratify
The People, by their Law condemned to die.
Now, hoping to have freed the Innocent,
The violent Priests my Clemency prevent:
Who urge the heady Vulgar to demand
One Barrabas; a Thief, who had a hand
In every murder, hot with humane blood.
How little it avails us to be good!
Preposterous Favour! through the hate they hear
His guiltless Soul, their Votes the guilty clear.
And now my Wives not idle dreams perplex
My struggling thoughts, which all this night did vex
Her troubled slumbers: who conjures me by
All that is holy, all the Gods, that I
Should not the laws of Justice violate
To gratify so undeserved a hate.
For this shall I the Hebrew Fathers slight,
Th'indeavours of a Nation so unite,
Committed to my charge? Shall I for One
Poor Abject, forfeit all the good I have done?
These pestered Walls all Jewry now enfold;
The Houses hardly can their Strangers hold,
Sent from all parts to this great Festival:
What if the Vulgar to their weapons fall?
Who knows the end, if once the Storm begin?
Sure I, their Judge, egregious praise should win
By troubling of the public Peace. Shall I
Then render him to death? Impiety!
For what offence? Is his offence not great,
Whose innovation may a war beget?
Lest Empire suffer, they who scepters bear
Oft make a Crime, and punish what they fear.
One hope remains: Our Soldiers the Free-borne,
And yet by our command, with whips have torn.
A sight so full of pity may assuage
The swiftly-spreading fire of popular Rage.
Look on this Spectacle! his arms all o'er
With lashes galled, deep died in their own gore!
His sides exhausted! all the rest appears
Like that Fictitious Scarlet which he wears!
And for a Crown, the wreathed Thorns infol'd
His bleeding brows! With grief his grief behold!
Away with him: from this Contagion free
Th'infected Earth, and nail him on a Tree.
What, crucify your King?
Dominion can
No Rival brook. His rule, a Law to Man,
Whom Rome adores, we readily obey:
And will admit of none but Caesars Sway.
He Caesars right usurps, who hopes to ascend
The Hebrew Throne. Thy own affairs intend.
Dost thou discharge thy Masters trust, if in
Thy government a president begin
So full of danger, tending to the rape
Of Majesty? Shall treason thus escape?
The Tumult swells: the Vulgar and the Great,
Join in their Votes with contributed heat.
Whose whisperings such a change of murmur raise
As when the rising Winds first Fury strays
Among wave-beat Rocks; when gathering Clouds de???form
The face of Heaven, whose Wrath begets a Storm:
The fearful Pilot then distrusts the Skies;
And to the nearest Port for refuge flies.
To these rude Clamours they mine ears inure:
Such sharpe diseases crave a sudden cure.
You my Attendants, hither quickly bring
Spot-purging Water from the living Spring.
Thou liquid Crystal, from pollution clear;
And you my innocent hands like record bear,
On whom these cleansing streams so purely run;
I voluntarily have nothing done.
Nor am I guilty, though he guiltless die:
Yours is the Crime; his Blood upon you lie.
Rest thou secure. If his destruction shall
Draw down celestial Vengeance, letit fall
Thick on our heads, in punishment renew:
And ever our dispersed Race pursue.
Then I, from this Tribunal, mounted on
Embellished Marble, Judgements awful Throne,
Thus censure: Lead him to the Cross; and by
A servile death let Judahs King there dye.
WE all deplore thy miseries;
For Thee we beat our breasts; our eyes
In bitter tears their moisture shed:
If thou be he by Ravens fed,
Aloft on flaming Chariot born;
Yet would to cruel Lords return:
Or that sad Bard, believed too late,
Who sung his Countries servile Fate;
Now come to sigh her destiny,
A like unhappy; twice to dye:
Or he, long nourished in the Wood,
Who late in Jordans cleansing Flood
So many washed; that durst reprove
A King for his incestious love;
Slain for a Dancer. If the same,
Or other of an elder fame,
Sent back to Earth, in vices drowned,
To raise it from that dark Profound;
It is sure thy Sanctity exceeds,
Blazed by thy Virtue and thy Deeds.
O never more, ringed with a Throng
Of Followers, shall thy sacred tongue
Inform our Actions; nor the way
To Heaven, and heavenly joys, display!
The Blind, who now the unknown light
Beholds, scarce trusting his own sight,
Thy gift, shall not the Giver see.
Those maladies, subdued by thee,
Which powerful Art and Herbs desie,
No more thy sovereign Touch shall fly.
Nor Loaves, so tacitly increased,
Again so many thousands feast.
Thou Rule of Lifes Perfection,
By Practice, as by Precept, shown;
Late hemb'd with Auditors, whose store
Encumbered the too-narrow Shore,
The Mountains covered with their Press,
The Mountains then their People less;
For whom our Youths their garments strew,
Victorious Boughs before thee threw,
While thou in Triumph rid'st along,
Saluted with a joyful Song:
Now, see what change from Fortune springs!
O dire Vicissitude of Things!
Betrayed, abandoned by thy own;
Dragged by thy Foes, opposed by none.
Thou hope of our afflicted state,
Thou Balm of Life, and Lord of Fate;
Not erst to such unworthy bands
Did thou submit thy powerful Hands.
Lo, he who gave the dumb a tongue,
With patient silence bears his wrong!
The Soldier, ah! renews his blows;
The whip new-op'ned furrows shows,
Which now in angry tumors swell:
To us their wrath the Romans sell.
Lo, how his members flow! the smart
Confined to no particular part:
His stripes, which make all but one sore,
Run in confused streams of gore.
Art thou the Slave of thy own Fate,
To bear thy torments cursed weight?
What Arab, though he wildly stray
In wandering Tents, and live by prey;
Or Cyclop, who no pity knows,
Would such a cruel task impose?
O that the fatal pressure might
Sink thee to Earth, nor weigh more light
Then Death upon thee; that thy weak
Untwisted thread of life might break!
It were a blessing so to dye:
But O for how great cruelty
Art thou reserved! the Cross thou now
Support'st, must with thy burden bow.
Daughters of Solyma, no more
My wrongs thus passionately deplore.
These tears for future sorrows keep:
Wives, for your selves and children weep.
That horrid day will shortly come,
When you shall bless the barren Womb,
And Breast that never infant fed:
Then shall you wish the mountains head
Would from his trembling basis slide,
And all in tomb's of ruins hide.
Alas! thou spotless Sacrifice
To greedy Death! no more our eyes
Shall see thy Face! ah, never more
Shalt thou return from Deaths dark shore.
Though Lazarus, late at thy call,
Brake through the bars of Funeral;
Raised from that Prison to review
The World which then he hardly knew:
Who forth-with former sense regains;
The blood sprung in his heated Veins;
His sinews supple grew, yet were
Again almost congealed with fear.
Thy followers, Sadock, now may know
Their Error from the Shades below.
A Few, beloved by the Most High,
Through Virtue of the Deity,
To others rarely rendered breath:
None ever raised himself from death.
I From the horridest Act that ever fed
The fire of barbarous Rage, at length am fled:
Yet O too near! The Object still pursues;
Flotes in mine eyes, that sad Scene renews.
Art thou a witness of his misery?
Saw thou the Galilean Prophet die?
Those Savages, to Scythian Rocks confined,
Who know no God, nor virtue of the Mind,
But only Sense pursue; who hunger tame
With slaughtered Lives; they, and their food, the same;
Would this detest.
Vain Innocence! would none
Lend him a tear! were all transformed to stone!
No certainly: yet so commiserate,
As Pity proved more tyrannous then Hate.
The cursed Tree with too much weight oppressed
His stooping shoulders: Death had now releast
His fainting Soul: but O, the Lenity
Of Malice would not suffer him to die,
Part of the load imposed with idle scorn
On Lybian Simon, in Cyrene born.
To whom th'affected quiet of the fields,
Secured by Poverty, no safety yields.
The Furies of the City him surprise,
Who from the vices of the City flies:
Who bears not his own burden, that none may
Misdoubt, the Innocent became their prey.
Forth-with unmask this wretched face of Wo:
All that he suffered, and the manner show;
What words brake from his sorrow; give thy tongue
A liberal scope: Our minds not seldom long
To know what they abhor: nor spare our ears;
What can be heard, is fancied by our fears.
With-out the City, on that side which lies
Exposed to the boisterous injuries
Of the cold North, to War a fatal Way,
Infamous by our slaughters, Golgotha
Exalts his Rock. No flowers there paint the field,
Nor flourishing trees refreshing shadows yield:
The ground all white, with bones of mortals spread,
Stencht with the putrefaction of the dead,
And relics of unburied Carcases.
Who on his aged Fathers throat durst seas,
Rip-up his mothers womb; who poison dressed
For his own brother; or his unknown Guest
Betrayed, and gave his mangled flesh for food
Unto the wild inhabitants of the Wood;
This Stage of Death deserved: while every soul
Misdeed of theirs pursues the guilty Soul.
Now when the Nazarite at this dismal place
Arrived, with a weak and tardy pace;
Least he should die too quickly, some prefer
Sweet wine, mixed with the bitter tears of Myrrh.
He of the idle present hardly tastes;
But to encounter with his torments hastes.
The Steel now bored his feet, whose slit veins spout
Like pierced conduits; both his arms strechtout.
His hands fixed with two nails. While his great Soul
These tortures suffered, while the rising Bole
Forsook the Earth, and crimson Torrents sprung
From his fresh wounds, he gave his Grief no tongue.
The Cross advanced and fixed; then, as more nigh
To his own Heaven, his eyes bent on the Sky,
Among such never to be equalled woes
(Who would believe it!) pities his stern foes;
And thinks those false Contrivers, those who gored
His flesh with wounds, more fit to be deplored:
Who even their merited destruction fears;
And falsely judged, the truly guilty clears.
Father, he cries, forgive this sin: they knew
Not what they did, nor know what now they do.
Mean-while the Soldiers, who in blood delight,
With hearts more hard then Rocks, behold this sight;
And savage Rigour never reconciled
To Pity, all humanity exiled:
Who, used to pillage, now intend their prey;
Nor for his death, though then a dying, stay;
But he alive, and looking on, divide
The Spoil; yet more in the Spectator joyed.
Fury in trifles sports: their scorn his poor,
Yet parted garments, distribute to four.
His inward Robe, with one contexture knit,
Nor of the like division would admit,
Their votes to the dispose of Lots refer,
Electing Chance for their blind Arbiter.
Nor wast the least of evils to behold
The ignoble Partners of his pain; who old
In mischief robed the murdered Passengers;
Followed by Troops, that filled the Night with fears.
While thus they hung, none could the doubt explain,
Whether He more had saved then They had slain.
The numerous Index of each bloody deed
Now brand their lives: when those who could not read
At such a distance, of the next inquire
For what they died; who had the same desire.
But above his declining Head they hung
A table in three Languages: the Tongue,
The first of tongues, which taught our Abrahamites
Those heavenly Precepts, and mysterious Rites;
Next, that which to th'informed World imparts
The Grecian Industry, and learned Arts;
Then this, from whence the conquered Earth now takes
Her Laws, and at the Roman Virtue quakes;
All of one sense. His place of birth, his Name
Declare; and for the Hebrew King proclaim.
After the bloody Priests so long had fed
On this loved Spectacle; at length they read
The Title: and in such a misery,
So full of ruth, found something to envy.
The Governor entreating to take down
That glorious Stile; lest he the Hebrew Crown
Should vindicate in Death; and so deny
That Princes by Subordinates should die.
But who that Day soreadily complied
To give a life, austerely this denied.
While lingering Death his sad release deferred,
How looked the standers by? what words were heard?
Not all alike: discording murmurs rise.
Some, with transfixed hearts, and wounded eyes,
Astonished stand: some joy in his slow fate,
And to the last extend their Barbarous hate.
Motion it self variety begets,
And by a strange vicissitude regrets
What it affected, nor one posture bears:
Tears scornful laughter raise, and laughter tears.
Who to the Temple from th'impoverisht shore
Of Galilee his followed steps adore,
And ministered to his life, now of his End
The Witnesses; still to their dying friend
Their faith preserve: which, as they could, they show
In all th'expressions of a perfect woe.
One, from her panting breast her garments tare;
Another, the bright tresses of her hair;
This, with her naked arms her bosom beats;
The hollow rock Her fearful shrieks repeat;
She, stiff with sorrow. But what grief could vie
With that example of all piety,
His virgin Mothers! this affords no way
To lessening tears; nor could it self display.
Where should she fix her looks! if on the ground;
She sees that with her blood, he bleeding, drowned:
Or if she raise her eyes; the killing sight
Of her wombs tort'red Issue quenched their light.
Fearing to look on either, both disclose
Their terrors; who now licences her woes.
Ready to have stepped forward, and embraced
The bloody Cross, her feeble limbs stuck fast:
Her feet their motion lost; her voice in vain
A passage sought: such Grief could not complain.
Whose Soul almost as great a Sorrow stung,
As his, who on the Tree in torments hung.
That Youth, one of the Twelve, so dignified
By his dear Masters love, stood by her side.
Beholding this sad Pair, those Souls that were
To him then life, while life remained, more dear;
He found an other Cross: his spirits melt
More for the sorrow seen, then torments felt.
At length, in strength transcending either, brake
The bars of his long silence, and thus spake:
A legacy to each of you I leave:
Mother, this son in stead of me receive
By thy adoption: and thou gentle boy,
The seed of Zebedeus, late my joy,
Thy friend now for thy mother take. This said,
Again he to his torments bowed his Head.
The Vulgar with the Elders of our Race,
And Soldiers, shake their heads in his disgrace:
Is this the man, said they, whose hands can raise
The Temple, and rebuild it in three days?
Now show thy strength. Or if the Thunderer
Above the rank of Mortals thee prefer,
Acknowledged for his Heir; let him descend,
Confirm thy hopes, and timely succour lend.
Behold, the help thou give to others, fails
The Author. Break these Bonds, these stubborn Nails,
And from the Cross descend: then we will say
Thou art our King, and thy Commands obey.
Nor wast enough that the surrounding Throng
Wound with reproaches: Who besides him hung,
Doth now again a murderers mind disclose;
And in his punishment more wicked grows.
Who thus: If thou be he whom God did choose
To Govern the freed Nation of the Jews,
Thy self, and us release: thus honour win.
The Partner of his death, as of his sin,
Who had his fierceness, with the thief, cast-off,
Ill brookes, and thus reprooves, that impious scoff:
Hast thou as yet not learnt to acknowledge God?
Nor sacred Justice fear? who now the rod
Of vengeance feel? wilt thou again offend,
And to the jaws of Hell thy guilt extend?
This death we owe to our impiety:
But what are his misdeeds? why should he die?
Then looking on his face with dropping eyes:
Forgive me, O forgive a wretch, he cries:
And O my Lord, my King, when thou shalt be
Restored to thy own Heaven, remember me.
He mildly gives consent; and from the bars
Of that sad Cross, thus raised him to the Stars:
With me, a happy Guest, thou shalt enjoy
Those sacred Orchards where no frosts destroy
The eternal Spring, before the Morn display
The purple Ensign of the ensuing Day.
What's this! the Centre pants with sudden throws!
And trembling Earth a sad distemper shows!
The Sun, affrighted, hides his golden Head;
From hence by an unknown Ecliptic fled!
Irregular Heavens abortive shades display;
And Night usurps the empty Throne of Day!
What threats do these dire Prodigies portend
To our offending Race! Those ills transcend
All that can be imagined, which enforce
Disturbed Nature to forget her Course.
I hear approaching feet: What ere thou art,
Whom darkness from our sight conceals, impart
All that thou know to our prepared ears:
Accomplish, or dissolve our pressing fears.
Fury (from which, if loose, the Earth had fled)
And fatal Stars have their event: He's dead.
O Heaven! we pardon now Days hasty flight;
Nor will complain, since they have quenched this light.
Yet tell how he disposed of his last breath;
The passages, and order of his death.
As the declining Sun the shades increased,
Reflecting on the more removed East,
His blazing hair grew black: no clouds obscures
His vanished Light; this his own Orb immures.
The Days fourth part as yet invests the Pole,
Were this a Day; when from the afflicted Soul
This voice was clearly heard, not like the breath
Of those who labour between life and death;
My God, O why dost thou thy own forsake!
Which purposely the Multitude mistake,
But to prolong their cruel mirth; who said,
He on the Thesbian Prophet calls for aid;
Now to return, and draw from Heaven again
Devouring Showers of Fire, or Floods of Rain.
With silence this he endures. His body rent,
His blood exhausted, and his Spirits spent,
He cried; I Thirst. As servants to his will,
The greedy hollows of a sponge they fill
With vinegar, which Hyssops sprigs combine,
And on a reed exalt the deadly Wine.
This scarcely tasted, his pale lips once more
He opens, and now louder then before
Cried, All is finished; here my labours end:
To thee, O heavenly Father, I commend
My parting Soul. This said, hung down his head;
And with his words his mixed Spirits fled:
Leaving his body, which again must bleed,
Now senseless of the Cross. From prison freed,
Those happy seats he enjoys, by God assigned
To injured Virtue, and th'etheriall Mind.
But Terrors, which with Nature war, affright
Our peacelesse Souls. The World hath lost its Light:
Heaven, and the Deeps below, our Guilt pursue:
Pale troops of wandering Ghosts now hurry through
The holy City; whom, from her unknown
And secret Womb, the trembling Earth hath thrown.
The cleaving Rocks their horrid jaws display:
And yawning Tombs afford the dead a way
To those that live. Heaven is the general
And undistinguished Sepulchre to all.
Old Chaos now returns. Ambitious Night
Impatient of alternate Rule, or Right,
Such as before the Days ethereal birth,
With her own shady People fills the Earth.
How did the many-minded People look
At these Portents? with what affection struck?
The Lamentations, mixed with the cries
Of weeping Women, in loud Volleys rise.
Those who had known him, who his followers were
While yet he lived, and did in death adhere,
In that new Night sighs from their sorrows send;
And to those Heavens they could not see, extend
Their pious hands; complaining that the Sun
Would then appear when this was to be done.
The safety of their lives the Vulgar dread:
Some for themselves lament, some for the dead;
Others the ruin of the world bewail.
Their Courages the cruel Romans fail:
Those hands, which knew no peace, now lazy grew;
And conquering Fear to earth their weapons threw.
The amazed Centurion with our thoughts complied;
And swore the Heroes most unjustly died:
Whose punishment the Earth could hardly brook,
But groaning, with a horrid motion shook.
Confirmed by the Days prodigious flight
To be a beam of the celestial Light:
And so the mourning Heavens inverted face,
Shows to the Under world his Heavenly Race.
Why flock the People to the Temple thus?
No cause, excepting piety, in us
Can want belief. Hope they to satisfy
With Sacrifice the Wrath of the most High?
New prodigies, as horrid, thither hale
Th'astonisht Multitude. The Temples Vale
That hung on gilded Beams in purple died,
Asunder rent, and fell on either side.
The trust of what was sacred is betrayed;
And all the Hebrew Mysteries displayed.
That fatal Ark, so terrible of old
To our palefoes, which Cherubins of Gold
Veiled with their hovering wings; whose closure held
Those two-leav'd Tables, wherein Godreveal'd
His sacred Laws; That Food which by a new
Example fell from Heaven in fruitful Dew
About our Tents, and tacitly expressed
By intermitted showers the seventh Days rest;
The Rod with never dying blossoms spread;
Which with a Meter honour Aarons Head:
These, with th'old Temple perished: The eye could reach
No object in this rupture, but the Breach.
What was from former Ageshid, is shown;
Which struck so great a reverence when unknown.
The Temple shines with flames; and to the sight
That feared Recess disclosed with its own Light.
Either Religion from their fury flies,
Leaving it naked to profaner eyes:
Or God doth this abhorred Seat reject,
And will his Temple in the Mind erect.
Shall Punishment in Death yet find an end?
Shall his cold Corps to earth in peace descend?
Or naked hang, and with so dire a sight
Profane the Vefper of the sacred Night?
Too late Religion warmes their savage breasts,
Lest that near Hour, which harbingers their Feast;
Should take them unprepared: to Pilot they
Repair; entreat him that the Soldier may
From bloody crosses take their bodies down,
Before their Festivals the Morning crown:
That no uncleanness might from thence arise;
In memory of the Egyptian Sacrifice.
The legs of the two Thieves, they brake, whose breath
Yet groaned between the bounds of life and death.
The crashing bones report a dreadful sound;
While both their souls at once a passage found.
Nor had the Cohortlesse to Jesus done,
Who now the Courseprescrib'd by Fate had run:
But dead, deep in his side his trembling spear
A Soldier struck: his entrails bare appear;
And from that wide-mouth'd Orifice, a flood
Of water gushed, mixed with a stream of blood.
The Crosses now discharged of their fraught,
The People fled; not with one look or thought:
Part sad, and part amazed. Spent Fury dies.
Whither so fast? run you to sacrifice
A silly Lamb? too mean an Offering
Is this for you, who have sacrificed your King.
Either deceived by the ambiguous Day,
Or troops of mourners to my eyes display
A perfect Sorrow: Women with their bare
And bleeding breasts, drowned cheeks, dissheveld hair.
The Soldiers slowly march, with knees that bend
Beneath their fears, and Pilots stairs ascend.
O Thou who on thy flaming Chariot rid'st,
And with perpetual Motion Time divid'st;
Great King of Day, from whose farre-darting Eye
Night-wandring Stars with fainting Splendour fly;
Whither, thus intercepted, dost thou stray!
Through what an unknown darkness lies thy way!
In Heaven, what new-born Night the Day invades!
The Mariner that sails by Tyrian Gades,
As yet sees not thy panting Horses steep
Their fiery fet-locks in th'Hesperian Deep.
No pitchy storm, wrapped up in swelling Clouds
By Earth exhaled, thy golden Tresses shrouds:
Nor thy pale Sister in her wandering Race
With interposed wheels obscures thy Face;
But now farre-off retires with her stolen Light,
Till in a silver Orb her horns unite.
Hath some Thessalian Witch with Charms unknown
Surprised and bound thee! What new Pha??ton
With feeble hands to guide thy Chariot strives,
And far from the deserted Zodiac drives!
What horrid fact, before the approach of Night.
Deservedly deprives the World of Light!
As when stern Atreus to his Brother gave
His Childrens flesh, who made his own their grave:
Or when the Vestal Ilia's God-like Sun,
Who our unbounded Monarchy begun,
Was in a hundred pieces cut; by theft
At once of Life and Funerals bereft.
Or hath that Day wherein the Gods were borne
Finished the Course of Heaven in its return;
And now the aged Stars refuse to run
Beyond that place from whence they first begun!
Nature, what plagues dost thou to thine intend!
Whither shrinks this hugh Mass! what fatal end!
If now the General Flood again retire,
If the World perish by licentious Fire,
What shall of those devouring Seas become!
Where shall those funeral Ashes find a Tomb!
What ever innovates the Course of Things,
To men alone, nor Nations, ruin brings:
Either the groaning Worlds disordered Frame
Now suffers, or that Power which guides the same.
Doe proud Titanians with their impious War
Again provoke the Olympian Thunderer?
Is there a mischief extant, greater then
Dire Python, or the Snake of Lerna's Fen,
That poisons the pure Heavens with Viperous breath?
What God, from Gods derived, oppressed by Death,
Is now in his own Heaven bewailed? Divine
Lyeus gave to man less precious Wine;
Not Hercules so many Monsters flew;
Unshorn Apollo less in Physic knew.
Sure we with darkness are enveloped
Because that innocent blood by Envy shed,
So dear unto the Gods, this place defamed:
Which shook the Earth, and made the Day ashamed.
Great Father of us all, whose Influence
Informs the World thou made; though Sin incense
Thy just displeasure, easy to forgive
Those who confess, and for their Vices grieve;
Now to the desperate Sons of men, who stray
In sins dark Labyrinth, restore the Day.
One Sacrifice seek we to expiate
All our Offences, and appease his hate.
Which the Religion of the Simian,
Nor Thracian Harp, wild beasts instructing, can;
Nor that Prophetic Boy, the Gleabs answered son,
Who taught the Thuscans Divination.
The Blood, which from that mangled body bled,
Must purge our sins, which we unjustly shed.
O smooth thy brows! Receive the innocence
Of one for all; and with our guilt dispense.
For sin, what greater Ransom can we pay?
What worthier Offering on thy Altar lay?
SEe, Citizens, we Pilots bounty bear:
With-out a suite men cannot man inter.
The Roman Progeny nor freely will
Doe what is good; nor, unrewarded ill.
Nothing is now in use but barbarous Vice:
They sell our blood, on graves they set a price.
O Joseph, these vain ecstasies refrain:
But if it seem so pleasant to Complain,
Let Rome alone, and seek a nearer guilt:
His blood not Romulus sons, but Abrahams spilt.
Who so the purer sense sincerely draws
From those celestial Oracles and Laws,
By God above himself inspired, will say
None led to Eternity a straighter way.
VVhat's that to Pilot? fell the Innocent by
A Roman Oath? was it through the subtlety
Of Senators or Priests? The Doom displayed
They Caesarlesse then Caiaphas obeyed.
Let us transfer the fact; the impious Jew
With heart, with tongue and eyes, first Jesus slew:
The Romans only acted their Offence.
How well the Heavens with Hebrew hands dispense!
For this the Jew th'Italians Crime envied,
And wished himself the bloody Homicide.
Doe we as yet our servitude lament,
When such a murder meets no punishment?
This doe they, this command.
The Progeny
Of Roman Ilia, and of Sara, I
With equal detestation execrate.
O may they perish by a fearful Fate!
Just Heaven, why sleeps thy Lightning! in a Shower
Of pitch descend: Let stenching Seas de your
This cursed City. Sodomy, thou art clear,
Compared to ours. No more will I a tear
Shed for my Country. Let the Great in War,
VVorse then the Babylonian Conqueror,
Enter her Breaches like a violent Flood,
Until the bloody City swim in blood.
Is this too little? Let Diseases sow
Their fruitful Seed, and in destruction grow:
Famine, in their dry entrails take thy seat;
What Nature most abhors, enforce to eat.
Let the Infant tremble at his Fathers knife;
The Babe re-enter her who gave it Life.
While yet the eager Foe invests the wall,
Within may they by their own weapons fall:
The Temple wrapped in flames. Let the Enemy
Decide their Civil Discord, and destroy
With fire and sword ungrateful Solyma:
The relics of their slaughter drive away;
Nor seventy years dissolve their servile bands;
Despised, and wretched, wander through all Lands:
Abolished be their Law; all form of State:
No Day see their return. Let sudden Fate
Succeed my curses. This infected Soil
No more shall feed me. What unusual toil
Shall my old feet refuse, so they no more
Tread on this Earth! though to that unknown shore,
Which lies beneath the slow Boots VVaine,
Dashed by the inconstant billows of that Maine.
That Country shall be mine, where Justice sways;
And bold Integrity the Truth obeys.
This Error with a secret poison feeds
The minds Disease. Who censures his own deeds?
Who not another? These accusing Times
Rather the men condemn, then tax their Crimes.
Such is the Tyranny of Judgement; prone
To sentence all Offences, but our own.
Because of late we cried not Crucify,
Nor falsely doomed the Innocent to die,
Our selves we please: as it a Virtue were;
And Great one, if from great Offences clear.
Confess; what Orator would plead his Cause?
To vindicate his truth who urged the Laws?
Or once accused their bloody suffrages,
By Envy signed? Who durst those Lords displease?
So Piety suffered, while by speaking they,
And we by silence, did the Just betray.
When women openly their zeal durst show,
We, in acknowledging our Master, slow,
Under the shady coverture of Night
Secured our fears, which would not brook the Light.
Joseph, at length our faith it self expressed;
But to the Dead.
This is a truth confessed.
The Evening now restored Day subdues:
And lo, the Vigil with the Night enseues.
Not far from Golgotha's in famous Rocks
A Cave there is, hid with the shady Locks
Of funeral Cypress, hewn through living stone:
The house of Death; as yet possessed by none.
My Age this chose for her eternal rest:
Which now shall entertain a nobler Guest.
That ample Stone which shuts the Sepulchre,
Shall the inscription of his Virtues bear.
Who knows but soon a holier Age may come,
When all the World shall celebrate this Tomb;
And Kings as in a Temple hereadore;
Through fire and sword sought from the farthest Shore?
Pure water of the Spring, you precious Tears,
Perfumes which Odor-breathing Saba bears,
With your preservatives his body lave,
Sink through his pores, and from corruption save.
Nor God, nor Fate will suffer, that this pure,
This sacred Corps, should more then death endure.
Religion, if thou know the Shades below,
Let never filthy putrefaction flow
Through his uncovered bones; nor wast of Time
Resolve this beavenly figure into slime.
THou reverent Virgin, of his royal Blood,
Who all between the Erythrean Flood
And great Euphrates won by strenuous Arms:
Assume his noble fortitude; those harms
Which press thy Soul, subdue: ungentle Fate
Hath by undoing thee secured thy state.
Fortune her strength by her own blows hath spent.
Judaea's kingdom from thy Fathers rent
By foreign hands; of ancient Wealth bereft;
Except thy Son, what was for danger left?
These storms by death dispersed, serene appear:
For what hath childless Poverty to fear?
O John, for thee in such extremes to mourn
Perhaps is new: but I to grief was born.
With this have we convers't twice sixteen years:
No form of sorrow hath beguiled our fears.
To me how ominously the Prophets sung,
Even from the time that heavenly Infant sprung
In my chaste Womb! Old Simeon this revealed;
And in my Soul the deadly wound beheld.
When One, among so many Infants slain,
Was by the Tyrants Weapons sought in vain,
No miracles had then his fame displayed,
Or him the object of their envy made.
Perfidious Fraud in Sanctities disguise,
Nor the adulterated Pharisies,
By his detection had he yet inflamed;
Nor for despising of their Rites defamed;
A Trumpet of intestine War: the Earth
Of nothing then accused him, but his birth.
Not that fierce Prince, so cruel to his Own;
Nor his Successor in that fatal Throne,
As high in vice, who with the Prophets Head
Supplied his Feast, and on the blood he had shed
Fed his incestuous eyes, in dire delight
To highthen impious Love, could me affright:
Nor yet the vulgar, hating his free tongue;
And showers of stones by a thousand Furies flung.
I though no mischief could our steps pursue,
That was more great; or to our sufferings new.
What wants example, what no mother feared;
This, this alone my dying hopes interred.
Wretch, wilt thou seek for words t'expresse thy woes!
Or this so vast a grief in silence close!
Great God (such is my faith) why would thou come
To this inferior Kingdom through my womb!
Why made thou choice of me to bring thee forth
For punishment! unhappy in my worth!
No woman ever bare a Son, by touch
Of man conceived, whose Soul endures so much:
No mother such an issue better gained;
Nor lost it worse; by cursed Death profaned.
What louder grief with such an emphasis
Strikes through mine ears! What honoured Corse is this,
With Tyrian linen veiled? What's he whose hairs
Contend with snow, whose cies look through their tears,
Who on those veins, yet bleeding, odors powers?
Or his assistant, crowned with equal hours?
What troops of women hither throng! what storms
Rise in their looks! Grief wanders through all forms.
My eyes, ah! wound my Heart. This was thy son;
This is thy blood, thy mangled flesh. O run,
Take thy last kisses, ere of those bereft
By funeral: What else of all is left?
My Soul, tired with long misery,
A midst these greater Sorrows die;
While Grief at his sad Exequies
Pores out her last Complaints in these.
Let me this snowy Paul unfold,
Once more those quickening looks behold.
O Son, born to a sad event;
Thus, thus, to thy poor Mother sent!
O Solemn, was thy hatred such,
To murder him who loved so much!
Ah see, his side gored with a spear!
Those hands, that late so bounteous were,
Transfixed! his feet pierced with one wound!
The Sun had better never found
His loss, then with restored light
To show the World so dire a sight.
You Neighbours to the Suns up-rise,
Who read their motions in the Skies;
O you in chief who found your Lord,
And with such lively Zeal adored,
Now view the Heavens inverted laws:
With me bewail the wretched Cause.
His Birth a Star, new kindled, signed:
To see his Death the Sun grew blind.
Thou hope of my afflicted State;
Thou living, I accused not Fate:
The Day again with light is crowned,
But thou in Night for ever drowned.
O coldest thou see my broken heart!
The flowing tears these springs impart!
Thy mother, whom man never knew;
Who by the Word then fruitful grew:
My Womb admired that unknown Guest,
Whose burden for nine Moons increased.
Thy Mother, to a Sceptre borne,
With age and wrinkling sorrow worn,
This Country sees to get her bread
With labour, in an humble Shed.
Thy milk from these two fountains sprung:
These arms about my neck have hung,
Couched on the flowery banks of Nile:
Egypt, so just to thy exile,
Hath now redeemed her former Curse;
Our Jews then those of Memphis worse.
If his chaste blood at length assuage
The bitter tempest of your rage;
If you can pity misery,
O let me by your mercy dye:
Or, if not glutted with his blood;
With mine increase this purple flood.
O my dear son! what here our eyes behold,
What yonder hung, or what Death could enfold
In endless Night; is mine, and only mine:
No mortal did in thy conception join,
Nor part of thee can challenge: Since the loss
Was only ours, let us the grief engross.
Ungrateful Man! who his Protector slew:
Nor feels his Curse, nor then his Blessing knew.
Poor wretch! no soul in thy defence durst rise:
And now the murdered unrevenged lies.
The Lame, who by thy powerful Charms were made
Sound and swift-footed, ran not to thy aide:
Those Eyes, which never saw the glorious Light
Before thy sovereign touch, avoid thy sight:
And others, from Deaths silent mansion by
Thy Virtue ravished, suffered thee to dye.
Too true is thy Complaint, too just thy Woes:
Such were his friends, whom from a World he chose.
O desperate Faith! from whence, from whom are we
Thus fallen! our Souls from no defection free!
Some sold, forswore him; none from tainture clear;
All from him fled to follow their own fear.
Thou Oracle! a father in thy care,
In love a brother, the delinquent spare,
In thy divine affection ?? too blessed!
Whom Yesternight saw leaning on thy breast:
If Love in death survive, if yet as great;
Even by that Love thy pardon I entreat:
By this thy weeping Mother: I the Heir
By thee adopted to thy filial care,
Though alike wretched, and as comfortless;
Yet, as I can, will comfort her distress.
O Virgin-mother, favour thy Relief;
Though just, yet moderate thy flowing grief:
Thy downe-cast Mind by thy own Virtue raise.
Th'old Prophets fill their Volumes with thy praise:
No Age but shall through all the round of Earth
Sing of that heavenly Love, and sacred Birth.
What female glory parallels thy Worth!
So grew a Mother, such a Son brought forth!
She who proved fruitful in th'extreame of age,
And found the truth of that despised presage:
She, whose sweet Babe, exposed among the reeds
Which ancient Nilus with his moisture feeds,
Who then, a smiling Infant, overcame
The threatening flood; aspired not to thy fame,
But these expressions are for thee too low;
The opening Heavens did their observance show:
Those radiant Troops, which Darkness put to flight,
Thy Throws aslisted in that festive Night:
Who over thy adored Infant hung
With golden wings, and Allelu jah's sung:
While the Old Sky, to imitate that birth,
Bare a new Star to amaze the wondering Earth.
Sorrow is fled: Joy, a long banished Guest,
With heavenly rapture fill's my enlarged breast:
More great then that in youth, when from the Sky
An Angel brought that blessed Embassy;
When Shame, not soon instructed, blushed for fear,
How I a Son by such a Fate should bear.
I greater things fore-see: my eyes behold
What ever is by Destiny enroled.
With troops of pious Souls, more great then they,
Thou to felicity shalt lead the way.
A holy People shall obey thy Throne;
And Heaven it self surrender thee thy own.
Subjected Death thy Triumph now attends,
While thou from thy demolished Tomb ascends.
Nor shalt thou long be seen by mortal eyes,
But in perfection mount above the Skies;
Propitious ever, from that height shalt give
Peace to the World, instructed how to live.
A thousand Languages shall thee adore:
Thy Empire know no bounds. The farthest Shore
Washed by the Ocean, those who Days bright Flame
Scarce warmes, shall hear the thunder of thy Name.
Licentious sword, nor hostill Fury, shall
Prevail against thee: thou, the Lord of all.
Those Tyrants, whom the vanquished Worlds obey,
Before thy feet shall Caesars Sceptre lay.
The Time draws on, in which it self must end,
When thou shalt in a Throne of Clouds descend
To judge the Earth. In that reformed World,
Those by their sins infected, shall be hurled
Down under one perpetual Night; while they
Whom thou hast cleansed, enjoy perpetual Day.

HAd not obedience ov'r ruled the Authors fear
And Judgment too, this humble piece had ne'er
Approached so high a Majesty, not writ
By the exact and subtle rules of wit;
Ambitious for the splendour of this night
But fashioned up in hast for his own delight.
This, by my Lord, with as much zeal as ere
Warmed the most loyal heart, is offered here
To make this night your pleasure, although we
Who are the Actors, fear twill rather be
Your patience: and if any mirth; we may
sadly suspect, twill rise quite the wrong way.
But you have mercy sir, and from your eye
Bright Madam, never yet did lightning fly,
But vital beams of favour such as give
A growth to all, who can deserve to live.
Why should the Author tremble then, or we
Distress our hopes, and such tormentors be,
Of our own thoughts, since in those happy times
We live, when mercie's greater than the crimes
ERe we begin▪ that no man may repent
Two shillings and his time; the Author sent
The Prologue, with the errors of his Play,
That who will, may take his money and away.
First for the Plot, it's no way intricate
By cross deceits in love, nor so high in state,
That we might have given out in our Play-bill,
This day's the Prince writ by Nick Machivill.
The Language too is easy, such as fell
Unstudied from his pen, not like a spell
Big with mysterious words, such as enchant
The half wetted, and confound the ignorant.
Then what must needs afflict the Amorist,
No Virgin here in breeches, casts a mist
Before her Lovers eyes; No Ladies tell
How their blood boils▪ how high their veins doe swell.
But what is worse, no bawdy mirth is here;
(The wit of bottle Ale, and double Beer)
To make the wife of Citizen protest,
And Country Justice swear, it was a good Jest.
Now sirs you have the errors of his wit:
Like or dislike, at your own perils be it.
MY Lord, lets change the subject: Love is worn
So thred-bare out of fashion, and my faith
So little leanes to vows.
The rage of time,
Or sickness, first must ruin that bright Fabrique,
Nature took pride to build.
I thank my youth then
For the tender of your service: Tic the last
Good turn it did me, But by this my fears
Instruct me, when the old bald man called Time
Comes stealing on me, and shall steal away
What you call beauty: my neglected face
Must be enforced to go in quest for a new
Knight Errant.
Slander not my constant faith,
Nor doubt the care fate hath to stop the Motion
Of envious Time, might it endanger so
Supreme a beauty.
Sure my Lord fate hath
More serious business, or Divines make bold
To instruct us in a scisme. But grant I could
Induce my self, (which I despair I shall)
To hear and talk that empty nothing Love
First now in season, when an Army lies
Before our City gates, and every hour
A battery expected? Dear my Lord
Let's seal our testament, and prepare for heaven:
And as I am informed by them, who seem
To know some part of the way, Loves not the nearest
Path that leads thither.
Madam! he is but
A Coward Lover, whom or death or hell
Can fright from his Mistress. And for danger now
Threatening the City; How can I so arm
My self, as by your favour, proof against
All stratagems of war.
Your Lordship then
Shall walk as safe, as if a Lapland witch
(You will not envy me the honour of
The metaphor) preserved you shot-free. But
Who is your Confessor? Yet spare his name
His function will forgive the glory of it.
Sure he's ill read in Cases to allow
A married Lord the freedom of this Courtship.
Can you think Madam that I trust my sins
(But virtues are those loves I pay your beauty)
To the council of a Cassock? Who hath art
To judge of my confession; must have had
At least a Privy Chamberer to his Father.
We of the Court commit not as the vulgar,
Dull ignorant sins. Then that I'm married Madam
Is rather safety to our Love.
My heart!
How sick am I of the sudden? Good my Lord
Call your dwarf hither.
Garaganta! Boy.
Prithee, thy pedigree.
Madam! What mean you?
O any thing, but to divert from Love.
Another word of Courtship, and I swooned.
My Ancestors were Giants Madam. Giants
Pure Spanish, who disdained to mingle with
The blood of Goth or Moore. Their mighty actions
In a small letter Nature Printed on
Your little Servant.
How so very little?
By the decay of Time, and being forced
From fertile pastures to the barren hills
Of Biskay. Even in trees you may observe
The wonder, which transplanted to a soil
Less happy, lose in groath. Is not the once
Huge body of the Roman Empire, now
A very Pygmy?
But why change you not
That so Gigantic name of Brumfilldora.
Spite of malignant Nature, Isle preserve
The memory of my forefathers: They shall live
In me contracted.
Madam! lets return
To the love we last discoursed on.
This my Lord
Is much more serious. What course thing is that?
I owe you sir, for the pleasure of this walk.
Madam it was to me the highest honour.
Welcome ó welcome to redeem me. What
Can the best wit of woman fancy, we
Have been discoursing of?
Sure not of love?
Of that most ridiculous hobby horse Love;
That fool that fools the world. That Spaniel Love
That fawns the more tic kicked.
Will you betray me?
Thy Lord hath so protested Floriana;
Vowed such an Altar to my beauty, swore
So many oaths, and such profane oaths too;
To be religious in performing all
That's impious toward heaven, and to a Lady
Most ruinous.
Good Cleantha: all your detraction
Wins no belief on my suspicion.
Be credulous and be abused. Floriana!
There's no vice so great as to think him virtuous:
Go mount your milke-white steed fit Lanceloi
Your little squire attends you there. In suburbs
Enchanted Castles are where Ladies waite
To be delivered by your mighty hand,
Go and protest there.
I thank your favour Madam.
It is not so much worth sir, come weal follow.
But stay Cleantha. Prithee what begot
That squeamish look, that scornful wry of the mouth
When Oniate parted?
Why? Thou had
So strange a fellow in thy Company
His Garb was so uncourtly, I grew sick.
He is a Gentleman: and add to that
Makes good the Title.
Happily he may so
And happily he's enamoured on thy beauty.
On mine Cleantha?
Yes dear Floriana.
Yet neither danger to thy chastity,
Nor blemish to thy fame. Custom approves it.
But I owe little to my memory,
If ere I saw him among the greater Ladies:
Sure he's some suburb Courtier.
He's Noble:
And hath a soul. A thing is questioned much
In most of the gay youths, whom you converse with.
But how disorderly his hair did hang?
Yet it was his own.
How ill turned up his beard?
And for his clothes.
Though not fresh every morning,
Yet in the fashion.
Yes in the soberfashion:
Which Courtiers wear who hope to be employed
And aim at business. But he's not gentile:
Not discomposed enough to Courta Lady.
His thoughts are much more serious.
Guard me Fortune▪
I would not have the Court take notice that
I walked one hour with that state Aphorism,
Each Autumn to renew my youth. Let us
Discourse with Lords whose heads and legs move more
Than doe their tongues, and to as good a sense.
Who snatching from my hand a Glove, can sigh
And print a kiss, and then return it back.
Who on my buck, even with a pin can write
The Anagram of my Name: Present it humbly
Fall back and smile.
Cleantha! I perceive
There is small hope of thy conversion;
Thou art resolved to live in this heresy.
Yes: since tic the Religion of our Sex.
Sweet Floriana, I will not yet suffer
For unregarded truth Court persecution. 
But what are they appear there?
We'll away.
This is the place for interview. You who'ar
Deputed for this service from the Lord
Florentio, use such caution as befits
Your charge. How ere your Generals persons safe:
The Lord Decastro having past his word.
Yet tic my wonder, that Florentio
A Soldier so exact, practised in all
The mysteries of war and peace, should trust
Himself where the enemies faith must best secure him
The great Decastro sir, whom our late King
Deputed regent at his death, and whom
The Kingdom judges fit to marry with
His only heir the present Queen (though she
Disdain his love and our desires) hath proved
To time and fortune, that he fears no danger
But what may wound his honour. How can then
Florentio (though he now set down before
Our City with so vast an Army) choose
A place for interview, by Art and Nature
So fortified; as where Decastro's faith
Makes it impregnable?
Distrust my Lord,
Is the best Counceler to great designs:
Our confidence betrays us. But between
These two are other seeds of Jealousy:
Such as would almost force Religion break
Her tying vows, authorize perjury,
And make the scrupulous Casuist say, that faith
Is the fools virtue. They both love the Queen,
Decastro building on his high deserts,
And vote of Arragon: Florentio on
The favour he gained from her Majesty
When here he lived employed by his great Master
King of Castle.
Such politic respects
May warrant the bad statesman to dark actions.
But both these Generals by a Noble war,
Resolve to try their fate.
But here my Lord
 Is a full period to all serious thought.
This Lord is so impertinent, yet still
Upon the whisper.
He's a mischief Sir,
No Court is safe from.
What fine tricks he shows
Each morning on his gannet, but to gain
A female Vision from some halfe-open'd window,
And if a Lady smile by accident
Or but in scorn of him; yet he kind soul
Interprets it as Prophecy to some
Near favour to ensue at night.
I wonder
What makes him thought a Wit.
A copper wit,
Which fools let pass for currant. So false coin
Such very Alchemy, that who vents him
For ought but parcel ass, may be in danger:
Look on him, and in little there see drawn
The picture of the youth is so admired,
Of the spruce Sirs: whom Ladies and their women
Call the fine Gentlemen.
What are those papers,
With such a sober brow, he looks upon?
Nor platform, nor intelligence, but a Prologue;
He comes to whisper to one of the Maids
In the Privy chamber after supper.
I praise the courage of his folly yet,
Whom fear cannot make wiser.
My good Lord!
Brave Oniate! Saw you not the General?
He's upon entrance here. And how my Lord?
I saw your Lordship turning over papers,
Whats the discovery?
It may import
Decastro's knowledge. Never better language
Or neater wit. A paper of such verses
Writ by the exactest hand.
In time of business
As serious as our safety, to intrude
The dreams of madmen?
My Judicious Lord!
It with the favour of your Lordship may
Concern the General. Such high rapture,
In admiration of the Queen, whom he
Pretends to Love. How will her Majesty
Smile on his suit, when in the heate of business
He not neglects this amorous way to woe her?
No man presume t'advance a foot. My Lord
Ossuna I desire your ear.
My Lord
I have a piece here of such elegant wit.
Your pardon good my Lord; we le find an hour
Less serious to advise upon your papers,
And then at large we will whisper.
As you please
My Lord you'll pardon the error of my duty.
The Queen my Lord gave free access to what
I spoke of the public, but when I began
To mention love.
How did she frown? Or with
What murdering seorne, heard she Decastro named?
Love! of thy labyrinth of Art, what path
Left I untroden? Humbly I have laboured
To win her favour: and when that prevailed not;
The Kingdom, in my quarrel, vowed to empty
The veins of their great body.
Sir her heart
Is mightier than misfortune. Though her youth
Soft as some consecrated virgin wax,
Seem easy for impression: Yet her virtue
Hard as a rock of Diamond, breaks all
The battery of the waves.
Unkind and cruel!
She charged me tell you that a faith less Moore
Who had gained honour only by the ruin
Of what we hold religious, sooner she
Would welcome to her bed; than who to his Queen
And Love had been a Rebel.
How? A rebel?
The peoples suffrage, which inaugurats Princes,
Hath warranted my actions.
But she answers
The subtle Arts of faction, not free vote
Commanded her restraint.
May even those stars
Whose influence made me great, turn their aspects
To blood and ruin; if ambition raised
The appetite of Love. Her beauty hath
A power more Sovereign, than the Eastern slave
Acknowledged ever in his Idol King.
To that I bowed a subject. But when I
Discovered that her fancy fixed upon
Florentio (General now of the enemies Army)
I let the people use their severe way:
And they restrained her.
But my Lord their guilt
Is made your crime. Yet all this new affliction
Disturbs her not to anger, but disdain.
She hath a glorious spirit. Yet the world
The envious world it self must justify;
That howsoever Fortune yielded up
The Sceptre to my power; I did but kiss it
And offered it again into her hand.
My Lord, the General of Castle, Florentio.
He's safely welcome. Now let each man keep
At a due distance. I have here attended
Your Lordships presence.
O my Lord! ar' we
Whom Love obliged to the same alleigance,
Brought hither on these terms?
The are terms of honour.
And I yet never knew to frame excuse,
Where that begot the quarrel.
Yet me thinks
We might have found another way to it.
We might have sought out danger, where the proud
Insulting Moore, profaines our holy places.
The noise of War had been no trouble then,
But now too much twill fright the gentle ear
Of her we both are vowed to serve.
That Love
Which arms us both, bears witness, that I had
Much rather have encountered lightning; than
Create the least distraction to her peace.
But since the vote of Arragon decrees
That my long Service hath the justest claim
To challenge her regard; Thus I must stand
Armed to make good the title.
This vain language
Scarce moves my pity. What desert can rise
So high to merit her? Were each short moment
Of the longest lived Commander lengthened to
An age, and that exposed to dangers mighty
As Cowards framethem; can you think his service
Might challenge her regard? Like the heavenly bounty
She may distribute favour: But it is sin
To say our merits may pretend a title.
You talk Sir like a Courtier.
But my Lord
You'll find a soldier in this Arm: which strengthened
By such a cause, may level mountains high
As those the Giants (emblems of your thoughts)
Piled up to have scaled heaven.
That must be
Decided by the sword. And if my Lord
Our interview hath no more sober end,
Than a dispute so froward; Let us make
The trumpet drown the noise.
You shall not want
That Musique. But before we yielded up
Our reason unto fury; I desired
We might expostulate the ground of this
So fatal war: and bring you to that low
Obedience Nature placed you in.
My ear
Attends you.
Where is then that humble zeal
You owe a Mistress; if you can throw off
That duty which you owe her as your Queen?
What justice (that fair rule of humane actions)
Can you pretend for taking Arms?
Pray forward.
Isle not deny (for from an enemy
Isle not detract) during her nonage, when
The public choice, and her great fathers will,
Enthroned you in the government; you managed
Affairs with prudence equal to the fame
You gained▪ And when your sword did fight her quarrel,
It was crowned with victory.
I thank your memory.
But hence ambition and ingratitude
Drew only venom. For by these great Actions▪
You laboured not to advance her state or honour;
But subtly wrought upon the peoples love:
A love begot by error, following still
Apparencie not truth.
You construe fairly.
The sun is not more visible, when not
One cloud wrinkles the brow of heaven. For
On that false strength you had in the multitude,
You swel'd to insolence: dared court your Queen:
Boasting your merit; like some wanton Tyrant
In the vanity of a new conquest. And
When you perceived her judgement did instruct her
To frown on the attempt; profainely against
All Laws of Love and Majesty, you made
The people in your quarrel seize upon
The Sacred person of the fairest Queen,
Story ere boasted.
Have you done my Lord?
Not yet. This injury provoked my master
To raise these mighty Forces for her rescue:
And named me General, whose aim is not
A vain ambition, but to advance her service
Ere we begin to punish, take this Offer:
Restore the Queen to liberty, with each
Due circumstance that such a Majesty
May challenge, freely to make choice of whom
She shall advance to the honour of her bed.
If your deserts bear that high rate you mention;
Why should you doubt your fortune? On these terms
The King, King of Castle may be induced
To pardon the error of your ruin.
Thus
In short my answer. How unlimited
So ere my power hath been, my reason and
My love hath circumscribed it. True, the Queen
Stands now restrained: But tic by the decree
Of the whole Kingdom, least her error should
Persuade her to some man less worthy.
How?
Less worthy than my self. For so they judge
The proudest subject to a Foreign Prince.
But when you mention love, where are your blushes?
What can you answer for the practising
The Queens affection, when Ambassador
You lay here from Castle; pretending only
Affairs importing both the Kingdoms? Nor
Can you my Lord be taxed by your discretion,
That by the humblest Arts of Love, you labour
To win so bright a beauty, and a Queen
So potent. Your affection looks not here,
Without an eye upon your profit.
Witness Love.
No protestation. If you will withdraw
Your Forces from our Kingdom, and permit
Us to our Laws and Government; That peace
Which hath continued many ages Sacred,
Stands firm between us. But if not.
To Arm.
Pray stay my Lord. Doth not your Lordship see
The advantage I have in the place: with how
Much ease I may secure my fortune from
The greatest danger of your Forces?
Ha!
It was inconsiderate in me. But I trusted
To the honour of your word, which you'll not violate.
Go safely off my Lord. And now be dumb;
All talk of peace: We'll parley in the drum.
COme on you Atlases of Arragon:
You by whose powers the Castilian cloud
Was forced to vanish. We have forked Florentio,
In the right Arm: made the enamoured Donn
Retire to doleful Tent.
We sallied bravely.
Thou did in the sally fight like lightning Condo,
Let the ayre play with thy plume, most puissant Peer.
No Condo Sanmartino now; but Condo
S. George, that Cappadocian man at Arms,
Thou hast done wonders, wonders big with story,
Fit to be sung in lofty Epic strain:
For writing which the Poet shall behold,
That which creates a Condo, gold. Gold which
Shall make him wanton with some suburb Muse,
And Hypocrene flow with Canary billow.
You are high in feat of Arm.
Captain I think
I did my part.
Base is the wight that thinks,
Let Condes small in spirit drink harsh sherry,
Then quarrel with promooting knights, and fine for it
Thou art in mettle mighty, tough as steel
As Bilbo or Toledo steel. Fight on.
Let Acres sink, and bank of money melt,
Forsake thy Ladies lap, and sleep with us
Upon the bed of honour, the chill earth.
Tic that will make thee held a potent Peer,
Mong men of the Pike, of buff, and bandeliere.
Thou speak brave language Captain,
Isle maintain
Tic Arragonian, Condo.
Captain Cedar,
Though in thy language lofty, give a shrub
Leave to salute thee. Sure we two are near
In blood and great attempt. Don Hercules
Was as I read in Chaldeon Chronicle,
Our common Ancestor. Don Hercules
Who rifled Nymph on top of Apennine.
Small Imp avaunt.
Stout sturdy Ok, that grows
So high in field of Mars, ô let no tempest
Shake thee from hence. And now I have with labour
Attained thy language, Isle thy truchman be,
Interpret for thee to those smaller souls,
Who wonder when they understand not. Souls!
Whom Courtiers gaudie outside captives,
And plume of Coronell.
I must expire.
Not talk to fish. See thou that man of match
Though small in stature, mighty he's in soul,
And rich in gifts of mind, though poor in robes:
Reward like Phillips heir his daring arm,
Which fetched thee off from danger. Once again
Most doughty Don adieu.
Great Don Saltpeeter,
I am the servant of thy famed caliver.
These are strong lines. Now friend! Art thou of the garrison?
If it please your Lordship.
It doth not please me,
It is indifferent. I care not what thou art.
Art thou extremely poor?
Left please your Lordship.
No not that neither. Why should I malign
So far thy fortune, as to wish thee poor?
It were safer for my purse, if thou were rich:
Then all reward were base.
Left please your Lordship.
O no more Prologue. Prithee the first Scene,
To the business man.
Then I must tell your Lordship.
I scorn that wealth makes you thus wanton, and
That wit which fools you. Did the royal favour
Shine but on you, without enlarging warmth
To any other, I in this torn outside
Should laugh at you, if insolent.
This is saucy.
I tell thee petulant Lord, Isle cut thy throat
Unless thou learn more honour.
What shall I doe? 
But see Cleantha. Not to be made Grande,
Would I she should discover me in parley
With such course clothes. There fellow take that gold,
And let me see thy face no more. Away.
There tic again. I will not owe one hour
Of mirth to such a bounty. I can starve
At easier rate, than live beholding to
The boast of any giver. Lord! I scorn
Thee and that gold which first created thee.
That Soldier seemed to carry anger in
His look my Lord.
What should his anger move me?
O no my Lord: The world speaks wonders of
Your mighty puissance.
Tic my joy you're safe.
But why adventured you into this quarrel?
The Queen will hardly thank your valour: since
They of Castle professed themselves her Soldiers.
The Queen must pardon courage: Men who are
Of daring Spirit, so they may but fight
Examine not the cause.
She doth expect us.
I will attend her here. For here she gives
Decastro audience. I must not loose
This Lord yet, it so near concerns my mirth.
Madam! I wonder with what confidence
You after such an injury, dare endanger
Discourse with me.
I injure you my Lord?
Whose favour I have courted with more Zeal
Than well my Sex can warrant? Triumph not
Too much upon my weakness; cause you have
Got victory ore my heart, take not delight
To make my grief your sport.
Be witty still,
And keep me for a Trophy of your pride,
I hope to see that beauty at an ebb;
Where will be then your over-flow of servants?
You'll then repent your pride.
O never, never.
If you'll particularise your vows to me;
You who toth'title of the Courtly Lord,
Have added that of valiant. And beshrew me,
She's no good huswife of her fame, that wants
A daring servant.
This perhaps may work.
If she live single; he preserves her name
And scarce admits a whisper, that the Jealous
May construe points at her. And if she marry;
He awes the husband, if by chance or weakness,
She have offended.
This cannot be fiction.
Then if she use but civil complement
To a Courtier Bachelor; He straight be speaks
The Licence, and the Favours, and calls in
Some wit into his Council for the Posy,
While I feel no tentation to such folly
But with a married Lord.
How gentle Madam?
Our walks are privileged, our whispers safe,
No fear of laying contracts to my charge,
Nor much of scandal. And if there be cause,
Who is so fond a Ghamster of his life,
As merely out of spleen to stake it? But
My Lord I now suspect you conster'd ill
That language I used to your Lady, when
I told her of your love. But I presume
You were not so dull sighted as in that
Not to discern the best disguise for love.
What a suspicious ass was I? How captious?
I ne'er mistrusted my own wit before.
Mischief how dull was I?
Pray turn your face
Away. Now know when worth and valour are
Led on by love to win my favour. But
The Queen.
Divine Cleantha! Noblest Lady!
Ossuna let me beg thy care. Though we
Bravely repulsed the enemy: They seem
To threaten a new assault.
Command your servant.
Bear then a vigilant eye, and by your scouts
Learn if they any new attempt prepare. 
May it please your Majesty, command these many
Ears from your presence.
Good my Lord! you who
Have power to guide your Queen, may make our presence
Or full or empty as you please.
Then with
Your licence Madam they may all with draw.
Not with our licence. If your usurped greatness
Will banish all attendance from our person;
I must remain alone. But not a man
Stir hence with our good liking.
If your will
(Averse from sober council) would submit
To safe advice.
You have instructed it
To more obedience, than I guess my birth
Did ere intend. But pray my Lord teach me
To know my fault and I will find amendment
If not, repentance for it.
Then great Madam
I must acquaint you that the supreme Law
Of Princes, is the peoples safety: Which
You have infringed, and drawn thereby into
The inward parts of this great state a most
Contagious Fever.
Pray no Metaphor.
You have invited war to interrupt
With its rude noise, the musique of our peace,
A foreign enemy gathers the fruit,
The sweat and labour of your subjects planted.
In the cool shadow of the Vine we pruin'd
He wantonly lies down, and roughly bids
The owner press the grape: that with the juice
His blood may swell up to lascivious heats.
My Lord I answer not the effects of war,
But I must pay Castle all thankful service,
For his fair charity.
Doe you then Madam
Reckon on mischief as a charity?
Yes, such a mischief as is merciful,
And I a Queen oppressed. But how dares he
Whose duty ought with reverence obey,
And not dispute the counsels of his Princess,
Question my actions? Whence my Lord springs this
Ill tutored privilege?
From the zeal I owe
The honour of our Nation: Over which
Kings rule but at the Curtsy of Time.
You are too bold: And I must tell your pride
It swells to insolence. For were your nature
Not hoodwinked by your interest, you would praise
The virtue of his courage, who took Arms
To an injured Ladies rescue.
It was ambition,
Greedy to make advantage of that breach
Between you and your people, armed Castle;
Unpitied else you might have wept away
The hours of your restraint.
Poor erring man!
Could thy Arts raise a tempest blacker yet
Such as would fright thy self. It could not for
One moment cloud the splendour of my soul.
Misfortune may benight the wicked, she
Who knows no guilt can sink beneath no fear:
Your Majesty mistakes the humble aim
Of my address. I come not to disturb
The harmonious calm your soul enjoys: May pleasure
Live there enthroned, till you your self shall woo
Death to enlarge it. May felicities
Great as the Idaeas of Philosophy
Waite still on your delight. May fate conspire
To make you rich and envied.
Pray my Lord
Explain the riddle. By the cadence of
Your language, I could guess you have intents
Far gentler than your actions.
If your ear
Great Madam, would convey into your heart
The story of my love. My love, a flame.
Leave off this history of love, and flame▪
And honestly confess your fears my Lord,
Least Castle should correct you.
Correct me?
No Madam, I have forced them to a retreat.
And given my fine young General cause to wish
He had not left his amorous attempts
On Ladies, to assault our City.
But he is not wounded?
Not to death perhaps,
But certainly w' have opened him a vein,
Will cure the Fever of his blood.
O stay!
Torment! And doth she weep? I might have fallen
Down from some murdering precipice to dust,
And mist the mercy of one tear: though it
Would have redeemed me back to life again.
Accursed be that felicity that must
Depend on women's passion.
Florentio!
If in my quarrel thou too suddenly
Art lost in the shades of death; ô let me find
The holy vault where thy pale earth must lye,
There I will grow and wither.
This is strange!
My heart swells much too big to be kept in.
But if that Providence which rules the world
Hath to preserve the stock of virtue, kept
Thee yet alive.
And what, if yet alive?
Pray recollect your reason and consider
My long and faithful service to your crown:
The fame of my progenitors, and that
Devotion the whole Kingdom bears me. How
Hath nature punished me, that bringing all
The strength of argument to force your judgement,
I cannot move your love?
My Lord you plead
With so much arrogance, and tell a story
So gallant for your self, as if I were
Exposed a prize to the cunningest Orator.
No Madam, humbler far than the tand slave 
Tied to the Oar, I here throw down my self
And all my victories. Dispose of me
To death, for what hath life, merits esteem?
What tie, Alas, can I have to the World?
Since you disdain my love.
Will you permit
The General kneel so long?
Fear not Floriana,
My Lord knows how to rise, though I should strive
To hinder it.
Here statue-like Isle fix
For ever, till your pity (for your love
I must despair) enforce a life within me.
O my Lord!
To arm, to arm. The enemy encouraged
By a strange leader, wheeled about the town,
And desperately surprised the careless guard.
One gate's already theirs.
Have I your licence.
To augment your own command, and keep me still
An humble captive.
Madam! your disdain
Distracts me more, than all the assaults of fortune.
My fate! O whether dost thou lead me? Why
Is my youth destined to the storms of war?
What is my crime, you heavenly powers! that it
Must challenge blood for expiation!
Madam!
Fortune! O cruel! For which side so ever
Is lost, I suffer: either in my people,
Or slaughter of my friends. No victory
Can now come welcome, the best chance of war
Makes me how ere a mourner.
Madam, you
Have lost your virtue, which so often vowed
A clear aspect, what cloud soever darkened
Your present glory.
I had thoughts Cleantha:
But they are vanished: what shall we invent
To take off fear and trouble from this hour▪
Poor Floriana. Thou art trembling now
With thought of wounds and death to which the courage
Of thy fierce husband like a headstrong jade,
May run away with him. But clear thy sorrows.
If he fall in this quarrel, thou shalt have
Thy choice among the Castilian Lords. And give
My judgement faith, there be brave men among them.
Madam, I have vowed my life to a Cloister
Should I survive my Lord.
And thou art fearful
Thou shalt be forced to make thy promise good.
Alas poor soul! Enclosure and course diet,
Much Disciple and early prayer, will ill
Agree with thy complexion. There's Cleantha!
She hath a heart so weaned from vanity,
To her a Nunnery would be a Palace.
Yes, if your Majesty were Abbess. Madam,
But Cloister up the fine young Lords withus,
And ring us up each midnight to a Masque
In steed of Matins; And I stand prepared
To be professed without probation.
Hark! What noise is that?
Tic that of death and mischief.
My griefs! but Isle dissemble them. Yet why,
Cleantha being the sole beauteous Idol
Of all the superstitious youth at Court;
Remainst thou yet unmarried?
Madam I
Have many servants but not one so valiant
As dares attempt to marry me.
There's not a wit but under some feigned name
Implores thy beauty, sleep cannot close up
Thy eyes, but the sad world benighted is,
Or else their sonnets are Apocriphall.
And when thou wake the Lark salutes the day,
Breaking from the bright East of thy fair eyes.
And if mongthy admirers there be some
Poor drossy brain who cannot rime thy praise,
He woos in sorry Prose.
Half of the City
Already is possessed by the enemy,
Our soldiers fly from the Assailants, who
With moderation use their victory.
So far from drawing blood, the abstain from spoil.
My comforts now grow charitable, This
Is the first dawning of some happier fortune.
Where did you leave my Lord?
Retiring hither.
And your good nature will in time Cleantha
Believe all flattery for truth.
In time
I shall not. But forth' present Madam give
Leave to my youth to think I may be praised,
And merit it. Hereafter when I shall
Owe Art my beauty, I shall grow perhaps
Suspicious there's small faith in Poetry.
Can thou think of hereafter? Poor Cleanthal
Hereafter is that time you are bound to pray
Against. Hereafter is that enemy
That without mercy will destroy thy face,
And what's a Lady then?
A wretched thing.
A very wretched thing. So fcorn'd ánd poor
Twill scarce deserve mans pity. And Ime sure
No Alms can ere relieve it.
Floriana,
You yield too much to fear. Misfortune brings
Sorrow enough: Tic envy to our selves,
T'augment it by prediction.
See your Lord.
Fly Madam fly. The Army of Castle
Conducted by an unknown leader, masters
The Town. Decastro yielding up his fate
To the prevailing enemy is fled.
And shall the Queen fly from her friends my Lord?
You have reason Madam. I begin to find
Which way the Gale of favour now will blow,
I will address to the most fortunate.
Some Musique there, my thoughts grow full of trouble,
Isle recollect them.
May it please you Madam
To hear a song presented me this morning.
Play any thing.
Cease the uncivil murmur of the drum:
Nothing sound now but gentle, such as may not
Disturb her quiet ear. Are you sure Lerma
The obedient Soldier hath put up his sword?
The Citizen and soldier gratulate
Each other, as divided friends new meeting.
Nor is there execution done but in pursuit
Of the enemy without the walls.
Tic very well. My Lord is that your Queen?
It is the Queen sir.
Tempered like the Orbs:
Which while we mortals weary life in battle,
Move with perpetual harmony. No fear
Eclipsed the bright lustre of her cheek.
While we who infants were swathed up in steel,
And in our cradle luld a sleep by the Cannon,
Grow pale at danger.
Isle acquaint her sir
That you attend here.
Not for a diamond
Big as our Apennine. She's heavenly fair.
And had not Nature placed her in a throne;
Her beauty yet bears so much Majesty,
It would have forced the World to throw it self,
A captive at her feet. But see, she moves!
I feel a flame within me, which doth burn
Too near my heart: And tic the first that ever
Did scorch me there.
Madam here's that brave Soldier
Which reinforc't the Army of Castle.
His name as yet unknown.
And must be so.
Nor did I merit name before this hour,
In which I serve your Majesty, enjoy
The fortune of my sword your liberty.
And since your Rebel subjects have denied
Obedience, here receive it, from us strangers.
I know nor sir to whom I owe the debt,
But find how much I stand obliged.
You owe it
To your own virtue Madam, and that care
Heaven had to keep part of it self on earth
Unruin'd. When I saw the Soldier fly,
Sent hither from Castle to force your rescue,
Their General hurt almost to death. I urged
Them with the memory of their former deeds,
Deeds famed in War. And so far had my voice
(Speaking your name) power to confirm their spirits
That they returned with a brave fury, and
Yield you up now your own humbled Arragon.
My ignorance doth still perplex me more.
And to owe thanks yet not to know to whom,
Nor how to express a gratitude, will cloud
The glory of your victory, and make
Me miserable however.
I must penance
My blood with absence, for it boils too high. aside
When we have ordered your affairs, my name
Shall take an honour from your knowledge Madam.
You have corrected me. Sir we will expect
The hour your self shall name, when we may serve.
Ime conquered in my victory. But Iletry
A new assault: And overcome, or dye.
MY Lord it shows a happy Discipline
Where the obedient soldier yields respect
To such severe commands. Now when victory
Gives licence to disorder.
Sir our General
The Lord Florentio, is a glorious Master
In the art of war. And though time makes him not
Wise at the expense of weakness or diseases; yet
I have beheld him by the easy motion
But of his eye, repress sedition,
When it contem'd the frown of Majesty
For never he, who by his Princes smile
Stood great at Court, attained such love and awe
With that fierce viper the ripening people.
Our Kingdom owes its safety to that power.
For how dejected looked our Majestrate
When conquest gave admittance to the Soludier▪
But how their fears for sooke them, when they saw
You entry with such silcence?
Sir, c•astile
Aimed not at spoil or ruin in this war,
But to redress that insolence, your Queen
Did suffer under, in Decostros pride.
And yet Auxiliaries oft turn their swords
To ruin, whom they come to rescue.
The Barbarous keep no faith in vows. But we
We of Castle, though flattering advantage
Persuade to perjury, have still observed
Friendship inviolate: No Nation suffering
To which we give our oath.
You speak my Lord
Your glories Nobly. And it is our joy
Your Generals wound but frighted us.
The Surgeons
Affirm there is no danger, and have licenced
His visit to the Queen.
Tic thought how-ere
His Love had not obeyed such a restraint,
Though death had threatened him. But in his health
Consists the common safety, since those Forces
Decastro in the morning did expect,
Ere you the Town assaulted, are discovered
To which he fled expel'd the City.
Sir,
We shall contemn and with ease break that Army,
Whose General we have vanquished: having won▪
The City and your Queen into our power.
Save you my Lord! Sir your most obedient!
And how likes your good Lordship the great Acts
Of the strange Cavalier? was not his conduct
Most happy for you, in the late assault?
He happily supplied the Office of
Our General▪ Howere your City had
Been ours. For though our Spanish Forces may
At first seem beaten, and we to retreat
A while, to animate a giddy enemy.
Yet we recover by our Art and patience
What fortune gives away. This unknown leader
(I know not how to stile him) pressed among
Our Soldiers, as they were returning back
After a small repulse: Encouraged them,
(Though it was much superfluous) and got honour,
Perhaps not so deservingly: But it was well.
Your Soldier speaks his glory even with wonder.
The ignorant are prone to it. But sir
I think in our whole army there fought none,
But who had equal spirit. Fortune may
Bestow success according to her dotage.
I answer not for that.
This is pure Castle.
But what is his birth, Country, quality,
And whether is he bound?
I seldom trouble
My language with vain questions. Some report
(It not imports who are the Authors) that
His Country's Sicily; his name Ascanio,
(Or else some sound like that) that he's a Lord:
(But what's an Island Lord?) and that he came
Into our continent to learn men and manners.
And well he might: for the All-seeing sun
Beholds no Nation fiercer in attempt,
More stayed in council.
He's of a brave presence,
I never saw more Majesty in youth
Nor never such bold courage in a face
So fashioned to delight.
The Queen commends him
Almost with wonder.
Did the Queen regard
A man unknown?
His merits spoke his worth,
And well might challenge a particular eye.
But his, as if in that dumb Oratory,
He hoped to talk all the history of love,
Still sixth upon her.
Your most humble servant.
This is abrupt.
What most politic flea
Is got into his Donships ear?
Now must
The Junto sit till midnight, till they rack
Some strange design from this intelligence.
Nay on my honour Madam!
Good my Lord!
Benight us not so soon. The short lived day
That gives the Russian in the winter hope
Of heate yet fails him; not so suddenly
Forsakes the firmament. Stay fairest Madam▪
That we may look on you and live.
My Lord
I fear you two were serious.
Never I
Upon my Conscience Madam.
No Isle swear:
Nor none of the whole form of you at Court,
Unless the stratagem be for a Mistress,
A fashion, or some cheating match at Tennis.
But happily that Gentleman had business,
His face betrays my judgement, if he be
Not much in project.
You mistake him Madam.
Though he talk positive, and bustle among
The Sober Lords, pretend to Embassies
And state designs all day; He's one of us
At night: He will play, he will drink, you guess the rest,
He will quarrel too, then underhand compound.
Why for a need he will jeer and speak profane,
Court and then laugh at her he courted. Madam
Forgive him his pretence to gravity;
And he's an absolute Cavalier.
My Lord
He owes you for this fair certificate:
Yet I fear your character's beyond his merit.
Madam dissemble not so great a virtue.
Nor to obey the tyranny of custom,
Become the Courts fair hypocrite. I know
This vanity for fashionsake you wear,
And all those gaieties you seem to admire
Are but your laughter.
Sir your charity
Abuses you extremely.
Come you cannot
Disguise that wisdom, which doth glory in
The beauteous mansion it inhabits. Madam
This soul of mine, how course so ere tic clothed,
Took the honour to admire you, soon as first
You shined at Court. Nor had a timorous silence
So long denied me to profess my service,
But that I feared I might be lost in the crowd
Of your admirers.
Nor can I perceive
Any strong hope now to the contrary.
Nor I. But give me licencet' undeceive
The world, that so mistakes you. This young Lord
Flatters his folly that indeed you are
Sick of that humour, you but counterfeit.
Believes you're frail and easy; since if not,
His courtship were without design.
My Lord
What means the Gentleman? He hopes to talk me
Into a virtue I near practised yet,
And much suspect I never shall.
Pray Madam
Pardon his ignorance: tic want of breeding.
Pardon your mirth fair Madam, and brush off
This honoured dust, that soils your company;
This thing whom Nature carelessly obtruded
Upon the world to teach, that pride and folly
Makes titular greatness the envy but of fools,
The wise mans pity.
Sir your words are rude.
Sure no, my Lord: Perhaps in times of yore
They might be conster'd so, when superstition
Worshipped each Lord an idol. Now we find
By sad experience, that you are mere men,
If vice debauch you not to beasts.
The place
Is privileged sir.
I know it is, and therefore speak thus boldly,
If you grow hot, you have your grots my Lord,
And in your Villa you may domineer
Ore the humble Country Gentleman, who stands
A aloof and bare.
My Lord leave off the combat
Yea're hard matched. And see the Lord Florentio. 
The Queen attends his coming. Sir voule find
A more convenient school to read this lecture.
But none so beatiful to hear me.
And are you sure my Lord, he durst presume
To look up at her?
Yes, and she commends
His person and his spirit.
It was too much
To observe his person. Sure his spirit's great,
And well may challenge the Queens memory:
I have not seen him yet.
Nor I my Lord.
He had a fortune gentler far than mine.
In envy of that service which I vowed
To Arragon; heaven used a strangers arm
In this great action: I was judged a thing
Unfit for use.
Your glory was the greater,
Your courage even opposing against your fate
In the attempt.
But yet mistaking man
Esteems the happy only valiant.
And if the Queen (Velasco) should smile on
His merits, and forget that love I have
With such religion paid her. But these doubts
Are impious: and I sin, if I but listen
To their disloyal whispers. And behold, 
She opens like a rock of Diamond;
To the curious search of the almost banckrout merchant,
So doth the Pilot find his star, when storms
Have even sunk his bark. Divinest Madam!
Welcome my Lord! But pardon me my joys
If I must interrupt you with a sigh.
I cannot look upon Florentios arm,
But I must grieve it bled for me.
O spare
The treasure of those tears! Some captive King,
Whom fortune hath locked up in iron, wants
One such to buy his freedom. Madam all
Those streams of blood which flow to warm my earth
Least it congeal to death, cannot compare
For value with the least drop shed for you:
By such a quarrel made inestimable.
The war I see hath only been the field
To exercise your fancy. Your discourse
Shows that the Court was kept beneath your tent;
Yet cannot I my Lord be jealous but
Tic mingled with some love.
Tic a pure love,
Unmixed as is the soul. The world perhaps
May judge a kingdom hath enamoured me,
And that your titles dress you forth, to raise
My appetite up higher. Pardon love,
If it grow envious even of your fortune;
And that I me foc't to wish, you had been daughter
Of some poor mountain cottager, without
All dowre but your own beauty. Then I might
Have showed a flame untainted with ambition:
And courted you. But now the circumstance
Of greatness seems to challenge more than I
Have power to give: and working up my love,
I serve my fortune.
You have not my Lord
Found me uneasy to your vows. And when
The troubled stream of my tempestuous state
Shall meet a perfect calm: you then shall know
How worthy I esteem your virtue.
Speak but those words again, and seat me in
An Orb above corruption! O confirm
Your thoughts but with a promise.
How, a promise?
I shall repent my favour if I hear
A syllable that sounds like that. Upon
My marriage day I have vowed to bring my self
A free oblation to the holy Altar.
Not like a fearful debtor, tender love
To save my bond. My Lord I must not hear
One whisper of a promise.
I'm silent.
And use me as your Vassal, for a title
More glorious I shall never covet. But
No jealousy my Lord.
Your Majesty
Is great in mercy: And I hope á stranger
Shall meet it, if his speech be an offence.
Your pleasure sir.
The Lord Ascanio charged
Me fall yet lower if the earth would licence.
For to so high a Majesty, obedience
Cannot bend down enough. Then he commanded,
I in his name, should beg the honour for him,
Before he take his journey from your Country,
To kiss your hand.
Pray sir lets know the hour,
But let it not be sudden. Years should sweat
In preparation for his entertainment,
And Poets rack invention till it reach
Such praises as would reach the victories
Of the old Heroes.
Madam, if his arm
Did actions worthy memory; it received
An influence from your quarrel: In the which
Adwarfe might triumph ore an Army: But
He humbly craves, his audience may not be
With crowd and noise as to Ambassadors;
But with that silence which befits his business:
For tic of moment.
Sir, we will obey
His own desires, though ours could wish his welcome
With a full ceremony. I attend him.
Madam this stranger.
Pray my Lord let Love
Not interrupt your business. I believe
The Army which Decastro so expected
Being now arrived, your soldier tired, the City
Ill settled in her faith, much council will
Be needful. When your leisure shall permit,
Our joy shall be to see you.
I'm all obedience.
And when sweet Madam will you crown our joys?
Lets not like riotous gamsters throw away
The treasure of our time. Appoint the hour,
The hour which must wear garlands of delight,
By which we'll make it the envy of the age.
My Lord what mean you?
What all fine Lords mean,
Who have plenty, youth, and title.
But my fame?
Tic the fools bugbear.
Then my conscience▪
A scarecrow for old wives, whom wrinkles make
Religious.
What will the Court say?
Why nothing.
In mercy to themselves, all other Ladies
Will keep your council.
But will you not boast it?
Isle be degraded first.
Well I'm resolved.
But when sweet Madam? Name
The moment.
Never. For now I weigh things better,
The antidote against fear is innocence.
Will you delude my hopes then? Pity Madam
A heart that withers, if denied this favour.
In pity I may be induced to much;
And since you urge compassion, I will meet.
Where excellent Madam?
In the Sycamore walk.
The minute, ô the minute?
An hour hence.
Felicity! fit for thy envy Love!
You will not fail now Madam?
To be such
As you shall count that hour your happiest.
This is a challenge! Prithee my small friend
May not a man take the height of thy Lords spirit,
Looking on thee?
Pray sir leave off your mirth
And write my Lord your answer.
Little sir,
I never learnt that pretty quality;
I cannot write. Only by word of mouth.
Your place sir?
The market place.
Tic fantastic: and my Lord will take it ill.
Your weapons sir.
Two English Mastives, which
Are yet but whelps, and not transported hither:
So that the time will be I know not when.
Your sport is dangerous. If my Lord forgive you;
I must resent the affront as to my self,
And will expect a most severe account.
Thou less thought angrier thing than wasp, farewell.
I am informed my Lord that you have business,
And tic of moment:
Great as that of Natures
In her most mighty work, Creation.
For to preserve from dissolution, equals
The gift of our first Being. Not to hold
Your Majesty in riddles, tic to beg
Your pardon for a Soldier doomed to dye;
Inevitably doomed: Unless your mercy
Steppe between him and death.
My Lord we use
To examine well the fact, for which he is
To suffer, ere we pardon. There be crimes
Of that black quality, which often makes
Mercy seem cruel.
That's the fear which frights
Me to this paleness: sure his crime is great
But fondly I presuming on the service
My fortune lately did you, gave my vow
Ne'er to forsake your ear with earnest prayers,
Till you had granted.
Would you had not vowed.
For by the practise of my enemies,
My fame is among the people yet unsettled,
And my capacity for government,
Held much too feeble. Should I then by this
Provoke them to disdain me, I might run
Apparent hazard even of ruin, now
War so distracts our Kingdom. But my Lord
Your merits are too ponderous in the scale,
And all respects weigh light, you have his pardon.
Your hand on that. The Down on the Swans bosom, 
Not white and soft as this: Here's such a dew
As drops from bounteous heaven in the morning,
To make the shadowy bank pregnant with violets.
My Lord!
I kissed it, and the Phoenix seemed
(The last of the whole race) to yield a perfume
More sweet than all his dying Ancestors
Breathed from their funeral piles. O shrink not back!
My life is so concomitant with love,
That if you frown on either both expire;
And I must part for ever hence.
How strange appears this ecstasy? My Lord I fear
Your brain feels some disturbance: If I cause it,
I will remove the object.
Pardon Madam
The error of my fancy (which oft seems
To see things absent) if my tongue did utter
What misbecame your ear. And doe not forfeit
Your servant to perpetual misery
For want of a short patience.
No my Lord;
I have the memory of your great deeds
Engraved so deep; no error can have power
To raze them from a due respect▪ You begged
To have a pardon. speak the offenders name.
The offenders name, is Love. His crime, high treason▪
A plot how to surprise and wound your heart;
To this conspirator I have given harbour,
And vowed to beg your mercy for him.
How?
And if you break your grant, I will hereafter
Scorn all your Sex, since the most excellent
Is cruel, and inconstant.
Pray my Lord
Go recollect your reason, which your passion
Hath too much scattered. Make me not have cause
To hate, whom I would ever strive to honour.
Madam you happily scorn the vulgar earth
Of which I stand compacted: And because
I cannot add a splendour to my name
Reflective from a royal pedigree;
You interdict my Language. But be pleased
To know, the ashes of my ancestors
If intermingled in the Tomb with Kings
Could hardly be distinguished. The Stars shoot
An equal influence on the open cottage,
Where the poor shepherds child is rudely nursed,
And on the cradle where the Prince is rocked
With care and whisper.
And what hence infer you?
That no distinction is 'tweene man and man,
But as his virtues add to him a glory,
Or vices cloud him.
But yet heaven hath made
Subordination, and degrees of men,
And even religion doth authorize us
To rule; and tells the subject tic a crime
And shall meet death, if he disdain obedience.
Kind heaven made us all equal, till rude strength
Or wicked pollice usurped a power,
And for Religion, that exhorts to obey
Only for its own ease.
I must not hear,
Such insolence against Majesty: And yet
This less offends than love.
If reason bends
You not to mercy; let my passion plead,
And not meet death from her, in whose fair quarrel
I could each moment bring a life to the hazard.
Philosophy, hath taught me that content
Lives under the course thatch of Labourers
With much more quiet, then where the sam'd hand
Of Artists, to the life have richly drawn
Upon the roofs the fictions of the Gods.
How happy then might I lengthen my life,
With some fair Country Girl, so ignorant
She knew not her own beauties: Rather than
Endanger death and scorn in your denial,
And in your grant nothing but pomp and envy.
My Lord be wise, and study that best content.
This bold presumptuous love, hath cancelled all
The bonds I owed your valour: henceforth hope
Not for that usual favour I show strangers,
Since you have thus abused it: would I might
With safety have appeared more grateful.
She's gone, as life from the delinquent when
Justice sheathes up her sword. I fine would have
Concealed lov's treason, but desire to obtain her
Put me to the torture, till each Nerve did crack,
And I confessed, then died upon the rack.
THy pride is such a flatterer of thy beauty,
That no man sighs by accident, but thou
Dost pity as enamoured.
Floriana!
Not so kind natured surely. I have put
The sighs of Courtiers in a scale, and find
Some three score thousand may weigh down a feather.
In have tried their tears, which though of briny taste,
Can only season the hearts of fools, not women.
Their vows are like their duels, ever grounded,
Upon the idlest quarrel.
This, experiences
Perhaps instructs you to. But yet your pride
I fear is over easy to believe.
Tic merely to fly idleness, that my Lord
Hath troubled you with courtship. If the Queen
Would make a statesman, she might cure a Lover.
Want of employment made him dream on beauty,
And yours came first to his fancy.
I begin
To think his making love but vanity,
And a mistake in wit.
And you begin
Perhaps to fear it?
True, perhaps I doe.
For though we care not for the Lover, yet
We love the passion. Though we scorn the offering
We grieve to see it thrown away, and envy
If consecrated to another. Woman
Hath no revenge against the injury of custom,
Which gives man superiority, but thus
To fool him to subjection.
Yet Cleantha!
I could have wished your charity had spared
This triumph o'er my Lord.
You see I take
The next way to redeem him. This the hour,
And this the place. Here he resolves to raise
A trophy in my ruin. And behold 
The just man of his promise. Not a minute
He fails; when sinne's the payment.
Isle endanger
His virtue to a blush: And happily
Convert an Infidel.
This is my province,
Nor shall you envy me the honour of
A work of meritorious. Let him walk
A while, and sin with his own fancy: Then
Isle undertake him: and if there be need,
Be you prepared to assist me.
Thou dost build
Such Forts on the opinion of thy wit.
Tic a full hour, and half a minute over.
And yet she not appears? How we severe
Strict Creditors in love, stand on the minute?
But yet the payment never comes unwelcome,
Until the gold, through age grow soul and rusty,
We stand not on a grain or two too light. 
Now your discovery?
My Lord I have
Made search in every Ally, every Arbour,
Not left a bush, wherein my littleness
Could creep without due scrutiny. And yet
No whispering of taffeta: No dazzling
Of your bright Mistress forced me to a wink.
I saw no mortal beauty.
Sure she'll not
Be so unworthy to delude me now?
But I had a more prosperous fate in love,
My Lord I met my mistress.
You, a mistress?
A Mistress to whose beauty I have paid
My vows, most fervent vows, ere since I was
Of stature fit to be an Amorist.
One of the Maids of honour to Queen Mob?
Your Lordship guesses near. For she is one
Of the Chamberers to her Fayrie Majesty;
A Lady of most subtle wit: who while
She puts a handkerchief or gorget on
Her little highness, holds intelligence
Abroad, and orders payment for the Spies.
She raises factions, and unites the angry.
She's much upon design.
Where found you her?
Walking alone under the shadow of
A Tulip, and inveighing against Court Arts,
Because one of Oberons Grooms had got from her
The Monopoly of transporting gnats,
A project she long aimed at.
No more fooling.
I am grown angry with my patience.
Boy, sing those verses, were presented me
This morning.
I will creep behind a bush,
And then for voice, vie with the Nightingale:
If seen I am so bashful.
Take your way. 
She breaks forth like the Morning in a Cloud.
Tic for the safety of my eyes, you veil
The glory of your beauties, which else might
Dazzle, not catch the sight. But I discern
A fair Cleantha through this gloominess.
Appear, and speak bright Madam. Why such silence?
O famish not my ear, which greedily
Longs to devour the Musique of your Language:
Is it to teach me that delight must be
Entombed in secrecy? Or else to show
How mad a spend thrift I'm to talk away
The treasure of this hour. Come fair unveil.
O give me leave, yet to retain my blushes.
Deceit of timorous modesty! Traitors
To love your blushes are. Your fears are envious
Of your delights. Lets vanish hence and near
To the vulgar eye again appear: Till we
Grown old in pleasure be transformed to a Vine
Or Ivy, so for ever to entwine.
Then I unveil.
O fly into my arms,
As a rich odor to the ravished sense▪
Perfume me with thy kisses.
Stay my Lord:
Actions of moment (as I take this is)
Must be maturely thought on. I have called
My reason to account.
Your reason Madam?
Yes my good Lord. That only doth distinguish
A woman from bruit beasts; or what's more sensual,
A vain loose man. What sin scandals my carriage
To give encouragement to this presumption?
What privileged this attempt?
That tempting beauty.
It is a traitor then to my pure thoughts:
And to preserve your eye, would it were wrinkled;
I could much easier suffer the reproach
Of age, than your bold courtship. If a Lady
Be young and sportive, use curiosity
And perhaps Art, to help where nature seemed
Imperfect in her work, will you, from the
False argument of your own loose blood, conclude
Her guilty? Or if she select a friend;
Whose innocence gives warrant to her faith,
Will you infer their whispers have no aim
But that of Brothels? Cause you find your self
Nought but loose flesh, will you turn Heretic,
And thence deny the soul?
This language Madam
Sounds nothing to the purpose of our meeting.
More to the benefit. But in your patent,
Among all the privileges of a Condo
Where find you lust inserted? Without which
Till age hath made you wise or impotent,
You think your honour is defective. Because
Your clothes are handsome, and mine too; must we
Deform our minds? Is it sufficient motive
To sin, if opportunity and youth
Persuade us? Such as you, are those foul plagues
Infect the ayre which breathes our fame, and make
The cautious sirs of the Country shun us.
Madam?
When we admit you to our bedchamber,
Powder, or happily bath before you. What
Of honor's here more than a groom may boast,
Our maids are tired with? Yet this with a smile
Is whispered to your friend, and you infer
How easy a more near approach will be.
My Lord learn virtue, and your wit may then
Not serve you to so fond a purpose. If
That courage you are famed for be no slander,
Go to the wars. Twill be a far less maim
To lose an eye there than your honour here.
If peace enamour you, and the Court, live honest;
And hope the heir who shall succeed you, may
Be yours. Revenge destroys more chaste it ie,
Than all the temptings of such Lords as you.
You shall not talk me Madam from that pleasure
This hour doth promise me.
You'll not commit
A rape my Lord?
That is a question as
Yet unresolved. For force is my last refuge.
Think on the danger; for the sin I see
Little distracts your conscience.
I propose
Felicity, which none can merit, who
Refuse so poor a venture. Here I vow
No prayer or Art shall free you. If you will
Hazard a life devoted to your service,
Isle dye your Martyr.
Come my Lord, Isle free you
From all such hazard.
There spoke harmony.
Isle not be cruel. You shall have kisses, such
As will melt your soul into your lips. And what
Is sweetest, no repentance shall be the issue 
Of your delight. Look here my Lord. She's yours.
No halter now? Not tree convenient? O!
A steeple would be precious for my purpose!
But Oniate's there. Isle fight with him;
Be killed, and be redeemed. Sir you received
A challenge from me! but returned no answer.
My Lord I had other business: you'll excuse me.
What satisfaction doe men give, when challenged?
According to their spirit. If they be
Regardless of their fame, then they submit.
If not, they fight.
What Sir, will you then doe?
Let me consider. Neither.
Come you shall fight.
My Lord I will not.
Then you shall subscribe
Your self a coward.
Not for the whole world:
Such an apparent lye would be a sin
Too heavy to my conscience. I subscribe
My self a coward? If I should; no soldier
Would think but that my hand were counterfeited.
Then you must fight.
My Lord on no condition. Hope not for it.
Then you shall swear, never to speak my name
But with respect.
Hereafter, if you can
Deserve it. For the present, I must crave
Your pardon with much mirth to laugh at you.
Sir I shall meet you.
It shall contradict
All my endeavours then.
I go sir. But.
For mercy sake go with thy Lord. Repentance
May turn to desperation.
Isle preserve him.
Have you no business sir, imports you more
Than t'hold discourse with me? Troth I shall pity
You want employment.
Madam, what can be
More serious?
Nothing more: If your design
Be to convert me; for I know you hold
All Ladies in a Schism, who are young and proud.
Your pardon Madam. I believe in cunning,
Court Ladies choose some petty venial errors,
To set perfection off. For should you not
Usurp a handsome pride, your fame would lye
Like unwal'd Cities, open to the prey
Of each invading youth. Did you not show
A scorn, you would deserve it.
Sir take heed.
Hope not to win my favour, by extolling
What in our better thoughts our selves condemn.
Jam so wearied out with vows and oaths,
With impious praises and most tedious flattery:
That nothing but plain speaking truth, can gain
On my affection.
Madam! your affection?
Pray sir doe not comment upon the word;
It doth portend no danger to you.
And if it did, whore's the beatitude?
For though I grant you virtues great as beauty
Can entertain; and foolish I resolved
To captivate my stock of life to a woman:
Yet would I not adventure on you, if
You did not vow to perform Articles.
Suppose the business come to Articles.
In the first then you should covenant love, not squinting
On every finer youth, or greater Lord;
But looking straight on me.
To the second sir.
No dotage on the Court, so far that my
Estate must rue it: and no vanity
Be started up, but my fond Lady must
Be melancholy, and take physic, till
She get into it.
Why! You envy then
Us our own trouble. Keep us from the expense
And leave us to our discontent for penance.
No. I would have the mind serene: Without
All passion, though a masque should be presented;
And you in the Country. I must have you wise,
To know your beauty mortal: which you must
Preserve to warm my eye: not aid by Arts,
To keep the Courtiers wit in exercise.
From his so practised flattery, your care
Must turn with a brave scorn; and when his eye
Doth offer parley, seem so ignorant
As not to understand the language.
Sir
You happily will debar us our she friends too?
As secret enemies who's first betray you.
You'll not allow us, wearied of our husbands,
To send them on discovery of new worlds?
Or if we take a toy our selves to travel,
Perhaps to Barberry, or Tartary,
Or the remotest parts?
To Bedlam sooner.
Or if our Sex should warrant it by custom,
To play at Tennis, or run at the Ring,
Or any other Martial exercise;
I fear me scrupulous sir, you will condemn it
As dangerous to my honour?
Sure I should.
I then perceive small hope of our agreement.
But I a confidence. For I discern
How much you loath these follies, you pretend.
Good sir no more of this so kind mistake,
You'll find some other Lady more deserves it.
And I aspire not to the honour.
Isle try yet farther.
My Lord you offer nobly.
Tic a steppe
Beneath Florentio's greatness, whether you
His birth consider, or his place. Sir the Queen
By natures seated and her high deserts,
Where only mighty souls (such as the Generals)
May offer to aspire.
My Lord your laps
To this proud language is so injurious, that
I must be forced to purge the humour. That
The Lord Florentio offers by a duel
To show no man can have fairer pretence
To serve the Queen; must be allowed. But that
You dare cast disregard upon this Lord
Although a stranger, urges me to entreat
Y'ould draw your sword:
It hath seen light, and made
Way through an Army, when fond victory
Smiled on our enemies. It hath done wonders,
When the thick troops of Moors invaded us,
It fears no opposition.
Show the effect of 't.
Not in a cause so trivial. Each small breath
Disturbs the quiet of poor shallow waters:
But winds must arm themselves, ere the large sea
Is seen to tremble. Pray your pardon sir:
I must not throw away my courage on
A cause so trivial.
As you palace my Lord;
But to omit all circumstance, you bring
A challenge to my Lord Ascanio:
The reason of the Lord Florentio's anger,
A rivallship in Love.
You speak it right.
Isle bring you back his resolution,
Before you have attended many minutes.
Sir twill be descent, for my nature knows
Not how to waite. And if no delays
Be used, twill show a fierce valour in him,
And happily prevent discovery.
For you may easily conjecture, that
A Generals absence soon will wake the eye
Of the suspicious Soldier.
Is my Lord
In readiness.
He walks not far from hence
You shall have use then but of a short patience.
It will be grateful to us sir: My Lord.
And will Ascanio meet?
Immediately.
I had no other way. Yet this is rough,
And Justice whispers tic unsafe to tread it.
If to love her be sinful, what am I?
How dare I call his passion to the bar,
And nourish it my self? Why may not he
Who hath as bold a fortune, entertain
As bold a love; and in the fate of war
Having outgone by service, why not then
Present it to the selfsame Altar? But
We cannot harbour both in the same Port;
Or he or I am shipwrecked: for the storm
Is raised, and to appease it, death must be
The sacrifice.
My Lord here is the second.
This stranger dares not meet with your great spirit.
Suspect him not my Lord. He hath a courage
Above the sense of fear. Well sir your answer?
My Lord Ascanio could have wished his life
Might have been destind to a happier purpose.
And charged me tell your Lordship that he had
Much rather have been lost with common dust,
In the cheap Churchyard, than endangered fame
In this great duel.
Sir explain his reasons.
He calls to his sad thoughts, the mischiefs which
This Kingdom needs must fall into when you
Shall perish by his sword; certainly
You cannot scope it, thus provoking death.
Then to what ruin may the Queen, whose safety
You both have laboured, be engaged? He could
With patience almost suffer on his name,
The infamy of coward, rather than
Hazard the quiet of her estate. But you.
Let me consider; Tic an idle rage
That heats me to this quarrel, Let her fate
Remain unshaken, though she choose my foe
Into her love and bosom. If she live
Above the fear of ruin; I am mighty,
Mighty enough, though by my griefs grown feeble
And weakened too, diseases fright the healthy.
I will refer my cause and life to her,
And ne'er dispute it by the sword.
My Lord!
Velasco, I am safe enough against
The taint of Coward. Spain bears witness that
I dare, as far as honour dares give warrant.
But in this cause.
My Lord you'll lose the glory
Of all your former Actions; and become
The mirth of Courtiers, empty things who brawl
Not fight, if you return after a challenge
Without performance.
Tic a serious truth.
Moreover this young Gentleman hath hope
To talk you from your resolution:
The Lord Ascanio will too much exult,
If this way too he can overcome you.
It must not be sir, tell my Lord I waite
His leisure.
And your Lordship shall not have
Reason to think it long. Prepare your self
His only prayer is now; that when he comes
There may be no discourse to take up time,
He hath desire the business may be all:
What he can say, hath been by me delivered.
We will obey him. Tyrant Love! Why is
Thy cruelty so wanton to delight
In murder? Like that impious Roman Prince,
Thou joyest to smother, whom thou love, in Roses,
And stifle them with the choicest perfumes. But
This is no place for reason; She may hold
Dispute in sober schools, where study raises
The soul to knowledge. Here's the Theater
For the bruit part of man to fight his last,
I must redeem the Laurel, fortune crowned
His Temples with, or perish in the attempt.
My fate decrees it.
Here's my Lord Ascanio.
Why doth he turn his face away as if
He durst not look on danger: Doe his fears
Now triumph ore his courage.
Put it to the trial.
He's more than Mortal sure. He strikes like lightning
Himself not passive. But Isle try again,
And disenchant the Sorcerer. I there
I reached him home. You bleed, open your doublet
The wound perhaps is dangerous.
But a scratch.
Sure I have heard that voice, and seen that face,
Velasco tic the King.
My Lord what mean you?
Some Planet strike me dead, and fix this arm
A monument to tell posterity
The treason of my error: Mighty sir,
Show mercy to your Creature, that my death
(Which hastily steals on me) may not be
Too foul for after story.
Rise Florentio,
This act cannot endure the name of Treason.
Some Surgeons quick to search the wound! O sir
How doe you feel your self? speak life, or I
Shall sink down to my Center.
Not a man
Stir hence, thy sword was loyal as thy thoughts,
And scarce hath pierced the skin. O my Florentio.
My Lord and King! But why did you engage
Your sacred person into danger? It was not well;
How many thousand lives depend on yours?
Envy of the greatness I possessed, without
The merit, and desire to know those perils
We wantonly our subjects cast upon
On every weak exception; wrought my youth
Into this action. Nor can I repent
The experience of this weir?
But oh great sir,
Why did your Majesty suffer this duel?
It was cruel and unkind. How easily
This hand might have committed sactiledge?
The very thought whereof, like some pale vision
Congeals my blood.
Search not that wound to deep.
Florentio! I shall blush, blust like some Lady
Surprised in sin, if you too far examine.
Conceal it not great sir, though in the speaking
Poison steal through my ear. Be confident,
Unveil your thoughts.
You needs must hate me then:
And will have Justice to throw off that duty
You owe me as a subject. Let it be
Unspoken still; though smothering it be death
Good heaven desend. What is an Army of us
Exposed to certain slaughter, if compared
To the shortest moment that should serve your quiet?
And shall I live and see my Sovereign wear
A sorrow, on his brow?
Florentio! thou
Art glorious in thy virtue. So was I
Till looking on the Queen I grew of the sudden
Darker then midnight?
O my cruel fate!
I grew a thief, a most ungrateful thief
In my designs, and laboured to have stole
The Jewel of thy life from thee. A Jewel,
My self so freely had bestowed upon
The merits of thy youth.
My soul foresaw this.
How justly had I perished by thy sword.
How happy for my safety. Then had I
Been lost in my disguise; or dyed, my crime
Unknown unto the world. Now if I live
I must wade through a sea of injuries,
T'attaine an unsafe haven.
Cheer your self
Dread sir: Though as I give the Legacy
I breath my last; yet will I show a heart
Thankful to your great favours. Madam, here
Behold the Sovereign of Castle.
You have
Been cruel in your kindness Sir, to keep
So long your sacred person hid from us.
He is your Lover Madam, and deserves
The title. Whether you observe his youth,
So beauteous, Nature dotes upon her work:
Or weigh his greatness powerful to defend you,
Should fate and all mankind conspire your ruin;
And add to that, he merits you, his sword
Having restored you freedom: when poor I
Was judged like some old instrument of war
Unfit for service. All my interest
I here resign to the Author of my fate;
My Love I cannot, which must still remain,
Companion to my life. But Isle take heed
My wound appear not, though it inward bleed.
I waite here Madam, and attend your sentence
For it is my doom.
Sir I am that sad wretch,
Stands trembling at the bar. I know your merit,
And know a gratitude, great as ere was owing,
By an injured soul relieved. I duly weigh
That double tie which doth obleige me yours.
First when you sent your soldiers to my rescue;
Then by exposing your most sacred person
To the dangers of a war.
A trivial nothng.
What honour can come equal to my state
As by so high a match? And against your person
The envious cannot find a quarrel.
Madam
All this is circumstance, the politic
Busy their fancy with. I bring a love,
An humble love, which is of value to
Ennoble the parcht labourer, and force
An Empress listen to his vows. Consider
In me nothing of fortune, only look
On that, to which Love new created me.
If once received your servant; what's Castle
In the comparison? For Princes are
Too bold, if they bring wealth and victory,
To enter competition with those treasures
A Lover aims at in his Mistress favour.
May I not hope your smile?
You must command it.
Then give me leave to whisper to my hopes
What strange felicities I shall enjoy.
But sir, consider how you gave away
To your Florentio, all that claim, you might
Have to me, as so great a neighbouring Prince.
It was a gift my ignorance made, which I
Was cozened in. For had my eye been honoured
With sight of such a beauty; safer he
Might have petitioned for my Sceptre: And
The grant had not so soon begot repentance.
But promises of Princes must not be
By after Arts evaded? Who dares punish
The breach of oath in subjects; and yet slight
The faith he hath made them?
But my Florentio,
Hath given me back his interest.
That gift
Was like a vow extorted, which Religion
Cancels, as forced from Conscience.
But your self
Are free, and never by an oath made his.
My resolution, grounded on his service,
Ties more than formal contracts.
Isle not urge
You father, but by these, which never yet
Found passage through my eyes not he, nor all
Mankind contracted to one heart, can harbour
A love that equals that I burn with, Madam
Think on it: and let your thoughts find out that path
Which leads to mercy.
How I am dazzled,
Placed on a precipice by tyrant Love?
The King is Noble, and his merits claim
A retribution great as I can make.
He loves me; and yields only to Florentio,
In the priority of service. My sad soul! 
Between these two I might stand distracted!
But Virtue guide me: Nor can I ere stray
While that directs, and honour beats the way.
MY fortune yet forsakes me not. There's something
Whispers my soul, that though a storm did cloud
My morning, I shall set the envy of
My yet prevailing enemy. Had you
My fellow soldiers not been three hours march
From aiding us, when the Castilian Army
Made the assault: we had given their fate a check,
And taught them how unsafe it is to Court
Dangers abroad. I must entreat your courage
To suffer for some moments, a short time
Will bring us the Queens answer. If she yield
(As reason may persuade her) we shall spare
Much loss of blood, if not your valour will
Have liberty to show it self. Yet still
Remember that the Cities forced to obey
A stranger; in their votes they fight for us.
Did no man see the Lord Ossuna since
Our fight in the morning?
He appeared not since
We left the City to the enemy.
Which hath bred jealosie, my Lord, that he
Changed with the present fortune.
Doubt him not.
He hath a heart devoted to the greatness
And safety of his Country. Well he may
Be lost in the number of the slain. But fate
Cannot enforce him stoop beneath the vow
Of rescuing Arragon from foreign Arms. 
What insolence is this? Unhand the man,
Me thinks his hahit should beget respect.
My Lord we guess he is some spy, he came
Skulking from the enemies camp. Pray guard
Your person, mischief often lurks in shapes
As holly.
I allow your care and thank it,
Leave him to me; and for a while retire.
Your Lordship knows me not?
Ossuna, welcome!
Blessed bethy better Angel who preserved thee!
How happy to the fortune of this war
Art thou restored? I should have fought unarmed,
Had I not had the fare to embrace thee thus.
How was my friend preserved?
By virtue of
This sacred habit. In the mist of war
Disguised I thus escaped, though close pursued
By some of the Queens faction. To this weed
I owe my safety.
Quickly throw it off,
And reinvest thy body in that steel,
With which thou still hast triumphed. O my Lord▪
How oft have we all bathed in blood and sweat,
Though clouds of dust found out the way to force
Back victory to our side; when fortune seemed
To dote onth' enemy. We two have grown
Like Caedars up together, and made all
Seem shrubs to us, no man sleeping secure
But in our shadows.
Yes; we have been happy.
Thou speak so hollow, as there were a doubt
We might not be so still.
But there's is no faith
In humane fate. An Emperor did serve
As footestoole to the Conqueror: and are we
Better assured of destiny?
What strange
Unworthy faintness weakens his great soul,
Who heretofore, near understood the language
Danger speaks in? Hath one defeat lost you
That mighty courage, which hath fixed upon
Your name a glorious memory? Resume
Your self my Lord: Let no degenerate fear
Benight the luster of your former acts.
I call your self and Arragon to witness,
My life hath yet been such, ye reverend shades
Of my great Ancestors, need not look pale
Or blush, to know my story. To your self,
To whose brave youth I tied my youth a servant;
I ever have performed all Offices
Due to so brave a friendship.
Tic confessed.
And here I vow, setting aside those fears
Distract me as a Christian; I could smile,
Smile like some wanton Mistress, upon death
What ever shape it wears.
My Lord this war.
Is warranted by Casuists for lawful▪
But they (you'll say) flatter the present state,
And make divinity serve humane ends.
But in it self its just. A war your judgement
Gave approbation to; and urged me first
To undertake. Therefore make good your own,
And throw off this unuseful habit
Never.
What said my friend?
By all things sacred, never.
In this I will grow old, and with the weight
Of years bend to the earth▪ In this Isle breath
A happier ayre, then you in all your soft
And varied silks.
Some coward devil sure
Possesses him.
My Lord I am instructed
To a patience far above your injuries.
Nor shall your scorn or anger triumph o'er
My resolution. I'm fixed here, unmoov'd
As is the center.
I was much to blame.
This may be a brave virtue. Pray my Lord
Give me your reasons, why you tread this path
So little beaten by the feet of Courtiers.
I would not have the world mistake your aim,
And construe it to fear or melancholy?
That cannot shake me. He who by the Card
Of the worlds opinion steers his course, shall harbour
In no safe port. But to your care my Lord
I give this free account. Seven winters past
When I set sail from Scicily, a storm
Ore took the ship, so powerful that the Pilot
Gave up the Sterne to the ordering of the waves,
His Art and hand grown useless; Those kind stars
The Sailors use to invoke, were lost in the tempest
And nothing but a night not to be seen
Was seen by us. When every one began
To advance himself toward death as men condemned
To the Axe, when hope of pardon is shut out.
I spite of the envious cloud looked up to heaven
And darted my faith thither: vowing to
Forsake the flattered pomp and business of
The faithless world, if I with safety might
Attain the Land.
Was not I there my Lord?
You were.
And made no I the self same vow?
Heaven hath recorded that we both did vow it.
Of the sudden night forsook us, and the loud
Unruly winds fled to their unknown dwellings;
When a soft breath began whisper to our sails
A calm was to ensue.
My memory
Afflicts me much. But these are feeble vows
Made only by our fears: We ought to have
Our reason undismaid, when ere a promise
Can force performance.
I dispute it not.
Soon as I reached the shore I courted on
Those vanities which had my youth enamoured,
Yet still with some remorse. Honours betrayed me
Into a glorious trouble, and I grew
Proud of my burden. But if heaven had been
Severe to my delays, in this diseased
Surfeit of pomp, my soul might have been called
To her last account: And O my Lord where then
Had breach of vow been safe.
These are sad thoughts.
But necessary. When the mornings loss
Made me search out a shape for flight: this habit
It self presented; and again redeemed me,
And know I am resolved, near to forsake it
Till in the vault, my earth and it together
Shall wear away to dust.
My Lord you have
Good title to your virtue. Pray retire
Into my tent. This sudden change, if known,
May much amaze the Soldier, and endanger
The glory of the attempt. I shall entreat
Your prayer, since you deny your arm.
My Lord may heaven direct you.
What have I obtained
By all this sweat of business? Like the wind,
Prosperous ambition only swelled my sail
To give me courage to encounter with
A tempest. Early cares and midnight frights,
Faint hopes and causeless fears, successively
Like billows have moved in me. What a fool
Is humane wisdom; what a beggar wealth;
How scorned a nothing that proud state we dote on?
Time laughs us out of greatness, and shuts up
Our wide designs in a dark narrow room:
Whence when the valiant Monarch shall creep forth
He will like some poor coward, hide his eyes
And hope to scoulke away. But these are thoughts,
And now it is time for Action.
If your Lordship
Will please for some few moments to retire
Into your tent, her Majesty in person
Will give you parley here.
In person sir?
The favour bears some omen! she who in
The tempest of misfortune still did spread
Her sail at large; why doth she strike them now,
The wind so prosperous? This is a descent
Beneath her greatness.
I reach not, my Lord,
The mysteries of Princes, but this message
She charged me to return.
The Acts of Princes
Are governed often by as frail a Passion,
As those are of the vulgar, the same rage
That stirs two footmen to a fray, creates
War between Kingdoms; but the zealous subject
Gazing a far, on the actions of the proud,
Finds towers and Lyons in an empty cloud;
But Isle obey her leisure. Watch you here
Till you discover her advanced this way.
Sir you created me; and raised me up
To the state of Duke, when I was common dust.
And had not fortune given me interest
In the favour of the Queen, I had continued
In the worst fate of man, ingratitude.
Now I can boast I have restored you back
A love rich as the bounty you showered on me.
It is all the stock of my poor life.
Sad fate!
That I must wound thee to the heart, to cure
My Leprosy with thy blood. Florentio search
In the stock of women there's some other beauty,
O no! no other.
Isle endow her with
The wealth of all Castle.
Poor empty nothing!
If Sovereignty be the Idol of thy soul,
I will divide my Kingdom: thou shalt reign
As independant as my self.
Great sir,
Continue but your favour, and my stars
Cannot afford a greatness equals it.
The treasures of the ambitious, are the scorn
Of those who seriously contemplate life:
My fortunes high enough. And now my thoughts
Grow temperate; not for the Empire of the East,
(Which yet retains the treasures, man enjoyed
Ere he grew black with sin) would I have wanted
This blessed occasion to express the zeal
I owe my Prince. Here with as free a soul
I give her to your Arms as ere you threw
A smile upon my service.
Thanks dear friend!
(That word must speak our loves) by this great gift
Thou hast redeemed me from the tortue, and
Possessed me of the fairest.
O!
The fairest, Nature ere made for wonder.
She is fair.
Enjoying her thy King shall live, who else
Were desperate beyond cure. He shall be envied.
And every year as age threatens decay,
He shall regain new life from her. Florentio
Believe it there's miracle in such a beauty.
Surely there is. 
And see she appears. How like some heavenly vision
That kills with too much glory.
Stand still, and wonder with me.
Cleantha! O the prodigy! And how
Wilt thou endure his serious face? Can thou
Whom nothing tempted but wit parcel guilt
And the last fashion, suffer Oniate?
Madam! I undertake him for a penance:
Perhaps he was enjoined me.
It was love
You went to shrift with then. And yet how that
Young wanton idleness, should counsel you
To this conversion still is more my riddle.
The Court is full of wonders Madam: and
Tic handsome to doe things extravagant.
But how in th'heate of war, your thoughts should be
So apt for loves impression.
Love will dance
As nimbly to the Trumpet, Fife, or, Drum,
As to those many Violins which play
So loud at Court. Moreover it concerned
My safety. I so straightly was besieged
And by so strong a Caesar.
O my Lord
I am informed with how fierce a spirit
You doe assault our Ladies.
Pray your mercy,
And if your Majesty will please to banish
The Art of making love quite from the Court;
Isle not be out of fashion.
For your sake
I will contrive it so: And good my Lord
Will you begin the example; you will see
How soon the fine young Lords will follow you.
Your pardon sir, had I but seen your highness,
I had not lost so much of language from
A most expressive gratitude.
Madam you pay a trivial debt with too great interest
For how contem'd a slightness was my life
Until employed to serve you?
She glanced this way,
And Loves Artillery played from her eye.
Unhappy banchrout what a Kingdom have
I forfeited? So often in a caime
Some vessel rich in fraught and proud in sail,
Doth spring a sudden leake, and sinckes for ever.
But Madam is there hope your heart can yield
To an exchange in love? My title's good,
Florentio having given up his claim.
But sir the estate is still my own nor have
I need to sell it. But Decastro's here,
And if your Majesty will deign your presence
Unto the parley'twill advance the honour
And purpose of our meeting.
I'm your servant.
My Lord you see how near the safety of
Our subjects touches us: We can stoop thus
Beneath our Majesty, and enter parley
Even with a Rebel.
Madam, it is in vain
To hold dispute against what you will condemn.
And it were insolence to boast my power,
Or speak my right, now when the hearts of all men
Confirm the justice of my taking Arms.
Cast but your eye on this vast body, which
The Kingdom doth unite in my defence,
And see how ruinous is your error, that
Must lean to foreign succours!
Tic a refuge
Your practice forced me to.
But would your highness
Had lent a gentler 〈◊〉 the safe counsel
Of him who had no crime but too much love.
My Lord, that word fell rudely from your tongue,
And I may say, unmannerly; Tic duty
You owe the Queen.
Right sir, an humble duty,
Ambitious to expose my life to dangers,
Greater than any other soul dares fancy.
Pray stay Florention: this is now my cause,
And I (proud man) will tell you, your great heart
Doth want expansion to receive a love
Worthy her scorn.
And I will answer you
(Proud Monarch of Castle) what mold
Soever Nature casts me in, my mind
Is vaster than your empire. And I can
Love equally with him whose name did Conquer
Kingdoms as large as yours.
Your Majesty
Must licence here my rage, to teach his folly
(Presumptuous folly) a submiss repentance.
Sir here I stand prepared.
What noise is that.
The Cities all in Mutiny: and vow
To perish in the Lord Decastro's cause.
They are ready now to lay rude hands upon
The Garrisons of Castle. Your Majesty
Should hinder mischief; if you suddenly
Return, and by your presence stop their fury.
Pray Oniate take this signet: tell
The Magistrats, her Majesty and I
Are now accorded, with a due regard
To the public safety. Take some of my army
To give authority to what you say.
Assure them all is well.
What means this wonder?
This speaks him Noble, even to our envy.
My Lord in this you have obliged us: Pray
Inform us of your thoughts, that we may study
To make this parley happy.
Mighty Lady,
I find my love hath not been dressed so smooth
To tempt your liking; and I must confess
My passion (like the spleen of witches) hath
Begot whirlewinds and thunder. Would I might
Have found a softer way to have wrought my ends.
For by your beauty (the most sacred oath
A Lover can swear by) that was the mark
The sole fair mark I aimed at. For if pride
Had overswayed my love, I could have stood
Of the level with that Prince, so much your people
Were vowed to my devotion▪
On my Lord,
You fairly speak your virtues.
And but view
The vastness, and good order of my Camp;
Your best towns sworn to run my fortune, and
You'll say it was love did beg this interview.
My Lord your language cannot fright us from
The Queens defence.
Great sir, she needs it not.
Down on your knees my fellow Soldiers, and
With me bow to your Sovereign: swear with me
Never to lift your Arm against her command.
Thus as your subject. As your Lover thus,
Thus to the earth I fall, and with my lips
Seal my obedience.
Pray rise up my Lord,
Would I could merit thus much favour; but.
Pardon I interupt you. But you cannot
Find love to answer mine; nor will I force it
Be happy in your choice, and wheresoever
You six, shine ever glorious. From this hour
Isle never more distube you.
Now beshrew me,
Me thinks I feel compassion. Good my Lord
Write in that blank all your demands, and by
The honour of a Princess, Isle deny
Nothing you shall insert.
There tic again:
The paper innocent as when you gave it.
My Lord you have writ nothing.
And tic nothing
Now I have mist your self, I can demand,
Fortune contract thy treasure from all Nations,
And guild it ore with honour and with beauty;
Yet hast thou not the power to force one wish;
Now I have lost this Lady.
A great spirit.
One humble prayer I have which must not be
Denied. And tic your Majesty will give
Me leave near more to see you.
O my Lord.
My vows irrevocable. I shall secure
Your Kingdom best by absence, and my eye
Will never brooke so rich a treasure made
The purchase of another. To a Cave
Some undiscovered Cave, to which no path
Doth lead the wandering Lover, I have vowed
The remnant of my days.
A strange conversion,
And twill behoove my fate to follow him.
My Lord Ossuna here, and I have sworn
Our lives to solitude, which weal observe
Religiously; And since I cannot prove
Possessor Isle be Couqueror in Love.
Pray stay my Lord. Behold Florentio there
He hath out donne you. He for love of me,
Hath done what you for love of heaven. All
The interest he had in that bright Queen
He hath resigned to me.
He hath paid you for
Your favours.
Tic confessed; what's mine is yours.
Thanks my Florentio. For with her my youth
May be still happy, and my age disdain
To know a weakness. From her eyes I may
Draw still new vital heate, and find what fools
Have studied for, the Elixir. In her Arms
I may be safe against all invasion from
Abroad, or civil dangers nursed at home.
Your highness pardon. I confess how high
Your merits rise in my esteem, but must not
To honour your deserts, my self become
Unworthy after story, blemished with
That scorn which still defames our Sex, registerd
A most Inconstant woman, or whats much
More infamous; one who reserves her love
To serve her profit, and exposes it, to the Merchant that bids fairest.
Madam spare that breath to clear
The ayre when poisoned by contagion.
I know your settled thoughts, and that my power
Or title weighs not in your love. Plorentio
I will no longer rack you, though the Queen
Beth' only fire ere warmed this heart, and I
Despair ever to love again; I will
Disdain to be unjust. I will not be
Overcome in friendship; resume thy right.
Sir you undo me; In your injury,
I was less wretched, like a banckrout, now
Without all hope of payment I must owe.
The ambition of my service, and disguise
Was to advance your fortune Madam: Nor
Can I attempt you farther though the conquest
Would wreath my Temples with a prouder Laurel,
Than the addition of the world unto
My Sceptre. Be safe in your choice and happy.
This goodness grows even to a Miracle.
In his behalf sir, I must vow my self
A subject, and your servant.
O command
For I have nothing Madam but obedience.
My Kingdom shall be proud to share with yours
In danger, and Isle glory to be stiled
Your Soldier.
I am lost in wonder. Sir
I know not how to entertain this blessing
I fear my Joys will be my ruin.
Be both happy.
And may time never father that black moment
Which shall appear to you less fortunate.
Join then your hands for ever. He doth live
Mighty indeed, w'hath power, and will, to give.
NOt the Phoenix in his death
Nor those banks where violets grow,
And Arabian winds still blow,
Yield a perfume like her breath.
But ô! Marriage makes the spell:
And tic poison if I smell.
The twin beauties of the skies.
(When the half sunk sailors hast,
To rend sail and cut their mast)
Shine not welcome as her eyes.
But those beams, then storms more black,
If they point at me I wrack.
Then for fear of such a fire,
Which kills worse than the long night
Which benumbs the Muscovite:
I must from my life retire.
But ô no! for if her eye
Warm me not; I freeze, and dye.
FIne young folly, though you were
That fair beauty I did swear,
Yet you near could reach my heart.
For we Courtiers learn at School,
Only we are sects to fool,
You're not worth the serious part.
When I sigh and kiss your hand,
Cross my Arms and wondering stand:
Holding parley with your eye,
Then delat on my desires,
Swear the sun ne'er shot such fires,
All is but a handsome lye.
When I eye your curl or Lace,
Gentle soul you think your face
Straight some murder doth commit,
And your virtue doth begin
To grow scrupilous of my sin,
When I talk to show my wit.
Therefore Madam wear no cloud
Nor to check my love grow proud,
For in sooth I much doe doubt
It is the powder in your hair,
Not your breath perfumes the ayre,
And your Clothes that sets you out.
Yet though truth has this confessed,
And I vow I love in Jest
When I next begin to Court
And protest an amorous flame,
You will swear I in earnest am:
Bedlam this is pretty sport.
WE have nothing left us but our blushes now
For your much penance, and though we allow
Our fears no Comfort, since you must appear
Judges Corrupt, if not to us severe:
Yet in your Majesty we hope to find
A mercy; and that our pardon find.
And how can we despair you will forgive
Them who would please, when oft offenders live;
And if we have er'd, may not the Courteous say;
T was not their trade, and but the Authors Play.
what shall the Author doe? it madness were
To entreat a mercy from you who are severe,
Sterne Judges and a pardon never give,
For only merit with you makes things live:
He leaves you therefore to your selves and may,
You gently quit or else condemn the Play,
As in an upright Conscience you will think fit,
Your sentence is the life and death of wit.
The Author yet hath one safe plea, that though
A Middlesex lury on his play should go,
They cannot find the murder wilful, since
T was Acted by Command, in his own defence.

THere, take your orders, and dispatch;
Your known faiths will not let me doubt th'observance
Of the least circumstance.
Yet give me leave (most noble Gene∣rall
To ask the reason, since his Highness lest
A free dispose at his departure, why
You should use so much severity in your commands?
Not a man enter the city in forfeiture of his life? their's somewhat hard conditions; I've entered a Kingdom, and helped to win it too, on far easier terms; this of the sudden, and so unexpected too may meet with a harsh con∣struction.
For mine own part, I've bin so long absent,
Especially being a poor servant to the state too,
I dare conclude I'm lost to all their memories;
Nor do I love the Camp so ill, to part with it
To win upon their faiths; urge a tedious catalogue
Of my dead ancestors, and then search records
To show I was their country-man; all this
For a cold welcome, or an annual pension;
To show my scores of wounds, that tally up
So many months pay behind hand: which
After seven years misery in an hospital,
Shall be both wiped off together: yet all
Are not of my humour.
What though your dull fat Senators, those land-Porpi∣ces
That skip, and frisk in the storm they ne'er are hurt with,
Those heavy lubbers, lapped in sweaty furs,
Batning on sleep and ease, lie snorting out
The peace poor Soldiers purchase,
And not so much as dream of toil, or danger,
Slight what they are ignorant of: yet you (my Lord)
May know, if cold lazy recompenses injure
Our high deserts such usage kills outright:
True Contareno, that is their intent.
L'as we bring no diseases home with us, unless va∣lore be one; no meager troops of thin starvelings, that they should fear a famine from our commerce, we have fed high, though somewhat irreverently: nor return wee in our old skins, blew coats, thrum'd caps, that harbour so much ver∣mine, they might fear we'd scatter one of Egypt plagues among them; and make i'm all lousy.
Enjoy the freedom of your speech; yet know
That they are ignorant of these in junctions,
And for a testimony of their loves
Unto your fair deservings, are all ready
To meet their Countries patriots, (so they term you)
After their ancient custom, with procession;
Show us an enemy then, or danger that is real,
And not the birth of fear, and we will return:
Nay, you may stay at home too:
At home?
It is so:
Our sons of peace have caught a surfeit, &amp; would be physick't
for it. ha! doe they mutiny? doe the fierce rams advance
their horns, to batter down the walls that kept them safe?
Be more composed and hear me, though you hate
Treason as ill as cowardice, yet I must
Tell you, you're the men have brought
The enemy home to Naples, I mean the army▪
For what less can I term such a vast body,
Consisting of such disproportioned members;
Fleshed with the spoils of fertile Sicily,
Enriched with what a happy soil can yield
To an insulting conqueror; fed too
With glorious hopes of ease, and plenty?
You know how hard a task you underwent
To govern them abroad, when tamed by want,
Thirst, hunger, heate, and cold; judge then what sway
Authority can bear, when by this change
They are grown mad, and mutinous; who shall
Compose their private jars, and quarrels, when
Their full cups add fury to their pride?
Enough: this speech hath cut of all reply,
Besides, you know Sicily is now in Naples;
The Prince a captive to his Prisoner:
How far his easy nature may be wrought upon
Is yet uncertain, his years though they have outdone
History, are not yet grown up to the ripeness of experience
For my severity; (I'd gladly have
You call it by another name;) it is
My duty, (if not yours) I take it, to be vigilant.
My Lord, think what I spake was but to gain
Satisfaction, which you have amply given.
And what should I doe in the City? that retain
No more of my education there, than what I gained
In the Artillery yard: my company
Would be shunned there more than poverty,
Or a disease; I should be interdicted
The Court, merely because I'm out of fashion,
Or for fear of challenges — Troth for the Ladies,
The homeliest please me best; I am as much
Too rough hewn for them, as they're to polished for me:
My constitution requires a dispatch
In the vaulting business, beyond that of tedious
Niceties, and witty prologues.
Gongales, and Petrucchio's regiment
I've left aboard to guard the fleet, yours must
Make safe the Castle, and the land forts; you
Cannot endear me more than by your circumspection;
The City will be all in triumphat
These nuptials, twixt our divided houses;
Think these Sicilian's, though you have won
And forced them to groan beneath your sword, may yet
At heart be traitors; if not, opportunity
May make them so; at such a time as this
Surprise is easy; history hath such examples,
Unfortunate ones; and you'd be loath to add
Unto the number.
You have chalk't out a way
That leads to honour, and we are hasty
To pursue it:
I shall report you noble.
And General, de'e hear, if you meet with
Ere a masculine feminine, that has impudence
Enough, to follow an army, a wench of twigging honchos,
And full things, fend her to me, she shall be my laundress.
Good Captain be less wild, and use me,
To the loss of honour.
Did meet with him?—he's here already.
— why this distance?
Is it in the power of several climes to break
Our sympathies in nature? true, I have
Bin long estranged from you, not from your virtue;
Why then should you deny your strict embraces?
Valenzo! you are grown too great, and glorious
For my friendship; become a theme for Princes,
Whose worthy acts enrich their high discourse:
The greedy multitude, snatching each word,
As it falls from 'em, wear your praise
As their best ornament!
How have I lost my friend,
And see Piero, for being so thou would
Nor mock, nor flatter me!
Alas Valenzo!
You prejudice your Princes wisdom, and
Your own just merits, those favours yet
Were never worn by them, that had not first
Deserved them.
You mean these titles, vain and empty names;
Let me enjoy thee still, I'll disinvest
My self of all additions, can but swell
Our pride, not virtue up; my Ancestors
Have left me rich enough in title to
Your friendship, and fore I forfeit that! —
That wee could mingle souls. —
Though you be prodigal of your affections,
Yet be not cruel to your Charintha,
Who must needs suffer in this wilful scorn,
You throw on that your valour dearly purchased.
Charintha mine! I hold all worth in her.
Were you as monstrous for impiety, as now
You are famed for virtue, such was her pious thrift,
In treasuring up her clean and humble prayers,
You could not die unpardon'd, every hour
(As you are always liable to danger,)
Can witness, with what forward zeal she begged
Heaven, to avert the stroke before it came:
We have taken so much pleasure in her orisons,
That even profane men to have heard her pray,
Would turn devout, were there no merit in it.
No more; my reason yields unto my passion.
And it is a joy requires me meet it with
My best temper; I would not surfeit
Nor swallow it too greedily; some light mixture
Of grief would give a relish to it; tell me, come—
What face wears the Court? how looks it
On our new dignities? Envy (like the Sun)
Darts her beams hottest on the rising banks:
Ʋrsini the grand favourite, is at Court,
And has his Princes bosom?
That's his sanctuary,
His safety lies there, yet (though I profess
No augury) I foresee, and read
His fall, all these vast glories which he boasts,
Are built upon the ruins of Alberto,
His tombe-stone is the basis of that building,
Which we admire, but think not safe.
There was a noble house soon lost.
Sooner (I believe) than to will be forgotten;
But what was that Frederico, Albert's son?
One that with his father's virtues
Inherited his unhappy fate, young he was,
And valiant; received and known so.
Had hee been less famed, he had not yet
Been numbered with the dead; (you are my friend▪
My Lord▪) I speak my thoughts, and freely;—
Ʋrsini endures no rival.
I've maintained
Fair correspondence with him at distance,
But like not his embraces.
To is dangerous to be near him;
There's such an Antipathy, twixt him, and virtue,
He wears it's ruin in his looks.
It is strange,
A Prince so wise and vertuours should not descry
His falsehood through his vifour; or at least
Lend ear to the loud cries of wronged Innocents.
He hath no use of either ear, or eye,
But what his loved Ʋrsini lends him; hee
Only rules, and limits his affections;
Suffers him not to cast a frown or smile,
But where he pleases; his next indearement, is
His care of the Princess, our Sicilian captive:
Whom sorrow for her fathers death, (slain in
The war, by him that was designed her lover;
Our famed Prince Ferrando,) has brought
Into a desperate melancholy; what reward
He expects, I cannot tell, unless it be
The Crown: you have heard of her strange distemper?
And wonder at the sudden change:
I've seen her, maugre all those sudden fears,
Her tender age, and womanhood could urge;
Stand in the head of troops, that we even feared
They had engaged some Goddess in their quarrel;
Bear up against the enemy, when her men
Lay scattered in the plains, like the ripe ears
The wealthy harvest yields into the Grange.
I know not how, but sure sh'as made the King
Wilde; he has such divers fits, as he had learned
To be mysterious in's passion; I have seen him weep,
Like a fond mother o'er her tender babe,
Whom too rude fate has ravished unripe from her:
Then rave, and curse, talk as he wanted reason
To guide his speeches Organ: or soft sleep
To recall his straggling senses:
Mutter distracted thoughts in broken words,
Until he lights upon her name, and then
He bows at the recital; blesses himself
In the often repetition of Calantha.
There's somewhat in it, her passion should lye hid
So long, and now break out so violently.
She rather seemed too thrifty, than too prodigal
Of tears, when she left Sicily; and taught us
To call it our chiefest happiness, we should have
A Queen, that reigned at home, that bore more sway
Over the people of her breast, than country.
Alas poor maid! why now she's a true captive
To passion, and to Naples: had she been still
Queen over ber great self, none could have said
She'd had been unhappy; now, and not till now
She's truly miserable.
It is holiness to pity her.
Our tears are better spent upon her sorrows,
Than our own sins, she talks so prettily,
Clothes grief in such a sad, and pious garb,
So void of any rudeness, that wee see
Composedness in distraction, reason in madness;
She never walks but when she's led along,
And that so faintly, as she had not spirits
Enough to actuate her tender limbs:
Want of meat and sleep have made her seem
A living coarse; to see her weep, you'd fear
That every drop were her own funeral tear.
—Hell, and furies!—
Oh! oh! oh!
A Moore! a devil! a mere devil! his very looks spake him so, but for his club-foote, his damnable club-foote, (Ass that I was not to see it, I'm sure I feel it now,) it is an infallible sign: This damned Devil did I bring to Court, and preferred him; but I'm served well enough, he that doe's the Devil a good turn shall be sure to bee thus rewarded. If I should chance to die a sinner (as it is ten to one but I shall,) he will know me again, for I shall carry his marks to my grave: because my Lord Ʋrsini was pleased to exchange some few words with him in private, he grew so insolent, that I going
to strike him (in passion, in choler I confess) he falls a kick∣ing me in'th open Court.
And looks, as if he would, have spent fire; but had I not known him to be a devil indeed, I'd spent fire with him.
How? so hot Seignior?
Men in anger may do anything.
Anything? with your leave Sir,
And you're a fool, and an ass.—
Do'e find it so by my ears?—
And I'll try what you are—
Draw in the Court? I must see the peace kept.
Gentlemen, you know I'm passionate, choleric, somewhat choleric.
And I intend to physic you for it; here's that will allay your heat.
It is down already.
I won't be jeered.
Wee intend no abuse, Seignior, wee only come to gratulate your good fortune, you are turned favourite of late.
It has pleased his Majesty to take some small notice of me.
Yes, and the Ladies speak high, &amp; gloriously of you.
Of me?
You could not but observe it as you walked the streets: you are the only object they gaze at.
In troth I did not think—
Come you are modest now.
Who was it you blessed to'ther day with a favour?
I give a favour?
Why man? you meant it should be seen.
I slip't a point indeed in a Countesses chamber.
Slip't a point?
Dropped it, dropped it, but to was not worth the taking up.
And yet I've heard her boast it as a special gift from your own hands.
Indeed I flung it somewhat scornfully, because she was very importunate; troth I was angry, she would have none but that.
Were it not for this filthy fretting humour of yours, I could tell you—
What good Grutti?
Of a Lady.
By my best hopes in love with me, is she not?
I'm not so happy as to be acquainted with her in∣tents, but I have heard her in my Lord Ʋrsini's presence commend you highly.
Prithee who is it?
The Lady Charintha.
The Lady Charintha; what should I do with her? she's honest, the only precise Madame of the Court.
They that drop the most beads, may commit the most sins, but were it not so, you have a kind of tempting presence, and besides—
Oh! I understand you, she's his Lordship's reversion.
St, not a word.
I'll to her presently.
This is my Lord Ʋrsini's plot, to slander that Ladies chastity.
And he has charged me, to whisper't about Court, that he has enjoyed her.
I wonder much, fince he seeks her himself in mar∣riage, why hee should thus traduce her.
On my conscience she's virtuous.
His plots are dark, and misty, but come, prithee let's leave this talk, we have state knowledge enough already to make us melancholy: I'll show thee a scene of mirth—
Where lies it?
This Physician that was sent for hither from the U∣niversitie to our melancholy Princess, they say, endures no music, and I've prepared a whole consort of these gut-scrapers this morning to salute him; no doubt but he will bee be very bountiful.
If the varlets can make good use of his charity.
I wonder much the Court endures him here; he's an odd humoursome fellow.
His art privileges him.
My Lord.—
Conduct that Moore hither, and see wee have all pri∣vacie that may be.
Hee shall wear my life upon his sword that enters without my leave.
See, he comes: here's one that's fit to kill a King,
A thing, whose soul is nothing but a spot
Transmitted from foul parricides, whose thoughts
Wear a more deep and horrid black, than that
Which spreads upon his body—
My Zisco welcome.
This day my Lord —
No more, I know what thou would say: I promised
To endear thee to Ferrando's love, and knowledge,
Are you according to my instructions ready
To meet all his demands?
Perfect.
With a forged Commendamus from his holiness?
—Of my stout service done against the Turks
In the Lepanto battle, where I turned Christian,
And was baptised in mine own blood.
It is well, but how stands't thou resolved for our de∣sign?
Unmoved as destiny.
—Could you have told me of it in that minute
I should have acted it, I'd owe you for
The glory of a sin, I might have boasted of;
What we intend, ne'er rises to that height
As what we act, because t'may prove abottive,
And perish in the thought, and for such crimes,
I only have repentance.
But he's a Prince —
Why there's the honour on it,
Killing the head, I kill the body too,
And at one blow lay a whole Kingdom gasping.
—One upon whom attends a guard of men,
And Angels, on whose brow divinity
Sits character'd, a Majesty that darts
Fork't arrows into the guilty soul, and strikes
A palsied fear through every limb and joint
Of the murderer.
Fancy, fancy this,
I'm proof against it; Isle take him in's cups
When he's drunk, betray him to a rape,
Or fowler sin, then kill him in the act.
Whom?
The King.
Traitor.
It is as soon done as thought of.
He never loved thee Zisco, nor was known
By special favours to deserve thee to him;
But he has made me great, worn me in's soul;
His father took me up, when I was nothing,
Bequeathed me to him, as a care hereditary,
Belonging to the Crown, placed me so near him,
I've grown, and spread like a tall mountain Cedar.
And dare encounter lightning, stand a thunder-bolt,
Or enraged winds; contend with that high influence
By which you flourish, yet ne'er fear a blasting:
His favour is a tyranny; it is
The pride of Princes, to be thought Gods here
On earth, daring to mock omnipotence,
To create them favourites, set them aloft
In their own sphere, till remote Kingdoms gaze
At their prodigious height, then in an instant
Shoot them from thence, like falling meteors:
Had he not loved you first, you could not be
The object of his hate, you were too poor,
And safe, when it was, to have him glory in
Your ruins: innocence below enjoys
Security, and quiet sleeps, murder's not heard of,
Treachery is a stranger there, they enjoy
Their friends, and loves, without ravishment,
They are all equal, every one's a Prince,
And rules himself, they speak not with their eyes,
Or brows, but with the tongue, &amp; that too dwells in the heart:
Were it but thus at Court,
your famed Marquess had not fallen.—
Alberto: ha.
Why start you Sir?
It is he: Frederico.
Oh that man! he was unhappy in his Princes love.
Your honours are no more your own than his:
It was the same favour that conferred them both,
And the same frown may take 'em both away:
He lets you only grow till you are envied,
And then you'll fall unpitied.
I have learned cruelty from him:
Zisco, thou shalt applaud the mysteries,
The rare contrivances of my revenge;
My fate lies in his breast, but this, this arm
Shall ravished thence.
Now your rage becomes you:
When Princes put off their humanity,
Murders, a holy sin, you may be good,
And fall like him, whose aged head lies low,
Low in the dust.
Again? this confirms it.
The groans of whose sunk house, are heard
To affright strangers; whilst Naples yet
Stained with the purple tide, his soul swam forth in,
Do's blush at it's own guilt: his son Frederico
(You know) was lost at Sicily in a crowd.
It is so reported, yet I believe—
My Lord.
That he was slain at Ferrando's command.
Perhaps and by a slave.
Felicia too, unhappy maid —
Your sister,  —I there,
Now thou strik'st home.
First won to his embraces
By volleys of false oaths, her virgin honour
Rifled, her chaste womb swollen with the imposthume
Of his salt lust, then torn with spite from his bosom,
Ravished, murdered, and by whom? (I could hate my self,
For taking birth amongst such,) cursed Moors:
Were she your enemy, her cause, and sex
Would challenge pity; but you loved her dearly,
The Mistress you adored; who then can think
But that your soul is black, and stained as his,
That are thus tame?
Zisco, you have raised a flame within this breast,
Nought but his blood can quench:—thanks to my brame;—
It shall be so;— The fatal raven croaks;
It is ominous, if he outlive this night
We are no more: —Come we will go plot within.
Here's his, study,
Is he there?
Yet do but observe his posture:
How he sits like a reverend Ape painted upon a Gally-pot, with an Urinal in's hand.
Faith Signior, in my judgement you've wronged your simile.
He's casting the Princesse's water.
Not upon his beard I hope.
Reading in it—
The colour of's copper-nose.
All the plots of Sicily; I warrant the poor Lady has not a thought escapes him.
The Sex has been always accounted open, yet I near knew a State betrayed that way; some Ladies would be in a pitiful case, if their secrets could be read in their Gentle∣women's—
Foh, they're mere sives.
—Come, come, these are his Lordships Lodgings,
He came home late yesternight, and I believe
Is scarce stirring yet. — Your last new tune,
This music sure will make him dance antic.
Not yet? pox on him, he's a sleep in's study: ha you no loud music? perhaps his Lordship likes that bet∣la.
So, ho, oh, ho, ho, murder, murder, murder,
Enter Hieronymo from his naked bed.
Hieronymo was drunk then last night, he lay in's clothes.
Rogues base rogues, scabby rogues, pocky  rogues, out, our rascals, abuse his Majesties Physi∣teen, offer to play under my nose, foh, how the rogues stink: farts, poisoned farts, foh, these meager-chapt rascals eat so much brimstone, and salt butter, that they outstinke hell: had these farts been let in Wales, they would have bred the plague there, — let me see— who should this bee. that should abuse me thus, let me but find him out, and be he the best in the Court, it shall go hard but I'll have a quaint poison for him, shall work a little o∣therwise with him than this has done with me.
The best in the Court?
A quaint poison for him.
Do's your retiredness lead you to treason? let's ap∣prehend him:
For a Traitor.
Nay good Gentlemen, what shall I do? I'm undone.
A quaint poison!— so it was.
And for the best in the Court.
In troth, Signiours, I meant it not.
It was too much you said it, Sir.
Doe but conceal me.—
Then you'll confess, and bring us in as parties.
May I be hanged if I doe; besides, what ever secret disease you have about you, I'll cure you gratis.
And think no more of poisoning them, that brought the musicians to your window; it was our plot Sir.
I forgive you, and pray Gentlemen use me for your Physician when ever the state of your bodies requires it. I'll learn secrecy of you.
Agreed.
Faith Grutty, this plot was well thought on; I could find in my heart to trust him.
You may; and hence forward I'll sin with less scruple.
It is hee— I am confirmed: Frederico, Albert's
Son— I'll let him live concealed, he's a sure
Instrument, and will serve me for all turns.
—humph, —could he think his puling sisters,
Or his Fathers, wrongs, sate so heavy on my heart-strings,
That I could be moved to kill my Prince
In their revenge? Indeed I loved her once,
Till I enjoyed her, but she's lost, so is her memory;
I've higher thoughts now; Charintha is my aim,
Ferrando's niece; next heir to the Crown;
Mine by his promise: can I but divorce
Valenzo from her love, together with
His life, I'm safe; it is that I am contriving:
He is my rival both in a Mistress, and
A Princes favour.—Who waits within there? ho.
My Lord.
Have you performed what I commanded you concer∣ning the Lady?
Charintha? it is done Sir; Fungoso straight intends a visit there.
Leave me—  It is well, if this slander can but pull on murder upon him, or any of my servants, from Valenzo's hand, his head shall answer for it; I am his judge,
(My power over the King makes me so:)
And he shall find me cruel; then the fort is mine,
In which his soldiers are in garrison;
This night the French, and Genowayes intend
To ceize our empty fleet, that rides in the harbour;
Those men I have endeared, —
Mount, mount my soul, let no fear weigh thee down.
He stakes his life that thus casts at a Crown.
This musicked dull, strike higher, higher yet.
Oh! oh! oh! I can hold no longer, furies, devils, oh! oh!
What ails our Physician there?
It is an odd humour my Lord: any kind of music is less pleasing to him, than the voice of Mandrakes.
Cease there, your accents are distasteful.
I am abused, grossly abused, but i'll be revenged — Sir Your pardon.
Rise and proceed.
As I was telling you, you must in every thing humour her; in each word, each action, the nature of her disease re∣quires it, which yields not unto cure, till it be wrought up to'th height.
Still such a sadness Ladies dwell on your brows? trust
me, it misbecomes you: shall's tread a lusty measure? I'm light, and active.
But grief is heavy.
Thus we'll shake it off, and thus.
Pray, why de'e use me so? you bind my arms,
As if I meant to sight, an they were loose,
Indeed I wo'not, trust me, I'll kill no body.
Pray unbind her.
I never killed the poorest worm, or fly,
Though it were against my will, but that I wept for it,
And begged a pardon too, for sure it was murder.
Marry was it.
Poor Lady, she's distracted!
Death on my fury, this sight brands my best actions with a stain too deep for penitence to wash away.
This exceeds cruelty, they will not let me eat;
Look I am pined almost to nothing.
A mere skeleton.
Had I but strength enough to struggle with heaven
By prayer, I'd expiate their sins, though they
Continued to be cruel.
Good Lady weep not, for if you continue
These tears, my eyes will drop.
Yes, yes, they will drop out, oh happiness!
Would mine would do so too; they smart extremely;
Were it not a courtesy, I think ere this
you'd pulled 'em forth.
Lady, I say weep not.
I say, be not you a coxcomb.
Take away the fool, we are much indisposed
To laugh to day, good heaven, they flour my miseries:
It is not well done, you may be sick your selves,
Before you die; want one to bid God comfort,
When I am dead.
My Lord, a word— you are not privileged
To do men wrong: you have done me one,
Pray take notice —
Of what?
S'life he won't challenge him.
The old Lord's afraid on it.
—How patient I am.
It is worth the noting, virtue is rare in you.
You Sir, do'e hear? they say you'll put
Poison in my drink; do, do, plot on, and be
A politic fool, I see into your thoughts,
My eye-sight's clear, thank heaven, and yet l've lived
A long long while.
Did you hear that?
It was shrewd.
Fourscore, and ten, you cannot be less Madame.
Some ere this would have used spectacles, but I Must suffer all.
View all the monuments, and tombs in Naples,
And if you find grief carved there in such variety of postures
As these women stand in, sell me for a statue.
This spectacle hath made me one.
Good heavens, have you a curse beyond this?
Throw it on me; my guilt deserves it, and
Somewhat beyond your vengeance: afflict not Innocence,
It will be called your crime, not mine, that she
Is miserable.
Look ye, now I think on it, I've a fine devise
Come in my head, what think you of a play?
We'll act a play, a tragedy, wilt not be well?
We'll have a King in it, and he, (do'e understand?) he shall be
Killed, methinkes you'd act it handsomely.
My Lord, you'd play the fool in it, an old doting fool rarely.
Now the cur bites.
If you'd lend me your gown, and cap, I should do it better; then, a noise of Musicians would be excellent.
Well, remember this.
Faith so I shall, as often as I am disposed to laugh.
No matter though, Ferrando, now I consider better on it,
you shall not, you'd not do it well; do it to'th life, I'll not give a pin for it else: let me alone for one, I'd act that same Kings daughter, I can command a tear or two: if need bee, perhaps a sigh; if it were to rave, or grow stark mad, I should learn too: alas these plays are pretty morals of our lives; fine, harmless, innocent sports.
Her madness grows strongly upon her.
But Madame, pray what part shall I act?
Thou Sylvio? — you are a pretty boy, but that thou weep so much; I fear you have spoiled thy face; with a little paint it would serve turn: thou shalt act some Lady in disguise.
How truly do I doe it?
One that has been in love.
I should do that scurvily.
Why?
Because I can love none but you, and would be loath to dissemble, though but in jest.
Come, thou shall it not then; thou shalt be my page still.
Indeed Madame I should dye if I were otherwise: But pray, when will you be well? you have bin sick a great while.
Yes, and shall be so till I am dead; say nothing Sylvio,
I'll steal away from them, when they shall not know of't.
Not alone, I'll dye with you, and be buried with you if you will give me leave.
Ferrando, you will see it done?
What Madame?
See us both buried, laid by my Father, he was a good, good King: build us a tomb as lasting as our names.
A very rich one Madame; I'll ensure you they're about it, with stately columns, curious antiques, &amp; glorious imagery.
There, let us both be cut in spotless marble,
It never shall upbraid us, we were innocent as that;
But innocence is no guard, it could not keep
The tyrant out: my father's, let his be cut
Just as he fell, make a sword pierce his heart,
And let it bleed too, yet don't hurt the Statue,
I would not have you wound it, when it is like
My Father, like a King, lest hee that do's it,
Learn thence to be a traitor, and in time
Wound you so too, Ferrando.
Mercy good heavens!
Pray why do'e weep? wee shall all sleep quietly
When we are dead, there is no noise of chains,
We shall not dream of prisons, rackes or whips:
But every night shall see the Gods descend
On our soft slumbers, and kiss away our miseries.
Ladies, you'll see me shrouded decently,
When I am dead, down in the mead you, where
Grimm Pluto stole his Proserpine, are still
The flowers she scattered: go, bring 'em hither,
And strew me ore with 'em; she was a virgin chaste,
And I have heard that flowers of their gathering,
Will never dye; quickly make hast, it is said
we're very noisome after death, I would not
Offend then, cause I can't ask forgiveness:
Before I die I'll break my heart, and give
A piece to every one to wear in's bosom,
And you shall have it whole, Ferrando: pray
Use it as you would her you loved, while I
To quit these miseries will go pray, and die.
Now let me alone with her.
Die? and let her, what should wee do with her here an she be mad? I hope Ladies you have more wit than to die of the sullens.
Grief dares not be so rude, did you but check it.
Las Sir, our miseries have taught it insolence,
Rather your own indulgence, Madame.
Pleasure's the same in Naples as in Sicily.
So are our losses too.
The eyes sad flux is tributary due
Unto your dead Lords memories, I confess it,
It carries virtue in it, but how? whilst it is moderate
Pish, let the dead care for themselves:
Did you but see how ugly sorrow looks.—
And then how fruitless.
Yes, where it is false, but wee
Have grief as real as our misery.
Fun, thy judgement Fun, what think thou of these Ladies?
In my judgement, (since your Lordship is pleased to make use of my judgement,) which indeed (my good Lord) is very small.
I perceive thou hast one good quality, thou wilt speak truth.
Truth (my Lord) is precious; but I say in that little judgement I have: (judgement, (since your Lordship was pleased to term it so) but that's all one,) in my mind they are mightily taken; —
With what?
A passion (my good Lord,) which the learned call grief.
Thy judgement against any mans in Naples.
My Lord, I praise not my self, yet I can prove by this that they are in love.
As how?
Grief always follows love; if grief follow love, love go's before, ergo, they're in love.
So, suppose now—
(My good Lord) I doe suppose.
What?
Even what your Lordship pleases.
Suppose then, any of 'em should be in love with me, would you? —
Yes my Lord.
What?
Any thing.—
Bring her to my chamber.
— But pimp, it will contaminate.—
A fools head, will it not? I say you shall bring her.
Nay then I will not bring her; slid, shall bring her? shall bring her?
Nay but Fun.—Pox on him, he'll discover me.
Bid me forsake heaven, my virtue, honour,
And all that's good —
Fie, fie.
You doe not see me weep,
Distill mine eyes into a dew,
I will not shed one tear, not vent a sigh,
No not in private.
So, this becomes you —
I have shook off all
Those weights that clogged my bosom— Wee can smile,
Shows it not hand some?
Such a smile ne'er blessed
The cheeks of Peace.
How art thou lost Ʋrsini!
Discredited to truth by this vile flattery!
Thou should have said, heaven smiled, when set with clouds
Black as nights swarthy mantle, when the air
Breaks out in hideous cracks, that cleave the Temple,
And strike dead the devout Priest at the Altar:
For this an easy faith would have believed,
As having less of contradiction in it:
My soul is rapt with furies, here they gnaw,
Like knotted Adders wrapped about my heart.
Oh! my sides swell as they would break, they want
A hoop, lend me your arm, —
Circled in these.
Embraces, you are safe: collect your self
(Dear Prince;) and let not passion triumph in
The conquest of your reason; think of your honour,
Your name, and spreading glories; how they dye.
I'm black and ugly; all
A whole stain already: Oh Calantha,
Thou goosed to heaven, to tell Ferrando killed thee;
And those blessed troops of Saints will wreak thy murder,
There's not one but suffers in it.
—The King!
Help here — Oh! Bentivoglio, come,
Come practice here, and raise your self a trophy
In his recovery.
Whence this sudden fit? — My Lord Ferrando:
Oh Calantha.
She lives,
Calantha lives.
What breath is that, that mocks us
With a false sound of our Calantha's life?
She lives; yet let old time add to his age
But one short pair of minutes, she shall be
No more:
No more distracted: next hour shall render
Calantha to your bosom fair, and well;
As rich in all the ornaments of mind,
As when she first blessed Naples with her presence.
Truth's but a name: it is false, by heaven it is false;
Did not I leave her sunk upon her bed,
Into a soft, but everlasting sleep?
So you supposed; and I have cause her women
To wrap her in her shroud, then sit down by her,
To weep, and pray, as if it were for the dead.
As if? — abuse me not, thy art
Shall be no privilege; she's gone, she's gone.
Be not so passionate; but hear him.
Ʋrsini, I have done.
After a strict enquiry into the nature
Of her disease, I find it by each symptom,
A melancholy deep, not dangerous:
The parents which produced it, grief and abstinence
From meat, and sleep; which as it hath encrea'st.
Has brought her now to such an extreme dotage,
That she do's verily suppose her self,
While living dead: In which false supposition
I've cause her women to continue her,
By shrouding her to her own desire,
Strewing her o'er with flowers, then weeping o'er her
What help from this?
Much Sir, this will work her
Into a strong opinion, that shoe's dead
Indeed, to confirm which I have prepared
Some two or three, trick't up in the same fashion
With shrouds, and chaplets, who shall sit down by her,
Walk, talk, eat, drink, sleep, in all which actions
Calantha will straight imitate them: Now I have prepared
A potion which they shall give her,
To make her sleep, the only remedy
Of her disease; this I lately practised in the French Court,
Yet lost no credit by the experiment.
You may believe him Sir, he's one of the skilfullest Physicians our age has boasted of, Padua is proud of such an ornament.
Thus my Virginio.
My best, my dearest Virginio: thou dost breath
A music to my soul, cures my distemper:
Thou art an honest man, we will found a College,
With a large pension to maintain the Students
In thy rare science; thou shalt govern there,
And when thou die, we will build a monument
Unto thy name, taller than Aegypts Pyramids.
These o'er your Court promises,
I'll only study some revenge, for you old Lord,
Then I'll return to'th University, &amp; dream on 'em.
For thee Ʋrsini, we will only live
To do thee honour, that shall be our glory;
The world shall know thee great, and envy thee
Thy share, both in our kingdom, and our soul.
Your goodness, my Lord, is as unlimited
As heavens.
You're sad Ʋrsini: has our Niece
Given you no cause of joy, by her soft answer?
None, —
The obstacle? tell me; ift' be any in Court she affects, by my honour I'll remove him.
None but this, that she's too much wedded to Heaven, and her devotions.
If that be all, shoe's thine.
A bliss, I would for ever live t'enjoy.—
With me?—
What would that Moore?
He has letters here from his holiness,
In which I'm certified, that he lately turned Christian,
And has well deserved in the wars,
Against the Turk;— The King admits you to
His hand.
I am in heaven too soon.
We will view his holiness commendations,
Then hear this Moore, discourse the fight at large;
My griefs begin to vanish; they are much lighter
Than of late they were, I know not why,
But it is a good presage.
Be near us.
Thus far I'm safe, heaven is just, and smiles
On my design, now all that's powerful
To move my spirits, to incite revenge
Appear, if not to sight, to memory;
Alberto: father: and my dear, dear sister,
Poor lost Felicia! — Ha! he groans, I hear him;
She sighs poor maid, wrings her hands, cries alas,
Look look I see 'em, there, there, sacred shades —
Vanished, and I'm deluded; no they are angry
At my delay:
I'll hast,—for that revenge must needs be just
Which punishes two sins, murder, and lust.
Happy souls that hither come
To enjoy Elizium;
Robed of bodies though you be,
You're richer by such poverty;
For with them you've put off pain,
Making of your loss, your gain:
Now your souls may meet and kiss,
Bathing in eternal bliss;
Nor can you surfeit, each delight
Whets, and quiets appetite;
Yet the joys you feed upon
Ne'er increase, nor ere are done;
Freely you may taste, and spend 'em,
Yet nor you, nor time can end 'em:
Where without a fading ray.
Ye enjoy eternal day,
Trace these groves, whose every path
Myriads of true lovers hath;
Where disporting, you may prove
A new, but happier, purer love:
Such, whose flames, though th'ever shine
Yet consume not, but refine.
I am too tame Piero, hold me not,
Lest in deferring of a punishment,
I make the sin mine own; had all malice
Dwelt in one tongue, all slander too been housed
Under the same roof with it, and both busy
To plot the ruin of my own fair name;
I could have stood unmoved: but my Charintha!
Heavens! ye ought t'inspire me with revenge,
Such as you'd call a Synod to contrive,
That I may meet this hell-borne ravisher
Of my Charintha's spotless fame, with vengeance
As mighty as his crime.
Her virtue is
It self an antidote against all such poisons;
His breath no more can stain that innocent whiteness,
Which ever dwelt upon her soul, than hee,
That in a sond maliciousnesse would throw
Dirt at the Sun, could sully the least ray;
Her memory, when hee, and's lying marble
Consume to dust, and rottenness, shall dwell
On earth like a perfume, after the sacrifice,
Pleasing to God, and men.
If I have used
Any immodest braveries, appeared
In wanton gaudiness, a hot temptation
To'th youthful flowings of the blood;
If I have entertained one looser thought
But such as Chastitie's cold votaries,
When they breath out a soul into her bosom,
Might safely nourish; if I've misemployed
One hour, in which with strict endeavour, I
Might have gained somewhat to my stock of virtue,
(The only dower I'd meet your love withal,)
May I be guilty of that sin, my honour,
My virgin honour's blasted with, and die
A loathed Apostate.
Now you grieve, I suffer double;
Forgive me Lady, I have wronged you, and
Only I.
Mock not my tears, they are holy.
I, that to purchase fame, and idle breath,
Could venture forth abroad into the world,
And leave thee here a prey to ravenous wolves;
Expose thee tender years of a weak virgin
To labour' against the furious tide of lust
That has assaulted thee; that my low birth
Should stand in need of such additions,
To raise me to a height, might equal yours:
That virtue and not blood ennobled us,
This then had never happened.
Greatness transmitted
Has lesser of Divinity; your honours
Are virtues purchase, and your own deservings.
Valenzo thou return in glorious triumph,
Rich, from the conquest of a noble foe,
And yet not laden with the gaudy spoil
So much, as with the valour of the enemy:
As if th'ad'st envied them their virtue only,
And sought to rob 'em of it; all for me:—
I've wav'd a plume, dight me in the warlike garb,
Managed a sword, or shook a dreaded spear,
Looked terrible, bin pitiless to those
That begged a life, revelled in cities sack't,
And rifled tents: too poor and trivial matters
To point at such rich ends as thee, (my love.)
Thy blood runs high, there's not one purple stream
Cased in these a sure veins, but is derived
From'th spring of Princely ancestry, and you are
The wealthy storehouse of their fortunes too.
Alas! what are these, but what the owner makes them?
Of themselves nothing, only as we use them,
Are good or bad, a blessing or a curse:
But then their virtues, by a thrifty providence,
Are all summed up in thy blessed self, and make thee
A happiness which if enjoyed must bee
Bestowed by gift, because above all purchase.
No (my Valenzo,) virtue's ravished hence,
Charintha's strumpeted, her name is rank't
In the vulgar breath, amongst common prostitutes;
Pardon, (my love) shall it never wed thy shame,
Thy jealousy.
Charintha, thou art cruel, and hast learned
An art to wound to'th death, yet keep alive
Whom thou hast killed, Obe but speedy in
Thy execution, and when I come below:
And walk those fields, that haplesse lovers trace,
I will report thee mild, soft as the Turtle in her down▪
What means Valenzo?
Perhaps report has injured me, and noised
That I was jealous of Charintha's love;
And you contrived this plot to make me hate you;
Or, if you should repent, (as well you may,)
Your favours so ill placed, upon a subject
So poor and worthless; take 'em back again,
Live happy in a better choice, Charintha.
Far, far be such a thought!
Your both abused,
Grossly abused: Ʋrsini's politic plots
May meet an eye, that can discern of objects
Far subtler than they are; come, come,
'Way with this passion, Love has something else
To employ you in:
You have robed me of a soul:—
Take in this kiss mine in exchange again.
That's my Lady Sir,
There,—take it I say;
My office will scarce deserve it.
Fungoso, as I wished; he is Ʋrsini's agent, this will con∣firm my relation; let's step aside.
Ha! What are these? Praesto, be gone; they are va∣nish't: men of office these, — and must be rewarded. — Madame—
Come, to your business.
S'life the Laddie's rampant:  soft and fair, two words to a bargain, now will I seem to neglect her, and she'll straight court me.
Sure the man's mad.
Not with love, sweet Lady; I can hold discourse with your Ladyship, under the loss of my little wits.
A blessed security; but your errand, your errand, Sir.
What do'e take me for? a foote-post.
Some such thing.
Go, you're a —
What?
A merrily disposed Lady: but faith, what doe you think sweet, I have a grant of his Lordships reversion.
Of cast suits.
La you now, you would make me angry; pretty piece of ingenuity; you understand me, was his Lordship whole∣some?
Stop his mouth, he breathes infection.
Traitor.
Devil.
Oh! oh! I'm dead, I'm dead, I'm dead.
Dares he abuse me to my face?—Piero
Thou hast prevented me; t'shall ne'er be said,
That thou were it forwarder to vindicate
Charintha's fame than I, then her Valenzo.
Nor shall the cause, but the revenge be mine;
I'll show my rage can flow as well as thine.
You have told a pretty story; — weep no more,
I see the Cupids angry in thine eyes,
That with thy tears, you have quenched their burning arrows;
Spare 'em until you are old, and spend 'em then
On thy whole stock of sins: thou play the tyrant;
And rob'st thy self of all that beauteous treasure.
Nature instructed thee withal.
Ah me!
Would I had never had it, that alone
Has only cause my grief:
Thou art passionate.
The virgins loved my innocence, and it
When I was yet a child.
So thou told me boy:
But after thou arriv'd'st in Sicily,
How fared it with thee?
Judge Sir, by these tears.
Did thy friend leave thee?
Yes, and the world too; I know hee would not have been so unkind else.
Then went thou to the Princess.
Begged relief from her.
Why did not return?
It was told me there, my Parents straightway dyed.
Thou shalt have new ones, royal ones my boy;
A Princely pair, that pride them in their youth,
And innocent sweetness; whose Majesties shall shed
As vigorous rays on thee, as on the issue,
Th'ensuing nuptial promises to spring
From their own loins.
Those are favours Sir,
That become them to give, not me to take.
Thou hast deserved them boy, Calantha speaks thee
A miracle of love and piety;
Is passionate in thy praise, all to win
Affection from the Prince to thee, dry up
Those tears; which till this time did never flow
Offensive unto any:
This day is consecrate to mirth and Hymen,
It is sin to wear a frown, or folded brow,
For every smile, thou lend'st them now, they'll pay
A thousand back again:
A large requital! —
A smile from my Ferrando? oh it was heaven,
Felicia, whilst thou wish'st it! now thou hast
Obtained it, it is a hell; the antidote
Is now become my poison: Tyrant love
That sport'st thee at the pains, thy Martyrs feel
And make thy salve applied, wound when t'should heal.
Come my Calantha, to consummate that joy,
By mutual vows before the Altar made,
Which thy return to life, to health, and reason,
Hath begun in me; those minutes which bring
Us any good, are swift and fleeting, and
Once past not to be recalled, who knows
Whether heaven will still be bountiful;
Or smile upon this hasty Union:
Yes royal maid, they have prepared thee for it.
By the addition of new warmth and strength:
For more sorrows; pray let's back, this day
(There's something whispers to me) will prove fatal.
Ʋrsini, see she weeps!
I've took thee from a sea of tears, (my Venus)
And thou art dropping wet yet.
It is ominous, this might have bin my marriage day;
But heaven forgive, and prosper him.
Create a Sun-shine,
With thine own smiles thou may, and dry thee in it:
Let the dull Negro dive to fetch thee Jewels,
These scattered seeds of pearl, are all too rich
And pompous for ornament; the least of these
Thy fond neglect has dropped, would purchase heaven.
Blame not my pious thrift, I shed them for it;
Thither my journey tends, I shortly shall arrive there.
Thou yeeldst too much to passion!
These rites,
(If we may credit what our dreams fore-tell,)
Will turn to funeral obsequies, for such
This morning, (when your careful art had bound
My senses up.) fancy presented 'em.
Methought I saw,
Aurora from the East come weeping up,
Wrapped in nights sables, and the following day
Paced slowly on, in griefs sad livery;
The pensive winds sighed forth a solemn dirge,
And strove to blow our marriage tapers out;
When you Ʋrsini joined in the solemnity,
I saw you look, like Sicily's pale ghost,
Broke from the hollow Caverns of the earth;
This hand Ferrando, at each gentle touch
Mouldred to ashes; on your lip there sate
A frost, which when I tasted straight conveyed
An icy chillness thorough every joint;
The stammering Priest methought mistook the rites,
And stead of those are used at nuptials,
Sung a short requiem to our souls, committed
All that was left of us, to the earth, our last
Cold bed.
I warrant you Ladies, this was because she lay alone; you should advise her better.
It was the intemperance of your disease
Suggested these Chimaera's.
And with it they are fled.
No, no Ferrando;
I've sinned against my fathers ghost; ere yet
His royal corps had slept two silent Moons
In the peaceful earth, or ere I had paid down
Just tribute of my tears, I've changed my sables
For a gay nuptial garment, whose light out-side
Denotes the looseness of a lighter mind,
To which grief should have bin perpetual guest.
Urge it no more, thy misery's Virgin Queen
Are powerful with me, and have taught this breast
A sad repentance.
Can thou Ferrando then repent?
I can, that I have wronged thy innocence, Killed thy father.
O take me to thy soul, we'll mingle sighs,
And tears, which still shall flow together from us,
As if the motion were but one; and those
So frequent, that the stones, which cloth his dust,
Shall soften into turf, from whence shall spring
A bed of flowers, creeping about the grave,
As if they'd strew themselves upon him, then
Whither, that men might think we wept for them.
Yet pardon Love, when ever I remember
He was a Prince, a Prince of equal power,
And strength with him he wronged; that he once stood
A bar betwixt our loves, or rather mocked
Our hopes of mutual enjoyment; that
For his own peevish humour, he would ruin
The edifice, that we had built to honour,
I glory in the act.
Take pity on me courteous death!
My thoughts are grown more terrible then thou!
I am monstrous, a prodigy in nature, one with
Him, that was my fathers murderer.
Royal my Queen!
It is the excess of piety,
The error of your duty, that thus wrongs
The justice of my cause.
Yet you might have spared
His life, and made it your just praise, that you
Could conquer, and not kill:
He was so eager in the pursuit of the foe,
When first he routed us, that willingly
He ran upon my sword, that stood t'oppose
His haste, and met a death instead of victory.
Nay rather we may say, that he met both
Who triumphs over life, and all the misery's
That too officiously attend upon it;
Crown his pale statue, with victorious wreaths,
And call his unkind fate, his happiness!
His fall was honourable, Kings like other men
Travel to death, they go in the common road,
Are in their end as sensible of pain
As the base peasants, whom they by and by
In the grave are equal with; their only privilege
Is in their executioner, who would not rather
Fall under a Kings hand, than yield his life
Up to a weak disease, a Fever, Gout,
Or grating Stone, which had he mist this stroke,
Might straight have seized him; and have robed him of
The glory of his end?
I cannot yield
So far to reason, but I still must look
Upon you, as an enemy to Sicily;
As him that killed my father, and so hate you;
Yet I must love you too: when first we met
Together in your Tent, both armed (you know)
I would have fought, nay, and have killed you too,
(Could skill or strength have done it, some I had
Of both;) yet I meant not to survive you,
Nor should I need to have made another wound
To let mine own life out, l'de dyed with yours.
Ʋrsini thou must quit some interest in my love, Calantha —
Deserves it all;
It were a sin no less than sacrilege,
To rob her of the least part of your affections.
My faculties are grown
All to one power, called love, and you engross it
Whole to your self; yet have it still entire
To my Calantha, it is a divers flame,
That burns me, yet but one, each takes it's difference,
And being from the object, be you still
My friend, &amp; thou my love, whom when we have once joined
Unto our amorous folds, thus we will move
And of our arms make a new sphere for love.
This way? to'th Temple say?
Married by this:
The Prince is fierce and eager in's desires,
Impatient of delay.
But seemed not she unwilling?
There appeared somewhat more in her, than in a virgin niceness,
They are here: —
The Priest has done his office, all delights
The married have a privilege in, are yours:
Be bold in the enjoyment, what ere while
Was termed a looseness in desire, is now
A virtuous thought: those flames which cloth your Souls
Are chaste and holy, dalliance is your devotion.
Yet you my Royal fair, can wear me at
A careful distance, tremble at each touch
Of hand or lip, as if you feared a rape:
— Display this beauteous treasure, lovely sweet
And let these flowers which dwell upon thy cheek,
Like those proud Maja wears, in the smiling ides
Blaze wild and open— see! they are fresh and lively,
Their odour flies to heaven in sacrifice!
Jove I'm thy rival;— and will share thy incense:
Sweet as the purple smoke arising from
The Phoenix funeral pile, or Southern breath
Perfumed with all Arabia's spiceries.
Good my Lord! you will too much indear us to you with your courtesies.
And being strangers we are apt to betraduc't:
Our good names are precious, they are all we have left
Unconquered.
Hymen applaud's this early piety:
The doves that drive the chariot of loves Queen.
Are swift in motion, and those happy troops,
Which waite upon her triumphs, maked their strife
Which shall out-runne the other, those that lag
Cupped will whip with roses to the Altar.
Henceforth (my Lord) I must attend your will,
Let me but drop a tear or two upon
My father's dust, and with his memory
I'll bid farewell to grief.
This vault contains it.
Let us pay our last duties.
The Quire attends without.
Noblest bodies are but gilded clay;
put away
But the precious shining rind;
The inmost rottenness remains behind.
Kings, on earth though gods they be,
Yet in death are vile as we;
He, a thousands King before,
Now is vassal unto more.
Vermin now insulting lye,
And dig for Diamonds in each eye;
Whilst the sceptre bearing hand
Cannot their inroads withstand.
Here doth one in odours wade
By the regal unction made,
While another dares to gnaw
On that tongue, his peoples law.
Fools! ah fools are we, who so contrive,
And do strive,
In each gaudy ornament,
Who shall his corps in the best dish present.
It is well; enough is wept for Sicily; cheer up,
We have other vows to pay, and as religious ones
As these: we made them at the Altar; and
If we perform them not, shall forfeit all
Our after joys:— remove those objects there;
We have no use of fables now; they breed
Melancholy thoughts; we will be loud,
And big in mirth, as full of pride as noise,
Till wee draw envy on our revels; which
Nor fate, nor the dull stoic shall control,
Whose sullen faith is the disease of's soul.
Revenge! were it thou more ugly than ere Painter
Limbed witch or fury, I could kiss thee now,
For thy so opportunely prompting me;
These brace of Courtiers here, my trim complotters,
Have tried my skill upon their bodies; and now
I'm dearer to them, then their confessor,
Both these have sworn to further my design,
I have against this Lord, this dotard; who
Hath heat his blood so with carousing healths,
That he's grown wild and furious; believes
His strength more able in these love-firkes,
Than when he was in the pride, and prime of youth;
Him are these two according to instructions
Leading into the snares, that I've spread for him;
Into which, if they, and blind fortune conduct him,
I'll use him less gently, than I would a noise
Of gowty-cheek't trumpeters:—They are here.
I'll be with you straight.—
Hymen is now predominant; the Stars
Will have it so; I must and will be married.
Married?
Yes, yes, you shall have favours, favours, Gentle∣men: bring me but to the sight of a woman, I'll clap up a match with her, and to bed straight; and if I don't outdo Hercules at his thirteenth labour, cut of my dainty dowsets, and feed dogs with 'em.
Hee deflowered fifty virgins in one night, I hope you won't marry so many.
Yes, and thou wilt get so many in the Kingdom, fifty? what's fifty? I'll have a monopoly of 'em, get 'em all with child with males, and they shall be borne with beards on.
There might have bin some likelihood of this once, but now you are old.
Old? ha! ha! he! Grutti, Grutti, dost hear him? ha! ha! he! prithee how old? how old dost think? have I not a warm moist palm? do's not my pulse beat strong, and healthy?
The flowings of your blood, that downy chin, and these full veins, speak you — some twenty, Sir.
And of complexion sanguine, I know it by my dreams.
The rose-buds now are blooming on your cheeks,
And op themselves into a crimson blush;
This hair curls up like wire, and and speaks you lusty,
Your strength is bold, and daring.
Believe it, I'm a wanton.
Come let's to a wench then.
Hang marrying, it is a slavery!
A mere purgatory!
An hell to be bound to one, and she prove false, ug∣lie, or loud, when wee may enjoy our liberties, to take or leave 'em, as our stomach serves us; have the choice beauties run into our arms, and every night a fresh one.
Hey! to a Wench; to a Wench!  now an I were King it should bee treason for any subject to marry.
Allow 'em but Wenches, and t'will be well enough.
Or to lye with a Woman.
How would you doe for subjects then?
Perhaps an I had a mind to it, Id get all my subjects my self, ha! what say thou to it, Grutti?
I say it is fit, you have a mind.
Bentivoglio! wee are friends, come thou shalt along with us, to a wench, old trangdido, to a wench, and thou shalt so bumfiddle her.
Nay, good my Lord, touch no more upon that string; but do ye hear? I came to carry you to one.
Art right? art right? old boy! these Physicians are notable jerkers, come, whore's their rendezvous?
In my Lodgings.
Ha? how many?—how many?—whats that there?
A draught to provoke.
—Sleep.
Nay good Bentivoglio give it me, a whole one, a whole one!
Be moderate; you'll take the next beggar you meet else; &amp; then the Ladies expectation yonder will be frustrate.
Ha! ha! he! Super naculum! my old bully lively, my authentic Don, soul of pleasure; line of life; let's too't; such a violent fit of the sudden! a dozen Calentures are an ague to it; twenty Juleps will not cool one wish.
Let's have him to bed quickly, and b'ele him warm; Bonum erit si sudaverit,
Foh! his breath stinks oath University.
Signior tic not perfumed: —now will I go fetch these Ladies to him; &amp; if he have courage enough but to speak to 'em; I'll forfeit my art, and turn tooth-drawer.
My Lord! —
Villain!
The injury! I am not any way conscious.—
Traitor thou lie;
Hell, and thy self the greater mischief, has
Conspired to ruin goodness. —
Madame! you've viewed these gardens;—has not art
Sweetly conspired with nature, to make up
A pleasure of variety?
It takes exceedingly.—
What do's?
Pretty indeed,
To have these flowers read moral lectures to us.
Yet Madame, you can find in your heart to tread
Them underfoot, scorning as much the beauty,
As the rare sense they cary.
Yes I can,
Yet straight I turn, and pluck 'em; —bind 'em up,
In one fair volume, thus —
And what read you, pray?
The emblems of true virtues in each leaf,
Imprinted there, at natures proper charges.
What think you of this Lily?
It figures innocence.
Wear it in your bosom.
Innocence indeed
Should be the breasts fair individual mate.
It will become you well.
So will this crown Imperial your head,
Pray stick it there.
I should be the envy of the Court then,
It is a pretty flower, what think you if I carry it to the Prin∣cesse?
Fit, very apt and fit, lady, — as fit
A gift, as this were for a Lord, an hony-suckle,
The amorous woodbindes off-spring; it emblems love;
You would not have us make love?
This mystic way has bin allowed of;
And practised?
Yes, and practised.
Sure I should never do it.
No Madame? why are not men creatures
As worthy Courtship, as wee?
Oh! but we are women!
Oh! but we are proud.
Shall I take it on your experience?
Or your own:— hal whose voice is that?
My heart is big with grief, my womb with lust,
Both fruits of my too easy trust;
Break first my heart, and it will be
To woeful me
The welcomst, and most safe delivery.
Hence my delight! thou art turned traitor to me:
Thy strings conveyed a poison to my ears,
And they drank deeply of it;— yet forbear,
Alas it was my self, my inward grief,
Thrown from the soul in often sighs, that made
Thy sound infectious; it is with that as guilt,
It grows still greater as it is borne about,
And poisons every thing should work it's cure.
Is not this Sylvio, Calantha's Page?
A lover grown? las pretty innocence.
How finely sorrow shows there — ! That, that passion
Is well expresl't; now sigh, then knock the breast. Excellent.
Let's use the benefit of this shade, to hide
Our selves, and secretly acquainted grow
With the black story of his sad mishap.
Felicia.
How has thy name, thy self, thy friend deceived thee!
That only were acquainted with the sound
Of happiness; mock't with a false report,
Into a real misery; whose easy nature
(The greatest foe unto it self, was flattered)
Out of a virgin treasure; and then left
Rifled of all; but (what grief now is preying on)
A haplesse life — yet cruel thief, you have left
So much of thee behind, as shall hereafter
Tell to the world a dark and gloomy tale
Of thy black perjury.
Ha! do's he riddle,
Or play with grief?
No it is too like a truth.
Me thinks each thing
I meet withal upbraids my fond credulity;
The soaring lark hovers aloft in the air,
At distance from th'inchanting glass, that Courts
Her to her ruin! the fearful Quail
Suspects and shuns the music of the pipe
That sings her into fetters.
Only poor I am sillier than these;
Witness th'untimely swelling of this womb
Pregnant to my disgrace;— As I lay hid
In yonder thicket, the brambles gently swelled,
And hid my shame, which yet each trivial wind
But dallying with, persuaded from my covert!
And left me naked to heaven's eye; the boughs
Of the next willow clung about my head,
As if they'd knit themselves into a garland,
Which I should wear for my forsaken lover,—
Very pretty!
Were it not so sad.
Oh you the weak supporters of my woes,
Why do'e fail me now at greatest need?
Bear me at least into some hollow cave
Where I may die, free from an after scorn;
And not when I am dead, be found the shame
Of our frail sex;— Oh! I faint, and fall,
Just like the early branches of some tree,
Whose hasty sap shoots into early fruit,
Till the o'er laden boughs crack with the weight,
Ere yet they bee full ripe —
I am amazed, a woman!
Some Lady here of the Court, I'll lay my life on it;
Let's to the Princess and inform her of it.
—Let me eternally perish to honour,
If their heads answer not for this foul insolence.
Though't be a sin of that portentous bulk,
That 'tstartles all the gods, and justice self
Wakes from a long dead lethargy to meet it:
Yet Kings are great as they, and spite of fate
Or rigorous laws, may triumph in their mercy.
Away with 'em to execution;
Him, and his fellow murderer, away:
—Pardon a Traitor?
Though you might urge, it were treason of that height,
That none but they could think of, much less act:
That murder cries for murder, blood for blood:
That he whose innocence they sacrificed
To their mad fury, was your loyal subject;
This on your marriage day — to affront Hymen.
And when your nuptial torch burnt brightest, dead it
With blood, into a sickly glimmmering taper:
That they should dare assault me! — in the Court —
One whom your goodness has bin pleased to look
Into a life, and honours, placed in the state,
Only to interpose my self between,
And meet all dangers that are shot at you.
It was a murder
Intended on our person, but that Heaven —
Was just in the prevention; True it might be so,
And were it, yet upon submission
Such faults have been remitted.
Away with 'em, I'll hear no more.
Down holy anger! —
One word, and I'm gone— you are my Sovereign,
And there's divinity worn in that title,
Which I adore, and think my self as happy
In this so early doom, since you are pleased with it,
As heaven had spoke it; though not till old age,
When nature claimed it as a due! Yet Sir
Be gentle to my memory; and if
At any time my crimes appear before you,
Fresh in your thought, to stain my Heraldry,
The happy mention of my virtuous acts,
From some that love my dust, shall rise to plead
My innocence—; and may you never live
To curse the untimely hand; or hour that robed you
Of so much loyalty!— for you Ʋrsini—
If ere your name shall fall in mention, when
I come in the other world, expect me not
Your friend; I fear me, I shall tell sad tales
In th'eares of heaven;—Farewell —
Impudent Traitor!
Yet still I dare be good; and spite of all
His hate, or malice to me, thus stand up
To beg his life.
Not after so much injury?
Yes, if Valenzo dare be sinful still
In wrongs, it shall be called my piety
To suffer.
You are all goodness;—for thy sake
We'll mix some mercy with our doom,
He that submits first to thee, has his pardon,
See justice done on the other; this sentence
Shall stand irrevocable;—
This sentence stand irrevocable?
Plague to your easy nature! —
Ha! this it is to over-act; how have I almost fooled my self, out
Of my own plots;
I were in a fine case now, if Piero
Should not accept life on this condition.
I'll send to him—Cassio! Grutti! who waits there? —
Ladies, pray absent your selves a while; —
— With child? impudent whore! to what cursed lump
Have thy sins swollen thee?
Oh, me miserable!
Hence ingrate wretch! that hast abused my favours
So far, till thou hast made a sin of charity:
— Ha! dost weep? —
My rare dissembler! those tears which art hath taught
To flow, carry more sinful cunning in 'em,
Then those the flattering Sirens wear upon
Their cheeks, when they court man to ruin:
Yet tell me ere you go, whom have those looks
Beguiled, and trained into your sinful arms.
You must prepare your self for a sad story then:
Yes, like enough, a tale as sad, and dismal
As that of Troy, and as much truth in it too!
Quickly, dispatch, before my anger prove
Too masculine!—and be modest in'th relation.
You'll wished untold.
Undone I doe! but why
This tedious circumstance? it do's involve
Your guilt.
Know then, that when I was my self
My name was—
What?
Felicia
Alberto's daughter?
Yes his—that was once Alberto
Durazzo's farre-fam'd Marquess; till
His cruel Master seized on's life, and honours,
At his return from Sicily in the first wars;
Where he received a fatal overthrow.
He was in action bold, and valiant!
However fortune wrought him this disgrace;
Here! here began my misery.
Proceed, trust me I now begin to pity thee.
Then let me die without your farther knowledge
Of my mishap; t'will be injurious
Unto my ashes, and disturb their quiet;
I know it will;
Nay, prithee tell me, come, and I'll weep with thee.
You'll have cause enough ere I've done;
Therefore don't hear't;
Is there ought in it concerns me?
Too much
Nay, then I must, and will have all the story,
Or think thee a foul prostitute.
It is thus then!
—Yet do'nt believe me, say that I was mad,
Distracted with my sorrows, that my words
Fell so uneven from me, you mistook
The sense; say any thing.—
Come, come, I know thou wilt tell truth!
Or may I never find peace hereafter!
How I fear
Whether this story tends?
The King Madame.
Ferrando;—(Seize me Courteous death,
Or I shall poison all her joys;)
Ha! what of him?
Be sudden, or, I swear by my just anger,
I'll straight rip up the cradle of thy lust,
The den where all thy loose adultery's
Were acted; search each corner of thy womb.
That keeps a record of thy villainies!
Ferrando was the author of my fall:
More lying then that evil Genius
That wrought the first mans fall!
Ferrando! oh! oh! (Swoons)
Thou rebel passion jealousy! what mean thou
To tumult in my breast?—ha! yet why not?
Why may not he be false?
Oh! oh! oh!
It is so!—Felicia!—she's gone, she's gone!
Help there, Florinda! Violetta! Ladies!
So—she begins to breath;—look up Felicia!
Where am I?
Here,—a medall? this confirms it;
Ferrando and Felicia!
Ha! the Princess!
Beshrew me but I've had a fearful dream!
I hope t'was but a dream;
No; I know all,
Ferrando's false, as stained with sin, and perjury
As howling-Ghosts.
Good Madame don't affright me;
Your fence's dark and gloomy.
Yes all hell
Is there at work contriving a revenge;
Revenge? for whom?
No matter whom;—But tell me
How, and with what false oaths, he won thee first
To his loose sheets.
I'll tell you; but you first
Shall promise me, to bread no other way
To your revenge and mine, then I shall lead you in.
I doe:
Let's sir, and hear it all.
Whilst yet Alberto lived
As great in favour as in blood, the glory
Of the Court of Naples, honoured with daily visits
From his Prince; t'was my unhappy destiny,
(Fool that I was to be so credulous!)
To receive many favours from Ferrando;
Which I interpreted in the way of love;
Mean while, this match was treated of between
Him, and your self; your Father (Sicily's King)
After your plighted troths, and formal ceremonies
Used betwixt Prince, and Prince, would break it off,
Which cause a sudden war upon his Country;
In which expedition Alberto
Was sent chief general: the King being fore't
Now to withdraw his public visits, employed
Ʋrsini in the business; gets access
Privately to me in the might, and that too
Always in the dark, lest happily he might
Be known to any of my servants; Briefly
After his many oaths, and protestations
Of his fair meaning, I at last consented
To let him steal the fruit, he durst not own:
When ere I urged, he was ingug'd to you,
He answered, that was but a trick of state,
A fair pretence to colour his design;
And maked seem glorious, in the eye of the world;
That he warred for a Kingdom, not a Queen;
Only entreated me, that I'd be silent,
And not so much as in a sign betray
To'th day, what only night was conscious of.
You condescended?
Willingly.
My father in the mean while returns defeated,
For which the King led on by passion, seized
His life and honours, these conferred on his
Now favourite Ʋrsini: the fleet re enforced,
He himself the second time in person
Went general of the forces, conquered Sicily,
And slew your father on Messina's plains,
Last brought you away captive.
But how came thou to Court in Sicily?
Thou told another story then:
For that
I crave your pardon, it was all the untruths
My life has ere bin charged with; but it was thus:
Led partly by a jealous fear, to see
What he intended; partly to find out
My brother Frederico, who was left there
Commander in Mazara, which was took
In the first expedition, in this disguise,
Amongst others whom desire of fame, or profit
Led to your shore, I cross't the seas; but failing
In quest of him I sought, I came to Court,
Where since I have remained.
But why Felicia
Did not disclose thy self before this time,
Now things are grown so bad?
When first I saw
Your person, and how mutually you loved,
Knowing how far I was beneath your worth,
So dear I held you both, that I determined
For ever to be lost to memory;
And serve you thus in this disguise: which I
Had done, but that this haplesse chance
Betrayed me to your knowledge.
Alas! thy piety has undone us both!
It was my too cruel destinies!
Methinkes wee two now seem to be set copies
Of griefs, to which wronged virgins will repair,
To take out patterns by.
Our wrongs and sorrows
Have made us just so like to one another,
That each seems th'o others counterfeit.
We will sit, and descant on our miseries,
Count the extent of each, proportion tears,
And sighs unto them.
Her's that doth surmount,
Shall borrow grief of t'other.
He has robbed me of a father cruel Tyrant,
He has robbed me of a father cruel Tyrant,
Bereaved me of my friends, and loving subjects,
Bereaved me of my Brother, and my friends.
Tan away all my honours, and my dower.
Taken my virgin honour, all my dower.
He has mock't me with the title of a Queen.
He has mock't me with the title of a Queen.
—But I am lost in Passion.
And I am lost in Passion.
Felicia come, and as our wrongs are equal,
So let our revenge be; we will hand in hand
Assault this Tyrant; and in bloody Characters
Print on his body the story of our sufferings:
Yet this cannot cure our grief.
What though, wronged innocence?
In death it will entitle us to honours;
And though our bodies molder to corruption,
Our better part shall survive fame; our names,
Free from decay, shall swell up numerous volumes;
Whilst our sad legends shall be made a pillow,
To every sleeping virgin.
O yet for my sake have some pity on him,
And for that part of him, that's cradled here,
Alas he may live to make us fair amends.
For thy sake I could spare him, but my wrongs
Sit heavy here, and urge me to revenge.
But say l've thought a way, how we may yet
Be both restored to happiness, would you not
Accept, and follow't?
Speak it (gentle soul.)
As yet (you know) your virgin treasure stands
Free from his ruder touch: those Ceremonies,
Which linked you in one Hymeneal knot,
Religion will make void, the praecontract
Twixt him and me being known, so that you then,
On this part are free from him; enjoy him thus
You cannot, neither would you (I suppose)
After these wrongs, (if you might be permitted:)
What hinders then, but that I take your place
This night? and show him, to what height his perjury
Has wrought our wrongs, whilst you in some disguise
May quit the Court, and ever next Sun appear,
From hence towards France, to whom you are allied
In blood, and wrongs. —
Content, — I'll in, and haste me to be gone,
To go there is some hope.
To stay there's none.
—To me this?
Out of particular respect
Hee stood engaged to repay your merits.
Dare you
Promise so much for's Lordship?
The Contents
Of that will speak, how much he tenders goodness
In every noble breast.
No doubt Sir, but
You are familiar with the sense it carries,
And can inform me, better than the dark Character.
It is that you'd be pleased t'accept
A life, for which to's Piety you shall owe,
Only a fair acknowledgement.
Wondrous good!
It is a becoming charity this, and hee
Wears it amongst the chiefest of his virtues.
Sir, it must needs be eminent in's Lordship,
Since exercised upon so noble a subject
As your self
But stay? — now I think on it,
This is a benefit of that nature, it seldom comes
Alone, are there not honours too? preferments
That wait upon this gift? speak, shall I be
His Lordships creature?
He's passionately yours.
Are we not for design? — ba, what dark trick
Is there in the State, that doth imply danger
Enough for us to manage, doth he think
Us fit to temper poisons, or use the benefit
Of the night to seize on his State-rivals, are we
Potent enough for faction, or intended
Intelligencer to some foreign Prince?
What mean you?
Engagements of this nature urge a return
Of thanks proportionable to themselves,
And what we have of such rich values,
I cannot tell, lest t'be our souls forfeited
To'th next occasion his Lordship has to use 'em.
This is strange language Sir, my understanding
Has not yet arrived at what it means.
Go home and study it then:—and do'e hear,
Entreat my Lord, t'employ his favours to
Some further profit, he'll scarce be gainer by 'em else.
I shall acquaint him with your humour.
Do maggot, wriggle, wriggle, do:—
Piero.
Madame! I am all joy, life, honours,
Preferment, and what not?
Then I'm undone!
Piero! did not promise me to stand
The utmost of's temptations? did thou boast
Thy virtuous strength, and fall at the first onset?
Life Madame is sweet.
If hitherto
It hath bin so, hereafter t'will be all
Bitterness, thou hast betrayed thy friend to death;
The thought of which will sour all thy content,
Make thy best pleasures relish worse then gall.
Life, with the worst that can befall us, is
A good exchange for death; but here are honours
Annex't to it Lady! I shall be great in favour.
Thou wilt grow big in sin too! thou must barter
Thy virtue for preferment; which being gone,
At best thou't be but painted ruins,
A glorious misery; thou must owe life
To him, that will infect and kill thy soul.
Yet you would be content, Valenzo should
Accept a life, on this condition.
Yet he may live, and still be virtuous.
Why? so may I.
Yet he's thy friend.
Am not I his too?
T'will be a glory to thee after death
That thou were friendships martyr, a title
Will sit upon thy tomb, richer than all
Thy Heraldry; more lasting than thy marble.
To show how far, I can prefer him to
My self, I am content this honour should be his.
False to thy friend, and virtue! that only came
To mock calamity, and midst our wrongs
Remain our greatest in jury.
Mistake me not,
I only did prepare you for a joy,
Which now you're ripe for:—know then, 'T returned
Him scorn for all his flattering promises;
And stood resolved t'incounter with his fury,
Made hot by my disdain.
Miracle of friendship.
Since it is decreed that one of us must fall,
And only one, my death shall free us both
From the laws rigour, enjoy your best Valenzo,
Enjoy him long, may you (a happy pair)
Grow like two neighbouring roses on one stalk,
Partaking mutually each others sweets;
Whence no rude hand approach to ravish you,
But when you are full blown, and ripe for heaven,
May you fall gently both into one grave,
There lye entombed in your own odours.
Piero, thou go
To heaven, to be the envy of the Saints;
For when thou come where those blessed troops reside,
No man shall ere direct a vow, or prayer,
But unto thee! — Valenzo take thy friend, 
Take him unto thy bosom, he has so much
Of heaven in him, I fear he can scarce die.
Is it your fear, Madame? can he deserve less in
Your fair opinion, than to be thought immortal?
That death at length should boast a victory
O'er so much goodness. — Methinkes (Piero)
Thou should for ever stand a rich example,
To all mankind, who in thy fall will sicken,
And dye to virtue; enjoy the happiness
Of thine own fate; I will not rob thee of
One precious minute; live till time has powered
A reverend snow upon thy head.—
But justice must be satisfied.
I'll bow my self beneath the stroke.
To slay
The innocent, is not to expiate,
But make a crime, preserve thy self entire
To thy Charintha, King, and Country.
What!
And betray my friend to death?
To what
I have deserved.
T'was thy too forward zeal, and a ripe spirit.
That spurred thee on to action, thou did it for
Thy friend, for me, and had not justice bin
Wronged in it, the honour had bin mine, why not
The shame?
You must not, shall not die.
No more!
Twill prove a breach of friendship else, I must not,
Shall not die: my honour suffers double,
Thou would foil me both in love, and valour.
Pity these tears.
Or in thy ruin I
Am lost.
Justice requires but one, her fate
Is so involved in yours, you cannot fall,
But in it she must find a certain death;
Think then, how can you satisfy the law?
Far easier than you, in whose sad loss
The whole world suffers, and in thy untipe fall
Looses all goodness.
Stint this pious strife,
I have bin too much woman, and betrayed
My name to infamy, in this tame passion:
Possess me a just anger, a spirit great
And noble as my birth; that I may shake,
And rowze this sleepy Prince, from his dull lethargy;
Who's wholly lost, in the bewitching flatteries
Of that bad man;— alas this is a danger
Too potent for your stars to free you from;
Henceforth I'll be your destinies: for since
This calm brings nothing but a certain fall,
A storm shall either save, or ruin all. 
Contemn our pardon.
Return your favours too
With so much scorn.
Better they'd played with lightning,
Or hugged a thunderbolt.
Justice is slow
Of pace, and if not led by fury,
Seldom o'retakes the crime, let your return
Of punishment be quick, and active, delay is worse
Than pity, and more dangerous: Valenzo
Is popular, and who knows, but hee had rather,
Owe his life to the peoples mutiny, than your pardon,
And therefore slighted it.
Oh the state of Princes!
How far are we from that security,
Wee dream't of in th'en pectance of our crown?
Were foreign dangers nothing, yet we nourish
Our ruin in our bosom: Valenzo is a traitor,
So is Piero too; and who is not in this age?
It is unsafe not to suspect our self.
To torture with 'em; be noble in thy justice:—
Here draw a warrant for their execution; —
We will sign't with our own signer;—hence pity,
Post from our breast; we banish thee our bosom
You are a disease bred there to ruin Majesty: 
And sink us below our subjects scotue.—
Our Princely cousin, welcome to Court; thou hast
Been too long absent, (I must chide thee for it,)
And envied us the boast of virtue.
Virtue!
Some malicious devil now, or other,
Has enticed her from her beads;
To undo me, and my plots, she carries anger
In her brow: — this I must mitigate, or I am
Lost. —
Thou art so eager after heaven,
Thou woo't o're-buy thy happiness.
Never fear't Sir.
But thy devotion's seasoned with so much charity,
Thou pil'st a stock of merit up for us
At Court.
I believe you'd need on it.
As long as we live here we shall; —
So wicked!
Ha! what frowne's that, whence these clouds, Charin∣tha?
So rises the blushing morn, as thou were wont
To smile, when thou appear'dst, we owe
Our day unto thy eyes; and if thou think
Thy beauty's worn too cheap, we will become tributaries
To thee for light; chase hence this sullen darkness,
Thy absence has already made too long
A night.
No Sir; it was your black deeds▪
How's this?
Do'e know me, who I am?
Not well.
Your King.
A Tyrant
Of big, and grorious impietic's,
A regal monster, the true head of that
Beast you rule, the multitude: more cruel
Than enraged lyons, or robbed bears; who both
Will spare the innocent, and humble.
Look to'th Lady there, sure she's distracted.
My wrongs indeed would make me so.
What wrongs? whence? or from whom?
Raise not my auger higher with your scorn;—
By all that's.—
Or if it be ignorance of my sufferings,
It but betrays your want of reason, and
How far you're lost to man, by your fond dotage.
Grow more particular, or wonder ruins me.
Good God! I've suffered so long, till patience
Grew my greatest crime.—
Now, now the storm is coming this way,
But I'm prepared to meet it.
Whence? or from whom?
Ask this good man how often he has mourned
Over the ruins of my fame? how often
His ears have met with the report of my
Disgrace? how I was noised a strumpet? when
Each talking thing at Court, might freely act
A rape upon my virtue, till I was left
All a whole stain, black as the front of perjured
Sinners? while you, (as if I'd bin a trifle
Cast from your blood, and kindred, or some dark thing,
Whose actions were so sowly bad.
That report bettered 'em in the expression:)
Could sit as silent as the night; as calm
As seas, when the winds sleep; yet at last be just;
And say, how have I appeared to you, or him,
That calumny has thus bin privileged,
To violate my honour?
Madame,
I have always spoke you, chastities best example.
Innocence it self is not so white.
Yet he that would confirm this with his sword,
Must meet, with prisons, wrackes, and tortures,
As a reward of so much virtue!
Ha!
Sweetest Princess! —
And ere he die, must suffer in's honour,
Be proclaimed traitor to the state:
Ʋrsini, thou hast abused our trust.
My Lord.—
Too weak pretence, for your ingratitude
To so large merit; Naples call's him
Her chief preserver; he brought home victory,
By his own arm achieved, when the proud foe,
Threatened your Kingdom with a fatal downfall.
He, to whose arm you owe your life, your crown,
To whom in war, you'd sooner fly for help
Then to the Altar; now in peace must have
His temples robbed; his garlands from his brow
Transplanted. to adorn this useless statue.
Madame, I have not so appeared in managing these affairs of yours.
Would thou had,
Or somewhat that carries less resemblance
Of man: Oh thou art bravely wicked.
I have not used the art to boast the virtue
Of mine own actions; yet heaven knows
They were all good, and aimed at ends as honourable
As your desires.
Ʋrsini leave, till there is hope of pardon,
This impudence in sin,
Bid's a defiance to all mercy; did we not,
At your persuasion, give order for Valenzo's
Quick dispatch?
How ere I seemed () to run down with the stream of your violent passion, yet my intents still bore up against it; witness this paper.
Ha! What's here a pardon?
Which you had sealed ere this, had not this Lady here interrupted it.
How?
your passion would not have permitted you,
To have o'er viewed what you consented too;
This I knew, as likewise how dangerous it
Would have been to the state, if he had fallen.
Again my own Ʋrsini:—
Charintha, pardon our errors, we will deserve it,
By the future love, and honours we will throw
On our Valenzo, — here take my signer
Fetch 'em to Court.
You are noble.
Ʋrsini Waite on her to the Castle.
You honour me.
Oh how near were we destruction.
Reason sit still enthroned in thine own state,
It is passion only ruins Kings, not fate.
Hold up, hold up Sir, the Ladies are coming this way,— for shame,—God's me, they are here; why do'e tremble so Sir?
A violent fit of the ague; oh! oh! oh! have me to bed gently, gently, or I shall scatter all my limbs;
Discredited for ever, (here take this staff Sir)— have I boasted your strength to them? — fortified you forth' in∣counter, and you fail me thus? — undone, undone!
Oh! oh! oh! for half a dozen of night caps.
Here Sir, on with 'em; they are somewhat dirty, they'll keep you the warmer; — now shall I be called Mountebank; Quackesalver, Pispot-peeper: and all the ugly mangy names can be invented.— come in, come in.—
Twill be a Scene of modest mirth, Ladies.
The Physician has cooled him.
Why Sir, you won't disgrace me? go towards 'em.
Some fire, some fire; —cold, cold, cold, cold.
Here, here, on with my gown: —this cap, so, so.
Ladies, we will take leave to be bold here to vex him.
How do'e my Lord?
We are come here to await your pleasure.
The very thought on it has cast him into a cold sweat.
Oh! oh!
Now for fifty virgins.
A monopoly of women.
Hey, for a wench, for a wench, to bumfiddle now; Ah! ha!
Oh! ho! oh!
Do'e remember you'd play the fool in my gown, and cap excellently.
Well said Doctor.
To him Doctor.
Then a noise of Musicians would do rarely.
Look he's nodding.
My Lord you intend no abuse to us?
Make us hazard our credits for nothing?
More clothes; — why hoe there, on my feet I say.
He's dreaming.
Fast, fast a sleep, so, so, this charm list's till Midnight, and then hee wakes.
Twill be good sport to see him then—
Dance up and down the Court like the ghost of old Hippocrates.
You must not expose him to the public view.
Mr Doctor you're sufficiently revenged, this is enough for you to boast on when you come in the University.
This, and the rare cures I've done upon you two shall be my theme.—Good night.— Ladies I'm your servant. — My doughty placket-hunter lye thee there, and even awake when thy stomach serves thee; to morrow morning I'm for Padua. —
The night comes on apace, straight every thing
Will be as black as I, and alike terrible,
Nay out-doe me too: each leaf that stirs
Affrights the fearful, makes the guilty tremble,
And yet this night, what is it but a shadow?
Yet I am less than that, for I do less:
I that have purposed so much, act nothing!
Horror! could but my thoughts be seen, they'd own
Murders, more than the basilisk could commit,
Were he all eye, more than revenge has acted,
Or than the trivial spite of plague, and war
Produce, in their full heate. — Ʋrsini be speedy
Or I'll outrun design. —
Zisco.
My Lord.
The hours are favourable
And have brought opportunity along with 'em,
We must resolve for action.
I'm prepared.
But Zisco, art thou sure Felicia was.—
Sure? puh! would you know? I my self
Am the Moore he cause to ravish her.
And can thou do it again?
Bravely.
This night then thou shalt—ravish his Mistress,
Calantha! this night! I've prepared all things ready
For thy conveyance into her chamber—thou wilt do it
Resolved.
And kill her too?
An she were my mother.
Obscure your self a while.—how now?
My Lord, the French have kept their word,
And unespied have stolen from Genoa,
Entered our haven, and this night have set
Upon our fleet, the bold Sicilians too
In the town are up in arms.
There spoke my Genius.
My Lord! the Cittie's in a mutiny,
The Court in wild distraction.
Well, beyond my hopes: excellent well; Grutti, Cas∣sio, be ne'er us, we must use your help to night.
Valenzo plays from the Castle with his Canons,
And strikes both parties without distinction:
He's now marching up with a well ord'red troop,
It is thought he had intelligence of your intents.
O my fate! that man undoe's me.
Thus early sins are blasted in the bud,
There is no safety but in being good.
—It is late.
Each man retire to his quarter: Captains,
We entertain your merit with a serious welcome.
Our deserts, my Lord,
Are so slender, that were it not to prejudice
Your judgement, we would blush to own any.
Hang this flattery, merit quoth? is it such a piece of merit to cut a score or two of throats; knock down an hun∣dred of the city herd? a gallant could do so much for's Cocka∣trice.
The King shall give you each particular thinks: He owes you both a trophy,
His acknowledgement
Of our duty, would raise our pride to sin,
We should forget to let heaven share in the victory.
Victories, by Mars's crest it deserves not to come in the Chronicle, though Hollinshead or Hall, those voluminous foreigners should write our annals, twill ne'er make us justly in among the Caesars, or own a name in the list of the worthies.
No Contareno, wee will not have thee painted in vile ugly colours, and clapped upon chimneys, thou shalt be cut—
In brass? mine would make an excellent brazen face?
In Parian marble, we'll rob the Quarries
To rear thee up a glorious monument.
A glorious loame to set lazy spiders a work in, an office for birds to mute in, if these be your glorious monumēts for men of arms, I'll even live to sin out my merit (as you call it) then when I die, the world and I will shake hands, and cry quit of all sides.
Hee that should hear thee talk thus, and not know
thee well, would doubt thy valour.
Hercules! an hee did he should try it.
It were punishment enough.
Gonçales— I gratulate thy naval victory;
France will have cause hereafter to mention thee in sad story,
Thou give them but a churlish salutation.
Such as they deserved,
It seems they came rather to steal than fight,
They were as ill prepared, as they had meant
To bear our empty hulks away unquestioned;
For soon as they perceived we descried 'em,
Pale, as the lilies in their trembling flags,
They turned their sails, and fled; we made after 'em,
With swift winged lightning from our Canons mouth,
Which sunk and fired 'em all, ere they could quit
The channel, or gain the wider Ocean;
Believe me, noble Soldier, thou art dear
To fame; as old in victory, as in years,
Yet still thou toyl'st t'undoe thy self, and benefit
Thy ungrateful soil, which never will be able
To requite thy meanest service.
Yet you for the same cause, in the pride of youth,
Opposed your self betwixt the state and danger,
When their sick hopes, were as their fortunes, desperate;
Reduced a Kingdom to your sway, in whose
Rich spoils, your gaudy Soldier triumphs;
Whilst boasting of their rifled plumes, they drink
Health's to victory; yet those so moderate,
Their bowls increase their fury, not their surfeits.
How these tall men of the sword claw one another?
They have an itch of pride runs through 'em.
The Hero's, when thou come into Elyzium,
To give thee place, shall shift their blessed mansions.
And load thee with their laurels.
How my fears betray me! shunning
One toil, I run into another.
Che va la?
Oh me! I'm surprised.
Spirit of valour you are my prisoner.
Ha! whom have you there?
(Valenzo! my voice betrays me.)
A young Sicilian, shall I draw my steel,
And give him a gentle stroke?
Lend me my sword — and be thou what thou wilt I dare thee to thy worst.
Bravely spoke,—set forward then.—
Traitor! the Princess! Calantha!
All the better; she's skilful at her weapon,
We will but exchange a thrust in sport.
Ha! what means this flight?
Dare none of you fight?
Dear Lady, not with you.
Then you are cowards, they speak you so in the City,
And I came out thus purposely to try you.
If you please, you shall quickly see that,
Command us sheath our swords in one another
Bosoms— we will fly like lightning to execute your
Commands; — you're our Princess.
No, I'm your Prince's murthresse.
How?
I've killed your King: will none
Dispatch me yet?
Sure she's distracted.
We must disarm you Lady; — it is a duty to our Prince
Was never till now unwillingly performed!
You must back to'th Court, whither we will waite upon you.
Villains, cowards,
The Princess! what made she abroad so late?
Did she not say that she had killed the King too?
Come let's walk the round; things are yet unsettled.
It is so dark now, an the devil should lye perdieu I should go near to stumble on's horns.
Too much of this sad story, Oh these men
How are they degenerate from the goodness
Of their creation! they have been always false —
Silly as we are,
We know it; their vows and oaths are traitors
To us, and yet we hug them, let them into our bosoms,
Into our hearts, till they undo us?
But Madame, why do'e desire us to leave you?
Fear you not his fury, what it may prompt him too,
When he shall see you are not his Calantha.
He never was acquainted with that passion,
He's violent in nothing, — But in love.
And yet he may dissemble that too
As well as his vows.
Should hee? were his hand
Lift up to strike me, I can charm it there!
Who can look on a Ladies bended knees,
Wet cheeks, swollen eyes, hear her sighs, her prayers,
And yet be cruel: If there be one that can,
That one is not Ferrando; his bosom is
Passable to every groan; it strikes his heart:
He would tell me (when he was absent)
If I sighed, or wept, for then he said
He wept and sighed by sympathy.
Yet now he loves you not.
Can hee not love himself? here, here I bear him,
Himself in a less model, this I'll show him,
If he mistrust it is none of his; let him
But rip me up, there he shall see each limb
As like to his, as his one hand, one eye,
One cheek is like the other: besides there lies
Folded by his own name, he told me hee
Would call it so, (Ferrando,) and lest I
Should chance forget, I wrote it in my heart,
There he will find it.
Good Lady!
It is a sad nuptial night, this,
I'll tell him too how hee
Would grieve if I were dead, go hanging down
His head, veiling his eyes from heaven, ashamed
To look up to the place, where his Felicia is:
Or poring on the ground, as he would find
Where my neglected ashes lay a sport
To the winds; where some rude blast might blow me up
Into his eyes, and then he would weep to find,
Me there; weep till the fretting brine had burned
His eye-bals out.
He told me of his dreams, what pleasure hee
Had to find me in 'em: alas they will
Be terrible now: I shall affright him, appear
A thin pale ghost, make him start out in his sleep;
(Alas! I will not) yet he'll dream he heard me.
Cry out, Ferrando! revenge upon Ferrando:
This cannot choose but startle him. —
Heaven grant it may.
Madame all joy that we can hope, or wish,
Be with you.
I'll go alone into the bed-chamber.
There expect him,—pray leave me.
Good night, I hear him coming.
Our Navy victor.
The City quiet too I those clouds
Which threatened ruin to your Kingdom, all
Blown o'er; the sky serene and calm, as if
It laugh't at your vain fears; the lamps of heaven
That now seemed all blown out, are trimmed a new
And brighter shine, to lead you to Elyzium.
To Heaven, Elyzium's poor to what wee shall
Enjoy to night.
The land of some dull villager
Or doughty Poëts dreams.
The birth of fancy,
A thin, fantastic, aerie paradise;
With which they flatter their weak hopes, but mine
Is known to sense; we gather odours there; wealthy
In their native sweetness, flowers of a hew
As bright as lasting, roses and lilies
Blown from their stalks, meet here, and dwell upon
Her cheeks, as if there only they were privileged
To enjoy an everlasting spring. Ʋrs. Let your
Imaginations seed even to a surfeit, your senses
Are too too weak, and narrow t'entertaine
The bounteous flowing of her pleasures:
You'll let so much pass by unknown,
As if you took but tribute of her blessings:
When the whole stock is yours.
We will be her Mars, and meet her in soft skirmish,
In amorous duel, where we will softly yield
And let her win: (to raise her to the pride
Of a new victory, as much upon our selves
As we have done upon her Country,
Then shall she bind us gently in her hair
Fetters for Captive lovers, and in scorn
Of our trim youth, and temperate blood, when we
Begin to faint within her arms, shall then
Supply us with new strength from her own eyes;
Whence she will dart a soul at every glance
Rich as her self, and the blessed smiles it is made of;
Create an active flame within our breast
Able to give old statue's life and motion,
Make their stiff marble feet supple as the joints
Of love: — oh I'm lost! my Venus
Come; lead to my Venus.
Your Cynthia, —your Moon
With a man in her—there there's
Your way, why move you not?
How you stand.
Ʋrsini, Ha! Se'st thou that black thing there?
That ugly fiend, I'll out stare thee, devil.
Where are you Sir?
It is done.
Ravished! Calantha's ravished—oh torment!
Grim fury post to hell.
Pardon me Sir,
I've a little business to dispatch first —
This for Felicia, thus Alberto fell.
Oh I'm wounded.
Ha! do'e know me Prince?
Frederico! just heavens.
Stay your hand—be innocent in your revenge,
Let me bear all the guilt.
Coldest thou think, dull Prince, that heaven so
Doted on thy royalty, thy crown, thy sceptre,
Or regal pall could bear thee out in sin?
Or the weak shine of trivial state dazzle
Their eyes that look upon the blessed sun!
Coldest thou flatter thy self into such a Security,
That vengeance would not find thee out?
When thou had forfeited thy luxurious palate
With all the dainties of Felicia's body
Thirsted her blood, quaffed off whole bowls of it,
Till thou were it drunk, and wild with fury
Of thy intemperate draughts —Am not I a rare villain now?
Mad, stark mad, besides himself,
Sure this is but a dream, and I asleep.
Thus, thus I'll wake you:—
Oh my blood scalds, h'has shot wild fire into my heart,
Ah traitor, thy steel is poisoned.
Frederico, let me embrace thee:
Now our revenge is perfect.
Your passage lies this way.
Thorough us.
Treason, treason, raise the Court.
Break op the doors.
We are betrayed.
Villain I greet thy heart.
Where tends your business?
Slave to hell, and thou shalt carryit thither.
Fire, fire, the poison boils my entrails.
The Prince wounded!
Where are the traitors?
Here I am his murderer.
Frederico.
Valenzo, I am overcome. —
New miracles, Calantha, my best my dearest love: — Oh I am sick, stand off Calantha, my breath's so hot, twill singe thee else; and like thy beauty's up, like nimble flames;
But dost thou live?
To curse thee false and perjured.
The spheres are out of tune; nature's distraught;
The orbs celestial have turned round so long
That they are giddy: the stars are in a mutiny,
The Intelligences are altogether by the ears.
Heaven! I bless your justice:
Sterne tyrant! that triumph'st o'er the memory
Of my father, mock me with love,
Till like a fool I doted on my fetters,
Because they were golden ones, that thus
Thy devilish art might make my soul a captive,
With my body.
Enigmatical.
Yet then a Lady mourned thy perjured vows.
Whom thou betrayd'st to loose adultery.
Thy speech, Calantha, is darker than an Oracle.
Truer it is, and dare thou yet dissemble it?
It is a truth precious to time, who will preserv't
To blast thy memory, and derive a stain
On all thy successors.
How? or when arrived this your knowledge Madame?
How? or when arrived this your knowledge Madame?
Felicia told me all her self
Confirmed it by religious oaths; besides
This medall which she gave me from her neck,
A pledge of his broke faith, with the sad fruits
Of his sate lust, within her womb.
She's a black whore: she lies; believe her not.
Thou wilt be damned:
So may I; and houle eternally
In those blew flames the devils bath in,
If ever my vows were made to any other
Then thee; and those, as spotless as thy soul.—
But whom have wee here?
Felicia! Sad Lady she entreated
This night's exchange of place; that she might show him
What an untimely mother he had made her,
And this it was cause my flight,
Felicia!
Ha! murdered.
My love.
My sister! ravished:
And murdered by! me, incestuous villain!
Did thou not tell me that Ferrando ravished her,
And cast her to his slaves, a prey to their
Bold appetites and furies.
To incense you the more against him; I told you
What I only did imagine, because at my return
From Sicily, report whispered her lost,
Lost in the ruins of my Father,
Which made me think her murdered.
Ye Gods! I now acknowledge you supreme:
Your power is mighty over our fond arts.
Silly projectors we ensnare our selves!
Whilst we spread nets for others.
This brain has wrought all these sad plots,
Calantha, take your Lord; who is as true,
And holy in his vo was, as those blessed Saints
He invoked.
And yet Felicia wronged?
It was I by whom she swelled, and not Ferrando,
As it was supposed.
Supposed! she swore it was hee.
Ʋrsini, farewell; I'll hear the rest anon—
That aggravates my crime, who wrought her into
This false belief, for having long loved her,
Without return of mutual flames, and at length
Finding that the impediment was her fond
Dotage upon the Prince; I determined,
Rather than not to be possessed of her,
To part with faith and loyalty, feigned all
My visits for him, courted her acceptance
Of his love, which I so darkly brought about
That she consenting to private meetings
As oft as she expected the Prince,
I my self filled her arms.—
Then you conclude Ferrando innocent▪
In act, or thought.
Felicia! sister! your brother Frederico call's,
She's gon, cold, cold! and pale, and yet methinkes
She smiles, look up, Felicia—
But how came it to pass she ne'er descried you?
For reasons I then gave her: all our meetings
Were in the night, and that in the dark too, where I
Dissembled so the Prince in voice and gesture.—
This agrees right with her relation: villain thou haste undone me.
And my self too.
Death hangs upon her lids, it is eternal night with her. hoe, sister, stay, take me along with you; I'll foal∣low you.
Pernicious traitor.
Rage chokes my utterance: — give me your fword.
Our hearts and hands are yours:
Our hearts and hands are yours:
Isle be an age in killing thee, dost tremble?
Thou look like one of those thin frozen ghosts,
That chattering lye on hills of thicke-ribb'd Ice,
Come meet my fury.
Here, here's my heart.
I: I'll dig it out,
And cast it to the hungry fiends.
My strength decays, I reel and totter like a cracked reed that leanes against the winds.
Take your sword.—
Madame.
Take it I say.
You do him too much honour.
Manag't with skill and strength, or thou affront'st
My honour,—faint-hearted! coward, I'll follow thee to hell.
Mercy heavens!
Ho! Charon, more company, lye farther there jolt-head, what quarrelling you dogs? thy oar, thy oar ferriman: clap 'em of the sconce with it, there, there.
The Gods are just.
You wore their cause upon your sword.
It is poor revenge this, can he not live again?
Start up from th'earth with life, and double strength?
Were it centupled I'd meet him: —but oh my eyes!
Look here Valenzo: which is Prince, which subject,
Which is my loved Ferrando? I see there is
No ceremonious state, no pomp in death;
They all lye level, all quiet, the bad as well
As the good, why should this traitor here
This devilish arch, arch-traytour lye as silent
As his Lord? should he not stare, and foam,
Start up and howl, till he wakes all the dead?
Lady:
Her old passion returns again.
—Roar, and curse heavens,
But they too have forgot to punish sinners,
And reward virtue, here's an example on it;
We were both virtuous, and deserved not this
Bad usage; let me embrace thee: —
Cold as the earth he lies on, and as dull too:
Where is the soul, that busy flame that lent
Him life and motion? affected such vain pomp
And glorious noise: whither is it fled? poor liveless trunk,
It was unkindly done to leave thee thus,
A prey to worms and rottenness.
Are you there fury, Megaera, Tisiphone, Alecto,
Howl, howl, furies, I'll lash you.
Kind death you are welcome; I kiss thy dart.
The Princess! she's slain, unlucky hand.
Spite of our stars, and all rude opposition,
We are one in death: Valenzo see us interred,
Both in one tomb, that we may mingle ashes
And be securely lodged, you know our souls
Were one; our hearts were long united.
A FATAL UNION.
Draw, draw the curtains there, my love and I
Must sleep; — uncivil I protest, put out the lights,
We shall sleep best in the dark; pray don't disturb us,
You may fright him from mine arms, —but — I'll — hold — him — fast.
The ruined treasure of two Kingdoms
In one heap.
In the bed-chamber! this way!
Yes Lady, the cry was full of horror.
It was the Physicians potion this my Lord.
Done in revenge.
Would 'thad bin poison.
Bless me! whence all these tragedies.
Astonishment ceizes me.
The King:
Ʋrsini dead. ha! whom have we here, Frederico,
Yes, and Felicia too.
All slain; by what dire hand?
I'll tell you that within.—
Charintha is your Queen.
May you be happy in her love.
Remove the bodies, in the morning we will take order for the state, and funeral rites.
Of these; the lasting story of whose wrongs
Shall be all royal lovers evening songs.
AFter these ruins, thus your Poët stands,
Expecting his own destiny from your hands,
By them he lives or dies; if it should hap
That stead of a mild doom, applause or clap.
(Your trivial allowance) his listening ears
Meet with harsh whispers, or half stifled jeers,
Such unkind censure kills him; his sad Muse
Ʋnlesse you give her bay, has vowed to use
The Cypress wreathes, her piety did allow
Those only to encircle her own brow:
Your candid acceptance will be
New life and soul to his lost Poesy;
His flame's but sickly yet, your breath no doubt
Will either blow't up higher, or quite out.

VAcation still: so little custom comes
To buy our Merchandise, and fill our rooms,
It would persuade us but for after hope
Of better takings quite to shut up shop.
But what's the reason? have we no goodware?
Or doe the sights and motions in the fair
Please better with their cheap rates? it is not fit
That we should set so low a prize on wit.
For what we shall present you with to day
The Bride, we wish you not t'expect a play,
Wherein a nesslecock, or youth of the town
(Borne to more state then wit)'s a gallant grown:
When one amongst you laughing at the elf
And at his gullery, thinks upon himself.
Perhaps there will be some concluding that
A person or a place is pointed at;
Such make that satire which the pure intent
Of the author meant but harmless merriment;
Who only labours here in what he can
T'expresse a Citizen a Gentleman.
Mark well the weaving and the dressing, the•…
Liking the stuff we hope you'll come again.
I Say, no more of this,
I'll have no brow contracted into wrinkles
Upon my wedding day: A day of mirth;
And thou stand like a melancholic figure
Of weeping penitence, when joy should dress
Thy cheeks in dimples; it is prodigious
That thou should only
Wear mourning at my nuptials, that have fostered
Thee from an Infant; bred thee to a man;
Ranked thee with Gentlemen, and made thee thought
To be what thou appear'st; and thou to grieve
For what I count my happiness!
Pray sir construe it
The expression of my duty. To your love
Were I possessed of many selves I ow them.
That love hath cause this passion out of fear•…
Your reputation in the act will suffer
Rumour is apt to prey upon occasion:
And if the rude mouths of the multitude
Catch hold on a report, they'll multiply it;
And make it. grow to scandal. You an old man
Will marry a young woman.
Who calls me old! Dost thou? Now by my beard
(Is it not turned black again? I should be loath
To swear by a false coluor) I am young,
Like a new spring grown out of a barren winter.
In ave likewise strength and activenesse: look here else. 
B•…shrew't, the floor's uneven: would it were mended
Ple have my corns cut too. Child we must dance
Always at weddings. Am I again a Bridegroom!
And shall I not be lusty?
Pray Sir, do not
Flatter your weakness, and decay of strength.
Your age begins to grow to a disease:
And can you then express such youthful appetite
Without being censured?
Pray no more dissuasion
Besides my will there is a reason for it:
And thou hast cause to joy, She brings a portion
Will be a large addition to thy state,
Which I but live t'encrease. I have no heir
Save thee? nor will get any: shalt have all.
Your welfare sir to me
Is an inheritance 'bove any state
Fortune can bless me with. Which to preserve
My knees should grow fast to some hallowed pavement,
Till mine own dissolution, and no thoughts
Busy my mind but prayers. Sir consider
The difference twixt your disability,
And her so hopeful fruitfulness. To increase
And propagate was the best end of marriage.
T•…en if the means be wanting, the end cannot
Be perfected: and some in scruple stick not
To call it sin.
More urging! when I am dead
Thou shalt have her too. Ha! dost startle at it?
Why that would make even your ashes infamous.
And tempt the idle gazers on it to scratch
Libels upon your Marble. It would be construed
That she in youthful heat longing for what
Your cold defects denied her, had enjoyd me
To lustful satisfaction, when she should
Have warmed your bed, and after married me
To prevent farther rumour. Nay sir more.
Hath she not settled her desire already
Upon some one of more proportioned years?
It were rare if such a beauty of that growth,
Should have her maiden thoughts untouched with the appetite
Of what instinct doth teach, though she were barred
Even all converse, so much as not to know
The difference of a sex.
A causeless jelousy
Shoe's noted to have more perfections
Lodged in her rich mind, then the outward structure
Though beautiful doth promise: she inherits
Her Parents virtues, and her education
Hath been their only care. I know shoe's free
From the lest thought may stain her purity.
Therefore no more.
Is my Bride yet come Cousin?
Not yet sir. Monsieur Kickshaw the French Cook's come to prepare dinner.
Hoe's welcome; let me see him
I'll have the feast seasoned with all variety
Of choice delights.
To me they will not relish;
But like those pills which an unwilling patient
Doubting their virtue takes, and turns the medicine
Into a worse disease.
Monsieur you are welcome.
Me tank you Monsieur.
I presume you'll show your best cunning.
Me make you de French dish; de pulpatone; de friga∣sie; de gran Kickeshaw an de kickeshaw royal; de macaroni: and two tree dozen ting more for your wedding.
Pray Cousin take him first into the cellar.
Remorse Monsieur. Me drink two tree cup a your Claret a your vite vine sall make a me lusty.
I shall thankfully consider your pains.
Monsieur ven a me vark is done, you give a me leave to dance two tree four dance, an kiss a devench two tree four time. Oh de French man love a de fine vench vary well. You be de old man Monsieur, and you love a de young vench: me make your de dish sall get sis Child.
Too many on conscience.
If de Madame love me, me get twenty.
To your business good Monsieur.
Dat be good business, better den go to my vark. 
Observe you sir this fellow! one that ought
To be kicked into manners how he taunts you?
Twill be the streets discourse, the conduits lecture:
And not an idle tongue but will abuse.
Your reverend name, which hitherto hath awed
The unbridled rabble.
Once more I command thee
Leave off this counsel, growing but from fear,
That will admit no reason. Cousin Raven
Hasten my Bride: she makes my patience tyre
With so much expectation. And hark you cousin. 
My sun of joy's eclipsed, and all the hopes
My fancy painted, by this accident
Are blotted out. How have I merited
Of heaven thus to be punished! But I must not
Tax providence with an injustice to me,
That have deserved worse curses for neglect
Of my religious duties. Only he,
My foster Father to possess those sweets
Love promised my inheritance! Were it another,
I'd from his rude hands snatch her in the Church,
Before the powerful words should knit that knot
Nothing but death dissolves.
Senior Maligo a most welcome guest.
Your Servant Senior.
And Mr. Rhenish.
The Spanish and Dutch Merchants! send there be no wars at the wedding.
Wee come to witness your solemnityes.
Welcome Mr. Rhenish: and since you are come so ear∣lie lets spend the time in conference about the wines we lately spake of. 
Cousin you're sad. Would I might know the reason,
I'll help to put it from you.
Cousin Raven,
Since love, not blood, hath made you wear that title,
Though it is a secret I would gladly hide,
To you I will impart it. Sent with gifts
To the fair maid that this day must be Bride
To the old man, my treacherous eyes conveyed
Flames to my heart from hers: which being fixed
Upon me, shot their magic influence
Of love with such a violence, that I took
The impression ever my bosom was prepared
And tempered for it.
This may be a ground
For me to work on.
Duty now and honesty
Fought with my passions, and enforced them back
To their unwilling prison: though her eye,
Look, gesture; and at parting when I took
Her hand to kiss it: then she held mine hard:
For all these invitations to their liberty
I durst not free them; but concealed even that
Perhaps she wished to know.
How can you doubt it?
They were all signals that you should assault,
And she would yield It is but a modest custom
For men to woo. It is women's only pride
To have men court them, not to be denied.
Indeed it was your fault.
My virtue rather.
Should I like the ungrateful serpent, sting
The bosom that hath warmed me into life?
Desire shall burst me first. Yet I must tell you,
I am resolved to give my passions
This satisfaction. When the bridal ceremonies
Have had their consummation, I will travail
And leave the cause behind. You may reveal it
When I am gone. I shall be praised or pitied,
For none can blame me.
None! Yes all that hear it.
Who will not tax your indiscretion,
And want of knowing what belongs to man,
That will deny your self that right, perhaps
None but your self can challenge. we are warranted
To be indulgent to our selves so far
As work our own contents by any means
Conscience or law calls just. Then if the time
Prevent it not, try your success: be sudden:
Steal her away and marry her.
Tempt me not
Out o•… my passion into one more dangerous.
It were but a just correction if I kilt thee;
That would instruct me to an act of error,
Repentance could scarce win a pardon for.
My counsail's worth a better fee. Perhaps
You fear some treachery in me. Clear your understanding,
I'll prove you ought to do it, and I to aid you.
You are his foster son, and I his kinsman.
You he intends his heir, and yet he must not
Neglect me altogether. When they are married
Sshe'l find one to get Children.
Thou art base
In thy suspect of her; and but for peace
(To which this day ought to be consecrate)
It should be punish't.
You're too violent.
Be calm, and understand demonstrative reason,
Children being borne, then are you disinherited.
When marrying her ther's an estate will follow
Worth thousands: For she is the only child
Her parents ever had.
And why should you
Advise to this, and aid it?
What more police.
Could I be guilty of? When his displeasure
Hath cast you of (for that way sure he will punish
The injury) stand not I fair to be
Possessed of what you loose, the old mans favour?
Were you the only object of my hate,
The good I'do my self would make the act
Show of sufficient malice: but my love
Guiding me to it—
It is well I am prevented;
My rashness else had executed justice
Upon thy guilt. Forbear to tempt me farther.
Thy friendship's but the shadow of a true one
Dare urge such counsel, goodness cannot choose but blush at.
Howsoever you receive it
I will attempt it. I'll prepare the Bride
With this discovery: if she hath desires
She'll some way give them liberty. The old man
I then will pre•…ossesse with jelousy;
And so indeere me to him, that my ends
Stand always fair in their opinions.
A cunning villain must pretend to save.
When most of all he doth intend a grave 
I like the rates: may the wines please as well
I'll not repent my bargain.
Trust me sir you have the best sack of Spain.
And Rhenish the swan hath none better: yet ther's that will make the crookedst horner in the lane speak latin with the Bedle of Vintiners hall.
Mr. Justice Ferret,
This was a large expression of your love
To come over the water:
It was my wives desire.
Kind Mistress Ferret.
Sir, the respects I bear you, and the obedience I owe my husband that commanded it, brought me over willingly to offer my service to so noble a friend.
Your courtesies overcome me.
A rot on the best linings of your three piled durable; your everlasting almanac of high days, feasts and sessions: was it my desire? Thou lie thou wrong side of a lawyer turned outwards: I had better business at home. I could have seen if mother Whirl had spun the last pound of flax I sent her, or called at Knocks the weavers for my new Napkins. I have no maids to cudgel their tasks out of. Indeed I can hardly keep any for such a goat as thou art.
Are ye offended with your husband Mrs. Ferret?
Obedience forbid it; my head: or if I may use the honourable phrase here without offence, my cap of maintenance.
No no sir; she was but excusing a few faults.
How sir lubber, must the world take notice by you that I have faults or modesty to excuse them? I'll make thee com∣plain a month of the fairies for this: the fairies of my nails I mean; and pretend pinching for pissing in thy shoes, or such night uncleanesse.
Sweet wife forbear a little. Thou wilt vex away thy ea∣ting stomach, and here will be excellent cheer.
So, so: I thought a City seast with a Ram-mutton pasty, and a twelve nookt custard, made with carriers eggs and the out scrapings of i•…inglas, must tempt you to the charge of six pence over, and six pence back again. Which with an addition of Clerks fees shared, and some garrisoned westphalian neates tongue or red deer pie out of my Chamber cupbord, might have been an entertainment for the Masters of the Parish in your own dining room; and all have been paid for too with the return of half emptied bottles.
Your wife Mr. Ferret hath called something to mind de∣serves a chiding.
Fie no sir: She is somewhat shrewish at home, but the best wife abroad—
Fie, sweet heart now you flatter. It is virtue enough in us to be obedient and dutiful: we should lay our selves under our husbands feet if they command it. But i'll exalt my self or somewhat else above your head, you malkin of suburb ado∣rity set up only to fright crows from the carrion of the common wealth, that it may lie still and corrupt government. Your worcester∣ship had best bind my tongue to the peace, my nails should soon bail it. 
My Bride come?
The welcom'st guest that ever blessed this roof.
Joy Crown ye both.
May your wish be prophetic.
But why is she so sad?
It is only custom.
Maids have their fears which by degrees must leave them.
May she make him a happy wife; and prove obedient from my example.
Salute my Bride son: she should be thy joy
As well as mine.
I better shall express
Her entertainment in my pious wishes,
Then any complement I will be ready
To pay you my best duty. 
Love you mean sir;
Give it no other name, might I own that
And call it my possession, soon this melancholy
Should leave it's mansion, and a Brides full joy
Inhabit here. You surely do rapine;
And it may be this act begets your fear
Of being dispossessed a fathers love.
Which he must now in some proportion
Confer on me.
Let me with reverence swear 
By this white hand—
Let me prevent your oath;
Or swear by another book. Perhaps twill be
The last warm kiss my lips shall ever feel. 
I do believe you love me. 
How shall I
Interpret this? how hard she clasped my hand,
And pressed my lips? as wishing their conjunction
Might be eternal. Tears with her last words fell:
And in their filent oratory taught me
To know my self more wretched by the knowledge
Of what should make me happy.
Can this be?
It hath both possibility and circumstance
To make it probable. Good •…ir observe
Their discontents: how they do sympathize,
And meet each other. Pray sir let them have
An opportunity; Isle be the spy:
And cal you to their billing.
It is well counselled
If 'tplease you Gentlemen I have within
Some rarities, whose fight shall be your business
'Till we are ready. Sweet you shall forbear them
'Till you are made their Mistress. 
Whether will you go? 
Wast not my plot to get this liberty
That you might put your purpose into act
If you have any? Why do you delay it?
You see shoe's willing; I prepared her to it.
Willing to what good Cousin?
To be your Bride.
My blusnes speak consent: then if you please
Prevent prevention. My desires were never
Settled on any other, though I durst not
Reveal my passions awed by feminine custom,
And my strict parents eyes. If you'll receive me,
The desperate state of my cross fortune arms me
To any enterprise you'll be my guide in
I shall be tempted to neglect that duty
I would not rashly violate, to possess
All that my wi•…h can covet.
You may hereafter
Discourse your loves. Play not away the occasion.
Her's the key of the back gate: take water presently, and away to the—whispers—I'll follow, get ye a Licence and see all dispacht. Fear not pursuit: that I'll hinder. 
So, the foundations laid on which I'll build
My self a fortune, and with better safety
Then making him away: Yet he must not marry her.
That were t'enable him if my villainy
Should be discovered to revenge and punish it.
The old man! aide me now hypocrisy, Or all miscarries. Oh sir I have searched for you all the house over.
Hast observed any thing?
I left them here so close condoling. They are questionless stolen to some private place. I'll sent them out, and bring you word.
I must absent my self for fear my joy
For this fair entrance doth discover me. 
Father in expectation I have suddenly
Bethought me of a business.
Pray what is it?
You see I am old; unfit for such a Bride.
Suppose I make a resignation,
And give my right up to another man,
One that your daughter and your self should like of.
What if my son were Bridegroom? '•…were a match
Would carry more proportion.
None more gladly,
So you'll confer upon him an estate
Answering her portion.
It shall be considered of.
We'll know their likings.
Will you not Marry her your self then after all these pre∣parations? Why sir the world takes notice of it, and it may con∣corn your credit.
Your husband counsels well Mrs. Ferret.
I cannot in obedience but allow of his wisdom. Thou changeling nursed with the milk of an ass whence thou derivest thy great empty noddle: must you hinder a good motion? Are there not cuckolds enough already?
Wher's the Bride Cousin? 
Vanished sir, not to be found. They are questionless run away together: the water gate is fast locked, and the key without. You were doubtful sir, and would hardly give credit to my relation.
How! stolen away together! what plots are these?
Yours sir, to undo the reputation
Of an old man.
Rather your own, t•… ruin
My only comfort.
Proceed you sir in your late motion and this difference will soon find a reconciliation. Is not the Gentleman his only son.
No son of mine, but the most monstrous birth
Of base ingratitude that ever made
Charity frozen. I found him in the fields,
An Infant almost starved, and bred him up.
It seems for this.
Alas our child's undone.
Pursue the villain. If the extremity
Of Law can do it, I will hang him for it.
I should be glad of that.
If I can prove sir your least knowledge makes you
A party in it, your state or mine shall crack for it.
Do you sir threaten me in mine own house.?
My credit's more at stake, then that I should
Be calm: but once I give you privilege.
Comelets' to water: we perhaps may take them.
Yes at the Tower questionless. 
Sir if I find them in my precinct.
What will you do? If thou dost the least wrong to the loving couple, though I burn for it, I will roast thee alive and sell thy greasy kidneys for kitchinstuffe. 
A good proceeding hitherto.
No vench, no voting? Me bid you adieu Monsieur; you no need a me varke.
Farewell Monsieur. Reward him Cousin.
Here be revert: two, tree silver dish, and tree, four spoon make Monsieur a jentleman an buy define vench beyond
de water. Me no stay for de reward. 
Ha ho ho he. 
Why laugh you sir? make you no more account of so great an injury?
They are gone: and now I'll tell ye gentlemen,
I knew the boy did love her, and I meant
He only should enjoy her; but pretended
My self would marry her, thereby to work
A greater portion out of her covetous Father;
And to insinuate my self into
A perfect knowledge of his true estate.
Now since h'hath played the wag, preventing me
Of mine own plot, you all shall in and witness
My act of love to him: I'll instantly
Confirm him my full heir, reserving something
For you my kinsman: whom I desire
Use your best diligence to find them out,
And bring them home, but coupled. And you gentlemen
Dispense with this days accident, your cheer
To morrow shall be doubled. 
How is this?
My plot's prevented too; curse on the charm
That witcheth you to love him. Bring them home,
But coupled: sine employment. Yet it is well
You tell me your intent. My brain must work
Some more successful mischief that may hit.
No villain can prosper without wit.
Your diligence knaves, or I shall canvas your pole davyes, deafen not a gallant with your anon anon fit, to make hi•… stop his cares at an over-reckoning. Can a mansion pur∣chased
and paid for be converted into a house of entertainment, and subsist without comings In and goings Out? Now sir what say you?
The reasoning sir for Mr. Serge the Mercer, and the Scri∣veners wife, that have been these two hours in the yellow bed-Chamber.
And what had they?
A dish of collops and eggs, and wine.
Sixteen shillings! it is well.
But her husband had half a quire of paper and bastard by himself in the Buls-head: which would hardly keep him employed below stayres; he was going up to peep through the key hole.
Saucy Scrivener! peep through a key hole! should have had him by the cares.
His peeping through a hole cost them long since.
And this came freely!
He wondered sir it was no more. 
Go carry the blades in the Lion a pottle of sack from me: their roaring must be maintained out of my profit. They are good procurers; and help now and then to stane of an over heated Citizen that pursues his game, too eagerly. Though my ho ly-day squires of the city bring me in most gain, my free Knights of the suburbs, the errants of Lincoln-Inn fields, where their rande∣vous makes the gunpowder house terrible, and the smock tribute due to their order is daily and nightly exacted: these I say are the best maintainers of my profits occasion; and Squirrel must venture cracking to maintain them whilst his sign and bush lasts.
The Master of the house!
The poor owner of some goods and chattels; movea∣bless and immoveables, with a small stock to drive a trade.
We would desire the use of a room.
You shall be accommodated.
We expect a frieind; 'till he comes this may serve.
What you please sir. A towel firrah quickly. 
Thou seem sweet hart as if the had fears within thee.
We may securely now discourse our loves,
And weary time with words, 'till we are fit
To act our wishes.
The fullness of my joys
Happening so sudden ere I was prepared
To taste them with an appetite, hath bred
A surfeit in me.
Now you smell of flattery
I would not have you court what you possess
with any attribute above its merit.
If my being yours you count your happiness,
Let us be sudden to confirm our selves
Mutually happy, ever our parents rage
Can reach us to prevent it.
That word parents.
Makes me reflecton my ingratitude:
Being greater far then infamous records
Did ever punish; and like pleasant dreams
My joys are changed to nothing.
Sudden dumbs:
Whence are they? to my self I am not guilty
Of a behaviour that should merit this.
I prithee let me blush, and kiss away
The clouds hang on thy brow. No discontent
Should interpose where equal love hath mixed
Equal desires; and for the noble end
No base dependence. For could I but think
Thy soul did harbour any bastard thought
Which goodness might not father, I would back
To my disgrace; and confidently meet
My parents anger; all the affronts of rumour;
And what the rabble pleased rather then stay
To nurse it to a growth.
Then pray return;
But not to your disgrace; all shall be thrown
Upon my guilt. And though my love (unstained
With the least blemish of impure affection)
Gave the act allowance, I'll belie my self,
And say I did enforce you; which the law
May punish with my life. I'll give it up,
To end the affliction of my soul, divided
Twixt love to you, and duty to that man
I have so wronged.
Can love admit such scruples?
Or is it thy coldness? I was too too credulous.
But the necessity denied more trial.
Here's a pretence indeed.
Can there be greater?
Ingratitude's a monster. Shall I then
Repay that man with injury, that gave
My almost starved life warmth, and made me breathe
Though to be miserable
Thou dost surely
Want the best part of man, and art not capable.
Of resolution. Such a coward spirit
Lodges not here. I now suspect thy worth,
And blame my rashness.
Why should I be taxed
With such defect? Know then I dare deserve you
By any enterprise that may be credible.
Invention cannot fancy an employment
I would not manage to confirm my love
Worthy your best opinion, only this
My conscience frights me from.
Why then farewell.
Passion will guide me some where, goodness guard me
From a despair; and whatsoever end
I am disposed for, I'll remember thee
Deny thy self good in denying me.
What's your wine sir?
Presently. Stay. 
Your pleasure sir. 
I mean not you.
I know your meaning sir. 
Why should those pearls be wasted,
Till they enrich my funeral? Distraction
Hurries my thoughts, and hindered them from ord'ring
Any resolve. Have I proceeded hitherto?
And shall I now give back? The infamy
Sticks on my name already; and the stain
Thrown on it by the black mouthed multitude
For being in grateful, by bare satisfaction
Cannot be washed away. Her virtue likewise
will be suspected. I must therefore on
Since reason prompts me to it. Love shall excuse
The act, and my neglect of other dues.
Sweet I am now resolved.
Resolved! to what?
To consummate our wishes.
Now I think on it
It is better not. I find my flame abated:
My lov's not half so violent, I can stay,
And try you first.
How's this? why will you now
Change your intent that seemed so resolute?
Twill make us be the subject of discourse,
And libelling ballads; every goships feast
Will make mirth from our shame.
No matter for it
I now begin t'examine what's in you
S•…king An indifferent handsome fra•…;
The superficies neatly varnished over.
In it should dwell a soul rich as the building
Doth promise to the eye; but I suspect it.
Thy actions suite not with a noble spirit.
Thy lov's but wanton passion, not the virtue
Should give it warrant. He that would be mine,
Must in his mind as well as outward shine.
Again farewell. 
Stay: I have fooled my self
Into a maze of errors, and do want
My instructive part to guide me. All my faculties
Of soul are puzzled, and at every turning.
Do mate themselves with doubts. Why should you feign
This cruelty to kill me, when my joys
Were almost strengthened in the life you gave them,
So far as not to fear a new relapse?
Having corrected all the accidents
Of my diseased love, will you now desist
To make a perfect cure?
Medicines applied
To an unwilling or distrustful patient
Their working's hindered. You have ill received
The means; and what succedes, your self is guilty of;
No cruelty of mine.
Are you resolved then
To send me back to my first misery?
And anew make me wretched?
'Till confirmed
Ther's merit in you.
Is my want of that
Only suspected by you? Hear me first,
And then farewell. May I be cursed beyond
Recovery by my penitence; let heaven
Ne'er make me master of a wish that may
Include my least good, if I marry you—
How's this?
Until your parents free consent,
And the good liking of that injured man
Allow it public ceremony
Thou can not
Figure a more impossibility.
It must be never then. Call in thy vow;
The rashness will dispense wished
That might give
A new occasion for your cruel wit
To tax me with new weakness. Know I can
Be man as well as lover; and am fixed
In my resolve, beyond the power of change
By any passion.
I have played too long
With the false shadow of my happiness,
And mocked away the substance. By my love
Zealous as ever kindled a chaste flame
I•… any maidens breast, I but dissembled
To try thy patience, and beget discourse.
I am so well confirmed in my opinion
Of thy desert, that should a thousand tongues
Swollen with detraction, break their tum'rou•… bags,
Venting from thence the most corrupted malice
That ever made man infamous to me
It should be flattering praise.
Did you dissemble?
Could she who through her eyes conveyed her heart,
And the assurance of her best desires
When other means were filenst; sh•…e that taugh•…
My equal passion to interpret looks,
Tears, smiles, and read in those dumb characters
Her soul, dissemble? or with any counterfeit
Disturb his joy that only from her truth
Derives it true possession? Jealousy
May then be warranted, since it is a virtue
Noble and masculine when justly grounded.
Was not your love dissembled? meant you not
To make a property of these proceedings
For some ends of your own? Dispose your self
A •…ur will guides you; twill but make my life
Somewhat more tedious wanting your society:
Besides whom I renounce all woman kind.
I man besides thee. Do not tempt thy fate
Too far beyond a reconciliation
With opportunity; as yet it serves.
If this day give thee not possession of me
Never expect it. I shall find a place
To keep out shame. In some chaste fellowship
I'll learn to pay religious vows to heaven.
And pray since here we cannot, we may be
Happy hereafter in eternity. 
Dissolve not with those tears my passive heart
That weeps within me. They will almost tempt me
To worse then sacrilege. Anon we will
Consult and practice something.
By the description he makes of you a gentleman below enquires for you. I was not curious to ask your name, but I know hi•….
My cousin Raven!
The same sir.
Pray direct him to us.
What's your wine sir?
When he comes.
This is sure some hide-bound student, that proportions his exp•…nce by his pension; and wencheth at Tottenham court for stewed prunes and cheescakes. Hoe's not •…quainted with the generous way, and I shall have the less scruple to cousin him. 
Be not so cloudy sweet; our sun of joy
May shine at full, and clear those dusky mists;
Obscure it for a season. Welcome Cousin
Unto our exp•…ctation.
The wine •…oy.
Anon anon sir: by and by.
Cousin the news? how go matters?
The tempest's laid, but they are scattered by it.
Some to the Tower; to Pancrace others run.
Noise fills the rooms within, and in the street
The rabble is convented; where a jury
Of wide mouthed oyster wives, to whom the foreman
A one legged ballad singer opens tunably
The merry case, not only do acquit you,
But praise the act; and swear a ballad of i•…
Would out sell all the libels ever yet
M. P. subscribed to.
It is an act indeed 
Deserves reproach
Deserves a Chronicle
A legend of delight. Which when it is read
By the learned youth of Hogsden after supper,
Shall cause such laughter amongst the attentive family,
That cheap-side wives shall curse the noise, for souring
The market women's cream and buttermilk.
You're very pleasant Cousin. Some mans jelousy.
Would soon interpret it to be but scorn.
What you intend it—
Cousin it is my zeal
Makes me thus light and aerie; yet rather
Then my behaviour should give way unto
The least suspicion, I'll put on a shape
Of like dejectedness, as seems to cloth
Your melancholic Bride; But how it would show
'Th occasion makes it doubtful. If she'll weep
Upon her wedding day, let it not be
But that she apprehends the ensuing night
Brings on her joyful fears. Cousin lets drink
A health to the effect: a jolly boy
Will follow fear not. 
Yet the cause is hi•…dred.
Pray let your counsels in our danger be
Movers unto •…ore serious thoughts and actions.
Our peace is not yet settled; and we doubt
What the success may be which our proceedings
Are destined to.
Success! the best that time,
And the application of endeavours can
Crown your desires with. Yet I must confess
Your parents storm, and threaten death if law
By any trick can urge it. But the old man
Seems to forgive you; only his intent
Is to dispose his state some other way
Then leave the least part yours. Which to comply for
With any least submission I should rather
Banish my self his sight, and cancelling
All the obligations of indebted duty,
Scorn to be flattered into payment of it.
Cousin be ruled by me; confirm yourself
In this possession. You may find delights
Enjoying one another though restrained
A general liberty. Get into the Country
Remote enough, but where you may receive
Weekly intelligence and means from me;
Which I'll supply you with in a proportion
For moderate expense. As things grow ripe
I can inform you. As it hath been ever,
It shall be still my care to do you offices
(For mine own ends.)
You have my dearest cousin
Given large testimony of your love;
Requital must be studied. But for this
You have advised to, a quite different course
Is here resolved on, and my •…ow hath sealed it.
I •…st return to labour a consent
F•…om those I have so wronged; which if denied me,
I never must enjoy, what I desire
Above my self.
Consent. it would soon •…e had,
If I prevent it not. 
What noise is that?
Perhaps some that pursue you; hide your selves▪
Her's an inner room. 
So, so, this is right gentlemen; one for another. Yet she looks not like carrion of Mr. Ravens leaving; I have sell∣dome known him turn over any flesh to another that hath not been sufficiently tainted.
This accident what ere it was hath gained me an op∣portunity. Squirrel thou must be intelligent and trusty. Hast observed?
Why is she a wench?
Ther's a question now to bring thy wit in question, and condemn thee for a puny politic in the s•…ok state. What blades are in the house?
Rashbe, Spell•…n, Po•…art, and others.
And they made the noise?
Right sir.
Will they attempt?
Any thing for you sir. Shall it be an affront?
More, more: send them up; and apply thy self with cunning as thou expect ever to thrive by the chostly sins of winching.
I have known you Mr. Raven a bird of the flesh these many years, and if I should not respect an old standard.
Away then to the execution.
Co•…in our fears was causeless. 
Had they been
Such as it spake them, we might well have staid
And yielded to them. We had only seemed
Compelled to what we fre•… 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
Have you business with any here sir?
I do not use to answer sir. Sweet Lady.
What fellow's this?
Fellow? one that will admit no fellow sir. Fellow! Fellow your self.
More! I suspect some rudeness. Pray Coffin call the Master of the house.
The Master of the house is the master of the house; but we will master both him and you unless you deliver.
My purse?
Your she familiar sir; we would be familiar with her.
You a•…e foul mouthed
How sir Citizen! do you think ever you are quite fledge in the nest, with the shell of your cuckows eg•… upon your head to confront us? We are blades; and blades must be scoured.
What mean you sir?
Your servant sweet Lady.
She is none of your pleasure Ladies, it is a wrong dire∣ction of your base thoughts.
Base! Cit. thou deserve the cane: but this Ladies good∣ness commands thy pardon.
You are mistaken sir, I have no skill
In the art of prostitution.
You shall be instructed Lady; it is the Blades profession.
Forbear your rudeness; if you must be wicked.
Let your temptations be directed where
The sin is grown to custom. Her chaste ears
Never received such sounds.
Come come, you must sweet Lady.
What sir?
A long with us: we are company indeed. Who would 〈◊〉 Cit. (whose teeth are rotten out with sweet meates his mo∣there
brings him from goshippings) breathe upon her varnish for the promise of a dry nets tongue and a pottle of Rhenish at the stillyard, when she may command a Blade to toss and tum∣ble her? and (if she should pawn a petticoat) beat such a fellow as this is till he hath redeemed it.
Advantage may do much; but I would wish ye
Desist, and be more civil: it is not the odds else
Shall fright me from attempting to correct you.
Correct us! nay then along Lady. 
Help me sweet heart, will ye use violence?
Ye cowards, against an unarmed man!
May not I pass?
Not through me sir, unless you were a Blade; the fra∣ternity may claim some privildege.
Then arm me Justice. 
Hold, for heavens sake hold.
Thy life! I scorn it: it is too base to pay
A satisfaction; she must be redeemed
At a far higher rate. 
My wishes issue
In all things yet. Are you much hurt sir?
A scratch or so. If the rest scope no better, I shall be∣leeve there is more valour in some, then what's only shown at a Finsbury muster. 
Your aid master Raven, or we shall have murder done. The young gentleman sir, the young gentleman— 
I hope so, if my plot succeeds.
This was an unlooked business thrust upon me.
But I must practise my hypocrisy
With best art; else suspicion may discover.
The guilt that's in me. Sure he's dead by this time,
Unless his skin be proof against their points.
If one of them should fall, and he escape
The rest I will suborn to make his life
The laws. Thus villainy like a pregnant mother
From the success of one begets another. 
Hold hold; I am hurt.
I bleed too.
If my sword had had a point, I had paid him home.
I beseech you sir be pacified.
Sir if your house be a place privileged
For such abuses, it must be informed of,
That law may punish it. But for these shadows,
Mockshapes of valour; •…were it not for staining
My innocent hands, I would compel your souls
Black as they are to give me satisfaction
As ye expire them.
Prithee sweet no more;
Tic well the art safe.
We do acknowledge an error sir; and for satisfaction sir and to preserve peace, our weapons shall be delivered up to the Master of the house.
Mischief upon their baseness; how are they
Declined from men! I hoped one desperate thrust
Or stroke ever this had sent him to his quiet,
And cut off farther labour to contrive it;
It racks my invention. Yet I cannot rise
To what I aim at but by his ruin.
We hope you'll do the like sir.
If I were confident of safety.
But you must give me leave being one that can
Command my self and passion. This with me
Serves as an instrument of peace, and may
Fright an intended mischief from me. Good sir
Retain their weapons as you'll answer it
At your own peril.
Surely Mr. Raven, you were mistaken; this is no wench.
Baffled and hurt! we may revenge it sir.
Ye properties of men, made up of rags
And outside only, shoot your threats at those
That fear the bubbles. Think not here to triumph
As o'er your easy gulls, that must redeem
Their softies from the danger of your furies,
By battering down with the engine of their purse
Some sconch your drunken valour in a tavern
Hath built with sack.
So sir.
Be gone, for fear you urge me
To more impatience: Yet my charity
Affords ye this good counsel. The world's full
Of brave imploiments for men capable.
You've persons, but want minds for actions
That might ennoble ye. Honour attends
On war; ye only call your selves by names
Of Captains and Lieftenants here where peace
Is most secure, but when your drunken quarrels
Disturb her. Go to th'warres, and save the City
The chargeable repairing of their prisons.
We'll think upon your satire.
Take the scabbard too. My belt I'll pawn •…or a scarf to hang my arm in, that the not wearing of a sword may have pretence; 'till whose recovery I am degraded from a Blade to a Baton. 
How lovely shows this valour? That in men
There should be so much difference.
Why so sad Cos? What think you on?
I was contriving mischief.
Mischief! against whom?
I shall betray my self.
A merry harmless mischief; whose relation
Shall make the Ice of melancholic spleens
Dissolve with laughter. It is a pretty plot
Upon those roarers.
Pray impart it then.
There is a passage in it imperfect yet
How apt is guilt to be its own discoverer?
I almost had spoiled all.
I do begin weighing the circumstance
To be possessed
With a suspect of his sincerity.
Hoe's surely treacherous; and perhaps occasioned
The late attempt upon me, so to have
Removed the bar he fears might shut him out
From an inheritance I never coveted.
I must not be too credulous. What's the reason
You are so cloudy Cousin? In your eyes
Me thinks I read sad thoughts; your merry mischief
Promised more lightsomnesse.
I cannot yet
Fancy a good conclusion; it hath passages
That would be get a neat one. Are you Cousin
Resolved on your return? or will you practise
As I advised?
Doth that concern your plot?
I mind no plots; my mind is only busy
To make you safe.
Safe! which way mean you Cousin?
Pray wrest it not. Suppose those baffled roarers
Should in revenge way-lay you: they are mischievous;
And if you should miscarry—
No great matter:
There were an end of misery. You need not
Be much solicitous to prevent my danger;
Since on my death depends the assurance
Of an estate to you. When you enjoy it,
If my cold ashes might be capable
Of such expressions, they should dance for joy
Fortune had so rewarded you, that merit
Above her flatter•…: which she but practised
When I was interposed by great•…r accident
Then ever yet made learned error give her
The profane attributes of a deity.
He surely doth suspect me.
Had I fallen
(As ten to one I might, had not the cause
Given me the greater odds.) Had you contrived it—
How's that! your jelousy is an unkindness
My love deserves not.
I hope you are not guilty,
That catch the uncertain meaning of my words
Ever they are perfected; and preinterpret
Thoughts that had never being! I may then
Justly have doubts. For innocence unmoved
At a false accusation, doth the more
Confirm it self; and guilt is best discovered
By its own fears.
Pray fancy what you please
To strengthen your suspicion: it is indeed
So weakly grounded, that unless you prop it
With better circumstances, your own s•…am
Shall ruin it, and justify my truth.
I must out faced.
Your own impatience
May serve for one. This house you sent us to
For ought I know a Brothel. You are noted
For one that surfeits in the pleasant sin:
And he that without scruple dares pursue it,
Dares without scruple do or be consenting
To any mischief from whose execution
The means may be derived that will maintain
His lust and riot.
It is not well that you
Digress from your first plea to this foul satire.
You should not tax my life, since it hath done you
Those offices deserve (besides your thanks)
Your most indulgence to my greatest faults
Nor doth it show of noble nature in you
To credit infamy from a report,
Until confirmed by knowledge. Howsoever
You have declared your self in your suspicion;
And hence forth I desist: my practises
Have been so fruitless. One I had contrived
To Crown the expression of my zealous care
In your affairs. You might have used my love
To better ends.
Pray •…ir continue it,
And reconcile your passions, he shall be
No more in such an error, to mistake
The aim of your intentions. From my warrant
He shall again be settled in's opinion
Of your fidelity, not to be altered
By after accidents.
When once suspected,
Can I presume that any undertaking
Will be received well?
Prithee sweet remove
The ill grounded jealousy and hear him. He will
Propose what may be useful.
I shall never
But fear hereafter all my actions
Will not be fairly constred.
It must be
By that fear only. Cousin I ne'er brought
My doubts to such a positive conclusion,
But that they might be changed to better truth
By your least satisfaction. If you have
Designed ought for our good, and that my judgement
Gives it allowance•…, no suspicion shall
Hinder the execution.
Might I be
Confirmed no misinterpretation should
Wrest the intent.
I am not capable
Of a new doubt, unless your doubts beget it.
Then pray impart your counsel.
Thus it is.
I have a little country house near Epping;
Thither I would convey you. You may there
Conceal your self some time; In which I'll practise
A reconciliation with their loves
By all the means th•…t my invention
Can work. Nor think I have sinister ends;
But fair, as ever perfect friendship made
Glorious in the success.
Prithee consent
To this fair motion.
Cousin to express
How far I am from fear of any treachery
You might be guilty of; what you advise to
Shall be put into instant act. This key
Will lead you where my husbandry hath stored
Something from honest gain, without least wronging
The old mans trust; I pray convey it hither
Where we'll expect you.
Please you to command
My store; what I am Master of is your•….
I shall gain time to plot; my sudden policies
Wanted a right foundation.
They are here an't please yo•…r worship.
We are anew betrayed.
Mischief forbid it.
You shall have justice fear it not.
You may take my warrant gentlemen.
The Justice! then ell's marred.
What Mr. Bridegroom?
And Mistress Bride! send you joy.
Are you the—
Let me speak sir parrot; must you be repeating your sessions lecture, and I in place?
The Justice knows them. Best shift for your self•… least you be found the most delinquents, and forced from your •…were of pleasure here to peep through a grate or taste the
charity of Bridewell. 
You are complaind of by these—
Ha! whether are they gone that accused you?
Without their accusation I submit
My self to the law. And if you have direction
To use your power, let it acquit this gentlewoman
From the ensuing scandal, I'll be patient
With any punishment the just revenge
Of those I have so wronged can lay upon me.
Is she not your wife?
Heaven hath forbid it, and my penitence
Restores her back.
It shall not by my hopes
Of comfort in thy love. If your commission
Be for our apprehension.—
Truly Mistress Bride I should be glad to apprehend you in bed together: it was expected all had been cock sure by this. It was but a plot of your old foster father to pretend mar∣rying her himself when he meant her only for you.
They will discover all; curse on the accident
That brought them hither.
To express it more fully, and how dear you are to him, he hath conferred his whole estate upon you. My Worship∣full husbands hand is to the writing.
It is indeed sir.
Is it so sir? as if my word were not sufficient!
Hear them attentively, and then your care.
I do hear words that must be scened and constred.
He appointed that gentleman to find you out.
Amazement hath possessed me wholly.
Although my person came before you, sir,
You were the first deliverer of this joy,
Which I concealed for reasons: but desire
I now may finish all in private:
Talk your fill sir, whilst I drink mine. 
Cousin I know you wonder at the strangeness
Of all: for which take this brief satisfaction.
You are betrayed to receive punishment,
For what you rather do deserve a Crown.
This Justice and my self had the instructions
Ell's nothing but a plot to get you back.
Why then would you pretending love conceal it?
And mock my fears with such diversity
Of dangerous accidents, you brought upon them?
Alas had I revealed the circumstance
Of his professed love; feigned intentions
And the smooth traps were laid to catch you in,
I know your nature of such easy temper,
You rather would have flattered your self
Into belief of them, then your own danger.
It was my prevention.
How I shall determine,
And reconcile these differences to truth
Is hard. Be firm my resolution:
I will be satisfy•…d, and yet prevent
The danger that is her. My Cousin Raven
Is certainly a villain. You have been sir
The con fortablest messenger of pardon
That ere engaged a man; and if you please
To be the instrument of farther good,
You'll find us grateful.
Command both me and mine husband.
Pray take this gentlewoman to your care,
Whilst I go back to make acknowledgemen•…
Of the great benefits are done me.
I will along with thee likewise.
By no means▪
Let him be satisfied of all that's past
Which I'll instruct him how without his danger,
Whilst you are absent.
Shall she be your charge?
She shall go to our house.
And welcome with my husbands good liking. To your house? as if the entertainment of constables on a sharing day were not chargeable enough, but you must complement a∣way wine and sweet meats. It is enough that we wish them well; let others do them good.
Sweet wi•…e 〈◊〉; I have found out another way.
Observe me sir, I will discover more.
Do you think it is fit my cousin go alone sir?
Suppose those bassled roarers (whom he did
Justly correct) way l•…y him; may there not
Be danger i•…'t?
You say well sir. Standish and Dash my Clerks shall a long with him. Or what think you of my neighbour Catch the Marshalls man? the sight of him would fright them.
Do you mark that sir he would have you guarded.
Would you were off: I'll tell you more by the way.
I'll along with you Cousin, so I may
Borrow a weapon.
You may have one of these.
Let's on; I will return to our full joys;
I go but to prepare them. And find out
The meaning of these riddles.
My prayers go with thee. 
By this, wh•…t I intend shall be conferred
Upon those roarers, that will carry circumstance
To make it credited, and quit me wholly
Of all suspect. In mischief ther's content,
When we on others lay the punishment. 
Come Mistress Bride, wee will walk and see some rari∣ties and antiquities till they return. There is one in the neigh∣bourhood is stored with them; as if he had translated the Capi∣tall hither.
The motion's good: it should have been mine sir. You shall see the feathers of a Phoenix; the beak of a Pelican, and the skins of •…irds, beasts and fishes, stuffed with hay, enough to bring down the marker. For coins and metals he hath those with inscriptions that speak their date 500 years before the use of letters. He hath the fingers and toes of a Colossus, and three hairs of a giants upper lip, each of them as big as a bull rush. Then he hath the the members of a pignie, that cannot be discerned but through a multiplying glass. Yet it is thought he would gladly part with all he hath for the Philosophers stone; I or the Unicorns horn at Windsor.
Come come, he hath those things a prince might glory to be owner of, and it is bravely done of him to affect them.
Such sights will be delightful. I must strive
In what I may my sad thoughts to withstand;
Which do presage some mischief's near •…t hand. 
Y' are welcome with a mischief to the occasion that brought you hither. Here hath been attendance for a quart of win•…and that not paid for. Some better customers, or I shall crack without credit. My Blades baffled too! Their loss must be re∣paired upon the next advantage.
 You are welcome sir.
Pray take a me cloak: me back be so hot, will burn a hole in it.
Would you have a cooler sir?
You understand for bien: de vench, de veneh.
Excuse moi pur•…la.
Parley Francois Monfieur?
Non intendo.
You fall intand dat me be de French jentleman; dat me have two tree•… crown in me pocket and the vuld have a de vine and de vench, and be merry in de shamber.
I'll send one to you sir. 
Remercie Monsieur. Voe call a me Cooke now! de greasy Larone! True; me make de French dish for de Lore: h•… give me two tree piece; me steal two tree piece of plate more, dat buy de sor, de ha•… an de seder; and Monsieur be so good a jentleman as—
Who sit? 
Me have noting to say to you
I had thought you had sent for me.
You be no vench Monsieur.
Would you have me to procure you one?
Me give you de vine and you fetch a de vench.
Do you take a Blade for a Pander?
You no quarrel vet me?
Yes and peace upon your back canopy, that shadows your half roasted kidneys if you dishonour a Blade with the least suspicion. Yet in a fair way I care not to exchange a glass or two.
Vet all mine art. But pray Monsieur be you no so hot in de mout.
Do you disparage my Tobacco? I assure you sir it is right Spanish.
Me can no endure de Spanish.
Not your Blade? why your French temper will not bear an edge to chop rotten litter for mortar.
You speak not like a jentelman dat love not to be a al mode.
Pox on your mode
Dat be no good word Monsieur.
Doth it touch you sir? why it is your credit to be marked by that French Herald for a gentleman of fashion.
Me can be no more patient. Me cut in two tree two∣sand piece for dishonour the French jentelman.
Will you so sir? we are for you. 
Oh de base coward.
We shall be valiant enough to over come your metal.
Help help; de thieves rob me. 
No no Monsieur, you shall have a vench for your money,
when you have entered into bonds for your good behaviour.
De gran English •…on you all▪ Vat you do vet me?
Work a cure (if we can) on the itch in your blood, that hath infected many of our wenches, and made them dange∣rous to us.
Oh diable! que feet vous?
He speaks ends out of a puppet play.
Help help; de thieves kill me beat me.
Peace Monsieur; you shall have a wench presently.
Wine, Music, and whilst you in dalliance, meet
We'll tread a measure with our nimble feet
Shall tempt you to be sportive, if desire
Want whetting and renew the active fire.
Come wenches. Monsieur ther's a she for you.
Your meat is paid for; if you liked fall to.
Oh fie fee. De thief, rogue poison me vet de stinking Maquarell.
Let's leave him now t'his patience, and go share.
And when you want a wench to cool you Monsieur,
You know wher's those can take your courage down sir. 
Oh de villain, de Laroone! my sor an my money; and de slut leave a verse stink behind her den de French Cook kishin stuff
Oh Monsieur help me. Me go to de Constable, and de bedle sall vip for dis. 
What's here? how came you bound? Not for any good behaviour.
De t•…fes kill me and rob me. Fetch a me cloak, me go •…o de Justice and his clerk. Fetch a me cloak I say.
Presently sir. But now I have releast you, who shall pay the reckoning? it is five shillings you and your company have had in wine.
Oh Diable! me no drink vine: De teefe leave me no vine penny.
Your cloak then shall be your surety: it shall be forth coming when you please to release it.
I say •…ill have a me cloak.
Not till you have paid the reckoning. I am not to take notice of all men's behaviour; if you admit of company and they abuse you, you must suffer for it. I mean not sir to be over∣reached with any of your French cheats.
Is English cheat to send me no vench—but my cloak.
Not without the reckoning.
Me must den valke in cuerpo.
A fashion of your own, and apt to be followed upon the like occasion.
Me sall fetch de Magistrate. 
Even whom you please. My correspondence with these Blades and wenches helps me and themselves to many such pur∣chases; yet still my house is honest. Though many will say,
No matter how so they have coming in,
And sin thrives best that is maintained by sin. 
It should be he by the description was made of him.
Let us salute him then. If your name be Horton sir?
I own no other.
We are commended to you by some friends of yours, that request for us your leave to see rarities and antiquitīes you have, and for which you are so much spoken of abroad in the world.
The world I do believe speaks grossly of me;
And c•…lls my curiosity in reposing
Such things, a prodigal veins being one
That lives by my endeavours: have no state
But what my labour purchases.
May we have leave to walk to your house?
And command
The sight of all. I must confess my care
Of knowing and possessing rarities
Makes me so skilful, I dare undertake
To pick a sallet out of Dioscorides,
Shall feast the Doctors college, with rare practises
Stranger then Aesons restitution
To youth by Magic. From my garden sir
I can produce those simples, shall out-worke
All the compounds of drugs, and show like miracles
Compared with them. What needs the weapon salve,
Condemned by some for witchraft? when each dunghill
Affords the Persicaria, that on wounds
Works the like Magic. Panax Coloni
Is known to every rustic; and Hipericon.
And yet we must from M•…mphis and Iudea
Fetch Balsam, though sophisticate; there is not
An ounce in Europe, will endure the trial
Of milk or water. Yet my Ladies gentlewoman
Bit by her Monkey, swears by her lost maidenhead
The world hath not a Balsam like to that
Her closet yields; when it is perhaps but oil
A little aromatiz'd for lamps.
You are learned likewise in antiquities.
A little sir.
I should affect them more, were not tradition
One of the best assurances to show
They are the things we think them. What more proofs
(Unless perhaps a little circumstance)
Have we for this or that to be a piece
Of delphos ruins? or the marble statues
Made Athens glorious, when she was supposed
To have more images of men then men?
A weatherbeaten stone with an inscription
That is not legible but through an optic,
Tells us i•…s age; that in some Sibills cane
Three thousand years ago it was an altar.
It is satisfaction to our curiosity;
But ought not to necessitate belief.
Antiquities fir are grown of late good merchandise.
The affection of some Princes hath begot
An imitation, and it is nobly done.
For by such things mans knowledge is informed
In principles of art, and many times
They light upon instruction by them, that
Direct invention to recover what
Neglect or ignorance hath lost.
Pray sir what are the rarities and antiquities you have?
Nor Pliny fir, nor Gesner ever made
Description of a creature, but I have
Some particle thereof: and for antiquity
I do not store up any under Grecian.
Your Roman antiques are but modern toys
Compared to them. Besides, they are so counterfeit
With mouldings, it is scarce possible to find
Any but copies.
Yet you are confident of yours that are of more doubt.
Others from their easiness
May credit what they please. My trial's such
Of any thing I own, all the impostors
That ever made antiquity ridiculous
Cannot deceive me. If I light upon
Ought that's above my skill, I have recourse
To those whose judgements at the second view
(If not the first) will tell me what Philosophers
That eylesse, noselesse, mouthlesse statue is,
And who the workman was, though since his death
Thousands of years have been revolved—
A good evening to you neighbour Horton.
And to your worship.
My husband will still be before me, to prevent the a∣men of a shrew. 
You are happily met Mistress Bride.
But it is my sudden wonder what accident should guide her this way.
These gentlemen are witnesses to the old mans deeds, as well as my worshipful husband
The fortune of this day hath led me through
Events both strange and dangerous. I hope
As you are Gentlemen that you will make
A fair construction of me, though the vulgar
Borrow discourse and pastime from my act.
You are a brave woman. Yet had I opportunity—
She is sure a light held wench, and if—
With all my heart and welcome.
Are you making motions now, before I can recover breath to begin my exordium as my son at the University taught me to say. Neighbour Horton it is thus. My self and my husband have this day been eyewitnessesses of strange accidents; chance upon chance, and fortune upon fortune: one disaster hath been the cause and cure of another. Now we desire the fa∣four that we may see your trinkets, knaks and knaveries (par∣don me neighbour I mean no hurt) to delight this melancho∣lick gentlewoman that hath found and lost, and lost and found a husband yet no husband—
You shall command me: but she chiefly.
And shall we see all?
All I assure you.
The great Sea horse what you call that cures women of the cramp.
What a wanton tempting eye she hath?
I will attempt her.
A handsome lass. I must have her home and give her a philter.
Vich be de Justice?
What justice sir?
Justice vat you call run up and down de cony hole.
My husbands name is Ferret: what's your business sir?
De he teefe and de she teefe rob me at vat you call de little nutcrack house? and he take a me cloak an me have no var for my money.
I know the house he means; a place much suspected. But a few hours since there happened a dangerous up roar a∣bout this gentlewoman; and the delinquents came to complain first. But had they not conveyed themselves away, they should have been punished.
With what trow? a reproof or a jeer out of your ta∣ble book notes, enlarged with a piece of a charge; then with a half bribe and single fees they are released to boast how cheap they have scoped. Come come you shall back to this house, and be se∣vere, and wise and say little, let mine be the speaking part, yours the doing: I'll make them come off and on roundly. Do you think I can keep house with bare warrants and mittimusses?
Will you with us neighbour?
I desire to be excused.
By all means neighbour; you are an officer.
What shall become of this gentlewoman then?
Please these gentlemen to walk a turn or two with her? The evening's pleasant if the mist rise not.
I had rather I had her at home.
We are her servants.
Is define vench.
We will along with you •…ir to this righteous—
Riotous you would say.
No sir it is routous place; and my husband shall ferret the hee thieves and the she thieves holes never fear it.
To have seen this wench and not to enjoy her, is such a Tantalising to me. 
Me sall turn back again from you to dis fine vench. Me give her my doublet cost two tree pound for lye vet her two tree time. Oh fine vench! 
Tic most opportune.
Could I but remove him?
Please you to walk, and let my hand support you.
Please her to be my charge. 
I'll be your servant Lady.
What mean ye gentlemen?
To do you manly service.
If you could sir.
How sir?
I am betrayed unto a new misfortune.
There is a malice in the stars that guide me,
Which yet seem wanton, as their influence
Were but a sportive mockery to show
The various fates that do depend upon it.
I have had strange deliverance; but the event
Of this is full of horror. I pray gentlemen
Do not make me the object for a quarrel.
Your gravity should be judicious,
And not mind trifles: such as youthful blood
Heated with wine can no way be excused for.
He shall not touch you his belly is nothing but a tun full of red herring, and boiled water.
And thou art a •…oaten herring Jackalent Spaniard.
A word in private. 
What you dare •…ir.
A challenge sure. Some happy chance direct
Aid to prevent a mischief: 
Me be your servant madame.
Would you would guide me to some house?
To de house of good fellowship, or de nix dish.
Here be de fine moral.
Viles Dutch and Spanish make a fray
De Frenchman bear de pri•…e a way. 
You'll meet me then?
I will not fail you.
But wher's the gentlewoman? where hath the mist con∣cleal'd you?
We have differed finely about a woman in a cloud.
We must not so loose her.
Saw you a gentlewoman sir?
Her sweet hart! let us avoid him least we be discovered.
I'll home and be drunk, and then perhaps grow friends with you. 
The Merchants? were they not?
Doubtless the same.
What Gentlewoman should that be they asked for?
Some Bonaroba they have been sporting with. Your outlandish merchants are notable barterers for such English ware Many of them keep their recreations at pension; and sometimes two copartners will share as even nightly.
That's strange; if love will brooke no rivals, lust should Being the more raging passion.
It is common.
How common?
Winching is like friendship hath all things common.
The mist is great: have we not lost our way?
We might ever this have got to the waters side
Though we had trod a labyrinth. 
Over this stile and then
Ha! what devil moved thee to attempt it.
Pox on these French blades; no point!
I have paid a debt to all my vain attempts
With mine own ruin. Hell hath left me yet
One means to express my malice. In my death
Dye to all knowledge of thy self; the world
Besides me owns it not- 
I cannot give
Utterance unto my thoughts; the narrow passage
Is choked up with a multitude, that strive
Which should first issue forth. How fruitless envy
Brings on its own destruction! Innocence
Is proof against all the battery of malice:
And he that's armed with it needs not fear to encounter
The most severe tribunal. Though I am
Guiltless to heaven, yet I shall appear
Foul to opinion wanting testimony;
And the act makes me the laws; I am no more
The subject of my conscience, which by judgement
Must be determined. Can I not prevent it?
Flight may procure my safety. Twill bring on
A greater danger, and cause supposition
That I am guilty by the circumstance
Of mine own fears.
Help, help, a rape. Villain keep back.
Horrors on both sides round me.
Hath my cross fortune found new instruments
To draw more mischiefs on me! By the voice
(A women's weakly uttered, as if fainting
Under some violence) it is near this hedge.
I'll aid her, though my ruin lay in ambush
With twenty murderers.
Out Villain:
Would I could spent a leprosy upon thee.
Help help. 
My dearest!
Oh pardon moi Monsieur.
Villain thy end's upon thee.
I being safe
Prithee forbear him.
Is no fair play for give me de prick Monsieur.
How came thou hither sweet?
Soon as my fears
Have finished their effects of trembling,
And that my breath's recovered, shalt know all.
Monsieur stir not; I have employment for you
May win your pardon.
Vet all mine art; but mine art will be in mine eel anon; is fallen already into me breeshes.
What object's this? Alas your Cousin Raven
Wounded or dead? what hand hath done it?
This;
Justice made this her instrument. He was
A villain to me, and betrayed my life
To all those dangers which I overcame
By the causes strength. And lastly his intents
To murder me, have brought upon himself
This punishment as due.
Why dost not fly then?
I'll bear thee company in all adversities.
Thy person being safe time may effect
A pardon by some composition.
If thou be tan, thou meet thy certain end
Mingled with shame; and mine hath the same date:
I'll not out live thee.
Did you bid me fly
To shun the end's before me? sure ther's difference
Twixt meritorious acts, and acts of shame.
I was but justice executioner.
His crime deserved death, and he had fair trial
By evidence: see here this pointless weapon;
If providence had not ordained it so.
As he so I had fallen; but innocent.
Should I then fly? and by my fears beget
A worse suspicion? No: I'll meet the event.
And though I now were circled with the terrors
Of racks and tortures; gibets; executioners;
And all the palsying apprehensions
That ever made a malefactor tremble,
Armed as I am, I would encounter all
With a fixed confidence. Just causes never
Did yet miscarry; or if any have
It was to the greater glory of the cause.
And Monsieur it is your imposition
To watch this corps, and give to passengers
What answers you have wit or language for.
Wilt thou not fly then? prithee do not rashly
Play away safety.
If I fly, and so
Provide for it, will you with me?
Even to death,
In that shalt find me resolute. I'll vi
Against thy courage with my constancy.
Let's go then 
Me be glad you be gon, for me will no stay long vet de dead man. If de live jentelvmanly so—but me sall see vat you have in your pocket. 
Oh? a surgeon.
De man be no dead: but me sall make you dead rader den go without your money. 
What wilt thou villain?
It is time then to leave off counterfeiting
Dis be de jentelman hire me to vark at de vedding; but he no know me, and day be sure de jentelman and de jenteluman da•… run avay together.
I'm wounded, but I hope not mortally;
I have no feeling of those accidents
Are deaths forerunners. Would I had a surgeon.
If I survive, I will convert this mischief
Into a benefit; and by his flight
Possess my self as well of what I cove•…,
As by his death. Sir you can witness for me
How and by whom I did receive this wound.
Although you know him not, make a description.
Pardon me Monsieur; me no see him do it.
You must dispense with scruple
If you will serve my purposes a little,
I can and will be thankful; otherwise
What ever you are I can betray your life
For your intent of rape.
Me be your servant Monsieur. Me do any ting; swear any ting; go to de devil along vet you rader den be hang.
Go with me to a surgeon.
We need make greater haste; it is almost night;
The mist is risen much.
My Uncles voice. Help a surgeon: assist me now.
Look about knaves: I have heard that voice.
Here sir a man wounded.
It is Master Raven.
My coffin Raven? what misfortune brought
This ill upon him? hold that gentleman.
Me no do it Monsieur: he be de young jentelman in black, an de jenteluman.
What gentleman in black? Theophilus?
My cousin •…ir? alas; ther's so much goodness
In him, I must not think he could be tempted
To wear such guilt about him. Good sir have me
Unto a surgeon; and that gentleman
Shall give you satisfaction, ere you give
Him a release.
Now mesall be discover, and hang for teefe.
Wee' I carry him to one Hortens house, and fetch a sir∣geon thither: it is close by.
One call my friend justice Ferret; and post you over to Mistress Brides father: his presence at the examination of these circumstances will be needful. 'Till truth satisfies my desires I am in torment.
I have a new design.
And till I see
Theophilus.
Which I hope ne'er will be.
Sir we are troublesome: the accident
Hath made a subject for your charity
As well as for your art; and neither shall
Be unrewarded. But may I presume
He will need no other surgeon?
Doubt it not sir.
The wound's but slight; were it more dangerous,
The simples that I have applied would cure it
According to the first intention
As surgeons call it.
Truly sir my neighbour is very skilful; he cured my little shock of the mange so perfectly, that it hath famed him through the neighbourhood for an excellent dog-leech.
I ow much to your commendation Mrs Ferret.
Truly neigbour it is not so much worth.
I dare be sworn it is not.
I dare not with much confidence rely
Upon this mans endeavours. Would I had
A surgeon here, whose judgement and experience
Might give me further satisfaction.
Is the French gentleman disposed of safely?
I have confined him to a chamber sir,
A too delightful prison. He may feast
His eyes with rarities.
I think you are
Owner of more then all the town besides.
It is my affected riches.
I have some
You shall command sir.
I'll have gratitude,
And something to exchange. This accident
May bring me in a purchase:
Pray neighbour let's see the late giants boot, and the dwarfs shoe.
Pretty extremes no doubt.
Extremes sir! me thinks their differences shoul'd make a very good mean. Suppose the one was a great drinker or wencher; the other must needs be a little one. What the one wasted in boots the other sav's in shoes. But I'll in to the won∣ded gentleman, and help to talk away his pain.
By no means: sleep would give him more ease, and prevent a distraction; which he seems to occasion some fear of by his often digressions and interruptions of discourse.
Indeed sir I am troubled when I weigh
The accident and circumstances of it.
Nor can we urge him to give satisfaction
With any positive truth, but all his answers
Are careless and imperfect; many times
The second contradicts the first: and then
He will name Theophilus, as if he were
The mischiefs worker. But of all kind friends
Your strange relations have begot most wonder.
The roarers, and Theophilus brave act;
My cousins not revealing my intents;
The maid left with the Merchants, and the Monsieurs
Stealing away, then found with my hurt kinsman,
What to conclude from these—
The news! what means your haste?
A lass sir you are robed.
How's that?
The French gallant sir which you locked in the chamber, is run away with your Remoras and Torpedos skins; and we know not what besides.
Pursue him. I'd not loose those rarities
For half my state. Alas sir they are valuable
'Bove any thing I own besides.
Hath Monsieur given you the slip as he gave us? He may chance be caught in a halter for it.
Be patient sir, and with your best endeavour
Restore my cousin to his former safety,
I'll recompense your loss with things more valuable.
I have large trees of coral, and Zibet•…s
Both of strange form and colour; I expect
Some living Ermines.
Would I had them, they
Should pacify me quickly,
Sure that french man
Is guilty of the fact: why should he fly else?
If by your servants industry that Monsieur
May be brought back again, twill be of consequence.
Something perhaps may be concluded from
A strict examination of him.
I'll employ all the servants I have about it.
They shall have my husbands authority with them; we'll make you a warren•…. 
How various are the events that may depend
Upon one action, yet the end proposed
Not follow the intention! Accidents
Will interpose themselves; like those rash men
That thrust into a throng occasioned
By some tumultuous difference, where perhaps
Their busy curiosity begets
New quarrels with new issues. I go on
From one consideration to another,
Yet can determine nothing.
Else my pains were fruitless.
Chance brought us hither, for what ends I know not.
But understanding you were here, I come
To ask a da•…hter from you.
I from you
Must have a wounded reputation cured,
It bleeds worse then my kinsman, whom your son
And daughter are by circumstance suspected
To have attempted.
My son said you sir?
I hear that son of mine must be your heir;
And I have heard what plots and circumventions
You used to catch me: so you have sir f•…ely.
My states mine own still, though my daughter's lost.
And pray sir keep it; doubt not but twill find
Some grateful heir, that will preserve the memory
Of such a benefit, with witty libels
Upon your glorious life.
Your scorn is well sir;
And well becomes that supercilious gravity,
Hath awed the city long, and frighted Rats
Into the Counter.
You are very free sir.
Yet these are not the Cities liberties.
Stand not too much upon your privilege.
If you can give fair satisfaction
For what concerns you, doe; and let not passion
Kindle a new flame. I am calm; have quenched
My spleen that late was fired.
I acknowledge
〈◊〉 •…ear your kinsman's wounded, and there is
A supposition by my daughters sweet heart.
But how far this concerns me, be your self
The judge. Sir I have suffered in my fame already
Too much, to have more added by suspicion
Of being accessory to an act
Of such vile nature; and your self may sooner
Prove guilty, if the circumstance be weighed
You have made him your heir.
My intention
Had done it; neither did it want the form
Of law for confirmation: but it was when
I was too partial in affection: now
I am resolved to satisfy that error
With severe justice.
You'll revoke your act!
Hands stained with blood shall never have the power
To make a distribution of that wealth
Heaven hath blessed my fair endeavours with.
Should he be proved a murderer (for though
My cousin dye not, his intent was such)
Revenge would waite on all his actions;
And even his charity when he gave alms
Would to his conscience so present the fact
In bloody characters, that his best deeds
Would loose their merit.
I am hard put to it.
But sir suppose your kinsman did attempt
Some practice upon him; ther's circumstance
To make it probable. Suppose your cousin
Ripening at it that you should prefer
Adoption before natural succession,
Assaulted him first to remove him, who
Defending so himself made the act lawful.
From your suppose I raise a supposition,
That he to clear himself of after troubles
Which might arise by any kinsmans claim,
Attempted this proven ion by some others
If not himself: which yet we cannot urge
My kinsman to discover.
There are plots
In these proceedings. Might I sir be witness
To an examination of your kinsman?
The knowledge of the truth is of some consequence
And doth concern us.
If he may endure
Discourse without his danger.
Her's Mr. Plaster, the learned Surgeon, that speaks nothing but Latin, because either he would not be understood, or not contradicted.
He is welcome.
There is no need sir of his trouble: the gentleman is past danger.
Are you a surgeon sir?
A simple one sir; one I mean that uses no com∣pounds.
If you are rational as well as empirical, and that you practice secundum artem it is well.
I dare secure his safety.
You may err sir. He hath a wound; and where there is con∣tinuitatis divortium, you must consider whether it came per contusionem, punctionem, or how; and whether a nerve, tendon, li∣gament or artery be in danger. The parts likewise whether it be in principalibus vel minus principalibus. Then the adjuncts; whether there be fracture or dislocatio; for these make it vulnus compositum.
Then the accidents; whether there be inflamma•… 〈◊〉 o•…▪
Pray sir what is that?
It is sir copiosa 〈◊〉 inter cutem diffusio; which ma∣ny times causes a dangerous apostema
You have satisfied very well sir.
Perhaps you have applied some Montebankes medicine which you believe will cure secundum primam intentionem.
Pray sir how is that?
That is sine suppuration vel cicatrice. We that work ac∣cording to art begin with alteration substantiae in p•…s: for ex corruption unius fit generatio alterius. And then—
You have said enough sir more then we understand.
Pray sir give him leave to see my cousin and his wound: his judge∣meant being a professor may confirm us.
He is here sir.
The Brides Father and a surgeon! what new devise is towards? 
I'll apply but one Emplastrum consolidans more: I think that's a term of art. 
I come not to be jeered.
To be rewarded; accept of this sir. 
My thankfulness. This is more then my practice would have deserved; for to say truth though I can out face it with tal∣king, though I am neither parson nor vicar yet my cures serve to maintain sextons.
I take my leave sir. 
The wound was very slight sir.
Indeed Mr. Raven you escaped a scouring in your bell∣lie: if you had miscarried, the Monsieur for all the separation be∣twixt his doublet and breeches should have trust for it, but that h•… is run away.
Esca•…'t I'm glad of that: it shall be useful.
Being past danger coffin▪ we would gladly
Be satisfied who it was that did attempt
This mischief on you: you have hitherto
Seemed as unwilling he should be discovered.
If it were Theophilus, all diligence
Shall be employed to find him, that he may
Pay law her due: his flight makes it suspicious.
Good sir forbear that trouble.
If he be fled with his fair Mistress, it is
A discreet policy to shun the danger,
Her parents anger might bring on him. It was
The French man wounded me.
On what occasion?
None sir that I know: I provoked him not;
Unless he meant to rob me.
Will you sir
Justify this on oath? 
Were there necessity:
It is otherwise sufficient I have said it.
Bring in the Monsieur.
How sir! is he taken!
Yes sir; with many trinkets that were yours.
I am restored to my first state.
We met him:
And for some reason you shall know anon
Brought him back with us.
I am still discovered.
It is needful sir this man should be committed;
That being accused he may be soon produced
Upon occasion.
Me have no •…or to kill de man: de tee•…es have mine, True; me take de jenteluman from de dushman and de Spaniard:
me offer too to kiss de jenteluman; an de yongjentelman in black dat hurt de man, almost kill •…e but dat me beg pardon.
I have lighted upon it.
Unto you all I do submit my self,
And what I shall discover. I confess
I may seem not to merit a belief
That have already feigned so many untruths:
But the officiousness of them considered
I hope you'll credit this. It was my cousin
Theophilus, that hurt me: But I know not
Whether it were chance or malice for this gentleman
Attempting rape upon your daughter sir,
I drew a pointless weapon I had got;
My cousins sudden apprehention
Perhaps mad him suspect me: and not knowing
I meant a rescue of the gentlewoman
(Whose voice I heard, but could not through the •…first
Discern her person) made his rash hand wound me;
Which for his sake I joy is not proved mortal,
Nor will I hope.
I doe believe all this
For certain truth. But why should you accuse
Another then?
I did presume this man
Unknown to any here was fled, nor would
Return to take a punishment: and being
A stranger was not capable of shame.
Now my concealing who the actor was
Neither his danger nor disgrace would follow.
Nephew I do admire thy love to him
So ill deserves it, and I now consider
What an injustice my election was.
Henceforth thou art mine heir. I will employ
A numerous search to find him that he may
Be punished for his •…act.
By no means sir:
Call him not back; my wound may yet have danger;
And if he should return to pay his life
For mine that's so unworthy—
But he shall
To make you give the law a satisfaction
For all your villainies. Come forth my son,
For so he is sir.
Humbly thus I beg 
Your pardon sir
Pray ask your father blessing:
You've got one now.
He hath sir, and shall keep him
His fair desert won my conversion;
And changed me from intents of punishing
To an indulgent favourite. This hath been
A villain to his life, and to his fortunes;
Whetted by envy to such practises
As merit death when you shall hear the passages.
A man that's guilty; that from foul intents
Proceeded to an act would fly for safety:
Instead of which Theophilus repaired
To me, that then was laboring with revenge,
First offers restitution of my daughter;
Then passing on from declaration
To declaration, made •…o confident
By his sweet innocence, he satisfied
Mine anger, and gave peace unto my passions
Nor was I patient to defer their joys
(Which likewise are mine own but got them married
This evening with a dispensation for it
Before we came to you. Where by the way
We met this Monsieur, and enforced him back:
Whom straight his fears betrayed to a discovery
Of what he was; no gentleman, but Kick-shaw
In's winching clothes.
Monsieur Kick-shaw •…e want plate Monsieur.
Now me sall be hang again.
And I want Jewels Monsieur.
Jewels! me have noting but two tree babble. Pray vat be dis? 
A babble call you it? This gentlemen is the horn of an Ethiopian •…hinoceros.
An dis!
The Taleon of a Bird in terra austr•…li incognito, which the inhabitants call their great god Ruse, that preys upon Eel∣phants, and will not be gorged under two or three in a morning This stone of a strange form and colour was brought by the learned traveller of Odcombe from the great Mogul.
How sir! One of the great mogul's stones,
Good sir forbear a little. Now he's mine
I'll own him and the rather if you will
Disclaim all interest in him. For your kinsman
Some wise and powerful authority
Must force truth from him.
My husbands authority sir is both wise and powerful
It is not in all my stock of cunning now
To hold out longer. Shame will be the end
Of all my undertakings.
Cousin your looks are strange, and seem as if
They would betray your thoughts. If you have guilt,
Let it not press your conscience with a weight
Will sink it into horror.
I have much sir.
Nor will there need another testimony
For confirmation of what I shall utter.
He that with grief doth publish his own shame,
Speaks from truths records.
What may this preface mean?
You had a son, whose birth deprived his mother
Of life; and what bestowed a joy upon you
Robed you of one.
Why dost review a grief
Time had worcester•… out? Indeed I had a son.
And have him still: enjoy him in Theophilus.
Was this the knowledge of my self he spake of,
That lived but in him self?
I fear his wound,
And a distraction.
Hear me sir and then
You will have faith. The child you did dispose
To be nursed by my mother, I being then
An in•…ant likewise. She knowing by law
That I was capable of your estate
Your heir being once removed, soon plots
To make the child away; attempts, but fainting
In the execution left it in the fields;
A formal burial strengthening the report
That it was dead. By providence directed
You found and bred it up, and this is he.
My dying mother did reveal it to me
With tears of penitence, and an injunction
I should discover it: which my avarice
And envy would not suffer me, but tempted
My soul to those black practises, which now
Cease with my shame and my repentance.
Joys 
Have filled me to the danger of a surfeit.
Welcome to life; I have a new begot thee.
How often have I wished in these embraces
The thing I did embrace but knew it not.
Cousin I hope your sorrow is not feigned
That it may merit pardon, and preserve me
A loving Uncle.
I forgive you Cousin,
You have at length in this discovery
Given large satisfaction.
I'll re•…ova
All cause of after jealousy.
We by these 
Are reconciled for ever.
But her's a delinquent must be punished.
He shall be pardoned •…o upon condition
He will no more play the impostor thus,
To wear the habit of a gentleman
Having such vile conditions; •…o disgracing
His noble nation; making all suspected.
I'll likewise add something unto your storehouse.
And though it is late le•…s have a wedding feast:
To which pray welcome every loving guest.
I Am a Maiden yet, how can I then
Without some fear and blushes speak to men?
Ladies and gentlewomen pray stick to me
If the rude men should offer to undo me.
Would they be kind, and say I have done well
I'd give them leave to clap me. I can tell
They'd take it for a favour if they might
Clap every Bride upon her wedding night.

OUr Mourning's ended, and the Court again
Looks like the Morning, when the Eastern ayre
Is painted with a mixture of her blushes,
And the Suns golden glory.
So it should:
Great Princes Death's but like a short Eclipse
Darken the Orbs they lighted, 'till another
Spreads his succeeding beams: We have his son,
As full of hope as ever promised state
A happiness; and now he's risen, we
Shall gaze, and glad our selves as cheerfully
In his warm favours, as in those, which time
So lately dispossessed us of.
I shall not
Court them with any flattery.
His temper
Is virtuous, Beneventi: Have le admit
Of no such practice; and his minion too,
The noble Spurio, such a rare example
Of a good great man.
That's your partiality,
Because he is your friend.
Wrong not th integrity
Of what is real in me. By my hopes
Of a fair memory, there's not a charm
In greatness hath the Magic power to sway
My reason with affection, but true merit,
That binds me. I ne'er couched unto the humours
Of any great one yet; or styled my self
Th'admirer of his virtues, if they were not
The true steps so his raising.
Sure the Duchess
Affects him with a more than common favour;
As if there were some secret interest
That yet scopes public knowledge.
Be not jealous:
Tic the rude peoples vice. In our pure difference
There should be nobler thoughts.
You love his sister.
Yes Beneventi: can my wishes covet
A greater honour▪ 
Here's your friend, the favourite:
He'll pay his sisters portion in some Office
Begged of the Duke; and with the Dowery which
His Father gives her buy himself sweet pleasures;
Or a new glorious ward-robe. How he stands?
As if some frowns of the new Duke dejected him,
And made him fear a fall.
You are too severe
And Cynical. This bitterness might move
Another spleen: but prithee Beneventi
Doe not presume on privilege. A friend
Shares so much of my self, he cannot suffer▪
But I am sensible by a consent
And an affinity of parts.
Isle honour him
At your commands.
My honoured Lord why thus? 
Fidelio, welcome to mine eyes; thy presence,
Like Sun-shine, hath illuminated my dark soul,
Clouded with melancholy.
What's the cause?
You flow in honours.
Oh Fidelio,
Be not too curious: should thou know my sufferings,
Thy Physic cannot cure them. Beneventi!
My friend, my Lord.
Then mine. My friends must be 
Like Chains, the first link leads on his dependants.
Instruct me how, then use me.
I shall study
A grateful service.
Pray doe not conceal
What's your disturbance. By communicating
You'll lessen something of the suffering▪
In making me partaker.
I shall add to it.
We shall be like two neighbour buildings, when
A flame proceeding from the one hath seized
The others roof, it makes the burning greater.
Friend let me suffer, be thou free.
Report,
Perhaps, hath multiplied, and rumour's grown
Pregnant withissue, that your noble brother
Wants the success we hoped for.
Ha! my Brother!
My brothers virtue doth command his fortune;
The later waits upon the first, as slaves
Act their Directors wills. No my Fidelio,
A certain knowledge newly's come to Court
Of his sure victory, and his arrival
Is suddenly expected, that it may
Crown this days (yet imperfect) glory. Friend,
My joys transport me, that I share in blood
With one so worthy: But the peace that waits
Upon his Conquest cannot stay the war 
That is within me.
Here's the Duke and Duchess,
Compose your self.
Grief, Madam, should be like
A short Sea-storme; 'soon as a calmer ayre
Hath smoothed the rugged waters, there's not seen
The least impression which the formers rage
Made on their even surface. I am still
Your son in duty, as in blood; And though
I share not in this out ward act of sorrow
For my dead Father (since the mourning ceremonies
Of Court should be prescribed to stricter limits
Of time, than where th'affaires and men are private)
His memory presents it self as fresh
To every apprehension that assails me,
As when his living precepts taught me how
To be a Prince, by more than the election
Of Fortune and my Birth: His virtues shall
Be (as I hope) my souls inheritance,
Well as his dignities: Isle be directed
By their examples.
Dear son (for my love
Bids me make use of Natures privilege,
And leave out other titles) I have joys
Greater within me, than those weak ones, which
Only take life from the expression,
And quickly dye, the object once removed.
Yet give me leave to temper them with mixture
Of some sad thoughts, lest their excess may grow
Into a danger, and a little taste
Of contrarieties will whet the sense
With a fresh appetite, preventing surfeits.
My comforts swell, like a full tide, to see
Thy growing state propped up with such advantages,
As show it unto all men's expectations
Int's future flourishing: A Counsel grave
And wise as ever ordered policy
From the best unresisted principles:
Men, whose designs set down the acts success
As positive as Oracles. Thy Spurio,
Thy almost self; a man so rich in soul,
And all her best dependancies, he gives
Honour to greatness, by the noblest ••••g
Of a Court-favourites power, that ever yet
Deserved a record. Next to him, thy Champion,
His valiant brother; one, upon whose Plumes
Victory dances as they far••e the ayre,
Whispering the voice of Triumph. Thou art guarded
With such a general loyalty in Subjects,
That if thou slept'st amongst the multitude,
Even when some rage possessed them, undesended
With any Arms but that, the imperfect slumber
Need not be broken with a fear. Macario,
These tears are tears of joy: and yet I cannot
Choose but reflect upon those times that gave me
The embraces of thy Noble Father.
Madam,
The loss you suffer is repaired in me;
Isle own no honours, nor delights of earth,
But what my duty shall confer on you:
Making your present greatness equal to
The former without discontinuance:
I will call nothing mine, more than a title,
And ceremonious out-side.
Would you'd please
To take your seat, and give an audience
To what I shall deliver.
Speak Corvino.
Your Oratory hath power to draw attention,
What ever the subject be.
It is that that makes
Language harmonious. It is your self, great sir,
Both your own private and the public good
Must be my Theme. In part it likewise hath
Relation unto your eternity,
For Princes never dye that have fair issue.
Your marriage sir.
I'm yet too young, Corvino.
You're old in judgement, and in all the parts
That make a Prince up absolute. Too young!
Some careful Parents (and such providence
Might be a good example) in the child-hood
Of their loved sons, have made election
Of hopeful beauties, that they might be sure
To keep their names alive in their posterity.
You are mature enough: now therefore know,
Your dying Father (to whose memory
We owe a reverence) when his fainting Spirits
Labourd for help from all their weakened Organs,
He breathed these last words: Let my Son (quoth he)
Marry betimes; and if he makes his choice
Amongst his own subjects, let him place Melissa
In his first thoughts.
Where is your honour now? 
I doe not urge it as she is my daughter,
Through an ambition that affects such greatness:
Sir, my desires are humble; and on those
A safety waits, whose comfort Isle not lose
For all the others flatteries.
Blush not Lady.
If Fortune hath designed you for a Princess, 
The favour's worth the courting with a smile,
And cheerful aspect, so't transport you not
From a becoming duty.
Gracious Sir,
My temper can admit of no desires 
Suit not with my condition. If it be
Decreed by providence, I can obey,
But never wish.
Rise lovely maid. 
My Lord, 
I'm lost to all the happiness that ever
My hopes showed me a way to.
Have no fears:
She's constant; and Isle soon divert the Duke,
Even here in public.
Fair Melissa take
Thy Princes grant.
Of what sir? Doe not mock
Your reason into error. You're a Prince
And every act of yours concerns a state,
Not your mere person only: what you doe
Must therefore deeply be considered on,
Before your will allow it execution.
Princes should wed with Princess: where there is
An innate Majesty on both sides, that
Well mixed, makes up an issue fit for rule,
And the successive dignities. Besides,
A State is strengthened: by alliance much:
It may enlarge your Territories to,
By times kind working. We have neighbour Princes,
That gladly would bestow their Female heirs
Upon your highness; and by such a choice,
Your subjects with your self might gain a happiness.
You, Spurio, counsel this?
He cannot own
A duty worth your cherishing with favour,
That will not urge it home.
She is your sister;
And it would be some additions to your honours
(Though they are many which your merits challenge)
To see your sister graced with the high Title
Of our great Duchess.
'T would be disadvantage
To all that's good within me: For although
No policy preserves my Actions
Free from suspicion, but their own integrity,
And that hath showed them clear without abuse
Of favour or of power; yet if I were
The brother of the Duchess, I should hardly
Scope envy, where I now have love.
Brave spirit.
Thy virtue moves me.
How his father frowns? 
He's moved another way.
If you esteem it
A virtue in me to suppress desires
That bear me higher than the moderate pitch,
Cherish it still, and doe not with addition
Of favours make me lose th'opinion
Of being good in my prosperities:
Such flatteries may tempt me to aspire;
My flight holds even yet.
My dearest Spurio,
How thou appear'st in this humility!
Nor doe I think it any counterfeit
To whet my yet cold appetite. Her form,
Though it be full of active fire, enough
To move the dullest earth, wherein a soul
Hath made its habitation, I not dote on:
Nor will it prejudice your worth Metissa,
In that your Prince refuses you: Affection
Must not guide us, but counsel.
You have done
A justice unto me and your own honour:
I shall be happy when my Virgin freedom
May make an equal choice.
That choice shall want
No honour we can give it. And dear Madam 
Your self have youth enough and beauty yet
T'admit a second fellowship: Elect
Even where you please, our duty shall allow it:
Virtue and judgement guide you.
I am happy in my unhappiness, that time hath left me
A husband still; thy Fathers memory
Preserved in thee my Son: I know no widow-hood
Whilst wedded unto that.
Yet if hereafter
You would at any time confer such honour,
Let it be Lord Corvinos.
Ha! my father! 
Named he not him Fidelio?
To my self
You show me my defects, by the fair light
Of your too gracious and too great opinion;
All the desert that I can have, must be
Of your creating. 
These events shall be 
Referred to time and providence
Son Spurio.
Now will he school his Son for being honest.
It is an ambitious Lord, yet strives to hide it 
With politic hypocrisy.
Your Child-hood
Grew up to riper years in such obedience,
As promised duty to me; how you should
Decline that goodness from the hopes conceived
Strikes me with wonder. Sure you were instructed,
And taught to know men by the study of
Their difference; and in what one may excel
Another being: Greatness is no vice
That you should shun it, and your Sisters honours
Would neither have impaired yours, nor mine:
It is not so dangerous caring to preserve
Abundance, as to labour with necessity;
And though it might be real temperance in you
To shun so great additions, yet it showed
Little obedience that you contradicted
What I proposed.
Sir it was from your example,
You urged it not as an ambition;
If your desires were humble, mine were so:
I prefer safety sir as well as you,
Before the flattering dangers that are incident
To the other.
You have mis-interpreted
A modest fear, an absolute denial.
Besides; how unbecomming it is to accept
A pressed consent with greed inesse; it argues
Desire without desert: but since you are
So nicely moral, by my self I will
Advance my self. The Duchess bed will be
An honour I ne'er thought of.
How sir! you
Marry the Duchess?
Hath your greatness taught you
To practise scorn on me? or are you swollen
With an unnatural envy? I shall hatch
Practices 'bove your reach; and teach your sister
To obey as well as love: it is not your humour
But my command that must dispose of her:
Nor will I ask your leave to have the Duchess.
Be what you are, and keep your Princes love:
You've almost lost a fathers. 
How he stands? 
Some wanton lobby Lady sure hath laid
The issue of her pleasures to his charge;
For which the old man chid him.
I much fear
Part of the cause is mine.
Two hands in a dish,
The right Court Ordinary.
Prithee bee
More serious. Why again dejected thus?
I have news for thee Fidelio.
Pay the Post.
Thou must not have my Sister.
Ha? it is horror.
Then it is not honour.
She must be disposed of.
How? for the Duke?
My father so resolves it.
Then I have lost—
Just nothing.
Thou prophan'st
A worth, that bids my justice punish thee.
She's nothing worth, nor to the purpose, if
You have her not.
If there be more impart it.
I love the Duchess.
So doe I your Sister.
And I love both.
How is that Beneventi?
Love both?
Yes, both alike; that is, love neither.
My rival is my father.
Mine my Sovereign.
Then if I be your second against either,
Let the Axe make me first a head less monster;
And Surgeons next in public search my parts,
To find where treason lay and patricide.
What Fates are we two subject to?
The worse
If you attempt to better them.
Fidelio,
We will consult a little; I have had
Grounds for strong hopes, I'll not be flattered by them;
But work with policy. There is within me
A war twixt love and duty: one must be
Destroyed to quit and set the other free. 
AManda you look sickly, you were wont
To wear a lovely blush upon your cheek,
Such as no Art can counterfeit: your eyes
Were the Court Stars, at which the amorous gallants
Lighted their flames: who but Amanda famed
For beauty, and a liveliness of spirit;
Your colour's earthy now, your mind unactive:
Nor can such accidents without a cause
Show their effects. I wish it were communicated.
Unto our knowledge.
Madam, it is nothing
But eating Sallets, Oate-meale, and greene fruits,
She hath got the loving Chamber-maids disease:
On my virginity that's it, she must
Be steeled to th'purpose.
I believe they are
Some passions rather.
Certainly that's it:
Madam she reads Arcadiaes, Amorettas;
And will discourse this Ladies love and that
So sadly, that the faces in the hangings
Seem to have sense and weep: I'm sure I cannot
Forbear when I remember it.
It is strange,
Your reverend Ladyship hath so much moisture;
Sure you preserved your tears, and wasted none
When you were young, to th'end you might express
Your self now tender-hearted: What sweet Courtier
But would esteem those tears and make them bracelets▪
Their toughness will endure the stringing.
So, so;
Be lightsome still.
And jeer my age, that hath
Given you counsel; which observed, would keep
Your heart from eking, and your lunges from sighs:
You ne'er would cry aye me, that love, but cannot
Be loved again.
Is she in love Cardente?
That's it upon my Maiden-head.
An o th,
Of great antiquity; the Cavaliers
Used it before the battle of Lepanto.
Used what? my Maiden-head?
You would have it constred
In that best sense.
You're very witty Ladies,
To play on my decays; I could have done
As well as you: but now have graver thoughts.
The Grave is that best fits them.
Well Amanda,
You may again want counsel; when you doe
I wish some cough may seize me, or the want
Of my fore teeth make my speech so imperfect,
You may not understand it.
Very likely;
You need not wish it.
They are wags Cardente,
But for your mirth Amanda it is affected;
Your soul I doe believe retains its sadness,
Reveal it, and i'll aide thee in the cure.
Madam I gladly would give satisfaction
Unto your graces curiosity,
So that it might not prejudice fair truth:
To say I'm sick, were a dissimulation:
If well, you'll not believe it.
How? you well?
When your complexion's like the queen of Spades;
Or like a painting wrought in the first colour;
Or like a withered blossom, or a—
Hold
Good Lady Simile; Or like your Monkey
When he wants Spiders; the poor beast looks scurvily,
And not unlike your Ladyship.
Well, well;
I still must bear with youth.
If a distemper,
Or a disease that's crept into my blood
Renders me now less beautiful, then lately
The flatteries of some esteemed me; must it
Conclude my mind is sick?
Enough Amanda,
Yet still I must suspect; when you're alone 
Perhaps she will reveal it. 
That's it Madame,
We maids will chat so prettily alone;
You did not well Amanda to abuse me
Before the Duchess: other Ladies would not
Have served me so, and there are few in Court
But would make use of what you slight; my counsel:
I have bin versed in things that might advantage
Your restitution.
Unto what good Lady?
Your health, your mind; your wits.
Why doth your reverence
Think I am mad?
A little loving frenzy.
Delude her importunity with some slight, 
She'll be a trouble else.
Pray think not Ladies
This age of mine hath not attained some knowledge
From observation. There have bin few passages
In Court which I have not bin privy too.
Ladies have fallen and risen; and their timpanies
Have bin cured with as secret carriage,
As ever was practised by a suburb Mid-wife:
I have had plots to save a Ladies honour.
She hath given me an occasion. 
Ply it home,
We'll raise some mirth from melancholy.
Come,
You must not be reserved.
Might I presume
You would be secret.
How? suspect Amanda?
By my virginity
I doe believe
That Oath will ne'er be broken.
Why Melissa?
I have bin known and known these fifty years,
My age hath seen Lords turn cast Ladies of
Unto their Pages, and preferment follow;
I have known secrets too, and kept them secret
Without any Oath. Is it coming yet?
It is almost
At my tongues end: but shame—
A fig for shame.
Perhaps it is something cannot be expressed
In modest Language.
Then I must interpret,
And now I see that's it.
That! what Cardente?
Yes, yes; it is so: your eye, your noses sharpness:
And here's a sign.
Of Virgo I dare swear.
Of Gemini: You're subject to strange qualms,
Are you not Lady? dare you wear a buck?
Are you not quick? me thinks it kicks on both sides:
You have bin at it to some purpose.
She
Interprets right Melissa.
I can doe it.
She's not the first at Court hath had a clap,
And let it be my charge to save her honour;
Even the Duchess self—
How's that Cardente?
Tut I know secrets.
And you'll reveal them.
How have I fooled my self into a misery,
Prevention cannot free me from? committing
A secret of such consequence to one
Will make my shame the pastime of the Court
By her discovery.
No such matter Lady,
Doubt not a close conveyance; yet I wish
You had revealed it sooner: Physic then
Might have done much.
You'll aid me then Cardente
In the concealment?
I'll not tell the Duchess.
But I will.
What sweet Lady?
What a creature
Warmes her self in her bosom, a Court Bawd;
A cloth of tissue sentinel.
An old cole
Raked up in counterfeited sanctity:
Thou credulous piece of wickedness, did think
If any wanton forwardness had led me
To such a sin as looseness, I would suffer
The knowledge of't pass from me? and especially
To one suspected for a wicked agent
In those base practises, but now discovered.
What will you bait me Ladies?
Yes, and worry thee;
Thou mother of the maids! you are fitter far
To be the Madam regent of the stews,
Nay we'll dissect thee.
And before the Duchess
Lay open all.
Nay then farewell sweet Ladies. 
She's gone, and we are free, and now Amanda
Let loose thy thoughts; for all are here imprisoned
Thou shalt command releasement.
Oh Melissa
I love thy brother, and my virgin flame
Grows every hour more violent.
Oh Amanda
I love thy brother, and my virgin flame
Grows every hour more violent.
You mock me
With echoing back my words.
I speak a truth
Although with blushes: If your anguish grow
From that sweet passion, how our even states
Hang in the balance?
All my hopes are lost,
In that the Duchess favours him so much;
My jealousies can point no other end out,
Then their uniting in that fellowship
My wishes covet.
Have not I like doubts?
The Duke rivals Fidelio; and my father
Urges unwilling honours, which my fears
Dare not attempt to reach at. I had rather
Sleep in the sweet embraces of thy brother,
Then be advanced to greatness that will make me
The object of men's envy. 
Here's the Duchess,
We'll hear you straight Corvino. Fie Amanda,
Have all your seeming virtues lost themselves
In one foul stain?
Madam let me prevent
The abusing of your faith: my honour suffers
In nothing but a counterfeit of that,
With which I mocked her curiosity,
That else refused all satisfaction;
And in it betrayed herself to the discovery
Of such an inclination, as to think on it
Renews the blushes which you say my cheeks
So late have lost.
Nay, Madam, I made show
Of any thing that might discover her:
Told her I had been privy to such cases,
And many a Ladies fall.
Enough Cardente.
But let not such things be your sport hereafter.
Jealousy is a spirit which once raised,
Will hardly be commanded down again;
And honour is a substance too too nice
To play withal
I dare expose my eslfe
To the trial of her jury.
U•ge no more;
You are believed Amanda. Now my Lord 
We give you hearing.
Madam, I would whisper
The secrets of my soul.
Withdraw Cardente. 
Madam, if ought appear an error in me,
Condemn it not with too severe a sentence,
Till I have pleaded my excuse. I love you:
The general graces of your mind and person,
In this my settled age hath raised high flames:
Which cherished by your favour will preserve me,
Or quite consume me, if they waste themselves
In your disdain. The disproportion
We wear in outward titles, makes me fear
You will refuse consent: and yet I hope
(Not urging the Dukes favour) you'll allow
My suit consideration, and your answer.
My Lord Corvino you have honoured me
In your opinion; putting such a gloss
On my defects, that I appear more worthy
Then really I am. My age is subject
To those decays, that render the unfit
For a morose delights.
Your beauty, Madam,
Is in that freshness yet, that were I warmed
In your fair bosom, all the frost that hangs
Upon these hairs would quickly be dissolved,
And a new spring of liveliness and strength
Quicken this cold and passive earth that holds,
An Icy soul within it. You'd restore me
To my best youth again.
This love hath taught you
The long neglected practice of your Court-ship:
Forbear it, good my Lord, my griefs are yet
Unapt for flattery.
Then give me leave
To speak in plainness my desires, that are
You would admit me to your sweet embraces
In lawful fellowship. You'd satisfy
My longing passions, and your sons request,
And pay those services that I have done you;
Which some might but my self dare not presume
To call desert.
Your faithful servines
Have been rewarded with degrees of honour,
And I expect your gratitude. I never
Discovered such ambition in your temper,
Which always seemed to level its just aim
At fair equality. Then good my Lord
Consider your attempts, and how they make
Your virtues much suspected.
If you dare
Call it a pride that I seek such addition,
Know there's no substance now depends upon
Your empty title which can make a difference,
But I will reconcile it by my merit,
I am not so inferior to be checked;
Nor weak in power, but that I can revenge
A scorn that is dishonourable.
Doe not
Add to your ills Corvino. This had sense
As if it did imply you would not owe
A Duty to me now: or that you meant
Some treacherous discovery. Take heed
Of base ingratitude, 'twil slain your fame
(which good men call their life) with such a Leprosy,
As time can never cleanse it from.
I then
Must count my self refused.
Yes for a husband.
I must prepare for heaven: Nor shall I ever
Admit of new desires whilst the loved memory
Of my dead Lord presents it self.
Your Pardon.
Only you may consider, it was his will
Melissa should be Dutehesse.
Not without
The free election of my son, who now
Leaves it to time and counsel. Thus you still
Show your ambition. Dearest Spurio welcome, 
Let us go take the ayre.
Your graces leave
To have some conference with him.
When it is ended
Attend us in the garden. 
Stay Melissa
Son I would urge your duty to reveal
What it is disturbs you. I by observation
Have noted odd expressions in your looks,
Your words, and actions, since the late Dukes death,
That argue there's within some strange distemper
Of your best parts, counsel must rectify.
I challenge from my interest the will
And power to give it.
How can I discover
What I yet know no? you must satisfy
Your self, and your own suppositions,
Even by yourself. If you have framed conjectures
From any outward Characters that may
Express an inward perturbation,
Propose and e's reveal it.
You are in love.
I have desires, I must confess, but temper them
With a discreet respect to their best end:
Nor doe I suffer any to flame out
In violent passions.
But they are directed
To one peculiar object; that's the Duchess,
Is it not so?
My breeding and Religion
Permit me not to lye: sir it is a truth;
And you may call it virtuous if you please:
But duty which you challenge from me checks it.
I neither dare nor will plead any right
Where you are interested.
I assign it all,
She hath o'er thrown my cause with such a scorn
As burns me into rage; witness ye powers
That guide our not to be resisted fates,
How far she's banished from my thoughts.
You have sir
Breathed a new soul of comfort into me;
Isle freely now solicit for my self,
And try success.
Twill show of youthful rashness,
Can you ground any hopes?
From circumstance
I can; but none with which I will be flattered:
The honours which she hath confert'd upon me
Are Arguments she loves me; her salutes
Are always dear or dearest.
Yet you must not.
Marry this Duchess.
How, will you oppose it?
You then are swollen with an unnatural envy.
No more, I must dispose you.
I'll obey.
But yet I beg you sir temper your power
With mild command, and deep consideration:
Think on the Duchess.
Think upon Melissa.
What of my sister sir?
She is a beauty
That might invite desire, and crown the bed
Of any Prince with happiness. Look on her,
And make her thy election.
Mine! for what?
A Wife.
Defend ye better influences,
No such incestuous dream could ever possess
My wanton'st, slumber.
It is not so incestuous
As that thy inconsideratnesse attempted:
Resolve to take her, and by all my hopes
Of blessed eternity, I will not only
Justify that for lawful, but salute thee
Ferrara's lawful Duke.
What riddle's this?
Give it solution.
First resolve to be
What I have promised. 
Good sir leave me not
Confounded with amazement: are not you
My Father sir? or who must own me? Sister,
Is there ought in your knowledge that may satisfy
My doubtful thrughts? must I not call you sister?
Or what's that greater ineest I would have
Committed? Can the Duchess be my mother?
An Aunt's less then a sister?
Dearest brother,
My knowledge owns no secret which I would not
As freely make you master of as wish
My self a happiness: I must confess
My mother oft hath told me that you were not
The issue of her Womb.
There's half the riddle 
Unfolded yet.
My Lord your valiant brother
This instant is arrived, t'enrich the Court
With his full glories: all men court his victory
With such a praise, it staines his manly cheeks
With modest blushes. He expects your visit.
I know no brother.
How my Lord? your virtue.
Will suffer by suspicion if'y express
Your self or proud or envious,
Melissa,
I cannot satisfy your fathers Will,
Though all were cleared that darkes the reasons of it:
Be still Fidelios. 
What the devil ails him?
His passions are as various as his clothes;
He shifts them daily: only keeps one fashion,
And one sad garb.
Are you acquainted with
Any events that have relation
Unto your brothers melancholy?
Some I am,
But urge not their discovery.
I obey
What ever you command; and hope my services
Will shortly be rewarded.
Take th'assurance
Of my resolves and promise.
Trifle not
With court-ship now: let's think on bouncing complements
To bid the Soldiers welcome.
To the presence,
There is their entertainment. We shall see
What different things Courtiers and Soldiers be. 
DId she reveal't her self Content to you?
Or else do you conclude it from some circumstance?
In such a cause I would not have credulity
Mock it self into error.
It was my Lord
Her own confession; yet before the Duchess
She doth pretend it was only an intent
To mock my curiosity: but I fear
It is too sad a truth.
To me most sad,
Mine age grows fast upon me; and to have
A stain thrown now upon our House, by one
So eminent in all appearances
Of good, it makes my wishes hast to meet
The sweet peace of my grave: but yet Cardente
I am not easy to believe.
Nor I.
There may be other causes why a Lady
Of her pure constitution should be subject
To qualms and puling.
Is she not in love?
That may be it my Lord, and if you could
Discover who the man is.
Would that help
To clear suspicion?
All would straightappeare
In its full truth; her stain, or innocence;
For thus my Lord. I know the inclinations
Of all the Gallants; which are Goats, which Eunuchs:
Now if she doth love any forward youth,
One that will thrust his Knife into the meat
Before he hath said grace (you can apply it)
Tic so; if not, so.
My Italian nature
Begins to break her prison, and grow violent;
I'll force her sir to tell me.
Use no threats,
But mild persuasions; such as may become
The place: and urge them home before the presence
Fills with more number. Here she is. 
Pray Heaven
He doe not stab her.
Sister are y' in health?
I know not brother, would you'd ask a Doctor,
A skilful one that hath proved more men mortal,
Then a corrupted Vintage, or French Duels:
If such a learned mans inspection can
Tell the disease which many think I have,
But am not sensible thereof my self.
You slight my question.
Sure it doth deserve
No better answer. How doe I appear
To every curious eye that undertakes
The reading of my inside? sure that Lady
Hath made you jealous.
There's a stain Amanda
Thrown on you by suspicion, on your honour;
Nothing but blood, or a fair satisfaction
Can wash it off.
I thought some such fine thing
Had mocked your credulous weakness. Blush to think
You own so low a soul as to suspect
Her whom your love calls sister; though detraction
Spake with a hunt red tongues, and muttered circumstance
To make it probable,
Your confidence
Carries the greater show of guilt.
Of guilt!
Should you present all tortures tyranny
Did ever invent: I have no fears can make me
Belie mine innocence, though it might free me
From all their suffering.
This doth show more like
The violence of a distempered passion,
Than will to satisfy. It was never yet
Read in the story of our Ancestors,
Any least blemish stuck upon our house.
And if you have transgressed, the knowledge of it
Will point us out a way to just revenge,
Or to an honourable recompense;
And so preserve our yet unsullied fems
Clear to post esterity.
This circumvention
Is of so strange and intricate a nature,
I know not how to free my self, but by
Mine own just testimony. Brother know
Your best prepared devotions are not purer
Then my worst thoughts; their ends being always noble
When I have had desires.
Not to have some,
Indeed were more than wonder: such a Lady
As you are sister, pampered with the full ness
Of Court delights, not to elect some one
Preferred in her esteem, were such a paradox,
Not all your learning can maintain.
Suppose
I should confess to whom mine are directed;
He's one that you dare not suspect, much less
Accuse of such a sin that is so far from
His virtuous inclination.
I am glad
Your love can give him such a Character.
To know him might advance your desires,
Provided they be honourable.
Brother
You seem to hedge me in with studied cunning.
But I can give my self a liberty
By naming him you'd know. I doe affect
Your friend Lord Spurio.
He the man hath done it?
Done what? your jealousy is weak, and grounded
Upon too nice a fear; and only propped
With her slight information.
Stay, stay Sister;
There's something more: Did not you once pretend
You had a powerful interest in his Sister
That might command me a success with her?
And you interpret it.
Nothing good Sister,
But one thing for another.
Hug your error,
And cherish it until it sting your bosom:
Your threats shall not enforce another answer
Though the place had no privilege.
Enough
Good Sister; I am satisfied.
Will you sir 
Cherish my duty with a faith?
Of what?
What that bad woman hath accused me of,
Is false as any fabulous Deity 
Ascribed to wicked mortal.
Nay good Lady,
If any grounded fear hath raised suspicion,
Truth ought to be discovered; if it were,
We then would make provision of some Villa,
Some pretty Country house, under pretence
That air's most wholesome for you.
Would thou were
Without that noysefull instrument of speech;
Or all thy hearers deaf. But that her virtues
Carry their perfect lustre, I should almost
Suspect the Duchess, for corferring favour
Upon so vile a woman. 
Practice it. 
Twill be a perfect trial.
Here's Vittorio,
And brave Polemici, that are returned
With the triumphing Notho.
I embrace ye;
You're welcome home to peace, 
We thank your Lord-ship.
It is down right complement; we Soldiers
Are sparing of our words my Lord: blows chiefly
Are our discourse.
We Courtiers Beneventi
Can talk, but seldom fight.
That hit you home. 
How dare you offer to salute the Ladies,
Before you've shifted shirts? sure your Camp Land resse
Never perfumed your linen.
Had you bin
There Beneventi, it would have made your linen
Soon want perfuming.
Soldiers doe not use 
Other perfumes than match and Gun-powder.
Were you converted into it Cardente,
You'd sweeten their Buffe-jerkins.
Were I Gun-powder
I'd blow you up.
You take your servants part.
You serve a Lady! Ladies should serve you
For your good service to the Duke and State:
Oh the men's heads that you cut off, Polemici!
The Maiden-heads you purchased in our absence!
Many a Suburb agent is enriched by it;
Though to the loss of your own state and conscience:
Ingeniously confess your chief employment.
We feign our selves as virtuous as the Duke,
And are as chaste at Court as withered Eunuchs:
But when we are at liberty abroad,
Ease and high feeding cannot hold out long:
Then to it like Monkeys Captain. Sure your selves
Doe piddle now and then with Sutlers wives;
And are content to praise their tanned complexions
For most rich beauties: whilst we Courtiers
Ravish delights from lips that taste of Nectar,
And think our selves in Heaven.
Whilst we Soldiers
After a tedious match, are forced to make
The earth our bed without a Pillow, sheets,
Or silver warming-pan; start from our sleep
At every sound the airs light motion makes,
Thinking it an alarm: Return from fight
Smeared o'er with blood and sweat, and savourly
Take the refreshment of a troubled water;
Whose muddy streams our Horses would scarce taste
But for necessity: fast till our guts
Contract themselves so close they will scarce hold
The full digestion of one Lark.
Good Captain
No more of this discourse; it mortifies me:
But now the Wars are ended, you'll turn Courtier!
It is quickly learnt.
You have instructed me,
Dissemble first an imitation
Of the Dukes virtues; feed high, and be lazy;
Next lecherous: is it not so?
A great proficient,
You'll quickly take Degrees.
In the last School
We shall out-strip you Courtiers; for observe
If any one of you should rival us,
And dare to intercept our pleasures, we
Can beat you Beneventi, mark me, beat you;
And sure the Duke would give us pensions for it,
To keep your Goat-ships honest.
Witty Soldier,
He fits you at all weapons.
Yours, the tongue;
But that it wants some of your women's length:
Hee'ld h•t you otherwise. 
Peace thus plays with war,
And makes it pastime.
Here's the noble Conqueror.
Welcome again into our bosom Soldier.
Weed have you now leave action, and apply
Your ready will to entertain and manage
The honours we intend you, as rewards
Due to your valour and success: you have
Settled our peace at home by the subversion
Of all our neighbouring enemies, and now
It is fit you share a full proportion
Of all you laboured for, that we in ease
And softness might securely please our senses;
And know no sufferings more then what are incident
To every prince, our cares: those lesson'd too
By our grave Counsels industry. I wish
You would move something from your own desires,
That granted might be valued by your self:
We should bee free.
Ambition never touched me.
If I have done an act hath gained allowance
In popular opinion, let not flattery
Court it with too much praife. These ought to share;
And every common soldier well as I:
I but directed what they executed.
Let your rewards sir, smile upon their wants,
For sure our victory brought much more honour
Then profit home: nor could I think it less
Than tyranny to slave men being conquered,
And force them buy their liberty; though in policy
And custom it is allowed both safe and honourable.
Cherish their valour sir, and the example
Will (when your need requires it) arm the hearts
Of others with like forwardness.
Wee give
The spoils to be distributed, and pension
To every soldier; and unto thy self—
I know not what: considerate judgements must.
Allow the gift a worth before I offer it.
Embrace you two whilst I embrace ye both.
Why doth my Spurio frown upon his brother?
Can his clear soul give entertainment to
Neglect or envy? such a glorious pair
To suffer an Eclipse.
Your victory
And person both are welcome.
Both must serve you.
Dear valiant Notho, now you have put off
The rough habiliments of War, pray wear
These ornaments for my sake. 
They are favours.
An Eastern Monarch might be proud of Madam:
A Mine could not have made your servant richer▪
In's own esteem.
Trust me the Soldier speaks
Excellent Court-ship Ladies. Those rich jewels
Will be yours shortly; and I would advise you
Not to refuse them upon any terms
When they are offered.
Your deserts require 
Some due acknowledgement.
These Madam are
Bounties above them.
Doe not you my Lord 
Conceive strange joys, to see so fair an issue▪
Make your age happy?
It is a happiness▪
For which I owe Heaven thanks.
What think you Captain? 
You seldom found such spoils in a pied Knapsack.
Doe you know how to use them?
Not as you doe,
Like Children; play with them.
You'll pawn them rather?
That I believe you use.
We'll have some revels,
It is fit that Soldiers sometimes should have rest,
And taste the Courts delights.
You'll find there's difference
Betwixt a Courtier and a Soldier Captain.
There's much.
How much?
As much as is betwixt
A good sword and a Fiddle-sticke.
But how
Doe you apply them?
That unto my self
I best know how to use.
We'll first thank Heaven,
And then we'll see some mockery. This day
We'll honour with solemnities. 
With me sir? 
Brother.
Forget that name; it must be lost
To both our memories.
Sure mine preserves not
The least impression of an injury
I ever did you, that might justly challenge
The acqu•intance of that Title. Others look
Upon my fortune with respectful smiles;
You either scorn or envy it.
I doe neither;
But there are secrets which my knowledge cannot
Yet comprehend, till time makes more discoveries:
If it appear then you are not my brother,
Say not it was my fault.
I would you give me
A fuller satisfaction.
When I can
I will not be reserved.
I know not what
Your words imply, unless you'll call me bastard;
And that hath danger in it. No privilege
Of nature, or respects unto the greatness
Favour hath raised you to—
Hoe's here can satisfy. 
Will you yet wed Melissa?
Never sir;
I would you'd clear my doubts.
Oh never sir,
Till you perform that act.
My ignorance
And innocence shall then preserve me safe▪
There may be danger in the knowledge of it:
Hence forth Isle not be curious. 
Sir, my duty
That taught me humble knees, and an obedience
Is somewhat staggered; something hath begot
A jealousy within me, that I ought not
Pay them to you: but still my virtuous reason
Doth fight against that sin.
What mean you Notho?
My brother sir, or Spurio (for the name
Of brother he refuses) says we are not
The issue of one blood.
It was a folly,
And inconsiderate rashness to betray
Himself to so much hazard.
Sir, the knowledge
Would settle my disturbances, and make
Again that duty perfect, which yet doubts
To whom it owes it self.
Those words of his
Might be interpreted; and I confess
My wanton youth had much unlawful issue:
Of which perhaps he's one.
My lawfulness
Had then first privilege to take exception:
I must not now own him.
Yes; for my love
Is equal to you both.
In that you are
Unjust to the deserts of my dead mother;
And the Honoured family whence she derived
Her blood and virtues.
It becomes not you
To tax my partial humour, since your self
Is equally unlawful.
You have awed me,
It was not my sin; and thus my duty begs 
The public knowledge may not be my shame.
That shall not stain, thy fame staines not thy conscience:
And tell me Notho, dare be great?
〈…〉 be
What fortune o• my reason promp•s me to,
If warranted for lawful.
Dare be Duke?
Forbid it loyalty.
It is in my power
To make thee justly so.
If it be my right,
There's no attempt that can have danger in it
Enough to fright me.
Shall it attempt no danger:
The prosecution shall be politic
And safe. But first thou must resolve to doe
What I command thee.
Speak it.
Wed Melissa.
Did ever father yet command his Children
To be incestious! is your reason perfect?
This shows distraction.
All depends upon it▪
And Heaven knows it is lawful: Therefore be
Sudden in thy resolves. 
What fit hath seized him?
The Ladies eyes have shot some wanton fire
Into his heart: my Lord.
Polemici
I have heard wonders, and your bosoms shall
Partake the secret, so you'll keep it safe:
It is of high consequence.
They are the same
Safe Closets you have trusted.
You'd not envy me
If I were Duke.
We should not sure unless
It made you proud.
But dare your valours aide me
In the design?
Why what disloyal devil
Hath put these thoughts into you? have we saved
Our throats from cutting by the enemy
To feel the Hang-mans Axe? why how dare you
Cherish such vain ambition? if you should
Marry the Duchess, she must have no son first:
And then it is doubtful whether the election
Will be conferred on you. There are more worthies
That hold as good opinion in the state.
But say it be my rig
I never studied
Your Genealogy so much, to find
How there might be relation; if there's any
Let it appear.
You shall know more hereafter;
Strange mysteries in fortunes hidden lye,
Cannot be judged of by a common eye.
It is an unkindness thus to be reserved,
And hide the causes of your discontent:
The privilege of friendship should be larger;
And not confined to any weak respects
That bound its limits. I should not conceal
My secret'st sins from you, but for the scandal.
Fidelio, I am lost in such a mist
Of doubts and error, all my reasons faculties
Cannot instruct my knowledge how to find
A way that leads to truth,
If any counsel
My weak abilities can aid you with
May be thought useful—
Urge it not Fidelio;
To know and not to remedy increases
The suffering more.
My love would not interpret
Neglect or jealousy to be the cause
Of these expressions; if you doe suspect it,
I then may ground a fear you have declined
Your wonted purity: and through the guilt
Of some foul act makes shame o'er sway your reason,
You doe enforce your blushing soul to be
The unwilling prison of so vile an evil
You dare not give it liberty.
This is
Such an extreme Fidelio, I should rather
Admit of flattery then to be taxed thus.
Time and your nearness to me might have taught
Your knowledge, something by observing me,
And how my courses tended: There was never
The coursenesse in my humour, that it pleased me
To hear my self commended: but the life
Of honour being wounded by detraction,
Or any false aspersion, it were a sin
Equal to guilt should I neglect to cure it
By any testimony; though it forced me
To Praise my self, above all the degrees
Of moderation: Therefore good Fidelio
Neither be partial to me, nor let weakness
Interpret any private act of mine
From common rumour: such an even temper
Would make our friendship lasting.
I my Lord
Think you so far from being vicious,
Your scruples scarce allow those virtues in you
A merit, which to us might be examples.
I meant you no such privilege.
Believe it,
I will not flatter you; for sure you have
Some easy faults, that will admit the excuse
Of frailty: such as love.
Is Love a sin then?
Yes, when it burns with a corrupted flame;
And lights desire to what is sensual only,
Without regard of ought that makes our difference
The most refined and perfect in its nature:
Beasts have their lust.
I almost understand you,
But sure you dare not think me forward that way;
Your error were not friendly: neither is there
A Lady so neglected: she would court
My shallow worth, or yield if she were courted.
There is that Magic in your masculine graces,
Th'have charmed the beauty of the Court to love you:
And it is arrived my knowledge.
What's that beauty?
Instruct my ignorance.
Amanda sir,
And though she be my sister, I doe give her
No attribute, fame and the general voice
Confirm? not to her.
With that name thou hast
Charmed me Fidelio thoroughly, and recalled
My apoplexi'd thoughts to their first life.
Mine eyes were blinded with the Duchess so,
I could not see that happiness which now
I wish next to my eternity. But give me
Assurance good Fidelio.
That were vainenesse;
And now I must confess you had great cause
To be disturbed: profess love to the Duchess,
When you had given Amanda such deep earnest.
What earnest mean you? yet I ne'er saluted
Her ears with a request; or urged the grant
Of what you say, her inclination
Would freely give me.
Why should you express
This nice unwillingness to be discovered?
The knowledge of't as yet is limited
To a small number, and the memory
Of her dishonour will be quickly lost
In a fair recompense.
There's nothing clear
To me in this dark mystery, but that
The beauty you call sister is a Whore:
Is it not so?
Your self can best interpret,
And yet me thinks another name would sound
More Court-like; and not have half so much offensive:
For though she have the stain, I know she holds
That nobleness of spirit, none but such a one
As your full self could ever win her to it;
And a fair satisfaction vowed withal:
Which sure you will perform.
Thou art a villain;
Did my election from a world of men
Single thee out to be so much my self;
The union of our souls would not admit
Of a division, but that interchange
And custom taught us read each others thoughts?
And can that soul of thine express it self
Subject, so easily to be corrupted
With jealousy and error? Then let Moralifts
Fable hence forth no empty name of friendship,
Nor boast there's such a secret: I shall never
Wear thee more here.
This is no satisfaction,
I dare believe your innocence; if you
Dare urge it solemnly, and thereby give it
A confirmation.
That my pity cannot
Deny thy weakness: witness Heaven—
Enough.
You shall not swear; I credit it; and my penitence 
Humbles me for your pardon.
Rise and take it:
But I would know upon what circumstance
This jealousy was grounded.
The information
Came from Cardente, and her own acknowledgement
Of her desires to you. But she shall dye,
Her shame must not out live her.
How Fidelio!
Mock not thy self out of eternity,
By such a sin will like wise render thee
A scorn to memory: her innocence
May suffer falsely. It is not supposition,
But proof that must condemn her; sure there cannot
Be lodged in such a frame as is Amends
A thought but nobleness: I'd soon take
A withered Anchoresse into my suspect,
As her sweet purity.
You'd have her live then!
Why not? to make me happy.
Marry her,
And to it again; 'till that confirms all lawful,
I must forbid more pleasure.
What words fall
From thy distraction? dare renew thy guilt
By a worse second jealousy?
You'll be
Her Champion too? this zeal of yours confirms
That truth which was but doubt.
I shall forget
The place hath any privilege; but come sir,
Since my clear protestations will not satisfy,
We'll argue it with these. 
There will not be
Much Fallacy. 
Is your belief good brother
Yet rectified?
I must not own thee: hence.
Since she is here—
This trifling smells of cowardice.
Away then. 
What's the meaning? two such friends
To be divided!
By that interest 
My love doth challenge, let us know the motives
To this strange anger.
Pardon me Melissa,
I must (though willingly I would not doe it)
Forget your virtues.
Let our tears divert 
Your rash and violent purpose: trust me sir,
Unless a noble cause hath fired your spirits—
It is yours Amanda.
Then I understand it;
And challenge it my privilege to order
Your reconciliation. Brother, know
Your error hath dishonoured you so much,
That till you have called back to your opinion
My fame and inocence, I must not own you.
To raise a scandal of high consequence
From such an empty and perverse suspicion
And not to clear it with the satisfaction
Both of protests and testimony, argues
A soul less noble than the generous blood
Of our brave Ancestors successively
Inherited; producing actions,
The subject of large stories. Let Melissae
Witness the intent; a humorous counterfeit,
To mock Cardendte curiosity
Into an apt discovery of her self
And wicked inclinations; that we knowing them
Our care might shun her courses.
This Amanda
Believed would bring me peace again.
Believe it, For it is a truth clear as the innocence
Of babes: after the holy ceremony
Hath purged the original stain.
I am confirmed;
And ask again your pardon! Yours Amanda▪
I doe presume upon.
Your noble anger
Hath such a fair excuse, that I must thank you.
Your error only was your fault, and that
My pity pardons freely.
This hath likewise
Restored me to new hopes: and fair Amanda,
If your esteem hath added any worth
To my defects that make them seem perfections,
Such as may please your chaste and free desires;
If you'll possess me with the happiness
Of blessed union, it is the only one
That I would covet.
Let my blushes speak
A maids consent, and in them you may read
My thoughts direction that made you their object;
Mixing themselves with fears, hopes, jealousies;
And all that's incident to earnest love,
May it be crowned with such a fair event,
Twill make your hand-maid happy.
Twill but be A mutual exchange.
I hope our loves 
Are grown so ripe, the fasting of our joys
Will not be long protracted. 
Even when
It pleases the high providence.
My Lord
Observe how they are paired. Doubtless ell's clear:
And sure he will make amends.
My Lord Corvino,
If your consent will ratify—
You need not
Urge it again. Have you observed Cardente
Ought in Melissas inclination 
Towards Fidelio?
That's it; she is struck
With the blind Archer.
From a cloud of error 
A light is broken that hath made new day
In our dark treasons, and directed me
To that which yields my being here a happiness,
'Bove any form I could prescribe my wishes:
My knowledge learnt it from the imperfect motives
To your suspicion; without which discovery
My ignorance had lost it: but it cannot
Be full till crowned with your consent,
You have it;
And I as freely pardon both your faults:
Your frailty doth excuse them.
You'll return
To your first error; let not a new jealousy
Stagger our fair proceedings: We have climbed
Half of our height already: and to fall
From such bright hopes.
As you would cherish duty
Or other virtues in me, clear the mist
That hangs before your reason; you shall see
The whiteness of my innocence: confirm it
With your beliefs (for truth is only valued
As it is received) I shall meet his embraces
With all my Virgin sweets, like evening ayre
Without a cloud; when it but only blushes
To kiss the Sun at parting.
It is received
As positive a truth as ever came from
A Sybills mouth.
It hath restored thee likewise
To my now rectified opinion:
Blessings dwell with you.
Please you Lord Corvino 
With your consent to perfect what's begun
So fairly here; and make our union add
Something to this days glory.
She Fidelio
Wants much to meet your full deserts; your love
Perhaps she may: when I have ordered her
With some becoming counsels.
Hoe's my son,
And shall inherit honours and possessions,
With virtues to their best dependences;
Grant that you like of the election,
And the solemnities of both their marriages
To morrows sun shall gaze at.
Pray my Lord
Give me a fathers privilege to prepare her
With some fit precepts; then few minutes shall
Resolve it.
We'll expect. 
Melissa, you
Have made my age conceive as many hopes
As ever father did to make him happy.
Kill not their issue by a rash neglect,
And voluntary loss of that which perfect
And ordered judgements doe call happiness;
Above th'enjoying of a course desire;
Confined to a mean person too: if greatness
Were not a relative to all that's good,
And glorious in the general speculation
Of things that doe affect us, not in sense,
But the bright part of reason; emulous man
Would not through danger manage actions
So full of wonder, nor employ his faculties
In high designs: but like a heavy lump▪
That only by its weight moves to its center,
And there sleeps, so should we: leave no? so much
As the Record of any memorable
And brave achievement, for a monument
That such men once had being. To be Duchess
Will not impair your virtues; they would take
More luster from the title. Now Melissa
I'd have you quench that low and common flame
That burns towards Fidelio; and embrace
Those high desires I point you to: my policy
Hath ordered the success, and your obedience
By your subjecting of it to my will,
Shall crown you with full blessings.
Honoured Sir,
The duty which I owe you, and which ought not
Be mentioned without reverence, humbles me 
Thus to express it. If I could new mould
My frame and temper fit for such great honours.
I should embrace them with the entertainment
Of my most ready will. My constitution
Is of too course a matter to receive
Such nice impressions. Those whom Heaven hath
Ordained for Princes, are of purer earth
Then common mortals sure; and by instinct
Both know, and order their high difference,
To make it fit for greatness. If I were
The Duchess sir, my thoughts would still betray
Me to my self; and such imperfect actions
Receive their ordering from my weak abilities,
They'ld render me a scorn to those, that otherwise
Would pay me reverence.
Your unwillingness
Plays with illusions that are vain and empty.
In what are you defective but your will,
That's regulated by a childish humour?
Let your consideration weigh the events
Are incident to both: when you are Duchess
You'll be above the danger of your fortune;
And awe that weak necessity to which
The other may be subject.
Sure your father
Saith right sweet Lady; there's much difference
Betwixt the Duchess and a subjects wife;
Betwixt a chair of State, and a thrum'd couch;
A Ward robe that would furnish a Jaws Lumbre,
And one embroidered petty-coate for Sundays;
And that perhaps not paid for too. Be wise,
Obey your father Lady and be Duchess:
Twill be the better choice.
Content abounds
In riches, when the owners of cramb'd Treasuries
Unsatisfied are beggars. Sir, the Duke
Having refused me, how can I affect him?
And where love is enforced.
Why there's your privilege,
Great Ladies ought not love: their husbands more
Then in a just proportion of state.
Melissa, I doe find your inclination:
And though my zeal intended your advancement
Which you your self refuse; yet my: indulgence
Ties up mine anger: only I must wish you
Consider thoroughly.
Sir, my duty shall not
Give way to any act without your liking;
Although I have desires I can restrain them
From satisfaction. 
Would Fidelio were not
His love, a love diverts her.
There are means;
You understand my Lord: but yet I doe not advise you to it.
Thou art wise Cardente,
And can be secret too; for thou and I
Know something hidden to the world: It is better
Give her some Philter, that may raise in her
A flame towards the Duke.
But is there virtue in any such?
My youth hath made experience,
And I am furnished with that is powerful:
I bear it still about me.
Good my Lord
Impart it to my use; I fine would have A Husband yet.
Why thou moist have Fidelio,
A young and handsome Lord. It chiefly works
Upon such disproportions; share it justly,
You both must take it; for in that consists
The magic Sympathy. 
Isle to my Closet
And pray, then love. 
Polemici, where left you
My valiant Son?
Notho! hoe's in the presence.
When you return, desire him meet me in
The Grove behind the Garden.
I scarce think
He will own you when hoe's Duke: Vittorio,
What think thou of this riddle?
It is a hard one, he to be Duke and lawful!
He begins
To form himself fit for it: he takes survey
Of all that he supposes shortly must
Bow to his humour: tell's me he will new mould
The State, and we shall be advanced.
To the Gallows▪
I doe not like such raising; let's be honest;
And though we cannot make a full discovery
Of this so close and intricate proceeding,
We'll intimate some fears that may betray him
To jealousy and care; that watchful eyes
Observing him; if ought should be attempted,
It may be stifled by prevention in the first birth.
His favours yet deserve
We should preserve him.
Yes, I would preserve him.
But chiefly from the dangers incident
To such a vain ambition, into which
Hoe's flattered by his father▪ but upon
What ground, I doe not think the devil owns
A perfect knowledge: Sure he cannot think
There's power in his success to make him popular,
And lead the multitude in their disorder
To wish an innovation first, then practise it.
He saith it is his right.
But whore's the testimony?
Hell on these dark devises. Well, let's be
Like valiant Soldiers in the Rear, that dare
Go on, whilst the front stands to be their bulwark:
But breaches made therein to show them danger,
In flight they put their safety. Let's observe,
And add more to our knowledge; then resolve:
He that pursues an act that is attended
With doubtful issues, for the means had need
Of policy and force to make it speed. 
THis preparation of your high resolves
I must allow with wonder: sure you had
Some revelation of the weighty secret;
Or else instinct hath taught your knowledge more
Then a weak judgement could conclude from doubts;
And those bare circumstances I have used
To instruct you by.
But if Ferrari must
Own me her Duke, what progress yet is ordered
For my establishment? great actions ought not
Want equal means: and sure my single force
May not encounter such an opposition
As I shall meet. To challenge it my right
And not maintain it, renders me the laws:
I would not pay my life for a distracted
Unwarrantable action. If it may
Be pleaded or with force, or testimony,
I am above all fears.
I have a faction
Which with your party will make up a power
Of strength enough: but there is no such need.
Melissa joined unto you will be more
Than any numerous Army of resolved
And faithful spirits: she alone shall clear
All that is yet in mists.
If you'll take from me
The scruples that I have about its lawfulness,
Isle court her to prevail.
You may command her,
Confirm it with an Oath as you're a Prince;
And as I hope the ends of my ambition
Will meet success, you shall be satisfied.
By all the virtual powers that make an Oath
Sacred, I vow only to wed Melissa;
Provided it be lawful.
Then accept
My duty sir, that owes subjection
Duly to none but you. It is your birth-right
That shall prefer you before this young usurper;
And thus his knee to whom yours oft hath bended 
Humbles it self for pardon, that my breast
So long concealed what should make many happy.
I then am elder son to the late Duke!
And only yours supposed: I must acknowledge
A large debt to you for my education,
Which answered my high birth. But can this have
Clear confirmation?
As the brightest ayre
The Sun illumines.
I am then a Prince,
And you my only Subject:
For I know not
Who else will pay obedience to me.
All Will follow my example; for the rumour
As it grows bigger will incense the multitude:
From whom your fortunes and deserts have won
Both love and admiration. Fury then
Runs them into a lump, or monstrous form
With many heads, that carry their mad body
Reelingly forward, where they find resistance
Growing more violent: when to prevent
The mischievous effects of such an uproar:
The cause is asked and known; expostulated:
And your right proved by me, the general voice
Salutes you Duke. And shortly after you
May call Melissa Duchess.
I have heard
She doth affect Fidelio, And unless
She be diverted—.
By this time Fidelio
Hath not his being,
Have you kilt him then?
Both politically it is and safely ordered,
Cardente poisons both him and her self.
Could you have such a conscience?
Nice religion
Awes not a Politician. They both stood
Betwixt me and my ends.
You have confessed
Your self a murderer, it was a bad act;
And you have added to it: the discovery
Hath made me guilty by the knowledge of it.
I cannot but with horror now embrace
Her love, for which his innocence hath suffered:
Nor will I marry her.
Dare you then be
Unjust to your own honour? and neglect
That which you call religion, we but form?
You have instructed me: all other virtues
Depend on Justice; she alone is perfect
Without addition in her self. A Prince
Cannot deservedly wear the royal title,
That orders not it, nor is ordered by it.
Justice with tyranny may be allowed
Rather than partiality, for that
Emboldens sin; the other makes it fear.
If this day I should not be just (the first
Of my uncertain government) a blessing
Would not preserve it; for the bad example
Would teach bad subjects (such as thou) to be
Presumptuous in their errors.
What proceeding Intends this ambage?
Such a sin as thine
Is not allowed the plea of an excuse.
Then since thoustand'st convicted by thy self,
I thus pronounce thy sentence: thou shalt dye.
Your self is not immortal Prince.
By the hand Of Justice.
Who's the executioner?
Thy self, I have no other to command.
Do it with that instrument. 
It is a command
Becomes a Prince; and chiefly such a one
As makes it scruple to preserve his rayser,
Or to connive at a slight petty sin;
Whose execution hath confirmed his title:
It is a less sin to kill thee than my self.
Honour must yield then to necessity:
Isle do it my self. My sword that hath bin just 
In war, in Peace shall be so. Therefore pray;
And if the apprehension of thy death
Presents thy guilty conscience with an horror,
Meet it with holy thoughts, that thy repentance
May bear thy best part upwards. I am loath
To kill thy soul.
What strange conceits are these
Transport your reason from its use? pray kill me,
And when y' have done it, call my silent ashes
To tell the people how you are their Prince.
What then shall give my cold tongue motion
To justify your right?
Just Hevens want not
Miraculous means. My Justice is too slow,
And slies with lazy wings. Therefore be sudden;
I cannot give thy preparations
A longer time.
Put up your sword, and take 
Your Hang-mans tool again. Put up I say,
And call your duty back. Son I have plaid
My trials into danger, hear the reason.
Observing in thee haughtiness of spirit,
Forward to noble action, that was always
Attended with success, I feared ambition
Might tempt thy virtue, therefore ordered this
To prove its truth.
You cannot trifle me
Into new error. I have shaken off
That loose and vulgar out-side I was dressed in
By ignorance; but now I know my self
To be a Prince: It is I that have discovered
Ambition in thee, and thy practises;
To make thy daughter Duchess. But I play
Too much with Justice. Take thy punishment
For murder. 
It is not yet but in attempt.
Y' have saved my life. 
Why dost thou interpose?
Rash man, I doe command thee fetch him back,
And be his executioner. Art fixed?
Obey thy Prince with motion, or I'll turn
My rage on thee.
What madness hath possessed thee?
I'm like to have good subjects, I must beat them
Into obedience: think not on defence
For that's as vain as if with nothing armed
But empty air, thou met a Thunder-bolt.
A sword thus ordered by the hand of Majesty
Will make its way.
Traitor call back that breath, 
Which as it doth divide the circling ayre,
Poisons it more than fenns from whence the Sun
Exhales infectious vapours.
Dare resist
Thy Sovereigns Will and power?
Disloyal villain,
Thy words have made the cause inspire such valour
Into my hand and sword, such a just rage 
To punish thee—
It hath a point, I feel it;
My royal blood doth wast.
It is course and sordid.
I fail not yet, my spirits still have force
I think that reached you 
That reached you again.
The cause assures me victory.
It is enough,
W' are both proved mortal. 
Farewell dearest Master:
I dye thy loyal Champion. 
What's this horror
Presents it self? Is it real or illusive?
My Spurio, Notho, dead! let my soul flight
To meet yours in the peaceful shades of rest. 
Madam look up, suffer not your faint spirits
Thus to retire unto their inmost cells:
Let them dilate their vigour, and at once
Make all your senses useful. This sad accident
If well considered is not of such consequence,
That it should show how much our passions can
Out doe our reason.
Give me more fresh ayre,
That I may draw it freely in to increase
My sighs; not to preserve the breath that keeps
The different parts united. What sad influence
Ordered this Tragic action? or what motives
Could teach them to direct it to this end?
This most unnatural end—
Good Madam cease
Your exclamations; this may be applied
To better use from a consideration.
Your honour is secured, your shame prevented:
It was a mercy in high providence
Would you receive it so.
How weak is counsel
To desperate frailty? it is not your Art can
Persuade me to a comfort, being lost
To all that should revive it. In these two
Were lodged such a proportion of
My living joys, in their cold earth remains
All my hopes dead and frozen, unto which
They whilst they lived gave life. If there were virtue
In tears to warm your numbed and bloodless limbs,
Into new life and motion, I would bath them
With a large flood: and when the springs were dry
Wish my self changed into a weeping marble
To be your monument.
Be not transported
Into such vain expressions.
Vain advise,
My griefs are like to Walls resisting Darts,
They'll beat thy counsels back to thy own danger.
Corvino you were surely false, and taught
The youths this way to ruin. One more sigh
Will crack my hearts weak cordage, and the vessel
Wanting its helps, yield to the only guidance
Of the distracted waves till it be swallowed.
I thought my patience could have met with cheerfulness,
Any cross storm of fortune; this hath kilt it.
Forgive me Heaven, translate my penitent
And reconciled soul to a better mansion
Then that she's lodged in now. Divide my heart
You two. Corvino bear my dying blessings
Unto Macario—Oh— 
Will you then dye?
And so prevent me? for I did not mean
You should survive them, though I ordered not
Their deaths; retain your senses yet a little.
Live but to hear me, and I will relate
All that my knowledge owns concerning it;
And the new policies that I have built
Upon these happy accidents; for hitherto
Fortune hath bin my Matchiaveile, and brought,
Events about I never practised for.
Fidelio and Cardente are removed:
One stood betwixt my high ends, and the other
Begot continual fear of a new danger
By her discovery. I shall be perfect now
In all things but revenge upon your scorn,
And the neglect of my deservings; will you not
Stay then to hear me? Farewell. 
What's this horror?
The Scene presents a Tragedy; our Guard.
Our mother dead, and our two friends made liveless
By one another? grief seal up mine eyes
With an eternal darkness.
Most unhappy 
Amanda, in the loss of all thy wishes;
We'll not be long divided, if my griefs
Meet not too stubborn and perverse resistance
From the soft heart I gave to thee.
Remove
The bodies decently, and then support me: 
My spirits faint. Corvino we would have
The best account you can of this sad business,
To which you cannot choose but have relation,
Considering the persons and the manner;
Speak your best knowledge.
I have now no language
But tears to be interpreted, and they
Are characters of inward sorrow only;
Cannot express more then their proper meaning,
And whence they take their form. Sir I am lost
To all my hopes of being, they being gone
On which it did depend, my sons; in whom
I had a lasting name, and should have lived
Unto succeeding times: now it will vanish
Like Clouds dissolved, to be forgotten.
Know you
What were the motives to their difference,
That fired such anger in them?
The remembrance
Of that calls up more grief. Your mother sir.
The inconsiderate youths interpreted
Her favours to be love, and rivalling
Each other in desire, their passions met
By fury, joined together, and begot
This sad effect: which when she understood,
And saw the dire events that had proceeded
From her so clear intentions through mistaking,
Compassion broke her heart. This sir is all
My sad soul knows.
I would it ne'er had bin,
Or I to know it.
Shortly I shall pay
Nature her last debt, for my weakened age
Cannot resist these killing sorrows long.
And my poor services desire your grief
Not to be deaf to one request; that is,
You'd take my daughter to your care, and be
A father to her: or—
We will respect her.
My information sir was truth. There is
More mystery to be unfolded yet;
Times daughter will appear, although she blush
To show her nakedness. 
Oh a Confessor.
Confess who it was that ordered this vile practise,
Or my just anger shall allay it self
With that infected blood thou hast, before
The poison works more.
It was Lord Corvino.
What's that?
She would have given poison to me,
Of which her self had tan before: but providence
Ordered it that my jealousy deferred it,
'Till it appeared to work on her with violence:
And so I was preserved.
But I am peppered;
There's something in my conscience.
Utter it,
Twill make thy peace with heaven; what is it Cardente?
Spurio, and Notho were your natural brothers,
Got by your father, on your mother sir.
In his first Duchess days she being barren.
I and Corvino had the secret carriage
Of all the business. He hath poisoned me.
I never shall love Philters more. 
Corvino,
Here's a discovery renders you so vile,
That new suspicions spring from it: Neither can we
Trust our own safety where a murderer
Sits near our favour. Tortures therefore shall
Force from you what they can.
Your Justice might
Be tempered with more mercy, and from reason.
Since the great secret is revealed which I
Kept guarded with my best resolves, as being
The Closet of your mothers honour, now
I will stand up and Justify my actions.
First for the death of your unlawful brothers
It was accidental, not by me determined.
And hath secured your state that might have suffered
A great disturbance by the knowledge of it:
Which by your Mothers and Cardentes death
Had found prevention being then restrained
Only to me. For you Fidelio,
You intercepted all my studied means
Unto my daughters honour. But intents
Proceeding not to act may challenge pardon.
What tortures then doe I deserve?
Just death.
That sentence kills me too. Melissa!
Take him away; provide for's execution.
This day Isle see it done; twill set more fairly.
Lust and ambition are two means of evils,
That practised by their owners make them devils.

SIr yet be gracious and hear them pray
That beg not for their own, but for your safety
And honour of your state which eclipse
In your long dark and melancholy life,
We want you at the helm.
Our duties bind us tell you tic unnatural
To bury your self alive, the people call
For their own King to govern, the'ile forget
To pray for you if you continue thus
A stranger to em
Or if not for them
Which every good king makes his care as being
A steward to provide them all earthly blessings,
Yet for the other part of you, our Mistress
That sleeps within your bosom, and not made
For such a conversation, return
And warm your thoughts again, about which all
Your servants like so many pictures gaze
At one another, but want motion, and take up
Room ith Chambers of your Court, like Arras
Have a compassion to our daughters sir
Kill not your hopes in their restraint
What cage
Can please the birds Created for sky freedom?
How can you see your eldest child Pommel•
Spend her best part of time with such a rude
And ignorant hind as the unbred Demotes?
A Lady of a high and active soul,
No more
Our duties bids us tell you this.
Hast thou forgotten
Philonax, or made a better gloss upon the Oracle?
Should we remain in Court and let our daughters
Be in the sight of the admiring world
Read that paper, and be not partial Philonax
Thy eldest Care shall from thy careful face
By princely mean be stolen and yet not lost
The younger shall with nature•es bliss embrace
An uncoch love, which nature hates most
Both these themselves unto two such shall wed
That at a Beer, as at a bar shall plead
Why isle thee a living man they have made dead,
In thine own seat a forralgne state shall sit
And ere that all these blows thy head shall sit
Thou with thy wife adultery shall commit.
Can blame me now? I should rejoice to see
My daughters happy mothers, but since their
Fate must be ripened with my blood, their pride
Rooted in my grave, and that untimely, tic
Wisdom to keep 'em vrigins. I me resolved
Your queen and Ladies
Vanish all discontent, Madam this place
Is empty of all royal entertainment
Your worth may Challenge, but since fate allows not
A Courtly life which best may answer your
High birth spirit, let your virtue guide you
To accept of what we tender,
This my Lord
Exceeds all merit here, it was the bliss
I aimd at to be acquainted with your goodness
I am your humble servant
Such a title
Would rather become me, call me so Lady
And stile me above Kings, while I write yours
If your grace
Could call him from this life you'd melt the hearts
Of your subjects into prayers for you
I thank your care but hes mexorable
Alas dear princess can you brooke these grove:
Has not a palace something more of pleasure?
This shall be so to me while tic n•y fathers,
I ha not seen a goodlier person, how
Came she admitted▪ 〈◊〉 gracious with the king
She has a charm to win from all the world
I have read the Amazons described so
Good my Lord.
These lips had he that robbed the dragon of
The golden Apples, but once seen he would
Ha wished to ha gatherd fruit here, and esteemed
The gain of one sweet kifse reward sufficient
For all his twelve hard labours
Sir your grace
Is pleasantly disposed to make my person
The subject of your mirth
And had those Creatures,
Book blinded men, that dream of other worlds
Tell of Elision blessings, know the joys
Are in your love they would have lost themselves
As I have done in speculation
You make me blush to hear you
Theres no action
Dares so affright your blood, to talk, why Lady
There be those men and women great and good
Have found no shame in telling of their loves
Nay in the acting
Give me leave to tell you
You are not modest if I understand you
A King give breath to such foul thoughts,
Your every action should be a starr
To guide your subjects, if you loose your piety
What wickedness have they not heence for
If the devotion of your service be
To such a friend as Lust (as what name else
Can it deserve) let those whose hearts are lost
In sin be tempted to dishonour, I
Abhor the thought, pardon me royal sir
I hope these are but trials, if I thought
There had been such a levity in men
Thus to provoke you
Smooth thy brow again
Or I shall need no other punishment
Theres death too much in that; Philocle•
That name sounds all my comfort, and I must
Despair to tell her so, I was to blame
To be so peremptory, would I were again;
To shape my answer
Noble Lady.
Sir
That smile has put me out, oh look thus ever
I was studying a new complement to beg
Thy excuse
If you brought no offence there needs none sir
I must suppose your love, love is noble chaste
You will find that hereafter, oh Zelmane.
Would thou could tell the meaning of my sighs
You can express them.
Not I
Choose another to speak them for you
And yet I want an or at or to tell you
What I would say, how ere I seem
Dost bless me
Theres something wants a tongue, but for your passions
I should not think they would carry so much discord
To any virgin care delivered by a woman
There is a Way to meet a gentle audience.
At least not harsh disdain, did your fair daughter
Philo•lea the volume of all sweetness
Plead half your suit, although it borderd on
Something not altogether just, her tongue
Might perchance guide it, but I am confident
Your ends are noble
Theres a lightening yet
Of comsort, happiest Lady I will study.
How to be worthy of this grace,
You are expected at the pastorals
We take our leaves my Lord again beseeching
Your pardon for our boldness to reduce you
To your own sphere of greatness
Doe you continue
Faithful to your employments, and deserve of us
And of your Country; come Zelmane
There are some sports which you must grace
I waite a servant to your commands
Come sweet Zelmane
Come sweetest of thy sex
Tic pity nature.
Made thee not a man, this complement
Would then become you
Mopsa you are to coy in my opinion
Tho I confess your beauty may deserve
As much as any; Dorus tho he be
Your fathers servant, hoe's a handsome shepherd
And not to be despised.
Despised, cannot a virgin love a young man I pray but she
must despise him.
You should then with some smiles encourage him.
Smoyles, let me alone to smoile, and something else
when we are alone; if I thought he did not love me, I know
What I know
Alas poor man he cannot sleep for you he says,
Nay and I were a bed with him he should not sleep
so long as his eyes were open, I'd watch him for that, but doe
you think my father would let us couple in matrimony as they
say, he has never a son but I and I am his only daughter.
Make no scruple of that, if you can find in your heart to
love him, in the name of •upped go together, for ought I perceive
your father holds a good opinion of him, marry I know not how
your mother is inclined
Whoop my mothers a scold
Here is your sweet heart▪
Look you make much of him, poor Gentleman
How love is aby to transport, who could
Expect so rich a guest in that poor dwelling
Oh how ere the winds compel him, or the stream
Into whose troubled waves he has launched forth
This way he steers his love, yet I seem ignorant.
My dearest Mopsa
Dear; I never cost you anything
I know not
At what expense of fortunes were I able
I should be willing to make purchase of you
But I'm sure you have already cost my heart
And yet I find yours made of Marble
Which neither pity nor my prayers can soften,
Sweet Madam plead for me, one gracious word
From you would make me happy, let one beam
Shoot fro• your eye, and it will strike a spring
Into that frozen piece of earth, and make it
A bower for love to spo•• in, it is in you
To unarme her noble heart, there's too much steel
And gentle love in vain attempts to fasten
The softer blows.
Mopsa take heed, your Shepherd can speak well
And if he be honest Menalcus brother
And heir, I know no reason why you should
Think scorn of him.
But for all his quaint speeches Isle keep my honesty
close enough I warrant you
Why should you be so cruel, nature made
Your face the only object of mans wonder
Does my face look like a flapiack?
Is it possible there can be a soul so hard
So unrelenting dwell in that fair body?
If you knew the truth of my affection and with what
Religion it looks upon your virtues.
'T would teach your eye compassion, gracious princess
Let the distressed Dorus gain this mercy
From you that with the blessedness of your
White hand reaching to Mopsa this poor toy
Which late I found my love may cherish hope
At last to be accepted
Oh fine what's that Madam?
You must yet be a little coy to receive it
I wonot have it, and he wou•d give it me
A rich Jewel the figure of a Crabfish
The true emblem of my loves pace which looks another way
To that it moves, she cannot but distinguish
Whether I would direct my heart, her eyes
Are fixed upon it, and my poor soul could here
Star-gaze for ever
By force not choice—all his desire is Mopsa
Tow in your grace by my presenting it
Isle take it for your sake, I wonot thank him
She has no apprehension, with what
A calm and careless temper does she give it
Madam Pamela, oh are you there, tic well
Whats the matter?
I me out of breath, let me walk my self a little
What haste does tire you?
Tire me, I am no woman, keep your tires to your self
Nor am I Pericles prince of Tyre.
I doe believe it, heaven make you an honest subject,
For a wise one, I despair to see you.
Am I the subject of your talk? But I give you leave to
use your tongue, you're a woman, Dorus what make you ideling
here? is the field dunged as I gave Directions, and the Calfe with
the white face brought home to execution?
I was careful in my duty.
Believe me governor there is much hope of your servant,
I, governor becomes you, I like it well when you carry
an M under your girdle, our govern, he will do pretty well in
time, when I have taught him the manners of the Cart, he begins
whistle in tune already, and can curry favour with the horses, but
now I remember my self I forgot what I came hither for,
oh dee hear tic the king your fathers pleasure and mine, that you
make haste to the lodge.
Isle attend
There will be gambols to please my Lady Salamandor.
Zelmane you would say.
I care not what you say, but if you mean to hear the
Dances and see the fine songs you must make haste; Dorus you
shall have leave to shake your heals, look you be mannerly, and
show a clean calf, Mopsa whats that you ha got there?
A fine thing our man Dorus game, he says tic a fish
Tic a Codds head first not, much came how you by this
Following the plow I found it.
Would all my acres were sown with such, vmh doors he
throw his stones at thee already, well set forward, if thou die
before me Dorus Isle make some body mine heir; if I out
live thee, I wonot say what legacy I mean to bestow upon
•hee, Continue thy duty Dorus and follow me with a re∣verence.
Ladies our revels wants the state and glory
With which the Court delights might charm your senses
Our scene is natural but interpret fairly it was meant
A cure for times sick feathers, and your mirth,
Virtue will prompt you to
Accept what was intended for your service
Yet it is within my wishes to salute you
With other testimony of your welcome.
I kiss your white hand,
Every touch conveies a fierce spirit through my blood
I shall betray my suffering, and through my eyes
Let out my heart, Philoclea sit
Wilt please you rest your self?
Dwell here for ever
I am now but one degree from heaven,
Since you imagine you are so near, it is no sin
I hope to entreat you stay with us a little, I would
Wish tho to make you blessed with too hasty a remove▪
You are all goodness, oh that I durst but give
Some liberty to my imprisoned thoughts
Philoclea you hinder the fair stranger.
Pardon me that am her trouble rather
She should want virtue to call you so, but they begin
Demotes is the steward for this days mirth I see.
And means to bring in the first course.
Cupped is blind some say but there are lies
Abroad, for Cupped never wanted eyes
He is a Deity with bow and arrow
And he can pierce with it the very marrow
And never hurt the bones, first not a wonder.
That flaming Ice should cut mans heart in sunder,
Behold the Dandiprat that liv'dat Court.
But is come hither to make country sport
A woody god; but yet a very Coult
Among the maids who feel his furious bolt.
Now Cupped speak thy self or while they play
Sing if you please I haven't more to say.
Cupped. Tell me tidings of my mother.
Shepherds, and be Cupids brother
Down from heaven we came together
With swans speed came she not hither?
But what Lady have I spied.
Just so was my mother eyed
Such her smiles wherein I dwelt
In those lips have I been felt
Those the pillows of her breast
Which gave Cupped so much rest.
It is she it is she make holiday
Shepherds Carroll Dance and play
It is Venus it can be no other
Cupped now has found his mother
This was your poetry, Zelmane
You are beholding to him, he would make
You another I see,
Gynecia
I am silent—Philoclea is too near
I am not well'oth sudden, break off your mirth
What ails Gynecia?
My heart is sick
Forbid it heaven
Retire, come my Zelmane
I attend
Look to your charge Demotes
I have a precious time; will you pace it governor?
Trot, amble or gallop Isle run in your hand Lady.
Come Dorus
Your humble servant
Thou art cruel.
To an innocent bosom love, there is no way
Within thy power to save me, oh Philoclea
Where shall I cool my heart, oh if there be
One shaft can kill, good Cupped aim at me.
I warrant you Madam they shall have good luck if they
whisper together in my hearing,
Where is Zelmane?
In some of the Arbours, she took a Lute abroad with her
but I left Philoclea with her father
Prithee be careful and watch them well good Miso
They shano't scope me, Isle watch their waters narrow∣lie
I warrant you.
I see through his disguise it is so, and love
Hath put this shape on him for Philoclea,
In what a miserable flame I burn!
Zelmane thou hast stolen.
My virtue from me, I haven't power to think
A harmless thought, ha Musique,
From whence breathes that sound? it is Zelmane.
What miserable accident brought her?
Zelmane
Madam I hope you'll pardon
The trespass of a rude hand and voice, I meant not
This for your curious care
It was harmony
It was no light air I'm sure
Indeed it carried something me thought
Of sorrows descant, I heard love i'nt too
Who is so happy to deserve a memory
But in your sigh, come whoe's your servant?
I have no servant.
Nay then I see you can dissemble, my husband
Madam I hope
Nay I am so far from Jealousy I should not
Be angry to see you both a bed together
How Madam
Why I can love you too, come thou shall it be my bed-fellow
I am not worthy
Believe me I could take as much delight
In thy embraces as my husbands, why
Are we so nice to one another, I
Am a woman, are not you so too?
Why should we not be bold then, I have a mind
To call thee Mistress, Yes and Isle disguise.
My self in some quaint shape to court thy love:
Disguise
Nay do not blush: thou shalt be a man
Your discourse appears.
Strange to me Madam.
As you would to me
And yet you may as easily perceive
Gynecias mindas I distinguish you
Through all your clouds, Cupped doth dictate rarely.
To those that come to school to him, instruct
With handsome shadows to deceive the eye
But cannot change my substance, I have a sense
Can look beyond the superficial bark
Come you're transparen't
Madam what dee mean?
What means Zelmane to be igonrant
When a Queen pleads for love, my heart will not
Allow more circumstance; doe not question
How you became reveled, but pity her
Whose bosom is tormented with those fires
Thy smiles the only greater flame can quench.
Pray heaven, you have your perfect senses.
Then I must be plainer, and be witness love
I am compelled, be witness modesty,
I now must blush for thee more then my self,
A man, and be so cruel to a Lady
Zelmane either give consent I shall
be welcome to thee, or I vow by heaven
To tell Basilius what thou art, I have
Patience to let him court thee as a woman
But when he see's his love abuse his privacy
And daughters so dishonoured had thou a thousand
Lives they were all forfeited by this
So desperate in trusion, think uppon't
A woman I have lost thee, wheither will
Thetempest of my fate enforce my tongue
Yet be thou kind Zelmane if thou takst
A glory in my suffering, Philoclea
Does that name startle you? Philoclea
My rival now
Your rival
Come I am familiar with every thought
Your dear saint shall repent it, for this hand
Shall take again the unlucky life I gave her:
Turn not Gynecia fury
I am lost
In the same minute I am found, I prithee
Doe not forsake me heart, I never had
More use of thee, great Queen can you forgive?
And ask thy pardon, but believe me t'was
Your strangeness did compel me to this language
I never thought that pity of another
Could be a reason to betray my self
But you have thoroughly charmed me, and I must
Deliver up my thoughts, the truth is Madam
I am a man, and if you dare believe me
A prince, I must confess beside Gynecia
Since I came heither I have had some sprinckling of
I know not what affection to Philoclea
For how could I imagine such a blessedness
From you, but if you mock not
Joys reward your pity
Oh pardon the over chardg'd Gynecia
Whose error may be yet made more excusable
By the immortal name of love
This grace is worth more then Zelmane, and yet I
Have nothing but my self to give you for it
A small but free gift, bestow me as you please
My soul is narrow to receive this wide blessing.
But me must be wise
It were not safe to be observe,'d stand I
Discovered to none else?
To none
Then know
I want no apprehension of what
True lovers would desire, but your honour is
My own, if shortly to secure 'em both
You let me study an opportunity
Isle bring your wishes home, and bless my stars
That pointed me the glorious fate, we are
Already interrupted
Doe this my dear Philoclea, and leave
My cares to thee, Isle call Gynecia
Away, and leave you both together, how
Fairs the best Zelmane?
Still your servant
Gynecia.
I cannot rule my eyes they will betray
My cunning to Gynecia if she go not
Hence quickly
How is it with my virtuous Amazon?
Philoclea
Let her alone, they have some business sweet
What business can they have together?
Why art thou troubled, thou would be jealous
Of me I see, were I in private with her,
Come let 'em alone a while
Stay you and spare not I would employ Philoclea
You shall obey me now, I prithee walk
My father sweet Zelmane to whose command
I owe my life
First let me give my life
Up to these lips, and take a new one from
This kiss, oh dear Philoclea contain
All other breath I know thy fathers mind
Already, and must now beseech thy patience
To a short story which I must deliver
Or die before thee, if it be within
My destiny to be condemned by you
At least know whom you sentence; I am
What? I fear not well
Cannot your eyes discover me, have I a shroud
To hide me from Philoclea? did the kiss
I gave thee last convey no secret to thee?
There was a spirit in my lip assured me.
To save the tedious trouble of my language.
I heard it whisper something, did it not?
I would be fraine undone
Good heaven forbid
You wonot understand me yet Philoclea
Then Isle undo my self, I am not what
I seem Zelmane; but—
What?
A thing not worth the name, if you frown on me, a man
A man, good heaven•
I have told you all the worst
If it be no offence to name a prince
Whose memory your own breath oft hath sweetened
I dare be called Pyroclos of Macedon
Transformed by loving your fair self to this
Feminine shape, if now I have not sinned
Above forgiveness.
Oh Philoclea
Come not too near I charge you; I would chide.
But dare not, would you had not told me this
Indeed you were to blame, I must not hear you
Excuse your self
She must not leave me thus
But she returns
I have lost my self already,
And love is but a blind guide to direct
My virgin steps, I fine would reply something
But feel a trembling in my voice, Zelmane
My father, what account shall I give him
I have said nothing he commanded
She smiles
My Lord I see you can use the advantage
And I did arm you against my self; I did not
Think when I advised you make Philoclea
Your advocate, she could so much have won
Upon me, but my counsel has betrayed me,
Pray think me not immodest, if my words
Doe fall too rudely from me, your fair daughter
Whose tongue would lay a charm upon the gods,
Hath gained all this.
The gods reward her for it
Was this his plot?
A thousand blessings overtake my child
But not a word, not a word Philoclea
To thy mother
I have learnt my duty sir
Beshrew your haste
Remove, convey thy self away dear girl, Isle follow
My heart is full, and tho my tongue denies
Him farewell, he may read it in my eye.
I knew thou could not choose at last but give
My heart an audience; I am not my self
With the imagination
Of what?
Of any thing; come I allow thee modest, it is not
fit we should say our pleasures, sweet but act them
You are to violent my Lord, I shall
Repent my freedom, if you give no limit
To your desires, if you doe love your servant,
Husband your flame that it may last
It shall
Pardon me dear Zelmane, I have a stock
Of blood, tho you may think it could is high
And active as the veins of promising youth
I wear this snow but a disguise
Poor winter,
My hairs are black at root, and shall grow up
Fair as the Ebony and curl themselves
Into a thousand pretty caves for love
It self to sit that best delights in darkness
This will be strange.
It is you that work these miracles
Upon Basilius, as I came heither
I felt a score of years drop off, which hung
Upon my locks
A score of hairs you mean: tic molting time
Contain your self a while, you have
A jealous queen, and yet it goes against my Conscience
To wrong so sweet a Lady, pray my Lord
Think better ont
This Does inflame me more
Be not so cruel to remember her
Thou must preserve my life.
Well I ha thought a way
Shall perfect all without suspicion
There is a cave hard by which nature made
Intending well to lovers, thither will I
With licence of your grace pretending
To exercise a few days some devotions
We Amazons have obligation to
At some convenient hour.
May I come to thee
Isle give you notice in some evening
Zelmane now thou dostravish me
You may with ease secure all at the lodge
Most excellent
I imagine sir the rest but doe not come till I desire you
Be not tedious then, I will prepare all this
I hope you doe not
Conclude me impudent that I incline
To doe this for you, by my hopes of a blessed
Eternity nor love nor lust ere tempted
My thoughts to yield thus much to any man
Be careful of my honour.
Oh divine Zelmane keep my soul.
Philoclea mine
Oh my dear Pyrocles
How first dear Cozen
Never till now could you salute me happy
The gods have been propitious
Will she know thee yet?
There's nothing wants to make me perfect blessed
But to hear thee pronounce thy love as fortunate
The envious clouds which interpose themselves
Like a dark Curtain ore Pamelas face.
Are drawn away and I enjoy her smile
She does believe my proofs, sweetly excusing
Her long neglect, and promises as much
As I dare ask: sheel' trust me with her person
I want but opportunity to deceive
Our waking Dragons;—and in good time Demotes.
Away you shall know all my fate hereafter,
I joy in thy success, pray thou for mine.
Where is this rascal Dorus
Whether were I best to tell the King ont first or seek out
Demotes, he will never be able to spend it, there may be gold
Enough to purchase half Arcadia
Vmh, what's that?
Isle seek him out at all adventures; oh s•r, pray is this
Gold—and this and this?
Ha gold, yes very good gold, where had it
You shall hear more hereafter
Dorus, honest Dorus, put on thy hat, where where, had it
Did you never hear of one Aristomines?
He was banished Arcadia
Was he rich
Infinite rich, so rich
It is so, belike he there had all his treasure
What treasure, where i'st honest Dorus tell me
You are my Master and may be my Father
My son Dorus, Mopsa is thine, and she were made of
as pure gold as this, thou should touch her, and melt her
Well I see it was ordained to make you rich
In duty Isle discover it, and yet—
Out with it good Dorus
Well—sitting beneath an oak that shall be nameless
I chanced to turn up some turf with my mole-spade
With thy mole spade, what then
I saw a yellow brightness peeping out of the ground, which
when I came to examine I pr•v'd this mettle, I this was the first,
you're sure it is gold, you shall pardon me for the rest but if these
will do you any pleasure, or twenty more
Nay good honest Dorus proceed.
Why the truth is I suspect where a great treasure has been
Long buried, these it seems were scattered when the rest
Went to the pit-hole.
But where is this place good Dorus? thou hast no more
About thee
No but if you please to furnish me with tools Isle try
The bottom; I digd till I came to a stone, whose inscription
Promised something worth a mans labour
Did it sound
Melodiously a golden tune
Where, where, thou moist tell me thou know I
Am secret
For Mopsa sake I will reveal't, you know▪
The oak where you first met me
Ha very well
On the right side of that same spreading tree
Lies all this riches
As you are honest
As I hope to be dear Mopsa's husba•d, Isle get strong tools
And bring you better proof
Stay Dorus stay, let me see
As I intend to be your father Dorus
And so in Mopsas name make you my heir
Of all my wealth, good Dorus I am yet
Till things and things be done your Master Dorus
Beside that ground is mine, the Oak is mine
Where under lies this treasure, I am Lord
Lord of the soil my Dorus, of the soil
I am content to be a ground for you
To build to hopes on Dorus, but my ground
No man shall dig or build on but my self
On such as this, be there a mine
Of Coin or vncoyne mettle it is mine
All may be yours another day my Dorus.
I know my duty sir and cannot think
The gods had ere a lotted my free mind
To serve you but for some strange end
In this thou show it, keep all close, not a word
Dorus, I take no leave be careful my good Dorus of my
young Madam, it is a charge I turn over to thee, over look her
well.
I mean to doe it doubly
How, ha you a duble meaning?
I mean with double care
Honest Dorus it is the last service I shall put thee to
I hope so to
Now to the Oak my golden land mark
Load a horse with tools sir
Mattocks and shovels
Hooks and ladders.
Spade and Pickaxes
Ropes and daggers; you'll have no help
No no, a mans own toil
Sweeter the profit makes in his own soil.
Go thy ways for the Lord a'th soil
Theres one block out a'th way the golden fly,
Has caught this trout, my jealous Mistress I
Hope she ore heard not
Oh that my ears had been long enough to have heard
some of there precious Knavery
It were but charity to tell her on it, little does my Mistress
Think what a flesh fly my Master is,
What says the Knave
Tho she be a little stricken in years she is handsome enough
For as good a man as Demotes, and he to run neighing
A this fashion after a blowse, and then put me to make excuse
For him, it is not right.
Oh fidious Rascal, I thought there was some roguery,
Dorus as thou come of a woman tell me
What forsooth
Oh naughty man to use an honost woman the wrong way
thus, have I been married so many years, and carried my self
like his lawful wife uprising and down lying as they say, so
even and jump with his desires to be thus handled, but Isle be
revenged it shall fall heavy upon his head for this I warrant him,
nay I did always suspect him for a co•t
What mean you forsooth,
Come I ouer-heard somewhat to my grief, and therefore
leave your bogling and your trim tram tricks you must not flap
me oath mouth with flooring and with flames whilst he
Claps up another betwixt the—a ha mistress mistress but you
say you overheard, and therefore if you know whether he is gone
you may come two hours hence time enough to prevent the
blow.
If thou look to have my daughter with, mark what I
say
With fathers mark and mothers mark, and every mark
about her
If you conceal any thing in this case, thou know no case
of her, nay tho thy teeth water out the liquor of thy life, thou
should not get a bit, the worst bit of her.
Be more charitable
Or if thou chance to get her against my will isle teach her
a trick of the mother shall make thee curse her and all the brood
she came one,
What is Charity to me, I know you heard him name her.
Charity.
I will discharge my conscience and yet if you over∣heard
us without my telling, you know where hee appointed
to meet her this evening at Mantinea at her fathers in Ondemi∣on
street,
Ondemion street?
I doe not betray him now if you provide so happily to
take em at it mistress at it.
I at it, how I itch to be at it
Saddle your mare.
They shall not scope with half an eye betwixt them.
I have given her the bells and she will fly to the de∣will
—here comes the tother I ha given her physic already fit
for her constitution and now it works.
How comes it Mopsa that you are so taken
So lifted up with high conceit?
Who I
Yes Mapsa you, dee think I cannot Judge
By outward gestures and your looks what joy
Doth inwardly possess you
Who me
Yes you again, and it were not over boldness
To request some knowledge of the cause
Rest you content; you are a Princess borne I might
have been so to, some body may be a Queen before you, make
what you can of that
Oh fate how's this
There is a tree, and there is things worth wishing, and
some may wish and wishes may be had make what you can of
that too
To my wish it works
But Mopsa may I not beseech a word
That may be to my understanding
You may know more hereafter, but till then I must pre∣sum
upon your Princely patience to keep your Chamber, it is
now my reign and doe not dare to follow
Not I, when you are drawn up to majesty
I can but wish you graciously would then
Remember the obedience of your handmaid
That first submits her self to your Command.
I faith I will Pamela, and reward it, go in sweet Lady,
on my Royal word I will,
She has spied me
Happy Dorus
What will my Mopsa say when she has climbed
The tree of happiness?
I I the tree, when I climb that tree, honey Dorus tell me
it over again, my dear bird what did Iupiter to Apollo.
Upon some falling out I told you Jupiter threw Apollo
out of heaven and his deity taken away he was fine to live upon
the earth and keep Admetas Cattle, in the time of his service
being sent to fetch abreede of beasts out of Arcadia, in this very
desert he grew faint and weary; and would needs rest himself
in the boughs of an Ashen tree.
The tree we wot of; on sweet bird
Apollo in that tree calling to mind his quarrel with
Iupiter became very sorrowful, and pitifully complaining to
his father, asking him mercy for having offended him was from
that tree received into his golden sphere, and made a god again
Oh brave
Having the perfect nature of a god
Never to be ungrateful he then granted
A double life to Admetas, and because
That tree was chapel of his happy prayers
To it he gave this quality
Now it comes
That whosoever sat down in that tree
In like estate and sort as he did then
Oh now now now.
Should forthwith have there their wish
Oh the tree, the tree, the tree
The king understood thus much by Oracle; and tried
himself but being neither herdsman as then Apollo was, nor of
the race which is necessary, delivered this secret to your father
but made him swear to wish by his direction; for his own been∣fit
Demotes told it me, and is now gon to furnish himself with
a scarlet Cloak for in that he must be muffled just as Apollo was,
I might now prevent'em all and be king my self, but what have
I to wish more then the love of Mopsa which since without
more charming force you yield me; Isle fit you with a cloak and
then wish what you will your self
Isle be Queen or Apollo shall never look me in the face
again, quickly sweet Dorus, come muffle me I long to be Queen,
and my father shall ask me blessing.
COme my masters let us be resolute, is there any man
That will justify himself to be sober amongst us?
No hang sobriety
We must be valiant, the King I say again has left us, and since
He scorns our company for my part I scorn to be his subject
I I scorn subjects, Isle be an Emperor
It is time to look into the government, none but Gentle∣men
are of his Counsel, I see no reason since the Country is ours
but we should have a stroke in the state.
That was bravely spoke my bully, stroke, heby Mars his
Gauntlet spoke like a soldier, I doe not like the Carriage of the
secret Counsels
Nor I nor any body
Take heed my Masters
Lets hear Thumb the Miller
We met together to drink in honour of the Kings birth∣day
and tho we have tickled the Cannikins, let vs be merry and
wise that's my opinion, no treason, the King is an honest Gentle∣man,
and so is the Queen.
Very wisely spoken.
But shall be governed by Philonax':
Who knows but he has made away the King
Made away the King, who honest Basilius, ask the King
who has made him away, by this hand if I thought they had made
him away I would make some body away, tho I hanged fort,
but neighbours for my own part I will join with you in any
thing that is honourable, dee mark honourable; but I say still I
am clear of opinion it is not a miss to be merry and wise
Gentlemen, my name's Thumb,
I Tom
And Isle be a your side howsoever
A great spirit
Shall I speak for you
I I agreed you shall be Captain
Why then let me alone; I will know a reason why hee
has left the government without our consents to depose him, it is
wisely spoken mybrave men 'oth common-wealth, we will have
other laws and the old shall be executed
I I hang the old ones
It is a discredit for any subjects as we are to have a King as
if we were not able to govern our selves
Stroke up thy forehead thou were borne to be a statesman,
Be ruled by me and weel have no justice in Arcadia
How
No justice, why should we loose our liberties, and being
free men, upon any occasion suffer our selves to be bound over
Gentlemen Citizens it were very good you would take
into your consideration the statute against drunkenness
It shall be lawful for any man to be drunk without
forfeiting or paying anything to the poor
Very good, every man drink away his estate, and then
charity begins at home,
No man shall marry
That's worse then the statute against two wives
For every woman shall be common
Every woman common, what shall we doe withal the
proper women in Arcadia
They shall be common too
Oh'rare, and what shall we doe withal the prisons
Set'em a fire twill warm the City when there is cold
doings
What with the prisoners
Put'em in possession of their creditors lands, they are the
only men fit for authority; for no men are used worst, and they
will know the better to domineer, nay weel have admirable
laws, but who shall be this Ambassador to the King
Me me choose me Captain,
Choose you Captain, Haberdasher of small wares, choose
you a Capon, Isle be the Ambassador, ever while you live let a
bold man be ambassador, and one that has a brain, I will not be
meals mouthed.
Well said Miller
And because we will be wise
I I be merry and wise, ever while you live be sober and
discreet.
Say weattend here to do our duties
Duties oh base
Say so we must, heel not come forth else
What if I could his highness there was a dance to be pre∣scented
we are furnished with our noise still
I I, I doe love this noise withal my heart
Excellent, get you behind the trees with your instruments,
and tune 'em ready, the new frisk we danced at Enispies to day
will serve rarely as the Prologue, away; but Captain what shall
we doe with the Kings daughters
Isle have one
And Isle ha the tother our Captain shall ha the Queen
And what shall we have.
Thereare Ladies about the Court will content you
I will have both the Kings daughters, and he that speaks
against it—
Thumb valiant Thumb, all spirit no mutiny no mutiny
all of a faction together by the ears for a piece of venison
I will have both the Kings daughters or else I shall not
be satisfied.
First let vs know the Kings resolution, and if we like not
our conditions, the hares a foot; and every man take what course
he please in my Lords Park
But stay the King vmh
Speak Captain
If it please your Majesty, what was it resolved upon
Hes out, let me come to him, prithee doe thou tell him
thy mind, that delicome wench has made my teeth water
And drowned thy tongue, a Company of bashful shrimps;
if I but open my mouth, I say no more
King, by your leave; which is the King, my eyes twinckle,
we have been playing the good fellows to celebrate your
majestic birth day, will your grace see a song
A dance
Or a dance, alls one, our seete are in tune, strike up behind
the tree, you are the King and I am the Miller, ther's all the
difference, sweet Ladies my name is Thumb
This is rudeness
Pardon their simplicity
Isle have that wench she looks like Hercules,
Omnes, Stand
We have intorrogations points to put to you
Treason, treason,
Barborous Villains
Where is Philoclea
Here art thou not hurt Zelmane.
My soul at every stroke made against thee
Was leaving my palebody
Dear Madam are you safe
I think I ha peppered some of 'em, Philonax it was not
amiss you came, but Zelmane and I should have made a shift
You alone my Lord, were an army against such reeling
valours, I did not think you could ha bestirred your self
so well
And I were in an other place alone with thee I could best•
my self better
I would you would consider yet to quit
This dangerous kind of life
Had not the valiant Amazon it seems, defenced your person
Ere the troops arrived, it might have proved too fatal
He plaide the man indeed, the King is troubled
And thinks me Jealous of him, lass old man
No more
Waite upon our Queen and daughter, weel follow
I am wounded
How
By thee Zelmane
I see your passions are the same and I
This might resolve to waite for you in the Cave
If you when your Gynecia is a bed
And fast a sleep, (be sure of that) will please
To put your self to a short travel, I
Shall not express your welcome, but
Dear as my soul I apprehend my comfort
One kiss in earnest of the million
Thou shalt receive, but carry it close Zelmane
This is the Tree
Oh let me kiss it toes
Best loose no time
Hail upon hail sweet tree, Crown thee and all thy
wishes, Oh Dorus up women Dorus, up women, up women,
up women Dorus, teach me to climb the right way prithee
You must be muffled in the cloak, so now remember
your instructions, make first your invocation to Apollo as I told
you, which being done, employ your mind withal devotion to
his deity, until you hear a voice call three times on you by your
name, tho you should think your father mother Pamela or my
self talk to you answer not they are spirits that would delude.
Under three Mopsas Isle not talk to 'em, Isle not be consent
Hold there and youl' be happy
Isle ask a king to my hus•and, and thou shalt be he
Your invocation.
Into the great ears of Apollo
Now let my invocation hollow
Oh thou that lightest all the day
For some to work and some to play
By owl light now
Incline a gracious ear to me
Thus▪ muffled in thy wishing 〈◊〉
Singing whoop whoop who••
And pardon this my subtlety
That I deceive the posers by
I in this bough
Doe use the accentes of that foul
Because I would be thought an Owl
With whoop whoop who
She has done her invocation
Can she not hear us
She shall hear us, but I have taken order with her eyes
and understanding too, sheel not believe us, thou lovely bird
Madge howlet
That's a spirit in the voice of Dorus, but Isle not answer.
See Dorus and Pamela both are here
Whilst old Demotes Miso, and their dear
Daughter are stragled forth, they both together
Are taking now their flight, and who knows whether
This is too plain
Oh cunning Devils, but Isle not hear nor speak a syllable
If thou can find a tongue to tell Demotes,
Make known unto his wisdom he is gulled
Take courage Madam the way lies fair before us
And abarque already prepared cries come a bored
Farewell Howlet
Whoop whoop whooe—Hey I hear another singing
spirit in my fathers voice, be it Apollo himself, under three
Mopsas Isle not speak
This is the tree, and here the earth is broken
The certain sign left by my trusty Dorus
The mouth of the rich treasure I salute thee
And kiss the hole from whence shall come my gold
Which being done blithly to work I fall
My hand is in the moone-shine, and up goes all
Whoop whoop, whooe
What's that; an Owl, good Mis••is Margerie I am busy
Art thou poor and would thou be
advanced by wealth to Dignity
doe not think it then unmeet
to stoop with hands beneath thy feet
It is not with hand over head to be found
no •o thou must stoop
though thou holdst
up thy poop
and grable for it in ground
Ha what's this, my hand is in the Honey pot I think, vmh vmh
I doe not like the softness, I did groape for harder stuff, if
this be gold it is liquid, and yet too thick to be potable as they
say, it has a kind of weft me thinks if I have not lost a sense
upon the sudden, I smell, call you this gold finding
I have an extreme list now so I have saving your pre∣sense,
devil would restore your sense
What's this, a written parchment this may be the inven∣tory
of all the treasure.
Who hath his hire hath well his labour placed
Earth thou did seek, and store of earth thou hast
Howe's this
Whoop whoop whooe
As sure as this is my own nose, I am stinkingly abused
Ha ha ha,
Can Madge Owlets laugh, that laugh was like my
Daughter Mopsa
There's one time, again again sweet Apollo
It is her voice what makes she there, now the dread
vengeance of my dear fatherly curse, light over th'wart thee
thou aukeward helding Mopsa
There's two times, Mopsa once more and it is Apollo
Will you not answer in the Devils name Mopsa I say, oh
are you come
Yes yes divine Apollo
Isle unhoode ye wheres Pamela
Thank your Deity
Speak now and tell me
Answer my wishes as 'thou art Phebus, as thou art
Apollo tho in the likeness of the Clown my father,
grant me my wishes first, I ask a King to be my husband.
What talk thou of a King; the King will hang thy
father if Pamela be gon
Let him be hanged I care not, but let Dorus be a King,
and let him be my husband good Apollo
Shoe's stark staring mad, hast thou forgot thy father,
where is thy wit
I doe not ask for wit, I tell thee, let me have a sufficient
husband and let him be a King
Thou shall it have thy bellifull of husbands
Oh that, that, that
Isle at you both thou ribald villain and thou harlot
Miso my spouse fallen mad too
Thou wot not beat thy mother
Oh me
I defy her and thee and thou be not Apollo,
Oh who has gulled us all, dear Miso, tender Mopsa
hear me, before I open my mouth, art not thou Miso, and
thou my daughter Mopsa, oh we are all undone we are all
undone
Are not you god Apollo
No as ever I hope to see him or any of his fellows
in the face again, I am mortal Demotes and I think thy fa∣there,
I am sure I am by thy mothers side, where is Pamela all this
while, whose at home.
As sure as you are my father and you my mother, theres
No body at home
Shoe's gon, shoe's gon
Dorus and Pamela, or two feends with their voices
pastby whilst
I was in Apollos tree
Apollos tree
Cast off your wonder I am not such an ass, but I perceive
We are gulled
So Devil Dorus told me
Oh me they are gon, was this your care
Nay then where was your own.
Fall not at odds bout that, but go with me
And help me to scope the gallow tree.
Did I not counterfeit an infirmity
Rarely, how love will prompt his votary
The King suspects not what we purpose
Las poor man, how careful he seemed of my health
And councilled me to bed
I smiled to see it
So soon as he is a sleep expect me
Stay, oath sudden I ha thought upon a way
Blessed blessed minute.
What's the device
You shan'ot go to bed
Not I
God Genius
I will not trust our work to fortune if
You should want cunning in your passions
Or he should wake unhappily and find
You absent, all were lost, to prevent this
You shall not come to me if there be danger
It is fit I be exposed Isle take your place
And disarray me for Basilius bed.
De'e mark, muffled up for your supposed
Distemper, let me alone to counterfeit
Dullness, and when his senses are chained up
In sleep, I will come down toth cave to you
But take my mantle if any of Demotes
People meet you
I will visit bu• my Closet
And follow thy instructions,
If there be any stars are kind to love
This night shoot forth your golden heads, be thou
Bright moon propitious; on all eyes that would
Betray our flight, cast out a fullen mist
And hide thy silver crescent in a cloud,
But to our passage be a gentle goddess
And borrow of thy brother yet more light
The day may spare it, Musidorus is
Embarked already with his Mistress,
If I obtain Philocleas consent
Zelmane now I am prepared
Haste to the Cave, expect,
Your servants visit
And my happiness
How rudely vice becomes us, here's a Lady
Whom never fame yet blemished, now the example
Of Cupids tyranny, love transforms us all
And fools our understandings, I pity her▪
Now are Basilius thoughts in motion
And hurry him to the same licentiousness.
There is warm snow I see, he delays time.
In hope to find his Queen asleep, whose place
I must assume for once, love dwells upon
A cliff and all the ways to our enjoying
Are difficult and ragged,
But I forget, Basilius, I must
Compose me for his bed, I shannot be
Much troubled, good old King he wishes me
Good rest I know, and secure dreams, oh see
Philoclea what ways I come to thee
These sounds may charm her into slumbers sweetly
Oh steal into her, hang upon her heart,
Come fix your gentle raptures in her soul
That it may take delight to be overcome
And never wake the body, till Basilius
Return with happy Conquest from Zelmane
Or if there be a leaden god of sleep.
Here let him shake his wings and then dispatch
A Herra•lt to the silent house of dreams
To bring one hither happier then the rest
To entertain my melancholy Queen; oh Philoclea
Thy mother will excuse thee this nights duty
Doe not disturb her, yet your voice and Lute
'Ith next Chamber may procure her sleep
That done without more ceremony go
To bed, so so my blood begins to move
Shoe's fast, I hear her, and the musique ceased,
Now to Zelmane.
I'm troubled, and dare not go to bed
There's some thing whispers to my soul this will
Will be a fatal night, my mother is not well
I must needs see her—ha, the gods protect me
If there were any treason meant against
Philoclea her prayers were vainly offered,
Since h•r own innocence is protection
As powerful as the Gods, I bring no horror
To fright your blood, dee not know me Lady
I was Zelmane,
Was•
I have been
So watched by your Jealous mother
Ha.
But I forget
What mean you?
To make fast the doors
If I could bar all the air out saving what
Your breath should draw, for should I live by that
You would not chide my care
You make me tremble.
If you cannot forgive me punish pray
This rudeness with my death; I prostrate to
Your feet my sword, and call you to my breast
To meet your anger, at this distance beg
I may behold you, but when you shall find
In the dissection of my heart, whose name
Hath filled it, and with what religion there
My thoughts adore your memory, too late
It may invite your tears, can fair Philoclea
Think I have a soul that dare be wicked to her?
Such looks would charm a ravisher, and throw
Ice through a Satires blood, but a man chaste
Already it draws up to the simplicity
And nature of an Angel, oh Philoclea
I am so far from being ill my self
In such a sensual way, that although time
And this fair opportunity might tempt
And excuse wanton heate, I should repent
Forget to, love your self, if you but with
One thought so treacherous to your virgin honour
Should give consent to enjoy you, it hath snow
Upon my blood Philoclea, whose flowings
Are Chaste as Crystal: dare you trust me yet
To kiss your hand, my lips shall gently touch it
Nor will I leave a breath to stain the whiteness
Pray be not fearful.
Sin did never yet
Profane that voice.
When it sounds lustfully
Your hate, a punishment next the wrath of heaven
Strike my heart dead—be pleased to rest a little
And if you dare vouch safe me to sit so near you▪
I have much to tell you
I know not what to say, where is my father
I had a mother too, this Chamber they
Used to call their's
They are safe Philoclea,
Let not your cheek look pale, their absence wrought
For such a minute doth encourage me
To tell you now or never you must show
There dwells a pittle in you, oh look smooth
On him whose life and fortunes you may now
Advance or ruin ever, if you can
Remember who I am, and what your virtue
Hath made me suster, think me worthy of
A life, let it begin from your consent
To love poor Pyrocles, it is in your power
To be no more a prisoner to this rude
And solitary dwelling, such a brightness
Is lost in caves, extend your arm and reach
A throne where seated with becoming greatness
You may disperse with moving of your eye
An influence beyond the stars, and quicken
A world that waits to be your creature
Pyrocles
For so you call your self, and such I dare
Believe you are, for falsehood cannot dwell
A neighbor to that tongue although I might
Demand with reason, and my duty first
What does concern my parents, such a truth
Shines in your language, and such Innocence
In what you call affection, I must
Declare you have not placed one good thought here
Which is not answered with my heart, the fire
Which sparkled in your bosom long since leaped
Into my breast and there burns modestly
It would have spread into a greater flame
But still I curbed it with my tears, oh Pyrocles
I would thou were Zelmane again, and yet
I must confess I loved thee then, I know not
With what prophetic soul but I did wish
Often, thou were no man, or I no woman
Thou were the comfort of my sleeps
And you
The object of my watches, when the night
Wanted a spell to cast me into slumber
Yet when the weight of my own thoughts grew heavy
For my tear dropping eyes, and drew these Curtains
My dreams were still of thee, forgive my blushes
And the imagination thou were then
My harmless bed fellow
I arrive too soon
At my desires, gently oh gently drop
These joys into me, least at once let fall
I sink beneath the tempest of my blessings
And you swell my heart too fast
If yo• be Pyrocles
You will rest satisfied with this confession
You only shall obtain my love
Although my soul acknowledge this a blessing
Such as no service can reward enough
There remains something, something which your honour
May easily consent to in this absence
Of both your parents whom with several promises
Of my return, I have already sent
To 'th Cave where they in vain this night expect me
We must for sake this place, I have provided
For our conveyance to my fathers kingdom
If after all these arguments of love
You dare trust Pyrocles to convey you thither,
I dare give thee my life, but pardom me
This is not safe, thus seeking to assure.
You may untimely happen loose Philoclea
My duty binds me not to rob my parents,
Such a departure may undo their comfort•
As you're a prince persuade me not commit
So unnatural a trespass, weel expect
And satisfy our young desires till time
Mature our joy, I could content my self
To look on Pyrocles and think it happiness
Enough, or if my soul affect variety
Of pleasure every accent of thy voice
Shall Court me with new rapture, and if these
Delights be narrow for us there is left
A modest kiss, whose every touch conveies
Our melting souls into each others lips,
Why should not you be pleased to look on me
To hear and sometimes kiss Philoclea
Indeed you make me blush
What an Eclipse
Hath that veil made, it was not night till now
Look if the stars have not withdrawn themselves
As they had waited on her richer brightness.
And missing of her eyes are stolen to bed,
What world of beauty is behind that cloud
But keep it still concealed, and let the creatures
When they shall miss day (for the same without
Thine eyes will glimmer like a petty taper)
Fear to be lost in darkness, and expect
No light to follow, but from those wide flames
Which heaven hath threatened to destroy the world,
When thou hast frighted us renew again
Our state and cure again the fainting universe
One look restores all—ha, Philoclea.
There's something that sits heavy on my forehead
I know you cannot but be noble, pray
A little sleep, if I exceed three minutes
Prithee wake me
Ha, I doe not like
Her senses should be snatched away so strangely
It is an ill omen, I should trespass much
Against manners, to disturb her, beside she
Did make it her request whose will is sacred,
Then gently may she sleep, and yet if she
Draw out this slumber to any length my hopes
Are blasted, if I loose this opportunity
Of flight, no hope hereafter can relieve us
We are both undone, she sleeps still, I was not
Quick enough to persuade her resolution
So necessary, yet look up Philoclea,
No, then enjoy thy dream, and let us try
The kindness of our fate, pity a harsh
Sound should disturb thy •oft repose, I would
But dare not steal a kiss for fear to wake her,
And yet my loud voice may be more offensive
Our souls are knit I see into one love
Then it is but reason they should exercise
Both the same act, why doe not I sleep too
The mist is fallen already, if I but dream of her
My slumbers shall be happy
There be more ways to the wood then one, she may
be in her sisters Chamber, I may thank my acquaintance with the
Buttery and a trap door for this passage; she has shut me out of
doors of all: vmh a sword I had rather it were Pamela naked, I
durst undertake to handle her with less fear; vmh Philoclea; it is
she and this is-no—this is not Pamela, she was a woman, unless
she be crept into breeches since I left her, no it is a man, here is no
tarrying for me; and he were not soundly a sleep, my smell were
enough to wake him;—treason treason
Ha, what voice is that, who cries out treason?
Pyrocles what's the matter?
Nothing
Treason, treason.
Hark, first not treason, my sword, my sword
Is gon, we are betrayed, some thief has been
Within the Chamber, yet the doors are safe▪ ha
Lets see, search every where, alas Philoclea
If now I must be ravished from thee, how
Can there be charity enough on earth
To pity me, they die but once who still
Despair of bliss; but the Fares twice destroy
A lover whom they kill so near his joy.
COme my bloods since there is no hope of our pardons
let us be honest out-lawes one to another, and doe
all the mischief we can, we are Masters of the Woods, and
we will domineer like Lords of the soil; I say we will live,
we will eat and we will drink.
Would I were at my forge again
Arcadia shall be thy Anvil smith; and thou moist live
to beat
Great men to dust
Some of them are so rotten they will save us a labour
Be resolute and strike the iron while it is hot, where is the
little miller
Thumb the miller is cut off
Who can help it, be not crest felon, but show your selves
Cocks of the game, weel make the state send for us home, and
agree to our own conditions, let vs therefore play the thieves
manfully
And so be hanged honourably
Hang hang ng, we defy the laws and we will execute
when we list in our own quarters we will rob man woman and
child
Do you fight with the men, and let me alone with the women.
And Thumb had he been alive he had been a fit match for
the children
A prise a Captain, I see a Gentleman and a Lady
strike into a grove hard by, their horses are for their better be∣havior,
already bound to a tree, follow me and Isle conduct
Without noise or tumult lets steal upon them
This grove is all one bower, nature her self
Must be delighted to dwell here, the Sun
Can shoot no beam upon us through this Orb•
Tho he does rage abroad
The heate betrays
The Sun is angry Madam to see you
Whose brightness takes all wonder from his shine
And leave him a pale starr.
You complement.
Are you not weary Madam
I shall never
In thy society, yet we may re•t
A little in this shade, oh M〈…〉
He should be enemy to virtue now
To cherish one suspectful thought of thee
Some wild licentious Prince had now 〈◊〉 me
And careless of his own ruined my honour.
It were not simple theft but Sacrilege
To rob you of one peaceful thought, if any
Service already have obtained so much
Trust I am so familiar with mine own
Desires, that hereafter Isle deserve to keep
Your fair opinion of me, lust could never
Intrude himself a guest here, I should not
Love mine own eyes, had they been but tempted
To see an unchaste picture with delight
What's that behind the trees?
Nothing, the birds are dancing on the leaves
Called heither by the musique of your tongue
Those that are silent doe but listen to
Your voice to mend their singing
Still methinkes I hear another noise
It is your fear
There's some thing whispers
Shall I tell Pamela
Pray if you can
It is the wind that would
Steal through the boughs to give you more refreshing
Whom the trees envy, I doe hear it murmer
To be kept from your lips which it would kiss
And mixing with your breath catch odors thence
Enough to sweeten all the wood, there can
No other danger enter here
We are betrayed help
Ha, villains, y'ad better lay violent hands
Upon your mothers
Let your courage cool, and hear us you were best
If you doe love this Gentlewoman's life.
Put up your tool, dee see this b•dkin sir
With it, Isle punch her heart, if you but offer
A blow at any of my train, Isle do it
As I am true Rebel and for the more security
Deliver up your whinyard to our use•
Or Isle make an oylet-hole presently
Doe not resign your sword but use it.
Hold hear me
Let us both die with honour, doe not give
Your strength and trust t'the mercy of those slaves
In humane villanes to us
But thy life,—as you are men but hear me
Drop your steel quickly, or
Alas she is my wife
Your wife, if you love her be not troublesome I tell you again
Pamela bids thee fight, fear not for me
If I die I shall not be dishonord
And thou shalt take a brave revenge on them,
Pity not me to loose us both, weel meet
Again in death and love eternally
My solo's divided, shall I venture her?
Isle stay no longer
Hold and take my sword
But swear by some religion you will use
No violence to her
We swear
So first and foremost throw his sword out of the way, we
have no use on it, secondly bind him to a tree
Set her at liberty
And use what cruelty you please on me
Kill me, and Isle forgive you.
Forgiv'e us, heaven forgive thee, say thy prayers
I see there's pity in you, if your wants
Council you to this sinful trade, we both
Will freely give our wealth, we have some Jewels
Of value to redeem you all, and make
You rich if you dare first be so in goodness
And exercise no tyranny upon
Our bodies, what a misery it is
Such spirits as you are should not have fortunes
High as your thoughts, when every dunghill fellow
Surfeits with honours and estates, and vomits
In Taverns what would keep your families,
But it is the times disease, when merit thus
Disgraced and unrewarded by the state
Makes subjects desperate
He says true
I prithee take my clothes, would they were rich
And worth your pillage, and will serve me
Alas good Gentleman, let even strip him
None dare to take a skirt
Perhaps for some offences you are banished
Your houses and estates
For nothing but being drunk
And offering to kill the King
He will not live amongst us as a good King ought.
Alas good men, I doe presume you, would not have killed
the King in any malice to him
I love the King withal my heart, and a pox take him that
does not, would he would but pardon us
There's no hope now, we have submitted our selves too often
Yet let him hear well of you, and tho
Necessity compel you to be thieves,
Be honest thieves and ravish no body.
And this report arriving at his ears
It inclines him to have pity on you
And call you to his favour
Vnhand the Gentlewoman, he that offers her
But a wry look had better eat my sword
Or my scabbard tho it have been pissed in
Faith Captain he hath given us good council let us deal
Honestly, if we take away but all they have they will
Have more cause to speak well of us
Unbind the malefactor
Shall I give him his sword?
His sword thou ignorant thief no so he may chance to
ask us again for his Jewels; take thy Penelope sweet tong'd
Vlisses; and on the next back smother her in kisses—farewell
Oh, my Pamela.
Captain captain comeback he calls her Pamela that should
be the Kings daughter,
How, vmh; now I look better on her I have seen that
face in a mask before now
We are lost again
I am the same Pamela
What ha we done, here are all your Jewels not a stone
diminished
If there be let me be gelded
I easily forgive all and will be
So far from a complaint that Isle plead for
Your pardons to my father, and he sha' not
Be able to deny me
Omnes A pardon, a pardon, if it please your highness weel go
back with you
Not with me
As we are true men and thieves Madam
We are undone again
At our return Isle join with her
Return, why whether are you going so far from the
lodge this is the way to the sea
Vmh, I guest treason, are not you an't shall please your
Ladyship running away with this Gentleman
He said she was his wife
I doe not like him
Lay hands on him again, well thought upon you shall
Justify your selves before the King
Dare you go to the King without a pardon
It is the only way to procure one
Rather go with us, and, as I am—
What are you
I am—I know not
Weel teach you to know your self; away with 'em
we are all made
Villains and Rebels.
Zelmane has abused me
Chide not her
It was mine own plot to try your constancy.
Death cease upon Zelmane for his coming
But I will be revenged, when did I fall
From my high birth; in what lascivious action
Lost I my fame, that this Basilius
should wrong his own Gynecia
I am ashamed, I prithee chide no more.
She gave me sure some philter to betray
My blood to this dishonour.
Tho your lust
Mist the enjoying him for whom your heart
Grew wanton, yet the sin cannot be purged
They are adulterate sheets, and those embraces
Which locked mine arms thy guilt, not one warm kiss
But was intended for Zelmanes lips
Oh my fate
Prithee forgive
The silence which I used
I wished might save my modesty a language
To accuse you now; indeed you have done ill
Touse me thus
My love to thee hereafter
Shall redeem all, wound me no more I prithee
If vice have so possessed you that my bed
Is now grown hateful, make me not the scorn
Of all your kingdom, send me home again
To Argos to wear out my life in weeping
My Lord has quite forsaken me
Not for
The crowns of Greece, and all the world dear dearest
Gynecia pardon thou hast saved mine honour
Destroy me not again, on what a rock
(Had not thy goodness rescued me) had I
Been ever ship wracked, take me to thy love,
A sad man for my fault, never, oh never
Shall such unworthy thoughts corrupt my heart
To leave a chaste wife
I doe freely pardon this error
Then I am strait again
But Zelmane shall account
Dearly for this unless he satisfy
My furious blood, new welcome to my bosom
A cup of wine would crown our reconcilement
As I remember in the cave I saw
A golden bottle
Your Majesty may taste on it, but I meant it
A draught for false Zelmane, it being virtual
To increase affection, to me a gift
My mothers love bestowed when I was married
To Basilius if ever he grew cold
To quicken his desires, I never yet
Made trial
It is the gods
Nepenthe, or a drink more precious
I prithee giv'ta name, and if my kingdom
Afford th'ingredients let me taste it often;
Ha Gynecia where am I?
Here my Lord
I think I am deceived, my tongue oath sudden
draws backward; and my limbs grow very feeble
Ha, oh-farwell.
My Lord, my Lord, Basilius, oh hoe's dead
If he be poisoned I have made fair work
Dear husband, then for ever morn Gynecia
The gods have punished thy lascivious heate
With hasty justice, hath my care so long
Almost religiously preserved this drink
To kill thus in a minute; oh my soul
Doth feel a scorpion, and my lust appears
Circled with thousand furies
Treason treason
Doe set out your throat here; and let me alone to roar
treason in the ears of my Lord Philonax—I should ha'beene the
town crier
Make hast.
Oh yes treason,
When you have spent your voices, let your eyes
Speak a more killing language
Ha, the Queen, Madam Pamela, is gon
No matter for Pamela, look here shepherds
Herelies the King
No matter for Pamela? I am glad of that
Is his majesty a sleep
Never to awake, hoe's dead poisoned by this viol
Oh base viol, why here is more treason then we looked
for, this is admirable, did he dye against his will, or was he killed
a natural death let vs sit upon him
For bear, I can direct you to the murderer
Look here you shepherds, it was I that killed him
You, your Majesty is very merry
Will you not trust me
Yes for more then I am worth, but if you killed him your
self, your majesty must pardon me for that, I have nothing to say
to you but, treason treason;
Yet fly Gynecia and save thy life,
Betray not thine own, life; why doe I talk
Of safety, can there be in all the World
A consort, when my honour and Basilius
Have both forsaken me
Pamela gon, how does the King take it
The King, would he could take it any way, good gentle∣man
hoe's in a pitiful taking himself
What sales the screech-oule
The truth is, he is sent of an errand to Erebus hoe's dead,
and for my Lady Philoclea, whom I suspect
Ha
And you make hast you may take her napping, there is a
thing in the likeness of a man with her, whom very valiantly I
dis-arm'd, and brought away his naked weapon
What traitor? did disarm him?
Did I and there had been twenty of 'em I would not
have cared a rush though they had been as valiant as Hector, had I
not treason a'my side so soon as I came in
Thou dost amaze me what said he?
Never a word, my friend quoth to his sword
Idiot did speak to his sword?
Why he was fast a sleep my Lord,
And never so much as dreamt of me
A sleep, we loose time go you along with Demotes,
seize upon that Traitor, oh I am rent with sorrow
Come my Masters be not afraid as long as I have a sword
You shall go before, and follow my example ther's the
King my Lord
Madam
Oh Philonax
Be comforted
You shannot need to mock me, when you know
By whom he dyed thou wilt call in thy charity
And curse me, it was I that poisoned him,
Good Madam speak that I may understand,
You poisoned him? he was Basilius
Your husband and your King, it cannot be
You are the Queen his wife
His murderer
The horror of my sin dwells round about me
I need no more accusers then my Conscience.
Doe with me what you please, the wicked reasons
That moved me to it you shall know hereafter
Bless me eternity, Isle not believe
That any woman after this can love
Her husband, oh my Lord, merciless woman
For here all other titles lost away
With her, see her lodged within the Castle.
Here they are my Lord
Where is the King?
New uprores.
My charge, it is Pamela, my Lord Philonax it is Pamela
Philon, Pamela and Philoclea
Yes my Lord we suspected they were running away
together and therefore in hope of his majesties pardon
Musidorus and thy sister under guard?
Pyrocles and Philoclea prisoners too?
Look here unnatural children, for I cannot
pronounce you Innocent, this circumstance
betrays your guilt, see where your king and father
lies a cold pattern for a tomb
Dead?
Oh we are miserable
Basilus dead?
Slain
He was murdered, and you are accessories
Sure I have seen your face; were not you called
Zelmane the Amazon?
I was.
Disguises, injurious villain
Profaner of all hospitable laws
I am not loose to answer thee
And this was my man Dorus my Lord, a ha have I found
you sir, you sent me abroad to be a gold-finder.
You have done service worthy all your pardons.
Now in my rage I could prevent the Law
And sacrifice their treachrous bloods my self
To this reverend hearse.
You are transported Philonax
But that I have compassion for the death
Of that good King I could laugh at thee.
Hence, load them with Irons, Ladies you must both
Be patient to be confined until
You clear yourselves.
What saucy fellowe's that?
Meant you me Philonax, vnhand those prisoners
Away with'em I command
Yet stay and hear me
As you did love Basilius hear his daughter,
This insolence doth interupt the tears
Due to my dear dead father, and enforces
Me, since he thus forgets, to declare to you
With confidence who I am, I am Pamela
The eldest daughter of Basilius
Your Queen if I mistake not, since my father
Is dead, to whose memory these pious drops
Fall as the tribute of my grief, who then
Shall be obeyed, he that was trusted with
My fathers power, which in his death is cancelled
Or I your natural princess?
Vmh, my charge speaks to the purpose.
Have you found so much sweetness in the reign
You borrowed of my father, that you would
Usurp now he is dead? I have not signed
Any commission for your office, how
Dare you then in my presence command any
To prison, nay like a bold insolent traitor
Talk of confining me? we are merciful
To let you keep your proud head on.
What will be come of us?
You shall have clean halters.
But in the justice to my royal father,
Snatched hence untimely from us, since you attempt
To charge them with his death, we give you space
To live and to accuse them, they shall be
Our prisoners, ith mean time t'will become
Your person to go home and study how
To play the Advocate when you are called
By us, and the grave laws, you are dismised.
I am astonished, doe you not wonder with me
To hear the daughter of our late good King
Lost to her filial piety, this comes.
To near apracide Pamela. Contrie-men
It is apparent they have all conspired
The death of the old king, me thinks I hear
His groans confirm it, if you suffer such
A treason pass Arcadia will become
The scorn of all the world, nor ever shall
Any good prince; trust his life amongst you,
For my Ambition, all the angels know
How tedious the hours have been, since I
Was forced to take this kingdoms weight upon me.
But let not ceremony to the daughter.
Whose title I dispute not shame our duties
To him that was her father and our Master.
Poisoned, yes poisoned by those men that have
No names, and will betray in our remissness
The honour of these Ladies and our country
As they have done his precious life already,
As you are good men let them be arraigned
If they be innocent their goodness will
Protect them, but if guilty let them dye
Like slaves unpitied.
A Philonax, a Philonax
Dare ye all be traitors then?
This your great love revives me, then convey
All to the Castle, but command these two
As traitors to be made safe, the ladies shall
Be under mild restraint.
Villains
You lives shall dearly answer this.
We must obey the tyrant, were our hands
At liberty, and armed with our good swords
We should not off so tamely.
Come away traitors.
Well remembered you.
Are not to be discharged, lodge himsafe too.
Who I, he does not mean me, my Lord these fellows.
Take him a way, a traitor with the rest,
Away away
So you must sir
Would I might never see my wife and children in my
right wits, if I be a traitor that's enough my Lord, the'il carry me
away too.
De'e remember a clean halter? come on sir.
King Evarchus say?
He has but a small train my lord.
Alas he comes to late to visit, but
Most seasonable to be a judgein this
Great cause, take gently up thatroyall body
Whose souls a star already, all that we
Can pay is justice to his memory.
GOod Master jailer you might be so courteous in your
office to let vs see these Gentlemen,
Madam I dare not,
It is well you dare obey King Philonax and be a rebel to
me, the time may come you will repent.
Confident that you will keep your princely words not to
interupt or change any discourse with 'em, I have brought you
where you may tho at some distance hear 'em, they are pre∣paring
for musique, it is all I dare consent to, neither durst I tell
them you should be with in reach of their voices
Well sir we are content
Weel speak with'em but in your hearing,
Doe not entreat him sister, pray have a special remem∣bronco
to let'em want air and necessaries, youl' forfeit your
place if you make conscience to be over honest to'em.
I am sorry Madam you accuse my nature
Which never yet was observed cruel, I
Would be as just to your commands.
So it seems
Were these misfortunes over
Good sir no tedious excuses nor Apology but proceed
you and your great Master Philonax, and he will make you his
treasurer, or trust you with his great seal, you cannot choose but
be an excellent keeper.
What will become of us?
Nay what will become at'h Princes, there's my fear,
would they were free again, and had but their good swords to
second their innocence, I am mad to think what a condition we
are fallen to, prithee Philoclea shed some tears for me, if I weep
now it must be for anger that we cannot help 'em, but let the
gray-beards look too't, for if they suffer, unless they send me of
an errand after them, not a head that nodded to their sentence,
shall know where to find Shoulders to support'em
Alas sister I want drops for my own grief
My fathers death,
My father, that that hath opened
The spring again
And although guilty of his blood, for so
They say our mother hath confessed her self
I must in duty weep for her.
My mother
That word strikes double sorrow, and doth call
A flood to drown my eyes, shall we not see her?
She could not kill him sure, did ever grief
So soon make such a pair of Orphants, our
Fortunes are so strange and thick, posterity
Will think our story fiction, and yet
It seems they are not so great to break our hearts
A'th sudden, I would willingly dye too
But I remember Pyrocles
And I my dear loved Musidorus, at which name
My tears dry up, and black revenge prepares
Thy throne within my blood, but Simpathus
Madam
Are not the Princes sent for yet?
Not yet
I prithee tell me how they look; what say they to thee?
Doe they name us?
It hath been all their question, how both their
Princely mistresses doe fare, for so
They call you Ladies, when I answer well
Their joy shoots up in prayers that you may still
Continue safe.
Doe they not rail sometimes and curse?
I never heard'em
Can thou be such a fool then to believe
They are murderers?
I doe not believe they are
Doe not if thou dare be a Knave, and try if the Devil will
bear you out in it, we must not see'em
Alas Madam
Nor speak to our mother,
I am commanded
Thou shat not deny us a little discourse with Demotes my
old governor since we have no other company.
You shall
His presence could be never more unwelcome
Beside his follies will but ill agree
With our affliction
They cannot hurt
Vs sister I have a breast as deeply charged
As thine although I flatter it, it is no sin
To enable vs for bearing—how de'e Governor?
How dee Madam, 'een as you see, as ill as this iron age
can make a man
What will they doe with thee?
They cannot use me worse then they have; for I am
hanged in chains already, I have had three whippings into the
bargain to, if they hold such a hand over me long, I shall never be
able to sleep in a whole skin.
Had you any hand in my fathers death?
Hand, I was so far from having any hand, that I had not
so much as a finger in it, no your mother poisond him with a base
viol.
Oh misery!
But Madam, I did not think you had been so dishonest,
and you had meant to run away with any body I thought you
would have told me so, but I see a woman and a wet eel have
both slippery tails.
You ran away from me.
Who I run? I was'never so good a foot man in my life,
alas I was told by that rascal Dorus where a great deal of gold
was buried, and I went simply with a resolution after I came
home to build half a dozen Churches, but now I hear say there
is a Gallows built to my hands, and I must hang ding dong like
a bell in the wooden steeple.
Speak well of Dorus sir, you had more need to pray
for him.
Heaven convert him then, and tho he live when I am
dead he may be rotten as soon as I
Who sent you sir to my Chamber?
Sent me, the Devil; and I ha thrived accordingly, would
my wife had broke her neck when I took you together.
Your wife.
Or my daughter, or you or any body to save the loose of my
own sweet Madam speak a good word for me, and Isle—
speak another for you, my evidence will be heard, and I care
Not what I swear; it is not for the King hoe's dead, I look
Every minute for a voice to call me to the Sessions.
Hey there'tis already, as ever you hope to be married
while your maiden heads are sweet; save me from the Gal∣lowes,
for if I be once hanged I shall never be my own
man ag•n.
They are very hasty to arraign em, Pyrocles
There's nothing left me now but prayers for thee
With which Isle weary heaven or tire my self
For thy success.
I wo lt doe so but I
Fear my revenge will kill my charity.
My Lord your sorrow and not my ambition
Hath made me Judge to day, therefore attend
The proof of your election, I came
With purpose of a visit to your Master
But now salute his hearse, and wear a title
Of your Protector, in which name I gave command
The prisoners should be sent for.
It is done, and they are ready;
My Lord my part to day is to accuse
And not side in compassion.
That the Queen?
Yes, My Lord
She shows a much dejected Lady.
Has she not cause?
Those the pretended Princes?
Of comely presence both, what's he?
Demotes to whose trust the King gave up
Pamela his eldest daughter.
Where is she?
Accompanied with her sister in the Castle
Their presence might occasion some tumult,
Nor doe the Arcadian Laws allow proceeding
Against the next of blood, as they permit not
She should determine anything her self
Till years or marriage enable her.
I will forgive thee Philonax for more malice then thou
hast brought against my life, for being so honest to Pamela,
Sir I look not for your thanks
As you are honourable, I beseech you
In the name of sacred Justice, ere you further
Proceed against our facts declare what you
Determine of Philolea, who is all Innocence
And most unjustly suffers, tho in thought
You doubt there virgin honour
She must become a recluse
And all her life with strict profession
Of Chastity repair her blemished honour.
A Vestal?
Not if I live, yet if I die it carries
This comfort none hereafter shall enjoy
The fair Philoclea.
Now to the Queen
Madam stand to the bar.
My barr indeed which I have laid my self
To bring my honour to a fall and ruin
Oh my dear Lord my tears doe now enbalme thee,
My blood shall quickly follow.
As you are just
Let not her sorrow tempt you to forget
What sin she hath committed, I want words
To express the horror of the deed which will
Throw shame on all her sex.
Stay Philonax sh'at have.
What thou desire, I have been a judge already
Upon my self and doe not desire life,
That am condemned by my own killing sentence
I doe again confess I was the murderer
Of your and my Lord, robbed Arcadia and
My children of a father, I, none but I
Poisoned Basilius
Palladius dost hear?
Unfortunate Lady,
And what could Philonax say more against me?
There remains only to obey your Judgment
Which cannot come in any shape of death
Too horrid for my sin I'm very weary
Of this bad world, be just and take a life
From me that else will groan it self away
And mock your Justice.
You hear my Lord?
And thus proceed to sentence
Having confessed, to spare your proof how much
She hath offended, an example to all times
We censure thus, she shall presently
Be carried to prison where she may
Have food but only to sustain her life
Until her husbands burial, with whom
In the same vault she shall be closed alive
To keep his body company from which
Her cruelty divorced his soul,
Ya're Just.
My heart weeps for her
It is a severe sentence.
Who binds my hands? Basilius I come
To de a living guest in thy sad tomb.
The others to the bar
What are their names?
Daiphantas of Licia mine
Mine Palladius of Iberia.
We do not dispute their titles here, they are
Private persons, you may proceed.
I shall, and with as much brevity
Choose whom you'll first accuse.
Then first this Daiphantas, this Zelmane
This what you will, for he hath yet no name
Nor shape that we can trust to, having knowledge
Of our late masters solitary life,
Came not without a purpose of this treachery
And by the cunning of Gynecia
Ith habit of a woman was received
As an unsuspected guest, enjoyed the freedom,
Of those whom the King placed nearest his bosom,
His children not more dear, treason thus fortified
They soon conspired the death of this good King,
A cave this Gentlewoman's, lodging was
The fatal scene where the unhappy Queen
By his direction forced his dear life from him
I omit what lustful motive prompted her
That with more licence she might twine with this
Hermophrodite, and that they had appointed
Where they might meet when this black deed was done,
But heaven was merciful and prevented her
Flight by the happy coming in of Shepherds
In the mean time transported with the confidence
Of her performance, that he might not leave
Any revenger of this hateful murder
He hastily makes up to Philocleas Chamber,
Whereby the mingling (what he could) her shame
With his offence, he easily might enforce
Her to be accessory to her fathers death,
And under her protection, and her sisters
(Against whom they knew we were not to rebel)
So•e with one gripe the state, but heaven preserved
All by the unexpected coming up
Of this Demotes.
Yes heaven and I preserved all.
Who sought then for Pamela
Which the other Princely thief had stolen away,
And finding these, I mean Philoclea
And this young man together, found occasion
To enclose the ravisher till by command
They were apprehended: thus you have in short
His wicked story, and what punishment
Will not be thought a mercy to that monster
That kills a King, dishonoured a Queen,
And violates the daughter?
In things promoted with such cunning mixture
It is hard to shape a square and direct answer.
My accusers sordid and malicious railing
More greevious to my tender sense of honour
Then death can be, I forget him
A thing beneath my anger and armed with
My own simplicity doubt not to assure
How much my cause is injured, know Grave Judge
This prince and I drawn hither by the fame
Of the rare beauties in Basilius daughters
Knowing that with their parents they lived here
Secluded from the world, where no access
In our own persons was to be expected,
Put on these forms as soonest might conduce
To make our loves known: this Palladius
Became so fortunate that his Princely Mistress
Consented to forsake, and trust his conduct
To a happier kingdom: my fortune
Was not so happy, for I did not cherish
A greater flame, yet modest, of Philoclea
Then her weak father in my sex deceived
Retained of me, that tired with his solicits
I had no time to perfect my desires
With his fair daughter,
Till under colour of some devotions
I made a cave my lodging to invite
Basilius thither, with full hope to enjoy me,
But this revealing to the Queen, she took
My place to make the old King see his follies.
In the mean time I must confess I went
To bright Philocleas Chamber hoping to
Win her by all the charms of noble love
To leave Arcadia; but she unhappily
Obeying her own Genius gave no
Consent, when in the midst of my security
I know not by what means I was made prisoner.
And heere's the thread to guide through this labyrinth,
Me thinks your man of mighty tongue should blush
To have spent his rage so poorly.
What ic all this to the death of the old King?
By all the gods I am innocent
The Queen hath absolved me, as for Philoclea
If you will call it a crime in that I loved her
I am and shall be guilty, but had never
A thought so rude to force her unstained chastity:
Or if the honour of this excellent Lady
Suffer it'h blind opinion of the world
Our marriage not my death may cure all wounds
Malice can fasten on her name.
Oh impudence.
If this be all you have to say proceed
To his confederate.
The imagination how miserable
These jugglers would have made us and our Country
If their disguise had prospered, strikes a terror
Through all my faculties, my tongue's enfeebled.
Therefore to omit his practice in the murder
Which you may easily collect by circumstance
This is enough to call him a foul traitor
He did attempt to steal a way out princess
The hope and treasure of Arcadia
And taken in the fact dares not deny it,
Had he no other cry me to answer for
This pulls severe death on him, and to insist
Upon offences of so foul a nature
Were to distrust your wisdom or your Justice.
Thou to there shame of mankind speak to this.
Not for thy sake who in this misery
Hast only merited to be my scorn
But for the truth I answer, pardon sir
If passion make me not remember language
That should become this place, this ill tongued man
That with such vehemence accuses thus
Is himself guilty.
How?
Of a more hateful vice, ingratitude.
Is this the payment for our services
Which once thy tongue acknowledged had desev'd
Statues to the eternal memory
Of the preservers of your King and Country?
Is all the valour of this young man cancelled
When Rebels had advanced their daring swords
High as the throat of your old King, his wife
And trembling daughters, is the time forgotten
When wild beasts had prepared their riotous mawes
To bury the dear pledges of your kingdom?
Oh where had been my treason or his rape
Had they been then devourd? the ground has not
Drunk up the blood so perfectly, but there
Remains a colour to teach impious men
To blush for their ingratitude, have we
Been careless of our lives to preserve
The King when danger threatend horror to him
And can a temperate man imagine we
Should be his murderers, we had not saved
To be our selves the hangmen? but I'm charged
For stealing of your Princess, can your breathes
Acknowledge her your Sovereign, and allow
No faith to what she says, you have degraded
My blood from honour, and unless you make me
Less then her subject I was bound to obey
When she commanded I should waite upon her,
But you'll object I counselled her, I did
And justify the act, she was confined
Too narrowly, and I durst lead her to
A throne above the Majesty her birth
Can challenge in Arcadia, love whose force
The gods have not resisted may plead for me.
Is this all?
Tho it want method'tis enough to vindicate
My honour from his base aspersion.
To him you call Demotes
Not guilty my Lord, as I hope to be saved not guilty.
Neglect of the great charge with which the King
Our Master trusted him sums up his fault.
I was made a gould-finder, I desire Justice for him and
Mercy for my self.
Silence.
I have heard you with attention, and whereas
To the Kings death (the unhappy cause of this
Assembly) you have answered with denial
Which you think fortified by the Queens
Selfes only accusation, I must tell you
It frees you not, for tho no manifest proofs
Yet circumstances well examined make you
The accidental causes of his murder.
For the other part of your offence I find not
You have denied your guilt, but only use
Qualification and excuse; your services
In themselves high and honourable, allow you
No privilege to offend, but give your black, faults
A black die; then justly weighing your offence, you meet
In equal guilt, for tho you first conveyed
Away Pamela, his intention was
Early as yours, and by the rules of justice
The will stands for the act, both ravished
Although not of the Ladies from themselves
Yet from their parents and their country, which
By all the Grecian Laws is paid with death.
Thus then I must pronounce Daiphantas shall
Be thrown from some high tower to mere his death,
Palladius loose his head before Sunne-set
The executioner shall be Demotes
Which office of the common hangman he
Shall for his whole life execute, a punishment
For his neglect of duty.
must I be hangman? oh brave, heaven preserve your
Lordship, I shall quickly learn the trade, and if ever any of your
honours have occasion to use me, I will owe you a good turn, and in
token I have been bound to you the knot of my dutiful affection,
shall tella tale in your ear you shall thank me when you are
hanged, come your ways, but I beseech your Lordship, I may be
allowed a man some times I would be loath to hang or to behead
my self, my wife or my own kindred, but if it happen there be
more work then he can turn his hands to, I will not stick with
him to hang my self, provide you malefactors and let me alone for
halters.
Hold stay the prisoners my Lord Protector
Oh my Lord
My servant Calodoulus by thy duty
Reveal us not.
Let me rather be dumb eternally
Then two such princes be lost by my silence.
My son and Nephew are they living?
Your own Pyrocles and his Princely Nephew,
Ask your father blessing, unhand'em rascals.
The two most famous Princes in the world.
It is Evarchus thy father Pyrocles, my uncle king of
Macedon, all ye gods, my heart is extaside with joy.
My father
My blessing and my tears you both divide.
Witness with me, ye immortal powers this day
I have done nothing, but what justice and
Your native laws require, without the knowledge
How near they were to my own blood, but since
They are proved my Son and Nephew
Endowed by nature richly, and how meriting
The fame and love of all the world before
This accident, I leave to your own thoughts,
Besides these two I have no joys of life.
Excellent Evarchus; why did you change your names?
To prevent the dishonour of our blood
If we had suffered
But I have judged already and if right
I have not wronged, unless the name
Of child have power to alter sacred Justice
You both must dye, though when I speak your death
It creeps upon my heart.
We dream, is this thy father Pyrocles?
Away with em.
It is most tyranicall he is thy son.
Thou wot not be a murderer of thy own?
Make not thy name hated of all the world
When it shall say hereafter Pyrocles
Had no fault in him but he was thy son.
For me I am his own and being so
Disposed of by his Justice; to whom rather
I hoped to have been a comfort then a shame
I kiss my sentence; but you cannot place
Your Kinsman in the sacrifice his mother
And country plead a title he is theirs
Oh save my princely cousin
Sure I shannot live
Long after them, and Gentlemen if I dye
Before I leave Arcadia let my ashes
Mingle with theirs:
oh oh oh
My Lord, Gentlemen, there's something stirs and groan••
Come back.
Basilius alive, assist him Philonax.
He breathes, what 〈◊〉 of joy run through me?
Send for Gynecia and his daughters.
Why am I supported thus like a dead man?
What are you?
Evarc•us your old friend.
I ha seen that face before,it is like sweet Zelmane.
My son
But was a conterfeit Zelmane.
Wonders, and you?
My Nephew, prince of Thessaly
Tho 〈◊〉 your servant Doru•
Very strange; Gynecia
My dear Lord returned
A thousand kisses welcome him to life
Which I was weary of in thy loss.
My daughters
Oh my father
Are you Philonax?
Your trusty servant
The oracle is accomplished.
You amass me, let me collect
Oh my sweet Pyrocles
We shall not be divor'd I hope again
I am your servant ever
Divinest Mistress
Your souls I see are married
Let me present these princes to be your sons
Is this real?
It is dangerous to expect the story.
I feared the drink, but it may be his virtue
To increase his love to me, Isle tell you more within sir.
Let me obtain your pardons
To his Chamber 〈◊〉 him gently
All is strange.
Never was day so full of happy change

HOw now presumpt'ous Lad, think thou that wee
Will be disturbed with this thy Infancy
Of wit:—
Or doe's thy amorous thoughts beget a flame
(Beyond it's merit) for to court the name
Of Poet; or is it common now adays
Such slender wits dare claim such things as Baize:
Or doe's thy sickly Fancy think to get
Some fool to be enamoured on thy wit?
Thy reason, prithee, why, ambitious Boy,
Thou dost present the world with such a toy;
Yet give it such a title, that it were sin
To view the outside, and not look within;
The Fancies Theater, a Title wee
Durst ne'er assume to reach, much less for thee:
It is the very Prologue, to invite
A Puritan to covet for it's sight.
And then again I wonder, what mad vain
Did prompt thy Fancy, to present a strain
(So far unworthy) to so bright an eye,
Where all deserts and true perfections lye.
When I behold his name, me thinks I see
Phoebus himself, the God of Poesy,
—By whose judicious eye deserts shall live,—
And spite of killing Envy, shall survive.
I should mistrust my self, should I but think
His judgement will at thee connive, or wink;
To him, forgetful Lad, durst thou present
These weak conceits; or was it to prevent
Our rasher censure; thinking thou might sing
At peace, once sheltered underneath his wing?
I laugh to see thy follies, yet I swear
I heartily could wish thy Fancies were
Such as might well deserve him; for, know, I
Doe envy at thy blessed prosperity.
Is not the world crammed full of wits? why then
Should thou be favoured thus above those men,
Whose high and rare deserts, doth claim to be
The Kingdoms best and richest Treasury?
Yet all their fortunes, and their merits, they
Would level at his feet; and, well they may.
IT is confessed, that Time's old age could yet
Ne'er glory in a world, so full of wit,
Nor was his snowy hairs crowned with delight
Of sweeter choicer Raptures, such as might
(Like gold-tongu'd Orpheus) make stones follow men:
Their Verse extinct, Stones propagate again,
And though the world doth boast of such, yet wee
Doe find it stained with base impiety;
Such as thy self proud Momus, that dost strive
To damn young wits, to keep thine own alive.
Time must amend this fault I say, unless
The world is weary of the big swollen Press,
And her deliverings; When our Wits are dead,
Shall only their great Names be registered,
And not their works; or shall not th'Muses heir•
Increase and multiply as Time, and Years?
For now adays our younger wits are quite
Disheartened by the venom of thy spite;
Whose base detraction would have none to be
Enrolled within the List of Poetry,
But of thy Sect; whose numbers still increase,
Belching out foule-mouth'd words, derision's ease;
For could your Sect make what you'd mend, it were well,
It is better prate than doe: But let me tell
The world my humour, though I've often bin
Taxed as being guilty of this Critic sin,
In giving leave to your profane intent,
(A thing Heaven knows, my judgment never meant)
I doe pro•est, though Opportunity
You have engrossed and bribed, yet, it was not I.
I hate thy doings, so I'll henceforth be
A scorner of thy base dishonesty.
Is it not time that Time should urge the ayre
Of such gross putrefaction; and repair
The almost lost deserts of many, which
Dare not presume their senses to enrich
With the Divine instinct of Poesy:
Fearing thy Carping and thy Blasphemy.
There cannot now a Rapture be put forth;
But thou detract'st the substance of their worth.
Is thy wit rare, or dost thou think there's none
Can equalise thy Fancies, but thine own?
Misguided selfe-conceited Idiots, see,
But your own ignorance and simplicity;
And then you'll yield it is better mend, than make;
This without Bribe, or favour, I have spake
For him whose wit's (as yet) but raw, till Time
And years hath taught him higher for to climb.
Then forward (Youth) let not the Critics eye
Be th'cause •o stay thy ingenuity.
LEt me first crave from thee gray-headed Time,
Thy absolution, ever I put my Rime
To be a Courtier in the wanton ayre,
Making their Progress to each witty fair.
And courteous Mistress, unto whose white hand
I wish them happy journey, while I stand
Devoted for their service: I have been
Too, too, too prodigal, and have not seen
My errors: but have wilfully run on,
As Steward to some liberal Gentleman?
Where I have been too lavish, and have spent
What was my Masters, freely to me lent.
And though the Steward hath but little now
Left for to show his Master, yet I vow
I have some remnants left, although they be
But shreds to what I might have gained from thee.
If I have used thee ill. I'll be thy Slave,
And henceforth dote on nothing but my grave.
Yet let me thus much tell thee; my desire
Ne'er kindled from a base ambitious fire
Of an applause, though carping Momus hee
Murmurs, and bites my Title Page and me.
I have observe•d his envy▪ and I say,
I doe not this in hope to get a pay,
Reward, or such base mercenary gain;
Let them that gape for it, have it for their pain.
I will not sell that little mite of wit,
If so (without offence) I dare term it,
At any rate; Nor doe I care the while,
If at the Title they doe lend a smile;
I willingly would please them, yet if they
Will not be pleased, I weigh not what they say.
My Title Momus, let me tell thee true,
Is for to please my self, not to please you.
Nor doe I strive to gain a Poets name;
A title my weak soul durst never aim
To court at; For, I may as soon aspire,
To kiss the Sun, as warm me at that fire.
To end expostulation, thus much know,
What my this•ts can merit, I doe owe
To him whose kind acceptance makes me blessed,
Lifting me higher than the Eagles nest.
And if my wit increase (as years in me)
I shall aspire no higher than to be
Accounted as his Servant; and will lay
My off'rings at his feet as well as they,
Whom you allege deserved him better; why?
They can but give their store, and so will I.
Then why should you as cankered, so deject
That, which his wisedome's pleased with to protect:
But I'll not bar your custom, for it is known
You will detract all Writings but your own.

OPinion, which our Author cannot court,
(For the dear daintiness of it) has, of late,
From the old way of Plays possessed a Sort
Only to run to those, that carry state
In Scene magnificent and language high;
And Clothes worth all the rest, except the Action.
And such are only good those Leaders cry;
And into that belief draw on a Faction,
That must despise all sportive, merry Wit,
Because some such great Play had none in it.
But it is known (peace to their Memories)
The Poets late sublimed from our Age,
Who best could understand, and best devise
Works, that must ever live upon the Stage,
Did well approve, and lead this humble way,
Which we are bound to travail in to night;
And, though it be not traced so well, as They
Discovered it by true Phoebean light,
Pardon our just Ambition, yet that strive
To keep the weakest Branch of the Stage alive.
I mean the weakest in their great esteem,
That count all slight, that's under us, or nigh;
And only those for worthy Subjects deem,
Fetched, or reached at (at least) from far, or high:
When low and home-bred Subjects have their use,
As well, as those, fetched from on high, or far;
And it is as hard a labour for the Muse
To move the Earth, as to disl•dge a Star.
See, yet, those glorious Plays; and let their sight
Your Admiration move; these your Delight.
TO me, and to the City, Sir, you are welcome,
And so are all about you: we have long
Suffered in want of such fair Company.
But now that Times calamity has given way
(Thanks to high Providence) to your kinder visits,
We are (like half pined wretches, that have lain
Long on the planks of sorrow, strictly tied
To a forced abstinence, from the sight of friends)
The sweetlier filled with joy.
Alas, I bring
Sorrow too much with me to fill one house,
In the sad number of my family.
Be comforted good Sir, my house, which now
You may be pleased to call your own, is large
Enough to hold you all; and for your sorrows,
You came to lose 'hem: And I hope the means
Is readily at hand: The Doctor's coming,
Who, as by Letters, I advertised you,
Is the most promising man to cure your Son,
The Kingdom yields; it will astonish you
To hear the marvels he hath done in cures
Of such distracted ones, as is your son,
And not so much by bodily Physic (no!
He sends few Recipes to the Apothecaries)
As medicine of the mind, which he infuses
So skilfully, yet by familiar ways,
That it begets both wonder and delight
In his observers, while the stupid patient
Finds health at unawares.
You speak well of him:
Yet I may fear, my sons long grown disease
Is such he hath not met with.
Then isle tell you Sir,
He cured a Country gentleman, that fell mad
For spending of his land before he sold it:
That is, it was sold to pay his debts: All went
That way, for a dead horse, as one would say,
He had not money left to buy his dinner,
Upon that whole-sale day. This was a cause,
Might make a gentleman mad you'll say; and him
It did, as mad as land less Squire could bee.
This Doctor by his art removed his madness,
And mingled so much wit among his brains,
That, by the over-flowing of it merely,
He gets and spends five hundred pound a year now,
As merrily as any Gentleman
In Derbyshire; I name no man. But this
Was pretty well you'll say.
My sonne's disease
Grows not that way.
There was a Lady mad,
I name no Lady: but stark mad she was,
As any in the Country, City, or almost
In Court could be.
How fell she mad?
With study;
Tedious and painful study: And for what
Now can you think?
For painting, or new fashions.
I cannot think for the Philosophers stone.
No, it was to find a way to love her husband,
Because she did not, and her friends rebuked her.
Was that so hard to find, if she desired it.
She was seven years in search of it, &amp; could not,
Though she consumed his whole estate by it.
It was he was mad then.
No; he was not borne
With wit enough to loose, but mad was she
Until this Doctor took her into cure,
And now she lies as lovingly on a flockebed
With her own Knight, as she had done on down▪
With many others, but I name no parties,
Yet this was well you'll say.
Would all were well.
Then sir, of Officers, and men of place,
Whose senses were so numbed, they understood not
Bribes from dew fees, and fell on premunires,
He has cured diverse, that can now distinguish,
And know both when, and how to take, of both;
And grow most safely rich by it, tother day
He set the brains of an Attorney right,
That were quite topsy turvy overturned
In a pitch ore the Bar; so that (poor man)
For many Moons, he knew not whether he
Went on his heeels or's head, till he was brought
To this rare Doctor, now he walkets again,
As upright in his calling, as the boldest
Amongst 'hem. This was well you'll say.
Tic much.
And then for horn mad Citizens my neigh∣bours,
He cures them by the dozens, and we live
As gently with our wives, as Rams with Ewes.
We doe you say, were you one of his Patients.
'Slid he has almost caught me; No Sir no,
I name no parties I, But wish you merry;
I strain to make you so, and could tell forty
Notable cures of his to pass the time
Until he comes.
But pray, has he the art
To cure a husbands Jealousy?
Mine sir he did: 'Sfoot I am caught again.
But still you name no Party, pray how long,
Good master Blaze, has this so famous doctor
Whom you so well set out, been a professor?
Never in public: Nor endures the name
Of Doctor, though I call him so, but lives
With an odd Lord in town, that looks like no Lord,
My Doctor goes more like a Lord then he. 
O welcome sir, I sent mine own wife for you:
Ha you brought her home again?
She's in your house,
With Gentlewomen, who seem to lodge here.
Yes sir, this Gentleman's wife, and his sons wife:
They all aisle something, but his son (tic thought)
Is falling into madness, and is brought
Up by his careful father to the town here
To be your patient, speak with him about it.
How doe you find him Sir? do's his disease
Take him by fits; or is it constantly,
And at all times the same?
For the most part
It is only inclining still to worse,
As he grows more in days; by all the best
Conjectures we have met with in the country,
Tic found a most deep melancholy.
Of what ye•res is he?
Of five and twenty Sir.
Was it borne with him? is it natural,
Or accidental? have you or his mother
Been so at any time affected?
Never,
Not she unto her grave; nor I, till then,
Knew what a sadness meant; though since, I have
In my sons sad condition, and some crosses
In my late marriage, which at further time
I may acquaint you with.
the old man's jealous
Of his young wife; I find him by the question
He put me to ere while.
Is your son married?
Diverse years since; for we had hope a wife
Might have restrained his travelling thoughts, and so
Have been a means to cure him; but it failed us.
What has he in his younger years been most
Addicted to? what study? or what practise?
You have now, Sir, found the question, which I think
Will lead you to the ground of his distemper.
That's the next way to the cure. Come quickly, quickly▪
In tender years he always loved to read
Reports of travails, and of voyages;
And when young boys, like him, would tire themselves
With sports, and pastimes, and restore their spirits
Again by meat and sleep; he would whole days
And nights (sometimes by stealth) be on such books
As might convey his fancy round the world.
Very good, on.
When he grew up towards twenty,
His mind was all on fire to be abroad;
Nothing but travail still was all his aim;
There was no voyage or foreign expedition
Be said to be in hand, but he made suit
To be made one in it His mother and
My self opposed him still in all, and strongly
Against his will, still held him in; and won
Him into marriage; hoping that would call
In his extravagant thoughts, but all prevailed not,
Nor stayed him (though at home) from travailing
So far beyond himself, that now too late,
I wish he had gone abroad to meet his fate.
Well sir, upon good terms Isle undertake
Your son: let's see him.
Yet there's more: his wife Sir.
Isle undertake her too. Is she mad too?
They'll have mad children then.
Hold you your peace.
Alas the danger is they will have none,
He takes no joy in her; and she no comfort
In him: for though they have bin three years wed,
They are yet ignorant of the marriage bed,
I shall find her the madder of the two then.
Indeed she's full of passion, which she utters
By the effects, as diversely, as several
Objects reflect upon her wandering fancy,
Sometimes in extreme weepings, and anon
In vehement laughter; now in sullen silence,
And presently in loudest exclamations.
Come let me see 'hem Sir, isle undertake
Her too: have you any more? how does your wife?
Some other time for her.
Isle undertake
Her too: and you your self Sir (by your favour▪
And some few yellow spots, which I perceive
About your Temples) may require some Council.
So, he has found him.
But my son, my son sir?
Now Bab, what news?
There's news too much within,
For any home-bred Christian understanding.
How does my son?
He is in travail Sir.
His fits upon him?
Yes, pray Doctor Hughball
Play the Man-midwife, and deliver him
Of his huge Timpani of news; of Monsters,
Pigmies, and Giants, Apes, and Elephants,
Griffons, and Crocodiles; men upon women,
And women upon men; the strangest doings
As far beyond all Christendom, as tic to it.
How, how?
Beyond the Moon and Stars I think,
Or mount in Cornwall either.
How prettily like a fool she talks?
And she were not mine own wife, I could be
So taken with her.
It is most wondrous strange.
He talks much of the Kingdom of Cathaya,
Of one great Caan, and goodman Proctor Iohn,
(What ever they be) and says that Coon's a Clown
Unto the Iohn he speaks of▪ And that Iohn
Dwells up almost at Paradise: But sure his mind
Is in a wilder ness: For there he says
Are Geese that have two heads a piece, and Hens
That bear more wool upon their backs than sheep.
O Mandevile, lets to him Lead the way sir.
And men with heads like hounds.
Enough, enough.
You'll find enough within I warrant ye.
And here comes the poor mad gentleman's wife,
Almost as mad as he: she haunts me all
About the house to impart something to me:
Poor heart I guess her grief, and pit•y her.
To keep a Maiden-head three years after Marriage,
Under wed-locke and key, insufferable! monstrous,
It turns into a wolf within the flesh,
Not to be fed with Chickens, and tame Pigeons.
J could wish maids be warned by it, not to marry
Before they have wit to lose their Maiden-heads,
For fear they match with men whose wits are past it.
What a sad look, and what a sigh was there?
Sweet Mistress Ioyl•sse, how is it with you now?
When J shall know Jle tell, pray tell me first,
How long have you been married?
Now she is on it. Three years forsooth.
And truly so have J, we shall agree J see.
If you'll be merry.
No woman merrier, now J have met with one
Of my condition. Three years married say you, ha, ha, ha,
What ails she trow?
Three years married, Ha, ha, ha.
Is that a laughing matter?
Tic just my story. And you have had no child,
That's still my story, Ha, ha, ha.
Nay I have had two children.
Are you sure on it,
Or does your husband only tell you so,
Take heed o'that, for husbands are deceitful.
But I am of the surer side, I am sure
I groaned for mine and bore 'hem. when at best,
He but believes he got 'hem.
Yet both he
And you may be deceived, for now Isle tell you,
My husband told me, faced me down and stood on it,
We had three sons, and all great travellers,
That one had shook the great Turk by the beard,
I never saw 'hem, nor am I such a fool
To think that children can be got and borne,
Trained up to men, and then sent out to travel,
And the poor mother never know nor feel
Any such matter; there's a dream indeed.
Now you speak reason, and tic nothing but
Your husbands madness that would put that dream
Into you.
He may put dreams into me, but
He ne'er put child nor any thing towards it yet
To me to making: something sure belongs
To such a worcester••• for I am past a child
My self to 〈◊〉 they are found in parsley beds,
Strawberry banks or Rosemary bushes, though
I must confess I have sought and searched such places,
Because I would fine have had one.
Lass poor fool.
Pray tell me, for I think no body hears us,
How came you by your babes? I cannot think
Your husband got them you.
Fool did I say?
She is a witch I think: why not my husband,
Pray can you charge me with another man?
Nor with him neither, be not angry pray now.
For were I now to dye, I cannot guess
What a man do's in child-getting, I remember
A wanton maid once lay with me, and kissed
And clip't, and clapped me strangely, and then wished
That I had been a man to have got her with child:
What must I then have done, or (good now tell me)
What has your husband done to you?
Was ever
Such a poor piece of innocence, three years married?
Does not your husband use to lye with you?
Yes he do's use to lye with me, but he do's not
Lye with me to use me as she should I fear,
Nor doe I know to teach him, will you tell me,
Isle lye with you and practise if you please.
Pray take me for a night or two: or take
My husband and instruct him, But one night,
Our country folks will say, you London wives
Doe not lye every night with your own husbands.
Your country folks should have done well to have sent
Some news by you, but I trust none told you there,
We use to leave our fools to lye with mad-men.
Nay now again you're angry.
No not I
But rather pity your simplicity.
Come Isle take charge and care of you.
I thank you.
And wage my skill, against my doctors art,
Sooner to ease you of these dangerous fits,
Then he shall rectify your husbands wits.
Indeed, indeed, I thank you.
Why broughtst thou not mine Arms, and Pedigree
Home with thee Blaze, mine honest Heralds, Painter?
I have not yet my Lord, but ell's in readiness,
According to the Heralds full directions.
But has he gone to the root, has he derived me,
Ex origin, ab antiquo? has he fetched me
Far enough Blaze?
Full four descents beyond
The conquest my good Lord, and finds that one
Of your French ancestry came in with the conqueror.
Iefrey Letoy, it was he, from whom the English
Letoy's have our descent; and here have took
Such footing, that we'll never out while France
Is France, and England England,
And the Sea passable to transport a fashion.
My ancestors and I have been beginners
Of all new fashions in the Court of England
From before Primo Record Secundi
Until this day.
I cannot think my Lord
They'll follow you in this though.
Mark the end,
I am without a precedent for my humour.
But is it spread, and talked of in the town?
It is my Lord, and laughed at by a many.
I am more beholding to them, then all the rest:
Their laughter makes me merry; others mirth,
And not mine own it is, that feeds me that
Battens me as poor men's cost do's Usurers.
But tell me Blaze, what say they of me, ha?
They say my Lord you look more like a peddler,
Then like a Lord, and live more like an Emperor.
Why there they have me right, let others shine
Abroad in cloth of bodkin, my broad cloth,
Pleases mine eye as well, my body better,
Besides I'm sure tic paid for (to their envy)
I buy with ready money: and at home here
With as good meat, as much magnificence,
As costly pleasures, and as rare delights,
Can satisfy my appetite and senses,
As they with all their public shows, and braveries.
They run at ring, and tilt against one another,
I and my men can play a match at football,
Wrestle a handsome fall, and pitch the bar,
And crack the cudgels, and a pate sometimes,
Twould doe you good to see it.
More then to feel it.
They hunt the Dear, the Hare, the Fox, the Otter,
Polcates, or Harlots, what they please, whilst I
And my mad Grigs, my men can run at base,
And breath our selves at Barly-breake, and dancing.
Yes my Lord in the country when you are there.
And now I am here in the city, Sir, I hope
I please my self with more choice home delights,
Then most men of my rank.
I know my Lord
Your house in substance is an Amphitheater
Of exercise and pleasure.
Sir, I have
For exercises, Fencing, Dancing, Vaulting,
And for delight, Musique of all best kinds:
Stage-playes, and Masques, are nightly my pastimes.
And all within my self. My own men are
My Musique, and my Actors. J keep not
A man or boy but is of quality:
The worst can sing or play his part of the Viols,
And act his part too in a Comedy,
For which I lay my bravery on their backs;
And where another Lord undoes his followers,
J maintain mine like Lords. And there's my bravery.
Now tell me Blaze, look these like Peddlers men?
Rather an Emperors my Lord.
I tell thee,
These lads can act the Emperors lives all over,
And Shakespeares Chronicled histories, to boot,
And were that Caesar, or that English Earl,
That loved a Play and Player so well now living,
I would not be out-vyed in my delights.
My Lord tic well.
I love the quality of Playing I, J love a Play withal
My heart, a good one; and a Player that is
A good one too, with all my heart: As for the Poets,
No men love them, I think, and therefore
I write all my plays my self, and make no doubt
Some of the Court will follow
Me in that too. Let my fine Lords
Talk of their Horse-tricks, and their Jockeys, that
Can out-talke them. Let the Gallants boast
Their May-games, Play-games, and their Mistresses,
I love a Play in my plain clothes, I,
And laugh upon the Actors in their brave ones.
My Lord, your dinner stays prepared.
Well, well,
Be you as ready with your grace as I
Am for my meat, and all is well. Blaze we have rambled
From the maine point this while, it seems by his letter,
My Doctor's busy at thy house. I know who's there,
Beside, give him this Ring, Tell him it wants
A finger: farewell good Blaze.
Tell him it wants a finger! My small wit,
Already finds what finger it must fit.
Sir I applaud your noble disposition,
And even adore the spirit of Travail in you,
And purpose to waite on it through the world,
In which I shall but tread again the steps
I heretofore have gone.
All the world o'er have you bin already?
Over and under too.
In the Antipodes?
Yes, through, and through:
No Isle nor Angle in that Nether world,
But I have made discovery of: Pray sir sit;
And sir be you attentive, I will warrant
His speedy cure without the help of Gallon,
Hippocrates, Avicen, or Dioscorides,
A rare man: Husband, truly I like his person
As well as his rare skill.
Into your chamber.
I doe not like your liking of men's persons.
Nay Lady you may stay: Hear and admire,
If you so please: But make no interruptions.
And let no looser words, or wandering look
Bewray an intimation of the slight
Regard you bear your husband, lest I send you
Upon a further pilgrimage, than he
Feigns to convey my son.
O jealousy!
Doe you think sir, to the Antipodes such a journey?
I think there's none beyond it; and that Mandevile
Whose excellent work this is, was the only man
That ever came near it.
Mandevile went far.
Beyond all English legs that I can read of.
What think you sir of Drake, our famous Countryman?
Drake was a Dy'dapper to Mandevile,
Candish, and Hawkins, Furbisher, all our voyagers
Went short of Mandevile: But had he reached
To this place here — yes here — this wilderness,
And seen the trees of the Sun and Moon, that speak,
And told King Alexander of his death, he then
Had left a passage op for Travellers:
That now is kept and guarded by wild beasts,
Dragons, and Serpents, Elephants white and blue
Unicorns, and Lyons of many colours,
And monsters more, as numberless, as nameless.
Stay there,
Read here else: can you read?
Is it not true?
No truer than I ha'seen't.
Have you bin there Sir, have you seen those trees?
And talked with 'hem▪ and tasted of their fruit.
Read here again then: it is written here,
That you may live four or five hundred year.
Brought you none of that fruit home with you sir?
You would have some of't would you, to have hope
T'out-live your husband by it.
Y'd have it for you,
In hope you might out-live your jealousy.
Your patience both I pray; I know the grief
You both doe labour with, and how to cure it.
Would I had given you half my land it were done.
Would I had given him half my love, to settle
The tother half free from encumbrances
Upon my husband.
Doe not think it strange sir:
Isle make your eyes witnesses of more
Than J relate, if you'll but travail with me▪
You hear me not deny that all is true
That Mandevile delivers of his Travails,
Yet J my self may be as well believed.
Since you speak reverently of him, say on.
Of Europe isle not speak, tic too near home:
Who's not familiar with the Spanish garb,
Th'Jtalian shrug, French cringe, and German hug?
Nor will J trouble you with my observations
Fetched from Arabia, Paphlagonia,
Mesopotamia, Mauritania,
Syria, Thessalia, Persia, India,
All still is too near home: though I have touched
The Clouds upon the Pyrenaean mountains,
And bin on Paphos isle, where I have kissed
The image of bright Venus: All is still
Too near home to be boasted.
That I like well in him too, he will not boast of kissing
A woman too near home.
These things in me are poor: they found
In a far travellers care,
Like the reports of those, that beggingly
Have put out, on returns from Edinburgh,
Paris, or Venice, or perhaps Madrid,
Whither a Milliner may with half a nose
Smell out his way: And is not near so difficult,
As for some man in debt, and unprotected
To walk from Charing-crosse to th'old Exchange.
No, J will pitch no nearer than the Antipodes;
That which is farthest distant, foot to foot
Against our Region.
What with their heals upwards?
Bless us! how scope they breaking of their necks?
they walk upon firm earth, as we doe here,
And have the Firmament over their heads,
As we have here
And yet just under us!
Where is hell then? if they whose feet are towards us,
At the lower part of the world have heaven too
Beyond their heads, whore's hell?
You may find that
Without inquiry: Cease your idle questions.
Sure Hell's above ground then in jealous husbands▪
What people sir (J pray proceed) what people
Are they of the Antipodes? are they not such
As Mandevile writes of, without heads or necks,
Having their eyes placed on their shoulders, and
Their mouths amidst their breasts?
J so indeed,
Though heals go upwards, and their feet should slip,
They have no necks to break.
Silence sweet Lady.
Pray give the gentleman leave to understand me.
The people through the whole world of Antipodes,
In outward feature, language, and religion,
Resemble those to whom they are supposite:
They under Spain appear like Spaniards,
Under France French-men, under England English
To the exterior show: but in their manners,
Their carriage, and condition of life
Extremely contrary. To come close to you,
What part of the world's Antipodes shall J now
Decipher to you, or would you travail to?
The furthest off.
That is the Antipodes of England.
The people there are contrary to us.
As thus; here (heaven be praised) the Magistrates
Govern the people: there the people rule
The Magistrates.
There's precious bribing then.
You'll hold your peace,
Nay Lady tic by Nature,
Here generally men govern the women.
I would they could else.
You will hold your peace.
But there the women over-rule the men,
If some men fail here in their power, some women
Slip their holds there. As parents here, and masters,
Command, there they obey the child and servant.
But pray Sir, is it by nature or by art,
That wives oresway their husbands there?
By nature.
Then art's above nature, as they are under us.
In brief Sir, all
Degrees of people both in sex, and quality,
Deport themselves in life and conversation,
Quite contrary to us.
Why then the women
Doe get the men with child▪ and put the poor fools
To grievous pain I warrant you in bearing.
Into your Chamber, get you in I charge you.
By no means, as you tender your sons good.
No Lady no; that were to make men women,
And women men. But there the maids doe woe
The Bachelors, and tic most probable,
The wives lye uppermost.
That is a trim
Upside-downe Antipodian trick indeed.
And then at christenings and gossips feasts,
A woman is not seen, the men doe all
The tittle-tattle duties, while the women
Hunt, Hawk, and take their pleasure.
Have they good game I pray Sir?
Excellent,
But by the contraries to ours, for where
We Hawk at Pheasant, Partridge, Mallard, Heron,
With Goshawk, Tarsell, Falcon, Laneret;
Our Hawks, become their game, our game their Hawks,
And so the like in hunting. There the Dear
Pursue the Hounds, and (which you may think strange)
I have seen one Sheep worry a dozen Foxes,
By Moone-shine; in a morning before day,
They hunt, trayne-sents with Oxen, and plow with Dogs.
Hugh, hugh, hugh.
Are not their Swans all black, and Ravens white?
Yes indeed are they; and their Parrets teach
Their Mistresses to talk.
That's very strange.
They keep their Cats in cages,
From Mice that would devour them else; and birds
Teach 'hem to whistle, and cry beware the Rats Pusse.
But these are frivolous nothings. I have known
Great Ladies ride great horses run at tilt;
At Ring, Races, and hunting matches, while
Their Lords at home have painted, pawned their Plate
And Jewels to feast their honourable servants.
And there the Merchants wives doe deal abroad
Beyond seas, while their husbands cuckold them
At home.
Then there are cuckolds too it seems,
As well as here.
Then you conclude here are.
By hearesay Sir. I am not wise enough
To speak it on my knowledge yet.
Not yet!
Patience good Sir,
Hugh, hugh, hugh.
What do you laugh, that there is cuckold-making
In the Antipodes, I tell you Sir,
It is not so abhorred here as tic held
In reputation there: all your old men
Doe mary girls, and old women boys,
As generation were to be maintained
Only by cuckold making.
Monstrous.
Pray your Patience.
There's no such honest men there in their world,
As are their Lawyers: they give away
Their practise; and t'enable 'hem to doe so,
Being all handy-crafts, or Labouring men,
They work (poor hearts full hard) in the vacations,
To give their law for nothing in the term times.
No fees are taken: Which makes their divines,
Being generally covetous, the greatest wranglers
In Law suits of a kingdom, you have not there
A gentleman in debt, though citizens
Haunt them with cap in hand to take their wares.
On credit.
What fine sport would that be here now!
All wit and mirth and good society
Is there among the hirelings, clowns, and tradesmen,
And all their Poets are Puritans.
Have they Poets.
And players too. But they are all the sobrest
Precisest people picked out of a nation.
I never saw a play.
Lady you shall.
She shall not.
She must if you can hope for any cure,
Be governed Sir: your jealousy will grow
A worse disease then your sons madness else,
You are content I take the course I told you of
To cure the gentleman.
I must be Sir.
Say Master Perigrine, will you travail now
With me to the Antipodes, or has not
The journey wearied you in the description.
No I could hear you a whole fortnight, but
Let's loose no time, pray talk on as we pass.
First, Sir a health to auspicate our travails,
And we'll away.
Give mee't. What's he? One sent
I fear from my dead mother, to make stop
Of our intended voyage.
No Sir: drink.
My Lord, Sir understands the course you're in,
By your letters he tells me; and bad me give you
This Ring, which wants a finger here he says
We'll not be stayed.
No Sir, he brings me word
The Mariner calls away; the wind and tide
Are fair, and they are ready to weigh anchor,
Hoist sails, and only stay for us, pray drink Sir.
A health then to the willing winds and seas,
And all that steer towards the Antipodes.
He has not drunk so deep a draught this twelvmonth.
Tic a deep draught indeed, and now tic down,
And carries him down to the Antipodes?
I mean but in a dream.
Alas I fear.
See he begins to sink.
Trust to my sk•ll,
Pray take an arm, and see him in his cabin.
Good Lady save my Ring that's fallen there.
In sooth a mervailous neat and costly one
So, so, the Ring has found a finger.
Come sir, aboard, aboard, aboard, aboard.
To bed, to bed, to bed: I know your voyage,
And my dear Lords dear plot, I understand,
Whose Ring hath past here by your flight of hand.
TO night says thou my Hughball?
By all means,
And if your Play takes to my expectation,
As I not doubt my potion works to yours,
Your fancy and my cure shall be cried up
Miraculous. O you're the Lord of fancy.
I'm not ambitious of that title Sir,
No, the Letoy's are of Antiquity,
Ages before the fancies were begot,
And shall beget still new to the worlds end.
But are you confident of your potion doctor?
Sleeps the young man?
Yes▪ and has slept these twelve hours,
After a thousand mile an hour out-right,
By sea and land; and shall awake anon
In the Antipodes.
Well Sir my Actors
Are all in readiness; and I think all perfect,
But one, that never will be perfect in a thing
He studies; yet he makes such shifts extempore,
(Knowing the purpose what he is to speak to)
That he moves mirth in me 'bove all the rest.
For I am none of those Poetic furies,
That threats the Actors life, in a whole play,
That adds a syllable, or takes away.
If he can frible through, and move delight
In others, I am pleased.
It is that mimic fellow which your Lordship
But lately entertained.
The same.
He will be wondrous apt in my affair:
For I must take occasion to interchange,
Discourse with him sometimes amidst their Scenes,
T'informe my patient, my mad young travellor
In diverse matters.
Doe, put him to it: I use't my self sometimes.
I know it is your way.
Well to the business.
Hast wrought the jealous Gentleman, old Ioylesse,
To suffer his wife to see our Comedy.
She brings your Ring, my Lord, upon her finger,
And he brings her in's hand. I have instructed her
To spur his jealousy of of the legs.
And I will help her in it.
the young distracted
Gentlewoman too, that's sick of her virginity,
Yet knows not what it is; and Blaze and's wife
Shall all be your guests to night, and not alone
Spectators, but (as we will carry it) Actor
To fill your Comic Scenes with double mirth.
Go fetch 'hem then, while I prepare my Actors.
Within there hoe?
1 This is my beard and hair.
2 My Lord appointed it for my part.
3 No, this is for you; and this is yours, this grey one.
4 Where be the foils, and Targets for the women?
1 Here, can't you see?
What a rude coil is there? But yet it pleases me.
1 You must not wear that Cloak and Hat.
2 Who told you so? I must.
In my first Scene, and you must wear that robe.
What a noise make those knaves? come in one of you:
Are you the first that answers to that name?
My Lord.
Why are not you ready yet?
I am not to put on my shape, before
I have spoke the Prologue. And for that my Lord
I yet want something.
What I pray with your grave formality?
I want my Beaver-shooes, and Leather-Cap,
To speak the Prologue in; which were appointed
By your Lordships own direction.
Well sir, well:
There they be for you; I must look to all.
Certes my Lord, it is a most apt conceit:
The Comedy being the world turned upside-downe,
That the presenter wear the Capital Beaver
Upon his feet, and on his head shooe-leather.
Trouble not you your head with my conceit,
But mind your part Let me not see you act now,
In your Scholastic way, you brought to town with ye▪
With see saw sack a down, like a Sawyer;
Nor in a Comic Scene, play Hercules furens,
Tearing your throat to split the Audients ears.
And you Sir, you had got a trick of late,
Of holding out your bum in a set speech;
Your fingers fibulating on your breast,
As if your Buttons, or your Band-strings were
Helps to your memory. Let me see you in it
No more I charge you. No, nor you sir, in
That over-action of the legs I told you of,
Your singles, and your doubles, Look you—thus—
Like one of the dancing Masters of the Bear-garden;
And when you have spoke, at end of every speech,
Not minding the reply, you turn you round
As Tumblers doe; when betwixt every feat.
They gather wind, by firking up their breeches.
Isle none of these, absurdities in my house.
But words and action married so together,
That shall strike harmony in the ears and eyes
Of the severest, if judicious Critics.
My Lord we are corrected.
Go, be ready:
But you Sir are incorrigible, and
Take licence to your self, to add unto
Your parts, your own free fancy; and sometimes
To alter, or diminish what the writer
With care and skill composed: and when you are
To speak to your coactors in the Scene,
You hold interloquutions with the Audients.
That is a way my Lord has bin allowed
On elder stages to move mirth and laughter.
Yes in the days of Tarlton and Kemp,
Before the stage was purged from barbarism,
And brought to the perfection it now shines with.
Then fools and jesters spent their wits, because
The Poets were wise enough to save their own
For profitabler uses. Let that pass.
Tonight, isle give thee leave to try thy wit,
In answering my Doctor, and his Patient
He brings along with him to our Antipodes.
I heard of him my Lord: Blaze gave me light
Of the mad Patient; and that he never saw
A Play in's life: it will be possible
For him to think he is in the Antipodes
Indeed, when he is on the Stage among us.
When't has been thought by some that have their wits,
That all the Players in the Town were sunk past rising.
Leave that sir to th'event. See all be ready:
Your Music properties, and —
All my Lord,
Only we want a person for a Mute.
Blaze when he comes shall serve. Go in.
My Guests J hear are coming.
My Lord, J am become your honours usher,
To these your guests. The worthy Mr. Ioylesse,
With his fair wife, and daughter in law.
They're welcome,
And you in the first place sweet Mistress Ioylesse.
You wear my ring J see; you grace me in it.
His Ring! what Ring? how came she by it?
Twill work.
J sent it as a pledge of my affection to you:
For J before have seen you, and doe languish,
Until J shall enjoy your love.
He courts her.
Next Lady—you—J have a toy for you too.
My Child shall thank you for it, when I have one.
I take no joy in toys since I was married.
Prettily answered! I make you no stranger
Kind Mistress Blaze.
Time was your honour used
Me strangely too, as you'll doe these I doubt not.
Honest Blaze,
Prithee go in, there is an Actor wanting.
Is there a part for me? how shall I study't?
Thou shalt say nothing.
Then if I doe not act
Nothing as well as the best of 'hem, let me be hist.
I say restore the Ring, and back with me.
To whom shall I restore it?
To the Lord that sent it.
Is he a Lord? I always thought and heard
In the Country, Lords were gallant Creatures. He
Looks like a thing not worth it: tic not his,
The Doctor gave it me, and I will keep it.
I use small verbal curtsy Mr. Ioylesse
(You see) but what I can in deed isle doe.
You know the purpose of your coming, and
I can but give you welcome. If your son
Shall receive ease in it, be the comfort yours,
The credit of't my Doctors. You are sad.
My Lord I would entreat we may return;
I fear my wife's not well.
Return I pray slight not so my curtsy.
Besides sir I am well; and have a mind
(A thankful one) to taste my Lords free bounty.
I never saw a play, and would be loath
To lose my longing now.
The air of London
Hath tainted her obedience already:
And should the Play but touch the vices of it,
She'd learn and practise 'hem. Let me beseech
Your Lord ships reacceptance of the un
Merited favour that she wears here, and
Your leave for our departure.
J will not
Be so dishonoured; nor become so ill
A master of my house, to let a Lady
Leave it against her will; and from her longing;
J will be plain wi'yee therefore: If your haste
Must needs post you away, you may depart,
She shall not not till the morning for mine honour.
Indeed tic a high point of honour in
A Lord to keep a private Gentleman's wife
From him.
J love this plain Lord better than
All the brave gallant ones, that ere I dream't on.
Tic time we take our seats. So if you'll stay.
Come sit with us, if not, you know your way.
Here are we fallen through the Doctors fingers.
Into the Lords hands. Fate deliver us.
Now the last minute of his sleeping fit
Determines. Raise him on his feet. So, so:
Rest him upon mine Arm. Remove that Chair,
Welcome a shore Sir in the Antipodes.
Are we arrived so far?
And on firm land.
Sailors you may return now to your ship.
What worlds of lands and Seas have I past over,
Neglecting to set down my observations,
A thousand thousand things remarkable
Have slipped my memory, as if all had been
Mere shadowy phantasms, or Fantastic dreams.
We'll write as we return Sir: and tic true▪
You slept most part of the journey hitherward,
The air was so somniferous: And it was well
You escaped the Calenture by it.
But how long doe you think I slept?
Eight months, and some odd days,
Which was but as so many hours and minutes
Of ones own natural Country sleep.
Eight Months —
It was nothing for so young a Brain.
How think you one of the seven Christian Champions,
David by name, slept seven years in a Leek-bed.
I think I have read it in their famous History.
But what chief thing of note now in our Travels
Can you call presently to mind? Speak like a Traveller.
I doe remember, as we past the Verge
Of the upper world, coming down, down-hill,
The setting Sun then bidding them good night,
Came gliding easily down by us; and struck
New day before us, lighting us our way;
But with such heate, that till he was got far
Before us, we even melted.
Well wrought potion. Very well observed sir.
But now we are come into a temperate clime
Of equal composition of elements
With that of London; and as well agreeable
Unto our nature, as you have found that air.
I never was at London.
Cry you mercy.
This Sir is Anti London. That's the Antipodes
To the grand City of our Nation,
Just the same people, language, and Religion,
But contrary in Manners, as I have told you.
I doe remember that relation,
As if you had but given it me this morning.
Now cast your Sea weeds off, and do fresh garments.
Hark sir their Music.
Here we may sit, and he not see us.
Now see one of the Natives of this Country,
Note his attire, his language, and behaviour.
Our far fetched Title over lands and seas,
Offers unto your view th'Antipodes.
But what Antipodes now shall you see?
Even those that foot to foot against London be,
Because no Traveller that knows that state,
Shall say we personate or imitate
Them in our actions: For nothing can
Almost be spoke, but some or other man,
Takes it unto himself; and says the stuff,
If it be vicious, or absurd enough.
Was woven upon his back. Far, far be all
That bring such prejudice mixed with their gall.
This play shall no Satiric Timist be
To tax or touch at either him or thee,
That art notorious. Tic so far below
Things in our orb, that doe among us flow,
That no degree, from Kaiser to the Clown,
Shall say this vice or folly was mine own.
This had bin well now, if you had not dreamt
Too long upon your syllables.
The Prologue call you this my Lord?
Tic my Lords Reader, and as good a lad
Out of his function, as I would desire
To mix withal in evil conversation.
Yes Lady, this was Prologue to the Play,
As this is to our sweet ensuing pleasures.
Kissing indeed is Prologue to a Play,
Composed by th'Divell, and acted by the Children
Of his black Revels, may hell take ye for it.
Indeed I am weary, and would fine go home.
Indeed but you must stay; and see the play.
The Play: what play? It is no Childrens play,
Nor no Child-getting play, pray is it?
You'll see anon. O now the Actors enter.
Why doe you not your office courteous friends?
Let me entreat you stay, and take me with you;
Lay but your hands on me: I shall not rest
until I be arrested. A sore shoulder-ache
Pains and torments me, till your virtuous hands
Doe clap or stroke it.
You shall pardon us.
And I beseech you pardon our intent,
Which was indeed to have arrested you:
But sooner shall the Charter of the City
Be forfeited, then varlets (like our selves)
Shall wrong a Gentleman's peace. So fare you well sir.
O you're unkind.
Pray what are those?
Two Catchpoles
Run from a Gentleman (it seems) that would
Have bin arrested.
Yonder's your Master,
Go take him you in hand, while I fetch breath,
O are you here? my Lady, and my self
Have sought you sweetly.
You, and your Lady, you
Should have said Puppy.
For we heard you were
To be arrested. Pray sir, who has bailed you?
I wonder who of all your bold acquaintance
That knows my Lady durst bail off her husband.
Indeed I was not touched.
Have you not made
An end by composition, and disbursed
Some of my Ladies money for a peace
That shall beget an open war upon you?
Confess it if you have: for twill come out.
She'll have you up you know. I speak it for your good.
I know it, and isle entreat my Lady wife
To mend thy wages tother forty shillings
A year, for thy true care of me.
Tic well Sir,
But now (if thou hast impudence so much,
As face to face, to speak unto a Lady
That is thy wife, and supreme head) tell me
At whose suit was it? or upon what action?
Debts I presume you have none: For who dares trust
A Ladies husband, who is but a Squire,
And under covert barn? it is some trespass—
Answer me not till I find out the truth.
The truth is —
Peace,
How dare thou speak the truth
Before thy wife? isle find it out my self.
In truth she handles him handsomely.
Doe you like it?
Yes, and such wives are worthy to be liked,
For giving good example.
Good! hold up
That humour by all means.
I think I have found it.
There was a certain Mercer sent you silks,
And cloth of gold to get his wife with child;
You slighted her, and answered not his hopes;
And now he lays to arrest you; is it not so?
Indeed my Lady wife tic so.
For shame
Be not ungrateful to that honest man,
To take his wares, and scorn to lye with his wife.
Do it I command you; what did I marry you for?
The portion that you brought me was not so
Abundant, though it were five thousand pounds
(Considering too the Joincture that I made you)
That you should disobey me.
It seems the husbands
In the Antipodes bring portions, and
The wives make Joinctures.
Very well observed.
And wives, when they are old, and past child-bearing,
Allow their youthful husbands other women.
Right. And old men give their young wives like licence.
That I like well. Why should not our old men,
Love their young wives as well?
Would you have it so?
Peace master Ioylesse, you are too loud. Good still,
Doe as my Lady bids, you got her woman
With child at half these words.
O, but another
Wife is another thing. Far be it from
A Gentleman's thought to doe so, having a wife
And hand-mayd of his own that he likes better.
There said you well; but take heed I advise you
How you love your own wench, or your own wife
Better then other men's.
Good Antipodian counsel.
Go to that woman, if she prove with child,
I'll take it as mine own.
her husband would
Doe so. But from my house I may not stray.
If it be me your wife commends you to,
You shall not need to stray from your own house.
I'll go home with you.
Precious! what doe you mean?
Pray keep your seat: you'll put the players out.
Here's goodly stuff! Shoe's in the Antipodes too.
And what are those?
All Antipodeans▪
Attend good Sir.
You know your charge, obey it.
What is his charge? or whom must he obey?
Good madam with your wilde authority;
You are his wife, tic true, and therein may
According to our law, rule, and control him.
But you must know withal, I am your servant,
And bound by the same law to govern you,
And be a stay to you in declining age,
To curb and qualify your head-strong will,
Which otherwise would ruin you. Moreover,
Though you're his wife, I am a breeding mother,
Of a dear child of his; and therein claim
More honour from him then you ought to challenge.
Insooth she speaks but reason.
Pray let's home then.
You have something there to look to, one would think,
If you had any care. How well you saw
Your father at School to day, and knowing how apt
He is to play the Truant.
But is he not
Yet gone to school?
Stand by, and you shall see.
Domino, domino duster. Three knaves in a cluster, &amp;c.
O this is gallant pastime Nay come on,
Is this your school? was that your lesson, ha?
Pray now good son, indeed, indeed.
Indeed
You shall to school, away with him; and take
Their wagships with him; the whole cluster of 'hem.
You shant send us now, so you shant.
We be none of your father, so we beant.
Away with 'hem I say; and tell their Schoolmistress,
What truants they are, and bid her pay 'hem soundly.
O, O, O.
Come, come, ye Gallows-clappers.
Alaffe, will no body beg pardon for
The poor old boys?
Sir, gentle Sir, a word with you.
To strangers Sir I can be gentle.
Good,
Now mark that fellow, he speaks Extempore.
Extempore call you him? he's a dogged fellow
To the three poor old things there, fie upon him.
Do men of such fair years here go to school?
They would dye dunces else.
Have you no young men scholars, sir I pray;
When we have beard laugh doctors?
He has wiped my lips, you question very wisely Sir.
So sir have wee; and many reverend teachers,
Grave counsellors at law; perfect statesmen.
That never knew use of Razor, which may live
For want of wit to loose their offices.
These were great scholars in their youth. But when
Age grows upon men here, their learning wastes,
And so decays; that if they live until
Threescore, their sons send them to school again.
They'd dye as speechless else as new born children.
Tic a wise nation; and the piety
Of the young men most rare and commendable,
Yet give me as a stranger leave to beg
Their liberty this day; and what they loose by it,
My father when he goes to school, shall answer.
I am abused on that side too.
Tic granted.
Hold up your heads and thank the gentleman
Like scholars, with your heals now.
Gratias, Gratias, Gratias. —
Well done son Peregrine, he's in's wits I hope.
If you lose yours the while, whore's my advantage?
And trust me, it was well done too of Extempore
To let the poor old children loose. And now
I look well on him he's a proper man.
She'll fall in love with the Actor, and undo me.
Do's not his Lady love him, sweet my Lord?
Love; yes, and lye with him, as her husband do's
Wed's maid. It is their law in the Antipodes.
But we have no such laws with us.
Doe you approve of such a law?
No; not so much
In this case, where the man and wife doe lye
With their inferior servants; But in the other,
Where the old Citizen would arrest the gallant
That took his wares and would not lye wed's wife,
There it seems reasonable, very reasonable.
Do's it?
Maked your own case, you are an old man,
I love a gentleman, you give him rich presents,
To get me a child (because you cannot) must not
We look to have our bargain?
Give me leave
Now to be gone my Lord, though I leave her
Behind me; she is mad, and not my wife,
And I may leave her.
Come; you are moved I see,
I'll settle all; But first, prevail with you
To taste my wine and sweet meats. The Comedians
Shall pause the while. This you must not deny me.
I must not live here always, that's my comfort.
I thank you Sir, for the poor men's release,
It was the first request that I have made
Since I came in these confines.
Tic our custom
To deny strangers nothing: yea, to offer
Of any thing we have, that may be useful,
In courtesy to strangers. Will you therefore
Be pleased to enter Sir this habitation,
And take such viands, beverage, and repose
As may refresh you after tedious travails?
Thou take him right: for I am sure he's hungry.
All I have seen since my arrival, are
Wonders. But your humanity excels.
Virtue in the Antipodes only dwells.
YEt, Mr. Ioylesse, are you pleased? you see
Here's nothing but fair play, and all above board.
But it is late, and these long intermissions
By banqueting and Courtship twixt the Acts
Will keep back the Catastrophe of your play,
Until the morning light.
All shall be short.
And then in midst of Scenes
You interrupt your Actors; and tie them
To lengthen time in silence, while you hold
Discourse, by th'by.
Pox o'thy jealousy.
Because I give thy wife a look, or word
Sometimes! What if I kiss (thus) Isle not eat her.
So, so, his banquet works with him.
And for my Actors, they shall speak, or not speak
As much, or more, or less, and when I please,
It is my way of pleasure, and isle use it.
So sit: They enter.
Your case is clear, I understand it fully,
And need no more instructions, this shall serve,
To firk your Adversary from Court to Court,
If he stand out upon rebellious Legs,
But till Octabis Michaelis next.
Isle bring him on submissive knees.
What's he?
A Lawyer, and his Client there, a Poet.
Goes Law so torn, and Poetry so brave?
Will you but give the Actors leave to speak,
They may have done the sooner?
Let me see,
This is your bill of Parcels.
Yes, of all
My several wares, according to the rates
Delivered unto my debtor,
Wares does he say?
Yes, Poetry is good ware
In the Antipodes, though there be some ill payers,
As well as here; but Law there rights the Poets.
Delivered too, and for the use of the right worshipful
Mr. Alderman Humblebee, as follows—Imprimis —
Umh, I cannot read your hand; your Character
Is bad, and your Orthography much worse.
Read it your self pray.
Doe Aldermen
Love Poetry in Antipodea London.
Better than ours doe Custards; but the worst
Pay-masters living there; worse than our gallants,
Partly for want of money, partly wit.
Can Aldermen want wit and money too?
That's wonderful.
Imprimis sir here is
For three religious Madrigals to be sung
By the holy Vestalls in Bridewell, for the
Conversion of our City wives and daughters,
Ten groats a piece, it was his own agreement.
Tic very reasonable.
Item, twelve Hymns,
For the twelve Sessions, during his Shrievalty,
Sung by the Quire of New-gate, in the praise
Of City Clemency (for in that year
No guiltless person suffered by their judgement)
Ten groats a piece also.
So, now it rises.
Why speaks your Poet so demurely?
Oh—
Tic a precise tone he has got among
The sober sister-hood.
Oh I remember,
The Doctor said Poets were all Puritans
In the Antipodes: But whore's the Doctor?
And whore's your son my Ioylesse?
Doe not mind him.
Item,
A Distich graven in his thumb-ring,
Of all the wise speeches and sayings of all
His Alder Predecessors, and his brethren
In two Kings reigns.
There was a curious Piece.
Two pieces he promised to me for it.
Item, inscriptions in his Hall and Parlour,
His Gallery, and garden, round the walls,
Of his own public acts, between the time
He was a Common Council man and shriefe,
One thousand lines put into wholesome verse.
Here's a sum towards indeed▪
 a thousand verses?
They come too, at the known rate of the City.
(That is to say at forty pence the score)
Eight pounds six shillings, eight pence.
Well sir, on.
Item, an Elegy for Mistress Alderwoman
Upon the death of one of her Coach-mares,
She prized above her daughter, being crooked—
The more beast she.
Ha, ha, ha.
Enough, enough sweet-heart.
Tic true, for I should weep for that poor daughter,
Tic like she'll have no children, pray now look,
Am not I crooked too?
No, no, sit down.
Item, a love Epistle for the Aldermanikin his son,
And a Book of the godly life and death
Of Mistress Katherine Stubs, which I have turned
Into sweet meetre, for the virtuous youth,
To woe an ancient Lady widow with.
Here is a large sum in all, for which isle try,
His strength in law, till he peccavi cry,
When I shall sing, for all his present bigness,
Jam{que} opus exegi quote nec Iovis Ira, nec ignis▪
The Lawyer speaks the Poets part.
He thinks
The more; the Poets in the Antipodes,
Are slow of tongue, but nimble with the pen.
The counsel and the comfort you have given
Me, requires a double fee.
Will you abuse me therefore?
I take no fees double nor single I.
Retain your money, you retain not me else.
Away, away, you'll hinder other Clients.
Pray give me leave to send then to your wife.
Not so much as a Poesy for her thimble,
For fear I spoil your cause,
You've warned me sir.
What a poor honest Lawyer's this?
They are all so
In the Antipodes.
You're welcome Captain.
In your two causes I have done my best.
And whats the issue pray sir?
Truly sir,
Our best course is not to proceed to trial.
Your reason? I shall then recover nothing.
Yes, more by composition, than the Court
Can lawfully adjudge you, as I have laboured.
And sir, my course is, where I can compound
A difference, Isle not toss nor bandy it
Into the hazard of a judgement.
Still
An honest Lawyer, and tho poor, no marvel▪
A kiss for thy conceit.
A sweet occasion!
How have you done sir?
First you understand
Your several actions, and your adversaries▪
The first a Battery against a Coach-man,
That beat you sorely▪
What hard hearted fellow
Could beat so spruce a gentleman, and a captain.
By this fair hilt, he did sir, and so bruised
My arms, so crushed my ribs, and stiched my sides,
That I have had no heart to draw my sword since;
And shall I put it up, and not his purse
Be made to pay for it?
It is up already, sir,
If you can be advised, observe I pray,
Your other actions'gainst your feathermaker,
And that of trespass for th'incessant trouble
He puts you to by importunate requests,
To pay him no money, but take longer day.
Against all humane reason, for although
I have bought feathers of him these four years,
And never paid him a penny; yet he duns me
So desperately to keep my money still,
As if I ought him nothing; he haunts and breaks my sleeps.
I swear sir, by the motion of this I wear now,
I have had twenty better feathers of him, and as ill paid for▪
Yet still he duns me to forbear my payment,
And to take longer day.
I haven't said my prayers in
Mine own lodging sir this twelvemonths day,
For sight or thought of him; and how can you
Compound this action, or the other of
That Russian Coachman that durst lift a hand
Against a Commander.
Very easily thus,
The Coachman's poor, and scarce his twelvemoneths wages
Tho't be five marks a year will satisfy.
Pray name no sum in marks, I have had too many
Of's marks already.
So you owe the other
A debt of twenty pound, the Coachman now
Shall for your satisfaction, beat you out
Of debt.
Beat me again?
No sir he shall beat
For you your feather man till he take his money.
So Isle be satisfied, and help him to
More customers of my rank.
Leave it to me then,
It shall be by posterity repeaten
That soldiers ought not to be dund or beaten,
Away and keep your money.
Thank you sir.
An honest lawyer, still how he considers
The weak estate of a young Gentleman
At arms — But who comes here? a woman.
Yes; that has taken up the newest fashion
Of the towne-militasters.
Is it Buff,
Or Calfe skin trow? she looks as she cold beat
Out a whole Tavern garrison before her
Of mill tasters call you 'em? if her husband
Be an old jealous man now, and can please her
No better then most ancient husbands can,
I warrant she makes her self good upon him.
Tic very good, the play begins to please me.
I wait to speak w'yee sir, but must I stand
Your constring and piercing of your scriblings.
Cry mercy Lady.
Lady does he call her?
Thus far I have proceeded in your cause
In the Marshalls court.
But shall I have the combat?
Pray observe
The passages of my proceedings; and
The pro's and contras in the windings, workings
And carriage of the cause.
Fah on your passages,
Your windy workings, and your fislings at
The bar. Come me to the point, is it decreed,
A combat?
Well, it is; and heir's your order.
Now thou hast spoken like a lawyer,
And heir's thy fee.
By no means gentle Lady.
Take it, or I will beat thy carcass thinner
Then thou hast worn thy gown here.
Pardon me.
Must I then take you in hand?
Hold, hold, I take it.
Alas poor man, he will take money yet,
Rather then blows, and so far he agrees
With our rich lawyers, that sometimes give blows
And shrewd ones for their money.
Now victory
Afford me fate, or bravely let me dye.
Very well acted that.
Goes she to fight now?
You shall see that anon —
What's here, what's here?
A Courtier, or some gallant practising
The beggars trade, who teaches him I think.
You're something near the subject.
Sir excuse me, I have
From time to time supplied you without hope,
Or purpose to receive least retribution
From you, no not so much as thanks or bare
Acknowledgement of the free benefits,
I have conferred upon you.
Yet good uncle.
Yet doe you now when that my present store
Responds not my occasions▪ seek to oppress me
With vain petitionary breath, for what I may not
Give without fear of dangerous detriment?
In what a phrase the ragged Orator
Displays himself.
The Beggars are the
Most absolute Courtiers in the Antipodes.
If not a piece, yet spare me half a piece
For goodness sake good sir, did you but know
My instant want, and to what virtuous use,
I would distribute it, I know you would not
Hold back your charity.
And how feelingly
He begs; then as the beggars are the best
Courtiers, it seems the Courtiers are best beggars
In the Antipodes; how contrary in all
Are they to us?
Pray to what virtuous uses
Would you put money to now, if you had it?
I would bestow a crown in Ballads,
Love-pamphlets, and such poetical Rarities,
To send down to my Lady Grandmother.
She's very old you know, and given much
To contemplation; I know she'll send me for 'em,
In Puddings, Bacon, Sows and Pot-Butter
Enough to keep my chamber all this winter.
So shall I save my fathers whole allowance
To lay upon my back, and not be forced
To shift out from my study for my victuals.
Belike he is some student.
There's a crown.
I would bestow another crown in
Hobby-horses, and Rattles for my Grand-father,
Whose legs and hearing fail him very much▪
Then to preserve his sight a Jack-a-lent,
In a greene sarsenet suite, he'll make my father
To send me one of Scarlet, or he will cry
His eyes out for it.
Oh politic young student.
I have but just a fee left for my Lawyer;
If he exact not that, Isle give it thee.
He'll take no fee (that's sure enough young man)
Of beggars, I know that.
You are deceived.
Isle speak to him my self else to remit it.
You will not sure, will you turn Actor too?
Pray doe, be put in for a share amongst em?
How must I be put in?
The Players will quickly
Show you, if you perform your part; perhaps
They may want one to act the whore amongst 'em.
Fie Master Ioylesse, you're too foul.
My Lord,
She is too fair it seems in your opinion,
For me, therefore if you can find it lawful,
Keep her; I will be gone.
Now I protest
Sit and sit civilly, till the play be done,
Isle lock thee up else, as I am true Letoy.
Nay I have done —
Give me my fee, I cannot hear you else.
Sir I am poor, and all I get, is at
The hands of charitable givers; pray sir.
You understand me sir, your cause is to be
Pleaded to day, or you are quite orethrowne in it.
The Judge by this time is about to sit.
Keep fast your money, and forgo your wit.
Then I must follow, and entreat him to it,
Poor men in law must not disdain to doe it.
Doe it then, Isle follow you and hear the cause.
True Antipodians still, for as with us,
The Gallants follow Lawyers, and the beggars them;
The Lawyer here is followed by the beggar,
While the gentleman follows him.
The moral is, the Lawyers here prove beggars,
And beggars only thrive by going to law.
How takes the Lawyers then the beggars money?
And none else by their wills?
They send it all
Up to our lawyers, to stop their mouths,
That curse poor Clients that are put upon 'em.
In form Pauperise.
In truth most charitable,
But sure that money's lost by the way sometimes.
Yet sweet my Lord, whom doe these beggars beg of,
That they can get aforehand so for law?
Who are their benefactors?
Usurers, Usurers.
Then they have Usurers in the Antipodes too?
Yes Usury goes round the world, and will doe,
Till the general conversion of the Jewes.
But ours are not so charitable I fear.
Who be their Usurers?
Soldiers, and Courtiers chiefly;
And some that pass for grave and pious Church-men.
How finely contrary they are still to ours.
Why doe you not enter, what are you asleep?—
My Lord the mad young Gentleman. —
What of him?
He has got into our Tyring-house amongst us,
And tan a strict survey of all our properties,
Our statues and our images of Gods; our Planets and our con∣stellations
Our Giants, Monsters, Furies, Beasts, and Bug-Beares,
Our Helmets Shields, and Visors, Hairs, and Beards,
Our Pastbord March-paines, and our Wooden Pies.
Sirrah be brief, be not you now as long in
Telling what he saw, as he surveying.
Whether he thought t'was some enchanted Castle,
Or Temple, hung and pild with Monuments
Of uncouth, and of various aspects,
I dive not to his thoughts, wonder he did
A while it seemed, but yet undaunted stood:
When on the sudden, with thrice knightly force,
And thrice, thrice, puissant arm he snatches down
The sword and shield that I played R•vis with,
Rushes amongst the foresaid properties,
Kills Monster, after Monster; takes the Puppets
Prisoners, knocks down the Cyclops, tumbles all
Our jigambobs and trinkets to the wall.
Spying at last the Crown and royal Robes
Ith upper wardrobe, next to which by chance,
The devils visors hung, and their flame painted
Skin coats; those he removed with greater fury,
And (having cut the infernal ugly faces,
All into mamocks) with a reverend hand,
He takes the imperial diadem and crowns
Himself King of the Antipodes, and believes
He has justly gained the Kingdom by his conquest.
Let him enjoy his fancy.
Doctor Hughball
Hath soothed him in it, so that nothing can
Be said against it, he begins to govern
With purpose to reduce the manners
Of this country to his own, h'has constituted
The Doctor his chief officer; whose Secretary
I am to be, you'll see a Court well ordered.
I see th'event already, by the aim
The Doctor takes, proceed you with your play,
And let him see it in what state he pleases.
I go my Lord.
Trust me, this same Extempore,
(I know not's tother name) pleases me better
For absolute action then all the rest.
You were best beg him of his Lord.
Say you so?
He's busy, or Id move him,
Prithee doe so,
Good Mistress Blaze; go with her gentle Lady▪
Doe as she bids you, you shall get a child by it.
Isle doe as any body bids me for a child.
Diana yet be wise, bear not the name
Of sober chastity to play the beast in.
Think not your self, nor make your self a beast,
Before you are one, and when you appear so,
Then thank your self; your jealousy durst not trust me,
Behind you in the country, and since Ime here,
Isle see and know, and follow th'fashion; if
It be to cuckold you, I cannot help it.
I now could wish my son had been as far
In the Antipodes as he thinks himself,
Ere I had run this hazard.
You're instructed.
And Isle perform't I warrant you my Lord.
Why should you wish so? had you rather loose
Your son then please your wife? you show your love both ways.
Now whats the matter?
Nothing, nothing. —
Sit, the Actors enter.
What's he a King?
No tic the City Governor,
And the chief Judge within their Corporation.
Here's a City
Like to be well governed then.—
Yonder's a king, doe you know him?
Tic your son,
My Ioylesse, now you're pleased.
Would you were pleased,
To cease your housewifery in spinning out
The Play at length thus.
Here sir, you shall see
A point of Justice handled.
Officer.
My Lord.
Call the defendant, and the Plaintiff in.
Their counsel and their witnesses.
How now!
How long ha you been free oath Poyntmakers,
Good master hilt and scabbard carrier;
(Which is in my hands now) do you give order
For counsel and for witnesses in a cause
Fit for my hearing, or for me to judge, haw?
I must be ruled and circumscribed by Lawyers must I,
And witnesses haw? no you shall know
I can give judgement, be it right or wrong,
Without their needless proving and defending:
So bid the Lawyers go and shake their ears,
If they have any, and the witnesses,
Preserve their breath to prophecy of dry summers.
Bring me the plaintiff, and defendant only:
But the defendant first, I will not hear
Any complaint before I understand
What the defendant can say for himself.
I have not known such down right equity,
If he proceeds as he begins, isle grace him.—
Now sir, are you the plaintiff or defendant, haw?
Both as the case requires my Lord.
I cannot
Hear two at once, speak first as you're defendant.
Mine adversary doth complain.
I will hear no
Complaint, I say speak your defence.
For silks and
Stuffs received by me.
A Mercer is he, haw?
Yes my good Lord, he doth not now complain.
That I like well.
For money nor for wares
Again: but he complains.
Complains again? do you double with me, haw?
In his wives cause.
Of his wife, does he, haw? That I must confess
Is many a good mans case; you may proceed.
In money I tender him double satisfaction,
With his own wares again unblemished, undishonor'd.
That is unworne, unpawned.
What an odd
Jeering Judge is this?
But unto me,
They were delivered upon this condition,
That I should satisfy his wife.
Heel have
Your body for her then, unless I amped
My breast of mercy to appease her for you,
Call in the plaintiff; sir, stand you aside.
Oh tic the flinching Gentleman that broke
With the kind citizens wife. J hope the Judge
Will make him an example.
Come you forwards,
Yet nearer man, J know my face is terrible,
And that a Citizen had rather lose
His debt, then that a Judge should truly know
His dealings with a gentleman, yet speak,
Repeat without thy shop book now; and without
Fear, it may rise in judgement here against thee.
What is thy full demand? what satisfaction
Require thou of this gentleman?
And please you sir—
Sir! you forget your self.
It was well said Sword-bearer,
Thou know thy place, which is to show correction.
My Lord an't please you, if it like your honour.
La! an intelligent Citizen, and may grow
In time himself to sit in place of worship.
I ask no satisfaction of the gentleman,
But to content my wife; what her demand is,
Tic best known to her self; please her, please me,
An't please you sir—My Lord an't like your honour.
But before he has given her satisfaction,
I may not fall my suit, nor draw my action.
You may not.
No alack a day I may not,
Nor find content, nor peace at home, and't please you
(My Lord, an't like your honour I would say)
An't please you, what's a tradesman, that
Has a fair wife, without his wife, an't please you?
And she without content is no wife, considering
We trades-men live by gentlemen, an't please you,
And our wives drive a half trade with us, if the gentlemen
Break with our wives, our wives are no wives to us,
And we but broken Trades-men, an't please you.
And't like your honour, my good Lord, and't please you.
You argue honestly.
Yet gentlemen,
A lack a day, and please you, and like your honour,
Will not consider our necessities,
And our desire in general through the City,
To have our sons all gentlemen like them.
Nor though a gentleman consume
His whole estate among ye, yet his son
May live t'inherit it?
Right, right, and't please you:
Your honour my good Lord and't please you.
Well,
This has so little to be said against it,
That you say nothing. Gentlemen it seems
You're obstinate, and will stand out—
My Lord,
Rather then not to stand out with all men's wives,
Except mine own, isle yield me into prison.
Alack a day.
If our young gentlemen,
Were like those of th'Antipodes, what decay
Of trade would here bee, and how full the prisons?
I offer him any other satisfaction;
His wares again, or money twice the value.
That's from the point.
I, I, alack a day,
Nor doe I sue to have him up in prison,
Alack a day, what good (good gentleman)
Can I get by his body?
Peace, I should
Now give my sentence, and for your contempt,
(which is a great one, such as if let pass
Unpunished, may spread forth a dangerous
Example▪ to the breach of City custom,
By gentlemen's neglect of Tradesmen's wives)
I should say for this contempt commit you
Prisoner from sight of any other woman,
Until you give this mans wife satisfaction,
And she release you; justice so would have it:
But as I am a Citizen by nature,
(For education made it so) isle use
Urbanity in your behalf towards you;
And as I am a gentleman by calling,
(For so my place must have it) isle perform
For you the office of a gentleman
Towards his wife, I therefore order thus;
That you bring me the wares here into Court,
(I have a chest shall hold 'hem, as mine own)
And you send me your wife, isle satisfy her
My self. Isle do it, and set all straight and right:
Justice is blind, but Judges have their sight.
And feeling too in the Antipodes▪
Have not they my Lord?
What's that to you my Lady?
Dismiss the Court.
Dismiss the Court, cannot you hear the prompter?
Have you lost your ears, Judge?
No: dismiss the Court,
Embrace you friends, and to shun further strife,
See you send me your stuff, and you your wife.
Most admirable Justice.
Protest Extempore plaid the Judge; and I
Knew him not all this while.
What over-sight
Was there?
He is a properer man methinks
Now, than he was before: sure I shall love him.
Sure, sure, you shall not, shall you?
And I warrant,
By his Judgement speech ee'n now, he loves a woman well:
For •e said, if you noted him, that he
Would satisfy the Citizens wife himself.
Methinks a gentlewoman might please him better.
How dare you talk so?
What's he a doing now trow?
Kneel down
Again. Give me a sword some body.
The King's about to Knight him.
Let me pray
Your Majesty be pleased, yet to with-hold
That undeserved honour, till you first
Vouchsafe to grace the City with your presence,
Accept one of our Hall-feasts, and a freedom,
And freely use our purse for what great sums
Your Majesty will please.
What subjects there are
In the Antipodes.
None in the world so loving.
Give me a sword, I say, must I call thrice?
No, no, take mine my Liege.
Yours! what are you?
A loyal Lord, one of your subjects too.
He may be loyal; he's a wondrous plain one,
Prithee Diana, yet lets slip away
Now while he's busy.
But whore's your daughter in Law?
Gone home I warrant you with Mistress Blaze.
Let them be our example.
You are cozened.
You're an impudent whore,
I know not what I may be
Made by your jealousy.
Isle none of this,
Give me that Princely weapon.
Give it him.
It is a property you know my Lord,
No blade, but a rich Scabbard with a Lath in it.
So is the sword of Justice for ought he knows.
It is enchanted.
Yet on me let it fall,
Since tic your highness will, Scabbard and all.
Rise up our trusty well beloved Knight.
Let me find favour in your gracious sight
To taste a banquet now, which is prepared,
And shall be by your followers quickly shared.
My followers, where are they?
Come Sirs quickly.
Tic well, lead on the way.
And must not we
Go to the Banquet too?
He must not see
You yet; I have provided otherwise
For both you in my Chamber, and from thence
We'll at a window see the rest of the Play,
Or if you needs sir will stay here, you may.
Was ever man betrayed thus into torment?
NOw sir be pleased to cloud your Princely raiment
With this disguise. Great Kings have done the like,
To make discovery of passages
Among the people: thus you shall perceive
What to approve, and what correct among 'hem.
And so isle cherish, or severely punish.
Stand close sir, and observe.
Royal pastime, in a great match between the Tanners and the Butchers, six dogs of a side, to play single at the game Bear, for fifty pound, and a ten pound supper, for their dogs and themselves. Also you shall see two ten dogge-courses at the Great Bear.
Fie Granny fie, can no persuasions,
Threatenings, nor blows prevail, but you'll persist
In these profane and Diabolical courses,
To follow Bear baitings, when you can scarce
Spell out their Bills with spectacles?
What though
My sight be gone beyond the reach of Spectacles,
In any print but this, and though I cannot,
(No, no, I cannot read your meditations) 
Yet I can see the Royal game plaid over and over,
And tell which dog does best, without my Spectacles.
And though I could not, yet I love the noise;
The noise revives me, and the Bear-garden scent
Refreshes much my smelling.
Let me entreat you
Forbear such beastly pastimes, they are Sathanicall.
Take heed Child what you say, tic the Kings game.
What is my game?
Bear-baiting sir she means.
A Beare's a Princely beast, and one side Venison
(Writ a good Author once) you yet want years,
And are with Baubles pleased, isle see the Bears.
And I must bear with it. she's full of wine,
And for the present wilful; but in due
Season isle humble her: but we are all
Too subject to infirmity.
Boy—Boy.
Sir.
Here take my Cloak.
Boy did he say?
Yes sir, old servants are
But Boys to Masters, be they ne'er so young.
Tic heavy, and I sweat.
Take mine, and keep you warm then,
Isle wear yours.
Out you Varlet,
Dost thou obscure it, as thou meantst to pawn it?
Is this a Cloak unworthy of the light?
Publish it sirrah:—oh presumptuous slave,
Display it on one arm—oh ignorance!
Pray load your Ass your self, as you would have it▪
Nay prithee be not angry: Thus, and now
Be sure you bear't at no such distance; but
Is it may be known appendix to this book.
This custom I have seen with us.
Yes, but
It was derived from the Antipodes.
It is a dainty creature, and my blood
Rebels against the spirit: I must speak to him.
Sir here's a Gentlewoman makes towards you.
Me? she's deceived, I am not for her mowing.
Fair sir, may you vouchsafe my company?
No truly, I am none of those you look for.
The way is broad enough, unhand me pray you.
Pray sir be kinder to a lass that loves you.
Some such there are, but I am none of those.
Come, this is but a Copy of your Countenance.
I ha known you better than you think I doe.
What ha you known me for?
I knew you once
For half a piece I take it.
You are deceived
The whole breadth of your nose, I scorn it.
Come be not coy, but send away your servant,
And let me give you a pint of wine.
Pray keep
Your curtsy, I can bestow the wine
Upon my self, if I were so disposed,
To drink in Taverns; fah.
Let me bestow it
Upon you at your lodging then; and there
Be civilly merry.
Which if you doe,
My wife shall thank you for it; but your better
Course is to seek one fitter for your turn,
You'll lose your aim in me; and I befriend you
To tell you so.
Gip gaffer Shotten, faugh,
Take that for your coy Counsel.
Help, oh help.
What mean you gentlewoman?
That to you sir.
O murder, murder.
Peace good Master,
And come away. Some Cowardly Jade I warrant,
That durst not strike a woman.
What's the matter?
But and we were your match.—
What would you doe?
Come, come before the Constable: now if
You were her match, what would you doe sir?
Doe?
They have done too much already sir: a Virgin 
Shall not pass shortly for these street-walkers,
If some judicious order be not taken.
Hear me the truth.
Sir, speak to your companions,
I have a wife and daughters, and am bound,
By hourly precepts, to hear women first,
Be it truth, or no truth, therefore virgin speak,
And fear no bug bears, I will doe thee justice.
Sir, they assailed me, and with violent hands,
When words could not prevail, they would have drawn me
Aside unto their lust till I cried murder.
Protest Sir, as I am a gentleman,
And as my man's a man she beat us both,
Till I cried murder.
That's the woeful truth on it.
You are a party, and no witness sir,
Besides you're two, and one is easier
To be believed: moreover as you have the odds
In number, what were justice, if it should not support
The weaker side? Away with them to the Counter.
Call you this justice?
In the Antipodes.
Here's much to be reformed, young man thy virtue
Hath won my favour, go, thou art at large.
Be gone.
He puts me out, my part is now
To bribe the Constable.
No matter go —
And you sir, take that sober seeming wanton,
And clap her up, till I hear better of her,
Isle strip you of your office and your ears else.
At first show mercy.
They are an ignorant nation,
And have my pity mingled with correction:
And therefore, damsel (for you are the first
Offender I have noted here, and this
Your first offence (for ought I know)
Yes truly.
That was well said.
Go and transgress no more,
And as you find my mercy sweet, see that
You be not cruel to your grandmother,
When she returns from bear-baiting.
So all be gone.
And what are these?
A woman Fencer, that has plaid a Prize,
It seems, with Loss of blood.
It doth amaze me.
What can her husband be, when shoe's a Fencer?
He keeps a School, and teaches needle-worke,
Or some such Arts which we call womanish.
Tic most miraculous and wonderful.
Rogues, Varlets, Harlots, ha you done
Your worst, or would you drown me? would you take my life?
Duck him again, duck him again.
What noise is this?
Some man it seems, that's duckt for scolding.
A man for scolding?
You shall see.
So, so,
Enough, enough, he will be quiet now.
How know you that, you devil ridden witch you?
How, quiet; why quiet? has not the law▪ past on me,
Over, and over me, and must I be quiet?
Will you incur the law the second time?
The laws the river, first? yes tic a river,
Through which great men, and cunning, wade, or swim;
But mean and ignorant must drown in it; no
You hags and hel-hounds, witches, bitches, all,
That were the law, the Judge, and Executioners,
To my vexation, I hope to see
More flames about your ears, then all the water
You cast me in can quench.
In with him again, he calls us names.
No, no: I charge ye no.
Was ever harmless creature so abused?
To be drenched under water, to learn dumbness
Amongst the fishes, as I were forbidden
To use the natural members I was borne with,
And of them all, the chief that man takes pleasure in;
The tongue; Oh me accursed wretch. 
Is this a man?
I ask not by his beard, but by his tears.
This shower will spend the fury of his tongue,
And so the tempest's over.
I am sorry for it,
I would have had him ducked once more;
But some body will shortly raise the storm
In him again I hope for us, to make
More holiday-sport of him. 
Sure these are dreams,
Nothing but dreams.
No, doubtless we are awake sir.
Can men and women be so contrary
In all that we hold proper to each sex?
I'm glad he takes a taste of sense in that yet.
Twill ask long time and study to reduce
Their manners to our government.
these are
Low things and easy to be qualified —
But see sir, here come Courtiers, note their manners.
This was three shillings yesterday, how now!
All gone but this? six pence, for leather soles
To my new greene silk stockings, and a groat
My ordinary in Pompions baked with Onions.
Doe such eat Pompions?
Yes: and Clowns Musk-Mellons.
Three pence I lost at Nyne-pines; but I got
Six tokens towards that at Pigeon holes —
'S nails wheres the rest; is my poake bottom broke?
What Jack! A pox oretake thee not; how dost?
What with a vengeance aylst? dost think my breech
Is made of Bell mettle? take that.
In earnest?
Yes till more comes.
Pox rot your hold, let go my locke, doe think
You're currying of your Fathers horse again?
Isle teach you to abuse a man behind,
Was troubled too much before.
Hay, there boys, there.
Good boys are good boys still. There Will, there Jack.
Not a blow, now he's down.
It were base, I scorn't.
There's as proud fall, as stand in Court or City.
That's well said Will, troth I commend you both.
How fell you out? I hope in no great anger.
For mine own part I vow I was in jest.
But I have told you twice and once, Will, jest not
With me behind I never could endure
(Not of a Boy) to put up things behind:
And that my Tutor knew; I had bin a Scholar else.
Besides you know my sword was nock'd in the fashion,
Just here behind, for my backe-guard and all;
And yet you would do it.
I had a lief you would take a knife—
Come, come,
You're friends. Shake hands isle give you half a dozen
At the next Ale-house, to set all right and straight.
And a new song; a dainty one; here tic.
O thou art happy that can read—
I would buy Ballads too, had I thy learning.
Come, we burn day-light, and the Ale may sour.
Call you these Courtiers? They are rude silken Clowns;
As course within, as water-men or Car-men.
Then look on these: Here are of those conditions
Sir, I am your servant.
I am much obliged
Sir, by the plenteous favours your humanity
And noble virtue have conferred upon me,
To answer with my service your deservings.
You speak what I should say. Be therefore pleased
T'unload, and lay the wait of your commands
Upon my care to serve you.
Still your Courtesies,
Like waves of a Spring-tide, ore-flow the Banks
Of your abundant store; and from your Channel,
Or stream of fair affections, you cast forth
Those sweet refreshings on me (that were else
But sterile earth) which cause a gratitude
To grow upon me, humble, yet ambitious
In my Devoire, to doe you best of service.
I shall no more extend my utmost labour,
With Oar and Sail to gain the lively-hood
Of wise and children, then to set a shore
You, and your faithful honourers at the haven
Of your best wishes.
Sir, I am no less
Ambitious, to be made the happy means.
With whip and whistle, to draw up or drive
All your detractors to the Gallows.
See,
Our noble friend.
Right happily encountered —
I am the just admirer of your virtues.
We are, in all, your servants.
I was in quest,
Of such elect society, to spend
A dinner-time withal.
Sir we are for you.
Three are the golden Number in a Tavern;
And at the next of best, with the best meat,
And wine the house affords (if you so please)
We will be competently merry. I
Have received, lately, Letters from beyond Seas,
Importing much of the occurrences,
And passages of foreign States. The knowledge
Of all I shall impart to you.
And I
Have all the new advertisements from both
Our Universities, of what has past
The most remarkably of late.
And from
The Court I have the news at full,
Of all that was observable this Progress.
From Court?
Yes sir: They know not there, they have
A new King here at home.
Tic excellent!
We want but now, the newes-collecting Gallant
To fetch his Dinner, and Materials
For his this weeks dispatches.
I dare think
The meat and news being hot upon the Table,
He'll smell his way to it.
Please you to know yours, sir?
Sir, after you.
Excuse me.
By no means sir.
Sweet Sir lead on.
It shall be as your servant
Then, to prepare your dinner.
Pardon me.
Insooth isle follow you.
Yet tic my obedience
Are these but labouring men, and tother Courtiers?
Tic common here sir, for your watermen
To write most learnedly, when your Courtier
Has scarce ability to read.
Before I reign
A Month among them, they shall change their notes,
Or isle ordain a course to change their Coats.
I shall have much to doe in reformation.
Patience and Counsel will go through it sir.
What if I craved? a Counsel from New England?
The old will spare me none.
Is this man mad?
My cure goes fairly on. Doe you marvel that
Poor men out-shine the Courtiers? Look you sir,
A sicke-man giving counsel to a Physician:
And there's a Puritan Trades-man, teaching a
Great Traveller to lye: That Ballad-woman
Gives light to the most learned Antiquary
In all the Kingdom.
Buy new Ballads, come.
A natural fool, there, giving grave instru∣ctions
T'a Lord Ambassador • That's a Schismatic,
Teaching a Scrivener to keep his cares:
A parish Clerk, there, gives the Rudiments
Of Military Discipline to a General:
And there's a Basket maker confuting Bellarmine.
Will you make me mad?
We are sailed, I hope,
Beyond the line of madness. Now sir, see
A States-man studious for the Common-wealth,
Solicited by Projectors of the Country.
Your Projects are all good I like them well.
Especially these two; This for the increase of wool:
And this for the destroying of Mice: They are good,
And grounded on great reason. As for yours,
For putting down the infinite use of Jacks,
(Whereby the education of young children,
In turning spits, is greatly hindered)
It may be looked into: And yours against
The multiplicity of pocket-watches,
(Whereby much neighbourly familiarity,
By asking, what de'yee guess it is a Clock?
Is lost) when every puny Clerk can carry
The time of the day in's Breeches; This, and these
Hereafter may be look into: For present;
This for the increase of Wool; that is to say,
By flaying of live horses, and new covering them
With Sheeps-skins, I doe like exceedingly.
And this for keeping of tame Owls in Cities,
To kill up Rats and Mice, whereby all Cats
May be destroyed, as an especial means
To prevent witch-craft and contagion.
Here's a wise business!
Will you honour now,
Be pleased to take into consideration
The poor men's suits for Briefs, to get relief
By common charity throughout the Kingdom,
Towards recovery of their lost estates.
What are they? let me hear.
First, here's a Gamester, that sold house and land,
To the known value of five thousand pounds,
And by misfortune of the Dice lost all,
To his extreme undoing; having neither
A wife or child to succour him.
A Bachelor!
Yes, my good Lord.
And young, and healthful?
Yes.
Alas tic lamentable: he deserves much pity.
How's this?
Observe him further, pray sir.
Then, here's a Bawd, of sixty odd years standing.
How old was she when she set up?
But four
And twenty, my good Lord. She was both ware
And Merchant; Flesh and Butcher, (as they say)
For the first twelve years of her house-keeping:
She's now upon fourscore, and has made markets
Of twice four thousand choice virginities;
And twice their number of indifferent gear.
(No rise raffe was she ever known to cope for)
Her life is certified here by the Justices,
Adjacent to her dwelling —
She is decayed.
Quite trade-fallen, my good Lord, now in her dotage;
And desperately undone by riot.
'Lasse good woman,
She has consumed in prodigal feasts and Fiddlers,
And lavish landings to debauched Comrades,
That sucked her purse, in Jewels, Plate, and money,
To the full value of six thousand pounds.
She shall have a Collection, and deserves it.
Tic monstrous, this.
Then here are divers more,
Of Panders, Cheaters, house-and high-way Robbers,
That have got great estates in youth and strength,
And wasted all as fast in wine and Harlots.
Till age o'retooke 'hem, and disabled them,
For getting more
For such the Law provides
Relief within those Counties, where they practised.
Ha! what for thieves?
Yes, their Law punishes
The robed, and not the thief, for surer warning,
And the more safe prevention. I have seen
Folks whipped for losing of their goods and money,
And the picke-pockets cherished.
The weal public,
As it severely punishes their neglect,
Undone by fire ruins, shipwreck, and the like,
With whips, with brands, and loss of careless ears,
Imprisonment, banishment, and sometimes death;
And carefully maintains houses of Correction
For decayed Scholars, and maimed Soldiers;
So doth it find relief. and almes-houses,
For such as lived by Rapine and by Cosenage.
Still worse and worse! abominable! horrid!
Yet here is one, my Lord, 'bove all the rest,
Whose services have generally bin known,
Though now he be a spectacle of pity:
Who's that?
The captain of the Cut-purses, my Lord;
That was the best it's art that ever was,
Is fallen to great decay, by the dead palsy
In both his hands, and craves a large collection.
Isle get it him.
You shall not get it him.
Doe you provide whips, brands; and ordain death,
For men that suffer under fire, or shipwreck,
The loss of all their honest gotten wealth:
And find relief for Cheaters, Bawds, and Thieves?
Isle hang ye all.
Mercy great King.
O mercy.
Let not our ignorance suffer in your wrath,
Before we understand your highness Laws,
We went by custom, and the warrant, which
We had in your late Predecessors reign;
But let us know your pleasure, you shall find
The State and Common-wealth in all obedient,
To alter Custom, Law, Religion, all,
To be conformable to your commands.
Tic a fair protestation: And my mercy
Meets your submission. See you merit it
In your conformity.
Great Sir we shall.
In sign whereof we lacerate these papers.
And lay our necks beneath your Kingly feet.
Stand up you have our favour.
And mine too?
Never was such an actor as Extempore!
You were best to fly out of the window to him.
Me thinks I am even light enough to doe it.
I could find in my heart to Quoit thee at him.
So he would catch me in his arms I cared not.
Peace both of you, or you'll spoil all.
your Grace
Abounds — abounds — your Grace — I say abounds.
Pox o'your mumbling chops; is your brain dry?
Doe you pump?
He has done much my Lord, and may
Hold out a little.
Would you could hold your peace▪
So long.
Doe you snoop me too my Lord.
Ha, ha, ha.
Blockehead.
I hope his hotter zeal to's actors
Will drive out my wives love-heat.
I had
No need to come hither to be sneape.
Hoyday! The rest will all be lost, we now give over
The play, and doe all by Extempore,
For your sons good, to sooth him into's wits.
If you'll mar all, you may. Come nearer cocks-combe,
Ha you forgotten (puppy) my instructions
Touching his subjects, and his marriage?
I have all now my Lord.
What voice was that?
A voice out of the clouds, that doth applaud
Your highness welcome to your subjects loves.
So, now he's in. Sit still, I must go down
And set out things in order.
A voice that doth inform me of the tidings
Spread through your kingdom, of your great arrival;
And of the general joy your people bring
To celebrate the welcome of their king.
Hark how the country shouts with joyful votes,
Rending the ayre with music of their throats.
Hark how the soldier, with his martial noise,
Threatens your foes, to fill your Crown with joys.
Hark how the City, with loud harmony,
Chants a free welcome to your majesty.
Hark how the Court prepares your grace to meet
With solemn music, state and beauty sweet.
O here's a stately show! look master Ioylesse:
Your daughter in law presented like a queen
Unto your son, I warrant now he'll love her.
A queen?
Yes, yes, and mistress Blaze is made
The mother of her maids, if she have any:
Perhaps the Antipodian Court has none.
See, see, with what a Majesty he receives 'hem.
HEalth, wealth, and joy our wishes bring,
All in a welcome to our king:
May no delight be found,
Wherewith he be not crowned,
Apollo with the Muses,
Who Arts divine infuses,
With their choice Chyrlouds deck his head;
Love and the graces make his bed:
And to crown all, let Hymen to his side,
Plant a delicious, chaste, and fruitful Bride.
Now Sir be happy in a marriage choice,
That shall secure your title of a king.
See sir, your state presents to you the daughter,
The only child and heir apparent of
Our late deposed and deceased Sovereign,
Who with his dying breath bequeathed her to you.
A Crown secures not an unlawful marriage.
I have a wife already.
No: you had sir,
But she's deceased.
How know you that?
By sure advertisement; and that her fleeting spirit
Is flown into, and animates this Princess.
Indeed she's wondrous like her.
Be not sl•cke
To embrace and kiss her Sir.
He kisses sweetly;
And that is more then ere my husband did.
But more belongs then kissing to child-getting;
And he's so like my husband, if you note him,
That I shall but lose time and wishes by him,
No, no, Isle none of him.
Isle warrant you he shall fulfil your wishes.
O but try him you first: and then tell me.
There's a new way indeed to chose a husband!
Yet it were a good one to bar fool getting.
Why doe you stand aloof Sir?
Mandivell writes
Of people near the Antipodes, called Gadlibriens:
Where on the wedding-night the husband hires
Another man to couple with his bride,
To clear the dangerous passage of a Maidenhead.
'Slid he falls back again to Mandevile madness.
She may be of that Serpentine generation,
That stings oft times to death (as Mandevile writes)
She's no Gadlibrien, Sir, upon my knowledge.
You may as safely lodge with her, as with
A maid of our own nation. Besides,
You shall have ample counsel: for the present,
Receive her, and entreat her to your Chapel.
For safety of your Kingdom, you must do it.
So, so, so, so, this yet may prove a cure.
See my Lord now is acting by himself.
And Letoy's wit cried up triumphant hoe.
Come master Ioylesse and your wife, come down
Quickly, your parts are next, I had almost
Forgot to send my chaplain after them.
You Domino where are you?
Here my Lord.
What in that shape?
Tic for my part my Lord,
Which is not all performed.
It is sir, and the Play for this time. We
Have other work in hand.
Then have you lost
Action (I dare be bold to speak it) that
Most of my coat could hardly imitate.
Go shift your coat sir, or for expedition,
Cover it with your own, due to your function.
Follies, as well as vices, may be hid so:
Your virtue is the same; dispatch, and doe
As Doctor Hughball shall direct you, go.
Now Master Ioylesse, doe you note the progress
And the fair issue likely to ensue
In your sons cure? observe the Doctors art.
First, he has shifted your sons known disease
Of madness into folly; and has wrought him
As far short of a competent reason, as
He was of late beyond it, as a man
Infected by some foul disease is drawn
By physic into an Anatomy,
Before flesh fit for health can grow to rear him,
So is a mad-man made a fool, before
Art can take hold of him to wind him up
Into his proper Center, or the Medium
From which he flew beyond himself. The Doctor
Assures me now, by what he has collected
As well from learned authors as his practise,
That his much troubled and confused brain
Will by the real knowledge of a woman,
Now opportunely tan, be by degrees
Settled and rectified, with the helps beside
Of rest and diet, which he'll administer.
But tic the real knowledge of the woman
(Carnal I think you mean) that carries it.
Right, right.
Nay right or wrong, I could even wish
If he were not my husbands son, the Doctor
Had made my self his Recipe, to be the means
Of such a Cure.
How, how?
Perhaps that course might cure your madness too▪
Of jealousy, and set all right on all sides.
Sure, if I could but make him such a fool,
He would forgo his madness, and be brought
To christian Sense again.
Heaven grant me patience,
And send us to my Country home again.
Besides, the young mans wife's as mad as he,
What wise work will they make!
The better, fear't not,
Bab Blaze shall give her Counsel; and the youth
Will give her royal satisfaction,
Now, in this Kingly humour, I have a way
To cure your husbands jealousy my self.
Then I am friends again: Even now I was not
When you sneapt me my Lord.
That you must pardon:
Come Mr. Ioylesse. The new married pair
Are towards bed by this time▪ we will not trouble them
But keep a house-side to our selfes. Your lodging
Is decently appointed.
Sure your Lordship
Means not to make your house our prison.
By
My Lordship but I will for this one night.
See sir, the Keys are in my hand. You're up,
As I am true Letoy. Consider, Sir,
The strict necessity that ties you to it,
As you expect a cure upon your son—
Come Lady, see your Chamber.
I doe waite
Upon your Lordship.
I both wait, and watch,
Never was man so mastered by his match.
DIana! ho! where are you? she is lost.
Here is no further passage. Ell's made fast.
This was the Bawdy way, by which she escaped
My narrow watching. Have you privy posternes
Behind the hangings in your strangers Chambers?
She's lost from me, for ever. Why then seek I?
O my dull eyes, to let her slip so from ye,
To let her have her lustful will upon me!
Is this the Hospitality of Lords?
Why, rather, if he did intend my shame,
And her dishonour, did he not betray me
From her out of his house, to travail in
The bare suspicion of their filthiness;
But hold me a nose-witnesse to its rankness?
No: This is sure the Lordlier way; and makes
The act more glorious in my sufferings. O—
May my hot curses on their melting pleasures,
Cement them so together in their lust,
That they may never part, but grow one monster.
Good gentleman! he is at his prayers now,
For his mad sons good night-worke with his bride.
Well fare your heart Sir; you have prayed to purpose;
But not all night I hope. Yet sure he has,
He looks so wild for lack of sleep. You're happy sir.
Your prayers are heard, no doubt, for I'm persuaded
You have a child got you to night.
Is it gone
So far doe you think?
I cannot say how far▪
Not fathom deep I think. But to the scantling
Of a Child-getting, I dare well imagine.
For which, as you have prayed, forget not sir
To thank the Lord of the house.
For getting me
A child? why I am none of his great Lordships tenants,
Nor of his followers, to keep his Bastards.
Pray stay a little.
I should go tell my Lord
The news: he longs to know how things doe pass.
Tell him I take it well; and thank him.
I did before despair of Children I.
But isle go wi'yee, and thank him.
Sure his joy
Has matted him: Here's more work for the Doctor.
But tell me first: were you their Bawd that speak this?
What mean you with that Dagger?
Nothing I,
Bu• play with it. Did you see the passages
Of things? I ask, were you their Bawd?
Their Bawd?
I trust she is no Bawd, that sees, and helps
(If need require) an ignorant lawful pair
To doe their best.
Lords actions all are lawful.
And how? and how?
These old folks love to hear.
Isle tell you sir—and yet I will not neither.
Nay, pray thee out with it.
Sir, they went to bed.
To bed! well on.
On? they were off sir yet;
And yet a good while after. They were both
So simple, that they knew not what, not how.
For she's sir, a pure maid.
Who dost thou speak of?
Isle speak no more, less you can look more tamely.
Go bring me to hem then. Bawd will you go?
Ah—
What ail you sir: why Bawd? whose Bawd is she?
Your Lords Bawd, and my wives.
You are jealous mad.
Suppose your wife be missing at your Chamber,
And my Lord too at his, they may be honest:
If not, what's that to her, or you I pray,
Here in my Lords own house?
Brave, brave, and monstrous!
She has not seen them. I heard all your talk.
The Child she intimated, is your grandchild
In posse sir, and of your sons begetting.
I, isle be sworn I meant, and said so too?
Where is my wife?
I can give no account,
If she be with my Lord I dare not trouble hem.
Nor must you offer at it: no nor stab your self.
But come with me: we counsel, or, at least,
Govern you better: She may be, perhaps,
About the Bride-chamber, to hear some sport;
For you can make her none; 'lasse good old man.
J'me most insufferably abused.
Unless
The killing of your self may do it; and that
J would forbear, because perhaps it would please her.
If fire, or water, poison, cord, or steel,
Or any means be found to do it: isle doe it;
Not to please her, but rid me of my torment.
J have more care and charge of you than so.
What an old desperate man is this, to make
Away your self for fear of being a Cuckold!
If every man that is, or that but knows
Himself to be of the order, should doe so,
How many desolate widows would here be,
They are not all of that mind. Here's my husband.
Bab! art thou here?
Look well. How think thou Tony?
Hast not thou neither slept to night?
Yes, yes.
I lay with the Butler. Who was thy bed-fellow?
You know I was appointed to sit up.
Yes, with the Doctor in the Bride-chamber.
But had you two no waggery? Ha!
Why how now Tony?
Nay facks I am not jealous▪
Thou know I was cured long since, and how.
I jealous! I an ass. A man sha' n't ask
His wife shortly, how such a gentleman does?
Or how such a gentleman did? or which did best?
But she must think him jealous.
You need not: for
If I were now to dye on it, nor the Doctor,
Nor I came in a bed to night: I mean
Within a bed.
Within, or without, or over, or under,
I have no time to think of such poor things.
What's that thou carry Tony?
O ho Bab.
This is a shape.
A shape? what shape I prithee Tony?
Thou'lt see me in it anon; but shalt not know me
From the starkst fool in the Town. And I must dance
Naked in it Bab.
Will here be Dancing Tony?
Yes Bab. My Lord gave order for it last night.
It should have bin in the Play: But because that
Was broke off, he will have it today.
O Tony.
I did not see thee act in the Play.
O, but
I did though Bab, two Mutes.
What in those Breeches?
Fie fool, thou understandst not what a Mute is.
A Mute is a dumb Speaker in the Play.
Dumb Speaker! that's a Bull. Thou were the Bull
Then, in the Play. Would I had seen thee roar.
That's a Bull too, as wise as you are Bab.
A Mute is one that acts speakingly,
And yet says nothing. I did two of them.
The Sage Man-midwife, and the Basket-maker.
Well Tony, I will see thee in this thing.
And tic a pretty thing.
Prithee good Bab,
Come in, and help me on with it in our Tyring-house.
And help the Gentlemen, my fellow dancers,
And thou shalt then see all our things, and all
Our properties and practice to the Music.
O Tony come, I long to be at that.
My Lord, your strength and violence prevail not.
There is a Providence above my virtue,
That guards me from the fury of your lust.
Yet, yet, I prithee yield. Is it my person
That thou despisest? See, here's wealthy treasure,
Jewels, that Cleopatra would have left
Her Marcus for.
My Lord tic possible,
That she who leaves a husband, may be bought
Out of a second friendship.
Had stout Tarquin
Made such an offer, he had done no Rape,
For Lucrece had consented, saved her own,
And all those lives that followed in her cause.
Yet then she had been a loser.
Would have gold?
Mammon, nor Pluto's self should over-bid me,
For il'd give all. First, let me rain a shower,
To out-vie that which overwhelmed Dane;
And after that another; a full river
Shall from my chests perpetually flow
Into thy store.
I have not much loved wealth,
But have not loathed the sight of it, till now,
That you have soiled it with that foul opinion
Of being the price of virtue. Though the Metal
Be pure, and innocent in it self; such use
Of it is odious, indeed damnable,
Both to the seller, and the purchaser:
Pity it should be so abused. It bears
A stamp upon it, which but to clip is treason.
Tic ill used there, where Law the life controls;
Worse, where tic made a salary for souls.
Deny thou wealth? wilt thou have pleasure then
Given, and taken freely, without all condition?
Isle give thee such, as shall (if not exceed)
Be at the least, comparative with those,
Which Iupiter got the Demigods with; and
Iuno was mad she mist.
My Lord, you may
Gloss o'er and gild the vice, which you call pleasure,
With god like attributes; when it is, at best
A sensuality, so far below
Dishonourable, that it is mere beastly;
Which reason ought to abhor; and I detest it,
More than your former hated offers.
Lastly.
Wilt thou have honour! Isle come closer to thee;
(For now the Flames of Love grow higher in me,
And I must perish in them, or enjoy thee)
Suppose I find by Power, or Law, or both,
A means to make thee mine, by freeing
Thee from thy present husband.
Hold, stay there.
Now should I utter volumes of persuasions;
Lay the whole world of Riches, pleasures, honours,
Before me in full grant, that one, last word
Husband, and from your own mouth spoke, confutes
And vilifies even all. The very name
Of husband, rightly weighed, and well remembered,
Without more Law or discipline, is enough
To govern woman-kinde in due obedience;
Master all loose affections, and remove
Those Idols, which too much, too many love;
And you have set before me, to beguile
Me of the faith I owe him. But, remember
You grant I have a husband; urge no more,
I seek his love. Tic fit he loves no whore.
This is not yet the way. You have seen Lady,
My ardent love, which you doe seem to slight,
Though to my death, pretending zeal to your husband.
My person, nor my proffers are so despicable,
But that they might (had I not vowed affection
Entirely to your self) have met with th'embraces
Of greater persons, no less fair, that can
Too, (if they please) put on Formality,
And talk in as divine a strain, as you.
This is not earnest, make my word but good,
Now with a smile, isle give thee a thousand pound.
Look of my face—Come—prithee look and laugh not—
Yes, laugh, and dare—Dimple this cheek a little;
Isle nip it else.
I pray forbear my Lord:
I'm past a child, and will be made no wanton.
How can this be? so young? so vigorous?
And so devoted to an old mans bed!
That is already answered. He's my husband.
You are old too my Lord.
Yes, but of better metal:
A jealous old man too, whose disposition
Of injury to beauty, and young blood,
Cannot but kindle fire of just revenge
In you, if you be woman, to requite
With your own pleasure his unnatural spite.
You cannot be worse to him than he thinks you,
Considering all the open scorns and jeers
You cast upon him, to a flat defiance;
Then the affronts I gave, to choke his anger:
And lastly your stolen absence from his chamber:
All which confirms (we have as good as told him)
That he's a Cuckold, yet you trifle time,
As it were not worth the doing.
Are you a Lord?
Dare you boast honour, and be so ignoble?
Did not you warrant me upon that pawn
(Which can take up no money) your blank honour,
That you would cure his jealousy, which affects him
Like a sharpe sore, if I to ripen it
Would set that counterfeit face of scorn upon him,
Only in show of disobedience, which
You won me to, upon your protestation,
To render me unstained to his opinion,
And quit me of his jealousy for ever.
No: not unstained by your leave, if you call
Unchastity a stain. But for his yellows,
Let me but lye with you, and let him know it,
His jealousy is gone, all doubts are cleared,
And for his love and good opinion,
He shall not dare deny it. Come; be wise,
And this is all: all is as good as done
To him already: let it be so with us;
And trust to me, my power, and your own,
To make all good with him—If not: Now mark,
To be revenged for my lost hopes (which yet
I pray thee save) Isle put thee in his hands,
Now in his heat of fury; and not spare
To boast thou art my Prostitute; and thrust ye
Out of my gates, to try't out by your selves.
this you may doe, and yet be still a Lord;
This can I bear, and still be the same woman!
I am not troubled now, your wooing oratory,
Your violent hands (made stronger by your lust)
Your tempting gifts, and larger promises
Of honour and advancements were all frivolous;
But this last way of threats, ridiculous,
To a safe mind, that bears no guilty grudge:
My peace dwells here, while yonder sits my judge.
And in that faith isle dye.
She is invincible!
Come isle relate you to your husband.
No,
Isle meet her with more joy then I received
Upon our marriage-day. My better soul.
Let me again embrace thee.
Take your dudgeon Sir,
I ha done you simple service.
O my Lord,
My Lord, you have cured my jealousy, I thank you;
And more, your man for the discovery;
But most the constant means, my virtuous wife,
Your medicine my sweet Lord.
she has tan all
I mean to give her sir Now sirrah, speak.
I brought you to the stand from whence you saw
How the game went.
Oh my dear, dear Diana.
I seemed to doe it against my will, by which I gained
Your bribe of twenty pieces.
Much good doe thee.
But I assure you, my Lord give me order,
To place you there, after it seems he had
Well put her to it within.
Stay, stay, stay, stay;
Why may not this be then a counterfeit action,
Or a false mist to blind me with more error?
The ill I feared may have been done before,
And all this but deceit to daub it ore.
Doe you fall back again?
Shugh, give me leave.
I must take charge I see of the dagger again.
Come Ioylesse, I have pity on thee; Hear me.
I swear upon mine honour she is chaste.
Honour! in oath of glass!
I prithee Hear me.
I tried and tempted her for mine own ends,
More then for thine.
That's easily believed.
And had she yielded, I not only had
Rejected her (for it was ne'er my purpose,
(Heaven I call thee to witness) to commit
A sin with her) but laid a punishment
Upon her, greater then thou could inflict.
But how can this appear?
Doe you know your father Lady?
I hope I am so wise a child.
Go call
In my friend Truelocke,
Take your dagger Sir,
Now I dare trust you.
Sirrah, dare you fool.
When I am serious? send in master Truelocke.
That is my fathers name.
Can he be here?
Sir, I am neither conjurer nor witch,
But a great Fortune-teller, that you'll find,
You are happy in a wife sir, happier — yes
Happier by a hundred thousand pound,
Then you were yesterday —
So, so, now he's mad.
I mean in possibilities: provided that
You use her well, and never more be jealous.
Must it come that way.
Look you this way sir,
When I speak to you, isle cross your fortune else,
As I am true Letoy.
Mad, mad, he's mad,
Would we were quickly out on's fingers yet.
When saw you your wives father? answer me?
He came for London four days before us.
Tic possible he's here then, doe you know him
O I am happy in his sight. Dear sir.
Tic but so much knee-labour lost, stand up,
Stand up, and mind me.
You are well met, son Ioylesse.
How have you been concealed, and this house?
Here's mystery in this.
My good Lords pleasure.
know sir, that J sent for him, and for you,
Jnstructing your friend Blaze my instrument,
To draw you to my Doctor with your son,
Your wife J knew must follow, what my end
Was in it shall quickly be discovered to you,
In a few words, of your supposed father.
Supposed father!
Yes, come master Truelocke,
My constant friend of thirty years acquaintance,
Freely declare with your best knowledge now,
Whose child this is.
Your honour do's as freely
Release me of my vow, then in the secret
I locked up in this breast these seventeen years
Since she was three days old.
True, master Truelocke,
I doe release you of your vow: Now speak.
Now she is yours my Lord; your only daughter,
And know you master Ioylesse, for some reason
Known to my Lord; and large reward to me,
She has been from the third day of her life
Reputed mine; and that so covertly,
That not her Lady mother, nor my wife
Knew to their deaths, the change of my dead infant,
Nor this sweet Lady▪ tic most true we had
A trusty Nurses help and secrecy,
Well paid for, in the carriage of our plot.
Now shall you know what moved me sir. I was
A thing beyond a mad-man, like your self,
Jealous; and had that strong distrust, and fancied
Such proofs unto my self against my wife,
That I conceived the child was not mine own,
And scorned to father it; yet I gave to breed her
And marry her as the daughter of this gentleman
(Two thousand pound I guess you had with her)
But since your match, my wife upon her death-bed,
So cleared her self of all my foul suspicions,
(Blessed be her memory) that J then resolved
By some quaint way (for J am still Letoy)
To see and try her thoroughly; and so much
To make her mine, as I should find her worthy.
And now thou art my daughter, and mine heir.
Provided still (for I am still Letoy)
You honourably love her, and defy
The Cuckold-making fiend foul jealousy.
My Lord, tic not her birth and fortune, which
Do jointly claim a privilege to live
Above my reach of jealousy, shall restrain
That passion in me, but her well tried virtue:
In the true faith of which J am confirmed,
And thoroughly cured.
As J am true Letoy
Well said. J hope thy son is cured by this too.
Now Mistress Blaze! here is a woman now!
J cured her husbands jealousy, and twenty more
Jth' Town, by means I and my Doctor wrought.
Truly my Lord, my husband has tan bread
And drunk upon it, that under heaven he thinks,
You were the means to make me an honest woman,
Or (at the least) him a contented man.
Ha done, ha done.
Yes, I believe you have done
And if your husband, Lady, be cured, as he should be;
And as all foolish jealous husbands ought to be,
I know what was done first, if my Lord took
That course with you as me—
Prithee when• came thou for?
My Lord to tell you, (As the Doctor tells me)
The Bride and Bridegroom, Both, are coming on,
The sweetliest to their wits again.
I told you.
Now you are a happy man sir; and I hope a quiet man.
Full of content and joy.
Content! So was my husband, when he knew
The worst he could by his wife. Now you'll live quiet Lady.
Why fliest thou off, thus woman, from the subject
Thou were upon?
I beg your Honours pardon.
And now isle tell you. Be it by skill or chance,
Or both, was never such a Cure, as is
Upon that couple: now they strive which most
Shall love the other.
Are they up, and ready?
Up! up, and ready to lye down again:
There is no ho with them;
They have bin in the Antipodes to some purpose;
And, now, are risen, and returned themselves:
He's her dear Per, and she is his sweet Mat.
His Kingship and her Queenship are forgotten.
And all their melancholy and his Travails past,
And but supposed their dreams.
Tic excellent.
Now sir, the Doctor, (for he is become
An utter stranger to your son; and so
Are all about em) craves your presence,
And such as he's acquainted with.
Go sir.
And go you daughter.
Daughter! that's the true trick of all old whore-masters, to call their wenches daughters.
Has he known you friend Trulock too?
Yes from his child-hood.
Go, then, and possess him (Now, he is sensible) how things have gone; what Art, what means, what friends have bin employed in his rare cure; and win him, by degrees, to Sense of where he is; bring him to me; and I have yet an entertainment for him,
Of better Settle-braine, then Drunkards porridge, To set him right. As I am true Letoy, I have one Toy left. Go, and go you, why stayst thou?
If I had been a Gentle-woman borne,
I should have bin your daughter too my Lord.
But never as she is.
You'll know anon.
Neat city-wives flesh, yet may be as good,
As your course country gentlewoman's blood. 
Go with thy flesh to Turn-bull shambles? Hoe
Within there.
Here my Lord.
The music, songs,
And dance I gave command for, are they ready?
All my good Lord: and (in good sooth) I cannot enough applaud your honours quaint conceit in the design; so apt, so regular, so pregnant, so acute, and so (withal) poetic legiti∣mate, as I may say justly with Plautus —
Prithee say no more, but see upon my signal given, they act as well as I designed.
Nay not so well my exact Lord, but as they may, they shall.
I know no flatterer in my house but this,
But for his custom I must bear with him.
'Sprecious they come already. Now begin.
Again you are welcome sir and welcome all.
I am what you are pleased to make me; but withal, so eg∣norant of mine own condition; whether I sleep, or wake, or talk, or dream; whether I be, or be not; or if I am, whether I doe, or doe not any thing: for I have had (if I now wake) such dreams, and been so far transported in a long and tedious voy∣age of sleep, that I may fear my manners can acquire no welcome, where men understand themselves.
This is Music, Sir, you are welcome; and I give full power Unto your father, and my daughter here, your mother to make you welcome.
How! your daughter sir?
My Lord you'll put him back again, if you trouble his brain with new discoveries.
Fetch him you on again then: pray are you Letoy or I?
Indeed it is so son.
I fear your show will but perplex him too.
I care not sir, isle have it to delay your cure a while, that he recover soundly. Come sit again, again you are most welcome.
There's an unwelcome guest; uncivil Discord that trains into my house her followers, Folly, and Jealousy, Melancholy, and madness.
My husband presents jealousy in the black and yellow jaundied suit there, half like man, and tother half like woman with one horn, and asse-eare upon his head.
Peace woman, mark what they doe: but but by the way, conceive me this, but show sir, and devise.
I ••ink so.
How goes he back again, now doctor? sheugh.
COme forth my darlings, you that breed
The common strifes that discord feed:
Come in the first place, my dear folly;
Jealousy next, then Melancholy.
And last come Madness, thou art hee
That bear the effects of all those three,
Lend me your aids, so discord shake you crown,
And make this place a kingdom of our own.
See Harmony approaches, leading on,
Against Discords factions fear great deities;
Mercury, Cupped, Bacchus, and Apollo.
Wit against Folly, Love against Jealousy,
Wine against Melancholy, and against Madness, Health.
Observe the matter and the Method.
Yes.
And how upon the approach of Harmony,
Discord and her disorders are confounded.
COme Wit, come Love, come Wine, come Health,
Maintainers of my Common-wealth,
Tic you make Harmony complete,
And from the Spheres (her proper seat)
You give her power to reign on earth,
Where Discord claims a right by birth.
Then let us revel it while we are here,
And keep possession of this Hemisphere.
Note there how Discord cheers up her disorders,
To mingle in defiance with the Virtues:
But soon they vanish; and the mansion quit
Unto the Gods of health, love, wine and wit,
Who triumph in their habitation new,
Which they have taken, and assign to you;
In which they now salute you — Bids you bee 
Of cheer; and for it, lays the charge on me.
And unto me you're welcome, welcome all.
Meat, wine, and mirth shall flow, and what I see,
Yet wanting in your cure, supplied shall be.
Indeed I find me well.
And so shall I,
After a few such nights more.
Are you there?
Good Madam, pardon errors of my tongue.
I am too happy made to think of wrong.
We will want nothing for you that may please,
Though we dive for it to the Antipodes.
WHether my cure be perfect yet or no,
It lies not in my doctor-ship to know.
Your approbation may more raise the man,
Then all the College of physicians can;
And more health from your fair hands may be won,
Then by the strokings of the seventh son.
And from our Travails in the Antipodes.
We are not yet arrived from off the Seas:
But on the waves •f desprate fears we roam
Until your gentler hands doe waft us home.

Fair stars attend this presence, Gentlemen,
Our Author bids me bid ye welcome, then
Our house bids welcome, I my self again,
Well, then at once thrice welcome Gentlemen.
But first, to you whose education brings
Learning along wee't for to judge of things;
I speak, but what needs that, your natures such,
That with nice Criticism it scorns to touch.
Ladies for you, I read it in each front;
You will, nay more, you must look fair upon it,
How ere, we hope, that all your smiles will be,
Propitious to our labours, not that wee,
Forestall your judgements, or doe beg applause,
Thats not our meaning, we have no such cause;
Yet doe believe, you will your Candors bring,
Cause it is the Primrose of the Authors Spring.
COme Hilts, one cup more.
Not a drop, I know they have dined by this time, and if I shu'd be out of the way, when my master comes, he would rail, that the noise of an Oyster wench wu'd not be half so devilish.
Come, come, one lusty dish now in the bottom of the cellar's worth all the rest —
A way with your number 4. it makes rattle-bagges and windmills in my guts, I cannot endure it.
Come, come, I warrant ye, it will not, prithee come.
Not? Why I'm blown wee't already like a Lan∣cashier Bag-pipe upon a May day; and besides, tic so weak, that a man cannot keep it alive while he throws it in's guts, when thou comst' to our house Isle give thee a cup of Beer will make thy nose cry twang Roger.
Why, but ye doe not keep such a house for all your jesting, doe ye?
Such a house, shat come in a morning, and find the cellar a foot deep in March beer; here a black Jacke, and there a slagon standing in it like steeples in a drowned city — Ther's house-keeping Roger.
I marry sir, there's a house well kept indeed.
Nay sir, by this means we make my Master a better house keeper than ere his father or grandfather was before him; for where they were used to ride every day a Hawking and hunting, my Master keeps the house sometimes for two or three years together, and what's the cause? nothing but our mirth, our randans, our tarra tantaras — oh the only way in the world to make a gentleman a house-keeper.
Well, come, I must needs have our round about to thy Masters daughters; for dost hear Hilts, me thought there was a little nodding and winking betwixt my young Master, Mr. Ʋalentine Crambag, and Mistress Sabina, did not per∣ceive it Rowland?
Yes marry did I, and tother gentleman there his Kinsman me thought now and then cast a sheep eye towards Mistress Mirabell; go to, an old Ape has an old Eye, Roger.
Why but Roger you are not such a Sillibraine, I hope to think that your young Master loves Mistress Sabina —
Nay, I me past thinking, for I doe partly know it.
How?
Why, tic neither impossible nor unlikely?
I doe not believe your young Master's such a stout fellow Roger.
Why pray?
I mean, as to venture himself upon such a wilde thing, I tell you sirs, your young Master, I confess is a pretty dappart young gentleman, but in respect of her he is but a Child, a shrimp, a Butterfly, a Chitterling, a Babble; in love with her quoth a? Shoe's not one that cares for complements, or will be won with cringes, or your tres-humble servitor Madame; no no Roger; she is a Blade, a Spark, a Teare-coate; and he that carries her away, must mumble her, jumble her,
rumble her, and tumble her, swagger, roar, and tear like a mad man; your young Master quoth a? — pish,
Hushed, here come the gentlemen.
Why stand you here? make sir Timothy Testies man welcome — go.
It was a brave speech of your worships sir.
O Cousin,
The womb of Aetnas but a rock of ice,
Compared unto those flames that rage within
My bosom;
I must enjoy, or else give end unto
This mortal life by some untimely means.
Good stars forbid it sir;
Come, come,
Lull not your own destruction, nor unman
Your self in doting on the outward frame
Of an imperfect soul,
Follow discretions finger that will guide
Your understanding and your mind to one,
Whose person's virtues Temple;
Cousin think on it,
Her qualities and yours will ne'er agree;
Your civil nature ne'er will correspond
With her wanton humours.
It cannot be,
There's nothing save a Deity can inhabit
So glorious a mansion,
Not love her, say ye? not have her;
I hope my stars will never look so black,
How ever yet my comforts this,
If I cannot have her I can perish.
That case is desperate, when a man must needs
Sink in a gulf, or split upon the rock;
Know sir, I bear as good a mind
To her fair sister Mirabell; but yet
I check these passions fearing that she is
Too like her sister, yet my flames doe rise
So high, that she takes notice on it; come
Learn to forget her, for you must expect
Nothing from her but scorn.
That such a creature has so foul a soul,
Twill never pierce
My understanding judgement, or belief;
Her birth and education needs must purge
Such grossenesse.
Sir be happy, hug your own fancy,
May things prove well, I shall be glad to see it;
Far be it from me to envy any good
Betides a friend and kinsman.
Peace, they are both come.
Welcome fair one,
Welcome I fey, to the arms of him that flies,
All joys but those that in thy bosom lies.
My bosom? what dee you find there pray sir; you have a mind perhaps to my Jewel, if you will not hurt it, ye shall have it a while to play with, tic a pretty bright thing sir.
Not so bright as your white bosom, Lady.
As how pray ye? what see you there?
O no, the gods wu'd frown if any mortal breath,
Shu'd once profane that milky way,
There's not a little in that lovely place,
But does create a wonder:
When Cupid's thirsty, and desires a sip,
Of Nectar, than he runs unto thy lip,
And for your hair, the brightness of it does
Persuade my soul the very graces spun
The golden twist.
Pray ye speak on sir, when ye have emptied your pockets you'll be quiet.
Emptied my pockets?
Sir, these are but pocket complements, run 'em over once, and then perhaps I shall talk with ye; remember where ye left, I wu'd be loath to put ye out sir, my hair was golden twist, ye said, come, what of all this?
This has inflamed my thoughts,
Ensnared my soul, and made me vow
A desperate destruction to my self,
Except from you I have one gracious smile
May stile me servant;
And for your fathers mind,
I know it jumps with our desires.
My fathers mind? dee think his frosty beard,
Can temper my affections,
No, no,
His precepts are too withered for my youth;
Know sir,
That I disdain those low-borne worms
That will be circumscribed by dotage
In loves affairs: I scorn to be directed,
I am my self sir, and my only soul
Is my own will and humour:
But pray whence come these words?
From my deep passions.
Whence those passions.
From your fair eyes, they
Were the happy guitars of my soul,
Unto this bower of wonder;
They fired my heart
Which burns, and will doe in remorseless flames,
Until from them I doe receive a glance,
May sweeten these my torments.
Not so loud I pray you, speak softly sir.
Speak Mirabell,
May I think a proud thought.
O by no means sir, they are great sins.
This of mine's a virtue.
What may it be sir?
Nothing Lady, but a presumptuous study to be yours.
Sir, you may speak what you please, but first
Let it arrive my apprehension what
Or how you mean, according to my skill,
I will return my answer.
Only to be
One of the number that doe still attend
Your pleasures beck, and so be styled your servant.
Sir,
My thoughts nor fortunes ever were so high,
To keep a servant of that consequence,
And tic my hope they never will, or shall be.
Break not a sacred oath, for I have sworn
My self your servant: then for pities sake,
Doe not infringe my vow.
Well,
Tendering your vow, Suppose I shut admit
Your self into my service, wot ye strive,
To express the faith and diligence belongs
Unto a servant.
My pleasure and delight shut fix,
On nothing more than to express,
My faith and loyalty.
Well, I admit you into my service,
But by the way you may perhaps observe
Some passages betwixt a friend and me,
As letters, tokens passages, or so;
Which if ye doe, take heed ye word it not,
But still possess your self with secrecy.
Betwixt a friend and you? — umph.
Ne'er scratch your head about it, for y' are now My servant.
I am, I've sworn it, and I will be so,
But yet ye did not hear me swear my self,
A servant to your friend — Isle none of that.
Your reason?
Tic love that makes me here present my self,
And with my self to tender up my soul,
Engaged by vows and oaths to waite upon
No creature but your self:
Love is the spur that pricks me on to this,
And love you know can brooke no rivals.
Doe you love and serve your self?
You and my self I doe.
Your self's the friend I mean, and this discourse
Has been a true prospective glass, whereby
To peep into your mind, which now I find
Full fraught with sweetness, when I did desire,
Ye wot keep private what ye did observe,
It was nothing else
But to be secret to your self and me;
Sir, in a word, I doe embrace your love.
Be not too prodigal of thy goodness sweet,
Consider what a scarciti's of it now
In the world.
Let this suffice sir, — I am yours.
Pray let me entreat ye to love your self a little better than to spend all this breath to no purpose.
Why then Isle take my leave, but first, let this snow white hand but deign to bless the unhallowed lips of your admiring Slave, that I may hence with gladness, and have cause to boast of something.
With all my heart sir; but I pray how long were you Doctor of the chair in the school of complements?
O they can never come from a dejected spirit.
Well, now I hope you are satisfied.
I wish my heart could truly speak it.
Come, come, you are too importunate.
O let not anger bend so smooth a brow,
Not for the earths hid mineral wot I give
The least occasion of a frown to thee,
For if I shut,
I should perpetually abhorring my self
Though not a word,
Yet let me have one glance before I go,
For nothing fair one speaks a lovers mind,
So well as the eye,
They talk of women, but you are able to teach all the women in the world to talk much to little purpose, for ought I see; come I must tutor ye a little, I see that.
Were I so happy to be your Pupil, I were a wonder
to my self.
If it were so I think you wot not be much troubled to make him untrusse forsooth.
For pities sake jest not at pities object:
Little know thou the miseries of him,
That has his amorous flames returned with scorn:
Well, since tic thus, I will my self translate
From this mortality, and embrace my Fate.
No further, no further, pray return.
Good sir give me leave to bring you a little further.
Pray ye, return, ye doe but trouble your self and me to no purpose, well, Sir Plenteous Crambagge I thank ye.
Farewell good sir Timothy Testy.
Come girls, come— whore's Hilts? — ha. Where is he?
Where are you sir, when ye shut waite upon me? —ha, Where I say?
I was but in the cellar, forsooth.
In the cellar forsooth? what business have you in the cellar for sooth? who shut waite upon me the whilst? where∣fore doe I give you three pound a year, and a trencher-cloake? — ha? — well—
Farewell sir Plenteous,
Farewell good sir Timothy Testy.
How does my cousin Fairefaith? how shall we squander away this afternoon, can you tell?
As you please sir.
Come, I have a mighty mind to be merry, what so ere the matter is.
I'm very glad of it sir.
But I have always observed that when I am so ex∣treamely disposed to mirth, one vexation or other falls pre∣sently in the very nick.
It falls so sometimes sir.
Well come, what de'e say gallants?
My thoughts me thinks are on a jocund pin,
I am strained up to a mighty pleasant key, me thinks.
What say you cousin Valentine?
What ye please.
Nay, In me indifferent, my masters walk the fields.
Go by Water, see a Play, or what ye will, tic
All one to me, come what say you son, — speak?
Which of these three, come, come, you are too sad▪
Say, what shall wee doe?
What ye will sir, I confess I doe sometimes Walk the fields, thinking to purge vexatious thoughts, but wheresoever I turn mine eye, something or other ministers occasion of fresh tortures: when I go by water, then the waves that tumble one in the others neck, present to my fancy the multiplicity of distraction crowding in at the door of my thoughts, and for seeing a Play, I confess it a brave thing, both to feast the wit, and recreate the mind: but, I think I shall ere be long see my self act my own Trage∣die.
I told you cousin, this Sunny flash wud have a storm;
Whats the matter son? — ha? —
Why thus dejected? —
Speak—cousin, what is the business?
What ails my son?
No great hurt sir.
Speak man, here is none but friends, unbrest your self, Whats the matter I say?
Nothing, nothing sir, only a melancholy fit.
Nothing? thats strange—Cousin, how comes my son thus discontented? what wud he have?
Sir, to stretch your patience no further than it will reach, tic a gentlewoman that hee wud have, a good lusty handsome gentlewoman.
A gentlewoman? how dee mean a gentlewoman? What wud he doe with her cousin?
I cannot tell sir, he has a use for her it seems, hee is in love with her, you may imagine now what hee wud doe with her.
How? in love with a gentlewoman?
You are a forward boy indeed — I hope
It is with one that hath a good portion, if not youth by
Gold and silver, you and I shall not be friends — umph:
In love quoth a? It is a thing cousin, I never yet knew
What it was, and yet I'm three score and upwards.
Not sir,
Were ye not in love with your Lady before ye married her?
Tic true, I had a great deal of money with her.
More than your sonne's like to have with this gentle∣woman I hear.
Say ye so? how comes this about son? — ha? First possible?
Sir,
Tic not this transitory pelf,
Nor all the trumpery the world cries up
That I respect; no, I esteem a soul
Sweetened with education;
Let dung admirers idolise their bags;
Tic not for man,
In whom there dwells an immortality:
I have made a choice,
Not for such by respects, this creature is
The pride and darling both of love and fame:
Sir, know that I
Scorneto dishonour my good stars so far,
As to besmear my soul with trash,
Or to profane Loves sacred rites for wealth.
Come, come, tell not me of education, and I cannot tell what, I must have money, I cannot purchase land
With education not I, neither with all your
Philosophy, I tell you, I must have
Money, and I will have money — but prithee cousin what is this
Gentlewoman — ha?
A brave lusty bouncing Lass, I can ell ye— what dee think of Mistress Sabina Testy, daughter to Sir Timothy Testy.
What of her?
She is the goddess of your sons idolatry.
She? Passion of my heart, son, coud'st thou find no body else to dote on but she? did I cark, and care, and watch, and toil and moil, and sweat for this — ha? have I endured a thousand millions of curses for exacting of forfeited bonds, and mortgaged lands for this? Sir Timothy Testy's daughter, quoth a? a wild slut, her father a decayed gentleman, and one that with riot and excess has cut so many collops out of his estate, that sometimes he is glad to keep his chamber, and gentily begin a course of physic two or three years together, Sir Timothy Testy's daughter quoth a?
O my heart, me thinks it tears in a thousand shivers, Mistress — father — friends, and all averse to my desires, be not so cruel Fates.
Well, to be short, if sir Timothy can, or will, give a considerable portion, tic a match, if not, Pardon moi, good son, I will not have a brood of beggars in my house — not I.
Stay a little sir, the greatest matter you doe not either know, or consider, were your consent the thing, that I think wot not be much stood upon; but here comes the break neck of the business; the gentlewoman scorns him.
How? scorn the Crambags? Sir, Be it known to all men by these presents, that there's ne'er a gentleman of 'em all but are now and then glad to be beholden to the Crambagges; she scorn him? come cousin, Isle go talk with her father about it, but first Isle know her portion.
Tic in vain, she cannot love, not? why can she not love? am I so vile a thing? no, I am not, whats the reason then? tic her immortal mind that wings her thoughts above my reach, there, there it is; what shall I doe then? turn co∣ward and suffer it; nay, what can I doe — what? I can die —
O ye fields of bliss,
If ye contain a flowery grove of rest,
Prepared for those that must needs dye for love,
Embrace my vows, and entertain that soul
That flies for shelter to your sacred shades,
Come forth thou purge of melancholy,
Rip up this lump of sadness, cut those chains,
Wherewith my soul is linked to misery;
—Stay,—come down proud thoughts,
Consider well what ye attempt to doe:
Am I a sacrifice for such a wight?
— O no, Isle then resolve to live,
Although it be but to torment my self,
And think that torment pleasure, cause tic she,
For whom alone I suffer misery.
PIsh, pray sir doe not urge me, I'm a little busy.
Tic but a word sir, and the matter ends.
Words, or matter, I cannot hear it now I tell ye.
Tic a concernment requires your serious intention, as much as mine sir.
Sir, I doe not use to step out of my humour, neither for my own sake, nor no mans else.
Tic for your own profit and good, pray hear it sir.
Well, lets here it then, lets hear it, but dee hear, be brief.
Thus it is.
Nay, come come, make an end, make an end.
I have not begun yet sir.
Prithee make an end I say.
Well, then you shall hear the end: my son Va∣lantine has a mind to make a conjunction copulative with your daughter Sabina.
Speak in a plainer part of speech man, what dee mean?
He has a mind to lye with her sir.
Isle see him hanged first, except he marry her first.
So he does entend sir, but you would not hear the beginning, which made me begin at the end.
Well, come to th'point, what says my daughter too't?
Rich Parents ne'er question that sir, they first wisely agree upon Portions, seal Writings, then marry the young couple, and afterwards, give 'em time to consider of that, if we may have your consent, I make no question of hers.
Well, ye have it, ye have it.
I thank ye sir, I shall make my son a glad man when I come home sir.
Send 'em joy, come, is this all ye have to say?
Tic all sir.
Well, fare ye well.
Stay sir, I had like to have forgot the maine business.
Puh, yet again, speak, speak come, what first?
I wud desire to know sir what blessings you mean to bestow upon your daughter?
Pish, dee think Isle be backward in these things? She shall have a thousand.
Tic a fair portion sir.
Have ye done now?
I have done, I have done, heavens protect ye sir—
A due, a due.
—Good sir, but one word more, and then I have done.
What again, what ails the man trow?
Only this sir, I hope you'll pay the money upon the wedding day sir, will not ye?
Money? — what money?
The marriage money sir.
What marriage money?
The thousand pound.
The thousand pound? what dee mean sir?
Did you not say but now you wot give a thousand pound with her?
I told you I wot give her a thousand blessings; passion of my heart, a thousand pound quoth a? sir I scorn it; ye have abused me to think so, let those scraping curmud∣gions, that for the most part beget •ripples and idiots like them∣selves, I say, let those do it J tell ye; on the wedding day, as I said, Isle give her a thousand blessings with all my heart.
And ne'er a penny of money?
Not a penny.
What? Not with your own child?
Not a Denier, not one Denier:
Why then give me leave to tell ye, your resolution is unworthy, nay, tic scurvy.
How scurvy? and in my own house too?
Ay scurvy, and I must tell ye, argues no better than a beggarly disposition.
Beggarly disposition? O baseness it self.
Base, I ne'er stood yet sir with my cap in my hand to a Scrivener for the procuring of ten pounds upon my own bond.
How? I stand with my cap in my hand ye rascal? when? when? how? to whom? I stand with my cap in my hand? — I defy thee.
I stand with my cap in my hand?
How now? what dee affront my master in's own house sir, pray avoid.
Out of my house ye dunghill, ye dirt, ye spawn of ten ith hundred.
Come, come sir, lets see your back, or your worcester∣ships pate feel the weight of my cudgel.
Out ye villain.
Very well sir.
A slave abuse me thus, and in my own house too.
Come sir, doe not trouble your self, he's gone now
A Sir, an old Pancridge.
Nay I see you are bell mettle sir if you're angered once.
Angry? it was well thou came in, for in my con∣science I had killed the rogue else.
Whoreson dogbolt affront me thus.
Whats the matter Hilts, who has vexed my father thus
Old Crambag forsooth, has been here and so abused me as I was never abused since I peeped into the world, and whats the reason forsooth, because his son and heire's in love with you forsooth, and entends to make you his bride forsooth, therefore must I give thim a thousand pound forsooth, but Isle see him hanged for a sign ats own door first; the truth is
daughter, his son is a pretty gentleman, but here is the thing, his son, as I perceive is mad in love, and for ought I see, rather than fail, he will give me a thousand pound for my consent, were not I an Ass then Hilts, to give a man a thou∣sand pound to marry my daughter; when the same man ra∣there than go without her will give it me? were not I a Buzz∣zard then I say?
A man wot think so sir.
Why shod I doe it —ha? give me but a why, and I'm satisfied?
In troth sir I cannot give you any great reason, un∣less your purse were sick of a Plurifie which I cud ne'er find yet.
Well, for the business of marriage, use your own mind daughter, I cannot tell, perhaps the old cur may leave him an estate — Well, once trouble not me, and doe your pleasure, but if you talk of money, I shall be angry, come along Hilts.
This young gentleman, a nimble spark I see, that I did not think the young co•• wot have been leaping so quickly —therefore doe you hamper him as soon as ye can, dee hear.
Come away Hilts.
I'm coming and please your worship.
Advise me in this dangerous maze to steer a safe course.
Ye are in a fair way to doe your self a great deal of good, keep your self in it sister, the gentleman's a great heir, sweetly behaved, bravely discoursed▪ and besides, a pro∣per handsome complete gentleman, what can you desire more sister?
Sister, I love the gentleman, at first, I confess, I did a little slight him, but my second thoughts framed a recanta∣tion which my intentions have directed to salute him spe∣deli.
A way with it sister, give it not a minutes more enter∣tainement for a world, send it immediately.
Come, Isle dispatch it instantly.
Be certain ye doe sister.
—umph,
And was I borne to the sport of Fate,
Cud not the destinies as well have said
Be happy
— inexorable stars,
Had ye but doomed me to have trod the paths
Of dreadful banishment never to return,
It had been a heaven in respect of this
— But tic in vain,
Upon the statutes of the stars to plain;
I must even rush upon some desperate death,
And theres an end.
Heavens forbid sir.
Theres no remedy, her loves impossible.
Impossible? why dee think the world contains a creature cannot be won.
Yes indeed?
You might as well have told me, that hee that has a Puritanical wife cannot be a cuckold sir; take this from me, there's not the bravest gallant that ever went naked to the middle, but a handsome man, good clothes, language, and money will bring her under the see, I warrant ye.
Sir, me thinks it were not a miss if you did cast your eye upon some other, the world is wide and populous, and now and then to look a squint, wud be a good way to as∣swag the violence of your passion.
O no, she—she is the blazing star where on I gaze, and the little world of beauty which I admire.
O brave Master — there was a speech; O Master Sportlove, this learning's a dainty matter — dee hear sir, shall I go and tell her what ye say? —
You cannot come again time enough, let it a∣lone.
I warrant ye sir.
Come, Try her again sir, ye cannot tell, drops of rain may pierce an Adamant.
That's with often falling upon it sir, if he cud but learn that, she wud love him presently.
Push, away with these fruitless passions, be your self once again.
That cannot be sir, you must consider he is in love.
Why, cannot a man be in love, and yet be him∣self too?
He may be, but it is raro aut nunquam, jealousy in a wo∣man, love in a man, and tooth ach in a dog, are three of the most dangerous things I can tell ye, that are incident to more∣talls.
Nay, I'm come again gentlemen.
What already, and done your errand too?
O rarely, sir, I had it as perfect —
Sir, what did ye tell her? you are so officious.
I told her sir, that your worship said, she was the staring blaze whereon you gazed, and the world of little beau∣tie which you admired.
Out ye rogue, ye small knowing rascal, thou hast undone me; did I tell ye so? dost thou go and turn my words backwards, ye villain.
Gentlemen, if I cud run away from him, I wud not be beholden to ye, for shame, doe not stand still and see a man killed.
It was but a mistake sir, pray pardon him.
It was nothing sir, but only the wrong end came out first, the gentlewoman understood it well enough.
Come, pray ye sir have patience.
I must kill the rogue, for he will never have wit.
Forbid that sir, if men shut be killed for want of wit, I had been a Masterless coxcomb long ago sir, but tic no matter, you may use me at your pleasure.
Come, come, ell's well, ell's well.
I thats true indeed, when I'm beaten once, then ell's well still.
But Mr. Sportlove, nothing but this gentlewoman troubles me, that she shut be so fair, so young, so handsome, and yet cannot love — me thinks it is strange.
It may be she feeds upon preserved snow, which if she doe, she'll seldom have a warm thought, I can tell ye,
Nay, her diet's good Isle assure ye, for she will con∣stantly have a breakfast of Oringoes, a dinner of Potatoes, a Sack posit to supper, and so goes to bed.
If she feed thus, tic impossible for the poor gentle∣woman to hold out long.
Fellow servant, how fares our Mistress?
Ye were told but just now, were not ye?
This Letter was commanded first to kiss your hand, and then inform ye.
To the gentle hand of her dearest Valentine address these.
Ʋal. Sir, I hope by this time your good nature has granted a pardon for my seeming rashness, which proceeded not from a mind fraught with disdain, but grounded on a reason∣lution to be your servant, th'old man's not yet in bed, but half an hours forbearance lockes him up in slumber; about which time my ambition is to see you at my chamber, where my servant shall attend to give you access to,
Now sir you wud run into the fire, and drown your self, wud ye? what dee think of me now sir, did I not doe my errant bravely sir, did not I?
Thou hast done ingeniously, and I will study corre∣spondent gratitude.
Nay, pray sir, I had as leefe you did beat me again, as give me hard words forsooth, I cannot endure 'em.
O how precious are those minutes wherein are wrapped unexpected joys, sweet piece of paper; fair was that star under whose influence thou were made— O this half hours forbearance, pardon sweet heart, passion had almost made me forget a due respect.
Pray sir doe not charge your memory with these things, leave 'em to me sir.
To you sir, wherefore?
Because she is the Sugar-plumme—of my af∣fections sir.
Cry ye mercy, farewell pretty Duck; tell your Mistress I will fly like time, till I have blessed these eyes with the sight of her.
Cousin, you're now in a progress towards the gentle∣woman, take a little of my advice along with ye — ha∣avenge now the advantage of a fair opportunity, try her every way, you know my meaning, and then as you find her dis∣posed, you may better dispose of your affections.
Sir, were it in my case, I tell ye in plain terms, I wud promise her a thousand things, and it may be for a nights lodging, I wud vow'em and swear 'em too; but when J had once satisfied my purposes, I wud show her a fair pair of heals, and there's an end.
Spoke like a gentleman, Isle assure ye sir.
Tic easy sporting where no pain is felt,
Come, come, lets go.
We attend your pleasure sir, for I perceive you long to be where your mind is.
A lack aday, you must consider sir every thing wud live.
Sweet, I come.
Did ever see a passion so transport a man, heaven• bless his wits.
It was a good prayer sir, but he must have 'em first.
What said he Betty when he read the Letter.
Hee was so ravished with joy, that J think he knew not what hee said forsooth, and for the letter, he did so cull it, and lull it, and clip it, and hug it, and bus it—O me Mi∣stress, this love—
Tic a pretty pleasant vexation; but did he say hee wud come?
He told me he wud come with all speed, and that hee shut think every minute a hundred years till hee saw ye, with many other pretty words which I cannot re∣peat
for sooth.
I shall be extreme melancholy till I see him; but are you sure he did say he wud come?
Very certain, forsooth.
How long dee think it will be first?
Your own appointment was half an hour, but for ought I saw, he was resolved not to forbear so long forsooth.
Prithee Betty help me to cousin the time a little with some pretty love Song.
That will but make ye the more melancholy for∣sooth.
Though it doe, yet me thinks I love it dearly.
Me thought ye said ye were afraid of being melan∣choly but now forsooth?
I did so, and so I am, and yet I love it.
I had heard 'em say forsooth, that melancholy people are like Spaniels.
Why prithee?
They say a Spaniel, the more a man beats him the more he fawns upon him; so melancholy people, me thinks, the more the humour torments 'em the more they love it.
Tic very true, come reach me my Lute— prithee sing Betty.
BE not so cruel fairest Boy,
But unstring thy golden bow,
In love we must expect no joy,
Nothing there but sorrow's flow;
If thy flaming arrow did
But touch, yet it still appears,
We must for ever after bid
Farewell joy, and welcome tears;
Tell us, then tell us where doth grow,
The herb that cures the wounded eye,
Else we must cry alas and woe,
There's no such herb that grows, and dye.
It was well sung.
No indeed forsooth my voice is quite gone, Cham∣barmaids have occasion you know forsooth now and then to
sit up in the nights when they have business to doe, and that spoils a maids voice quickly forsooth —they knock.
They're come I vow, run to the door.
My little Tewxbury mustard, how does thou doe?
Mustard? why mustard, pray ye?
Because I never come near thee, but thou makes my very eyes water.
Sir, tic fit wee now withdraw; the darkness of the night preswaded our attendance, now common civility re∣quires our absence—pleasures attend your proceedings sir.
Sweet night embrace ye sir.
Thanks noble sir, peace conduct ye.
Well now your worships pleased I hope —but stay, Whore's Betty?
She's gone out with the gentlemen.
Gone out with the gentlemen quoth a? and I stand here.
Your courteous invitation makes some recompense for the late scorn with which you did slight my honest zeal.
I doe acknowledge sir
The error of my rashness, and beg pardon,
I have informed my judgement better since;
And you appear to my opinion
More acceptable far than when you first
Presented your desires with your self,
That now shall want no fitting entertainment
To satisfy the first neglect.
I cannot deny, but that it made 〈…〉
Of some sad thoughts within me, but I 〈…〉
A little rectified, consideration
Hath almost cured my passions, and my fire
Of love is some what abated.
The few hours
Are added to my age, since you last saw me,
Have made no wrinkles yet upon that beauty,
To which you then did give large attributes,
And to be cold so soon, argues it was only
Your flattery and courtship.
Not so Lady,
I ne'er dissembled any false intents,
My words were the true characters of my thoughts,
Only your scorn, —there tic.
Sir I amalter'd much
From that bad humour, and my heart hath tan
A flame into it from the observation
Of your complete deservings, and is ready
To answer your desires.
You engage me
To a due gratitude, but I have settled
New resolutions.
Sir, ye are now revengeful,
And punish scorn with scorn; a gentle nature
Wud not deny a reconciliation
Upon such terms; but you suspect my freeness.
I blush to think on it, and am sorry sir,
The offer of my self is no more valued,
Than thus to be refused, straight my servant
Shall be your guide, and so I wish sweet peace
To your fair thoughts.
They are the fairer, Lady,
In that they have called back your fairest self
To be their object.
Call not back your humour
To flatter me.
By my best hopes I doe not;
A Saints devotion 〈…〉 earnester,
Or more free fro• •ny pocrisie than my love:
I own not a desire but what is yours;
And if again you chide my forward zeal,
My danger will be more in the relapse,
Than in the first disease which you have cured;
In steed of healing Balms, apply no Corrosives
To my sick heart, but gently entertain
My second motions, for next to Eternity
You are my happiness.
You did intimate
That you had fixed upon some other beauty,
From whose pure excellence, a brighter flame
Is shot, than my dull eyes can sparkle forth;
If it be so I shall not envy it.
Your error
Was a just motive I confess, but when
I said I had settled new resolutions,
I did but dissemble, which pray pardon first,
And then receive me to your fair opinion,
By all the sacred powers, religious mortals
Invoke to make an oath of power to force
Belief, you only must be she,
Or none; in whose blessed union I shall joy,
And satisfy my kinreds expectation
Of issue.
Urge no more,
My Faith takes all for truth, and in exchange
Of your dear self, delivers up my self as freely.
This blessed minute doth deserve
A note in times large register.
To morrow
Let it have public motion before our friends;
And when you please the consummation
Of our full joys shall follow: Dear, farewell,
I must to bed.
I will go with ye sweet —
Forbid ye chaste directors of my soul,
Desire shut be so forward ere the Ceremonies
Confirm it lawful.
Why shut we be nice,
And stand upon the outside of our actions
More than the substance, though we shut anticipate
Those pleasures, since our vows are past we need not
Have scruple, they'll beget a second doubt,
And make the earnestness of love suspected.
O fie upon it sir, doe not cloud your virtue
With such a stain, you're lovely to me yet,
And shall be whilst you're faithful — Isle to bed
And wish you rest.
Good night.
Are ye a man?
And wud not take
A better leave of me?
How looking back, and leaving op the door,
Isle leave you such an earnest, if I can
Prevail, that you shall swear I am a man.
MY cousin Valentine not yet returned, say ye?
Not yet indeed sir.
What dee think shut be the reason?
Tic not revealed to me sir; but I think hee prevailed with his Mistress for a nights lodging, and that may be the cause of his long stay.
He has staid something long indeed, but —I be∣leeve he will come home very shortly forsooth.
I confess I long to be acquainted with the issue of his enterprise.
Oh my sweet Master's come again.
I am so.
And you are even as welcome sir, as ever poor Ma∣ster was to a servant.
—Pray sweet heart return, let not me trouble ye.
No trouble sir, — if you have any other commands
To impose, I shall joy t'observe'em.
Not I sweet heart, only fare ye well.
O my sweet hony-suckle, art thou gone already.
Good stars, gentlemen.
Fair morning to my sweet cousin, we hope health betides your Mistress, and doe now expect to be gladded with the news of a fair progress to the end of your desires.
The end of my desires is even the desire of my end, for I have no joy on earth.
What again in these perplexities, whence come these clouds of discontent now? — ye took no joy before be∣cause ye had no hope t'enjoy her, in whom ye had placed all your hopes and joys, the cause of that distempers removed, what may occasion this — heavens know.
Ye cannot tell sir, perhaps the letter was dissembled, and she in some idle humour might send for him to abuse him.
O cousin Fairefaith, this gentlewoman —
What? cannot she love yet?
Yes — love? O yes.
Whence rise these distractions then?
Even from her love.
How? can neither frowns nor smiles give ye satis∣faction, tic some what strange, two mere contraries shut pro∣duce the very same effect.
She has with love undone her self and me.
There's some mystery in it without question.
I pray sir untie these knotty expressions, for I cannot.
To be too prodigal of that, which once lost, the whole world cannot recover — weakness intolerable Admit Iurg'd her,
I'd thought the treasures not of earth or sea
Cud have persuaded such a brave borne mind,
Unto the pleasures of forbidden sheets.
O sir, is the wind in that corner now?
What dee think of my opinion now sir.
O cousin Fairefaith, had I been a woman —
You wud have been an arrant whore in my consci∣ence.
I say, if I had been a woman cousin,
Armies of Virgin resolutions shut
Have still environd me:
O misery!
Had she been cautious in preserving that,
That rein of immortality her honour;
Earth had not carried such a Paragon;
But now
Her outward frame sets but the blacker dye
Upon her minds deformity; I'm now resolved
To hate those very thoughts that pitch upon
So pure a piece of impurity.
Puh, what needs all this stir Master, suppose ye have found her to want a grain or two, doe but consider of it, it is nothing amongst friends; alack a day sir, the Gold∣smith himself may be cozened with a light piece, ant shall please your worship.
But will not ye visit her again?
Never — never.
Nor send to her?
No, neither my self, nor any one depends on me shall ere come there again.
O poor Betty, I shall ne'er see thee again, I perceive that.
Come cousin, I must be gone.
Sir, I shall entreat to be excused,
I have engaged my self to meet a friend,
Which will expect me here immediately.
Farewell cousin.
Dee hear sir?
Come, what say you?
I have a strange thing come just now into my head sir, and that's this sir; there's Newgate for Thieves, Bridewell for Whores, and Bedlam for Madfolkes, yet among all these I doe wonder there's ne'er a place for fools.
It were a charitable foundation had a man means to do it with, your Master has an estate, and might doe well to
think of such a thing.
Ye say right sir indeed; charity shut begin at home, that's the truth on it—but let me tell ye sir, this gentle∣woman does a little trouble my scull for all that.
What a capcase were I in, if her sister shut be of the same stamp, what wud the world say, what wud men think?
What? — they wud think ye were borne when the sign was either in Aries, Taurus, or Capricorn, that's all they wud think for ought I know, and so fare ye well.
Children and fools tell truth, well
If it be my fate, there's no remedy,
Nor friend to fly unto in such a case
But honest patience.
Stay, here she comes, Isle see,
If in her carriage I can read my fortune
— What my Mirabell—unexpected happiness.
How dee sir?
Better then I was.
Why? were ye sick sir?
Suppose I had been, or am, your presence wud beget a health immediately, J confess I was not even now so well as now I am, because I wanted thee which now I have sweetest.
I shut be loath to be found wanting, when your occa∣sions call upon my service sir.
Sweetly spoken fair Mirabell,
But hear me,
Admit I had a strange occasion now
To try thy bosom, wudst thou be content
To run a hazard that might manifest
Thy love and loyalty?
There's not a danger in the world can be
So dreadful to my thoughts, but I wud run
To embrace it for the pleasure of my love;
But pray sir, what mean these doubts?
Nothing fair one, only a conceit.
May it concern me sir.
Yes —it is but a thing incident to all your Sex.
Please you to unlock your mind sir,
Isle study what I can to purge your thoughts.
Tic only this —I fear you are too coy,
That's all my fear, too coy Mirabell, too coy,
Coins! O heavens! tic the only object of my scorn s;ir,
I doe not think there's such a thing in the world,
Or that kind nature
Was ever the mother of so vile a monster;
Were I persuaded that my veins contained,
But the least dram of such a peevish humour,
Though't kept my heart alive Id rince it out;
In a word I disdain it.
My hopes say you doe.
Sir, if you please,
Put your invention to the rack,
Till it find out some strange device to try
Whether I'm coy or no;
Breath but a syllable, and it straight commands
The mind or person to serve
Your pleasures.
There's not a tittle of a word in this,
But has its quire of harmony;
But why doe I defer so great a bliss?
Come, let love embraces crown our sweet desires.
What dee mean sir?
Only a gentle taste of loves delicious sweets.
What, before we marry?
Yes.
Your reason.
O it puts life into a patient expectation — come.
Pray forbear sir.
How? forbear?
What's become of this present minutes protestations.
I never dreamed that you
Had ever sullied your well tutored soul
With such a vile intention.
Come, come, where twining hearts unite
What need these scruples?
Sir,
Stain not your breast with such ignoble thoughts,
Tic true —
I scorn proud coins, but I doe abhor
To think of this.
O that those eyes
Shut be the portals to a heart of flint,
I cannot endure it;
Come, come, I must needs satisfy my flames.
Therefore no more excuse.
Sir, ye have uttered words
Doe breath an air wud kill a Basilisk;
Call ye this love?
It is rather treason against Loves Majesty▪
Will you pretend t'expresse a love to me,
And yet speak ruin to my reputation;
Banish these thoughts, or else for ever be
A detestation to my bosom.
Dwell in thy goodness, gentle love;
It was not to please a wanton appetite,
Or spot thy shrine of Virgin purity
That I have spoke;
No it was only but to try the strength
Of thy resolves in goodness, what before
I did but love, I now admire;
But—
If like thy sister thou had swerved a jot,
From that integrity wherewith I see
Thy mind is fortified, I shut have cut
Thee off from my acquaintance.
How's this? if like my sister, say ye?
What has she done, pray ye?
No great hurt forsooth.
If ye love me tell me sir.
Now ye conjure me, I will. My cousin Ʋalentine Crambagge that was so in love with her, it seems he prevailed with her a little too much, to give it ye
in plain terms he has lain with her, glutted himself with the sweet spoils of her virginity, and now for ought I hear by the virtue of Hocus Pocus, my gentleman's gone.
Accursed fate, Sabina thus dishonoured,
And by thy kinsman?
I fear too much of that detested blood
Flows in thy veins, henceforth Isle not converse
Either with thee or any other man
That is of kindred to him, pray ye be gon,
Your presence turns my very stomach up,
Take it as ye please, I must for ever discard ye.
Displeased with me for his faults?
Tic all one, speak not —reply not—your sentence Is this —fare ye well.
I obey it —
It has been still observed since time begun
That sweetest natures still are soonest won,
This is the fate that usually attends
Best dispositions:
Poor women! into how many fools paridices are wee daily brought by these wicked men!
Ah poor sister.
How now, what ails your sister now?
Nothing forsooth.
What does the wedding hold or no? —ha?
Shees wedded already sir.
How? and I not know on it? what a forward saucy girle's this?
But is she married indeed?
Yes, to misery, shame, and infamy.
What's the matter girl? — ha? — speak — what's the matter?
Hee that pretended so much love to her, I mean young Crambragge.
Ay —what of him? —ha? what's the business I say?
O Sister, sister!
Daughter, I charge ye tell me what the matter is,
what of young Crambagge?
He — that villain has by smooth words wrought upon her gentle nature, to her perpetual dishonour; to tell ye the plain truth sir, he has lain with her, published it abroad to her disgrace, and is now fled.
—umph — lain with her? — and fled?
Is there no thunder left above the sky?
Is Jove grown deaf? or has he sworn to lie
A sleep, and thus forget the earth?
What's your business sir?
Sir, my Master sent me to your worship, to tell your worship, that your worship needs not trouble your self a∣bout your daughters portion, for his minds altered, and hee bid tell your worship that he wud entreat your worship to have patience.
Sir, your Master's a rascal, and you are another.
O by no means, and please your worship.
O Mirabell, me thought I had a good opinion of him, he had so civilised her, and me thought had brought her to be the best natured girl:
Merciless fate,
My passive fortitude wherewith I once
Out-fac'd misfortune now is fled and gone,
My daughter thus digrac'd?
What's the reason I know it no sooner?
It comes too soon whenever sir;
The messenger has heals of lead that brings
Good news, but ill news fly with Eagles wings.
Stand fast ye weak supporters of my age
Henceforth my hand be pillow to my head,
O my perplexed soul!
Cud I but leap now from some rocky top,
Into the plunging swallow of the sea,
'Twud be some ease,
Fetch her Mirabell, fetch her,
Alas I little dreamed of this.
Your worship might have dreamed on it, for to my knowledge your worship was a sleep in your bed when the
business was done.
O that I had the rogue by the ears.
I but he does not desire to give ear to ye.
Out ye strumpet, ye whore, does thou play the whore and look me in the face? hast thou played the baggage? hast thou played the whore? — Ha? Out of my sight ye queen, get ye out.
O Mirabell is there no stones, nor water, fire nor sword to be revenged with — Ha?
Come Sir, you keep a fine order here, I appoint you to over see my house, and you let gentlemen come in and lye revelling here all the night, you are a trusty Trojan you.
Tic more then I know Sir, tic the first time I heard on it, if I had seen the saucy rascals I wud have sent 'em fur∣there with a vengeance.
Abominable — thus to disgrace her self and me, where is she, did not I bid ye fetch her?
She has been here Sir, and you sent her out again.
Has she? I know not, these distractions do so con∣found me, that I forget the last minute: O daughter Mirabell what shut I doe?
Me thinks your worship shut keep always a rope about your house against such a desperate case as this is.
Hilts take that rogue, and dee hear, deliver him from me to the keeper of Bridewell — take him away I say.
Come Sir come, are ye come hither to jeer?
No Sir, I did not jeer Sir.
Take him away I say.
Come along come.
Master Hilts, your master does but jest man.
Sir your master has abused my house, and Isle make him smart fort.
Tic like enough and please your worship, but shall I be punished for the wickedness of my Masters Codpeece, and please your worship, no no.
Carry him away I say.
Your worship's a merry Gentleman, you love to make sport I see that.
Hilts, I bid you once more carry him away, what dee think to laugh me out of my resolutions?
Come your ways sir.
Hilts is in sober sadness and please your worship.
So am I too sir, carry him I say —
Was thou mad to talk thus to a Justice of Peace, a Justice of Corum horum rotulorum? it is as much as thy life's worth.
A prating saucy rascal; carry him away.
I beseech your worship forgive me, good your worcester∣ship.
Carry him away I say.
Good your worship forgive me, I beseech your worcester∣ship.
Well, let him go for this time, get ye gone sir.
Yes and shall please your worship — gone quoth a? Isle see your worship hanged before Isle come near ye again.
O Hilts, this wicked fellow has undone us.
Who dee mean sir? Mr. Crambagge?
The same.
What has he done sir?
What? my cheeks wud burn to speak it, uncon∣trouleable fates — is there no pity in your votes.
Well, if I once meet with him —
What then?
I'd make him an example to all the young lads in England, I wud fustinado the carcass of him till the limbs of the rogue flew one from another, and then I wud beat 'em together again.
No, no, if we shut hurt him Hilts, the Law wud be of his side.
Hurt him, no forsooth, I wud only bestow a little timber upon the shoulders of him.
Pish, pish, come, go your ways to my cousin Muchcraft the Attorney, tell him I'm coming to him for
his advice; in the mean time doe you put the Case to him for coming into the house at an unseasonable time of the night, go your ways, Isle be with ye presently.
Your father's coming after us here.
Where is he?
O son—I have been so abused—nay, and a hundred to one but I had been soundly basted too, and all this to please thee.
As how pray sir?
I went to treat with sir Timothy about the marriage, and because I stood upon a portion, old Testy was pleased to call me a thousand rascals; and in the heate of the business (O my arms!) comes me in that same great horse-bon'd Hilts, and so shakes me; well son, Isle even walk in, if a∣ny body come to pay money tell 'em I'm within, if they come for money, tell 'em I'm not well, for this fellow has so bruised my arms that I'm not able to tell it; dee hear what I say, to ye son?
Nay lower and pout till Doomsday, tic all one, I will have money before I give my consent, come, come, tell me no more tales—love quoth a? If I had married for love cousin, I had been a rogue, a fool, a beggar; no, no son, I must have money, and I will have money.
Sir, the last night your son went to see his Mistress, and prevailed so far with her, that to tell you the naked truth, they lay together all night; he perceiving her so easily won to wantonness, and fearing hereafter she might be a little too liberal of her entertainment, has cast her quite off now fears your displeasure for his too much forwardness, and that's the cause of his sadness.
How? lay with her—it is not possible.
Not for a gentleman to lie with a handsome wench, why, it is one of the possiblest things that can be sir.
I'ame sorry to hear it cousin, but I'm glad hee has put her off, a company of rascals, they are served well enough,
I warrant ye, the poor boy hearing how her father had abused me, cud not find in's heart to love her a jot longer; yet for all that cousin, I like not's humour in this, that he cannot talk with a woman but he must be jobbing presently, I doe not like that I must tell ye — well it is done and past now.
I but I'm afraid you'll hear on it again, sir Timothy intends to clap him up till he has made satisfaction, but pray sir voice it not that I told ye.
Will he so? tell him, Isle see him hanged by the neck in the high way to Paddington first; he clap him up? he shall not have so much as a hair of his head except it were to choke himself with, and yet my son shall go up and down, aye, and job him upon the nose too and hee shall not know him; and if you please tell him, that I'm resolved before I have done with him, so bitterly to vex him, that he shall be glad to come with a rope in's hand, and make a humble petition to the Hingman, that he may have license to hang himself to save his clothes — come along.
Not vex?
Why? Doe you think there is a woman lives.
That has a sister abused as mine
And not yet be vexed?
To bring a maid into this misery,
And all under loves pretence:
This is your kinsman sir, your own flesh and blood sir.
The more sorry am I forsooth;
But if you'll please to entertain my vows,
Of real love and service once again
Into your better thoughts, Isle use a means
That shall preserve her honour from the dust,
If not abhor me.
Let your heart and tongue but correspond
And you enslave my soul.
I have already hammered in my scull,
A vindication that shall make her name
Shine to posterity.
The boundless Ocean of your goodness drowns
The slendernite of what I can return.
Here she comes, if ye can doe her a favour,
Both she and I will be glad to snatch all
Opportunities to express our thankful minds sir.
Ladies, thus it is, hee has disguised himself, goes in women's apparel, if ye please Isle bring ye to him, where, if there be occasion, you shall command my best assistance.
Pray ye sir where is the place?
It is at A Shoemakers house in the Strand, but that's all one, follow me.
Budget.
Sir.
Have ye drawn William Woodcocks plea to Tri∣stram Widgroms declaration — ha?
No sir, the cause is removed, Woodcock fearing to be overthrown at Common Law, comes with a pitiful long bill, makes a case of conscience on it, and so is flown away.
Is he so? if I had known that Budget, I wud have Plucked his feathers a little first, but it is no matter, let him go.
What's your errand fellow?
Fellow? Sir I'm none of your fellows, not I.
I believe ye are not, whats your business before me?
Sir I doe not come to doe my business before you.
What mean these frivolous answers? Whose man are ye sir?
My masters sir.
Very good — what mad man are you pray?
Mad sir, no more than your self—mad sir? —umph.
Nay let him alone Budget, wee shall have a brave action of battery here by and by.
Sir, I belong to the right worshipful Sir Timothy Testy; my master sent me for your Vice, the Case is this; a Gentleman comes into my masters house at an unreasonable time of the night contrary to my Masters known will and command, whether is this a trespass or no?
No, no, prithee doe not trouble me, I'm a little
busy.
Cousin Muchcraft, how dee sir?
Sir Timothy Testy, you are kindly welcome sir, how dee sir?
Never worse cousin, — even almost dead with grief, most abominably abused.
Wherein, pray ye sir?
That I will tell more at large hereafter sir, not one∣lie a piece, but my whole love attends ye sir — the case is this; a Gentleman comes into my house, at an uncivil and un∣seasonable time of the night, contrary to my known will and command; a Trespass or no?
A trespass: a transcendent crime sir; a most foul matter, Isle assure ye; your man did not put the Case to me in this manner.
Not? ye whoreson blockhead, are ye not able to speak to a man? wherefore doe I keep ye? —ha?
I cud not, I had not instructions in my pocket.
It is well enough sir, both Law and Equity supports your cause; come, we'll walk out and talk of it.
Your tongue drops honey cousin, and you have re∣vived my staggering spirits:
And now though time and age,
Cover my head with honourable hairs,
Yet —
Since rays of Sunny thoughts peep out again,
Isle strive to quell these passions — come
Sad sighs, and tears are Orators of grief,
But it is an active brain that brings releese.
Come, pray sir doe not think on it.
How shall I stand by and see.
A gentlewoman of my kindred wronged?
Be patient?
And my kindred thus abused? my proper flesh
And blood disgraced, our reputation turned
Quite topsy turvie, nay, and all this done
By a lascivious villain?
No, no,
Nothing butt's blood shall pacify my sword;
Had but the slave as many thousand lives
As there doe grains of sand surround the sea,
There wud be scope to vent my fury on;
But now it is circumscribed within the verge
Of one poor rascals life, whose blood will scarce
Give satisfaction to my thirsty steel:
Come sir, I doe perceive you know his haunts,
which if ye doe,
I doe conjure ye here to bring him forth;
And if you will, or dare to second him,
Isle stand ye both.
Sir, on my life I vow,
The place of his abodes unknown to me;
They say he's fled and gone:
Tic true, I had
Some conversation with him, but I was
A stranger to his thoughts and actions;
And where this time hee does bestow himself
Tic not known to me.
Sir, what say you? whore's your Master?
Ah, I wud I cud tell ye, he has left me in a pitiful case here, if old sir Plenteous doe not take pity upon me, I must even go and drive Wheele-barrowes in Lincolnes-Inne-fields, for ought I know.
Alas poor fellow, I'm sorry for that, what can doe?
I have a quality sir, but the world now adays does not respect men of parts.
What first?
A Bagge-piper, an't shall please your worship,
A Bagpiper?
Yes indeed sir, as simple as I stand here, I have plaid before as good Bears as be in the Kingdom of England.
Where dost live now?
Sir, in the mean time J waite upon the Lady that lies in the house here.
Trash.
Madam.
Come ye hither.
Unhappy eyes ye have undone my heart.
I come forsooth.
Stay fair one, stay,
Speak ye to me sir?
I doe,
But first, I doe entreat you will be pleased
To smile upon my rashness, then must I
Perforce inform ye, that just now I felt
A blow upon my heart, which I conceive
Was darted from your eyes.
Your conceit was in an error sir.
O no,
I see betwixt those breasts
Is Adons garden, and Elisiums love,
And from these lips proceeds an ayre transcends
Sabean spices, or the Phoenix nest;
Lady,
Be pleased to let this Jewel pride it self
Between those snowy hills, and you engage
My soul unto your self.
My gratitude entertains your loving directions sir, A word sir,
What gentleman is this? me thinks he much resembles Sabina Testy, know ye him not?
Not I, I met him here by chance, it matters not who it is, take you his gifts —and be sure to yield what hee would have ye doe, and wee shall want neither gold nor jewels, I see that: and dee hear, you will by this means put such a trick upon your sweete-hearts Champion as never was,—and in the issue it will be found to be but a jest, there's and end.
Pray accept of this.
I were to blame if I shut not sir; Wheelebarrowes, quoth a? Isle see 'em all hanged first, a handsome gentlewoman's service is as good as fee tail, I see that.
Me thinks Lady, you much resemble a gentleman I know, one Mr. Valentine Crambagge, one that I wud be every glad to see.
I know the gentleman sir, he is, I take it, a friend to one Mistress Sabina Testy.
A friend,
Had she been dead when first she saw his face,
She had been happy.
Pray you why sir?
Has done her that dishonour,
That time can never raze out of memory;
And in regard she is my nearest cousin,
The sad remembrance of it tears my heart
Into a thousand shivers;
But now your presence like the morning Sun
Drives off these melancholy mists wherein
My soul did sometimes wander.
Sir, I am yours.
O the sweetness of those words!
Nay, there's a pound of Sugar almost in every word she speaks sir.
Lets mix our selves.
But first, let Hymen with a wedding knot
Knit up our souls.
O no sir.
Nay you are now my captive.
I hope I shall easily procure my redemption.
Thy very hearts thy ransom, nothing shall,
But only that redeem thee.
I doubt not sir, but your own goodness will plead my excuse;
For know, I did
Set up a resolution long ago,
Never to marry.
Pish.
How, not marry?
Remember what I told you cousin; Sir, I know she will be persuaded, but that gentlewomen, ye know, think it a kind of disparagement to be too soon won, that's all sir.
Pray express your intentions Lady.
I have already sir.
And is that your resolution?
Indeed it is sir.
Why then Isle tell ye mine:
I'm now in quest of this detested slave
That wronged my cousin, and doe hope ere long
To vindicate her quarrel, therefore know,
If thou'lt not marry me immediately,
Those looks that doe so much resemble his,
Shall whet my sword against thee, nay, convert
My love to fury, and shall sacrifice
Thy blood, to expiate my kindreds wrong;
Therefore I must, nay more, I will enjoy;
Despite of fate I will;
My quike desires doe chide my patience,
And thou must yield or die, than quickly speak;
I cannot stand to waite upon discourse:
But by the way consider, that ye are now
To give a sentence either of life or death,
Upon your self, take heed; if ye say aye,
You live my darling, but if no, you die.
Sir, I consent to marry, and am content to be disposed of as you shall please.
Your breath is music now, come lets along.
Why, but sir, you will not carry away my Mistress I hope in this manner, will ye? and I have but newly got her neither — slid, these are tricks indeed?
Sir, there's for you hold you, your peace, it is my humour.
Bless your worship sir, and keep ye in this humour still say I.
Well sir, I hear ye, but ye have not spoke toth
purpose yet.
Accept this from me sir, Isle prove sir, that my son was invited and sent for, and that her maid and she both used all means possible to allure him thither.
Ay, now you have spoke home sir, this is some∣thing now, I feel your cause a little better▪ and thus much for your comfort, never trouble your self
about it, Isle take such a course that his cause shall ne'er proceed Isle warrant ye, alas sir Timothy's cause is not worth the leg of a Fly, and yet he does so torment my house, that I can neither eat, drink, nor sleep; ye know Budget how often I have desired him to forbear my house▪ and yet all will not doe.
I wish hee were hanged, he makes me tell a hundred lies in a week in telling him ye are not within, of purpose to be rid of him.
Here's a rogue.
Alas for's business, were my case, if any body wud but give me a saucer of Mustard sor't, he shut have it.
Saucy rascal.
Suppose he brings his action, what can he doe in▪t? — not this, tic true, he wud have retained me to have ta∣ken out a Writ against ye, but when I perceived that it was nothing but a malicious humour, I bid him go and be hanged with this brabbles▪ I wud not be troubled with 'em.
Very good, but you were willing enough to be troubled with my money, I have heard you all this while, and this your sucking knave too.
Sir Timothy, come, come, Ime glad you are come, Ime glad you are here with all my heart, come, I must have you made friends by all means.
Friends? Isle see him stand bare to the tail of a Cart first, I friends with him? —hang him rascal.
Sir, I make no doubt but I shall make you know, and your daughter too before I have done with her, that she has abused my son, I cannot tell, I will not say she has be∣witched him, but if I prove it, Isle make ye all stink with a
vengeance.
Why, ye worme-eaten slave, does my daughter look like a Witch?
Budget, pray ye put down worme-eaten slave, and the day of the month too, bee hear?
Did not come thy self (you whoreson gull▪)
Write ye whoreson gull.
Yes sir.
Did not come, thy self, I say to know what pore∣tion I wud give her? Now I find it was but a mere pretence, ye cheating rogue you.
Write ye cheating rogue you.
Yes forsooth.
If my man Hilts were here I wud beat thy very nose into thy face, and afterwards beat it out again.
What wud ye doe sir?
Nay pray gentlemen forbear while ye are in my house.
I can forbear him no longer.
Come sit Timothy, pray go along with me.
Sir Plenteous, pray ye go along with me sir.
Prithee let me beat the rogue first.
Nay come sir, come, come.
Why so?
This is the crown of all our joys on earth,
When love and marriage trip it hand in hand,
It makes the mind to vault
And caper o'er the clouds of discontent;
Me thinks my soul has wings and I cud fly,
From hence to Elizium, come cheer up my sweet,
What art thou sad, and see thy husband laugh?
Come now we are married, we must have but one
Passion betwixt us — Gentlemen what?
Frowns at a Wedding?
How? frowns?
Shut a man seem to droop or hang the wings
At such a time, he were far fitter for
T'accompany wild Tigers in a wood,
Then to converse with men, the gods themselves
Sing Epithalamies, when mortals wed,
If Gods are subject to these passions, then
They needs must over-sway the hearts of men;
Sir, joys attend ye, may you ever be
As full of joys, as we are now to see
Your happy Nuptials:
Pish, be not so sad cousin.
Come leave this dull discourse, and let us fill,
Our active souls up to the brim with joy;
Come,
FArewell this company,
If you love sadness,
For melancholy is,
Nothing but madness;
Hang up proud costly clothes,
Peddlers and pack toys;
Let us make the hogs-heads weep,
Claret and sack boys.
Are there no Fiddlers in this world?
Sir, I wud they wud come once, my very heals are up in the air already me thinks in this humour, I cud wish the whole world were a Morris dance for four &amp; forty hours outright.
O thou egregious puppy, if the whole world were a Morris dance for four and forty hours outright, what shut, nay, what does thou think wud the good people of New England doe all that while.
I doe think they wud pray for a timely cessation of the noise of the superstitious bells hanging about their knees.
A most damnable witch in my conscience.
Come sweet-heart, rush up your spirits, put on a re∣solution to be jocund; think but on what must pass betwixt us two this very night;
How I must revill in thy arms, and then
How thou must tumble in my bosom;
And that I know will be enough to purge
Sad contemplations.
Sir, pray you excuse me;
Troublesome things doe whisper in my ear,
Which for the present J cannot expel.
Pish.
Doe not heed or nusle the least sad thought
At such a time, tell 'em some other time
You'll sit and hear their grievances.
Ay, ay, doe so, what? upon your jovial day be sad? but where be these Fiddlers?
We are come sir.
Pray ye play then.
Come, a song, a song.
Joy, health, and pleasure, waite upon
This lovely pair,
May all your days like to this one
Be void of care,
And may those twinkling stars of night
Attend your bed,
That so the bridegroom may get right
Your maidenhead.
And let Arabian odours then
Perfume thy sheets;
Strewing thy chamber once again
With dainty sweets,
Then let these pretty thoughts that move
A flame in Cupids fires,
Bring ye to bed where you may prove
The things that love desires.
Come, these Nuptial rites being done,
It now remains we speed it to the bed,
Where we will arm in arm discourse and act
Loves pretty handy dandies — Gentlemen
—speak—
Has not my stars been kind,
To grace my Fortunes with so fair a bliss.
Sir, ye enjoy a happiness beyond
Expression or compare.
Nay sir, Isle promise ye this, that as long as she is your wife, no man breathing shall ere bring Actions punishment
upon your head —I will not say what the woman may doe, and that's a rare blessing Rowland betwixt you and me, I can tell ye.
Me thinks I see
My self now dandled on the knee of Fate.
Sir, you doe now embrace
A richer vein than ere the Sun beheld,
And I presume none save your only self,
Whose presence is a treasure of enchantments,
Could have prevailed so far with her, whose eye
Ne'er yet cast glance of love upon a man,
Therefore doe I pronounce
You the only minion both of Fame and Fate.
Nay, you are a happy man, that's certain sir, if all men had such wives, we shut have a strange world, for then we shut be troubled neither with children nor cuckholds.
Well gentlemen golden slumbers attend ye,
Come fair one, come, we have too long deferred
The love embraces of the marriage bed,
O how it rapps my soul to think that I
This very hour with my fair love must lie,
Raked up in cinders, love may burn, but when
It 'gin's to flame, it fires both gods and men;
Come.
Pray ye sir forbear a little.
I will sweet-heart.
Cousin Fairefaith, a word, you have brought me here upon a business will utterly disgrace me; what will this gen∣tleman think of me dee think, when he finds that I have gulled him thus.
Come, come, put your feats to sleep,
Nay, come sweete-heart, why these delays?
Pray ye sir deal gently with her, she's young and fearful to lie with a man, and that's the business sir, that makes her so loath t'unpin.
Alas poor soul, in my conscience you had rather lie with a woman, than with these rude men behalf, wud not ye forsooth?
Come, give me your hand.
Good sir.
Why? what's the matter?
Nothing sir.
Nothing? I know tic something; are not y•• well?
Yes forsooth.
What's the reason ye will not go to bed then? pray ye come without more ado.
Fie upon it cousin, a woman wud scorn these things.
Nay, ye are in the right sir, I doe believe she wud defy it.
Come, what's the business with ye? will ye not go to bed —ha?
Sir, Isle consider of it presently.
How, consider of it?
Am I a man? a married man? or what?
Am I a husband? must a husband then
Entreat his wife?
Is Nature grown so old she has forgot
To teach her children what belongs unto
Their different places?
Although before I was content to bend
My spirits to your foot, yet know, that now
The will of Fate has destined me to be
Next under it the sole, commander of
Your mind and person, therefore now I must,
Nay, I will be obeyed.
Pray ye doe not fright her too much, she's a very ten∣der hearted thing forsooth — pray ye speak her fair.
Hold you your prating sir, she shall observe my will now.
You'll never doe good sir with foul means.
By your favour my friend, I know this out of my own knowledge, that a froward sharpe husband will pre∣sently make a woman doe what she list.
Stop your mouths.
Sir, for my part I will not stop my mouth, I under∣derstand
what I say sir, I'm a married man my self sir, and it is well known to be true, that I cud never yet get any thing of my wife by harsh words.
Once more I bid you hold your babbling.
Sir, she shall not go to bed till she has a mind to go to bed, nor I will not hold my babbling neither sir.
Hold your peace Trash.
Yes forsooth.
You'll close your mouth by and by I hope.
Yes marry will J sir, but not at your bidding sir: what now—what dee think I'm a fool in a Play?
Will you hold your tongue or no?
Yes forsooth and please your worship.
This insolence I cannot bear,
And for your part you are my wife, and one
In whom obedience ought to be expressed,
And I your top.
Ay, you want but a little whipping.
What say you sir?
I say, a woman that has a good husband, and all things else, and will not go to bed, wants nothing but whipping.
Well, it is thus,
If mild entreaties, nor a gentle fawn;
Nor protestations, nor a husbands love
Can mollify thy Stubbornness, nor bring
Thy sturdy disposition to my hand;
Isle for a time quite turn out of my thoughts
A husbands pities, and where smiles did fail,
A lusty bastinado shall persuade
— What shall I be bafled thus
Out of my pleasures with a women's blush;
First fit that I stand pleading where my stars
Bid me command? I scorn it, therefore speak
This very present minute, nay before
You fetch more breath, speak either ay, or no,
Or I must strike, there's no remedy.
We shall have the Peace broken, here presently, I see that.
Peace, quoth a? nay and my head be not broken I care not.
Come, she is content to go sir.
Give the word.
Sir, I will go to bed.
Come your ways then.
Dee hear gentlemen, dee hear?
What if this gentleman shut get my Master with child now?
Nay, what if your Master shut get that gentleman with child.
I cannot tell what hee may doe for men, but I ne'er knew him doe such a curtsy for a woman yet.
Mr. Fairefaith, pray tell me one thing, why did you being my Masters kinsman, and an old soldier stand so pati∣ently, and see him so affronted.
J that's true indeed Rowland, he being an old beaten soldier too.
A beaten soldier?
An old soldier I mean sir.
I confess I had no disposition to meddle in it, because J know they'll agree themselves, I know the bowels of the business, which you doe not, come, go along, and by the way Isle tell ye the plot.
And then we'll bring this news
To bless the ears of old sir Timothy,
Come—
Strength I confess may make a Giant yield,
But give me policy to win the field.
O My poor sister!
There's no question but we shall find her, how long has she been wanting forsooth?
A great while Kate, a little faster, what shall I tread upon your heals?—not so fast neither.
What the devil ails ye? too soft, and then too fast, here's more ado with you, than with all the Pageants in
my Lord Majors show; he that waits on you, had need to have his steppes pricked out with a pair of Compasses, for ought I see.
What a surly groom are you, may not one speak to you?
Speak? yes forsooth you may speak, but I doe not love to walk before a Gentlewoman like one of these gin∣gerly youths that go before their Mistresses, as if the streets were paved with eggs, not I.
Why, how now sir sauce box, what is it all fellows with ye, ye filthy, stinking, saucy, dirty, scabbed, paltry, lousy, mangy rogue ye.
Heyda, Mistress Juniper, what's the matter with you trow? you were not used to be so snappish, I'm sure on it, I have both gone and rid before you, and you ne'er found fault with it.
O ye lying rascal, did ye ever ride before me in your life?
Yes marry have I forsooth.
It is as false a tale Mistress as ever was told; it is true, •e rid before me one night a little short journey; it was no∣thing, I cud even a gone as far a soot upon the matter.
Who doubts that forsooth?
Why will you lie then ye rascal?
Why, whats the business? what the mischief ails ye? sure ye have not made water today I think.
Come Hilts come, you shut bear with her.
Bear forsooth, she shut bear, shoe's used too it, more than I am forsooth.
What shut I bear pray? suffer such an Ass as you to ride upon my back, shut I not?
Why not? as well as always upon your belly for∣sooth?
Come, come, pray ye go along, we have something else to think on than stand here.
Very well sir, I shall think upon your words.
This way forsooth?
Yes, yes, go on.
How now daughter, whether are you going?
To see if I can find my sister sir.
Come, come, doe not trouble your self to no pur∣pose, I have ordered it already, Isle have these men go that have authority to make the doors and gates fly open where they come and go, and dee hear Officers, look too it, and be sure to search very narrowly the places that I told ye of, and especially the house where young Crambagge is suspected to lie, and if ye find either one or both of 'em, bring 'em away, dee hear?
We shall sir.
Daughter, I rather think (to put her self out of th-way of this approaching disparagement) she has run her self upon some desperate course.
But dee think these men will find her sir?
I cannot tell, wee shall know presently.
Doe not weep Mistress, I hope shoe's well, and will be here again shortly.
Come, come, lets have no weeping.
Doe not you greeve, and for them it is not a pin matter, let them alone, weeping is as wholesome for a woman sir as making of water.
Had she but bid farewell
'Twud not have troubled me so much;
But thus to go away—
Ne'er fear, shoe's well enough Isle warrant ye.
Oh Hilts,
Her high borne spirit cannot brooke disgrace,
And I doe fear these mischiefs will provoke
Some violent hand upon her self;
yet me thinks one thing
Whispers my understanding in the ear,
And tells me she is safe;
There's not a jewel, ring, or bracelet left
That ere she wore, but is conveyed away.
Nay then sir fear nothing, for if she had so much wit to carry away her rings and jewels, she has wit enough to keep her self from killing or drowning, I warrant ye.
O heavens!
With what a swinge is youth,
Hurried along the world and subject still,
Unto the rule of an unbridled will:
Oh!
Pity those Parents then, who oftentimes
Are brought unto their graves by children crimes;
In, in, and comfort your self;
Isle see these Officers dispatcht away,
Rowland, Rowland▪ Rowland; I say.
What's the matter here?
Wast you that called sir?
It was I.
What wud ye have sir, are not ye well?
I wud I were.
I'm sorry you are not well sir?
Call Trash, call Trash.
Trash, Trash.
What's the matter?
Come presently, you master's not well;
Hes coming sir, what wud ye please to have sir?
Nothing, nothing at all.
Rowland, where art fool?
Here, here man, whether dost go?
What's the matter Rowland—ha?
Your Master's not well here.
Not well? O alas! Isle run and fetch some hot wa∣la presently.
Stay, whether dee go? come your ways hither, what will you fetch man, I'm not sick.
Not? you're but a yowling rascal Rowland for waking of me, I was in the daintiest sleep, and the sweetest dream; me thought my Master was in bed with the bravest wench—
It was too true.
How? was it too true? in truth, I thank ye for no∣thing, you ne'er dreamed so for me I'm sure on it.
O Rowland, I'm undone, I'm undone.
What's the matter sir?
Isle warrant ye the gentleman that went to bed with him, finding himself cozened has killed himself, or one mis∣chief or other, I thought no good wud come on it.
No, no, it was a woman all the while, it was a woman.
It was a woman good man simple, what? dost thou think that I dream out of Aesops Fables?
'Twud vex a man to marry in jest, and then to have it prove plain earnest, Isle assure ye that.
O Trash, I'm undone.
Why undone sir, why dee say so, and please your worcester∣ship.
Ime married man, I'm married with a vengeance,
Why so am I too sir; but how shut we help it, can ye tell that sir.
O Rowland, what shall I doe? where shall I go? where shall I run?
Run quoth a? nay, if you're married once, Isle trust ye for running.
I am married, and I know not to whom, did I but know that.
That's no great matter, it is but going to the Church Book, and you may know that presently.
Accursed Fate, what marriages might I have had? to what a pitch might I have mounted up my fortunes? which now I see are nothing but confusion:
Who knows what strumpet this may be,
Some queen for ought I know, that thinks to raise
Her self out of my ruins:
Now my perplexed thought begin to burn
With flames of guilt:
Now comes my trembling soul unto the bar
Of my own knowledge:
O Sabina, Sabina!
The gods now tumble vengeance on my head
For wrongs to thee;
Had I been well advised, O then I might
Have lain by thy fair side, where every touch:
Had been as tender as a bed of down.
And every smile a heaven;
But it is too late,
To call back what is past, it was my fate,
And there's an end;
Now am I round entrenched with miseries;
One side a marriage nips me in the bud;
On the other side, a rankrous enemy,
Old Testy, who still gazes on the print
Of our mistaken step, therefore it is now
No time to pause, pack up my clothes this night,
I doe intend to save my self by flight:
Trash, about it presently.
Yes and please your worship.
But dee hear, let not my Landlady, nor her husband have so much as a glimpse of it, for I have no money for 'em.
Nay sir, if you intend to travel, be sure ye take all your money along with ye, especially if you mean to be merry, for you shall find that money is the most dainty companion sir; but Rowland, dee hear? scatter no words.
By no means.
Not a word sir;
Travel quoth a? here's a piece of work indeed:
O Mr. Welt, how dee sir, how does my Landlady —ha?
Very well, how dee you Rowland?
Troth, pretty well, Serving-man like, careless of much, proud of a little, drunk for want of wit, and some∣times sober for want of money.
I thought ye had been sick, because I have not seen ye this long time.
Sick quoth a? my pockets are a little cowardly now and then indeed, that's all my sickness.
What? wud ye have 'em quarrelsome?
Quarrelsome? no, but I wud have 'em to have a little more mettle in 'em for all that.
Wher's your Master pray?
Nay I know not, I have not seen him this six hours.
There is a little money due to me from him, I wish he wud take the payment of it into consideration, I have ex∣extraordinary occasion to use the money, if he please to let me have but some of it, it will doe me a curtsy, he shall find me reasonable.
How idly you talk husband? Is that a way to live in the world, doe you think it is for my ease to have gentle∣men come, and lie in my house, and go away and pay nothing — ha?
Pay? yes good sweetheart, why shut he not pay; there's no body speaks against that, sweetheart.
Why doe you talk so foolishly then of being reason∣noble, and I cannot tell what, I doe not like such words I tell ye truly; —reasonable quoth a? Eat my meat, drink my drink, burn my wood, foul my rooms, wear my sheets, make use of my servants, and yet I must be reasonable; if ye can talk no wiselier before folks, pray ye hold your peace and let your wife speak — besides, ye know he owes me both for boots, shoes, and pantables, and I shall give him that too shall not I? no indeed forsooth, I wud have your Master to know that I do not buy my leather so cheap, Isle as∣sure ye — be reasonable quoth a? besides, I have pro∣missed to pay Mr. Sugerbox the Chandler, nutmegs and sugar for his mornings draughts, and Mr. Dash the Vintener for wine in's chamber, and shall I pay them before your Ma∣ster has paid me —in truth I doe not mean it.
It is fit a gentleman shut pay you before, that's the truth of it.
Ye say right Rowland, I see you have more concede∣ration with ye than my husband has — be reasonable quoth a? —marry whoop.
Why dee keep all this stir, my Master's not run∣ning away woman — here's a quarter indeed, if hee will be ruled by me, he shall not give you one farthing, because you keep such a coil.
How keep such a coil ye jacke sawee? how now? such a coil? dee think ye are talking to your companions sir? such a coil? and in my own house too sir? and you
must stand by forsooth like Iohn a Noakes, and see every Ser∣vingman run upon me in this manner; remember this when ye come to bed; and for your Masters not paying of me, ye Sawcebox, I'm at the better end of the staff with him, for I have locked up all his clothes; nay if you're so Saucy, Isle fit him, Isle warrant ye.
Ye will?
Yes indeed will I?
Rowland, Rowland, Rowland, thieves, thieves, thieves, thieves, Rowland, thieves.
How now? how now?
All my Masters clothes are stolen quite a way Rowland, all stolen every jot, breeches, doublet, boots, spurs, cloaks, gowns, hats, bands, cuffs, ruffs, caps, shoes, shirts, all gone, all stolen, every jot.
Here's the thief.
Where? where?
Here I say.
Who, my Landlady, did you steal my Masters clothes — ha? wherefore pray ye?
Steal 'em? no sir J scorn it; I took 'em indeed, and Isle justify it; and more than so sir, I have locked 'em up, and Isle justify that too.
How? locked up my Masters clothes, wherefore I pray ye?
Wherefore? doe not ye know your Master owes me money? doe not you know I have often asked it, and can∣not get it? doe not ye know that it is a pretty sum? doe not you know that it is for meat, drink, lodging, fire, and candle-light, washing, wringing, and starching; besides, boots, shoes, pantables, and galoshes: if, I had the Book I cud show ye.
Nay, you're perfect enough without book for ought I see.
Trash, Your Master's come home, and you must come to him presently.
Here's a creature Isle swear upon a book, this woman has no bones in her tongue, if any man love trumpets, there's a noise for him, sure I doe not think but this Shoomaker's a witch, he wud never a contracted himself to the devil else.
What, are ye here? and I have nothing put up yet?
Sir, your clothes are all put up, and safe under locke and key.
Nay then it is no matter; who put 'em up?
That did my Landlady sir, she has locked 'em up, and swears she'll keep 'em safe till she can persuade ye to part with some pocket mettle sir.
Enough, enough, I will not be beholden to her, Isle satisfy her.
O sir, have I found ye out in the end, Come Officers lay hold on him — but stay lets talk with ye a little first.
Sure my master was borne when the sign was in Can∣cer, for whatsoever he does intend, goes always quite back∣wards, well some body shall know on it presently, that shall fetch him off again for all this sir.
Sir, hold your peace, and
Be gone about your business fellow,
Dost know what thou hast done? or have my wrongs
Arrived at thy understanding yet? — ha?
Sir I am conscious to my self of all
The wrongs and injuries that I have done ye.
Why hast thou put this blemish on my child,
Which like a Canker threatens to deface
My Story, and for ever raze my name
Out of the book of honour, nay, a spot,
Which time nor date, nor all the brinish waves
Can ever wash out — speak thou detested wretch;
Had not a spark of virtue left within
Thy bosom to preserve thy honour— speak, I say.
In trembling reverence to your precepts here,
I creep upon my knees before the bar
Of Your just frowns, I dare not plead excuse,
No, no, my crimes are writ upon my front
In die of blushing guilt, which nothing but
Your reconciling smiles can ere wash out,
—They, I say, they must be
That expiating sacrifice for me.
Smiles on thee?
Hast thou the face to say thy faults can be
Capable of mercy? go to, mark what I say,
Unless thou can contrive a way to cure
The wounded reputation of my Girl,
Expect not one commiserating thought,
But all the tortours of severity
That ever can be inflicted —
Come, come, rise up, it is in vain to kneel,
My ears are stopped to mercy, nothing now
But only that can op them.
Sir, I am content to engage all my possibilities to ac∣complish your desires.
There may be some hope in this.
Sir, Devise how I may
But give this satisfaction you require,
And my soul shall study its performance.
I cannot tell,
Thou hast so plunged her in a sink of shame,
—That't will, for ought I know,
Nonplus the world to find a remedy.
Her case is not so desperate, I hope,
I'm ready here to hug
The most ingenious torments on these terms,
That she and you'll be pleased;
Were to encounter a whole host of fiends,
Never to sleep but in a Dragons den;
Or from the bowels of the burning hill
To fetch a cole, eat fire, or drink a cup
Of Mercury precipitate, Isle do it,
And think it an Elisium, if it may
Redeem your loves, and state me once again
In your esteem.
It is well, I doe commend your forward mind;
But this will never do it;
There's nothing but a marriage will admit
A thought of remedy.
Nothing but marriage?
Not any thing in the world but Marriage▪
Not?
No indeed.
Merciless Planets, will ye still go on,
To heap these hills of mischief on my neck▪
Or can misfortune reach a higher pitch
In him whose misery is intolerable,
And remedy impossible, O no;
Sir, in a word,
Your daughter's quite undone, and so am I.
How stands the business?
Speak the worst, if truth, and let me die.
Sir, it is in vain to counterfeit,
Or build up castles where they cannot stand;
Doe with me what ye please, the truth is this,
I am already married.
How? already married?
Villain, keep in that breath;
The repetition of these words wud tear
A heart of brass—already married?
Did thou ensnare my child for this?
Hast thou betrayed her white innocence for this?
Blasted the blossom of her virgin spring,
And married now another?
Can hope or dream, that ever thy perjured soul
Shall see the Elision groves?
Hold heart from breaking, now or never hold,
Married to another?
Shall I be bandied thus for ever twixt
Rackets of shame and misery,
Cud fate find ne'er a football but my self
To toss and spurn—umph?
Hell and the furies doe conspire I think,
To cull out me from all the rest of the world
To vent their mischiefs on, who is it ye have married? speak.
It is unknown to me sir.
I ask ye who it is you have married?
Sir,
Upon my life I know not who she is.
Has thy lewdness brought thee to distraction; mar∣ried, and ye know not to whom? come take him away, it is in vain to talk—but stay a little. Isle see what creature it is.
It is very true sir.
What wilt thou make me mad?
Where is she, in the house?
Yes.
Officer, go fetch her hither,
Isle make her tell me who she is,
If she can:
Married already quoth a? and ye know not to whom neither, here's a marriage with a vengeance.
We heard ye sent for my cousin Valentines wife sir.
I did so.
We have brought her to you sir, here she is sir.
Very well, in good time: what are you gentlewo∣man? whence are ye? ha? — speak; nay, if you will not give me an account, I must punish ye;
— let not my eyes surfeit — what my Sabina?
My lovely Girl?
Thrice welcome to my bosom?
My Sabina? my daughter, and the wife
Of this my deared friend, unexpected felicity,
Sir Plenteous? welcome thrice noble sir Plenteous;
But stay
Gentlemen, pray ye present her to her husband first,
Sweet sir Plenteous, how dee sir?
Dee know me sir, nay gaze on sir.
He knows her present I see that.
Know her? he has been familiarly with her—be∣fore man, and that thee did not know.
Gaze on still sir,
I'm not Sabinaes ghost, but her poor self;
Here stands the creature that was wronged by thee,
The very selfsame that you married sir:
What dost thou think?
Dost thou not tremble, lest I shut begin,
To number up my wrongs?
I that was lulled in the bosom of my friends,
And as it were dandled on a Fathers knee;
Forfeited all this favour, and was made
A stranger to his eye for love to thee;
Yet thou
Like the prodigious Monster of the world
Ingratitude, did labour to forget,
Not my love only, but those sacred vows
Have past betwixt us; but to be short,
Thus —thus I revenge my self.
O my Sabina!
It is too sweet and loving a revenge
Upon so vile a miscreant.
Come
Let the remembrance of these matters dye,
And be confined to dust, let 'em be trod
Into the very center of the earth,
Never to rise again; and let our loves
For ever twine like twins;
What's past I have forgot and pardoned.
Seal it, or else I die;
Live, O live!
A rare example to all future times
Of constancy in love.
Daughter, my heart bids thee welcome,
This night my house shall give thee entertainment,
Whereof thy self shall be sole governess,
And when the icy hand of death shall drive
My soul out of this clod,
It shall be his and thine.
But gentlemen, me thinks I long to hear
The story of this marriage, how it come to pass;
For did I know it, I shut adore the star,
Under whose influenee she woe brought t'arive
Midst storms of woe upon this shore of bliss.
Sir, I doe think twill be
A seasonable discourse for supper;
Suspend but your desires till then
And you shall be satisfied.
With all my heart, with all my heart, but son, I have one petition to prefer to you.
You may stile it a command sir.
You must needs bestow upon me your servant Trash.
Heyda? now I'm a begged fool, I see that.
Sir, attend my father.
Your worships humble servant sir.
In all this business I have observed in thee
Discretion —judgement — wit—and police;
Therefore
I doe appoint thee Steward of my house,
And put into thy charge the overseeing
Of all my businesses.
Nay sir, for an oversight in any business let me alone.
And what is more.
Dispose my house and servants as you please.
Hilts, come hither —Sir, doe you waite upon me.
Yes forsooth.
I did ever think thou wudst come to some good, for thou hast been always an honest Trojan; Dee hear, if you had carried me to Bridewell, when ye were bid —where had your proferments beenethen Hilts.
Mr. Fairefaith, for you,
I doe perceive your ingenuity,
Has been a means to make my comfort swell;
And for return, J doe bestow on thee
My daughter Mirabell.
Sir, your returns are far beyond the claim
Of my deserts; and though J am not fit
To bandy favours with so brave a Knight,
Yet I will stretch my studes to express
A detestation of ingatitude: and now Sabina,
I doe salute thee by the word of Sister,
—but why so dumpish on a sudden —ha?
I know the cause already, it is for fear
Your censures on her faults be too severe;
She has given satisfaction where it was due,
Her Father's pleased, and so we hope are you:
To you she is referred, who now are set,
Ready to give your sentences; but yet
Be pleased to speak your doom with gentle breath,
Cause you're the Judges of her Life and Death.

TEll me Cimena and deal truly with me,
What makes you thus disdain to be a Queen,
Are the allurements of a Kingdom such
As they can hardly touch, less charm your heart?
No, I shall ne'er believe it, but must wonder
At your refusal: do you think your Cid
With all his fortune, and the best effects
Of his great valour, can at any time
Impale this fair head with a Diadem?
That from the King alone you must expect
Cid is as much a subject as thy self,
And though he lift thy fortune to a height
As great as any subjects, yet a thousand
Will side with thee, when this my brother offers
Will set thy beauties in a point to strike
The gazers eyes with envy, or amazement.
Madam, tic true so great a Princes love
Might take another, though it cannot me,
And the false lustre of a Sovereign greatness
May dazzle any fond young Virgins eyes,
But for my own direction isle take less
Of their ambition, more of modesty,
And truly Madam, I shall never envy
Her who enjoys the happiness you offer,
The pomp of Thrones seems troublesome to me,
My desires draw themselves within their compass,
And look no higher then their proper reach:
Equality does make the perfect match,
Unequal persons render the link so weak
That love can hardly make it hold together.
I know Cimena thy great modesty,
But let it not divert thee from a good
Sent from the hand of Heaven, and a King.
That power, which gave thee such rare parts, would never
They should be straightened in a narrow fortune
It knows this fore head's destined for a Crown
Which to confirm, it makes a Monarch know
That nought less then himself can suite thy merit
Though Cid have heretofore made thee his Idol.
Dost think his love's not subject unto change
And that he must continue in his absence
As a great soldier, so a faithful lover▪
Perhaps thy love may trouble him at present,
Whilst his ambition grows up with his fortune▪
If ere he gained his glorious name of Cid,
He thought himself already worthy thee,
Dost think his heart will stay in the same bounds,
Now that all Spain, and other Nations
Admire and fear his valour? ah Cimena
Some thing persuades me that his hopes fly higher,
A throne will be the certain rock whereon
Thy so much boasted faith must find its Tomb.
Oh heavens, how handsomely she would surprise me
And ravish that from me her self would have! 
I without doubt she loves him; and I know
She speaks more for herself then for the King:
Madam, if Rotor go leave Cimena
To give his heart unto a nobler love,
You shall perceive that she is one can suffer
With as much ease his lightness, as his absence.
But since thou hast the very same advantage
Serve thy self of it, and as his great honours
Alter his passions, so let thine Cimena
Take the same flight, and do not think thou shalt
For that, be called inconstant or less faithful,
Or that thy change should stick a crime upon thee,
The wills of Kings can render all things lawful.
Besides thy fathers death may well excuse thee,
And I remember with how much constraint
Thou made a promise of thy love to him
Which was no more then hope; the King has power
To cancel that, nor must thy virtue suffer
So great a stain as to prefer the man
Who kilt thy father to the King.
But Madam.
You know how strong a conflict I had in me
Before I gave consent, whilst his great love
Did less then my obedience, I resisted
Yell in the end I saw I must obey
What the King willed, he feed, I must forget
His Crime and my revenge: your father Madam
Gave me into his hands, and since I am
His prisoner▪ the same bonds shall end my life
And fortune both at once.
But hear my reasons.
To what purpose.
Should we dispute of what's resolved already?
Well you may think of it at better leisure. 
Yes: and I know the object of my Choice:
If the Cids glory do put out his flame;
And that's great lustre quench the heat of this
I shall not stay the progress of his fortune,
Let him be on a Throne, me in my grave,
Yet if this head must ever wear a Crown
From none but Cid himself shall I accept it.
But what's the reason that he writes not to me?
I had some letters from him at the first,
When the same hand which was bedewed in blood
Dried up my tears, but yet (alas) I fear
Least distance of our eyes estrange our hearts:
For of late (save the conquest of the Rebels)
I can hear nothing from him, he destroys
His enemies and my hopes both at one time,
His glory makes him to forget his duty;
But yet dear heart excuse my sad complaint
True love was never yet without some fear
Thou can not be so generous and inconstant,
And I should fear less, loved I not so much.
Come then my foul and make no longer trial
Both of my passion and my patience:
Come to deliver me from those my doubts
Or know that here I cannot live without thee.
WHo's this Don Sancho? what may his business be?
The best of news unto the best of women.
What news? Is Cid returned?
Not yet sweet Madam,
He's still expected, but a greater joy
Attends you, which will soon dispel these clouds,
How glorious is your fortune like to be?
What? has he overcome his enemies?
Is he come home laden with Palms and Laurels?
I hear his valour has assured our state,
But that is not the cause of this my visit.
What's then my happiness, pray let me know it.
Madam advise but with your own perfections
And you will know the good provided for you,
Ask counsel of your eyes; and they will tell you
Against whom their quick &amp; burning darts are thrown
They'll tell you that a King sprightly and young
Chooses to be a slave before himself:
And that he finds his chains so sweet and pleasant
He seems to have no will to reign without you,
And I am sent to ask what he implores,
Be not then rigorous to your self and him,
But think what baits a Sceptre carries in it,
And that twill ill become you to be cruel
When a Crown, and title of a Queen is offered.
I me sure it less becomes thee to afflict me
With a discourse so hateful, perjured man
Hast thou so little shame, and courage in thee
To speak this and not blush; hast thou forgot
The glory of thy bonds; and that my self
Permitted thee to wear em, whilst my pity
Made my looks gracious to thee, could thou then
Having been once a Lover, proud to be so,
Speak for another now, and that I should
For thy sake take his love into my heart.
Thou show by this thy baseness, how unworthy
Was Roderigoes rival, since thou can not
Preserve the honour which thou had, for once
To have been his Competitor.
Did I think
That you bore any thoughts of love to me,
Or that the impression of my former flame
Were not quite worn out of your heart, I should not
Speak for the King a word, but for my self,
And you should see by my great constancy,
How much I de cherish such a hope.
What traitor
Should I love thee? can thou imagine it?
Or tempt thy self with such a vanity;
I never yet received a flame so hateful
And if I thought my heart could entertain it,
Id pull it out my self: but can thou have
The confidence, Don Sancho to pretend
To what thou were not able to defend;
Hast thou forgot the Duel where thou were
Forced to bring me the sword thou vainly had
Employed against the Cid, is it for that
Thou lay thy claim to my affection?
For that must I prefer thee to the man
Whom the Moors fear, and Spain does reverence?
Come let me hear thy actions; were our enemies
Defeated by thy valour? Did the Moors
Yield themselves at the hearing of thy name?
Does thy arm hold our tottering Kingdom up?
Art thou the glory of it? prove it true
And I will run into thy dear embraces.
Madam, I have not so much arrogance
To challenge to my self such mighty deeds.
My actions bound themselves more narrowly:
I never did defeat the Moors, my arm
Could ne'er do any thing worth your acceptance,
And yet it reak, not with your fathers blood.
Knows thy fierce rage no bounds, take thou delight
To persecute me still, art thou not weary
To see my tears run? thou might easier draw
My blood, and kill me with less cruelty.
Come make it perfect, and revenge thy shame
Upon my lives loss; yet let thy rage forbear
To wrong that goodness, which has spared thy life.
In telling truth I offer no man wrong,
Nor did my rage suggest my words unto me
Your Designe's fair indeed, but your hope vain;
You care not how y'affront a Monarchs will;
Nor can you think that your Cid will be faithless,
You are the only she in all the Court
To whom his love's unknown, you have not heard
That Cordubas Infant is his Mistress;
But he himself avows it in his letters,
Which he has done so to the life, that all
Believe he's less their enemy, then her lover.
Well let the Infant come, let her instead
Of being captive be a conquers,
Let Cid that should be victor, be her slave,
It matters not, so I may have thy absence:
Isle wait th'effects of his inconstancy
With more assurance, and far less disquiet,
Pray leave▪me, I demand it as a favour
And find some better office when you next
Address your self to any▪ it is no shame
Not to have well discharged such an employment
As being done must needs betray thy honour.
Belong as I serve my King, I fear no blame
But here's an end of this; I leave you Madam,
Till time shall make you to digest my counsel.
In the mean while In me silent, and obey. 
DO not believe Don Diego, though I share
My heart and Crown with the beloved Cimena,
That isle usurp by my authority
A treasure which thy son deserved so well.
No, his great services do live too fresh
In my remembrance to be so requited:
Rather I mean t'augment his happiness,
And his reward shall parallel his valour,
A nobler Mistress I design for him
To whom Cimena without blushing may
Give place unto; nor should thy son complain
Of this my affection, or of that his change.
But we have never sir deserved this honour,
Nor dare my son pretend to such a fortune,
A higher happiness attends the Princess,
Who is too generous to descend so low.
His actions tell me that he merits more
Which to reward according to his value
A Sceptre is too little; I will share
With him in his desires, he in my power.
Love may content us both, if as my sister
Is willing to receive him for her servant,
So will the fair Cimena me for hers.
Don Sancho from me is gone to see her,
He knows her spirit, and should, how to tame it:
I hope well of his fair tongues good success.
But why is he so slow in his return?
Since he is conscious of my nearest secrets
He must needs know that I burn all this while
And that his slowness causes me to languish.
YOur Majesty has no cause of further trouble,
See where he is.
Oh Don Sancho welcome,
What says Cimena?
All that rigour can
All that disdain and scorn does usually
Inspire proud spirits with, that cruel fair
Permitted to her tongue, my gentle words
Were spent in vain; the Northern wind would sooner
Have given them hearing, Roderigoes love
Has made her to all else inexorable
Nor can we hope to treat with her again.
As for a Crown, Sceptre, or any greatness
They seem but to stir up her anger more.
What? will she be so cruel to her King?
I must abate the pride of that fierce humour,
And my resentment of t shall make her see
That Princes must be treated otherwise:
But these scorns her, Isle turn into her shame:
And Cid whom she believes her own already,
Shall as well fail her hopes, as she has mine
When a more worthy object shall invite him
To change his love, and his disdains of her
Shall revenge hers of me.
Don Arias,
What news is it you bring?
Of Cids good fortune,
And of the Rebels fate, he is hard by
Victorious and in health.
I long to see him
He is not far sir from the City walls,
Mean-while this Letter will confirm your Majesty,
In the truth of what I said.
How am I ravished
And my soul burns with hot impatience
After this object which she so desires,
Go tell him that my thoughts are swift to see him,
Don Diego see that he be well received.
IT seems Cimena, you have no room left
In this hard heart of yours for him that loves you,
Must a King live and die in the same fetters?
Were I a private man you'd be ingrate∣full
To hate me, because I love you, howsoever
You were too blame to use Don Sancho so.
Coming from me, and offering my service
He might deserve a kinder entertainment
Civility would require so much; and though
He had displeased you, courting you for me
Duty should have made good your want of love.
I cannot tell, sir, what has raised your anger,
Nor how Don Sancho has described me to you:
But certainly, no vanity of mine
Did make me to forget my duty to you:
And my refusal of the sovereign title
Showed my respect, and not my cruelty,
Don Sancho perhaps might be displeased,
But his discourse moved me to what I said,
Since he durst call to mind my fathers murder
(A wound still bleeding in my memory.)
If thou hast yet a feeling of this grief
Both for thy honour, and content Cimena
Tic fit thou banish from thy kinder thoughts
The Author of it, nor does he now bear
The same affection to thee which he did;
When he left thee hee left his first intentions
And having changed his climate, changed his love,
Seriffas beauty is the mark he aims at,
Who once thy enemy, is now thy rival.
I'm sure he's much engaged to this Jnfanta,
But if he were not, yet the services
My father had from all his Family
Design for him the Infant of Castle.
SIr.
What would thou?
Roderigo is without.
Admit him then: now you shall see Cimena
This glorious Conqueror, I know heal come
Triumphantly, leading his Mistress with him,
You'll easily perceive in this encounter
Either his love or his ingratitude.
Make your best use then of this time, compare
Your Graces with your Rivals, and by them
Guess what your fortune's like to be.
Oh Heavens!
With what eyes can I see this his approach?
GReat King, then whom the Sun sees nothing hap∣pier,
(Joy of your subjects terror of your foes)
At length the war respiring, gives me leave
To have the honour to kneel here before you,
But as unto the Deity▪ of which
You are the Image, none should dare to come
Without an offering, so nor could I
Hope to deserve the happiness to see you
Without a present: Then be pleased, great sir,
T'accept from my hand what Heavens bounty gives you
This Crown, and these two Princes, so far happy
That they are fallen your prisoners, under whom
To be commanded is to live with freedom:
This was the King of Corduba, and this
The heir apparent of Toledos Kingdom.
He hear thy full relation, but before it
Let me embrace thee, and behold this forehead
Where Love and Mars do sit enthroned, and make thee
Victorious in either of their wars.
Oh sir, how can I answer this discourse
To spare my modesty, sir, spare your favours
And share the honours, as you've done the labours
Your soldiers as much as I procured
This victory, tic just they should receive
Part of the honour from your Majesty
Both for their valour and fidelity.
Their merit can be easily satisfied
But for thy deeds there can be no rewards:
Sure thou were born to make all men ungrateful,
Thy tongue's no less a conqueror then thine arm,
But for my sake spare thy sweet eloquence,
Else I shall be thy captive as are these
But now recite the fortune of thy arms;
No entertainment can be half so pleasant.
Sir (what soar it be) since you command it,
T is fit that I obey: Your rebels slain
Or taken, and those Darers that opposed
The current of your fortune quite defeated
To make your name more glorious, I advanced
My Army towards Corduba, which even then
I had made sure of, if some timely succours
Had not prevented me. This noble Prince
Seeing it beleaguerd straightly; by his forces
Thought to relieve it, but that hope being vain
He like a wise Commander changed his purpose,
And meant to try no valour but his own:
Then by a Herald sent he me a challenge
Which easily my spirit gave consent to
I named the place, where when we both were m•t,
Many fierce blows were dealt, and sure the heavens
Looked pale to see the storms our anger made,
Shine more in our wilde looks than in their lightning
Whilst men durst do, that which they durst not see
T was equally between us fought, until
At length your fortune gave me th'advantage,
Here, sir, your modesty betrays your valour,
I suffered by your strength not my mishap,
You may vaunt freely what I cannot deny.
This was the blow made Corduba to fall,
After this Princes yielding their great thoughts
A bated of their pride, and this fair Princess
To whom I owe for her intelligence,
Made the Town yours almost without resistance,
T is true great King, this woman, Natures monster,
By her base treachery betrayed my state,
You have my goods, my sceptre and my person;
But look, sir, who it is that gives them you,
See from what hand you do receive these presents,
The same put her brother in these fetters,
It is my sister, or some Devil rather,
That took that name upon her to betray me.
Leave to upbraid me thus, that name of sister
Has bin the greatest stain upon my life:
But you that stand so on the point of honour
Was I used as a sister by you, rather
Was I not treated as a slave? the name
Away, I felt the thing▪ pray sir, believe not
That out of any womanish impudence▪
I gave the intelligence I am accused of;
But when I captived him, I freed my self
From those more cruel chains, where in his rage
Shut up my will and free election,
Designing me the object of my hate:
Which when I saw, and that this haughty Prince
Came from his country to my ravishment,
Armed not with fair deserts, but soldiers
I thought I justly might to his violence
Oppose my artifice, which was to render
Unto his enemies his place of refuge,
Which my design I kept long in suspense,
Till this more noble object took my heart,
And made me perfect my intentions.
I without doubt, his false heart does adore her. 
Can I then see my rival, and yet I live?
When the wit's nimble, and the courage ready,
A good success still follows the design,
The business that halts forward is half lost.
Sir, to neglect the execution,
My courage, and my love were too important,
I quickly was resolved, when love came in
To finish up the plot my hate begun,
This valiant Cid whose fame prevented him
In my good thoughts, was of my enemy
Become the object of my best desires;
His virtue conquered me, and had I not
Been overcome I had not been so happy:
For giving up my arms to such a conquest,
'Steed of my own loss I have got a prize,
The honour of all soldiers: Roderigo.
Alas, what can thou hope poor Lady now. 
Can thou doubt yet whether he be engaged.
Madam, you put a double tie upon me,
That having done me a curtsy so happy,
You add to it, so much of kind respect,
And believe, Madam, that occasion
Will make me blessed, which points out my obedience,
What may I do to serve you, pray command me.
What has she to desire, she has thy heart? 
Ah sir, you can do all, and Id have all.
Madam, the King is here sole sovereign,
He only can give all.
Which thou may promise,
Such is thy merit as does challenge all,
Freely dispose of my authority,
And think I have done less then thou deserve.
So great a favour, sir, I not desire
The good I wish (great Cid) is in thy self,
Which is the object my desires aim at,
And that sweet hope, which only makes me live.
I know not, Madam, upon what appearance
You have conceived this hope, I'm sure Roderigo
Ne'er spoke to you about it.
Oh, how finely! 
He carries it.
Tic prettily dissembled. 
Have you then, sir, forgot your promises,
Is this the love, and are these the endearments
You promised to the action I performed.
Who gave you that false hope.
Your self.
Who I,
I doubt it much.
Oh Heavens, do you know
This Letter?
Yes.
Pray read it sir, and there
You shall perceive the reasons of my hope.
I know well what I owe, and what I promised,
You shall see Madam, I am not ungrateful.
Oh then excuse my anger, my disdain
Cause it, and not my will, I can be calm,
Having my fear abated by those comforts
You promised to my passion.
Your desires,
Madam, exceed my power, but from me
Expect all duty, and all curtsy
That you could hope for, from a Gentleman,
Or I know how to give.
How faithless man?
Do you fall back unto your first discourse?
Thou paper which betraydst my heart at first
Discover to his infamy thy secrets,
And show his breach of faith.
Let it be read
Isle ne'er oppose it, and I swear t'observe
What ever that enjoyns.
The thing you offer
Seems reasonable, thou art just Roderigo
By it we shall perceive your interest.
Sir, if you please, I will be judged by it.
And so will I.
Then I shall do you justice.
Here must I stand with patience to hear 
The sentence of my punishment.
From this, 
I must expect either to live or die.
IF your brother have so little sense both of his own blond and your beauty, that he had rather please himself in your affli∣ctions, then his own duty, let me entreat you to make good that bravery of Spirit which you mentioned to me in your Let∣ters; which is to leave him to his cruelty, letting him first know that you were sense∣ble of it, by the revenge you take. And then enter into the Victors Camp, where you shall make your own conditions▪ and
find an entertainment to your content by
You understand the sense, sir, of these words,
These are not terms that should make void a promise
Am not I that Seriffa; you the victor,
Did not I give you entrance into Corduba,
And my own heart at once, and will you now
Bereave me of the hope your self has raised
Is this the great content you promised me:
What first you can complain of Madam? who
Durst be so insolent to do you hurt?
Are you not heer in covert of that storm
Which your fierce brother mean should overtake you?
What could you hope more then this noble usage
Did you suppose your eyes could conquer me,
Alas, I am another; and when ere
I change that object, I must think my self
Led into blindness, and mistake of beauty.
Oh do not change, but end my misery,
Let my blood quite deface this character,
As it looks black already with thy crime,
So let it blush to punish me for mine,
Why stay thou? satisfy thy hate in me,
Tear from my breast my love and heart together.
How am I ravished with this sweet revenge,
What pleasure tic to see thee in this case
Where thy best hope is to sit down with nothing,
Now Lady you may triumph, though you wear not
These fetters, you're no less a slave then I.
What villain?
Fie, Madam, calm your anger.
In the word of a King to both of you
I promise a fair treatment, I am one
That know to use a victory. Take you care
That in their several lodgings they want nothing
That their state may requires how ere they be
My prisoners, I'll not bate their due respect
Go Roderigo home unto thy father,
I know he longs to see thee.
I obey,
Pray, Madam, give me leave to do the duty
I owe unto Cimena.
To me sir?
Pray spare the labour, for you owe me none.
Besides Seriffa, being vexed already
Has too much reason to complain of you,
Though you committed not this last offence.
What may the reason be she quits me so?
What crime have I committed? whats my fault?
I know not, but you see her cruelty,
And what a little makes her to fly off;
Perhaps you're pleased well with your punishment,
Thou should show more of courage Roderigo
And let her see that he who comes home victor
Should receive better welcome▪ she is (me thinks)
Some what too full of vanity.
Ah, Madam,
I must not murmur though she be ungrateful,
She is Cimena, and I cannot hate her.
But this thy too much goodness will betray thee,
Thou make thy constancy unhappy to thee.
Madam, you know where tic my duty calls me,
Pray give me leave to wait upon my father. 
Go; this was a pretext I know to leave me,
But I shall be revenged of this neglect
When against all thy hopes of future joy
The rigour of Cimena I employ. 
HEnce-forth Cimena live for ever quiet,
Roderigo shall no more be so unhappy
As to disturb your peace, since you deny him
The sight of you he is content to suf∣fer,
Not only want of that but all things else
You being all to him, that he desired:
Good heaven was there ever so much rigour
Practised on any as on wretched me?
Did I hope any other recompense
Of all my services, my labours, watchings,
To bring home victory? but that she should
Crown um with her acceptance; and must I
(Courted by all else) be by her despised
Into whose arms I looked to have bin received?
Nor is her anger more apparent then
The cause of it concealed, I am not worthy
To know the reason of my banishment.
Therefore farewell for ever cruel Mistress,
Isle seek some place unhabited by women,
Where I may never see such shining eyes,
As only light us to our miseries. 
BUt, Madam, spare Roderigos innocence,
His virtues, and your worth are both too great
To suffer such a stain.
Think of it Madam,
And call not him a traitor, but your heart
Which entertained a love that was not sent
You were too credulous, not he perfidious,
What you desired you were willing to believe,
And knowing the command of your own beauty
With the advantage of your birth and fortune,
I cannot blame you if you thought that love
Which was but civil application:
But now you have found your error, let your courage
Find scorn for him that has not love for you.
How easily the whole Counsel the sick, 
And yet they have not hit my true disease.
My sister Madam, tells you right, desires
That are not honourable ought to be short,
Your quality which your beauty only equals,
Invites a higher match then Roderigo.
A conqueror is next unto a King,
Since hes denied me, how can my hopes look higher?
Don Sancho wait the Princess to her lodgings,
And see that she command▪ my Court as freely
As I my self.
Your Graces humble creature. 
Don Diego, is the Cid contented with
The offer which I make him of my sister?
You are the King sir; he your humble vassal,
He could not be my son if disobedient
To you that are his master, and I find
His inclination ready only fear
And modesty keeps in his strong desires.
Tic not his fear but Mistress which restrains him▪
He will forget her sooner then his duty
Of which the Count can give you the best proof,
For though at that time he adored Cimena,
Yet ventured he to lose her for my sake
(His honour and his duty so commanding)
He can love well tic true, but obey better.
I never doubled his obedience
Of which his excellent virtue does assure me:
Id have (you sister) to accept the Courtship
Which he shall make to you, and if you ask
A reason why, know I will have it so;
Though fortune have not blessed him with a Crown,
And though his greatness be within himself,
Yet there propitious heaven has showed its power,
Heaping its richest treasures on his person,
Hi heart is valours proper sphere, his soul
The throne of virtue where she sits and governs
Directing all his actions to honour;
These rare perfections must be the objects
Sister, of your desires.
Such a command
Makes my obedience ready to love virtue,
When you that are my King requires it of me
I not to give consent to hard conditions,
Tic your part to command, mine to obey.
Tic well, it only rest now that Cimena
Comply with my desires I will no onger
Burn to so little purpose, my affection
Haftes to its end, there can be no content
To approach a fire that will consume, not cherish,
I am resolved to have her, as for love
Which to the Cid she promised, I have power
To absolve her of it; Princes render lawful
What ever pleases them: respects become
The people, not a King: send for her sister
And tell her I would see her in your lodgings,
To treat of something that concerns her nearly,
Tic wearisome to live thus in desire,
This day enjoying her, Isle quench my fire. 
BEauty is loves object, Madam and it were hard
T approach such flames and keep a frozen heart,
Dull fouls have eyes lent 'em to see their way,
But men of courage to behold what's fair.
Pardon divinest Lady if my spirit
Made me to love where I should have adored
And though you do estrange me from your heart
Envy me not the glory of my sufferings.
Don Sancho cannot be so young a Courtier
To think that any Lady can despise
A noble love bounded with due respects,
We have no other witness of our beauty
And heaven defend that we should hate our lovers.
Accept my vows then, Madam, with the temper
Of one that seemed to love; and let my service
Be entertained at least with fair acceptance.
How can I do that without injury
Either to you or my own modesty?
To cherish you in what you cannot have
Were to augment your punishment: to give
A heart which is not mine, in me were falsehood,
And no less wrong to you should you receive it
Then to its proper owner.
But he seems
(As one that does not know his happiness)
To be insensible of what your goodness
Has offered him: why should you cast away
That whereof Kings would be ambitious?
Ay me!
That sigh the greatest Monarch scarce deserves
Much less, a subject, thrust him from your thoughts
And let some nobler love take up his room.
Take heed Don Sancho, you begin to forfeit
Your first pretentions, I must not think,
You can love one whom you believe to have
The easy power to dislodge a love
Which she had once receive d, but hence-forth know
My flame runs up into a point so small
As cannot be divided into parts.
Not though there be division of your hearts
The Cid I shame to say it, neglects you Madam:
If he did not I were more miserable
This now seems strange to you, but when I shall
Relate that to you which in part concerns you,
As you are Favourite to the King your Master,
And one that should advise him to be just,
You will perceive, that what I utterd of
Love to the Cid was to secure my self.
But here is my brother, lets withdraw a little.
IS not this fight enough dear Celimant,
To choke that fire up within my breast
Which I too long have nourished to my ruin
For an ungrateful, and perfidious woman•,
Was it too little to disdain a Prince,
And run into the hands of one she knew not
Unless having quited him, for whom his worth
And valour pleaded she become the prey
Of a y that will-seize her, see Don Sancho
Has made her his already▪ and shall I
Love where I am so rivalled, no my heart
If thou must be a captive, let thy fetters
Be such as need not shame the wearer.
Friend,
Which name I rather choose to call you by
Then brother, (since you cannot be her husband
With safety of your honour) could you think
That she can spare her modesty, whose falsehood
Spared not her brother, and her Country too,
No sir, believe, she that is base her self
Cannot love virtue in an other person:
For how should she love that she never knew;
Heer then put out your flame, and think Spheranti
That this conformity of our lives and fortune
Which makes me share in all your passions
May link our hearts so fast we shall not need
Such an alliance to confirm the knot.
J know not friend whether I be more happy
In losing of my love, then in the finding
Th'assurance of thy friendship; now let fortune
Look well or ill upon me in thy love
Isle sum up all my bliffe, nor can I think
Brave Celimant, will profess less to me.
Which to confirm, no ceremonious oath
The band of doubtful, and inconstant souls
Shall I now take; thee friendship, I invoke,
When I do leave this Prince, let me be left
Without a friend, I and without a name.
J know my father at this time endeavours
My liberty, (if at least I can call
This thraldom, where I am so well received)
But I'm resolved to run your course of fortune,
My freedom joined with yours is welcome to me
Else a worse torment then that bondage was
Your sisters rigour did impose.
No more
Dear friend of her; come, come forget her name.
Since she could be so thankless to disdain,
The man that quit his liberty for her,
Which when the Cid did offer, I refused
To follow her, who follow all men else
And that her crime has merited my hate▪
I have shook off that chain; but find my self
Caught in another which thou dost not know
Tic such as makes me fear my liberty
I cannot go from hence, and think I'm free.
You are in love it seems.
Yes Celimant.
I am in love, and as much in despair.
Is there a beauty can oppose your Courtship,
What quality is higher then your own?
Why should you then despair?
I but the horrcur
Of being vanquished makes me think my self
Unworthy to look up to such a height.
Consider that your fortune was to yield
His to overcome, yet did you long dispute it
And bravely too; what can you fear Spheranti?
To be too rash▪
To be too rash, let hope
Remove those thoughts, and you will not displease her,
A virtuous love was never odious.
But tell me sir, what name has this your Mistress,
Honour my freedom with this trust.
The Infant,
Dear Celimant has snatched my heart, and though
My eyes were caught in their first motion to her,
Yet durst I not discover it till now;
But such force has my flame, it will not be
Contained within the limits of my heart
But must break out to thee and suddenly
To her, which if displeasing is my death.
Hope better sir, I am your caution
She shall receive the offer of your vows.
BUt here's Don Arias.
The King sir asks for you.
Isle wait him sir. 
Tic strange he should be sent for and not I.
WHat, all alone?
I Madam, Celimant,
Is sent for to the King.
Oh, I know why
His liberty is now in proposition,
And yours too shortly, if you desire it.
That Madam, is the least part of my care
J am so far from wishing it, I fear it.
This is a Courtship sir, I understand not
Were not Toledo better than Civil to you.
Madam, the effect will make you see it is not.
Well, we shall hope to see it then; adieu.
My duty, Madam, will not give me leave
To let you go alone, do not deny me
The honour to wait on you▪
WHat said Roderigo, boy? when he departed.
Nothing, but in his looks one might discover,
Amazement joined with grief to be excluded.
Excluded, whence? not from my heart I'm sure
There he makes good the place he ever had,
Were it a easy to remove him thence
As from my presence, I should fear no rival,
Take your Lute boy, and sing the song I gave you,
It suits my present state.
It was not his person nor his parts,
Though ne'er so famed that won me,
He loved, he said, which I believed;
And that faith has undone me.
His virtues were alike to all,
Nor were they more to me,
I honoured them, but loved the man▪
Because that he was he.
Who since he has his love forgone,
And is himself no more:
I love him not as he is now,
But as he was before.
Tic true I must still love him, the remembrance
That I was once Roderigo's only object,
Is that I cherish now.
MAdam, the King
Stays for you to come to him.
The King! where?
Why would he speak with me?
J cannot tell,
But he expects you on the Infantas side.
Tell him I come, I know what he would have
But all his power shall not shake my firmness,
In vain he tries to win me by his greatness.
What is a throne to me that seek a grave?
Ime sure he has no power ore my will,
He that first took my heart shall keep it still. Exeunt.
MAdam, tic true, I may have bin too rash
To offer you a heart unworthy of you
But yet my fault is such as cannot give
Consent to any low thoughts of re∣pentance;
And if my service find no other grace,
Let me have leave to cherish my attempt,
And let me love my self for loving you,
Then if you shall deny your presence to me,
My soul may do the office of mine eyes
Which may contemplate what these cannot see,
And if my love cannot appear from thence,
From this you shall perceive my obedience.
Though I am better read in my own faults,
Then to believe I could charm any man;
Yet for your sake, because you▪le have it so.
J am content to think you love me sir,
And I am sensible of what I owe you,
But you must know that I depend upon
A brother to whose will I am confined,
So that I am not Mistress of my heart,
Nor dare I hazard it without his leave,
Therefore to warrant your pretensions
Make your address to him, till then I dare not
Be known to entertain you for a suitor.
Tic fit I be obedient to this law
Which is most reasonable, but may I be
As sure of your favour, as his leave.
Your virtue, sir, will be your best assurance,
My love proceeds not freely, but deserts
Must challenge it.
Kissing your fair hands, Madam,
J go to make my way to bliss or ruin. 
What shall I do, my heart, this Prince is lovely,
So is the Cid, but he less tractable,
Spheranti is more soft and courteous,
And yet not of less spirit then the other,
Let Roderigo then endear his Mistress,
And since that love is the only price of love,
Let him that offers his, have his reward.
Alas, what did I say? how can I leave
That object, which rules all within my heart?
Roderigo's free possessor there, and yet
Me thinks, there is a room left for Spheranti.
What shall I do then in this labyrinth?
Shall I to oblige Cimena, quit the Cid.
No Isle not leave him, but with patience wait
The pleasure of my brother and my fate. 
DOn Sancho, sir, and Arias do wait you
Wi h the conditions of your liberty,
They are but gentle ones, that you forgive
Your sister, in the recompense of which
Your ransom is remitted.
Greatest Monarch,
Who may dispose my life, you know that here,
I am no less without a will then power
I must obey, what ever you impose,
But yet her crime joined with the insolence
In facing it is such, that giving me
My Kingdom back with her, is worse to me
Then to live here your captive, with what pleasure
Can I behold that power re-deliver'd
Which with my enemies I must receive.
Isle quit you of that fear, in taking care
To keep Seriffa in the terms of duty
You shall command her wholly, but at present
Till you be better satisfied, her fight
Shall not offend you, since her love has cause
The treason which you blame her for, I mean
To keep her fast in fetters, until love
And Hymen be the executioners
Of the sweet sentence which I will pronounce.
Such is her want of worth, the Prince you meant
To Join her to, despises her, and truly
I should believe him to be worth my pity,
Of whom so base an object were considered.
Sir, your too quick resentment makes you speak so,
But leave that care to me, there is a Lord
Within my Court, of birth as great as any,
But virtue much beyond his quality,
Which does a done your sister, though it be true
That he has mingled with his love some boldness,
Since he can't plead any descent from Kings,
Yet if our spirit bids us despair nothing,
This noble Lover must obtain his wishes,
In a word tic Don Sancho that I mean.
Sir, I beseech you think how great the distance
Is between their conditions▪ Don Sancho
Has much worth in him, but he is no Prince,
And though Seriffa has disgraced her birth,
She's ne'er the less descend from a King.
Don Sancho, sir, is all you can desire
Being my Favourite, I will advance
His fortune to that height as shall deserve,
Seriffa's and your love: but did you know
How much he has employed his favour with me
For your advantage, you would recompense
His care with this alliance, but if all
That he has done, cannot make you flexible,
Yet hear me that am King, and do conjure you
To love your sister, and confirm this match,
A Kings entreaties must have no denial.
Sir, I am yours, and since this marriage
Is welcome to your thoughts: Don Sancho may
In Celimant meet a brother, and Seriffa
Being looked on by me, through you and him,
Shall see I can forget what she has done.
Now you oblige me, and this clemency
Shows whence you are descended: how I love
This sweetness in you, trust me your sister
(Now I may tell you so) will well deserve
This favour of you; such a beauty, sir,
Ought not to dwell clouded in your dislikes:
But you are for your business: Arias,
See he find no delay, and call Roderigo▪
My sister too; I know they are without,
So good success when I speak for another
Makes me hope all things in my own behalf:
But I must change my countenance: Roderigo.
ALL Spain from thy brave hand has felt that peace
And quiet, which thy Prince cannot obtain,
This work is wanting to fill up thy glory,
Therefore to make thy victory more perfect,
For my sake undertake this enemy,
That would cut from thy valour half thy conquest.
How sir? dares any, who may be so blessed
As to live under your just laws, shake off
Their due obedience? what vain insolence
Dares lift it self against so sweet a power:
Name him sir, to me, that I may destroy him.
There's none can do it Roderigo.
None sir, Why?
Tic love that little tyrant which rules all,
The enemy which makes this war upon me,
Regards not majesty, but as a victor
Triumphs already in my captived heart,
Which has consented to its own defeat
So much that I am on the brink of ruin,
If Roderigo's hand sustain me not.
If your ease sir, depend upon my service,
You may be sure of my readiness,
Only sir, let me know what you desire?
Oh, Roderigo!
Why do you sigh, sir?
First that you doubt of my obedience?
Or that my power is less then your desires.
By no means Roderigo, but I fear
Lest some ill fortune, stead of putting me
Into the haven, cast me further from it,
And lest the difficulty should change thy courage,
And leave me to my self in this fierce storm.
My courage is exempted from such fear.
I'm well assured of thy faith and valour,
And yet in this I fear, because thou must
Combat thy self, subdue thy own desires,
Conquer thy own dear passions to make
Thy self a sacrifice to my affections.
Your Majesty may dispose then of my life.
Tic not my purpose, nor for all Castle
Shall it be said that I wished any good
Which must be purchased at so dear a rate.
What can I do then for you.
Thou may put
An end to all my pain in quitting of
Cimena: do not start, they are her charms
By which I'm caught and suffer, nor can I
Believe though now she slight my offered love
Any thing else withholds her, but the thought
Of being thine.
Oh sir, assure your self,
If that be all, and that your Majesty
Vouchsafe to cast your eyes upon this beauty,
I shall not be so rash to hope that good,
Which has the honour to please you my Prince.
In this sir, you may free me from suspect,
My love is (much indeed) more my respect,
And howsoever my heart be linked to hers,
J owe more to my Master then my Mistress.
Oh royal soul, and truly generous,
Great Cid, this instant thou hast made me happy:
Now I am King indeed, for what thou give me,
I prize above the value of a Crown,
In lieu of which I mean to give thee one,
Behold the Infant, whom I freely offer:
Tic fit, the state, which owes all to thy valour,
Should make thee a great sharer in her fortune.
Every thing smiles upon me, blessed effects 
O'er take my wishes, what could I hope more?
Love is made for me to my hand, Cimena
Engaged, to which Roderigo gives consent.
Thou dost not answer me.
Excuse me sir,
I am your subject, and you are my King,
Tic not a Kingdom, which I wish or hope for
To serve you is the honour I aspire to,
Obeying you, I learn how to command,
And since—But see Cimena.
OH, Madam,
The date now of your cruelty is out,
Your coldness, and your hate no more in season▪
Roderigo for my sake has quited you,
And if he had an interest in your person,
He has now put me in full possession of it.
Sir, Roderigo's free and may renounce me,
I have no scepters to bestow upon him,
But yet I think my birth is not so mean,
As to live under his command; A slave
I am not yet, and my affections
Are not to be inclined and rule by his,
Since greatness is the thing, not love he aims at,
Let him have his desires, I shall not be jealous
Though love do wound him with more pleasing darts
So that the tyrant which shall end his sufferings,
Do not put me on new, nor that his great
Felicity be purchased at the rate
Of my lost honour, or my liberty.
Madam, think better of the man which loves you▪
To get you happiness I quit mine own:
And to obtain the sovereign power for you,
I make my affection stoop unto my duty,
If when I see a Crown is offered you,
I should come in, to cross your better fortune,
I must believe my love did then betray you,
And had relation to my self not you.
This Roderigo were a fair pretext,
If both our thoughts were levelled at one height,
But let not any right that I can plead
Divert your dear ambition, mount upon
A throne, and taste its sweetness, as for me
I am so far from blaming this your change,
You cannot find more pleasure then I praise,
T'applaud your act; you see sir, I submit
To the same laws your self has made.
Oh, heavens! 
How am I fallen from all my hopes at once,
He is Roderigo still, and she Cimena.
You are resolved then Madam, to continue
In the same cruelty? my love I see
Is useless, and my vows superfluous:
Yet think I am a King, and can command.
What you deny my love, you'll give my power,
And since I can't persuade, I must constrain.
Sir since my presence does but move your anger
Suffer me to retire I beseech you. 
See Roderigo, how my love is answered,
She flies my present; leaving not so much
As a kind look behind her; if by this
She thinks to cool the fire which burns my heart,
She is deceived; for this her suddenness
Does not restrain but quicken more my flame,
Tell me was ever King so rudely treated?
This her judicious and wise retreat,
Being no effect of spite or arrogance,
Should not excite your anger: sir you know
A modest fear keeps subjects in restraint,
When they are near their King, and in that sex
The dazzling lustre of a Princes person,
Strikes more respect into their hearts then love.
Why, was I made a King then? if my quality
Must cross my dearest wishes, let me be
A subject, any thing, so I have her:
Some kind fare rob me of my crown and sceptre,
And you shall see that I will bless your rigour,
If in exchange you'll give me but one heart:
Cimena limits my ambition,
On her depends either my life or death,
Then if thou ever had a thought to please me,
Roderigo win Cimena to my love,
Accomplish what thou hast begun, and try
To melt the ice which circles in her heart,
Or if it be a fire, oh turn it this way,
From thee I must expect all my content: 
And I from you sir, all my punishment:
Did ever any mischief equal this,
I'm made the confident of my own rival,
To my self faithless, true to him that wrongs me,
My duty and my love run contraries,
One binds me to obey a wilful Prince,
The other my Mistress, whom my heart adores,
If I obey my love, I get his hate,
And if my duty, I must lose her love,
But that I may however, since the King
Has power to take her from me when he will:
Then let me serve my King which I have promised,
But that Cimena claims as well as he;
On both sides thus engaged, and thus distracted.
Roderigo, what can thou resolve to do,
Since with thy love or duty thou must part
Give him thy life, and let her have thy heart. 
THE Infanta's lodgings are that way.
Madam.
You are mistaken, sir, I am Cimena,
He that courts titles must forget a name
That sounds not Princess, nor would I divert
The full stream of your hopes: here lies my way.
Madam, Cimena, stay and hear.
My ruin.
One word.
Pray let me go.
The last I mean
To speak to any of your sex: what rigour
Is this you use, did ever any yet
Refuse to be a witness to a Will?
Was ever any cruelty like this?
Ah Roderigo, is it not enough,
First to betray me to your love, and then
Leave me, unless to shake my resolution:
You set upon me with new battery,
I cannot hear and live.
I do not come
To urge ought in my own behalf, my duty
And promise made to him, who may command me,
Forces this from me, can you love the King?
Can you be Roderigo, and demand it.
I have no more to say then, but to take
My last farewell, perhaps when I'm removed
Your duty or ambition will persuade
What from your servant is not credited,
And when by this your obstinacy (as sure
It must fall out so) my poor life grows forfeit,
You will too late repent the loss of both.
A lover and a Crown.
Tic vainly urged.
How can I lose a Lover, when he first
Renounces me? a Crown I never had,
And if I never seek it, as I shall not,
Where is my loss? but rather whore's thy courage
Ah Roderigo must the fear of death
Only come in to make some small pretence
For leaving me, you did not use to be
Frighted at such a name.
Nor must you think
That I am now, yet would I live to see
Cimena in that lustre with her virtues
Ever designed her to, for me I think
Nothing can add unto my present state
More happiness then to have been the ground
Where on my Mistress would erect her glory.
And can you think Cimena will go less,
While you discourse thus, you but teach my duty,
The honour of our love must not be yours
More then mine own, I have as great a share
In it as you, and should it come to suffering
I can as well expect to see you great
As my self miserable; which must be so
If fortune once divide us.
Can our faith
Be so rewarded? heavens, where is your justice?
If we must needs be severed; why to both
Gave you an equal mind, and thoughts alike?
That being parted, we might be more near,
For they that love alike are always one,
Since but the sight nought can distinguish them.
These mysteries Cimena, are not strange
Unto our loves, in which there has not been
Any thing known, or easy, yet me thinks,
We might find out a way for intercourse.
Thy love is too material Roderigo,
I could be satisfied with thy Idea.
And I with thine, but is it not some pleasure
To stand thus, and to gaze on one another?
Go Roderigo, for I feel within me
Since this thy stay, some thing, that prompts me to
Desire thy company, which must be fatal
To both of us; adieu, and think we may
Be severed yet continue still our selves. 
Our selves! am I Roderigo, or has she
Bereft me of my spirit, can she brave
The majesty of Kings secured within
Her own firm constancy, and must I tremble,
If the Kings will have not the wished success?
I ought him duty, and I have performed it,
I've offered with my life all my desires,
Yet though I give, I may refuse to take,
He cannot force me to a new affection,
Or make me love her less, then she does me,
In other things he rules, in this I'm free. 
MAdam believe, I could not justify
The love I did pretend, if in this business
I should prefer my passion before
Your honour and content, I hear your brother
The King has reconciled to you, it rests
I let him know how much he owes to justice.
But as you do it, spare my modesty,
I would not be an offer, but his choice.
As you have given credit to my faith,
In this distrust not my discretion,
It is your honour which I seek, to which
I made my love submit, and can you think
I will not now preserve it, I am here
T'attend the King as sent for, and shall use
All opportunities to do you service,
Please but your Highness to retire.
Bequeathing to thy care, the hopes of all
My future happiness. 
Your Highness servant.
IN this sir, I confess, Spheranti has
Obliged our Family, the Prince is noble,
And I could wish my sister would embrace
The love he offers, what I can confer,
He may be sure of: but you know the Jnfanta
Is promised Roderigo, to whose valour
She has been long a debt, and yet this business
Is not arrived so far as to cut off
This noble Rivals hopes, sometimes a moment
Alters the state of things; a Ladies mind
Is not less changeable: tell him from me
He shall have all assistance.
T is the sum
Of his desires, your Majesty will pardon
The abruptness of my parting, he's my friend
And such a happiness he longs to hear
As much as I to tell him.
Your own time
You may command brave Celimant: Don Sancbo
This Prince has royal thoughts &amp; more your friend,
Then you could hope.
Your Majesty still puts
Fresh obligations on your humble vassal,
I am your creature, and the Prince through you,
Looking on me, may happily bestow
His grace upon me as I am your servant,
Though otherwise I be not worth his thought.
This modesty becomes thee, and sets off
Thy virtues which I cherish; in reward
Of which, and for thou hast been still an aid
To my desires, I have assisted thine,
The love thou made to Corduba's Infant,
I have tan notice of, and though another
Might suffer in the like attempt, in thee
I've not disliked it, but commend thy choice,
She is as great, in beauty as in birth.
She is an object for which mighty Kings
Being rivals should take arms, such excellence
Was never meant to be attained with ease.
You speak sir, like a lover, but Don Sancho
What would he say, that should be made the owner
Of this rare beauty by consent of all?
That fortune had left nothing to confer,
Being undone in this, hope cannot look
So high.
She shall be thine, nay more, she is.
Leave me not now my faith and honesty. 
For I had ne'er more need of your assistance.
Thou dost not answer, has thy sudden joy
Surprised thy senses, and shut up thy speech?
I must confess, I'm ravished with this offer;
And on my knees in sign of gratitude
I here restore her to you.
Dost thou mock,
My curtsy, or is it madness in thee?
Return unto thy self.
Your favours, sir,
Have come so thick upon me, that my thanks
Are still ore taken, only now my fortune,
Has given me leave to show my gratitude,
This Princess whom you offer I adore,
But dare not love, nor any but your self.
Thou make me wonder, how can she concern me?
In justice, sir, she is your wife, if contracts
Can stand in force with Princes, by your father,
In your minority, with her a match
Was made and ratifide, of which Don Diego
Cannot be ignorant, nor Don Arias,
Who did transact the business.
Some such thing
I heard, but have forgotten, my Cimena
Calls back my thoughts and fixes them on her;
Beside she loved the Cid, and for his sake
Betrayed her Country and her brother.
True,
She did, but not for him: had you great sir,
But heard the story of her love, and how
It grew up in her fancy, since the time
The King her father mentioned first your name
To her yet infant apprehension,
And gave your picture to her, you would say
Love entering by degrees, gathers his strength
From small beginnings, but makes sure his hold.
In fine, your Majesty has been the object,
For whom she has despised the Prince Spheranti.
Endured her brothers fury, and at length
To colour her desires, made the occasion
Of Roderigo's being there, the means
To bring her to your Court, and acted that
Unto the Cid, she truly meant to you:
Feigned love is often better showed then true.
I must confess my self a debtor to her,
But yet Cimena is my choice, the Princess
Consulted well for her own modesty,
And no less for her good, when she made you
Her speaker, I shall think on it: call Don Diego,
My sister and Seriffa, to them all
I have to say, Entreat the fair but cruel.
Cimena come, and Roderigo too.
I shall dispose of them: how unhappy 
Are Princes that must love by others reason,
And not their own affections, this Princess
Is fair and loves me, so is my Cimena,
But she abhors me; should I sacrifice
To fame, Seriffa must be mine, but if
To love, Cimena; one of these I'm led to
By reason, to the other forced by love:
Must a Prince suffer violence? he must
Or else imprison them that offer it,
(His wilde desires) there being no other course,
But to submit to reason or to force.
BUt here they are▪ sister, I am resolved
This day to see you married, and to make
Your joy more perfect, I shall give you leave
To choose your husband: the Prince of Toledo
Courts you with such a love as nought can equal
But his perfections, which you must honour,
As well as he your beauty: yet Roderigo
Is for himself so much to be considered,
That we can hardly find a Mistress for him,
Which may deserve his virtues; both of them
Out-weigh your merits, yet since equally
They make an offer of their service to you,
Declare which is the object of your choice.
I cannot, sir, believe my self so happy,
As to have either of em for my husband:
But if they do submit to my desires,
Being both equal, I have no election.
They both adore you, and on this assurance
You may distingish of their love.
How, both.
I doubt it much.
If you do not believe me,
From their own voice I shall confirm it to you.
Yes divine beauty from my heart I speak,
That heart which your fair eyes have set on fire,
The light of which may show you how I love.
And if I lose my hope, I lose my life.
Can you doubt yet of his affection?
And Roderigo sure will say as much.
Tic true great King, all men adore the Princess▪
She has such universal power ore harts,
She cannot be seen by any, and not loved,
But here's the difference between my love
And theirs, they live with hope, I with despair.
What robs thee of thy hope?
Love.
Speak more clearly,
Tic without reason that thou say: can love
Take thy hope from thee, when it gives it thee?
Then when I love, my hope forsakes me quite.
But now it does restore what then it took.
In doing so it keeps me further from it.
These terms are too obscure, I cannot conceive em.
Time and my constancy will make it plain▪
But I would know their meaning at this present.
The effect will quickly tell you.
What effect.
My death.
Thy death, who can cause it?
Cimena, sir.
Cimena, thou hast yielded her to me.
It was your will prescribed that Law unto me,
I am your subject sir, and you my King.
Though you be so, I never had intent
To do you wrong, to do my self a pleasure:
Thou know how dear thy person is to me,
And that my sister is thy valours prize,
Will you refuse her your affection.
I have not, sir, ambition enough
To look so high: pray sir, regard not me,
But leave me to my self, possess Cimena;
In your love let her drown the memory
Of mine, I am your subject, you my King.
Well then since you refuse my proffered honours,
And that my sister cannot touch your heart,
My promises are disengaged for me,
I shall accept Cimena, and this Princess
You are content to part with, are you not?
What do you fix upon?
On what I ought,
I am your subject sir, and you my King.
Spheranti, if my sister be your choice,
So that your father will give his consent,
I freely shall give mine.
Your Majesty
Shall quickly see that cleared, I know my father
Will be well satisfied, when he shall hear
That I have joined the Kingdoms of Toledo
And Sevill by a match: but may I Madam
Receive this happiness from your consent?
The King has made you, sir, disposer of me,
And what he chooses answers my desires.
You are silent Roderigo, what dost think?
That she could hardly have a braver Prince,
Nor he hope more then her.
And you Cimena,
Will you not put an end unto my sufferings,
Will you be still obdurate to your King?
Sir, I have no other faith then what I have given,
You know your father made me wear these bonds,
Which only death can break.
My constancy
Shall overcome thy stubbornness, I know
The ground and cause of thy aversion,
Thou hast some feeble hope t'enjoy the Cid,
But that's without appearance; his own mouth
Has ruined it, speak it again Roderigo,
Assure her that her hopes but flatter her,
Or if thou doft repent thy curtsy,
Deal freely with me, say thy mind is changed,
And that thou love her spite of all her rigours.
Great sir, my duty here restrains my tongue,
It is enough for me that I have told you,
You are my King, and I your humble vassal.
Though I am so, I will not force my subject
To suffer for concealing his desires.
Ah sir, cast off all thoughts that may retard
The course of your contentments, when a business
Concerns the good of such a gracious King,
What is the death of one unhappy man?
Twill be a fair employment for my arm,
To punish him thats troublesome to his Prince.
Well thou hast overcome, thy extreme virtue
Shall serve for an example to thy King. 
See where I am obliged, Madam, Don Sancho,
I hope has tan these blushes off, I know
What right you have to me, and I to you.
This should have been your work Don Diego rather
Then his that did it, you were privy to
All passages between our fathers; but
You I say, as all else do, it is dangerous
To turn the stream of Kings affections.
Your majesty is gracious, and prevents
Excuses from your subjects, I could say
No more in my own defence.
Here I restore to thee thine own Cimena,
(Most perfect lover) Madam, I hope your rigour
Is not habitual, he's Roderigo,
Who spite of my desires, has always loved
And honoured you, do not defer then longer,
His and your own contentment, let his love
Wracked with so many storms, find here its harbour,
He has conquered still abroad, let him not lose
At home, but add thy Myrtles to his Laurels,
And so confirming to him the same faith,
Thou give him once, receive him for thy husband.
On what shall I resolve?
To take my life,
If you deny the price of my dear love,
For since the hope of that has yet preserved it,
They both must fall together, and twill be
Some satisfaction to have died your lover.
Rise, tic enough, I am Cimena ever,
Thou Roderigo, and I wholly thine.
Live happy Loversthen, and taste the pleasures,
Which with so many crosses you have purchased:
Quit all your cares, and celebrate this day,
My Court shall be Loves Palace, come fair Princess:
Y are mine by a double tie of love and duty,
Which I shall still preserve, since I am taught
To do not what I would; but what I ought.

WHy how now Puss, what ails my
Monkey to chatter out of tune thus?
A whoreson senseless Cox∣comb—
but I am glad you are come,
I long for a pottle of wine and a Capon.
Good provision for the pre∣sent
Monkey, but viderit futuritas, in
the mean time, who lays up for future∣rity?
Come you raise four hundred per annum, out of pottles
of Wine and Capons?
Yes my Granado, in this quality: they that come
short of my breeding have don't. The first credit I won
was in a Garrison.
In Holland.
No; and yet in the low Countries: I never sate
foot in a leaguer yet.
The reason of that?
My hard fate nothing else, having as much impu∣dence,
and as many ways to manage it, receiving weekly
Corantoes from Paris, Rotterdam, and Flushing, and having
trade too in Middleborough, I have been house Lecturer
three years together, and read Aretine, both in print and
picture, and that is much for one of my years.
'T may be thou want acquaintance.
No such matter, the old Exchange, the new Burse,
and new Town, afford plenty; not a Prentice that can cry
Bawd, nor a Butchers Dog that can say bow wow, but is of
my acquaintance.
Yet it may be they are precise, and will not be seen in it.
That I know not, but most sure, I have feasted the
Liberty twice at mine own charge, and helped their wives
and daughters to the earning of many a fair pound: they will
be seen in that.
Well, I am sure I have furnished thy Library with
all books of behaviour, and tables of entertainment.
And I have culled out all my phrases as curiously &amp;
stuck my language with such enticing conveniences: and for
intellicence, all the lawn women, lace women, box women,
and to come nearer to the business, very hair women, per∣riwig
women, and candied Elicumpany lick halbars, come
in twice a week like decoy Ducks, with whole shoal at the
•ail of them.
Why, then there's a fault in your company.
I, I, that villainous company undoes all, Ther's Lo∣dowick
Tomaso Valentine, high talkers, and deep drinkers,
but they have wit in their wine, and too much honesty in
their actions at all time, there's only on Gentleman—
Stultissimo of a plain cut and square size, he runs just
as you throw him; rub him a little against the grain now, and
he will come off a great deal the smoother. You would not
think, what charitable benefactors three or four
such plush Colonels would be to the founding of a new ho∣nor.
But hast thou such a purpose, indeed?
Why should not I have purpose and effect as much
as any: A leaguer, yes, so it lay in the Isle of plenty; Id dig
through the Alps with Haniball, and fetch Theseus from
Hell, with Hercules purpose and practice, my precious
Monkey, tic done.
And shall I come to the honour to write Mistress of
the Leaguer.
Shall not bate an accent of that title my Catampti∣all
Monkey, but you must look out for Spiders Monkey, and the
Sprall of all four Puss: I have laid the foundation in gold
already.
Hast had a good return of thy Rings chuck?
Rings hangum, they are as stale as Scotch Lanson,
Or as your Decoy,
No, I have sent um out in a desperate venture to Cape.
No Monkey, my old friend Franciscus hath repaired my
Jacket already, &amp; has promised to new thatch my outside too.
One of these boxes has 100 pieces of new gold,
With chains and keys correspondent.
For what use Chick?
For a dead lift Monkey: a Leaguer cannot be plan∣ted,
manned, victualled and munition'd with a small Mega∣zine:
to work Monkey, a mousing Puss, make choice of your
company, admit no parley with the popular, be high and
proud of thy self, and let those that will needs buy thee, pay
soundly for thee with a pox to um, Puss a wink to the wise,
you know my mind, let's have no more midnight catter∣wowlings
under Sale-mens shop windows, Vintners dark
cellars, no Justices long Entries, but bear up your self so
civil and so meager▪
You may be stilt a sister of the Leaguer.
Away you Rogue.
As I am a Gentleman body and soul Isle break your
windows.
Master, as you are a man stand and tickle her.
Will you, you Rascal.
Ah, sweet heart, prithee good woman.
Nay, let her come Isle give her heart belly full.
Let her alone Fub: let her alone, by this hand, Isle
make the boys maule her Ruffs.
Fie how I am tyred a whoreson stinking shamleg'd,
Fie, fie, fie, use a Gentlewoman thus in her own lodging.
How does your back, O the Fuses, out alas, here's
half a Crown in Complexion utterly cast away.
If I be not even with the Rutter—
If hee come where you have to doe, let him pay
soundly.
A plague upon his Asses ears, by my Virginity,
Isle send his beard into New-found-land for this.
And so I would, to make lines to catch Cods: out,
out, out, a Gentleman, and use a woman no otherwise; in faith,
yfath, it stands not with his reputation.
A whoreson smelt: Mistress Durable, I would I had
some of your aqua vitae, I'm sick after the conflict.
And shall good woman, come, come, pray keep your
self warm.
Forsake me honour, when I doe forget the bond of
friendship, let not poverty, no, nor your fathers haviour
Julio: though our Venetian law proved him a Traitor: come
pluck away your interest from my breast: when we were
pupils in the Academy, I was Franciscus and your fellow
then; I am Franciscus and your fellow still, nor can be alto∣red:
I have now a heart as free from pride, as when I clipped
thee thus, before thou knew the taste of poverty, or I pros∣parity.
Think not ancient friend I can forget thee, though
thy need were such as beggary despised.
The liberal hand of heaven reward your love, or
lend my wishes that ability to thank you in requital.
Amen to that and more.
I tell thee Iulio, I am not happier in my virtuous wife: and
yet that's greater than yielding thee relief tic all that good
men wish: Why have we wealth bestowed on us, but to re∣turn
the same, where stern necessity pinches the ribs of him
or her that wants? it has no other worth, no more esteem
of me. Heap it together while the, massy weight even crack,
what bears it less than dust? on dust deserves no more re∣guard.
I have a Wife, Nurse, and mother, all she is in one; yet
one deserves more Titles, besides her feature, which may
make compare with those that boast of parts: she is so kind,
that many millions may be stamped again, ere one so perfect
currant. She is worth more than the earth is: but she is my
wife, and I will cease her praise: you know her father when
you have his name: hee is called Chrisippus, many stile
him good, and wish all Venice such.
Ere I was banished for my fathers fact, my know∣ledge
coated, and all Italy, spoke of a Damsel called Cor∣nelia,
this good Chrisippus daughter.
She is that jewel, that unmatched, thing I made my
boast of: That Cornelia is none but mine, I dare boldly
say, and eke affirm it: See my Julio, she meets us unexpec∣ted,
and comes to hinder what I would speak more, in cause
of her demerit, modesty, and sweetness.
Franciscus: son!
My Love and duty make me ever such.
To all this company a happy hour.
You have bin mist Franciscus.
You have been mist Cornelia.
Where?
Where ere I have bin, this is my friend, tender him
your welcome with as good respects as I my self where he.
Sir, bid your own welcome, and command as much
as all we have, were yours.
Your courtesies to one so thronged in misery
As my self, dulls my behaviour, that I know not how
Enough to laud or thank you.
You shall exchange your habit:
Phemone, sister, Anthonio—
We mist you yester night.
I durst not come believe it:
Vallentius for says rouses are too great,
They make me quake to see 'em.
How fares my cousin Lodwick?
He spoiled our sport: he was not well he said:
I would you had been there: Tomaso pledged you twice.
I thank his love.
It is not worth it Sir.
In faith Nephew I was extreme drunk, ask my man
Fub else, he'll tell you what a coil he had with me: the ra∣rest
lest in faith: prithee tell 'em how thou foundst me under∣neath
the stairs.
By no means, twill make 'em drunk to hear it.
Signior Arbaces you are the man I wished for.
Well met Gentlemen: are you here Antonio?
Cornelia.
Sir.
No, tic no matter. Tomaso you shall do it,
Go see nothing want; you are all my guests, you dine with
Me that's certain: Nay, I will not be denied:
Most welcome Sir to you: will you walk?
Ever, ever welcome.
Will you walk sir? will you munch?
Sirrah Fub, thou would not think how sore my
head is, ever since I had the knock with the Ladle?
I believe you: will you feed sir?
No more in the Ladle. Me thinks I am pocky me∣lancholy
here of late.
So I guest, ever since you knew the Gentlewoman
that beat you.
Thou say true, ever since in faith.
Why she is able to make any body pocky melan∣choly.
But would you would snap a bit sir.
I love her I cannot tell how: in faith and I were
well searched, I think I am little kin to a Spannell, the more
I am beaten, the better I affect.
Would I were sure of that.
Well, she shall hear from me in some Sonnet or
Ditty; some rare thing of mine own invention, and that
speedily: Let me see to what tune shall I have it?
And if you please, let it go to the Punkes delight;
it is your only sweet tune: for women doe love the Punks
delight.
By this hand gramercy; they doe indeed, thou
can sing if need be.
I can make a scurvy shift: But to say truth I am no
good Chorister.
But can thou doe well and scurvily?
After my manner.
Would I might be hanged presently, but methinkes
I am a piece of a Poet already, there's such a whistling in my
pate.
That's nothing but your conceit sir.
Conceit merrily: O that my love were any thing
but woman.
O that your love were any thing but
Common: then might she be.—
What might she be.
Nay what you will in faith.
Isle to it while tic hot, I know I'm in an excellent vein.
Prick it quickly then:
But Hark you Signior, shall you not need my help?
I defie't, It shall be all mine own, I cannot abide,
tic the scurviest thing to rob others of their wit, good or
bad, it shall flow from mine own sweet brain.
I believe you'll find the tide turned, tic ebbing wa∣la
there, would I might be begged, as hee had like to have
been, if his foolery do not vex my discretion, but hee gives
me means, and I could do little if I could not smile.
Well Vallentius, and you be caught in the purlues: and
you be not stung for it Isle forswear privacy, and all that
belongs too••, I have a Girl, the very spirit of what she was
made for, and she were honest, she might crave supremacy
of Helen, and make her ride behind.
And I love one were she not honest, that's her only
fault, she were a Paragon unparalleled, mingle all beauty
that our Venice yields, and set her self aside, she would stand
peerless, over-shine them all, and dim the Artists cun∣ning.
Is she a woman?
Yes, but such a one no voluntary habit, nor sly
drift with all accommodations that beseems, unblemished
truth it self can bring to speech or give my thoughts ac∣cesse.
What is she for a Saint, that stands in the how fair
and beautiful: may one of my birth entreat her name and
knowledge?
Vow your assistance to my purposes, and I a Traitor
to my self reveal the treason of my mind.
Give me your hand, I am yours for better or worse,
in all causes, all adventures, my sword and self vow fealty:
Is she a wife?
I, would she were not.
Know you Vanderman our great Physician.
What, my fretful Doctor? the only curer of mad
folks;
Know I my self?
You know hoe's married.
Yes, and what of this (oh would you be ministering
therein.) I have you my dear Flora, well take my word
shoe's thine.
I would that I were hers.
Why it lies in thine own choice.
But setting all this pleasantness aside, in earnest Lo∣dowick
I affect her so, no motive mean nor yet dire accident
can change my steadfast will, I must enjoy her, or I must not
live.
Thou shalt enjoy her, or I will not live.
You speak like a friend.
I speak like what I am, a Christian, and by that Epe∣thite,
I meant as much as I speak, nor could I think, Val∣lentius,
you of all the men alive, would have mistaken
me.
In any kind but this I never had: pardon me Lodo∣wick
this doting loves bears such a jealous sway, the least
suspicion puts us on the wrack, and breaks all chains of
duty: You may persuade me to believe, but yet he that never
saw a Vessel under sail, cannot imagine what the Seaman
brooks, the Merchant sleeping on his downy Couch, ne'er
dreams what danger the bold Souldie•r duress, and he that
never felt the pangs of Hell, cannot report the torments:
assure thee Lodowick so be satisfied, since I knew her, I have
not known my self, so mighty is loves extremes.
Tic strange.
She troth plight was to me, and had been mine, had
not desire of pelf altered her friends, and I dare well vow
she loved me once, what ere her mind be now.
Come be ruled by me, thou shalt set thy toe in the
Doctors stirrup, ride and go a foot at thy pleasure: did she
love thee once?
I had her oath.
Go to, renew thy suite, the fire is not all out, stir up
the ashes, and thou dost not find some embers, that will both
glow and warm, pawn me for buttered Sack, and let me no∣ver
be worthy redemption.
I want the means.
Think not of that, tic here my Flora, what man? he's
not the first Doctor has worn a corner Cap: come, will you be
merry Vallentius, and you'll forsake not this mood, I renounce
society.
I am yours, obedient as your hand.
Follow me then, and I drive not this melancholy
fit out of thee, Isle never trust my conceit: what, ho Dama∣zella?
Knocks, and Clarislona looks out at the window.
Whose there?
He's here that should be here, come down?
Lodowick.
Yes.
What's she.
The commodity I told you of, there's a Gentleman
a friend of yours in love with her.
Not your self.
No faith, though you shall hear her swear as much,
tic our rich heir Signior Stultissimo.
What, the Fool?
That more sell of mans flesh, she cannot beat him a∣way,
he haunts the Eves like a Sparrow in March, you may
hunt flies from honey sooner then him out of her company:
now Mistress how stands things with you, when did you play
with your fools babble?
You'll never leave this.
Bid my friend welcome.
I thank you Lady.
Come kiss me?
Will you stay all night?
Yes, when I am weary of strength, and foes with
my back.
In faith Lodowick, you must leave this?
So I will▪
When?
When thou leave thy trade?
Will you sup here?
Yes drink, nothing else.
Lord, how wise your grown?
So I were, if I could keep out of your company.
Fie, your'e to uncourteous Lodwick: nay, he's ever
thus, but tic my fault.
Marry mend it then for shame.
Whore's my Bracelet, which of your Truls has
that?
Shall I be true to thee?
Your'e ne'er true to me.
I mean honest.
I care not for your honesty.
I believe that too, but in plain verity. Your bracelet
embraces my horses main.
Come, you jest.
No good troth.
Swear you, I hope you make a difference between
your horse and me.
Faith but little: and yet your'e both good bearers.
By the bright Sun you wrong her: weep not fair
one.
What, shall we have tricks?
You are too blame beshrow me.
Now, when, what needs all this, nay, and you pout
farewell.
As I am a Gentleman you part not so.
Sweet, Lodwick.
Hum, why was not this before, I have seen the
Bears.
Do not I know your woman?
Hist, hist, Are you the man of War?
Nay, you must draw nearer, if you'll have your Em∣bossy
answered: how first Mistress Durable?
How do you Master Lodowick?
The worse for you, and your creatures.
It's a good hearing.
Shall I have three or four words in private?
Not with her unless I participate.
Whats the matter?
Yonder's Fub, the parties man you wot on has
something under hand and seal.
For me.
So he gives out.
You may admit him.
Rest you merry Gentlemen.
Whose this secret party, this concealed Champion▪
What have ye here, Signior Stuliissimoes man?
All hail.
This fellow would keep a wild coil if hee were a
top ath' tiles.
Gentiles, good speed.
What, the Plough?
No, you, and you please, Marona to your self.
This fellows discreet.
To me.
So says his backside.
You the man of War, or more properly Pirate, that
gave summons to the leaguer.
Leaguer, Sir.
Leaguer, Sir, the report of your Pot-guns cannot
make us hang up a white flag.
The skirt of a clean smock's more proper ath' two.
Wee come not to learn whats proper of you,
Monkey, and catch flies.
Play at his foolery, come hither Punk.
Sir, you're uncivil, she's none; nor this a Bawdy
house; but a Leaguer of gentle entertainment.
The fellow dreams: Come wake and be thy self.
My self? Would you were as sure your selves as
I am.
A what?
I'd fine know that of you:
But I advise you to take council of your best judgment first,
Your words will be questioned.
Question that dares, you are an arrant Cheater.
Tic not your pare royal of plush Coxecombes can
secure you in it.
Valiant a the sudden too.
Not suddenly neither:
The growth has both time and sufficient temper.
Why I a Cheater? let any impartial—
Ride Circuit, and sit in judgement of us all,
And show any reason either in Art or Nature,
Why I a Cheater more than any of you.
Thou hast nothing but a little wit to live upon.
That's endowment enough for a Gentleman:
I ever shall count him the nobler gentleman
That makes himself a fortune in the world, than he
That brings it into the world with him.
Suppose this granted: yet why this a Leaguer?
I want words for you: only for conclusion, one out
of a strange affected carriage has gathered an admirable me∣thod
of drilling, and training men from the flying of Cranes:
Another rare order and government of Commonwealths,
from the poor labour of the Bee: And I out of this
Leaguer—
Will extract certain ways and carriages for Chea∣ters
and Libertines.
It were not from my purpose if I granted that to. Lie∣curgus
was the first Law-maker; and the best Law that ever
he made, was a provision or maintenance for Cheats, as you
call em, and Felons (viz.) That he (without exception of
age, quality, or condition) which could doe the most high
dainty, and dangerous piece of Felony, and come clear off,
should be preferred to the most eminent place of office in
the State; but if he failed, he was then to receive Martial
Law.
Strange course, pick Officers out of Felons.
It is a kind of Meslin or mingled grain still.
How much of the poores money was found in one of the
Churchwardens purchase last day?
None I think.
How many thieves horses have bin watered at the
High Constable of the hundreds watering trough within this
ten years?
I think not any.
It may be so: But I am sure, I have heard, or read▪ or
something, that a new Chief Justice of some place, or a bet∣la
man wo'd not ha made very nice to bid a fat purse to
breakfast with him if he light upon it soundly: so that it is
not so much the Art to know, as the government to dispose:
that qualifies the man.
He says true: all times have bin guilty of good fell∣lowship,
why not this? I like the Leaguer now so well, I
care not if I buy a place of command in it my self.
Why now you come to me,
That's the Pearl I ha• dived for all this while:
I have a catalogue of names, places, and prizes.
A cup of entertainment for my friend.
Welcome to the new Leaguer.
We will pledge, we will pledge:
Victual'd and Wined already?
To the Society at the Swan two pottles and a half:
Monkey the health; these are my noble &amp; prime visi tants;
the boxes I gave you to lay up.
How now Iulio, gold?
By this light, and the most curious.
A poor Grannams gift gentlemen: 300 pieces,
or such a taste, par•lie induction to a business, or so. There's a
Bordeaux Merchant in Town now, would lay me between
wind and water this twelve month, but the spite is, I am
tied not to part with this gold for ever: if I knew where
to borrow but half the worth on it—
Half the worth?
Isle vow to lend the full worth,
If that will pleasure thee.
You shall keep the gold under locke and key for
your pawn.
Thou shalt not want for such a curtsy to doe thee
good: Ime glad you are so thriving.
Lock up the box, and keep the key; there's the full
sum.
To a Piece I assure you: you shall see else again.
No more, no more trouble:
Let me see for how long?
Three Months, not a day longer:
Nay sooner if money chance to come in before:
I have offices in my Leaguer stand upon Fortunes hill.
'Vds me Signior Stultissimo promi•ed
Me a curtsy last night:
Assure thee sweet chuck he'll not fail thee.
I believe thee without an oath:
Make my friend welcome to the Leaguer Monkey:
As soon as I have dispatched my voyage
To the Canaries, I am for you again Lads.
Gentlemen, who can read?
Who cannot?
I can resolve you:
She cannot.
What's here?
Opprobrious Saint, and most Angelic fiend,
Ere I begin, thus doe I make an end.
I should have been sorry else:
Nay silence, or the Proclamation's lost.
And if thy heart be not patched up in Marble,
Hark how my pen does in thy praises warble.
O dear Apollo, how art thou abused,
Is there more?
Sweet stinging Wasp, and well conceited Dove▪
For beauty nice, entitled Queen of love
Of me; Sir reverence; that doe's thee adore;
Which art esteemed a good one and no more:
Let reason rule thy Amazonian sist▪
Let ladle rude be thrown at body wist,
So shall I love thee, take it for no fable
Better then well, and more then I am able.
Ass, Ass.
The Authors name.
Cannot you get her Signior Stultissimo?
O, lamentable complaint!
As ever poor man heard.
Will he take no warning.
Is this a Challenge?
Fie no, they are too violent to come in rime.
Lodowick, is not this your practice?
Why, dost thou think me so simple, so ridiculous.
No, Isle assure you, It's a token of good will of my
Masters, there's no brain guilty ont but his own: if you like
it you may, and you will not, the laws in your own hands,
you may choose.
Good Gentlemen return the Carrier.
What? a cuff or a knock.
Hee has penned a Song too, which I should have
tickled, if I had not been hoarse with drinking Flap-Dra∣gons
last night.
Whats thy name?
Fub.
Prithee honest Fub, tickle thy self out of our com∣panies,
weal be Fubb'd no longer.
Will not you be Fubb'd Sir.
Thou know my resolution.
Nay, but will ye not indeed?
No faith▪
I am glad I know it,—be with you.
Have you any wine in the house?
Yes dearest.
Come, a pox a these devices, hang off: will you drink
Vallentius?
Will I live?
Whore's the Matron?
The Matron, Lord, you're the strangest man.—
Your Matron Grandum, what will you have it, your
Bawd?
I must be quiet.
Nay, enter, enter.
The easy time, and such as thrive in it, favour my
wishes, the ignorant whose sole dependence is on verity,
and carry conscience in their timorous breasts, are not asso∣ciates
meet for Iulio. Those that near knew the strain of
Policy, nor aim at more, then what may well content,
draw not my length, the way to prosper, the directest course
such are my sore necessities, is to get liking of this lovely
Maid Franciscus sister, bright Phemone, the Virgin's mo∣dest,
chaste, and debonair, besides her brother's rich, there
hang my hopes, but she affects not me, all her desires
are on young Anthonios, rich Arbaces son, my friend
(supposed) at least, but that is breath; by what man has, or
can have, he's my foe that hinders my design, where hee
my next of blood, that shall he find: the mean to purchase
what I reach at now, there is but only one, one only mean
that can supplant him, here it lies shall do it, were hee as
dear in estimation as Nisus to Eurialus.
I love my self, I count him still most wise,
That cares not who's thrown down so he arise.
THou hast to say something, yet nothing I hope trivial,
by our known affection I beseech thee, speak what thou
can.
I would I had embraced my poverty, while the
pale Moon has residence in heaven, would I had been
deaf.
Whereto tends this speech if I thought my fault, or
any ones pertained to me, through wilful negligence, or
otherwise, to breed the occasion of this passionate mood, I
should condemn the cause of the offence, and deem my
self unhappy.
Can heaven suffer it?
What, what does heaven suffer, speak my Iulio?
Too much of ill.
Let me know that ill, and I rest satisfied.
Pray no more, the malady is mortal, unsanctified,
monstrous. Anthonio is there such a man?
Many that wear that name in Italy: but one a∣amongst
that many known to me.
Hate all the name.
Pardon Iulio, Isle hate my self first.
Anthonio is a Villain.
Blot not the reputation of his youth with such
calumny, he is no way such, but as unblemished, as the snow
before it touch the Mountains.
He's a Villain.
Villain never had so fair an out-side, nor yet heart
so just as that he carries.
He's a Villain.
I have some business at the Port, you'll sup with me
to night.
Doe you love your self, do you love honour, do you
love your wife?
I do.
Then hate that Anthonio.
Give me to understand, since you will force me to
endure your report, wherein hoe's culpable, or does deserve
these ignominious titles.
He loves not you.
Tic not my fault.
He wrongs your sister.
Therein, he's too blame.
He loves your wife.
That amends, quits all his former wrongs.
Can you bear it thus, wink Vulcan then,
And let the god of War, throw up her skirts again.
How's this?
You will not understand; Isle speak no further.
Come, come, my wife is honest.
Yes.
If she be, tic nothing you have said, Isle hear no
more; begone.
Will you list a word, Anthonio wongs you.
Wrong me, and if he would he cannot.
He plays the Parasite, the officious Ass
to veil his sin.
Would I might understand you?
The Serpent tempts your wife, these ears and eyes
can testify; for your sister, she's stale: his excuse, whereby
hee cloaks his vice.
I wish you Iulio, to know what you speak.
I am not mad, I love you, tic my love, you are my fa∣there.
I pray be advised, consider what you do? speak not
this no report, be certain; do not abuse my patience. Tempt
my wife, rent earth, and swallow falsehood.
Will you be moved Pernassus, the two topped, forked
Mount?
My blood is not mine own, I want command of all
that now obeyed me, how different are my fits? I am now a
congealed, kneaded cake of ice, bound from all motion,
now again (me thinks) a flaming Island, a Vesunius Hill,
merely combustion.
Forget not, sir, your patience.
Tell me of patience when I am my self: how did
he tempt her, how did she accord on thy reputation?
I would I had been dumb?
Hang not in the wind, (delay does torture) answer
me as how?
Kind, sir, recall your wonted manhood?
Answer me how.
I pray pardon me.
What? strike and cry mercy, I must be resolved,
thou hast flung me in the fire, even in the Oven, the mouth of
Aetna, nothing thou coulst have said, nothing have done,
could have assured like torture.
Would, when I saw him kiss her, crush her hand,
wink and laugh out, use his indecent language: Fie, fie.
Cornelia false, the flood may come again, nothing
impossible, kiss, and crush hands, wink, wink heaven and
all above.
Kind, sir.
Bear witness, all that good are, how dear, how
dear, I held that most false man: set him here, here, even on
the spire and pinnacle of my heart; my life was his, and all
that I call mine, but her he has abused?
Dear friend, do not forget your name, these are but
likelihoods, far from the thing it self, and say he be a Vile∣lain,
as no doubt he's little better in his rude exposures:
she may be honest.
No Julio, no, had she meant well,
She would have warned me of his foul attempts,
Said such, and so's his haviour.
When she was loyal, as sure one she was,
(If ever any was) no accident how vain
So ever it seemed, but she a woman, would unfold
Her sex, and say it was thus, and thus.
I have stroke him through.
Treble abuse:
Deflowered my wife, abused me,
Disgraced my sister; thrown infamy
On all our heads at once: What beast uncivil bred,
Amongst careless Monsters (but thee Antonio)
Would have been kicked on to that damned enterprise?
That I had patience; me thinks thou should not
Be the Villain yet, report does speak thee.
Nay gentle friend.
Tic true, it is true.
Had any twixt the North and Southern Pole
Spoke these words but hee, it had not been,
And he had falsely lied.
This is a Creature I have raised, revived,
Snatched from destructions teeth,
Incorporated to me, so dear and just, as not
A thing in all the world can be more truer to it self
And certain: but his modesty conceals it,
Could write a Volume of their loathed designs,
And curse the stories cause. O false Cornelia!
Remember what you are.
Remembrance burst!
There's no contemplation, nothing what ere can
Drive the thought of shame out of my mind:
Would I had never known discretion,
Could never have made distinctions of persons,
And harmless Creatures; hence forth be ignorance:
Mother of Nations and Understanding perish:
Fair, foul Cornelia. The blue faced
Occan, nor her fertile womb, that yields
Vs all increase, nourishes none so false as woman:
Traitors have they been since their first being,
And betrayed poor man ever he beheld himself.
Cornelia can it be thou art a Strumpet?
Oh, oh, fury finish that, burns thee to Cinders.
Work on, work on:
Fate lifts me to the seat of my desires;
And I am prosperous and happy.
This Devil jealousy, my present friend,
Cannot at least but quite supplant Anthonio:
Besides this seeming honesty of mine, begets me good
Opinion of Franscicus, as shall install my wish;
All adds to my avail: what need I curses fear
For the debate my policy shall raise betwixt these Turtles▪
I hold with Machievel, for fame or profit
To break oath or league with friend,
Or Brother: there's nothing gainful bad:
I ha my wish, Advancement now
Is what I aim at, present glory here:
He's true religious, that does nothing fear.
And how? and how?
Was it not pathetic and pretty?
Y faith I never heard the like.
Nor I.
I thank the Muses, I have as sharpe a conceit of
mine own when I list.
Sir I take you to be a great devourer of Verjuyce.
Now and then; but it is not altogether that; every
one has his gift.
Tic so.
Some has two or three.
You say true Signior, some has twenty: for which
they may thank impudence and the art of begging.
The art of begging: pray you how long has begging
been an art?
Ever since in rid in a foote-cloath, and wore the badge
of authority.
How long's that ago?
Ever since you Grannams daughter had a Calfe of
your age.
Is it possible?
Yes, and will continue till hoe's a Bull and horn
mad.
Most miraculous: would I were mercenary, and had
no more in me than an ordinary man: Signior, I cry you
mercy. How doe you since you powered the pottle of wine
in my neck, and threw the pot at my head, because I would
not pay my part of the shot?
Was there such a time?
Was there? Why have you forgot how you kicked
me, and I crept under the Table: Isle be sworn this Hip's as
lame ever since, as if I had the Cyatica.
Absurd and gross.
We must leave you Signior.
I thank you with all my heart: I am going to the
foresaid place: here's my servant Fub can tell you if I lye in
my throat.
I will assure you he's wandering to Pusse, or as a man
would say, to deal with Mistress Clariflora.
Yes faith am I: she beat me tother day, and I am now
going to make her amends. I think I endure more beating
than any three in Venice.
Than a Stock-fish.
It is a sign you are offensive.
So they say that do it. Yester night a scurvy boy
did so joule my head and the wall together, for holding o∣pinion
that Cheese was unwholesome.
No more good Signior: farewell.
At your service:
Shall we expect you at the old house?
If you please:
Have you heard the like?
These are Asses so tedious—
They're kin to Burs, they will not off with shaking.
Now my Thomaso what I have to say:
The chief occasion made me summon you,
Is to entreat your knowledge and assistance
In such a project, (as your self set by) and him that must
Partake in the attempt, Venice in Italy
Conceals the man that I durst credit.
Let it not touch confusion of the State,
Treason, and Murder: whatsoever it be,
Command my will and sufferance.
Defend that ever I should be such:
Vallentius never had so foul a thought,
To infect himself, and others.
Thus, in brief, I love a woman; fairer
Than her self ne'er wore the Epithet:
You have seen her sure, and know her:
She's wife to Vanderman.
Correma's daughter?
That same only wight, is the most precious
Beauty I adore, and would fine call mine own.
Knew you her husband?
By his name, no further;
By that knowledge you understand his course.
Yes he's a Physician: and besides,
What else report speaks of him.
Listen then my purpose,
The severe sir, whose high stretched phrases
Galls the ears of Patience, and wisdom would fain shun,
Bears such a jealous and observant eye
Over the prey I aim at, all conference is debarred,
And you may sooner whisper with the Saint
Argos had charge of, than converse with her,
Unseen, and unsuspected.
Is there no device to compass her?
But one, and this is it;
Your self and Lodwicke (harken I beseech you)
Shall to this skilful Vanderman present me
As one distracted: nay smile anon,
And with a kind of sober modesty, as if you list you can,
Report some probable possibility, how
And which way I got my ecstasy:
Let me alone to make your words seem truth,
And so possess my prating Mountebank,
That he shall say and swear I'm mad at least.
If not past all recovery.
Will this doe?
This, or none.
Then none.
Why this is the shallowest, indirectest course to win a wo∣man
that ever was composed, in my opinion.
In your opinion: why sir?
Why, hope you to gain her thus with a mad fit:
mark the event, this is a course as wide: Are you so simple
to imagine, she a timorous woman, will endure your pre∣sense,
seeming possessed? for shame believe it not, invent
some other means.
I verily think so too, but he will never bee per∣swaded.
This were a way to scare her, and to make her shun
you.
Leav't off, leav't off, and study some other new
passage.
Doe, doe; this is the grossest: fie Vallentius:
Come, you shall pardon him once: wee all miss
sometimes.
Good gallants doe not ride me, lest I gall you: Isle
assure you I trot hard: why my brace of conceits, my wits;
what does your abundance of wit run at waste: for shame,
have you so poor a brain, and you my most exquisite ex∣cellent,
for shame take off your spectacles and see better: are
you such a dunce: are you so rare a Coxcomb, to deem I
will appear always the same: are you the men you promised?
will you be Masters of your words and oaths, tender your
vowed assistances?
I am Lodwicke still.
And I Tomaso.
Continue so: what shall redound upon this adven∣ture,
falls upon my head, be it no shame to yours: only pre∣ferment
and your smooth apologies.
Leave that to us.
But can you act the mad-man bravely?
Tut, I have played Ajax, and performed the part well,
to make boast of imitation, better than he that Lucian writes
of, who so digested what he plaid, that he run mad indeed.
Can you do it?
So well, as Aesop could discharge his Scene, where∣by
he won most laud.
This praise were well in me.
Mistrust not my behaviour, and if it prove not cor∣respondent
to my word, think me an idle venture, and no
meet associate for you.
When put we this in practice?
There's no deferring weeks, nor days, this hour,
this very evening does my fit begin.
Shall we about it then?
What else, what else? Remember gentlemen you
fall not upon the scandal of Ignorance: but in any case keep
your countenances.
Make no doubt of that.
Come then, and fortune friend us.
Draw your sword.
Against whom?
Against me.
Against any living man thats your enemy:
What ails my dear Francisco?
By your face you should not be in health.
Draw your sword.
What mean you?
Draw your sword.
Against you never in anger:
Are you well Franciscus? me thinks your cheek
Carries a paler hue than wont to be his Livery.
I must fight with you.
With me.
With thee perfidious monster, with thee thou Iudas.
Are you your self?
Thou hast abused me, wronged me.
I wronged and abused you?
Franciscus, can you think so of me?
Doe not enquire; yonder he sits knows all:
Look yonder, thou art to him transparent, and seen through,
As easy as the air: doe not cloak thy vice, doe not:
See thou this? see thou the place we tread on?
Mark my speech, one of us twain, or both (never start)
On this cold earth, this very Champion, shall
Offer up a crimson sacrifice of his most precious blood:
For that cause drew I to this silent shade,
Remote from all suspicion, where
Revenge might glut with satisfaction:
Draw thy sword, or else thou never shalt.
Did not my love prohibit,
Think, Francisco, I could not be a Coward,
Nor endure the opprobrious taunts the malice
Of your heart has made your tongue throw on me;
Why I know not: believe me, and receive it for a truth,
Were you some other, in this wide vast world,
And not Franciscus, you had been a dog
That I had kicked long since; but you are my friend,
And my disgrace is buried: yet if you carry honour
In your breast, and bear your wonted venerable mind,
Make me to understand from whence, or why your
Comminations &amp; indecent language point thus at me alone?
Will you draw?
Do you thirst for blood? if so, and mine, hide to the
hilts your naked instrument, my bosom is your mark: thrust
home and take your fill.
Will you draw?
You had mine answer, never▪ never.
Do you not love my wife?
Yes, by Heaven.
Confess, ô impudence! my wrong cries out, no
more expostulation, remember Iulio.
Wherefore him, he is a Toad more virulent, oh, oh!
Bathe there, adulterate fiend, and thy red drops
wash off thy guilty stains.
Oh, some charitable creature!
Francisco, dear Francisco.
No pity, no remorse, I bleed, and much effusion robs me of
my breath, something of sense relieve me, help, ô help.
That dying tune, was sure a mans, where art thou
friend, speak thou that cried for help, if thou would have
thy wish, speak once again: where art thou?
Here.
To one in thy case could I ne'er less wish, then
health and mercy, how fare you sir?
Oh! Oh!
His utterance is decayed, and life begins to creep
out of his wounds: let me see, so many, and so mortal! can I
but stay the course I wish no more: have I nothing left, to
stay this passage: well, yet still hee breathes, that I had here
some help. Thy aid Omnipotent, yet his pulses beat, life is
not quite discharged,—no succour! keep he but mo∣tion,
till I can bear him to my Cell, I doubt not, his re∣covery:
this wind, this wind, that my Balms were here:
for my youthful days heaven lend ability.
Run to all brief confusion.
Good, sir, be pacified.
Even in the pride, and noon time of his fortunes,
brought to destruction thus: a milder, better tempered Gen∣tleman,
Venice nor Europe yielded; his knowledge made
me proud, and I was rich in his adoption.
O my Franciscus, ô my gentle Lord!
My brother, my dear brother.
My son, my son, so noble, valiant, wise, dearer to
me then him I call mine own by true succession, doe you
weep?
I am not blessed, all things doe sort contrary; twill
not do, my projects thrive not, would I had been silent, wee
know the first, but not the last, I begin to perceive our poli∣cies
of times whets the Axe, cuts off our own necks; I have
and one my self, that it should come to this, wee seek to
mend so long, that we mar all: for mine own part, would
I could have been content: but who would have dreamt the
course would have proved so violent: well this I am sure on,
I may starve ere I get such another friend.
Sister, if it be true, as so the rumour goes, you have
played false, and wronged your dearest friend: you are not
worthy such another man, you sole Queen of Africa; had
you to live as many ample years as our first fathers, or their
ages thrice: you might spend all those tedious houses twice
told, ere you find a Mate so worthy, were you equivalent,
in birth and beauty, and had no parallel: Neptunes gems to
boot, you want worth and excellence both, to weigh down
his demerit; Virtue and Honour stamped him for their own,
at his first being, and the Graces strove to increase his plane∣tude.
More perfection then he has, hee needs not, where ere
he's betook.
Something that's mighty, stain me Leopard like, if
ere I gave offence.
I should be loath to wish so.
Not you offend? look here,
This letter left he as a testimony,
Who is there here amongst all this company,
That knew Franciscus, knew not he affected,
And highly prized the slain Antonio?
What could have raised such deadly enmity?
But this, but this, thou strumpet,
Between such twinlike friends?
Thy misdemeanour, thy approved falsnesse;
Which too, too well he knew▪
Thou hast not one him,
Fled he is and gone;
His goods already seized are for the State:
And die he shall if ever he be took,
Oh, fie upon thee my perpetual shame!
Can you this behold, you upright Justices?
Thou art not mine, I here deny thy claim,
And warn thee hence-forth,
Come not near my roof:
Pine, starve and die, relief and comfort
Never more expect from him that was thy father.
It is nothing I see, to work the dissolution of a house,
How easily this is done?
I must weep, to deem
I should be forced to be so cruel;
More I have to say, if tears would let me;
(Me thinks) I could both kiss and curse her:
If she be wronged, and through some make-strife,
These foul ills prove a greater plague,
Then fell in Egypt, light on the Authors head,
The maws of Dogs be his Tomb:
Help me to curse him Iulio.
Ten thousand swords struck me together.
Lived there such a wretch,
And that I knew him,
Let my faith not save me,
But I would tear the Viper with my teeth,
And like a rude and savage Caniball,
Eat out his treacherous heart.
Now the foul Devil, stuff thy glutnous paunch,
I am no viand for thee?
Who's this comes here, Arbaces?
Disgrace and woe smite all this company, and make
them feel my grief.
Disgrace, contagion, and what can be worse,
Smite thee and all thy tribe.
Undone, undone, where is Anthonio?
Whore's my son Crisippus?
Answer thine own words;
Whore's mine Arbaces?
Where such a Villain—
And fell murderer should.
More charity for shame.
Sorrow gripe my heart till it be blood less,
But what thou speak is false:
A more slanderous lye never left the lips of any.
Lye?
Sir, be persuaded.
Tell not me, Isle prove it on him, Arbaces, boy—
That we were alone.
Well said, old Lad.
Show thy self a man, meet me to morrow.
Good, sir, forbear.
Not meet him.
Will you be entreated?
Give me leave.
Will you be pacified?
Meet thee, yes I will meet thee;
I dare meet a man: Arbaces thou shalt find it.
Come, you are a praetor.
Prate; ye shall hear from me.
With reverence of your age, good sir,
You want of that discretion and stayed judgement;
Your years and place requires: It is not well,
One of your reputation and report,
Should so forget your self: to be plain,
You lack advice; and this same cavillation,
Merely provoked by you.
Proclaims a loud your inconsiderate folly.
Sir, sir; check your own:—
You never lost a son, and cannot
Aim at my affections and paternal care:
You have undone me—
Robbed me of my joy.
You are not right considerate,
Who has undone you sir?
You, you, and she, and every one of you;
The punishment for murder fall on all your heads,
And blast your terrene hopes:
Cruel, cruel, butchery.
Wast not sufficient that he took his life,
As by his own confession:
Undid his woeful mother and my self,
But he must practice more
Immanly, more dire austerity;
Throwing his breathless trunk
In some obscure night-shaded Mansion,
A prey for ravenous beasts;
Where never eye of creature rational,
Shall more behold him: unchristian part,
If there be justice, above or here;
As certainly there's both: Isle petition,
My loud complaints shall pierce both sides of the globe,
And strike a sorrow in the rudest thing,
Nature for mans use moulded:
O! my Antonio? my joy, my life;
My dear, my dear Antonio.
There's cause for this.
Sure, sure, how fond was I
That could not weigh this before;
Having his proper cause,
If for some not slaughtered,
Nor mine own, but by selection,
I could sigh my age, shed floods of tears,
Meet dangers in my shirt, bid conquering
Death defiance, if all this and more I durst attempt,
For one no otherwise, then mine by law;
Needs must he rave past rules of Manhood,
And forget all precepts that support his suffrance:
See you this? What think you of your self?
Have you not done well? account thou scandal,
That like the Whore of Greece,
Was teem'd for mans destruction;
Thy sin upon thy self, my door is shut;
That hospitality I show a stranger,
Shall be restrained from thee.
Most courteous sir,—expect more.
Keep your Orisons to charm relenting beggars.
Such in need, as may thy wants relieve;
Or at least sympathy thy mournful tale,
When fierce distress smiles,
Expect more comfort from the blustering North,
When he does blow the highest Acorn head
Down to the Meadow, and there dips his cup;
Then least relief from me, for thee;
For thee chaste Maid, all benisons,
And goodness, that I can, command and have.
Your liberality was ever such,
As merits more then thanks; yet thus far,
Truth emboldens me to say you are too cruel kind,
Not all the proofs,
What ere incensed my brother to his rage;
Can wean me to that vain opinion,
To think it her desert: I dare protest for her,
No persuasion can drive belief in me,
To call Antonio false; if you prove so cruel,
So unnatural as you speak, there is no pity in you:
Nor are you such as a father ought to be,
Thrust her out, then turn me off;
If you supplant one, you extirp us both,
And her extremes are mine.
Since you disdain my proffered curtsy,
Together shelter your necessities;
Take up your harbour with the hardy beast;
These gates are locked to her and her relievers
Hence-forth I will forget her,
Blot her name forth of the Bed roll
Where my children stand,
And vow I had none such:
Hence, hence, thou scandal.
Thus guilt less ones, suffer the guilties blame,
While they triumph in fraud, thus the strict Judge
Condemns th'innocent for the thieves offence;
Whilst partiality allows his wrong,
And greatness makes it good;
Will equity never take place again?
Has trust left swaying here? that I but knew my crime:
Or that Francisco but beheld my heart!
Let mine eyes rain a river of salt drops,
And my tears drown me, if any foul sin of mine,
Deserve Franciscoes hate:
I had rather heaven had made me any thing,
Then one so much unhappy,
When ere thou bid on the plenteous shore,
Or labouring flood,
Prosperity adhere to thy proceedings,
And fame conclude thy deeds,
For me despised, such be my fortune as my loyalty,
And I request no more,
My sweet, my sweet Francisco.
Heaven do thee right.
And if thou be not honest,
There's neither pride nor cozenage in this City:
If every conscience were well searched,
And you did not find
Some dainty fine conceited Rogue
Has been tempering,
Let me return to my Cradle,
And be hanged in my swaddling clouts.
THink you it so?
Yes, and verily believe it.
Tic strangely carried.
Mark the end, mark the end;
Why do you sigh, Signior?
Are you troubled with the Cramp?
O, blame him not, he has good cause to sigh,
Francisco set by him precious: How fare you, Signior?
Never worse, my Friend's undone.
I, a mischief and a vengeance of the cause, by this
sword, nay, fear not man, I am not angry, and I could not
judge, well, I say no more: but if hee did not walk on
Stilts, I do detest eating and drinking, and those are two no∣cessaries,
a man can hardly live well without them.
The very Paragon, mirror of the time.
If I could not have wept when I beheld her, and that
was more then I did at the death of my father, I have no be∣lief
in me.
Who but she, the wonder of our age.
No more words, mark the end, mark the end; I say,
still mark the end.
I must leave you.
Not as the wench left the Frenchman in the suds,
there's neither mettle nor society in thee; if thou abando∣n'st
my company, till we have visited Valentius.
I wonder how he speeds?
Did he not act the madman to the life, was it not well?
could ever a Dunsticall Doctor in this Town, have picked
falsehood out of his behaviour: he was so mutable, so full
of varying tricks (me thinks) I see him yet.
Defer your visitation till to morrow, or late some∣time
to night: I am yet unfit, this sudden trouble has made
me not my self.
Nay, you must go; I have sworn you shall, and (that presently.
I pray you pardon me,
I will not be denied, refuse me now and ever.
You'll have your humour still?
What, eschew acquaintanceship? forget, After my
most hearty commendations, my very trusty friend, It were
sin and shame Tomaso.
But some other time.
This time, sometime, other times, and all times, this
day, yesterstay, tother day, and every day; no hour amiss,
march on, march on.
I could launch my Dagger through my side, at one
easy throw: beggar my friend; subvert mine own estate,
and undo her, by whom I hope to climb, accursed, brainless
slave: could the damned Devil with all his fire-brands, beat
into my pate no sounder subtlety. I had, I had relief, Fool
vaunt of that?▪ boast what thou had? or might have? tic
past, it is gone, my villain self, confounded has my self,
and him that did sustain me:
What chokes Corn sooner than side-fed weeds,
Who ofter does man wrong than he afeeds:
Let me ponder; have I no other invention?
No trick to take away my life, after my means:
Study upon it, I'm struck upon a sand,
Swallowed, devoured, through wilful ignorance,
Never to rise again: it is a villains cast,
First to sink others, them himself at last.
You cannot blame me neither:
For love himself undertook more for love;
Had you been tangled in a Labyrinth more intricate
Than held the Minataure, or have been
By Enchantments bound to servitude,
My life's adventure had my love expressed,
And offered the release.
Our plighted amities will dwell in me
While life endures; the many winters, &amp; the tedious hours
We two have spent alone, alone Vallentius,
When nothing but what was not fit the Sun
Should look upon,—Alack my Husband.
It must not be denied, Isle maintaine't before the
Synod, here's my witness: was it not well done of brave
Caligula to make his horse a Senator? deny it, deny it, would
not a good horse show well among a team of Asses: ha,
what think you: give me another sword: O noble Hector,
look, Achilles flies, and bloody Pyrrhus shrinks.
Alas, alas.
What news, what news?
Gentlemen he takes me for a Carrier:
You are deceived sir, I am not the party.
Will Pluto keep his word, shall all extortioners, en∣grocers,
usurers, be finely damned, of what kind so ever? will
he spare none?
Wondrously spent.
Let me see, let me see, the son of Panace, a sprightly
Lad; Hercules, a lusty youth, a very lusty youth; Simpson,
a tall young man, a very tall young man.
Does he not do it well?
Isle make thee proov't, Isle make thee proov't.
I think you are mad:
What shall I prove?
Why greatest generals, that command whole Legi∣once,
and train, and keep in order every man, cannot keep
in a woman.
That's an easy question, because most of them get
Follies wings, and grow so light there's no ho with them:
they must fly out.
Hang them, they are nought all: Tell not me learned
Ovidius Naso, what's your name.
Good sir.
That bloody villain: Treason gentlemen, call up a
Guard, the traitor's discovered: bind him sure, sure: are
you took napping sirrah: Down with him, down with
him, down.
Help, help, help Gentlemen.
I doe not like this.
Now my sweet I have sent him off in post,
Let us retire the while.
Who in affection will not his wits prove,
Was never loyal, nor did ever love.
Past, past cure, I doubt. Give me leave, I find by
my Art it is no Vertigo, no whirling, but a mere settled
frenzy: Nay I pray you give me leave: for as both Hypocrite∣tes,
and Gallon, Avicen, Podalirius, Ruses, Cornelius, Celsus,
Corannus, Augustino, and Rombart, doe you conceive me?
besides a dozen or two of English-men, most learned and
worthy physicians (if I knew what they were) have demon∣strated
paraphrastically, both it and the cause, styling the
malady the digestion of the brain, or Irrevocabilis ignis, the
irrevocable fire: Nay, will you understand me?
Would we could.
I pray you give me leave.
Who hinders him?
Sir if you can speak our tongue, I would very fine
be beholding to you.
Art thou mad?
Not altogether mad, though I confess I have been
pricked with the thorns of Love: I have been over shoes
in my days.
Avoidance, for charity avoidance.
Yes marry shall you: I would desire you to help
me to a pill, or a potion that could make one honest, that I
doubt is a little gone astray.
Avaunt, avaunt.
No sir, she is none of my naunts: shoe's one that
must be my wife.
Turbulent fiend: avaunt, avaunt I charge
thee.
I would have it applied sir.
Illiterate dunce, abandon my house, avaunt I say
again.
Nay, I pray you be quiet, for though I have endue∣red
many hard words at your hands, I shall hardly brooke
blows.
Good gentlemen give me leave to laugh: ha, ha, ha,
the Doctors wife, and the Mad-man: the mad-man, and the
Doctors wife.
Why, what's the matter?
Why sir, the fits upon him, and he's upon her, and
younder's such sport, ha, ha, ha.
Fire and Thunder.
Run: ware horns.
Is this true sirrah?
Follow the Doctor, believe your eyes.
Beware the trap Valentius.
Pray heaven he be not tan with nibbing.
Why are you melancholy Signior?
Faith sir In me troubled with corns, and ever against
rain they make me so melancholy—
Is that it, for the thing you spake on, you shall not be
beholding to the scald peremptory Doctor: Come to my
Chamber anon, and Isle give you a powder shall fulfil your
request, as well as all the potions or Pills he can devise.
Nay, but will you be constant.
Say no more:
And you doe take my word, while I live: She and I
will be at your service: when shall I come for it?
Any time after noon. Will you walk Tomaso?
This is good news withal my heart: Fub we are
all made; thou shalt have a new Livery out of the bargain.
I thank you sir, I would I had it.
Thou shalt, thats as good: would I were whipped but
I could be monstrous merry now.
No I pray you bee not monstrous merry till you are
married.
Isle go give thee a pottle of Sack.
And ever he gave her a bob,
And ever he gave her a blow:
But where he knocked her once above,
He thumpt her thrice below.
What will it not doe? prethee-let's be lusty.
As a Crow in a Gutter. Run there she goes.
Father, for so I must stile you,
Your care and pains in my recovery,
Deserves a recompense more than I am able to perform:
Now I consider with my self, had we compassionate souls,
Or were men but good, they would banish beggary
The World quite over, and every one have sufficient.
As hitherto you have concealed my course,
Continue still your wonted secrecy,
Call me your son, and such appointments as a father
Should command me to endure I shall perform:
Blessed, blessed be you: effectual be my prayers.
The longer time you so journe here with me
The more welcome: nothing more I crave;
But if I dye while you recide in the grove,
Out of your charity you'll take the pains
To lay me in the grave I have prepared, and with your hand,
Your foot, or any thing, cast dust upon my body,
And spend a little Ceremony.
More than this I will, and more than I will speak.
Francisco, whersoe're thou bid, abide in quiet,
And have my pardon ever. If thou be fled
For any cause of mine, and I thy ruin prove,
Defend it heaveu, were it not for trial of Phemone's love,
And promised constancy, how soon would I renounce
My habitatiation, uncloath thy fear, &amp; set all even again?
Nothing 'mazes, nor drives me into that serious
Contemplation, as whence his wrath should proceed.
Perchance Franciscus thinks me unfit to call him brother,
And his sud deign rage proceeded from advice.
If it be so for ever will I keep this shady bower,
And never hold companionship with man,
More than is present, forget Arbaces ever
Called me his, or that I was his son.
Circle me safety, what are these come here
Where never neighbourd welt?
Calamity could not inflict so much as I could bear
With patienee, did Franciscus imagine but the truth:
No lenity, but all extremes that may
Attend me with their sharpest violence,
If ever I broke my vow: this sorrow,
Nor the haviour I sustain are for mine own endurings,
Witness you that know all secrets, it is for him
I wish thrice better than my self.
Yes, and that Cornelia; as sure as the black Ousell
Has a yellow mouth, that whistles me awake.
Tic she, or I am fond.
O my Franciscus! O my dearest Lord!
There needs no more for confirmation:
What make they here? Doe not undo me wonder.
Ne'er had two ragged coats more orient pearls,
Than you two shells doe hide: it is she, or I am fond,
Leap not forth with joy, such needy robes
Should wrap the shoulders of necessity,
When winter falls the Leaf: happy Antonio,
I am disguised, and so, if that my speech reveal not,
Without suspect I may obtain my wish,
And have all doubts resolved: Isle greet 'em.
Bonny wight, what ever you be,
Luck be in your company:
Are you Sylvanus, say to me?
None such, good Shepherd.
Deft and trim ones mickle glee,
Be you what you please to be,
Some disaster tend by ye,
Never, never more.
A me unfortunate.
Welladay, now by my Creed,
And my merry Oaten Reed,
Seek another rousing sigh
Would well split me gay and blithe:
Let a loutish Clown partake,
Why this sobbing dole you make?
O inconstant world.
A me unfortunate.
Wonderment of woe relate
If simpleness you might not scorn,
How you hoped to be forlorn.
The story would be too tedious for the time,
And would undo the speaker: Friend no more,
You shall doe well to leave us.
Be not all too keen, bright star,
If my pertness went too far,
Mercy is the doom I sue,
Good things never meant more true,
Than the silly shepherd did,
Late wen he your sorrow bid:
Discourse the means merry Pan,
And the sagest gods doe scan;
Wherefore was it? well a near,
You foul mucky cloud I fear
Will be sprint us, Poebus twain,
If so list you but to deign
A poor shepherds entertain,
Welcome should you be, I wise,
Nor thing comely should you miss,
Though not courtly: answer make,
Will you my small feasting take?
The rain begins to fall;
Sister accept the Shepherds curtsy,
His simpleness cannot but mean well sure.
Even what you please:
Whither I go, or wheresoever I rest,
Sorrow with me, and I with sorrow feast.
Welcome, welcome, welcome still,
Never with a freer will
Was welcome spoken, by the sky;
Welcome, welcome heartily.
Alack, alack, the rotten south
Gins to op his dewy mouth,
Time to hide you: Father meek
Give kind welcome, I beseek,
To these white ones, bonny girls,
Welcommer than heaps of Pearls.
You see our Cave, and make as bold as welcome.
Receive my adorations Queen of chance,
Thou never give that jewel to that man, was half so well
esteemed; my hopes have their desires, Phemone, blessed suc∣cesse;
nothing that's amiss, but I shall understand: disguise
I thank thee, joy ties up my tongue, and will not let me
speak; they part not soon.
What Angle of the Earth must be my grave?
The Sea and Sun have bounds, and know their course,
The sons of men have none:
Limitless he wanders the foreign deserts,
And begets more wonders every hour:
The Chime that tells the last minute of the night,
Chides but in vain when every thing's a sleep;
So I in the relation of my woe, when no man hearkens,
Spend but idle breath, and never find relief.
But for increase sake, I could wish devoutly,
I never had known woman:
What comfort ever others reaped from them,
They have been plagues to me: to note the difference,
They are such things, nothing's more worse, nor better;
To say truth, they are Angels, and Devils;
I will not curse 'em, lest I make them worse
That needs no badness, nor rip up their defects,
Lest I spend all my after time of life in nothing else but that.
Iulio, the profit of my Orisona be thine,
Where ever I spend 'em, upright constant man:
Yet I am eased, in that I doe not bear my slavish yoke,
Cocker mine infamy, as many doe within our Venice gates:
Thanks to thee Iulio; Chastity, honour of women,
Whither art thou fled? that they are all so false
I must forget 'em, they will make me mad
To think of their abuse: would I could learn
What inquisition is made after me;
Some speech of my concealment will report blab out,
That I may hear the danger does pursue me,
Though I adventure life, I will know more,
Or dye in the presumption: I'll nearer to the City.
That's a good jest in faith; Drawer, gives more
Wine.
What's a good jest Signior?
That none should be honest but the valiant.
How's that? how's that?
Why my beetle-brow'd Host swears it is impose∣sible
for any to be honest, that is not valiant.
What said he? What said he?
That none could be honest, that were not valiant.
O very good, very good: more Wine here, hoe's
packing, set out his hand.
And his foot too, ere I have done: whore's this
fellow? another Pottle sirrah.
Sir I thank you for my powder, it gave her half
a dozen of tickling stools, she has been loose ever since.
Give me your hand, here's even now to all the envy∣sible
horns in the City.
Forget not the Country, let it go round I pray you.
A health.
You'll have reason to pledge this shortly.
Will you come? to morrow is the day Isle assure
you, for better or worse.
To morrow from better to worse?
Yes faith he has said it, and I swear it, from better
to worse indeed.
Married to morrow Signior?
You have said we shall be doing.
Undoing he means.
So near marrying Clariflora, and not acquaint
your friend? in faith I thought Mistress you would have let me
understood what had past.
It is my part to conceal.
She were no good Bawd else.
Come, sit round, sit round, to morrow the day?
Pardon me, Isle not sit next this lousy fellow: gen∣tlemen,
what doe you with this poor rogue in your comp∣niece?
Does he come to make mirth, can hee play the fool
wittingly?
I know him not.
Would he were set down stairs, I never could
endure him from the first: Franciscus made me know him.
Sir, if you mean to depart in peace, begone sud∣dainly.
Would the Ass could rid this intruding Copes∣mate.
Let me beseech you.
You shall go, your prayers cannot save you; Fub,
show him the way down.
Shall I be your Usher? will you follow your lea∣der
sir?
Thus poverty's despised at home, abroad, and in
all companies.
A whoreson Tatred-demallion, come amongst Gen∣tlemen
of sort. What, is it no more but up and ride? How
now Fub, is he vanished?
The Drawers have drawn him out Sir.
Clink boys.
Drink boys.
And let the Cannikin clink boys.
Stultus.
Yes Lodwick.
Tomaso, shall's make a night on it mad lads?
And a mad night too Bullies: where shall's strike
fail?
The Leaguer, where but a'th' new Leaguer: there's
generous entertainment for Gallants of sort at all times:
and for entrance trust me my mates.
But money grows low, and expenses will fly
high.
Fly hye, let it, I have a jacke in a box shall pay for
all one day.
I am as full as a Sponge, I cannot sink up a drop
more.
No matter, we can squeeze some more out thus: we
can wake the Constable, trouble the neighbours, disquiet
the Master and whole family, spill his Wine, puff his To∣basso,
foul his rooms, practise who shall break most
holes, and cleanliest, in the bottom of quart-pots, with a
piece of a Tobacco-pipe: cry good morrow mine Host, we
have made a mad night on it I vow, and so trance; wee are
no Gallants and we cannot doe this.
But this course is either conscionable, or come∣dable.
Faith it is the course, most of the corke-headed Can∣dle-snuffes
walk in these latter days, late at nights.
Well, let them rest: So, ho, the Leaguer.
Chi-va-lah.
Amiss.
The word.
Pecima largienda.
Let 'em pass: down with the Percullis:
Lights and attendance, welcome Gentlemen.
I ever said, it might come in a night, that came not
in an age, Et ass noctem faelicem; see, that jovial night is
come: They have been playing high, and potting deep:
Lights, Wine, and more stools for these Gentlemen; well∣come.
Tomaso when's the day?
Assure's this the night before to morrow, I have
brought in my Estate a matter of 400 pound per annum,
in Deeds, Leases, Fee-simple, and Coppy-hold already: and
that's no simple Estate you'll say: I mean to bid you welcome
to a Leaguer of mine own shortly Gentlemen; some wine
you Scondrils.
I'm pleased to here't, whose faults this, yours To∣maso?
What's this Leaguer raised yet, Par la ho boy, I
thought we should have had a second siege of Troy on it, is
their Reckoning paid? not a penny, they called for one, but
in such a drunken key; I bad em sleep upon it, and I would tell
em more on it when they were sober.
Best of all, and whats to pay then?
Nine and six pence, Sir, allowance for lights, lin∣nen,
coals to light faggots: and six pence for one journymans
sleep only deducted, and yet they grumbled too.
But nine and six pence, and grumble; my friend
the reckoning's not paid you say.
Not a penny.
The reckoning but nine and six pence, how poorly
this shows, in a Leaguer too, and friends that pretended me
a curtsy too? How many joints of meat to supper?
Only a couple of clean Pipes, some three times
filled I think.
No meat, come to hansell a Leaguer, what no meat?
Are they abed at Anthonies Ordinary yet?
Two hours ago.
Step down, and see, nine and six pence, they must
and shall hear more of this: we may go beg, or buy up all
the, refuse, broken bread and meat, scraps, offal, and garbage
that Cooks shops, Shambles, Ordinaries, Entries, and Rich∣men's
doors afford; nine and six pence, if they do not hear
more of this—
Tic past that time of night; Charitie's bed, sir, but
if not.—
Bread and meat for poor prisoners, Bread &amp; meat.
What doth that fellow cry?
Bread and meat for the poor prisoners, bread &amp; meat.
For poor prisoners? as fit for my purpose, as a Con∣ny
for a Pursnet; here, take money, buy his provision by the
lump: if I had studied for a fortune to fall upon me, I could
not have had a fairer.
Wilt thou victual thy Leaguer with scraps, sweet
Chuck?
No, my sweet Monkey, I have further aims then so,
this broken meat and baggage offal, will I strew in my Kit∣chin,
Dressers, Hall, Entries, and every door and draw∣window,
and perspicuous places about the house: foul all the
vessel, three or four times over, all to besmear the rusty
spits and dripping-pans; break all my broken glasses, beat
the bottom out of my Cans: beat all my foul Tobacco-pipes,
into fractions
And to what end all this?
Perlahay, My friends shall hear more of that in the
reckoning: My sweet Monkey, when the Drunkards shall
wake, and see all these ruins, or rather remains of a plenti∣full
Leaguer: Oh, hast thou no apprehension? Why, I tell
thee, they cannot choose out of their generous bounties, but
see all discharged?
Within. A cup of six, Drawer.
Oh, the Leaguer begins to rise! Come Monkey a few
directions for you in private, give you attendance on the
Leaguer; let em call for what they will, and want nothing
they call for: only I will tell em no more of nine and six
pence in the reckoning.
But for the nine and six pence.
Monkey, you shall hear more of that anon, when
they are sober? why Drawer, Dog, Dunghil-raker; is the
Leaguer dry? By and by, a cup of six into the low Leaguer,
there.
So, ho, the Leaguer.
What do ye lack? by and by, do ye call Gentlemen?
No, and I called a Gentleman, he would answer me,
I call a Drawer goodman Rascal, art thou one?
For fault of a better, sir.
Could not ha said so then? whore's the Master of
the Leaguet?
Parlahey Monkey, been venue Gallants, com a stato
Sigiores mio com I stato.
Marry the better for your entertainment; thanks, sir.
Thank him, I scorn to thank him, Isle pay him, and
be out of his debt: come, to pay? A reckoning Drawer.
You Rascal, who takes away here? here's a house
bestrewed with garbage and offal, as if the great Inquest had
been feasted, &amp;c.
As good men, to no mans dispraise be it spoken,
whore's a Bill?
Prithee knock us not down, before our time; was this
certain feast of our making? what a spoil of Poultery has
here been? Tom•so, I must be beholding to thee for this or∣denariate.
Some small trifle Stultissimo, the Reckoning is
thought to be.
The Reckoning's very high, nine pound six shil∣lings.
Nine pound six shillings, Parlahey, and yet I use you
like Christians too boys.
Nine pound six shillings, how could wee four de∣voure
so much being half drunk when we came in?
Why there's the mystery? you fall asleep with meat
in your mouths, my Mistress and I stood it out.
Wast not an excellent Swan-pie? Servant.
As ere swam in Mil-dam.
Nine pound six shillings, one lay out for all,
Come, your purses Gentlemen.
And you love me, let me have the credit at this time
there's: ten pounds, give me the rest again (ah, wee had the
bravest Marchpane, and Sugar-candy Custard) or do not, let
it run on towards fouling of linen, and paying for sawee:
the rest again, or do—
I do not think but you are saw pretty well alrea∣die,
for the Devil a bit of meat saw I, and yet all these scraps
could not come of nothing.
The Reckoning's paid to a hair, come let's with∣draw
(but while the Room be a little finificald.
Parlahey, welcome Gallants to the Leaguer still:
please you withdraw.
We accept it thankfully.
Whose fault's this yours Tomaso?
There wants lap.
Throw down the pottle pot, let's have a gallon
more.
Wilt please you Gentlemen, to hear any Music▪
and a good Song?
Very fain, a good one.
What's your fellows, whose noise are you?
Ruberts noise, and please you?
Call your fellows, and strip your tools.
Here's to you Signior.
A brace of them if you love me.
Marry and shall.
Score a gallon of Claret in the Pomegranate.
What Tim?
Master Fub I rejoice to see you well.
You are not merry Gentlewomen, Mistress Durable
what, no mirth?
And how first, how have you done this seven years,
welcome again.
As you see, in perfect memory, when shall wee ride
the hogsheads?
Ha, do you remember that night, Ancient Thumps
health overthrew me, my Master goes out of Town next
week; in faith and you'll come, there's half a dozen good
boys, weal be swingeing merry, will give him a crash, old
Will, Will be here?
What Will?
Little Will of the Mitre. Oh, Master Fub, Sir, out
Maid, that gave us the Nets Tongue is gone.
See, see.
Some Sugar there?
Ha, ha, hum.
In ample stories written tic,
Who list but for to mind it;
How loved Narcissus?
Go look and you shall find it.
This Echo was a Nymph most chaste,
A lack, the more the pity▪
She should be so, and should not reap▪
What follows in my Ditty?
Narcissus was but young, I wise,
But yet of perfect feature,
And had enough to satisfy
A reasonable creature.
His brawny limbs became his parts,
No one of sense could blame them:
And so did something else I trow,
Echo knew how to name them.
A virtuous piece of matter, Gentlemen, we'll no
more on it.
Nay, hold up, Signior.
Bid her hold up, fear not me.
Come Gentlewomen, shall we have a dance? Tomaso
what say you?
You prevented me.
I thought it should have been my motion?
Wherefore ring those bells?
Bells, you are deceived, it is the clincking of pots.
I would have sworn, it had been Coronation day.
Masters, can you play us Gascoynes Whibling?
Yes, sir.
Let's have it.
Here lacks a couple, we cannot dance it.
Lack a couple, what serve Tim and I for?
Tic true, well remembered.
Truly, Master Fub, I cannot dance.
Truly, you shall learn then.
I shall be willing to endeavour.
Strike.
Isle throw the pot at his head that strikes here,
Whose that will strike?
Rare in faith, give's more wine.
What, Timothy?
By and by.
Look to the Lion.
Isle have my Galliard too
You spoil all.
How does your head, sweet heart?
Yes faith, and thank you too, what Rogue's he that
turns the Room round? shall we not quench our thirsts be∣fore
we part?
What else my sweet Signior, this is your servant?
Good enough for a property, he will serve my turn,
as well as a better, I shall but use his name: do you think I
would marry the Coxcomb, but only for colour and fear
of the Law? I'd see him baked first.
Tic wisely done of you? and so my Gossip Slight
could say I warrant you.
Boy, another quart, and bring a Reckoning. Here sir.
Heaven keep your Worship.
In honester company.
Fub, call for a Looking-glasse.
Did you go the right way?
It's a cup of neat wine, Isle assure—
Mistress to your self, and to our next meeting?
What's to pay?
Nine and six pence, and you're welcome.
How comes that to pass?
Here's seven groats Glasses.
How?
No less, Isle assure your Worship.
Come your money, Signior—
Fub, discharge it Fub.
Some lights, show the Gentlemen.
Fub, I am en as full as a Toad.
Yes, sir, but do not spit your venom.
Prithee give me another sip. I am as dry as a
Cook.
So I think.
A pox a this Megrum.
What's here, I prithee mark Tomaso: Lodwick, I
have my desire: fetch me off speedily, lest I cure the Do∣ctour?
yours Vallentius, lest I cure the Doctor.
What should he mean by this?
Why, belike he has infused his fit into him, and the
Physician's turned Patient?
That's impossible?
But for Ʋallentius.
We must redeem him.
What else.
Heyda, is the wind in that door?
A link good Tim, a link.
Here's one ready, sir.
Signior, good night.
Not a drop more in faith.
We'll take our leaves.
When shall we see you?
Sometime to morrow, if my father send not.
Good night Master Lodwick, good night good, sir.
Good night Tim, remember Friday.
I warrant you, forget not to bring Hugh, Welcome
Gentlemen.
I Speak't in thunder once again, no more: thou Babylo∣neon
Strumpet, in thunder I command thee thou lump of
sin, no more.
Have patience, sir.
I roar it in thy ears, once more aloud, no more:
cannot I deal, but you must be applying, you must be tam∣pering,
you must minister: have you not Pills for Potions? do
you not traffic? do not you exchange Merchant?
Good Vanderman.
Sorceress, I defy thee, and thy deeds of darkness.
Hear me, sir.
I have heard and seen too much, has hee not paid
you soundly for your pains: no, has he popped you.
You are deceived.
You say very true, I am deceived indeed, and Fub'd,
and Gulled, and Rid, and you are Rid too.
What mean you?
Here blow it abroad, there's horns enough to do it.
Why are you thus impatient?
Dainty fine y faith, very dainty. Whore thou hast
made me monstrous, and I may challenge Giants: Yes, he
shall be your mad-man; Doe you not like his fits, doe you
not, doe you not?
God morrow to you both.
Why should this be?
How doe you sir? how does your patient?
Are you not satisfied? am I a stale? must you have
new-found Crochets?
Doe you hear me sir: is he recovered▪
Homo Armatus, a man armed.
Have you heard the like?
Me thinks it is excellent.
And when, when shall he plant again?
I wish you would understand me, sir.
Here's a fruitful soil.
Ha, ha.
Sir, I will be heard, and understood:
Save you Lady:
More furies, might, and secrecy, whoredom and
The every bring all to confusion.
Would we had more of this: we will see what will
come of all.
I perceive Vallentius was in the right, he's mad in∣deed:
Good Morrow Gentlemen: I have good news for
you; your friend is well.
Your tidings makes us happy, and gives us a moiety
of that content which nothing can doe more.
I shall rejoice to see him what hee was, and Master of
that temper he commanded, when he did dare the vaunting Ba∣jeset
for taxing his belief.
Tomaso, Lodwick.
Valentius.
I am glad to see you once again your self.
You're welcome to your wits.
When time and place shall serve, my wit shall thank you
I am ever bound to you sweet Lady.
Hark you Lodwick, are not we partly Bawds?
Faith in one kind, we have a snatch that way.
So I say partly.
I must confess, partly.
Not remember you, have not that bad opinion, doe not
think I can be one so false by this kiss.
Sibylla.
Ay me, my husband.
Once again and part.
Sibylla.
Farewell, Valentius.
A thousand take with thee.
What, hungry still Vallentius, that you cast such a greedy
eye that way?
How first man? what in a trance?
And kinder far then fair.
What, shall we have a Pamphlet; that he begins to stu∣die?
doe you hear Ʋalentiuss: here's a friend of yours would
speak with you, when you are at leisure.
I crave your pardon Gentlemen, as I live she is—
What's this to the purpose?
You know my price: for the fineness of the silk, the
working of the stuff, and the pleasantness of the colour, the
whole street shall not afford you a better, Isle assure you tic died
in grain.
The better for him that shall wear it, nothing but what's
in grain can please him: let me see, I know not how my money
will reach: the Silkman hath emptied my pocket this morning,
but you will bate nothing of your price?
I protest sir, I cannot, and save by it, and I know you
would not wish me to be a loser.
By no means, I would have every man to live &amp; thrive
by what he professes, it is mine own case: let me see, I cannot
make up the sum, I pray you let one of your men step over to the
next lane: I lie there at the Barbers, Isle dispatch him presently.
My servants are all busy for the present, you see my shop
is full of Customers, and every one striveth who shall be first
served.
And I am in haste too, for I have sent for my Tailor to
meet me at my lodging, and I am loath to disappoint him, because
I would have his opinion in the stuff.
I pray you, sir, be expeditious, and my man shall be with
you by that time you have told out the money.
I am much obliged to you as a stranger, I care not if I accept—
Dispatch me that Customer quickly, and follow this Gen∣tleman
to his lodging: you hear where he lies.
Yes, at the next turning?
Isle but fold up this bolt of Satin, and be with
him instantly.
Turn by the next lane, and thou shalt be sure not to
miss it, though thou find not me, I have took sufficient order
and you shall be sure to be satisfied.
We have many cheapners, but few buyers, many such
customers as this would make quick riddance.
What comes the sum to, sir.
Three yards of Satin and a half at seventeen, eight
yards of Plush at four and twenty; nay, there are divers other
parcels, the sum is soon cast up: thou shalt have a note of all.
And Isle but fold up these few bolts lie loose,
and clear the counter and be gone.
Be quick there.
But thou must be secret.
As your self, Sir.
A pretty handsome youth, and will be loath to discover
himself, being extremely bashful, and will make it strange.
Leave him to me, Isle persuade him that I knew him,
ere I saw him.
Hoe's my Kinsman, next Cousin German's by the Mo∣theirs
side; now playing the Wag, as many youths will doe, you
know it Barber.
Very well, it hath been many a good mans case.
He hath got a clap.
These claps are got by clapping.
But for one thing, never should it grieve me, I fear it
might go ne'er to spoil his marriage, which I would not for
more than Isle speak.
You show your self a Kinsman.
Now his exuse will be (as I told thee he's extremely bash∣full)
to enquire for a Gentleman that owes his Master money, to
comply with the old Proverb, Though his excuse be draff, yet
drinks his errand.
And lotion must be used.
As it shall seem best: but think thou he will endure it.
Twill put him to some pain.
Which Isle not hear, my heart's so tender ore him:
when he comes (as long hee will not stay) take him in charge,
Thy pains shall be well paid, for doubt not but Isle come to the
conclusion.
Very good, sir?
My hope is it will succeed according to my wishes.
Make no doubt of that, sir.
If I had, I had not made choice of thee above any other.
You are my friend indeed: and so I hope to keep you.
I will withdraw for the present, and instantly return.
Now good speed with you, good customers are thick
sowed, and come up but thin. It is good to make much of them,
when we have them. This should be the patient, that he talked
off.
I come to seek a Gentleman.
You do: that owes your Masters money.
Very true, sir, you know my errand then.
Before you came.
The Gentleman belike hath told it you.
He hath indeed.
Is he within?
But before he went, left order with me, you should be dispatcht.
Then I shall find him as good as his word: he hath
acquainted you with my occasions.
Isle assure you that, and intends well towards you, I pray
come near into the withdrawing Room.
Isle wait on you, pray know you what it comes too.
Yes youth, I know, wherefore you come: pray rest you
in that chair, and Isle be for you presently; be not ashamed, you
are not the first, nor shall be the last, that meet with these disa∣sters:
and now come, pray show me your commodity.
The commodity belongs, sir, to my Master, it was
not mine.
Are his in danger too? let him not fear, but if hee have
not let it run too far, there may be help found: nay, come, will
you show?
Mean you the note: there are the parcels sent.
These parcels may in time grow great, come, will you
be ruled, the Gentleman your Kinsman, told me before, how
bashful you would be; and it becomes you well: but for your
parcels, show them in time: for if delay be long, that little
which perhaps you shall have left, in time will come to nothing:
your Kinsman's loath that you should spoil your Marriage?
Spoil my Marriage, spoil not my Masters debt,
Neither draw these fearful tricks on me: I need them not, pay
me the money that your friend hath left, Dispatch me so, for
Kinsman I have none; And honest Barber find some else to sport
with, make me none of your Gulls?
But I pray say.
I say, pay me sir, what's my due, &amp; what by your con∣fession,
your friend left, or bring me to the party, or commodity
he late had of my Master, or Coin for it: you have confessed him
to be your friend, therefore for him must answer.
By your favour, no more friend of mine, then you found
him, to claim Kindred: my acquaintance with him, yet is scarce
a full hour.
You are Confederates, and so I fear that I shall
find you: You know my errand, &amp; promised me dispatch:
Why am I not dispatched then?
My meaning was to give you a Sering, or an incision
Knife, Of which he told me you did stand in need: Indeed I deal
in such cōmodities, And am acquainted what such parcels mean:
For other wares or money due for them, I know not what be∣longs
to it.
Satisfy my Master so, quit me, and clear thy self; or
twill fall foul upon thee.
Willingly: my cloak boy, Isle along, yet am afraid
That hee who had professed himself thy Kinsman, and my dear
friend, will prove thy Masters Cousin.
Give you joy Master Stultissimo; give you joy.
You talk like Gentlemen, and I like your talk the bet∣la,
because you talk to a Gentlemen; you call me Stultissimo,
and I say, Stultorum plane sunt omnia: and now I talk to you like
a Gentleman and a Scholar.
All health and joy betide you.
Gramercy Gentlemen, I am not now the man, I was in
the morning; I did rise single, I return double: in the Meridian
but Worshipful, in the afternoon Honourable before Sun-set, and
who knows but Majestic before mid-night: nay I persuade
my self I am so: am I not sweet Monkey?
Thou art my dear Baboon.
Very pretty names in faith: I prithee let's interchange
them still betwixt us: or Marmoset, or Apes face.
Yes, yes, by any means.
All thy goods and chattels, thy movables, and the stuff
that belongs thereto, thy utensils and implements; now are all
mine.
They are, to have and to hold.
Yes, as long as ye can keep them.
I have purchased thee in thy proper person by my word,
but all thy other omnium gathrum, beforenamed, by my deeds, I
think thou hast them to show.
The mind gives sometimes words unto the tongue, and
makes it speak perforce, bear with him Lodwick.
Let the Doctors wife bear with him, for mine own part,
without he renounce this mood, and become sociable, as hee had
wont, I defy his fellowship.
Will you dine with me Vallentius?
Yes, shall we be merry?
O is the tide turned, is the wind come about, by this
good day, and I were not cursing my self, for being accessory to
this melancholy, I have no faith in me; if women can transmute
men thus suddenly, hang me, if I keep not out of their clutches.
Gallants, shall wee walk? I have a story for ye: prithee
Lodwick frown not, be a friend indeed, and see not my defects, I
have a tale shall make you laugh anon, and will excuse my blame;
prethe be thy self, be jocund man.
Nay, I am soon persuaded.
Where shall we be?
At the old house.
Come then, I'll make you laugh I swear.
Thus by degrees, with hazard of my life, have I attained
unto my wishes rest; and boldly gaze thee Venice in the face: the
time has been, Oh, but that time is past, when I was more
familiar with thy pomp, but all that bliss is gone: And murder
now, has with a crimson stain sealed me accursed, and like a con∣damned
guilty Fugitive; I wander in despair; fearing the rue••le
of the harmless bird, and the flies clamour, the Ant, the Wasp, and
every lesser thing, Dreadlesse of danger, strays abroad for food;
Not caring who behold them, But I, alas, of all; am most unhappy:
Would I were dead, and past the fear of that, Makes me thus
Cowish. Who art thou come here, more needy then my self?
Where might I run to meet destruction, And set a period
on my wretchedness? Stern misery I know, and feel thee now:
Yet is the earth content to bear my weight, And suffer what
proud man disdains to know, Unless to spit upon, or add to that,
Which wants no extreme.
I cannot hold: his voice, his humour, I dare swear as
much, it is he; It is he by heaven, my Iulio.
Franciscus, preserver of my life; O let me kiss the
ground whereon thou treads, then rise to thank thee.
That I could spend my self to tears for joy, bear wit∣ness
you that know it: Iulio, for ever dwell within these arms
of mine, thou truest among men, I have not power to question
thee, my danger, my joy is so excessive; run all to spoil, &amp;
terror meet with terror; I fear none my Julio.
Strike when thou wilt proud death, I dare thee now;
For having what I wished, I wish no more, nor would entreat
time to defer a minute to have him rest an age, since all things
must have end, end it at once, my prayer is confirmed, I have
seen you ever I die.
And if you love me wish me not that wrong by pray∣ing
for your end: doe not quite undo me, if you but knew my
heart, my Julio, you would not crav't again: I could have com∣fort
now, and clean forget the dangers I have past, and those
pursue me still: nothing to come can half so much dismay, as
thou dost comfort; be it sudden death or torture worse than it:
but for your sake, would in my womb I had bin strangled, and
never drawn this air.
Where art thou Conscience? whither hast thou took
Since thou did leave mans breast? that wee should all have
mothers; Wisdom all, yet all contemn her precepts:
when you first fled, and by commandment from the Senate
house, your ships and lands were seized on for the State, those
that which staid them did appear so near, as if their blood
had tied them to your service, grew so forgetful in a mo∣mints
space, that neither argument, nor extreme signs
could win them to belief there had been such, as what
you were to them: I (as no less I could) bound to it by duty,
spoke your merits still, and did maintain your right, on the
Allies of your inconstant wife: but I am poor for it, truth
was still despised, and less I could not be.
Take all I have▪ had I my former wealth,
My bounty could not recompense thy worth,
And power it all before thee (my dear Iulio:)
Be not impatient with thy sufferance, he's above will pay thee all
My debts, though I should perish now.
Contemned for me? alack, alack, if there be such
A thing in Charity, be charitable: doe not curse the cause
Of this thy present want, I doe beseech thee doe not thou Iulio?
I prithee answer me, and either doe what I have wished,
Or cure the wound thou hast made.
Good sir no more: doe not call all the tears out of mine
eyes; think who I am: would you did but know.
I will not urge thee further:
Shall we here combine, and shape our course alike,
And never, never part; yet pardon me,
I will not wish thee so much injury
To be unknown of woman.
You wish me not so well, how ever you wish, if you wish
otherwise: your misery be mine, and my enduring yours; one
grave receive our bones; and hee that says this Sepulchre is
mine, call it Francisco's Tomb.
I have a habit for thee yet unknown, or worn,
But by my self: it is not a Furlong from the Antique Beech,
Whose hollow sides conceals it: bide but here,
Till I can reach it from the hidden place,
And take it for thine own: though homely,
Yet the coursenesse will keep warm,
And ward the sharpest blast.
You bind me to my prayers.
Isle be with thee straight.
Ignorant honesty, shallow Italian, yes, live a wretch:
Can thou be so fond to think me of that mettle? hast thou
eyes, and may, yet will not see how thou art o're-recht: yes,
doe continue innocent, doe, and die a fool, my friend, my friend,
my very loyal friend, all friendship I forswear, save outward
signs, which with my garment J cast nightly off. The father
of the slain Antonio promises liberally by Proclamation to any
that can bring Francisco forth. I will betray him, I will be the
man shall purchase the reward: What way I curses, or care for
the report the multitude shall clamour therein. Isle imitate the
Lawyer, making bad words my gain. Franciscus thou wast born
for my advancement: he's sunk himself, and fruitless is the
hope depends on that which was, and not which is; give me the
present, not precedent man. Let me not hanker for emergency,
but take the instant sway, the published recompense is mine, it is
said, it is mine.
That any should be false—But were there no dross,
gold could not be esteemed, nor nothing precious rare. Cornelia
let me forget that name and nothing else.
It is a month and more since she left Venice.
Would I had left the world when I first saw her.
And the same minute did Phemone forsake her friends
and kindred: but where or whither they have betook themselves
the most knowing but conjecture.
How easy could wee make our miseries, if wee might
live and dye when't pleased our selves?
These strange additions to my news I add, Antonio's
Carcass never could be found since yours and his contention.
I left him dead: thou art still just; some beast has made
that fouler beast his prey, and made up my revenge: but come
with me, let us withdraw unto you thicket by, and speak at
large that woeful history comixed of my proceedings, and pur∣suith;
wilst time's our own.
I would provide me of some necessaries, small in ex∣pence,
which make a mighty miss, and health cries out to have:
so if you please but let me fit my present want, at my return en∣join
me to your will, though it continue to the latest date, and
I am serviceable.
Speak no more such words, but make your own con∣tent:
yet good Iulio be not absent long, make me not long to see
thee.
Such shall be my speed, you will not wish me sooner to
return.
Not wish thee? yes, though thou should make return
ever thou depart.
Mark the end.
Be brief, and goodness take with thee. This Iulio, if
desert might purchase Fame, deserves sufficient: but thou art par∣teal
Fortune in cramming Buzzards, whilst the Eagle sterves:
How many in this fertile Italy, whom Nature moulded when
she loathed her task, and blew her seed among the ignorant,
hast thou adorned with plenty? whilst seemly virtue, wrecked
with poverty, jets under base control: There's no felicity, nor
true content here upon earth: The Spider builds his Web in
Barnes and Palaces: and the Prince himself tastes gall as honey:
Happiness there's none, for least or greatest: Here my grief so
parches me, that it does pain me to relate my woes, and make
my feelings known. Beneath this Hill a clear and pleasant
fountain curls along, whose shallowness makes the small
pebbles 'peare above like Rocks, and murmur as she runs
down to the silver Current, thither will I high, and borrow so
much of her watery store, as will assuage my thirst:
All things are kind,
And feed our wants when they themselves are pined.
Now my Catter-whauling Pusse, how did thou like my
last Cheat? did I not fool them finely?
Thou art the very mere Mephostophelus, and I per∣swade
my self thou hast new vamped thy wits.
Tush these are nothing: I have cheated one of the bra∣vest
Stats-men of the world; the very quintessence of Spain:
Nay, I have fooled him who boasted in his Country, he had gulled
all our Nation A Guelding is not rid in the horse-faire, but hee
is mine to ride, maugre his Masters teeth. I have out-fac'd a
fellow of his horse in the open Market, sold him before his face;
&amp; but making a question whether he trots or ambles, ride away
both with the horse and money, my Pusse. Sweet Munkey look
to the house at home, I must abroad again, to fetch in a new
purchase.
Moist thou thrive according to thy will, and to my
wishes.
And what's your Action?
Three hundred pound: bee you ready to snap him,
and not to escape you without good bail: he's as slippery as an
Eel.
Therefore we will take him by the shoulder, and not
by the tail; and so we shall be sure to hold him. But can you
show us the man?
This is his walk, and without waiting long you may
spy him.
Say but that's he, and it is enough.
Stand as close as you can: If he have but the least suspi∣tion
of an arrest, he's gone in a twinkling.
But will not you stay and assist us?
By no meunes; Isle but see him in hucksters handling,
and be gone. Are you not paid your Fees afore-hand, and—
That's he now: Now let him scope upon your own peril.
Farewell.
If he doe, say no more: Yeo man stand to me.
Now let me see: whom shall I next encounter?
Marry the Counter sir: for we arrest you.
Ha, Counterfeits so nigh?
Yet currant enough to carry you to prison.
And yet your Counter-tenour sounds but like scurvy
Music: am I caught then? I pray you at whose fuite?
At three men's suite.
Then three merry men, and three merry men be we, are
we not honest Sergeants? well, there's a piece to begin with∣all:
lets talk further of the business.
You speak well sir, if you hold on as you begin:
and if you can find good bail, ten to one but we shall prove
as you late called us (Honest Sergeants.)
Me thinks you doe not speak like Varlets:
May it please you, sir, to employ mine industry
For any further service?
Something more,
Which in my former Letter I forgot,
I would entreat you bear in memory:
And that's but this—
And in good time: Know you that reverend man?
Know him sir, yes, for a worthy Doctor.
He's mine own Uncle: will you take his word.
And make it to me as a free discharge?
If he but say (nay there's another piece)
Isle see you satisfied?
Yes could we hear him say so: for hoe's one whose
word will not be questioned.
It is enough:
Give me but so much leave as speak unto him,
All Isle keep in fair distance: on my life,
If he •ay not Isle see you satisfied,
I will return your prisoner.
It is enough: for so far we dare trust you: you have
paid for it well: but we will watch him at an inch.
I know he will not suffer me to lye
For such a petty sum: Now brain or never.
Excuse my boldness Sir: though it be scarce manners,
To interrupt your serious conference.
With me sir is your business?
Such a business,
Which as it touches me in Charity,
So should it you in Conscience.
Speak it pray.
Look well on these two men.
He points at us.
The one is an arch Brownest, and the other
Cannot endure to see a Surplice worn:
Subject indeed to no conformity;
Yet both so well persuaded of your learning,
And spotless life, that what you shall propose
They are willing to subscribe too.
I am as ready to give them my instructions.
And please you say so, that they may hear you sir.
Well I will:
My honest friends, and please you to have the patience
Till I have ended with this gentleman,
And instantly Isle see you satisfied.
It is enough grave sir.
Now honest Sergeants: what desire you more?
Nothing from you sir.
I hope so honest Sergeant: you see I deal fairly.
Farewell my honest Sergeants.
I have told you all: only remember me to these my no∣ble
friends.
With all the art
My weak tongue can deliver.
So, he is now at leisure.
And now I come to you.
Most welcome, sir, we stay for the same purpose.
Now, tell me briefly, which of you is the Brownest?
which the other, cannot endure a Surplice?
You are pleasant, sir,
We waite here, hoping to be satisfied.
And to that end I stay, for these opinions
So erroneons and so gross.
Sir, all the opinion that we hold is that you will pay
us the money.
Still obstinate in error; it is this money,
And worldly care on which so much you dote:
Breeds in you these distractions.
Please you to pay the money, you shall find us confor∣mable
in all things.
Money my friends, are not you Sectaries?
Sectaries; no, sir, we are Sergeants.
Sergeants; and waite for me? I owe you money?
Yes, sir, for your Nephew that was with you but now,
and told you of it; &amp; we heard you say, you would see us satisfied.
The man's to me a stranger I protest,
And his request was I should satisfy you
In some points of Religion.
Religion, sir, it is a theme we seldom think of,
But three hundred pound is money.
But I tell you,
I past my word for counsel not for coin,
And this is all that you from me can have:
Endure a Surplice, and beware a Knave.
Had we not warning sufficient of this before?
Well, howsoever, we have had good counsel,
If we had the grace to follow it.
ASsure me of the promised recompense, I'll bring you
to his presence.
Hear me a word.
Now Signior, how do you feel you self? How like you
marriage?
Faith it's a pretty quaint thing, and there's much good
sport belongs to it, would I were unmarried again?
Why? are you weary of Clariflora already?
Weary no, but I would have store.
Hark you, sir, take my counsel; though store be no sore,
meddle with no more of them, lest you make me a Prophet, and
get many a sore head by the match: have you not heard the an∣cient
saying, No man can serve two masters?
That's true, but any man may serve two Mistresses.
And serve their turns well.
Nay, i'll leave that to the performer.
Hark you Master Lodwick, you or any man may think
he does well, and yet come short.
Briefly, directly, and learnedly spoken, sweet Fub.
I speak by proof.
Go to, your are a Knave Fub.
Hold your peace, there's more in the company.
Well said, in faith, thank him Lodwick.
It's not worth it, though I should say as much by you.
This fellow flows with wit.
Gallants, when were you at Court? I have been desired
thither forty times, my wife (I think) has a hundred friends
there: besides Cooks and Pantlers, that she has had many a good
thing of, and they have sworn to bid me welcome for her sake.
You may see what comes by marriage?
If we might see all that comes by marriage, there would
be old butting abroad?
Here's the sum, perform thy word, and claim it.
Good morrow, good Arbaces.
Make me not known to these?
Vallentius.
Hee?
Are you not mad, I heard no less of late.
Report's a calumnious queen, and will abuse virtue it self
you see, both what he is, and what he was?
I am not sorry, that I am deceived: hear you not of
Franciscus.
Upon my credit nothing.
Fair be your company, come Gentlemen.
What's he that throws his Cloak about his nose?
Is it not Iulio?
By all exterior seeming?
My life it is he?
What should this mean?
I was asking that.
Marked you Arbaces: he hath some drift in hand.
Did you not note his followers?
Yes, and the Arms they carried.
Shall we trace them, firs? and leave our wonder: I dare
gage my life, the knowledge will deserve the industry?
You speak my words.
Hee named Franciscus.
Yes, and questioned me.
Withal, observed you but his speed.
Come, wee will pursue him.
La, la, la, la: nay, I pray take me with you Gentlemen.
If not for company, for mirth's sake, take heed before
there.
In mighty men how great appears the virtue ne'er so
small; how small the vice, though mighty Philosophy, they rules
bridles my cogitations, and prolongs, what manhood would
disdain, the time to come appals my courage and strikes instant
fears through every nerve and artery: might wee like beasts
end when wee die, and never make account in no other place
then heer: what heart so base would fear the threatening Law?
Flatter the Judge to save him: I would not sure: but there is bliss
and torment much to come, wee cannot think on it yet the Re∣surrection
aws me, I am much distempered, and want of comp∣no,
begets in me millions of terrors: Iulio tarries long, my
Orisons secure him, could the tears wash the blood but of my
hands, my mind were something free.
This is the place, and there Franciscus walks.
Where?
That's he: apprehend him, i'll not be seen in it.
Your office, sir.
What are these for men.
Lay hands upon him.
What mean you friends?
This we mean to attach you, as a murderer.
Arbaces, I am betrayed.
Look to the homicide, such mercy as a Tiger yields his
prey, when he's pinched for want of what's his booty, expect from
me thou murderer.
None I have deserved, or am about to crave, I know the
worst, my life thou can but have, It is thine; I make a tender of it
ere the sentence come, &amp; give thy labour ease, alas, poor Iulio: thou
wilt unfriended, run thy future race without society, I pity thee
my friend more then my self, danger to me is such, I do expect
and dread not. Fare thee well, my breach of promise, is not with
my will, but merely on constraint.
Lead him hence.
Here they are.
Who have we here bound to the good behaviour? Fran∣ciscus!
My dear friend.
My brother.
Officers, why doe you linger thus, away with him?
How fare you, sir?
Sick, sick to death Vallentius: shall wee hence?
I now behold my fear, when I did hear Arbaces speak
of him.
Something of badness shoot me instantly, but hee does
pierce me through.
Good Gentleman.
Has he recided here since he first fled?
I thought him now in Millain, where hee did traffic much.
I wonder how he came to be discovered?
Beshrew my blood, I pity his estate.
Will you accord with me, show that respect you once
did tender him, and withal willingness strive to invent a means
may do him ease.
What, my sword, my word, or wealth can doe is
his, command it for him?
Let us petition to his rough adversary, and like true Sup∣pliants
in our own behalfs, draw mercy from Arbaces.
Agreed.
About it then, and our intentions thrive. Manet Julio.
The gold is mine, his certain bondage does assure me
it, why should I be an Ass, and nicely stand on that no Trades∣man
does: no thrifty one, what conscience, any thing but such a
word: our wise divines that preach an't, know it not, nor make
good use of that, or ought they say, but of good money: this I dai∣lie
see, and sometime make my daily meditation, ell's Ceremony
composed for purpose:
But be it what it will, this is my grace,
If not for one, I'm for the other place.
Bring the offender forth.
Have mercy, good my Lord.
Believe it thou may sooner move a rock, which nei∣there
blustering wind, nor boisterous Sea could shake or swell∣low,
then beget remorse or smallest favour in so foul a case: I
were unjust, and much unmeet to be the man I am, should wee
show mercy where the crime deserves, beyond the laws extent.
He that shall pardon murder, take it from me, is accessory to the
guilty deed, and stands in self predicament: Heaven defend we
should be such, were he my Nephew, nay, my first-borne son,
or one more near: let me not be blessed in my proceedings, if our
Authority should blind his sin, or alter justice course, set
him forth: what favour equity can yield be his, no more expect
Crisippus.
Read the indictment.
Save that pains, guilty, nor do repent, that in my wrath
I did, whereof I stand convict.
Art thou not sorry for thy heinous crime?
No mighty sir, but rather joy the more, in that it bre∣viats
my passage here, which I would willingly leave.
Impudent homicide: justice good my Lord, with that
severity which they deserve, which wilfully commit—
Arise, thou need not kneel, nor beg for justice, be issue∣red
Arbaces: such his deservings, such his punishment, and cruel
as the cause, thou most brutish man, nay, beast or something
worse: had thou no humanity, no spark of reason then, nor
sense, to think thy trespass foul and ugly? dost not repent thy
tyranny in death, though not the deed it self: fie on thee monster,
hast thou a foul and dreadst not her perdition: what heathen sa∣wig,
nay, what ruder thing, having the life thou soughtst, would
have enacted such a deed of ruth, as thou, thou worst of cry∣tures,
on the image and liveless carcass of thy loving friend.
It was most uncivil, most unchristianly.
An act, a Tiger would not have performed, on one that
had slain his brood.
Hear me good my Lord.
My poor Antonio.
That I did take his life, I have confessed, what further
accusations laid on me, is merely malice, and proceed from
some, could wish my torment worse.
Out on thee butcher: give me leave my Lord.
Silence.
Can thou deny thy wrathful cruelty, impetuous tie∣ronnie,
and fell revenge upon his bleeding trunk?
Unless I should belie my self, and speak like a vain
boaster, more then what I did, I must say this is false, and hoe's
from truth, as far as I am from hope of life, begot this slander.
Produce your proof Arbaces, strike blushes through
the cheeks of this false man, and let him see his shame.
What Devil should be raised from the lowest hell, to
justify this wrong?
This is strange.
I never thought Franciscus one so foul, as I behold him
now.
Not thought, I durst have sworn him of a purer mettle▪
and better temper far.
Prosperity to the Venetian State.
Iulio: he's not his proof I hope.
Is this the Gentleman?
This is he my Lord.
Make room, give way there.
How comes this about?
The fact's confessed, my Lord, what need we further wade
into the Law, or heap on troubles which we may eschew, upon
so plain a case? the crime is Murder, Murder is confessed, then as
you find the guilt, proceed to judgement, and make no further
question.
We shall be sudden.
My sentence, good my Lord.
Speak, sir, can you report any thing more touching
this business then what already is delivered here in the open
Court.
No more or less, then what his own tongue uttered,
can I or have to say.
How's that?
We were once friends: once had I such opinion of his
virtues, my life and estimation were both his, hee might com∣mand
them, much it were to speak of all that past between us:
thus in short, I would some other were compelled to this, which
you have tied me too, my nearest friend alive.
Arbaces: was this the man gave you first notice where
this Murderer kept?
The same my Lord.
Did he betray me? can this be.
Forward.
Speak.
Must we be enforced, what should I speak, hee flue him,
ripped his bowels, mangled him, and in his wrath, as man will any
thing: tumbled his reeking quarters down a Vault most steep
and loathsome: what of this, hee might deserve much worse au∣steritie,
yet this was bad enough?
Ha?
Justice, gracious Prince, justice, justice, sir.
Is this truth?
Let me be deposed—
The most erroneous, execrable part that ever was per∣formed.
Were hee my father, should forget himself, and match
this outrage, mercy quite forsake me if I would sue his pardon.
It was ruthless, fell, and bloody.
Look not up for shame, thou hast no interest there.
I have done wrong, mighty, mighty wrong.
Can thou behold it now?
Pardon me father, pardon good Arbaces: that villain,
that foul villain.
It was time to come.
Show mercy, mercy, Duke.
Pity our complaints, have some compassion.
What are these that make this earnest deprecation, with
such a hearty zeal; are they well known to this assembly?
Cornelia, sister.
Fair Phemone.
When will these humid fountains be dried up, and yield
no more warm drops?
My sweet Franciscus.
Some good or bad thing fell me suddenly, let me be∣hold
no more.
Is that his wife?
She was my Lord, while some hard fate dis-joyn'd their
mutual league, and burst the holy concord.
Wilt thou pardon me and live a happy one, when I am
dead, and lapped in this cold earth.
Franciscus I was ever true to you.
I see it, and believe: that villain, oh, that villain!
Harken thy sentence.
Hear me my good Lord, little I have to say, yet to
much grief tend my few words, this traitor, nay, it is title all too
good for one so heinous foul, that he is perjured, by the death I
owe his latest words do witness what hee is more, and worse:
with pardon Lords, I shall delat at large, that all hereafter
may example take, and shun a villains snare; I took him up,
when like an Adder in the frosty dew, the cold had starved him:
that I had set my foot upon his head, when to my bosom I did
take the Serpent, not cherished, comforted long had he been, but
hee both bit and stung me: foolish man I was to be so fond, not
many months, nor happy days I had with this most truest, most
immaculate piece, but that perfidious Caitiff, that black fiend
by strange suggestions, and invented projects, draws me into a
confirmed jealousy, that she had stained her honour, falsely played
with young Antonio.
O forgive me heaven, what is this?
I from my wrong conceived, least could I not,
Drew him apart into a silent Grove,
Having before vowed solemnly revenge,
Where I made some repetition of my grief: he still
(I see him) innnocent gentleman, taking my words
For such as Lovers use, when they are wanton,
Smiles me in the face, and would not thing it was anger.
Tic truth he speaks.
This kindled me, and as Boar,
When he does chaw his foam, predicts some mischief,
So my bended front fore-told his ruin,
Forth I drew my sword, and sheathed it
Within his breast, what else is added,
He's a Jew avers, and falser than a whore.
See, see the Ages wickedness: can it be possible?
O miserable time, when men make no more reckoning of their
souls! Fie, fie, Francisco, think upon your end, and whither
you must go. Most reverend Fathers, observe you this his con∣tumacy:
I shall I fear be forced to speak what in my heart till
now I chested, and rib'd in, because mine oath, it was not my will
hath hear constrained me to expose his blame, my soul had
vowed to hide; Note into malice how he throws himself, and
would stain my reputation with a calumnious lye.
Art thou a man, or something else; oh fool, fool.
Is this possible?
Give ear unto thy sentence.
I must, in—
Did not I say he's mad, stark raving mad, away with
him. The man's alive that's dead.
Yes, they supped together: I love this fellow.
Your Grace shall doe well to punish this saucy groom.
You are a most pernicious damned villain, and your
soul knows it.
Come, sir, depart, &amp; rave not, or I shall see you whipped.
Good Father pardon; pardon mighty Duke, pardon An∣tonio,
cause of this disquiet. Lod. Antonio?
By this light he supped with him indeed.
It is not so, this cannot be.
Is there no mountain nigh to fall on me, no rotten house?
I know not whether I may call thee son, or rest in
doubt for ever.
I am Antonio, and I was your son, when I left Venice last.
Is no man here amazed but only I?
My dear Phemone!
Were you the Shepherd?
You see chaste Cornelia.
Was ever man so blessed?
Nay, come Francisco, I must have your hand: I can as
well forgive, as I can love; and nothing more than both: good
Crissippus, my old friend.
You have bin a stranger Signior; but I'm glad it is thus.
Whither away: stay him officers; wee have not done
with you.
Wither shall I run to hide my self?
What Climate, or what Region? Pardon greatest Prince.
Pardon grave Fathers.
Against that prayer kneel I:
No pardon Prince, as thou dost hope for bliss.
Grant him a halter; nothing else good Duke.
Give him his liberty: Art thou so impudent to plead
for mercy, and beg of me, having committed such a capital tres∣pass
here in my view?
Though what I speak, with some additions, I have done
and more, and he more false has plaid, than I have said, blot his
offences: be propitious Sir.
Though the greatest sufferance fell on my part, I here ac∣quit
him, and beseech for mercy.
Yet be compendious, and possess this presence, what
cause thou had that tempted thee so badly to seek my ruin.
The Devil and his Angels.
O fie Ioretzo.
How Ioretzo? not the son of that pernicious traitor,
had plotted with Lamunes for sums of gold to burn our City?
He's dead, and suffered for the same offence.
When brought the toad forth other than himself, un∣less
it were something worse?
Forget his Fathers faults: be pitiful.
He that prays next in his behalf, by heaven friends
not himself, and is mine enemy: We have too long suffered such
Weeds as these to flourish in our soil: No more the bosom of
this earth of ours, shall (like a mother) lend her fruitless en∣crease,
to cherish those would bane her: The sword of justice cut
the justice off that keeps it sheathed to such: His deeds were
shameful, his rewards be so, and quittance his desert: S•are on
his brow in letters cappitall, the name of knave, that all behold
may read him what he is, and hate him in the sight: His next
doom is this; after three days we charge thee on thy life, never
set foot more in thy Native Climate.
So, bear him to his torture, speech is vain:
For what is said there's nothing can restrain.
Most worthy Prince.
Isle be honester while I live for this trick.
Can you forgive mine injury, Antonio?
As freely as I hope to be forgiven; and crave no more
amends, but only this you'll call me brother, and make Phemo∣no
mine.
I need not make what's made, take and enjoy her that
hath vowed to be none but yours.
Thy hand Arbaces, our quarrel's over, we will no fighting.
Fight, yes: I hope we shall find something else to doe.
Daughter I have done thee wrong too; but Isle seek for∣forgiveness
when we have more leisure.
This day breeds wonders: by what accident escaped you
of your wounds?
Here stands the means, whom I must ever tender with
respect, as with my full proceedings you shall hear, when none
can interrupt.
Francisco, henceforth know your virtuous wife, &amp; prize
her as a jewel: I have heard the world speak well of her, and
those unmatched wish they may have your fortunes. Lodwicke
whore's the dumb show you promised me.
Even ready my Lord; but may be called a motion: for
puppets will speak but such corrupt language, you'll never under∣stand
without an interpreter, or a short plot; which I have drawn
thus—Now the motion follows.
What not divulge: yes, yes, I will divulge.
The jealous Doctor: I have him.
Doe me right, sweet Duke, doe me right.
What art?
A fool, a physician, a maintainer of whoredom, with
a pox to me.
Then Medic cura teipsum; more knave than fool, the
plot's false drawn else: away with em.
Come sir, depart.
Purge me Duke, purge me, or let my wife take out my
corrupted brains, and rince them in a Cucking-stoole: I come
Skimmington, I come.
Vallentius you must take some order for the Doctors
cure: he befriended you in as great a curtsy.
Trot on before: is the Corne-cutter come yet?
The Horne-cutter is come, sir.
On, on to the Leaguer then: I am ashamed to show
my head amongst Animals: on to the Leaguer.
This is a Monster of your making, Lodwicke, buy him a
Cap-case to hide up his horns in, for shame of the world.
Come we are both—
He comes, he comes.
Where doth he come? hee is rather drawn hither
like a Bare to a stake.
What in a Coach?
Nay, rather in an open Chariot: and yet it cannot
bee properly called a Chariot, because it runs but on two
Wheels.
Room for him there: for I am sure hee had rather
any here had his room than his company.
Silence there; you in the Docket there, let but one
speak in the Court at once.
Noverint universe,
It is the Dukes mercy;
And the condition of my Obligation,
To make my recantation,
That I within bound,
Should give reasons profound,
Why (much against my heart)
I thus ride in a Cart.
Nay, gentlemen, no eggs I beseech you: for I love them
at this time, neither raw, roasted, nor rotten. For should
they hit me on the breast, they would go clean against my
stomach.
You Phaeton.
Is that your Father Phoebus his Chariot, and will he allow you
never a Box to sit in?
No jugglers Box, Isle assure thee friend: for here's
neither pass, nor repose, I stand here you see for an example,
And could wish all these good people to follow it.
Who's that, Boots mounted in his Charles wane? doth
he cry Pippings, Carrets, or Turnips?
You are deceived, Signior: rather Bread, and Meat, as
Pye-crust, bones, and fragments out of the Ludgate mans basket:
Nay, hold your hands, I beseech you Gentlemen, and use your
tongues and spare not.
Well, he stands hear but for a show, and I am sure I suf∣feared
for it really and indeed.
Bear witness my Masters, that is the maine malefactor
indeed, and I stand here for a show: Isle go no further than his
own confession.
They talk of Cheaters, here is a twenty shil∣lings
piece that I put into my mouth, let any Cheater in
Christendom cousin me of this, and carry it away cleanly, and
Isle not only forgive him, but hug him and embrace him for it,
and say he is a very Hocus Pocus indeed.
What said that fellow?
He saith he hath a piece in his mouth, that all Europe
shall not cheat him of.
I have marked him, it is mine own: and notwithstan∣ding
all this melancholy we will spend it at night in Wine and
Music.
Hee that can pluck this piece out of my jaws,
spite of my teeth, and I keep my mouth fast shut, Isle say hee
is more than a Cheater, and a Doctor Faustus, or Mephostophilus
at least.
Dost hear how he brags?
It is mine own I warrant thee.
But what's become of my horse?
And what's become of my load of hay?
May I eat hay with your horse, if they were not both
done neatly and cleanly. But Gentlemen, and the rest, you see I
am at this present your pitiful spectacle. I looked once within
this twelve month, not to have been mounted in such state: but
no man knows what preferment hee is born to. You see I have
hitherto sailed through this great storm without soyling my
Suite, spoiling my Ruff, or spattering my Beaver: thanks to
these kind spectators.
But Master Fast and Loose; doe you remember what a
slippery trick you served Master Doctor and us?
And was it not fairly done Master Sergeant, to teach
you how to digest the wearing of a Surplice, before you came to
stand in a white sheet.
Well now you are at your journeys end: May it please
you to alight for your ease?
Withal my heart: and if either you or any of my accu∣sers
be weary with following me on foot, the Room is now emp∣tie,
I will give him leave to ride in my place. 
Yet when I doe but think of this disaster, it
draws tears from mine eyes.
He draws his handkerchief (as to wipe his eyes) just before the
Country fellow, and scatters some small money.
Sir, you have (I think) let fall some money.
Thanks honest friend.
What do you look for? I can assure you here is all
that fell.
Nay, sure I had more money? it is not in my handker∣chief,
nor in my pockets, I have examined them both.
Why, what do you want sir?
A piece, a piece, and had it now, just now; sure whilst
I was so high perched none could dive so low into my pocket,
it was sure as I lighted, and dropped from me, just as I drew my
handkerchief.
Some such thing I saw fall.
Pray who were they that stooped?
I saw none stoop but this Country fellow.
Then sir, I must demand this piece of you.
Of me? I profess I took up but two shillings
and six pence, and that I gave into your hand.
But I profess that one of them was a piece, and never
came into my hand, and that I must demand of you: say did no
body stoop but hee?
None I assure you.
Thou art still my honest Sergeant.
That fellow hath something in his mouth.
Yes my tongue and my teeth, and what of all that.
Nay, something else sure, for hee is not troubled with
the Mumps, and yet see how one side of his cheeks bumps out.
I am afraid, we shall find him a Cheater.
Sirrah know I am an Officer, I charge you open your
mouth, and let us see what you have in it, &amp;c.
Well sir, I have a twenty shillings piece, what then?
And this man misses a twenty shilling piece out of his
pocket.
Plead well Sergeant and thou shalt have thy see.
Well, there it is, what can you make of it?
Marry twenty shillings good and lawful currant mo∣ny,
Puss, was not this the piece that I put in my pocket this more∣ning?
I know it by that mark.
And she's witness sufficient in conscience.
Doe you see Gentlemen. I am here brought to public
penance for a Cheater, and here's a plain fellow that (it seems)
in his simplicity would out-doe me: if I be thus censured mere∣lie
for suspicion; shall hee scope free that is taken in the very
action?
No, no, mount him, mount him.
Nay, by your favour Gentlemen, I have driven a
Cart often for my pleasure, and would bee loath to ride in one
now for my punishment. It is penance enough for me to part
with my piece, which cannot be more currant of Coin, then his
is Arrant for Knavery.
He's gone, I am still here, now Gentlemen,
If heretofore there hath been any Doll,
Any bold Beachum, and any Cut-purse Moll.
Any Bawd fat with wealth, or with care meager,
That spends her time in Garrison or Leaguer,
Grace me so far to say, that of a Cheater
Though some have been more grave; scarce any greater,
But Gentlemen; what need we more repeating?
Knowing, that even in all Trades there is cheating?
Tic common both in buying and in selling,
In all Commerce; nay, even in money telling.
Tic frequent twixt the Pander and the Whore,
We our selves find it at the Play-house door.
And though (for an example) here I stand,
I am not all the Cheaters in the land.
Some here (no question) know it but I vow,
(They what they please) I will cheat none of you.
We understand their humours,
And the cause of their distempers;
And have too long suffered such weeds
As these to flourish in our soil,
But now no longer shall this earth of ours,
Like a •inde Mother lend her fruits increase,
To cherish those would eclipse her worth.
But those whose aims and acts are imitable,
Crown with green Garlands, and with Bowls brimmed full.
Musique proclaim a general Festival,
A Jubilee of joy and mirth to all:
May love and truth, never like comfort miss,
Nor Knave in Grain, scope a reward like this.

IN the border that enclosed the Scions and made a frontispiece to all the work, in a square Neech on the right hand stood two figures of women, one of them expressing much majesty in her aspect, apparelled in sky colour with a crown of gold on her head, and a bridle in her hand, representing Rea∣son: the other embracing her was in changeable silk with wings at her shoulders, figured for intelle∣ctuall Appetite, who while she embraces Reason, all the actions of men are rightly governed. Above these in a second order, were winged children, one ri∣ding on a furious Lion, which hee seems to tame with reins and a bit: Another bearing an Antique ensign: the third hovering above with a branch of Palm in his hand, expressing the victory over the Perturbations. In a Neech on the other side stood two figures joining hands, one a grave old man in a robe of purple, with a heart of gold in a chain a∣bout his neck, figured for Counsel; the other a woman, in a garment of cloth of gold, in her hand a sword with a serpent winding about the blade, re∣presenting Resolution, both these being necessary to the good means of arriving to a virtuous end.
Over these and answering to the other side was a round Altar raised high, and on it the bird of Pallas, figured for Prudence: on either side were children with wings, one in act of Adoration, another hold∣ing a book, and a third flying over their heads with a lighted Torch in his hand, representing the intel∣lectuall light accompanied with Doctrine and Disc∣pline, and alluding to the figures below, as those on the other side.
Above these ran a large Freeze, with a Cornice∣meant: in the midst whereof was a double Comport∣meant rich and full of ornament: on the top of this sate Fame with spreaded wings, in act, sounding a Trumpet of gold: joining to the Compartment in various postures lay two Figures in their natural colours as big as the life; one holding an Anchor representing safety; the other expressing Riches, with a Cornucopia; and about her stood Antique vases of gold. The rest of this Freeze was compo∣sed of Children, with significant signs to express their several qualities; Forgetfulness of injuries, extinguishing a flaming torch on an Armour; Com∣merce, with ears of Corn; Felicity, with a basket of Lilies; Affection to the Country, holding a Grasshopper; Prosperous success, with the Rud∣der of a Ship; Innocence, with a branch of Fern: All these expressing the several goods, followers of peace and Concord, and fore-runners of humane felicity: so as the work of this Front consisting of Picture qualified with moral Philosophy, tempered delight with profit.
In the midst of the aforesaid Compartment in an Oval Table was written.
The Ancient Adagies are these.
Salmacida Spolia sine sanguine sine suitor, potius quam.
Cadmia victoria, ubi ipsos victors pernicies opprimit.
But before I proceed in the descriptions of the Scenes, it is not amiss briefly to set down the Hi∣stories from whence these Proverbs took their o∣riginall.
For the first Melas and Arevanias of Argos, and Troezen conducted a common Colony to Habicar∣nassus in Asia, and there drave out the barbarous Ca∣rye and Lelegi, who fled up to the Mountains; from whence they made many incursions, robbing and cruelly spoiling the Grecian Inhabitants, which could by no means be prevented.
On the top of the right horn of the hill which surrounds Halicarnassus, in form of a Theater, is a famous Fountain of most clear water, and exquisite taste called Salmacis: It happened that near to this Fountain one of the Colony (to make gain by the goodness of the water) set up a Tavern, and furnished it with all necessaries, to which the Barbarians resorting (enticed by the deli∣cious taste of this water, at first some few, and after many together in troops,) of fierce and cruel na∣tures, were reduced of their own accord to the sweetness of the Grecian customs.
The other Adage is thus derived.
The City of Thebes, anciently called Cadmia, had war with Adrastus, the Argive King, who raised a great Army of Arcadians and Missenians, and fought a battle with them near Ismenia, where the The∣bans were overthrown, turned their backs, and fled into their City; the Peloponnesians (not accustomed to scale walled Towns) assaulting furiously, but
without order, were repulsed from the walls by the defendants, and may of the Argives slain: at that in∣stant the besieged making a great sally, and finding the enemy in disorder and confusion, cut them all in pieces, only Adrastus excepted, who was saved by flight: but this victory was gotten with great da∣mage and slaughter of the Thebans, for few of them returned alive into their City.
The allusion is, That his Majesty out of his mercy and clemency approoving the first Proverb, seeks by all means to reduce tempestuous and turbulent natures into a sweet calm of Civil concord.
A Curtain flying up, a horrid Scene appeared of storm and tempest: no glimpse of the Sun was seen, as if darkness, confusion, and deformity, had possessed the world, and driven light to Heaven, the trees bending, as forced by a gust of wind, their branches rent from their trunks, and some torn up by the roots: a far off was a dark wrought sea, with rolling billows, breaking against the rocks, with rain, lightning and thunder: in the midst was a globe of the Earth, which at an instant falling on fire, was turned into a Fury, her hair upright, mixed with snakes, her body lean wrinkled and of a swear∣thy colour, her breasts hung bagging down to her waste, to which with a knot of serpents was girt red bases, and under it tawny skirts down to her feet: in her hand she brandished a sable Torch, and looking a Scanse with hollow envious eyes came down into the Room.
BLow winds! until you raise the Seas so high,
That waves may hang like Tears in the Suns eye,
That we (when in vast Cataracts they fall)
May think he weeps at Natures Funeral.
Blow winds! and from the troubled womb of Earth
(Where you receive your undiscovered birth)
Break out in wild disorders, till you make
ATLAS, beneath his shaking Load to shake.
How am I grieved, the world should every where
Be vexed into a storm, save only here?
Thou over-lucky too much happy Isle!
Grow more desirous of this flattering stile!
For thy long health can never altered be,
But by thy surfeits on Felicity:
And I to stir the humours that increase
In thy full Body (over-growne with peace)
Will call those Furies hither, who incense.
The guilty, and disorder Innocence.
Ascend! Ascend! you horrid sullen brood
Of evil spirits, and displace the good!
The great, make only wiser, to suspect
Whom they have wronged by falsehood, or neglect;
The Rich, make full of avarice as pride,
Like Graves, or swallowing Seas, unsatisfied;
Busy to help the State (when needy grown)
From poor men's fortunes, never from their own.
The Poor, ambitious make, apt to obey
The False in hope to rule whom they betray:
And make Religion to become their vice,
Named, to disguise ambitious Avarice:
The speech ended, three Furies make their entry presented by
M. Charles Murray.
M. Seymor.
M. Tartarean.
This Antimasque being past, the Scene changed into a calm, the sky serene, a far off Zephyrus ap∣peared breathing a gentle gale: in the Landscape were Corn fields and pleasant Trees, sustaining Vines fraught with grapes, and in some of the furthest parts Villages, with all such things as might express a Country in peace, rich, and fruitful. There came breaking out of the Heavens a silver Chariot, in which sate two persons, the one a woman in a watchet garment, her dressing of silver mixed with bulrushes, representing Concord: somewhat below her sate the good Genius of Great Britain, a young man in a carnation garment, embroidered all with flowers, an Antique sword hung in a scarf, a garland on his head, and in his hand a branch of Platen mixed with ears of corn: these in their dissent sung to∣gether.
WHy should I hasten hither, since the good
I bring to men is slowly understood?
I know it is the Peoples vice,
To lay too mean, too cheap a price
On every blessing they possess
Th'injoying makes them think it less.
If then, the need of what is good,
Doth make it loved, or understood,
Or tic by absence better known
I shall be valued, when I'm gone.
Yet stay! O stay! if but to please
The great and wise Philogenes.
Should dews not fall, the Sun forbear
His course, or I my visits here;
Alike from these defects would cease
The power and hope, of all increase.
Stay then! O stay! If but to ease
The cares of wise Philogenes.
I will! and much I grieve, that though the best
Of Kingly science, harbours in his breast,
Yet tic his fate, to rule in adverse times,
When wisdom must awhile give place to crimes.
Being arrived at the Earth, and descended from the Chariot, they sing this short Dialogue, and then departed several ways to incite the beloved people to honest pleasures and recreations which have ever been peculiar to this Nation.
O who but he, could thus endure
To live, and govern in a sulleine age,
When it is harder far to cure,
The Peoples folly than resist their rage?
After which there followed these several Entries of Antimasques.
Wolfgangus Vandergoose Spagricke, Operator to the invisible Lady stiled the Magical sister of the Rosi∣cross, with these receipts following, and many other rare secrets, undertakes in short time to cure the de∣fects of nature, and diseases of the mind:
1 Confection of Hope and fear to entertain Lovers.
2 Essence of dissimulation to enforce Love.
3 Iulope of fruition to recreate the hot fevers of Love.
4 Water of dalliance to warm an old courage.
5 A subtle quintessence drawn from mathema∣ticall points and lines, filtred through a melancho∣lie brain to make Eunuchs engender.
6 Pomado of the Bark of Comeliness, the
sweetness of wormwood, with the fat of gravity to anoint those that have an ill mine.
7 Spirit of Saturus high capers, and Bacchus whirling virtigoes to make one dance well.
8 One dram of the first matter, as much of the rust of times Since mixed with the juice of Medeas herbs, this in an electuary makes all sorts of old people young.
9 An Opiate of the spirit of Muskadine taken in good quantity to bedward, to make one forget his Creditors.
10 Powder of Menippus tree, &amp; the Rine of Hemp to consolate those who have lost their money.
11 Treakle of the gale of Serpents, and the liver of Doves to initiate a Neophite Courtier.
12 An easy vomit of the fawning of a Spaniel' Gallobelgicus, and the last Coranto, hot from the Press, with the powder of some lean jests, to pre∣pare a disprovues welcome to rich men's Tables.
13 A Gargarisme of Florioes first fruits, Diana de monte Major, and the scraping of Spanish Romano' as distilled in balneo, to make a sufficient Linguist with∣out travelling, or scarce knowing himself what hee says.
14 A Bath made of a Catalogue from the Mart' and Common places, taken in a Frankford drifat, in his diet he must refrain all real knowledge, and on∣lie suck in vulgar opinions, using the Fricase of con∣federacy, will make Ignorants in all professions to seem and not to be.
Four old men richly attired, the shapes proper to the persons, presented by
M. Boroughs.
M. Skipwith.
M. Pert.
M. Ashton.
Three young soldiers in several fashioned habits, but costly, and presented to the life, by
M. Heron.
M. Slingsby.
M. Chumley.
A nurse and three children in long Coats, with bibs, biggins, and muckenders.
An ancient Irishman, presented by M. Iay.
An ancient Scotsman, presented by M. Atkins.
An old fashioned Englishman, and his mistress presented by 
M. Arpe.
M. Will. Murry.
These three Antimasques were well and naturally set out.
Doctor Tartaglia and two pedants of Francolin, presen∣ted by
M. Rimes.
M. Warder.
M. Villiers.
Four Grotesques or drolities, in the most fan∣tactical shapes that could be devised.
The invisible Lady magical sister of the Rosi∣cross.
A shepherd, presented by M. Charles Murry.
A Farmer and his wife, presented by M. Skipwith.
A Country Gentleman, his Wife, and his Bailiff, pre∣scented by
M. Boroughs.
M. Ashton.
M. Pert.
An amorous Courtier richly apparelled, pre∣scented by M. Seymor.
Two Roaring boys, their suites answering their profession.
Four mad Lovers, and as madly clad.
A jealous Dutchman, his wife and her Italian Lover, presented by
M. Arpe.
M. Rimes.
M. Tartarean.
Three Swisses, one a little Swiss, who played the wag with them as they slept, presented by
M. Cotterell.
M. Newton.
M. Ieffrey Hudson.
Four antique Cava∣liers, imitating a manage and tilting.
A Cavaleritro and two Pages.
All which Antimasques were well set out and ex∣cellently danced, and the tunes fitted to the per∣sons.
The Antimasques being past, all the Scene was changed into craggy rocks and inaccessible moun∣taynes, in the upper parts where any earth could fa∣sten, were some trees, but of strange forms, such as only grow in remote parts of the Alps, and in de∣solate places; the furthest of these was hollow in the midst, and seemed to be cut through by art, as the Pausilipo near Naples, &amp; so high as the top pierced the clouds, all which represented the difficult way which Heroes are to pass ere they come to the Throne of Honour.
The Chorus of the beloved people came forth (led by Concord &amp; the good Genius of Great Bri∣taine,) their habits being various and rich, they go up to the State and sing.
WHen with instructed eyes, we look upon
Our blessings that descend so fast,
From the fair Partner of our Monarchs Throne,
We grieve, they are too great to last.
But when those groweing comforts we survey,
By whom our hopes are longer lived,
Then gladly we our vows, and praises pay
To her, from whom they are derived.
And since (great Queen) she is derived from you;
We here begin our offerings,
For those who sacrificed to Rivers, knew,
Their first rights due, unto their Springs.
The Stream, from whence our blessings flow, you bred;
You in whose bosom, e'ven the chife, and best
Of Modern Victors laid his weary head,
when he rewarded Victories with rest.
Your Beauty kept his vallor's flame alive;
Your Tuscane wisdom taught it how to thrive.
WHy are our joys detained by this delay?
Unless (as in a morning Overcast)
We find it long, ere we can find out day;
So whilst our hopes increase, our time doth waste.
Or are you slow because th'way to Honor's Throne
(In which you travail now) is so uneven,
Hilly, and craggy, or as much unknown,
As that uncertain path which leads to Heaven?
O that Philosophers (who through those mists
Low nature casts, doe upper knowledge spy)
Or those that smile at them (o're-weening Priests)
Could with such sure such an undoubted eye,
Reach distant Heaven, as you can Honors' Throne,
Then we should shift our flesh t'inhabite there,
Where we are taught, the Heroes are gone;
Though now content with Earth, because you are here.
The song ended they return up to the Stage, and divide themselves on each side; then the further part of the Scene disappeard, and the Kings Maje∣sty and the rest of the Masquers were discovered, sitting in the Throne of Honour, his Majesty highest in a seat of Gold, and the rest of the Lords about him: this Throne was adorned with Palm trees, be∣tweene which stood statues of the ancient Heroes: in the under parts on each side lay captives bound in several postures, lying on trophies of armours, shields, and Antique weapons, all his Throne being feigned of Goldsmiths work. The habit of his Ma∣jesty and the Masquers was of watchet, richly em∣embroidered with silver, long stockings set up of white: Their caps silver with scrolls of gold, and plumes of white feathers.
THose quar'ling winds (that deafened unto death
The living, and did wake men dead before)
Seem now to pant small gusts, as out of breath,
And fly, to reconcile themselves on shore.
If it be Kingly patience to out last
Those storms the peoples giddy fury raise,
Till like, fantastic winds themselves they waste,
The wisdom of that patience is thy praise.
Murmur's a sickness epidemical;
It is catching, and infects weak common ears;
For through those crooked, narrow Alleys, all
Invaded are, and killed by Whisperers.
This you discerned, and by your mercy taught,
Would not (like Monarchs that severe have bin)
Invent, Imperial Arts, to question thought;
Nor punish vulgar sickness as a sin.
Nor would your valour, (when it might subdue)
Be hindered of the pleasure to forgive;
They are worse than overcome (your wisdom knew)
That needed mercy to have leave to live.
Since strength of virtues, gained you Honours throne;
Accept our wonder, and enjoy your praise!
Hoe's fit to govern there, and rule alone,
Whom inward helps, not outward force doth raise.
Whilst the Chorus sung this Song, there came softly from the upper part of the Heavens, a huge cloud of various colours, but pleasant to the sight; which descending to the midst of the Scene opened, and within it was a transpa∣rent brightness of thin exhalations, such as the Gods
are feigned to descend in▪ in the most eminent place of which, her Majesty sate, representing the chief Heroin, environed with her martial Ladies; and from over her head were darted lightsome Rays that illuminated her seat, and all the Ladies about her participated more or less of that light, as they sate near or further off: this brightness with many streakes of thin vapours about it, such as are seen in a fair evening sky softly descend: and as it came near to the Earth, the seat of Honour by little and little vanished, as if it gave way to these Heavenly Graces. The Queens Majesty and her Ladies were in Amazonian habits of carnation, embroidered with silver, with plumed Helmes, Bandrickes with Antique swords hanging by their sides, all as rich as might be, but the strangeness of the Habits was most admired.
YOu that so wisely studious are,
To measure, and to trace each Starr,
How swift they travail, and how far,
Now number your celestial store,
Planets, or lesser lights, and try,
If in the face of all the sky,
You count so many as before?
If you would practise how to know
The chief for influence, or show;
Level your perspectives below!
For in this nether Orb they move!
Each here (when lost in's doubtful Art)
May by his Eyes, advance his Heart,
And through his Optic learn to love!
But what is she that rules the night?
That kindles Ladies with her light,
And gives to Men the power of sight?
All those who can her virtue doubt,
Her Mind, will in her face advise,
For through the Casements of her Eyes,
Her Soul is ever looking out.
And with its beams, she doth survey
Our growth in Virtue▪ or decay;
Still lighting us in Honours way!
All that are good, she did inspire!
Lovers are chaste, because they know
It is her will, they should be so;
The valiant take from her their Fire!
When this heavenly seat touched the Earth, the Kings Majesty took out the Queen, and the Lords the Ladies, and came down into the Room, and danced their entry, betwixt which and the second dance was this song.
WHy stand you still, and at these Beauties gaze,
As if you were afraid,
Or they were made,
Much more for wonder than delight?
Sure those whom first their virtue did amaze,
Their feature must at last invite.
Time never knew, the mischiefs of his haste!
Nor can you force him stay
To keep off day:
Make then fit use of Tiumphs here;
It were a crime against pleasant youth, to waste
This night, in overcivill fear.
Move then like Time, for Love (as well as he)
Hath got a Calendar,
Where must appear,
How evenly you these measures tred;
And when they end, we far more grieved shall be,
Than for his Hours when they are fled.
The second Dance ended, and their Majesties be∣ing seated under the State, the Scene was changed into magnificent buildings composed of several se∣lected pieces of Architecture: in the furthest part was a Bridge over a River, where many people, coaches, horses, and such like were seen to pass to and fro: beyond this on the shore were buildings in Prospective, which shooting far from the eye show∣ed as the suburbs of a great City.
From the highest part of the Heavens came forth
a cloud far in the Scene, in which were eight per∣sons richly attired representing the spheres; this joining with two other clouds which appeared at that instant full of Music covered all the upper part of the Scene, and at that instant beyond all these, a Heaven opened full of Deities, which celestial Pro∣spect with the Chorus below filled all the whole Scene with apparitions and harmony.
SO musical as to all Ears,
Doth seem the music of the Spears,
Are you, unto each other still;
Tuning your thoughts to eiders will.
All that are harsh, all that are rude,
Are by your harmony subdued;
Yet so, into obedience wrought,
As if not forced to it, but taught.
Live still, the pleasure of our sight;
Both our examples and delight.
So long, until you find, the good success
Of all your virtues, in one happiness.
Till we so kind, so wise, and careful be,
In the behalf of our Posterity,
That we may wish your Scepters ruling here,
(Loved even by those, who should your justice fear)
When we are gone, when to our last remove
We are dispatched, to sing your praise above.
After this song the Spheres past through the Ayre, and all the Deities ascended, and so conclu∣ded this Masque: which was generally approved of, especially by all Strangers that were present, to be the noblest and most ingenuous that hath been done here in that kind.
The Invention, Ornament, Scions and Appear∣tions, with their Descriptions, were made by INIGO IONES, Surveyor General of his Majesties Works.
What was spoken or sung, by WILLIAM DAVENANT, her Majesties Servant.
The Subject was set down by them both.
The Music was composed by LEVVIS RI∣CHARD, Master of her Majesties Music.

O•• Author thinks it is not in the power of Wit,
Invention, Art, nor Industry, to fit
The several fantasies which in this age
With a predominant humour rule the Stage.
Some men cry out for Satyr, others choose
Merely to story to confine each Muse;
Most like no Play, but such as gives large birth
To that which they judiciously term mirth.
Nor will the best works with their liking crown,
Except 't be graced with part of fool or clown.
Hard and severe the task is then to write,
So as may please each various appetite.
Our Author hopes well though, that in this Play,
He has endeavoured so, he justly may
Gain liking from you all, unless those few
Who will dislike, be it ne'er so good, so new;
The rather Gentlemen, he hopes, cause I
Am a main Actor in this Tragedy:
You've graced me sometimes in another Sphere,
And I do hope you'll not dislike me here.
NO murmurings, Noble Captains.
Murmurings, Cousin?
this Peace is worse to men of war and action
then fasting in the face of the foe, or lodging
on the cold earth. Give me the Camp, say I,
where in the Sutlers palace on pay-day
we may the precious liquor quaff, and kiss
his buxom wife; who though she be not clad
in Persian Silks, or costly Tyrian Purples,
has a clean skin, soft thighs, and wholesome corps,
fit for the trailer of the puissant Pike,
to solace in delight with.
Here in your lewd City,
the Harlots do avoid us sons of the Sword,
worse then a severe Officer. Besides,
here men of the Shop can gorge their musty maws
with the delicious Capon, and fat limbs
of Mutton large enough to be held shoulders
of the Ram anco•ge the 1• Signs, while for pure want
your soldier oft dines at the charge of the dead,
among tombs in the great Mo•que.
It is believed Cos,
and by the wisest few too, that in the Camp
you do not feed on pleasant: po•lts; a •allot,
and without oil or vinegar, appeases
sometimes your guts, although they keep more noise
then a large pool full of engendering frogs.
Then for accoutrements, you wear the Buff,
as you believed it heresy to change
for linen: Surely most of yours is spent
in lint, to make long tents for your green wounds
after an onslaught.
Cos. these are sad truths,
incident to frail mortals!
You yet cry
out with more eagerness still for new wars,
then women for new fashions.
It is confessed,
Peace is more opposite to my nature, then
the running ach in the rich Usurers feet,
when he roars out, as if he were in hell
before his time. Why, I love mischief, Cos,
when one may do it securely; to cut throats
with a licentious pleasure; when good men
and true of the Jury, with their frosty beards
shall not have power to give the noble wesand,
which has the steel defied, to the hanging mercy
of the ungracious cord.
Gentlemen both,
and Cozens mine, I do believe 't much pity,
to strive to reconvert you from the faith
you have been bred in: though your large discourse
and praise, wherein you magnify your Mistress,
War, shall scarce drive me from my quiet sheets,
to sleep upon a turf. But pray say, Cozens.
How do you like your General, Prince,
is he a right Mars?
As if his Nurse had lapped him
in swaddling clouts of steel; a very Hector
and Alcibiades.
It seems he does not relish
these boasted sweets of war: for all his triumphs,
he is reported melancholy.
Want of exercise
renders all men of actions, dull as dormice;
your Soldier only can dance to the Drum,
and sing a Hymn of joy to the sweet Trumpet:
there's no music like it.
I'll know the cause,
he shall deny me hardly else.
His melancholy,
known whence it rises once, 't may much conduce
to help our purpose.
Pray Cos. what Lords are these?
they seem as full of plot, as General•
are in Siege, they're very serious.
That young Stripling
is our great Emperors son, by his last wife:
that in the rich Embroidery's, the Court Harms;
one that has hatched more projects, then the ovens
in Egypt chickens; the other, though they cal
friends, his mere opposite Planet Mars,
one that does put on a reserved gravity,
which some call wisdom, the rough Soldier Mura▪
Governor •the Moroccos.
Him we've heard of
before: but Cozen, shall that man of trust,
thy tailor, furnish us with new accoutrements?
hast thou tan order for them?
Yes, yes, you shall
flourish in fresh habiliments; but you must
promise me not to engage your corporal oaths
you will see it satisfied at the next press,
out of the profits that arise from ransom
of those rich yeomans heites, that dare not look
the fierce foe in the face.
Doubt not our truths,
though we be given much to contradictions,
we will not pawn oaths of that nature.
Well then, this note does fetch the garments:
meet me Cozens anon at Supper.
Honourable Cos▪ we will come give our thanks.
My gracious brother,
make us not such a stranger to your thoughts,
to consume all your honours in close retirements;
perhaps since you from Spain returned a victor,
with (the worlds conqueror) Alexander, you grieve
Nature ordained no other earths to vanquish;
if it be so, Princely brother, we will bear part
in your heroic melancholy.
Gentle youth.
press me no farther, I still hold my temper
free and unshaken, only some fond thoughts
of trivial moment, cal my faculties
to private meditations.
Howsoe're your Highness
does please to term them, it is mere melancholy,
which next to sin, is the greatest malady
that can oppress mans soul.
They say right:
and that your Grace may see what a mere madness,
a very mid-summer frenzy, it is to be
melancholy, for any man that wants no money,
I (with your pardon) will discuss unto you
all sorts, all sizes, persons and conditions,
that are infected with it; and the reasons
why it in each arises.
Learned Selinthus,
Let's taste of thy Philosophy
Pish, It is unwelcome
to any of judgment, this fond prate▪
I marvel that our Emperor dos permit
fools to abound in the Court!
What makes your grave Lordship
in it, I do beseech you? But Sir, mark me,
the kernel of the text enucleated,
I shall confute, refute, repel, refile,
explode, exterminate, expunge, extinguish
like a rush candle, this same heresy,
that is shot up like a pernicious Mushroom,
to poison true humanity.
You shall stay and hear a lecture read
on your disease; you shall, as I love virtue.
First the cause then
from whence this flatus Hypocondriacus,
this glimmering of the gizzard (for in wild fowl,
it is termed so by Hyp•crates) arises,
is as Averroes and Avicen,
with Abenbucar, Baruch and Aboflii,
and all the Arabic writers have affirmed,
a mere defect, that is as we interpret▪ a want of —
Of what, Selinthus?
Of wit, and please your Highness,
That is the cause in general, for particular
and special causes, they are all derived
from several wants; yet they must be considerd,
pondered, perpended, or premeditated.
My Lord, y'ad best be brief,
your Patient will be weary else.
I cannot play the fool rightly, I mean▪ the Physician
without I have licence to expalcat
on the disease. But (my good Lord) more briefly,
I shall declare to you like a man of wisdom
and no Physician, who deal all in simples,
why men are melancholy. First, for your Courties,
It concerns us all to be attentive, Sir.
Your sage and serious Courtier, who does walk
with a State face, as he had dressed himself
in the Emperors glass, and had his beard turned up
by the irons Royal, he will be as pensive
as Stallion after Catum, when he wants suits,
begging suits, I mean▪ Me thinks, (my Lord)
you are grown something solemn on the sudden;
since your Monopolies and Patents, which
made your purse swell like a wet sponge, have been
reduced to the last gasp. Troth, it is far better
to confess here, then in a worser place.
Is it not so indeed?
What ere he does
by mine, I'm sure he has hit the cause from whence
your grief springs, Lord Simanthes.
No Egyptian Soothsayer
has truer inspirations, then your small Courtiers
from causes and wants manifold; as when
the Emperors countenance with propitious noise
does not cry chink in pocket, no repute is
with Mercer, nor with Tailor; nay sometimes too
the humor's pregnant in him, when repulse
is given him by a Beauty: I can speak this
though from no Memphian Priest, or sage Caldean,
from the best Mistress (Gentlemen) an Experience.
Last night I had a mind t'a comely Seamstress,
who did refuse me, and behold, ere since
how like an Ass I look.
What, at your Counsels, Lords? the great Almanzor
requires your presence, Mura; has decreed
the War for Persia. You (my gracious Lord)
Prince Abilqualet, are appointed Chief:
And you, brave spirited Abrahen, an Assistant
to your victorious Brother: You, Lord Mura,
destined Lieutenant General.
And must I march against the foe, without
thy company? I relish not the employment.
Alas, my Lord,
Tarifa's head's grown white beneath his helmet;
and your good Father thought it charity
to spare mine age from travel: though this •as
will be more irksome to me then the toil
of war in a sharp winter.
It arrives just to our wish. My gracious brother, I
anon shall wait on you: mean time, valiant Mura,
let us attend my Father.
Good Selinthus,
vouchsafe a while your absence, I shall have
employment shortly for your trust.
Your Grace shall have as much power to command
Selinthus, as his best fancied Mistress. I am your creature.
Now, my Lord,
I hope you're clothed with all those resolutions
that usher glorious minds to brave a•chievements.
The happy genius on your youth attendant
declares it built for Victories and Triumphs;
and the proud Persian Monarchy, the sole
emulous opposer of the Arabic Greatness,
eourts (like a fair Bride) your Imperial Arms,
waiting to invest You Sovereign of her beauties.
Why are you dull (my Lord?) Your cheerful looks
should with a prosperous augury presage
a certain Victory: when you droop already,
as if the foe had ravished from your Crest
the noble Palm. For shame (Sir) be more sprightly;
your sad appearance, should they thus behold you,
would half unsoul your Army,
It is no matter,
Such looks best suit my fortune. Know (Tarifa)
I'm indisposed to manage this great Voyage,
and must not undertake it.
Must not, Sir!
Is it possible a love-sick youth, whose hopes
are fixed on marriage, on his bridal night
should in soft slumbers languish? that your Arms
should rust in ease, now when you hear the charge,
and see before you the triumphant Prize
destined to adorn your Valour? You should rather
be furnished with a power above these passions;
and being invoked by the mighty charm of Honour,
fly to achieve this war, not undertake it.
I'd rather you had said, Tarifa lied,
then uttered such a sound, harsh and unwelcome.
I know thou love me truly, and durst I
to any born of woman, speak my intentions,
the fatal cause which does withdraw my courage
from this employment, which like health I covet,
thou should enjoy it fully. But (Tarifa)
the said discovery of it is not fit
for me to utter, much less for thy virtue
to be acquainted with.
Why (my Lord?)
my loyalty can merit no suspicion
from you of falsehood: whatsoere the cause be
or good, or wicked, 't meets a trusty silence,
and my best care and honest counsel shall
endeavour to reclaim, or to assist you
if it be good, if ill, from your bad purpose.
Why, that I know (Tarifa.) It is the love
thou bear to honour, renders thee unapt
to be partaker of those resolutions
that by compulsion keep me from this Voyage:
For they with such inevitable sweetness
invade my sense, that though in their performance
my Fame and Virtue even to death do languish,
I must attempt, and bring them unto act,
or perish in the pursuance.
Heaven avert
a mischief so prodigious. Though I would not
with over-sawcie boldness press your counsels;
yet pardon (Sir) my Loyalty, which •imorous
of your loved welfare, must entreat, beseech you
with ardent love and reverence, to disclose
the hidden cause that can estrange your courage
from its own Mars, with-hold you from this Action
so much allied to honour: Pray reveal it:
By all your hopes of what you hold most precious,
I do implore it; for my faith in breeding
your youth in wars great rudiments, relieve
Tarifa's fears, that wander into strange
unwelcome doubts, left some ambitious frenzy
against your imperial fathers dignity
has late seduced your goodness.
No, Tarifa,
I ne'er durst aim at that unholy height
in viperous wickedness; a sinless, harmless
(left can be truly termed one) it is my soul
labours even to despair with: t'faine would out,
did not my blushes interdict my language:
it is unchaste love, Tarifa; nay, tak't all,
and when thou hast it, pity my misfortunes,
to fair Caropia, the chaste, virtuous wife
to surly Mura.
What a fool Desire is!
with Giant strengths it makes us court the knowledge
of hidden mysteries, which once revealed,
far more inconstant then the air, it fleets
into new wishes, that the coveted secret
had slept still in oblivion.
I was certain
it would fright thy innocence, and look to be
besieged with strong dissuasions from my purpose:
but be assured, that I have tired my thoughts
with all the rules that •each men moral goodness,
so to reclaim them from this love-sick looseness;
but they (like wholesome medicines misapplied)
faced their best operation, fond and fruitless.
Though I as well may hope to kiss the Sun-beams
because they shine on me, as from her to gain
one g•ance of comfort; yet my mind, that pities
it self with constant tenderness, must needs
revolve the cause of its calamity,
and melt in the pleasure of so sweet a sadness.
Then you're undone for ever; Sir, undone
beyond the help of council or repentance.
It is most ignoble, that a mind unshaken
by fear, should by a vain desire be broken;
or that those powers no labour ever could vanquish,
should be overcome and thrilled by sordid pleasure.
Pray (Sir) consider, that in glorious war,
which makes Ambition (by base men termed •in)
a big and gallant Virtue, you've been nursed,
lulled (as it were) into your infant sleeps
by the surly noise of the trumpet, which n•w summons
you to victorious use of your endowments:
and shall a Mistress stay you! such a one too,
as to attempt, then war it self's more dangerous!
All these persuasions are to as much purpose,
as you should strive to reinvest with peace,
and all the joys of health and life, a soul
condemned to perpe•uity of torments.
No (my Tarifa) though through all disgraces,
loss of my honour, fame, nay hope for Empire,
I should be forced to wade to obtain her love;
those seas of mischief would be pleasing streams,
which I would hast to bath in, and pass through them
with that delight thou would to victory,
or slaves long chained to'th' oar, to sudden freedom•.
Were you not Abilqualit, from this time then
our friendships (like two rivers from one head
rising) should wander a dissever'd course,
and never meet again, unless to quarrel.
Nay, old and stiff, now as my iron garments,
were you my son, my sword should teach your wildness
a swift way to repentance. You're my Prince,
on whom all hopes depend; think on your Father,
that lively Image of majestic goodness,
who never yet wronged Matron in his lust,
or man in his displeasure. Pray conjecture
your Father, Country, Army, by my mouth
beseech your piety to an early pity
of your yet unslain Innocence. No attention!
Farewell: my prayers shall wait you, though my Counsels
be thus despised. Farewell Prince!
Alas good man, he weeps.
Such tears I've seen fall from his manly eyes
once when ye lost a battle. Why should I
put off my Reason, Valour, Honour, Virtue,
in hopes to gain a Beauty, whose possession
renders me more incapable of peace,
then I am now I want it? Like a sweet,
much coveted banquet, it is no sooner tasted,
but it's delicious luxury's forgotten.
Besides, it is unlawful. Idle fool,
there is no law, but what's prescribed by Love,
Natures first moving Organ; nor can ought
what Nature dictates to us be held vicious.
On then, my soul, and destitute of fears,
like an adventurous Mariner, that knows
storms must attend him, yet dares court his peril,
strive to obtain this happy Port. Mesith•s
(Loves cunning Advocate) does for me besiege
(with gifts and vows) her Chastity. She is
compassed with flesh, that's not invulnerable,
and may by Love's sharp darts be pierced. They stand
firm, whom no art can bring to Love's command.
My gracious brother!
Dearest Abrahen, welcome.
Tic certainly decreed by our dread Father,
we must both march against the insulting foe.
How does thy youth, yet uninur'd to travel,
relish the Employment?
War is sweet to those
that never have experienced it. My youth
cannot desire in that big Art a nobler
Tutor then you (my Brother•) Like an Eaglet
following her dam, I shall your honoured steps
trace through all dangers, and be proud to borrow
a branch, when your head's coverd ore with Laurel,
to deck my humbler temples.
I do know thee
of valiant active soul; and though a youth,
thy forward spirit merits the Command
of Chief, rather then Second in an Army.
Would heaven our Royal Father had bestowed
on thee the Charge of General.
On me, Sir!
Alas, it is fit I first should know those Arts
that do distinguish Valour from wild rashness.
A General (Brother) must have abler nerves
of Judgment, then in my youth can be hoped for.
Your self already like a flourishing Spring
teeming with early Victories, the Soldier
expects should lead them to new Triumphs, as
if you had vanquished fortune.
I am not so
ambitious (Abrahen) of particular glories,
but I would have those whom I love partake them.
This Persian war, the last of the whole East
left to be managed, if I can persuade
the great Almanzor, shall be the trophy
of thy yet maiden Valour. I have done
enough already to inform Succession,
that Abilqualit durst on fiercest foes
run to fetch Conquest home, and would have thy name
as great as mine in Arms, that History
might register, our Family abounded
with Heroes, born for Victory.
Tic an honour,
which, though it be above my powers, committed
to my direction, I would seek to manage
with care above my years, and courage equal
to his, that dares the horridest face of danger:
But it is your noble curtsy would thrust
this mas•'line honour (far above his merits)
on your regardless Brother; for my Father,
he has no thought tending to your intentions;
nor though your goodness should desire, would hardly
be won to yield consent to them.
Why, my Abrahen,
w'are both his sons, and should be both alike
dear to's affections; and though birth hath given me
the larger hopes and Titles, it were unnatural,
should he not strive to endow thee with a portion
opted to the magnificence of his Off-spring.
But thou perhaps art timorous, lest thy first
essays of valour should meet fate disastrous.
The bold are Fortunes darlings. If thou hast
courage to venture on this great employment,
doubt not, I shall prevail upon our Father
to ordain thee Chief in this brave hopeful Voyage.
You imagine me
beyond all thought of gratitude; and doubt not
that I'll deceive your trust. The glorious Ensigns
waving in the air once, like so many Comets,
shall speak the Persians funerals, on whose ruins
we will build to Fame and Victory new temples,
which shall like Pyramids preserve our memories,
when we are changed to ashes.
Be sure, continue
in this brave mind; I'll instantly solicit
our Father to confirm thee in the Charge
of General, I'll about it.
Farewell gracious Brother.
This haps above my hopes. Alas, good dull fool,
I see through thy intents, clear, as thy soul
were as transparent as thin air or Crystal.
He would have me removed, march with the Army,
that he mean time might make a sure defeat
on our aged fathers life and Empire: 't must
be certain as the light. Why should not this
with equal heat, be like my thoughts, ambitious?
Be they as harmless as the prai'rs of Virgins,
I'll work his ruin out of his intentions.
He like a thick cloud stands twixt me and Greatness:
Greatness, the wise mans true felicity,
Honour's direct inheritance. My youth
will quit suspicion of my subtle practice:
then have I surly Mura and Simanthes,
my allies by my dead Mothers blood, my assistants,
his Eunuch too Mesithes at my service.
Simanthes shall inform the King, the people
desire Prince Abilqualit's stay; and Mura
whose blunt demeanour renders him oraculous,
make a shrewd inference out of it. He is my half Brother,
the other's my Father; names, mere airy titles!
Soveraigntie's only sacred, Greatness goodness,
true self-affection Justice, every thing
righteous that's helpful to create a King.
My trusty friends, you're welcome:
our fate's above our wishes; Abilqualit
by whatso'ere power moved to his own ruin,
would fain enforce his charge of General on me,
and stay at home.
Why, how can this conduce
to advance our purpose?
Tic the mainest engine
could ever move to ruin him. Simanthes,
you shall inform our Father, tic the people
out of their tender love desires his stay.
You (Mura) shall infer my Brothers greatness
with people; out of it, how nice it is and dangerous.
The air is open here; come, we'll discourse
with more secure privacy our purpose.
No•hing's unjust, unsacred, tends to advance
us to a Kingdom; that's the height of chance.
HOw? not go, Simanthes?
My dread Sovereign,
I speak but what the well affected people
out of their loyal care and pious duty
enjoined me utter: they do look upon him
as on your eldest Son, and next Successor,
and would be loath the Persian War should rob
their eyes of light, their souls of joy and comfort,
this flourishing Empire leave as it were widowed
of its loved Spouse: They humbly do beseech
your Majesty would therefore destine some
more fitting General, whose loss (as heaven
avert such a misfortune) should it happen,
might less concern the State.
It is not the least
among the blessings Heaven has showered upon us,
that we are happy in such loving Subjects,
to govern whom, when we in peace are ashes,
we leave them a Successor whom they truly reverence:
A loving people and a loving Sovereign
makes Kingdoms truly fortunate and flourishing.
But I believe (Simanthes) their intents,
though we confirm them, will scarce take effect:
My Abilqualit (like a Princely Lion,
in view of's prey) will scarcely be overcome
to leave the honour of the Persian War,
in's hopes already vanquished by his valour▪
and rest in lazy quiet, while that Triumph
is ravished by another.
With the pardon
of your most sacred Majesty, it is fit then
your great commands forbid the Princes Voyage:
boldness enforces youth to hard achievements
before their time, makes them run forth like Lapwing•
from their warm nest, part of the shell yet sticking
unto their downy heads. Sir, good success
is oft more fatal far then bad; one winning
••st from a flattering Di• tempting a Gamest•
to hazard his whole fortunes.
This is dull,
fruitless Philosophy, he that falls nobly
wins as much honour by his loss, as conquest.
This rule may hold well among common men,
but not among Princes. Such a prince as ours is,
who knows as well to conquer men's affections
as he does enemies, should not be exposed
to every new cause, honourable danger.
Prince Abilqualit's fair and winning carriage
has stolen possession of the peoples hearts,
they dote on him since his l•te Spanish conquest,
as new made brides on their much coveted husbands;
and they would pine like melancholy turtles,
should they so soon lose the unvalued object
both of their love and reverence: Howsoe're,
what ere your awful will (Sir) shall determine,
as heaven, is by their strict obedience
held sacred and religious.
Good Simanthes, let them receive our thanks
for their true care of our dear Abilqualit.
We'll consider of their request, say.
Your highness humblest creature.
I do not like this.
Like what? Valiant Mura,
we know thy counsels so supremely wise,
and thy true heart so excellently faithful,
that whatsoere displeases thy sage Judgment,
Almanzor's wisdom must account distasteful.
What is it dislikes thee?
Your Majesty knows me
a downright Soldier, I affect not words;
but to be brief, I relish not your son
should (as if you were in your tomb already)
engross so much the giddy peoples favours.
It is neither fit for him, nor safe for you
to suffer it.
Why, how can they, Mura,
Give a more serious testimony of reverence
to me, then by conferring their affections,
their pious wishes, zealous contemplations
on him that sits the nearest to my heart,
my Abilqualit, in whose hopeful virtues
my age more glorious then in all my conquests?
May you prove fortunate in your pio•s care
of the Prince Abilqualit. But (my Lord)
Mura is not so prone to idle language
(the Parasits best ornament) to utter
o•light, but what (if you'll please to give him audio•ce
he will show you a blunt reason for.
Come, I see
into thy thoughts, good Mura; too much car•
of us, informs thy loyal soul with fears
the Princes too much popularity
may breed our danger: banish those suspicions;
neither dare they who under my long reign
have been triumphant in so many blessings,
have the least thought may tend to disobedience:
or if they had, my Abilqualit's goodness
would ne'er consent with them to become impious.
It is too secure a confidence betrays
minds valiant to irreparable dangers.
Not that I dare invade with a foul thought
the noble Princes loyalty; but (my Lord)
when this same many headed beast (the people)
violent, and so not constant in affections,
subject to love of novelty, the sickness
proper •'all humane specially light natures,
do magnify with too immoderate praises
the Princes actions, dote upon his presence,
nay chain their souls to th'shadow of his foot-steps,
as all excesses ought to be held dangerous,
especially when they do aim at Scepters,
their too much dotage speaks, you in their wishes
are dead already, that their darling hope
the Prince might have the Throne once.
It is confessed, all this a serious truth.
Their mad applauses
oth'noble Prince, though he be truly virtuous,
may force ambition into him, a mischief
Ceasing the soul with too much craft and sweetness,
as pride or lust do's minds unstay'd and wanton:
'tmakes men like poisoned rats, which when they'ave swallowed
the pleasing bane, rest not until they drink,
and can rest then much less, until they burst with it.
Thy words are still oraculous.
Pray then think
with what an easy toil the haughty Prince,
a demi God by the popular acclamations,
nay, the world's Sovereign in the vulgar wishes,
had he a resolution to be wicked,
might snatch this diadem from your aged temples?
What law so holy, tie of blood so mighty,
which for a Crown, minds sanctified and religious
have not presumed to violate? How much more then
may the soul dazzling glories of a Sceptre
work in his youth, whose constitution's fiery,
as overheated air, and has to fan it
into a flame, the breath of love and praises
blown by strong thought of his own worth and actions.
No more of this, good Mura.
They dare already limit your intentions,
demand (as it were) with cunning zeal (which rightly
interpreted, is insolence) the Princes
abode at home. I will not say it is,
but I guess, 'tmay be their subtle purpose
while we abroad fight for new kingdoms purchase
deprived by that means of our faithful succours,
they may deprive you of this crown, enforce
upon the prince this Diadem; which however
he may be loath to accept, being once possessed of't
and tasted the delights of supreme greatness,
he will be more loath to part with. To prevent this,
not that I think it will, but that may happen,
it is fit the Prince march. I'ave observed in him too
of late a sullen Melancholy, whence rising
i'll not conjecture; only I should grieve, Sir,
beyond a moderate sorrow, traitorous practise
should take that from you which with loyal blood
ours and your own victorious arms have purchased.
and now I have discharged my honest conscience
censure on it as you please; henceforth I'm silent.
Would thou had been so now, thy loyal fears
have made me see how miserable a King is,
whose rule depends on the vain people suffrage.
Black now and horrid as the face of storms
appears al Abilqualits lovely virtues,
because to me they only make him dangerous,
and with great terror shall behold those actions
which with delight before we viewed, and dotage;
like Mariners that bless the peaceful seas,
which when suspected to grow up tempest•os,
they tremble at. Though he may still be virtuous,
it is wisdom in us, to him no injustice,
to keep a vigilant eye o'er his proceedings
and the wild peoples purposes.
Abilqualit!
come to take your leave, I do conjecture.
Rather, Sir, to beg
your gracious licence, I may still at home
attend your dread commands, and that you'd please
to nominate my hopeful brother Abrahen
(in lieu of me) chief of your now raised Forces
for the Persian expedition.
Dare you (Sir) presume to make this suit to us?
Why? (my royal Lord)
I hope this cannot pull your anger on
your most obedient Son: a true affection
to the young Prince my brother, did beget
this my request; I willingly would have
his youth adorned with glory of this conquest.
No tree bears fruit in Autumn, 'less it blossom
first in the Spring; it is fit he were acquainted
in these soft years with military action,
that when grown perfect man, he may grow up too
perfect in warlike discipline.
Hereafter
we shall by your appointment guide our Counsels.
Why do you not entreat me to resign
my Crown, that you the peoples much loved minion
may with it impale your glorious brow? Sir, henceforth
or know your duty better, or your pride
shall meet our just waked anger. To your Charge,
and march with speed, or you shall know what it is
to disobey our pleasure. When you're King,
learn to command your Subjects; I will mine (Sir.)
You know your Charge, perform it.
I have done.
Our hopes (I see) resemble much the Sun,
that rising and declining cast large shadows;
but when his beams are dressed in's midday brightness,
yields none at all: when they are farthest from
success, their guilt reflection does display
the largest shows of events fair and prosperous.
With what a settled confidence did I promise
my self, my stay here, Mura's wished departure?
when stead of these, I find my fathers wrath
destroying mine intentions. Such a fool
is self-compassion, soothing us to faith
of what we wish should hap▪ while vain desire
of things we have not, makes us quite forget
those w'are possessed of.
Alone the engine works
beyond or hope or credit. How I hug
with vast delight, beyond that of stolen pleasures
forbidden Lovers taste, my darling Mistress,
my active Brain! If I can be thus subtle
while a young Serpent, when grown up a Dragon
how glorious shall I be in cunning practise?
My gracious brother!
Gentle Abrahen. I
am grieved my power cannot comply my promise:
my Father's so averse from granting my
request concerning thee, that with angry frowns
he did express rather a passionate rage,
then a refusal civil, or accustomed
to his indulgent disposition.
Hoe's our Father,
and so the tyrant Custom doth enforce us
to yield him that which fools call natural,
when wise men know it is more then servile duty,
a slavish, blind obedience to his pleasure,
be it nor just, nor honourable.
O my Abrahen,
these sounds are unharmonious, as unlooked for
from thy unblemished innocence: though he could
put off paternal piety, 't gives no privilege
for us to wander from our filial duty:
though harsh, and to our natures much unwelcome
be his decrees, like those of Heaven, we must not
presume to question them.
Not, if they concern
our lives and fortunes? It is not for my self
I urge these doubts; but it is for you, who are
my Brother, and I hope, must be my Sovereign,
my fears grow on me almost to distraction:
Our Father's age betrays him to a dotage,
which may be dangerous to your future safety;
he does suspect your loyalty.
How, Abrahen?
I knew it would start your innocence; but it is truth,
a sad and serious truth; nay his suspicion
almost arrived unto a settled faith
that you're ambitious.
It is impossible.
The glorious shine of your illustrious virtues
are grown too bright and dazzling for his eyes
to look on as he ought, with admiration;
and he with fear beholds them, as it were,
through a perspective, where each brave action
of yours surveyed though at remotest distance,
appears far greater then it is. In brief,
that love which you have purchased from the people
that sing glad Hymns to your victorious fortunes,
betrays you to his hate; and in this Voyage
which he enforces you to undertake,
he has set spies upon you.
It is so: afflictions
do fall like hailstones, one no sooner drops,
but a whole Shower does follow. I observed
indeed, my Abrahen, that his looks and language
was dressed in unaccustomed clouds, but did not
imagine they'd presaged so fierce a tempest.
Ye gods, why do you give us gifts and graces,
share your own attributes with men, your virtues,
when they betray them to worse hate then vices?
But Abrahen, prithee reconfirm my fears
by testimonial how this can be truth;
for yet my innocence with too credulous trust
sooths up my soul, our father should not thus
put that off which does make him so, his sweetness,
to feed the irregular flames of false suspicions
and soul tormenting jealousies.
Why, to me,
to me (my Lord) he did with strong Injunctions
give a solicitous charge to overlook your actions.
My Abrahen (quoth he) I'm not so unhappy,
that like thy brother thou should be ambitious,
who does affect, before thy aged Fathers ashes,
with greedy lust my Empire. Have a strict
and cautious diligence to observe his carriage,
'twil be a pious care. Moved with the base
indignity, that he on 'me should force
the office of a spy; your spy, my noble
and much loved brother: my best manhood scarce
could keep my angry tears in; I resolved
I was in duty bound to give you early
intelligence of his unjust intentions,
that you in wisdom might prevent all dangers
might fall upon you from them, like swift lightning,
killing because they invade with sudden fierceness
In afflicting me, misery is grown witty.
Nay besides (Sir)
the sullen Mura has the self same charge too
consigned and settled on him; which his blind
duty will execute. O brother, your
soft passive nature, do's like jet on fire
when oils cast on it, extinguish: otherwise,
this base suspicion would inflame your sufferance,
nay make the purest loyalty rebellious.
However, though your too religious piety
forces you 'ndure this foul disgrace with patience,
look to your safety, brother, that dear safety
which is not only yours, but your whole Empires:
for my part, if a faithful brothers service
may ought avail you, tho against our father,
since he can be so unnaturally suspicious,
as your own thoughts, command it.
Come, I know,
although you have lost some implements of manhood
may make thee gracious in the sight of woman,
yet you have a little engine, called a tongue,
by which thou can overcome the nicest female,
in the behalf of friend. Insooth, you Eunuchs
may well be styled Pimps-royal, for the skill
you have in quaint procurement.
Your Lordship's merry,
and would enforce on me what has been your
office far oftner than the cunningest Squire belonging
to the smock transitory. May it please your Highness.
Ha! Mesithes.
His countenance varies strangely, some affair
the Eunnch gives him notice of, 't should seem,
begets much pleasure in him.
Is this truth?
Mes. Else let me taste your anger.
My dear Abrahen,
we'll march to night, prithee give speedy Notice
to our Lieutenant Mura, to collect
the forces from their several quarters, and
draw them into Battalion on the plain
behind the City, lay a strict command
he stir not from the Ensigns till our self
arrive in person there. Be speedy, brother,
a little hasty business craves our presence.
We will anon be with you, my Methises.
Can your grace imagine
whether his highness goes now?
No, Selinthus;
can thou conjecture at the Eunuchs business?
what ere it was, his countenance seemed much altered:
Il'd give a talent to have certain knowledge
what was Mesithes message.
I'll inform you
at a far easier rate. Mesithes business
certes concerned a limber pett•coat,
and the smock soft and slippery; on my honour,
has been providing for the Prince, some female
that he takes his leave of Ladies flesh
ere his departure.
Not improbable, it may be so.
Nay, certain (Sir) it is so:
and I believe, your little body earns
after the same sport. You were once reported
a wag would have had business of engendering
with surly Mura's Lady: and men may
conjectute you're no chaster then a vot'rie:
yet though she would not solace your desire•,
there are as handsome Ladies will be proud
to have your Grace inoculate their stock•
with your graft-royal.
Thou art Selinthus still,
and wilt not change thy humour. I must go
and find out Mura; so farewell Selinthus,
thou art not for these wars, I know.
No truly,
nor yet for any other, 'less't be on
a naked yielding enemy; though there may
be as hot service upon such a foe
as on those clad in steel: the little squadron,
we civil men assault body to body,
oft carry wild-fire▪ about them privately,
that •indges us in the service from the crown
even to the sole, nay sometimes hair and all off.
But these are transitory perils.
Cozens,
I thought you had been dancing to the drum.
Your General has given order for a march
this night, I can assure you.
It is Cousin,
something of the soonest; but we are prepared
at all times for the journey.
To morrow morning
may serve the turn though. Hark you, Cozens mine;
if in this Persian War you chance to take a
handsome she Captive, pray you be not unmindful
of us your friends at home; I will disburse
her ransom, Cozens, for I've a months mind
to try if strange flesh, or that of our own
Country has the completer relish.
We will accomplish thy pleasure, noble Cousin.
But pray do not
take the first say of her your selves. I do not
love to walk after any of my kindred
in the path of copulation.
The first fruits
shall be thy own, dear Cos. But shall we part
(never perhaps to meet again) with dry
lips, my right honoured Cos?
By no means,
though by the Alcharon wine be forbidden,
you Soldiers in that case maked not your faith.
Dr•nk water in the Camp, when you can purchase
•o other liquor; here you shall have plenty
•f wine, old and delis•os. I'll be your leader,
and bring you on, let who will bring you off.
To the encounter, come let us march, Cozens.
No more, my gracious Lord, where real love is
needless are all expressions ceremonious:
the amorous Turtles, that at first acquaintance
strive to express in murmuring notes their loves,
do when agreed on their affections change
their chirps to billing▪
And in feathered arms
encompass mutually their gaudy necks.
How do you like
these love tricks, Perilinda?
Very well;
but one may sooner hope from a dead man
to receive kindness, than from thee, an Eunuch.•
You are the coldest creatures in the bodies,
no snow-balls like you.
We must needs, who have not
that which like fire should warm our constitutions,
the instruments of copulation, girl,
our toys to please the Ladies.
Caropia, in your well becoming pity
of my extreme afflictions and stern sufferings,
you've shown that excellent mercy as must render
what ever action you can fix on, virtuous.
But Lady, I till now have been your tempter,
one that desired hearing, the brave resistance
you made my brother, when he wooed your love,
only to boast the glory of a conquest
which seemed impossible, now I have gained it
by being vanquisher, I my self am vanquished
your everlasting Captive.
Then the thraldom
will be as prosperous as the pleasing bondage
of palms, that flourish most when bowd down fastest;
Constraint makes sweet and easy things laborious,
when love makes greatest miseries seem pleasures.
Yet it was ambition (Sir) joined with affection
that gave me up a spoil to your temptations.
I was resolved, if ever I did make
a breach on matrimonial faith, 't should be
with him that was the darling of kind fortune
as well as liberal nature; who possessed
the height of greatness to adorn his beauty;
which since they both conspire to make you happy,
I thought 't would be a greater sin to suffer
your hopeful person, born to sway this Empire,
in loves hot flames to languish, by refusal
to a consuming fever▪ then t'infringe
a vow which ne'er proceeded from my heart
when I unwillingly made it.
And may break it with confidence, secure from the
least guilt, as if 't had only in an idle dream
been by your fancy plighted. Madam, there
can be no greater misery in love,
than separation from the object which
we affect; and such is our misfortune
we must ith'infancy of our desires
breath at unwelcome distance; ith'mean time,
lets make good use of the most precious minutes
we have to spend together.
Else we were unworthy to be titled lovers; but
I fear loathed Mura may with swift approach
disturb our happiness.
By my command hoe's mustering up our forces.
Yet Mesithes, go you to Abrahen, and with intimations
from us, strengthen our charge. Come my Caropia,
love's wars are harmless, for who ere do's yield,
gains as much honour as who wins the field.
Open the door, I must and •ill have entrance
unto the Prince my brother, as y•• love
your life and safety and that Ladies ••nor,
whom you are lodged in amorous twi••s▪ with, do not
deny me entrance to you, I am Abra••n,
your loyal brother Abrahen.
It is his voice,
and there can be no danger in it, Caropia,
be not dismayed, though w'are to him discovered.
your fame shall taste no blemish by it. Now brother,
it is something rude in you, thus violently
to press upon our privacies.
My affection
shall be my Advocate, and plead my care
of your loved welfare, as you love your honour,
haste from this place, or you'll betray the Lady
to ruin most inevitable. Her husband
has notice of your being here, and's coming
on wings of jealousy and desperate rage
to intercept you in your close delights.
In brief, I over heard a trusty Servant
of his ith'Camp come and declare your highness
was private with Caropia: at which tidings
the sea with greater haste when vexed with tempests,
so sudden and boisterous, flies not towards the shore,
then he intended homewards. He by this
needs must have gained the City; for with all my power
I hasted hitherward, that by your absence
you might prevent his view of you.
Why? the slave
dare not invade my person, had he found me
in fair Caropias arms: it would be ignoble,
now I have cause her danger, should I not
defend her from his violence. I'll stay
though he come armed with thunder.
That will be
a certain means to ruin her: To me
count that cure, I'll stand between the Lady,
and Mura's fury, when your very sight,
giving fresh fire to th'injury, will incense him
against her beyond all patience.
Nay, besides
his violent wrath breaking through his allegiance,
may riot on your person. Dear my Lord
withdraw your self, there may be some excuse
when you are absent thought on, to take off
Mura's suspicion: by our loves, depart
I do beseech you. Hapless I was born
to be most miserable.
You shall over-rule me▪
Better it is for him with unhallowed hands
to act a sacrilege on our Prophets tom
then to profane this purity with the le•••
offer of injury; be careful Abrahen,
to thee I leave my heart. Farewell Car••in,
your tears enforce my absence.
Pray hast my Lord
lest you should meet the enraged Mur. now Madam
where are the boasted glories of that v••tu,
which like a faithful Fort withstood m• bat••ries?
demolished now, and ruined they app••r;
like a fair building tottered from its b•••
by an unruly whirlwind, and are no
instead of love the objects of my pity
I'm bound to thank you Sir •et credit me;
my sin's so pleasing't cannot meet re•••ntance.
Were Mura here, and armed with al• the horrors
•age could invest his powers with; n•t forgiven
Hermits with greater peace shall hast t• death,
then I to be the Martyr of this cause,
which I so love and reverence.
It is a noble
and well becoming constancy, and merits
a lover of those Supreme eminent graces,
that do like full winds swell the glorious Sails
of Abilqualit's dignity and beauty!
yet Madam, let me tel you, though I could not
envy my brothers happiness, if he
could have enjoyed your priceless love with safety,
free from discovery, I am afflicted
beyond a moderate sorrow, that my youth
which with as true a zeal, courted your love,
should appear so contemptible to receive
a killing scorn from you: yet I forgive you,
and do so much respect your peace, I wish
you had not sinned so carelessly to be
betrayed in the first fruitions of your wishes
to your suspicious husband.
It is a fate Sir,
which I must stand, though it come dressed in flames,
killing as circular fire, and as prodigious
as death presaging Comets: there's that strength
in love, can change the pitchy face of dangers
to pleasing forms, make ghastly fears seem beauteous;
and I'm resolved, since the sweet Prince is free
from Mura's anger, which might have been fatal
if he should here have found him, unresistless
I dare his utmost fury.
'Twil bring death with it
sure as stifling damp; and it were much pity
so sweet a beauty should unpitied fall,
betrayed to endless infamy; your husband
knows only that my brother in your chamber
was entertained; the servant that betrayed you,
curse on his diligence, could not affirm
he saw you twined together: yet it is
death by the law, you know, for any Lady
at such an hour, and in her husbands absence▪
to entertain a stranger.
It is considered Sir,
and since I cannot live to enjoy his love,
I'll meet my death as willingly as I
met Abilqualit's dear embraces.
That were too severe a cruelty. Live Caropia,
till the kind destinies take the loathed Mura
to their eternal Mansions, till he fall
either in war a sacrifice to fortune,
or else by stratagem take his destruction
from angry Abilqualit, whose fair Empress
you were created for: there is a mean yet
to save the opinion of your honour spotless,
as that of Virgin innocence, nay to preserve,
(though he doth know (as certainly he must do)
my Brother have enjoyed thee) thee still precio•s
in his deluding fancy.
Let me adore you
if you can give effect to your good purpose.
But tic impossible.
With as secure an ease
't shall be accomplished as the blessed desires
of uncross'd lovers: you shall with one breath
dissolve these mists that with contagious darkness
threaten the lights both of your life and honour.
Affirm my brother ravished you.
How my Lord?
Obtained by violence entry into your chamber
where his big lust seconded by force,
despite of yours and your Maids weak resistance
surprised your honour: when 't shall come to question,
my brother cannot so put off the truth,
he owes his own affection and your whiteness,
but •o acknowledge it a rape.
And so by saving mine, betray his fame and safety,
to the laws danger, and your fathers justice,
which with impartial doom will most severely
sentence the Prince, although his son.
Your fears
and too affectionate tenderness will ruin
all that my care has builded. Sure, Mesithes
has (as my charge enjoined him) made relation
to him of Abilqualit's action. See your Husband,
resolve on it, or y' are miserable.
Furies,
where is this lustful Prince, and this lascivious
Strumpet? ha Abrahen, here?
Good• Cozen Mura,
be not so passionate, it is your Prince
has wrought your injury; resolve to bear
your crosses like a man: the greatest afflictions
should have the greatest fortitude in their sufferings
from minds resolved and noble. Alas poor Lady,
it was not her fault; his too unruly lust
it is, has destroyed her purity.
Ha, in tears!
Are these the livery of your fears and penitence,
or of your sorrows (minion) for being robed
so soon of your Adulterer?
Fie, your passion
is too unmannerly; you look upon her
with eyes of rage, when you with grief and pity
ought to surveigh her innocence. My Brother,
degenerate as he is from worth, and merely
the beast of lust, (what •fiends would fear to violate)
has with rude insolence destroyed her honour,
•y him inhumane ravished,
Good Sir be
so merciful as to set free a wretch
from loathed mortality, whose lifes so great
and hateful burden now sh'as lost her honour:
'Twil be a friendly charity to deliver
her from the torment of it.
That I could
contract the soul of universal rage
into this swelling heart, that it might be
as full of poisonous anger as a dragons
when in a toil ensnared. Caropia ravished!
Me thinks the horror of the sound should fright
to everlasting ruin, the whole world,
start natures Genius.
Gentle Madam, pray
withdraw your self, your sight, till I have wrought
a cure upon his temper, will but add
to his affliction.
You're as my good Angel,
I'll follow your directions.
Cozen Mura,
I thought a person of your masculine temper,
in dangers fostered, where perpetual terrors
have been your play-fellowes, would not have resented
with such effeminate passion a disgrace,
though ne'er so huge and hideous.
I am tame,
collected now in all my faculties,
which are so much oppressed with injuries,
they've lost the anguish of them: can you think, Sir,
when all the winds fight, the enraged billows
that use to imprint on the black lips of clouds
a thousand briny kisses, can lie still,
as in a lethargy? that when baths of oil
are po•'d upon the wild irregular flames
in populous Cities, that they'll then extinguish?
Your mitigations add but seas to seas,
give matter to my fires to increase their burning,
and I ere long enlightened by my anger
shall be my own pile, and consume to ashes.
Why, then I see indeed your injuries
have ravished hence your reason and discourse,
and left you the mere prostitute of passion.
Can you repair the ruins you lament so
with these exclaims? was ever dead man called
to life again by fruitful sighs? or can
your rage reedify Caropias honour,
slain and betrayed by his foul lust? Your manhood,
that heretofore has thrown you on all dangers,
me thinks should prompt you to a noble vengeance,
which you may safely prosecute with Justice,
to which this crime, although he be a Prince,
Renders him liable.
Yes, I'll have justice
or I'll awake the sleepy Deities,
or like the ambitious Giants wage new wars
with heaven it self, my wrongs shall steel my courage,
and on this vicious Prince like a fierce Sea-breach
my just waked rage shall riot till it sink
in the remorseless eddie, sink where time
shall never find his name but with disgrace
to taint his hateful memory.
This wildness neither befit your wisdom nor your courage,
which should with settled and collected thoughts
walk on to noble vengeance. He before
was by our plots proscribed to death and ruin
to advance me to the Empire; now with ease
we may accomplish our designs
Would heaven
I ne'er had given consent, overcome by love
to you to have made a forfeit on my allegiance,
tic a just punishment, I by him am wronged,
whom for your sake I fearless sought to ruin.
Are you repentant grown, Mura? this softness?
ill suits a person of your great resolves,
on whom my fortunes have such firm dependence.
Come, let Caropia's fate in••ke thy vengeance
to gain full mastry o'er all other passions,
leave not a corner in the spacious heart
unfurnished of a noble rage, which now
will be an attribute of glorious justice:
the law you know with loss of sight doth punish
all rapes, though on mean persons; and our father
is so severe a Justicer, not blood
can make a breach upon his faith to justice.
Besides, we have already made him dangerous
in great Almanzors thoughts, and being delinquent
he needs must suffer what the meanest offender
merits for such a trespass.
I'm awake now,
the lethargy of horror and amaze
that did obscure my reason, like those dull
and lazy vapors that o'reshade the Sun,
vanish, and it resumes its native brightness.
And now I would not but this devil Prince
had done this act upon Caropia's whiteness,
••nce't yields you free access unto the Empire,
The deprival of's sight do's render him incapable
of future sovereignty.
You're in the right,
and hast put on manly considerations:
Caropia (since shoe's in her will untainted)
he's not forgone her honour: he dispatc'd once,
as we will have him shortly,'t shall go hard else▪
a tenant to his marble, thou again•
wedded in peace moist be to her pure virtues,
and live their happy owner.
I'll repair
to great Almanzor instantly, and if
his partial piety do descend to pity,
I will awake the Executioner
of justice, death, although in sleep more heavy
than he can borrow from his natural coldness;
on this good sword I'll wear my causes justice
till he do fall its sacrifice.
But be sure
you do it with cunning secrecy, perhaps,
should he have notice of your just intentions,
he would repair to the Army, from which safeguard
our best force could not pluck him without danger
to the whole Empire.
Doubt not but I'll manage
with a discreet severity my vengeance,
invoke Almanzors equity with sudden
and private haste.
Mean time
I will go put a new design in practice
that may be much conducing to our purpose.
Like clocks, one wheel another on must drive,
affairs by diligent labour only thrive.
No quarrelling good Cozens, le•ft it be
with t•e glass, because it is not of size sufficient
to go•e you a magnificent draught. You will
have ••ighting work enough• when you're in the wars,
do n•t fall out among your selves.
Not pledge
my peerless Mistress health? Soldier, though•t mortal,
if thou refuse it.
Come, come, he shall pledge it,
and it were a Tun. Why, w'are all as dull
as dormice in our liquor: Here's a health
to the Prince Abilqualit.
Let go round:
I'd drink't, were it an Ocean of warm blood
flowing from th'enemie. Pray, good my Lord
what news is stirring?
It should seem, Soldier,
thou can not read; otherwise the learned Pamphlets
that fly about the streets, would satisfy
thy curiosity with news; they are true ones,
full of discreet intelligence.
Cousins, shal's have a Song? here is a Soldier
in's time hath sung a dirge unto the foe
oft in the field.
Captain, I have a new one,
the Soldiers Joy it is called.
That is an harlot.
Prithee be musical, and let us taste
the sweetness of thy voice.
Whist, give attention.
How does your Lordship like it?
Very well.
And so here's to thee. There's no drum beats yet,
and it is clear day; some hour hence twill be
time to break up the Watch. Ha! young Lord Abrahen,
and trim Mesithes with him! what the devil
does he make up so early? He has been
a bat-fowling all night after those Birds,
those Ladie-birds termed wag•ails; what strange business
can he have here, trow?
It was well done, Mesithes!
and trust me, I shall find an apt reward,
both for thy care and cunning. Prithee hast
to Lord Simanthes, and deliver this
note to him with best diligence, my dear Eunuch;
you're half the soul of Abrahen:
I was borne
to be entitled your most humble vassal;
I'll hast to the Lord Simanthes.
How he cringes!
These youths that want the instruments of Manhood,
are very supple in the hams.
Good-morrow
to noble Lord Selinthus: what companions
have you got here thus early?
Blades of metal,
tall men of war, and't please your Grace, of my
own blood and family, men who gathered
a •allot on the enemies ground, and eaten it
in bold defiance of him;
and not a Soldier here butt's an Achylles,
valiant as stoutest Mirmidon.
And they
never had juster cause to show their valour;
the Prince my dearest brother, their Lord General's
became a forfeit to the stern laws rigour;
and it is imagined, our impartial father,
will sentence him to lose his eyes.
Marry heaven
defend, for what, and 't like your Grace!
For a fact
which the severe law punishes with loss
of natures precious lights; my tears will scarce
permit me utter 't: for a rape committed
on the fair wife of Mura.
Was it for nothing else, and please your Grace?
ere he shall lose an eye for such a trifle,
or have a hair diminished, we will
lofe our heads; what, hoodwink men like sullen hawks
for doing deeds of nature! I'm ashamed
the law is such an Ass.
Some Eunuch Judge,
that could not be acquainted with the sweets
due to concupiscencial parts, invented
this law, I'll be hanged else. 's Life, a Prince,
and such a hopeful one, to lose his eyes,
for satisfying the hunger of the stomach
beneath the wast, is cruelty prodigious,
not to be suffered in a common-wealth
of ought but geldings.
It is vain to sooth
our hopes with these delusions, he will suffer
less he be reskued. I would have you therefore
if you ow any service to the Prince,
my much lamented brother, to attend
without least tumult about the Court, and if
there be necessity of your aid, I'll give you
notice when to employ it.
Sweet Prince, we'll swim
in blood to do thee or thy brother service.
Each man provide their weapons.
You will win
my brothers love for ever, nay my father,
though he will seem angry to behold his justice
deluded, afterwards when his rage is past,
will thank you for your loyalties: Pray be there
with all speed possible, by this my brothers
commanded before my father, I'll go learn
the truth, and give you notice: pray be secret
and firm to your resolves.
For him that flinches
in such a cause, I'll have no more mercy
on him. Here is Tarifa
the Princes sometimes Tutor, Mura with him
a walking towards the Court, let's take no notice
of them, lest they discover our intentions
by our grim looks. March fair and softly Cozens,
we'll be at Court before them.
You will not do this, Mura!
How Tarifa?
will you defend him in an act so impious?
Is it fit the drum should cease his surly language,
when the bold Soldiers marches, or that I
should pass o'er this affront in quiet silence,
which Gods and men invoke to speedy vengeance?
which I will have, or manhood shall be tame
as Cowardice.
It was a deed so barbarous,
that tree•th it self blushes as well as justice
to hear it mentioned: but consider Mura,
he is our Prince, the Empires hope, and pillar
of great Almanzors age How far a public
regard should be preferred before your private
desire of vengeance! which if you do purchase
from our impartial Emperors equity,
his loss of sight, and so of the succession,
will not restore Caropia to the honour
he ravished from her. But so foul the cause is,
I rather should lament the Princes folly
than plead in his behalf.
It is but vain,
there is your warrant, as you are high Marshal,
to summon him to make his speedy appearance
before the Tribunal of Almanzor;
so pray you execute your office.
How one vice
can like a small cloud when't breaks forth in showers,
black the whole heaven of virtues! O my Lord,
that face of yours which once with Angel brightness
cheered my faint sight, like a grim apparition
frights it with ghastly terror: you have done
a deed that startles virtue till it shakes
as it got a palsy. I'm commanded
to summon you before your father, and
hope you'll obey his mandate.
Willingly,
what's my offence, Tarifa?
Would you knew not,
I did presage your too unruly passions
would hurry you to some disast'rons act,
but ne'er imagined you'd have been so lost
to masculine honour, to commit a rape
on that unhappy object of your love,
whom now you've made the spoil of your foul lust,
the much wronged wife of Mura.
Why, do's Mura charge me with his Caropia's rape?
This warrant sent by your angry father, testifies
he means to appeach you of it.
It is my fortune, all natural motions when they
approach their end, hast to draw to it with accustomed
swiftness. Rivers with greedier speed run near
their out-falls, than at their springs. But I'm resolved,
let what happen that will, I'll stand it, and defend
Carpoia's honour, though mine own I ruin;
Who dares not dye to justify his love,
deserves not to enjoy her. Come, Tarifa,
what ever befall, I'm resolute. He dies
glorious, that falls loves innocent sacrifice.
NO more Tarifa, you'll provoke our anger,
if you appear in this cause so solicitous,
the act is too apparent: nor shall you
need (injured Mura) to implore our justice,
which with impartial doom shall fall on him
more rigorously, then on a strange offender.
O Abilqualit, (for the name of Son,
when thou forsookst thy native virtue, left thee;)
Were all thy blood, thy youth and fortunes glories
of no more value, then to be exposed
to ruin for one vice; at whose name only
the furies start, and bashful fronted justice
hides her amazed head? But it is now bootless
to show a fathers pity, in my grief
for thy amiss. As l'me to be thy Judge,
be resolute, I'll take as little notice,
thou art my off-spring, as the wandering clouds
do of the showers, which when they've bred to ripeness,
they straight disperse through the vast earth forgotten.
I'm sorry Sir, that my unhappy chance
should draw your anger on me; my long silence
declares I have on that excelling sweetness,
that unexampled pattern of chaste goodness; Caropia acted
violence. I confess,
I loved the Lady, and when no persuasions
served to prevail on her, too stubborn, incensed,
by force I sought my purpose and obtained it;
nor do I yet (so much I prize the sweetness
of that unvalued purchase) find repentance
in any abject thought; what ere false on me
from your sterne rigour in a cause so precious,
will be a pleasing punishment.
Yon are grown
a glorious malefactor, that dare brave thus
the awful rod of justice! Lost young man,
for you're no child of mine; dost not con••der
to what a state of desperate destruction
thy wild lust has betrayed thee! What rich blessings
(that I may make thee sensible of thy sins
by showing thee thy suffering) hast thou lost
by thy irregular folly! First my love,
which never more must meet thee, scarce in pity;
the glory flowing from thy former actions
stopped up for ever; and those lustful eyes,
by whose deprival (you're deprived of being
capable of this Empire) to the law,
which will exact them, forfeited. Cal in there
a Surgeon, and our Mutts to execute this act
of justice on the unworthy traitor, upon whom
my just waked wrath shall have no more compassion,
then the incensed flames have on perishing wretches
that wilfully leap into them.
O my Lord,
that which on others would be fitting justice,
on him your hopeful though offending son,
will be exemplar cruelty; his youth Sir,
that hath abounded with so many virtues▪
is an excuse sufficient for one vice:
he is not yours only. hoe's your Empires,
destined by nature and successions privilege,
when you in peace are shrouded in your marble,
to wield this Sceptre after you. O do not,
by putting out his eyes, deprive your Subjects
of light, and leave them to dull mournful darkness.
It is but in vain, I am inexorable.
If those on which his eyes hang, were my heart strings,
I'd cut them out rather then wound my Justice•;
nor dos't befit thy virtue intercede
for him in this cause horrid and prodigious;
the crime against me was acted; it was a rape
upon my honour, more then on her whiteness;
his was from mine derivative, as each stream
is from its spring; so that he has polluted
by his soul fact, my fame, my truth, my goodness,
stricken through my dignity by his violence:
nay, started in their peaceful urns, the ash•
of all my glorious Ancestors; defiled
the memory of their still descendant virtues;
nay with a killing frost, nipped the fair blossoms,
that did presage such goodly fruit arising
from his own hopeful youth.
I ask but justice;
those eyes that led him to unlawful objects,
tic fit should suffer foe•'t a lasting blindness;
the Sun himself, when he darts rays lascivious,
such as engender by too piercing fervency
intemperate and infectious heats, straight wears
obscurity from the clouds his own beams raises.
I have been your Soldier Sir, and fought your battles;
for all my services, I beg but justice,
which is the Subjects best prerogative,
the Princes greatest attribute; and for a fact,
then which, none can be held more black and hideous,
which has betrayed to an eclipse the brightest
star in the heaven of virtues: the just law
does for 't ordain a punishment, which I hope
you the laws righteous guitar, will according
to equity see executed.
Why! that law
was only made for common malefactors,
but has no force to extend unto the Prince,
to whom the law it self must become subject.
This hopeful Prince, look on him, great Almanzor;
and in his eyes, those volumes of all graces,
which you like erring Meteors would extinguish▪
read your own lively figure, the best story
of your youths noblest vigour; let not wrath (Sir)
overcome your piety, nay your humane pity.
It is in your breast, my Lord, yet to show mercy;
that precious attribute of heavens true goodness,
even to your self, you• son! me thinks that name
should have a power to interdict your Justice
in its too rigorous progress.
Dear Tarifa,
I'm more afflicted at the intercessions,
then at the view of my approaching torments,
which I will meet with fortitude and boldness,
too base to shake now at one personal danger,
when I've encountered thousand perils fearless;
Nor do I blame my gracious fathers Justice,
though it precede his nature. I'd not have him
(for my sake) forfeit that for which hoe's famous,
his uncorrupted equity, nor rapine
I at my destiny; my eyes have had
delights sufficient in Caropia's beauties,
to serve my thought• for after contemplations;
nor can I ever covet a new object,
since they can ne'er hope to encounter any
of equal worth and sweetness.
Yet hark Tarifa, to thy secrecy
I will impart my dearest, inmost counsels;
if I should perish, as it is probable
I may, under the hands of these tormentors;
thou moist unto succession show my innocence;
Caropia yielded without least constraint,
and I enjoyed her freely.
How my Lord?
No words on it,
as you respect my honour! I'd not lose
the glory I shall gain by these my sufferings;
come grim furs, and execute your office. I will stand you,
unmoved as hills at whirlewinds, and amidst
the torments you inflict, retain my courage.
Be speedy villains.
O stay your cruel hands,
you dumb ministers of injured Justice,
and let me speak his innocence ere you further
afflict his precious eye-sight.
What does this mean, Tarifa!
O my Lord,
the too much bravery of the Princes spirit
it is has undone his fame, and pulled upon him
this fatal punishment; it was but to save
the Ladies honour, that he has assumed
her rape upon him, when with her consent
the deed of shame was acted.
Tic his fears
makes him traduce her innocence: he who did not
stick to commit a riot on her person,
can make no conscience to destroy her fame
by his untrue suggestions.
It is a baseness
beyond thy other villainy (had she yielded,)
thus to betray for transitory torture,
her honour, which thou were engaged to safeguard
even with thy life. A son of mine could never
show this ignoble cowardice: Proceed
to execution, I'll not hear him speak,
he is made up of treacheries and falsehoods.
Will you then
be to the Prince so tyrannous? Why, to me
just now he did confess his only motive
to undergo this torment, was to save
Caropia's honour blameless.
I am more troubled▪
Sir, with his untimely frenzy,
then with my punishment; his too much love
to me, has spoiled his temperate reason. I
confess Caropia yielded! Not the light
is half so innocent as her spotless virtue.
'T was not well done, Tarifa, to betray
the secret of your friend thus: though She yielded,
the terror of ten thousand deaths shall never
force me to confess it.
Again, my Lord, even now
he does confess, she yielded, and protest•
that death shall never make him •ay shee'• guilty•:
the breath scarce passed his lips yet.
Haplesse man,
to run in•o this lunacy!
Fie Tarifa,
so treacherous to your Friend!
Again, again.
Will no man give me credit?
Where is our royal fathe?: where our brother?
As you respect your life and Empires safety,
dismiss these tyrannous instruments of death
and cruelty unexemplified. O Brother,
that I should ever live to enjoy my eie-sight,
and see one half of your dear lights endangered.
My Lord, you've done an act, which my just fears
tells me, will shake your Sceptre! O for heavens sake,
look to your future safety; the rough Soldier
hearing their much loved General, My good Brother
was by the law betrayed to some sad danger,
have in their piety beset the palace;
think on some means to appease them, ere their fury
grow to its full unbridled height; they threaten
your life, great Sir: pray send my brother to them,
his sight can only pacify them.
Have you your Champions!
We will prevent their insolence, you shall not
boast, you have got the Empire by our ruin.
Mutts, Strangle him immediately.
Avert
such a prodigious mischief, heaven. Hark, hark
they're entered into the Court; desist you monsters,
my life shall stand betwixt his and this violence,
or I with him will perish. Faithful Soldiers,
hast to defend your Prince, curse on your slowness.
Hoe's dead; my fathers turn is next. O horror,
would I might sink into forgetfulness▪
What has your fury urged you to?
To that
which whosoever murmurs at, is a faithless traitor
to our tranquillity. Now Sir, your b•siness?
My Lord, the City
is up in arms, in rescue of the Prince;
the whole Court throngs with Soldiers.
'T was high time
to cut this viper off, that would have eat his passage
through our very •owels to our Empire.
Nay, we will stand their furies, and with terror
of Majesty strike dead these insurrections.
Traitors, what means this violence?
O dear Soldiers,
your honest love's in vain; my Brother's dead,
strangled by great Almanzor's dire command,
ere your arrival. I do hope they'll kill him
in their hot zeal.
Why do you stare so, traitors?
it was I your Emp'ror that have done this act,
which who ripens at, treads the self same steps
of death that he has done. Withdraw and leave us,
wee'ld be alone. No motion▪ Are you statues?
Stay you, Tarifa here. For your part, Mura,
you cannot now complain but you have justice;
so quit our presence.
Faces about, Gentlemen.
It has happened
above our wishes, we shall have no need now
to employ your handkercher. Yet give it me.
You're sure it is right, Simanthes.
Tarifa,
I know the love thou bear Prince Abilqualit
makes thy big heart swell as 't had drunk the some
of angry Dragons. Speak thy free intentions,
Deserved he not this fate?
No: You're a Tyrant,
one that delights to feed on your▪ own bowels,
and were not worthy of a Son so virtuous.
Now you have •an his, add to your injustice,
and take Tarifa's life, who in his death,
should it come flying on the wings of torments,
would speak it out as an apparent truth▪
the Prince to me d•cla•'d his innocence,
and that Caropia yielded.
Rise Tarifa;
we do command thee, rise: a sudden chillness,
such as the hand of winter casts on brooks,
thrils our aged heart. I•ll not have thee engross
sorrow alone for Abilqualii's death:
I loved the boy well, and though his ambition
and popularity did make him dangerous,
I do repent my fury, and will vie
with thee in sorrow. How he makes death lovely!
Shall we fix here, and weep till we be statues?
Till we grow stiff as the cold Al•bl•sters
must be erected over us▪ Your rashness
has robed the Empire of the greatest hope
it ere shall boast again. Would I were ashes.
He breathes (me thinks:) the over-hastie soul
was too discourteous to forsake so fair
a lodging, without taking solemn leave
first of the owner. Ha, his handkercher!
You're liberal to thy Father even in death,
leave him a legacy to dry his tears,
which are too slow; th•y should create a deluge.
O my dear Abilqualit!
You exceed now
as much in grief as you did then in rage,
One drop of this pious paternal softness
had ransomed him from ruin. Dear Sir, rise:
my grief's divided, and I know not whether
I should lament you living, or him dead.
Good Sir, erect your looks. Not stir! His sorrow
makes him insensible. Ha, there's no motion
left in his vital spirits: The excess
of grief has stifled up his powers, and •racked
(I fear) his aged hearts cordage. Help, the Emperor,
he Emperor's dead; Help, help.
What dismal outcrie's this?
our royal father dead! The handkercher has wrought I see.
Yes; his big heart
vanquished with sorrow, that in's violent rage,
he doomed his much loved son to timeless death,
could not endure longer on its weak strings,
but cracked with weight of sorrow. Their two spirits,
by this, are met in their delightful passage
to the blessed shades; we in our tears are bound
to cal you our dread Sovereign.
Long live Abrahen
Great Caliph of Arabia.
It is a title
we cannot covet, Lords, it comes attended
with so great cares and troubles, that our youth
start at the thought of them, even in our sorrows
which are so mighty on us; ou• weak spirits
are ready to relinquish the possession
they've of mortality, and take swift flight
after our royal friends. Simanthes, be it
your charge to see all fitting preparation
provided •or the funerals.
Whore's great Almanzor?
O Selinthus, this
day is the hour of funerals grief; for his
cruelty to my brother, has translated
him to immortality.
He will have attendants
to wait on him to our great prophets paradise,
ere he be ready for his grave. The Soldiers
all mad with rage for the Princes slaughter,
have vowed by all oaths Soldiers can inve•t,
(and that's no small store) with death and destruction,
to pursue sullen Mura.
Tarifa,
use your authority to keep their violence
in due obedience. We're so fraught with grief,
we have no room for any other passion
in our distracted bosom. Take these royal bodies
and place them on that couch; here where they fell,
they shall be embalmed. Yet put them out of our sight,
their view• draw fresh drops from our heart.
Anon we will show our selves to cheer the afflicted
Subject.
Long live Abrahen, great Caliph of Arabia.
And who can say now, Abrahen is a villain?
I am saluted King with acclamations
that dea• the Heavens to hear, with as much joy
as if I had achieved this Sceptre by
means fair and ver•uous. It was this handkercher
that did to death Almanzor; so infected,
its least insensible vapour has full power;
applied to the eye, or any other Organ,
can drink its poison in to vanquish Nature,
though ne'er so strong and youthful. It was Simanthes
devised it for my brother, and my cunning
transferred it to Almanzor; it is no matter,
my worst impiety is held now religious.
Twixt Kings and their inferiors there's this odds,
These are mere men, we men, ye• earthly gods.
It was well the Mutts proved fai•hful, otherwise
I'd lost my breath with as much speed and silence
as those who do expire in dreams, their health
seeming no whit abated. But it was wisely
considered of me, to prepare those sure
instruments of destruction: The suspicion
I had by Abrahen of my fathers fears
of my unthought ambition, did instruct me
by making them mine, to secure my safety.
Would the inhumane Surgeon had tan
these blessed lights from me; that I had lived for ever
doomed to perpetual darkness, rather then
Tarifa's fears had so appeach'd her honour.
Well, villain Brother, I have found, that by
my seeming death, which by my lives best arts
I ne'er should have had knowledge of. Dear Father,
though thou to me were pitiless, my heart
weeps tears of blood, to see thy age thus like
a lofty pine fall, eaten through by the gin
from its own Stock descending: He has agents
in his ungracious wickedness: Simanthes
he has discovered: Were they multitudes
as numerous as collected sands, and mighty
in force as mischief, they should from my Justice
meet their due punishment. Abrah•n by this
is proclaimed Caliph, yet my undoubted right▪
when 't shall appear I'm living, will reduce
the people to my part; the armie's mine,
whither I must withdraw unseen: the night
will best secure me. What a strange Chimera
of thought possesses my dull brain! Caropia,
thou hast a share in them: Fate, to thy mercy
I do commit my self; who scopes the snare
once, has a certain caution to beware.
Your Lord is not returned yet!
No, good Madam:
pray do not thus torment your self, the Prince
(I warrant you) will have no injury
by saving of your honour; do you think
his father will be so extreme outrageous
for such a trifle, as to force a woman
with her good liking?
My ill boding soul
beats with presages ominous. Would heaven
I'd stood the hazard of my incensed Lords fury,
rather then he had run this imminent danger.
Could you ne'er learn, which of the slaves it was
betrayed our close loves to loathed Mura's notice?
No indeed could I not; but here's my Lord,
pray Madam do not grieve so!
My Caropia,
dress up thy looks in their accustomed beauties,
cal back the constant spring into thy cheeks,
that droop like lovely Violets, o'er charged
with too much mornings dew; shoot from thy eye•
a thousand flames of joy. The lustful Prince,
that like a foul thief, robed thee of thy honour
by his ungracious violence▪ has met
his royal fathers Justice.
Now my fears
carry too sure an augury! you would fain
sooth me, my Lord, out of my flood of sorrows▪
what reparation can that make my honour,
though he have tasted punishment?
His life
is fallen the off-spring of thy chastity,
which his hot lust polluted: nay, Caropia,
to save himself, when he but felt the torment
applied to his lascivious eyes; although
at first he did with impudence acknowledge
thy rape, he did invade thy spotless virtue,
protested, only it was to save thy honour,
he took on him thy rape, when with consent
and not constrained, thou yeildedst to the looseness
of his wild vicious flames.
Could he be so unjust, my Lord?
He was, and he has paid for it;
the malicious Soldier, while he was a losing
his eyes, made violent head to bring him reskue, which
pulled his ruin on him. But no more
of such a prodigy; may his black memory
perish even with his ashes. My Caropia,
the flourishing trees widowed by winters violence
of their fair ornaments, when it is expired once,
put forth again with new and virgin freshness,
their bushy beauties; it should be thy emblem.
Display again those chaste immaculate glories▪
which the harsh winter of his lust had withered;
and I'll again be wedded to thy virtues,
with as much joy, as when thou first enriched me
with their pure maiden beauties. Thou art dull,
and dost not gratulate with happy welcome▪
the triumphs of thy vengeance.
Are you sure, my Lord, the Prince is dead?
Pish, I beheld him breathless.
Take comfort best Caropia, thy disgrace
did with his loathed breath vanish.
I could wish though,
that he had fallen by your particular vengeance,
rather then by the laws rigour; you're a Soldier
of glory, great in war for brave performance:
me thinks 't had been far nobler, had you called him
to personal satisfaction: had I been
your husband, you my wife, and ravished by him;
my resolution would have armed my courage
to've stroke him thus: The dead Prince sends you that.
O, I am slain!
Would it were possible
to kill even thy eternity. Sweet Prince,
how shall I satisfy thy unhappy ruins!
Ha,• not yet breathless! To increase thy ang•each
even to despair, know, Abilqualit was
more dear to me, then thy foul self was odious,
and did enjoy me freely.
That I had
but breath enough to blast thee.
It was his brother
(curse on his art) seduced me to accuse
him of my rape. Do you groan, prodigy!
take this as my last bounty.
O Madam, Madam,
what shall we do? the house is round beset
with Soldiers; Madam, they do swear they'll tear
my Lord, for the sweet Princes death, in pieces.
This hand has saved
their fury that just labour: yet I'll make
use of their malice, help to convey
him into 's Chamber.
Where is this villain, this traitor Mura?
Heaven knows what violence
their fury may assault me with; be it death,
't shall be as welcome, as sound healthful sleeps
to men oppressed with sickness. What's the matter?
what means this outrage?
Marry, Lady gay,
We're come to cut your little throat; pox on you,
and all your sex; you've cause the noble Princes
death, wild-fire take you fort, weel talk with you
at better leisure: you must needs be ravished!
and could not like an honest woman, take
the courtesy in friendly sort!
We trifle:
her husband may escape us. Say, where is he?
or you shall die, ere you can pray
Here, here I have found the villain! what, do you
sleep so soundly? ne'er wake more, this for the
Prince, you rogue: let's tear him piecemeal.
Do you take your death in silence, dog!
You appear endowed with some humanity,
you have •an his life; let not your hate last
after death; let me embalm his body with
my tear•, or kill me with him.
Now you 've said the word,
we care not if we do.
Slaves, unhand
the Lady, who dares offer her least violence,
from this hand meets his punishment. Gazelles,
Osman, I thought you had been better tempered,
then thus to raise up mutinies. In the name
of Abrahen our now Caliph, I command you,
desist from these rebellious practises,
and quietly retire into the Camp,
and there expect his pleasure.
Abrahen Caliph!
There is some hopes then, we shall gain our pardons:
Long live great Abrahen. Soldiers, slink away,
our vow is consummate.
O my dear Lord!
Be gone.
Yes, as quietly
as if we were in flight before the foe;
the general pardon at the coronation,
will bring us off▪ In me sure.
Alas, good Madam!
I'm sorry that these miseries have fallen
with so much rigour on you; pray take comfort▪
your husband prosecuted with too much violence
Prince Abilqualit's ruin.
It appeared so!
what worlds of woes have hapless I given life to,
and yet survive them!
Do not with such fury
torment your innocent self. I'm su•e the Emperor
Abrahen, will number 't amongst his greatest sorrows,
that he has lost your husband. I must give him
notice of these proceedings. Best peace keep you,
and settle your distractions.
not until
I'm settled in my peaceful urn. This is yet
some comfort to me, amidst the floods of woes,
that do overwhelm me for the Princes death,
that I revenged it safely; though I prize
my life at no more value then a foolish
ignorant Indian does a Diamond,
which for a bead of Jet or glass, he changes:
Nor would I keep it, were it not with fuller,
more noble bravery, to take revenge
•or my Lord Abilqualit's timeless slaughter.
I must use craft and mystery. Dissembling
is held the natural quality of our Sex,
nor will it be hard to practice. This same Abrahen,
that by his brothers ruin wields the Sceptre,
whether out of his innocence or malice,
it was that persuaded me to accuse him of
my rape. The die is cast, I am resolved
to thee my Abilqualit • will come.
A death for love, 's no death but Martyrdom.
NO more, good faithful Soldiers; thank the powers
divine, has brought me back to you in safety;
the traitorous practises against our life,
and our dear fathers, poisoned by our b•other;
we have discovered, and shall take just vengan•e
on the unnatural parricide: Retire
into your tents, and peacefully expect
the event of things, you Osman and Gasselles
shall into the City with me.
We will march
through the world with thee, dear Sovereign,
great Abilqualit.
Selinthus,
give you our dear Tarif• speedy notice
we are again among the living: pray •im
to let our loyal Subjects in the City,
have sure intelligence of our escape;
and dearest friends and fellows, let not your
too loud expressions of your joy, for our
unlooked for welfare, subject to discovery
our unexpected safety.
Never fear: they are trusty M•rmidons, and will stick close
to you their dear Achilles; but my Lord,
the wisest may imagine it were safer
for you to rest here among your armed legions,
then to entrust your person in the City,
whereas it seems by the passed story, you'll
not know friends from enemies.
Selinthus,
Thy honest care declares the zealous duty
thou ow'st thy Sovereign: but what danger can
assault us there, where there is none suspects
we are alive? we will go surveigh the state
of things, in the morning we will seize the Palace,
and then proclaim our Right. Come, valiant Captains,
you shall be our companions.
And w•'l guard you
safe, as you were encompassed with an Army.
You guard your own fools heads: Is 't fit his safety,
on which our lives and fortunes have dependence,
should be exposed unto your single valour?
Pray once let your friends rule you, that you may
rule them hereafter. Your good brother Abrahen
has a strong faction, it should seem in the Court:
and those these Blood-hounds followed the sent ho•lie
till they had worried Mura He has other
allies of no mean consequence; your E•nuch
Mesithes his chief Favourite, and Simanthes.
It was that Villain that betrayed my Love
to him and •laught'red Mura.
Very likely.
An arranter, falser Parasite, never was
cut like a Colt. Pray Sir, be wife this once,
at my entreaties; and for ever after
use your discretion as you please: these night works
I do not like; yet ever the morning I will bring
Tarifa to you.
You shall o'er rule us. Poor Caropi•, these
thoughts are thy vot'ries; love thy active fire,
••ames out when present, absent in desire.
What State and Dignitie's like that of Scepters?
With what an awful Majesty resembles it
the Powers above? the inhabitants of that
Superior world are not more subject
to them, then these to us; they can but tremble
when they do speak in thunder; at our frowns
these shake like Lambs at light 'ning. Can it be
imp•y by any means to purchase
this earthly Deity▪ Sovereignty▪ I did sleep
this night with as secure and calm a peace,
as in my former innocence. Conscience,
though•t but a terror, first devised by the fears
of Cowardice, a sad and fond remembrance,
which men should shun, as Elephants clear springs,
lest they behold their own deformities,
and start at their grim shadows. Ha, Mesithes!
My Royal Lord!
Call me thy Friend, Mesithes,
thou equally dost share our heart, best Eunuch;
there is not in the stock of earthly blessings
another I could wish to make my state
completely fortunate, but one; and to
achieve possession of that bliss, thy diligence
must be the fortunate Instrument.
Be it dangerous
as the affrights Sea men do fain in Tempests,
I'll undertake it for my gracious Sovereign,
and perish, but effect it,
No, there is
not the least show of peril in it; it is the want
of fair Caropia's long coveted beauties
that doth afflict thy Abrahen. Love, Mesithes,
is a most stubborn Malady in a Lady, not cured
with that •elicity, that are other passions,
and creeps upon us by those ambushes,
that we perceive our selves sooner in love,
then we can think upon the way of loving.
The old flames break more brightly from th'ashes
where they have long lain hid, like the young Phoenix
that from her spy•le pile revives more glorious.
Nor can I now extinguished; it has passed
the limits of my reason, and intend
my will, where like a fixed Star 't settles,
never to be removed thence.
Cease your fears;
I that could win her for your brother, who
could not boast half your masculine Perfections,
for you will vanquish her.
My Lord, the widow
of slaughtered Mura, fair Caropia does
humbly entreat access to your dread presence;
Shall we permit her entrance?
With all freedom
and best regard. Mesithes, this arrives
beyond our wish. I'll try my eloquence
in my own cause; and if I fail, thou then
shalt be my Advocate.
Your humblest vassal.
With-draw and leave us, and give strict order
none approach our presence
till we do call. It is not fit her sorrows
should be surveyed by common eye. Caropia, welcome;
and would we could as easily give thee comfort
as we allow thee more then mod'rate pity.
In tears those eyes cast forth a greater lustre,
then sparkling rocks of Diamonds enclosed
in swelling seas of Pearl.
Your Majesty
is pleased to wanton with my miseries,
which truly you, if you have nature in you,
ought to bear equal part in your deer brothers
untimely loss, occasioned by my falsehood,
and your improvident counsel: It is that calls
these hearty sorrows up, I am his Murdresse.
It was his own destiny, not our bad intentions
took him away from earth; he was too heavenly,
fit only for the society of Angels,
amongst whom he sings glad hymns to thy perfections,
celebrating with such eloquence thy beauties,
that those immortal essences forget
to love each other by intelligence,
and dote on the Idea of thy Sweetness.
These gentle blandishments▪ and his innocent carriage
had I as much of malice as a Tigress
robed of her young, would melt me into meekness.
But I'll not be a woman.
Sing out, Angel,
and charm the world (were it at mortal difference)
to peace with thine enchantments. What soft murmurs
are those that steal through those pure rosie organs,
like aromatic west-winds, when they fly
through fruitful mists of fragrant mornings dew,
to get the Spring with child of flowers and spices?
Disperse these clouds, that like the vail of night,
with unbecoming darkness shade thy beauties,
and strike a new day from those orient eyes,
to gild the world with brightness.
Sir, these flatteries
neitheir befit the ears of my true sorrows,
nor yet the utt'rance of that real sadness
should dwell in you. Are these the funeral rites
you pay the memory of your royal Father,
and much lamented Brother?
They were mortal,
and to lament them, were to show I envied
the immortal joys of that true happiness
their glorious souls (disfranchised from their flesh)
possess to perpetuity and fullness.
Besides, (Caropia) I have other griefs
more near my heart, that circle 't with a sickness
will shortly number me among their fellowship▪
if speedier remedy be not applied
to my most desperate malady.
I shall
(if my hand fail not my determined courage)
send you to their society far sooner
then you expect or covet. Why, great Sir,
what grief, unless your sorrow for their loss,
is it can afflict you, that command all blessings
men witty in ambition of excess
can wish, to please their fancies?
The want only
of that which I've so long desired; thy love
thy love, Caropia, without which my Empire,
and all the pleasures flowing from its greatness,
will be but burdens, soul-tormenting troubles.
There's not a beam shot from those grief drowned Comets
but (like the Sun's, when they break forth of showers)
dart flames more hot and piercing. Had I never
doted before on thy divine perfections,
viewing thy beauty thus adorned by sadness,
my heart, though marble, actuated to softness,
would burn like sacred incense, it self being
the Altar, Priest, and Sacrifice.
This is
as unexpected, as unwelcome, Sir.
Howere you're pleased to mock me and my griefs
with these impertinent, unmeant discourses,
I cannot have so prodigal a faith,
to give them the least credit; and it is
unkindly done; thus to deride my sorrows.
the virgin Tur•les hate to join their pureness
with widowed mates; my Lord, you are a Prince,
and such as much detest to utter falsehoods,
as Saints do perjuries: why should you strive then
to lay a bait to captivate my affections, when your
greatness conjoined with your youths masculine beauties,
are to a women's f•ailtie, strong temptations?
You know the story too of my misfortunes,
that your dead brother, did with vicious looseness,
corrupt the chaste streams of my spotless virtues,
and left me soiled like a long plucked rose,
whose leaves dissever'd, have forgone their sweetness
Thou hast not (my Caropia;) thou to me
art for thy sent still fragrant, and as precious
as the prime virgins of the Spring, the violets,
when they do first display their early beauties,
till all the winds in love, do grow contentio•s,
which from their lips should ravish the first kisses.
Caropia, think thou I should fear the Nuptials
of this great Empire, because it was my brothers?
As I succeeded him in all his glories,
it is fit I do succeed him in h•s love.
It is true, I know thy fame fell by his practise,
which had he lived, he would have restored by marriage,
by it repaired thy injured honours ruins.
I'm bound to do it in religious conscience;
It is a debt his incensed ghost would quarrel
me living for, should I not pay't with fullness.
Of what frail temper is a women's weakness!
words writ in waters, have more lasting Essence,
then our determinations.
Come, I know,
thou must be gentle, I perceive a combat
in thy soft heart, by the intervening blushes
that strive to adorn thy cheek with purple beauties,
and drive the lovely livery of thy sorrows,
the Ivory paleness, out of them. Think, Caropia,
with what a settled unrevolting truth
I have affected thee; with what heat, what pureness;
and when upon mature considerations,
I found I was unworthy to enjoy
a tree•sure of such excellent grace and goodness,
I did desist, smothering my love in anguish;
anguish! to which the soul of humane torments,
compared, were pains not easy, but delicious;
yet still the secret flames of my affections,
like hidden virtues in some bashful man,
grew great and ferventer by those suppression•.
Thou were created only for an Empress;
despise not then thy destiny, now greatness,
love, Empire, and what ere may be held glorio•s,
courts thy acceptance like obedient Vassals.
I have considered, and my serious thought•
tel me, tic folly to refuse these proffers:
to put off my mortality, the pleasures
of life, which like full streams, do flow from greatness,
to wander in the unpeopled air, to keep
society with ghastly apparitions,
whore's neither voice of friends, n•r visiting suitors
breaths to delight our ears, and a•l this for
the fame of a fell murdress. I have blood
enough already on my soul, more then
my tears can ever wash off. My royal Lord,
if you can be so merciful and gracious,
to take a woman laden with afflictions,
big with true sorrow, and religious penitence
for her amiss, her life and after actions,
shall study to deserve your love. But surely
this is not serious.
Not the vows which votries
make to the powers above, can be more fraught
with binding sanctity.
This holy kiss
confirms our mutual vows: never till now
was I true Caliph of Arabia.
Ha, what tumult's that!
Be you all furies, and thou the greatest of devils,
Abrahen will stand you all, unmoved as mountains.
This good sword
if you be air, shall disenchant you from
your borrowed figures.
No, ill-natured monster,
we're all corporeal, and survive to take
revenge on thy inhumane acts, at name
of which, the bashful elements do shake
as if they teem'd with prodigies. Dost not tremble
a• thy inhumane villains? Dear Caropia,
quit the infectious viper, lest his touch
poison thee past recovery.
No, she shall not;
nor you, until this body be one wound.
Lay a rude hand upon me! Abilqualit,
how ere thou scapst my practises with life,
I am not now to question; we were both
sons to one father, whom, for love of Empire,
when I believed thee strangled by those Mutts,
I sent to his eternal rest; nor do I
repent the fact yet, I have been titled Caliph
a day, which is to my ambitious thoughts,
honour enough to eternize my big name
to all posterity. I know thou art
of valiant noble soul; let not thy brother
fall by ignoble hands, oppressed by number;
draw thy bright weapon; as thou art in Empire,
thou art my rival in this Ladies love,
whom I esteem above all joys of life:
for her and for this Monarchy, let's try
our strengths and fates•: the impartial fates
to him, who has the better cause, in justice
must needs design the victory.
In this offer,
though it proceed from desperateness, not valour;
thou showst a masculine courage, and we will not
render our cause so abject as to doubt,
but our just arm has strength to punish
thy most unheard of treacheries
But you shall not
be so unjust to us and to your right,
to try your causes most undoubted Justice,
against the despairing ruffian; Soldiers, pull
the Lady from him, and disarm him.
Stay!
though he doth merit multitudes of death,
we would not murder his eternity
by sudden execution; yield your self,
and we will allow you liberty of life,
till by repentance you have purged your sin;
and so if possible, redeem your soul
from future punishment.
Pish, tel fools of souls,
and those effeminate cowards that do dream
of those fantastic other worlds: there is
not such a thing in nature; all thesoul
of man is resolution, which expires
never from valiant men, till their last breath,
and then with it like to a flame extinguisht'd
for want of matter, 't dos not die, but rather
ceases to live. Enjoy in peace your Empire,
and as a legacy of Abrahens love,
take this fair Lady to your Bride.
Inhumane Butcher!
has slain the Lady. Look up, best Caropia,
run for our surgeons: I'll give half my Empire
to save her precious life.
She has enough,
or mine aim failed me, to procure her passage
to the eternal dwellings: nor is this
cruelty in me; I alone was worthy
to have enjoyed her beauties. Make good haste
Caropia, or my soul, if I have any,
will hover for thee in the clouds. This was
the fatal engine which betrayed our father
to his untimely death, made by Simanthes
for your use, Abilqualit: and who has this
about him and would be a slave to your base mercy,
deserved death more than by daily tortures;
and thus I kissed my last breath. Blast you all.
Damned desperate villain.
O my dear Caropia,
my Empire now will be unpleasing to me
since I must lose thy company. This surgeon,
whore's this surgeon?
Drunk perhaps.
It is but needless,
no humane help can save me: yet me thinks
I feel a kind of pleasing ease in your
embraces. I should utter something,
and I have strength enough, I hope, lest yet
to effect my purpose. In revenge •or your
supposed death, my loved Lord, I slew my husband,
I'm sorry thou hast that sin to charge thy soul with,
it was rumoured by the soldiers.
Cozens mine, your necks are safe again now.
And came hither
with an intent to have for your sake slain your brother
Abrahen, had not his courtesy and winning carriage
altered my resolution, with this poniard
I'd struck him here about the heart.
O • am slain, Caropia,
and by thy hand. Heavens, you are just, this is
revenge for thy dear honour which I murdered,
though thou were it consenting to it.
True, I was so,
and not repent it yet, my sole ambition
was to have live•d an Empress, which since fate
would not allow, I was resolved no woman
after my self should ere •njoy that glory,
you dear Abilqualit: which since my
weak strength has served me to perform, I dye
willingly as an infant. O now I faint,
life's death to those that keep it by constraint.
My dear Lord,
is there no hopes of life? must we be wretched?
Happier, my Tarifa, by my death:
but yesterday I played the part in jest
which I now act in earnest My Tarifa,
the Empire's thine, I'm sure thou'lt rul't
with justice, and make the subject happy. Thou hast a Son
of hopeful growing virtues to succeed thee,
commend me to him, and from me entreat him
to shun the temptings of lascivious glances.
Alas good Prince!
heel die indeed. I fear, he is so full
of serious thoughts and Counsels.
For this slaughtered body,
let it have decent burial with slain Muras,
but let not Abrahens corps have so much honour
to come in the royal monument: lay mine
by my dear fathers: for that treacherous Eunuch,
and Lord Simanthes, use them as thy justice
tells thee they have merited; for Lord Selinthus,
advance him (my Tarif•) •••'s of faithful
and well deserving virtues.
So I am,
I thought t'would come to me anon:
poor ••ince, I even could die with him.
And for those soldiers, and those our most faithful
Mutts, that my life once saved, let them be
well rewarded; death and I are almost now
at unity. Farewell.
Sure I shall not
survive these sorrows long. Mutts, take those Traitors
to prison; we will shortly pass their sentence,
which shall be death inevitable. Take up
that fatal instrument of poisonous mischief,
and see it burned, Gazelles. Gentlemen,
Fate has made us your King against our wishes.
Long live Tarifa, Caliph of Arabia.
We have no time now for your acclamations▪
these are black sorrows Festival. Bear off
in state that royal Body; for the other,
since it was his will, let them have burial,
but in obscurity. By this it may,
as by an ev'dent rule be understood,
they're only truly great, wh' are truly good.
I'M much displeased the Poet has made me
The Epilogue to his sad Tragedy.
Would I had died honestly amongst the rest,
Rather then live to the last, now to be pressed
To death by your hard Censures. Pray you say,
What is it you dislike so in this Play,
That none applauds? Believe it, I should faint,
Did not some smile, and keep me by constraint
From the sad qualm. What power is in your breath,
That you can save alive, and doom to death,
Even whom you please? thus are your judgme•ts free,
Most of the rest are slain, you may save me.
But if death be the word, I pray bestow it
Where it best fits. Hang up the Poet.

〈21+ pages missing〉twelvemoneth, thou hast lost thy comple∣xion, by too much study. Why thou shale bee an heir and rule the roast of half a shire, if thy Father would but dye once, come to the Assises with a band of Janissaries to equal the grand Signior, all thy tenants shall at their own charge make them selfes fine &amp; march, like Cavaliers with tilting feathers gaudy as Agamemnons in the play after whom thou like a St George on horse back, or the high Sheriff, shalt make the Country people fall down in Adoration of thy crupper &amp; silver sturrup, my right worcester∣shipfull. A pox on buckoram and the lug∣gage in it, papers defiled with court hand and long dashes or secretary lines, that straddle, more then Frenchmen, and less wholesome to the client! Is thy head to bee filled with P•olamations Rejoinder &amp; hard words beyond the Alkemist? Be ruled, and live like a fine Gentleman, that may have hawks, and hounds, and whores; and horses, and then thou art fit Company.
You talk wildly; I would you saw your error; that plaee all your happiness upon such course delights I should degene∣rate, and too much forfeift my education.
Education? hee has got a tune; I doe not think but thou wilt leave thy law, And exercise thy talent in compassing some Treatises against long-hayre &amp; drinking that most unchristian weed, yclept Tobacco: preach to the Punies of the Inn sobriety &amp; abstinence from shaving of lewd Bailiffs
that will com shortly to your chamber doors &amp; there with reverence entreat your worcester∣ships come forth and bee arrested: precious tad-poles: I would not willingly despair of thee; for thy Lands sake and cause I am thy Countryman: one generous vagary, if thou were w•se, would break some bodies heard, within a seven night, &amp; then thou art lord of all; have but the grace to dine with me at the Tavern, and I'll tell thy Friends, there is some hope.
My Friends.
Thy Father is in Essex, if hee live, hee will, purchase Rumford if he dye sooner, then the Town's our own, Spend but an acre a day and thou majesty live till all the world bee weary of thee; between, us too, what think you of a wench?
Nothing.
You mean, one wench between us too is nothing; I know a hundred Leverett•; things that will bound like a dancer on the rope, and kiss thee in thy natural Com∣plexion; a sinner that will climb thee like a squirrel.
And crack me as a nutt; I have no kernel to spare for her sweet tooth.
That was a metaphor; he is not de∣sqerate.
Buy' my dear Captain.
Why farewell Countryman. I may live to see thy conversion. 
How does my Uncle.
He desires presently to speak with you at his lodging.
I'll attend him. 
And hast thou been careful of all those things I gave in charge to bee provided?
There is a noate of the particulars.
Tic very well done, Thomas, let me see, Inprimis.
The Captain will not faileto bee with you Sir, hee was not at his lodging, and en∣quiring at the horn Tavern, I heard hee had bin there with two or three citizens that owed him money.
That hee owed money too.
Tic all one I think; Sir; for when Captains have not pay, Creditors may pay themselves, here they said, he did mollify the heart of the haberdasher, &amp; drank him∣self a little mellow ere they parted which gave me some hope I might find him ere night, at the devil, where indeed I fetched him out of the fire, and gave him your letter.
And the gold too.
That was the first word Hee read, if you had writ it in text, hee could not have fownd it out so soon, his eye was no sooner on the inside, but his arm flew out with an open month, and his very fingers ends cried give me the gold which pre∣suming to bee weight he put into his hocus •ocus a little dormer under his right skirt,
and so taking his word to come down and turning over your horse to him, with some caution, not to be drunk and forget your, worship, I took my leave and went about my Inventory.
These things are very right Thomas, let me see now the books of Martial disc∣pline.
I bought up all that seem to have re∣lotion to war and fighting.
That was well done; well done; Item the Sword-salve.
Sir if you bee hurt you need go no further then the blade for A surgeon.
The Buckler of faith.
You had the sword before, Sir.
A book of Mortification.
I Sir, that is A kind of killing, which I thought very necessary for A Captain.
Item the Book of Cannons; Shakspeares works. Why Shakspeares works?
I had nothing for the Pike men be∣fore.
They are plays.
Are not all your musteringes in the Country so, Sir? pray redone.
Bellarmines Controversies, in Six Tomes.
That I took upon the stationers word, who had been Apretty scholar at Paules; for the word Bellarmine, he said, did comprehend war, weapons &amp; words of defiance 〈◊〉 words provoake men to draw their swords and fighting makes an end of the business
and all this is controversies, pray go on Sir.
Two pair of Tables; Tables? for what?
Oh Sir for Ticktack; you know it was in my note, which though I doubted at first yet considering you were newly made A Captain I conceive it was fit you should learn to set &amp; order your men.
Tackticks man; thou did mistake: they are books of war.
You cannot know these from books as they are painted I warrant you.
Why doest thou think these will make A Soldier.
Not of them selves, Sir, and there∣fore I provided; please you read on Sir.
P•rsons resolutions; &amp; Felthams Re∣solves.
All is nothing, I know Sir without resolution.
Somma totalis 23. 19. and 7. thou hast undone me.
If you doe not like the penny words; Tic but the charges of my self and a horse again to London: I will loose but the three odd pounds nynteene shillings &amp; seven∣pence. It may bee you doe not understand these Authors; when the Captain comes, hee will expound them to you.
What a Coxcomb have I to my man? but I dare not bee angry with him, well, carry them into my study; Thoma•. 
My most honoured Captain.
My complete Monsieur Device: This is a grace to us; you come to visit your Mistress my cousin:
And see as if by instinct, she had knowledge of your approach, she is come to meet you: shall I never get opportunity with that she waiter. If I get her with child my man Thomas shall marry her.
Sir the Captain is newly alighted.
Get a bottle of sack up to my chamber presently.
You are a Gentleman of your word.
And such a Gentleman is to be trusted:
Hee is an Infidel Madam, that will break his word with A Lady.
I suspect servant you have many Mi∣stresses.
Nor by this white hand, I must ac∣knowledge there are some Ladies in the court in whose eyes &amp; opinions I am favored; I cannot obscure my self from their observe∣tions: but my heart with contempt of all other indeerements, is only devoted to your service.
Is it not a charge to dress your self in such varieties of Ribbons every day?
Is that your scruple? tic the mode to express our fancy upon every occasion; to show the turn, or present state of our hopes or fears in our affections. Your colours, to an understanding lover, carry the inter∣pretation of the heart, as plainly as wee ex∣press our meaning one to an other in Cha∣racters. Shall I decipher my colours to you now; here is Azure &amp; peach. Azure is con∣stant, and peach is love; which signifies my constant affection.
A pretty Moral.
It saves the trouble of writing, where the Mistress and servant are learned in this Amorous Blazon, yesterday I wore fuel∣mote; greedeline; and Isabella; fuille-mote is withered, greedeline is absent, and Isa∣bella is beauty: which put together ex∣prest'd, I did wither or languish for your ab∣sent beauty.
But is thereany reason for their di∣stinctions?
Yes Lady for example, your fuel∣mote is a withered leaf; which does more∣rallize decay; your yellow is joy, be∣cause:—
Why yellow Sir is jealous.
No it is your lemon colour, a pale kind of yellow is jealous; your yellow is perfect joy: your white is death, your milk white Innocent, your Black moorninge, your orange spiteful, your flesh colour •ass∣vious, your maid-blush envy, your red is defiance, your gold avaricious, your straw,
plenty, your grass greene, hope; your sea greene Innocent, your violett, religious; your willow, forsaken.
Wee may then committ a solecism &amp; be strangely interpreted by some curious ex∣ponders in the rash election and wearing of our colours, I perceive.
Tic pity but there should bee some books written for our instructions in this Art.
Your Hieroglyphic was the Aegip∣teen wisdom. Hebrews had their Cabal; the Romans had their symbol▪ and Im∣prese, &amp; Emblem, but these are absolute. Your modern Invention of Character, an Alphabetical key trite and conspicuous your motto or rebus, too open, and demonstrative but the science and curiosity of your Rib∣bands, is not only instructive but an orna∣meant, and the nearest comentator of love, for as love is entertained first by the eye, or, to speak more plain, as the object affected is took in first by these optics, which re∣ceave the species of things coloured &amp; beau∣tified, so it is answerable to nature that in the progress of our passion wee should di∣stingvish by our eye the change or constan∣cie of our affections, in Apt, and significant colours.
You have taken pains, to study this learned Blazon.
It is the only gentile knowledge; or Philosophy in the world: I willundertake to open any man or women's heart:—
Heaven for bid.
Tell the most secret imaginations &amp; designs, conclude every passion and scruple if they be but careful to observe the Artifi∣ciall Method of their Colours.
Why this may bee a way of fortune ••llinge too.
You say right Lady. Physiognomy &amp; Chiromancy are but mere tri••es your goo∣mince mere conjectural, the erection of your scheme circumstantial, and fallible: but your quaint a la Mode wear of your fancy, more then Astrological.
Tic a kind of divinity.
You say true Madam, &amp; comes near to prophetical, if the minds of Ladies and Gentlemen were elevated to the sublime consideration.
What pains hee takes to bee ridi∣culous? 
This Gentleman has a notable fancy, and talks Poetically.
Yes; yes; hee can make Verses.
Well I have red Authors in my days and knew the length of the Poets in my time too which was an Hexameter, and which A Pentameter, but the wits are not, as they have been, right and straight.
Why D•rothey.
Why because wind is the cause of many things, now if the wind bee not in the right corner, it is, the ill wind, the proverb spea∣kes of, which blows no body good; for whē vapors and wind fly up into the head it
cannot bee in two places at one time and that is the reason your men of most wit doe seldom love A woman. But here coms my Master and Sir Francis.
This is a double honour to us Sir Francis; I shall want Langvage, but not A friendly heart, to entertain you and your noble Kinsman. What my exquisite Cavalier Device? Tic to no purpose. I see, to remove into the Country, to save charges and bee quiet, the whole City will come hither, if I stay: I have no stomach to my court knight. 
I hope Madam, you will bee no En∣my to my Kinsman.
Sister I present this Gentleman; obe∣serve &amp; cherish him; hee has bin in the un∣varsity.
Any degree Sir?
Only bachelor, forsooth.
If he win you to marriage; Lady Quickfillver.
Hee will bee Master of his Art.
My vote is for him.
I like not the induction of this Rival.
Hee studies the law: and that is the next high way to preferment, Sister.
Indeed it is the high way in which some deliver up their purses: he may climb to searlett, but that hee has to good a face:
Sir, I hope—
Troth doe not Sir; I mean trouble your self, he is to bashful to prevail upon your spirited Mistress. let's leave them.
Sir Richard.
More Customers; Master Engine, welcome. your presence was expected in the Country.
It was my Ambition with some intents to serve you, Sir, please you vouch safe your privacy, I bring affairs worth your enter∣tainement; I have rid hard.
What Cavalier is this uncle?
Hee is the inventor of new projects •ouzen, they say, and patents; one that lives like a moth upon the common wealth.
He looks like one.
You will excuse me gentlemen. Make much of Sir Francis Madame. 
We'll leave my Nephew and your Sister Madame: And take A turn in the garden. 
You may bee confident.
I doe not like the fancy in his hat: that Gulls is war and will bee ominous. 
I must seem a modest coxcomb now to preserve my uncles Character.
The Gentleman is turned Statue, bless me how he stares upon me, and takes root? I think it moves, and now to earth is fixed again; oh how it walks and sadly marches
this way? Is it not a ghost? he will fright me; oh; sweet Sir, speak if you can and say who murdered you: it points at me: my eyes, ungentle eyes to kill so at first sight, I'll have my looks Arraigned for it &amp; small cupped shall bee judge who for your sake will make me blind, as hee is.
Lady
The man is a live again and has A tongue, discretion guide it; hee but sent his soul forth of an Errant; tic returned; now wee shall have some sentences.
Such, are the strange varieties of love, Such heats, such desperate colds—
No more winter if you love me; un∣less you can command the coal pitts; wee have had a hard time of it already, for want of fuel
I'm all turned ears, and, Lady, long to hear you;
But, pressing to you, doubt I am to near you.
Then I would speak but cannot, nought affords
Expression, the Alphabet's to poor in words.
Hee that knows love knows well that every hour
Lo•e•s glad; love's sweet—
And some times sower;
These words would go well to a Tune, pray let's hear you singe: I doe not think but you can make; me A Jointure of four Nobles a year in ballads, in lamentable bal∣lads, for your wit lies Tragical, did not you make the Ladies downfall? you express
a passion rarely, but pray leave your coup∣pletts, and say something in blank verse before you go.
Before I go; breath not that kill∣lingo Langvage;
There is no Sun but in your eyes: and when I once take leave of those Celestial beams Tic darkness through the world.
Oh; pitiful; if I were a widow then youl'd keep me waking for fear I shut my eyes, and your discretion loose the way home.
Where strech'don sable ground, I down shall lay
My mournful body, and with folded Arms:
Hear sadder notes upon the Irish harp;
And while my Footman plays; sigh out my part,
And drop division with my brinish tears.
This must bee lamentable musique sure.
But I will find an Art to cure this wound;
For I with fancies pencil, will so draw
Your picture in the table of my heart
Your absence shall but like dark shadows stand,
To set you of, and see you, Lady better
Then love will let me when I look upon you.
Could this bee true and meant, sweet Sir, to me;
I should be kinder then the gentlest spring
That warmes the world, &amp; makes fierce beasts so tame
And trees to swell themselves to cheerful greene
More jocund then the proudest Quire of birds,
What ere they bee, that in the woods so wide
Doe singe their merry catches.
Sure hee does but counterfeit. 
Oh now I see that love
Is sweet; as flowers in their fragrant birth,
Gentle as silk; and kind as clouds to earth.
One rithme more and you undo my love for ever, out upon it; Peddlers French is a Christian language to this. I had rather you should put me a case out of Littleton: they say you are a pretty lawyer.
Tenant par la courtesy d'Angliterre, est son home print sum self en see simple est fee tail general en self comme heir de la tail especial &amp; ad Issue per la mesme fe∣me male ou female •pes on knife soit Issue apres mort ou en dive de la feme debie la baron tiendra la terra durant sa vie per le ley d'Angliterre.
Nay here is enough in conscience: what a noise this confusion of Languages makes; this is almost as good as A bear baiting, hark you Sir, you are never like to recover me by law.
You are not the first sweet Lady•; has ben overcome in common law.
Not by ten thousand, Sir: Confessed, but I have no mind to come to Issue with A lawyer: when hee should consider my case at
home, he will be at West minster teaching men their statutes! no; no; I will not marry a Judge.
Why Lady.
They are casual things and men that hold such strange opinions, they are not safe; no, not in their own lambskins.
Lady you may bee misinformed; Astray hath not quite left the earth and the Abuses of some, which shame the calling, are but like patches of beauty on the face of law to set the Native whiteness off.
Farewell; Sir; you are in love with a bared Gown, not beauty; if you will follow my learned counsel, leave it. This young thing is a fool or a fine fellow. 
She kicks and stings out like a colt unwayd. Her wit's a better portion then her money I would not love her, yet, if I could help it. (My Uncle and his Mistress) I'll not hinder them. 
It is no honour, Sir, if Armed with so much eloquence, you overcome A wo∣man; I blush to say I love you now too much. I wish you would release what your Sweet charms won from my tongue: I shall repent my promise.
Make me not miserable after so much blessing. Why, Madame, it is upon honourable terms since not upō the first at∣tempt, but, after a tedious siege to your fair love, you give up what shall enrich us both:
It were A sin to fear you can retract what both our lips have sealed, and loose a hap∣pines so near &amp; so secure; your husband holds his pleasure of early hunting constant, and when hee pursues his timorous hart to morrow morning, Cupped will wait, to bring me to Elizium, your bed, where every kiss will new create us.
You must bee wise in your excuse to quit his importunity.
Leave that to me. I were not worth the name of him that served you to lose my glorious hope for want of such a thin Device; In your thought wish me prosperous &amp; I am fortified against the power of fate to separate us; and when thou art with in the Amorous Circle of mine Arms, wee will make laws to love, teach time new Actions, or chain him with the cordadge of his hair; like a tame thing to wake and watch our pillow; and bee our pleasures sentinel.
I see my husband, tic not safe hee should observe us. Bee wise &amp; constant. 
All thats sweet attend thee. So; I am sailing now to my own Indies: and see the happy coast too; how my wings doe spread to catch the wind which coms to cover them. And the greene sea enamord on my bark, doth leap to see how cupped sits, at the helm &amp; steers my soul to his new world.
A monopoly, say you, for periwiggs?
Bin visiting your grounds?
My hounds rather, Sir Francis, and some horses, that takes up my Country re∣creations; tic Supper time.
First not a rare design? and by such Art and reasons I can name most beneficial to the common wealth, preventing the diseases which some unwholesome hair breeds in men's heads. It will bee worth our agitation Sir, &amp; you after the rate of every thousand per Annum milked out of the common purse into your own, may easily defalke to me a hundred for my first projection; did I not love you, Sir, I could make coin of other Abel men that would bee glad to multiply their money.
Sir I thank you, but have no mind to thrive upon abuse of my princes favour, nor the Peoples curse. Here is a Gentleman; Sir Francis Courtwell, perhaps, will undertake it.
What; Sir Richard?
A monopoly for composing and sellinge of periwiggs.
Excuse me Sir, I dare not deal in them; doe not you hear things of this na∣ture questioned?
How Sir questioned?
There's one among the rest, I cannot hit upon his name in fair election to be hanged, one Engine.
Oh Sir.
What aisle you Sir?
A meagrim in my head.
Who's there? look to Master En∣gin here, hee faints, &amp; send to your Lady for some cordial waters presently.
There is a sovereign well hard by, has done strange cures, please you; I'll throw him into that. 
Though I distaste his business, I would not hee should miscarry here, you frighted him. Tic supper time, I shall expect your company in the morning, Sir Francis: I have a pack of dogs will make the forest ringe.
I'll carefully attend Sir: as early as you please I love the sport too.
I wish wee had all pleasures to delight you; but nothing wants in my true love to serve you.
Yet I must cuckold him, I cannot help it. 
Sir.
Who is that? Thomas?
The Sun is up before you Sir, here
bee your boots.
That's well.
Prithee doe not rise, it is hardly day, Sir, who bid you call him so early? Sir Richard will not rise yet.
I cannot help it, tic none of my fault.
Where is Dorothy.
Here, Madame; what make you up so soon, Thomas.
Oh Mistress Dorothy tic even lunge of you for between sleep and wake your re∣membrance came to me this morning, and Thomas was up presently.
You must excuse me; I mean to kill a brace of hares before you think tic day. Come, on with my boots. Thomas; And Dor thy go you to Sir Francis chamber tell him the day grows old &amp; I am ready: our horses &amp; our merry hounds expect us. 
Any excuse to leave me.
You may take your ease in bed still Madam, I'll not loose one morning, that invites so pleasantly, to hear my Dogs, for a new mayden-head. It was for these sports and my excess of charge I left the Town; besides the City fogs and steam of brickhills almost stifled me. This Air is pure, and all mine own.
My Lady means she would have you get an other Heir Sir for your land, though, it bee against my Master the young Captain yet she speaks but reason and now, I talk of the Captain, Sir. would you had given him council.
To what.
Before hee took this huffing trade upon him to have been a man of peace, I mean, a Justice, nature has made him fits for both a like; hee is now at charge to keep a Captain Schoolmaster: he might have saved the Quarteridge of his Tutor if I had been his clarke, and then the in come that broken heads bring in; and New years gifts from soadred virgins and their she Provincials whose warren must bee licenced from our Office.—
Away you prating knave; what is hee ready?
Alas hoe's almost dead.
How dead?
Hee has bin troubled with a fit of the stone Sir, all this night poor Gentleman, hee groans &amp; sweates &amp; cannot:—
What?
Make urine Sir.
I heard my Lady has an excellent re∣ceipt to cure the stone. She is a piece of a rare surgeon.
Well-away and get the horses ready; sir; or I shall ride you and your wit together.
Alas any fool may ride me, but I would fine see any man ride Mistress Do∣rothy. 
How Sir.
I am sorry I must leave such a com∣pinion but more lament the cause, I wish
him health: my presence cannot serve him, morrow wife, I will not lose my sport. 
Nor she; when you are gone; my Lady does expect an other bunts up
Now I must trust thy service.
You shall not doubt me; Madam; and to assure you my faith, I have a suite to your •adiship, whose grant, were there no other bonds upon me, would tie me to ever∣lastinge silence.
What is it; but name it and I shall soon consirme thee
Our Captain of the train band has bin offering to chaffer Mayden-heads with me; I must confess I can affect the fool. upon good terms, &amp; could devise to noose my Amorous woodcock if you assist me pri∣vatly, and dare trust me with some Jewel of price, that is not known, which shall bee faithfully restored, Madame.
I that dare trust my honour with thee, shall not suspect thy faith in any trea∣sure else, choose from my cabinets, but, prithee, draw the curtains while I expect this friend, I needs must hide my blushes thou moist discover from my gallery win∣dow when they are horsed, I tremble, to consider what I have promised.
Tremble to meet a ghost; you are more fearful then a Virgin; Madame; why this sets me a longing, but I'll watch: this is the timorous world of flesh &amp; blood. 
Alas what doe you mean? re∣tire for heavens sake: my husband is not gone, I heard his voice yet, this rash∣ness will undo my fame for ever, should hee return.
Howe's this? retire for heavens sake, my husband is not gone, I heard his voice this will undo my same. It was my wife and this is sure my bed chamber. 
I have undone my self, it is my husband.
My forehead sweates; where are you; Madame; whom did you talk too; or take me for? Ha; a sleep already; or doe I dream; I am all wonder; Madame.
Nay; nay kill him; if it please you; sweet heart, I cannot abide a black∣moore 
How's, this? wife.
Help, help, dear husband strangle him with one of my lute strings; doe, doe, doe.
If she bee a sleep: she was nor wont to talk thus, She has had some hideous dream, she spake to me, too. Who should I strangle sweet hart, with a lute string?
The king of Moroco I think.
It is so, she dreams, what strange chymaeras wee fancy in our sleep: I were best wake her, Madame, Madame.
Oh Murder, Murder.
Sweet heart, Madame, wake.
What's that?
Tic I.
Sir Richard? oh, you have delivered me from such a dream I quake to think upon it.
I must confess you frighted me at first.
My Master come back? if hee had found the sick Sir Francis here.
How, now, art thou frighted, too.
Frighted quoth a; ô Madame; the key of the closett, quickly, I must have some cordial water for Sir Francis I fear this 〈◊〉 will kill him.
Alas good Gentleman make hast.
His appearance would betray all Thus prevented. 
Nay sweet heart, you shall not leave me till I told what a cruel dream I had, me thought a king of blackamoores was in love with me, and having, by flattering courtship drawn me to his bed chamber, by my consent, or force, swore to en•oy me. I knew not by what reasons to dive•t the Ravisher; but told him that I heard thy voice, I bid him if hee loved his life retire, for thou would, (dear,) revenge my honour, but hee pursuing me, I cried out murder and having ne'er a sword, I councelld thee to strangle him with a lute string; for which cruelty of mine me thought hee threw an Arrow at me, which
if thou had not waked me as thou did would, as I slept; with my strong fears have killed me.
This was the king of Moroco; well, I am glad I came to take away thy fright.
But, sweet, you left me, with a reason∣lution to hunt this morning, have you done already?
The thieves prevented me, my stable has bin robbed to night, two geldings &amp; my Roan n•gg are vanished.
How?
Nay doe not thou vex, I have sent Hue and cry that may overtake them; but come I'll leave thee to thy glass, and visit Sir Francis, now she is returned. How does your Noble guest? 
Hee is pretty well, Sir Hee has voided one stone since and now finds ease.
Tic well, attend your Mistress. 
Oh wench, I had almost undone my self, come on the other side, reach me that petticoat. I le tell thee the story as I make me ready. 
Is it possible you can talk thus, and bee no Scholar?
I have travelled in my fancy: took the Air about the world with the muses, and doe for my recreation of wit, compose some wonders in Verse, Poetical Essa•es: as one upon report of a heate that was in Aegipt.
Let's hear them.
In Countries I have been;
Under the Aequinoctiall, where I have seen
The Sun disperse such a prodigious heate
That made our sive-like skins to rain with sweat:
Men would have given, for an Eclipse, their lives
Or one whisper of Air, yet each man strives
To throw up grass, feathers; nay women too
To find the wind, all falls like lead, none blew,
The dog starr spits new fire, till't came to pass
Each eye became his neighbours burning glass.
Lean men did turn to As•hes presently
Fat men did roast to lean Anatomy.
Young women's heate did get them selves with child
For none but they them selves, them selves defiled.
Old women naturally to witches turned
And only rubbing one an other, burned.
The beasts were bakt, skin turned to crust they say
And fishes in the river boiled away
Birds in the Ayre were roasted, and not burned
For, as they fell down, all the way, they turned.
Most excellent.
I have seen Larks in that motion at fire with an Engine of packthred perpen∣dicular.
What would they have given for a shower in those Countries.
Now you talk of a shower, you shall hear another Copy of Verses that I made of a mighty rain which fell once in the Indies.
That you made? if you will venture your lungs let me hear some more impose∣sible stories to pass away the time.
Heaven did not weep, but in its swell∣lingo eye
Whole seas of rheum and moist catharrs did lye
Which so bespauld the lower world men see
Corn blasted, and the fruit of Every tree,
Ayre was condensed to water against their wish
And all their foul was turned to flying fish,
Like watermen they thronged to ply a fair
And thought it had bin navigable Ayre.
Beasts lost the natural motion of each limb.
Forgot to go with practising to swim.
A trout now here, you would not think How soon
Tan ready, dressed for the Empress of the Moon.
The fixed stars, though to our eyes were missing
Wee knew yet were by their continual hissing
Women were Mermaids sailing with the wind,
The greatest miracle was fish behind.
But men were all kept chaste against their wish
And could commit but the cold sin of fish.
And that sin would puzzell all the civil lawyers in the Kingdom. Sins of the flesh they are perfect in, they know well enough what belongs to Adultery &amp; simple fornication: but you would much improve and oblige the practice of the court if you could bring this sin of fish under their co∣mission. But now I hope the rain is over; and wee shall have fair weather.
Now can I tell you Lady, what a. strange frost was in one part of the world
I shall cry out fire if you doe: I'd rather have some discourse to keep me warm.
Or how the whole world was trow∣bled with the wind colic.
No more Earth quakes I beseech you: some friends of mine lost a great deal of Land the last term &amp; for ought I know, tic never to bee recovered. Why all these Verses you have honoured me to hear, were translated out of French.
You say very true Lady.
No, no; they are out of Spanish as I remember.
I think it bee out of Spanish indeed.
Or else out of the Italian.
Troth Madame; I know not which very well.
And yet you made them: some Gent∣lemon have the faculty to make Verses, and
forget what Language, was the Original. •is a la Mode, I confess, Sir.
There is the mischief in Poetry; A man might have told a hundred lies in prose upon his own name and never miscar∣rye, but leaving these lewd Rymes, Lady, how doe you like the Novice that Sir Richard commended.
Master Courtwell?
Is he not a pretty Chrysome; I could not Choose but laugh to observe in what rural deportment he came to salute you that should have made his address in these postures:—
It is enough, Sir, I apprehend what you would doe: the truth is, touching that thing in black; I doe not love him.
I know tic impossible.
Why is it impossible? The man is a pretty indifferent meaning man but I must have one of a more Active spirit: no, no; the man is a coward.
Hee looks like one.
I put him to it, hee dares not fight, and hee that expects my favour to so high a degree as Marriage, must bee none of my Lord Mayors whiffelers; he must be valiant in Arms; I am not taken with a ringe or a Carkenett as some avaricious Ladies: hee that presents me with the sword of his rival, is more welcome then all the silken soft na∣tur'd 600. a year widgeons that will bee baffled in their best clothes; and go down into the Country every vacation, like At∣torneys
to bee beaten against the next tear• me, &amp; get damages by it. But I forget some affairs that concerns me, &amp; take my leave: your deserts upon me are eminent and many; and for all your noble services, I will promise you nothing, you apprehend me.—
Tic too much, sweet Lady.
I am so weary I can stay no longer with you. 
You make me over happy, so; so; the matters done. I may visit my friends; hum! well thought upon, I shall leaveher Joys with out any bound to entertain me, if I first beat this foolish rival of mine, and present her with his sword; she assures me hee dares not fight: it shall bee so, thus with one baffeling and disarming him I shall secure my Mistress; and get the reputation of a fighting Cavalier, which may save me many knocks here after, among men of strong faith, that shall hey•e how much honour I have else where taken up upon the Tickett. 
Stand right to your files,—Make even your ranks,—Silence—Front to the right hand,—As you were,—To the right hand about,—By the left hand, as you were,—Ranks—To the right, double—Ranks as you were,—Ranks to the left double,—Middle men to the right hand double the front,—Middle men to the
right entire, double the front—Files to the right,—To the left,—To the right hand—Counter march to the right—To the left—Wheel about.—
Rantan! enough, you must not, waste your lunges at once; march fair and make a Captain. When these words of command are rotten, wee will sow some other mili∣tarry seeds; you bear a brain and me∣mori.
I hope so.
And now you are chosen a Captain for the Country, you must give good exam∣ple to your soldiers, and cherish nature: after exercise you must drink sack; sack is a fortifier. Come we'll to the Town.
With all my heart; 
Here is one Master Courtwell let us take him with us.
My costive Countryman; he's an Anabaptist, hee will not drink, and yet hee kissed the cup oft; last night, me thought, when his mistress drank to him. We'll try; how is it, my man of moral breeding?
My man of war, Tresbone; your servant, Captain.
Why this was spoke like one of us, can do it again? thy voice is more Au∣thentick, sounds as I have heard a Cavalier in a Tavern; or like the merry Master of the dragon. Small Neptune, that comptroules the rich Canaries when hee commands the Tritons of his cellar; scud and bring wine you varlets, with a flavour for my Nobel∣litie;
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
wee were conspiring to go to the Tavern.
I'll make one Gentlemen; to wast away some melancholy.
Spoke boldly like an Argonaut.
I am not now in London; upon a hall day marching with the Puinees Twenty of us in a Teem, to Westminster in our torn gowns embroidered with strand dirt, to hear the law.
Is not thy Father dead? thou talke'st so well? how I was couzend' in thee; come a way.
Heere's my man Thomas.
Now the news, Sir Tristram?
Oh; the Gentleman is mad.
What Gentleman?
Why Master Engine, that did faint last night.
With fear of being hanged for his projections.
My Uncle told me of him.
Send him to Bedlam then; what makes hee here? clean straw &amp; a good whip are held restoratives.
Hee walks and talks the motliest, twenty midwifes are nothing to him, hee drowns all their noise his tongue is twenty rings of bells; and yet hee seems so merry.
Save you Gentlemen; Gallants; Ca∣valeires; how far travel you? me thinks
you are finely accommodated: are you a doctor Sir?
No; but I can tell you; how to purge if it please you.
You say very well; troth Gentlemen you must pardon me; cry you mercy: your name is Captain Vnderwi••.
Yes, Sir: but my Mother came of the Overmuches by the Peak: she broke my Fa∣theirs heart, and Sir Richard buried her. Things must bee as please the Stars.
What think you; of the Blazing Start in Germany according to Ptolomy? tic very strange; does the race hold at Newmarket for the cup? when is the coo∣king, Gentleman there are a parcel of rich jewels to bee sold now if a man had 〈◊〉: I doe mean to build a very fine hows next summer, and fish ponds. What did you hear of the new play? I am afraid the wits are broken, there bee men will make affidavit, they have not heard a good jest since Ta•leton died: pray may I crave your name Sir?
My name is Courtwell Sir.
In your ear, I have a cast of the best Marlins in England: but I am resolve'd to go no more by water, but in my coach: did you ever see the great Ship?
I have been one of the twenty that have dined in her Lantern.
It may bee so, she is a good sailor; but, I'll tell you one thing, I mean to have the best pack of hounds in Europe, Sir Richard
loves the sport well, and then if I can but find out the reason of the load stone, I were happy and would write non ultra.
The Philosophers stone were better in my opinion: have you no project to get that?
That has startled him; I doubt this fellow does but counterfeit. 
What think you of the Dromedary, that was to bee seen on the back side of the Bell?
I have seen a stranger beast.
So have I; I have seen you before now, Sir.
Why then I'll tell you; the straingest beast that ever I saw was an Ostrich that eat up the Iron-mines: but, now you talk of birds, I saw an Elephant beat a tailor in the fencing school, at his own weapon.
The Spanish needle?
Hee did out eat him in bread, and that was miraculous, I have seen a catta∣mountain once, but all was nothing, to the Lady, that turned round &amp; threaded needles.
Troth Sir I think you have turned round too, and are not settled yet.
Now you talk of settling I knew a Gentleman, that was borne to a great for∣tune, sold all his land, went to sea in a Hole∣lander, was taken by a Dunckercke, at 7. years and stole away in a English bottom after that, saw both the Indies, for all this, was taken by a Turkish man of war put into the Galleys, and, for ought I hear by cre∣dible
report, is not settled yet.
Sure hee is a great Scholar; a man cannot understand him.
His brains are out of tune.
Now you talk of music; there is no man in the world loves music better then I: I'll give you the reason: I have ben deaf almost this half year; it came with a cold sitting up at Primero.
Now you talk of a cold, it puts me in mind of the new Device of fire, for brewing &amp; baking: had you no hand in that project?
Again hee is startled: come hee shall to the Tavern with us and confess all; if hee does not strip his soul stark naked to us; say I am no fortune teller.
What think you of a cup of medium wine?
That will spoil all: please you to honour our society? wee are going to Indulge at the Tavern.
Oh the neates tongues &amp; Asparagus that I have eaten at the Stillyarde! But of all things in the world I doe not love a black catt, next a brewers cart, there is nothing will stay a man so much in the night as a Con∣stable; one word before you go and I beseech you give me your opinion clearly; was not the Morocco Ambassador, a very fine Gentleman for a Pagan?
Yes sure; and the Lead mines in Derby∣sheire hold still. Marry for the Allome businesses—But come, will you walk?
I doe use to go a foot some times, but
when I ride; and then I must confess ther's no striving with the stream: you were in London lately they say the people are more affected to Bearebaytinge then in former time.
There are some of late are drawn like bears to a stake but for your own part the gout and the grand pox are all one to you: what price bears meat in the shambles?
Flesh rises and fales; as it uses to doe; Sir: But a Country life is the best when all is done: are wee all of one religion? what think you of a bridge from Lyon Key to Flandres, you may guess I talk at random, Gentlemen, but you must not interpret all foolish discourse a distemper of the brain; Lords would take it for a scandalum magna∣tum, and your Ladies would bee Angry too; now you talk of Ladies.
By no means Master Engine: that Gentleman loves you not. Come, I le bring up the Rear, where is Thomas?
I'll follow Sir; I would give my 4. marks a year that I could talk like that mad Gentleman; hoe's here, and there, and every where: how will his tongue run when his Coggs are oiled? they'll drench him. 
Although I missed a happiness, •ap∣plate your nimble wit that secured both our honours: you have an excellent instru∣meant to your Gentlewomen.
Oh she delivered so to the life, how you were troubled with the stone, at first I did be∣leive't my self, and think of the sad consequence: but time is precious now; although our stars have not been yet propitious to our meeting, I'll try my Art to night to make them shine with happy influence on our loves.
Most excellent, Madam; how?
I'll not engage your visit to my chamber, since the first proved so unfortunate, but come to yours.
This night? wo'not your husband be at home?
Yes.
You enjoy but one Bed?
Without witchcraft Sir. I have a strata∣gem to delude my husband and all his jealous wa∣king eyes: A plot that cannot fail, if you dare but expect me.
I grow immortal with my hopes, and fancy more than the worlds most glorious Empire, in my first embrace, I should run back into an in∣fant once again, and by degrees and time, grow up to meet so vast a happiness: Ages in expect∣tion spent were poor and easy sufferings weighed against this triumph. Me thinks I am not man, but something of a more exalted essence, humane Nature hath not Capacity to understand and own these precious blessings.
No more rapture, but with the confidence of a lover, spread your equal thoughts, and in your heart and Arms Prepare an entertainment for that guest that hath no life nor name but what you give. A kiss, and leave our souls to think
upon the joys this night attends us.
Sullen day
Doe not tyre now tic down hill all the way.
COme let us throw the dice who shall drink,
Thine is twelve and his sic sink.
Six and Four is a cast,
Six and three not too fast.
Come aloft sink tray,
Sic ace fair play,
Cator duce is your throw sir,
Cator ace they run low sir.
Two duces we see,
Duce Ace is but three.
Oh where is the wine, come fill up his glass,
For here is the man that has thrown Am•ace.
They are all drunk already, and such a confusion in their heads and tongues: my Master kisses the next man and calls him Mistress Dorothy, Master Courtwell possessed with the spirit of defi∣ance to Cupped is ready to beat him for being in
love. My Projector's dead drunk in archaire, and the Captain peeping into his mouth like a tooth∣drawer and pouring down Sack, which he feels not, but his chapps shut again like a spring-lock, till he return with a key to open his teeth to pour in the next health.
My Cloak and Sword Drawer.
Tic here sir.
Thou art a pretty fellow; there's half a crown, say I am gone Thomas.
You are a petty well.
What shalls doe with him? this Engine burns like Etna.
Throw him into the River.
Hoe's able to mull the Thames. Well for mine own part, would Mistress Dorothy were here to open her files.
Did not you name a woman?
I will have no mention of any thing thats Female.
May not a man talk of sack?
Sack is a sovereign medicine.
Oh very sovereign.
It is hic &amp; hac sack, both for he and she. Stay, is my Countryman gone? come my Apollos, my Orpheus's, or my Bachus his Minstrels; which to leave poetical expressions, in broader phrase, is Tavern fiddlers, some of your Tunes my masters, doe you hear?
Doe you mean Master Adsons new airs si•?
I sir. But they are such fantastical airs as it puts a Poet out of his wits to rhyme to them but let me hear—
—
No I doe not like that?—
—
Nor that: no, no, no, neither:
An't please your worship Master Captain our boys can sing songs to these.
No, no, saving your presence, your boys have nothing surreverence but love songs, and I hate those things monstrously to make things ap∣pear better than they are, and that is but Decep∣tio visus, which after some embracing, the par∣ties see presently what it is.
—
I, I, this thumping tune I like a lise; a Song, a song to it.
The Juice of Spanish squee'zd grapes is it
That makes a dull brain so full of wit,
So Lemonado's clear sparkling wine
The grosser wits too doth much refine,
Then to be fox'dit is no crime,
Since thickest and dull brains it makes sublime.
The Stilyards Rhenish wine, and Devils white,
Who doth not in them sometimes take delight?
If with mimique gestures you'll keep you from sadness
Then drink lusty Claret, twill make you in madness.
And then to settle you no hopes in beer,
But wholesome po•ts of Scotch ale though tic dear.
But hark you child, you say in your song the Devils white, you have been ill catechised boy, for a white Devil is but a Poetical fiction, for the devil bless us child is black.
No Captain, I say white wine at the De∣will.
Thats true, thats a good boy indeed—Vnderwit, lend me a piece, lend me a piece to give these harmonious men—The•e,—and now be gone my masters; without noise, for I will have no more fiddle fiddles for my money; no tunes of superrogation after the musical bill is paid,— 
Come hither Thomas, do you think I am drunk?
Truly Captain, I cannot tell.
You cannot tell, there's your ignorance, drink is a vice I am as little given to as another, for I do abhor it in my self, I do wonder how any reasonable man can be drunk, &amp;c—man can be drunk, therefore every wise man take counsel and example by me, and he may see very plain∣lie what an odious thing it is, for you must follow your Leader, and Virtue which is an ancient—
Virtue an Ancient?
I, an ancient old Gentlewoman, that is grown very poor, and no body knows where she dwells, very hard to find her out, especially for a Captain, you will find it very difficult for a Lieutenant, but we will endeavour the best we can. You see my courses, I have travelled to find her out, and I could never yet see her at a baudihouse?
Who is this to be seen at a Baudihouse?
To the righthand—Counter-march.
He talks of virtue sir.
Virtue? she never comes there, why doe you think she should be there Captain?
Why? because she is an old Gentlewoman, and might keep the house.
Alas Captain Mistress Virtue is poor and lean.
Nay then she is not fit to be a Baud; but tell me, did you ever see her, or if so, did you ever—
No, but it was none of my fault. I know not what I may doe in time, when she understands the words of command.
He does not mean Mistress Dorothy; but Captain, I would •aine know the reason why your Bawds are so fat still?
A plain case, they lye fallow and get hart, then they keep themselves so in health, and so soluble with stewed prumes, and then sipping of sack is a great matter to fatten them. But they are as good people as a man can keep company withal, and bring up the young gen∣tlewomen so virtuously; I came into one of their houses tother day for a career, and I found the Baud very sick upon her deathbed, very reli∣gious, and much given to repentance, for those poor sins she had committed; when she had taken order for her soul, she told me the young Gentlewoman I looked for was in the next room, &amp; desiring her upon her blasting to give me con∣tent, she turns her to the wall, and gives up the Ghost very privately, because she was loath to trouble us.
By your relation Captain, these ap∣peer
to bee very good people what if wee went to visit one of these Matrons? I have a great mind to exercise
Why you speak like an understan∣dinge Soldier &amp; one that may come to some∣thing in the end, therefore let us march on.
March on to venus wars.
For you know, Thomas that the spy∣der &amp; the Bee doe something, but I have for∣get what it is.
Tic no matter, come let us go.
Go? no more but go, though I bee a Captain if I have not commission in this employment,—
What then Captain?
Why then I cannot go.
Very right. 
Doe you hear Captain? for all this; I have a great mind to a wench, and a wench I must have, if there bee one aboue ground; oh, oh; London; London. Thou art full of frank tenants, give me London shall wee wheel about thither, yett?
Give you London? will not cheapside serve your turn or the Exchainge?
Oh Gentlemen, Master Engine is truly bewitched.
Why, what's the matter?
Bring the witch and Master Engine before us.
Hee does vomitt the straingest things yonder.—
Did not I say, murder will out?
I think hee has eaten and drunken nothing but monopolies: and, being too hard to bee digested they all come up again, I must hold his head.  Oh
Did not I tell you something would come out?
Pins; Pins; they lay cross his throat, I told you hee was bewitched? Hey day cards and dice, and with them the devil is a gamester. And pays the box soundly, now; now; now:  Oh.
What's that.
Tic something clammy; oh tic Soap.
Soap? give a man leave to wash his mouth.
Does not the lime burn his throat Thomas?
Alas poor Gentleman, something now again is ready to strangle him, I think they are Hides, &amp; the horns stuck in his gul∣let, well strained! what a foul stomach hee has:  Oh.
Open his mouth, thrust down a pottle pot.
I have Sir; and it is come up full of medium wine. If you have any charity come and help to hold his head: now again.
Oh; Oh; Oh:
Tic very strange Captain; the man is certainly enchanted.
Oh; Oh.
Master Master; hey! will you take Tobacco in the Roll? here is a whole shipladinge, variety of Bermoda's and one
little two penny paper of Verina's, with a super subscription, to my very Friends of the cu∣stome hows.
Put up that for a relic, Thomas: and open it upon high days to clear the fore eyes of your Spanish Merchants, Thomas; no more, but call the Drawer, an understan∣ding Drawer and one writes Orthogra∣phy &amp; doe you pay the Reckoning.
Sir I charge you set A padlock on the chamber door: there is a dangerous fellow must be bronght to his purgation and look all the goods that he hath vomited bee forth coming. While wee discreetly go and in∣form the Magistrates: at your peril Sir, at your peril: Seal up the door and doe you pay the Reckoning.
Sir Richard is a Justice; there's your money, and yet wee need not pay; the Gentleman hath left enough for the Recko∣ninge in the next room.
I have made him fast; you're very welcome Gentlemen: all is paid in the Por't cullis. 
I'll walk no further; if you have a Secret to impart, you need not fear this place. The trees, and hedges will not listen, what is the business? I hope your phlegmaticall stock of verse is spent.
Why then in prose the worst that I can speak; I doe not love you Lady.
How? you have not trained me thus far to tell me that?
You are.—
You doe not mean to quarrel, now you have betrayed me to the field, and beat me, Sir?
What is there in your face more, to attract me, then that red cowes complēxion? why the devil doe you think, I should dote upon your person? that thing when she is stroked gives milk.
By that I understand, all this is in re∣avenge, because you think I did neglect you: pray, Sir, tell me, and tell me seriously; put the case that I should love you: could you love again?
In troth, I think I could not.
Doe you but think:
I will bind it with an oath before the parish.
What reasons?
I shall bee loath to say your eyes are twinckelinge stars again your lips twyn cherries, and out blue•h the rubies; your Azure veins vie beauty with the Sapphire: or that your swelling breast are hills of •vo∣rye pillows for Jove to rest his Amorous head. When my own conscience tell me that Bun—hill is worth a hundred of them, and but High gate compared with them is a para∣dice, no I thank you.
But how come you so cur•d? you weere a passionate, I may say, fool, in hope you will deserve it: what physic took you, that hath thus restored you?
A little sack had power to cure this madness.
I hope you are not sober yet; the hue∣more may chainge when you have slept.
I'll rather stich my eye lids up with Sisters-threed, and stareperpetually.
When you may see me again.
I think I shall not, unless it bee to wonder when you are in that •vie bush; that face cut upon taffeta, that cream &amp; prunes so many plumbs in white broth, that Sued∣cheon of pretence. powderd with Ermines. How sell you grapes? your hair does curl in bunches: your lips look like the Par∣sons gleabe; full of red, blue, and yellow flowers; how they are chapp'd and look like trenches made to drain the meadows?
This rudeness is beyond the manner of a Gentleman.
I cannot help it and I hope you think so.
But if your passion have not drowned all reason; I pray let us part civilly.
With all my hart, I dare then take my leave too.
Who is that.
Where.
Behind that tree.
You have no plot t'accuse me for a rape? t'was at the worst, but felony with cherryes, that look as if they had bin a fort night gathered:
I know you'll bring me home in courtesy.
Not I; I will not trust my self and you: fare well Lady: doe you see that bull?
Yes Sir.
That is a happy beast.
Why happy Sir?
Hee writes no verses to his Mist∣resse, is not cozened nor forsworn: to get her favour, bestows no rings, nor empties his exchequer to appear still in new rich suites but lives free upon the stock of nature, yet loves none. Like the great Turk, hee walks in his Seraglio and doth command which Concubine best pleases, when hee has done, hee falls to graze or sleep, and wakes, as hee had never known the dun, white, red, or branded Cow.
You are unmanly.
Nay, I know you will rail now: I shall like it: call me a skirvy fellow, proud, and saucy, and ill bred crooked clown, I'll hear. This, rather then live upon your pity, and yet doe not: For if you rail too men that know you can dissemble, may believe you love me, and tic not my Aim.
You are a fine man
I am in my best clothes.
I perceive tic true now, what the world says of you, and yet tic strange.
Tic strange it should bee otherwise.
You give your tongue a licence, nor will I hope your malice should spare me a broad, that have so prodigally abused a Ladies fame that deserves nobly from you; but you men care not whose name you blast
with a loose Character, so you maintain your pride of Talk.
How is this? it is confessed I have talked in my time and talked too much, but not too much of you; for I but seldom thought of such a woman, or any other.
Nay Sir I am satisfied, you can talk your pleasure.
Have I not done it, too?
Yes by your own report, and with a Lady so much in virtue &amp; in birth aboue you? &amp; therefore I expect not your modest language of me.
Stay. This moves me; I never took a pleasure yet to lye with Ladies fems: or ever thought that sport lye in the tongue; such humours are for men: that live by Bro∣thell offices, let me but know who hath traduced me to you thus, hee shall bee known no more.
I'll not bee guilty Sir: of any murder; when wee meet again and you in better humour I may tell you: so farewell Gon∣dari•o, nothinge's lost when you turn wo∣man hater. 
She has vexed me, if wee two make a matrimony after this rate, the devil is like to dance at our Wedding. 
Hoe's here, a lone too, and the place most opportune! how shall I begin. Master Courtwell, doe you love any friend of mine?
Not to my knowledge, Sir, I should bee sorry.
Doe you not love a Gentlewoman, Sir?
If she bee a friend of yours, I'll take the first occasion to neglect her, for your sake.
It will become your wisdom, and your safety.
What mischief have you done to your face?
My face?
You look so scurvily, come hither thou new monster, with more feet then a caterpillar what time of the day is it? you that move upon so many wheels, say Mon∣sieur, are you not a walking clock; I have a mighty mind to see you took in pieces.
I doe not like this: you cannot put me, Sir, together again.
I will not take the pains, why doe you smile now?
At your conceit, to think I was a clock I am a watch; I never strike, Hoe's valiant. 
You have pretty colours their are these your Mistresses.
If you did know the mystery you would applaud them: you have read Lievre de B'azon•, what mean you?
I will bestow them upon some fore∣horse; they will become a Country •gem rarely.
More▪d•e•! why you dare fight it seems, and I was told, you were no Cava∣lier: A very dream, a wedge for men to break their swords upon, I shall never trust fame again for your sake.
Thou never did•st cousin me.—
I was never so Illiterate in a man.
For 〈◊〉 did ever think thou durst not fence but at a cōplexion, aglisteringe vapour: a thing of clothes, and fit for Chamber∣maids to whett their wits upon: but now resolve either to have your skin flayed off; or fight with me for troubling my present me∣ditations.
Why Sir if you bee serious I shall quit that prejudice you have upon my valour look you Sir I can draw, &amp; thus provoke'd I dare chastise you, too cause I was merry I am not bound to feed your spleen eter∣nally with laughter, yet I am not Ignorant what an advantage, Sir, your weapon gives you in length.
We'll change why this is honour in thee. 
Now, Sir, keep of.
Sure thou art not so base.
I never consent you, doe you remem∣ber? these two will guide me on the rope.
You mean to dance then.
Yes but with quicker time then you I hope can follow. Thus I begin; fa la, la. 
What a heathen coward is this? how the rogue tripps like a fayrie: to the town with them, he has bin a footman sure I have not breath enough to overtake him, &amp; t'will be dark presently if I loose the sight of him; I'll search the Town and if I find him not there, pursue him with hue and cry, and after hang him. 
The sun, whose busy eye is still Employed a spy upon our Actions, tire'd with waytinge is drowsy gon to bed, about whose pillow night hath hung all her wings, &amp; set up Tapers as if the day were timorous like a child and must have light to sleep by, welcome all the hours that go∣verne pleasure, but bee slow when you have blessed me with my wishes, time and love shall dwell like twins, make this your bower and charm the air to sweetness, and to silence: favour me now, and you shall chainge your states: Time shall bee old no more, I will contract with destiny, if hee will spare his wings, to give him youth and beauty, that wee may find every minute a fresh child of pleasure: love shall bee proud to bee no more a boy but grow to per∣fact strength and hold consistance: for when two active lovers meet so happy as wee whose equal flames doe light Embraces twill bee no weight to number many years in our delights and think all age a blessing: but language is too narrow to express what I expect, tic fit my soul retire till she pre∣sent her self, and if it can measure my hop'd-for Joys with thoughts prepare to entertain the happiness. 
I have set already my design a
moving to take my Captain, Vnderwit, who in wine was late more fierce upon me; in the mean time I cannot choose but laugh at the Device wee hope to cheat my Master with sure the devil is agreat friend to womē that love men! Hee doth so furnish us with quaint inventions: presently after supper, she began her sit of tooth atch, and did coun∣terfet so naturally; but since she went to bed she almost raved by turns; I heard her at it.
Oh oh; whose there.
Tic I for sooth, I heard you groan and I have not the heart to sleep, shall I watch by you?
Oh no! get you to bed, make fast the chamber: I cannot endure.—
Dear heart, bee patient.
I, you have your homilies of pa∣tience, but if you had my pain, it would make you mad, oh; oh.
I'll send for the french tooth drawer in the morning.
There is no rack nor torture like it, oh; what shall I doe; I shall never sleep again.
Which tooth is it.
The sweet one you may bee sure troubles her
This, this; oh that there.—
They are happy that are old and have no teeth.
Oh take heed; now it shoots up to my head.
Thou make my headāke with thy noise.
If you knew what I suffer, your head would ache, in deed, I must rise and walk in the chamber, there's no remedy.
You'll catch more cold.
Oh no; dear life doe not cross me; if you weere in my torment, you would rise; and try any thing, for a little ease It cannot bee worse the pain sure came with a cold and who knows but an other cold may cure me.
I prithee come to bed again.
So, so doe not trouble me. I am now in some little ease it is a heavenly thing to bee going.
Doest thou hear?
Your noise will bring my pain back again, if you knew what a vexation it is for me to speak you would not put me to it so, if you doe talk I will not answer a word more. 
Well! by this no light I'll to London to morrow. I see tic possible a wo∣mans Tooth may bee as trouble so me, as her tongue
Oh; oh.
I cannot choose but pity her: that any woman should hold so much pain in a hollow Tooth!
If my Master touched with so much compassion should rise and force me to bed
to him, I must not cry out a rape. Tic at the worst on my side, but fornication in my own defence.
Prithee come to bed.
Oh; oh; oh:
The music at a convocation of cats, at a witches upsetting is the spheres to this caterwauling. I will thrust my head into the pillow, as Diana did, in the bush when the bear was coming, and then I shall not hear her.
Oh! this is a kind of purgatory for the sins of the flesh: if she should fall a sleep with the other knight; it is not possible I should hold out till morning that which would fright away an ague hath put me into a fever: I shall have the tooth atch in deed with counterfeiting. I have known some men taught the Stammers so, my gums doe murmur, there is fear all over my flesh she will stay too long, and then,—
Vh; uh:
Oh; oh; I'll shift places to show more distraction at the worst my noise shall be within his reach it may give her warning to return too. 
I am full of fears and my own motion frights: me this furious love is a strange Pilott: Sir where are you, ha; a sleep? can any dullness that is not death possess a Gentleman so valiant in desires, when hee
expects to meet his Mistress? how I blush to raise him? was I not worth thy waking expectation, farewell: yet something like a chain that's fastened to my poor heart re∣strains me, ink and paper: 
I'll leave him a short monument of his shame &amp; my neglected love. Hee knows my hand, farewell forgetful lover. 
What? have I slept? some witch∣craft did betray my eyes to so much dark∣ness, yet my dream was full of rapture such as I with all my waking sense would sly to meet; me thought I saw a thousand cupids slyde from heaven and landing here made this there scene of Revels clappinge their golden feathers, which kept time while their own feet struck music to their dance as they had trod and touched so may Lutes: This done with in a cloud formed like A throne, she to whom love had con∣secrate this night my Mistress, did descend, and coming towards me my soul that ever wakes, angry to see my body made a pri∣sooner, &amp; so mocked, shook of the chains of sleep, least I should loose essential pleasures for a dream. Tic happy: I will not trust my self with ease and silence. But walk and wait her coming that must bless me. For∣give me you bright Stars, and doe not frown that I have not attended as became one that must live by your kind Influence. Not yet appear? she did command I should with confidence expect her; Ha! what's here? this Character was not visible before;
" That man's too much composed of phlegm
" Will loose his Mistress, for a dream.
Tic hers. I know she has ben here; Oh fatal! and finding me a sleep scorned to uncharme my dull and cursed silence, this distracts me. Have I so long, with so much Art and Study labourd this hour and obe∣tain'd, what my ambition looked at, her con∣sent, and when the tree itself bowed down Its golden fruit and tempted me to gather, must I make my self incapable &amp; bee guilty of so black so base a forfeit? I could tear my eye lidds off, that durst let in a mist so dark and so destroying: must I sleep at such a time? that the devil must bee over watched too? this hour hath blasted such a hope as the Earth never teem'd with nor the spring gave up in smiling blossoms to the breath of those sweet winds that whisper from the west, a tale of triumph to the year, I could dissolve, with cursing of my Le•hargie. How shall I look upon her face, whose love and bold adventure I have thus rewarded? but passion will not cure my wound which must bleed till I see her, and then either cease blessed by her pardon; or dismiss a life though just, too poor a sacri∣fice to her Anger. Where shall I hide my self and shame for ever? 
I cannot forget my careless Gentle∣man; his neglect &amp; reproaches have wrought strangely upon me; hoe's here.
Is there not a weasel crept in to your chamber, Lady.
A weasel Sir?
Yes, a Monsieur suckegg.
Doe you take my chamber for a hens nest, Sir?
Ther's a Thing that calls him self Device, one that will break the heart of a post-horse to continue a hand gallop with him, your a la mode, your fighting fayrie, fethered footed servant, when saw you him?
My fighting servant, has hee beaten you Sir? perhaps hee thought you were his rival: surely I saw him not since yesterday.
Be'e Lady how many mile is it to the next Cutler? the rogue has pound or sold my sword.
Doe you hear Sir? I can tell you now what Lady; it was you did abuse so
I abuse a Lady? Tell me the slave re∣ported it; I hope it will prove this Monsieur if ere wee meet again;—Who was it?
Upon condition Sir you will requite
me but with one Gentle favour.
Any thing.
You must sit down and hear me then, while lat a distance, thus deliver.
Tic more state.
I am most unfortunate.
For what dear Damsel?
And wrong d by a Gentleman I loved.
Can hee bee a Gentleman that dares wrong so much love and beauty? what s the offence?
He will not love again.
And you would have the stubborn man corrected?
I would bee revenged, if I know how, and honour him, should doe me •ustice.
Name the man: I'll doe it.
I cannot.
How.
Yet turn your face: alas! it is your self: I have your word to punish him.
Sweet Lady I am well acquainted wi•h the worthy Gentleman, but will not kill nor strike him: for I know hee has just reason not to love you, you, of all your sex; hee told me so.
His reason?
Was in these words, suppose you hear him speak it. Now doe you sit; Lady; when I consider you to a perfect form of what we can call hands•me with all your at∣tributes of soul and body where no Addi∣tion or detraction can by cupids, •icer critics find a fault, or Mercury with your
eternal frame &amp; then consider what a thing I am to this high Character of you; so low so lost to noble merits, I despair to love a Mistress cannot love again.
This is as much dissembled modesty.
No let it all alone, I have other rea∣sons, Lady, among my papers, to love, or to bee in love is to bee gulled, that's the plain English of cupids latin besides, all reverence to the calling, I have vowed never to marry: and you know, love may bring a man to▪t at last and therefore my fine gewgaw, doe not abuse me.
How can I when you will neither love me nor marry me?
I was not made for a husband.
But I would make you.
I know what you would make me.
Monsieur Device if you bee alone would present his service to you.
Is hee come?
Doe me but one favour, I'll recant my love, I will not have so much as one good thought of you, I will neglect you, Sir, but for three minutes.
I'll have patience so long. 
Admit him. I will bee revenged on somebody? now Sir: 
I'have broug'ht you a weapon Lady.
Me, what to doe Sir.
Tic justice I present it to your feet, whose love Armed me to vindicate your honour.
My honour?
This is but the first of my valour in your cause; if you affect these monuments, I'll make you up an Armoury: mean time receive my service with this sword; if hee provoake me to fight with him again; I'll cut his hand off and bring it with me, to present the next.
Whose hand dear Servant?
Hee is not worth the naming, alas; this does not deserve your knowledge; only think what I dare doe, when your bright name is questioned: and I in time may mer∣rit to bee called the darling of your Virgin thoughts.
Pray stay; my name traduced? who was so impudent? doe me the grace to let me know on whom your valour has bin exer∣cis'd.
Why upon the formal thing, called Courtwell, I would call him Gentleman, but that I have baffled him; you need no other witness then his sword:  With the fine holiday hilt.
Look you Sir I have made fast the door because I mean before you go, to have a satisfaction for the base Injury you have done me.
I done you Injury?
Not that I value Courtwell whom you would pretend has bin too saucy with my honour, but cause I scorn to own a good∣ness should depend upon your sword or vine∣dication: I'll fight with thee my self in this
small volume against your bulk in folio.
Excellent wench.
I was your champion, Lady.
I had rather have no fame then have thee name it; thou fight for a Ladies honour, and disarm a Gentleman? thou fence before the Pageants &amp; make room for the porters, when like Elephants they carry once a year the City Castles: or go a feasting with the drum or school boys to the bank side &amp; save the bears a whipping that day: come Sir I mean to have about with you.
At what weapon?
This, and none other, Sir.
I'll rather bleed to death then lift a sword in my defence▪ whose inconside∣rate brightness may fright the roses from your Cheeks, &amp; leave the lyllyes to Lament the rude divorce: but were a man to dare me, and your enemy, my rage more nimble then the M•dian shaft should fly into his bosom, and your eye change Anger into smiles, to see me fight and cut him into a rag∣general staff.
I cannot hold no longer; you have got a stomach Sir with running, I'll try how you can eat a Sword.
Have you an ambush Lady; I'll cry out murder, tic two to one. Fair play!
Let me but cut one leg off to mar his running.
Hold: let me speak.
What can thou say for thy base∣ness?
Some men love wit, and can without dishonour endure a Jest; Why? doe you think I knew not you were here &amp; but obe∣served to see my humour? I came to wait upon you with your sword.
How came you by it? Confess be∣fore this Lady.
Doest think her wit's so limber to believe I could compel it from thee, it was a trick, a mere conceit of mirth, thou shalt have mine: Doest think I stand upon a sword? I'll give thee a case of pistols, when wee come to London; and shoot me when I love thee not: pox on it, thou apprehend me well enough.
But I am not satisfied, doe you love this Gentlewoman?
Hum;
You will resolve Sir.
As may become a stranger; I will not lose thy friendship for all woman kind.
Hee dares, not own you.
I easily forgive him: I should hate my self if I depended on his pity.
Thou art a noble wench: shall wee leave of these Jiggs, and speak our minds in earnest by these twyn lips, I love thee extremely.
Swear by your own.
They shall bee mine: Monsieur, for your penance you shall a long &amp; witness.
What I pray.
The priest shall tell you, come, wee have both dissembled, wee doe love one an other.
Tic not possible.
Unless you will deny me in the church. I have vowed to lye with you this night: Device, amble before, and find the Parson out; wee will bee friends, and thou shalt bee her Father.
I must maintain my honour, or be beaten.
Com we will have no more acquaintance.
Very pretty! I may deceive you yet for all your confidence.
If the sky fall, we'll have the darkes to supper. 
It was a strange neglect, Sir.
I confess it, and not deserve to live for it, yet if you but knew my sufferings.
Let her bee Judge.
By no means Madame.
You may trust her knowledge.
This is worse then a whipping now, these Ladies have no mercy on a delinquent; I must stand to it; there is no tyrant to a chambermaid, made judge in such a case; I'll give a limb to bee quit now; but if she choose, I am a cripple for this world.
Is it possible? A man and such a beast?
So: I must to the shambles.
What punishment can bee equal to the offence?
Hee looks with some compunction for his fault, troth, Madame, such an other
night: and try whether he will sleep again.
Merciful wench; if wee piece again; it shall bee a good turn in thy way.
My husband is resolved this day for London. It is his humour, or else worse, suspicion: there's no pretence for him to stay behind.
You have made ill use of your time Sir Francis; I know not how to help you; seven years hence you may have such an other opportunity.
Watch if my husband come not this way, Dorothy, well Sir, though your trance∣gression deserve no pardon, yet I am chari∣table upon condition.
Any thing, Madame: this shows ex∣cellent in you. No penance shall displease, so you absolve me. Bid me to climb some rock or pyramid, upon whose narrow spear you have advanced my peace, and I will reach it, or else fall lost to the world in my contempt.
You speak gloriously, the condition that assures your pardon, is only this, that you conclude, here, all your loose desires, with a resolve never to prosecute or hope to enjoy me:
Call you this charity, let me rather loose your pardon, then ever bee thus Di∣vorc'd: bind me never to see you, (and yet that were cruelty) then, charm me to forget that I am man, or have a heart, and you a beauty which your absence can as well make nothing, as divide from my adoring
It is not cure but killing to prescribe I never must enjoy you, if you have resolved death upon me, let it bee when wee like lovers have embraced.
It is not possible.
nothing in love can bee impossible to willing minds. I'll tell you, Madame, Sure the devil has forsworn the flesh, there may bee a plot, I have it. An excellent rare Do∣vice, if you but favour it: your husband is immediately for London I must in modesty ride with him; you are left behind.
How can that proffit you?
What a deal of submission these foolish men trouble us women with, that are more forward to bee friends again, then they?
I will counterfeit a fall.
A fall?
I, from my horse, observe me then.
My confederate I hope by this time is at the gate enquiring for Sir Richard very formally from the old Knight his Master &amp; good Lady: the follow has wit to manage it.
My F•o man shall pretend himself the surgeon to attend me; I'st not rare? stand but to it fate in this and if I fail I will sit down a convert and renownce all wanton hope hereafter. Dearest Madame if you did mean this honour to me before let not your loving thoughts freeze in a minute; my genius is a prophet.
Sir Richard, Madame, is coming this way.
Shall I hope again
I will not say you shall despair.
You bless me. 
My business is on foot, your Jewel Madame will credit much the cause.
Wee will with draw; and let me know how you, have cast the plot. 
From thy Master? his name?
Sir William Litleland.
I doe not know him.
His name is well known in Lincol∣neshire near the Fenns; there were of his family Ancient Gentlemen before the con∣quest, some say, ever since the flood,
Little Land?
But hee has now more land then 3. of the best of the sheer, thank the dutch men that have drunk up al the water.
They water—drinkers?
Why not, as well as eat dry land? they are lined with butter; Sir; they fear no dropsies.
She has bin absent these two years, the occasion her dislike and decaf∣fection to a Gentleman whom I confess, I did severely urge her to marry, if she have lived with you, as my late intelligence informs me in the nature of a Servant, which is be••ath my wish and her cōdition, I hope upon this knowledge, you will with consider of her quality she being my
only child and heir to my fortunes, use her like a Gentlewoman: and though my pea∣res have made me unfitt for travel I doe Intend upon the return of my daughter, whom I shall receive as a new blessing from you, to express my self for your favour
My maid Dorothy A knights daughter &amp; heir? doe you know your young Mistress?
I shall bee happy to see her, with a Letter and token from her Lady Mother.
I pray trust me to deliver it.
I, With all my heart, Sir; you may command.
T•omas, pray entertain this Foot∣man in the buttery: let him drink &amp; refresh him self and set the cold chine of beef be∣fore him hee has run hard.
That will stay his stomach indeed; but claret is his only binder.
Sack while you live after a heate, Sir.
Peas you, I'll show you the way to be drunk. 
To my loving daughter? may not this bee a trick? 
By your favour Madame; Captain, gather you the sense of that Letter, while I peruse this, you know Mistress Dor•thy?
I have had a great desire to know her,
I confess, but she is still like the bottom of the map, Terra incognito, I have ben a long time hovering about the Magellan straits but have made no new discoveries.
Ha! This is no counterfeit; I dare trust my own Judgment; tic a very rich one I am confirmed, and I will seal them up again. My Ladies Woman Sir William Littelands daughter and heir? what say you now of Mistress Dorothy?
A great deal better then I did, and yet I have loud her this half year in a kind of way, of my conscence, why may not I marry her?
This Jewel was sent by her Mother to her.
Dear Uncle conceal it till I have talk with her, oh for some witchcraft to make all sure.
I like this well: shoe's here.
I vow, Mistress Dorothy; if I were immodest, it was the mere impudence of my sack, and not my own disposition but if you please to accept my love now by the way of marriage I'll make you satisfaction, like a Gentleman in the point of honour.
your birth and estate is to high and unequal for me, Sir.
What care I for portion or a face, she that has good eyes, has good—Give me virtue.
You are pleased to make your mirth of me.
By this ruby nay; you shall wear it in the broad eye of the world; doest think I jest?
Sir Richard:—
If hee were ten Sir Richards, I am out of my wardship
How hee flutters in the lyme-bush: it takes rarely. 
What a necessary thing were a house∣hold chaplin? 
So; so; the wench inclines, I will hasten my jornie that I may appear with more excuse, when they are married in my absence. 
Come wee are fast enough, and now I have thee, I'll tell the all the fault I find, thou hast a little two much wit, to bee a wife: it could not bee too nimble for a Mistress. There is a part of your penance still behind Device; you would pretend to bee a poet, I'll not disgrace the name to call thee one, but let me have times against wee go to bed, Two Anagrams that weigh an ownce with comment, and after that, in verse your affida∣vitt that you doe wish us joy, and I'll dis∣charge you.
Tic time I were at study then.
About them, your double congie, and depart with silence: now prithee tell me who reported I had wronged a Lady? Was it
not thy revenge to make me Angry?
It was indeed Now tell me; why at the first approach seemed you so modest? you have confidence to spare, now.
Troth I came not with any wooing purpose: only to please my Uncle, and try thy wit and that converted me. 
Did you see my Master Captain Un∣derwit?
Yes he's talking with a priest and Mistress Dorothy.
Her Fathers Footman is here, she is a Knights daughter and heir, but she doth not know it.
I think so?
Whore's my Uncle?
A mile on his way to London, by this time with Sir Richard, I lunge to see my Master. 
Wee shall want Company to dance.
My Sister.
If you please Madame, you may call me, Brother, wee have ben at, I Iohn take thee Elizabeth, a possett and four naked thighs in a bed to night, we'll bid fair earnest for a boy too.
Tic even so Madame; the Priest has done it
Nay then all joys attend you; if this had bin known, it might have, stayed Sir Richard, and your Uncle one day more.
Room for an other couple.
In hell, my Master is married.
My husband left some letters, and a token was sent you Mistress Dorothy, you did Ill to obscure your self so much, you shall not want hereafter all respects that may be∣come you.
Madame I know not what you mean.
She will not take it upon her, yet.
There is the sport 
Oh Madame, news; Ill news; an Accident which will blast all your mirth, Sir Francis;—
What of him.
Has broke;—
His neck?
You guess very near it, tic but, his shoulder has saved that Joint; a fall from his horse they say hath much endangerd him.
My Uncle hurt? 
Hee has kept his word; now if hee counterfeit handsomely.
Monsieur Device, I must entreat a cour∣tesie: you have wit and I will have a Masque to entertain my new Father in Law Sir William Littleland; Mistress Dorothy now my wife is his only daughter &amp; heir
Who has gulled you thus? I am no Knights daughter.
Give you Joy Captain
She is still loath to confess it.
If you love charity; a bone setter.
Hee counterfeits rarely, where is Sir Richard.
Hee rid before, but I sent my Foot∣man, to tell him my misfortune; oh; Ma∣dame.
This is better then the tooth atch; he carries it excellently.
Ask me no torturing questions, I desire Madame a little conference with you, I'll thank the rest if they will with draw.
Let's leave him.
We'll to my chamber, Captain.
You have a mind to examine the bu∣sinesse privately.
No, good Captain you may bee pre∣sent, come; Thomas, thou shalt bee witness too. 
They are gone, you fine most Art∣ficially, let me embrace you.
Oh take heed.
What's the matter.
Tic no dissembling, Madame; I have had a fall indeed: a dreadful fall, I feel it, I think my horse saw the devil in some hedge, ere I had rid three furlongs: gave a start, pitched me off his back like a bar and broke a flint with my shoulder, I think; which struck fire too there was something like it in my eyes; I am punished.
But is this serious, are you hurt in∣deed?
Hurt? I have broke my shoulder, feelingly, and I am of opinion when I doe enjoy you, Madame, I shall break my neck: that will bee the next; I'll take this for a
warning and will leave of in time.
It makes me tremble.
I will bee honest now, and so forgive me, is not the surgeon come yet?
Heaven hath cured us both.
I am not cured yet, oh for the bone setter, if ever I counterfeit again.
There is a blessing fallen upon my blood: your only thoughts charm had power to make my thoughts wicked, and your con∣version disenchants me: may both our lives be such as heaven may not greeve, to have showed this bounty.
Sir Richard; Madame:
You may enter now, Sir.
I doe not like this Stratagem, Sir Francis must not here practice his court tricks, I will not trust my wives surgery:
Hoe's come; 
How is it noble Sir Francis; best with draw, I'll see him dressed my self.
Madame and Gentleman; Mistress D•rothy will not acknowledge she is a Knights daughter she swears she knows no Little∣land.
Till it appear to whom, this •emm was meant, deaf Madame, bee you treasurer, I confess I have wealth enough in such a noble husband.
It shall belong to thee; be honest Dorothy, and use him well.
With my best study•, Madame;
Where is this Foo••man you talk of?
He p•attended letters to carry two miles off to a Kinsmans of his Masters and return presently: hee drunk 3. or 4. beer glasses of Sack and hee rune away so lightly.
His reward shall overtake him.
Will you have her; she'll doe you service, Captain at a low Country leaguer or thou Thomas I le give thee a coppihold.
You have one life to come in that lease yet, I thank you I am free, and that is Inheritance. For ought I know she may serve us both.
Come you may persuade her to take it upon her for your creditt, the gullery is yet with in these walls let your shames go no further, the wench may prove right; she may.
What news from Sir Francis.
Wife I heartily ask thy forgive∣ness: I had jealous thoughts, but all is right again.
I will deserve your confidence.
No great danger, his blade bone dislocated: the man has put every thing in his right place
Doe you hear Sir Richard, wee are married.
Tic well done it is to my mind, send you Joy;
Come hither Dorothy.
My Mother dyed, I have it by tradi∣tion, so, as soon as I was borne my Father but no Knight, is now in the Indies a poor Merchant that broke for 20000.
The ships may come home, ha;
You had best use me well now wee are married, I will bee sworn you forced me to the church and thrice compelled me there to said, I Dorothy—The Parsons oath and mine, for ought I know may make it half a rape.
There is no remedy wee can prove no conspiracy; and because I have bin gulled my self, get her with child; my Doe is barren, at birth of his first baby I'll give thee a hundred pieces.
That's somewhat yet: when charge coms on, thy hand, a wife can bee but a wife: it shall cost me 500. but I'll make thee a Laay in earnest.
How is it Sir Francis.
My Surgeon says no danger: when you please I may venture Sir to London.
No hast now.
Not to night, Sir, wee must have revels, and you salute my bride.
And mine.
A Knights daughter and heir.
May all Joys thrive upon your Ioues; then you are cozened of your Mist∣resse Monsieur, but your nephew knows
I have met with my match if not put to the worst.
Come wee loose time.
Preserve your Marriage faith: a full increase of what you wish confirm your hap∣pines.

NO Army yet discovered?
None.
We are lost.
Despair not sir.
Away, thy confidence is folly,
Is not danger round about us,
From every part destruction staring us
In the face? this City, like a fatal Center,
Wherein the bloody lines of War, and Famine,
Prepare to meet?
And every minute we expect a Battery.
The walls are not so easily made dust,
As the besiegers would persuade our faith;
Disarm not your own hearts, my confidence
Tells me we sha'not suffer, the Duke of
Ferrari may send yet to raise the siege.
Fond Boy, it was thy counsel to depend
Upon his aids, and promise Fioretta,
Thy Sister, with so great a dowry to
The Dukes vainglorious Son; fame has belied
His valour, and we now are cheated of
Our lives and Dukedom.
Sir, with my duty safe, let me entreat you
Not stain the character of a Prince so much;
The interest we have in that great Title
Should make us wise in our belief; for when
Princes break faith, Religion must dissolve,
And nature groan with burden of the living
Beside his Son Leonato, how ever
Traduced or sullied by some Traitors envy,
Deserves a noble fame, and loves the hope
Of our alliance; I ne'er saw his person
But, it were a sin, honour could not forgive
In us to question him.
We fool our selves;
Lets think of timely Articles and yield.
Whilst there is hope of mercy.
Oh! this want
Of man will make all our well meaning stars
Forfeit their kind aspects, &amp; turn their influence to death
My Lord, I cannot be concerned in name
And honour with your person, whose least blood
Is worth ten thousand arteries of mine,
Therefore while such necessities invade us
I cannot but prefer your lives, and in
My duty counsel, you would think of what
Is offered here, rather than hazard all
By a vain expectation of an Army
From Leonato, who with all his forces
Is not yet sure to prosper in our cause.
Consider that Honorio.
Nay, should Heaven
So smile upon us, that his sword o'er come,
This to weak apprehension may promise
Our glory, but examine well the close,
There may be greater danger in his victory,
Than all our want of him can threaten.
You perplex my understanding.
He expects your Sister the reward of his great service.
Is it not Justice?
Yes, forbid it goodness,
He should not thrive in his fair hope, and promises;
But if her Highness find not in her heart
Consent, to meet the Prince with love and marriage,
Who shall defend us from his power? that must
Keep us in awe, and this earth, panting yet
With frights and sufferings of the War.
It is my wonder Lord Flaviano, your wisdom
Should weave these wild impossibilities;
My Sister not consent? nature, her birth,
Obedience, honour, common gratitude,
Beside ambition of what can be hoped for
To make her happy, will give wings to her desires.
I cannot tell.
I cannot think,
Your reason sir can be so much corrupted,
To look upon my Sister with that fear,
She should not fly to meet our great preserver;
Do you believe, she now among holy Virgins,
Lead thither by her own devotion,
During this War to pray, and weep for us
(Tears, whose clear Innocence might tempt an Angel
To gather up the drops, and string for Saints
A Crystal Rosary) can wish us safe
By his victorious arm, without a will
To be her self his own reward? her virtue
Must needs instruct her that, and we apply
No motive to her heart—
What news?
From the Watch-tower we descry an Army
Marching this way; the Sun which hath thus long
Muffled his face in clouds, as it delighted
In their approach, doth gild their way, and shine
Upon their burgonets to dazzle the faint eyes
Of our besiegers.
It is Leonato.
Our Enemies, whose Troops circle the Town,
Are making hast to meet 'em, and the Foot
Quitting their trenches, now are gathering
Into a body, as it seems resolved
To give 'em battle.
We have life again.
H•norio, collect what strength we have,
And make a sally at your best advantage.
It is good to engage 'em both ways.
How my thoughts triumph already!
Now my Son is gone,
Who is not of our Counsel; wee must think
How to behave us, if the Prince succeed,
Our daughter which wee promised him in marriage,
Being already sent away, the price
Of his great Victory.
Trouble not your self,
Great Sir, your wisdom that inclined your faith
To my true Character of the Prince,
And took my counsel for her absence, shall
Applaud my future policy; hoe's not come
To conquest yet, however Princes are not
Obliged to keep, what their necessities
Contract, but prudently secure their states
And dear posterity; trust to my care,
Fioretta is no match for Ferraras Son,
A Prince deep read in lusts, faithless, and cruel,
So will a Turtle with a Vulture show,
Or Lamb yoked with a Tiger: shoe's a pledge
Destined by better fate to Crown your age
And heart with blessings Sir.
Hark,
The d•ums talk louder, from the battlements,
I may behold their fight, and see which Army,
Conquest, now hovering in the air, will mark
Her glorious perch, upon whose Plumed heads
She may advance, and clap her brazen wings.
Sir I'll attend: Claudio.
My Lord.
Thou left'st the Princes Fioretta safe at Ply∣centia?
Yes Sir.
How did she like her progress? thou did urge
It was my care of her, to take her from
The fright and noise of War.
I did my Lord.
And did she taste it well?
To my apprehension exceeding well,
And gave me strict commands
To say she will remember, and reward
Your love and care of her.
Did she name love?
The very word she used, and I returned,
How much your study and ambition was
To merit her fair thoughts.
And did thou scatter, as I instructed
Here and there dark language, to
Dissafect her with the Prince, to whom
The Duke hath rashly made a promise?
All; I had failed my duty else my Lord.
Call me thy friend, thou hast deserved me, now
Attend the Duke—so, now my next art must be,
How to come off with with Leonato, if his
Army prevail, the Duke must be instructed;
Honorio thinks his Sister still in the Nunnery;
That thought must be preserved; a thousand wheels
Move in my spacious brain, whose motions are
Directed by my ambition to possess
And call Fioretta mine, while shallow Princes
I make my State decoys, then laugh at 'em.
The Prince Honorio wounded; fate I bless thee.
How is it with your highness?
I am shot sir.
Would it were dangerous—be careful of him;
A curse upon that hand that mist his heart.
So, so, fortune thou shalt have eyes again
If thou would smile on mischief, I will build thee
An Altar, and upon it sacrifice
Folly and all her children, from whose blood
A curled smoke shall rise, thick as the mists
That breath from Incense to perfume and hide
The sacrificing Priest; sight on,
Ye are brave Fellows, he that conquers may
Get Honour, and deep wounds, but I the day.
You Virgins, that did late despair
To keep your Wealth from cruel men,
Tie up in silk your careless hair,
Soft peace is come again.
Now lovers eyes may gently shoot
A flame that wo'not kill:
The Drum was angry, but the Lute
Shall whisper what you will.
Sing Iö, Iö, for his sake,
Who hath restored your drooping heads,
With choice of sweetest flowers make
A garden where he treads;
Whilst, we whole groves of Laurel bring,
A petty triumph to his brow,
Who is the Master of our Spring,
And all the bloom we ow.
Our hearts were open sir before the gates
To Entertain you, I see Laurels grow
About your temples, where, as in a grove
Fair Victory Enamoured on your brow
Delights to sit, and cool her reeking head
And crimson tresses in your shade.
The City
In glory of this day shall build a Statue
To you their great preserver, whose tough brass
Too hard for the devouring teeth of age
Shall eat up Time, to keep your fame Eternal;
Our active youth in honour of your name
Shall bring again the old Olympic games,
And willing to forget what's past in time,
And story, count their years from this days triumph,
As if the World began but now; the wives
As if there were no legends past of love,
Shall only talk of you, and your great Valour;
And careless how mans race should be continued
Grow old in wonder of your deeds; our Virgins
Leaving the natural tremblings that attend
On timorous maids, struck pale at sight of blood,
Shall take delight to tell what wounds you gave,
Making the horror sweet to hear them sing it;
Their hands at the same time composing Garlands
Of Roses, Myrtle, and the conquering Bay,
To adorn our Temples, and the Priests, and while
The Spring contributes to their art, make in
Each garden a remonstrance of this battle,
Where flowers shall seem to Fight, and every plant
Cut into Forms of green Artillery,
And instruments of War, shall keep alive
The memory of this day, and your great Victory•
Yet all that can be studied short of you,
Our best, a rude Imperfect Monument
Of your deserved honours.
You're too bountiful
In language sir, the service wee have done
May merit your acknow•edgment, which though
The Justice of your cause directed first
To this success, was not without a hope
Of a reward you promised, and I value it
More than you can esteem all your pr•servings;
So much hath fame preferred your Daughters Virtue
To every excellence.
This adds to what
Wee held before excess of honour to us.
I had but a part in the Universal benefit
Your Valour gave, but this affection
Falls like a happy Influence on my self
And blood, whose aged s••r•ems you fill with blessings.
My Daughter shall be yours, in which I sum
My lives chief satisfaction. My Lord
Go to the house of Benedictine Nuns,
Among whose sweet society our Daughter,
During this War and tumult, went to offer
Her prayers for our deliveran•e.
I am in a storm, and now must stand
My desperate fate.
I hope shoe's not turned Nun?
I should not like it.
May not we visit the holy house? it is pity so much
Sweet flesh, should be engrossed and barrelled up
With penitential pickle before their time,
That would keep fresh and fair, and make just work
For their Confessions. I do not like the women
Should be cabled up.
I think so.
I would this Virgin would be peevish now.
Why so?
That we might have some sport among the Leve∣rets.
For I would so inflame the General
He were affronted, that wee should have all
Commission to work into the Warren.
We do want a person here, whose name is great
In the Register of honour, it would much
Enlarge our present happiness to Embrace him,
Your Son the prince Honorio. Duke. It was his chance
Upon a sally, when your colours gave
Us Invitation to the Field, and spirited
Our soldiers, to receive a shot, whose cure
May excuse the want of his attendance sir,
Nor will I doubt his wounds are doubled by
The thought he cannot wait upon your person.
He should have honoured us, and made me proud
To know, whom so much fair desert hath made
Dear in the voice and love of men: but I
Shall not despair to see him. We want
A limb of our own Army, where is Signior
Bertoldi, that came with us to see Fashions?
I hope we have not lost him.
Sir, I know not, I fear hoe's slain.
He wo'not die so nobly;
He'll ne'er give up the ghost without a Featherbed.
He was sick last night at the report we were
But three leagues off the Enemy, and called
For a hot caudle. I that knew his cold
Disease persuaded him to drink, which he
Did fiercely as I could wish, in hope to see him
Valiant and vvalk the round, but quite against
Nature his ague shook him more, and all the Drink
Which was the full proportion of a gallon
Came out it's forehead in faint svveat; he had
Not moved ten paces, but he fell down backward
And swore he was shot with a cold bullet; how
They rolled him like a Barrel back to his Tent,
For levers could not raise him to make use
Of's feet again, I know not, nor since saw him.
I hope hoe's still asleep.
But when he wakes,
And finds the Army marched away, He dares not,
Go home again alone, &amp; how he will venture
O'er the dead bodies hither—he has don't.
Where is the General?
Here comes our mirth.
A walking Armoury; noble Signior Bertoldi.
If you want Pikes or Muskets there, I could
Ha brought field pieces, but I durst not venture
My chine.
Where had you these?
Ask, ask the men I killed, if they deny
A syllable I'll forswear the Wars.
He has disarmed and robed the dead.
A coward has impudence to rob a Church.
He durst not take 'em from a man that had
But so much life in him to gasp or groan,
That noise would fright him.
I rejoice Signior, you're safe come home.
I would I were at home, and you get me
Among your Guns again—how first Volterino?
This news will much exalt your Mothers heart.
He is returned but with a melancholy face.
Where is the Princess?
Where is our Daughter?
Where her devotion I fear will make
This Dukedom most unhappy, if your virtue
Exceed not what is read in other Princes,
It was my fear that place, and conversation,
Would mortise too much that active heat
Sh•uld wait on the desires of high-born Ladies.
The mystery?
Do not you find it? they have nunnified her.
Sir, your pardon;
She whom first fear and fright of War persuaded
To join her prayer and person with the Virgins
In the religious Cloister, by what art
Or holy magic won, is now resolved—
What, hath she vowed?
Until a year be finished
By revolution of the days great guide,
Not to forsake the Nunnery, but spend
Her hours in thankful prayers to Heaveu for this
Great victory.
So, so, It will come to the battery I talked on.
It cannot be.
It must not be
I am of that opinion my Lord,
It must not be, this is a stratagem.
She humbly prays you would interpret this
No breach of filial piety, nor your
Highness a will to wrong so great a merit
As hath engaged all fortunes here, and lives
To bleed for you, but weigh in your best charity
That duties are first paid to Heaven, the spring
And preservation of what makes us happy,
And she is confident when you consider—
How much my honour suffers, to employ
The strength I have to punish this affront.
A pox upon it, we shall have more fighting now
I hope you have no thought of any p••ctice
Here to deserve that language?
You're abused.
If you be her Father sir, I must expect
What did engage me hither, and without
Delays, or leave this City in a flame.
More Fire-works?
In whose Ashes I will bury this foul ingra∣titude.
We are ruined all.
There is not so much danger, to be put
In Rank and File with Pye-meat in an Oven,
If a man were certain to come out again
Dow-bak'd.
Yet stay. I have considered,
I may have leave to see this Frozen Lady.
We are more undone.
Your person may prevail sir,
And by some better charm, gain her consent,
Or if you please not to engage your self
Upon the trouble of a hasty visit,
The presence of her Father, and what else
We can prepare to keep your smile upon us,
Shall be enforced, to clear how much we aim
At the perfection of your wishes.
So, so. Leon. Prospen.
I have now• courage sir to serve your will,
And am of the sudden confident.
It pleases.
It is impossible.
Promise any thing
In such a strait, and not despair to effect it.
Be private men content with their poor Fathom,
Since Heaveu we limit not, why should not Kings
Next Gods, perform the second mighty things?
Your ear—
YOu will obey the Dukes command?
Good Princes,
Punish, not teach us sacrilege; I'll obey
A thousand sufferings ere such a rape—
A rape?
Of honour, Honesty, Religion;
I am placed here to preserve, and not betray•
The Innocent; should I instead of prayer,
Chaste life, the holiness of vow, of discipline,
With those austerities that keep wild blood
In calm obedience, now begin to teach•
Soul-murdering liberty, the breach of all
Was promised Heaven.
With Madam you mistake,
We ask no Virgin to turn Whore, we only
Desire you would persuade some pretty Nun,
In this extremity, to take upon her
The Princess Fioretta, whom Leonato
Ne'er saw, and be his Wife in honest marriage.
Can you be thus
Unjust to him, so late preserved your lives?
Trouble you not your reverend head with that,
He shall be satisfied, and you remain
Still mother of the Maid, no more sour faces,
But turn your wit to'th' business.
Never sir.
Take heed and have a care of this enclosure,
The Dukes breath makes all flat, tic yet no common;
〈◊〉 are old, and should be wise.
I would be honest.
Show it in your obedience; will you do it?
Never.
Do ye hear? I sent unto this holy place,
A Damsel called Iuliana, she's in your Catalogue,
And yet but in probation, cause I see,
You make so nice a conscience, so severe,
In the rules of honesty, and would not have,
Your Virgin province touched with least defilemen•,
Pray let me speak with her, it will concern you.
Would you pervert her?
I know not what you call perverting,
But she has not too much Nuns flesh,
And tic my charity to your chaste Order
To give you timely notice.
What do I hear?
No more than you may justify in time,
If things prove right, she was a merry soul
And you have not spoiled her, if you mean to be
No Midwife, let me talk with her a while.
Protect us Virgin thoughts
So, so, this was reserved to wind up all,
It may be fortunate;
I know her spirit high, and apt to catch at
Ambitious hopes and freedom, some good counsel
May form her to my purpose, I have plunged
Too far, to hope for safety by return,
I'll trust my destiny to the stream, and reach
The point I see, or leave my self a rock
In the relentless waves; shoe's here, I'm armed.
By your own goodness, reverend Mother give
No belief to him; though he be a great man,
He hath not been held guilty of much virtue,
Yet tic my wonder he should stain my Innocence;
Pray in your presence, give me leave to acquit
My Virgin honour; for the wealth of all
The World, I would not have this shame be whispered
To the stain of our profession.
Madam, the Duke.
The Duke?
Peace to the fair Iuliana.
You're not noble,
A most dishonord Lord, your titles cannot
Bribe my just passion, who will trust a man?
Oh sir, you are as black, nay have a soul
As leprous with ingratitude, as the Angels
Are white with Innocence; was it not enough
To rob me of my honour, the chief wealth
Of Virgins, and confine me to my tears,
Which ne'er can wash away my guilt (should I
Live here to melt my soul into a stream
With penitence) but when I had resigned
The World with hope to pray, and find out mercy,
You must thus haunt me with new shame and brand
My forehead here, as if you meant to kill
My better essence by despair, as you
Have stained my body.
Deer Iuliana I
Confess I injured thee thou knew no sin
But from my charm, it was only I betrayed thee
To loss of thy dear honour, then of liberty,
For it was my practice, not thy pure devotion
Made thee a Recluse first; but let not passion
Lose what I would not only save from shipwreck,
But make as happy as thy thoughts can wish thee;
By thy wronged self tic true, nor could I choose
Another way than by discovery
Of both our shames to right thee, I am come
To make thee satisfaction in so high
And unexampled way of honour, thou
Shalt say I did deserve to be more wicked,
When thou hast vveighed the recompense.
You amaze me
Collect thy senses, and discreetly mind me;
Thou can not be concerned so much alive
In any other story, hear me gently
And prize the wealth of every syllable.
Had you been pleased to have left your daughter still
My charge and sweet companion, I should
Have left no duty unessaid, to have shown
In what degree I honoured her, but I
Must not dispute your royal pleasure, though
With some sad thoughts to separate, I resigned her
To your commands.
It was your virtue Madam, she found no
Consent to be professed, nor love the Prince,
To whom I promised her a Wife, although
Our fears keep warm his hope, in his belief
Shoe's here enclosed still, but without thy help,
We are all lost.
The Prince Leonato?
Ther's a preferment, this is considerable.
If you my Lord be serious; a Princess!
The change would do well.
Be but confident to manage it.
Hath he not seen the Princess by picture?
Never.
Strange!
'T was a ceremony, in the necessities of our state,
The Duke ne'er thought on, &amp; I meant not to insert it,
As knowing Fioretta had no zeal,
To what her Father darkly had contracted;
His Highness doth expect thee.
It would be
More for my honour, if he took the pains,
To visit our Religious house, and then—
It shall be so.
But twill be necessary,
You purge me to the Abbess, no suspicion,
Must live within her thought.
I apprehend;
Oh! you have shot a trembling through my soul,
I dare not kiss your hand, the Earth you tread on,
Would too much grace the lips have so profaned you.
Madam your pardon; sir be you the witness,
I have wronged this noble Virgins honour,
It was my anger, and revenge upon
Your goodness that so late opposed me made
Me careless, where I flung disgrace and scandal,
Thus I implore her mercy and forgiveness,
Take her white thoughts to your again, she is
As innocent from sinful act by me
As the chaste womb that gave me life.
Tic piety,
Thus to restore the Innocent, I conceive not
His aim in this.
Tic satisfaction.
When I stray from your sweet precepts—
In, I am confirmed.
All to our expectation, shoe's prepared,
A Mistress for the Prince.
But now I think on it
She must not marry him, it will breed ill blood.
By all means marry him, there's no other way
To send him hence, and quit us of the Army,
I'll instantly acquaint him how I prosper.
It must not be, my honour will bleed for it.
I have been too much guided by Flaviano.
Madam—
Your face is troubled.
No, my heart
Which you may curc with honour, as I have
Contrived it now—
I shall study with my loss of life
To gain your bosom peace.
I like this Virgin,
I know my Lord here hath been practising,
But finds her not inclined to that extent
We had proposed, she is virtuous, you shall
Counsel her only but to take the name
Of my Fioretta, but not change her life
To marry with the Prince; I do believe,
Her chaste, Oh let your goodness keep her still so,
And fortify her virtuous thoughts, I doubt not
But she with holy eloquence, and pretence
Of vow, and Virgin sanctity,
May so prevail upon him both to save her self,
Our honours, and the Kingdom from a sacrifice.
May not this be?
Such extremes I know not.
If she persist a chaste, and noble Virgin,
You must dispense, we have but little time
For pause, unless this present care be found,
We all must bleed to death upon the wound.
Hum! shall I never fight? drink wo'not do it,
No nor a Whore the greater provocation;
I speak it to my shame, I never durst
Fight for my wench, yet Gentlemen commend
My confidence at paying of a reckoning,
There I can kill 'em all with courtesy,
Discharge my Pieces like a Mr. Gunner at a great sup∣per,
Yet I am not valiant, this must be mended someway.
Volterino? a word;
Tic not unknown to you, that I am a coward.
No, not a coward, but you, are not sir,
If I were put to answer upon Oath,
So valiant altogether as Don Hercules,
That strangled a great Bull with his forefinger
And's Thumb, and killed the King of Troys great Coach horse
With a box of the car.
Pox on it, do not abuse me, I shall take it
Scurvily and you deny it.
But you wo'not beat me.
Ther's the thing, I know it
As well as you can tell me, I am base,
And in plain terms a coward.
Why dost not beat thy self for being one?
Then I durst fight; no, I was begotten
In a great Frost, between two shaking Agues,
I never shall be valiant, who can help it?
But when you come home again, if you will but
Swear I am valiant—
You shall pardon me.
Come, my Mother shall make you amends; a ha,
You love her, she's a Lady and a Widow,
That has the Goldfinches, hark in your ear,
You shall have her.
Shall I have her?
A word to the wise.
Would I were sure on it.
If I have thy Mother, I will not only swear thou art,
But make thee valiant.
Would it were possible, upon that condition
You should have my Sister too.
She's dead.
〈◊〉 she were alive I mean—
•arewell, we'll treat again, and if I live
Thou shalt be Iulius Caesar.
When I dye, thou shalt be Caesa•s heir.
Noble Hortensio.
I am in hast, what's the matter?
There lies your way, a hundred thousand Ducats
Will find entertainment somewhere else.
Can thou help me to 'em?
Yes, and a better business.
How? where noble Bertoldi?
Wy—but you are in hast.
No, no, where is all this money?
Safe enough in a place.
But how shall I come by it?
You know my Mother.
The rich Lady Florclia, the Court Widow,
Shoe's my Mistress.
You shall have her.
Shall I?
Yes, and be Master of as much money
As will make you mad.
The Prince, hark in your ear.
I knew I should prevail, and I am happy,
There's no frost now within her, if your excellence
Would grace the Monastery with a visit
And satisfy your self, your presence will
Perfect the business, and be a just excuse
To some nice ceremonies that detain
Her Person to comply with virgin modesty,
The Duke will meet you there.
I will attend him.
You will consider Sir it is a place
Not used to public treaties, though dispensed with
For this your solemn view, and conference,
Your person may be trusted there, without
A numerous train.
You shall direct me Sir.
Volterino, you shall only wait upon me.
Sir when you please.
I'm proud to be your conduct.
You shall have her
And her Estate, that's fair, she has enough
To undo the Devil if he go to law with her,
My Father's dead and has told him that already.
I'll do it.
Here's my hand, my mother's thine.
Not my mother.
She shall be any thing I'll have her,
Do you but persuade her I am valiant,
And I'll venture to beat her, and she dare
Deny to marry any man I please
To call my Father in law.
Let's walk and think on it.
You may swear any thing,
And you pawn your soul for me,
You know you cannot be a loser.
O fly my soul, what hangs upon
thy drooping wings,
and weighs them down,
With love of gaudy mortal things?
The Sun is now in the East, each shade
as he doth rise,
is shorter made,
That Earth may lesson to our eyes:
Oh be not careless then, and play
until the Star of peace
Hide all his beams in dark recess;
Poor Pilgrims needs must lose their way,
When all the shadows do entrease.
She is exceeding fair, what pity it were
Such beauty and perfection should be
Confined to a melancholy Cell: I approach
You Madam with the reverence of a votary,
You look so like a Saint, yet nature meant
You should not with such early hast translate
Your self to heaven, till earth had been made happy
With living modells from your excellent figure.
You that become a cloud, and this dull dress
So well, whose sight doth pale, and freeze the blood,
How will you shine to admiration
Of every eye, when you put on those Ornaments
That fit your name and birth? if like a statue
Cold and unglorified by art, you call
Our sense to wonder, where shall we find eyes
To stand the brightness, when you're turned a shrine,
Embellished with the burning light of Diamonds,
And other gifts that dwell like stars about you?
If you do fancy me an object so
Prodigious, for the safety of your eyes
And others, tender-sighted, give consent,
I may not change this poverty a•d place,
(More pleasing to my self, than all the pride
Can wait those Goddesses, at Court you bow to)
And yet it were heresy in me to say
You could receive addition or glory
By the contributory blaze of Wealth,
Or other dress, which art and curiosity
Can form; you are not by them graced, but they
By you made beautiful. Jewels near your eye,
Take soul and Lustre, which but once removed
Look dull as in their quarry.
He is taken.
I now applaud my fate, and must account
My undertaking in this War to save
Your Dukedom, but the shadow of a service,
When I consider my reward. Oh! hast
To make me Envied of the World, and once
Possessed of you, to undervalue all
But Heaven, of which you are the fairest copy.
My Lord, our study here is life, not language,
And in that little time I've had of practice,
My tongue hath learned simplicity, and truth;
You are a Prince, and in your Cr•ation
But one degree from Angels, strive to rise
That one round higher, and y' are perfect; I am
By my good Fathers leave, and the sweet rules
Of this Religious order, now in the way
To meet another Bridegroom, before whom
While you stand a competitor, you fall
To Atoms; sir my love is planted here,
And I have made a vow, which your own charity
Will bid me not to violate, (your triumph
Being the spring of my imperfect duty,)
That for a year, I'll spend my time among
This happy Quire, to offer up my Prayers
And humble gratitude to Heaven, a weak
Oblation for our safeties.
Ha? how's this?
My Lord, did you not say you had prevailed?
What mockery is this?
I am undone.
What does the Gypsy mean, she'll betray all.
Most excellent Madam.
Oh my Lord employ
Your counsel, to advance not Kill our Virtue,
Remember where, and what I am.
So, so.
Sir will you suffer this? a new affront.
I am resolved
To live and pay you better tribute here
For your affection, and unequalled service.
Here no distraction will afflict my prayers,
Which trust me I will offer chastely for you,
At every hour of my devotion.
It is you, next Heaven, that gave this blessing to us,
To meet, and in the holy Quire breath up
Our sacred Hymes, while Angels Echo to us,
And Heaven delighted with our harmony,
Opening her azure curtains will present us
A vision of all the joys we pray and hope for.
This my instructions?
O think my Lord
To what a loss of Heaven your love invites me,
Yet let me not be thought while I pretend
The choice, and sweetness of a Recluse, I
Should in a thought accuse your worth, who are
The man of all the World I most could fancy;
If I be seen 〈◊〉 blush, make it no sin,
I know it is but honourable love
Wings your desire, and that which should prefer you,
Is merit of your Sword that cut our way,
To freedom and soft peace, Religions Pillow,
The Nurse of Science, and the general blessing,
You have a title yet more strong pleads for you,
The contrac•, •nd the promise of a Prince
A chain with many Links of Adamant.
I like not that.
To bind and make me yours,
When I have named these several interests,
And look upon my self so short of merit,
I chide your unkind destiny, at such
Expense of honour to go off unsatisfied,
And quickly should despise my self the cause
Of your distaste, but that my vow confirms me,
And mustering up Religious thoughts prevails,
Above my other will, made to obey you,
Tic but a year my Lord, that I have bound
My self this exile.
Tic an age.
But while• Time hath one minute in his Glass of that,
Nothing shall take me hence, unless you bring
An impious strength upon this holy dwelling,
And force me from my cell, but you are far
From such a sacrilege, oh think not on it,
I'll place you in my heart while you are virtuous,
But such an Act might lose those noble thoughts
Of you I wish preserved, but I offend,
And am too large in this unwelcome argument,
May wisdom guide your Princely thoughts,
Whilst I return to pray for you.
She has orethrown all.
Sir, if you love her she
Hath taught you a cunning way to make her yours,
This habit is compelled, a little force,
For form will disengage her, she does love you,
And pleaded handsomely against her self.
N•more—I'll not despair yet of your Daughter,
This is but Virgin nicety, at the next
Meeting she may incline to smile upon me,
Shoe's too much treasure to be won at first
Assault, Volterino.
Flaviano.
I did expect a storm.
We are not safe yet.
I wonder why Iuliana kept not promise,
The Dog-dayes thaw her chastity, I'm mad,
Oh for some stratagem to save all yet,
But you Sir (give me leave to say) are timorous,
Princes should fix in their resolves, your conscience
Should be as subject to your will, as I am.
I must confess Flaviano I had
No fancy to Iulianas marriage.
That was all my hope, how could I love the man
Durst kill him now.
I shudder, what noise is that?
These horrors will eternally affright us.
The man that dares be guilty of least Insolence,
To any Virgin, dyes.
My hopes are nipped, I thought to have tasted,
Nuns flesh, but the General has made it fasting day.
I hope he means to force away Iuliana—
Ha? they attempt it, prosper'em deer fate.
Blessed beyond expectation.
Dost think,
We shall be safe.
Enjoy the other benefit of my Sword
In peace, this shall be mine.
The stars dote on us.
What unexpected tumults fright the City?
You are too bold upon your wound Honorio
To come abroad.
The Prince has stolen your Sister
From the Nunnery.
He dares not
Blemish his honour so, though he deserved her,
And all our lives, should she be obstinate.
Tic done.
This Act shall lose him, death upon
The Surgeon, that hath dallied with my wounds,
But I'll revenge this rape.
Look to the Prince.
I could adore my destiny, the wench sure,
Meant to be ravished thus, I kiss thy policy;
This chance hath made a dancing in my blood,
While sin thrives, tic too early to be good.
IS this Ferraras Court?
Yes Madam.
I will not yet discover, I shall find,
A time Antonio to reward thy faith
And service to me.
Here are Ladies Madam.
I have a great desire to see this wonder,
The Princess Fioretta, so much famed
For beauty.
Comes she with his Excellence?
Most certainly, so speaks the Prince Leonato's
My Brothers Letters, and that with some difficulty,
He gained her from the Nunnery.
Who is this?
She has an excellent shape, some stranger;
Prithee Florelia ask.
This Lady Madam,
Seems to make some address this way; I know not,
Upon what Jealousy my Lady left
Placentia so privately, where she
Was entertained by Flavianos Mother,
Though old, a Lady of no decrepit brain.
Antonio.
A Lady, Madam, calls her self Lauriana,
Born in Placentia, but the Wars affrighting,
Both Mantua and the confines, she came hither
With confidence of safety, till the storm
At home be over.
It is not fit a person of your quality
And presence should be engaged to common persons,
And if I may entreat, you shall consent
To be my guest at Court, which will be proud
To entertain such beauty.
It must be
Too great an honour Madam.
Leonato my Brother hath secured your peace at home,
Which cannot be less pleasing, if you taste
The freedom I can here provide and promise you,
We expect him every minute with the Princess
Fioretta, in whose love he holds more triumph
And yet his fame was Earlier than this conquest,
For many noble Virtues, but has your grace
A confidence that he brings Fioretta with him?
Since he left Mantua we received such letters.
Madam, the Prince is come to court, and with him
The gallant Lady wee expected.
I am not well of the sudden.
Virue defend!
The good old Duke your Father, will
Show comfort in his sick-bed to behold
A Son and Daughter.
Are they married?
No Madam, but I am confident
So great a joy will not be long deferred,
It were sin such hope should wither by delay,
They both wish to be happy in your presence,
And you at first sight of this Princely sister
Will much applaud your brothers fate.
I hope so,
How is it Madam yet?
I do beseech you
Let not your graces too much care of me
Detain you from the joy your brother brings.
Another Fioretta?
Donabella?
I shall not fear a surfeit in my joys
To see you safe.
A gallant Gentleman.
What Laddie's that?
A stranger, sir, with whom I have prevailed
To grace our court a while, which will be Honoured
In such a guest.
And I should call it happiness
If you would please to dwell for ever with us,
I have brought home such a companion,
For both your beauties you will not repent.
The Duke of Mantuas Daughter, I congratulate
Y••• double victory, and if I may,
Without imputed flattery speak my thoughts,
You did deserve her, had she to her birth,
All the additions that grace a Woman.
You have conferred a bounty on me Madam,
And leave me hopeless to reward the debt
Jove this fair opinion.
Sir, the venture
You made through blood, and danger, doth deserve it,
And she were impious, did not think her self
Much honoured to be called your valors triumph.
I shall betray my self. Censure me not,
Immodest or suspectful of her virtue,
Whom you have made the darling of your heart.
Sir the Duke calls for you.
Signior Bertoldi.
Your Graces creature.
Will it please you Madam?
I humbly pray your Highness to excuse me,
I may have time and happiness to attend you,
When with more health I may present my services,
I dare not see this Lady.
Wait you upon that Lady Signior.
With all my heart; incomparable Lady—
I have servants to attend me.
But not one,
More humble, or more active for your service,
You cannot choose but know my Lady Mother;
I have not seen her yet, but she shall stay,
I'll kneel to her when I have done with you.
But is my Son so valiant, Signior?
This War hath wrought a miracle upon him.
He was a coward beyond Ela, Madam,
I must acknowledge, to whom men in pity
Of his Birth, and care of your much-loved honour
Often forgave his life, but see the turn,
He that went forth (for all our conjurings
And promise of no danger) as he had
Been marching towards Aetna, nay before
The instant fight would have given all the World
To have been assured when he came home, but one
Of every thing about him—
What do ye mean?
One eye, one ear, one arm, and but one leg
To have hopt home withal, strange, how in the heat
Of the Battle he grew double, and there fought
As he had two souls; oh! had you seen
When like a Magazine he marched, with pikes
With guns &amp; Corslets, which he took from the Enemy,
With swords more than a Surgeons sign, stuck round,
And seeming like a porcupine to shoot
The Iron Quills—
But is this possible?
I never saw a Dragon do such thing•
This was not by instinct, but some example
He saw in you, that waked his sleeping spirit.
And he must owe all that is Valiant in him
To your brave soul, which like a burning Comet
Flew with prodigious terror to the Enemy.
You do not Jeer your servant?
And so he, by your great blaze
Saw his next way to honour;
Nor can I but acknowledge all my joys
Now in my Son do flow from you; a soldier
Was ever high in my esteem, but you
Have placed the title nearest to me, pray
Favour me often' with your visit.
The Town's my own.
No complement good Signior, your love
If placed on me, shall find an object, though,
Not equal to your favours, not ungrateful;
I wonder he absents himself so long.
My care shall be to find him out and bring him
A welcome present to your eye. She's caught.
These Soldiers think if they but once lay siege,
We must come in by force or c•mposition.
Although a Maiden Town may not hold out,
A Widow but well vittled with the bare
Munition of her tongue, will tire an Army;
I must suspect my Son, for all this legend,
No mighty man at arms; hoe's here.
Your blessing.
Take it, and with it all my prayers, thou moist
Grow up in honour, and deserve to be
Thy Fathers Son.
Kiss her Hortensio, do, she is thine own.
It was my ambition Madam
To wait upon my Convert, and to kiss
Your white hand.
Signior Volterino was here but now, and has
Told me such stories, Son—
Of me?
He had better eat my Spaniard, then mention me
With any scruple of dishonour.
He extols you for • Soldier, and tells me won∣ders.
If you dare believe me Madam, your Son has
Behaved him like a Gentleman.
I confess,
I was—but that's no matter, thank this Cavalier;
can receive and give a gash, and look on it
When I have don without your cordial waters
Shall I cut you o'er the face Mother?
Sir I am poor to recompense the honour
You have done my Son, I see he is your convert,
You that infused a soul in him cannot
Enough be glorified.
Tic within your power
Madam to overpoise all my deserts.
True, I did stir those dormant seeds of nobleness
Your blood left in him, and made glow those sparks,
Into a flame, were hid in hills of Ashes;
Now he is yours, and if you Madam think
I have done any service by an Act
Or precept that could light your Son to honour,
You make me fortunate, and encourage
A Soldier to employ his whole life here.
How do ye mean?
Without more complement to love you, and—
What?
Wish my self with you Madam when you dream
You would be with me when I dream.
But I should wake you.
But I should be very angry to have my sleep broke.
But I would please you again,
And rock you into a trance with so much harmony,
You shall wish to dye in it. I am very plain.
Me thinks you are very rough.
A Soldiers garb,
The old but the best fashion; a Sword,
And flattery were not meant for one mans wearing;
Madam I love you, but not dote upon you,
For you are something old.
I am indeed sir.
Yet you are very handsome, and I love you;
You're witty, fair, and honest, but a VViddow,
And yet I love you; I do know you are rich,
Exceeding mighty rich.
And yet you love me▪
But Madam, I am a man.
I do not mean to try you Signior,
Pray Son do you.
Now put your vote in.
What should I do Madam?
Try whether he be a man or no.
Should I?
Do ye hear? they say you are grown valiant•
Upon my blessing I command you strike
This Gentleman, and do it presently.
Strike him?
Yes.
A way, away, what here?
Even here, this very minute.
Not for your house, and all the monies in it,
Not for my Fathers Wardrobe, and I were
An Adamite a top of the Alps, though you
Admire the relics, and have turned your Gallery
Into a Chapel, where his several suites
Hang up like Images for you to pray to:
Strike one taught me to fight?
Is she gone? what said she?
The foolish woman—
Why what's the matter?
She shows her breeding, but do not you despair.
If I mistake not sir, you would pretend
You love me honourably.
May I perish else.
When you can maked appear in visible wounds
Upon your head' or body, that my Son
Dares fight—you and I'll be married.
I told you Signior you should have my Mother.
The Devil shall have you both upon easier conditions;
Visible wounds upon my head or body?
And here's my hand upon the sight thereof,
I'll be your wife; and so farewell till dooms-day.
But hark you Lady
My Mother's a Witch. I shallne'r be valiant
In this World, what quarrels I may have in the next,
I know not,
There are some dead threatened to cudgel me.
Is there no hope, that I may catch you in
The Noose of Matrimony, unless your Son
First break my head?
I wo' not swear.
It is not your best course, take heed of vows.
Why my dear Signior?
For your souls sake, and yet
Dispose that as you please, I'll see who dare
Cary your body from me, spite of Lucifer
I will have that, and come by it •awfully;
And so my service; think on it.
A fine fellow.
Would I had his audacity; my Mistress,
Yet knows not what I mean, but I will to her,
And kiss her Glove immediately.
This Court is like a twilight, where I cannot
Distinguish day, or perfect night, some faces
Are c•earful as the morn, others again
Are dark, and wrapped like evenings in a mist
•s is instinct for my approach, that brings
A resolution to revenge the rape
Upon my Sister; grow more strong my thoughts,
And let no fear distract you. Prince I have
Con•ider'd thee in all thy pride of merit,
Allowed my Fathers Contract, and did give thee
My Sisters heart in thy own vote, but when,
She only made a pause for ceremony,
Not disaffection, since thou coldest forget
Thy honour of a Prince, to invade her Chastity,
And forfeit thy Religion, thus I come,
To whip thy blood, or leave my own a sacrifice.
Sir, may a stranger ask without offence, why
The Court like Ianus doth present a double
Face, as it laboured twixt the fierce extremes
Of triumph and despair▪
Sir you mistake not
The mixture of our passions, the Court
Smiles in our happiness to entertain
The Prince, and his fair Mistress, but doth wear,
A grief and paleness, for the Duke, whose want
Of health delays their marriage.
I apprehend;
Sir I am bold, May not a Gentleman
Engaged to visit other Courts of Italy,
Make his ambition fortunate to receive
A favour from this Prince, and kiss his hand,
Before he leave the Dukedom?
He is here Sir.
Lord Patron•, entreat the Princess
Fioretta, and my Sister meet me in the grove—
This Gentleman—
You have made me happy;
Though I want honour to be known, your fame
Speaks you a valiant Prince, and fortunate,
And I must with the World congratulate
Your victory at Mant•a, upon which,
So rich a triumph waits.
What triumph fir?
The Princess Fioretta.
I acknowledge,
That Garland is my glory, such a treasure,
Was worth more service, than my sword could merit:
But I must be a debtor to my stars,
And can release all other happiness,
Within their influence to come, so they
Confirm me Lord still of her beauties Empire.
This doth become your Excellence; what error
(Receive it not profane) should Heaven and nature,
Have made, to have kept your hearts too long asunder?
And yet I may mistake, for though your Grace,
Affect her with all height your soul can fancy,
I know not how her love may answer this
Desert in you.
How sir?
Your Highness pardon;
I am no Prophet, nor do wish to see,
Upon your spring, another wind than what
The wings of pregnant Western gales do enrich
The air withal, which gliding as you walk,
May kiss the teeming flowers, and with soft breath
Open the Buds to welcome their preserver;
I wish you might grow up two even Cedars,
Till your top-boughs kiss Heaven that made you floe∣rich,
When stooping to behold the numerous branches
That prosper in your growth, and what refreshing
The World below receives by your cool shade,
You wave your heads in the applause and wonder.
This is the Song I bri•g to your chaste Hymen,
And thus would every good man pray, but that
They fear.
Fear, what?
The blessings they invoke,
With all their importunity of prayers,
Will not descend.
Icannot reach you sir
Without a perspective, but this wanders from
The doubt you made of Fiorettas love,
To answer mine, that talk was dangerous,
I must not hear't again.
You must, unless
You can be deaf, or cut the tongue of fame out.
The man hath somwhere lost his senses; go back
And sind thy strangled wits, this language has
No chain of reason, I lose breath upon
A thing distracted.
Tic not come to that,
I've no such hot vexation, but a soul
Possessed with noble anger, and with pity.
Prince, I must tell you there are dangerous symptoms
Of a State Apoplex; those aerie stilts
Of fame you walk on, will deceive your pride,
When every honest breath, angry at what
You did so late in the contempt of goodness,
Will tell the wind how it mistook your praise,
And in a sigh conclude her sad repentance.
I come not sir to flatter.
It appears so.
But tell you what hath eat into your soul
Of honour, and there poisond all the worth
The World once loved you for.
You talk as if
You had consulted with my fate, and read
The leaves of my inevitable doom;
What action hath so much incensed my late
Kind stars to this revolt, and threatened like
To busy tongues in my disgrace?
The noise is loud already, would there were
No truth in men, who say, you ravished Fioretta
Sweet Princess from her Prayers, and left a Monument
Of such a sacrilege committed by you,
The very stones since groan in her behalf
You ravished from the Nunnery, on this
Must needs depend her hate,
Whose person and Religious vow you have
Unlike a Prince profaned.
You're very bold,
What confidence can that outside raise in you
To be thus saucy?
Saucy?
Impudent.
Is life a burden, that you dare my anger?
What art?
A gentleman, that have more right to honour
Than he that is a Prince, and dares degenerate.
There's something in thy face would have me think
Thou moist be worth my punishment, that I
•old uncreate thee, if thy veins do house
But Common blood, to make thee a fit Enemy
In Birth, and soul to me, that I might kill thee
Without a blush to honour, do not tempt
My Just rage, that provoked will scorn a sword,
And make thee nothing with a look; be gone,
Get hence with the same speed, thou would avoid
A falling Tower, or had new seen a Lioness
Walking upon some cliff, and gazing round
To find a prey, which she pursues with eyes
That shoot contracted flame, but when her teeth
And paws arrive, they quickly leave no part
Or sign of what there was.
Just heaven, how high he talks, and counterfeits
Your noise! I have a charm against your thunder;
If thou hast courage to stay, thou quickly shalt repent
Heavens Justice in my arm sent to revenge
Thy sacrilege, the more to encourage thee
To fight, I am thy equal, and a Prince.
Or may thy sin o'take my blood, and set
A weight upon my soul when thou hast killed me
Alas my Lord?
Dear Brother?
Help, what traitor's this?
Away sweet Fioretta.
Fioretta.
Ha? I am undone, alas what do you mean?
My Brother, Prince Honorio.
Thy brother?
Oh let me hold thee safe in my Embraces.
Leo. Honorio.
The same, but not her brother.
Pardon me,
Whose soul disdained in my belief thou were
An insolent stranger, to acknowledge any thing
Of satisfaction, but let thy sister
Now speak for both.
Give space to my amazement.
If changing thus soft kisses, arms and heart
You interpret violence, Fioretta, then
Thy sister has been ravished; who hath thus
Abused your faith, and wronged this Princes Virtue?
Clear as the light of stars. I must confess
I seemed to wave his courtship, when he first
Beheld me veiled, which modesty instructed,
And though my heart were won, I kept it secret,
To make more proof of his, who not consenting
To be deprived too long of what he loved,
He brought a force to the Cloister: but took me
His own away without a rape, and since
All his addresses have been honourable.
Instead of satisfaction, you enlarge
My wonder, what Impostures here? the Prince
Is consent, yet she owns me; pardon sir,
I was made believe, you did most impiously
Compel my sister, and by force enjoyed her,
But now I find we are all abused, to what
Misfortune might this error have engaged us?
This is my sister.
You cannot want a charity
That are so fair.
Would Leonato's Sword
Had prospered in his death; I must be confident;
You have not yet made glad my heart Honorio,
With our good Fathers health, I have some trembling
Within my blood, and fear all is not well.
Gypsy?
You look not cheerfully.
My Father enjoys a perfect health.
That word hath blessed me.
Sister and Leonato, you'll excuse,
If I transgress with joy to see my Brother;
Were but the Duke my Father here, I summed
All my delights on earth—
She confounds me.
Honorio and I will follow you.
You are not my Sister?
Sir, tic very true.
Where is she?
You shall know what will make you happy sir,
If you preserve this wisdom.
I have seen you before.
But I am destined here, to do such service
To your Family you shall know more—
Give me breath for two minutes,
Be confident of my silence, they expect you.
So let me have some air, am I Honorio.
What prodigies are these? we are all bewitched,
Ha Sister,
Brother Honorio.
Tic she, what's he?
Not worth the interruption of one kiss.
My friend—
My fool—Fioretta show me where
We may enjoy a shade, I'll tell thee wonders.
Sir I shall meet with you again; a pretty fellow.
MAdam I fear this walk into the Park,
May engage your grace too far without some more
To attend you,
Our own thoughts may be our guard,
I use it frequently; but to our dlscourse
Of Prince Honorio, for we cannot find
A nobler subject, I observe that he
And you have been acquainted.
It was my happiness,
To have my breeding in the Court of Mantua,
Where I among the rest of his admirers,
Seeing his youth improved with so much honour,
Grew into admiration of his virtues,
Which now he writes man do so fully crown him,
His Fathers Dukedom holds no ornament
To stand in competition.
You speak him high,
And with a passion too, that tastes of love.
Madam, I honour him,
As may become his servant.
As his Mistress rather.
My heart is clear from such ambition,
But yet not proof against all Cupids shaf•s;
I do not think but you have been in love.
Who hath not felt the wounds? but I ne'er looked
Above my birth and fortunes; Prince Honorio,
May become your election, and great blood.
I find it here already.
Nor could you
Endear it where so much desert invites
It to be beloved.
My looks do sure betray me,
I do believe him all composed of honour,
And have received your Character from the World
So noble, all your praise can be no flattery.
I know not by what powerful charm within
His person, Madam, I confess my eyes
Take some delight to see him, but I fear—
I find your Jealousy, and dare secure you.
If in your amorous bosom, you feel, Madam,
A Golden shaft, the cure is made by cherishing
The happy wound; my destiny hath placed
My thoughts of love, where they cannot concern
Your trouble or suspicion, nor indeed
My hope, for I despair ever to meet,
His clear affection whom I honour.
Would
This Court contained whom you would make so pre∣cious;
I should with as much cherefullness assist
Thy wishes, as desire thy aid to mine;
I do believe you have much credit with
His thoughts, and virtue to deserve it Madam,
If you trust me,
The favour I have with his Highness, shall not
Create your prejudice, be confident,
Your birth, your beauty, and those numerous graces
That wait upon you, must command his heart.
Madam you force a blush for my much want
Of what you're pleased to impute my ornaments,
You are acquainted with your self, and show
What I should be, if I were rich like you,
But my disparity of worth allowed,
Would you would call me Sister, and impose
Something on me, my act of confidence,
And free discovery of my soul, may
Deserve faith from you, that I shall never
Injure his name you love.
There is no hope
In my desires, and therefore I beseech,
Dear Madam, your excuse, yet thus much I
Dare borrow of my grief to say, he lives
Now in the Court, for whose sake I thus wither.
Alas I fear again, is he composed
Of gentle blood, and can to thee he cruel?
No, he is very kind, for he did promise
To be my Husband, we have been contracted.
Disperse these mist•, &amp; clear my wonder Madam.
When time and sorrow shall by death prepare
My sad release of love, you may know all;
Were the condition of my fa•e like others,
It were no grief to name him.
This doth more enlarge my Jealousy.
But let us leave this subject, till time fit,
To op the maze of my unhappy fortune.
I heard that she was come into the Park,
They cannot far be; they are in view,
And no man with'em, I'll now be valiant.
It was her Highness charge I should direct you,
I know her walk.
The blustering Prince again;
Who sent him hither? I think he conjures.
Now dare I with as much confidence undertake
To cure a Lyon rampant, of the Tooth-ach,
As but go forward; and my valiant Mother—
Your Son; I must excuse my self then to him.
Now shall I be fit for a Carbonado.
I hope you'll pardon sir, if I appeared,
Less smooth when I la•t saw you.
My good Lord; your Grace is too much humble,
I'm your blow-ball, your breath dissolves my being,
But to show how free my wishes are to serve you,
If you have any mind, or meaning to my Mother—
How do you mean?
In what way your Grace pleases,
She shall be yours, your Highness may do worse,
Although I say it she has those things may give
A Prince content.
Your Son is very courteous.
I should prepare you sir to look with mercy
Upon his folly. But the Princess.
Mother.
Will you be still a fool,
What said you sir to the Prince?
Will you be wise and use him tenderly.
Stain to thy Fathers blood—
I was coming Madam.
Vmh: he is my rival, would my hilts
Were in his belly; they are out of sight;
It is no rutting time, no trick?
Signior Bertoldi.
I do not know you friends, but how soever,
There is a purse of money
Sir, I want not.
That Gentleman perhaps can drink; I like not
Their goggle eyes, it was well I gave 'em money:
What do ye want else? you are Soldiers;
I love a Soldier.
I am a Gentleman of Mantua sir,
That owe my life to your command, as one,
That had an interest in the preservation,
Your army brought when the Enemy besieged us.
Your mercy Signior, and how do all
Our limber friends 'it 'h Nunnery? I was one
Of the Cavaliers went with the General,
Into the Orchard of Hesperides
To fetch the golden Dragon.
Golden Apple,
You mean the Princess Fioretta Signior;
Is she married sir?
No, no, the Duke will neither dye, nor live,
To any purpose, but they will be shortly;
Have you a mind to kiss her hand?
I shall be proud—
You shall be as proud as you please sir.
You can resolve me, is Honorio
Our Duke of Mantuas Son here?
Yes, he is here,
Heaven were a fitter place for him.
Ha! look to him,
For he is come with bloody thoughts to murder
Your Prince Leonato, caution him to walk
With a strong guard, and arm himself with all
That can be proof against his Sword or Pistol,
He cannot be too safe against the treason
And horrid purpose of Honorio.
His mouth is Musket bore; but are you sure
He did resolve to kill our Prince?
Most certain.
I am very glad to hear't.
Glad sir?
Yes, I cannot wish him better then a Traitor,
Now I shall be revenged.
Has he been guilty of any affront to you?
He is my Rival.
Why do not you kill him then?
Pox on him, I cannot endure him.
He is then reserved to fall by me.
Tic too good to be true; are you married Signior?
What then?
If you be not, do this &amp; you shall have
My mother, a Lady that has Gold enough to pave
The Streets with double Ducats, here is my hand,
Kill but this huffing Prince, my Mothers yours,
And all her movables—tic he alone too,
There's convenient bottom sir hard by
The finest place to cut his throat, I'll not
Be seen.
I am resolved, charge home thy little Murderers,
And follow.
I warrant you my Lord.
But tell me hast thou any hopes of Madam Floe∣•ally?
I had a lusty promise.
From her?
Ye Coxcomb her sweet Son.
Why so had I, he did contract her to me,
A flat bargain and sale of all she had,
So I would say he was valiant.
That was the price he made to me, but I,
Had hope last visit from her self.
Be plain, I'll tell thee, she gave me strong expect∣tion,
And came on like a Cheverell.
I hear,
She has given out she wi•l have one of us,
She cannot love us by•h.
Would she had on•, &amp; then the toy were over,
I could make shift to love her.
And to lye with her estate, one helps the tother well.
I find a change within my self, I hope,
I sha'not prove in love now after all
My jesting, and so many coy repulses,
To men of birth and honour.
Tic she.
Why do I think upon him, then? I fear,
This man of War has don't.
I have it, we'll find whether she affect
Or Juggle with us presently.
Those postures,
Would show some difference, here I can observe—
Your Mistress?
Mine if she be pleased, what interest
Can all your merit challenge above me?
You will repent this insolence, I must,
Forget to wear a sword, and hear thee name
Florelia, with that confident relation
To her fair thoughts, and not correct your pride,
I'll search your heart, and let out those proud hopes,
That thus exalt you.
You are cofend Signior,
I do not fear your probe—she lets us fight,
If we had no more wit, we might foin in ear••st.
Ha, ha, ha, are you at that ward Gentlemen?
She laughs to see us fence of this fashion,
Lets come a little closer.
Hold, hold Gentlemen,
For your own honours, is this valour well
Employed? what cause can urge effusion,
Thus of that noble blood was given you
To serve your Country? are you mad?
We are but little better to be both in love.
What Woman,
Considered in her best is worth this difference;
She is cruel cannot •inde a better way
To reconcile you, than by letting blood.
Do you both love one?
It does appear so Madam.
I would I knew the Lady makes you both
Unhappy, I would counsel her some way,
To set your hearts at peace.
Tic in your power.
Without more circumstance, do but look upon
Your self, and end our civil Wars; we have both
Opinion of your virtue, and both hope
An interest in your love, if you will please
To point which of us two is most concerned
In your affection, •ou conclude our danger,
And oblige one your everlasting Servant.
This Madam is a charitable way
To know your own, and save two lives, for we
Shall fix upon your sentence, and obey
The fate you give us.
Do you fight for me?
And will it save •ncision and preserve
Your noble veins to know whom I prefer
In my best thoughts of love? this is but reasonable,
And twill be hard to set a period
To this contention, for I love you both
So equally, observe me Cavaliers,
Tic most impossible to distinguish which
Is first in my neglect, for I love neither:
Fight or be friends, you have your choice, and I
My liberty—I had forgot to thank you,
For your infusion of that fierce courage
Into my Son, there is great hope if he
Live till next year, he may be a Constable,
He has an excellent art to keep the peace. Farewell.
Madam, for all this I believe you love—
I believe now shoe's old and has no teeth,
Else she would bite at one of us—Reverend Madam,
That word has fetched her,—we have no other cordial,
At this dead pang for your disdain, but drink now;
If you will have your Son made a fine Gentleman,
Be sure you send him to the Tavern to us,
He knows the rendezvous, though you despair,
We may wind him up yet with spirit of Wine,
How ever we'll be merry, and perhaps,
For all this, drink your health.
Buoy Madam.
If you love your Baby send him.
I am to blame, but I must help it some way.
Two Engines of so small extent to do
Such mighty execution? may I see
These instruments you say you have invented,
And so commend for service?
Yes my Lord,
Show 'em to the Prince, do they not fright already?
Your Grace may take full view, and quickly be
The proof what force they have.
I am betrayed,
Who hath conspired my death
To vex you, see him—
Flaviano, what make thou here?
To put of these commodities; you are
A princely Merchant, and affect this kind
Of traffic, that you may not die in the dark,
I'll tell you a brief story, which you may
Report in the other world, I did affect
Ambitiously thy Sister Fioretta,
Abused thy Father with a false opinion
Of Leonato, for my end removed
His Mistress from the Cloister, and persuaded
A witty Nun to take her name, and cheat
The Prince, whom he suspects not yet.
Damned rascal?
For pure love to your Sister I did this.
Why having been so impious, does thy malice
Pursue me, ignorant of all thy treasons?
Would you know that?—because I am undone
In my chief hope, the Princess whom I thought
Thus placed secure, and apt for my own visit
Is gone, is vanished, and as soon I may
Find the impression of a Ship at Sea,
And by the hollow tract in waves oretake
The winged Bark, distinguish where the Birds,
At Chase in the air, do print their active flight,
As find in what part of the envious World
Fioretta is bestowed; this sad intelligence
Surprised me like a storm, nor was it safe
To look upon the Duke, who must too late
Repent his trust, and punish it. In this conflict
Of desperate thoughts, I thus resolved to see
Ferrari, and the Lady I preferred,
But find things cannot prosper, if you live?
Whose angry breath will throw down waht my policy
Wrought high, and strike my head beneath the ruins.
Are you now satisfied why you must not live?
Hear me, shoe's still in silence, and believed
My Sister by the Prince.
When you are dead, then
You Will be sure to tell no tales; now shoot—
In my opinion, if all this be truth,
The mischief you have done may be sufficient,
And he may live.
Villain wilt thou betray me?
You have betrayed your self, and after this
Confession, as I take it, I may be
Your Ghostly Father, and prescribe you a Penance.
Hold.
I will but Physic you, your soul has caught
A vehement cold, and I have two hot pills
Will warm you at heart.
Shall my revenge be idle?
Good Prince, you are too forward, &amp; you be
So hasty, I'm of this side; did you think,
I would be false? yet lest my aim be unlucky,
Trust your own hand to guide 'em.
Thou art honest,
Thus I salute thy heart Honori•—ha, no charge.
Tic time sir to be honest, I could serve you
In some Court sins, that are but flesh-colour,
A wickedness of the first dye, whose brightness
Will fade, and tincture change; your murder i•
Crimson in grain, I have no fancy too't.
Sir you are safe.
I see thou hast preserved me.
I'm lost for ever.
Tic but a minute
Since you were found, you must be plea•'d to walk
Into the Court, the Vestal you preferred
No doubt will bid you welcome. Fate I thank thee.
False stars, I dare you now.
I shall wait on you.
I have collected all my brain, and cannot
In any counsel of my thoughts find safety;
Honorio's death wo'not secure my strength,
Or prop my languishing greatness; tic but like
A cordial when the pangs of death hang on us,
Nay to my present state no other than
Some liberal portion of a quivering stream,
Drunk to abate the scorching of my Fever,
It cools to'th' taste, and creeps like Ice dissolved
Into my blood, but meeting with the flame,
It scalds my bosom, and augments the fire
That turns my heart to ashes; poor Iuliana,
To what a loss hath thy first •in betrayed thee▪
Ambition hath revenged thy breach of Honour,
And Death must cure Ambition, for I have
No prospect left, but what invites to ruin.
I am resolved not to expect my fate,
But meet it this way.
Dearest Fioretta?
Ha, what offends my Princess? there is something
That dwells like an Eclipse upon thy eyes,
They shine not as they did, a discontent,
Is like a mildew fallen upon thy cheek,
Tic pale and cold, as Winter were come back
To over-run the Spring.
My dearest Lord,
My face is but the title to a volume
Of so much misery within, as will
Tire your amazed soul to read.
Thou dost
Freeze up my blood already. O call back
Part of this killing language, if thou mean
To make me understand thee; the amazement
Doth fall so like a deluge, I am drowned,
Ere I can think my fears; how have we lived
At distance? thou should walk upon this Earthquake
And my ground tremble not, but with this fright
I am awake, open the volume now,
I will read every circumstance.
Observe then, what first becomes my sorrow.
Dost thou kneel?
That posture is for them have lost their Innocence;
We must do this to Heaven.
I must to you.
What guilt can weigh thee down so low?
Dost weep too!
I should not love my eyes if they were silent,
They know this story will too soon o'rcharge
My fe•ble voice, that every tear could fall
Into some character which you might read,
That so I might disp•nse with my sad tongue,
And leave my sorrows legible; oh my Lord,
I have wronged you above hope to find your mercy.
Take heed, &amp; think once more what thou hast don
Ere thou describe such an offence, lest I
Believe a fault, will drown us both with horror;
T•ou hast not broke thy vow▪ nor given away
Thy honour, since thy faith did seal thee mine?
Not in a thought.
I wo'not see thee kneel,
Rise, and be welcome to my arms, thou hast
Done nothing can offend me Fioretta.
Alas—I am not Fioretta.
Ha! this doth confirm me, thou hast all this while
But mocked my fear, and yet this weeping is
Not counterfeit, thou art too blame my love,
Is it thy jealousy, that I am cold
In my returns to answer thy affection?
Or have I less in thy esteem of merit
Than thy hopes flatterd thee? or doth the time
That dully moves, and intermit the joys
We promised when the Altar had confirmed us
Sit heavy on thy thought? we will awake
From this our sullen sleep, and quit off those
Sick Feathers that did droop our wings; fly to
The holy man whose charm shall perfect us,
And chain our amorous souls.
Divide us rather;
Joy is a fugitive of late, and while
You think of Hymen, you remove your wishes.
Fioretta will forbid the Priest.
Can thou forget thy love so much?
Alas my Lord,
You have been all this while abused, and when
I have said enough to assure your Faith, that I
Am not your Fioretta, but a Virgin,
Compelled to take her name, you will I hope
Kill me your self, and save me a despair,
That will conclude my breath else in few Minutes.
Are not you Fioretta, but a Virgin
Compelled to take her name? who durst compel thee?
The Duke of Mantua.
I dissolve in wonder.
Durst Mantua use me thus? thy name?
Iuliana;
My blood, (excepting what does fill the veins
Of Princes) flowing from the noblest spring
Of honour.
Where was Fioretta then?
Conveyed I know not whither, ere you came
To save their lives that did betray you thus.
I was too careless of my fate, that I
Kept such a glowing secret still within me,
I had no fear to be consumed, that had
Another Fire within me, whose wide flame
Had soon devoured all my considerings.
Alas my Lord, You did appear so full
Of honour, virtue, and such Princely love,
It was easy to forget on whom you smiled,
I had no thought to wish my self unhappy,
Or own another name to my undoing,
Yet now more tender of your birth and fame
Than my own life, I cast my self beneath
Your feet a bleeding sacrifice.
Am I awake and hear all this?
I see my Lord,
In your enraged eye, what lightning is
Prepared, tic welcome; since I denote hope
To live upon your smile, I would fain dye
Betime, before the shame of my dishonour
Enforce a mutiny upon my self▪
But think my Lord while I confess all this
Against my self, how free I might have been,
How happy, how near Heaven, above those glories,
Had not you forced me from the blessed Garden
Where I was planted, and grew fair, though not
Obliged by any solemn vow, it was you,
Your own hand ravished me from that sweet life,
Where without thought of more than should concern
Your welfare in my prayers, I might have sung,
And had converse with Angels.
Sir, I bring sad news.
I prithee speak, I am prepared for all.
The Duke is dead.
My Father dead?
I do not like the Princess at that posture.
I have forgot your name Lady—you may rise.
My Lord I bring you news welcome as health
Or liberty, your soul will not be spacious
Enough to entertain what will with joys
And strong amazement fill it; how I swell,
With my own happiness to think I shall
Redeem your noble heart from a dishonour
Will weigh down death. You think you vvalk on Roses
And feel not to what Dragons teeth, and stings,
You were betrayed. I bring a disenchantment,
And come with happy proofs.
To tell me this is not
Your Sister Fioretta: but a Nun
Subornd to cheat me—I know all the business,
And am resolved in my revenge. Iuliana,
Sweet suffering Maid, dry thy fair eyes, tic I
Must make thee satisfaction, I thus
By thy own name receive thee to my bosom,
But you that practised cunning, shall ever time
Contract the age of one pale Moon, behold
The Country I preserved a heap of ruins.
Flaviano? sir—
Do you know whom you embrace?
Flaviano has confessed
Himself the Traitor, and the black contriver
Of all this mischief; Leonato hear me,
Or by thy Father nevvly fallen to ashes,
I shall repent I had an honourable
Thought of thee. Flaviano; Madam, witchcraft,
My rage will strangle my discourse, my soul
Is leaping forth to be revenged upon
That Devil; Prince keep off, his very breath
Will stifle thee, and dam thy honour to
All ages▪ Fioretta's now in Court.
Ha! in the Court?
This is some new device.
I charge thee by thy blood throw of these Harpies,
And do my Sister justice, whom their treason
Hath made a scorn, that minute she usurps
Her name of Bride, I shall forget the Altar,
And turn my self the Priest, with all your blood
To make a purging sacrifice.
If when we
Receive our rites, thou dost but frovvn, or vvhispe•
To interrupt one ceremony, I
Will make thee hold the tapers while the Priest
Performs the holy office; tell thy Sister
Here I bestow, what you have made me forfeit.
Present her to the Nunnery, and counsel
Thy ignoble Father, when I next see Mantua
To be a sleep in's Coffin, and his vault
Deep, and thick rib'd with Marble, my noise else
Will shake his dust; thy youth finds mercy yet,
Take the next whirl-wind, and remove—our guard;
Petronio we confine him to your house.
Thou coward Prince, there's not one honest man
In all the World, our sins ascend like vapours,
And will, if Justice sleep, stupefy Heaven,
For thine own glory wake, if thou dispense
With this, proud man will cry down providence.
SUch Wine as Ganimede doth skink to Jove
When he invites the Gods to feast with him
On Iunos wedding-day.
Jove never drank so brisk a Nectar as I'll draw.
But does Signior Bertoldi come?
What else? my Alderman of the Cellar.
He is our Hilas; shall we not ha Music?
By all means, and the Mermaids.
You shall have any thing;
But if Signior Bertoldi come, I have
A boon to beg, I have a pretty plot
To make you laugh.
What is it?
As you are Gentlemen, do not deny me;
I have been your up-and-down-stairs-man to draw
The best blood of the Grape these ten years,
Troy held out not longer, I have a device
Shall make you merry when he comes, if you
Will give me leave to shift, and help a jest.
He is a Coward still, under the Rose?
As any lives under the Sun, be confident.
The same senseless piece of timber,
You may cut him into a Bed-staff.
I'll send you Wine, say I am valiant,
Let me alone with the Catastrophe.
What will he do?
I know not, he were best make us laugh,
I shall expound the matter else.
My Mother remembers her service Gentlemen,
I left my Mistress to come to you; and how?
Shall we drink like Fishes? Toll roll lolly, &amp;c.
Sit, sit, a health to the Lady you kissed last.
Let it come, I'll pledge it,
And it were the Gulf of Venice.
And who's your Mistress?
Faith I do not know her name, nor ever kissed any
thing but her Glove in my life.
But you have told her your mind?
Not I by this Wine—but thats all one,
She is a Lady, well bred, and companion
To the Princess, that's enough.
Here Signior—would we had some Wenches here.
Some bouncing bone robes, hang this dull City
there's no music in it, no silken Music.
Oh for a Wench could spit fire now, that could
whizz like a Rocket, and fall into a 100 blazing stars,
such a Fire-drake would be warm company in a close
room, Signior.
And it were in a Cellar under the Alps, it
would make Hercules melt in the back.
But for all that, I do not like a sinner of such
a fiery constitution.
You would not venture upon the golden Fleece
then, which is but the moral of a Maidenhead.
I never heard that before.
So say the learned, first for the difficulty to obe∣tain
it, being watched by a Dragon, and then for the
Rarity, there being but one in all the World.
But one Maidenhead?
And that some hold as doubtful as the Phoenix
or Unicorn, such things are in History, but the man's
not alive that will take his Oath in what climate they
are visible. Here's to the Swan that broke her heart
with singing last.
And to the Dolphin that was in love with a
Fiddlers Boy of Thebes, who carried him cross the Seas
on her back a fishing, while he sung the •iedge of Troy to
the Tune of Green-sleeves, and caught a Whale with an
angling rod.
I'll pledge 'em both; they are very fine healths.
Are these your Mistresses names Gentlemen?
Mystical, Mystical.
I Understand they are mystical—who's this?
Save you Gentlemen.
Tic the Drawer.
I do not like the odor of your Wine
Was it a health? let it go round Gent.
I am troubled with sore eyes, &amp; this Signior
has washed 'em for me, I hope I shall see to thank him.
Cry mercy Signior, you are like a noble Gent.
I saw at Rome, you are the very same, to whom his Ho∣lines
gave a pension, for killing 6 great Turks in Tra•∣silvania,
whose heads were boiled, and brought home
in a Portmanteau.
It was but 5 sir and a Saracens.
You are the man?
Pray give me leave to honour you.
I desire to be your poor admirer too,
My eyes are clear to see your worth, my name
Is Bertoldi at your service.
To you Signior, a health to Iulius Caesar, Proctor Iohn,
And the grand Cham of Tartaria.
You sha'not pledge him.
No.
Make your exceptions, I'll justify 'em.
This Cavalier drank t'ee sir.
I do remember, but I cannot pledge him.
How sir?
No sir, I'll pledge my friend Proctor Jack,
But for Iulius Caesar and the grand Cham they are
Pagans, I have nothing to say to 'em.
Here is a Gentleman, he seems of quality,
Enquiring for Signior Volterino and Hortensio.
Admit him, and he be a Gentleman.
You'll pardon if a stranger that has had
A long ambition to kiss your hands,
Rather entreat for his access, than lose
The happiness of your knowledge.
Sir, you're most welcome.
If you will keep us company
You must be equally engaged.
My humble service, Signior Hortensios Mistress.
You honour me; would I were off again.
Excuse me Signior.
You're too full of ceremony.
Sir, is there any difference between you &amp; Iulius Caesar,
You would not pledge his health?
No difference in the world.
How, no difference between you, and a Roman Emperor?
Divide'em, what's the matter?
O for some Trumpets.
Somebody hold my Sword, give me the Wine,
I'll drink it—
So, we are friends.
O shameful!
But I shall find a time—
Find twenty thousand years, there's time e∣nough.
I'll be your stickler.
I have not pledged the Cham yet, nor I wo' not,
come, I know you well enough.
Know me, for what?
For a brave fellow, and a man may believe thee
thou hast done things as well as the best on 'em, but
I know not where, nor I care not, tel me of Iulius Caesar:
I am a Gentleman, and have seen fighting before now,
here's a Cavalier knows it, I scorn to be baffel'd by any
Transilvanian Turk-killer in Christendom, I; thar't a
Well said, and a Sandiack.
And a Sandiack, I defy the grand Cham, and Mufti.
all his Tartars, you're a stinking obstreperons fellow to
tell me of a Turd and a Fart, and I honour you with all
my heart. Horrid. He called you Mufti.
What's that?
And a Sandiack, that is son of whore in 2 languages.
How? in two languages? then my honour is
Concerned, have I in 30 battles against the Turk
Stood the dire shock, when the Grenades flew
Like Atoms in the Sun,
Have I killed 20 Pashas, and a Musselman,
And took the Sultans Turban Prisoner,
And shall I be affronted by a thing
Less than a Lancepresado?
Will no body hold me?
Gentlemen, this heat must needs be dangerous.
Let me but speak with him
No danger of my life, let 'em go together:
And let us mind our business.
Signior, I am your friend, and pity you
Should lose so much your honour, be advised,
I'll show a way how to repair your fame,
And without danger.
To Volterinos Mistress.
I receive it, I shall have my share, I now
Repent my curiosity to see
Their humours, and to hear what they would say
Of me—
Let 'em alone—to Volterinos Mistress.
Come, to my Whore.
Your Whore Signior?
Does that offend you?
Not me—I ha done you right.
I am well enough rewarded &amp; they beat me.
I know not how to deserve this courtesy being a stranger•
But if you want a Wife noble sir, and will accept of my
Mother, you shall have her before any man in Italy.
I thank you sir,
But be sure you hit me full of the head.
Tic too much, a cut of the leg and please you.
No, let it be of the head.
You wo'not strike again?
Mine's but a foil.
They measure and give back—
Oh I am slain, a Surgeon. Bertoldi strikes Pand.
I'll take my leave.
By this hand, I'll drink his Mothers health first,
There's no danger &amp; he were dead; a health to the Lady
Florelia, I drink it for his sake.
Away, and get a Surgeon.
Come, to my Lady Mother.
A man is not born to be a coward all his li•e.
I can no more sir.
You should have told me sir at first,
There is no remedy, tic to an honourable Lady.
You must excuse me sir.
Throw't in his eyes.
At your request.
You're most uncivil.
You're a mushrump.
So sir, you're a multitude, and in a Tavern,
I did believe you sir a Gentleman,
If you be, give me satisfaction nobly.
With all my heart.
Then thus—
Signior Bertoldi fly, his wound is dangerous,
We fear he will bleed to death before the Surgeon come.
Out by the Postern.
Pox, a conspiracy, I shall kill but one, I see that;
Would I were a Mite in a Holland Cheese now.
I wo'not fail you sir.
He desires to speak with you before he dye.
Is Bertoldi gone?
Hortensio, I guess you may be engaged:
Leave me to these things, There may be danger.
I know the private way.
Virtue and honour, I allow you names,
You may give matter for dispute, and noise,
But you have lost your Essence, and that truth
We fondly have believed in human souls,
Is ceased to be, we are grown fantastic bodies,
Figures, and empty titles, and make hast
To our first nothing, he that will be honest,
Must quite throw off his cold decrepit nature,
And have a new creation—my poor Sister,
She has heard the Dukes resolve.
Oh let me dye, upon thy bosom Brother,
I have lived
Too long; they say the Duke resolves to marry
With Iuliana, so they call her now,
Whose sorcery hath won upon his soul;
I have walked too long in dark Clouds, and accuse
Too late my silence, I am quite undone,
There was some hope while he did love my name,
But that and all is banished; is it not in
The power of fancy to imagine this
A dream that hath perplexed us all this while?
If it be real, I will be revenged,
Tic but forgetting what I am, and then
I am not concerned.
Rather forget the Duke,
And live to triumph in a love more happy.
He is not worth a tear.
How's this? my heart!
Come, I will kiss these sorrows from thy cheek,
This Garden wants no watering, preserve
This rain, it is a wealth should ransom Queens,
As thou dost love me, chide thy saucy grief,
That will undo the spring here, and enforce
My heart to weep within me equal drops
Of blood for these.
Oh my abused confidence,
Lauriana now I find hath but betrayed me,
Instruct me rage and jealousy.
I am resolved.
Well said, take courage Fioretta,
Appear with thy own name and sufferings,
Thy sight will strike the proud Impostors from
Their Pyramids of glory.
It were more revenge to dye.
Not so deer Fioretta, something glides
Like cheerfulness of the suddrn through my blood;
Despair not to be happy: Let's consult,
And form the aptest way for all our honour.
There's but one cloud in all our sky, were that
Removed, we were above the rage of storms:
That Claudio knows too much. I look upon
His life like a prodigions blazing Comet;
He palls my blood; if I but meet him handsomely,
I'll make him fixed as the North-star. I hear
No whisper of him yet; were but he dead,
Iuliana and her friend might revel here:
The Duke should have the name, but we would steer
The Helm of State, and govern all. I have
Gained much upon Leonato's easy faith,
Who thinks me innocent, and that only duty
Mislead my nature and my tongue to obey
The Duke of Mantua and the Prince, upon
Whose heads I have translated all my guilt,
And framed their jealousy at home my cause
Of flight for refuge hither—Ha, my eyes
Take in confusion! The Duke and Claudio!
It is doomsday in my soul.
Can this be justified?
I dare confirm this truth with my last blood.
I dare not hear it. That I now could fling
My self upon the winds—
And should be happy
Were Flaviano's life put into balance
Against my own, to make it clear by his
Confession. To my shame I must acknowledge
was the agent twixt 'em; he was pleased
To choose me his smock Officer, a place
Poor Gentlemen at Court are forced to serve in,
To please luxurious greatness, younger brothers,
Who cannot live by fair and honest ways,
Must not starve sir.
Flaviano's Whore?
Where can we hope to trust our faith, when such
White brows deceive us?
I do not like
This Claudio's business here, the Duke is troubled;
My whole frame trembles.
Madam Iuliana?
My excellent white Devil, you are welcome,
Where is your Catamountain Flaviano?
You are no Serpents spawn?
Oh hear me sir, by your own goodness.
When did thou kneel to Heaven?
I see my leprosy unveild, that sin
Which with my loss of honour first engaged
My misery, is with a Sun-beam writ
Upon my guilty forehead, but I have not
(Excepting the concealment of my shame,
Which charity might privilege) offended
•bove what I confessed, and you have pardond.
She hath a tongue would almost tempt a Sai••
To unbeleeve Divinity, she learned
••me accents from the first Apostate Angel
That mutined in Heaven; away,
• dare not trust my frailty; whore's Flaviano?
My soul doth apprehend strange shapes of horror.
•a—tic the Princess Fioretta.
Can you direct me Madam, how I may
〈◊〉 with the noble Lady Iuliana?
I can instruct you Madam where to find
A miserable woman of that name.
Where?
Here.
Do not deceive me,
I came to visit her whom the Dukes love
And confluence of glories must create
A Duchess, to whose greatness I must pay
My adoration.
Do not mock her, Madam,
To whose undoing nothing wants but death;
Let not my sin, which cannot hope your pardon,
Make you forget your virtue; Princely natures,
As they are next to Forms Angelical,
Show the next acts of pity, not derision,
When we are fallen from Innocence.
Do you know me?
For the most injured Princess, Fioretta.
You must know more, I come to take revenge
And kill thee.
Thus I kneel to meet your wounds,
And shall account the drops my proud veins weep
Spent for my cure; oh Madam you are not cruel,
You have too soft, too merciful a look;
When you see me, your countenance should wear
Upon it all the terrors that pale men
Can apprehend from the wild face of War,
A civil War, that wo' not spare the womb
That groaned and gave it life, this would become you,
Or fancy meager Famine when she hunts
With hollow eyes, and teeth able to grind
A rock of Adamant to dust, or what
Complexion the devouring pest should have,
Were it to take a shape, and when you put
Their horrors in your visage, look on me.
What hath prepared this bold resolve?
A hope
To be your sacrifice; I was not before
Without a thought to wish my self thus laid,
And at your feet to beg you would destroy me.
Can you so easily consent to die,
And know not whither afterwards this guilt
Would fling thy wandering soul?
Yes. I would pray
And ask your self, and the wronged world forgiveness.
Why did thou use me thus?
I could, if you
Durst hear me, say something perhaps would take
Your charity. Do you weep? gentle Madam?
And not one crimson drop from me, to wait
Upon those precious showers? not to invite
Your patience upon the lost Iuliana,
But to call back your tears into their spring,
And stay the weeping stream, I can inform you,
The Duke looks on me now with eyes of anger;
I have no interest in a thought from him,
That is not armed with hate and scorn against me.
This will undo my pity, and assure me
Thou hast all this while dissembled with my Justice.
I would I might as soon invest my soul
With my first purity, as clear this truth;
Or would the loss of him were all that sits
Heavy upon my heart; I cannot hope
For comfort in delays of death, and dare
Attend you to him, though it more undo me.
Rise, and obey me then.
I follow, Madam;
My use of life is only meant to serve you.
This is the place within the wood he promised
To meet in, there is Saint Felices Chapel,
That Father Cyprians cell, I hope my Gamester
Will think it fit, I should not walk and wait
Too long for him, these businesses of fighting
Should be dispatched as Doctors do prescribe
Physical Pills, not to be chewd but swallowed;
Time spent in the considering dead the appetite,
If I were not to fight now, I could pray;
These terms of honour have but little grace with 'em,
Like Oysters we do open one another•
Without much preface; he that fights a duel
Like a blind man that falls but cares to keep
His staff, provides with art to save his honour,
But trusts his soul to chance, tic an ill fashion.
This is the Gentleman by her description
That comes to fight, another Champion?
Do none pursue me, what a timorous Hare
This guilty conscience is, I am not safe,
I had no time to think of a disguise,
And this can be no wilderness, the Duke
Would give his Palace for my head.
Say so?
Oh for some Pegasus to mount! a Friar?
His habit will serve rarely, seeming holiness
Is a most excellent shrovvd to cheat the world.
Good Father sanctity, I must be bold,
Or cut your throat, nay I can follow.
Help, help.
Thou sacrilegious Villain.
I am caught already.
My good Lord Flaviano. Father
You may come back, and help to bind the Gentleman
If I did understand him well, he said
The Duke has some affairs to use his head-peece;
I would not have him out of the way, when I•
Return—to that tree—you were best be gentle.
I can but dye.
Oh yes, you may be damned
All in good time, and it is very likely.
You have preserved my life Son.
It was my happiness to be so near,
When virtue was distressed.
You have not done sir,
As you are noble follow me, there is
Another •nemy to meet, but I
Dare be your second and direct you.
What means the Fryer?
I'll walk and see the worst on it.
Oh for a Tenement under ground to hide me▪
This wood will hardly do it, if I can lurk
Here but till night; I am furnished well with ducats;
Your melancholy mole is happy now,
He fears no Officers, but walks invisible;
Would I were chamber-fellow to a worm,
The Rooks have princely lives that dwell upon
The top• of Trees, the Owls and Bats are Gentlemen,
They fly and fear no warrants, every Hare
Out-runs the Constable, only poor man
By nature slow and full of phlegm, must stay,
And stand the cursed Law, I do not think
Tic so much Penance to be hanged indeed,
As to be thus in fear on it.
Sir, look this way.
Oh! if I had but the heart of a women's Tailor,
I might run away now.
I am robed and bound.
Umh, are you bound? there's the less danger in you.
For charity release me.
You are surely bound—whats that?
I hear another whispering of that side;
Now I sweat all over, I but think
If I were naked, how Maids might gather dew
From every part about me—Tic the wind
Among the leaves. I do not like the Trees
Should lay their heads together of this fashion.
You are my fast friend still.
Signior Bertoldi.
Does he name me?
You and the Tree shall grow together now,
I came not hither to be known; some Thief,
Or sturdy rogue; I have heard of these devices
In woods before; should I unbind him now,
He would cut my throat, or rob me for my charity.
I am the man for your sake undertook
To kill the Prince your rival.
Did you so? I'll trust you ne'er the sooner;
Well remembered, I'm glad you're not at leisure;
You that will kill your Prince, will make but little
Conscience to quarter me.
But he is still alive.
Is he so?
Why then I am the less beholding to you.
So, you shall cancel your own bonds your self.
How now, more persecution?
Here was a Duel quickly taken up,
And quaintly too, I did not think to marry
The Gentleman that challenged me to fight,
I thank your device Madam.
Thank the blow you gave me sir,
I love a man dares strike.
I'll please you better with my after striking.
My Mother and Hortensio?
Signior Bertoldi well met, lay hands on him
And bind him fast, he has a dangerous spirit
Who I? you may as well say I have skill in the
Black art, Volterino, Gentlemen, there's my Mother.
Your Son is valiant Madam now I hope,
As you can wish, he has killed his man; but I
Studious to gain your favour have procured?
His pardon from the Duke.
Is the Drawer dead?
Dead as the Wine he sometimes drew.
Farewell he; will you salute my Lady Signior
And give us joy? yon Friar married us.
Let me go, I have my pardon.
Not yet; now you shall be hanged again,
Did not you swear I should have your Mother
You shall have her yet.
If it be so,
He shall be worth your suit, and compound fairly.
No, I have thought of my revenge; because
I cannot have your Mother, do ye observe,
If you expect the benefit of this pardon,
You shall marry mine.
I'll marry any living soul,
Shoe's somethi•g old, till the last night I see her not
These forty years, since when shoe's grown so ugly,
I dare not own her, and some think the reason
Of her deformity to proceed from witchcraft.
Alas good Gentlewoman.
I mean she is a Witch her self,
And has two Cats they say,
Suck her by turns, which some call her Familiars;
She has not had a tooth this thirty years;
And you must kiss her with a sponge in your mouth,
She is so full of phlegm, else sheel go near
To strangle you, and yet they say she has
A most devouring appetite to mans flesh,
You may have a devil of your own to attend you,
And when you're melancholy,
Sheel make you Ghosts and Goblins dance before you
Bring Bears and Bandogs with an o'er grown Ape
Playing upon the Gittern.
Where is this creature? shall he not see her first?
I left her in a Sive was bound for Scotland,
This morn to see some kindred, whence she was
Determined to take Eg-shell to Skeedam.
From thence when she has dined she promised me
To ride post hither on a Distaff.
How?
Oh here she is, what think you of a Husband
Mother? can you love this Gentleman, hoe's one
Will be a great comfort to you.
I like the stripling well,
He will serve to watch my pits, and see that non•
Of my spirits boil over.
Is this your Mother
Come I'll be hanged, tic the more handsome destiny
Unless you will take composition—
Let me talk with the Gentleman.
I am at leisure now to wait on you sir.
Unbind, and lead him to the Duke.
Flaviano? you are the Gentleman his Highness
Gave strict command should be pursued, I shall
Be proud to wait upon you to the Court.
I wo'not lose my passion on such bloodhounds.
We are agreed, hey, here's my pardon.
Yes, I am satisfied, and can thank you Signior
In several shapes—
The Drawer.
I did want a sum like this to set me up: I was
Provided against your Sword, a pretty night-cap,
And almost Pistol proof, I shall be rich,
I thank your bounty, and so rid the Witch.
Here's none of the Dukes hand.
It needs not Madam.
I know not yet by what device you came together thus.
I'll tell you as we walk.
Pay for a pardon and not kill my man?
The Duke shall hear of this.
No news of Flaviano yet? some furies
Have sure transported him.
A Gentleman with Letters sir from Mantua.
Ha! admit him—leave us, the Duke himself?
That comes to offer
A pledge for young Honorio, not in thought
Guilty of that unprincely entertainment
You h•d at Mantua. if my Son, as fame
Is ••sie in Ferrari, be exposed
To your displeasure, change my fate with his,
That to my shame in part consented to
The practice of a Traitor Flaviano,
Who used my power to advance his own ambition
To your dishonour, and instead of my
Fioretta, whether now alive or dead
I know not, cheat your faith with Iuliana,
To quit the noble safety your Sword brought us,
My life is troublesome in the loss of fame,
And Fioretta.
Where is Flaviano?
Duke Fled like a guilty villain from my Justice,
May hortor overtake him; let my Son
Live by some noble deeds to expiate
His Fathers forfeit, and disgrace; I come
Without a guard, and were it not a crime
To my eternity, could sacrifice
My self without expecting your revenge,
Or nature to conclude my age.
Let me have Justice.
Give me Justice Prince.
Let me have Justice too.
Against whom Sister?
Against this Lady.
She hath conspired to take away my life.
My enemy is Duke Leonato sir,
Who hath conspired to take away himself,
A Treasure equal with my life.
My enemy is Iuliana sir, that hath con•pir'd
To rob her self, both of her life and honour.
Mant. Tic she, my aged eyes take leave of seeing,
Expect no object after this so welome.
My Daughter Fioretta.
Dearest Father.
How, Fioretta? she is then but Sister
To my Honorio, life of all my joys,
My feet have wings at this glad news.
Were you the Suffering Lady Fioretta?
How could you live so long within the Court,
And no good Angel all this while acquaint me?
This joy is too too mighty, and I sha' not
Repent my exile to be thus rewarded.
Confirm my happiness again, no treason
Shall now divide us.
Your hearts grow together.
I have received by Claudio the particular
Of Flavianos treason, he has guilt
Above your knowledge sir, Iuliana finds it,
And is confessed his strumpet.
You amaze me.
I bless now my suspicion, when I was
Conveyed from Mantua, which directed me
To leave Placentia secretly, and invite
My self a stranger to this Court, where now
I meet as much joy as my soul can fancy.
You have not all this while pronounced my doom,
I fear you hold intelligence with my soul,
And know what pains I feel while I am living,
You will not be so merciful to kill me.
Flaviano!
I present you with a Gentleman,
I took rifling a Hermit in the Wood,
As it appears in hope to scope pursuit,
Hid in a Friars habit, who dispatched
After a matrimonial betwixt
This Lady and my self.
That old Gentleman should be Duke of Mantua
What think you sir?
And that his Daughter Fioretta.
She is my Mistress.
She is like to prove the Duchess of Ferrari.
His Grace will not use me so,
I will have Justice, Justice Gentle Duke.
Are you mad.
I'll be revenged of somebody.
Honorio your son, to meet your blessing.
This was the life I feared to lose by her,
Whom I supposed my rival, pardon Madam.
Thus circled, I must faint beneath my happiness
Forgive my passion, and receive a Brother.
That name doth honour us, where is Flaviano?
Whose witty brain must sentence me? let it
Be home and hansom, I shall else despise
And scorn your coarse inventions.
Let me obtain, since providence hath wrought
This happy change, you would not stain our joys
With any blood, let not their sins exceed our charity.
Let him for ever then be banished both
Our Duke-doms.
What shall become of Iuliana?
She (if your grace more fit to judge, consent)
Shall to a house of converts and strict penance,
Where Flaviano, as the price of her
L•st honour, shall pay her dowry to Religion;
What doth remain of his estate, shall be
Employed toward the redeeming Christian Captives.
I cheerfully obey, and call it mercy.
Tic a most pious Justice.
Justice, thats my kue, Justice, Justice to Bertoldi
Against Signior Volterino, I am cheated.
Will you be a fool upon record?
You shall have Justice.
we appoint you, till he learn
More wit, to be his Guardian, and at your
Discretion govern his estate, so leave us.
I shall with my best study manage both.
I am as good as begged for a fool.
And thus we chain our hearts and provinces.
Madam I wish you joys, to Fioretta
I give my self, my Sister to Honorio.
Treason is sick in her short reign, but when
Heaven sees his time, Truth takes her Throne again.
NOW the ploy's done, I will confess to you,
And wo' not doubt but you'll absolve me too.
There is a mystery, let it not go far;
For this Confession is a•ricular:
I am sent among the Nuns to fast and pray,
And suffer piteous penance, ha, ha, ha,
They could no better way please my desires,
I am no Nun—but one of the Black-Friers.

TO write a Tragedy is no such ease
As some may think, amongst whom ther's a disease
Still of dislike, censuring what ere is writ
With ignorance; only to be thought a wit.
Plays are like several meates, their strange effects
So different prove, some carelessly neglect
•hat others long for, that which surfeits thee,
Another says tic good, give• life to me.
What's to be done? the way to please you all
Requires a• Art, past Magic natural.
Our best endeavours still with Comic fare
Have strived to please; now all our cost and care,
Soars on the wings of laboured industry;
To feast your senses with the Tragedy
Of Roman Messallina, the Play is new,
And by Romes famed Historians confirmed true.
We hope you'll not distaste it, nor us blame,
Where spots of life are acted to sins shame.
Tell me I pray? can there be no content?
To see high towering sins just punishment
And Virtues praise; insatiate lust to ••e,
And chaste Dames stared unto Eternity,
Will not this please? if any answer no,
I, let that soul and all the world to know,
Your loves the mark we aim at, all our might,
Shoots at your love, labours to hit that white.
SOla virtus vera nobilitas.
Virtue is only true nobility,
So speaks our times best Tutor Seneca,
And it is divinely spoken, like himself.
True Philosopher, for what is it to man
For to be borne noble, and yet detain
The ignoble mind of vice, licentious will,
Such no way are alide to nobleness.
Times hellbred, base, ignoble noble blood,
Runs through his veins, tha•s only great not good▪
Far better live a private life with thee,
Thou sweet companion to Well-minded man.
Here's no seducing Pomp, no clouds of vice,
Nor fogs of vanity obscures mans sight
From the direct to ways directly ill.
This seal confirm the sequel of my life
To imitate the good that thou presents.
Still plodding at your Book, shall we ne'er find
You otherwise; Pox of this sad mutt'ring
To your self; hanged up, it is a disease to
Sweet alacrity, of all true jovial
Minds to be abhord, come.—
Prethe desist.
How scurvily this shows, how ill in you,
That Should be framed just of the times fashion.
Thats learning, and valour; or should be so
At least; and not in outsides fond delight,
Whereon Times Puffe-paste costly coxcomb, all
His great little wit, and wealth, thinks best bestowed
To please his Mistri's Eye; when all mans mind
Should bend his course to follow virtues steps.
Out upon it; drink me and whore; those are
The virtues best, and best accepted among
Gallants of this age.
They are gallant sots,
Silly and senseless; what's all the delight,
That seems so pleasing to the itchie whorer?
But like the Itch, scratch't raw, it is still the sorer
Twill smart to purpose; make you to find out
An obscure grave, cold as the snowy Alps,
There, in a hollow circle of the night
Lust breeds more cause of terror then delight.
Fie Cajus fie, turned Satire against your friends,
Alas you're blind my friends, and I am sorry.
Pish; were it not for sparkling beauty, precious woman,
Woman I say, that fair and winning creature,
Whose ne'er to be resisted delicate touch,
Divides us into all the sweets of sense,
Were it not for her, (glorious sweet faced woman,)
Man makes no use of his Creation,
What says our Roman phrase,
Si non letaris vivens laetabere nanquam.
Leave then this puling study and be ruled.
Hang up Philosophy that Scene of sorrow,
Come go with me to beauties fair abode,
There, if you'll make true trial of your strength,
Let it be there employed; doe but withstand
The catching beauties there, and spite of all
Their povverfull charms and incantations
Come freely off, untainted with the Act.
For ever Isle abjure to be seduced
By the worlds quaint enticements; betake me
Wholly to Philosophy, and practise
The same in life.
So shall Proculus.
O were I sure that sworn you'd keep, &amp; not
Infringe your vows (though noble wisdom bids,
To shun the glorious strumpets licorish snares,)
You soon should find me sudden, dare to stand,
The baits of whorish fortitude unmoov'd.
Talk not but do it.
Therein consists the Test
Of complete man.
Then on this book take Oath,
Swear that by all the good therein contained,
And all that's good the virtues of true Man,
At my return free from adult•'ate sin
To live true friends to virtue ever after
You shall prevail.
We swear.
So deeply swear
That may loves thunder strike when we forsake
Our vows.
Tic well, lead on; And if I ever prove
False to Syllana punish me great Jove.
Hey ho, what Hem, Hem, Hem, what Hem I say.
Here Mistress.
Stitch, oh Stitch.
In your side Madam.
No Stitch, orethwart my heart, O I shall die;
The bottle, the bottle, the bottle knave the bottle.
Doe doe drink and be fatter still up with it,
Why so my brave bundle of guts and garbish.
I you may well say drink, well may I drink
All sorrow from my heart, for I thank you
Ten thousand sesterces, this day is lost
To our victorious Empress Messallina;
 Witness the Number five and twenty,
All in the circuit of a day and night,
And yet shees ready for a new delight.
She may, for who but she dares do the like,
For a poor subject, •alse the number serves,
On greatest Queens most servants still attends.
Had not provocations to enable thee,
Confection of Cantharides, Diasaterion Eringoes,
Snails, Oysters, Elegant, and could not these
Make thee hold out with five and twenty;
It was but a Forenoons work, a forenoons work
You paltry puling.
I, in your young days.
In my young days, I tell thee small Floun∣der,
Old as I am and fat, I durst yet wager,
To lay twice the number of such shrimps as thee,
That they should ne'er rise more.
Yes with a Pox.
I have not the Court art to kill my lovers,
Nor draw them on with witchcraft, Circean charms,
Nor is it lust, but want makes me a trader,
And those I clip with, I must like at least,
Let Romes brave Empress do her liking,
I she's a brave Roman dame indeed.
And those Mad-dames are the best doers Stitch.
Calphurnia loathes variety of men,
Times big bone Animals so apt to please,
Th'Empresse will whets not my appetite,
Besides you know I'm not for durance,
Wanting the daily visits of best Doctors,
To make me broths of dissolved Pearl and Amber,
Which well considered will not quit the cost,
She won the wager, I am glad I lost.
Glad I have lost,
Let me come to her, Isle claw you Minkes, glad
I have lost, and which goes nearest my heart;
To rail, and none to rail against but tall
Proper and goodly able men, calling
Them big-bond Animals, O blasphemy.
Why Phisgig; must I keep thee rich in clothes,
To want that ever pleasing sweet,
Honey, and Sugar candy delight; which the
Bravest high spirited glistening Ladies,
(Such as make Punies of their petty Lords)
Account their heaven, their only happiness,
Never but discontented when they are
Out of Action▪ and are you defective now;
Fallen out (forsooth) with the felicity
You shu'd take in men; O most absurd,
Not to be suffered, uttered, nor endured,
It is intolerable; it is, it is▪ it is,
Thou muddy minded piece of mischief it is.
Hem, Mistress, here comes our fellow Pander
The Lord Saufellus.
All of a house, but not all fellows Stitch,
And yet we hope to be Sir Panders; nay since
Great-ones be of that profession, and thrive so by it,
It cannot choose but be a brave profession.
Oh, tic a good,
A goodly brave profession; it is the best,
Best stream to fish in, be ne'er so impious,
Gold stiles the royal villain virtuous.
Here, here my most precious procurers
Down, and adore our royal Empress,
And me the messenger of these glad tidings;
Proud is her highness of the wager won,
Yet scorning the advantage of the loss
Trebly returns your own, with a reward,
And sign of her high favour ever after.
I hope her mightiness received content,
And will make bold with my poor house hereafter.
Yes, with your house a little bold her yet,
Silius comes hither straight brought by his friends
Valence and Proculus, your best wills work,
To make him serve her pleasure.
Pleasure her,
What? Silius a private gentleman of Rome
And be so gross as not to pleasure her.
Which of you gallants wu'd not pleasure an
Emp'resse; that a man should be so very a sot
As not do, Oh it were abominable.
But hoe's a man of precise abstinence,
And hardly will be drawn by any woman.
Hoy day; not drawn by woman said you,
If he come here, he shall be hanged and drawn,
And dry drawn to; not drawn by a woman!
Gogs negs that's fine in faith.
See, here they come prepared; I must withdraw
For a more apt employment, show your skills,
Women through lust and Hell will work their wills.
Come Sir, we'll enter you.
Most certain
Into the devils vaulting school; where lust
In triumph rides over shame and innocence,
Am I not in Hell.
O silly Silius.
Cannot a sweet shaped gallant like my self,
Enter the house where Ve•us vestalls live
But it must needs be Hell, ha, ha, ha.
Welcome Princely Spirits,
Sweet faces, rich clothes, and exquisite bodies,
Make you for ever (my most curious clients)
Pru•iently, pleasing to the blood of beauty,
Hem and Stitch some stools and cushions quick.
What have you brought me to your Sempsters house.
These are no idle persons.
Is this your lusty kindred, sweet pleasure
Which angles souls to hell, as men hook fish;
I, this is she the bane of all devotion,
She whose enticements turns weak men aside
From the right way of virtue, throwing em down
Into the gulf of all confusion;
From whence me thinks those dreadful souls I hear
Now at this instant cursing of your Sex;
Your sin affected trimings to entice
Which implicates the wretched mind of man
Crying with horror against your impudence.
O woman, woman, thy bewitching motion,
Fools wisdom, reason, and blinds all devotion.
What is the man detracted from his wits trow.
Out thou devourer up of maiden heads
Hoy day, I a devourer of maiden heads,
That (with joy be it spoken) I have not had
A maidenhead these fifty years.
Prithee be not thus bitter unto 'em,
Poor necessary evils they pleasure us.
Out on your beastly, your most senseless plea∣sures,
That makes you reasonless, esteeming best
Those things delight you most.
O I could stand,
My lifetime here to hear this Silius rail.
Note but the end of all your lustful pleasures,
All breed diseases, griefs, reproaches foul,
Consumption of the body, and the soul,
Engender sorrows and sottishness,
Forgets all prudence, grows most insolent,
Breeds the Ep•leps•e that falling evil▪
Begets murder, makes a man a devil,
O'rethrowes whole families, confounds the just,
Foisted in children illegitimate,
Corrupts all humane sweet society.
The various paths of lust are all uneven,
Her pleasures dreadful plagues the scourge of heaven.
Our sovereign good is pleasure unto which
None can attain but valiant men and wise.
Oh.
Silius thou shalt not fall unless I fall,
Nor rise without me, we love thee Cajus
Thou soul of music breath, breath and enchant.
With thy delicious Tones while thus we bend,
And health our love mirror of men to thee.
Fool that I am, thou hast undone thy self,
Keep in my virtue or this fie•y trial
Flames thee to Cinders.
Fill for him, •st prepared?
With deepest Art.
Here pledge, and pledge freely, a hearty draught
(As I began) up withed; so tic well, this,
This failing, pure, precise one now is silenced,
Convey him to our bed, Natures delight
Where when he wakes he may admire and burn
Be mad in love to pleasure free in us.
Thanks Valence, and Proculus, Caesar dispatcht
To Ostia, we'll find fit time to make you
Shine in glory, all shall find rich rewards.
May you for ever glister like the Sun.
Silius you're snar'd; and we our wager won.
Swift nimble time the season of the year
(To offer sacrifice unto the Gods)
Calls us with speed from Rome to Hostia, in
Which our absence, sweet, dear then my life,
We doe implore, use all the careful means
That may preserve that life and happiness
Thy love assures us▪ which if want of health
Should •ate thee joy; Caesar were not himself
Disaster, griefs, diseases pale and wan
Wu'd make me marble, such is the affiance,
The strong persuasion of that love I bear
To thee thou star on earth my only bliss
Bear record heaven, bless thou this parting kiss.
Farewell my life, my love, my royal, Fool
Shallow brain fop, dull ignorance adieu,
The kindest Cuckold woman ever knew.
Saufellus draw nigh,
Now is the wis•t for time to crown delight
Turn night to day and day into the night,
Prepare for stirring, Masque, midnight revels
All rare variety to provoke desire;
Then haste and fetch those invite Adamants
Rome most admires for foolish chastity,
When we have grasped them here, surfeits riot
Shall squeeze their sponge virtue into vice.
If they deny to come, let vengeance fall
Like to that all devouring thunders flame
Which feared the world, be merciless and kill.
Rome shall take notice, our incensed blood,
Like to Medusa's shall to Serpents turn,
Poys'ning the Ayre, where local chastity
Claims least pre-eminence.
Spoke like your self beyond thought excel∣lent
O it becomes you rarely; think what you are
All glory dross is, in comparison
Of that all rare inestimable worth,
You truly owe; all admired beauty past,
And that to come with full attractive force
Have fixed their lively characters in you.
Divinest fair; earth breathes not such another,
It were madness longer your delights to smother:
I'm feared with joy to see your high blood free.
Continue with increase, add flame to flames.
Burn high bright glorious wonder of thy Sex,
Act what your thoughts shall prompt too, I in all
Am only yours at whose commanding will
Isle death and horror wade to save or kill.
Stay ever you go resolve us; what is that
Stagerites Name, he that last night in the play
Did personate the Part of Troylus.
Minister (glorious Empress) thats his name.
Minister how that name works on my blood
And like a violent Tide, swells me with full
Desire to know the man; it must be so
Command him to attend our will tonight.
Know mighty Queen I by your looks perceived
•he graceful Actor pleasing to your eyes,
And therefore already here in court, I
Have prepared him.
Diligent Saufellus, Isle to my chamber,
Admit him thither; be swift in return,
We long for change to feed on various fruit;
Up Messallina let thy mountain will
Too long kept down, fly to thy full desire,
Isle live in pleasure though I burn in fire.
Come, come, come, this way, f•o how I sweat,
This venery is a stirring business,
Remain you here, Isle instantly return.
My heart that ne'er yet shr•nk begins to throb,
And my good Genius whispers in mine care
A fair retreat; I am fair warned, and yet
I waver doubtful.
Fortunate Actor,
Now let thy best of action to the life
Court Romes rare Emp'resse to the height of pleasure,
Muster up all the powers of man in thee
To an united strength, prepare a part
To ravish, pleasure win an Empress heart,
Look to it, prove active to yield full content,
Or else •ou die, die a most shameful death,
So speed as you shall please.
That's certain death,
I, I that in Pompeys, spacious Theater
Acted the noble virtues of true man,
When the fair piercing lines so much prevailed,
I felt a sacred flame run through my brains,
And in this Orb of mans circumference,
My self at furious war within my self,
That in my lifes sweet sequel, I still strived
Wrestled with flesh and blood to imitate
The good I then presented, but now, a
Coward plague, or else some F•end raised from the
Pit of fear, hath all my goodness to a
Period dropped; and I like chafe, blown on this
Wide worlds stage, am now to act my own part,
Which must be vicious now, lust stung vicious
With Romes majestic Empress, whose command
Strikes dead in the refusal, dead; a word
That quakes even the most valiant He, though least
Expressed, if by escape I think my self
Secure in some remote soil, her revenge
Will with the self same stroke there strike me dead,
Among petty imminent persons now tic
Common; then Princes cannot fail, their Arms
Are long and large, compulsion bids me on
Who ere shall read my story then shall say
It is forced compulsion, and not rich reward,
No high Court favourers made Minister sin.
 Enchanting earth's temptation is in vain,
He basely, basely sins that sins for gain.
If not for gain, shall I commit for fear,
For fear to die, I must, I will not, keep
There my mind, and with chaste fortitude
O be my bar to this lascivious act,
And cleave me to the Center ever I yield,
Your pardon glorious Empress,
Ther's something in me works so powerful,
I dare not, dare not yield to your content.
How's this, dare not, is that answer for us
Why fool, poor scum of the Earth dost know
What tic to stop an Empress lofty will:
Saufellus, within there, a Guard, we'll learn
You better manners, hoist him on the Rack,
To the Rack with him, tear limb from limb, dare not
We will enforce thee wretch.
O dog; not doe;
Up with the Snow ball, melt him, so, so, so.
Shall our high favours, (equal to base and
Mercenary Trulls) prove common put offs,
What say you now Sir.
That I am truly miserable, weak,
And vile, not being able to endure
This torment, O let me down; my pain, but
Not my mind yields to your bed, I doe
Consent, consent.
Ha, ha, doe you so, Sir;
Let him down, and let him find sudden cure
Command our Doctors, feed him hot and high,
Pleasur's a Princess full felicity.
Mans a weak Bulrush; all his fortitude
Brittle at best; witness these tenter'd, limbs,
Witness the Rack, which tears me from the sight
Of sacred virtue; whose just anger now,
Like a d•nyed wooer puts me off,
Blushing and despairing; •even out of sight
Mans out of heart, all virtues lose their light.
MY servants all are fast it is dead of night,
And yet my restless senses want their rest;
This was no wont to be, tic wondrous strange
I fear (nor is it unlike) my daughter, my
Most ambitious, irreverent daughter,
Dead to good counsel, now in great Caesars
Absence, most apt for ill; takes her full flight
To the loose life of all licentiousness,
Now at this instant wrongs him, and that the
Gods, whole eyes see blackest deeds, doe see and
Abhor; and therefore cause me thus to wake
From dead resembling sleep, to pray
T'oppose her ill with good, heaven I obey.
Open the door, O noble Lepida
Open the door.
What ill includes this noise.
Open the door, O save us from the gripes
Of Rape and Ruin.
That was a women's voice most certain it was,
I will no longer stay you.
O save us from the Rape, death dogs us
At the heals.
Our parents and husbands slain
In their beds this night, have paid lifes forfeit
For our escape.
For whom there is no hope
If sheltered not under your wings of safety▪
She is your daughter that commands this ill.
Woe is me wretch, accursed be the time
That brought her forth; O may it ever be,
For ever bard the rank of blessed hours.
Hark, hark, they come, that fatal bell rings their,
Approach; turn us to Ayre some whirlwind, ever
We perish through spotted whoredom.
O are you here.
And have we found you out.
O you abominable pictures of
•eevish virtue, ye thread bare thin cheeked chastity,
Ye Puppets.
I am amazed, if from my daughter sent,
Tell me ye frightful villains her demand.
Them there, whose paltery puling honesty,
Merits no favour but a world of mischief,
They must live at Court.
There to live, and brave.
To shine in pearl, and gold flow in treasure.
Fed with delicious Cates, to swim in pleasure. breath.
Tossed on the downy beds of dalliance.
Peace hell bred hag, stop thy unhallowed throat.
Dispatch, resolve to go or die.
Then die,
Arm you brave Roman Dames, Tertestriall stars,
Armed with fair fortitude resolve to die,
That when you're gone I may look up and see
Your chaste thought stars in the Celestial spheres▪
Is it not better die then live at court?
Racked, torn and tossed on proud dishonours wheel,
There to be whoor'd, your excellence defiled,
Rather be free, be free rare spirits for
Succeeding times to wonder at; spurn, spurn
In contempt of death, at deaths base strife,
To die for virtue is a glorious life.
O blessed encouragement.
All are so willing, ther's not one of us
Wu'd wish to live, so fairest mind farewell,
Behold we link in love, thus armed to die,
Strike slaves, mount souls, fly to eternity.
Mischievous Monsters, O what have you don.
Take this, this, and this for me, ye Puppets
Of purity.
Wu'd you be gone!
Nay you dimbed hell-hagge I'll preserve you safe
Manutius Folio wake, wake from drowsy sleep.
How's this, locked in, what the great devil
Will become of me.
Murder murder, what ho, Manutius awake.
How she bawles, vengeance stop your throat.
O see where murdered chastity lies slain,
Under my tragic roof this fatal night.
Sad dismal accident.
Here take this Baud.
She hath a large hand in this impious act
Take, hang her by the heals then let my dogs,
Compelled through hunger tear, eat her alive,
I must to Court there prosecute the rest.
Remove those bodies I'll take charge of this,
O thou insufferable Bitch Whore, Bawd,
Have you been actor in this bloody Scene?
You shall be gnawn with dogs for it, tottered
And piecemeal torn, you shall you rotten
Stinking tun of decayed Lechery you shall.
Yet, I will set thee free, grease me now finely,
Finely in the Fist, you know the Art, money
Will corrupt, it is beggary to be honest.
Hold ther's my purse, the better part is gold
Perform thy promise, I'll advance thy sty•e
At Court promote thee.
To wear brave clothes.
Rich, wondrous rich.
And shall I have a wench.
A very dainty device, a Springer▪
One that shall make thy constitution curvet
And wind about thee like a Skein of Silk
Titckle, tickle, tickle thee my brave bully:
Say thou so, my old motions procurer,
Go thy ways—stay—O wonderful whats that
There betwixt thy teeth, gape.
Au, au, au.
We must be honest here, nay you shall go
Not to be tickle, tickle, tickled, but
To be tottered with your heals aloft
To be totter, totter, tottered my brave Bawd,
To be tottered.
Minister, Valence, Proculus, not all
No, not a world of favourites can yield
To us that free delight in dalliance which
Silius gives, he must not live at Forum,
Though it be near at hand it is too far off
Calphurnia.
Your highness pleasure.
Cause Cajus, Silius to be sent for straight,
And let Harmonius Musics ravishing Airs,
Breath our delight.
To your accomplished wish.
Circle me round you Furies of the night,
Dart all your fiery lust-stung Arrows here.
Here, here, let Circa and the Sirens charms,
Pour their enchantments; Monarch of flames,
Fill with aluring poison these mine eyes
That I may with the misty souls of m•n,
And send them tumbling to th'Acharusian Fen:
It were an all pleasing object unto thee,
Thou great Arck-Ruler of the lowe Abyss,
Like to Cadmaean Simile I wu'd burn
Rather then want this my implored desire▪
And be consumed in thunder, smoke, and fire;
Let petty Queens dull appetite dread fear,
I'll be my self sole pleasures Queen in all.
Ha, whats this? cease that Music there,
A sudden strange and drowsy heaviness
Enchants my tender eyes to close their lights▪
From those blew flames burning dim,
Where black souls in sulphur swim.
Dark infernal Den below,
Lakes of horror, pain and woe.
From dread Thunder smoking fire,
We come▪ we fly at thy desire.
To fire thy mind, lewdly inclined.
To deeds unjust, murder and lust.
Dreaming see, at thee, at thee.
Furies dart sins potent night.
Sable shafts of endless night.
Furies enough, I'm fully satisfied,
A Plurifie of lust runs through my veins
I could grasp with any.
Me above all.
O the uncounted sea of my delight
In thee my Silius, tic miraculous,
Ineffable, never to be expressed
By learnings deepest Art.
Glory of Queens▪
Cease to enchant with words that can so charm.
And Scarf about thy neck, my Ivory Arm
Practise upon thy lips the Energy
Of sweet allurements, shoot into thine eyes
Amorous glances stirring dalliance,
Embraces, passions, such as shall beget
Perpetual appetite, that all the gods
May in beholding emulate our joy,
Enveloped with pleasures sweetest sweets,
Ambrosiack kisses thus.
Delicate Nectar.
Redoubled thus and thus.
O I am all Flame,
A scorched enchanted flame and I shall burn
To Cinders with delight, debarred to quench
Fervour with fervour, violent flame with flames.
Thou art too noble a substance to embrace
Thy wife Syllana, be sudden, kill her,
She must not live.
How?
Be not ignorant,
 That singular alone we must enjoy
The freedom of thy body undebard
Least let to pleasure, by this I charm thee.
O that delicious melting kiss prevails;
Sucks dry the sweetness of a soul distressed,
Poisons my blood and brain, and makes me apt
To doe an outrage▪ I should loathe to name:
O if I ever was gracious in your sight,
Desist fair beauties abstract, I implore;
Spur me not on to murders horrid act
Which I shall ever rue; let it su•hse,
I'm only yours, never Syllana's more;
Sworn a perpetual exile from her bed,
Vanished so soon, how wondrous strange seems this.
Death and destruction satisfy my will
Or take it in thy bosom, I'm intemperate
Briefly resolve.
Hold, be not so respectless
Of him that loves you dearer then his life▪
Dreadlesse of death I speak it, what is death?
A bug to scarre th'ignoble cowards mind
The valiant never; did the Fates conspire
And terrible death in the most horrid shape
It ever put on threat, despair, and ruin,
Yet it should ne'er affright the soul of Silius;
Th'impatient sudden cause of discontent
In your rare worth, only torments me more
Then were I rack't upon Ixions wheel
To perpetuity; be gracious then
To him that does repent, confess his error,
Seal't with this kiss.
Did Lucius Cataline
Spare wife nor child, for Orestillas love,
And must our high borne savours be slighted
Put off with bare perswasives.
Oh be pleased.
Let mighty Queens, majestic imminence
In the high pitch of their ambition learn
Of us to hate corivalls in their love
Trampling the Torch of Hymeneal rites
Under their se•te.
The attractive force
Of those amazing eyes those glorious lights
Fixed in the Firmament of your sweet f•ce
Shall make me undergo the worst of ill,
Though with the forfeiture of life I •azard
A death more terrible then Alcides was.
I love thee now, like to a burning glass
You have fier'd a fresh th'affection of my mind
More violent then ever▪ be gone, be gone,
Hasten Syllanas death then come to Court,
There the Imperial Diadem of Rome
Dreadlesse of Caesar shall impale thy Front
 Like Jove and Iuno in a nuptial knot,
We'll knit the bands of Hymen, and out shine
The glorious Tapers of the golden Sun,
Whirl through the stately streets of spacious Rome
Like glistering Phaeton in an Orient chair.
That with the bare report, swift fame shall strike
Amazement through the world Monarchal state
All-gazing eyes fixed on our rich attire
Languish in dreams our stately state admire.
Ravished in thought panting amazed I stand
At your Harmonious speech Emphaticall.
Ambitious blood, like to the Banks of Nyle
Ore flows this Orb of mans circumference,
And points my actions thus their way to ill
Aspiring Arms Lavolto when they kill.
Go the influence of whose power stars,
Mounts thy imperial lot to set aloft
On the high Orb of our affection,
Like the bright rising oriental Sun,
When it salutes Aurora; 'bove the choice
Of five and twenty Iove-like Ganimends,
Who charmed, and wrapped in wanton dalliance,
Live fired with admiration; O pleasing,
More pleasing sweet to my insate desire,
Then was to Synon Illions lofty fire.
Shall Messallina in her flourishing youth
Like dull and tame, Nobility live cooped,
Confined and mewed up singular to one;
No Caesar no, it were fools Philosophy,
And I abjure't; there is no music in it,
Those of our Sex the minds of sots contain
And are of no brave spirits that deny
Pleasure, the heaven of my Idolatry.
Plagues yet unfelt light on thee mischievous
Slave, villainy, dog, murderer rot as thou livest.
Mother the cause of your distemprature.
Murder in thee, in thee thou wicked Imp
And that thy substitute by the ordained
Against the most noble minds of chastity,
Whose innocent blood like the Atlantic sea
Looks red with murder, and cries out to heaven
For justice and revenge; O had thou first
Then been the Author of so foul a fact
Made thy own passage, happy woman I.
Beldam give over, or Isle disclaim all smoothness,
Ther's nothing done that's wished undone by us.
1st even so, then too too ill farewell
Truths story shall relate to after times
My love to thee; hate to thy desperate crimes.
Pish to your chamber dotard be advised.
Go and a mischief dambe you, and all your
Pitiful Sex.
We doe commend thy care,
Joy 'ith performance of our strict command,
Which shall from hence forth stile thee favourite
To us, that will command thy fortunes rise.
And all those fortunes, favours, life and all,
Shall like an Atlas undergo the weight
Of your imperious will, be it to the death
Of Parents, massacre of all my kin,
To exceed the devil, act any sin.
For which we thus inseam thee,
O Dulls,
Divinest goddess whom my soul adores,
Multiply that sweet touch of rare delight,
And from the Garden of Hesperides,
Those delicate delicious ruby lips,
Make me immortal, quench, quench the burning heat
Which like th'immoderate thirst of Tantalus,
(Scorching the meadows of my solid flesh)
Dries up the Rivers of my crimson blood,
And as the gaping tongue tide earth for rain
Opens her grief, so in my looks behold,
View my distress; make me to live or die.
Grasp me Saufellus; lets have a sprightly dance,
Swift footing opts my blood for dalliance.
Music, rich music there; O that my skill
Could transcend mortal.
Tush: we'll accept thy will.
What devil sends her back,
Pish mind her not.
Nature constrains me back, what though dismayed
Shall I desist, O then shees lost for ever,
No; I will bend with fairest fair demean.
To save her soul I'll make my foot my head,
Mothers were Monsters else not truly bred,
Give my speech once more freedom.
You'll force us through unmannerly exclaims
To rest the strictness of our dread command
I come not bent with wrath, but to implore
On bended knees, with penitential tears,
T'appease the Gods for thy full Sea of sin,
Such is a mothers love, and such is mine;
Prove thou m• like, thy soul shall never fall
Into those damned sins it nourishes;
Which like a ponderous Argosy full fraught,
Cuft on the mountain top of some big wave,
In the descent, falls on the fearful Rock
And splits in pieces irrecoverable.
So fatal death upon the wings of night
Whirls the black soul in her triumphant Car
To the Tartarian vales; where crowned in flames,
Tumbling descend to dreadful Or•us Cell,
That merciless pit of bottomless despair,
To fry in those blew fl•mes of fear for ever,
In never ending endless pain for ever.
If mothers tears were ever of force to move,
Let th•se of mine take place; strive to repent,
Think what a horrid thing it is to see
There is fear above us; fear still beneath us,
Fear round about, and yet no fear within us.
I doe begin to melt.
Heavens blessings on thee.
And hells curse on thee; tic high time to speak,
O be your self divinest fair on earth,
This idle superstitious lecturing
Proceeds of malice; what? to make you child
And slave to her desires.
O impious devil.
No more, live and be thankful.
Ha, howes that?
Live and be thankful; am I then contemned
Is all my labour in a moment lost.
Live and be thankful; sure I doe but dream,
It cannot be, na•ur against it self
Should so rebel; O fool, fool that I am
With vain hope thus to play the flatterer.
Morse e•umna•um quies; morse omnibus finis.
Dissolve the glassy pearls of mine eyes,
That N•obe-like I may consume in tears,
And nevermore behold da• light again.
Pish, all this is but talk; and talk I must,
Fly from me soul and turn my earth to dust.
Must I then live to see my daughters shame,
Crack, crack poor heart; sterne death let fly thy dart,
Send my sad soul to the El•zium shades
That there it might drink Lethe, and forget
It ever lived in this mortality.
Parcae dispatch; when, when I say; no, no,
Then will I act Medeas murd'ring part
Upon my stain of blood▪ that gods and men
May sit and laugh, and plaudit my revenge.
Ye dismal sisters of the fatal night,
Rise, rise, and dance hells round lays for joy,
Rhamn•sia finds employment for you all.
Follow, follow, follow, follow, follow.
Note with your grim aspects the courts of Kings,
See how the politic statesman for his ends,
Sits hammering mischief; and how Toad-like swells
Bombast with treasons riches; see ther's lust,
Brave Madam, lust temptations painted whore
Divinely worshipped by the bastard brood
Of knaves and fools.
Ye dread and ireful furies i'ft not true.
Why then employ your burning whips of steel,
Lash with eternal lashes, there, there, there,
Excellent Furies how you doe excel,
So, so, so, so, tic holy day in hell.
O what a fiery combat feels my soul,
The Genius good and bad that weights on man,
Shakes natures frame, trembles this Microcosm,
There virtue pleads for sleeping innocence,
For love, true love, chaste thoughts, and virtuous acts
Which entertained within a constant breast
Makes man triumphant crowned immortal blessed.
But O the ponderous plummets of black vice,
Suppress those pure imaginations,
Which break like lightning only for a flash,
Wanting the true material to impel,
And to continue this false clock of life
From its exorbitant course; such like are
Majestic title, and the Empress,
That unpeer'd excellence, bewitching dalliance▪
Soul of temptation sweet, so charms all sense,
Virtue I loath, like politic states whose good
Depends on ill, work their attempts in blood.
O my affrighted soul art thou there sweet•
Then am I safe; t'was but a dream I see,
A waking walking in my sleep wherein,
Me thought I saw near to a River side,
Two lovely Turtles sit, like morn in May,
Adorned with all the glories of the Spring,
Their loves to either seemed to sympathize,
And with such sober chastity connex,
That their two hearts (as true loves ever should,
Like fire and heate inseperate a like)
Showed like the splendour of a heart that lived
In sacred flames; in unextinguisht flames
Of chaste desires, free from the tainted spot
Of pe•ulent dalliance, till temptations snare
Appeared Parthenope like; that with her charms
Worked so effectual on the Turtle Male,
He (like Troy, firebrand, falsely that forsook
Unpitied Oenon) not alone content,
Alone forlorn, t'abjure his lovely mate,
But back returned his black intents to further,
And to the height of lust he added murder
The very thought seemed daggers to my breast,
That with the fear I waked.
To sleep thy last.
Light of my life how's that?
Briefly this;
I'll be your dreams expositor thou must die;
Die by this hand, this fatal instrument
Nor must I seem to yield a slave to pity.
Sure, sure I dream, dream still, if not tell, O
Tell me my better self, whose killing words,
Wounds crueler then death; what cause, what offen•
What ill desert in me, that wronged you never,
The Gods me witness bear.
Tic for no fault sustained on thy behalf,
N•; tic the Empress Doom.
She; nay then.
It is thee; that model of creation,
Must through thy death participate alone
All that is man in me; And to that end
With sweetest concord of discording parts,
Out sings the Sirens, fierce this mansion
With haut, Ambition, Romes imperial crown,
And therefore I must kill; or else forgo
All those bright shining glories, which what fool
Would be so nice.
Is there then no hope,
No comfort, no remorse; must I depart
Where I shall never see thy face again,
Never behold those joys, which Hymens Rites
Were wont to crown with true loves flames,
Is there no remedy.
Farewell vain world, my life is such a toy,
I will not with to live, t'abate thee joy.
Yet ever I go, grant this one curtsy,
It is the last kindness you shall ever give,
Place against my heart thy deadly pointed steel,
So, now farewell; death is for me most meet,
Strike sure and home, I doe forgive thee sweet.
Bravely resolved, and I'll perform thy will
As bravely thus,
Not to be Emp'rour of the spacious earth,
Live, live Syllana free.
First possible,
Twixt fear and hope struck through with deep amaze
I waver doubtful.
Cease admiration
And be sure of this, though I must confess
I hither came Armed with a full intent
To take thy life, yet Silius ne'er shall add
To his libidinous life, a murderers name.
Of ill•, it is ever best, the worst to sh•nne,
By murders murderers souls are oft undone;
I wish I were far better then I am.
 But since without my most assured ruin
It cannot be; being so far engaged
Into the Empress favour, I must on
Make use of some devise cloaked with deceit,
That far beyond persuasion may enforce
Thy deaths b••eefe.
Kill, O kill me rather.
Be not far crueler to thy self then death
To put to hazard on so slight a ground
Thy life for mine; I know the Emp'resse
That if least notice of my life she hear,
Not ireful Nemesis in swift revenge
Could be more speedy.
Pish, I will so work
You shall not need to fear, therefore as I,
At court with my continuance must make way
To clear suspect; use you the matter so
Among your noble Family whereby
Argos eyed Envy descry me not; I
Shall securely live dreadlesse of danger.
Though you had struck my body f•ll of wounds
And I survive, m• fierce revenge should he
Good against ill, how to preserve your life.
You are the true Emblem of a perfect wife,
For whose rare virtue, from my soul I wish
All husbands were the same, in that right way
A perfect husband truly ought to be.
Which since in me (ordained by powerful Fate)
Never to be avoided backward runs,
Let my recursion from thy mind expel,
That Serpent foe to life; sad griefs extreme.
As grossly vain in being remediless, and
Therefore shun it, patient conjuence
Is the calm of trouble, best cure against care,
Gives greatness best content in mean estate.
Why doe I then (like Godless villains) tell,
The way t'heaven, yet lead the path to hell.
Minds that will mount into superior state,
Climb mischiefs Ladder; virtuous actions hate.
Yet first not so with Silius; I doe love
Those virtues in another, though I want
The like performance; nor shall my high aim,
Raised on advancements top doe me more good,
Then th'injoyning free from the act of blood.
But I protract delay, ther's danger in it;
Video meliora, proboque, deteriora Sequor.
Never was man so infinitely
Bewitched; charmed, and enchanted as is Caiu•
Silius, to leave a constant wife; farewell,
We must part.
Must, must, O wretched word o•
Mischievous command; must we part.
We must; nay prithee weep not sweet,
Blessings like drops of rain shower on thy soul,
O that I might part dying in thine arms.
Farewell.
Farewell.
Tears want their remedy,
There is no striving, against our destiny▪
MY brother gone to exile and I here,
So near the Empress Court, the Court of shame,
Where mischiefs hourly breed; how strange seems this,
I have a will to follow, yet I want
My wills performance; not that I am sick,
Wanting, or limbs, or liberty; which begets
More strange imaginations, yet all I can,
Comes short to guess th'inscrutable meaning
That thus detains me here, in vain, in vain•
The more I strive my senses I confound,
Then give it o'er, salute thy mother earth,
And rest, rest while thy poor distracted mind
Upon the wings of thought takes flight and fly
Fly to the Island of Cor•yra there,
Learn the souls comfort sweet Philosophy,
What infinite good it is to contemplate heaven,
For to that end the life of man is given.
Prove prosperous my design upon this
Brother to the banished Seneca,
Are you caught Sir?
Ha, villain what art thou.
A murderer and villain, O Sir,
It is the best thriving trade and best employed
Against such malevolent Satirists •s you.
You that are all for virtue, a mere word,
When indeed ther's no such thing; say there be
None truly loves it but dies beggarly.
Slave, rather dispatch me then torment m• sou•
With thy envenomed scoffs against that that is
Most rare, most excellent.
A little more,
And then I'll speed you, excellent Ladies
Cannot disable with a charming spell,
(A trick of wit, a humour that they have)
Husbands they not affect; making free way
For Atlas backs to leap their lovely laps,
But your Satirical censure straight must pa••e,
Th'ones pride's scab•-hammd Rascals, and the 〈◊〉
Mischiefs venereal Trulls; these are fine terms,
Pray who made you a censurer of manners.
O slave,
T'upbraid such imminent persons
What madness durst the like, deserve not death,
Yes, yet your life is safe, pass but your vow
To embrace a beauty I shall bring you to,
(More delicate then was the Spartan Queen)
One that shall pay large tribute night by night,
Give thee thy weight in gold for each delight.
Not I, I yield my body mercenary slave
To lust and lucre, no, though mines of gold
She could give oftner then those who•each looks
Women take pride in, to bewitch men's souls;
First partch't to Cinders, against the burning Zone,
Be buried quick▪ all torments possible,
(Stretched on the Tenters of invention)
I gladly would (most willingly) endure
Ever thy soul killing proffers enters here.
No?
Pish, for my death, ther's too much man in me
To fear so slight a scratch; let it come,
I will no budge a foot; strike fair and home,
Tic better die then live to live unjust,
Slave to th'unsounded Sea of women's lust.
Are you so confident, have at you Sir,
Your love, your love, it is only that I seek
I am no villain, though I seemed in show
But one that fearful in these dangerous times
For to retain a friend; led on by hope
Of your fair life, whom envy in your foes
Reports no less of; cause me through disguise,
To put to trial your unvalued worth,
Which beyond man I find of such pure mold,
Sun-like your virtues outshine purest gold.
Believe me Sir ther's no such thing in me
Worthy your least Encomium.
But there is
A miracle, which but in me in part,
Through friendships dear respect incorporate.
And you shall bind me everlastingly
To bless the thou•e we met.
As I am slow,
To friendships confidence (as tic requisite
For every one, and yet once entered in
Affect stability, judge you the same,
A man that truly sensitive well knows,
Virtue to be but merely adjective;
Wanting that sovereign sweetness which directs
The mind to honest Actions; and therefore,
As friendship joins with virtue; truly is,
The lover of love; each true friends property,
By that true blessing, sundry, wills connexion
Our h•arts as hands unite, dilate affection,
That th'enlarge length, orbicular may spread
And ne'er find end.
So am I yours.
You mine.
Unparalleled is that love where friends com∣bine▪
Here comes the top top gallants of the time.
The fools of the time; how are we bound to heaven
Exempt the bondage of these Palace Rats,
These, whose delights are last provocatives.
Let us withdraw, and seem to mind them not.
Was men ever blessed with that excess of joy
Equal to ours; to us that feel no want
Of high court favours lifes licentiousness;
Kings have their cares, and in their highest state,
Want those free pleasures crowns us fortunate.
O happy state.
Glorious slave. —
Thrice happy,
I'd not change Earth for Ioves felicity.
Nor I, who wu'd, what inconsiderate he
For such a Mistress as the Emp'resse
Wu'd be so dull, as not make use of Art,
Forcing the bodies jovial able might,
To yield her expectation full delight.
Libidnious Goat. —
I'd do it, though Phaeton like,
The hot receipt should fire this Fabric.
When I commemorate her excellence,
How lavish lovely dalliance free proceeds
From that rarity of perfection, O
How I'm ravished; ravished in thought as well,
As with the Act; which breeds no wonder though
High Jove transhap't him to Amphitrio
To taste the pleasure of Alemenas bed;
Needs must such prodigal sweets mad thoughts of
Men; when power t'atract the Gods▪
Impious Lechers. —
Silence, mark the event. —
I that know none more worthy then my self
Of true regard and worth; would be resolved
What's he, that bears the valiant mind of man
Dares for his mighty sovereign Mistress more
Then Vrctius Valence.
That dare I, I dare;
Pond that thou art to question such a toy,
Were thy power equal to thy daring pride,
Proculus dares doe more.
Nor thou, nor he,
Not Valence nor Proculus though you both,
Both durst as much as he durst cuckold Jove
Minister would transcend you.
That our bloods decide.
A Spirit of valour.
Let it come.
What killing objects, this presents our eyes,
Our Favourites turned fighters must not be,
Descend Saufellus, know the cause, we'll follow.
Stand all so firm, this Seal express my rage.
Mine this,
This mine
Hold, hold, y're wounded all;
As you'll incur our Emp'resse deep displeasure
Hold, and resolve why thus you have exposed
Your lives to danger.
Whence proceeds this fray.
From that concerns the credits of best men
Which of us three in our affections prized
Your excellence most.
And was that the cause?
Wee doe embrace and pretiously account
The vigour of your loves; so you no more
So full of spite, let prosecute your hate.
With the like hardy daring, twill not please.
We should esteem your jars ridiculous
Issuing from brainelesse wit discerned in others.
And as it is common to our imminent Sex,
Triumph instate, and glory in your falls;
Yet th'operation of your loves so works,
That it scruze ours to judge the contrary.
Dry up your wounds with care; then come to court
Love shall entrance your souls; prepare for sport.
Isle study Art in love for recompense.
My love shall mount.
Mine yield profuse expense.
Here was a storm of mischief soon blown over,
It was to preserve them for a wicked life,
But since these accomplices are gon that are
Not worth least memory; behold this book,
Set my dear friend, and I will read to thee
Of that high Majesty puissant Ens,
From whom we have our being, life, and soul,
Which should dull flinty inconsiderate man,
When with black deeds 'ith miry bog of sin,
Beast like he wallowes; considers right,
Thinks on his present state (whence came and must)
Then on that terrible Thunderer that sees,
His actions kick at heaven; he then no more
Would dare t'offend his Maker, but with tear•,
Lament his souls polution, which doth give
Matter, by which men's souls immortal live,
But through an unfrequented heaviness
I am prevented.
Repose a while I'll read.
Make us celestial happy with thy news,
Art thou sure it is he.
It is, it is Montanus,
Sure as I live, I took full view of him
Before and after the fight; then with drawn
Within you grove of Oaks.
My hearts on fire
To clip him; fly swift as thought Saufellus
Conduct him to our Paradise of joy,
If he escape desire then confound us,
We only viewed him once, but then the time
Crossed our desires; blessed opportunity
That makes our happiness a very heaven
We'll build an Altar, and erect a shrine
That shall eternize thee for this; were it my brother
Resembled him we so entirely love,
Weed force him ravish pleasure if not kill
Be a S••i•amiss to sate our will.
Hail to Montanus.
Sir the like to you.
It is th'Emp'resse pleasure you attend her will.
Know you the cause.
Delay not with demands they are frivilous
Will you along.
Your favour sir a while;
I'll but awake my friend, (So-ho) sleepy still,
Pray heaven this heaviness imports no harm.
How's this, my friend departed, I alone,
I know not what to think, it is very strange,
He thus unwak'd would leave me; sure he strived,
Yet I so fast, that he no doubt was loath
To break my rest; it is so, and some chief cause
Which I might well dispense with drew him hence.
I'll to his fathers house, there certain find
Or hear of him.
O Potent lust, thou that hast power to make
The valiant and the wise, coward, and fool,
I'm not so dull, but that I know thee now.
Now comprehend why Music breathes delight,
And why this banquet; why both presents themselves
To be my slaves; It is to make me a slave
To lust; that deadly potion of the soul,
 Whose poison quaft, kills body and the soul.
That's the maine end of these harmonious strains,
These stirring meates, which unto me appear,
Like those blew flames the damned taste in hell.
Celestial Angels guard me, now she comes,
And I so ill prepared, I, know not what,
A sudden earthquake trembles natures frame,
Which like a falling Pine tree to and fro,
Uncertain where to fall, it tottering stands.
She's most bewitching sweet, I fear, I fear,
She will ore come; now I begin to burn,
To scorch, like to the coals of Etna; strike
Me eternal winter with thy frosts; quench
Quench this hot combustion in my blood,
And if I needs must fall, O sacred powers
Benumb my senses so, that I may taste
No sweetness in the Act, yield no delight.
Thus long with admiration we have stood
To gaze on thy perfections, precious shape
Why dost thou shake? why stare? as rapt in wonder
Why dumb? or think thy happiness a dream
This kiss confirm thee ours; entrance thy soul
To stir loves-panting appetite while thus
We clip thee in our Arms, embrace thee thus.
O —
That's loves Alarm, to bed, to bed,
To Venus field, there combat for loves treasure
Swim in excess of joy, there ravish pleasure.
To thee fair fortune in divinest sense,
In w•om all excellence inclusive is,
To that high power, I invoke impore.
If pleased, direct where I may find my friend,
Fi•l when, I fitly may assimulate
The restless acquiescence of my mind,
To the perpetual motion of a wheel.
That by the force of water restless turns
The vigour of the torrent left unstopped.
So the strange absence of my noble friend,
Suffers th'insulting tortent of sad grief,
(Tyranicke-like upon the wheel of sense)
To rack my restless rest, which I must bear,
It is vain to strive against sorrows stream to swim,
Man hath no power on grief, grief power on him;
What's he declines his visage to the ground,
Is it not my friend? tic he, happily met.
Hell-cat no more, no more of thy embrace,
Find thou my body enemy to lust
And yet again attempts me.
How's this?
Keep off insatiate Empress, I'll no more,
Poison of Monsters, the blood of Nessas
Damme up thy Curtian-gulph-like appetite;
May furies fright thy whorish fortitude
Dancing Lavolto's in the very act
And dambe you.
Save him divine assistance,
For he's lost; mistake not I'm thy friend
Tic so, and I am happily mistook,
Thy pardon worthy friend, it was my fear
Of further ill; made me forget my self
Distracted sense, as well it might, Other's
A strange deed past.
I fully comprehend,
By that distemper lately in your blood.
It was musics sweetest concord to my soul,
To hear with what a cold performance
You have was wrested from you, happy prevention,
How like a doubtful battle it hath made
The victory more joyful; which had else,
Had you replenished those soule-killing sweets,
No means for safety then, but fall you must,
A prey to slaughter, or a slave to lust.
But since with heavens prevention you are free,
Fly Rome; the impious maladies she breeds,
Experience tells, are hooks to catch at souls.
Therefore to be avoided, ther's no trust
To trust to stay, where such infection reigns.
Who is at all times one; in that right way
Man ought to be, being circumvolv'd mong those,
That by the Plummets of licentious will
Measure their virtues; it is impossible.
The scholar, He, in whom there doth consist
Honest conditions, and within whose heart
Ther's many virtues make their residence,
Though with night watchings at his study site,
Wasting his vital spirits (not unlike
His burning Tapor) to illuminate
Others the way that leads to the direct,
From superficial to essential joy,
Even he, ill company corrupts, directs
To the indirect; so that some one vice
Robs him of all his virtue: The Soldier
That magnanimous resolution,
He that leaves nothing unattempted
May tend to the honour of his country,
Ill company poisons with self conceit,
Cankers with envy; till on the rack of
Haute ambition stretched, like stubble set
On fire he prove a flame.
And therefore to prevent us, against all ill against
Wisdom commands our absence, truly knows,
Man at the best, his power to doe is little
His state obnoxious, at the best most brittle.
Your counsel points my actions their true way
To immortality, forewarns to fly,
The dire event of future Tragedy
Which as the flame, the fire of force must follow
By th'Emp'resse bloody project; that Monster
In nature, in this the Emperors absence,
Mounts on the highest Spyre of infamy,
Resolves to join in Hymeneal bands
With Cajus which Silius quaint villainy,
To put in speedy practise, he last night
Arrived at Court.
There let their impudence,
For glassy glories of Monorcall state
Engender sin with sin, flatter their hopes,
While our souls fixed on contemplation
Make for the Isle of Corce, (come my dear
Friend there on the Tyrhen shore we'll practise
Mans sole perfection to be heavenly wise.
YOur Excellence that too, too gloriously
Resembles your rare Sex; succeeding times
Shall to the end of time, gaze and admire,
Wonder at your high prudence, which to the
Combination of our Nuptials, hath charmed
 Dull Caesar to a free consent, behold;
There you whose loves doe ever bind me yours
May view my fortunes like a valley rise
Above those hills that will admit no clouds,
Ther's a full grant wherein you may discern
My glories in this admirable lemme.
It is a fit bound unto your boundless glory.
Not Ninus,
Was ever more dull, more easily entrap
Then Romes ridiculous Em'prour Claudius.
Ridiculous indeed here it is comfirm'd.
Read it Virgilianus.
The marriage of our Emp'resse with Cajus
 Silius we fairly like; and to that end,
(For approbation of our Copious Grant)
With our imperial signet willingly
Have sealed this assurance, granting a Dower
Out of our Treasury to be exhaust,
And of our royal pleasure to be given
With her our only happiness on earth.
By whose persuasions we are confident
The sa•d Nuptials, to be but colorably,
Only of purpose t'avert the danger
Of certain prodigies, aimed at our loss
Of life and Empire.
This credulity in Caesar, was by
Her highness excellently managed.
Sure
Ioves high love to his loved Gaenymed
Descends in triumph on the Noble Silius.
Else, how should the means to his high ay••e,
Free from the plots of blood thus fairly greet
Without least flaw in safety.
True, true, nor
Can it enter in my thoughts to think,
What obstacle should bar his excellence
From writing Emp'rour.
None, not the least let;
The people that are the Nerves of Empire
All for the virtues of your noble Sire,
Dearly affect you; boldly rely on it
At publication of this copious grant
They'll add all majesty to your high fame.
Their love to you and fear of prodigies
Pretended for to dim dull Caesars glory
Will work constraint.
Refresh to memory
The Acts of blood that reigned in Scylla's days▪
Busy their brains, and put them 〈◊〉 mind
That the black thoughts of Cataline survive
For this prodigious Age to perpetrate.
Besides the Auspices, among whom this grant
Was signed, they by the Entrails of their beasts
Firmly affirm (past contradiction)
Your reign to be most safe and popular.
Which with the rest are piercing motives, that
Of necessity (as food and raiment
To the bodies health) will force the people
Constant; they in their love and fear must make
Your more then royal spirit most endeared
That state best rules, rule•s to be loved and feared
Noble Romans, dear country men and friends
These solid certainties you here pronounce
In my behalf, which argues your firm friendship,
The vengeful Gods must in their justice grant.
Make me the Minister of Fate, dig up
The dignities of Caesars Race, and in
The stead, plant monumental ruin, make
The name wretched draw dishonoured breath,
All the dire torments Furies can invent,
Were all too little for my Fathers loss,
That memorable 〈◊〉▪ he that hath stood
The fiery fervour of so many fights,
Come bravely off, and saved this Empire.
Gave unto Caesar Rome and servile senate
Gave all their strength and being, and for all
(Grown too too great examples for the times,)
Plots were devised in recompense to kill,
And that their machivillian darkness, he
No sooner scented, but in open senate
Scorning Tiberius, and deaths base censure
Exposed his life a sacrifice to valour.
And for that fact, upon the blood and name,
That cause so brave and famous an example
For all free spirits, Isle be revenged after
No common sort.
Brave Silius go on, and
Prosper, and command me ever
And all.
The thanks among Princes of ignoble brain
That shines like rotten wood, serves petty use,
The mind of Silius much much more then scorns,
The grave V•rg•l a•os, during the
Life of Silius shall ne'er speak but with the
Voice of Co•sull; he, Calphurnianus
Vectius Valence, Proculus, Minister,
And Saus•llus Trogus, to all renown
Command and wealth of Provinces shall flow,
T'expresse the gratitude of Sell••s, and
Though last named, yet your bright excellence (the
Which for gratitude ever remembered)
Best in esteem and first; not unlike, to
That rare Gem reserved last to view for
Worth and glory, to you all the delight
This world of man affords I freely give.
Thy temper melts me my magnanimous Mate.
The Rites of Hymen, with next morrows Sun
Shall apt my blood unto the perfect height
Of pleasure, love and imminence, lead on.
Pompey nor Caesar, could endure a Mate,
Nor Silius Claudius in superior state.
Emp'rour of empty brains z'heart I could curse,
His soul to the depth of Barathrum O—
Who but Claudius, unworthy of Empire,
Drunk with the dreggs of overlight belief
Would be so gross•lie gul'd.
Scared with the Bugs
Of Babies.
A whoores invention, a drab
Of state, a cloth of Silver slut, the tricks
Of a tempting Tissue Troll, to push his
Horns upon the Pikes of ruin, where he
Should rot; rot; were it not to serve our own ends,
Maintain that habit of perfection sure,
Which till this sudden unexpected change
Like Paste has worked him to what mould we pleased.
And must doe still, or certainly we perish.
It is the prime policy, the heart of state,
Which if with vigilance we not pursue,
 We lose, and in that loss lost for ever.
Silius grows popular, and the people
As it is their nature, ever covet change,
They are as easy •o be filed with errors,
As for a lust-stung strumpet to take up
To her dishonour; therefore as Sailors,
That have for guide the South and North, sometimes
To traverse and to cross their way, and yet
Not lose their guide; so in the deep affairs
Of such high consequence of state (as now
The time concerns) we must for guide, detain
 The knowledge how to pierce the ends of those
We most malign.
Thereby indeed man rarely
Rests deceived, which for to put in speedy
Practise, and stop the marriage, you and I
My Lord (under the veil of friendship) will
To Rome; persuade the Empr'esse Caesar is
Himself; perceives that all her plots to his
Destruction tends; the loss of Empire and
The abuse of 'his bed, dissuaded her from the
Love of Silius, which (in the refusal)
Blood and fire must quench.
This put home
With low submission, making her believe
By cringes, creepings, and a Synons face,
That all our care is only for her good,
May work persuasion.
But not in her.
There is no trust to such uncertainty,
It were deadly Stibium to our vital blood,
Like that dire poison thats resistative
Against the most wholesome Antidotes of life.
Weak minds of men they are, fit to be fooled,
Slighted, add scorned, whose dull ignorance
Knows not that women in their height of ill,
Who bars them their delight, delight to kill.
What will Valerie, Messallina, the
Emp'resse then; •think you she will be slow,
Whose hot Alarms in the very Act
Within the circuit of a day and night
Endured the test of five and twenty, came
Off unwearied: A deed to quake the hearts
Of virtuous Dames, think you she will be bared
Dissuaded from the love of Silius, no,
We cannot therefore (knowing that credit and
Authority is far more safely for
To be maintained with circumspect, then with
Rash counsel) cannot I say be too too
Wary, least by any notice taken
She take least knowledge of our discontent
Whose rugged thoughts unseen, must be smoothed ore
And with a pleasing veil, appear in show
To like, and give full approbation
Of the opprobrious marriage, so to
Secure us from suspect and peril,
Undoubted death.
I fully apprehend,
That so To•es Siren in the height of pride;
Silius and all the factious Accomplices
Through wicked wedlocks jollity made drunk
Drunk with the dregs of blind security.
Then, then my pyoning policies aloft
(Of which my brain detains the Theorick)
Shall apt a Time for vengeance unwithstood
The thirst of their Ambition qu•nche in blood.
Till when sleep on, sleep on ye fools of fate,
"Plots best-encounter plots, free from suspect,
"Fly like the bolts of jove, firm in effect.
Blessed be that sacred power which restored
My senses lost, and in that perfect being
Gives me the noble patience for to see,
And suffers not mine eye-balls to drop out
At sight of this my daughters impudence,
Shame that attends this wicked Nuptial Rites
Now in the name of goodness, what means this
Whispering? what new mischief lies hatching
In yonder bloody villains busy brain?
In the discovery, counterf•it sleep,
And madness be my Mock.
At the Bachanalian feast which now
Draws nigh, then a rich stirring Mask will best
Express it self in greatest glory; the
Tunes for song I'll take that charge on me.
For changes in each dance my brain shall work.
What says Minister, he that has borne the
Prize; leapt Madam Venus in her height of pride
For graceful action and sweet Poesy.
Now,
Does he claw like a decayed Tradesman▪ when
To maintain the wagging of his chappes
His wives Venereal Firk-in must to Sale.
Why? did you ne'er hear of a fellow, that
By the scratching of his nimble pate,
Worked your best pleasing project for a mask,
Was well rewarded for it, when such as you
For pains in song and dances laughed to scorn
Poor simple sots▪ their payment was the horn.
O nimble Satirical vein.
That's slow enough and dull at this time.
What think you
Of a wooden Cupped brought in, in
An antic amble making it wag like
The Apish head of a French Fiddler, when he
Firkes with his Fingers.
Twill never take
Unless you bring in the dapper dancer,
With his la ta tat a teero tat a tant
Ta ra rat a ta too rant tat a ta teero tat a too,
Flinging away his legs, and skrewing his face
Into the fury of a thousand fools.
Whose this? Mad-madam Lepida a sleep.
Tic well; else she would rail faster then any
City Pupper.
That's a horrid hearing.
O a hell, none like it, let Scorpios itch
Reign in her middle sphere, phy how she'll
Play the devil with Cuckold simplicity
Her hue•band for want of performance, it
Passes all admiration, and that with
No little wonder, yet demand the Act,
And then you shall have my nice o'recurious dame,
Upon the Tiptoes of her apish pride,
Protest, with O no—I will not wrong my
Husband for earths treasure, stand upon her
Honesty, then smile, change in a moment,
And then wantonize, mop, mew, bite lip and
Wriggle with the bumbe to put a man in mind,
Then touch, she'll gripe, and clip with a kiss,
Melt into all the forms of Venery
Thought can devise, and ther's her honesty.
O petulant pureness of defiled pitch,
But you forget what actors are prepared
In readiness for practise against the Masque.
The vestal Virgins from the Temple hailed
They shall supply that want it is so decreed
By the Empress strict command.
O horrible.
All from the age of ten, to twenty five
Must suffer Rape, and shall, stood hell in fight.
Spoke like thy self my metropolitan
Cut throat of chastity.
Twill be excellent,
Rare, I fat with laughter at the rich conceit,
We'll play at Tennis with their maiden heads,
Fifty at a breakfast, shall not give me
Content.
I say, virtues a Cipher in
The hearts of great ones, and stands for nothing.
What says your most approved judgements, your
Single sole conceits I am sure will stand
For bawdy Comedies, and ribald jests.
Insinuate thou and so wax knavish wise,
Thou a stamped villain, learn to temporise,
Plot thou, and set friends hourly at debate,
Cling to the surer side, the weaker hate,
Turn Bavvd at midnight, Dander to a Whore
While lust in 'ith act (ye knaves) look to the door.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Laughs thou mad mewed
Go with a burning mischief, Z'heart I could cut
Her throat, but something in her looks there is
That shakes me; what a gen.
Be thou,
One that knows how to mix with perilous 〈◊〉.
The deadly poison with the amorous dart,
Drunk with conceit, that greatness bears the sway,
Safely to act what villainy it may.
Godge gotten I'll come again anon.
But we'll prevent you, come Lords to Court,
She shall be silenced or her tongue cut out.
Gon, O happy blessed blessed prevention
That to mine ears unlocked the horrid sound
The black intention of so foul a rape▪
A hundred vestal virgins to be whored,
First let the world dissolve and dissipate;
To its first Chaos; O thou all seeing power
Prostrate on bended knees, I here implore,
Beg at thy mighty hands to inspire my soul,
Make me the substitute and holy means▪
The sweet prevention of so horrid a
Fact; O heaven tic granted, thanks Majesty
Divine; work on my mind; thought happily
Thought upon; a spacious vault I have, which
Near adjo•nes unto the Vestalls Temple;
Thither this night by a back secret way
I'll draw the holy maid• (none will suspect
Because all deem me mad) there by this hand
Succour, relief, and safety shall attend
Your noble souls; chaste maids live long and blessed,
"Free from the bondage of black mischief• hands,
"To virtuous Actions, heaven propitious stands.
ARe we not Caesar?
Is not Romes Empire servile unto us?
You mad me with your news.
Mad a Dog, a
Cat, a Rat, you're to tame, want spirit
To be mad, I am mad, mad to the depth
Of madness; O I could tear my hair, to
See you thus, thus senseless of your wrongs, but
Doe, doe; be the grand Cuckold of this universe,
Let Cajus Silius reign Romes Emp'rour.
Loved of the people.
Honoured of the Senate
Hurrid in triumph through the streets of Rome▪
In Caesars Chariot glistering like the Sun,
While Caesar, unlike Caesar calmly suffers.
Out of his Empire finely to be worked,
Finely, betwixt the two hot Palms of lust.
Abused (forsooth) for fear of Prodigies.
That, that, O infinite shame in stately
Majesty, to make your self a never
Dying scoff for ages yet unknown
To point at you, for the most famous Cuckold.
The renowned Cuckold.
The high and mighty Cuckold.
Cuckold by five and twenty, all in the
Short space of a day and night, O insati•te
Bawdy villainy.
Damnation seize her,
I will hear no more; misery of miseries,
Impatience cramps my vital vein•; that swell
With fiery boiling rage, O I am a lump
Of true vexation, tortured with torments
Worse then those in hell, in hell, very hell;
This body sure is not substantial, no
I am all ayre, pierced through and through with storms,
Incessant storms, that strike a terror to
My panting soul, misery of marriage,
Horned, and abused by every vastaile Groom
Vessels of baseness, they shall buy it dear
The high Sea of their daring pride must down
All topsy turvie to confusion turn:
I will uncharme and never more be fooled
Slave to those wonder darting eyes that strike
Amazement through the world, those bewitching
Lamps her eyes, fed with the oil of whorish
Fortitude, (that like the Centaure'• blood)
•iv•s the poison of •ell furies rage
Into my blood and brain, those false false eyes,
Shall never more entice, because that I
Will never see them more, they shall put out
Their glory for a grave, there forgot.
Scorned, and contemned of Caesar, lye and rot.
Now are you Caesar.
What you ought you are.
The high and mighty Roman Emperor.
But am I so indeed (for I'm amazed
At my dull follies past) is it not too late
To call back errors darkness, O tell me
Narcissus, is not Silius Emperor,
Usurps he not that name past reach to quell.
Confe•re on me that absolute command,
Which Geta Captain of your guard now holds
Over your soldiers here at Hostia,
And ever the next Sun set his circular course
The daring pride of all the faction,
Caesar shall sit in senate, and their doom.
Sweetest revenge, honoured Narcissus draw
Out the soldiers at thy free dispose
Here's thy command Geta we doe mistrust
Thee only trust, accelerate revenge,
That I may ebb the high swollen tide of wrongs,
Which beyond limits tears my restless brain,
Knits and then tears with infinite unrests
If there be Hell, the devil and damnation
It is mans delight in woman, insatiate
Woman; that will doe with the devil, O
It is a fearful thing to be a Cuckold,
Rolled up in wrinkles of fool patience,
We hear they have a Masque, but rather, then
Any of the lustful route, make their escape
Fire me the Palace, burn 'em in that Masque,
It will be brave to see 'em dance in fire,
Skip letch'rous Antiques in a boiling flame,
That thus with raging passion, boiling, flames
My most distracted brain; tortures no less,
Then if on Caucasus we were exposed,
A never dying prey to the Eagles beak.
Such is the misery of marriage, where
The besotted husband most affects, there
To be most abused, Cuckold, Cuckold, Cuckold, O.
After Calistus, t'appease his fury.
My Lord, I'll post to Rome, the people groan
Beneath the Emp'rsse weight; tic mischievous
 The bloody massacre of those Roman dames
Murdered for hate to lust, affords plentle
Of friends, to force the City gates open
To our free entrance.
In si•no whereof,
From the high top, the temple of god Mars
Let a bright burning Torch in the dead of night
Waft our approach.
Like Synons unto Troy;
Talk trifles time.
Farewell my noble Lord.
Till next we meet farewell, it is decreed
In the height of pride murder and lust must bleed.
Now good Vibidia, thou virtuous Matron
Of Romes Vestal maids, say, are they all safe,
Can they endure the vault, that wretched shift
This wretched Age enforces,
Best, best Lady,
Thou Angel mother, of a Fiend-like child,
All earthly similes are too too base
To express thy admirable virtues,
By you Romes Vestal Virgins all are safe,
Only by you preserved and kept from rape
From being hurrid in sad silence, unto
The gate Colina, there in a deep pit
To be put into, there buried alive,
From that dire death which was at first ordained
For unchaste vestalls; by thee chaste vestalls
Live all preserved, to them their darksome vault
Is far more glorious then the courts of Kings,
For which upon my knees in blessed time,
Wonder of women let me kiss thy feet.
What means Vibidia?
To reverence your steps,
The earth, the very ground whereon you tread,
For that's made holy by your sacred steps.
Not unto me Vibidia but to heaven,
To that lets kneel, to that omnipotence
Which made this earth, lets both with holy zeal
Salute our mother earth in ardent love,
To heavens great Master.
Now the good Gods preserve us.
Fly to the vault, I fear we are betrayed.
Search, search about,
My Genius whispered in mine ears last night
The vestalls lodge•d within this mad Mawdes house
She dies for it, while the chaste puppets we will
Drag to court, there ravish and there kill,
'I will prove an excellent closing to the Masque.
How if we find them no▪ (my Lord)
Find or find not, for that I'm sure they are here
We'll fire the house and flame it into Ayre.
The ground shakes, I sink,
Zownes Hems hemmed to the earth
I cannot stir.
Nor I I sink, Stitch sinks
Had we our names for this, a vengeance of
All false Stitches, they have stirs•t me, O horror.
How's this.
Hell and confusion
Devils and Furies
Horror of darkness, what dread sight is this
What black Red-raw-eyd witch hath charmed this ground▪
Sink'st thou my limbs supporter; must I yield,
Dost thou then faint proud flesh, mount mount my blood,
And like Enc•lotus out dare thy fate,
O that my wish were suited to my will
Now would I cuckold all the world, leave not
A man unhorn'd, a maid unrap't, beget
A b•ood of Centaure's to supply, and work
The worlds confusion; ha more horror yet,
Why silly dames, I confess your murders,
But to repent the fact, know that my heart.
Is like the Corsick Rock, more hard; far more
Unpassable then Chimera mount, whats
That in white there, what so ever it be; the
Majesty it bears, trembles my sinews,
O how it shakes me; came Furies clad in
Flames, not all hells totturts, th'affrights &amp; horrors
Equals the thousand part the pains I feel
Through sight of that, that flaming Crystal, sink
Me O—earth; Pindus and Ossa cover
Me with Snow, hide me Cimerian darkness
Let me not see it, my Eye sight fails
Ingeniosi sumus ad salendum nosmet ipsos,
Farewell Romes Emp'resse
To all ambitious vermin,
Puncks, Pimps, and Panders, Whores and Bawds farewell.
Confound the world, the worst of death is hell.
Make way there for shame; clear the stairs,
You of the guard, force all intruders back,
Back, back, back there, keep back,
For shame make hast, way for my Lords the Senate.
Burn beards and faces, burn em in the face.
That offer to press in▪
Abstract of rare perfection my Iuno,
Glorious Emp'resse all admiration.
Excellent Silius all perfection.
Amazing rarity, beauties treasure.
Natures wonder, my delight my pleasure.
Let me suck Nectar, kiss, kiss, O kiss me.
Soul to my lips, embrace, hug, hug me.
Leap heart.
Mount blood.
Thus relish all my bliss.
Again the pressure of that melting kiss.
Descend my Venus all composed of love.
Locked in thy Arms my Mars.
Down, down we come
Like glistering Phoebus mounted in his Car,
When in the height of the celestial signs
He sails along the Circuit of the Sky.
Black is the night; a Canopy of cloud•,
Hides the bright Silver spangles of the sky,
All is secure, revenge proportion keeps
To my full wish; no thought of blood and death
Writes on the Index of black deeds at Court
The least suspect; mad lust and wine, revels
And pleasures, muffle their understanding.
O Lust, lust, lust, were it thou not what thou art,
A thick black cloud only composed of ill
For to tempt judgement, had thou the relish
Of sweet good, as thou art badly bitter,
Thee above all the Gods I would adore,
Thee, thee adore, that unresisted thus,
Snares the besot•ed Faction to their fall.
Load them with Lethe still, while thus I waft
Revenge from Hostia; like the sad flames
Of Ilion burn, burn bright Torch; let thy fair view
Tune to the dance of death, the amorous
Measures of full vengeance; blaze prodigy,
When the bad bleed give me that Tragedy.
Music, distill new sweetness, vary thy
Nectar Notes, while Loves bright eyes, court lips to
The height of dalliance, each sacrifice a kiss,
To all th'inchantments of loves luscious bliss.
O liquid life of live.
Here's a full bole, a health to the height of pleasure.
Brave health again, another, and a third.
That deep carouse, makes Vectius Valence see.
See, what dost see?
In my minds eye me thinks,
A moving Army coming from Hostia.
O likelihood, an Army from Claudius.
Senseless Cornuto, he's to confident,
He he's too great affiance in my love.
His Cornucopia skull fears prodigies,
Alas, his horns forked like an aged Oak,
Are grown too great, to huge to enter Rome.
O mighty horns.
O monstrous Majesty.
Scoff of glory.
My scorn,
Come, come lets dance, Music proceed,
Claudius my hate shall with the next sun bleed.
Hast, hast to save your selves, we are betrayed,
The armed Troops of Caesar enter Rome,
Fly or their brandished ste•le will guirt the Court
Past all escape.
Deaf, deaf me O thuunder,
B•trait, O black affright, fly Silius fly.
What to out live my Fate, no, you of
The Senate fly, fly all, stand not amazed, my
mighty Mistress, endanger not your self,
Excellent Empress, Sulpitius be your guard.
But why you sad copartners in my fall,
Why stand you thus plunged in the panting depth
Of deep amaze, collect your spirits and
Pursue your safety.
What? fly?
And leave you here; first with this hand
I'll tear my bowels out, and sacrifice
My heart's last leave to life.
To fly from you,
O it were the loathsom'st scum coward ever lapped:
Black blots of infamy to endless fame
Wu'd write our Epitaphs, if basely fly.
Where were the noble minds of Brutus then,
Brave Cassius, and Tytinnius hate to life,
Our deaths shall be more glorious, far less ill;
Yet will we die, armed with a world of valour.
Not like those desperate fools, which by their
Own swords fall; we are too deep in lust▪ to
Suck such back damnation, that were horrid.
The soul, the all that is the best in man,
Tells of two opposites, life and death in death.
True sorrow for lifes death misselead in life,
That's perfect valour, makes men bravely die
That lived not so, when the self violent death
Is but a bastard volour.
Now you luxurious traitor, Emperor
Silius; your highness gates at length are forced
To bow; wher's your top gallant strumpet, that
Strumpet, witch, hell-Cat; most insatiate whore
That ever cleaved to the loins of Lechers.
Tell me ye impious villens, Traytrous slaves,
That I may execute my burning hate,
And send ye swimming in her blood to hell.
Claudius, let it suffice, she is not here,
Spit all thy venom; be it a Sea of
Poison let it fall, here's none will shrink; ou•
Bloods are all too much ennobled, into
The eminent temper of true Monarchs,
To dread respectless death.
None here but scorns
To plead with humble baseness, low submission
For miserable mercy.
None here complains upon the enticements
Of your Emp'resse, that were too basely vile.
We win no glory in our deaths by that,
Our selves against our selves give guilty,
Only beg mercy from the Gods.
Of you our quick dispatch▪ tart lifes ex∣change
For a delicious death; which if I thought
Should feed upon delay▪ by all thats sacred
Thus weaponless, we all would force
And cut our way to death through some of you.
I fret with sufferance, upon 'em soldiers▪
O ravishing content.
Fullness of joy,
My lustful blood flows from me, man's ne'er blessed,
Till freed by death; locked from the worlds unrest.
Man is to man a monster hearted stone,
With heaven ther's mercy, but with man ther's none.
This Tragic end is the most welcome part
I ever graced with action; it is the best,
O homo fragilis, specta volupta•es abeuntes.
Man is an Actor, and the world the Stage▪
Where some do laugh, some weep, some sing, some rage,
All in their Parts▪ during the Scene of breath
Act follies, scourged by the Tragedian death.
My Sun is set in blood; fly soul and catch
"At a more glorious being, farewell breath,
"Man's never in the way to joy till death.
Why like a worm crawling twixt life &amp; death
Am I thus forced; I must, I will not die
So like a beast, the lofty Cedar and the aged Oak,
Cuft with incessant storms shall represent
The fall of Silius; what? will it not do? no?
Shall my death then prevail above my mind▪
O sad condition, misery of life.
Expense of blood faints me, and yet I stand,
Stagger in spite of death; lifes threads unsure,
What means this Riddle? are the Fates asleep?
So drunk at sight of this sad spectacle,
I must awake their waking; I'm abused,
Where art thou, thou invisible threefe; lean
Rogue I dare thee to this comb•te, why slave,
Dog, coward, dastard Death, no no; why then
O kind best loving death; if valiant, if
Thou be that sole conqueror of Kings time
Speaks thee for? prithee, but for one bout,
I'll not resist, scarce able to stand; open
Breasted, take all advantage, disjoint the
Chain of inauspicious stars, fettering
My over wearied flesh with life, one thrust
Put home will end me.
Sink him Evodius.
Thrust home and sure,
Why so; desire now follows my blood,
Farewell world picture of painted folly,
Frame of woe; paltry life, I gladly shake thee off.
Hold, hold, for pity hold.
It is too late.
Too late Syllana my most virtuous wife.
O my dear husband, •lint hearted Caesar,
Was not this husband wrought by the Circean
Charms of thy she devil; she, she hath bin,
The fatal Engine of my husbands sin,
She from my heart hath torn away this pearl
More precious then the world, O my dear love,
I doe beseech thee to bear up in death,
Shoot thy pale looks through my afflicted soul,
Whose sighs and tears &amp; prayers knit up in groans
Ascend you starry globe unto the Gods.
The good good Gods to pardon thee my love.
Like a spent Taper only for a flash,
I doe recover to embrace thee sweet:
Forgive me injured excellence; constant wife.
Take from my lips (dear heart) a parting kiss
Cold as the dead mans Skull; nay weep not sweet
There is dive•nity in that weeping eye,
Prayer on thy lip, and holiness in thy heart.
The Devils cannot say I flatter thee,
Nor this abusive, scornful, dull dark Age,
Tax me to say it never, never can▪
Not out of all the Catalogue of women,
Pick such a Phoenix Saint forth as thy self.
In thee, bright heavens majestic imminence,
Lives my supporting prop against all ill
To take me up to mercy.
Stay, O stay,
And take me with thee up to mercies seat,
For when we are there I know, we shall not
Part thus; O he is gone; the strings of life
Are cracked; I'll not outlive thee, no; thy loss
Most noble husband, wa••s my soul the way
To her eternal rest, break heart, swell grief,
And mount me to my love; I need not I,
The burning coals of Portia, Lucrece knife,
One kiss wilt do it, thus ends Syllana's life.
Live royal Emp'rour long and happy live,
To add to your revenge behold I bring
The opprobrious Faction unto Silius.
More blood unto this banquet welcome, what
Virgillianus so grave a Senator
So trech'rous, served you as Bawds to sooth the
Minds of Lechers, Calphurnianus and
Sulpitius too: off with their heads, away
With them, be sudden, the tun of vengeance
Now begins to stoop broached with the blood of
These; vain inconsiderate fools.
My Lord,
The Core of lust still lives, time was Rome bragged
Of these dead corpse for the most virtuous youths
It ever brought forth, till your le•d Empress
Poisoned their bloods with her bewitching lust.
Where is that wretch?
Prisoner my Lord, safe in Lucullu's garden
Remove these bodies, her bloods the period
To my full revenge.
Mercy great Emp'rour, mercy for the love
You bear unto your hopeful royal issue,
Lovely Britanicus, sweet Octavia,
And for that admiration of her sex.
Their mothers mother virtuous Lepida
She that hath saved a hundred virgins from
The rack of rape, for that true piercing motive
Mighty Lord; O be in your great mercy
Pleased; to give your Emp'resse audience.
My Emp'resse,
She is no more my Emp'resse, her black life
Lost in lust, hath changed that name into an
Aethiops blackness, yet for those Infants sake
For Lepida, and for the love we bear
Your holy order we will hear her speak,
Narcissus, against to morrow let her
Have warning to appear in Senate.
I but such warning as she shall ne'er come there.
I'll give no trust to those her whorish eyes.
 She will bewitch thee Caesar, mollify
Th• flint heart; if they ever piece again
Off goes my head; I'll not abide the Test.
The reconcilement of a drab of state,
Tripped, in the height of pride when topt-with pleasure,
O'twere fine fool state policy to trust
Raise that declining tempest to her height,
But I'll be no such president, it smacks
Too much of the great dish of fool for me,
And if I doe, may thunder sink me.
Prevented with a storm in Sunshine,
Frost in the hear of all our happiness,
O fire and Ice, O how between these two
Sad smarting strange extremes I madly live
Tortured in mind and blood.
To this, if ruled by me you ne'er had plunged
But thats too late now; O strive to repent.
Repent, redivell,
Tell not me mother of repentance,
Earths pleasures are to full of high content,
To be forgot by such a bitter Pill.
Pray give some better solace, what return
Makes Romes grave Matron your friend Vibidi•,
Can she with all her holiness of life,
Procure our pardon; is that possible.
Only a day of hearing that's all, which
You must arm your self for against to morrow.
O what a lightnings this to my sad heart
My heavy heart, will Caesar hear me speak,
Nay then I am sure of reconcilement.
My quick-Ey'd sense, and Sirens tongue shall work it
Charming like Lethe make him to forget
My Criminal life, then my rich Revenge
Like to the Plots of thundering Iupiter
Shall —ha, what horrid sound is this,
What dreadful sight thus quakes me.
O It is a gailty conscience.
Help'esse wretch despair, despair,
Fool to live, why draw thou Ayre.
Friends all are dread,
Friends all are dead, thou hast none▪
Th•se that seemed like Chafe are blown.
Then die, O— die,
Die—O die.
It is better die then live disgraced,
Joys and glories all defaced.
Thy pride of eyes,
Thy pride of eyes,
Which world of hearts have fier'd
Gon is their glory now no more desired.
Then die—O—die
Die—O—die,
Die be free live exempt
And scorn the base worlds base contempt.
Come live with us, live with 〈◊〉,
Live with us, with Spirits dwell,
Life is a lake of woe continual hell.
Swallow me earth, gape gape and swallow
Hide me from sight of this sad spectacle,
No? why then doe sty•e till you burst again
It is true, I was your deaths chief Actor
Mischiefs chief Engine, ruin of you all
Quid faciam? ubi fugiam, hi•, &amp; illi•,
Vbinam nescio, O dira Fata.
Close eyes and never open, ell's vanished now.
T'was but the perturbation of my mind
So let it pass—what again.
Tic a guard,
I fear the Emp'rour in his mind is changed
And this some sudden plot to take your life.
Within this hour my Lord.
Let it be so,
By that time hither I will conduct th'Emp'rour
In th'interim cut her off, when she is dead
Narcissus with his own saves many a head.
A Headsman and a scaffold are these for me▪
For thee thou woman all composed of lust
•loudly insatiate Monster of thy Sex
See here thy stage of death, be sure to die,
If thou haste respite given thee for to pray
And ask the Gods forgiveness, think it
A world of favour and he sudden, least
Unprepared we force you to the block.
 O be not wholly lost die resolute,
If thou respect the womb that brought thee forth,
Let thy faults ripe in Act, be blown to Ayre.
Through fair repentance.
How can that be?
Am not I only Author of all ill,
Is it not I that have prepared the paths
To the loose life of all licentiousness,
Black murder, lust, and rapes unspeakable
Why doe I live? I that have lived too long,
Worthy a thousand deaths; I fear not death
But O the journey I know not whether,
Torments me more then twenty thousand deaths
But how so ever it must not be denied,
Fall then my earthly substance; thus low humbled
 Let my declining height submit my head
To take an everlasting leave of life.
Hold, our blot's to precious we will not die
So like a Calfe, nor by the hand of any
But our own, thus and thus, O this cold steel
How it offends my flesh, I want full strength
To put it home; if thou be valiant and a soldier
Help to dispatch me; that was bravely done
O my mad lust whither wilt thou bear me
A dim black fog raised from the Lernean Fen
Obscures my sight; farewell dear, dear Mother.
Had I been ruled by you, I had been happy
Now justly scourged for disobedience.
A Caitiff most accursed she is no other
That scorns the virtuous counsels of a Mother;
So farewell light of eyes, ne'er to entice,
Horror invades my blood, I am all Ice.
Is she then dead.
And that desperately by her own hands.
O Caesar grant this Corps to my dispose.
It is at your free dispose convey her hence,
And now since we are free by fair revenge,
Never shall marriage yoke the mind of Caesar
To trust the hollow faith of woman more,
And if we doe; may Heaven by treason foul
Shorten our days; the sequel of our reign,
Shall to the good of Rome suppress black vice.
Kingdoms are swallowing gulphes by careless rule,
Justice makes Kings the Gods to imitate,
Virtue in Princes, is the prop of state.
Our Play is done, now what your censures a•e,
If with, or against Arts i•dustrie, the care
Took by the Author (and our pains to p•ease)
We know not yet, 'till judgement give us •as.
Why should we doubt? this Theater do's appear
The Music Rome of concord; you being here.
Let no harsh jarring sound of discord then,
Echo dislike; claps crown the Tragic Pen.

